MMT while 76 received nMMT. Patients receiving MMT displayed higher overall
response rate (37.3% vs 12.9%), median progression-free-survival (PFS 5.8 months,
95% CI 4.1e7.5 vs 3.6 months, 95% CI 2.5e4.8, p¼0.041; HR 0.679, 95% CI 0.467e
0.987) and median overall-survival (mOS 35.1 months, 95% CI not evaluable vs 8.5
months, 95% CI 3.8 e 13.2; HR 0.431, 95% CI 0.250 e 0.744, p¼0.002). Superiority in
OS and PFS persisted in multivariable models. Among 61 pretreated patients receiving
MMT, 37.5% had superior PFS compared to the prior line (PFS2/PFS1 ratio  1.3).
Higher OS (p¼0.001) and PFS (p¼0.049) were observed for patients with higher
actionability evidence (ESCAT tier I) alterations, while no difference was observed in
lower evidence levels.
Conclusions: We report real-world data of the ﬁrst Italian experience of MTB appli-
cation in clinical practice. Our work shows that MTBs can yield valuable clinical
beneﬁt in terms of OS and PFS. Biomarkers with lower actionability ESCAT level
appear to be linked to lower clinical beneﬁt.
Clinical trial identiﬁcation: This study is approved by IEO Ethical Committee with the
reference number UID 3572.
Legal entity responsible for the study: E. Crimini, M. Repetto.
Funding: Has not received any funding.
Disclosure: E. Guerini-Rocco: Financial Interests, Personal, Advisory Role: AstraZeneca, GSK, Roche,
Termo Fisher; Financial Interests, Personal, Advisory Board: Novartis. C. Criscitiello: Financial In-
terests, Personal, Invited Speaker: Pﬁzer, Novartis, Eli Lilly, Roche, Gilead; Financial Interests, Per-
sonal, Advisory Board: MSD, Seagen, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo. A. Esposito: Financial Interests,
Personal, Speaker’s Bureau: Novartis. G. Curigliano: Financial Interests, Personal, Invited Speaker:
Roche, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Novartis, Pﬁzer; Financial Interests, Personal, Advisory Board:
Ellipsis, Roche, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Lilly, Pﬁzer, Veracyte, BMS, Merck, Exact Sciences,
Celcuity; Financial Interests, Institutional, Research Grant, Investigator Initiated Trial: Merck;
Financial Interests, Institutional, Funding, Phase I studies: BMS, Novartis, AstraZeneca, Daiichi
Sankyo, Roche, Blueprint Medicine, Kymab, Astellas, Sanoﬁ, Philogen; Financial Interests, Institu-
tional, Invited Speaker, Phase I clinical basket trial: Relay Therapeutics; Non-Financial Interests,
Personal, Ofﬁcer, Italian National Health Council as Advisor for Ministry of Health: Consiglio Supe-
riore di Sanità; Non-Financial Interests, Personal, Advisory Role, Member of the Scientiﬁc Council.
Patient Advocacy Association: Europa Donna; Non-Financial Interests, Personal, Advisory Role,
Cancer Research Foundation: Fondazione Beretta; Non-Financial Interests, Personal, Invited Speaker,
No compensation for this role. This a public national company for cancer prevention: Lega Italiana
Lotta ai Tumori; Non-Financial Interests, Personal, Ofﬁcer, Member of the Advisory Council:
EUSOMA. All other authors have declared no conﬂicts of interest.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.100929
72P
MDM alterations in patients with advanced or metastatic
cancers
I. Lugowska1, H.M. Kosela Paterczyk2, M. Iwanski1, M. Chelstowska1,
A. Dawidowska1, S. Jaczewska1, A. Napora1, M. Witczak1, A. Tysarowski3,
P. Rutkowski2
1Department of Early Phase Clinical Trials, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research
Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland; 2Department of Soft Tissue/Bone Sarcoma and
Melanoma, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology, Warsaw,
Poland; 3Cancer Molecular and Genetic Diagnostics Department, Maria Sklodowska-
Curie National Research Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland
Background: Oncogenic alterations in MDM represent important therapeutic targets
in various type of cancer. We aimed to assess the prevalence of its incidence together
with p53 status in advanced solid tumors based on commercially available NGS panel
and to monitor patients’ clinical pathway care.
Methods: Between 2019-2022, 740 patients were included for molecular testing in
the Center of Excellence for Precision Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National
Research Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. The population with MDM alter-
ations was extracted for this analysis. We analyzed their therapeutic options over the
years, access to clinical trials and impact on patients’ survival.
Results: In our cohort, 48 patients (6.5%) had been identiﬁed with MDM alterations
as ampliﬁcation (38), rearrangements (5), and SNPs (5). The most common histology
were sarcomas (22), cholangiocarcinoma (3), gastric cancer (3), colorectal cancer (3),
breast cancer (3), ovarian cancer (2), salivary gland cancer (2), melanoma (2),
urothelial cell carcinoma (2), other (6). In sarcoma, 20/22 had ampliﬁcation of MDM2,
6/22 rearrangements (MDM2-PPFIA2 rearrangement, MDM2-CSMD1 rearrangement,
MDM2-EYS rearrangement) and SNPs (I388V and R332P). The predominant histology
types were liposarcomas 14 (64%), sporadically MDM changes were found in rhab-
domyosarcoma, osteosarcoma, angiosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, undifferentiated
spindle cell sarcoma and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour.
Conclusions: The detection of MDM alterations allows for access to targeted thera-
pies, especially in sarcomas, which may be an important therapeutic option in these
rare cancers.
Legal entity responsible for the study: The authors.
Funding: Has not received any funding.
Disclosure: I. Lugowska: Financial Interests, Personal, Invited Speaker, The reports of clinical trials:
Roche, BMS, Macrogenics, Amgen; Financial Interests, Institutional, Other, Research grants: Roche;
Financial Interests, Institutional, Other, Research grant: Agenus; Financial Interests, Personal and
Institutional, Invited Speaker: Agenus, Roche, BMS, Janssen, Astra, Incyte, Macrogenics, Checkpoint
Inhibitors, Celon, Pﬁzer, MSD, DeBio; Non-Financial Interests, Personal, Project Lead: MSCI; Non-
Financial Interests, Personal, Advisory Role, Board Member: EORTC. H.M. Kosela Paterczyk: Financial
Interests, Personal, Research Grant: Roche, ABM; Financial Interests, Personal, Invited Speaker: BMS,
MSD, Pierre Fabre; Financial Interests, Personal, Principal Investigator: Rain. M. Chelstowska:
Financial Interests, Personal, Research Grant: Roche, ABM, MSD, BMS, Pﬁzer, Janssen. A. Dawi-
dowska: Financial Interests, Personal, Research Grant: Roche, MSD, ABM, BMS, Pﬁzer, Janssen. S.
Jaczewska: Financial Interests, Personal, Research Grant: Roche, BMS, ABM, Pﬁzer; Financial In-
terests, Personal, Invited Speaker: Janssen. A. Napora, A. Tysarowski: Financial Interests, Personal,
Research Grant: Roche. P. Rutkowski: Financial Interests, Personal, Invited Speaker, Honoraria for
lectures: MSD, BMS, Pierre Fabre; Financial Interests, Personal, Advisory Board: MSD, BMS, Pierre
Fabre, Merck, Sanoﬁ, Blueprint Medicines, Philogen; Financial Interests, Personal, Invited Speaker:
Merck, Sanoﬁ, Novartis; Financial Interests, Institutional, Research Grant for ISS: Pﬁzer; Financial
Interests, Institutional, Funding, Research Grant: BMS; Non-Financial Interests, Personal, Invited
Speaker: Polish Society of Surgical Oncology; Non-Financial Interests, Personal, Ofﬁcer: ASCO; Non-
Financial Interests, Personal, Invited Speaker, President Elect: Polish Oncological Society. All other
authors have declared no conﬂicts of interest.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.100930
73P
Automated detection of typical and atypical mitotic ﬁgures
for improving survival prediction in breast cancer
S. Ben Hadj1, D. Wallis1, M. Aubreville2, C. Bertram3, R. Fick1
1AI & Computer Vision, Tribun Health, Paris, France; 2Medical Imaging, Klinikum
Ingolstadt, Ingolstadt, Germany; 3Pathobiology, University of Veterinary Medicine
Vienna, Vienna, Austria
Background: The number of typical and atypical (deﬁned as mitoses with any
morphological appearance other than the typical forms) mitotic ﬁgures (MFs) and a
high atypical-to-typical mitosis ratio are strongly associated with tumour aggressivity,
survival rates, and a predictor of poor response to chemotherapy in breast cancer.
Manual detection is time consuming, especially on whole slide images (WSIs). An
automated approach is therefore necessary to investigate these aspects on a larger
scale. We demonstrate that deep learning can be used to automate this detection,
improving on the performance of pathologists.
Methods: All MFs in the mammary carcinoma dataset (21 hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E)-stained WSIs with w14 000 MFs and w36 000 hard negatives) were labelled as
typical or atypical. These slides (originally scanned on a Leica scanner) were then
rescanned on six other scanners (2x Hammamatsu, 2x 3DHISTECH, Philips, Olympus),
and the annotations were registered. This gave a large, multi-scanner dataset, which
was used to train a YOLOv6 deep learning object detection model. For testing, all MFs
in the (human) TUPAC16 and MIDOG21 datasets were labelled by two pathologists as
either typical or atypical. In cases of disagreement, a third reader gave a consensus.
We used the alternative version of the TUPAC16 dataset provided by the same au-
thors as the MIDOG21 dataset to reduce potential label bias. We then ran our model
on these images and compared the mean average precision (mAP) vs the consensus
to the mAPs of the two individual pathologists vs the consensus.
Results: The mAP of our model (0.80) was higher than the average mAP of the two
pathologists (0.75, p<0.05), showing that the model can successfully automate the
process of MF detection. There was considerable disagreement in the labelling by the
two pathologists (14% of cases). By automating the process we reduce this variability,
meaning we can more consistently predict clinical outcomes (e.g. survival rates) from
our results.
Conclusions: The numbers of both typical and atypical MFs are indicators of patient
survival and response to treatment. We have demonstrated an automated deep
learning model that can accurately detect these ﬁgures and could thus be used for
patient survival prediction.
Legal entity responsible for the study: The authors.
Funding: Tribun.
Disclosure: All authors have declared no conﬂicts of interest.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.100931
Table: 71P Most frequent actionable genes
Alteration
Total
number
Treated
patients
Drug
administered
ESCAT at
discussion
ORR
PIK3CA
51
4
Alpelisib
IA
1/4 (25%)
BRCA2
32
19
PARP-i
IA
7/19 (37%)
BRAF V600
20
2
BRAF + MEK-i
IIIA
1/2 (50%)
ERBB2
17
1
Trastuzumab +
pertuzumab
IIIA
1/1 (100%)
TMB-HIGH
16
4
Anti-PD(L)-1
IC
2/4 (50%)
ATM
15
2
PARP-i
X
0/2 (0%)
MSI-HIGH
14
8
Anti-PD(L)-1
IC
4/8 (50%)
BRCA1
11
9
PARP-i
IA
2/9 (22%)
RET
10
10
RET-i
IIIA
7/10 (70%)
abstracts
2
Volume 8
- Issue 1S2
- 2023
