Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Acta Biomaterialia 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actbio 
Review article 
A comprehensive review on modeling aspects of infusion-based drug 
delivery in the brain 
Tian Yuan a , ∗, Wenbo Zhan b , Michele Terzano c , Gerhard A. Holzapfel c , d , Daniele Dini a , ∗
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, UK 
b School of Engineering, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, AB24 3UE, UK 
c Institute of Biomechanics, Graz University of Technology, Austria 
d Department of Structural Engineering, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway 
a r t i c l e 
i n f o 
Article history: 
Received 21 March 2024 
Revised 10 July 2024 
Accepted 11 July 2024 
Available online 19 July 2024 
Keywords: 
Brain disease 
Computational modeling 
Mechanical property 
Drug delivery 
Finite element method 
Neuron 
Biophysics 
Biomechanics 
a b s t r a c t 
Brain disorders represent an ever-increasing health challenge worldwide. While conventional drug ther- 
apies are less effective due to the presence of the blood-brain barrier, infusion-based methods of drug 
delivery to the brain represent a promising option. Since these methods are mechanically controlled and 
involve multiple physical phases ranging from the neural and molecular scales to the brain scale, highly 
eﬃcient and precise delivery procedures can signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from a comprehensive understanding 
of drug-brain and device-brain interactions. Behind these interactions are principles of biophysics and 
biomechanics that can be described and captured using mathematical models. Although biomechanics 
and biophysics have received considerable attention, a comprehensive mechanistic model for modeling 
infusion-based drug delivery in the brain has yet to be developed. Therefore, this article reviews the state- 
of-the-art mechanistic studies that can support the development of next-generation models for infusion- 
based brain drug delivery from the perspective of ﬂuid mechanics, solid mechanics, and mathematical 
modeling. The supporting techniques and database are also summarized to provide further insights. Fi- 
nally, the challenges are highlighted and perspectives on future research directions are provided. 
Statement of signiﬁcance 
Despite the immense potential of infusion-based drug delivery methods for bypassing the blood-brain 
barrier and eﬃciently delivering drugs to the brain, achieving optimal drug distribution remains a signif- 
icant challenge. This is primarily due to our limited understanding of the complex interactions between 
drugs and the brain that are governed by principles of biophysics and biomechanics, and can be described 
using mathematical models. This article provides a comprehensive review of state-of-the-art mechanistic 
studies that can help to unravel the mechanism of drug transport in the brain across the scales, which un- 
derpins the development of next-generation models for infusion-based brain drug delivery. More broadly, 
this review will serve as a starting point for developing more effective treatments for brain diseases and 
mechanistic models that can be used to study other soft tissue and biomaterials. 
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Acta Materialia Inc. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ) 
1. Introduction 
Neurological disorders, particularly brain diseases such as 
Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, brain tumors, epilepsy 
and stroke, represent a signiﬁcant health challenge worldwide, 
∗Corresponding authors. 
E-mail addresses: t.yuan19@imperial.ac.uk (T. Yuan), d.dini@imperial.ac.uk 
(D. Dini) . 
especially given the rapid growth of the aging population over 
the last two decades [1] . The World Health Organization (WHO) 
estimates that neurological disorders will cause 12.22% of all 
deaths worldwide in 2030 [2] . Therefore, developing effective 
treatments for neurological disorders has been a major concern. 
While pharmacotherapy is a common treatment approach for 
various brain diseases, drug delivery to the brain is challenging 
due to the selective permeability of the blood-brain barrier (BBB). 
The BBB consists of closely connected endothelial cells and is 
additionally reinforced by astrocytes. It is a protective barrier 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2024.07.015 
1742-7061/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Acta Materialia Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ) 
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of brain structures at different scales and the convection-enhanced delivery (CED) technique: (A) Schematic representation of the blood- 
brain barrier and the CED technique. (B) The color tracts are nerve ﬁbers visualized by the diffusion tensor imaging technique. This shows the direction of nerve ﬁbers in 
different regions. The nerve ﬁbers (axons) form the white matter of the brain, while the cell bodies of the neurons (soma) form the brain gray matter. 
that prevents harmful substances from entering the brain. This 
gives the BBB a selective function to properly transport nutrients, 
oxygen and metabolic wastes and ﬁlter the toxic substances, but 
along with most conventional drug molecules [3] . 
To penetrate the BBB and deliver drugs to the brain, some novel 
drug-delivery techniques have been developed. A promising ap- 
proach is convection-enhanced delivery (CED) [4] . As schematically 
shown in Fig. 1 A, CED involves the implantation of one or more 
catheters (or needles) into the brain to deliver the therapeutic 
agent to the target area by applying a pressure gradient, thereby 
physically bypassing the BBB [5] . Despite its high eﬃciency and 
accuracy, few desired results have been achieved in clinical CED 
trials for the treatment of brain diseases [6] . One of the biggest 
failures is the unwanted distribution of drugs, e.g. , some areas re- 
ceive too little or too much of the drug [7] , uneven distribution of 
drug concentration [8] , backﬂow of the drug caused by incorrect 
pressure or catheter position [9] , tissue damage caused by implan- 
tation of catheters [9] . Because it is a mechanically triggered and 
controlled drug delivery technique, these problems in CED could 
be alleviated by improving the current insuﬃcient understanding 
of the ﬂuid transport properties of the brain and the relationship 
of tissue response to local microstructural features and cells. 
The brain is the most sophisticated soft tissue in nature, making 
it a source of endless scientiﬁc challenges. As shown in Fig. 1 B, it 
is mainly composed of gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM). 
While GM consists of neuronal bodies and dendrites distributed 
on the surface of the brain to produce and process neuronal sig- 
nals, WM contains bundles of nerve ﬁbers or axons which trans- 
mit signals between neurons in different brain areas and between 
the brain and the rest of the body. Because the nerve ﬁbers are 
enclosed by myelin, a sheath made of proteins and fat, the tissue 
appears relatively white and is therefore called white matter [10] . 
The nerve ﬁbers connect different regions of the brain and have a 
speciﬁc orientation, giving WM a structural anisotropy. The combi- 
nation of GM and WM, as well as the different packing patterns of 
neurons in different regions, make the brain tissue very heteroge- 
neous. As drugs ﬂow around neurons, the morphological features 
of brain tissue suggest that the micro-channel network for drug 
delivery is both anisotropic and heterogeneous. From a hydrody- 
namics perspective, this makes drug ﬂow very complex and diﬃ- 
cult to predict. In addition, since the neurons are extremely soft 
and the equivalent Young’s modulus is in the range of 102 ∼104 
Pa [11,12] , the infused drug can easily deform the microstructure, 
which in turn changes the micro-channel network for drug deliv- 
ery [13] . Since the diffusion of the drug molecules also depends on 
the shape of the micro-channels [14] , the complex and deformable 
micro-channel network also makes the prediction of the diffusion 
eﬃciency (which can be characterized by the diffusion coeﬃcient) 
challenging. Despite increasing research, the fundamental relation- 
ship between the ﬂow status and the mechanical behavior of sur- 
rounding neurons is not yet clearly understood and deﬁned. This 
unclear perception of the connection between ﬂuid ﬂow and neu- 
ron deformation may mislead clinical treatments at the brain level. 
Therefore, highly eﬃcient drug delivery in the brain relies on (i) 
a clear and fundamental mechanistic understanding of how drug 
ﬂuid and molecules are transported in brain tissue while interact- 
ing with them and (ii) a new model correlating microscale drug- 
neuron interactions with the macroscale drug transport properties 
of brain tissues, thus enabling accurate pre-operative predictions of 
the drug-delivery process in the brain. 
Computational modeling plays an increasingly important role 
in understanding drug transport in the brain [15–19] . It can pro- 
vide cost-effective approaches to (i) conduct comprehensive para- 
metric sensitivity analyzes to identify the most inﬂuential factors; 
(ii) allow for individual examination multiple steps and factors in- 
volved in drug delivery, taking into account the effects of other 
steps and factors; and (iii) integrate clinically controllable param- 
eters such as drug dose and administration schedule into in sil- 
ico models. Once fully validated, the models can be used to as- 
sist in the design of drug delivery systems for optimal therapeu- 
tic responses [20] . This can also help reduce the number of lab- 
oratory and animal experiments. However, developing a compre- 
hensive mathematical framework for brain drug delivery is chal- 
lenging. First of all, it is important to correctly deﬁne the individ- 
ual physical phases of the entire delivery process at the respec- 
tive scales. The phases include the ﬂuid phase ( e.g. , drug ﬂuid, 
interstitial ﬂuid (ISF) and cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) [21,22] ), the 
solid phase ( e.g. , neurons [13,23] and tissues [24,25] ), and the 
molecular phase ( e.g. , drug molecules [26,27] ). Second, the trans- 
port processes span large length and time scales, from the cellular 
and molecular scale ( nm ∼μm , μs ∼s ) [13,23,28] , through the tis- 
sue scale ( μm ∼mm , ms ∼min ) [24,29] , to the organ scale (cm, 
h ∼day ) [30–32] ). Most importantly, these transport processes, 
which involve different phases and time/length scales, are usually 
strongly coupled. 
Under these circumstances, an in-depth analysis of the mecha- 
nisms and theories of infusion-based drug delivery in the brain, as 
well as a comprehensive review of relevant recent studies are par- 
ticularly important. This will not only help expand the currently 
insuﬃcient knowledge of drug transport in the brain, but also im- 
prove our ability to accurately predict this process. From a physical 
point of view, the process of drug delivery in the brain is mainly 
governed by the interactions between the ﬂuids (including the so- 
lutes, e.g. , drug molecules) and the solids, which take place at dif- 
ferent scales. At the tissue level, interactions between the drug 
ﬂuid and tissue opens gaps between the needle and the tissue, 
leading to local tissue swelling and backﬂow of the drug to the 
tissue surface. At the cellular level, interactions between the drug 
ﬂuid and the cells alter the tissue microstructure, thus changing 
the ﬂow pathway and tissue permeability; this controls the bipha- 
2
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
sic property of the brain tissue and can be described by a poro- 
elastic model at the tissue level. Capturing such a complex process 
requires a fundamental understanding and accurate mathematical 
descriptions of the key factors controlled by ﬂuid mechanics and 
solid mechanics at the tissue and cellular levels. Fortunately, there 
are some comprehensive literature reviews that discuss the me- 
chanical properties of the brain [33] and testing methods [34] , the 
mechanics of the brain [35] and computational models for axonal 
cytoskeletal components of neuron [36] , physiological mechanisms 
of ﬂuid transport mechanism in the brain [37] and computational 
models of drug delivery to brain tumors. They have provided im- 
portant insights into modeling the mechanical processes in the 
brain. However, there is still a gap in integrating the methods and 
techniques from different areas to build a comprehensive mathe- 
matical model to accurately predict the drug delivery process in 
the brain. 
In order to close this gap, in this review article we ﬁrst deal 
with ﬂuid mechanics ( Section 2 ) and solid mechanics ( Section 3 
at the tissue scale and Section 4 at the cellular scale) involved in 
infusion-based drug delivery in the brain. Note that the principle of 
ﬂuid mechanics at the cellular level is primarily the Navier-Stokes 
(NS) equations. Therefore, in Section 2 we focus mainly on the 
principles of ﬂuid mechanics at the tissue scale. Then, in Section 5 , 
we provide an overview of the mathematical models that can in- 
tegrate inputs obtained by applying ﬂuid mechanics and solid me- 
chanics methods to model the process of drug delivery through- 
out the brain. Finally, in Section 6 , we summarize the key ﬁnd- 
ings of the reviewed studies, analyze the limitations of current re- 
search, and propose strategies to close the research gaps. The in- 
sight provided in this review will serve as a starting point for the 
development of more comprehensive and accurate computational 
models that can accurately predict the brain drug delivery process, 
thereby improving the treatment eﬃciency of infusion-based brain 
drug delivery. 
2. Fluid mechanics: ﬂuid ﬂow and mass transfer in the brain 
From the perspective of ﬂuid mechanics, drug delivery in the 
brain occurs primarily through (i) convection, i.e. transport by ﬂuid 
ﬂow, (ii) diffusion, i.e. transport through molecules’ thermal mo- 
tion, and (iii) reaction, i.e. the biochemical interactions between 
drug molecules and the other substances. The entire process can 
be brieﬂy described by the convection-diffusion reaction equation 
[21] : 
∂(φCn ) 
∂t 
+ ∂(ρCS n ) 
∂t 
+ ∇ · (uF Cn ) 
   
Convection 
= ∇ · [(Dn + DS n ) ∇Cn ] 
 
 
 
Diffusion 
+ R (Cn ) 
   
Reaction 
, 
(1) 
where n denotes the species of drug particles, φ is the tissue 
porosity, Cn (mol/l) is the particle concentration in the ﬂuid phase, 
CS n (mol/unit dry weight of the cells) is the amount absorbed by 
the cells, ρ = (1 −φ) ρS is the dry bulk density and ρS is the cell 
density, t is time, uF is the ﬂow velocity, Dn ( m2 / s ) is the par- 
ticle diffusion tensor in the ﬂuid phase, DS n is that in the solid 
phase, R (Cn ) deﬁnes the biochemical reaction processes of the drug 
particles. 
2.1. Convection 
Driven by the ﬂuid ﬂow, the convection term in Eq. (1) can 
be obtained by solving the NS equations. However, because of its 
physiological structure, as shown in Fig. 1 , brain tissues are widely 
treated as porous media. The NS equations must therefore be mod- 
iﬁed to take into account the effect of the porous medium on the 
drug delivery pathway, i.e. 
Continuity equation 
∂ρF 
∂t + ∇ · (ρF uF ) + S = 0 , 
(2) 
Momentum equation 
ρF 
∂uF 
∂t + (uF · ∇) uF 

= −∇ p + μF ∇2 uF + ρF f , 
(3) 
where ρF is the ﬂuid density, S is the source term counting for the 
plasma leakage (or ﬂuid exchange between tissue and the blood lu- 
men), p is the hydraulic pressure, μF ( Pa · s ) is the dynamic viscos- 
ity of the ﬂuid and f is the force per unit volume that the porous 
medium exerts on the ﬂuid. 
The above equations are strongly coupled, nonlinear and have 
no analytical solutions. Therefore, Darcy’s law, as a simpliﬁed ver- 
sion of the NS equations, is more widely used to determine the 
ﬂow ﬁeld in porous media. Named after Henry Darcy, a French en- 
gineer who ﬁrst formulated it in 1856 based on the results of ex- 
periments on the ﬂow of water through sand beds, Darcy’s law ex- 
presses a proportional relationship between the pressure drop and 
the ﬂow rate in porous media, described as 
w = −κ
μF ∇p,
(4) 
where w (m/s) is the averaged ﬂow velocity over the cross sec- 
tion and κ (m2 ) is the hydraulic permeability tensor of the porous 
medium, which measures the ability of the material to allow ﬂuids 
to pass through. It is worth noting that in order to apply Darcy’s 
law, the following conditions must be met: 
(i) the ﬂuid must be incompressible and Newtonian, i.e. , 
Eq. (2) can be reduced to ∇ · uF = 0 ; 
(ii) the ﬂow must be slow and steady so that the convective accel- 
eration is small compared to the viscous forces, i.e. , Eq. (3) can 
be reduced to ∇ p = μF ∇2 uF + ρF f ; 
(iii) the porous medium must be fully saturated and homogeneous 
so that the above equation can be further reduced to ∇p = 
μF ∇2 uF and a local volume-averaging approximation can be 
applied. 
Although Darcy’s law was originally obtained as an empirical 
expression based on experimental measurements, it can be derived 
theoretically by substituting the above assumptions into the NS 
equations [38–40] . This makes Darcy’s Law a fundamental princi- 
ple in the mechanics of porous ﬂuids. Because of its universality, 
Darcy’s law has numerous applications in various ﬁelds of science 
and engineering, including hydrogeological science, soil mechanics, 
petroleum engineering, environmental engineering, and biomedical 
engineering. The adoption of Darcy’s law to model ﬂuid transport 
in the brain, e.g. , to understand the formation and resolution of 
hydrocephalus and oedema, goes back to the 1980s [41,42] . In the 
past two decades, due to the sharp increase in the incidence rate 
of brain diseases, great attention has been paid to the development 
of highly eﬃcient drug delivery techniques to cure brain diseases. 
Darcy’s law is now more practically applied to predict and opti- 
mize the procedures of drug delivery to the brain, especially for 
direct and localized drug delivery methods in the brain, e.g. , CED 
[43,44] . 
Application of Darcy’s law requires knowing the hydraulic per- 
meability tensor κ of the target porous medium, which largely de- 
pends on the microstructure of the medium, e.g. pore size and dis- 
tribution, and is usually characterized by measuring the ﬂow rate 
in the samples under a given pressure drop [24,45] . 
Table 1 shows a summary of the characterized permeability of 
brain tissues. The methods developed for brain permeability char- 
acterization will be detailed in Section 2.4.1 . 
3
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
Table 1 
Hydraulic permeability of brain tissue determined using various methods. The values correspond to the scalar compo- 
nents of isotropic or transversely isotropic permeability tensors. 
Tissue type 
Permeability κ 
m2 	
Method 
Refs. 
Hepatic neoplastic tissue in vitro 
3 . 1 × 10−17 
Lab test 
[46] 
Hepatic neoplastic tissue in vivo 
(2 . 9 ∼8 . 4) × 10−18 
Lab test 
[46] 
MCaIV murine mammary carcinoma 
1 . 86 × 10−15 
Lab test 
[47] 
LS174T human colon adenocarcinoma 
3 . 37 × 10−16 
Lab test 
[47] 
U87 human glioblastoma 
4 . 87 × 10−16 
Lab test 
[47] 
HSTS 26T human soft tissue sarcoma 
6 . 9 × 10−17 
Lab test 
[47] 
Human brain tissue 
2 . 47 × 10−17 
Lab test 
[48] 
Sheep corona radiata ⊥∗
7 × 10−17 
Lab test 
[24] 
Sheep corona radiata ∥∗∗
2 × 10−16 
Lab test 
[24] 
Sheep corpus callosum ⊥ 
7 . 94 × 10−16 
CFD 
[28] 
Sheep corpus callosum ∥ 
1 . 71 × 10−15 
CFD 
[28] 
Sheep fornix ⊥ 
4 . 32 × 10−16 
CFD 
[28] 
Sheep fornix ∥ 
9 . 05 × 10−16 
CFD 
[28] 
Sheep WM ⊥ 
(0 . 9 ∼1 . 8) × 10−16 
Theory and CFD 
[49] 
Sheep WM ∥ 
(0 . 48 ∼0 . 82) × 10−16 
Theory and CFD 
[49] 
∗⊥ : perpendicular to nerve ﬁbers ∗∗∥ : parallel to nerve ﬁbers. 
2.2. Diffusion 
The diffusion behavior of drug particles is determined by the 
thermal motion of the particles themselves and the effects from 
the liquid environment, cells and other substances. According to 
Fick’s law [50] , the fundamental principle that describes the dif- 
fusion of molecules, the rate of diffusion of a substance is pro- 
portional to the concentration gradient of the substance across the 
diffusion domain, i.e. 
J = −D ∇C,
(5) 
where J is the diffusion ﬂux vector, representing the amount of 
substance moving through a unit area per unit time, and ∇C is 
the concentration gradient of the diffusing substance, represent- 
ing the concentration changes with position. The negative sign in 
the equation indicates that the substance diffuses from higher to a 
lower concentration. The coeﬃcient D denotes the diffusion tensor, 
which determines the diffusion eﬃciency. Analogous to hydraulic 
permeability, the isotropic diffusion coeﬃcient D of a speciﬁc par- 
ticle in the brain microenvironment is a key parameter in deter- 
mining the drug delivery route. It can be determined both through 
laboratory tests and numerical simulations, mainly based on Fick’s 
law, i.e. Eq. (5) , by measuring the ﬂux and concentration gradients 
[51–54] , and the Einstein diffusion Eq. (6) , by recording the dy- 
namics of the displacement of each individual particle. Thus, the 
diffusion coeﬃcient D may be given as 
D = ⟨ R ⟩ 
6t =

 N 
i =1 (d2 
xi + d2 
yi + d2 
zi ) /N 
6t 
,
(6) 
where ⟨ R ⟩ is the mean square displacement of all particles, N is 
the particle number and dxi , dyi , dzi are the i −th particle dis- 
placements in the directions x , y and z over the time period t. 
The studies that have developed methods for evaluating the dif- 
fusion coeﬃcient of substances in the brain will be discussed in 
Section 2.4.2 . 
2.3. Reaction 
While the diffusion term in drug delivery models represents the 
physical transport of drug particles in the ECS, the reaction term 
accounts for drug elimination due to biochemical interactions be- 
tween drug molecules and cells. Enzyme kinetic models, a class of 
mathematical models that describe the rate of enzyme-catalyzed 
chemical reactions, can be used to describe the drug reaction pro- 
cess. One of the most widely adopted models is the Michaelis- 
Menten model, i.e. 
V = Vmax C 
Km + C ,
(7) 
which describes the rate of enzymatic reactions by relating the re- 
action rate to the concentration of a substrate. In Eq. (7) , V is the 
reaction rate, Vmax is the maximum reaction rate, C is the substrate 
concentration and Km is the Michaelis constant, which represents 
the substrate concentration at which the reaction rate is half of 
Vmax . Researchers have used the Michaelis-Menten kinetics model 
to describe the active transport of drugs into or out of the nerve 
cells [23,55–57] . 
By deﬁning the reaction rate as a function of drug concentra- 
tion, this model can be perfectly integrated into the convection- 
diffusion equation. However, this also represents a signiﬁcant limi- 
tation of the model, as the rate of drug reaction is generally not 
determined by concentration alone. It is also worth mentioning 
that the Michaelis constant Km varies depending on the type of 
drugs and cells and must be carefully calibrated. Therefore, more 
sophisticated kinetics models are required to describe drug reac- 
tions in the brain [58] . 
2.4. Supporting techniques 
The supporting methods for the above-mentioned studies 
mainly include experimental and numerical characterization of 
hydraulic permeability, diffusion coeﬃcient and reaction rate re- 
quired to solve the established biomechanical models, as well as 
experimental observations of unknown phenomena to develop new 
biophysical laws. 
2.4.1. Characterization of hydraulic permeability 
The characterization of hydraulic permeability has been a long- 
standing research topic since the introduction of Darcy’s law in 
1856. Based on Darcy’s law, the typical method is to apply a pres- 
sure gradient across the sample and measure the ﬂow rate of the 
ﬂuid ﬂowing through the sample [59–61] , as shown in Fig. 2 A, and 
referred to as the perfusion method. Tavner et al. [62] used this 
method to measure the hydraulic conductivity of lamb and sheep 
brains. 
Compression is also a commonly used method for indirectly 
measuring hydraulic permeability. Based on the consolidation the- 
ory, which considers the equilibrium between the hydraulic pres- 
sure inside the pores and the stress of the matrix caused by com- 
pression, the relationship between the ﬂow rate due to pore de- 
formation and the hydraulic pressure can be obtained to calcu- 
4
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
Fig. 2. Methods for characterizing the hydraulic permeability of brain tissue: (A) Perfusion method. Orange block represents the tissue, P1 −P2 stands for the pressure 
difference along the sample, and Q is the ﬂow rate. (B) Unconﬁned compression method. (C) Infusion method, where P is the applied pressure difference and Q the ﬂow 
rate. (D) Computational ﬂuid dynamic method based on high-resolution imaging and reconstruction techniques; reproduced from Vidotto et al. [28] . 
late the permeability. There are two types of compression meth- 
ods, namely unconﬁned compression and conﬁned compression. In 
unconﬁned compression, as shown in Fig. 2 B, ﬂuid drains out of 
all boundaries of the sample. Using this method, Cheng and Bil- 
ston [63] and Su et al. [64] measured the permeability of calf brain 
and porcine brain, respectively. In conﬁned compression, the ﬂuid 
drains out from the top and bottom of the sample. Based on con- 
ﬁned compression, Franceschini et al. [48] performed an uniaxial 
deformation experiment on human brain tissue within 12h after 
death and indirectly determined the permeability from the com- 
pressibility parameters by ﬁtting the data to Terzaghi’s theory. 
However, for brain tissues, which are very soft, highly het- 
erogeneous and less permeable, both the perfusion method and 
the compression method reach their limits. Low perfusion pres- 
sure gradients may not allow ﬂuid to ﬂow through the tissue, 
while high perfusion pressure gradients may compress the tissue 
and alter its microstructure, resulting in inaccurate values of mea- 
sured permeability. This indicates that the parameters in the perfu- 
sion method should be determined very carefully. In addition, the 
compression method deﬁnitely deforms the microstructure. Under 
these circumstances, the infusion method, which involves injecting 
ﬂuid into tissue while monitoring the ﬂow rate and injection pres- 
sure, as shown in Fig. 2 C, can be applied [65–67] . Furthermore, the 
infusion method offers the advantage of capturing local permeabil- 
ity, which cannot be explicitly measured using the perfusion and 
compression methods in nonuniform tissues. Using the infusion 
method, Jamal et al. [24] measured the localized anisotropic per- 
meability tensor of the ovine brain WM under different infusion 
pressure. Importantly, this study found that the brain permeability 
is pressure dependent. Subsequent theoretical studies [13,23] re- 
vealed that this is caused by the interactions between the infused 
ﬂuid and the axons. These studies demonstrated the signiﬁcant ef- 
fects of pressure-driven neuronal deformation on the permeability 
tensor of brain WM. Subsequently, a new pressure-dependent per- 
meability tensor for brain WM was proposed, which complements 
the classical Darcy’s law and can quantitatively consider the effects 
of infusion pressure on the drug-delivery process in the brain [13] . 
Numerical methods can also be employed to derive hydraulic 
permeability because pressure drop and ﬂow rate can be calcu- 
lated by solving the NS equations in the pore-scale geometry. For 
example, based on simpliﬁed geometries and realistic geometries 
at the neuron level, Vidotto et al. [22,28] characterized the per- 
meability tensors of brain tissue in different regions using com- 
putational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) simulations. Their study showed 
high heterogeneity of hydraulic permeability in different regions of 
the brain, which to some extent explains the failure in drug de- 
livery to the brain caused by CED, especially the observed uneven 
distribution of drug volume and concentration [7,8] . Motivated by 
the uncertainty of brain permeability due to microstructural het- 
erogeneity, in a recent study Yuan et al. [49] proposed a math- 
ematical expression that links the microstructural information of 
brain WM with its permeability tensor, using mathematical deriva- 
tion, CFD modeling and stochastically reconstructed brain WM ge- 
ometry obtained from high-resolution imaging (FIB-SEM) data. This 
study was able to ﬁll this gap and provide more accurate predic- 
tions about the pathway of drug delivery in brain tissue. However, 
from an imaging perspective, further effort s are required to cap- 
ture the microstructural information in vivo . Importantly, Su et al. 
[68] found that wettability signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the permeabil- 
ity of brain WM and that the effects are anisotropic. This shows 
the importance of adjusting the boundary conditions when using 
CFD to characterize the permeability of brain WM. 
2.4.2. Characterization of the diffusion coeﬃcient 
Characterizing the diffusion coeﬃcient of molecules or parti- 
cles in the brain is a challenging task. According to Section 2.2 , 
either the concentration gradient (macroscale, Fick’s Law Eq. (5) ) 
or the motions of individual particles (microscale, Einstein’s diffu- 
sion equation Eq. (6) ) must be known to be able to calculate the 
diffusion coeﬃcient. 
Based on Fick’s law, Nicholson and Tao [69] developed a 
concentration-based method called integrative optical imaging 
(IOI) technique to measure the diffusion coeﬃcient of ﬂuorescent 
dextran molecules in the agarose gel and in the extracellular mi- 
croenvironment of the brain. As demonstrated in Fig. 3 A, they in- 
jected a known amount of ﬂuorescent molecules ( i.e. , a known 
concentration) into the tissue and then took images of the ﬂuo- 
rescence over time using a microscope. By analyzing the changes 
in ﬂuorescence intensity in the images, they were able to calculate 
the apparent diffusion coeﬃcient (ADC) of the dextran molecules. 
In addition, by analyzing the diffusion of particles of different 
sizes, Thorne and Nicholson [70] found that the extracellular space 
(ECS) of brain tissue has a normal width of 38 to 64 nm, which 
has a great impact on subsequent studies related to the brain 
micro-environment, e.g. , drug development and delivery [71–73] , 
metabolic waste clearance [37,74] , and treatments of brain can- 
cer [73,75] . Similarly, Valnes et al. [76] developed a mathematical 
contrast approach to measure the diffusion coeﬃcient of the CSF 
tracer in the cortical GM of the human cerebral cortex. The au- 
thors used the diffusion equation to model the concentration of a 
tracer injected into the CSF of the brain. By comparing the results 
of their model with the observed CSF tracer concentrations from 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, they were able to esti- 
mate the ADC that best ﬁt the data. 
Einstein’s diffusion equation provides the fundamental theory 
for the numerical characterization of the diffusion tensor, since the 
trajectory of the particles can be solved based on Newton’s second 
law once the forces acting on the particles are described math- 
ematically. For example, Su et al. [26] developed a particle tra- 
jectory tracking model that can account for particle dynamics in 
5
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
Fig. 3. Diffusion in the brain: (A) In vivo measurement of particle diffusion in 
the brain. Consecutive images of ﬂuorescent intensity I were taken with a cooled 
charge-coupled device camera through a microscope with a ×10 water-immersion 
objective after pressure ejection from a micropipette into the rat brain accessible 
through an open cranial window (scale bar: 500 μm); reproduced from Thorne 
and Nicholson [70] . (B) Typical mean square displacement relationship over time 
of nanoparticles in brain WM; reproduced from Yuan et al. [27] . (C) Representa- 
tive particle trajectories for COOH- and PEG-coated nanoparticles of various sizes in 
human brain tissue at a time scale of 1 s; reproduced from Nance et al. [71] . 
an aqueous solution and the interactions of the particles with a 
spherical surface, which allowed the authors to calculate the diffu- 
sion tensor of particles. However, in this study, the microstructure 
of the porous medium was not considered, which means that the 
model may not be valid if the particle size is not negligible com- 
pared to the pore size. A new framework developed by Yuan et al. 
[27] that embeds a particle tracking model into the neuron-scale 
microstructure of the brain WM narrows the gap and is able to 
estimate the diffusion coeﬃcient of nanoparticles (NPs) up to the 
ECS width of the brain WM. The authors obtained the typical rela- 
tionship between the mean squared displacement and the time of 
charged NPs in the brain WM, as shown in Fig. 3 B. The slope of the 
Stage II curve is the diffusion coeﬃcient. The accuracy obviously 
depends on the accuracy of the reconstructed microstructure. The 
Brownian force due to molecular thermal motion, the drag force of 
the ﬂuid environment, and the electrical forces due to the charge 
properties of particles and neurons are the most commonly consid- 
ered forces in the reported models. Further investigation demon- 
strated the ability of this model to explore new drug delivery tech- 
niques, such as achieving isotropic drug distribution in anisotropic 
brain tissue by applying magnetic NPs and an external magnetic 
ﬁeld [77] . Nance et al. [71] has also successfully measured the ADC 
of particles with different surface coatings in the brain parenchyma 
by adopting the multiple particle tracking method to record parti- 
cle trajectories, as shown in Fig. 3 C. The advanced particle tracking 
methods also allow researchers to explicitly observe the particle- 
brain interactions in the brain micro-environment. These provide 
strong evidence for developing a deeper understanding of particle 
behavior in the brain and for creating more precise models, e.g. , 
models based on molecular dynamics (MD) simulations [78,79] to 
characterize the reaction term of the transport processes. The re- 
cent advances and capabilities of particle tracking methods have 
been discussed in detail in [80,81] . 
2.4.3. Characterization of the reaction rate 
From a macroscale perspective, clearance is the most important 
measure of drug reaction. It can be deﬁned as the theoretical vol- 
ume of ﬂuid from which a drug is completely removed per unit 
time [82] . In other words, clearance represents the rate at which 
the drug is removed from the body. The clearance rates of some 
commonly used brain tumor drugs can be found in [29] . 
To explicitly account for individual drug molecules, the reaction 
rate of drugs can also be assessed through MD modeling. Com- 
pared with the particle trajectory tracking model discussed in the 
above section, MD has inherent advantages in terms of accuracy 
because the objects of MD are atoms and molecules that form the 
drug particles and cell surfaces. Therefore, far fewer hypotheses are 
needed in the simulations, aside from the availability of accurate 
potentials to describe atomic and molecular interactions, which is 
essential to avoid deviation or the inability to capture the funda- 
mental interactions of interest. Consequently, MD has been widely 
used to model particle-cell interactions. Shi and co-authors have 
performed extensive experimental and MD studies to investigate 
the process of molecules and NPs entering into cells. For example, 
they used the method of coarse-grained molecular dynamics to 
theoretically analyze the entry process of one-dimensional nano- 
materials into the cell [78] . The results showed that the caps or 
shells at the tip of NPs have a signiﬁcant effect on the nature of 
membrane interaction. Further studies were conducted to investi- 
gate the inﬂuence of other factors on the molecular-membrane in- 
teractions, including size [83–85] , shape [78,86] , and chemical and 
physical properties of the molecules [87,88] . 
2.4.4. Imaging techniques for microstructure reconstruction 
Numerical characterization of the hydraulic permeability and 
diffusion coeﬃcient as mentioned in Sections 2.4.1 (represented by 
Fig. 2 D) and 2.4.2 (represented by Fig. 3 B) are gaining increasing 
attention as high-resolution imaging techniques become more ac- 
cessible for neuron-scale microstructural reconstruction [27,28,89] . 
Rapid advances in these techniques over the past two decades have 
led to noticeable improvements in both higher resolution and the 
ability to segment and reconstruct brain microstructure with in- 
creased accuracy and varying degrees of automation [90,91] . The 
most commonly used techniques include: 
(i) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM): a type of electron micro- 
scope that creates images of a sample by scanning its surface 
with a focused beam of electrons. The electrons interact with 
atoms in the sample and produce various signals that contain 
information about the surface topography and composition of 
the sample. 
(ii) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM): a microscopy tech- 
nique in which a beam of electrons is transmitted through an 
ultra-thin specimen (usually less than 100 nm) to produce an 
image. The electrons interact with the sample as the beam 
passes through it, and an image is formed from this interaction. 
Due to the smaller de Broglie wavelength of electrons, TEMs 
are image with a signiﬁcant higher resolution than light micro- 
scopes. This allows the instrument to capture ﬁne details, even 
as small as a single column of atoms. 
(iii) Focused ion beam-scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM): a 
technique that combines a focused ion beam (FIB) and a scan- 
ning electron microscope (SEM) on the same platform. The FIB 
can be used to remove or deposit materials on the sample sur- 
face, while the SEM can be used to image the surface with 
electrons. FIB-SEM can create two-dimensional (2D) and three- 
dimensional (3D) images of surface topography and resolve nm- 
scale features. FIB-SEM can also integrate diffraction and X-ray 
spectroscopy for microstructural analysis. 
(iv) Micro-computed tomography ( μ-CT): a non-destructive imag- 
ing tool that produces high-resolution 3D images consisting of 
2D trans-axial projections or ’slices’ of a target specimen. μ-CT 
is similar to hospital CT imaging, but on a smaller scale and 
with signiﬁcantly higher resolution. It allows examining the in- 
ternal structure of an object without having to destroy it. 
Theoretically, they all have the ability to microstructurally re- 
construct brain tissue, but they have their speciﬁc advantages and 
6
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
disadvantages. For example, while SEM and TEM have higher reso- 
lution compared to μ-CT, they are destructive. FIB-SEM is capable 
of producing high-resolution 3D images, but is time-consuming. A 
systematic comparison between these techniques, including other 
3D imaging modalities, e.g. , confocal optical microscopy, neutron 
tomography and MRI, was carried out by Vásárhelyi et al. [92] . 
3. Solid mechanics: brain tissue properties and needle-tissue 
interaction 
As an invasive drug delivery method to physically bypass the 
BBB, CED operations will inevitably lead to brain deformation and 
damage [93] . The deformation may further change the local mi- 
crostructure and pathways for drug transport, thus affecting the 
eﬃciency of drug delivery [13,29] . In addition, the brain-needle in- 
teraction can alter the penetration path of the needle, especially 
when using ﬂexible catheters designed for robotic needle steering, 
which can also affect drug delivery eﬃcacy [94,95] . The principles 
of solid mechanics are therefore essential to understand, predict 
and minimize tissue damage caused by invasive drug delivery to 
the brain. 
3.1. Properties and constitutive models of brain tissues 
3.1.1. Nonlinearity 
Based on experimental and theoretical methods, it is widely 
accepted that brain tissue deforms similarly to soft porous elas- 
tomers, with an intricate response governed by large deformations, 
pre-conditioning, and rate-dependent behavior at different time 
scales [33,96] . Various strain-energy functions for brain tissue have 
been proposed in the literature, including Mooney-Rivlin [97,98] , 
Fung [97] , Gent [97] , Ogden [97–102] and some polynomial for- 
mulations [100,103–105] . In addition, the mechanical properties of 
brain tissue are heterogeneous, region- and age-dependent [106–
112] . GM usually appears stiffer than WM in large-strain compres- 
sion, tension and shear experiments [110] , while the opposite trend 
is observed for indentation [109,112–116] . 
3.1.2. Rate-dependence 
Rate-dependence in brain tissue is traditionally related to vis- 
coelasticity and has been modeled using various approaches based 
on linear or quasi-linear viscoelasticity [97–105,108,115,117,118] , 
fractional viscoelasticity [119,120] , and nonlinear viscoelastic mod- 
els [121–124] . Given the extreme softness of brain tissue, several 
studies have emphasized the importance of considering nonlinear 
deformations in brain tissue mechanics. Nonlinear viscoelasticity 
is usually based on a kinematic multiplicative split of the defor- 
mation gradient tensor F into an elastic part (labeled by the sub- 
script e ) and a viscous part (labeled by the subscript v ), so that 
F = Fe Fv . As a result, one can obtain a decoupled representation of 
the strain-energy function and of the Cauchy stress tensor [125] , 
namely 
(C ) = eq (C ) + neq (Ce ) , 
(8a) 
σ = σeq + σneq = 2 J−1 F∂eq 
∂C FT + 2 J−1 Fe ∂neq 
∂Ce 
FT 
e , 
(8b) 
where C = FT F is the right Cauchy–Green tensor, Ce = FT 
e Fe is the 
elastic part and J = det F > 0 is the volume ratio. It may be ben- 
eﬁcial to visualize this decomposition with a classical rheological 
model, borrowed from linear viscoelasticity, in which the strain- 
energy function eq and the associated stress σeq represent the 
contribution of an elastic spring, while neq is the strain energy 
in the spring-dashpot element and σneq the associated stress. Note 
that there is no restriction on the speciﬁc form of the strain-energy 
functions that enter into Eq. (8) . 
It is worth mentioning that some studies claim that the appli- 
cability of linear models should not be ruled out. At low loading 
rates, which is usually the case in drug delivery and device im- 
plantation, linear viscoelasticity might provide reliable results and 
ensure higher eﬃciency [98,108,112] . 
3.1.3. Anisotropy 
Some experimental studies suggest that WM regions of the 
brain exhibit mechanical anisotropy, probably due to the bun- 
dles of axonal ﬁbers that can be highly aligned along a preferen- 
tial direction, such as in the corpus callosum [98,106,107,126,127] . 
Therefore, WM models based on those developed for ﬁber- 
reinforced soft tissues have been proposed [11,126,128–130] . How- 
ever, the anisotropic nature of brain tissue is still controversial, and 
other studies assumed that the mechanical anisotropy is marginal 
[102,110,131] and the structural anisotropy of the tissue is only rel- 
evant to the diffusion or permeability properties [24,29] . Part of 
the discrepancy may depend on the different scale and loads at 
which the tissue samples were tested [132] . Here, we assume that 
the strain-energy terms appearing in Eq. (8) are isotropic func- 
tions, leaving open the possibility of extending this framework to 
anisotropy, but at the expense of a more cumbersome numerical 
treatment [133] . Assuming isotropy, the strain-energy function and 
the associated Cauchy stress tensor of the viscoelastic brain tissue 
are expressed as [123] 
(b ) = eq (b ) + neq (be ) , 
(9a) 
σ = σeq + σneq = J−1 
3 
 
a =1 
λa ∂eq 
∂λa 
na  na 
+ J−1 
3 
 
a =1 
λa, e ∂neq 
∂λa, e 
na, e  na, e , 
(9b) 
where λa , a ∈1 , 2 , 3 , are principal stretches representing the eigen- 
values of the left Cauchy–Green tensor b = FFT = 
 3 
a =1 λ2 
a na  na , 
where na are the principal directions of the material in the current 
conﬁguration. The elastic principal stretches λa, e and principal di- 
rections na, e are deﬁned analogously from the elastic left Cauchy–
Green tensor be = Fe FT 
e . This tensor represents the viscoelastic his- 
tory variable and is obtained from the solution of an appropri- 
ate rate equation (generally one for each spring-dashpot element 
introduced to approximate the relaxation of the material), which 
needs to ensure a non-negative viscous dissipation Dv . For exam- 
ple, Budday et al. [123] adopted the following rate equation [125] : 
−Lv be b−1 
e = (J/η) σneq , where η is the viscosity of the solid and 
Lv denotes the Lie derivative [134] . The viscous dissipation rate is 
then calculated as Dv = (J2 / 2 η) σneq : σneq [135] . 
3.1.4. Compressibility 
Another fundamental aspect of brain tissue mechanics is related 
to volumetric deformations. It is generally accepted that viscous 
relaxation has no inﬂuence on the volumetric response [121,123] , 
so that the non-equilibrium term in Eq. (9) becomes purely devia- 
toric. In addition, similar to elastomers, the volumetric component 
is usually decoupled from the total deformation, so the equilibrium 
Cauchy stress is given as σeq = σeq 
iso + σvol , where σeq 
iso is the devi- 
atoric equilibrium stress and σvol is the term associated to the vol- 
umetric deformations. In several studies, brain tissue is assumed 
to be incompressible, meaning that the volumetric term σvol = −pI 
is a means to enforce incompressibility through a Lagrange param- 
eter p [121,123] . However, as discussed later in this section, brain 
tissue is highly hydrated and the motion of the interstitial ﬂuid 
must be reﬂected in the bulk response of the material. For exam- 
ple, Prevost et al. [122] proposed the following expression for the 
7
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
volumetric stress, i.e. 
σvol = K ln 

J −f1 
1 −f1 

I , 
(10) 
where K is the bulk modulus and I denotes the second-order iden- 
tity tensor. The scalar f1 represents the incompressible volume 
fraction of the material and deﬁnes the so-called compaction point 
of the material, that is, the volumetric stress becomes inﬁnite for 
J → f1 [122] . 
3.1.5. Biphasic and poro-elastic properties 
The effects of ﬂuid-solid interaction (FSI) between ﬂuids and 
cells are a fundamental part of the mechanical behavior of brain 
tissue and are involved in the healthy and pathological physiol- 
ogy of the human brain [136–138] . Although it is quite common 
in the brain tissue literature to include rate-dependent behavior 
only in the framework of viscoelasticity [62,103] , the interaction 
between brain tissue deformation and ﬂuid transport is crucial in 
the context of drug delivery. Modeling approaches that consider 
the presence of a ﬂuid phase in the brain are based on the theory 
of porous media, which approximates the brain tissue as a bipha- 
sic material. The basic biphasic theory assumes that the tissue is a 
mixture of an elastic solid phase and an inviscid ﬂuid phase. The 
relative motion between these two phases results into a form of 
dissipation that determines the characteristic relaxation in the soft 
tissue. This approach, formalized by Bowen [139] and ﬁrst applied 
to biological tissues for articular cartilage by Mow et al. [140] , was 
also adapted to the brain [141] . More recently, it has been com- 
bined with viscoelasticity to describe ﬂow-independent dissipation 
[135,142–144] and with a growth term to account for tumor prolif- 
eration [145] . In parallel, another modeling approach was derived 
from Biot’s classical consolidation theory [146,147] , and applied to 
the brain within the inﬁnitesimal strain theory [4 8,14 8–151] or 
nonlinear poroelasticity [101,152–155] . 
Speciﬁcally, the brain tissue is modeled as a biphasic medium 
consisting of a solid phase, including the network of cells and cap- 
illaries embedded in the ECS, and a ﬂuid phase consisting of inter- 
stitial ﬂuid surrounding the neurons [135] . These two phases are 
characterized by mass densities ρF , ρS and volume fractions nF , nS , 
which we assume to satisfy the condition of saturation nF + nS = 1 . 
The theory is developed within the framework of nonlinear kine- 
matics and requires the fundamental mass and momentum bal- 
ances for the biphasic medium [156] . In the current conﬁguration 
these are expressed as 
∇ · ( nF wF ) +
˙ln J = 0 ,
(11a) 
∇ · ( σF + σS ) + ρf = 0 .
(11b) 
The mass balance in Eq. (11a) equates the rate of volume 
change of the biphasic medium with the outﬂow of ﬂuid and is 
derived assuming the incompressibility of the single phases. Here 
wF is the seepage velocity, a relative velocity of the ﬂuid with re- 
spect to the deforming solid, and J is the volume ratio, which de- 
scribes the volume change in the biphasic medium. In the bal- 
ance of linear momentum for quasi-static conditions, written in 
Eq. (11b) , f is the vector of body forces per unit volume and ρ = 
nF ρF + (1 −nF ) ρS is the homogenized density. This expression for 
the biphasic medium is derived by considering the Cauchy stress 
tensor in the single phases and the interaction terms, which we 
express as 
σF = −nF pI , 
σS = σE 
S −nS pI , 
(12a) 
˜ 
pF = −˜ 
pS = p∇nF + ˜ 
pE 
F . 
(12b) 
Eq. (12a) deﬁnes the extra stress in the solid matrix σE 
S , similar 
to the concept of effective stress in Biot’s classical consolidation 
theory and assumes that the shear stresses of the ﬂuid are negli- 
gible. The internal friction exerted between the solid and the ﬂuid 
is modeled by the exchange term ˜ 
pE 
F in Eq. (12b) , which therefore 
provides the ﬂuid-dependent dissipative contribution in the model. 
The theory is completed by suitable constitutive models for the 
solid and ﬂuid phases. The constitutive behavior of the ﬂuid in 
the biphasic medium is governed by the generalized Darcy’s law, 
which was introduced in Eq. (4) , where w = nF wF . With this as- 
sumption, the ﬂuid-dependent dissipation rate can be calculated 
from the interaction term as Df = − 
pE 
F · wF = μF κ−1 w · w [135] . 
Note that the hydraulic permeability tensor κ appearing in 
Darcy’s law (4) is a spatial tensor that is generally anisotropic 
[157] . Ehlers and Eipper [156] proposed a power law form to ac- 
count for the dependence of the hydraulic permeability on defor- 
mation, i.e. 
κ =

J −n0 , S 
1 −n0 , S 
m 
κ0 ,
(13) 
where κ0 = κ0 I is an isotropic material tensor, m ≥0 is a param- 
eter, n0 , S is the initial solid volume fraction and κ0 is the intrinsic 
hydraulic permeability, a material property. Due to the microstruc- 
tural complexity of brain tissues, the porosity of the tissue ( φ or nF 
in mixture theory) cannot uniquely determine its permeability ten- 
sor [49] . Yuan et al. [13] has developed a permeability tensor as a 
function of local pressure and pressure gradient, providing an accu- 
rate alternative to consider the deformation-dependent permeabil- 
ity of brain tissue. This function was derived by explicitly model- 
ing the dynamic interactions between axonal deformation and ﬂuid 
ﬂow, as shown in Fig. 4 . 
The constitutive model for the solid phase may include nonlin- 
ear elastic or viscoelastic terms. Although the individual phases are 
incompressible, it is required to include a term that allows for large 
volume changes that can occur as a result of changes in volume 
fractions [156] . Following the framework introduced by Eq. (9) , 
Comellas et al. [135] proposed two Ogden strain-energy functions 
for the equilibrium and non-equilibrium parts of the solid, so that 
the Cauchy extra stress in the solid matrix is expressed as 
σE 
S = σeq 
S , iso + σvol + σneq 
S , iso , 
(14a) 
σeq 
S ,iso = J−1 μ∞ 
3 
 
a =1 

λa α∞ −1 
3 

λ1 α∞ + λ2 α∞ + λ3 α∞ 

na  na , 
(14b) 
σneq 
S ,iso = J−1 μ
3 
 
a =1 

λa, e α −1 
3 

λ1 , e α + λ2 , e α + λ3 , e α
na, e  na, e , 
(14c) 
where we have introduced the Ogden moduli and nonlinear pa- 
rameters μ∞ , α∞ and μ, α in the equilibrium term eq 
S and the 
non-equilibrium term neq 
S , respectively. In Eq. (14b) , ¯λa are iso- 
choric principal stretches that represent the eigenvalues of the iso- 
choric left Cauchy–Green tensor and b = J−2 / 3 FFT = 
 3 
a =1 λ
2 
a na 
na , and analogously for their elastic counterparts in Eq. (14c) . The 
volumetric Cauchy stress tensor in Eq. (14a) is given by Comellas 
et al. [135] 
σvol = (1 −n0 , S )2 

1 
1 −n0 , S 
−
1 
J −n0 , S 

I , 
(15) 
where  is the second Lamé parameter related to the bulk mod- 
ulus. Eq. (15) is similar to Eq. (10) , but here the evolution of the 
8
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
Table 2 
Mechanical properties of brain tissue obtained using different methods (GM = gray matter; WM = white matter). 
Tissue types and region 
Material model 
Loading condition 
Refs. 
Swine brain 
Hyper-viscoelastic model 
indentation, in vivo ∗
[158] 
Swine brain 
Hyper-viscoelastic model 
tension and unconﬁned compression (strain 
in < −0 . 3 , 0 . 2 > ) 
[99] 
Porcine brain GM and WM 
Modiﬁed Ogden hyperelastic model 
shear and compression 
[106] 
Porcine brain cerebral cortex 
Hyper-viscoelastic model 
indentation, in vivo, in situ , and in vitro 
[159] 
Human brain GM and WM 
Poro-viscoelastic model 
cyclic loading, failure, conﬁned compression 
[48] 
Calf brain WM 
Poro-viscoelastic model 
unconﬁned compression 
[142] 
Bovine brain GM and WM 
Linear elastic model 
tension 
[160] 
Bovine brain GM and WM 
Anisotropy rate-dependent model 
high strain-rate compression (up to 3000/s) 
[131] 
Porcine brain mixed GM and WM samples 
Large strain, nonlinear, viscoelastic model 
cyclic unconﬁned compression 
[122,161] 
Porcine brain GM and WM 
Elastic and Yeoh hyperelastic models 
indentation, in vitro 
[162] 
Porcine brain multiple regions 
Quasi-linear viscoelastic 
multistep indentation 
[108] 
Bovine brain 
Quasi-linear viscoelastic model hyperelastic 
material 
ﬁnite step-and-hold uniaxial unconﬁned 
compression 
[104] 
Porcine brain mixed GM and WM samples 
One-term Ogden model 
unconﬁned compression strain rates ≤90 /s 
[163,164] 
Lamb brain WM 
Transversely isotropic hyperelastic model 
indentation 
[126] 
Porcine brain mixed GM and WM samples 
Ogden and Mooney-Rivlin models 
simple shear test at strain rates ≤120 /s 
[97] 
Human brain multiple regions 
Isotropic modiﬁed one-term Ogden model 
simple shear in two orthogonal directions, 
unconﬁned compression, and tension 
[110] 
Brain 
Visco-hyperelastic model 
tension/unconﬁned compression 
[165] 
Porcine brain multiple regions 
Linear viscoelastic model 
multistep stress relaxation indentations 
[98] 
Bovine brain different WM regions 
Hyperelastic, strain-stiffening in compression 
and strain-softening in tension 
uniaxial tension and unconﬁned compression 
[166] 
Sheep brain, WM regions 
Two-term prony series 
microindentation 
[127] 
Human brain, fresh, post-operative, GM and WM 
Linear viscoelastic 
multistep indentation 
[112] 
Göttingen minipigs brain multiple regions 
Unidirectional hyper-viscoelastic models with 
an Ogden hyperelastic representation and a 
single-term Prony series, strain rate stiffening 
in both shear and compression 
simple shear and unconﬁned compression 
[167] 
∗In vivo experiments are listed; no information means in vitro experiments. 
Fig. 4. Derivation of the brain white matter permeability tensor as a function of 
pressure and pressure drop by explicitly modeling the ﬂuid-solid interaction be- 
tween the interstitial ﬂuid and the axons; reproduced from Yuan et al. [13] : (A) 
Parallel ﬂow status and axonal displacement. The streamlines on the left side of 
the ﬁgures indicate the ﬂow direction. The cone size of the streamlines is propor- 
tional to the ﬂow velocity magnitude and the scaling factors are indicated below 
the streamlines. The images on the right show the axonal displacement in the cen- 
tral cross section ( i.e. the T - T cross section as annotated in the streamline image). 
(B) Permeability in the parallel direction as a function of pressure and pressure drop 
( i.e. κ∥ = f(p, p) ) derived by surface ﬁtting. The tables show the ﬁtting equations, 
values of the coeﬃcients ± standard error (SE) as a percentage of the coeﬃcients, 
and the R2 of each ﬁtting result. (C) Perpendicular ﬂow status and axonal deforma- 
tion. (D) Permeability in the perpendicular direction as a function of pressure and 
pressure drop ( i.e. κ⊥ = f(p, p) ). 
volume fraction depends on the continuity equation of the bipha- 
sic medium. 
Table 2 summarizes the mechanical properties of brain tissue in 
terms of tissue types, tissue regions, constitutive model and load- 
ing conditions obtained by experimental tests. The adoption of a 
speciﬁc material model depends on the application. In the condi- 
tion of hydrocephalus, which resembles the drug transport process 
in the brain, Gholampour et al. [137,138] suggested that the most 
optimal material properties for the brain are ‘poro-visco-elastic’. 
This can be an important reference when selecting material mod- 
els for modeling drug delivery in the brain. 
3.2. Needle-tissue interaction during infusion-based drug delivery 
The deformation of brain tissue caused by infusion-based drug 
delivery occurs in several stages [168,169] . As illustrated in Fig. 5 , it 
includes tissue compression, contact with friction, and rupture. In 
general, both the tangential stress ts and the normal stress tn pro- 
vide an energetic contribution entering Eq. 16 and directly affect 
the tissue rupture [170,171] . Subsequently one can observe local tis- 
sue swelling due to drug injection [172] , tissue-needle separation 
due to backﬂow [173] , and recovery of tissue viscosity with drug 
absorption and outﬂow from the injection site. If the pressure is 
too high, local tissue damage can occur. Capturing these phenom- 
ena requires a combination of theoretical principles and targeted 
experiments. 
Studies of needle-tissue interaction in the brain began about 
20 years ago. However, despite the relevance of such phenomena, 
there are few studies directly targeting the brain, which may be 
partly due to limited access to brain samples and data. Fortunately, 
there are a number of related studies on various soft tissues or tis- 
sue phantoms that could provide useful insights for needle-brain 
studies. 
The ﬁrst attempt to model the needle-tissue interaction re- 
sulted in low-resolution numerical models based on phenomeno- 
9
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
Fig. 5. Types of tissue deformation during the needle insertion process: (A) Tissue rupture and shear deformation; tn stands for normal stress and ts for shear stress due to 
friction. (B) Local tissue swelling due to drug accumulation. (C) Tissue-needle separation due to development of backﬂow. (D) Tissue recovery due to drug absorption and 
drainage. 
logical expressions of the forces exerted by the needle on the sub- 
strate [174–177] . It is noteworthy that in these studies the tis- 
sue mechanics was based on the linearized theory of elasticity. In 
2008, Wittek et al. [178] developed a continuum mechanics-based 
needle insertion model for the brain using a nonlinear viscoelas- 
tic constitutive model and patient-speciﬁc brain geometry recon- 
structed from MRI images. While this study assumed that brain tis- 
sue represented a single-phase continuum, other models for brain 
drug delivery developed the same period began to suggest the use 
of biphasic models [179,180] . However, the fundamental aspects 
of tissue rupture and needle-tissue interaction during penetration 
have been neglected, despite the proven importance of these fac- 
tors [173] . 
The role of fracture mechanics in needle insertion has been in- 
vestigated in several theoretical and numerical studies [181–183] . 
Accordingly, a versatile description of the needle insertion process 
provides an energy balance taking into account only mechanical 
work and quasi-static conditions. That reads [184] 
˙Wext = ˙Wint + ˙Uf + ˙ .
(16) 
The left-hand side of Eq. (16) represents the rate of change of the 
external mechanical work, Wext , while the right-hand side stands 
for the rate of change of the internal energy of the system, Wint , 
the energy per unit time dissipated due to friction, Uf (equiva- 
lent to the effect of shear stress ts in Fig. 5 A), and the energy per 
unit time spent increasing the crack surface, . The internal en- 
ergy might also be responsible for the deformation of ﬂexible nee- 
dles commonly used in drug delivery and consists of a stored part 
W s 
int and a dissipated part W d 
int in a material with rate-dependent 
behavior. For example, with respect to the nonlinear biphasic vis- 
coelastic model presented in Section 3.1 , the internal energy is 
(with a rigid needle) 
W s 
int =
 
v 
eq 
S + neq 
S 
	
d v , W d 
int =
 
v 
 
t ( Dv + Df ) d t d v .
(17) 
Now we introduce the assumption that the crack propagation 
occurs in a steady-state fashion, which implies that the rate of 
new crack surface formation is equivalent to the penetration rate 
of the needle [185] . Furthermore, the inﬁnitesimal increment in 
time is proportional to the inﬁnitesimal increment in the area A 
of the crack surface, which can be mathematically translated into 
∂ /∂ t = ˙A ∂ /∂ A . Eq. (16) can then be re-written as 
∂ 
∂A 

Wext −W s 
int 
	
= G0 + Gd + ∂ 
∂A 

W d 
int + Uf 
	
,
(18) 
where G0 is the intrinsic fracture energy of the material, and Gd 
is a rate-dependent contribution. Note that Eq. (18) for a purely 
elastic material and mode-I crack propagation, reduces to [182] 
F d u = d W s 
int + Ff d u + G0 bd u,
(19) 
where d u is the increment of the needle displacement, b is the 
thickness of the material and Ff denotes the frictional force. 
Fig. 6. Flexible needle for brain drug delivery and ﬁnite element modeling: (A) Pro- 
grammable bevel-tip needle (PBN) for infusion-based brain drug delivery developed 
by Secoli et al. [95] . Left : Trocar with embedded medical grade PBN. Right : Cross 
section of the 4-segment PBN with two working channels with a diameter of 0.3 
mm per segment. The overall diameter of the PBN is 2.5 mm. The ﬁgure is adapted 
from Secoli et al. [95] . (B) Typical force-displacement relationship obtained from 
the PBN insertion simulation. The simulation is based on an adaptive ﬁnite element 
algorithm developed by Terzano et al. [25] . The ﬁgure is adapted from Terzano et al. 
[25] . 
Advances in computational methods have enabled the incor- 
poration of tissue rupture in large-scale ﬁnite element simula- 
tions of needle-tissue interaction [186] using cohesive zone models 
[25,94,187–190] or meshless methods [191] . Considering the new 
generation of steerable needles [95] , Terzano et al. [25] have de- 
veloped an adaptive ﬁnite element algorithm to handle the chal- 
lenge that there is no predetermined penetration path, as shown 
in Fig. 6 . This study showed that needle tip trajectories are highly 
dependent on the relative stiffness of the needle and tissue. In this 
study, a soft elastic phantom material was considered. 
Regarding the effects of needle insertion in the tissue, Mahvash 
and Dupont [188] found that increasing insertion velocity leads to 
lower tissue rupture force and suggested applying a velocity in- 
versely proportional to the relaxation time of the tissue to reduce 
tissue damage. Interestingly, Casanova et al. [173] came to the op- 
posite conclusion and found that the average rupture force and 
surface dimpling increased with increasing insertion speed. These 
contrasting ﬁndings may be caused by the different tissues used in 
these studies, particularly pig heart in [188] and rat brain in [173] . 
While the heart is more densely made up of cardiomyocytes, the 
brain is more viscous due to the high proportion of water. Further- 
more, Casanova et al. [173] also compared the responses of brain- 
mimicking hydrogels and real brain tissue and found that hydro- 
gels exhibited opposite trends for dimpling and friction stress with 
10
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
insertion speed. In their study, Mahvash and Dupont [188] also 
examined the rupture transitions between tissue layers, which is 
important in brain tissue because the properties of GM and WM 
show signiﬁcant differences [109] . 
These ﬁndings highlight the requirements for creating special- 
ized brain-needle models that must further consider the hetero- 
geneity and anisotropy of brain tissue. Experiments are essential 
for the development and validation of such models. While a small 
number of experiments have been conducted with brain tissue, 
e.g. , rat brain [173] and swine brain [178] , most existing studies 
are based on tissue-mimicking materials [25,94,187,192] . 
At the initial stage of drug infusion, when the drug infusion rate 
is higher than the drainage rate, the retained drug ﬂuid will gener- 
ate a high hydraulic pressure at the tip of the needle and compress 
the local tissue forming a spherical cavity ﬁlled with drug ﬂuid. 
Hydraulic pressure can also open and enlarge the gaps between 
the needle wall and the tissue, allowing ﬂuid to ﬂow back to the 
tissue surface. This is the so-called backﬂow, one of the main prob- 
lems in CED treatment [173,193,194] . Because the high local pres- 
sure can potentially cause discomfort or other complications to the 
patient and the backﬂow would signiﬁcantly reduce the drug vol- 
ume, local tissue compression should be avoided. 
The FSI modeling method is ideal for capturing the ﬂuid-solid 
interface and helps in the development of backﬂow-free needles 
and procedures [193] . However, FSI has so far not been widely ap- 
plied due to the numerical challenges of some factors, e.g. , (i) the 
ﬂuid-solid interface is not constant but varies with hydraulic pres- 
sure, (ii) the fact that the tissue itself is permeable. Alternatively, 
[195] proposed using multiple layers of solid elements to repre- 
sent the ﬂow and tissue. The deformability of the two layers of 
solid elements enables capturing of the deformation of ﬂuid-solid 
boundaries. This method was then adopted and extended to 3D by 
Orozco et al. [194] . The accuracy of this method highly depends 
on the properties of the solid elements, which must match the 
behavior of the ﬂuid. Ivanchenko et al. [196] also applied the hy- 
draulic pressure directly to the solid domain to solve the solid de- 
formation. Particular attention must then be paid to the applied 
hydraulic pressure. 
3.3. Development of hydrogels to mimic brain tissue 
Because brain tissue is not easily accessible and raises ethical 
issues, synthetic materials that have similar mechanical properties 
to the real brain are gaining increasing attention [197] . As men- 
tioned above, some needle-tissue studies are based on phantoms. 
Hydrogels are, among other materials, the most commonly used 
materials that can mimic the mechanical and hydraulic behav- 
ior of brain tissues. These properties allow the hydrogels to serve 
as phantoms and provide real-scale training models for develop- 
ing treatments, e.g. , drug delivery, tumor resection and device im- 
plantation [198–200] . Reported brain-mimicking phantoms include 
those developed by Forte et al. [201,202] and Tan et al. [203] for 
brain surgery and drug delivery (among other things, the nonlinear 
mechanical properties of the brain-like hydrogel were fully charac- 
terized by Kainz et al. [204] ), Lavrova et al. [205] for the study of 
molecule diffusion in the brain, Distler et al. [206] for various load- 
ing conditions, including compression, tension and torsional shear, 
and Vanina et al. [207] for modeling complex metabolic transport 
processes. 
Researchers have also compared the properties of different ma- 
terials against different tissues and loading conditions with the aim 
of ﬁnding solutions to further improve existing materials and also 
provide guidance on material selection. Leibinger et al. [208] con- 
cluded that while gelatin (a commonly used phantom [209] ) re- 
produces well the needle insertion forces of the brain, a newly de- 
signed composite hydrogel developed at Imperial College [201] can 
better mimic the viscous nature of the soft tissue. Navarro-Lozoya 
et al. [210] compared hydrogels and emulsions with porcine brain 
tissue under similar strains and strain rates and concluded that the 
emulsion exhibits mechanical responses more similar to those of 
native porcine brain tissue than the other candidates. Tejo-Otero 
et al. [211] even tested a number of commonly used hydrogels ( e.g. , 
agarose, polyvinyl alcohol -PVA-, Phytagel -PHY- and methacrylate 
gelatine -GelMA-) and compared their mechanical properties to a 
variety of organs ( e.g. , liver, heart, kidney and brain) and drew 
some important practical conclusions. 
With the remarkable advancement of 3D printing techniques 
for hydrogels [212] , brain-like properties can be achieved at the 
macro scale by programming the microstructure of the mate- 
rial. This requires a quantitative understanding of the key mi- 
crostructural factors that govern the macroscale properties, thus 
enabling precise microstructural design [213] . Dimensional analy- 
sis, as represented by the Buckingham π theorem, provides pow- 
erful tools for identifying the key dimensionless parameters that 
govern some speciﬁc physical phenomenon. For example, the well- 
known Reynolds number, known in ﬂuid mechanics, regulates the 
ﬂow patterns [214] ; and a series of dimensionless parameters pro- 
posed by Yuan and colleagues can control the nonlinear buckling 
process [215–217] . Therefore, if the key dimensionless microstruc- 
tural parameters that control the mechanical and hydraulic be- 
havior of the brain can be identiﬁed, our ability to develop and 
program brain-mimicking phantoms will be greatly improved. The 
good news is that in recent years, machine learning has made com- 
plex dimensionless analyses more accessible [218,219] . 
3.4. Supporting techniques 
To understand the mechanical behavior of brain tissue and 
characterize its mechanical properties, mechanical testing tech- 
niques are required. The most commonly used techniques are 
compression testing, (including conﬁned compression, unconﬁned 
compression and indentation), tension testing and shear testing. 
Indentation testing methods [220,221] are often used to char- 
acterize compression behavior and to develop constitutive mod- 
els of brain tissue. Since compression is the most common defor- 
mation pattern of the brain, most mechanical tests of brain tis- 
sue have been performed using indentation methods, as summa- 
rized in Table 2 . Brain tissues have been shown to be strain rate 
and depth sensitive materials [99,109,131] , so strain rate and in- 
dentation depth are important factors to consider in these tests. 
In published data, strain rates used for brain tissue testing are up 
to 30 0 0/s. Indentation tests can also be carried out at different 
scales. While macroscopic indentations extract the macroscale and 
homogenized properties of tissues for practical applications and 
modeling, microscopic indentations are able to capture localized 
properties to reveal some unknown mechanisms [110,127] . Further- 
more, indentation testing can be performed in vivo and provide re- 
sults with high ﬁdelity [158,159] . 
Tensile testing is another type of mechanical testing used to de- 
termine mechanical properties of materials in which a controlled 
tension is applied to a sample until it fails. In fact, compared to 
indentation testing, it provides more comprehensive information 
about the mechanical properties of the material. However, since 
(i) this type of test is often used for materials that can with- 
stand tensile forces without immediately breaking while brain tis- 
sue is extremely soft and vulnerable, (ii) a larger sample size is 
required while brain tissue is diﬃcult to obatin, and (iii) it cannot 
be performed in vivo due to its destructive power, tension tests 
are relatively rarely used for mechanical tests of brain tissue (see 
Table 2 ). Nevertheless, Miller and Chinzei [99] showed that swine 
brain tissue was signiﬁcantly softer when extended than when 
compressed, and the brain tissue constitutive models developed 
11
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
based on compression experiments are not suﬃcient to explain 
tissue behavior under tension. Similarly, Eskandari et al. [166] ob- 
served that brain tissue exhibited strain-stiffening under compres- 
sion and strain-softening under tension. Budday et al. [110] also 
concluded that material parameters of the human brain identiﬁed 
for a single loading mode cannot predict a response under arbi- 
trary loading conditions. Therefore, tensile testing is essential to 
fully describe the mechanical behavior of brain tissue. 
However, in terms of the drug-delivery process, tension is not 
the main pattern of tissue deformation. On the other hand, the 
shear deformation caused by needle insertion might be more rel- 
evant. Shear properties ( e.g. , the shear modulus) of soft tissue can 
be measured by applying shear deformation and recording the re- 
action force, and there are a number of studies that have con- 
ducted shear tests with brain tissue [97,104,106,108,110,126,164] . It 
is worth noting that magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) is a 
new technique that can precisely measure the stiffness, shear mod- 
uli and viscosity of brain tissue in vivo [222–224] . The mechanism 
is to use a mechanical vibrator on the surface of the patient’s body 
to generate shear waves that propagate into deeper tissues of the 
patient, measure the propagation and velocity of the waves using 
an MRI acquisition sequence, and ﬁnally map the stiffness using 
inversion algorithms. The resolution reaches the scale of mm ∼cm 
[225] . However, since tissue stiffness is calculated by the inversion 
algorithm, the MRE measurements may be inaccurate for regions 
with strong heterogeneity, i.e. where the stiffness varies over a very 
small distance [226] . 
4. Solid mechanics: properties and deformation of neurons 
4.1. Mechanical properties of neurons 
At the cellular level, the neurons and their mechanical behav- 
ior also play an important role in brain drug delivery. On the 
one hand, neurons constitute the brain tissue, so their mechani- 
cal properties and spatial distribution directly determine the me- 
chanical behavior of the brain tissue. On the other hand, the gaps 
between neurons form the ﬂuid ﬂow pathway, so their mechanical 
behavior can divert the drug delivery route. Consequently, a deep 
understanding of the mechanical response and properties of neu- 
rons is crucial for developing precise drug-delivery procedures in 
the brain and can also unravel some unsolved brain problems re- 
lated to ﬂuid and mass transport [37] . 
As mentioned in Section 1 and illustrated in Fig. 1 , neurons 
consist of three parts: the cell body, also called the soma, which 
contains genetic information and maintains the structure of the 
neurons, and provides energy to drive activities; the axon, a long 
tail-like structure that connects to the cell body at a special junc- 
tion, often insulated with a fatty substance called myelin that helps 
them transmit an electrical signal; and the dendrites, which are ﬁ- 
brous roots that branch off from the cell body and receive/process 
signals from the axons of other neurons. This slender structure 
makes neurons extremely soft and ﬂexible, with the equivalent 
elastic moduli typically in the range of 0 . 1 ∼2 kPa [227] . This 
means that even minor mechanical stimulation may deform the 
neurons, while the drug infusion pressure can reach up to 10 kPa 
[5] . In addition, neurons also show hysteretic features, strong non- 
linearity and signiﬁcant time/rate dependencies [12,228] . There- 
fore, some hyper- and viscoelastic material models have been pro- 
posed and the corresponding parameters characterized to describe 
the mechanical behavior of neurons [12,13,228,229] . The fracture 
property of neurons is another important factor to be considered 
when injecting drugs as a benchmark for deﬁning the threshold of 
locally applied hydraulic pressure. According to Hasan et al. [230] , 
the failure strains for the microtubules and Tau proteins (major 
components of neuronal cytoskeleton) are 50 and 40%, respectively, 
Fig. 7. Methods for measuring the mechanical properties of neurons: (A) Schematic 
representation of the indentation test using atomic force microscopy. (B) Left : 
Schematic representation of the tension test with micro-needle and micro-motor 
system. Right : Neuron deformation over time using the micro-needle and micro- 
motor system; reproduced from Bernal et al. [12] . (C) Top : Schematic representation 
of the tension test with optical tweezers. Bottom : Neuron stretch with and without 
applying optical tweezers; reproduced from Lu et al [229] . 
and the corresponding axonal failure strain and stress vary be- 
tween 6 and 11% and 5 ∼19 . 8 MPa under strain rates from 10/s 
to 50/s. All the above evidence supports the need to consider the 
mechanical behavior of neurons to better capture the process of 
drug delivery in the brain. 
4.2. Supporting techniques 
The techniques that have been used to measure the mechanical 
properties of neurons can be categorized into indentation meth- 
ods and tension methods, although all types of tests are very rare 
in the literature. The indentation method is mainly based on the 
use of atomic force microscopy (AFM). Using a very sharp tip at- 
tached to a cantilever, as shown in Fig. 7 A, AFM is capable of 
not only scanning over a sample surface and restoring the shape 
of the surface, but also to penetrate the sample and return the 
force-displacement curve. Lu et al [229] used AFM to determine 
viscoelastic properties of neurons and glial cells from the mam- 
malian brain (hippocampus) and retina. They found that elastic 
behavior dominates over viscous behavior in all CNS cells. Zhang 
et al. [231] used AFM to show that the stiffness of the axon plasma 
membrane is signiﬁcantly higher than the stiffness of dendrites 
and soma using cultured rat hippocampus neurons. Regarding the 
tension test of neurons, Bernal et al. [12] used a micro-needle 
mounted on a direct current motor to retract the neurons like 
pulling back a bow, and recorded the force-displacement curve, as 
shown in Fig. 7 B. They observed elastic response, viscoelastic relax- 
ation and active contraction, and created a constitutive model to 
describe these behaviors. Optical tweezers / stretchers / trap, a type 
of technology that uses laser beams to manipulate microscopic 
and sub-microscopic objects, offers another approach to conduct- 
ing tension testing on neurons, as shown in Fig. 7 C, and has been 
widely used to study cell mechanics [232,233] . In the work by 
Lu et al. [229] , the optical stretcher has also been used to mea- 
sure the viscoelastic properties of glial cells and neurons. Other 
techniques such as the nano tensile tester [234] and the mag- 
netic (electromagnetic) tweezers [235] could also offer alternatives. 
The theories, capabilities and limitations of these advanced, high- 
precision techniques are systematically reviewed by Neuman and 
Nagy [236] . A comprehensive analysis of neuronal biomechanics 
using AFM can also be found in [237] . 
12
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
In addition, understanding and modeling the behavior of neu- 
rons also requires ultra-high resolution imaging techniques to ob- 
serve the components in neurons and reconstruct the geometry or 
microstructure of neurons to model them [227,230] . Using SEM, 
the cross-sectional view of the axons revealed the cytoskeleton of 
the axon, which includes the microtubules, Tau proteins, neuro- 
ﬁlaments, and microﬁlaments, and that the microtubules are or- 
ganized in a hexagonal arrangement and cross-linked by proteins 
[230] . Using FIB-SEM, Wu et al. [238] reconstructed the realistic 3D 
structure of neurons, and in addition, Bernardini et al. [239] built 
a comprehensive database of the size and shape distribution of ax- 
ons in the ovine brain. These data allow researchers to reconstruct 
neurons and conduct numerical studies to gain a deeper under- 
standing of the mechanical behaviors of neurons across scales [13] . 
5. Mathematical models for brain drug delivery 
While biomechanics and biophysics focus on a few speciﬁc fac- 
tors to build the principles that control the drug-delivery processes 
in the brain, mathematical models utilize these principles and in- 
tegrate the information to further predict the entire drug-delivery 
process. Due to the ﬂourishing biomechanical and biophysical re- 
search on the brain, numerous mathematical models for drug de- 
livery in the brain have been proposed. Here, we focus primarily 
on infusion-based methods of drug delivery. 
5.1. Single-phase models 
As mentioned in Section 2 , the convection-diffusion-reaction 
equation is a fundamental principle in building mathematical mod- 
els for drug delivery. An example of seminal work dates back to 
1997, when Kalyanasundaram et al. [15] used MR images to rebuild 
brain geometry in 2D. The employment of the convection-diffusion 
equation allowed them to simulate the interleukin-2 transport in 
the brain parenchyma post-ventricular perfusion and, based on the 
simulation results, identify the essential role of brain microstruc- 
ture and drug transport properties on the delivery of this speciﬁc 
drug. A more advanced image-based brain model in 3D was set 
up years later, enabling the comparison of various brain regions 
[240] . Their study demonstrated the signiﬁcant differences in drug 
distribution in the GM and WM, in particular along and perpen- 
dicular to axons, indicating the necessity to develop models that 
can consider tissue anisotropy and microstructural heterogeneity. 
Linninger et al. [16,20,30] and Kim et al. [31,241,242] developed a 
protocol and model to extract tissue anisotropy and heterogene- 
ity from DTI images. Moreover, their drug delivery model was also 
developed with the capability of considering drug metabolism and 
elimination, including drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, 
and excretion (ADME). These contributions further increased the 
model’s accuracy in predicting drug delivery in the brain and pro- 
vided valuable references for optimizing the design of the CED in- 
fusion catheter. In pharmacology, the ADME processes of drugs can 
be mathematically described using pharmacokinetic models [17] . 
These models are particularly useful for understanding the fate of 
drugs in the brain and have therefore been widely developed and 
adopted. 
The ﬂuid ﬁeld of drugs in brain tissue is also affected by other 
bioﬂuids and components in the brain, such as CSF and ISF, which 
form other phases in mathematical models. Stine and Munson 
thoroughly analyzed the relationship between CED and ISF dynam- 
ics in their review [243] . A biphasic model, which is more sys- 
tematic, was established by Linninger and colleagues by coupling 
pulsatile CSF motion with intracranial pressure [244,245] . Although 
the model was developed to investigate hydrocephalus and exter- 
nal ﬂuid which was not considered, it could still be utilized to 
simulate drug delivery through CED. Later, a nonlinear biphasic 
model was further developed by considering ﬂuid exchange be- 
tween the blood and tissue. This allowed the model to represent 
a more complex system for cerebral ﬂow infusion analysis [246] . 
To be closer to reality, ISF, blood plasma [247,248] and tumor leak- 
age [249] were also considered in the following studies. In the 
mathematical models by Zhan and colleagues [18,19,29,32,44,250] , 
multiple steps in brain drug delivery, including drug release and 
bioreactions, werecombined with the drug ﬂuid and ISF. The 
Physiologically-based pharmacokinetics (PBPK) models have the 
advantage of providing more accurate and comprehensive results 
because they take into account the physiological and anatomi- 
cal differences between individuals, such as blood ﬂow rates be- 
tween speciﬁc organs, tissue partitioning coeﬃcients, and organ 
size [251–253] . Therefore, a number of other PBPK models are also 
being developed to predict the fate of different drugs in different 
brain compartments [254–259] . Readers can refer to a recent book 
chapter [260] and a review [261] , in which the pharmacokinetic 
principles and anatomical connections of drug distribution in the 
brain have been comprehensively presented. 
Since these models only consider the drug ﬂuid, we categorize 
them as a type of single-phase model. By using advanced imag- 
ing techniques to create realistic geometries, single-phase models 
have become very sophisticated after almost 20 years of develop- 
ment. However, ﬁndings from biomechanical and biophysical stud- 
ies clearly show that the drug-delivery process in the brain does 
not involve just one phase. The tissue and neuron deformations, 
for example, must be taken into account. 
5.2. Considerations of the biphasic nature of the brain 
The deformation of the neuron leads to microstructural defor- 
mation, which can alter the local ﬂow ﬁeld and trigger the de- 
velopment of biphasic models for the brain. Chen et al. [262] es- 
tablished one of the earliest poroelastic models of brain tissue in 
2002 to enable the prediction of ﬂuid ﬂow in brain tissue in CED 
with improved accuracy. In addition to the possibility of visualiz- 
ing the ﬂow ﬁeld in the brain, the tissue microstructure deforma- 
tion caused by the localized ﬂuid pressure could also be included 
in the model. To validate the model, brain-like agarose gel exper- 
iments were performed. As the ﬁrst step to establish the poroe- 
lasticity model for the tissues of brain, some assumptions were 
introduced, particularly the tissue was considered linear elastic, 
isotropic and homogeneous. To relax the linear elastic assump- 
tion, Chen and Sarntinoranont [179] applied an exponential equa- 
tion to describe the tissue deformation and hydraulic permeability, 
derived from agarose gels and biological tissues, e.g. cartilage. In 
addition to the application of empirical relations, the introduction 
of nonlinear material properties to the model is an effective way, 
which has already been studied in detail, particularly in Smith’s 
group. They ﬁrst utilized an Ogden-type hyperelastic compress- 
ible function to describe brain tissues, enabling modeling of the 
nonlinear relationship existing between local hydraulic permeabil- 
ity and local ﬂuid pressure [180] . The later model which geomet- 
rical nonlinearity was added allowed simulation of the hydraulic 
permeability’s dependence on both the matrix strain and nonlin- 
ear boundary conditions at the infusion cavity [263] . A compari- 
son of modeling prediction from single-phase and biphasic models 
demonstrated the importance of considering the matrix’s ﬁnite de- 
formation when predicting drug concentration and its distribution 
pattern. Moreover, their studies also highlighted the necessity to 
experimentally determine the brain tissue’s material nonlinearity 
in a range of strains [263,264] . 
Another potential improvement of poroelastic models is to in- 
clude the anisotropy and heterogeneity of brain tissues. In pio- 
neering work performed by Støverud et al. [265] in 2012, patient- 
speciﬁc brain structures and parameters were acquired from DTI 
13
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
Fig. 8. Finite element models for the brain: (A) Finite element modeling for drug delivery in the brain. Brain geometry is reconstructed using magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI); reproduced from Yang and Zhan [19] ; CNP stands for the drug concentration. (B) Registration of tissue anisotropy based on diffusion tensor imaging (DTI); reproduced 
from Hajiaghamemar et al. [269] . 
data and implemented into their biphasic model. The model char- 
acterized the difference between WM and GM in terms of frac- 
tional anisotropy, whereas, material nonlinearity was not covered. 
Despite widespread acceptance of accounting for the two-phase 
nature of the brain, the implementations at the whole brain level 
and in drug-delivery scenarios are scarcely seen. 
Obviously, consideration of the biphasic nature of the brain 
highlights the importance of understanding and characterizing the 
hydraulic and mechanical properties of brain tissue and neurons, 
which have been discussed in Sections 2 –4 . 
5.3. Supporting techniques and databases 
Obviously, the mathematical model’s development is inextrica- 
bly linked to the development of imaging techniques and geometry 
reconstruction methods as well as the construction of experimen- 
tal databases that can be used to validate the models. 
Mathematical models are commonly established based on 
idealized geometrical models at the initial stages of develop- 
ment. For instance, Chen et al. [262] developed their poroelas- 
tic biphasic model in 2002 using brain phantom gels, which 
could be considered isotropic and homogeneous. The model was 
upgraded to include material and geometric nonlinearity while 
it was still based on an idealized model in spherical geometry 
[179,180,246,263,264,266] . Idealized models are suitable for con- 
ducting parametric scan to determine the impact of different ma- 
terials and administration parameters on the spatial proﬁle of drug 
concentration since geometric properties are not a primary focus. 
Hence, in recent years, the spherical model is still used to examine 
how drug diffusion anisotropy and tissue permeability determine 
the delivery outcome of CED [29] . Notably, so far, most simula- 
tion studies of drug particle diffusion are based on idealized mod- 
els [26,266–268] . The main reasons are (i) the shortage of high- 
resolution and accurate anatomical images to re-build brain tumor 
microstructure; and (ii) the high requirement on computational re- 
sources and power to perform particle-tracking simulations that 
can accommodate the complex realistic tissue microstructure and 
micro-environment. 
Given the importance of anisotropy and heterogeneity of brain 
tissues, more realistic geometric models are necessary to ensure 
the modeling prediction accuracy at the relevant length scales 
[29,270] . Anatomical MRI and DTI techniques have been exten- 
sively developed and applied in simulation studies in the last few 
years. In the earliest work done by Kalyanasundaram et al. [15] in 
1997, a realistic 2D brain geometry was extracted from MRI data. 
This was closely followed by the reconstruction of the brain in 
3D from anatomic MRI [270] . With the recognition of the impor- 
tance of anisotropy, DTI technology has also begun to be widely 
used to characterize the orientation of neurons, particularly ax- 
ons in WM [30] . Since then, the use of anatomical MRI and DTI 
techniques to reconstruct the brain, as shown in Fig. 8 , has gradu- 
ally become a conventional method in mathematical modeling ap- 
plications [31,32,44,241,242,24 8,24 9,265] . The primary objective of 
developing mathematical models is to offer recommendations for 
preoperative planning. However, because of individual differences, 
a geometric model cannot be used for different patients. There- 
fore, the procurement of patient-speciﬁc models also become a hot 
topic and has been extensively studied [93,271–273] . As a practi- 
cal diffusion MRI technique, Neurite Oriented Dispersion and Den- 
sity Imaging (NODDI) can provide estimations of the microstruc- 
tural complexity of dendrites and axons in vivo on clinical MRI 
scanners Zhang et al. [274] . Such detailed information on tissue 
Table 3 
Animal studies that can develop and improve mathematical models of drug delivery in the brain. 
Subjects 
Health condition 
Infusion substance 
Measured parameters 
Images 
Refs. 
Monkey 
Healthy 
MRI contrast agent Gadoteridol 
Infusate position and size, ﬂow rate 
MRI, DTI 
[276] 
Monkey 
Healthy 
liposomal GD, free GD 
Flow rate, distribution of GDNF protein 
MRI 
[277] 
Porcine 
Healthy 
MR marker Gadodiamide 
Tracer concentration, ﬂow rate, brain tissue expansion 
MRI 
[278] 
Rat 
Healthy 
Gd-DTPA albumin tracer 
Tracer distributions, ﬂow rate 
MRI, DTI 
[31] 
Monkey 
Healthy 
Saline 
Flow rate, infusate distribution, anisotropy, and 
temporal dynamics, tissue structure change 
MRI, DTI 
[279] 
Sheep 
Healthy 
Gadolinium (GD) 
Flow rate, GD distribution 
CBCT, MRI 
[280] 
Pig 
Healthy 
GD 
Flow rate, GD distribution 
MRI 
[281] 
Human 
Brain tumor 
Gd-DTPA tracer 
Flow rate, distribution and concentration of Gd-DTPA 
tracer 
MRI 
[273] 
14
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
microstructure can improve mathematical models. The most im- 
pressive feature in terms of mathematical modeling is its ability to 
provide in vivo information about the local porosity distribution. 
Since the hydraulic permeability of porous media is closely related 
to the porosity of the medium and the correlation of permeabil- 
ity with variable porosity is the basis of biphasic models, NODDI 
holds great potential to be an effective tool in further improving 
the mathematical modeling of drug delivery in the brain. 
A number of animal studies of CED have been performed in 
swine, monkey, ovine, and rat models, and there are also some 
clinical trials with human patients. These experiments and tri- 
als are important databases that can be used to create and im- 
prove mathematical models of drug delivery in the brain. The de- 
tailed information of some referenced experiments is summarized 
in Table 3 . Further preclinical and clinical evidence can be found in 
the review [275] and on ClinicalTrials.gov (a database of privately 
and publicly funded clinical studies conducted around the world). 
6. Conclusions, challenges and perspectives 
Mathematical models for infusion-based drug delivery in the 
brain have steadily improved over the past twenty years, partic- 
ularly with the advancement of emerging supporting techniques. 
However, several gaps still need to be ﬁlled to meet clinical re- 
quirements. In this section, we ﬁrst summarize the strategy for 
modeling infusion-based drug delivery in the brain, drawing on 
key ﬁndings from the reviewed studies. This will help readers get 
clear ideas of how to build proper models according to the needs 
of their search. We then highlight the major gaps in the develop- 
ment of next-generation models and provide insights into strate- 
gies to potentially address these gaps. 
It is worth noting that although most of the studies reviewed 
relate to CED, the most representative type of mechanically con- 
trolled drug delivery in the brain, there are also other types, such 
as focused ultrasound blood-brain barrier disruption [282] , which 
uses ultrasound waves to temporarily open the BBB to allow drugs 
to pass, and magnetic ﬁeld-assisted drug delivery [283] . They also 
involve ﬂuid transport and tissue deformation. Therefore, the in- 
sights of this article are also applicable to modeling other types of 
mechanically controlled drug delivery in the brain. 
6.1. Summary 
In this article, we have provided a comprehensive overview of 
the current status of the ﬁeld to shed light on the development of 
a next-generation computational model that can accurately predict 
infusion-based drug delivery in the brain from physical, mechani- 
cal, and mathematical perspectives. 
In general, the convection-diffusion-reaction Eq. (1) , as dis- 
cussed in Section 2 , provides the framework for capturing the 
time-varying drug concentration distribution in the brain. The con- 
struction of this equation requires a number of inputs, namely tis- 
sue permeability, drug diffusivity and drug clearance rate, which 
can be characterized by methods discussed in Section 2.4 . Due 
to the biphasic nature of the brain, the permeability of brain tis- 
sue varies during the drug transport process, as drug ﬂow can 
deform the nerve cells and change the ﬂow pathway, as shown 
in Fig. 4 [13,24] . This problem can be solved by adopting (i) a 
pressure-dependent permeability tensor for brain tissue, as devel- 
oped by Yuan et al. [13] and (ii) the poro-elastic theory and com- 
putational models that connect tissue deformation with perme- 
ability change, as discussed in Sections 3.1.5 and 5.2 , respectively. 
Capturing ﬂuid-cell interactions at the cellular level is crucial for 
developing pressure-dependent permeability tensors and advanced 
poro-elastic models to more accurately predict drug delivery in 
the brain. Therefore, we discussed the properties of nerve cells in 
Section 4 . 
A complete model should also account for the effects of nee- 
dle implantation and drug injection on the ability to administer 
drug delivery and thus be able to provide practical suggestions for 
conducting drug delivery. The needle implantation process can be 
modeled by properly describing the needle-brain interaction ( i.e. 
friction, shear deformation, crack initiation, crack propagation). The 
process of drug injection, which involves the complex interactions 
that lead to tissue swelling and backﬂow ( Fig. 5 B and C), can po- 
tentially be modeled by FSI techniques and models [193] . How- 
ever, modeling the backﬂow is still challenging, as analyzed in 
Section 3.2 . The properties and constitutive models form the ba- 
sis for modeling brain deformation during these processes, which 
were analyzed in detail in Section 3 . 
6.2. Limitations and future work in parameter identiﬁcation 
Parameter identiﬁcation of processes governing drug delivery 
in the brain is currently highly variable. For example, the mea- 
sured hydraulic permeability values of brain tissue differ by a fac- 
tor of 10 0 0 among different studies, as shown in Table 1 . This can 
be attributed to differences in brain regions, species, measurement 
methods and environmental conditions, etc . It should be noted that 
sample preparations in these tests ( e.g. , shipping, cutting) can have 
a signiﬁcant effect on the hydraulic permeability since the mi- 
crostructure of the porous medium would inevitably change. How- 
ever, due to the limitations and possible biases in the experimen- 
tal setups, as analyzed in Section 2.4.1 , there are no gold standard 
methods. In addition, the current understanding of the mechani- 
cal properties of neurons is neither suﬃcient nor comprehensive, 
while abundant evidence demonstrates the signiﬁcant inﬂuence of 
the mechanical behavior of neurons on drug delivery pathways in 
the brain. The question therefore arises as to how to develop gold 
standard methods to generally and precisely identify the properties 
that govern drug delivery in the brain, e.g. , the permeability tensor 
of brain tissue, the diffusivity tensor of drug particles, constitutive 
models of brain tissues and neurons are essential. Furthermore, 
the question of how to characterize these properties non-invasively 
is not currently addressed but, once resolved, would greatly con- 
tribute to clinical practice. 
Alternatively, numerical modeling offers great potential to as- 
sist in the characterization of these properties, but the precision 
depends heavily on the ﬁdelity of the microstructural description. 
Although the NODDI technique has made it possible to map the 
local porosity of the brain, additional details, e.g. , the neuron size 
distribution, are required to map the permeability tensor. There is 
also a need for models and techniques at the molecular and neu- 
ron scales that can help identify the interactions between neurons 
and drug molecules. This is not only valuable for the discovery of 
new eﬃcient drugs, but can also provide information for establish- 
ing and improving upper-scale models. 
6.3. Disease-induced alterations 
The occurrence of pathologies can lead to changes in tissue mi- 
crostructure, thereby affecting the results of drug delivery. On the 
one hand, parameters that reﬂect tissue properties can be changed 
signiﬁcantly. For example, tissue permeability in brain tumors can 
become an order of magnitude higher than that of surrounding 
normal tissue due to increased tissue porosity and changes in the 
proportion of extracellular matrix components [284] . Moreover, tis- 
sue porosity varies with the grade of brain tumors [285,286] , fur- 
ther expanding the spectrum of tissue permeability changes. These 
changes in tissue microstructure also complicate drug delivery. In 
neurodegenerative diseases, the change or loss of neuronal myelin 
15
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
[287,288] can alter the surface charge of axons, which may further 
inﬂuence the outcomes of nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery 
due to the crucial role of Coulomb forces in determining nanopar- 
ticle diffusion in the brain tissue [27] . On the other hand, these 
alterations also affect model assumptions. For example, mathemat- 
ical models of drug delivery to the brain often assume that BBB 
is intact. However, it has been found that intratumoral microvas- 
culature can become leaky in metastatic brain tumors [289] , mak- 
ing the assumption of an intact BBB less valid for simulating drug 
delivery to these tumors. The effects of disease on tissue proper- 
ties are diverse and may be interrelated, ultimately affecting drug 
transport and accumulation. This inﬂuence may vary depending on 
the disease type, highlighting the need to establish disease-speciﬁc 
models. 
6.4. Limitations and future work in modeling approaches 
Drug delivery in the brain is a multiscale process and includes 
several phases. The ﬁnal drug distribution pattern throughout 
the brain is determined by the underlying complex sub-processes 
down to the neuron and tissue scales, which are governed by in- 
teractions between different physical factors. Once the effects of 
individual phases have been identiﬁed, how to reconcile the in- 
teractions between these different phases ( i.e. chemical reaction, 
biological metabolism, mechanical behavior) and different compo- 
nents ( e.g. , ECM, neurons, ISF, CSF) in one equation system is also a 
challenging problem. Furthermore, the homogenization of this sys- 
tem of equations in the heterogeneous and anisotropic brain tis- 
sues still remains a challenge given the multiple scales. 
At the tissue and brain scales, consolidation theory ( i.e. 
poroelastic/poroviscoelastic models) is a great inspiration and a 
powerful tool to study the mechanical behavior of brain tissue 
during the drug infusion process. While the assumption that 
local homogeneity and isotropy agree well with geological ex- 
periments, the same hypothesis may not be applicable to brain 
tissues. To obtain more accurate outcomes, it is worth going to 
the microscopic scale to analyze the interaction between the hy- 
draulic pressure and the microstructure, which also increases the 
need for a reconstruction method with higher resolution imaging 
techniques. 
There is not enough research on how to capture the phenom- 
ena caused by the interactions between the drug and the brain 
tissue across scales. These include tissue swelling due to the ac- 
cumulation of the drug at the needle tip, backﬂow ( i.e. drug ﬂow 
back along the gap between the needle wall and the tissue when 
the local hydraulic pressure is high), and tissue recovery due to 
the absorption and drainage of the drug, as shown in Fig. 5 . 
Section 3.2 has reviewed studies on tissue needle interactions, but 
very few studies have involved brain tissue. The diﬃculty in mod- 
eling these phenomena lies in the continuously evolving ﬂuid-solid 
interfaces. The pressure-dependent permeability of brain tissues 
due to the interaction between the ﬂuid and neurons also requires 
more attention. 
Model validation using experimental or clinical data, particu- 
larly at the brain level, represents an open challenge, mainly due to 
ethical issues and the lack of experimental/clinical data. Therefore, 
there are currently no fully validated computational models avail- 
able to predict convection-enhanced drug delivery in the brain. 
In fact, as introduced in Section 5.3 , some animal studies of CED 
have been conducted on swine, monkey, ovine, and rat models, 
and there are also some clinical trials on human patients, which 
are summarized in Table 3 . These data could be used to validate 
brain-scale models. Model validation can focus on the outcomes of 
delivery, including the time course and spatial distribution of drug 
concentration, as well as treatment effectiveness, such as changes 
in tumor volume in cancer therapy. 
6.5. Model-image compatibility and patient speciﬁcity 
Currently, single-phase mathematical models have shown the 
best compatibility with advanced imaging-based digital brains, al- 
lowing them to assist clinical planning. However, a major short- 
coming is that the role of tissue deformation in determining drug 
distribution cannot be taken into account. Although two-phase 
models can account for the coupling effects of ﬂuid and solid 
phases, they have not yet been fully integrated into realistic geo- 
metric models. This may be attributed to numerical challenges and 
computational workload. Greater diﬃculties may arise when mul- 
tiphasic mathematical models are solved on patient-speciﬁc brain 
structures, although this can signiﬁcantly improve the reliability of 
the predictions. While searching for the most accurate method, one 
must also consider how to keep the trade-off between the advan- 
tages of advanced mathematical models and the heavy workload 
brought by realistic geometric models. 
In addition, the biological and physiological properties of tis- 
sues as well as the transport properties of drugs can vary signiﬁ- 
cantly from patient to patient and can be highly heterogeneous in 
some diseases, such as brain tumors. These variations and changes 
can greatly inﬂuence drug transport and accumulation, thereby af- 
fecting the outcomes of drug delivery. Advances in medical imag- 
ing techniques have enabled the interpretation of various tissue 
and drug properties from medical images of patients, which can be 
captured during diagnosis. The imaging protocols, tissue and drug 
properties, models for property extraction and applications for var- 
ious modalities of MRI, CT, ultrasound and PET are discussed by 
Bhandari et al. [290] . Readers are encouraged to study Section 3 of 
this reference for detailed information. 
6.6. Emerging technologies and approaches for improved drug 
delivery in the brain 
Except for the infusion-based drug delivery method, emerging 
technologies have shown promise in overcoming the BBB in pre- 
clinical trials. Nano-sized drug delivery systems (DDSs) that encap- 
sulate small molecular drugs with materials inert to bioreactions 
can effectively extend the circulation time and half-life of drugs in 
the human body [291] , ensuring sustainable drug supply. In addi- 
tion, surface modiﬁcations using speciﬁc ligands enable these DDSs 
to bind to corresponding receptors on the membrane of endothe- 
lial cells, thereby enhancing BBB penetration [292] . In addition, the 
combination of microbubbles and ultrasound was found to tem- 
porarily open the BBB [293] . Unlike most nano-sized DDSs that cir- 
culate throughout the body with the bloodstream, the location of 
BBB disruption can be precisely controlled by focusing ultrasound, 
allowing for more localized drug delivery to target regions in the 
brain. Beyond intravenous administration, CED offers an alterna- 
tive by infusing drugs directly in the extracellular space of the tis- 
sue. To minimize tissue damage during catheter infusion, ﬂexible 
catheters that can penetrate the tissue along a pre-designed tra- 
jectory have also been developed [294,295] . Their integration with 
an image-based path planner and visual navigation system can en- 
sure accurate placement at the target infusion site while avoid- 
ing important and sensitive brain regions [95,296] . Limited drug 
penetration remains another challenge in brain drug delivery. In- 
travenously administered drugs accumulate mainly near capillaries 
[297] , and the drug concentration in CED is high enough for ef- 
fective therapy only near the infusion site [44,298] . Recent stud- 
ies have demonstrated the potential to homogenize drug distribu- 
tion using external magnetic ﬁelds [299] . Drug delivering through 
the glymphatic system [300] and intrathecal injection [301] also 
play prominent roles in the ﬁeld of brain drug delivery. These 
techniques allow the drugs to transport though the convection of 
CSF, thus proving other ways to bypass the BBB. However, there 
16
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
are signiﬁcant challenges to be addressed before achieving their 
clinical applications. Therefore, they also require attentions to be 
paid to the speciﬁc processes, challenges, and solutions. Artiﬁ- 
cial intelligence (AI), with its powerful data processing capabilities, 
holds great potential in drug development and design to identify 
the most effective therapeutic compounds [302,303] . AI can also 
quickly extract tissue properties from medical images, providing 
a more detailed description of the patient-speciﬁc environment in 
vivo [304] . Since the patient’s condition can change during treat- 
ment, reinforcement learning-based models have been developed 
to adapt drug delivery regimens in real time to the patient’s evolv- 
ing condition [305,306] . 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan- 
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
inﬂuence the work reported in this paper. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Tian Yuan: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Conceptualization. 
Wenbo Zhan: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Methodology, Data curation. Michele Terzano: Writing – re- 
view & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology. Gerhard A. 
Holzapfel: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Methodology. 
Daniele Dini: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, 
Project administration, Methodology, Conceptualization. 
Acknowledgements 
This project has received funding from the European Unions 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under Grant Agree- 
ment No. 688279. Daniele Dini would like to acknowledge the 
support received from the EPSRC under the Established Career 
Fellowship Grant No. EP/N025954/1, the Shell/RAEng Research 
Chair in Complex Engineering Interfaces (RCSRF2122-14-143), and 
the Medical Research Council (MR/Y008448/1). Tian Yuan would 
like to acknowledge the support received from Great Britain- 
China Educational Trust award and the Medical Research Council 
(MR/Y008448/1). 
References 
[1] V.L. Feigin, T. Vos, E. Nichols, M.O. Owolabi, W.M. Carroll, M. Dichgans, 
G. Deuschl, P. Parmar, M. Brainin, C. Murray, The global burden of neurolog- 
ical disorders: translating evidence into policy, Lancet Neurol. 19 (3) (2020) 
255–265, doi: 10.1016/S1474- 4422(19)30411- 9 . 
[2] V.L. Feigin, E. Nichols, T. Alam, M.S. Bannick, et al., Global, regional, and na- 
tional burden of neurological disorders, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for 
the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016, Lancet Neurol. 18 (5) (2019) 459–
480, doi: 10.1016/S1474- 4422(18)30499- X . 
[3] N.J. Abbott, A .A .K. Patabendige, D.E.M. Dolman, S.R. Yusof, D.J. Begley, Struc- 
ture and function of the blood–brain barrier, Neurobiol. Dis. 37 (1) (2010) 
13–25, doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.07.030 . 
[4] A .M. Mehta, A .M. Sonabend, J.N. Bruce, Convection-enhanced delivery, Neu- 
rotherapeutics 14 (2) (2017) 358–371, doi: 10.1007/s13311- 017- 0520- 4 . 
[5] R.H. Bobo, D.W. Laske, A. Akbasak, P.F. Morrison, R.L. Dedrick, E.H. Oldﬁeld, 
Convection-enhanced delivery of macromolecules in the brain, Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91 (6) (1994) 2076–2080, doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.6.2076 . 
[6] A. Jamal, T. Yuan, S. Galvan, A. Castellano, M. Riva, R. Secoli, A. Falini, L. Bello, 
F. Rodriguez y. Baena, D. Dini, Insights into infusion-based targeted drug de- 
livery in the brain: perspectives, challenges and opportunities, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 
23 (6) (2022) 3139, doi: 10.3390/ijms23063139 . 
[7] J.H. Sampson, G. Archer, C. Pedain, E. Wembacher-Schröder, M. West- 
phal, S. Kunwar, M.A. Vogelbaum, A. Coan, J.E. Herndon, R. Raghavan, 
M.L. Brady, D.A. Reardon, A.H. Friedman, H.S. Friedman, M.I. Rodríguez-Ponce, 
S.M. Chang, S. Mittermeyer, D. Croteau, R.K. Puri, Poor drug distribution as 
a possible explanation for the results of the PRECISE trial: clinical article, J. 
Neurosurg. 113 (2) (2010) 301–309, doi: 10.3171/2009.11.JNS091052 . 
[8] M.F. Salvatore, Y. Ai, B. Fischer, A.M. Zhang, R.C. Grondin, Z. Zhang, G.A. Ger- 
hardt, D.M. Gash, Point source concentration of GDNF may explain failure 
of phase II clinical trial, Exp. Neurol. 202 (2) (2006) 497–505, doi: 10.1016/ 
j.expneurol.2006.07.015 . 
[9] F. Casanova, P.R. Carney, M. Sarntinoranont, Effect of needle insertion speed 
on tissue injury, stress, and backﬂow distribution for convection-enhanced 
delivery in the rat brain, PLoS One 9 (4) (2014) e94919, doi: 10.1371/journal. 
pone.0094919 . 
[10] R.J. Mackenzie, Gray matter vs white matter, Neurosci. Technol. Netw. (2023) . 
https://www.technologynetworks.com/neuroscience/articles/gray- matter- vs- 
white-matter-322973 
[11] D.F. Meaney, Relationship between structural modeling and hyperelas- 
tic material behavior: application to CNS white matter, Biomech. Model. 
Mechanobiol. 1 (4) (2003) 279–293, doi: 10.1007/s10237- 002- 0020- 1 . 
[12] R. Bernal, P.A. Pullarkat, F. Melo, Mechanical properties of axons, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 99 (1) (2007) 018301, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.018301 . 
[13] T. Yuan, W. Zhan, D. Dini, Linking ﬂuid-axons interactions to the macroscopic 
ﬂuid transport properties of the brain, Acta Biomater. 160 (2023) 152–163, 
doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2023.02.010 . 
[14] S. Ito, M. Funaoka, I. Hanasaki, S. Takei, M. Morimoto, M. Irie, H. Miyasaka, 
Visualization of the microstructure and the position-dependent diffusion 
coeﬃcient in a blended polymer solid using photo-activation localization 
microscopy combined with single-molecule tracking based on one-color 
ﬂuorescence-switching of diarylethene, Polym. Chem. 13 (6) (2022) 736–740, 
doi: 10.1039/D1PY01100F . 
[15] S. Kalyanasundaram, V.D. Calhoun, K.W. Leong, A ﬁnite element model for 
predicting the distribution of drugs delivered intracranially to the brain, Am. 
J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. (1997) . https://journals.physiology.org/ 
doi/full/10.1152/ajpregu.1997.273.5.R1810 
[16] A .A . Linninger, M.R. Somayaji, M. Mekarski, L. Zhang, Prediction of 
convection-enhanced drug delivery to the human brain, J. Theor. Biol. 250 
(1) (2008) 125–138, doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2007.09.009 . 
[17] W. Zhan, M. Alamer, X.Y. Xu, Computational modelling of drug delivery to 
solid tumour: understanding the interplay between chemotherapeutics and 
biological system for optimised delivery systems, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 132 
(2018) 81–103, doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2018.07.013 . 
[18] W. Zhan, Convection enhanced delivery of anti-angiogenic and cytotoxic 
agents in combination therapy against brain tumour, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 141 
(2020) 105094, doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2019.105094 . 
[19] Y. Yang, W. Zhan, Role of tissue hydraulic permeability in convection- 
enhanced delivery of nanoparticle-encapsulated chemotherapy drugs 
to brain tumour, Pharm. Res. 39 (5) (2022) 877–892, doi: 10.1007/ 
s11095- 022- 03261- 7 . 
[20] M.R. Somayaji, M. Xenos, L. Zhang, M. Mekarski, A .A . Linninger, Systematic 
design of drug delivery therapies, Comput. Chem. Eng. 32 (1) (2008) 89–98, 
doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2007.06.014 . 
[21] J. Siepmann, F. Siepmann, A.T. Florence, Local controlled drug delivery to the 
brain: mathematical modeling of the underlying mass transport mechanisms, 
Int. J. Pharm. 314 (2) (2006) 101–119, doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2005.07.027 . 
[22] M. Vidotto, D. Botnariuc, E. De Momi, D. Dini, A computational ﬂuid dy- 
namics approach to determine white matter permeability, Biomech. Model. 
Mechanobiol. 18 (4) (2019) 1111–1122, doi: 10.1007/s10237- 019- 01131- 7 . 
[23] T. Yuan, W. Zhan, A. Jamal, D. Dini, On the microstructurally driven 
heterogeneous response of brain white matter to drug infusion pres- 
sure, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 21 (4) (2022) 1299–1316, doi: 10.1007/ 
s10237- 022- 01592- 3 . 
[24] A. Jamal, M.T. Mongelli, M. Vidotto, M. Madekurozwa, A. Bernardini, 
D.R. Overby, E. De Momi, F. Rodriguez y Baena, J.M. Sherwood, D. Dini, Infu- 
sion mechanisms in brain white matter and their dependence on microstruc- 
ture: an experimental study of hydraulic permeability, IEEE Trans. Biomed. 
Eng. 68 (4) (2021) 1229–1237, doi: 10.1109/TBME.2020.3024117 . 
[25] M. Terzano, D. Dini, F. Rodriguez y. Baena, A. Spagnoli, M. Oldﬁeld, 
An adaptive ﬁnite element model for steerable needles, Biomech. Model. 
Mechanobiol. 19 (5) (2020) 1809–1825, doi: 10.1007/s10237- 020- 01310- x . 
[26] D. Su, R. Ma, M. Salloum, L. Zhu, Multi-scale study of nanoparticle transport 
and deposition in tissues during an injection process, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 
48 (9) (2010) 853–863, doi: 10.1007/s11517- 010- 0615- 0 . 
[27] T. Yuan, L. Gao, W. Zhan, D. Dini, Effect of particle size and surface charge on 
nanoparticles diffusion in the brain white matter, Pharm. Res. 39 (4) (2022) 
767–781, doi: 10.1007/s11095- 022- 03222- 0 . 
[28] M. Vidotto, A. Bernardini, M. Trovatelli, E. De Momi, D. Dini, On the 
microstructural origin of brain white matter hydraulic permeability, Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118 (36) (2021), doi: 10.1073/pnas.2105328118 . 
e2105328118 
[29] W. Zhan, F. Rodriguez y. Baena, D. Dini, Effect of tissue permeability and 
drug diffusion anisotropy on convection-enhanced delivery, Drug Deliv. 26 (1) 
(2019) 773–781, doi: 10.1080/1071754 4.2019.163984 4 . 
[30] A .A . Linninger, M.R. Somayaji, T. Erickson, X. Guo, R.D. Penn, Computational 
methods for predicting drug transport in anisotropic and heterogeneous brain 
tissue, J. Biomech. 41 (10) (2008) 2176–2187, doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2008.04. 
025 . 
[31] J.H. Kim, G.W. Astary, S. Kantorovich, T.H. Mareci, P.R. Carney, M. Sarnti- 
noranont, Voxelized Computational model for convection-enhanced deliv- 
ery in the rat ventral hippocampus: comparison with in vivo MR experi- 
mental studies, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 40 (9) (2012) 2043–2058, doi: 10.1007/ 
s10439- 012- 0566- 8 . 
17
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
[32] W. Zhan, C.-H. Wang, Convection enhanced delivery of liposome encapsulated 
doxorubicin for brain tumour therapy, J. Controlled Release 285 (2018) 212–
229, doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2018.07.006 . 
[33] S. Budday, T.C. Ovaert, G.A. Holzapfel, P. Steinmann, E. Kuhl, Fifty shades 
of brain: a review on the mechanical testing and modeling of brain tis- 
sue, Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 27 (4) (2020) 1187–1230, doi: 10.1007/ 
s11831- 019- 09352- w . 
[34] S. Chatelin, A. Constantinesco, R. Willinger, Fifty years of brain tissue me- 
chanical testing: from in vitro to in vivo investigations, Biorheology 47 (5-6) 
(2010) 255–276, doi: 10.3233/BIR- 2010- 0576 . 
[35] A. Goriely, M.G.D. Geers, G.A. Holzapfel, J. Jayamohan, A. Jérusalem, S. Sival- 
oganathan, W. Squier, J.A.W. van Dommelen, S. Waters, E. Kuhl, Mechanics 
of the brain: perspectives, challenges, and opportunities, Biomech. Model. 
Mechanobiol. 14 (5) (2015) 931–965, doi: 10.1007/s10237- 015- 0662-4 . 
[36] M.I. Khan, F. Hasan, K.A .H.A . Mahmud, A . Adnan, Recent computational ap- 
proaches on mechanical behavior of axonal cytoskeletal components of neu- 
ron: a brief review, Multiscale Sci. Eng. 2 (4) (2020) 199–213, doi: 10.1007/ 
s42493- 020- 0 0 043-4 . 
[37] M.K. Rasmussen, H. Mestre, M. Nedergaard, Fluid transport in the brain, Phys- 
iol. Rev. (2022) . https://journals.physiology.org/doi/full/10.1152/physrev.0 0 031. 
2020 
[38] S.P. Neuman, Theoretical derivation of Darcy’s law, Acta Mech. 25 (3) (1977) 
153–170, doi: 10.1007/BF01376989 . 
[39] S. Whitaker, Flow in porous media I: a theoretical derivation of Darcy’s law, 
Transp. Porous Media 1 (1) (1986) 3–25, doi: 10.1007/BF01036523 . 
[40] F.J. Suárez-Grau, Theoretical derivation of Darcy’s law for ﬂuid ﬂow in thin 
porous media, Math. Nachr. 295 (3) (2022) 607–623, doi: 10.1002/mana. 
2020 0 0184 . 
[41] T. Nagashima, N. Tamaki, S. Matsumoto, B. Horwitz, Y. Seguchi, Biomechan- 
ics of hydrocephalus: a new theoretical model, Neurosurgery 21 (6) (1987) 
898–904 . 
[42] T. Nagashima, T. Shirakuni, S.I. Rapoport, A two-dimensional, ﬁnite element 
analysis of vasogenic brain edema, Neurologia Medico-Chirurgica 30 (1) 
(1990) 1–9 . 
[43] K.H. Rosenbluth, J.F. Eschermann, G. Mittermeyer, R. Thomson, S. Mittermeyer, 
K.S. Bankiewicz, Analysis of a simulation algorithm for direct brain drug de- 
livery, Neuroimage 59 (3) (2012) 2423–2429, doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011. 
08.107 . 
[44] W. Zhan, C.-H. Wang, Convection enhanced delivery of chemotherapeutic 
drugs into brain tumour, J. Controlled Release 271 (2018) 74–87, doi: 10.1016/ 
j.jconrel.2017.12.020 . 
[45] G.E. Kapellos, T.S. Alexiou, Chapter 1 - Modeling momentum and mass trans- 
port in cellular biological media: from the molecular to the tissue scale, in: 
Transport in Biological Media, Elsevier, Walthm, MA , USA , 2013, pp. 1–40, 
doi: 10.1016/B978- 0- 12- 415824- 5.0 0 0 01-1 . 
[46] E.A. Swabb, J. Wei, P.M. Gullino, Diffusion and convection in nor- 
mal and neoplastic tissues, Cancer Res. 34 (10) (1974) 2814–2822 . 
https://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article/34/10/2814/479947/Diffusion-and- 
Convection- in- Normal- and- Neoplastic 
[47] P.A . Netti, D.A . Berk, M.A . Swartz, A .J. Grodzinsky, R.K. Jain, Role of ex- 
tracellular matrix assembly in interstitial transport in solid tumors, Cancer 
Res. 60 (9) (20 0 0) 2497–2503 . https://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article/60/9/ 
2497/507280/Role- of- Extracellular- Matrix- Assembly- in 
[48] G. Franceschini, D. Bigoni, P. Regitnig, G.A. Holzapfel, Brain tissue deforms 
similarly to ﬁlled elastomers and follows consolidation theory, J. Mech. Phys. 
Solids 54 (12) (2006) 2592–2620, doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2006.05.004 . 
[49] T. Yuan, L. Shen, D. Dini, Porosity-permeability tensor relationship of closely 
and randomly packed ﬁbrous biomaterials and biological tissues: application 
to the brain white matter, Acta Biomater. 173 (2024) 123–134, doi: 10.1016/j. 
actbio.2023.11.007 . 
[50] A. Fick, V. On liquid diffusion, London Edinb. Dublin Philos. Magaz. J. Sci. 10 
(63) (1855) 30–39, doi: 10.1080/14786445508641925 . 
[51] B. Serin, R.T. Ellickson, Determination of diffusion coeﬃcients, J. Chem. Phys. 
9 (10) (1941) 742–747, doi: 10.1063/1.1750834 . 
[52] C. Andrade, Calculation of chloride diffusion coeﬃcients in concrete from 
ionic migration measurements, Cem. Concr. Res. 23 (3) (1993) 724–742, 
doi: 10.1016/0 0 08-8846(93)90 023-3 . 
[53] T. Sasaki, Y. Gunji, T. Iida, Transient-diffusion measurements of radon: Fick’s 
law conﬁrmation and 218Po/214Po behavior determination, J. Nucl. Sci. Tech- 
nol. 44 (10) (2007) 1330–1336, doi: 10.1080/18811248.2007.9711379 . 
[54] M.P. di Cagno, F. Clarelli, J. Våbenø, C. Lesley, S.D. Rahman, J. Cauzzo, 
E. Franceschinis, N. Realdon, P.C. Stein, Experimental determination of drug 
diffusion coeﬃcients in unstirred aqueous environments by temporally re- 
solved concentration measurements, Mol. Pharm. 15 (4) (2018) 1488–1494, 
doi: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.7b01053 . 
[55] C. Nicholson, Interaction between diffusion and Michaelis-Menten uptake of 
dopamine after iontophoresis in striatum, Biophys. J. 68 (5) (1995) 1699–
1715, doi: 10.1016/S0 0 06-3495(95)80348-6 . 
[56] C. Nicholson, K.C. Chen, S. Hrabˇetová, L. Tao, Diffusion of molecules in brain 
extracellular space: theory and experiment, in: Progress in Brain Research, 
volume 125, Elsevier, Walthm, MA , USA , 20 0 0, pp. 129–154, doi: 10.1016/ 
S0 079-6123(0 0)250 07-3 . 
[57] D. Calvetti, Y. Cheng, E. Somersalo, A spatially distributed computational 
model of brain cellular metabolism, J. Theor. Biol. 376 (2015) 48–65, doi: 10. 
1016/j.jtbi.2015.03.037 . 
[58] E. Vendel, V. Rottschäfer, E.C.M. de Lange, The need for mathematical mod- 
elling of spatial drug distribution within the brain, Fluids Barriers CNS 16 (1) 
(2019) 1–33, doi: 10.1186/s12987- 019- 0133- x . 
[59] X.-Y. Zhang, J. Luck, M.W. Dewhirst, F. Yuan, Interstitial hydraulic conductiv- 
ity in a ﬁbrosarcoma, Am. J. Physiol.-Heart Circ. Physiol. (20 0 0), doi: 10.1152/ 
ajpheart.20 0 0.279.6.H2726 . 
[60] P. Heneghan, P.E. Riches, Determination of the strain-dependent hydraulic 
permeability of the compressed bovine nucleus pulposus, J. Biomech. 41 (4) 
(2008) 903–906, doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2007.11.014 . 
[61] K.L. Kleinhans, A.R. Jackson, Hydraulic permeability of meniscus ﬁbrocartilage 
measured via direct permeation: effects of tissue anisotropy, water volume 
content, and compressive strain, J. Biomech. 72 (2018) 215–221, doi: 10.1016/ 
j.jbiomech.2018.03.011 . 
[62] A.C.R. Tavner, T.D. Roy, K.W.W. Hor, M. Majimbi, G.R. Joldes, A. Wittek, 
S. Bunt, K. Miller, On the appropriateness of modelling brain parenchyma 
as a biphasic continuum, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 61 (2016) 511–518, 
doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2016.04.010 . 
[63] S. Cheng, L.E. Bilston, Unconﬁned compression of white matter, J. Biomech. 
40 (1) (2007) 117–124, doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.11.004 . 
[64] L. Su, M. Wang, J. Yin, F. Ti, J. Yang, C. Ma, S. Liu, T.J. Lu, Distinguishing poroe- 
lasticity and viscoelasticity of brain tissue with time scale, Acta Biomater. 155 
(2023) 423–435, doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2022.11.009 . 
[65] Y. Boucher, C. Brekken, P.A. Netti, L.T. Baxter, R.K. Jain, Intratumoral infusion 
of ﬂuid: estimation of hydraulic conductivity and implications for the deliv- 
ery of therapeutic agents, Br. J. Cancer 78 (1998) 1442–1448, doi: 10.1038/bjc. 
1998.705 . 
[66] A.M. Saaibi, M. Sarntinoranont, An infusion and pressure system to measure 
hydraulic conductivity at a microscale level, ASME Digit. Collect. (2014) 561–
562, doi: 10.1115/SBC2008-193011 . 
[67] P. Shrestha, B. Stoeber, Imaging ﬂuid injections into soft biological tissue to 
extract permeability model parameters, Phys. Fluids 32 (1) (2020), doi: 10. 
1063/1.5131488 . 
[68] L. Su, J.-C. Lei, Z. Li, C. Ma, S. Liu, Wettability effect on hydraulic permeabil- 
ity of brain white matter, Acta Mech. Sin. 40 (2) (2024) 1–15, doi: 10.1007/ 
s10409- 023- 23278- x . 
[69] C. Nicholson, L. Tao, Hindered diffusion of high molecular weight compounds 
in brain extracellular microenvironment measured with integrative optical 
imaging, Biophys. J. 65 (6) (1993) 2277–2290, doi: 10.1016/S0 0 06-3495(93) 
81324-9 . 
[70] R.G. Thorne, C. Nicholson, In vivo diffusion analysis with quantum dots and 
dextrans predicts the width of brain extracellular space, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. 103 (14) (2006) 5567–5572, doi: 10.1073/pnas.0509425103 . 
[71] E.A. Nance, G.F. Woodworth, K.A. Sailor, T.-Y. Shih, Q. Xu, G. Swaminathan, 
D. Xiang, C. Eberhart, J. Hanes, A dense poly(ethylene glycol) coating im- 
proves penetration of large polymeric nanoparticles within brain tissue, Sci. 
Transl. Med. 4 (149) (2012) 149ra119, doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003594 . 
[72] J.J. Lochhead, R.G. Thorne, Intranasal delivery of biologics to the central ner- 
vous system, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 64 (7) (2012) 614–628, doi: 10.1016/j.addr. 
2011.11.002 . 
[73] S. Quader, K. Kataoka, H. Cabral, Nanomedicine for brain cancer, Adv. Drug 
Deliv. Rev. 182 (2022) 114115, doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2022.114115 . 
[74] G. Ringstad, L.M. Valnes, A.M. Dale, A.H. Pripp, S.-A.S. Vatnehol, K.E. Emblem, 
K.-A. Mardal, P.K. Eide, Brain-wide glymphatic enhancement and clearance in 
humans assessed with MRI, JCI Insight 3 (13) (2018), doi: 10.1172/jci.insight. 
121537 . 
[75] C.D. Arvanitis, G.B. Ferraro, R.K. Jain, The blood–brain barrier and blood–
tumour barrier in brain tumours and metastases, Nat. Rev. Cancer 20 (2020) 
26–41, doi: 10.1038/s41568- 019- 0205- x . 
[76] L.M. Valnes, S.K. Mitusch, G. Ringstad, P.K. Eide, S.W. Funke, K.-A. Mardal, 
Apparent diffusion coeﬃcient estimates based on 24 hours tracer move- 
ment support glymphatic transport in human cerebral cortex, Sci. Rep. 10 (1) 
(2020) 1–12, doi: 10.1038/s41598- 020- 66042- 5 . 
[77] T. Yuan, Y. Yang, W. Zhan, D. Dini, Mathematical optimisation of magnetic 
nanoparticle diffusion in the brain white matter, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24 (3) (2023) 
2534, doi: 10.3390/ijms24032534 . 
[78] X. Shi, A. von dem Bussche, R.H. Hurt, A.B. Kane, H. Gao, Cell entry of one- 
dimensional nanomaterials occurs by tip recognition and rotation, Nat. Nan- 
otechnol. 6 (2011) 714–719, doi: 10.1038/nnano.2011.151 . 
[79] X. Zhang, G. Ma, W. Wei, Simulation of nanoparticles interacting with a cell 
membrane: probing the structural basis and potential biomedical application, 
NPG Asia Mater. 13 (52) (2021) 1–18, doi: 10.1038/s41427- 021- 00320- 0 . 
[80] C. Manzo, M.F. Garcia-Parajo, A review of progress in single particle tracking: 
from methods to biophysical insights, Rep. Prog. Phys. 78 (12) (2015) 124601, 
doi: 10.1088/0034-4885/78/12/124601 . 
[81] T. Kuhn, J. Hettich, R. Davtyan, J.C.M. Gebhardt, Single molecule tracking and 
analysis framework including theory-predicted parameter settings, Sci. Rep. 
11 (9465) (2021) 1–12, doi: 10.1038/s41598- 021- 88802- 7 . 
[82] A.J. Onetto, S. Sharif, Drug Distribution, StatPearls Publishing, 2022 . https:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK567736 
[83] X. Lin, Y. Li, N. Gu, Nanoparticle’s size effect on its translocation across a lipid 
bilayer: a molecular dynamics simulation, J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci. 7 (1) 
(2010) 269–276, doi: 10.1166/jctn.2010.1358 . 
[84] T. Yue, X. Zhang, Molecular understanding of receptor-mediated membrane 
responses to ligand-coated nanoparticles, Soft Matter 7 (19) (2011) 9104–
9112, doi: 10.1039/C1SM05398A . 
18
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
[85] C. Montis, D. Maiolo, I. Alessandri, P. Bergese, D. Berti, Interaction of nanopar- 
ticles with lipid membranes: a multiscale perspective, Nanoscale 6 (12) 
(2014) 6452–6457, doi: 10.1039/C4NR00838C . 
[86] C. Huang, Y. Zhang, H. Yuan, H. Gao, S. Zhang, Role of nanoparticle geometry 
in endocytosis: laying down to stand up, Nano Lett. 13 (9) (2013) 4546–4550, 
doi: 10.1021/nl402628n . 
[87] Y. Li, X. Chen, N. Gu, Computational investigation of interaction between 
nanoparticles and membranes: hydrophobic/hydrophilic effect, J. Phys. Chem. 
B 112 (51) (2008) 16647–16653, doi: 10.1021/jp8051906 . 
[88] H.-m. Ding, Y.-q. Ma, Interactions between Janus particles and membranes, 
Nanoscale 4 (4) (2012) 1116–1122, doi: 10.1039/C1NR11425E . 
[89] K.B. Walhovd, H. Johansen-Berg, R.T. Káradóttir, Unraveling the secrets of 
white matter – bridging the gap between cellular, animal and human imag- 
ing studies, Neuroscience 276 (2014) 2–13, doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014. 
06.058 . 
[90] R.I. Koning, A.J. Koster, T.H. Sharp, Advances in cryo-electron tomography for 
biology and medicine, Anna. Anatomy Anatomischer Anz. 217 (2018) 82–96, 
doi: 10.1016/j.aanat.2018.02.004 . 
[91] M. Kleinnijenhuis, E. Johnson, J. Mollink, S. Jbabdi, K.L. Miller, A semi-au- 
tomated approach to dense segmentation of 3D white matter electron mi- 
croscopy, bioRxiv (2020) . 
[92] L. Vásárhelyi, Z. Kónya, Á. Kukovecz, R. Vajtai, Microcomputed tomography–
based characterization of advanced materials: a review, Mater. Today Adv. 8 
(2020) 10 0 084, doi: 10.1016/j.mtadv.2020.10 0 084 . 
[93] E.D. Bander, K. Tizi, E. Wembacher-Schroeder, R. Thomson, M. Donzelli, 
E. Vasconcellos, M.M. Souweidane, Deformational changes after convection- 
enhanced delivery in the pediatric brainstem, Neurosurg. Focus 48 (1) (2020) 
E3, doi: 10.3171/2019.10.FOCUS19679 . 
[94] S. Misra, K.B. Reed, B.W. Schafer, K.T. Ramesh, A.M. Okamura, Mechanics of 
ﬂexible needles robotically steered through soft tissue, Int. J. Rob. Res. 29 (13) 
(2010) 1640–1660, doi: 10.1177/0278364910369714 . 
[95] R. Secoli, E. Matheson, M. Pinzi, S. Galvan, A. Donder, T. Watts, M. Riva, 
D.D. Zani, L. Bello, F.R.y. Baena, Modular robotic platform for precision neuro- 
surgery with a bio-inspired needle: System overview and ﬁrst in-vivo deploy- 
ment, PLoS One 17 (10) (2022) e0275686, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0275686 . 
[96] A. Goriely, M.G.D. Geers, G.A. Holzapfel, J. Jayamohan, A. Jérusalem, S. Sival- 
oganathan, W. Squier, J.A.W. van Dommelen, S. Waters, E. Kuhl, Mechanics 
of the brain: perspectives, challenges, and opportunities, Biomech. Model. 
Mechanobiol. 14 (5) (2015) 931–965, doi: 10.1007/s10237- 015- 0662-4 . 
[97] B. Rashid, M. Destrade, M.D. Gilchrist, Mechanical characterization of brain 
tissue in simple shear at dynamic strain rates, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 
28 (2013) 71–85, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2013.07.017 . 
[98] S.N. Sundaresh, J.D. Finan, B.S. Elkin, C. Lee, J. Xiao, B. Morrison, Viscoelas- 
tic characterization of porcine brain tissue mechanical properties under in- 
dentation loading, Brain Multiphys. 2 (2021) 10 0 041, doi: 10.1016/j.brain.2021. 
10 0 041 . 
[99] K. Miller, K. Chinzei, Mechanical properties of brain tissue in tension, J. 
Biomech. 35 (4) (2002) 4 83–4 90, doi: 10.1016/s0021-9290(01)00234-2 . 
[100] M. Kohandel, S. Sivaloganathan, G. Tenti, J.M. Drake, The constitutive proper- 
ties of the brain parenchyma Part 1. Strain energy approach, Med. Eng. Phys. 
28 (5) (2006) 449–454, doi: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2005.01.005 . 
[101] A.E. Forte, S.M. Gentleman, D. Dini, On the characterization of the het- 
erogeneous mechanical response of human brain tissue, Biomech. Model. 
Mechanobiol. 16 (3) (2017) 907–920, doi: 10.1007/s10237- 016- 0860- 8 . 
[102] A .M. Felfelian, A . Baradaran Najar, R. Jafari Nedoushan, H. Salehi, Determining 
constitutive behavior of the brain tissue using digital image correlation and 
ﬁnite element modeling, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 18 (6) (2019) 1927–
1945, doi: 10.1007/s10237- 019- 01186- 6 . 
[103] K. Miller, Constitutive model of brain tissue suitable for ﬁnite element anal- 
ysis of surgical procedures, J. Biomech. 32 (5) (1999) 531–537, doi: 10.1016/ 
S0 021-9290(99)0 0 010-X . 
[104] K. Laksari, M. Shaﬁeian, K. Darvish, Constitutive model for brain tissue under 
ﬁnite compression, J. Biomech. 45 (4) (2012) 642–646, doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech. 
2011.12.023 . 
[105] A. Awasthi, U. Gautam, S. Bhaskar, S. Roy, Biomechanical modelling and 
computer aided simulation of deep brain retraction in neurosurgery, Com- 
put. Methods Programs Biomed. 197 (2020) 105688, doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2020. 
105688 . 
[106] M.T. Prange, S.S. Margulies, Regional, directional, and age-dependent prop- 
erties of the brain undergoing large deformation, J. Biomech. Eng. 124 (2) 
(2002) 244–252, doi: 10.1115/1.1449907 . 
[107] F. Velardi, F. Fraternali, M. Angelillo, Anisotropic constitutive equations and 
experimental tensile behavior of brain tissue, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 
5 (1) (2006) 53–61, doi: 10.1007/s10237- 005- 0007- 9 . 
[108] B.S. Elkin, A. Ilankova, B. Morrison, Dynamic, regional mechanical properties 
of the porcine brain: indentation in the coronal plane, J. Biomech. Eng. 133 
(7) (2011) 071009., doi: 10.1115/1.4004494 . 
[109] S. Budday, R. Nay, R. de Rooij, P. Steinmann, T. Wyrobek, T.C. Ovaert, E. Kuhl, 
Mechanical properties of gray and white matter brain tissue by indentation, 
J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 46 (2015) 318–330, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2015. 
02.024 . 
[110] S. Budday, G. Sommer, C. Birkl, C. Langkammer, J. Haybaeck, J. Kohnert, 
M. Bauer, F. Paulsen, P. Steinmann, E. Kuhl, G.A. Holzapfel, Mechanical char- 
acterization of human brain tissue, Acta Biomater. 48 (2017) 319–340, doi: 10. 
1016/j.actbio.2016.10.036 . 
[111] A. Samadi-Dooki, G.Z. Voyiadjis, R.W. Stout, An indirect indentation method 
for evaluating the linear viscoelastic properties of the brain tissue, J. Biomech. 
Eng. 139 (6) (2017) ., doi: 10.1115/1.4036486 . 
[112] S.N. Sundaresh, J.D. Finan, B.S. Elkin, A.V. Basilio, G.M. McKhann, B.M. Rd, 
Region-dependent viscoelastic properties of human brain tissue under large 
deformations, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 50 (11) (2022) 1452–1460, doi: 10.1007/ 
s10439- 022- 02910- 7 . 
[113] J.A.W. van Dommelen, T.P.J. van der Sande, M. Hrapko, G.W.M. Peters, Me- 
chanical properties of brain tissue by indentation: interregional variation, J. 
Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 3 (2) (2010) 158–166, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2009. 
09.001 . 
[114] J. Weickenmeier, R. de Rooij, S. Budday, T.C. Ovaert, E. Kuhl, The mechani- 
cal importance of myelination in the central nervous system, J. Mech. Behav. 
Biomed. Mater. 76 (2017) 119–124, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2017.04.017 . 
[115] A. Samadi-Dooki, G.Z. Voyiadjis, R.W. Stout, A combined experimental, mod- 
eling, and computational approach to interpret the viscoelastic response of 
the white matter brain tissue during indentation, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. 
Mater. 77 (2018) 24–33, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2017.08.037 . 
[116] A. Menichetti, D.B. MacManus, M.D. Gilchrist, B. Depreitere, J. Vander Sloten, 
N. Famaey, Regional characterization of the dynamic mechanical properties of 
human brain tissue by microindentation, Int. J. Eng. Sci. 155 (2020) 103355, 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijengsci.2020.103355 . 
[117] L. Qian, H. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Li, M. Zhou, L. Yang, Z. Wang, Y. Sun, Inﬂuence of 
strain rate on indentation response of porcine brain, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. 
Mater. 82 (2018) 210–217, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2018.03.031 . 
[118] Z. Du, Z. Li, P. Wang, Z. Zhuang, Z. Liu, Revealing the nonlinear mechanical be- 
havior of white matter brain tissue by analyzing the asynchronous deforma- 
tion and damage of matrix and axonal ﬁbers, Int. J. Solids Struct. 242 (2022) 
111554, doi: 10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2022.111554 . 
[119] M. Kohandel, S. Sivaloganathan, G. Tenti, K. Darvish, Frequency dependence 
of complex moduli of brain tissue using a fractional Zener model, Phys. Med. 
Biol. 50 (12) (2005) 2799–2805, doi: 10.1088/0031-9155/50/12/005 . 
[120] G. Davis, M. Kohandel, S. Sivaloganathan, G. Tenti, The constitutive properties 
of the brain paraenchyma Part 2. Fractional derivative approach, Med. Eng. 
Phys. 28 (5) (2006) 455–459, doi: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2005.07.023 . 
[121] M. Hrapko, J.A. Van Dommelen, G.W. Peters, J.S. Wismans, The mechanical 
behaviour of brain tissue: large strain response and constitutive modelling, 
Biorheology 43 (2006) 59–69 . ISBN: 2951421060 
[122] T.P. Prevost, A. Balakrishnan, S. Suresh, S. Socrate, Biomechanics of brain tis- 
sue, Acta Biomater. 7 (1) (2011) 83–95, doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2010.06.035 . 
[123] S. Budday, G. Sommer, G.A. Holzapfel, P. Steinmann, E. Kuhl, Viscoelastic pa- 
rameter identiﬁcation of human brain tissue, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 
74 (2017) 463–476, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2017.07.014 . 
[124] K. Haldar, C. Pal, Rate dependent anisotropic constitutive modeling of brain 
tissue undergoing large deformation, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 81 
(2018) 178–194, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2017.12.021 . 
[125] S. Reese, S. Govindjee, A theory of ﬁnite viscoelasticity and numerical 
aspects, Int. J. Solids Struct. 35 (26-27) (1998) 3455–3482, doi: 10.1016/ 
S0 020-7683(97)0 0217-5 . 
[126] Y. Feng, R.J. Okamoto, R. Namani, G.M. Genin, P.V. Bayly, Measurements 
of mechanical anisotropy in brain tissue and implications for transversely 
isotropic material models of white matter, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 23 
(2013) 117–132, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2013.04.007 . 
[127] A . Jamal, A . Bernardini, D. Dini, Microscale characterisation of the time- 
dependent mechanical behaviour of brain white matter, J. Mech. Behav. 
Biomed. Mater. 125 (2022) 104917, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2021.104917 . 
[128] R.J.H. Cloots, J.A.W. van Dommelen, T. Nyberg, S. Kleiven, M.G.D. Geers, Mi- 
cromechanics of diffuse axonal injury: inﬂuence of axonal orientation and 
anisotropy, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 10 (3) (2011) 413–422, doi: 10. 
1007/s10237-010-0243-5 . 
[129] C. Giordano, S. Kleiven, Connecting fractional anisotropy from medical im- 
ages with mechanical anisotropy of a hyperviscoelastic ﬁbre-reinforced con- 
stitutive model for brain tissue, J. R. Soc. Interface 11 (91) (2014) 20130914, 
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2013.0914 . 
[130] K.M. Labus, C.M. Puttlitz, An anisotropic hyperelastic constitutive model of 
brain white matter in biaxial tension and structural-mechanical relationships, 
J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 62 (2016) 195–208, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2016. 
05.003 . 
[131] F. Pervin, W.W. Chen, Dynamic mechanical response of bovine gray matter 
and white matter brain tissues under compression, J. Biomech. 42 (6) (2009) 
731–735, doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2009.01.023 . 
[132] S. Saeidi, M.P. Kainz, M. Dalbosco, M. Terzano, G.A. Holzapfel, Histology- 
informed multiscale modeling of human brain white matter, Sci. Rep. 13 (1) 
(2023) 19641, doi: 10.1038/s41598- 023- 46600- 3 . 
[133] J. Ciambella, P. Nardinocchi, A structurally frame-indifferent model for 
anisotropic visco-hyperelastic materials, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 147 (2021) 
104247, doi: 10.1016/j.jmps.2020.104247 . 
[134] G.A. Holzapfel, Nonlinear Solid Mechanics: A Continuum Approach for Engi- 
neering Science, Wiley, Chichester, 20 0 0 . 
[135] E. Comellas, S. Budday, J.-P. Pelteret, G.A. Holzapfel, P. Steinmann, Modeling 
the porous and viscous responses of human brain tissue behavior, Comput. 
Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 369 (2020) 113128, doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2020.113128 . 
[136] M. Kaczmarek, The hydromechanics of hydrocephalus: steady-state solutions 
for cylindrical geometry, Bull. Math. Biol. 59 (2) (1997) 295–323, doi: 10.1016/ 
S0 092-8240(96)0 0 073-0 . 
19
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
[137] S. Gholampour, N. Fatouraee, Boundary conditions investigation to improve 
computer simulation of cerebrospinal ﬂuid dynamics in hydrocephalus pa- 
tients, Commun. Biol. 4 (394) (2021) 1–15, doi: 10.1038/s42003- 021- 01920- w . 
[138] S. Gholampour, D. Frim, B. Yamini, Long-term recovery behavior of brain tis- 
sue in hydrocephalus patients after shunting, Commun. Biol. 5 (1198) (2022) 
1–13, doi: 10.1038/s42003- 022- 04128- 8 . 
[139] R.M. Bowen, Theory of mixtures, in: A.C. Eringen (Ed.), Continuum Physics, 3, 
Academic Press, New York, 1976 . 
[140] V.C. Mow, S.C. Kuei, W.M. Lai, C.G. Armstrong, Biphasic creep and stress 
relaxation of articular cartilage in compression: theory and experiments, J. 
Biomech. Eng. 102 (1) (1980) 73–84, doi: 10.1115/1.3138202 . 
[141] W. Ehlers, A. Wagner, Multi-component modelling of human brain tissue: 
a contribution to the constitutive and computational description of defor- 
mation, ﬂow and diffusion processes with application to the invasive drug- 
delivery problem, Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng. 5842 (8) (2015) 
861–879, doi: 10.1080/10255842.2013.853754 . 
[142] S. Cheng, L.E. Bilston, Unconﬁned compression of white matter, J. Biomech. 
40 (1) (2007) 117–124, doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.11.004 . 
[143] A. Greiner, N. Reiter, F. Paulsen, G.A. Holzapfel, P. Steinmann, E. Comellas, 
S. Budday, Poro-viscoelastic effects during biomechanical testing of human 
brain tissue, Front. Mech. Eng. 7 (2021), doi: 10.3389/fmech.2021.708350 . 
[144] S. Urcun, P.-Y. Rohan, G. Sciumé, S.P.A. Bordas, Cortex tissue relaxation and 
slow to medium load rates dependency can be captured by a two-phase ﬂow 
poroelastic model, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 126 (2022) 104952, doi: 10. 
1016/j.jmbbm.2021.104952 . 
[145] W. Ehlers, M. Morrison, P. Schröder, D. Stöhr, A. Wagner, Multiphasic mod- 
elling and computation of metastatic lung-cancer cell proliferation and 
atrophy in brain tissue based on experimental data, Biomech. Model. 
Mechanobiol. 21 (1) (2022) 277–315, doi: 10.1007/s10237- 021- 01535- 4 . 
[146] M.A. Biot, General theory of three-dimensional consolidation, J. Appl. Phys. 12 
(2) (1941) 155–164, doi: 10.1063/1.1712886 . 
[147] M.A. Biot, Theory of ﬁnite deformations of porous solids, Indiana Univ. Math. 
J. 21 (7) (1972) 597–620 . 
[148] S. Sivaloganathan, M. Stastna, G. Tenti, J.M. Drake, Biomechanics of the brain: 
a theoretical and numerical study of Biot’s equations of consolidation the- 
ory with deformation-dependent permeability, Int. J. Non-Linear Mech. 40 (9) 
(2005) 1149–1159, doi: 10.1016/j.ijnonlinmec.20 05.04.0 04 . 
[149] B. Wirth, I. Sobey, An axisymmetric and fully 3D poroelastic model for the 
evolution of hydrocephalus, Math. Med. Biol. 23 (4) (2006) 363–388, doi: 10. 
1093/imammb/dql014 . 
[150] I. Sobey, B. Wirth, Effect of non-linear permeability in a spherically sym- 
metric model of hydrocephalus, Math. Med. Biol. 23 (4) (2006) 339–361, 
doi: 10.1093/imammb/dql015 . 
[151] A. Mehrabian, Y. Abousleiman, General solutions to poroviscoelastic model 
of hydrocephalic human brain tissue, J. Theor. Biol. 291 (1) (2011) 105–118, 
doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.09.011 . 
[152] T. Dutta-Roy, A. Wittek, K. Miller, Biomechanical modelling of normal pres- 
sure hydrocephalus, J. Biomech. 41 (10) (2008) 2263–2271, doi: 10.1016/j. 
jbiomech.2008.04.014 . 
[153] J.J. Garcia, J.H. Smith, A biphasic hyperelastic model for the analysis of ﬂuid 
and mass transport in brain tissue, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 37 (2) (2009) 375–386, 
doi: 10.1007/s10439- 008- 9610- 0 . 
[154] J.H. Smith, J.J. Garcia, A nonlinear biphasic model of ﬂow-controlled infusion 
in brain: ﬂuid transport and tissue deformation analyses, J. Biomech. 42 (13) 
(2009) 2017–2025, doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2009.06.014 . 
[155] M. Hosseini-Farid, M. Ramzanpour, J. McLean, M. Ziejewski, G. Karami, A 
poro-hyper-viscoelastic rate-dependent constitutive modeling for the anal- 
ysis of brain tissues, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 102 (2020) 103475, 
doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2019.103475 . 
[156] W. Ehlers, G. Eipper, Finite elastic deformations in liquid-saturated and 
empty porous solids, in: Porous Media: Theory and Experiments, 34, Springer 
Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1999, pp. 179–191 . 
[157] G.A . Ateshian, J.A . Weiss, Anisotropic hydraulic permeability under ﬁnite de- 
formation, J. Biomech. Eng. 132 (11) (2010) 1–7, doi: 10.1115/1.4002588 . 
[158] K. Miller, K. Chinzei, G. Orssengo, P. Bednarz, Mechanical properties of brain 
tissue in-vivo: experiment and computer simulation, J. Biomech. 33 (11) 
(20 0 0) 1369–1376, doi: 10.1016/s0 021-9290(0 0)0 0120-2 . 
[159] A. Gefen, S.S. Margulies, Are in vivo and in situ brain tissues mechanically 
similar? J. Biomech. 37 (9) (2004) 1339–1352, doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2003.12. 
032 . 
[160] S. Mehdizadeh, M. Khoshgoftar, N. Siamak, F. Farhad, A. Hooshiar, Comparison 
between brain tissue gray and white matters in tension including necking 
phenomenon, Am. J. Appl. Sci. 5 (2008), doi: 10.3844/ajassp.2008.1701.1706 . 
[161] T.P. Prevost, G. Jin, M.A. de Moya, H.B. Alam, S. Suresh, S. Socrate, Dynamic 
mechanical response of brain tissue in indentation in vivo, in situ and in 
vitro, Acta Biomater. 7 (12) (2011) 4090–4101, doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2011.06. 
032 . 
[162] T. Kaster, I. Sack, A. Samani, Measurement of the hyperelastic properties of 
ex vivo brain tissue slices, J. Biomech. 44 (6) (2011) 1158–1163, doi: 10.1016/j. 
jbiomech.2011.01.019 . 
[163] B. Rashid, M. Destrade, M.D. Gilchrist, Mechanical characterization of brain 
tissue in compression at dynamic strain rates, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 
10 (2012) 23–38, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2012.01.022 . 
[164] B. Rashid, M. Destrade, M.D. Gilchrist, Mechanical characterization of brain 
tissue in tension at dynamic strain rates, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 33 
(2014) 43–54, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2012.07.015 . 
[165] Z. Zhu, C. Jiang, H. Jiang, A visco-hyperelastic model of brain tissue incorpo- 
rating both tension/compression asymmetry and volume compressibility, Acta 
Mech. 230 (6) (2019) 2125–2135, doi: 10.10 07/s0 0707- 019- 02383- 1 . 
[166] F. Eskandari, M. Shaﬁeian, M.M. Aghdam, K. Laksari, Tension strain-softening 
and compression strain-stiffening behavior of brain white matter, Ann. 
Biomed. Eng. 49 (1) (2021) 276–286, doi: 10.1007/s10439- 020- 02541- w . 
[167] G.M. Boiczyk, N. Pearson, V.B. Kote, A. Sundaramurthy, D.R. Subramaniam, 
J.E. Rubio, G. Unnikrishnan, J. Reifman, K.L. Monson, Rate- and region- 
dependent mechanical properties of Göttingen minipig brain tissue in simple 
shear and unconﬁned compression, J. Biomech. Eng. 145 (6) (2023) 061004., 
doi: 10.1115/1.4056480 . 
[168] N. Abolhassani, R. Patel, M. Moallem, Needle insertion into soft tissue: a sur- 
vey, Med. Eng. Phys. 29 (4) (2007) 413–431, doi: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2006.07. 
003 . 
[169] B. Takabi, B.L. Tai, A review of cutting mechanics and modeling tech- 
niques for biological materials, Med. Eng. Phys. 45 (2017) 1–14, doi: 10.1016/j. 
medengphy.2017.04.004 . 
[170] F. Zhong, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Y.-H. Liu, Dual-arm robotic needle insertion with 
active tissue deformation for autonomous suturing, IEEE Rob. Autom. Lett. 4 
(3) (2019) 2669–2676, doi: 10.1109/LRA.2019.2913082 . 
[171] W. Wu, C. Xu, C. Pan, Z. Huang, J. Zhou, P. Huang, Effect of vibration frequency 
on frictional resistance of brain tissue during vibration-assisted needle inser- 
tion, Med. Eng. Phys. 86 (2020) 35–40, doi: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2020.10.003 . 
[172] Y. Tang, J. Zou, R.C.C. Flesch, T. Jin, Backﬂow modeling in nanoﬂuid infusion 
and analysis of its effects on heat induced damage during magnetic hyper- 
thermia, Appl. Math. Model. 114 (2023) 583–600, doi: 10.1016/j.apm.2022.10. 
020 . 
[173] F. Casanova, P.R. Carney, M. Sarntinoranont, In vivo evaluation of needle force 
and friction stress during insertion at varying insertion speed into the brain, 
J. Neurosci. Methods 237 (2014) 79–89, doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2014.08.012 . 
[174] C. Simone, A.M. Okamura, Modeling of needle insertion forces for robot- 
assisted percutaneous therapy, in: Proceedings 2002 IEEE International Con- 
ference on Robotics and Automation, 2, 2002, pp. 2085–2091, doi: 10.1109/ 
ROBOT.2002.1014 84 8 . 
[175] S. DiMaio, S. Salcudean, Needle insertion modeling and simulation, IEEE 
Trans. Rob. Autom. 19 (5) (2003) 864–875, doi: 10.1109/TRA.2003.817044 . 
[176] A.M. Okamura, C. Simone, M. O’Leary, Force modeling for needle insertion 
into soft tissue, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 51 (10) (2004) 1707–1716, doi: 10. 
1109/TBME.2004.831542 . 
[177] S. DiMaio, S. Salcudean, Needle steering and motion planning in soft tis- 
sues, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 52 (6) (2005) 965–974, doi: 10.1109/TBME. 
2005.846734 . 
[178] A. Wittek, T. Dutta-Roy, Z. Taylor, A. Horton, T. Washio, K. Chinzei, K. Miller, 
Subject-speciﬁc non-linear biomechanical model of needle insertion into 
brain, Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng. 11 (2) (2008) 135–146, 
doi: 10.1080/10255840701688095 . 
[179] X. Chen, M. Sarntinoranont, Biphasic ﬁnite element model of solute trans- 
port for direct infusion into nervous tissue, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 35 (12) (2007) 
2145–2158, doi: 10.1007/s10439- 007- 9371- 1 . 
[180] J.J. García, J.H. Smith, A biphasic hyperelastic model for the analysis of ﬂuid 
and mass transport in brain tissue, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 37 (2) (2009) 375–386, 
doi: 10.1007/s10439- 008- 9610- 0 . 
[181] O.A . Shergold, N.A . Fleck, Mechanisms of deep penetration of soft solids, with 
application to the injection and wounding of skin, Proc. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. 
Eng. Sci. 460 (2050) (2004) 3037–3058, doi: 10.1098/rspa.2004.1315 . 
[182] T. Azar, V. Hayward, Estimation of the fracture toughness of soft tissue from 
needle insertion, in: F. Bello, P.J.E. Edwards (Eds.), Biomedical Simulation, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 166–175 . 
[183] M. Khadem, C. Rossa, R.S. Sloboda, N. Usmani, M. Tavakoli, Mechanics of tis- 
sue cutting during needle insertion in biological tissue, IEEE Rob. Autom. Lett. 
1 (2) (2016) 800–807, doi: 10.1109/LRA.2016.2528301 . 
[184] M. Kuna, Finite Elements in Fracture Mechanics: Theory - Numerics - Appli- 
cations, Springer Netherlands, Heidelberg, 2013 . 
[185] M. Terzano, A. Spagnoli, P. Ståhle, A fracture mechanics model to study in- 
dentation cutting, Fatigue Fract. Eng. Mater. Struct. 41 (4) (2018) 821–830, 
doi: 10.1111/ffe.12750 . 
[186] H. Mohammadi, A. Ebrahimian, N. Maftoon, Finite-element modelling of 
needle-tissue interactions, Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. (2023), doi: 10.1007/ 
s11831- 023- 10020- 3 . https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11831- 023- 10020- 3 
[187] S. Misra, K.B. Reed, A.S. Douglas, K.T. Ramesh, A.M. Okamura, Needle-tissue 
interaction forces for bevel-tip steerable needles, in: 2008 2nd IEEE RAS & 
EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics, 
2008, pp. 224–231, doi: 10.1109/BIOROB.2008.4762872 . ArXiv: NIHMS150003 
ISSN: 2155-1774 
[188] M. Mahvash, P. Dupont, Mechanics of dynamic needle insertion into a bio- 
logical material, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 57 (4) (2010) 934–943, doi: 10.1109/ 
TBME.2009.2036856 . 
[189] M. Oldﬁeld, D. Dini, G. Giordano, F. Rodriguez y. Baena, Detailed ﬁnite ele- 
ment modelling of deep needle insertions into a soft tissue phantom using 
a cohesive approach, Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng. 16 (5) (2013) 
530–543, doi: 10.1080/10255842.2011.628448 . 
[190] J.D. Toaquiza Tubon, O. Moreno-Flores, V.D. Sree, A.B. Tepole, Anisotropic 
damage model for collagenous tissues and its application to model fracture 
and needle insertion mechanics, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 21 (6) (2022) 
1–16, doi: 10.1007/s10237- 022- 01624- y . Publisher: Springer Berlin Heidelberg 
ISBN: 0123456789 
20
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
[191] A. Wittek, G. Bourantas, B.F. Zwick, G. Joldes, L. Esteban, K. Miller, Mathemat- 
ical modeling and computer simulation of needle insertion into soft tissue, 
PLOS ONE 15 (12) (2020) e0242704, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0242704 . 
[192] A .A . Yakovenko, Y.-X. Lai, I.G. Goryacheva, M.-S. Ju, M.Z. Dosaev, Y.D. Se- 
lyutskiy, Modeling and experimental study of the needle indentation into 
a brain phantom, Int. J. Non-Linear Mech. 137 (2021) 103832, doi: 10.1016/j. 
ijnonlinmec.2021.103832 . 
[193] E. Lueshen, K. Tangen, A.I. Mehta, A. Linninger, Backﬂow-free catheters for 
eﬃcient and safe convection-enhanced delivery of therapeutics, Med. Eng. 
Phys. 45 (2017) 15–24, doi: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2017.02.018 . 
[194] G.A. Orozco, J.H. Smith, J.J. García, Three-dimensional nonlinear ﬁnite el- 
ement model to estimate backﬂow during ﬂow-controlled infusions into 
the brain, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. H 234 (9) (2020) 1018–1028, doi: 10.1177/ 
0954411920937220 . 
[195] J.J. García, A.B. Molano, J.H. Smith, Description and validation of a ﬁnite ele- 
ment model of backﬂow during infusion into a brain tissue phantom, J. Com- 
put. Nonlinear Dyn. 8 (1) (2013), doi: 10.1115/1.4007311 . 
[196] O. Ivanchenko, N. Sindhwani, A. Linninger, Experimental techniques for study- 
ing poroelasticity in brain phantom gels under high ﬂow microinfusion, J. 
Biomech. Eng. 132 (5) (2010), doi: 10.1115/1.4001164 . 
[197] E. Axpe, G. Orive, K. Franze, E.A. Appel, Towards brain-tissue-like biomaterials, 
Nat. Commun. 11 (3423) (2020) 1–4, doi: 10.1038/s41467- 020- 17245- x . 
[198] X. Chen, G.W. Astary, H. Sepulveda, T.H. Mareci, M. Sarntinoranont, Quan- 
titative assessment of macromolecular concentration during direct infusion 
into an agarose hydrogel phantom using contrast-enhanced MRI, Magn. Re- 
son. Imaging 26 (10) (2008) 1433–1441, doi: 10.1016/j.mri.2008.04.011 . 
[199] P. Nakielski, T. Kowalczyk, K. Zembrzycki, T.A. Kowalewski, Experimental and 
numerical evaluation of drug release from nanoﬁber mats to brain tissue, J. 
Biomed. Mater. Res. Part B 103 (2) (2015) 282–291, doi: 10.1002/jbm.b.33197 . 
[200] Z. Tan, J.P. Ewen, A.E. Forte, S. Galvan, E. De Momi, F. Rodriguez y. Baena, 
D. Dini, What does a brain feel like? J. Chem. Educ. 97 (11) (2020) 4078–
4083, doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.0c00957 . 
[201] A.E. Forte, S. Galvan, F. Manieri, F. Rodriguez y. Baena, D. Dini, A composite 
hydrogel for brain tissue phantoms, Mater. Des. 112 (2016) 227–238, doi: 10. 
1016/j.matdes.2016.09.063 . 
[202] A.E. Forte, S. Galvan, D. Dini, Models and tissue mimics for brain shift sim- 
ulations, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 17 (1) (2018) 249–261, doi: 10.1007/ 
s10237- 017- 0958- 7 . 
[203] Z. Tan, D. Dini, F. Rodriguez y. Baena, A.E. Forte, Composite hydrogel: a high 
ﬁdelity soft tissue mimic for surgery, Mater. Des. 160 (2018) 886–894, doi: 10. 
1016/j.matdes.2018.10.018 . 
[204] M.P. Kainz, A. Greiner, J. Hinrichsen, D. Kolb, E. Comellas, P. Steinmann, 
S. Budday, M. Terzano, G.A. Holzapfel, Poro-viscoelastic material parameter 
identiﬁcation of brain tissue-mimicking hydrogels, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 
11 (2023), doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2023.1143304 . 
[205] A .I. Lavrova, A .V. Sychev, A .S. Vanina, E.V. Grekhnyova, E.B. Postnikov, Access- 
ing random diffusivity in a hydrogel-based brain’s paranchyma phantom, in: 
2022 7th International Conference on Intelligent Informatics and Biomedi- 
cal Science (ICIIBMS), IEEE, 2022, pp. 24–26, doi: 10.1109/ICIIBMS55689.2022. 
9971620 . 
[206] T. Distler, E. Schaller, P. Steinmann, A.R. Boccaccini, S. Budday, Alginate-based 
hydrogels show the same complex mechanical behavior as brain tissue, J. 
Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 111 (2020) 103979, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2020. 
103979 . 
[207] A .S. Vanina, A .V. Sychev, A .I. Lavrova, P.V. Gavrilov, P.L. Andropova, 
E.V. Grekhnyova, T.N. Kudryavtseva, E.B. Postnikov, A hydrogel-based phan- 
tom of the brain tissue aimed at modelling complex metabolic trans- 
port processes, Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. (2022) 1–9, doi: 10.1140/epjs/ 
s11734- 022- 00733- 0 . 
[208] A . Leibinger, A .E. Forte, Z. Tan, M.J. Oldﬁeld, F. Beyrau, D. Dini, F. Ro- 
driguez y. Baena, Soft tissue phantoms for realistic needle insertion: a com- 
parative study, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 44 (8) (2016) 2442–2452, doi: 10.1007/ 
s10439-015-1523-0 . 
[209] A.E. Forte, F. D’Amico, M.N. Charalambides, D. Dini, J.G. Williams, Modelling 
and experimental characterisation of the rate dependent fracture properties 
of gelatine gels, Food Hydrocolloids 46 (2015) 180–190, doi: 10.1016/j.foodhyd. 
2014.12.028 . 
[210] M. Navarro-Lozoya, M.S. Kennedy, D. Dean, J.I. Rodriguez-Devora, Develop- 
ment of phantom material that resembles compression properties of human 
brain tissue for training models, Materialia 8 (2019) 100438, doi: 10.1016/j. 
mtla.2019.100438 . 
[211] A. Tejo-Otero, F. Fenollosa-Artés, I. Achaerandio, S. Rey-Vinolas, I. Buj- 
Corral, M.Á. Mateos-Timoneda, E. Engel, Soft-tissue-mimicking using hydro- 
gels for the development of phantoms, Gels 8 (1) (2022) 40., doi: 10.3390/ 
gels8010040 . 
[212] S.D. Kim, K. Kim, M. Shin, Recent advances in 3D printable conductive hy- 
drogel inks for neural engineering, Nano Convergence 10 (1) (2023) 1–19, 
doi: 10.1186/s40580- 023- 00389- z . 
[213] F. Dell’Isola, D. Steigmann, A.D. Corte, Synthesis of ﬁbrous complex struc- 
tures: designing microstructure to deliver targeted macroscale response, 
Appl. Mech. Rev. 67 (6) (2015), doi: 10.1115/1.4032206 . 
[214] N. Rott, Note on the history of the Reynolds number, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 
22 (1) (1990) 1–12, doi: 10.1146/annurev.ﬂ.22.010190.0 0 0245 . 
[215] X. Kong, Y. Yang, J. Gan, T. Yuan, L. Ao, W. Wu, Experimental and numerical 
investigation on the detailed buckling process of similar stiffened panels sub- 
jected to in-plane compressive load, Thin-Walled Struct. 148 (2020) 106620, 
doi: 10.1016/j.tws.2020.106620 . 
[216] T. Yuan, Y. Yang, X. Kong, W. Wu, Similarity criteria for the buckling pro- 
cess of stiffened plates subjected to compressive load, Thin-Walled Struct. 
158 (2021) 107183, doi: 10.1016/j.tws.2020.107183 . 
[217] Z. Wang, T. Yuan, X. Kong, W. Wu, A universal similarity method and design 
procedure for buckling assessment of stiffened plates under compression load 
on real ships, Thin-Walled Struct. 181 (2022) 110025, doi: 10.1016/j.tws.2022. 
110025 . 
[218] J. Bakarji, J. Callaham, S.L. Brunton, J.N. Kutz, Dimensionally consistent learn- 
ing with Buckingham Pi, Nat. Comput. Sci. 2 (2022) 834–844, doi: 10.1038/ 
s43588- 022- 00355- 5 . 
[219] X. Xie, A. Samaei, J. Guo, W.K. Liu, Z. Gan, Data-driven discovery of dimen- 
sionless numbers and governing laws from scarce measurements, Nat. Com- 
mun. 13 (7562) (2022) 1–11, doi: 10.1038/s41467- 022- 35084- w . 
[220] E.P. Chan, Y. Hu, P.M. Johnson, Z. Suo, C.M. Stafford, Spherical indentation 
testing of poroelastic relaxations in thin hydrogel layers, Soft Matter 8 (5) 
(2012) 1492–1498, doi: 10.1039/C1SM06514A . 
[221] M. Wang, S. Liu, Z. Xu, K. Qu, M. Li, X. Chen, Q. Xue, G.M. Genin, T.J. Lu, F. Xu, 
Characterizing poroelasticity of biological tissues by spherical indentation: an 
improved theory for large relaxation, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 138 (2020), doi: 10. 
1016/j.jmps.2020.103920 . 
[222] S. Chatelin, A. Constantinesco, R. Willinger, Fifty years of brain tissue me- 
chanical testing: from in vitro to in vivo investigations, Biorheology 47 (5-6) 
(2010) 255–276, doi: 10.3233/BIR- 2010- 0576 . 
[223] M.C. Murphy, J. Huston, R.L. Ehman, MR elastography of the brain and its 
application in neurological diseases, Neuroimage 187 (2019) 176–183, doi: 10. 
1016/j.neuroimage.2017.10.008 . 
[224] H. Herthum, S.C.H. Dempsey, A. Samani, F. Schrank, M. Shahryari, C. War- 
muth, H. Tzschätzsch, J. Braun, I. Sack, Superviscous properties of the in vivo 
brain at large scales, Acta Biomater. 121 (2021) 393–404, doi: 10.1016/j.actbio. 
2020.12.027 . 
[225] L.V. Hiscox, C.L. Johnson, M.D.J. McGarry, M. Perrins, A. Littlejohn, E.J.R. van 
Beek, N. Roberts, J.M. Starr, High-resolution magnetic resonance elastogra- 
phy reveals differences in subcortical gray matter viscoelasticity between 
young and healthy older adults, Neurobiol. Aging 65 (2018) 158, doi: 10.1016/ 
j.neurobiolaging.2018.01.010 . 
[226] A . Arani, A . Manduca, R.L. Ehman, J.H. Iii, Harnessing brain waves: a review of 
brain magnetic resonance elastography for clinicians and scientists entering 
the ﬁeld, Br. J. Radiol. (2021) . https://www.birpublications.org/doi/10.1259/bjr. 
20200265 
[227] E. Spedden, J.D. White, E.N. Naumova, D.L. Kaplan, C. Staii, Elasticity 
maps of living neurons measured by combined ﬂuorescence and atomic 
force microscopy, Biophys. J. 103 (5) (2012) 868–877, doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2012. 
08.005 . 
[228] K.B. Bernick, T.P. Prevost, S. Suresh, S. Socrate, Biomechanics of single cortical 
neurons, Acta Biomater. 7 (3) (2011) 1210–1219, doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2010.10. 
018 . 
[229] Y.-B. Lu, K. Franze, G. Seifert, C. Steinhäuser, F. Kirchhoff, H. Wolburg, J. Guck, 
P. Janmey, E.-Q. Wei, J. Käs, A. Reichenbach, Viscoelastic properties of individ- 
ual glial cells and neurons in the CNS, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103 (47) 
(2006) 17759–17764, doi: 10.1073/pnas.0606150103 . 
[230] F. Hasan, K. Al Mahmud, Md.I. Khan, A. Adnan, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 10 
(2022), doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.904818 . 
[231] Y. Zhang, K. Abiraman, H. Li, D.M. Pierce, A.V. Tzingounis, G. Lykotraﬁtis, Mod- 
eling of the axon membrane skeleton structure and implications for its me- 
chanical properties, PLoS Comput. Biol. 13 (2) (2017) e1005407, doi: 10.1371/ 
journal.pcbi.1005407 . 
[232] M. Dao, C.T. Lim, S. Suresh, Mechanics of the human red blood cell deformed 
by optical tweezers, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 51 (11) (2003) 2259–2280, doi: 10. 
1016/j.jmps.2003.09.019 . 
[233] J. Sigüenza, S. Mendez, F. Nicoud, How should the optical tweezers ex- 
periment be used to characterize the red blood cell membrane mechan- 
ics? Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 16 (5) (2017) 1645–1657, doi: 10.1007/ 
s10237- 017- 0910- x . 
[234] E.P.S. Tan, S.Y. Ng, C.T. Lim, Tensile testing of a single ultraﬁne polymeric 
ﬁber, Biomaterials 26 (13) (2005) 1453–1456, doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2004. 
05.021 . 
[235] X. Tang, X. Liu, P. Li, D. Liu, M. Kojima, Q. Huang, T. Arai, Eﬃcient single- 
cell mechanical measurement by integrating a cell arraying microﬂuidic de- 
vice with magnetic tweezer, IEEE Rob. Autom. Lett. 6 (2) (2021) 2978–2984, 
doi: 10.1109/LRA.2021.3062793 . 
[236] K.C. Neuman, A. Nagy, Single-molecule force spectroscopy: optical tweezers, 
magnetic tweezers and atomic force microscopy, Nat. Methods 5 (6) (2008) 
491–505, doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1218 . 
[237] E. Spedden, C. Staii, Neuron biomechanics probed by atomic force microscopy, 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 14 (8) (2013) 16124–16140, doi: 10.3390/ijms140816124 . 
[238] Y. Wu, C. Whiteus, C.S. Xu, K.J. Hayworth, R.J. Weinberg, H.F. Hess, P. De 
Camilli, Contacts between the endoplasmic reticulum and other membranes 
in neurons, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114 (24) (2017) E4 859–E4 867, doi: 10. 
1073/pnas.1701078114 . 
[239] A. Bernardini, M. Trovatelli, M.M. Kłosowski, M. Pederzani, D.D. Zani, S. Briz- 
zola, A. Porter, F. Rodriguez y. Baena, D. Dini, Reconstruction of ovine axonal 
cytoarchitecture enables more accurate models of brain biomechanics, Com- 
mun. Biol. 5 (1101) (2022) 1–14, doi: 10.1038/s42003- 022- 04052- x . 
21
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
[240] M. Sarntinoranont, R.K. Banerjee, R.R. Lonser, P.F. Morrison, A computational 
model of direct interstitial infusion of macromolecules into the spinal cord, 
Ann. Biomed. Eng. 31 (4) (2003) 448 . 
[241] J.H. Kim, G.W. Astary, X. Chen, T.H. Mareci, M. Sarntinoranont, Voxelized 
model of interstitial transport in the rat spinal cord following direct infusion 
into white matter, J. Biomech. Eng. 131 (7) (2009), doi: 10.1115/1.3169248 . 
[242] J.H. Kim, T.H. Mareci, M. Sarntinoranont, A voxelized model of direct infusion 
into the corpus callosum and hippocampus of the rat brain: model develop- 
ment and parameter analysis, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 48 (3) (2010) 203–214, 
doi: 10.1007/s11517- 009- 0564- 7 . 
[243] C.A. Stine, J.M. Munson, Convection-enhanced delivery: connection to and im- 
pact of interstitial ﬂuid ﬂow, Front. Oncol. 9 (2019), doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019. 
00966 . 
[244] A .A . Linninger, C. Tsakiris, D.C. Zhu, M. Xenos, P. Roycewicz, Z. Danziger, 
R. Penn, Pulsatile cerebrospinal ﬂuid dynamics in the human brain, IEEE 
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 52 (4) (2005) 557–565, doi: 10.1109/TBME.2005.844021 . 
[245] A .A . Linninger, M. Xenos, D.C. Zhu, M.R. Somayaji, S. Kondapalli, R.D. Penn, 
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬂow in the normal and hydrocephalic human brain, IEEE 
Trans. Biomed. Eng. 54 (2) (2007) 291–302, doi: 10.1109/TBME.2006.886853 . 
[246] J.H. Smith, K.A. Starkweather, J.J. García, Implications of transvascular ﬂuid 
exchange in nonlinear, biphasic analyses of ﬂow-controlled infusion in brain, 
Bull. Math. Biol. 74 (4) (2012) 881–907, doi: 10.1007/s11538- 011- 9696- 7 . 
[247] A. Wagner, W. Ehlers, Continuum-mechanical analysis of human brain tissue, 
Proc. Appl. Math. Mech. 10 (1) (2010) 99–10 0, doi: 10.10 02/pamm.201010042 . 
[248] A. Wagner, W. Ehlers, Computational modelling of drug infusion into the 
anisotropic white-matter tracts of the human brain, Proc. Appl. Math. Mech. 
11 (1) (2011) 133–134, doi: 10.1002/pamm.201110058 . 
[249] K.N. Magdoom, G.L. Pishko, L. Rice, C. Pampo, D.W. Siemann, M. Sarntinora- 
nont, MRI-based computational model of heterogeneous tracer transport fol- 
lowing local infusion into a mouse hind limb tumor, PLoS One 9 (3) (2014) 
e89594, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089594 . 
[250] W. Zhan, D.Y. Ariﬁn, T.K.Y. Lee, C.-H. Wang, Mathematical modelling of con- 
vection enhanced delivery of carmustine and paclitaxel for brain tumour 
therapy, Pharm. Res. 34 (4) (2017) 860–873, doi: 10.1007/s11095- 017- 2114- 6 . 
[251] S.A. Peters, Identiﬁcation of intestinal loss of a drug through phys- 
iologically based pharmacokinetic simulation of plasma concentration- 
time proﬁles, Clin. Pharmacokinet. 47 (4) (2008) 245–259, doi: 10.2165/ 
0 0 0 03088-20 0847040-0 0 0 03 . 
[252] W.-C. Chou, Y.-H. Cheng, J.E. Riviere, N.A. Monteiro-Riviere, W.G. Kreyling, 
Z. Lin, Development of a multi-route physiologically based pharmacokinetic 
(PBPK) model for nanomaterials: a comparison between a traditional versus a 
new route-speciﬁc approach using gold nanoparticles in rats, Part. Fibre Tox- 
icol. 19 (1) (2022) 1–19, doi: 10.1186/s12989- 022- 00489- 4 . 
[253] D. Deepika, V. Kumar, The role of “Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic 
Model (PBPK)” New Approach Methodology (NAM) in pharmaceuticals and 
environmental chemical risk assessment, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 20 
(4) (2023) 3473, doi: 10.3390/ijerph20043473 . 
[254] M. Hammarlund-Udenaes, M. Fridén, S. Syvänen, A. Gupta, On the rate and 
extent of drug delivery to the brain, Pharm. Res. 25 (8) (2008) 1737–1750, 
doi: 10.1007/s11095- 007- 9502- 2 . 
[255] J. Westerhout, B. Ploeger, J. Smeets, M. Danhof, E.C.M. de Lange, Phys- 
iologically based pharmacokinetic modeling to investigate regional brain 
distribution kinetics in rats, AAPS J. 14 (3) (2012) 543–553, doi: 10.1208/ 
s12248-012-9366-1 . 
[256] I. Loryan, E. Melander, M. Svensson, M. Payan, F. König, B. Jansson, 
M. Hammarlund-Udenaes, In-depth neuropharmacokinetic analysis of an- 
tipsychotics based on a novel approach to estimate unbound target-site con- 
centration in CNS regions: link to spatial receptor occupancy, Mol. Psychiatry 
21 (2016) 1527–1536, doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.229 . 
[257] Y. Yamamoto, P.A. Välitalo, D.R. Huntjens, J.H. Proost, A. Vermeulen, 
W. Krauwinkel, M.W. Beukers, D.-J. van den Berg, R. Hartman, Y.C. Wong, 
M. Danhof, J.G.C. van Hasselt, E.C.M. de Lange, Predicting drug concentration- 
time proﬁles in multiple CNS compartments using a comprehensive 
physiologically-based pharmacokinetic model, CPT Pharmacometrics Syst. 
Pharmacol. 6 (11) (2017) 765–777, doi: 10.1002/psp4.12250 . 
[258] Y. Yamamoto, P.A. Välitalo, Y.C. Wong, D.R. Huntjens, J.H. Proost, A. Ver- 
meulen, W. Krauwinkel, M.W. Beukers, H. Kokki, M. Kokki, M. Danhof, 
J.G.C. van Hasselt, E.C.M. de Lange, Prediction of human CNS pharmacokinet- 
ics using a physiologically-based pharmacokinetic modeling approach, Eur. J. 
Pharm. Sci. 112 (2018) 168–179, doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2017.11.011 . 
[259] A.M. Heitman, R.R. Bies, S.L. Schwartz, A physiologically-based pharmacoki- 
netic model of the brain considering regional lipid variance, J. Pharmacol. 
Exp. Ther. 383 (3) (2022) 217–226, doi: 10.1124/jpet.122.001256 . 
[260] M. Hammarlund-Udenaes, Pharmacokinetic concepts in brain drug delivery, 
in: Drug Delivery to the Brain, Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 2022, pp. 173–
209, doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 030- 88773- 5_7 . 
[261] I. Loryan, M. Hammarlund-Udenaes, S. Syvänen, Brain distribution of drugs: 
pharmacokinetic considerations, Handb. Exp. Pharmacol. 273 (121-150) 
(2022), doi: 10.1007/164_2020_405 . 
[262] Z.-J. Chen, W.C. Broaddus, R.R. Viswanathan, R. Raghavan, G.T. Gillies, Intra- 
parenchymal drug delivery via positive-pressure infusion: experimental and 
modeling studies of poroelasticity in brain phantom gels, IEEE Trans. Biomed. 
Eng. 49 (2) (2002) 85–96, doi: 10.1109/10.979348 . 
[263] J.H. Smith, J.J. Garcíaa, A nonlinear biphasic model of ﬂow-controlled infusion 
in brain: ﬂuid transport and tissue deformation analyses, J. Biomech. 42 (13) 
(2009) 2017–2025, doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2009.06.014 . 
[264] J.H. Smith, J. Jaime Garcíaa, A nonlinear biphasic model of ﬂow-controlled 
infusions in brain: mass transport analyses, J. Biomech. 44 (3) (2011) 524–
531, doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2010.09.010 . 
[265] K.H. Støverud, M. Darcis, R. Helmig, S.M. Hassanizadeh, Modeling concentra- 
tion distribution and deformation during convection-enhanced drug delivery 
into brain tissue, Transp. Porous Media 92 (1) (2012) 119–143, doi: 10.1007/ 
s11242-011-9894-7 . 
[266] D. Su, R. Ma, L. Zhu, Numerical study of nanoﬂuid infusion in deformable 
tissues for hyperthermia cancer treatments, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 49 (11) 
(2011) 1233–1240, doi: 10.1007/s11517- 011- 0819- y . 
[267] M. Nilsson, J. Lätt, F. Ståhlberg, D. van Westen, H. Hagslätt, The im- 
portance of axonal undulation in diffusion MR measurements: a Monte 
Carlo simulation study, NMR Biomed. 25 (5) (2012) 795–805, doi: 10.1002/ 
nbm.1795 . 
[268] C. Nicholson, P. Kamali-Zare, Reduction of dimensionality in Monte Carlo sim- 
ulation of diffusion in extracellular space surrounding cubic cells, Neurochem. 
Res. 45 (1) (2020) 42–52, doi: 10.1007/s11064- 019- 02793- 6 . 
[269] M. Hajiaghamemar, T. Wu, M.B. Panzer, S.S. Margulies, Embedded axonal 
ﬁber tracts improve ﬁnite element model predictions of traumatic brain in- 
jury, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. 19 (3) (2020) 1109–1130, doi: 10.1007/ 
s10237- 019- 01273- 8 . 
[270] M. Sarntinoranont, R.K. Banerjee, R.R. Lonser, P.F. Morrison, A computational 
model of direct interstitial infusion of macromolecules into the spinal cord, 
Ann. Biomed. Eng. 31 (4) (2003) 448–461, doi: 10.1114/1.1558032 . 
[271] B. Sweetman, M. Xenos, L. Zitella, A .A . Linninger, Three-dimensional compu- 
tational prediction of cerebrospinal ﬂuid ﬂow in the human brain, Comput. 
Biol. Med. 41 (2) (2011) 67–75, doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2010.12.001 . 
[272] E. Messaritaki, S.U. Rudrapatna, G.D. Parker, W.P. Gray, D.K. Jones, Improv- 
ing the predictions of computational models of convection-enhanced drug 
delivery by accounting for diffusion non-gaussianity, Front. Neurol. 9 (2018), 
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.01092 . 
[273] M. Brady, R. Raghavan, J. Sampson, Determinants of intraparenchymal infu- 
sion distributions: modeling and analyses of human glioblastoma trials, Phar- 
maceutics 12 (9) (2020) 895, doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12090895 . 
[274] H. Zhang, T. Schneider, C.A. Wheeler-Kingshott, D.C. Alexander, NODDI: prac- 
tical in vivo neurite orientation dispersion and density imaging of the human 
brain, Neuroimage 61 (4) (2012) 10 0 0–1016, doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012. 
03.072 . 
[275] A . Jahangiri, A .T. Chin, P.M. Flanigan, R. Chen, K. Bankiewicz, M.K. Aghi, 
Convection-enhanced delivery in glioblastoma: a review of preclinical and 
clinical studies, J. Neurosurg. 126 (1) (2017) 191–200, doi: 10.3171/2016.1. 
JNS151591 . 
[276] D.P.M. Tromp, N. Adluru, A.L. Alexander, M.E. Emborg, Simulating convection- 
enhanced delivery in the putamen using probabilistic tractography, 2011 IEEE 
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro, IEEE, 
2011, doi: 10.1109/ISBI.2011.5872523 . 2011–02 
[277] F. Gimenez, M.T. Krauze, F. Valles, P. Hadaczek, J. Bringas, N. Sharma, J. For- 
sayeth, K.S. Bankiewicz, Image-guided convection-enhanced delivery of GDNF 
protein into monkey putamen, Neuroimage 54 (2011) S189–S195, doi: 10.1016/ 
j.neuroimage.2010.01.023 . 
[278] M. Brady, R. Raghavan, Z.-J. Chen, W.C. Broaddus, Quantifying ﬂuid infusions 
and tissue expansion in brain, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58 (8) (2011) 2228–
2237, doi: 10.1109/TBME.2011.2128869 . 
[279] K.H. Rosenbluth, A.J. Martin, J. Bringas, K.S. Bankiewicz, Evaluation of 
pressure-driven brain infusions in nonhuman primates by intra-operative 7 
tesla MRI, J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 36 (6) (2012) 1339–1346, doi: 10.1002/jmri. 
23771 . 
[280] I.M.J. van der Bom, R.P. Moser, G. Gao, M. Sena-Esteves, N. Aronin, M.J. Gou- 
nis, Frameless multimodal image guidance of localized convection-enhanced 
delivery of therapeutics in the brain, J. NeuroIntervent. Surg. 5 (1) (2013) 69–
72, doi: 10.1136/neurintsurg-2011-010170 . 
[281] R.S. D’Amico, J.A. Neira, J. Yun, N.G. Alexiades, M. Banu, Z.K. Englander, 
B.C. Kennedy, T.H. Ung, R.J. Rothrock, A. Romanov, X. Guo, B. Zhao, A.M. Son- 
abend, P. Canoll, J.N. Bruce, Validation of an effective im plantable pum p- 
infusion system for chronic convection-enhanced delivery of intracerebral 
topotecan in a large animal model, J. Neurosurg. 133 (3) (2019) 614–623, 
doi: 10.3171/2019.3.JNS1963 . 
[282] B. Partridge, A. Eardley, B.E. Morales, S.N. Campelo, M.F. Lorenzo, J.N. Mehta, 
Y. Kani, J.K.G. Mora, E.-O.Y. Campbell, C.B. Arena, S. Platt, A. Mintz, R.L. Shinn, 
C.G. Rylander, W. Debinski, R.V. Davalos, J.H. Rossmeisl, Advancements in 
drug delivery methods for the treatment of brain disease, Front. Vet. Sci. 9 
(2022) 1039745, doi: 10.3389/fvets.2022.1039745 . 
[283] S.K. Niazi, Non-invasive drug delivery across the blood–brain barrier: 
a prospective analysis, Pharmaceutics 15 (11) (2023) 2599, doi: 10.3390/ 
pharmaceutics15112599 . 
[284] D.Y. Ariﬁn, K.Y.T. Lee, C.-H. Wang, Chemotherapeutic drug transport to brain 
tumor, J. Controlled Release 137 (3) (2009) 203–210, doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel. 
2009.04.013 . 
[285] L. Vargová, A. Homola, J. Zámeˇcnik, M. Tichý, V. Beneš, E. Syková, Diffusion 
parameters of the extracellular space in human gliomas, Glia 42 (1) (2003) 
77–88, doi: 10.1002/glia.10204 . 
[286] J. Zamecnik, The extracellular space and matrix of gliomas, Acta Neuropathol. 
110 (5) (2005) 435–442, doi: 10.10 07/s0 0401-0 05-1078-5 . 
[287] B.D. Trapp, J. Peterson, R.M. Ransohoff, R. Rudick, S. Mörk, L. Bö, Axonal tran- 
section in the lesions of multiple sclerosis, N. Engl. J. Med. (1998), doi: 10. 
1056/NEJM199801293380502 . 
22
T. Yuan, W. Zhan, M. Terzano et al.
Acta Biomaterialia 185 (2024) 1–23
[288] A. Wilkins, Y. Kondo, J. Song, S. Liu, A. Compston, J.A. Black, S.G. Waxman, 
I.D. Duncan, Slowly progressive axonal degeneration in a rat model of chronic, 
nonimmune-mediated demyelination, J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 69 (12) 
(2010) 1256–1269, doi: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181ffc317 . 
[289] E.K. Nduom, C. Yang, M.J. Merrill, Z. Zhuang, R.R. Lonser, Characterization of 
the blood-brain barrier of metastatic and primary malignant neoplasms: lab- 
oratory investigation, J. Neurosurg. 119 (2) (2013) 427–433, doi: 10.3171/2013. 
3.JNS122226 . 
[290] A. Bhandari, B. Gu, F.M. Kashkooli, W. Zhan, Image-based predictive modelling 
frameworks for personalised drug delivery in cancer therapy, J. Controlled Re- 
lease 370 (2024) 721–746, doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2024.05.004 . 
[291] J.S. Tan, D.E. Butterﬁeld, C.L. Voycheck, K.D. Caldwell, J.T. Li, Surface modiﬁca- 
tion of nanoparticles by PEO/PPO block copolymers to minimize interactions 
with blood components and prolong blood circulation in rats, Biomaterials 14 
(11) (1993) 823–833, doi: 10.1016/0142-9612(93)90 0 04-L . 
[292] S.A. Kulkarni, S.-S. Feng, Effects of surface modiﬁcation on delivery eﬃciency 
of biodegradable nanoparticles across the blood–brain barrier, Nanomedicine 
(2011), doi: 10.2217/nnm.10.131 . 
[293] N. McDannold, N. Vykhodtseva, K. Hynynen, Blood-brain barrier disruption 
induced by focused ultrasound and circulating preformed microbubbles ap- 
pears to be characterized by the mechanical index, Ultrasound Med. Biol. 34 
(5) (2008) 834–840, doi: 10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2007.10.016 . 
[294] M.J. Oldﬁeld, C. Burrows, J. Kerl, L. Frasson, T. Parittotokkaporn, F. Beyrau, 
F. Rodriguez y. Baena, Highly resolved strain imaging during needle insertion: 
Results with a novel biologically inspired device, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. 
Mater. 30 (2014) 50–60, doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2013.10.016 . 
[295] T. Watts, R. Secoli, F.R.y. Baena, A mechanics-based model for 3-D steering 
of programmable bevel-tip needles, IEEE Trans. Rob. 35 (2) (2018) 371–386, 
doi: 10.1109/TRO.2018.2879584 . 
[296] M. Pinzi, S. Galvan, F. Rodriguez y. Baena, The Adaptive Hermite Fractal 
Tree (AHFT): a novel surgical 3D path planning approach with curvature 
and heading constraints, Int. J. CARS 14 (4) (2019) 659–670, doi: 10.1007/ 
s11548- 019- 01923- 3 . 
[297] M.R. Dreher, W. Liu, C.R. Michelich, M.W. Dewhirst, F. Yuan, A. Chilkoti, Tumor 
vascular permeability, accumulation, and penetration of macromolecular drug 
carriers, J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 98 (5) (2006) 335–344, doi: 10.1093/jnci/djj070 . 
[298] R. Raghavan, M.L. Brady, M.I. Rodríguez-Ponce, A. Hartlep, C. Pedain, 
J.H. Sampson, Convection-enhanced delivery of therapeutics for brain dis- 
ease, and its optimization, Neurosurg. Focus 20 (4) (2006) E12, doi: 10.3171/ 
foc.2006.20.4.7 . 
[299] T. Yuan, L. Shen, D. Dini, Porosity-permeability tensor relationship of closely 
and randomly packed ﬁbrous biomaterials and biological tissues: applica- 
tion to the brain white matter, bioRxiv (2023), doi: 10.1101/2023.01.14.524065 . 
2023.01.14.524065 
[300] T.J. Lohela, T.O. Lilius, M. Nedergaard, The glymphatic system: implications for 
drugs for central nervous system diseases, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 21 (2022) 
763–779, doi: 10.1038/s41573- 022- 0 050 0-9 . 
[301] M.J. Fowler, J.D. Cotter, B.E. Knight, E.M. Sevick-Muraca, D.I. Sandberg, 
R.W. Sirianni, Intrathecal drug delivery in the era of nanomedicine, Adv. Drug 
Deliv. Rev. 165-166 (2020) 77–95, doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2020.02.006 . 
[302] W. Duch, K. Swaminathan, J. Meller, Artiﬁcial intelligence approaches for ra- 
tional drug design and discovery, Curr. Pharm. Des. 13 (14) (2007) 1497–1508, 
doi: 10.2174/138161207780765954 . 
[303] R. Gupta, D. Srivastava, M. Sahu, S. Tiwari, R.K. Ambasta, P. Kumar, Artiﬁcial 
intelligence to deep learning: machine intelligence approach for drug discov- 
ery, Mol. Diversity 25 (3) (2021) 1315–1360, doi: 10.1007/s11030- 021- 10217- 3 . 
[304] C. Meaney, S. Das, E. Colak, M. Kohandel, Deep learning characterization of 
brain tumours with diffusion weighted imaging, J. Theor. Biol. 557 (2023) 
111342, doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2022.111342 . 
[305] R. Padmanabhan, N. Meskin, W.M. Haddad, Reinforcement learning-based 
control of drug dosing for cancer chemotherapy treatment, Math. Biosci. 293 
(2017) 11–20, doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2017.08.004 . 
[306] H. Mashayekhi, M. Nazari, F. Jafarinejad, N. Meskin, Deep reinforcement 
learning-based control of chemo-drug dose in cancer treatment, Comput. 
Methods Programs Biomed. 243 (2024) 107884, doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2023. 
107884 . 
23
