ABSTRACTS COLLECTION
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics
(ESHG) Conference: Hybrid Posters
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345–709; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-023-01338-4
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Human Genetics 2023
Volume 31 | Supplement S1
Vienna, Austria
June 11-14, 2022
Sponsorship: Publication of this supplement was sponsored by the European Society of Human Genetics. All content was reviewed and
approved by the ESHG Scientiﬁc Programme Committee, which held full responsibility for the abstract selections.
Disclosure Information: In order to help readers, form their own judgments of potential bias in published abstracts, authors are asked to
declare any competing ﬁnancial interests.
Contributions of up to EUR 10 000.- (Ten thousand Euros, or equivalent value in kind) per year per company are considered “Modest”.
Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are considered “Signiﬁcant”.
Presenting author names are bold in the contributor lists.
P01
REPRODUCTIVE GENETICS
P01.001A An unusual number of high mutations expand in
the male germline in tyrosine kinase receptors
Irene Tiemann-Boege1, Ingrid Hartl1, Soﬁa Moura1, Renato Salazar1
1Biophysics, Linz, Austria.
Background/Objectives: The higher risk of older fathers having an
affected offspring with early or late-onset rare disorders has been
quite unsettling; but unfortunately, the methods have been limited
to better characterize this phenomenon. So far, studies have
focused on well-characterized mutations mainly identiﬁed in the
receptor tyrosine kinase receptor (RTK) signalling pathway [1-3].
Methods: The establishment of duplex sequencing opened
exciting new possibilities in ultra-rare variant detection with a very
high accuracy for a sequencing-based method [4, 5]. This is the
ﬁrst study that has used this sequencing approach to explore this
type of mutagenesis directly in sperm in the FGFR3 gene.
Results: We found mutations associated with congenital dis-
orders at increased frequencies and identiﬁed new unreported
selﬁsh mutations expanding with age [6]. We further characterized
the expansion of these in the male germline with droplet digital
PCR and analysed the change in receptor signalling [7, 8].
Conclusion: Our work sheds light into different mutational
mechanisms potentially affecting the receptor kinase activity.
References: 1 Arnheim, N. et al. Annu Rev Genomics Hum
Genet 2016.
2 Goriely, A. et al. Am J Hum Genet 2012.
3 Shinde, D. N. et al. Hum Mol Genet 2013.
4 Kennedy, S. R. et al. PLoS Genet 2013.
5 Salk, J. J. et al. Nat Rev Genet 2018.
6 Salazar, R. et al. bioRxiv 2021.04.26.441422 2022.
7 Lanzerstorfer, P. et al. PLoS One 2014.
8 Motsch, V. et al. Sci Rep 2019.
Grants: FWFW1250, FWFP30867000, REGGEN ATCZ207.
Conﬂict of Interest: Irene Tiemann-Boege Johannes Kepler
University Linz, principal investigator, Ingrid Hartl Johannes Kepler
University Linz, Soﬁa Moura: None declared, Renato Salazar: None
declared.
P01.002.B Using accurate duplex sequencing to explore the
connection between elevated germline mutation rates, sperm
selection, and male (sub)fertility
Jason Kunisaki1, Suchita Lulla1, Xichen Nie2, Joemy Ramsay3, Yixuan
Guo2, Joshua Horns3, Jim Hotaling3, Kenneth Aston3, Aaron Quinlan1;4
1University of Utah School of Medicine, Human Genetics, Salt Lake
City, United States;
2University
of Utah School of Medicine,
Oncological Sciences, Salt Lake City, United States; 3University of
Utah School of Medicine, Surgery, Salt Lake City, United States;
4University of Utah School of Medicine, Biomedical Informatics, Salt
Lake City, United States.
Background/Objectives: Elevated germline de novo mutation
rates can impact health and fertility, especially in the context of
male subfertility. In 2020, we associated elevated paternal
germline mutation rates with reduced lifespans, mirroring the
somatic theory of aging. Similarly, studies of subfertile men
report elevated individual and familial cancer risks compared to
www.nature.com/ejhg
1234567890();,:
age-matched fertile controls. We will examine the mechanistic
connection between germline instability, somatic mutation
burden, subfertility, and poor health.
Methods: Analysis of germline mutation rates frequently
involves the use of whole-genome sequencing from pedigrees.
However, this strategy suffers from high sequencing error rates
(10^-3) and the indirect determination of mutations in sperm. To
account for this, we use TwinStrand Duplex Sequencing (TDS) on
bulk sperm and blood samples to accurately detect true mutations
in individual gametes as those occurring on complementary DNA
strands, reducing our per-nucleotide error rate to <10^-9.
Results: Studying a normozoospermic individual’s bulk sperm
and blood, we obtained high (≤50,000X) coverage across our
sequencing panel. We estimate sperm and blood mutation rates
of ~4e-7 (95% CI: 3.2-4.8e-7) and ~2.3e-7 (95% CI: 2.1-2.6e-7),
respectively.
Conclusion: We ﬁnd mutation rates in sperm to be elevated
compared to those inferred from pedigree studies, and in line with
expectations based on per-cell-division error rates. This supports a
hypothesis that sperm with elevated mutation rates are selected
against during capacitation and/or fertilization which has sig-
niﬁcant implications for IVF and ICSI procedures that bypass these
processes. We will share results from additional samples to explore
the link between mutation rates, male fertility, and health.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jason Kunisaki: None declared, Suchita
Lulla: None declared, Xichen Nie: None declared, Joemy Ramsay:
None declared, Yixuan Guo: None declared, Joshua Horns: None
declared, Jim Hotaling NIH R01 Grant - Fertility Status as a Marker
for Overall Health, Kenneth Aston NIH R01 Grant - Fertility Status
as a Marker for Overall Health, Aaron Quinlan NIH R01 Grant -
Fertility Status as a Marker for Overall Health.
P01.003.C Bi-allelic variants in INSL3 and RXFP2 cause
bilateral cryptorchidism and male infertility
Ann-Kristin Dicke1, Margot Julia Wyrwoll1, Jakob Christian Albreth-
sen2, Alexander Busch2, D. Fietz3, Adrian Pilatz4, Anders Juul2, Sabine
Kliesch5, Jörg Gromoll5, Birgit Stallmeyer1, Frank Tüttelmann1
1Institute of Reproductive Genetics, University of Münster, Münster,
Germany; 2Department of Growth and Reproduction, Rigshospitalet,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark;
3Institute of
Veterinary Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Justus Liebig
University Gießen, Gießen, Germany; 4Clinic for Urology, Paediatric
Urology and Andrology, Justus Liebig University Gießen, Gießen,
Germany;
5Centre
of
Reproductive
Medicine
and
Andrology,
University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Impaired testicular descent is a common
birth defect, leads to cryptorchidism and predisposes to infertility.
In mice, the hormone insulin-like factor 3 (INSL3) and its receptor
relaxin family peptide receptor 2 (RXFP2) are essential for inguinal
canal opening and gubernaculum dilatation pulling the testes into
the scrotum. Heterozygous variants in INSL3 and RXFP2 were also
proposed as associated with cryptorchidism but those variants are
frequently found in unaffected controls.
Methods: We screened exome sequencing data of >1600
infertile men for variants in INSL3 and RXFP2. Clinical, semen, and
testicular phenotypes were evaluated and INSL3 serum level
measurements in patients with identiﬁed rare (MAF <0.01) LoF
variants are ongoing.
Results: Two patients with homozygous LoF variants in either
INSL3 or RXFP2 were identiﬁed. The INSL3 variant c.143dup
p.(Arg50Profs*33) is located in the ﬁrst exon and the RXFP2 variant
c.1406del p.(Phe469Serfs*8) affects the transmembrane domain,
thus encoding a non-functional protein if not degraded. Both
patients showed bilateral cryptorchidism, azoospermia, elevated
FSH and variably impaired spermatogenesis. In a multiply affected
family, segregation indicates no association of heterozygous LoF
variants with cryptorchidism.
Conclusion: Aside from a family in which a homozygous mis-
sense variant in RXFP2 segregated with cryptorchidism in boys,
this is the ﬁrst report of homozygous LoF variants in INSL3 and
RXFP2 in adults. Our ﬁndings show that for both genes, bi-allelic
variants are a more convincing cause of bilateral cryptorchidism
than a previously assumed autosomal dominant inheritance.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the DFG Clinical Research
Unit 326 ‘Male Germ Cells’.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.004.D Associations between epigenetic biomarkers of
aging and infertility
Yunsung Lee1, Jon Bohlin1, Christian Magnus Page1;2, Haakon
Egdetveit Nustad1;3, Jennifer Ruth Harris1, Per Magnus1, Astanand
Jugessur1, Maria Christine Magnus1, Siri Håberg1, Hans Ivar
Hanevik1;4
1Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Centre for Fertility and Health,
Oslo, Norway; 2University of Oslo, Department of Mathematics, Oslo,
Norway;
3Deepinsight, Oslo, Norway;
4Telemark Hospital Trust,
Fertility Department Soer, Porsgrunn, Norway.
Background/Objectives:
As
more
individuals
in
developed
countries postpone parenthood, more experience infertility and
use assisted reproductive technologies (ART). While the effect of
increased chronological age on the risk of infertility is well known,
the relationships between epigenetic biomarkers of aging and
male or female infertility are understudied.
Methods: Using 1,945 mother-father pairs from the Norwegian
Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study, we compared ﬁve
epigenetic biomarkers of aging between 1,000 couples who
conceived by coitus and 894 couples who conceived by ART – in
vitro-fertilization (IVF, n = 525) and intracytoplasmic sperm injec-
tion (ICSI, n = 369).
Results: We found a signiﬁcant difference in one epigenetic
biomarker of a pace of aging, the standardized Dunedin Pace of
Aging methylation (DunedinPoAm), between non-ART and IVF
mothers (0.208, P-value = 0.0004) after adjustment for chronological
age and potential confounders. Further, we detected elevated
DunedinPoAm in mothers with tubal factor infertility (0.326,
P-value = 0.0001), ovulation factor (0.248, P-value = 0.0075) and
unexplained infertility (0.245, P-value 0.0014) compared to non-ART
mothers. No differences in epigenetic biomarkers of aging between
non-ART and ICSI fathers were found. DunedinPoAm also showed
stronger associations with smoking, education, and parity than other
epigenetic biomarkers of aging.
Conclusion: In conclusion, DunedinPoAm captured a differ-
ence in the pace of epigenetic aging between non-ART and IVF
mothers, indicating an association between female epigenetic
aging and infertility.
References:.
Grants: Research Council of Norway (Women’s fertility, project
no. 320656 and Centres of Excellence Funding Scheme, project no.
262700) and the European Research Council under the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research, grant no. 947684.
Conﬂict of Interest: Yunsung Lee: None declared, Jon Bohlin:
None declared, Christian Magnus Page: None declared, Haakon
Egdetveit Nustad: None declared, Jennifer Ruth Harris: None
declared, Per Magnus Research Council of Norway. Centres of
Excellence Funding Scheme (project no. 262700), Astanand
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
346
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Jugessur: None declared, Maria Christine Magnus European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement
number 947684)., Siri Håberg Research Council of Norway.
Women’s
fertility
(project
no.
320656)
and
Centres
of
Excellence Funding Scheme (project no. 262700)., Hans Ivar
Hanevik Research Council of Norway. Women’s fertility (project
no. 320656).
P01.005.A Aftermath of long-term cigarette smoking on
telomere length and mitochondrial DNA copy number in
human cumulus cells prior to In Vitro Fertilization
Fani Konstantinidou1;2, Maria Cristina Budani3, Francesca Gon-
nella1;2, Gian Mario Tiboni3, Liborio Stuppia1;2, Valentina Gatta1;2
1“G. d’Annunzio” University of Chieti-Pescara, School of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Chieti, Italy; 2“G. d’Annunzio” University of Chieti-
Pescara, Unit of Molecular Genetics, Center for Advanced Studies and
Technology (CAST), Chieti, Italy; 3“G. d’Annunzio” University of Chieti-
Pescara, Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences,
Chieti, Italy.
Background/Objectives: The female reproductive system repre-
sents a sensitive target of the harmful effects of cigarette smoke,
with folliculogenesis as mostly affected by this exposure. Some of
the main causes of ovarian injury can be represented by cigarette
smoke-induced oxidative stress (OS), abnormal crosstalk between
oocyte and granulosa-cells and increased cell death [1]. Studies
have shown that smoking can also result in telomere shortening
and mitochondrial dysfunction in human reproduction [2]. Based
on these premises, we estimated the effect of tobacco smoking on
telomere length and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number in
cumulus cells (CCs) of healthy smoking and non-smoking women
(<35 years of age) enrolled from Assisted Reproductive Technol-
ogy protocols.
Methods: DNA was manually extracted from CCs of all subjects
and subsequently quantiﬁed. 96-well plates were prepared in
order to perform dual quantiﬁcation qPCR assays using telomere,
mtDNA and a single copy reference primer sets, as well as a
reference genomic DNA sample. Results were deemed signiﬁcant
when showing a fold change >1.4 or <0.7 and a P-value < 0.05
(two-tailed T-test).
Results: Statistical analysis indicated a signiﬁcantly lower
relative telomere length and mtDNA copy number (p-value ~
0,014/0,012) of the target sample to the reference sample in CCs
of smokers compared to corresponding controls.
Conclusion: A signiﬁcant correlation between smoke exposure
and telomere length, as well as mtDNA copy number has been
evidenced in cumulus cells of smokers. Further epigenetic and
proteomic investigations could be useful to better elucidate the
underlying mechanisms.
References: [1] Konstantinidou, F et al. (2021).
[2] Thilagavathi, J et al. (2013).
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.006.B BMP15 and FSHR genetic polymorphisms in
Bulgarian patients with premature ovarian insufﬁciency
Ivelina Oprova1, Petya Andreeva1, Kalina Mihova2, Martin Geor-
giev2, Radka Kaneva2, Ivanka Dimova3
1Medical complex “Dr Shterev”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 2Medical University
Soﬁa, Molecular Medicine Center, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 3Medical University
Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Premature ovarian insufﬁciency (POI) is
the early depletion of the ovarian reserve affecting 1–2% of
women < 40 years of age and 0.1% of women < 30 years. Genetic
factors have been identiﬁed in approximately 20–25% of cases.
Among the genes associated with POI, BMP15 and FSHR have been
proposed to be incorporated as diagnostic biomarkers. The aim of
our study was to determine the frequency of genetic poly-
morphisms in both genes in Bulgarian women with POI in com-
parison to non-selected Bulgarian individuals (controls), in order to
ﬁnd an association of these genetic factors with the disease.
Methods: Eighteen patients with POI (median age of 30.6
years) were subjected to genetic sequencing of all BMP15
exons and FSHR exon 10, containing SNPs rs6165 (c.919G>A,
p.Ala307Thr) and rs6166 (c.2039G>A, p.Ser680Asn). The sequen-
cing data were compared to data from clinical exome sequencing
in 485 controls.
Results: We didn’t ﬁnd any difference for the analysed FSHR
variants between groups. Statistically signiﬁcant difference was
discovered for BMP15 rs41308602 (c.308A>G, p.Asn103Ser) het-
erozygotes frequency, as it was 4.8 times higher in POI patients
compared to controls.
Allele frequency
Heterozygous frequency
Homozygous
frequency
POI
Controls
POI
Controls
POI
Controls
BMP15
rs3810682
33.3%
23.2%
22.2%
19.6%
22.2%
13.4%
BMP15
rs41308602
13.9%
p < 0.06
6.2%
27.8%
p < 0.0002
5.8%
0%
3.3%
FSHR rs6165
47.2%
49.5%
38.9%
45.8%
27.8%
26.6%
FSHR rs6166
52.8%
49.4%
61.1%
46.4%
22.2%
26.2%
Conclusion: We discovered an association between BMP15
rs41308602 polymorphism and POI in Bulgarian patients and lack
of association for FSHR polymorphisms with this condition.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.007.C A GWAS of parental allelic interactions associated
with subfertility
Siri Naerland Skodvin1, Miriam Gjerdevik1, Julia Romanowska1;2,
Christian Magnus Page1;3;4, Yunsung Lee1, Astanand Jugessur1;2,
Haakon Gjessing1;2
1Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Centre for Fertility and Health,
Oslo, Norway; 2University of Bergen, Department of Global Public
Health and Primary Care, Bergen, Norway; 3University of Oslo, Section
for Statistics and Data science, Department of Mathematics, Faculty of
Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Oslo, Norway; 4University of Oslo,
PharmaTox Strategic Initiative, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural
Sciences, Oslo, Norway.
Background/Objectives: Subfertility is a heterogeneous pheno-
type, the causes of which are often unclear. One hypothesis is that
the joint contribution of risk alleles in the parents may partly
explain subfertility. We, therefore, performed a GWAS to study
parental allelic interactions.
Methods: In the 29,199 pregnancies available for analysis in
the Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study (MoBa),
609 newborns were conceived using assisted reproductive tech-
nology (ART). We used ART as proxy for subfertility and analyzed
interaction effects using logistic regression and a multiplicative
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
347
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
dose-response model, adjusting for principal components, age,
and BMI.
Results: Our results revealed interaction effects between
maternal and paternal SNPs and use of ART. Entries in various
public gene databases indicated that several of the identiﬁed
genes are highly expressed in tissues relevant for the phenotype
studied here. For example, the gene for coiled-coil domain con-
taining 171 (CCDC171, 9p22.3) is expressed in both testis and
endometrium. Two other genes, DENN domain containing 6B
(DENND6B, 22q13.33) and karyopherin subunit beta 1 (KPNB1,
17q21.32), are also expressed in testis.
Conclusion: Our results pointed to several signiﬁcant interac-
tion effects between maternal and paternal SNPs in genes that are
highly relevant to subfertility. Further replications are necessary to
conﬁrm these ﬁndings.
References: Magnus et al. Cohort proﬁle update: the Norwe-
gian Mother and Child Cohort study (MoBa). Int J Epidemiol. 2016.
Gjessing & Lie. Case-parent Triads: Estimating Single-and Dou-
ble-dose Effects of Fetal and Maternal Disease Gene Haplotypes.
Annals of human genetics. 2006.
Grants: Norwegian Research Council (grant 262700).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.008.D Establishment of the niPGT-A programme in two
IVF centres
Antonio Urbano1;2;3, Marina Sánchez1;3, Isabel Ochando1;2;3, Mireia
Poveda3;4, Juan Iñiguez3;5, Estefanía Montoya1;3, Rosario Vazquez1;3,
Juan Manuel Moreno3;4, Jose Jesús López-Gálvez3;4, JOAQUIN
RUEDA1;2;3
1Unidad de Genética. Hospital HLA Vistahermosa, Alacant, Spain;
2Universidad Miguel Hernández (UMH), Departamento de Histología
y Anatomía, UMH, Alicante, Spain, San Juan de Alicante, Spain;
3Cátedra de Biomedicina Reproductiva Vistahermosa, UMH, Alicante,
Spain, Alacant, Spain; 4UR Vistahernosa, UR Grupo Internacional de
Reproducción Asistida, Alacant, Spain; 5UR IMED Valencia, UR Grupo
Internacional de Reproducción Asistida, Burjasot, Spain.
Background/Objectives:
Preimplantation
genetic
testing
for
aneuploidy (PGT-A) selects euploid embryos, improving the results in
in vitro fertilisation (IVF) cycles. The evolution of next-generation
sequencing (NGS) has made it possible to reduce the amount of
genetic material needed to obtain reliable results. NGS allows analysis
of spent culture medium (SMC) to determine embryo ploidy, with
even better concordance with embryo ploidy than trophectoderm
(TE) biopsy (1). Non-invasive PGT-A (niPGT-A) promises to be one of
the main tools for embryo selection, as it provides insight into
embryo ploidy without altering embryo development at all. Our
objective is to determine the best protocol for niPGT-A.
Methods: We established a niPGT-A programme in 2 IVF cen-
tres. We determined concordance, FPR and FNR.
Centre A stablish standard protocol for remove granulosa cells
from oocyte and Centre B stablish a strict protocol for remove
granulosa cells.
Results: Control: 47 SMC from vitriﬁed embryos. Concordance
95.74% SMC vs TE, FNR of 2.13% and FPR 2.13%.
Centre A: 34 fresh SMC, 52,94% concordance, 38,24% FNR and
8,82% FPR.
Centre B: 16 fresh SMC. 100% concordance and 0% FPR and FNR.
Conclusion: niPGT-A is one of the best techniques for embryo
selection, but it is necessary to establish a strict protocol for the
removal of granulosa cells from the oocyte and/or embryo to
ensure consistent results.
References: 1. Huang L, Bogale B, Tang Y, Lu S, Sunney X,
Racowsky
C.
Noninvasive
preimplantation
genetic
testing
for aneuploidy in spent medium may be more reliable than
trophectoderm
biopsy.
2019:1-8.
https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1907472116.
Grants: UMH-Citolab1.19A.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.009.A Experimental validation of PRD-like homeobox
genes expressed in bovine oocytes and early IVF embryos
Barış Yaşar1;2, Nina Boskovic2;3, Eeva-Mari Jouhilahti4, Piibe Vill1,
Thomas Bürglin5, Shintaro Katayama2;4;6, Tõnis Org1;7, Juha Kere2;4;6,
Ants Kurg1
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu,
Department of Biotechnology, Tartu, Estonia; 2Karolinska Institutet,
Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition,
Huddinge, Sweden;
3Helsinki University Hospital, University of Helsinki, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki, Finland;
4Stem cells and
Metabolism and Biomedicum Stem Cell Centre, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Helsinki, Research Programs Unit, Helsinki, Finland;
5University of Basel, Department of Biomedicine, Basel, Switzerland;
6Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland; 7Estonian Genome
Centre, University of Tartu, Institute of Genomics, Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: Identiﬁcation of genes involved in
embryonic genome activation (EGA) in humans revealed a role of
PRD-like homeobox genes during early embryo development. In
this study we investigate bovine (Bos taurus) oocytes and pre-
implantation embryos in order to clarify the possible roles of PRD-
like homeobox genes in EGA.
Methods: Bovine oocytes/embryos were used to prepare cDNA
by STRT-N which was followed by PCR for subsequent TOPO
cloning and Sanger sequencing.
Results: We analysed RNA-seq data derived from a bovine
model system to investigate the transcriptome in germinal vesicle
and metaphase II oocytes, and in embryos at the four-, eight-, 16-
cell, and blastocyst stages. This revealed the expression of a similar
set of early embryo PRD-like homeodomain transcription factors
previously identiﬁed in humans. In addition, evolutionary com-
parisons of oocyte and early embryo transcription factors helped
predict gene structures and the genomic location of these PRD-
like homeobox genes. cDNA cloning allowed the validation of
these genes in bovine as candidate igniters of EGA.
Conclusion: Orthologues of human PRD-like homeobox genes,
ARGFX, DUXA, NOBOX, LEUTX, TPRX1, and TPRX2 were experimen-
tally identiﬁed in bovine at the transcript level. A TPRX duplicate,
TPRX3, which was earlier predicted but not conﬁrmed, was also
shown to be expressed in bovine.
References: Töhönen, V. et al. Novel PRD-like homeodomain
transcription factors and retrotransposon elements in early human
development. Nat Commun 6, 8207 (2015).
Grants: This work is funded from the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skło-
dowska-Curie grant agreement No 813707.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.010.B SizeMatters: a novel algorithm for fetal-fraction
estimation based on fragment-size distributions
Jesper Eisfeldt1;2, Camilla Holmgren2, Malin Tirﬁng2, Anna Lind-
strand1;2, Erik Iwarsson1;2, Agne Lieden1;2
1Karolinska Institute, Molecular medicine and surgery, Solna, Sweden;
2Karolinska University hospital, Clinical genetics, Solna, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for
trisomy 13,18, and 21 is performed on cell free DNA (cfDNA)
extracted from peripheral blood from the pregnant woman. The
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
348
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
cfDNA contains both foetal and maternal DNA and the foetal
fraction (FF) is an important factor for NIPT test accuracy. In
general, NIPT on cfDNA with an FF < 3% is considered unreliable.
In a male fetus, the FF is estimated from chromosome Y signals
(FFY), however, no such patterns are available for female fetuses.
Instead, the FFY is complemented by machine learning approa-
ches, requiring large training sets and homogenous data. As such,
there is a need to develop robust computational tools for the
estimation of FF in both male and female fetuses. Herein, we
present a novel algorithm (SM) based on a machine-learning
consensus approach for FF estimation from DNA fragment size
distribution in shallow genome sequencing data (sGS).
Methods: We develop the SM-algorithm, combining multi-
layer perceptron regression, support-vector machine, and multiple
linear regression in a machine-learning framework.
Results: We analysed 4000 pregnancies using the SM-algorithm
for FF estimation based on sGS data and fragment size distribution
and compared it to current leading methods for sGS FF estimation.
The SM-algorithm was able to successfully estimate FF, providing
high concordance with FFY (median absolute error (MAE) =0.9),
signiﬁcant correlation with trisomy 21 signal (r = 0.75), and ﬁnal
NIPT quality (fail < 1%).
Conclusion: Our novel algorithm for FF estimation provides a
FF estimation in both male and female fetuses.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.011.C Shedding light on Endometriosis (EM) disease:
Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) and new genes discovery in a
fully clinical characterized Italian cohort
Aurora Santin1, Paola Tesolin1, Beatrice Spedicati1, Gabriella Zito2,
Federico Romano2, Anna Morgan3, Maria Pina Concas3, Giuseppe
Ricci1;2, Giorgia Girotto1;3
1University of Trieste, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health
Sciences, Trieste, Italy; 2Institute for Maternal and Child Health –
I.R.C.C.S. “Burlo Garofolo”, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Trieste, Italy; 3Institute for Maternal and Child Health – I.R.C.C.S.
“Burlo Garofolo”, Medical Genetics, Trieste, Italy.
Background/Objectives: EM is a multifactorial disease, involving
the proliferation of endometrial epithelium and stromal tissue
outside the uterine cavity. Despite its prevalence, little is known
about the genetic factors involved.
Methods: To date, 50 EM adult women with a deep clinical
evaluation (i.e., second-level ultrasound echography) were recrui-
ted and WES was performed. WES focused on a ﬁrst list of 285
known EM genes and later on new candidates. Likely pathogenic
variants have been selected and their frequency checked in 1000
already sequenced healthy controls.
Results: Preliminary results allow the identiﬁcation of 47 var-
iants within 23 genes. In particular, two approaches have been
conducted: a) the identiﬁcation of recurrent genes shared among
many patients (e.g., LAMA5, CSMD1, NEB), b) private variants
within speciﬁc genes (e.g., IL18). In group a) 4/50 patients carry
different heterozygous missense variants within LAMA5 gene,
already known to be associated with EM and EM-related infertility;
3/50 patients carry pathogenic variants (i.e., two heterozygous
missense/one intronic deletion) within CSMD1 gene, a negative
complement regulator previously associated with infertility. Fur-
thermore, 7/50 patients carry heterozygous missense variants
within NEB gene, a new candidate encoding a structural sarco-
mere protein. In group b) one patient carries a heterozygous
missense variant in IL18 gene, known to be involved in EM
pathogenesis and in embryo implant regulation.
Conclusion: This study allows the identiﬁcation of novel
pathogenic variants in EM known genes as well as new candidates
which can guide clinicians in deﬁning diagnostic/prognostic mar-
kers and tailoring targeted therapies for patients and their families.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.012.D Design and validation of a next-generation
sequencing workﬂow for simultaneous detection of
aneuploidy, ploidy, and common pathogenic microdeletions
within Preimplantation Genetic Testing (PGT)
Matteo
Figliuzzi1,
Silvia
Caroselli1,
Francesco
Cogo2,
Paola
Zambon2, Cristina Patassini2, Dany Bakalova3, Federico Favero4,
Attilio Anastasi5, Francesco Capodanno5, Andrea Gallinelli5, Danilo
Cimadomo6, Laura Rienzi6, Filippo Maria Ubaldi6, Carmen Rubio7,
Jose Miravet-Valenciano7, Jorge Jimenez Almazan7, David Blesa7,
Carlos Simon7, Antonio Capalbo1
1Igenomix Italia, Reproductive Genetics, Rome, Italy; 2Igenomix Italia,
Reproductive Genetics, Marostica, Italy; 3Igenomix UK, Reproductive
Genetics, Guildford, United Kingdom; 4Arc-Ster, ART center, Mestre,
Italy; 5Hospital “del Delta”, Physiopathology of Human Reproduction
Center, Lagosanto, Italy;
6GeneraLife, ART center, Rome, Italy;
7Igenomix Spain, Reproductive Genetics, Valencia, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Standard methodologies employed in
preimplantation genetic testing allow to identify chromosomal
aneuploidies but not to determine embryo ploidy status nor the
presence of microdeletions (MD). Transferring embryos with these
abnormalities can result in miscarriage, molar pregnancy, or
multiple congenital anomalies, requiring later-stage invasive pre-
natal diagnosis. Our objective is the development of a novel NGS-
based framework to resolve current limitations.
Methods: PGT-A products were reampliﬁed and sequenced
using
a
custom
AmpliSeq
panel
targeting
357
genomic
regions harbouring high frequency SNPs and/or associated to 8
pathogenic microdeletions (-4p = Wolf-Hirschhorn, -8q = Langer-
Giedion, -1p = 1p36 deletion, -22q = DiGeorge, -5p = Cri-du-Chat,
-15q = Prader-Willi/Angelman,
-11q = Jacobsen,
-17p = Smith-
Magenis). Sequencing data were processed by a bioinformatic
algorithm which accounts for sequencing noise through gaussian-
mixture modeling of B-allelic ratios measured at each SNP locus
and estimates the likelihood of different ploidy levels and of the
presence of MD.
Results: Ploidy was correctly determined in 233/234 cases, with
only one diploid sample misclassiﬁed as triploid (PPV = 94.1%,
NPV = 100%). Microdeletions could be consistently detected with
high reliability (PPV = 98.5%, NPV = 99.5%) in 6 out of 8 micro-
deletion regions. Detection in -1p and -4p was less reliable due to
the presence of recurrent haplotype blocks in the population, as
conﬁrmed by the analysis of a dataset of 2504 whole genome
sequencing from 1KGP database.
Conclusion: This study provides, for the ﬁrst time, detection of
common pathogenic microdeletions and ploidy status from a
single trophectoderm biopsy, expanding PGT clinical validity. This
new assay will also help elucidate fundamental biological and
clinical questions related to the genetics of implantation failure
and pregnancy loss of apparently euploid embryos.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Matteo Figliuzzi Igenomix Italy, Silvia
Caroselli Igenomix Italy, Francesco Cogo Igenomix Italy, Paola
Zambon Igenomix Italy, Cristina Patassini Igenomix Italy, Dany
Bakalova Igenomix UK, Federico Favero Arc-Ster, Attilio Anastasi:
None declared, Francesco Capodanno: None declared, Andrea
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
349
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Gallinelli: None declared, Danilo Cimadomo GeneraLife, Laura
Rienzi GeneraLife, Filippo Maria Ubaldi GeneraLife, Carmen Rubio
Igenomix Spain, Jose Miravet-Valenciano Igenomix Spain, Jorge
Jimenez Almazan Igenomix Spain, David Blesa Igenomix Spain,
Carlos Simon Igenomix Spain, Antonio Capalbo Igenomix Italy.
P01.013.A Actionable secondary ﬁndings in infertile men and
their clinical signiﬁcance
Kristiina Lillepea1, Laura Kasak1, Liina Nagirnaja2, Kenneth Aston3,
Don Conrad2, Margus Punab1;4;5, Maris Laan1
1University of Tartu, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational
Medicine, Tartu, Estonia;
2Oregon Health & Science University,
Oregon National Primate Research Center, Division of Genetics,
Beaverton, OR, United States; 3University of Utah School of Medicine,
Department of Surgery, Division of Urology, Andrology and IVF
Laboratory, Salt Lake City, UT, United States; 4University of Tartu,
Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tartu, Estonia;
5Tartu University
Hospital, Andrology Center, Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: Whole exome sequencing (WES) has
been increasingly used in medicine for patients with suspected
genetic disorders. WES also enables the identiﬁcation of secondary
ﬁndings (SFs) – genetic variants in disease-causing genes that are
unrelated to the patient’s primary condition but are still medically
actionable. The prevalence of SFs in the general population is
1–3%; data of SFs in speciﬁc clinical conditions is limited. This
study aimed to describe SFs in non-obstructive azoospermia
(NOA) patients.
Methods: GEMINI1 represents a multi-center study aiming to
map the genetic composition of NOA. We evaluated SFs across 85
genes in a cohort of 836 GEMINI participants from six countries.
Recommendations from the American College of Genetics and
Genomics (ACMG), the Geisinger Health System’s MyCode and the
Clinical Genome Resource were used to compile the gene list.
Results: Based on the ACMG guidelines for the interpretation
of genetic variants, we identiﬁed 27 SFs in 21 genes in 30 patients
(3.6%, 30/836). The majority of these patients carried SFs in genes
linked to familial cancer syndromes, followed by cardiac condi-
tions. Moreover, 11 patients with SFs (37%, 11/30) carried variants
in genes linked to spermatogenic failure in knockout mice. Clinico-
molecular diagnoses were conﬁrmed in multiple cases during a
retrospective evaluation of patients with SFs.
Conclusion: Every 28th analyzed NOA patient carried a medi-
cally actionable SF. Disclosure of SFs is valuable in genetic disease
prevention and intervention, and long-term health management
of andrology patients.
References: 1. Nagirnaja et al. (2021) N Engl J Med; 385:707-719.
Grants: Estonian Research Council IUT34-12, PRG1021; NIH
R01HD078641, P50HD096723.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.014.B Asymptomatic male carriers of long copy number
variants are predisposed to spermatogenic failure
Triin Kikas1, Laura Kasak1, Margus Punab2;3, Maris Laan1
1Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia; 2Andrology Centre, Tartu University Hospital,
Tartu, Estonia; 3Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: Infertility affects 7-10% of all men. About
60% of these cases remain idiopathic. Among other genetic factors,
a burden of copy number variants (CNVs) has been suggested to
increase the risk for spermatogenetic failure. Only a limited number
of genome-wide studies have been conducted on the subject.
Methods: All study participants were recruited at the Androl-
ogy Center of Tartu University Hospital (2000-2015). The study
group consists of azoospermia (no sperms, n = 73), severe (sperm
count per ejaculate <10 mln, n = 83) or moderate oligozoos-
permia (10-39 mln, n = 58) and normozoospermia (>39 mln,
n = 63) cases. All individuals were genotyped using Illumina
HumanOmniExpress-24-v1.0/v1.1 BeadChips. Calling of autosomal
CNVs (>100bp) from the genotyping data was performed with
three algorithms (GADA, QuantiSNP, and CNstream) (1). CNVs
detected by at least two programs were included in the analysis.
Results: No difference was detected between the groups for
the mean number (7.2-7.4) and length (101-120kb) of CNVs per
subject. CNVs longer than >1Mb (n = 33) were located in peri-
centromeric regions and near telomeres. Three loci overlapped
with known pathogenic CNV regions (1q21.1, 7p22.2, 14q32.33).
A recurrent CNV within the CSMD1 gene (n = 4) was detected only
in azoospermia and severe oligozoospermia cases, supporting its
reported link to spermatogenic failure (2).
Conclusion: Large pericentromeric and subtelomeres CNVs may
affect spermatogenesis through meiotic and mitotic chromosomal
missegregation. CNVs located within genes showing enhanced
testicular expression may compromise normal spermatogenesis.
References: 1. Kasak et al (2015) Sci Rep 5:8342.
2. Lee et al (2019) Nat Commun 10:4626.
Grants: PRG1021 (Estonian Research Council).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.015.C Novel STARD8 and STARD9 mutations identiﬁed in
46,XY gonadal dysgenesis patients lend support to these
genes as DSD candidates
Ludmila Livshits1, Dmytro Sirokha1, Alexandra Gorodna1, Nataliya
Zelinska2, Jadwiga Jaruzelska3, Kamila Kusz-Zamelczyk3, Serge Nef4
1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, National Academy of
Sciences of Ukraine, Laboratory of Human Genomics, Kyiv, Ukraine;
2Ukrainian Scientiﬁc and Practical Center for Endocrine Surgery,
Transplantation of Endocrine Organs and Tissues, Ministry of Health
of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine;
3Institute of Human Genetics, Polish
Academy of Sciences,
Poznan, Poland;
4Faculty of Medicine,
University of Geneva, Department of Genetic Medicine and Devel-
opment, Geneva, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Investigating mutation in genes, affect-
ing gonad development is essential for understanding the genetic
mechanisms causing Disorders/Differences in Sex Development.
The aim of the research was to identify novel DSD genetic variants
using whole exome sequencing (WES).
Methods: The WES was performed for two unrelated 46,XY SRY
positive patients with gonadal dysgenesis.
Results: In ﬁrst patient the hemizygous missense mutation
NM_001142503.2
c.2659C>T
(p.Arg887Cys)
(rs766188656)
in
STARD8 gene (MAF = 0.0000251) was identiﬁed and conﬁrmed as
pathogenic using bioinformatic tools. After analysis of second
patient two deferent mutations in compound heterozygous state
were identiﬁed in STARD9 gene: NM_020759.3 c.5585_5590del
(p.Ser1862_Thr1863del) (rs528276071) – inframe deletion (MAF =
0.0019) combined with NM_020759.3 c.3514C>T (p.Arg1172Cys)
(rs12594837) – missense mutation (MAF = 0.00837). The analysis of
genetic background which were performed for both patients did
not reveal any pathogenic variants implicated in DSD phenotype.
All detected mutant variants were inherited from healthy parents –
heterozygous carriers and were not previously implicated in the
pathogenesis of any disease. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
350
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
mutant variant in STARD8 and both mutations in STARD9 genes
located in positions that are conserved in primates.
Conclusion: Based on the results obtained in current study,
previous reports of STARD gene family mutations in DSD patients,
expression patterns of STADR8 and STARD9 genes and steroido-
genic properties of those protein products we conclude that
STADR8 and STARD9 considered as 46,XY DSD causing genes.
References:.
Grants: Study was funded by the Swiss National Science
Foundation, grant number SCOPES IZ73Z0_152347/1 and National
Academy of Sciences of Ukraine [0121U110054].
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.016.D Using marginal analysis to optimise the number of
tested genes for reproductive genetic carrier screening
Leslie Burnett1;2;3, Matthew Hobbs1, Heather Gordon1
1Garvan
Institute
of
Medical
Research,
Darlinghurst,
Sydney,
Australia; 2University of NSW, Sydney, School of Clinical Medicine,
St Vincent’s Campus, Darlinghurst, Sydney, Australia; 3University of
Sydney, Northern Clinical School, Royal North Shore Hospital, St
Leonards, Sydney, Australia.
Background/Objectives: Genomic technologies now permit car-
rier testing using very large panels, or even the entire exome.
Including more genes increases diagnostic sensitivity, but at
higher cost. We have explored if there is an optimum number of
genes for clinical utility and cost effectiveness.
Methods: We used a comprehensive list of 1,300 genes
causative of autosomal recessive and X-linked recessive condi-
tions relevant to carrier screening. From data in the Genome
Aggregation Database (gnomAD), for both total population as
well as major population subgroups, we extracted the allele
frequency (AF) in these genes for all known single nucleotide
variants (SNV) and indel variants that have been reported as
Pathogenic or Likely Pathogenic in ClinVar. We also considered a
notional population subgroup, in which the AF was set equal to
the highest encountered AF in any other population subgroup.
Using marginal analysis techniques, we calculated the number
of genes needing to be incorporated into a carrier screening
panel to achieve 90%, 95% or 99% of theoretical maximal
diagnostic sensitivity.
Results: To achieve the stated fraction of theoretical maximal
diagnostic sensitivity, the number of genes needing to be inclu-
ded in a screening panel was found to be:
Diagnostic sensitivity
90%
95%
99%
Couples
84
160
381
Individuals
383
546
842
Conclusion: To achieve generally accepted levels of diagnostic
sensitivity, the number of genes needing inclusion in a screening
panel is much smaller than the total number of genes potentially
available for testing. This has signiﬁcant policy implications for
both cost and public health beneﬁts of carrier screening.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Leslie Burnett Garvan Institute of
Medical Research, Takeda Pharmaceuticals USA Inc, Invitae
Asia-Paciﬁc, Honorary academic positions at University of NSW
and University of Sydney, Matthew Hobbs Garvan Institute of
Medical Research, Heather Gordon Garvan Institute of Medical
Research.
P01.017.A Cytogenetic investigation of infertile patients in
Hungary: a 10-year retrospective study
Szilvia Andó1, Katalin Koczok1, Beáta Bessenyei1, Istvan Balogh1;2,
Aniko Ujfalusi1
1University of Debrecen,
Department of Laboratory
Medicine,
Division of Clinical Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary;
2University of
Debrecen, Department of Human Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Infertility is a very common health pro-
blem that can caused by numerical or structural abnormalities of sex
chromosomes or autosomes. The main purpose of this retrospective
study was to determine the types and frequency of chromosomal
aberrations detected in infertile patients and to compare the fre-
quency of structural aberrations with control group.
Methods: Constitutional karyotyping was performed in 1489
men and 780 women diagnosed with infertility between 2010 and
2020. The control group was represented by 869 male and 1160
female patients having cytogenetic investigation with other
referral reason then infertility. Karyotyping was performed on
peripheral blood lymphocytes as standard protocol by using
G-banding method.
Results: Thirty three (2,22%) of 1489 infertile men showed sex
chromosomal aberrations [47,XXY (n = 28); 47,XXY/46,XY (n = 3);
47,XXY/48,XXXY (n = 1); 46,XX (n = 1)] and 89 (5,98%) had structural
abnormalities [inversion (n = 21); balanced translocation (n = 16);
single cell translocation (n = 52)]. Three (0,38%) of the 780 infertile
women had sex chromosomal aberrations [X numerical mosaicism
(n = 2); 46,XY (n = 1)] and 58 (7,44%) had structural abnormalities
[inversion (n = 21); balanced translocation (n = 10); single cell
translocation (n = 27)]. Structural chromosomal abnormalities were
detected in 27/869 (3,11%) control male cases [inv(9) (n = 23); sin-
gle cell translocations (n = 4)] and 39/1160 (3,36%) control female
samples [inversions (n = 31); single cell translocations (n = 8)]. The
prevalence of single cell translocations was higher in infertile
patients (3,5% vs. 0,46% in men and 3,46% vs. 0,7% in women).
Conclusion:
The
type
and
frequency
of
chromosomal
abnormalities of infertile patients was comparable to literature
data. The frequency of less-studied single cell translocations was
signiﬁcantly higher in infertile patients.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.019.C Familial Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser
syndrome
Hagit Daum1, Ayala Frumkin1, Vardiella Meiner2, Iris Harel3, Dvora
Bauman4
1Hadassah Medical Organization and Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Israel, Genetics, Jerusalem, Israel; 1Hadassah
Medical Organization and Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel, Genetics, Jerusalem, Israel; 3Barzilai Medical Center,
OBGYN, Ashkelon, Israel;
4Hadassah Medical Organization and
Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel, OBGYN,
Jerusalem, Israel.
Background/Objectives: Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH)
syndrome is characterized by congenital agenesis/aplasia of the
uterus and part of the vagina in women with a normal 46,XX
karyotype. Most cases are sporadic and do not have a molecular
diagnosis, although individual case reports have been described in
association with copy number variants or candidate genes
(WNT9B, LHX1, GREB1L, 1q21.1 deletion, 22q11.21 duplication etc).
We describe a dominantly inherited case of MRKH, in which a
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
351
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
mother with MRKH had a biological daughter with the same
syndrome through a surrogate pregnancy.
Methods: We used G-banded chromosomal analysis in order to
conﬁrm a 46,XX karyotype, and exome sequencing in order to
investigate single nucleotide variants (SNV). Copy number variants
were inferred from read depth analysis of the exome data.
Results: Chromosome analysis on the mother and daughter
with MRKH revealed a female karyotype with a deletion of
chr2q37 in both. The deletion was found to be de novo in the
mother. Exome sequencing, undertaken in the daughter, con-
ﬁrmed the ~4Mbp deletion and did not demonstrate pathogenic
or likely pathogenic variants. Similar deletions have been descri-
bed in the literature in association with a spectrum of neuro-
physical ﬁndings but never with MRKH.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that deletion of 2q37 may be
associated with MRKH. The developing options of surrogacy and
uterine transplantation stress the importance of genetic investi-
gation for MRKH patients.
References:.
Grants: Internal fund of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and Hadassah Medical Center.
Conﬂict of Interest: Hagit Daum Mentoring Grant of the
Hebrew university and Hadassah Medical Center. PI: Hagit Daum,
Ayala Frumkin: None declared, Vardiella Meiner: None declared,
Iris Harel: None declared, Dvora Bauman: None declared.
P01.020.D A Novel Cause of Male Infertility and
Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism: Inhibin-A Deﬁciency Due
to Loss of Function Variations of INHA
Esra Arslan Ateş1, Mehmet Eltan2, Bahadır Şahin3, Busra Gurpinar
Tosun2, Tuba Seven Menevse2, bilgen bilge geçkinli4, Andy Green-
ﬁeld5, Serap Turan2, Abdullah Bereket2, Tulay Guran2
1Marmara University Pendik Training and Research Hospital, Genetic
Diseases Diagnostic Center, İstanbul, Turkey; 2Marmara University
School of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Istanbul, Turkey; 3Marmara University School of Medicine,
Department of Urology, Istanbul, Turkey; 4Marmara University School
of Medicine, Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey;
5MRC Harwell
Institute, Mammalian Genetics Unit, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: The human INHA gene encodes the inhi-
bin subunit alpha protein, which is common to both inhibin A and B.
The functional importance of inhibins in male sex development,
sexual function, and reproduction remain largely unknown. Todate
no clinical manifestation were related to INHA gene variations. Here
we report for the ﬁrst time two male siblings sharing the same clinical
features associated with homozygous INHA pathogenic variations.
Methods: The medical documents were examined for clinical,
biochemical, and imaging data. Genetic analysis was performed
using next-generation and Sanger sequencing methods.
Results: Two brothers were referred to us because of gyneco-
mastia, testicular pain, and having a history of hypospadias. They
were born to a consanguineous parents and no similar cases were
reported in the family. Biochemistry revealed low serum testoster-
one, high gonadotropin and anti-Mullerian hormone, and very low/
undetectable inhibin concentrations, where available. Both patients
had azoospermia in spermiogram. We have identiﬁed a homo-
zygous 2bp deletion (c.208_209delAG, R70Gfs*3), which leads to a
truncated INHA protein in both patients, and conﬁrmed hetero-
zygosity in the parents. The external genital development, pubertal
onset and progression, reproductive functions, serum gonado-
tropins, and sex hormones of mother and father, who were het-
erozygous carriers of the identiﬁed mutation were normal.
Conclusion: Homozygosity for pathogenic INHA variations
causes decreased prenatal and postnatal testosterone production
and infertility in males, while the heterozygous female and male
carriers of INHA variations do not have any abnormality in sex
development and reproduction.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.023.C Copy number variant (CNV) analysis in couples with
recurrent miscarriages
Evelina Dagyte1, Algirdas Utkus1
1Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius,
Lithuania.
Background/Objectives:
Recurrent
miscarriage
(RM)
is
an
important global health issue and carries psychological and
ﬁnancial burden for affected couples. Anatomy factors, antipho-
spholipid
syndrome,
endocrinological
and
chromosomal
abnormalities are the most commonly recognized aetiologies for
RM. Aetiology of RM remains idiopathic in 40-60 % of couples. The
aim of this study was to evaluate copy-number variation (CNV)
characteristics in couples with RM and compare to the Lithuanian
population cohort.
Methods: Microarray analysis was performed for couples with
unexplained RM (anatomy factors, antiphospholipid syndrome,
chromosomal and endocrinological abnormalities were excluded)
to
detect
CNVs.
Genotyping
was
performed
with
Illumina
HumanCytoSNP-12 v2.1 arrays using the standard Illumina Inﬁ-
nium HD Ultra Assay Protocol Guide.
Results: In total, 68 RM patients were tested and 72 CNVs were
detected. The average number of CNVs per patient was 1,1 (1,67 in
Lithuanian population cohort). No CNVs were identiﬁed in
approximately 40 % of patients (30-40 % in Lithuanian population
cohort). CNV regions (CNVRs) presented >1 individual (criteria met
13 CNVRs) were selected for further analysis. Three of 13 CNVRs –
at 3q29, 5p15.33 and 19p12-q11 – were not reported in Lithuanian
population cohort or in DGV database.
Conclusion: The number of CNV is similar in the RM group and
Lithuanian population cohort. For more detailed results, the study
continues to involve more patients.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.024.D DNA methylation in newborns conceived by
assisted reproductive technology
Robert Lyle1;2, Christian Page2;3, Yunsung Lee2, Haakon Nustad2,
Maria Christine Magnus2;4;5, Kristine Løkås Haftorn2, Ellen Carlsen2,
William Denault2;6, Jon Bohlin2;7, Astanand Jugessur2;8, Per Magnus2,
Haakon Gjessing2;8, Siri Håberg2
1Oslo University Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo,
Norway; 2Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Centre for Fertility and
Health, Oslo, Norway; 3University of Oslo, Department of Mathematics,
Oslo, Norway; 4University of Bristol, MRC Integrative Epidemiology
Unit, Bristol, United Kingdom; 5Bristol Medical School, Population
Health Sciences, Bristol, United Kingdom;
6University of Chicago,
Department of Human Genetics, Chicago, United States; 7Norwegian
Institute of Public Health, Department of Method Development and
Analytics, Oslo, Norway; 8University of Bergen, Department of Global
Public Health and Primary Care, Bergen, Norway.
Background/Objectives: Assisted reproductive technology (ART)
may affect fetal development through epigenetic mechanisms as
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
352
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
the timing of ART procedures coincides with the extensive epi-
genetic remodeling occurring between fertilization and embryo
implantation. However, it is unknown to what extent ART proce-
dures alter the fetal epigenome. Underlying parental character-
istics and subfertility may also play a role.
Methods: Here we identify differences in cord blood DNA
methylation, measured using the Illumina EPIC platform, between
962 ART conceived and 983 naturally conceived singleton newborns.
Results: We show that ART conceived newborns display
widespread differences in DNA methylation, and overall less
methylation across the genome. There were 607 genome-wide
differentially methylated CpGs. We ﬁnd differences in 176 known
genes, including genes related to growth, neurodevelopment, and
other health outcomes that have been associated with ART. Both
fresh and frozen embryo transfer show DNA methylation differ-
ences. Associations persist after controlling for parents’ DNA
methylation, and are not explained by parental subfertility.
Conclusion: Our results support the hypothesis that ART pro-
cedures inﬂuence DNA methylation in fetal life. The epigenetic
differences between ART and naturally conceived children were
not explained by parental DNA methylation or parental sub-
fertility. Longitudinal assessments of DNA methylation are neces-
sary to establish whether ART-induced differences in DNA
methylation persist and inﬂuence later health outcomes.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.025.A Genome sequencing reveals causative CHH
structural and single nucleotide variants in consanguineous
families
Yassine Zouaghi1;2, Saba Irshad3, Ambrin Fatima3, mariam shahid3,
Nida Najmi4, Fernanda De Azevedo Correa1;2, Ansar Muhammad5,
Alexia Boizot2, Michela Adamo2, Federico Santoni1;2;6, Jim Acierno2,
Nelly Pitteloud2
1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; 2Lausanne University
Hospital, Service of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolism,
Lausanne,
Switzerland;
3Aga
Khan
University,
Department
of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan;
4The Aga
Khan University Hospital (AKUH), Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Karachi, Pakistan; 5Hospital Ophthalmic Jules-Gonin -
Fondation Asile Des Aveugles, Ophthalmology Department of the
University
of
Lausanne,
Lausanne,
Switzerland;
6Medigenome,
Genève, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism (CHH) is a rare genetic disorder that causes incomplete or
absent puberty leading to infertility due to defects in secretion or
action of gonadotropin-releasing hormone. CHH is very hetero-
geneous phenotypically, and its genetics are complex. More than 25
genes have been associated with it explaining up to 50% of cases.
Discovering new causative genes, or new variants in known genes may
aid explaining the intricacies of CHH improving diagnosis and treat-
ment. Here, we present 6 consanguineous families from Pakistan, each
with at least one member affected by CHH. Using different approaches,
we determined in each case the genetic origin for the disorder.
Methods: 18 genomes from 6 families were sequenced. They
were analysed using Sentieon. Then single nucleotide variants
(SNVs) were ﬁltered based on frequency in gnomAD and/or
potential for pathogenicity. Copy number variations (CNVs) were
extracted using CoverageMaster.
Results: A genetic cause for CHH was identiﬁed in all families. 4
SNVs following an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance:
GNRHR:p.P320Q, GNRHR:p.F309del, KISS1R:p.S262X, KISS1R:p.W108X
in 4 of them and 2 CNVs following an X-linked mode of inheritance
ANOS1:NC_000023.11:g.8,593,145-8,733,4053del,
ANOS1:NC_000023.11:g.8,471,269-8,568,633del
in
the
last
two.
Except for GNRHR:p.P320Q, all the variants were not known before.
Conclusion: Systematic analysis of CNVs on top of SNVs can
heavily increase the success rate of ﬁnding a genetic cause for
CHH in patients. Performing such analysis in consanguineous
families can uncover new causative variants leading to better
understanding the function of genes involved in CHH.
References: Boehm, U., Bouloux, PM., Dattani, M. et al. Nat Rev
Endocrinol 2015.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.026.B Autosomal recessive disorders - A common cause of
early pregnancy losses?
Gjorgji Bozhinovski1, Katerina Kubelka-Sabit2, Marija Terzikj1,
Dijana Plaseska-Karanﬁlska1
1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi
D. Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje,
Macedonia; 2Private Hospital “Acibadem-Sistina”, Skopje, Macedonia.
Background/Objectives: Miscarriage or early pregnancy loss
(EPL) represents one of the most common pathologies in the
reproductive medicine occurring in about 15% of couples trying to
conceive. About half of the miscarriages are caused by numerical
chromosomal abnormalities. Up to 5% of couples experience
recurrent miscarriage, deﬁned as two or more consecutive preg-
nancy losses. Increasing number of case reports suggest Mende-
lian causes of recurrent miscarriages. Whole exome sequencing
(WES) may help uncover the genetic etiology, but so far it has
been rarely used to study EPL.
Methods: We have performed WES on seven euploid mis-
carried tissues from couples with recurrent EPL.
Results: Compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in
CPLANE1 (c.1819delT and c.5820+3_5820+6delAAGT) and DHCR7
(c.964-1G>C and c.452G>A) genes were detected in two mis-
carriages. The variants were conﬁrmed with Sanger sequencing
and the partners in both families were heterozygous carriers. The
compound heterozigosity in CPLANE1 was also conﬁrmed in a
second miscarriage from the same couple. Pathogenic variants in
CPLANE1 and DHCR7 genes cause Joubert syndrome 17 and
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, respectively. Both are multi-systemic
disorders associated with variable clinical severity and, besides in
patients, have been conﬁrmed in pregnancy losses and/or fetuses
with ultrasound abnormalities.
Conclusion: In conclusion, our study shows a high percentage
of autosomal recessive disorders (2/7 or 28.5%) as a cause of EPL.
Increased number of WES analysis in recurrent euploid mis-
carriages could improve our understanding of the etiology of EPL
and relevant biological processes. The knowledge of genetic
causes responsible for EPL allows for genetic counselling and
gives hope to the families.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.028.D Genetic variation in genes linked to telomere
length in Estonian non-obstructive azoospermia patients
Anna-Grete Juchnewitsch1, Laura Kasak1, Liina Nagirnaja2, Ken-
neth Aston3, Don Conrad2, Margus Punab1;4;5, Maris Laan1
1University of Tartu, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational
Medicine, Tartu, Estonia; 2Oregon Health & Science University, Division
of Genetics, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Beaverton,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
353
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
United States; 3University of Utah School of Medicine, Andrology and
IVF Laboratory, Department of Surgery (Urology), Salt Lake City, United
States; 4Tartu University Hospital, Andrology Center, Tartu, Estonia;
5University of Tartu, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: Intact telomeric structures are important
in protecting chromosomes from damage. Association between
telomere length and risk to chronic diseases has become an
engrossing topic. Sperm quality has been correlated with shorter
telomeres1 and rare variants in genes implicated in meiotic telo-
mere complex have been linked to non-obstructive azoospermia
(NOA)2. We investigated the suggested potential causative link
between rare variants in genes linked to telomere length and
spermatogenic failure.
Methods: Exomes of 85 idiopathic NOA cases from Estonia
were sequenced in collaboration with the GEMINI (GEnetics of
Male INfertility Initiative) project. A list of 66 genes associated with
telomere length in the scientiﬁc literature was compiled. Rare
variants were identiﬁed and their possible pathogenicity was
evaluated based on the ACMG guidelines.
Results: In our study group, no likely pathogenic/pathogenic rare
variants in 66 candidate genes were identiﬁed. However, two auto-
somal dominant genes (pLI > 0.8) PELI2 and TERF1 carried two het-
erozygous missense variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS). Among
these TERF1 is also implicated in the male reproductive system.
Conclusion: None of 85 Estonian NOA cases could be
explained by causative variants in the analyzed genes modulating
telomere length. The study may have been limited by an insufﬁ-
cient number of patients given a high heterogeneity of mono-
genic NOA and uncertainties in evaluating the effect of variants.
References: 1. Darmishonnejad et al Andrologia 52, e13546
(2020).
2. Salas-Huetos et al Human Genetics 140:217-227(2021).
Grants: IUT34-12, PRG1021; NIH R01HD078641, P50HD096723.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.029.A Role of progesterone receptor genetic variants
rs4754732 and rs1942836 in spontaneous premature birth
Jasenka Wagner1, Mirta Kadivnik2, Andrijana Muller2, Kristina
Kralik3, Nena Arvaj1, Siniša Šijanović2
1Faculty of Medicine, J.J. Strossmayer University Osijek, Department
of Medical Biology and Genetics, Osijek, Croatia; 2Clinic of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, University Hospital Center Osijek, Osijek, Croatia;
3Faculty of Medicine, J.J. Strossmayer University Osijek, Department
of Medical Statistics and Informatics, Osijek, Croatia.
Background/Objectives: To evaluate the roles of two selected
genetic variations in fetal and maternal progesterone receptor gene
(PGR) and to identify women who may have higher or lower odds for
spontaneous premature birth compared to the general population.
Methods: A preliminary case–control study with two groups of
pregnant women (with term and premature delivery, 219 in total)
and two groups of newborns (term and preterm, 219 in total) was
performed. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the
progesterone receptor gene (rs4754732 and rs1932836) were
genotyped.
Results: Our results suggest that women who gave birth to
male newborns with CC or CT rs4745732 genotype have 2.5 higher
chance for preterm birth (OR = 2.5; 95%CI 1.09 – 5.6; P = 0.03;
Fisher’s Exact Test). We also found that women older than 35
whose newborns have CC or CT rs1942836 genotype have 5.3
higher chance for preterm birth (OR = 5.3; 95%CI 1.05 – 26.2;
P = 0.04; Fisher’s Exact Test).
Conclusion: Our study suggests that patients with selected
genetic variants of the progesterone receptor gene could have
greater odds for premature birth compared to general population.
Replication studies with a larger population of different ethnicity
are needed in order to conﬁrm these ﬁndings.
References:.
Grants: ‘Role of PROGINS Mutations in Progesterone Receptors
as Modulators of Risk for Premature Birth’(VIF2017-MEFOS-3),
Faculty of Medicine in Osijek, Croatia.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P01.030.B Does aneuploidy discordance between
trophectoderm and spent culture medium suggest embryo
mechanism of self-correction?
Anna Strychalska1, Wojciech Sierka1, Joanna Smolen-Dzirba1, Anna
Kokot1, Natalia Jodłowiec-Lubańska1, Klaudia Simka-Lampa1, Urs-
zula Wroblewska1, Patrycja Piotrowska1, Adam Pudełko1, Emilia
Morawiec1, Anna Bednarska-Czerwińska1, Simone Palini1;2
1Gyncentrum Genetic Laboratory, Sosnowiec, Poland;
2‘Cervesi’’
Hospital Cattolica, IFV unit, Cattolica, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Investigating the utility of spent culture
media (SCM) and mixture of SCM and blastocoel ﬂuid (BF) in non
invasive preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT-A).
Methods: Embryo was cultured until day 4, then washed and
transferred to fresh medium. Trophectoderm (TE) biopsied from
embryo day 6 has been tested for PGT-A in our routine procedure.
SCM and mix of SCM + BF were collected prior to TE biopsy.
Testing was performed with the use of Illumina VeriSeq NGS
platform and MiSeq system.
Results: Comparison of chromosome 8 changes is presented in
table.
Material
Start cyto
End cyto
Type
of change
Copy#
Trophectoderm
pter
q24.13
Gain
2.66
Spent
coulter medium
q24.13
qter
Gain
6
SCM+BF
pter
q24.13
Loss
1
q24.13
qter
Gain
4
TE analysis showed partial gain of chromosome 8 (pter-
>q24.13). In SCM we found gain of remaining part of chr8 (q24.13-
>qter). Sample of mix (SCM+BF) showed DNA gain of chr8
(q24.13->qter) and loss of chr8 (pter->q24.13).
Conclusion: Human embryo ability of self-correction has been
discussed
widely.
Repairing
mechanisms
may
result
from
increased aneuploid cells death and release of fragmented DNA
into culture media. We tested cell-free embryo DNA released from
the blastocyst to SCM and mix of SCM+BF during cell cleavage
(day 4 to day 6). We have observed chromosomal status after
breakage occurred in mitotic cell division of chromosome 8 in
embryo. Discordance between results in collected samples may be
evidence for embryo undergoing self-correction mechanism.
References:.
Grants: WND-RPSL.01.02.00-24-0477/19-007.
Conﬂict of Interest: Anna Strychalska Gyncentrum Genetic
Laboratory, Wojciech Sierka Gyncentrum Genetic Laboratory,
Joanna Smolen-Dzirba Gyncentrum Genetic Laboratory, Anna Kokot
Gyncentrum Genetic Laboratory, Natalia Jodłowiec-Lubańska Gyn-
centrum Genetic Laboratory, Klaudia Simka-Lampa Gyncentrum
Genetic Laboratory, Urszula Wroblewska Gyncentrum Genetic
Laboratory, Patrycja Piotrowska Gyncentrum Genetic Laboratory,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
354
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Adam Pudełko Gyncentrum Genetic Laboratory, Emilia Morawiec
Gyncentrum Genetic Laboratory, Anna Bednarska-Czerwińska Gyn-
centrum Genetic Laboratory, Simone Palini Gyncentrum Genetic
Laboratory.
P01.032.D Novel variant curation strategies and preclinical
technology to improve diagnosis of differences of sex
development
Emmanuèle Délot1;2, Surajit Bhattacharya2, Hayk Barseghyan1;2;3,
Eric Vilain1;2
1George Washington University, Genomics and Precision Medicine,
Washington, D.C., United States;
2Children’s National Research
Institute, Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Washington, D.C.,
United States; 3Bionano Genomics Inc, San Diego, United States.
Background/Objectives: Despite being collectively among the
most frequent congenital developmental conditions, differences
of sex development (DSD) lack recognition and research fund-
ing. As a result, what constitutes optimal management remains
uncertain. Identiﬁcation of the individual conditions is challen-
ging and molecular diagnosis frequently not achieved, which
may have psychosocial and health-related repercussions for
individuals and their families. While research genome sequen-
cing of samples from the DSD-TRN repository contributed to the
description of the new GUBS syndrome (OMIM 618820) and
diagnosed previously unsolved cases, network-wide diagnosis
rate remains under 50%.
Methods: New pre-clinical genomic approaches have the
potential to increase diagnostic yield through ascertainment of
under-recognized etiology such as mosaic, structural, non-coding,
or epigenetic variants. We undertook a study to determine the
usefulness of Optical Genome Mapping for clinical DSD diagnosis
and etiology discovery. As interpretation of now widespread exome
sequencing requires expert interpretation rarely available in clinical
settings, we also examined variants in ClinVar for 32 DSD genes.
Results: OGM identiﬁed 7 common DSD so far. We showed
that curation of DSD gene variants in clinical databases used by
algorithms to classify variants is currently insufﬁcient even for the
best validated DSD genes.
Conclusion: To address this gap, a special-interest group on the
Franklin.genoox.com platform, opened to interested curators world-
wide, integrates curation of DSD-speciﬁc variants into the genetic
data analysis platform, with variant classiﬁcation available through
the free Franklin interface. Analysis of DSD-TRN registry data also
shows that practice needs to evolve to prioritize early genetic testing.
References: PMID33513338.
Grants: NICHD RO1HD093450.
Conﬂict of Interest: Emmanuèle Délot Estranged spouse has
stock options in Bionano Genomics, current value $12,000 USD.,
Surajit Bhattacharya: None declared, Hayk Barseghyan Bionano
Genomics Inc, part-time employee, Stock/stock options, Eric Vilain
Stock options, Bionano Genomics. These are current theoritical
value $13,000, acquired over 4 years, they are non vested (non-
sellable)., Scientiﬁc consultancy, Bionano Genomics.
P01.033.A Polygenic risk score for recurrent pregnancy loss in
LUCAR study, Ukraine
Yevheniya
Sharhorodska1;2,
Zhanna
Balkhiyarova2;3,
Anna
Ulrich2;3, Vincent Pascat4, Liliia Chorna1, Ivanna Shymanska1,
Harmen M Draisma3, Danuta Zastawna1, Oleg-Roman Gnateyko1,
Halyna Makukh1, Marika Kaakinen2;3, Inga Prokopenko2;4
1Institute of hereditary pathology, National Academy of Medical
Sciences, Lviv, Ukraine; 2University of Surrey, Department of Clinical
and Experimental Medicine, Guildford, United Kingdom; 3Imperial
College London, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
London, United Kingdom; 4University of Lille, Lille, France.
Background/Objectives: The loss of 2+ sequential pregnancies
before 24 weeks of gestation is deﬁned as recurrent pregnancy
loss (RPL). In RPL etiology, endocrine, immunological, anatomical
and other factors could drive individual susceptibility, still ~50% of
RPL cases remain idiopathic. We assessed the predictive ability of
a polygenic risk score (PRS) for RPL in the LUCAR study (Lviv
Ukrainian Cohort for Advancing Reproductive Health) from the
Western Ukraine.
Methods: LUCAR includes 350 idiopathic RPL cases/458 con-
trols with at least one healthy child, all having the genome-wide
association study (GWAS) data imputed to TopMED and RPL
association analysis performed using log-additive model. We used
summary statistics from recurrent miscarriage (RM) GWAS meta-
analysis (Laisk et al., PMID:33239672) and PRS software PRSice-2.
Results: In LUCAR, the unweighted common variant PRSRM, with
independent SNP sets after LD clumping, did not increase the RPL
risk (Table). The lead variants from the Laisk et al., rs146350366 and
rs7859844, did not affect RPL susceptibility.
Laisk et al.
PRSRM in LUCAR
Association test
Signiﬁcance
Threshold
Total SNPs
R2
Beta(SE)
P-value
5 × 10-8
50
0.0021
0.082(0.075)
0.27
10-3
336
0.0054
0.13(0.076)
0.075
0.01
767
0.0013
0.065(0.075)
0.39
0.5
9889
0.0022
0.084(0.075)
0.26
0.99
21013
0.015
0.23(0.076)
0.0028
Conclusion: Despite the previous meta-analysis showing good
predictive ability of the PRS for RPL, we were unable to replicate
this in dataset from Western Ukraine. We believe this highlights
the commonly observed problem of low portability of PRS derived
in one population to another, and an urgent need for well-
powered GWAS for RPL in world-wide populations.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02
PRENTAL GENETICS
P02.001.B Exome sequencing for structurally normal fetuses -
yields and dilemmas
Hagar Mor-Shaked1, Hagit Daum1, Tamar Harel1, Avital Eilat1,
Duha Fahham1, Shiri Gershon-Naamat1, Chaggai Rosenbluh1, Orly
Elpeleg1, Vardiella Meiner1
1Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Human Genetics,
Jerusalem, Israel.
Background/Objectives: There is a growing body of literature
regarding the yield of chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) in
structurally normal fetuses (1-3). We aimed to assess the empirical
data as to the yield of exome sequencing (ES) in this population.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
355
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: From February 2017 to January 2022, 1,298 fetuses
were subjected to ES; 374 of them were structurally normal
(28.8%). Only pathogenic and likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants, per
the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)
classiﬁcation, were reported. Additionally, ACMG secondary ﬁnd-
ings relevant to childhood were reported.
Results: Five fetuses (5/374; ~1.33%) had a P/LP variants indi-
cating a moderate to severe disease: Wilson disease, Enhanced
S-cone syndrome, Legius and Muenke syndromes (upon affected
genes ATP7B, NR2E3, SPRED1 and FGFR3 respectively). One fetus
had a paternally inherited pathogenic variant in RET.
Conclusion: Our data suggest that offering only CMA for
structurally normal fetuses may provide false reassurance. Prenatal
ES mandates restrictive analysis, and careful management com-
bined with pre and post-test genetic counselling.
References: 1. Stern S, Hacohen N, Meiner V, et al. Universal
chromosomal microarray analysis reveals high proportion of copy
number variants in low risk pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol. 2020.
2. Sagi-Dain L, Cohen Vig L, Kahana S, et al. Chromosomal
microarray vs. NIPS: analysis of 5541 low-risk pregnancies. Genet
Med. 2019.
3. Moshonov R, Hod K, Azaria B, Abadi-Korek I, Berger R, Shohat
M. Beneﬁt versus risk of chromosomal microarray analysis per-
formed in pregnancies with normal and positive prenatal screening
results: A retrospective study. PLoS One. 021;16(4):e0250734.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.002.C DES-NIPT study: Global approach to detect
inherited paternal variants in NIPT samples using deep exome
sequencing
Ieva Miceikaite1, Charlotte Brasch-Andersen1;2, Qin Hao2, Christina
Fagerberg1;2, Britta Schlott Kristiansen2, Pernille Torring2, Geske Sidsel
Bak3, Lene Sperling3, Martin Larsen1;2
1University of Southern Denmark, Human Genetics, Department of
Clinical Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, Odense, Denmark;
2Odense
Universitetshospital,
Department
of
Clinical
Genetics,
Odense, Denmark; 3Odense University Hospital, Fetal Medicine Unit,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Odense, Denmark.
Background/Objectives: Deep sequencing has now enabled
detection of sequence variants and diagnosis of speciﬁc mono-
genic diseases by non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), using tailor-
made assays for each pregnancy. However, a comprehensive non-
invasive genome-wide diagnostic approach suitable for all cases
and all known monogenic disorders is needed.
The aim of this study was to utilize high-throughput deep
exome sequencing (DES) on cfDNA as a global approach to detect
inherited paternal sequence variants, allowing the detection of
known dominant monogenic disease variants and enabling
paternal variant exclusion in recessive disease diagnostics.
Methods: For our pilot study, we included 16 pregnancies with
high-risk criteria for genetic testing. The gestational age ranged
14-21 weeks. We obtained plasma, parental blood and invasive
fetal samples (trio), and applied DES. We performed bioinformatic
evaluation of the results from trio and DES-NIPT analysis. To esti-
mate DES-NIPT sensitivity and precision, we compared paternal
variants found in the overlapping exonic regions in both the NIPT
and the invasive sample, where variants from invasive samples
were the reference.
Results: We achieved a mean alignment target coverage of
537x. Using the paternal allele frequency in NIPT samples,
we estimated fetal fraction, which ranged 5.13-18.77%. The sen-
sitivity and precision of our approach to detect all inherited
paternal variants from plasma samples were 98.19% and 99.41%,
respectively.
Conclusion: Using DES-NIPT approach, we can detect and
exclude inherited paternal variants from NIPT samples with high
sensitivity and precision. This potentially allows the detection of
the majority known inherited monogenic disorders early in the
pregnancy and non-invasively.
References:.
Grants:
RegionSyddanmarksForskningspulje(20/14085);Syd-
danskUniversitet;FondentilLægevidenskabensFremme(19-L-
0281);AaseogEjnarDanielsensFond(19-10-0259).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.004.A Valuable insights after one year whole exome
sequencing in a fetal/prenatal setting
Sarah Delbaere1, Machteld Baetens1, Candy Kumps1, Ellen Roets2,
Noortje Van Oostrum2, Bert Callewaert1, Sandra Janssens1, Olivier
Vanakker1, Björn Menten1
1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent
University, Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Gent, Belgium;
2Women’s Clinic, Ghent University Hospital, Department of Obste-
trics, Gent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: The aim of this study is to evaluate the
implementation of whole exome sequencing (WES) for fetuses
with congenital anomalies in a diagnostic workﬂow.
Methods: A fast-WES track for prenatal testing was imple-
mented, with a maximal turn-around-time of 8 weeks. Depending
on the fetus’s abnormalities, targeted gene panel or Mendeliome
analysis was performed in-silico, the latter comprising all human
disease-linked genes. The variant analysis strategy was optimized
to efﬁciently identify the causal variant, by focusing on de novo,
X-linked or biallelic inheritance. National Belgian guidelines have
been established to standardize the testing and reporting
strategy.
Results: Over the period of one year, 59 structurally abnormal
fetuses with normal copy number variant (CNV) analysis were
investigated via exome sequencing. The overall diagnostic yield
was 16.9%; in 10 out of 59 fetuses, a class 4 or 5 variant could be
identiﬁed. When comparing analysis in on-going versus termi-
nated pregnancies or miscarriages, diagnostic yield was 17.9% (5/
28) and 15.6% (5/32) respectively. Diagnostic yield for targeted
gene panels was 13% (3/23), which is less compared to 18.4% (7/
38) for Mendeliome analysis. Additional CNV analysis on the WES
data using the ExomeDepth algorithm revealed a small intragenic
ASCC1 homozygous deletion in a fetus with heterozygous carrier
parents. Furthermore, two inherited pathogenic incidental ﬁnd-
ings were reported (APOB and BRIP1).
Conclusion: These results proof an important contribution of
WES within prenatal and fetal context to obtain a higher number
of molecular diagnoses and can broaden the understanding of
aberrant fetal phenotypes and their underlying genetic cause.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.005.B C-terminal cFLIP disruption in humans causes
intrauterine multisystem anomalies due to aberrant cell death
response switch
Ivana Lessel1, Leonie Piehl1, Kira Kirchner1, Thilo Diehl2, Christian
Kubisch1, Davor Lessel1
1University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institute of Human
Genetics, Hamburg, Germany; 2University Medical Center Hamburg-
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
356
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Eppendorf, Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Pregnancy losses are mostly attributable
to chromosomal abnormalities although recent studies also
identiﬁed selected Mendelian disorders responsible for stillbirth.
However, in the majority of cases the underlying cause of foetal
death remains elusive. Here, we studied a consanguineous family
with history of recurrent early miscarriages and two foetuses who
presented
with
severe
intrauterine
multi-system
anomalies,
resulting in early demise.
Methods:
Next-generation
sequencing
and
segregation
analyses were used to identify candidate variants. Functional
characterization
was
performed
in
a
dual-cellular
model
utilizing cell viability analyses, immunoblotting, immunopreci-
pitation, caspase activity assays, RNA-sequencing and methyla-
tion proﬁling.
Results: We identiﬁed a homozygous frameshift variant in
CFLAR resulting in C-terminally truncated cFLIP, a master regulator
of multiple cell death pathways. In-vitro analyses of the identiﬁed
variant revealed enhanced binding to unprocessed procaspase-8,
which correlated with abrogated caspase-8 activity, thus disclos-
ing the inability to execute CASP8-mediated extrinsic apoptosis.
Furthermore, we observed enhanced binding to RIPK1 and
phosphorylated-RIPK1, which correlated with an enhanced aber-
rant execution of the RIPK1-RIPK3-MLKL phosphorylation cascade
upon apoptotic stimuli. Thus, aberrant necroptosis induction
concomitant with impaired ability to execute apoptosis during
embryonic development underlies the cFLIP-deﬁciency. Moreover,
integrative transcriptome and epigenome analysis of patient-
derived ﬁbroblasts revealed compensatory, pro-survival silencing
of RIPK3 and CASP10.
Conclusion: Above identifying a novel Mendelian cause for
foetal death and linking for the ﬁrst time a pathogenic CFLAR
variant to a human disease, we further expand the knowledge
underlying the molecular switch between apoptosis and necrop-
tosis, and provide the ﬁrst direct evidence for the importance of
necroptosis inhibition for proper human embryonic development.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ivana Lessel Full time, Leonie Piehl
Full time, Kira Kirchner Full time, Thilo Diehl Full time, Christian
Kubisch
Full
time,
Davor
Lessel
Full
time,
1.
Deciphering
molecular mechanisms of CHAMP1 deﬁciency-associated devel-
opmental delay, German Research Foundation (Deutsche For-
schungsgemeinschaft, DFG). 2. The role of RNA interference in
human neurodevelopment, Werner-Otto Foundation. 3. Identiﬁ-
cation and characterization of highly penetrant risk genes in tes-
ticular germ cell tumors, German Cancer Aid (Deutsche Krebshilfe).
4. Elucidating the role of stress granules associated translational
control in aging and aging-associated diseases, Fritz Thyssen
Foundation. 5. The RNA helicase DHX30: Physiological function
and role in a neurodevelopmental disorder, German Research
Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG). 6. Genomic
context analysis of clinically-relevant disease-associated variants in
zinc ﬁnger proteins (mis-ZFs), German Academic Exchange Service
(Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst, DAAD), The Champ1
Research Foundation, Member of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board,
https://champ1foundation.org/scientiﬁc-advisory-board/
AGO2
Association, Member of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board, https://
ago2.org/en.
P02.006.C Increased nuchal translucency (NT). Can we do
more? Prenatal trio exome sequencing of >150 cases revealed
unexpected ﬁndings in fetuses with increased NT
Heinz Gabriel1, Björn Schulte1, Martin Ritthaler1, Saskia Biskup1
1Praxis fuer Humangenetik/CeGaT Tuebingen, Tübingen, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Ultrasound diagnosis allows for the
detection of half of all major structural anomalies. As a soft marker,
nuchal translucency (NT) is associated with a spectrum of struc-
tural anomalies. Mostly, NT measurement is offered as part of
screening for chromosomal abnormalities. About 20% of fetuses
with increased NT will have a chromosomal abnormality. Noonan
syndrome is considered the most frequently reported syndrome
associated with increased NT. Prenatal panel testing for Noonan
syndrome genes is nowadays widely offered in cases with
increased NT. Aside from these Noonan syndrome genes, there
are only a limited number of gene for which increased NT is
documented.
Methods: In this study, we performed prenatal trio exome
sequencing in cases with increased NT.
A cohort of 158 fetuses with increased NT were analysed by
trio exome sequencing. The mean turn-around-time (TAT) was
12 days.
Results: We detected (likely) pathogenic variants in 46 cases
(29%). Noonan syndrome genes were found in 11 cases. In 22
cases pathogenic variants were found in genes which are not to
be known to be associated with increased NT so far.
Conclusion: Our data demonstrate that prenatal testing should
not be limited to chromosomal aberrations, or RASopathies/Noo-
nan syndrome, in cases with increased NT. Increased NT can be
found in a wide range of syndromic conditions and might be one
of the earliest detectable phenotypic features in the ﬁrst trimester.
We have shown the value of trio exome sequencing for the pre-
natal genetic diagnosis of fetuses with increased NT.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Heinz Gabriel full time, Björn Schulte full-
time, Martin Ritthaler full-time, Saskia Biskup full-time.
P02.007.D Prenatal WES for rapid detection of copy number
variants and single gene disorders in uncultured samples
Vincenzo Cirigliano1, Elisabet Lloveras2, Elena Ordonez1, Isabel
Castilla1, Mireia Lechuga1, Mafalda Almeida1, Cristina Perez2, Miriam
Leon1;1;1
1Veritas Intercontinental, Barcelona, Spain;
2Synlab Diagnosticos
Globales, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain.
Background/Objectives: aCGH is currently the ﬁrst line test in
prenatal diagnosis. However, most cases with normal results
require additional tests targeting speciﬁc indications or whole
exome sequencing. We evaluated an optimized WES capture assay
to detect both CNVs and SNVs in a single assay aiming to assess its
performance for genomewide detection of CNVs in uncultured
prenatal samples.
Methods: DNA extracted from uncultured amniotic ﬂuids (17)
and CVSs (8) were selected with pathogenic CNVs of different
sizes reported by aCGH. Samples were sequenced using an
improved whole exome capture of 51 Mb designed to allow
genomewide CNV detection and optimised for coverage of a
wide subset of genes related with fetal structural abnormalities
and developmental delay.
Results: All samples passed sequencing QC metrics, full con-
cordance between WES and aCGH results was observed with an
expectable slight difference in CNVs breakpoints locations. CNVs
ranged between 13.8Kb and 52.9Mb in size: 17 cases with a
unique event, 4 cases with 1 gain and 1 loss, two more samples
had 2 and 3 losses. One rare case of chromothripsis, with 8
duplications along different regions of the same chromosome was
also correctly classiﬁed.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
357
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: WES can be used to identify pathogenic CNVs in
uncultured prenatal samples. CNVs testing as ﬁrst analysis step on
sequencing data has the advantage of allowing rapid inclusion of
SNVs/indels detection in multiple genes if required. While reducing
time/costs for the analyses, this single test approach has the potential
to increase the overall diagnostic yield in prenatal diagnosis.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.008.A A positive nonivasive prenatal testing result for sex
chromosome aneuploidies. What could we expect?
Radostina
Raynova1,
Stoyan
Bichev2,
Katerina
Vladimirova2,
Kameliya Kercheva1, Violeta Dimitrova3, Irena Bradinova2, Ivanka
Dimova4, Alexey Savov1
1National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 2National Genetic
Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
3University
Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 4SAGBAL “Dr.Shterev”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for
detection of fetal aneuploidy risk has been widely adopted in
clinical practice due to its high positive predictive value (PPV) for
common aneuploidies, involving chromosomes 21, 18, 13. How-
ever, PPV for sex chromosome aneuploidies (SCA) is as lower as
57.6 %. NIPT remains classiﬁed as a screening, non-diagnostic test
with standard recommendations that any positive NIPT result be
followed by conﬁrmatory diagnostic testing.
Methods: We present three cases referred to our Laboratory
for conﬁrmation of positive results for SCA from NIPT: 1) for Jacobs
syndrome (47, XYY), 2) Turner syndrome (45, X) and 3) a deletion
of 9.71 Mb on Xp11.4-Xp11.23. Amniocenteses were performed
and DNA was extracted from uncultured amniocytes. Commercial
QF-PCR kit and MLPA probe mix were used and samples were
analyzed on ABI 3130. Karyotyping was performed on cultured
amniocytes using standard protocol.
Results: For the ﬁrst case, QF-PCR showed a XXY proﬁle instead
of a XYY, and the karyotype was 46, XY[12]/47,XXY[18]. Monosomy X
was excluded for the second case, karyotype was 46, X, del(Y)(q12).
The Xp deletion of the third case wasn’t conﬁrmed by MLPA probe
mix P034; the QF-PCR result was consistent with Turner syndrome.
Conclusion: The conﬁrmation of a positive NIPT result for SCA
demands an integral approach for the elucidation of the case and
thus facilitating the counseling and patients’ decision making.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.009.B Exome sequencing in prenatal diagnosis: results
from 156 cases
Emmanuelle Ranza1, Xavier Blanc1, Federico Santoni1, Katayoun
Afshar2, Guerry Frederic3, Bernard Conrad4, Isabelle Eperon5, Cécile
Tissot6, Cecile Deluen7, Tanguy Araud7, Loïc Baerlocher7, Yasmine
Sayegh-Martin8,
Anne-Claude
Müller-Brochut9,
Christian
Bisch5,
Wawrzyniec Rieder5, Joel Fluss10, Jean-Marie Pellegrinelli11, Marta
Carrasco12, Thibaud Quibel13, Sylvie Lacroix13, Philippe Extermann5,
Graziano Pescia4, Romaine Robyr Susini13, Stylianos Antonarakis2
1Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine, Geneva, Switzer-
land; 1Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine, Geneva,
Switzerland; 3Genesupport, Lausanne, Switzerland; 4Genesupport -
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; 5Dianecho, Genève, Switzerland;
6Hirslanden Clinique des Grangettes, Chêne-Bougeries, Switzerland;
7Genesupport - Genève, Plan-les-Ouates, Switzerland; 8Centre Jean
Violette, Geneva, Switzerland;
9GynEcho, Fribourg, Switzerland;
10Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève (HUG), Pediatric Neurology,
Genève, Switzerland;
11Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève (HUG),
Maternity, Genève, Switzerland; 12Dre. Marta Carrasco Gynécologue,
Nyon, Switzerland; 13Echofemme, Genève, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Exome sequencing (ES) has become a
standard test for undiagnosed developmental disorders, now
increasingly used in prenatal diagnosis.
Methods: We report here our experience with 156 consecutive
prenatal cases through ES. The most common fetal signs were:
increased nuchal translucency (25 %), congenital heart defect
(21.8 %), skeletal malformations (18.6 %) and brain abnormalities
(9.6 %). After performing a-CGH, 28 cases had solo and 128 trio ES.
Results: In 21.8 % of cases, we have identiﬁed a pathogenic or
likely pathogenic variant (as per the ACMG guidelines) likely
causative of the fetal phenotype. The diagnostic yield was 34.5 %
for skeletal malformations, 15.4 % for nuchal translucency, 11.8 %
for congenital heart defect, and 33.3 % for brain anomalies. In 29
of the solved cases, the pathogenic variants were SNVs, while 2
were pathogenic structural variants (SV). Furthermore, the trio ES
has identiﬁed in three cases complete uniparental disomies UPD6,
UPD16 and UPD17, all including isodisomic segments with likely
causative recessive genes.
Conclusion: ES is a powerful method for the identiﬁcation of
causative variants in prenatal; trio sequencing reduces the turn-
around time and increases the diagnostic yield. The VUS remain a
challenge and guidelines are needed to assist in the interpretation
and disclosure of the results.
The discovery of novel mendelian genes and the introduction
of additional laboratory and computational methods such as long-
read sequencing and improvement of SV detection may further
increase the diagnostic yield.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Emmanuelle Ranza Medigenome, Medi-
genome, Xavier Blanc Medigenome, Federico Santoni Medigen-
ome, Katayoun Afshar Medigenome, Guerry Frederic Genesupport,
Bernard Conrad Genesupport,
Genesupport, Isabelle Eperon
Dianecho, Cécile Tissot Clinique des Grangettes, Cecile Deluen
Genesupport, Tanguy Araud Genesupport, Loïc Baerlocher Gene-
support, Yasmine Sayegh-Martin Centre Jean-Violette, Centre
Jean-Violette, Anne-Claude Müller-Brochut GynEcho, Christian
Bisch Dianecho, Wawrzyniec Rieder Dianecho, Joel Fluss HUG,
Jean-Marie Pellegrinelli HUG, Marta Carrasco: None declared, Thi-
baud Quibel Echofemme, Sylvie Lacroix Echofemme, Philippe
Extermann Dianecho, Dianecho, Graziano Pescia Genesupport,
Genesupport, Romaine Robyr Susini Echofemme, Echofemme,
Stylianos Antonarakis Medigenome, Medigenome.
P02.010.C Frequency of cystic ﬁbrosis in fetuses with
echogenic bowel in Bulgarian population
Nadezhda Yaneva1, Guergana Petrova2, Irena Bradinova1, Kameliya
Kercheva1, Radostina Raynova1, Alexey Savov1
1National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and
Gynecology “Maichin Dom”, Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria,
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 2Pediatric cilinic, UMHAT
“Alexandrovska”, Soﬁa;, Medical University of Soﬁa, Pediatric, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) is the most common
life-limiting condition with autosomal recessive inheritance. The at
birth prevalence of CF in Bulgaria was estimated to be 1:3,600 live
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
358
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
births. According to prenatal ultrasound evaluations 0,5-9,9% of
cases with fetal echogenic bowel (FEB) are affected with CF.
Recent studies revealed that detected echogenic bowel is asso-
ciated with CF, chromosome abnormalities, congenital CMV
infections, intrauterine growth retardation, and even fetal or
neonatal death. However, the relation between the presence of
FEB and cystic ﬁbrosis is still scarcely studied. The purpose of this
study was to assess the frequency of occurrence of cystic ﬁbrosis
in cases with fetal echogenic bowel.
Methods: 101 cases with FEB, detected during a routine
ultrasound examination were screened for transmembrane con-
ductance regulator (CFTR) mutations with Sanger sequencing at
National Genetic Laboratory.
Results: Of the 101 cases studied, in 9 cases only one parent
was carrier for CFTR mutation. Additionally, in 7 cases both parents
were carriers of CFTR mutation. In ﬁve of these cases the fetuses
had CF. Only one pregnancy was terminated. Other four was
conﬁrmed postnatally. In the other two cases the fetuses were
negative.
Conclusion: We observed relatively high frequency of occur-
rence of CF in fetuses with echogenic bowel (5%, 5/101). However,
the presence of CFTR mutation in the parents is not mandatory
associated with the presence of CFTR mutation and CF in their
fetus. For this reason after screening for carrier status of the par-
ents, we recommend prenatal diagnosis for fetal CF when FEB is
detected.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.011.D Genetic variants identiﬁed in Slovenian families
with apparent non-syndromic orofacial cleft phenotypes
Lara Slavec1;2, Ksenija Geršak1;3, Andreja Eberlinc4, Nataša Karas
Kuželički2
1University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Research Unit, Ljubljana, Slovenia;
2University of
Ljubljana, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Clinical Biochemistry,
Ljubljana, Slovenia; 3University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Ljubljana, Slovenia;
4University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Department of Maxilofacial
surgery, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: Orofacial clefts (OFCs) are common
congenital anomalies that manifest as cleft lip and/or cleft palate.
Most OFCs are non-syndromic (nsOFCs), but can also occur in
various syndromes (syOFCs). The majority of syOFCs have a
known, monogenic cause, while nsOFCs usually have a complex
aetiology. In some syOFCs, the presence of additional anomalies is
not obvious, thus they often remain undiagnosed as such.
Examples of such syOFCs are Van der Woude syndrome (VWS;
IRF6, GRHL3 mutations), and X-linked cleft palate (CPX; TBX22
mutations). Moreover, there is increasing evidence that mutations
in single genes may be implicated in some families with nsOFCs.
Methods: We recruited 35 Slovenian multiplex families. Using
whole-exome sequencing (WES) and Sanger sequencing, we ﬁrstly
screened the proband of each family for causal variants in IRF6,
GRHL3, and TBX22. In probands without any relevant variants in
these three genes, we ﬁltered WES data for 72 additional genes.
Family segregation was checked for each identiﬁed variant.
Results: We genetically conﬁrmed the diagnosis of VWS in ﬁve
families. We identiﬁed four (likely) pathogenic variants in IRF6: two
stop-gain, one frameshift, and one missense variant. In one family,
we identiﬁed the deletion of TBX22 and conﬁrmed CPX. We have
also found one nsOFC family with deletions in coding regions of
ARHGAP29.
Conclusion: With a two-step approach in gene selection and
analysis, we identiﬁed families with syOFCs, and found a mono-
genic mutation in a family with nsOFCs. We present the ﬁrst
genetic study performed on Slovenian patients with apparent
nsOFCs.
References:.
Grants: Slovenian Research Agency (J3-8207, MR51882).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.012.A Is nuchal translucency of 3.0- 3.49 mm an
indication for NIPT or microarray-still needs a debate
Magda Rybak-Krzyszkowska1;2, Anna Madetko-Talowska3, Katar-
zyna Szewczyk3, Miroslaw Bik-Multanowski3, Agata Sakowicz4, David
Stejskal5, Marie Trková5, Dagmar Smetanova5, Silvia Seraﬁm6,
Hildeberto Correia6, Julián Nevado7;8, Fe Amalia García Santiago7;8,
Maria Angeles Mori7;8, Lena Rutkowska9, Agata Kucińska9, Agnieszka
Gach9, Hubert Huras1, Magdalena Kołak1, Malgorzata Srebniak10
1Department of Obstetrics and Perinatology University Hospital,
Kraków, Poland;
2Hi-Gen Centrum Medyczne, Krakow, Poland;
3Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Paediatrics, Faculty of
Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Kraków, Poland;
4Department of Medical Biotechnology, Medical University of Lodz,
Łódź, Poland; 5Centre of Medical Genetics and Reproductive Medicine
GENNET,
Prague,
Czech
Republic;
6Unidade
de
Citogenética,
Departamento de Genética Humana, Instituto Nacional de Saúde
Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal; 7Instituto de Genética Médica
y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz- IdiPaz and
Centro de Investigación Básica en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Madrid, Spain; 8ITHACA, International Research Network in
Rare
Diseases.
Hospital
Universitario
La
Paz,
Madrid,
Spain;
9Department
of
Genetics,
Polish
Mother’s
Memorial
Hospital
Research Institute, Łódź, Poland; 10Department of Clinical Genetics,
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Nowadays, fetal nuchal translucency
(NT) values of >3.5 mm constitute an indication for invasive
testing, optimally followed by chromosomal microarray. In our
analysis, we wanted to evaluate the occurrence of clinically rele-
vant sub-microscopic chromosomal aberrations in fetuses with the
NT range from 3.0 to 3.49 mm, which would be missed by cur-
rently available non-invasive prenatal tests (NIPT).
Methods: A retrospective analysis of 271 fetuses with NT
between 3.0 and 3.49 mm and increased risk after combined test
in ﬁve cohorts of pregnant women referred for invasive testing
and chromosomal microarray was performed: Czech Republic
(n = 152), Poland (Cracow n = 48, Lodz n = 7) Portugal (n = 46)
and Spain (n = 18).
Results: A chromosomal aberration was identiﬁed in 1:5 fetu-
ses (19.19%; 52/271). In 15.13% (41/271) of cases trisomy 21, 18 or
13 was found. In 0.74% (2/271) sex chromosome aneuploidy was
found. In 1.1% (3/271) of cases copy number variant (CNV) >10Mb
was detected, which would potentially also be detected by NIPT.
The residual risk for missing a clinically relevant (sub)microscopic
chromosome aberration in the presented cohorts is 1:45 (2.21%; 6/
271).
Conclusion: Our results indicate that a signiﬁcant number of
fetuses with increased risk after combined test and presenting NT
of 3.0-3.49 mm carry a clinically relevant chromosomal abnorm-
ality other than common trisomy. Invasive testing should be
offered and counselling on NIPT should include the resolution
limitation that may result in NIPT false negative results in a sub-
stantial percentage of fetuses.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
359
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P02.013.B Sodium channel gene variants in fetuses with
abnormal sonographic ﬁndings
Andrea Hadjipanteli1, athina theodosiou2, ioannis papaevripidou2,
paola evangelidou2, angelos alexandrou2, nicole salameh2, violetta
anastasiadou3, Yiannis Kallikas4, LUDMILA KOUSOULIDOU2, carolina
sismani2
1The Cyprus Institute on Neurology and Genetics, Cytogenetics and
Genomics, Nicosia, Cyprus; 1The Cyprus Institute on Neurology and
Genetics, Cytogenetics and Genomics, Nicosia, Cyprus; 3Archibishop
Makarios III hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus; 4AAK Ultrasound and Fetal
Medicine Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Background/Objectives: Voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs)
are responsible for the initiation and propagation of action
potentials in the brain and muscle. Pathogenic variants in genes
encoding VGSC may therefore cause epileptic encephalopathies
and congenital myopathies resulting in severe phenotypes. This
study presents two cases of sodium channelopathies in preg-
nancies with abnormal ultrasound ﬁndings; identiﬁed as part of a
larger cohort study.
Methods: Fetal samples with abnormal sonographic ﬁndings
accompanied by normal karyotype and array-CGH results were
included in the study. Trio-based whole-exome sequencing was
performed, followed by Sanger sequencing for the conﬁrmation of
pathogenic variants.
Results: Two unrelated fetuses presented pathogenic variants
in genes encoding the alpha subunit of VGSCs. A known de novo
heterozygous missense variant was identiﬁed in the gene SCN2A
(c.751G>A; p.Val251Ile) in a fetus with intrauterine growth retar-
dation, hand clenching, ventriculomegaly and other structural
ﬁndings that neonatally also exhibited refractory epilepsy, spasms,
and MRI abnormalities. The second fetus was compound hetero-
zygous for two parentally inherited novel missense variants in the
gene
SCN4A
(c.4340T>C;
p.Phe1447Ser),
(c.3798G>C;
p.Glu1266Asp). The fetus presented a severe prenatal phenotype
including talipes, fetal hypokinesia, hypoplastic lungs, poly-
hydramnios, ear abnormalities and other. Both probands died
soon after their birth.
Conclusion: Our results suggest a potentially crucial role of the
sodium channel gene family in fetal development since non-
functional VGSCs have been associated with severe fetal pheno-
types and early lethality. New genotype-in utero phenotype
associations related to this gene family may ultimately result in
new additions to preconception and prenatal diagnostic panels.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.014.C Diagnostic yield and implications of exome
sequencing analysis, including the use of copy number variant
analysis pipeline, for pregnancy management in a series of 46
fetuses with structural anomalies
Sebastien Moutton1;2, Ines Harzallah3, Laure Raymond1, Jérémie
Mortreux1, Nada Houcinat1, Marine Dancer1, Vanna Geromel1,
Radoslava Saraeva-Lamri1, Angeline Preto1, Luc Druart1, Marc
Nouchy1, Fabienne Prieur3, Marine Lebrun3, Francis Ramond3,
Rodolphe
Dard4,
Aude
Tessier4,
Benjamin
Dauriat5,
Valentin
Marquet5, Constance Wells6, Caroline Deiller6, Elise Schaefer7, Leila
Frigere8, Patrice Bouvagnet1;8, Renaud Touraine3, Marie-Emmanuelle
Naud-Barreyre1
1Laboratoire Euroﬁns Biomnis, Département de génétique, Lyon,
France; 2Maison de Santé Protestante de Bordeaux Bagatelle, Centre
Pluridisciplinaire de Diagnostic PréNatal, Talence, France; 3CHU de
Saint-Etienne, Service de génétique médicale, Saint Etienne, France;
4CHI Poissy-Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Service de génétique médicale,
Poissy, France; 5CHU de Limoges, Service de génétique médicale,
Limoges, France; 6CHU de Montpellier, Service de génétique médicale
et foetopathologie, Montpellier, France; 7CHRU de Strasbourg, Service
de génétique médicale, Strasbourg, France; 8CHU de Martinique,
Centre Pluridisciplinaire de Diagnostic PréNatal, Fort de France,
France.
Background/Objectives: During the past years, exome sequen-
cing has been used more and more widely and contributed to
increased diagnostic yield in many ﬁelds of human genetics
including developmental disorders (25-40% according to the
studies, the design, the limitation to diagnosis or extension to
research). Its use has been progressively implemented in a pre-
natal setting, ﬁrst to assess the yield in these particular patients,
and second to assess its usefulness in pregnancy management.
Methods: Between June 2020 and November 2021, 46 exome
analyses were asked for fetuses with structural anomalies (at the
same time or after normal chromosomal microarray result),
questioning the prognosis. Prescriptions came from several French
multidisciplinary centers for prenatal diagnosis. Exome data were
producted by Euroﬁns Biomnis laboratory and analyzed by 2 or 3
independant molecular geneticists, medical geneticists and/or
scientists followed by meetings before reporting the results.
Results: In 11/46 = 24% of cases, a conclusive diagnosis could
be made, with implications in pregnancy management in 5/
11 = 45%, leading to opt for termination in 3 cases and to reassure
in 2 cases (and 3 additional cases where the molecular diagnosis
conﬁrmed the suspicion by imaging and helped decision-making
of termination). One diagnosis was an intragenic GPC3 duplication
not seen by chromosomal microarray. In at least 16 until 29/35
unconclusive results, the negativity contributed to the continua-
tion of the pregnancy.
Conclusion: Although the cohort remains quite small, this study
suggests that exome sequencing could be useful in selected pre-
natal situations, as reported in still not so numerous other studies.
References: -.
Grants: -.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.015.D Designing a quantitative PCR assay for fetal RhD
genotyping from maternal plasma derived cell-free fetal DNA
(cffDNA)
Suvi Parviainen1, Ville Veikkolainen2
1University of Turku, Life Technologies, Turku, Finland; 2PerkinElmer
Wallac Oy, Turku, Finland.
Background/Objectives: Hemolytic disease of the fetus and new-
born (HDFN) is typically caused by maternal alloimmunization against
antigens of RhD positive red blood cells. During pregnancy, these
anti-RhD antibodies can induce the destruction of fetal RhD positive
red blood cells and lead to HDFN. Maternal alloimmunization can be
prevented with antenatal and postnatal anti-D prophylaxis treatment,
which is often routinely performed for all RhD negative mothers.
However, fetal RhD genotyping allows anti-D prophylaxis to be tar-
geted only for women carrying RhD positive fetus. Therefore, unne-
cessary anti-D prophylaxis treatments can be avoided. The aim of the
study was to develop a multiplexed, quantitative PCR (qPCR) assay for
fetal RhD genotyping using maternal plasma derived cell-free fetal
DNA (cffDNA) as sample material.
Methods: The fetal RhD genotyping assay was designed for
simultaneous detection of RHD gene exons 5, 7 and 10, in addition
to an internal control gene. Dry qPCR chemistry was utilized to
enable simpliﬁed qPCR workﬂow. The assay was conﬁrmed to
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
360
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
be compatible with cfDNA samples extracted with PerkinElmer
Vanadis Extract® system.
Results: The assay was able to distinguish RhD positive and
negative cfDNA samples and showed similar performance with
both liquid and dried qPCR chemistry. The presence of fetal DNA
in the maternal cfDNA samples was demonstrated by ampliﬁca-
tion of male-speciﬁc sex-determining region Y (SRY) gene.
Conclusion: Dried qPCR chemistry enables a simple and time-
saving workﬂow, which can be easily combined with other pre-
natal cffDNA screening. Further clinical testing is required to
determine clinical sensitivity and speciﬁcity.
References:.
Grants: In collaboration with PerkinElmer Wallac Oy.
Conﬂict of Interest: Suvi Parviainen This Master’s Thesis study
was done as collaboration with PerkinElmer Wallac Oy and Uni-
versity of Turku. I am currently working full-time at PerkinElmer
Wallac Oy as Subject Matter Expert (customer support)., Ville
Veikkolainen Employee at PerkinElmer (Senior R&D Scientist).
P02.016.A LARS1-related disorder presenting as recurrent
severe early onset fetal growth restriction attributed to
placental and immune disease
Dana Brabbing-Goldstein1, Sharon Perlman2;3, lily bazak1, Gabriel
Arie Lidzbarsky1, Yael Kilim1, lina basel-salmon1;2;4;5, Rivka Sukenik-
Halevy2;6
1Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center-Beilinson
Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel; 2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel;
3Ultrasound Unit, Helen Schneider
Women’s Hospital, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel;
4Paediatric Genetics Clinic, Schneider Children’s Medical Center of
Israel, Petach Tikva, Israel; 5Felsenstein Medical Research Center,
Petach Tikva, Israel; 6Genetic Institute, Meir Medical Center, Kfar
Saba, Israel.
Background/Objectives: While the yield of chromosomal micro-
array in isolated fetal growth restriction (FGR) has been estab-
lished, the added value of whole exome sequencing (WES) in such
cases is unknown. We report recurrent severe early onset FGR in
three of the ﬁve pregnancies in one family related to Infantile liver
failure syndrome type 1 (OMIM 615438).
Methods:.
Results: Fetal autopsy showing hepatocyte hemosiderosis and
placental pathology showing >50% necrosis of villi, multiple cysts
and synechia, raised suspicion of both gestational alloimmune liver
disease and thrombophilia. However, FGR fully reoccurred albeit
IVIG and antithrombotic treatment. Fetal chromosomal microarray
analysis was normal. Quatro WES revealed that two affected
fetuses were compound heterozygotes for paternal truncating
(c.1144G>T;p.Glu382Ter) and maternal missense (c.1511C>T;p.A-
la504Val) variants in the LARS1 gene (NM_020117.11) which is
related to autosomal recessive infantile liver failure syndrome type
1. The variants co-segregated in a third affected fetus but not in a
healthy daughter.
Conclusion: Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase deﬁciencies, including
LARS1-related condition, cause multisystemic disorders mostly
affecting growth and nervous system. Inefﬁcient translation and
consequential decreased cell proliferation may explain the FGR
phenotype. The family’s genetic diagnosis will allow prenatal
diagnosis or preimplantation genetic testing in future pregnancies
and will help to avoid unnecessary treatments. This report high-
lights the importance of incorporating WES in the evaluation of
early severe isolated FGR, as genetic diagnosis may completely
change medical interventions and shed light on the expected
outcome. Further studies are needed to evaluate the prevalence
of single gene disorders in isolated FGR.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.017.B The role of a multidisciplinary team in managing
variants of uncertain clinical signiﬁcance in prenatal genetic
diagnosis
Karin Diderich1, Jasmijn Klapwijk1, Myrthe van den Born1, Martina
Wilke1, Marieke Joosten1, Diane Van Opstal1, Hennie Brüggenwirth1,
Malgorzata Srebniak1
1Erasmus MC, Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: The aim of this study was to evaluate
the role of the multidisciplinary team (MDT), the elements that
facilitate rapid management of variants of unknown clinical sig-
niﬁcance (VUS) in prenatal diagnosis, and which types of VUS were
considered for reporting.
Methods: We reviewed the frequency of MDT meetings and
factors contributing towards decision making on reporting VUS
after prenatal exome sequencing.
Results: The crucial elements that facilitate rapid VUS man-
agement were regular meetings, appropriate expertise, profes-
sional connections with other experts (ad hoc present) and
psychological team safety. The following VUS were considered for
reporting: possibly matching the fetal phenotype, associated with
severe disorders when a functional test is available (e.g. enzymatic
test), possibly associated with a disorder where early post-partum
diagnosis and treatment are crucial for a better prognosis.
Conclusion: In order to protect prospective parents from the
burden of VUS, the professionals should limit reporting them.
Apart from using software ﬁlters and building professional
guidelines, this can be achieved by sharing professional experi-
ence and responsibility in a MDT setting. Moreover, we noted that
emotional distress caused by communicating uncertain informa-
tion to the prospective parents can only be borne when sup-
ported by psychological team safety.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.018.C CHRAB – a tool for identiﬁcation and visualization
of chromosomal abnormalities in preimplantation embryos
using next-generation sequencing data
Timing Liu1, Zainul Ariﬁn1, Vivienne Tan1, Beatrice Pak1, Arnold Tan1,
Simin Wong1, Henry Yang1, Caroline Lee1, Mahesh Choolani1, Peng-
Cheang Wong1, Samuel Chong1
1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
Background/Objectives: Current commercial solutions for pre-
implantation genetic testing of aneuploidies (PGT-A) using next
generation sequencing (NGS) data entail the use of speciﬁc pro-
prietary analysis software, which preclude analysis of NGS data
generated from other sources. We have developed and evaluated
CHRAB, a tool for identifying CHRomosomal ABnormalities in
preimplantation embryos using NGS data.
Methods: Single-cell and ﬁve-cell replicates from aneuploid
and segmentally unbalanced cell lines were whole genome
ampliﬁed using SurePlex and subjected to Nanopore single-
molecule sequencing, followed by CHRAB analysis and visualiza-
tion. An aliquot of each Sureplex-ampliﬁed sample was also
sequenced using a leading commercial NGS-based PGT-A solution
(Illumina VeriSeq PGS) and analyzed using its proprietary analysis
software (BlueFuse Multi).
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
361
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: Using Nanopore sequencing and CHRAB analysis and
visualization, the expected cell-line speciﬁc aneuploidy was
detected in 84 of 88 (95.45%) single- and multi-cells tested, and
the expected segmental imbalance (≥10 Mb) was detected in 88
of 90 (97.78%) single- and multi-cells tested. The corresponding
percentages obtained using the commercial PGT-A solution were
95.45% (84 of 88 single- and multi-cells with an aneuploidy) and
98.89% (89 of 90 single- and multi-cells with a segmental imbal-
ance of ≥10 Mb). Detection sensitivity for smaller segmental
imbalances of <10 Mb was signiﬁcantly lower on both platforms.
Conclusion: We have developed a bioinformatics tool for
aneuploidy and segmental imbalance detection from single- and
multi-cell NGS data, with accuracy comparable to commercial
platforms.
References:.
Grants: NMRC OF-IRG 20Nov-0060 (Ministry of Health, Singa-
pore) and NUHSRO/2019/055/RO5+5/Seed-Mar/08 (National Uni-
versity Health System, Singapore).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.019.D Perlman Syndrome: A prenatal and genetic
diagnostic challenge
Kim Van Berkel1, Elise Vantroys1, Ileen Slegers1, Astrid Leus2, Stefanie
Brock3, Boyan Dimitrov1
1UZ Brussel, Centre for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium;
2UZ
Brussel, Department of Radiology, Brussels, Belgium; 3UZ Brussel,
Department of Pathology, Brussels, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Perlman syndrome (PS) is a very rare
congenital overgrowth syndrome, with a prevalence estimated to
be less than 1/1.000.000. Generally the diagnosis is based on
neonatal clinical appearance and histologic ﬁndings. For a long
time the genetic basis of PS was unknown with an assumed
autosomal recessive inheritance. Since 2012 mutations in DIS3L2
gene have been found to be associated to PS. Some cases have
been described prenatally, but precise diagnosis in a prenatal
setting remains difﬁcult to obtain due to overlap with other
overgrowth syndromes. Both prenatal imaging and genetic diag-
nostic technologies have enormously evolved over the past dec-
ade and are being implemented in prenatal diagnosis today,
enhancing diagnostic yield.
Methods: Here, we a present prenatal case of PS, with phe-
notyping by subsequent ultrasound and MRI examinations and
molecular diagnosis by NGS, with an overview of existing litera-
ture. Accurate prenatal phenotyping of PS and comparison with
Beckwith-Wiedemann
and
Simpson-Golabi-Behmel
sydrome
was made.
Results: Conﬁrmed prenatal diagnosis of PS was obtained by
subsequent
high
resolution
imaging
with
next
generation
sequencing (NGS) on amniotic ﬂuid sample, showing 2 pathogenic
variants in the DIS3L2 gene, not yet described in existing literature.
Conclusion: Since knowledge of the concerned gene and use
of new technologies, for imaging as well as genetic analysis, the
diagnosis of PS can be made prenatally. This is of great value
during prenatal counseling of pregnant couples, as PS is known to
have a poor prognosis.
References: Astuti D et al Nature Genet. 2012.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.020.A Prenatal Trio-Exome-Analysis reveals not yet
published prenatal manifestations of rare diseases
Uwe Ahting1, Melanie Isau2, Bernt Schulze3, Markus Stumm2,
Konstanze Hoertnagel1
1MVZ-Martinsried
GmbH, Human Genetics, Planegg, Germany;
2Medicover Genetics GmbH, Molekulargenetik, Berlin, Germany;
3Medicover Humangenetik Berlin Lichtenberg, Humangenetik Hann-
over, Hannover, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Between 7-2021 and 12-2021 we per-
formed 79 prenatal trio exome analyses with 23 positive results
(29.5%) with a turnaround time of 12.05 days on average. In all
cases, indication has been ultrasound abnormalities. Most fre-
quent leading symptoms were increased nuchal translucency
(n = 19), skeletal (n = 14), brain (n = 14), and heart (n = 13)
abnormalities. Most pathogenic variants found in association with
skeletal abnormalities were de novo and located in known disease
genes. In some cases, pathogenic variants were associated with
prenatal manifestations of rare diseases not published so far. Here
we present two case reports.
Methods: Prenatal trio exome analysis.
Results: Case 1: Fetus with cerebella vermis hypoplasia, chor-
oid plexus cyst and micrognathia in 19th week of pregnancy. Trio
exome analysis demonstrated a frameshift variant in CNOT3 (dis-
ease IDDSADF; OMIM #P: 618672), already published as patho-
genic. Postnatal manifestations of IDDSADF are small chin, short
stature, hypotonia, cerebellar abnormalities. Prenatal manifesta-
tions are not published yet.
Case2: Fetus with increased nuchal translucency and cystic
hygroma in 13th week of pregnancy. Trio exome analysis provided
a probably pathogenic missense variant in KCNT2 (disease DEE57,
OMIM #P: 617771). Postnatal manifestations of DEE57 are global
developmental delay, hypotonia, intellectual disability and sei-
zures. Hitherto only fetal hiccup has been mentioned in one case
report.
Conclusion: Notwithstanding the possibility of spurious cor-
relations, the two presented cases reveal so far unreported pre-
natal manifestations of rare diseases. More to be found. In
addition prenatal trio exome analysis increases the diagnostic
yield of genetic prenatal investigation, especially if increased
nuchal translucency is present.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.021.B Expanded NIPS does not signiﬁcantly increase the
detection rate of abnormal genetic ﬁndings in pregnancies
with normal ultrasound
Lena Sagi-Dain1, Idit Maya2, Liat Sheelo Salzer2, lina basel-salmon2
1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel; 2Rabin Medical Center Golda
Hasharon Campus, Petach Tikva, Israel.
Background/Objectives: Non-invasive prenatal screening (NIPS)
is currently widely used in many countries. The common NIPS
technique is focused on trisomies 13, 18, 21 and sex-chromosomal
aberrations (5-NIPS), while many laboratories offer expansion to
include common microdeletions as well as genome-wide aberra-
tions sized over 7Mb. We aimed to evaluate the theoretical yield of
NIPS expansions compared to the commonly used 5-NIPS, based
on chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) results of pregnancies
with normal ultrasound.
Methods: CMA results of pregnancies with normal ultrasound
(including soft markers and abnormal maternal serum screening)
were recorded. We have calculated the detection rate of 5-NIPS
detectable aberrations and compared those to rates of ﬁndings
detectable by 5-NIPS plus common microdeletions (1p36.3-
1p36.2,
4p16.3-4p16.2,
5p15.3-5p15.1,
15q11.2-15q13.1,
and
22q11.2), and genome-wide NIPS-detectable ﬁndings (including
variants >7Mb).
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
362
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: Of the 8,605 pregnancies, 44 (0.51%) 5-NIPS detect-
able ﬁndings were noted, ranging from 1.56% in 642 pregnancies
with abnormal maternal serum screening, 0.63% in 318 preg-
nancies with soft markers, 0.62% in 4,378 women aged over 35
years, to 0.15% in younger women. Three cases of common
microdeletions were detected in the overall cohort (0.03%), as well
as six genome-wide-NIPS detectable ﬁndings (0.07%), yielding a
non-signiﬁcant difference compared to 5-NIPS.
Conclusion: NIPS expansion to common microdeletions as well
as to genome wide-ﬁndings does not signiﬁcantly increase the
detection rate compared to 5-NIPS. These results facilitate
informed
decisions
of
couples
regarding
prenatal
genetic
screening using NIPS technology in comparison to CMA from
invasive fetal sample.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.022.C A rare case of fetoplacental discrepancy: a normal
result in chorionic villi in contrast to de novo unbalanced
translocation 46,XX,der(6)t(6;17) in amniotic ﬂuid
Lucie Lišková1, Vlasta Cejnova1, Monika Stará1, Vjaceslav Harmas1,
Lilly Dejová1, Lenka Vancová1, Jana Lastuvkova1
1Masaryk Hospital in Ústí nad Labem, o.z., Krajská zdravotní, a.s.,
Department of Medical Genetics, Ústí nad Labem, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: We present a gravidity with different
results from invasive prenatal testing. Firstly, a normal analysis of
chorionic villi and subsequently an abnormal karyotype of cul-
tured
amniocytes
were
detected.
Combined
ﬁrst
trimester
screening was positive and the fetal ultrasound scan revealed
hygroma colli cysticum.
Methods: Prenatal ultrasound, aCGH, karyotyping and FISH.
Results: Microarray analysis of native chorionic villi showed a
normal female proﬁle of the fetus. The amniocentesis (at 16 WG)
was performed due to other fetal ultrasound ﬁndings: ascites,
hyperdense lung and hyperechogenic fetal bowel. Cytological
analysis of cultured amniocytes revealed an abnormal karyotype:
46,XX,der(6) which was conﬁrmed by microarray: arr[GRCh37]
6q26q27(162799322_170884575)x1,17q21.32q25.3(47109888_810
44553)x3. De novo unbalanced translocation was determinated in
the fetus: 46,XX,der(6)t(6;17)(q26;q27.3), where the 8 Mb terminal
deletion of long arm of chromosome 6 and 34 Mb terminal
duplication of chromosome 17 were determined. Karyotypes of
both parents were normal. The gravidity was terminated and the
samples of placenta, amniotic ﬂuid, cord blood and skin were
analyzed. Cytological analysis of placenta conﬁrmed a normal
karyotype, whereas in the other types of tissues the normal cell
line was detected together with abnormal cell line with der(6) in
different levels of mosaicism. The mosaicism of cell line with der(6)
was deﬁned by FISH analysis: amniotic ﬂuid, fetus tissue, cord
blood; 90%, 66%, 17.5% of interphase nuclei, respectively.
Conclusion: The mosaicism of normal cell line 46,XX together
with abnormal cell line with de novo unbalanced autosomal
translocation is extremelly rare and needn´t be detected in CVS.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.023.D False positivity and false negativity as a standard
part of noninvasive prenatal testing
Gabriel Minarik1;2, Michaela Hyblova1;2, Martina Sekelska1;2, Erika
Tomkova3, Katarina Tothova3, Dagmar Landlova3, Peter Krizan1;3
1Medirex Group Academy n.p.o., Department of genomics, Nitra,
Slovakia; 2Trisomy test Ltd., Nitra, Slovakia; 3Medirex Inc., Depart-
ment of genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: Nonivasive prenatal testing (NIPT) is
becoming highly accepted as a routine prenatal screening tool in
most of developed countries. With advanced versions of NIPT tests
covering aneuploidies of all chromosomes and subchromosomal
aberrations false positives and false negatives appear more
frequently.
Methods: To get comprehensive information about the reason
of NIPT result falseness methods as qPCR, aCGH, FISH, karyotyping
in diagnostic settings were used additionally to original low cov-
erage whole genome sequencing based NIPT.
Results: After 19159 NIPT performed in routine clinical
laboratory 9 analyses were reported as false negative (2) and false
positive (7), in statistics focused solely on chromosomes 21, 18 and
13 trisomies, representing less than 0.05% of cases. When focusing
on all chromosomes and also subchromosomal aberrations the
frequency of such false results is even higher. From the portfolio of
potential biological reasons we detected and conﬁrmed by
molecular methods cases related to conﬁned placental mosaicism,
true fetal mosaicism, maternal aberration in full and mosaic state,
precancerous maternal aberration, incorrect previous anamnestic
data. As technical reasons grey zone result, insufﬁcient coverage
and syndrome speciﬁc information were detected.
Conclusion: False negative and false positive NIPT results are
reported every day all over the world and need to be addressed
with comprehensive supplementary diagnostic testing. Consensus
about its routine usage is needed and international guidelines
should reﬂect this need too.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the OPII programme as
the project - Center for biomedical research – BIOMEDIRES – II.
phase, ITMS 313011W428, co-ﬁnanced by the ERDF.
Conﬂict of Interest: Gabriel Minarik part-time employee of
Medirex Group Academy n.p.o and Trisomy test Ltd., principal
investigator
of running grants,
Michaela Hyblova part-time
employee of Medirex Group Academy n.p.o and Trisomy test
Ltd., collaborator on several grants, Martina Sekelska part-time
employee of Medirex Group Academy n.p.o and Trisomy test Ltd.,
collaborator on several running grants, Erika Tomkova full-time
employee of Medirex Inc., Katarina Tothova full-time employee of
Medirex Inc., Dagmar Landlova full-time employee of Medirex Inc.,
Peter Krizan part-time employee of Medirex Inc. and Medirex
Group Academy n.p.o.
P02.024.A Clinical implementation of a custom
oligonucleotide array-CGH. Experience in the largest cohort of
Spanish prenatal samples (>5300 samples)
Olaya Villa Marcos1, Marina Viñas-Jornet1, Noemí Sousa1, Nerea
Alvarez1, Neus Fornés1, Manel García-Aragonés1, Luis Pérez-Jurado2,
LLuís Armengol1
1Quantitative Genomics Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics, Micro-
array, Esplugues del Llobregat, Spain; 2Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
Hospital del Mar - IMIM, and CIBER de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Genetics unit, Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: The implementation of genomic array in
prenatal routines, when accompanied by pre- and post-test
genetic counseling, has demonstrated its utility by fulﬁlling the
longstanding need for a diagnostic test with a higher resolution
and higher diagnostic yield than its predecessor, the conventional
karyotype.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
363
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: Array CGH was performed in 5388 prenatal samples
(3972 amniotic ﬂuids, 1131 corions and 285 fetal samples), using a
custom
60K
oligonucleotide-based
microarray
(qChip®
CM)
designed to maximize the detection of clinically relevant copy-
number alterations, and minimize the detection of variants of
unknown signiﬁcance (VOUS). As a general rule, VOUS with
unclear phenotypic effect according to current knowledge, and
some susceptibility variants are not reported.
Results: We identiﬁed a total of 363 pathogenic or likely
pathogenic alterations (detection rate: 6.73%) and 76 VOUS
(1.41%). As expected, the greatest pathogenic detection rate
(7.28%, 326/4477) was among fetuses with ultrasound anoma-
lies, while detection rate was 4.06% (37/911) in normal ultra-
sound gestations. When both parental samples were available,
the vast majority of the VOUS were inherited from a non-
affected parent (90.24%) and could be reclassiﬁed as likely
benign.
Conclusion: Our series reinforces the clinical utility of prenatal
microarray testing: it nearly doubles the diagnostic yield of con-
ventional karyotype (153/363 with variants <10Mb), with no sig-
niﬁcant increase in the frequency of VOUS that could interfere in
decision making. In our experience, we highlight the importance
of implementing aCGH in prenatal routines, for all gestations with
an indication of invasive fetal sampling.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Olaya Villa Marcos qGenomics, Marina
Viñas-Jornet qGenomics, Noemí Sousa qGenomics, Nerea Alvarez
qGenomics, Neus Fornés qGenomics, Manel García-Aragonés
qGenomics,
Luis
Pérez-Jurado
qGenomics,
LLuís
Armengol
qGenomics.
P02.026.C The diagnostic yield of prenatal exome sequencing
in fetuses with ultrasound anomalies
Karin
Diderich1,
Florentine
Thurik1,
Martina
Wilke1,
Marieke
Joosten1, Myrthe van den Born1, Robert-Jan Galjaard1, Marjolein
Weerts1, Marjon van Slegtenhorst1, Frank Sleutels1, Sander Galjaard2,
Maarten Knapen2, Attie Go2, Lies Hoefsloot1, Malgorzata Srebniak1,
Hennie Brüggenwirth1
1Erasmus MC, Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2Erasmus
MC, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: The aim of the study was to evaluate
the diagnostic yield of routine exome sequencing (ES) in fetuses
with ultrasound anomalies detected in the ﬁrst two trimesters that
had a normal molecular karyotype by chromosomal microarray.
Methods: A retrospective analysis of 138 fetuses with multi-
ple or isolated ultrasound anomalies that were referred for ES in
May 2019- March 2021. Some speciﬁc isolated abnormalities
were excluded from ES: e.g. neural tube defect, ventricular septal
defect and echogenic bowel. Variant analysis was limited to a
broad gene panel consisting of genes involved in multiple
congenital anomalies and/or intellectual disability as published
before. We used trio analysis and ﬁltering for de novo variants,
compound
heterozygous
variants,
homozygous
variants,
X-linked variants, variants in imprinted genes and for known
pathogenic variants.
Results: Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants (class 5 and
4 respectively) that explained the fetal phenotype were identiﬁed
in 13% (18/138) fetuses. Potentially actionable class 3 variants
(matching the phenotype) were reported in few cases after
extensive discussion in a multidisciplinary team. The risk for a
single gene disorder in the presented cohort was ~ 1:8. The time
between the invasive procedure and genetic diagnosis was 13-
18 days.
Conclusion: Our results indicate that a signiﬁcant number of
fetuses
with
ultrasound
anomalies
and
normal
molecular
karyotype carry a clinically relevant (likely) pathogenic variant
that can be diagnosed through prenatal exome sequencing. In
our opinion not only microarray testing, but also exome
sequencing should be offered in case of a fetus with ultrasound
anomalies.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02.027.D Use of prenatal exome sequencing in fetuses with
ultrasound anomalies
Maria Segura-Puimedon1, Marta Carreño1, Raquel Garcia1, Lidia
Carreño1, Hector San Nicolás1, César Arjona1, Cèlia Sintas1, Olaya
Villa Marcos1, Marina Viñas-Jornet1, Mònica Vall1, Nina Bosch1, LLuís
Armengol1
1qGenomics, NGS Clinical Department, Esplugues de Llobregat,
Spain.
Background/Objectives: Whole exome sequencing (WES) is an
established diagnostic tool in postnatal settings for individuals
with a suspected genetic condition. Recently, it is increasingly
used as a diagnostic tool in prenatal settings as well. We present
here our experience using this technology in fetuses with ultra-
sound anomalies.
Methods: WES was performed in 350 fetal samples with
ultrasound anomalies. 248 samples were from evolutive preg-
nancies and 102 were from legal interruptions or stillbirths. Seg-
regation studies were performed in cases with a candidate variant
when possible.
Results:
Common
reasons
for
referral
were
skeletal
anomalies, polymalformated fetuses, cerebral anomalies or
speciﬁc syndrome suspicion. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic
variants were identiﬁed in n = 56 (16%) of samples. In n = 64
(18.2%) cases, variants of unknown signiﬁcance were identiﬁed.
In more than half of the cases (58%) no candidate variant was
identiﬁed. Diagnostic yield was higher in fetuses with skeletal
anomalies, where pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were
identiﬁed in (n = 19) 33% of cases, and in fetuses with increased
nuchal translucency or hydrops (Noonan syndrome suspicion),
where a pathogenic variant was found in 23.5% (n = 13) of the
samples.
Conclusion: Exome sequencing is a valuable diagnostic tool in
fetuses with ultrasound anomalies, especially when skeletal
anomalies are present or when Noonan syndrome is suspected.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict
of
Interest:
Maria
Segura-Puimedon
qGenomics,
Marta
Carreño
qGenomics,
Raquel
Garcia
qGenomics,
Lidia
Carreño qGenomics, Hector San Nicolás qGenomics, César Arjona
qGenomics, Cèlia Sintas qGenomics, Olaya Villa Marcos qGenomics,
Marina Viñas-Jornet qGenomics, Mònica Vall qGenomics, Nina Bosch:
None declared, LLuís Armengol qGenomics.
P02.028.A Two novel variants in the POR gene causing Antley-
Bixler syndrome type 2 detected prenatally in a foetus with
abnormal ultrasound ﬁndings
Jana
Lastuvkova1,
Miroslav
Brestak2,
Pavel
Votypka3,
Petra
Peldova3, Vlasta Cejnova1, Lucie Liskova1, Vjaceslav Harmas1
1Masaryk Hospital, o.z., Krajska zdravotni, a.s., Department od Medical
Genetics, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic; 2Prague Prenatal Diagnosis
Centre, ProﬁG2, Prague, Czech Republic; 32nd Faculty of Medicine,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
364
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Charles University in Prague and Motol University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: Antley-Bixler syndrome (ABS) is a rare
severe form of syndromic craniostenosis.
Type 1 ABS is autosomal dominant due to heterozygous patho-
genic variants in the FGFR2 gene, type 2 ABS is autosomal recessive
due to biallelic pathogenic variants in the POR gene. Phenotypic
features include craniostenosis, characteristic facial features, propto-
sis, skeletal anomalies and wide range of organ malformations.
We present a case of ABS type 2 detected on the basis of
prenatal ultrasound examination.
Methods: Prenatal ultrasound, aCGH, targeted NGS panel of 89
genes associated with craniostenosis.
Results:
Atypical
head
shape
of
foetus
was
seen
on
ultrasound in the 21st week of pregnancy. Combined screening of
the 1st trimester was negative but level of PAPP-A was extremely
high - 41.112 MoM. Specialized ultrasound examination conﬁrmed
turicephaly, deformity of the cerebral hemispheres, hypertelorism,
low set ears and talipes varus. Craniostenosis was suspected.
Parents decided to terminate pregnancy.
Autopsy of the foetus showed turicephaly, frontal bones
agenesis, hypertelorism, proptosis, low set ears, lack of thumbs
and arachnodactyly foreﬁngers on both feet. Examination of the
targeted NGS gene panel revealed 2 novel heterozygous probably
pathogenic variants in the POR gene - c.1898 + 1del/c.450>A
p.(Asp150Glu). Each variant is present in one of the parents.
Conclusion: This case demonstrates the importance of colla-
boration between precision ultrasound diagnostics and modern
laboratory methods (NGS) in elucidating the causes of rare serious
foetal disorders. We believe this is the ﬁrst case of prenatal
detection of ABS type 2 in the Czech Republic.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03
SENSORY DISORDERS (EYE, EAR, PAIN)
P03.001.B Accurate clinical evaluation and high throughput
technologies for the molecular characterization of hereditary
hearing loss in a large cohort of Italian patients
Anna Morgan1, Stefania Lenarduzzi1, Beatrice Spedicati2, Paola
Tesolin2, Aurora Santin2, Elisa Rubinato1, Giorgia Girotto1;2
1Institute for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”,
Trieste, Italy; 2University of Trieste, Department of Medicine, Surgery
and Health Sciences, Trieste, Italy.
Background/Objectives: HL is the most prevalent sensory dis-
order, affecting ~6% of the world’s population. From a genetic
perspective, HL is a challenging disease because of its genetic
heterogeneity and clinical variability with different onset of
symptoms complicating the molecular diagnosis.
Methods: We applied a multi-step approach for testing
290 syndromic and non-syndromic HL families (negative to GJB2
mutation), which included:
1. an accurate clinical evaluation,.
2. the assessment of STRC-CATSPER2 and OTOA Copy Number
Variants (CNV) via Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe
Ampliﬁcation (MLPA),.
3. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) in patients negative to
steps 2-3.
4. Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) in a subset of families
negative to 2-3.
.
Results: MLPA and WES led to the characterization of ~41% of
cases. In particular, data analysis allowed to 1) conﬁrm the relevant
role of CNVs in the STRC gene, with ~5.9% of patients carrying a
pathogenic deletion, 2) discover six new disease genes (e.g. PSIP1,
TBL1Y, SPATC1L, PLS1, SLC12A2, MYO5C), and 3) shed the light on
unexpected scenarios, such as the presence of dual molecular
diagnosis, further exploring the complexity of HL. In negative
cases to steps 2-3 we proceeded with WGS, searching for new
possible causative alleles, including deep intronic and structural
variants, starting from patients carriers of one pathogenic variant
in recessive HL genes (e.g. SLC26A4).
Conclusion: Our approach led to an overall detection rate of
~41% in the Italian population. Furthermore, we expect WGS to
unveil
other
possible
disease
mechanisms,
deepening
the
knowledge of the biological mechanisms of HL.
References: NA.
Grants: NA.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.002.C A comprehensive WGS-based pipeline for the
identiﬁcation of new candidate genes in inherited retinal
dystrophies
Elena Fernández-Suárez1;2, María González-del Pozo1;2, Nereida
Bravo-Gil1;2, Cristina Méndez-Vidal1;2, Marta Martín-Sánchez1, Mar-
cela Mena1;2, Enrique Rodríguez-de la Rúa3;4, Manuel Ramos-
Jiménez5, Maria Jose Morillo Sanchez3, Salud Borrego1;2, Guillermo
Antiñolo1;2
1Virgen del Rocío University Hospital/CSIC/University of Seville,
Department of Maternofetal Medicine, Genetics and Reproduction/
Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, Seville, Spain;
2Center for
Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Seville,
Spain;
3University
Hospital
Virgen
Macarena,
Department
of
Ophthalmology, Seville, Spain; 4Institute of Health Carlos III, Retics
Patologia Ocular, OFTARED, Madrid, Spain;
5University Hospital
Virgen Macarena, Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Seville,
Spain.
Background/Objectives: To enhance the use of Whole Genome
Sequencing (WGS) in clinical practice, it is still necessary to stan-
dardize data analysis pipelines. Herein, we aimed to deﬁne a WGS-
based algorithm for the accurate variant interpretation in inher-
ited retinal dystrophies (IRD).
Methods: This study comprised 429 phenotyped individuals
divided into three cohorts: i) the training cohort with 209
genetically diagnosed IRD individuals was used to perform a sta-
tistical comparison of 14 pathogenicity predictors, redeﬁne cutoffs
and design the algorithm; ii) the validation cohort, consisting of 50
additional IRD individuals, 109 hereditary cancer patients and 47
with neurological diseases, allowed to select the optimal combi-
nation of predictors and to evaluate its translational value and iii)
the discovery cohort including WGS data of 14 individuals from 7
genetically undiagnosed IRD families that were analysed applying
our optimised workﬂow.
Results: The statistical analysis disclosed the most effective
combination of predictors for non-splicing (CADDv1.6, MAPP,
Grantham, and SIFT) and splicing (SpliceAI and NNS) variants. The
pipeline validation showed high sensitivity, detecting 90% of
causal variants in all the pathologies tested. This approach allowed
identifying variants in candidate genes for IRD, such as CFAP20, in
the discovery cohort families. Moreover, our results showed a 90%
reduction of variants to be manually reviewed applying the cus-
tomized cutoffs instead of the literature values.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
365
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: Given the lack of consensus on the use of pre-
diction tools, we offer a translational strategy for accurate WGS
data prioritization in the clinical setting.
References: PMIDs: 24618965; 20238084.
Grants: ISCIII-ERDF/ESF (PI18/00612; PI21/00244; FI19/00091),
Andalusian Government (PEER-0501-2019), F.Isabel Gemio/F.Caja-
sol [FGEMIO-2019-01].
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.003.D Evaluation of CFAP20 as a candidate gene for
autosomal recessive non-syndromic retinitis pigmentosa
María González-del Pozo1;2, Elena Fernández-Suárez1;2, Nereida
Bravo-Gil1;2, Cristina Méndez-Vidal1;2, Marta Martín-Sánchez1, Mar-
cela Mena1;2, Enrique Rodríguez-de la Rúa3;4, Manuel Ramos-
Jiménez5, Maria Jose Morillo Sanchez3, Salud Borrego1;2, Guillermo
Antiñolo1;2
1University Hospital Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University of Seville,
Department of Maternofetal Medicine, Genetics and Reproduction,
Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, Seville, Spain;
2Center for
Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Seville,
Spain;
3University
Hospital
Virgen
Macarena,
Department
of
Ophthalmology, Seville, Spain; 4Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Retics
Patologia Ocular. OFTARED., Madrid, Spain;
5University Hospital
Virgen Macarena, Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Seville,
Spain.
Background/Objectives: The cilia and ﬂagella-associated pro-
tein 20, CFAP20, encodes for a highly conserved protein that
plays a critical role in cilia formation and morphology. Previous
studies have demonstrated that CFAP20 (Bug22) depletion
causes a ciliary phenotype in both in-vitro and in-vivo models,
supporting its likely implication in human ciliopathies. On the
other hand, retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a highly penetrant
phenotype among a vast majority of ciliopathies. Here, we
aimed to evaluate the association between CFAP20 variants and
autosomal recessive RP.
Methods: Two members of one consanguineous non-syndromic
RP family underwent WGS using Illumina’s HiSeqX platform. Seg-
regation analysis was conducted by Sanger sequencing. The retinal
expression and localization of human CFAP20 were evaluated by
real-time-qPCR and immunohistochemistry using retinal sections
from healthy donors. The CFAP20 clinical impact was further
investigated using 3D-modeling and protein-protein interaction
networks.
Results: An in-house data analysis pipeline allowed the
identiﬁcation of one homozygous variant in CFAP20 (c.337C>T;
p.Arg113Trp) segregating with the disease. Comparison of
the relative mRNA levels between different tissues showed
that CFAP20 mRNA was highest in the retina. Speciﬁc immu-
nolabeling was observed in the photoreceptors layer. Our in-
silico mutagenesis experiments also predicted conformational
changes
secondary
to
hydrogen-bonds
loss.
Additionally,
CFAP20 is known to interact with the RP-associated protein,
ARL2BP.
Conclusion: Although additional studies are needed, this work
led us to propose CFAP20 as a candidate gene for non-syndromic
RP and is expectedly to expand the mutational landscape of ciliary
genes associated with human diseases.
References:
PMIDs:24414207;20118210;24574454;31763178;
23849777.
Grants:
ISCIII-ERDF/ESF
(PI18-00612;PI21-00244;FI19/00091),
Andalusian Government (PEER _0501_2019), F.Isabel Gemio/
F.Cajasol (2019-01).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.005.B Genetic heterogeneity of prelingual severe to
profound hearing impairment in patients from North African
countries and Jordan
Zied Riahi1, Sophie Boucher2, Fabienne Wong Jun Tai1, Amrit Estivalet1,
Magali Niasme-Grare3, Yosra Bouyacoub1, Samia Abdi4, Malika
Dahmani5, Sonia Talbi5, Rhama mkouar6, Ghita Amalou7, Soukaina
Elrharchi7, Mirna Mustafa8, Malak Salame9, Ely Cheikh Moctar9,
Mouna Hadrami9, cherine charfeddine6, Marrakchi Jihene10, Rim
Zainine10, Houda Chahed10, Besbes Ghazi10, Mediha Trabelsi11, Ridha
Mrad11, Ichraf Kraoua12, Ilhem Turki12, Ahmed Houmeida9, Abdelha-
mid Barakat7, Fatima Ammar-Khodja5, Akila Zenati13, Mohamed
Makrelouf13, Sonia Abdelhak6, Christine Petit1, Crystel Bonnet1
1Institut de l’audition, Institut Pasteur, INSERM, Paris, France; 2Service
d’ORL, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) d’Angers, Faculté de
Médecine,
Angers,
France;
3Service
de
Biochimie
et
Biologie
Moléculaire, Hôpital d’Enfants Armand-Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris,
France; 4Laboratoire de biochimie génétique, Service de biologie -
CHU de Bab El Oued, Université d’Alger 1, Laboratoire central de
biologie, CHU Frantz Fanon, Faculté de médecine, Université Saad
Dahleb, Blida, Algiers, Algeria; 5Equipe de Génétique, Laboratoire de
Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Faculté des Sciences Biologiques,
Université des Sciences et de la Technologie Houari Boumédiène
(USTHB), El Alia, Bab-Ezzouar, Algiers, Algeria; 6Institut Pasteur de
Tunis, LR16IPT05, Biomedical Genomics and Oncogenetics Labora-
tory, Tunis, Tunisia; 7Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institut
Pasteur du Maroc, Casablanca, Morocco; 8University of Shefﬁeld,
Department of Biomedical Science, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom; 9Unité
de Recherche sur les Biomarqueurs dans la Population Mauritani-
enne, Université des Sciences, de Technologie, et de Médecine (USTM),
Nouakchott, Mauritania; 10Hôpital La Rabta, Otorhinolaryngology
Diseases, Tunis, Tunisia; 11Hôpital Charles Nicolle, Congenital and
Hereditary Diseases, Tunis, Tunisia; 12Institut National de Neurologie,
Tunis, Tunisia;
13Laboratoire de biochimie génétique, Service de
biologie - CHU de Bab El Oued, Université d’Alger 1, Algiers, Algeria.
Background/Objectives: Prelingual hearing impairment (HI), one
of the most frequent monogenic disorders, has a very high
genetic heterogeneity. For genetic counseling as in the perspec-
tive of gene therapy, it is essential that all patients can beneﬁt
from molecular diagnosis.
Methods: We explored the variants responsible for deafness in
a total of 450 unrelated patients affected by severe to profound
early onset HI from North African (Algeria, Mauritania, Morocco,
Tunisia) and Middle East (Jordan) countries. To this purpose, we
developed a targeted exome high throughput sequencing of 156
known deafness genes (HearPanel-IdA), followed by qPCR analysis
and only retained predicted pathogenic variants.
Results: This allowed us to ascertain molecular diagnosis for a
total of 391/450 patients (86.9%). Remarkably, we found 63/450
patients (14%) with variants in Usher syndrome (USH) genes of
whom 40 had been clinically diagnosed as Usher. In the other 23
patients, subsequent clinical exams established the existence of a
retinitis pigmentosa. Moreover, a total of 213 predicted patho-
genic variants were identiﬁed in 49 known deafness genes of
which 84 (39.4%) never reported. This makes the HearPanel-IdA a
powerful and cost-effective tool to identify rare mutations
causing HI.
Conclusion: The use of HearPanel-IdA as a routine investiga-
tion should not only facilitate the detection of rare mutations in
uncommon HI genes, but also contribute signiﬁcantly to the early
diagnosis of speciﬁc forms of syndromic HI such as Usher syn-
drome, for which early cochlear implantation is of utmost
importance because of the secondary sight loss.
References:.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
366
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Grants: FPA-IDA05, ANR-10-LABX-65, ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02,
ANR-11-BSV5-0011, ANR-16-CE13-0015-02.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.006.C Deciphering the genetic architecture of inherited
retinal diseases in the Iranian population by integrated exome
sequencing
Miriam Bauwens1, Kristof Van Schil2, Marieke De Bruyne1, Mattias
Van Heetvelde1, Quinten Mahieu1, Toon Rosseel1, Ebrahim Al Hajj3,
Sarah Van Malderen1, Reza Marooﬁan4, Fatemeh Suri5, Elfride De
Baere1
1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University and Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 2Center for Medical Genetics
Antwerp, Universiteit Antwerpen, Antwerp, Belgium; 3Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium; 4Institute of Neurology, Department of
Neuromuscular Diseases, University College London, London, United
Kingdom;
5Ophthalmic Epidemiology Research Center, Research
Institute for Ophthalmology and Vision Science, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
Background/Objectives: To uncover the underlying molecular
causes of inherited retinal disease (IRD) in 105 unrelated families
of Iranian descent, an integrated approach consisting of whole
exome sequencing (WES) and autozygosity mapping was used.
Methods: WES was performed in 105 Iranian IRD families,
predominantly originating from a consanguineous background
(77%). Data-analysis was performed using the in-house Seqplorer
tool. Copy number variants (CNVs) were assessed via ExomeDepth.
Variants were validated, classiﬁed (ACMG/ACGS guidelines) and
segregation analysis was performed. AutoMap was used to
determine runs of homozygosity (ROHs).
Results: By interrogating 290 known IRD genes using a WES-
based analysis, we obtained a molecular diagnosis for 85% of
the IRD cohort. In total, 103 (likely) disease-associated variants
were identiﬁed in 42 genes, 58 of which are novel variants.
ABCA4, EYS, AIPL1 and CRB1 were the four most implicated
genes. In addition, the importance of structural variation (SV) in
IRD was demonstrated, with CNVs identiﬁed in 8% of the cohort,
including novel CNVs in CDHR1, CHM and RD3. Homozygous
nonsense and missense deleterious variants were found in novel
retina-expressed candidate IRD genes, including PFKFB2 and
QRFPR.
Conclusion: This integrated study using WES and an in-depth
analysis of the variants provides insight into the genetic archi-
tecture of IRD in Iran. We provided 85% of patients with a mole-
cular diagnosis and expanded the molecular spectrum of IRD in
Iran by the identiﬁcation of novel variants in the majority of
patients. Finally, autozygome-guided exome sequencing revealed
several novel candidate genes for IRD in unsolved cases.
References:.
Grants: FWO1802220N.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.007.D Transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 (TRPA1)
channel: rare variants in chronic neuropathic pain patients
Erika Salvi1, Margherita Marchi1, Elkadia Mehmeti1, Mirna Ande-
lic1;2, Daniele Cazzato3, Grazia Devigili4, Ilaria D’Amato1, Raffaella
Lombardi1, Daniele Cartelli1, Monique Gerrits5, Milena Ślęczkowska6,
Rayaz Malik7;8, Catharina Faber9, Giuseppe Lauria Pinter1;10
1Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico “Carlo Besta”, Neuroalgology
Unit, Milano, Italy;
2School of Mental Health and Neuroscience,
Maastricht University, Department of Neurology, Maastricht, Nether-
lands;
3Fondazione
IRCCS
Istituto
Neurologico
“Carlo
Besta”,
Neurophysiology Unit, Milano, Italy;
4Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico “Carlo Besta”, Movement Disorders Unit, Milano, Italy;
5Maastricht University Medical Center, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands; 6Maastricht University, Depart-
ment of Toxicogenomics, Maastricht, Netherlands;
7University of
Manchester and NIHR/Wellcome, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and
Health, Manchester, United Kingdom; 8Weill CornellMedicine-Qatar,
Qatar Foundation, Research Division, Doha, Qatar;
9Maastricht
University Medical Centre, School of Mental Health andNeuroscience,
Maastricht, Netherlands;
10University of Milan, Department of
Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, Milano, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Chronic neuropathic pain is amongst
the most common non-communicable disorders, with a signiﬁcant
impact on patients’ quality of life. The aim of this study is to assess
the incidence of rare mutations in patients with neuropathic pain
(NeuP).
Methods: We collected 480 patients complaining NeuP,
and
216
healthy
controls
(HC)
aged
over
50.
Subjects
were classiﬁed according to symptoms distribution as “length-
dependent”, “non-length-dependent” and “atypical” and ana-
lysed by target NGS of 107 genes involved in pain signalling.
Rare genetic variants were selected and classiﬁed following
ACGS recommendations.
Results: TRPA1 showed a signiﬁcant overrepresentation of rare
variants with functional or disrupting impact on the protein in
NeuP patients compared to HC. We found that mutated samples
with rare functional or disruptive variants were 2.92 time
(p = 0.017) as prevalent in NeuP (7.7%) compared with HC (2.85%).
TRPA1 variants are mainly clustered in the N-terminal domain
containing the ankyrin repeats, involved in channel function and
regulation. Among patients harboring TRPA1 mutations, 18 (69%)
has non-length-dependent NeuP, 10 (38%) reported cold-induced
or cold-accentuated pain, 12 (46%) neuropathic itch and 14 (48%)
electric shock-like pain.
Conclusion: TRPA1 encodes for a polymodal Ca2+ channel,
involved in pain and inﬂammation, activated by potentially nox-
ious stimuli, chemicals, and cold. The only genetic disease asso-
ciated with TRPA1 is Familial Episodic Pain Syndrome. High-
throughput studies on SNPs frequency found no association with
NeuP susceptibility. Focusing on rare high-impact mutations, our
study suggests that TRPA1 could increase the risk for complex
painful conditions.
References:.
Grants: GRANT AGREEMENT NO.602273 PROPANE STUDY-FP7-
HEALTH-2013-INNOVATION-1.
Conﬂict of Interest: Erika Salvi: None declared, Margherita
Marchi: None declared, Elkadia Mehmeti: None declared, Mirna
Andelic: None declared, Daniele Cazzato: None declared, Grazia
Devigili: None declared, Ilaria D’Amato: None declared, Raffaella
Lombardi: None declared, Daniele Cartelli: None declared, Monique
Gerrits: None declared, Milena Ślęczkowska: None declared, Rayaz
Malik: None declared, Catharina Faber Dr. Faber reports grants from
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gramme Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant for PAIN-Net, Molecule-to-
man pain network (grant no. 721841), grants from Grifols and
Lamepro for a trial on IVIg in small ﬁbre neuropathy, grants from
Prinses Beatrix Spierfonds., Steering committtees/advisory board for
studies in small ﬁbre neuropathy of Biogen/Convergence, Vertex,
Lilly and OliPass, Giuseppe Lauria Pinter: None declared.
P03.008.A Molecular characterization of inherited retinal
degenerations in a Swiss patient cohort
Karolina
Kaminska1;2,
Francesca
Cancellieri1;2,
Quinodoz
Mathieu1;2;3, Giacomo Calzetti1;2, Bence György1;2, Lucas Janeschitz-
Kriegl1;2, Hendrik Scholl1;2, Carlo Rivolta1;2;3
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
367
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Institute of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel (IOB), Basel,
Switzerland; 2University of Basel, Department of Ophthalmology,
Basel, Switzerland; 3University of Leicester, Department of Genetics
and Genome Biology, Leicester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs)
are a group of disorders known for their genetic and clinical
heterogeneity, which make molecular diagnosis a challenging
process.
Methods: We collected approximately 200 DNA samples from
more than 170 families with IRDs and other ocular disorders, ascer-
tained by the Department of Ophthalmology at the University of
Basel, and we developed a robust workﬂow based on the next
generation sequencing (NGS) to identify the genetic determinants for
these conditions. All patients underwent an ophthalmic examination
performed by an IRD specialist, and their DNA was extracted from
whole blood or saliva samples. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) was
performed for at least one affected individual from each family.
Results: Thus far, NGS analysis of 109 probands enabled the
identiﬁcation of causative variants in 37 known disease genes for
80 individuals, leading to an overall molecular characterization
rate of 73%. Most identiﬁed mutations were single nucleotide
variants (SNVs) and small deletion or insertions, whereas 6% of
mutations were copy number variants (CNVs). Interestingly,
mutations in intronic regions contributed to the diagnosis of 17
patients (>20% of all solved cases), with 3 deep intronic variants
identiﬁed by an extensive analysis.
Conclusion: Integration of a research approach into analytical
pipeline, together with the precise description of the clinical phe-
notype, lead to a high molecular diagnostic rate for patients with
IRDs. Molecular diagnosis is crucial for the development of future
gene therapies and proper genetic counseling of all patients.
References:.
Grants: The Swiss National Science Foundation, grant #204285.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.010.C Visual acuity GWAS in children identify novel genes
and pathways
Krzysztof Marianski1, Judith Schmitz1;2, Filippo Abbondanza1,
Michelle Luciano3, Silvia Paracchini1
1University of St Andrews, School of Medicine, St Andrews, United
Kingdom; 2Georg-August-University Goettingen, Biological Personal-
ity Psychology, Goettingen, Germany;
3University of Edinburgh,
Department of Psychology, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Visual acuity (VA) is a measure of the
eyes’ ability to distinguish between shapes and overall detail of
objects. Reduction in VA is associated with myopia, reading dis-
ability (RD) and lower quality of life. Genetics of VA are not well
understood due to most of the genome wide association studies
(GWAS) related to vision, focusing on myopia or age-related
macular degeneration, predominantly in adults.
Methods: We performed GWAS for VA on children aged 11,5
years old, from the ALSPAC data (N = 6,807), calculated polygenic
risk scores and applied novel, non-standard post GWAS analyses
tools - FINDOR and Downstreamer. FINDOR uses functional
annotations to reweight GWAS summary statistics p-values and
Downstreamer prioritises genes and pathways that would not
normally be analysed for GWAS loci. Neither tool uses any phe-
notypic information.
Results: We report the ﬁrst GWAS for VA in children. The top
hit (NPLOC4 locus) was previously associated in GWAS for vision
outcomes in adults and we ﬁnd that having a higher polygenic risk
for ADHD and RD is correlated with worse VA. Post-hoc analysis
showed signiﬁcant enrichments of genes and pathways related to
vision. FINDOR re-weighted p-values resulted in six additional
SNPs reaching statistical signiﬁcance. Downstreamer prioritised
two genes, namely PDE6G and RFSN, both important in sensory
functions.
Conclusion: Our GWAS and post-GWAS analyses for VA resul-
ted in signiﬁcant associations despite a small sample size. This
indicates the potential of VA as a useful phenotype for dissecting
the genetics of vision.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.012.A Spectrum of ABCA4 variants in Slovenian patients
with Stargardt disease
Jana Sajovic1, Andrej Meglič1, Martina Jarc-Vidmar1, Vlasta Hadalin1,
Zelia Corradi2;3, Frans P.M. Cremers2;3, Jana Zernant4, Rando
Allikmets4, Damjan Glavac5, Aleš Maver6, Marija Volk6, Borut Peterlin6,
Marko Hawlina1, Ana Fakin1
1Eye
Hospital,
University
Medical
Centre
Ljubljana,
Ljubljana,
Slovenia;
2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 3Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands; 4Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University, New
York, United States; 5Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of
Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia; 6Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical
Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: There are >1290 known pathogenic
variants in ABCA4 causing heterogeneous phenotypes. This study
aims to report the genetic and clinical characteristics of the Slo-
venian ABCA4 cohort.
Methods: Study included 75 patients (28 male; median age at
the last exam 32 years, range 8-75). Genetic analysis was done with
next-generation sequencing, deep intronic regions were included
in 65/75. Phenotype analysis included age at disease onset,
Snellen decimal best corrected visual acuity (VA), pattern and full-
ﬁeld electroretinography (ERG), and fundus autoﬂuorescence (FAF)
appearance.
Results: 63 (84%) patients had ≥2 identiﬁed variants, whereas
12 (16%) had 1 identiﬁed variant. Most frequent variants were
p.(Asn1868Ile) (11% alleles), p.(Gly1961Glu) (11%), p.[(Leu541-
Pro;Ala1038Val)] (10%), p.(Arg681*) (7%) and c.5714+5G>A (7%).
The latter was more frequent than in a multicentric study of 279
patients (2%) (1). 7/52 different variants were novel. Median age at
onset was 15 years (range 5-60). Late-onset (>40 years) was pre-
sent in 28%. Median VA was 0.16 (range counting ﬁngers-1.0).
According to ERG, generalized retinal dysfunction (ERG group 2 or
3) was present in 52%. Abnormalities on FAF extended beyond the
vascular arcades in 60%. Patients with late-onset had a higher
frequency of foveal sparing (44%) than other patients (9%).
However, frequency of missense variants was similar between the
two groups (72% vs 67%).
Conclusion: Slovenian ABCA4 cohort has a speciﬁc spectrum of
ABCA4 variants. 13% of variants were novel, while c.5714+5G>A
was relatively more frequent than in other cohorts. Around one-
third of patients had late-onset disease, which may be mis-
diagnosed as age-related macular degeneration.
References: (1). PMID:29925512.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jana Sajovic Eye Hospital, University
Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Andrej Meglič Eye
Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
Martina Jarc-Vidmar Eye Hospital, University Medical Centre
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Vlasta Hadalin: None declared, Zelia
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
368
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Corradi Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, Frans P.M. Cremers
Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, Jana Zernant Department of
Ophthalmology, Columbia University, New York, New York, United
States, Rando Allikmets Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia
University, New York, New York, United States, Damjan Glavac
Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Aleš
Maver Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical
Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Marija Volk Clinical Institute
of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia, Borut Peterlin Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics,
University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Marko
Hawlina Eye Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubl-
jana, Slovenia, Ana Fakin Eye Hospital, University Medical Centre
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
P03.013.B Biallelic variants in KITLG cause Waardenburg
syndrome type 2, albinism-deafness syndrome and
oculocutaneous albinism
Katta Girisha1;2, Barbara Vona3;4, Daniel Schwartzbaum5, Alejandro
A. Rodriguez5, Solange S. Lewis1, Mehran Beiraghi Toosi6, Periyasamy
Radhakrishnan2,
Nazım
Bozan7,
Ramazan
Akın7,
Mohammad
Doosti8, Ramachandran Manju9, Duygu Duman10, Claire J. Sineni5,
Sheela Nampoothiri11, Ehsan Ghayoor Karimiani8;12;13, Henry Houl-
den14,
Guney
Bademci5;15,
Mustafa
Tekin5;15,
Soﬁa
Douzgou
HOUGE16;17, Reza Marooﬁan14
1Department
of
Medical
Genetics,
Kasturba
Medical
College,
Manipal, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India,
Manipal, India; 2Suma Genomics Private Limited, Manipal Universal
Technology Business Incubator Manipal, Karnataka, India, Manipal,
India;
3Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, Göttingen, Germany; 4Institute for
Auditory Neuroscience and InnerEarLab, University Medical Center
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, Göttingen, Germany;
5John P.
Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA, Miami, United States;
6Pediatric Neurology Department, Ghaem hospital, Mashhad Uni-
versity of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Mashhad, Iran; 7Depart-
ment of Otolaryngology, Yuzuncu Yıl University Faculty of Medicine,
Van, Turkey, Van, Turkey; 8Department of Medical Genetics, Next
Generation Genetic Polyclinic, Mashhad, Iran, Mashhad, Iran; 9Renai
Medicity, Cochin, Kerala, India, Cochin, India;
10Department of
Audiology, Ankara University Faculty of Health Sciences, Ankara,
Turkey, Ankara, Turkey; 11Department of Paediatric Genetics, Amrita
Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Kochi, India, Kochi,
India;
12Molecular and Clinical Sciences Institute, St. George’s,
University of London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK,
London, United Kingdom;
13Innovative medical research center,
Mashhad branch, Islamic Azad University, Mashhad, Iran, Mashhad,
Iran; 14Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Queen Square
Institute of Neurology, London, UK, London, United Kingdom; 15Dr.
John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA, Miami,
United
States;
16Department
of
Medical
Genetics,
Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, Bergen, Norway; 17Division of
Evolution, Infection and Genomics, School of Biological Sciences,
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester,
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic variants in KITLG, a key
player in melanocyte proliferation and pigment production, cause
autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss, Waardenburg
syndrome type 2 and familial progressive hyperpigmentation and
familial progressive hyper- and hypopigmentation. We expand
this spectrum to include a recessive disorder presenting with a
hypomelanosis spectrum with or without hearing impairment.
Methods: We characterized the largest case series with biallelic
KITLG variants identiﬁed through precision phenotyping, multiple
sequencing approaches and extensive networking.
Results: We expand the KITLG-related hypomelanosis spec-
trum to include different patterns of distal depigmentation,
partial depigmentation resembling Tietz albinism-deafness syn-
drome and complete depigmentation reminiscent of oculocu-
taneous albinism. We speculate that loss-of-function KITLG
variants cause oculocutaneous albinism while those with possi-
ble residual function cause Waardenburg syndrome type 2 or
albinism-deafness syndrome.
Conclusion: We expand the understanding of the mode of
inheritance of Waardenburg syndrome type 2 to include auto-
somal recessive transmission. This work deﬁnes KITLG as a new
molecular cause of autosomal recessive albinism-deafness syn-
drome and oculocutaneous albinism.
References:.
Grants: Funding was provided by the Bio-CARe Woman Sci-
entist Award, Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science
and Technology, Government of India (grant no. BT/Bio-CARe/07/
9889/2013–14) (SSL and KMG), the John T. and Winifred M. Hay-
ward Foundation (to MT), and the German Research Foundation
Collaborative Research Center 889 (BV).
Conﬂict of Interest: Katta Girisha Founding director of Suma
Genomics Pvt.
Ltd.,
Barbara
Vona: None
declared,
Daniel
Schwartzbaum: None declared, Alejandro A. Rodriguez: None
declared, Solange S. Lewis: None declared, Mehran Beiraghi
Toosi:
None
declared,
Periyasamy
Radhakrishnan
Scientist
and Laboratory Director. Suma Genomics Private Limited, Nazım
Bozan: None declared, Ramazan Akın: None declared, Moham-
mad
Doosti:
None
declared,
Ramachandran
Manju:
None
declared,
Duygu
Duman:
None
declared,
Claire
J.
Sineni:
None declared, Sheela Nampoothiri: None declared, Ehsan
Ghayoor
Karimiani:
None
declared,
Henry
Houlden:
None
declared, Guney Bademci: None declared, Mustafa Tekin: None
declared, Soﬁa Douzgou HOUGE: None declared, Reza Mar-
ooﬁan: None declared.
P03.014.C Dysregulated microRNA in skin epidermis
contributes to small ﬁber neuropathy pathophysiology
Mirna Andelic1;2, Erika Salvi1, Margherita Marchi1, Daniele Cazzato3,
Stefania Marcuzzo4, Daniele Cartelli5, Janneke Hoeijmakers2, Cath-
arina Faber2, Raffaella Lombardi6, Giuseppe Lauria Pinter5;7
1Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico “Carlo Besta”, Neuroalgology
Unit, Milano, Italy;
2School of Mental Health and Neuroscience,
Maastricht University, Department of Neurology, Maastricht, Nether-
lands;
3Fondazione
IRCCS
Istituto
Neurologico
“Carlo
Besta”,
Neurophysiology Unit, Milano, Italy;
4Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico “Carlo Besta”, Neuroimmunology and Neuromuscular
Diseases Unit, Milano, Italy; 1Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico
“Carlo Besta”, Neuroalgology Unit, Milano, Italy; 1Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Neurologico “Carlo Besta”, Neuroalgology Unit, Milano, Italy;
7Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of Medical Biotechnol-
ogy and Translational Medicine, Milano, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Small ﬁber neuropathy (SFN) is a multi-
factorial condition deﬁned by impairment of peripheral nerve ﬁbres
often accompanied by pain. Lately, miRNAs are emerging as key ﬁne-
tuning regulators in complex neurodegenerative diseases, particularly
associated with regulation of axon guidance and cross-talk. Our study
aimed to investigate miRNA proﬁles of painful SFN patients and their
possible correlation with underlying disease mechanisms.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
369
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: Total RNA was isolated from skin epidermis.
Unbiased miRNA expression quantiﬁcation was performed using
microﬂuidic array containing 754 miRNAs. Discovery and valida-
tion proﬁling involved 23 painful SFN patients and 15 healthy
controls. We applied the relative threshold (Crt) method and
NormFinder software was used to determine the optimal nor-
malization gene. Results were expressed as relative quantiﬁcation
with healthy control tissue as reference group. Moreover, target
and functional enrichment analyses were performed to explore
possibly affected biological processes and molecular functions.
Results: We identiﬁed a miRNA as signiﬁcantly downregulated
in SFN patients respect to controls. The validation revealed an
optimal diagnostic accuracy (AUC = 96.4%). Functional enrich-
ment analysis showed involvement in biological processes and
pathways that are closely related to nociception signaling cascade
triggering various cellular responses and pain-related channel
trafﬁcking. Speciﬁcally, miRNA’s effect on target genes such as
TRPV1, MAPK14, NTRK1 dysregulates inﬂammatory mediator reg-
ulation of TRP channels, cAMP and MAPK signaling pathways.
Conclusion: Our proof-of-concept study of miRNA proﬁling of
human epidermis provided novel hints on epigenetic regulation of
epidermal innervation and chronic neuropathic pain, while adding
value to the dysfunction of axon-cell network in the contest of SFN.
References: None.
Grants: PAIN-Net (grant no. 721841).
Conﬂict of Interest: Mirna Andelic: None declared, Erika Salvi:
None declared, Margherita Marchi: None declared, Daniele Caz-
zato: None declared, Stefania Marcuzzo: None declared, Daniele
Cartelli: None declared, Janneke Hoeijmakers: None declared,
Catharina Faber Grants from European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme Marie Sklodowska-Curie
grant for PAIN-Net, Molecule-to-man pain network (grant no.
721841), grants from Grifols and Lamepro for a trial on IVIg in
small ﬁbre neuropathy, Grants from Prinses Beatrix Spierfonds,
Steering committtees/advisory board for studies in small ﬁbre
neuropathy of Biogen/Convergence, Vertex, Lilly and OliPass,
outside the submitted work., Raffaella Lombardi: None declared,
Giuseppe Lauria Pinter: None declared.
P03.016.A Achromatopsia: The curious case of triallelic
inheritance
Ratna Tripathy1, Rainer König1, Mojgan Drasdo1, Nuha Al Zaabi2
1Bioscientia
Institute
for
Medical
Diagnostics
GmbH,
Human
Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany;
2College of Medicine and Health
Science, United Arab Emirates University, Department of Pediatric, Al
Ain, United Arab Emirates.
Background/Objectives: Achromatopsia is a retinal disorder
characterized by reduced or complete loss of color vision, reduced
visual acuity, pendular nystagmus, and congenital photophobia
(1). Affected patients show limited or complete lack of cone
photoreceptor activity, caused in the majority of cases by biallelic
variants in the CNGA3 or CNGB3 genes (2, 3), encoding CNG
channel subunits that heterodimerize to mediate membrane
hyperpolarization in response to light. A recent study by Burkard
et al (2018) looked into the controversial p.R403Q hypomorphic
variant in CNGB3, which in a biallelic state shows high variability,
reduced penetrance, with high frequency in unaffected indivi-
duals. The authors showed that a trialleic co-occurrence of het-
erozygous pathogenic CNGA3 variant, in individuals with the
homozygous CNGB3 p.R403Q variant, contributes to an exacer-
bated retinopathy (3).
Methods: We present a four-year-old boy with visual defects
since age of six months, preferring dark or dimly lit rooms, showing
nystagmus, and defective color discrimination. We performed
whole exome sequencing to identify a possible genetic cause.
Results: The analysis lead to the identiﬁcation of a new triallelic
combination of the homozygous hypomorphic CNGB3 p.R403Q
variant with the monoallelic known pathogenic CNGA3 variant
p.A323P, which can explain the phenotype of the boy.
Conclusion: Along with broadening the list of triallelic variant
combinations for achromatopsia, with this case, we aim to raise
awareness in the clinical genetics community of the presence and
importance of digenic-triallelic inheritance, which has implications
for diagnosis, prognosis, and genetic counseling.
References: PMID: (1) 20301591, (2) 9662398, (3) 10958649, (4)
30418171.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.017.B Retinitis pigmentosa caused by mutations in the
ush2a gene: clinical trend comparison and genotype-
phenotype correlations
Luigi Monti1;2, Nicole Balducci3, Antonio Ciardella3, Sara Taor-
mina1;2, Soﬁa Cesarini1;2, Giulia Olivucci1;2, Elena Luppi1;2, Mina
Grippa1, Enrico Ambrosini1, Giovanna Sartor1, Francesca Monta-
nari1;2, Giulia Severi2, Sara Miccoli2, Claudio Graziano4, Cesare Rossi2,
Daniela Turchetti1;2, Marco seri1;2
1Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,
Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Bologna, Italy;
2IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria di Bologna, U.O. Genetica
Medica, Bologna, Italy;
3Ophtalmology Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi
Hospital, University of Bologna, Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences, Bologna, Italy;
4AUSL della Romagna, U.O.
Genetica Medica, Cesena, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Mutations in the USH2A gene are
responsible for both isolated and syndromic (Usher syndrome
type IIa) retinitis pigmentosa. We studied genotype-phenotype
correlations and compared clinical prognosis between Usher
syndrome type IIa and non-syndromic RP.
Methods: Clinical data, visual acuity (VA), visual ﬁeld (VF), ret-
inal imaging and electrophysiologic features were extracted from
medical records of patients affected, with non-syndromic RP (n 6)
and Usher syndrome type IIa (n 25). The patients were carriers of
at least one pathogenetic USH2A mutation and they underwent to
counseling in the medical genetics unit of University of Bologna
(2003-2021). Statistical analysis has been performed (Student’s t-
test, Chi-squared test, Fisher’s exact test).
Results: Participant groups had similar distributions of gen-
der and similar ethnicity. Usher syndrome type IIa patients
demonstrated earlier symptoms than non-syndromic RP (14 vs
27 years, P = 0,04), earlier clinical diagnosis (24 vs 43 years,
P = 0,01), earlier molecular diagnosis (37 vs 58 years, P = 0,04)
and earlier visual impairment (40 vs 56 years for VF, 45 vs 68
years for VA, P = 0,02). Truncating mutations are associated with
earlier symptoms (13 vs 20) and with syndromic phenotype.
We found novel variants (4 missense, 2 frameshift, 1 splicing) in
both groups and suspected pathogenicity has been raised for
other (n 3).
Conclusion: Patients with Usher syndrome type IIa have
symptoms and severe visual impairment earlier than non-
syndromic RP. One truncating mutation seems to predispose to
worse clinical trend, two truncating mutations in USH2A is asso-
ciated with syndromic phenotype.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
370
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P03.019.D Functional characterization of potential
spliceogenics PAX6 variants in aniridia combining minigenes
and long-reads sequencing
Carolina
Ruiz-Sanchez1,
Alejandra
Tamayo1;2,
Gonzalo
Nuñez
Moreno1;2;3, Tudor Pastae1, Carmen Ayuso1;2, Pablo Mínguez1;2;3,
Marta Corton1;2
1Health Research Institute - Fundación Jiménez Díaz (IIS-FJD),
Genetics Department, Madrid, Spain; 2Center for Biomedical Network
Research on Rare Diseases - CIBERER, Madrid, Spain;
3Health
Research Institute - Fundación Jiménez Díaz (IIS-FJD), Bioinformatic
Unit, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: PAX6 is a highly-conserved transcription
factor involved in ocular development. Several aniridia-associated
exonic and intronic variants located in the hotspot exon 6 of PAX6
generate aberrant splicing patterns involving 5 cryptic donors. We
aim to functionally study the potential spliceogenic effect of other
variants affecting this exon.
Methods: Potential spliceogenic variants located in exon 6
were selected from our aniridia cohort or mutational databases
based on in silico splicing analysis and further characterized
in vitro. Then, a minigene was generated from the pSPL3 vector
containing the full sequences between exons 5 to 7 of the PAX6
gene. Directed mutagenesis was used to introduce the selected
variants in the PAX6_exon 5-7 minigene. Mutated and wild-type
minigenes were transfected in HEK293 cells and total RNA was
extracted. Finally, the splicing isoforms were analysed by RT-PCR
using Oxford Nanopore long-read and Sanger sequencing.
Results: After an in silico analysis of 120 PAX6 variants, 6 of
them showing potential splicing effects were analysed using
in vitro minigenes. Four showed aberrant splicing patterns,
including intronic retentions and partial or total exon skipping.
Two of them, initially considered variants of uncertain signiﬁcance,
were reclassiﬁed as probably pathogenic.
Conclusion: In silico and in vitro minigenes assays are a good
approach to test the involvement of different genetic variants in the
splicing process. In addition, this functional characterization is useful
to deepen into the pathogenicity of aniridia-causing variants.
References:.
Grants: Spanish Health Institute Carlos III (PI17_01164 and
PI20_00851) and Spanish National Organization of the Blind (ONCE).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.020.A Rare missense variants and deletions in α-tectorin
may drive a change in tectorial membrane stability in familial
Meniere’s disease
Pablo Román-Naranjo1;2;3;4, Alberto M. Parra-Perez1;3;4, Alba Escalera-
Balsera1;2;3, Andres Soto-Varela5;6, Alvaro Gallego-Martinez1;2;3, Ismael
Aran7, Nicolas Perez-Fernandez8, David Baechinger9, Andreas H.
Eckhard9, Rocio Gonzalez-Aguado10, Lidia Frejo1;2;3, Antonio Lopez-
Escamez1;2;3;4
1GENYO. Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research: Pﬁzer /
University of Granada / Andalusian Regional Government, Otology &
Neurotology Group CTS 495, Department of Genomic Medicine,
Granada, Spain;
2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en
Enfermedades Raras, CIBERER, Sensorineural Pathology Programme,
Madrid, Spain; 3Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs.Granada,
Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Universidad de Granada,
Department of Otolaryngology, Granada, Spain;
4University of
Granada, Division of Otolaryngology, Department of Surgery,
Granada, Spain; 5Complexo Hospitalario Universitario, Division of
Otoneurology, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain;
6Universidade de Santiago de Compostela,
Department of Surgery and Medical-Surgical Specialities, Santiago
de Compostela, Spain;
7Complexo Hospitalario de Pontevedra,
Department of Otolaryngology, Pontevedra, Spain; 8Clinica Universi-
dad de Navarra, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Madrid, Spain;
9University Hospital Zurich, Department of Otorhinolaryngology,
Head and Neck Surgery, Zurich, Switzerland; 10Hospital Universitario
Marques de Valdecilla, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Santan-
der, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Meniere’s disease (MD) is an inner ear
disease characterized by low frequency sensorineural hearing loss
associated with vertigo and aural fullness. Familial aggregation
has been found in 9-10% of MD patients showing, mostly, an
autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance.
Nevertheless, other inheritance patterns have been proposed,
such as recessive and digenic inheritance involving rare variants in
OTOG and MYO7A genes. This study aimed to search for relevant
genes not previously linked to MD.
Methods: Exome sequencing was performed in 99 individuals
diagnosed with MD. Candidate variants were classiﬁed according
to the ACMG/AMP guidelines and their effects were evaluated by
protein modeling. Audiometric evaluations were retrieved, and a
case report was made of each family to assess genotype-
phenotype correlations.
Results: TECTA gene was highlighted as candidate for four
multicase MD families and two additional families with one MD
patient and relatives with partial syndromes. Four rare missense
variants and two frameshift deletions were found in hetero-
zygous state segregating the MD phenotype. These variants
could affect the stability of α-tectorin based on the predicted
protein model.
Conclusion: Several MD families were identiﬁed carrying rare
variants and deletions in the TECTA gene, which encodes one of
the main proteins of the tectorial membrane (TM). The TM is an
extracellular matrix localized over the sensory epithelium med-
iating the mechanical stimulation of cochlear hair cells. Modiﬁca-
tions on the TM stability and the micromechanics involved in the
sound-evoked motion of stereocilia may drive MD.
References:.
Grants: H2020-SC1-2019-848261 (UNITI), CECEU PY20-00303
(EPIMEN), European Regional Funds B-CTS-68-UGR20 (M3N-OMIC)
and the Schmieder-Bohrisch Foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.021.B Investigation of gene variations in inherited retinal
dystrophies via next-generation sequencing
Şenol Demir1, esra arslan ateş2, bilgen bilge geçkinli1, ahmet arman1
1marmara university school of medicine, medical genetics, istanbul,
Turkey; 2marmara university pendik training and research hospital,
genetic diseases diagnosis center, istanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Inherited Retinal dystrophies(IRD) are a
group of progressive degenerative disorders of the retina with
clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Common presentations include
night blindness and peripheral vision abnormalities. Among ret-
inal dystrophies most common sub-type is retinitis pigmentosa. In
addition Leber congenital amaurosis, Usher syndrome, Stargardt
disease are the other rare subtypes. This study aims to determine
the effectiveness of the multigene panel testing in retinal dys-
trophies and to reveal genetic etiology of the IRD patients.
Methods: Thirty probands having retinal dystrophy with spe-
ciﬁc examination ﬁndings were included in this study. After eva-
luation of clinical and family histories, probands were screened
using a custom designed retinal disorders panel including 140
genes via next-generation sequencing (NGS). The family members
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
371
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
of the probands carrying pathogenic variations were screened via
Sanger Sequencing.
Results: Among 30 cases, 14 were born to consanguineous
parents and IRD family history was reported in 8 cases. Onset of
the ages of the probands ranged between 3 months-48 years.We
detected in 21 (70%) probands biallelic pathogenic variations,
which of 5 were novel, in CYP4V2(n = 4), ABCA4(n = 4), USH2A
(n = 3), RDH12 (n = 2), PROM1, ABHD12,TTC8, BBS1, RP1, CRB1,
MAK, GRK1 genes.
Conclusion: The detection of 5 novel pathogenic variations has
contributed to the expansion of the mutation spectrum. Also, the
diagnosis of 70% of the patients supports that the NGS panel is an
effective diagnostic method in IRD. Deﬁning molecular etiology of
IRD is important in terms of screening at risk family members and
giving appropriate genetic counseling for preimplantation genetic
diagnosis opportunities.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.022.C Cryptic chromosomal rearrangements disrupting
the PAX6 locus identiﬁed in aniridia cases based on long-read
whole-genome sequencing
Alejandra Damián1;2, Gonzalo Nuñez Moreno1;2;3, Claire Jubin4,
Alejandra Tamayo1;2, Marta Rodriguez de Alba1;2, Jean-François
Deleuze4, Pablo Mínguez1;2;3, Carmen Ayuso1;2, Marta Corton1;2
1Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital Health Research
Institute (IIS-FJD)-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Depart-
ment of Genetics & Genomics, Madrid, Spain; 2Centre for Biomedical
Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain;
3Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital Health Research
Institute (IIS-FJD)-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Bioinfor-
matic Unit, Madrid, Spain; 4National Center of Human Genomics
Research (CNRGH) Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France.
Background/Objectives: Haploinsufﬁciency of the transcription
factor PAX6 is the main responsible for aniridia, a disorder mainly
characterized by iris and foveal hypoplasia. 11p13 microdele-
tions altering PAX6 or its 3’ regulatory regions were found in
~25% of aniridia patients. However, only few complex chromo-
somal rearrangements have been involved in aniridia which can
be attributed to the inherent difﬁculty of detecting structural
variants (SVs) involving repetitive/low-complexity regions. Long-
read sequencing (LRS) techniques may overcome these limita-
tions. Our objective was to assess the presence of cryptic SVs in
our “PAX6-negative” cases suffering from aniridia using LRS
approaches.
Methods: Long-read genome sequencing was conducted in
two previously unsolved sporadic patients of our aniridia cohort
after short-reads sequencing and CGH arrays. Libraries were pre-
pared using high-weight molecular DNA following Oxford Nano-
pore Technologies protocols and sequenced at 30x on a
PromethION. Detected SVs were validated using Sanger sequen-
cing and/or FISH analysis.
Results: LRS analysis revealed a 4.9 Mb inversion in 11p13
involving the intron 7 of the canonical PAX6 isoform disrupting its
linear structure. In a second patient, LRS revealed breakpoints for
an apparently balanced translocation t(6;11) that affects the cen-
tromeric region on 6p11.1 and the downstream regulatory region
(DRR) of PAX6 on the 11p13 region.
Conclusion: We ﬁrst report two cases of cryptic balanced
chromosomal SVs disrupting directly PAX6 or its regulatory ele-
ments. We demonstrate here how LRS can provide insight into
hidden sources of variation.
References:.
Grants: H2020 EasiGenomics program (PID10291), PI20_00851
and Spanish National Organization of the Blind (ONCE).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.023.D Burden of rare coding variants in connexin genes
involving Meniere Disease
Alba
Escalera-Balsera1;2;3,
Pablo
Román-Naranjo1;2;3;4,
Marisa
Flook1;2;3, Paula Robles-Bolivar1;3, Alberto M. Parra-Perez1;3;4, Alvaro
Gallego-Martinez1;2;3, Jose Antonio Lopez-Escamez1;2;3;4
1Otology & Neurotology Group CTS495, GENYO, Centre for Genomics
and Oncological Research, Pﬁzer University of Granada Andalusian
Regional Government, Department of Genomic Medicine, Granada,
Spain; 2Sensorineural Pathology Programme, Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red en Enfermedades Raras, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain;
3Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs.GRANADA, Hospital Uni-
versitario Virgen de las Nieves, Universidad de Granada, Department of
Otolaryngology, Granada, Spain; 4Division of Otolaryngology, Uni-
versity of Granada, Department of Surgery, Granada, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Gap junctions consist of connexin pro-
teins forming hemichannels in the sensory epithelia. Mutations in
GJB2, GJB6 and GJB3 cause genetic deafness and hearing loss.
Meniere Disease (MD) is an inner ear disorder characterized by
episodic vertigo and associated with sensorineural hearing loss,
tinnitus and/or aural fullness.
Methods: Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) was performed in
313 patients with MD. Gene Burden Analysis was done ﬁltering the
variants by a Minor Allele Frequency<0.05 and using gnomAD
database as reference population. Connexin genes expressed in
the mammalian inner ear were retrieved for further analyses. The
pathogenicity of each variant was estimated and the protein
stability changes were studied using PremPS and DynaMut2.
Results: An enrichment of rare missense variants was found in
2 genes expressed in the inner ear: GJB5 (OR = 29.53) and GJD2
(OR = 13.77). GJA10 presents an enrichment in rare stop-gain
variants (OR = 2.28). GJB5 (OR = 103.28) and GJC2 are enriched in
rare frameshift, inframe insertion and deletion variants (OR =
22.73). Functional analysis revealed biological processes involved
in gap junctions, cell communication or transmembrane transport.
Conclusion: We have found a burden of rare missense variants,
stop-gain variants and indels in patients with MD in 4 genes: GJB5
(CX31.1), GJD2 (CX36), GJA10 (CX62) and GJC2 (CX47). Further stu-
dies, including segregation analysis, are needed to conﬁrm the
role of these variants in MD.
References:.
Grants: European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innova-
tion Programme, Grant Agreement Number 848261.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.024.A PACS1-related syndrome: three cases with
colobomas further delineating the phenotype
Simon Boussion1;2, Thomas Smol2;3, Perrine Brunelle2;3, Mélanie
Rama3, Séverine Drunat4, Pierre Blanc5, Françoise Ernould6, Sabine
Defoort7, Vasily Smirnov7, Jamal Ghoumid1;2, Florence Petit1;2,
Catherine Vincent-Delorme1
1CHU Lille, Clinique de Génétique Médicale “Guy Fontaine”, Lille,
France; 2Univ.Lille, RADEME, EA7364, Lille, France; 3CHU Lille, Institut
de Génétique Médicale, Lille, France; 4Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP,
Service de Génétique Médicale, Paris, France;
5Seqoia-FMG2025,
Laboratoire de biologie médicale multisites, Paris, France; 6CHU Lille,
Service d’Ophtalmologie, Lille, France; 7CHU Lille, Explorations de la
Vision et de Neuro-Ophtalomologie, Lille, France.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
372
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: PACS1 gene (MIM #607492) is related to
Schuurs-Hoeijmakers syndrome (MIM #615009), a condition char-
acterized by the association of intellectual disability, recognizable
facial appearance, and a wide range of congenital abnormalities.
Here we report 3 patients with coloboma and developmental
delay due to the recurrent PACS1 missense variant.
Methods: After clinical examination, NGS sequencing was
performed (WGS for patient 1, gene panels for patients 2 and 3).
Results: The ﬁrst proband is a 3 years old male presenting with
congenital bilateral iris, chorioretinal and papillary coloboma,
ectopia lentis, hypotonia, cryptorchidism. The second proband is a
9 years old female presenting with congenital bilateral chorior-
etinal coloboma, microphthalmia, right iris coloboma, hypotonia.
The third proband is a 6 years old male presenting with congenital
iris and chorioretinal coloboma, hypotonia, cryptorchidism. Cere-
bral MRI showed diffuse cortical atrophy, dysplastic corpus callo-
sum, vermis hypoplasia. All 3 patients evolved towards global
developmental delay. The same pathogenic de novo hetero-
zygous variant in PACS1 (c.607C>G, p.(Arg203Trp)) has been
identiﬁed in all 3 patients.
Conclusion: PACS1 encodes the Phosphofurin Acid Cluster
Sorting Protein 1, a trans-golgi-membrane trafﬁc regulator. So far,
61 patients with Schuurs-Hoeijmakers syndrome have been pub-
lished, carrying the p.(Arg203Trp) heterozygous missense or rarely
the p.(Arg203Gln) missense in PACS1. Intellectual disability is
constant but congenital malformations are variable. Iris and
chorioretinal colobomas are rare (9% and 13% respectively). Our
patients present with coloboma at the forefront of the clinical
description, further delineating the phenotype and highlighting
the variable expressivity of this condition. PACS1 implication
should be considered in patients with congenital coloboma.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.025.B Longitudinal follow-up of Slovenian patients with
RPGR associated retinitis pigmentosa
Vlasta Hadalin1, Maša Marija Buscarino1, Jana Sajovic1, Marija
Volk2, Martina Jarc-Vidmar1, Manca Tekavcic Pompe1, Marko
Hawlina1, Ana Fakin1
1Eye
Hospital
University
Medical
Centre
Ljubljana,
Ljubljana,
Slovenia; 2Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical
Centre Ljubljana, Slovenia, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: To report the variant spectrum and
longitudinal follow-up data of Slovenian RPGR-retinitis pigmen-
tosa (RP) patients.
Methods: The study included 13 subjects (7 males) from 6
RPGR-RP families. Age at onset, logMAR best corrected visual
acuity (BCVA), visual ﬁelds and fundus autoﬂuorescence (FAF)
were analysed. Eyes with milder disease were taken for the ana-
lysis to best reﬂect the functional impairment.
Results:
Genetic
analysis
revealed
two
reported
(c.1217dupT(p.Ser407fs),
c.2236_2237delGA(p.Glu746ArgfsTer23))
and four novel variants (c.457G>A(p.Ala153Thr), c.1245+704_1415-
2286del, c.G1978G>A(p.Glu660Ter), c.2340_2341delAG(p.Arg780-
SerfsTer54)). Median age at onset in males was 3 years (0-18). At ﬁrst
exam at median age of 16 years (0-61), median BCVA was 0.3 log-
MAR (0.15-2.0). All had constricted visual ﬁelds and hyperauto-
ﬂuorescent rings on FAF. At the last follow-up at median age of 39
years (4-71), median BCVA was 0.48 logMAR (0.0-2.30). FAF showed
ring constriction, transitioning to patch in 2/7 cases. Median age at
onset in females was 22.5 years (5-66). At ﬁrst exam at median age
of 40 years (6-66), median BCVA was 0.0 logMAR (0.0-0.30). One had
normal/near-normal autoﬂuorescence, 2 radial pattern, 1 focal
pigmentary retinopathy and 2 male phenotype with partial AF ring.
At the last follow-up at median age of 45 years (10-66), median
BCVA was 0.10 logMAR (0.0-0.20). In 2 cases with male phenotype
partial AF ring constricted.
Conclusion: RPGR-RP-causing variants in Slovenian cohort
include 4/6 (67 %) novel variants, suggesting a distinct genetic
background of the RPGR alleles in Slovenian population. Long-
itudinal follow-up of RPGR-RP patients showed disease progres-
sion in all males and 5/6 (83%) females.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.026.C Impaired bestrophin channel activity in a iPSC-RPE
model of Best Vitelliform Macular dystrophy (BVMD) from an
early onset patient carrying the P77S dominant mutation
Arnau Navinés-Ferrer1;2, Sheila Ruiz-Nogales1;2, Pilar Mendez1;2,
Esther Pomares1;2
1Fundació de Recerca de l’Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular, Departa-
ment de Genetica, Barcelona, Spain; 2Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular,
IMO Grupo Miranza, Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives:
Best
Vitelliform
Macular
dystrophy
(BVMD) is the most prevalent of the distinctive retinal dystrophies
caused by mutations in BEST1 gene. This gene, which encodes for a
homopentameric calcium-activated ion channel, is crucial for the
homeostasis and function of the retinal pigment epithelia (RPE), the
cell type responsible for recycling the visual pigments generated by
photoreceptor cells. In BVMD patients, mutations in this gene
induce functional problems in the RPE cell layer with an accumu-
lation of lipofucsin that evolves into cell death and loss of sight.
Methods: In this work, we employ iPSC-RPE cells derived from
a patient with the p.Pro77Ser dominant mutation to determine
the correlation between this mutation and the ocular phenotype.
To this purpose, gene and protein expression and localization are
evaluated in iPSC-RPE cells along with functional assays like pha-
gocytosis and chloride ion entrance. The apoptotic proﬁle is
determined through several markers as well as TUNEL assay.
Results: Our cell model shows no differences in gene expres-
sion, protein expression/localization or phagocytosis capacity. There
are no signs of apoptosis but the iPSC-RPE presents an increased
chloride entrance that would explain the patient’s phenotype.
Conclusion:
The
molecular
mechanisms
underlying
this
dominant mutation from a BVMD patient widen the under-
standing of this pathology and open the door for a better diag-
nosis and prognosis of the disease.
References: Domingo-Prim et al., Generation of Best disease-
derived induced pluripotent stem cell line (FRIMOi006-A) carrying
a novel dominant mutation in BEST1 gene.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P03.030.C Targeted retinal dystrophy panel as a reliable tool
for genetic diagnostics of retinal disorders in Polish patients
Ewa Matczyńska1;2, Anna Wąsowska1;2, Marta Beć1, Przemysław
Łyszkiewicz1, Robert Szymańczak1, Ewa Suchecka1, Monika Jur-
kowska1, Maria Jędrzejowska1, Sławomir Teper2, Anna Boguszewska-
Chachulska1
1Genomed S.A., Warsaw, Poland; 2Medical University of Silesia, Chair
and Clinical Dept. of Ophthalmology, Zabrze, Poland.
Background/Objectives: A developed targeted panel approach
for genetic diagnosis of inherited retinal dystrophies (IRD) was
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
373
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
successfully implemented in the routine diagnostics of Polish IRD
patients. Here we present the results for the second part of Polish
patients group subjected to IRD genetic diagnosis using the
established method.
Methods: A group of Polish patients with clinical symptoms
of retinal dystrophies (N = 182) were subjected to an NGS ana-
lysis using a custom panel capturing coding regions of 270 IRD
genes (RetNet), developed with the Roche NimbleGen SeqCap
EZ. Bioinformatic analysis was performed with the GATKv4 and
CoNVaDING (for CNV analysis), using the GRCh38 reference
genome. Variant analysis and interpretation were completed
according to ACMG guidelines using the in-house variant inter-
pretation tool - BroVar.
Results: The NGS data presented a satisfactory level of QC
data metrics with mean target coverage in a range of 200-250x,
heterozygote SNP calling sensitivity level above 0.997, and
fraction of target bases covered >20x between 0.996 and 0.997).
An IRD diagnosis was conﬁrmed in 109 cases (59.8%). In several
cases, the disease conﬁrmation was enabled by CNVs or deep
intronic variants calls. In further 29 patients only one patho-
genic/likely pathogenic variant was identiﬁed in the context of
AR disease.
Conclusion: The results of the application of the existing tar-
geted retinal dystrophy panel are promising. Further increase in
the method sensitivity is expected in the second version of the
approach, which would broaden the targeted gene list, include
more deep intronic clinvar variants and target the mtDNA using
additional spike-in.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ewa Matczyńska Employed in Genomed
S.A., Anna Wąsowska Employed in Genomed S.A., Marta Beć
Employed in Genomed S.A., Przemysław Łyszkiewicz Employed in
Genomed S.A., Robert Szymańczak Employed in Genomed S.A.,
Ewa Suchecka Employed in Genomed S.A., Monika Jurkowska
Employed in Genomed S.A., Maria Jędrzejowska Employed in
Genomed
S.A.,
Sławomir
Teper:
None
declared,
Anna
Boguszewska-Chachulska Genomed S.A. CEO.
P04
INTERNAL ORGANS & ENDOCRINOLOGY (LUNG, KIDNEY,
LIVER, GASTROINTESTINAL)
P04.001.D Genetic polymorphisms and susceptibility to
urinary tract infection among paediatric and adult
populations: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Jiakun Yu1, Kristina Allen-Brady2, Romana Cuffolo3, Felice Sorren-
tino4, John Chua5, Harmeet Sidhu6, Marianne Koch7, Philippe
Violette8, Rufus Cartwright1
1Imperial College London, School of Medicine, London, United
Kingdom;
2The Univeristy of Utah, Utah, United States;
3Stoke
Mandeville Hospital, Aylesbury, United Kingdom; 4Department of
Obstetrics & Gynecology-Policlinico Riuniti Foggia, Foggia, Italy;
5Frimley Health NHS Foundation Trust, Firmley, United Kingdom;
6LONDON NORTH WEST UNIVERSITY HEALTHCARE NHS TRUST,
London, United Kingdom; 7Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
United Kingdom; 8McMaster University, Ontario, Canada.
Background/Objectives: The lifetime risk of UTI is known to be
highly heritable. Associations have also been observed across the
life course from paediatric UTI to recurrent UTI in adulthood,
suggesting lifelong susceptibility factors. We conducted a sys-
tematic review to identify all genetic polymorphisms tested for an
association with UTI in children and adults, and to assess their
strength, consistency, and risk of bias.
Methods: PubMed, HuGE Navigator and Embase were searched
from 01/Jan/2005 to 01/Sep/2021, using a combination of genetic
and phenotype key words. Fixed and random effects meta-analyses
were conducted using co-dominant models of inheritance in metan.
The interim Venice criteria were used to assess their credibility.
Results: 1283 studies were screened, with 42 included in the
analysis (18 adult papers and 24 paediatric papers). All possible
meta-analyses summarised in Table 1 (paediatric samples) and
Table 2 (adult samples). These meta-analyses demonstrated sig-
niﬁcant pooled associations for paediatric UTI with variation in ACE,
CXCR1, IL8, TGF, TLR4, VDR and VEGF. These meta-analyses also
demonstrated a signiﬁcant pooled association for adult UTI with
variation in ACE and CXCR1. All signiﬁcant pooled associations were
graded as providing at most weak epidemiological credibility.
.
Conclusion: This systematic review provides a current synth-
esis of the known genetic architecture of UTI in childhood and
adulthood,
and
should
provide
important
information
for
researchers planning or analysing future genetic association stu-
dies. Although, overall, the credibility of pooled associations was
weak, the consistency of ﬁndings for rs2234671(CXCR1) in both
populations suggests a key role in UTI pathogenesis.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.002.A KIF12 variants and disturbed hepatocyte polarity in
children with a phenotypic spectrum of cholestatic liver
disease
Amelie Stalke1;2, Malte Sgodda3, Tobias Cantz3, Britta Skawran1,
Elke Lainka4, Björn Hartleben5, Ulrich Baumann2, Eva-Doreen Pﬁster2
1Hannover Medical School, Department of Human Genetics, Hann-
over, Germany; 2Hannover Medical School, Pediatric Gastroenterology
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
374
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
and Hepatology, Hannover, Germany; 3Hannover Medical School,
Translational Hepatology and Stem Cell Biology, Department of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, REBIRTH-Center for
Translational Regenerative Medicine, Hannover, Germany; 4University
Children’s Hospital Essen, Department for Pediatric Nephrology,
Gastroenterology, Endocrinology and Transplant Medicine, Essen,
Germany; 5Hannover Medical School, Institute of Pathology, Hannover,
Germany.
Background/Objectives: Recently, KIF12 has been identiﬁed as a
cholestasis-associated candidate gene(1,2). As KIF12 is a member
of a microtubule-associated motor protein family involved in
intracellular transport, KIF12-associated cholestasis is assumed to
be a result of disturbed cell polarity. We describe six cases with
likely pathogenic KIF12 variants from four unrelated families, their
different phenotypes and our investigations to study hepatocyte
polarity.
Methods: Children with familial cholestasis and a likely
pathogenic variant in the KIF12 gene were identiﬁed by exome
sequencing. Segregation was analysed by testing parents and
siblings. Immunoﬂuorescence imaging of apical markers MRP2
und BSEP, basolateral marker OATP1B1, tight junction protein ZO-
1 and KIF12 itself was performed on patient’s liver tissue sections.
Results: We detected two homozygous KIF12 variants in ﬁve
patients ((NM_138424.1) 4 patients: c.655C>T p.(Arg219*); 1
patient: c.482-4_500del p.?). Segregation analyses conﬁrmed
autosomal recessive inheritance. The patients’ clinical manifesta-
tion ranged from neonatal cholestasis with complete clinical
remission, or absent clinical symptoms to a progressive course
ending in liver transplantation. Immunoﬂuorescence imaging of
liver sections of KIF12 patients revealed an ectopic cytoplasmic
MRP2 staining. BSEP staining appeared in thickened long clus-
tered structures, the latter was detected partly also for ZO-1. KIF12
and OATP1B1 staining was widely unremarkable.
Conclusion: Our results strongly support pathogenic KIF12
variants as cause for familial cholestatic liver disease and suggest
that these variants result in functional cell polarity disturbance.
Due to its wide clinical presentation with even asymptomatic
cases, KIF12-associated cholestatic liver diseases are potentially
underdiagnosed.
References: 1.PMID: 30250217; 2.PMID:30976738.
Grants: DFG:#433387263; BMBF (HiChol):#01GM1904B.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.003.B Elevated polygenic burden for brain haemorrhage
related traits in kidney donors
Kane Collins1;2;3, Edmund Gilbert1;2, Peter Conlon1;4, Gianpiero
Cavalleri1;2, Elhussein Elhassan4, Graham Lord5
1Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, School of Pharmacy and
Biomolecular Sciences, Dublin, Ireland; 2SFI FutureNeuro Research
centre, Dublin, Ireland; 3SFI Centre for research training in Genomics
Data Science, Galway, Ireland; 4Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland;
5The University of Manchester, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and
Health, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Brain haemorrhage (BH) is a common
cause of death among kidney donors, but little research has
been done to investigate polygenic risk scores (PRSs) for BH and
related traits in kidney donors. A PRS estimates the cumulative
effect of common genetic variation on an individual’s disease
status.
Methods: We had 2,122 genotyped donor-recipient pairs from
across the UK and Ireland and 5,519 ancestry matched controls.
We calculated PRSs for stroke, Intracranial Aneurysm (IA) and
hypertension. We compared PRSs between the donors who died
of intracranial haemorrhage (DDICH) (1,303 individuals) and con-
trols. We then used PRS to predict case/control status.
Results: PRS for stroke explained the greatest amount of var-
iance in case/control status between DDICH and controls (6.7%, p:
8.1 x 10-63), with still signiﬁcant values for the other PRSs (IA: 5.3%,
hypertension: 0.24%). A null model using just sex and principal
components to predict case/control status achieved an AUC of
0.63, while models using just hypertension, IA and stroke PRSs
achieved AUCs of 0.54, 0.61 and 0.67 respectively. A combined
model with all the PRSs and covariates achieved an AUC of 0.74.
Conclusion: These observations support the hypothesis that
DDICH carry an increased burden for traits related to BH. PRSs can
play a part in being able to distinguish DDICH from the general
population. These ﬁndings could have utility in testing relatives of
DDICH to determine if they share the same risk for ICH.
References:.
Grants: Science Foundation Ireland grant number 18/CRT/
6214.
Conﬂict of Interest: Kane Collins Full time, Science Foundation
Ireland Grant number 18/CRT/6214.
UKIRTC was supported by grants awarded from the Wellcome
Trust
(090355/A/09/Z,
090355/B/09/Z
and
088849/Z/09/Z,
“WTCCC3”), Edmund Gilbert Full time, Peter Conlon Full time,
Gianpiero Cavalleri Full time, Elhussein Elhassan Full time, Graham
Lord Full time.
P04.005.D Genetic complexity of congenital hypopituitarism:
oligogenic inheritance may explain the variable expression
and incomplete penetrance of deleterious GLI2 variants in
congenital hypopituitarism
Francisco Javier Rodríguez-Contreras1, Puriﬁcación Ros Pérez2, Fe
Amalia García Santiago3, Elena Vallespín4;5, Angela Del Pozo Maté5;6,
Mario Solís6, Isabel Gonzalez-Casado7, Karen E. Heath5;8, Angel
Campos-Barros5;9
1Centro de Salud Galapagar, Pediatrics, Galapagar, Madrid, Spain;
2Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Pediatrics, Majadahonda,
MADRID, Spain; 3Institute of Medical & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM),
IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Prenatal Genetics & Fetal
Medicine, Madrid, Spain; 4Institute of Medical &Molecular Genetics
(INGEMM), IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Molecular Ophthal-
mogenetics, Madrid, Spain; 5Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), CIBER
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) U753, Madrid, Spain; 6Institute of
Medical & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), IdiPAZ, Hospital Universi-
tario La Paz, Bioinformatics, Madrid, Spain; 7Hospital Universitaio La
Paz, Pediatric Endocrinology, Madrid, Spain; 8Institute of Medical &
Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain; 9Institute of Medical & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM),
IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Molecular Endocrinology
Division, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic GLI2 variants are implicated
in the etiology of the broad clinical spectrum of congenital
hypopituitarism (CHYP), showing a highly variable expressivity and
incomplete penetrance.
Aims: Genotype-phenotype correlations in a cohort of patients
with CHYP and deleterious GLI2 variants.
Methods: Subjects: 114 patients with CHYP (n = 72), septo-
optic dysplasia (SOD; n = 33) or isolated GH deﬁciency (n = 9).
Molecular analysis: Targeted NGS (HYPOPIT_V3 panel) of 310
genes implicated in the etiology of CHYP and hypothalamic-
pituitary development.
Results: Deleterious GLI2 variants were identiﬁed in 11/114
(9.6%), all of them with CHYP. These included 4 truncating variants
[p.(Arg1226*),
p.(Leu709Trpfs*15),
p.(Ser267*)
and
p.(Ser859-
Profs*53)] (ACMG: pathogenic). All had pituitary hypoplasia, 75%
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
375
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
had ectopic neurohypophysis, and those with truncating variants
had both conditions. 10/11 were GH and TSH deﬁcient and 8/11
were also ACTH deﬁcient. Other associated traits observed inclu-
ded
postaxial
polydactyly,
ogival
palate,
bulbous
nose,
nephrourological dyspasia, and holoprosencephaly, with midfacial
hypoplasia and hypotelorism being the most pervasive among the
studied relatives (n = 25) of the 11 probands. All of them (11/11)
also presented with a burden of additional deleterious variants in
multiple genes involved in the regulation of pituitary develop-
ment signaling pathways (SHH, BMP/TGFb, FGF, WNT, NOTCH,
NODAL).
Conclusion: All probands with GLI2 variants presented dele-
terious variants in other genes involved in pituitary development
and function, suggesting the possibility of a complex multifactorial
genetic component.
This may explain the highly variable expressivity and incom-
plete penetrance observed, which seems determined by the
burden of additional inherited variants in other relevant genes.
References:.
Grants: PI18/00402, ISCIII, to A.C.B.
Conﬂict of Interest: Francisco Javier Rodríguez-Contreras:
None declared, Puriﬁcación Ros Pérez: None declared, Fe Amalia
García Santiago: None declared, Elena Vallespín: None declared,
Angela Del Pozo Maté: None declared, Mario Solís: None declared,
Isabel Gonzalez-Casado: None declared, Karen E. Heath: None
declared, Angel Campos-Barros Research grant as PI received from
ISCIII (PI18/00402).
P04.006.A Clinical and genetic features in two patients
carrying PAX2 variants
Deimante Brazdziunaite1, Ilona Rudminiene2, Migle Gudynaite2,
Rasa Strupaite3, Gabija Mazur2, Marius Miglinas4, Algirdas Utkus1
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania;
2Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania;
3Center of Eye diseases, Clinic of Ear, Nose, Throat and Eye diseases,
Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University,
Vilnius, Lithuania;
4Center of Nephrology, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic variants in PAX2 have been
associated with a spectrum of kidney and eye disorders, including
isolated renal hypoplasia, papillorenal syndrome (renal coloboma
syndrome) and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
Methods: We report clinical, pathology and genetic data of 2
unrelated adult male patients carrying previously reported het-
erozygous mutations in PAX2 gene.
Results: 27-years-old patient 1 referred to clinical geneticist
with suspicion of hereditary cystic kidney disease. At 11 years, he
was diagnosed with bilateral multicystic kidney dysplasia, now
presenting with proteinuria and chronic kidney disease (CKD
3 stage). Patient’s father, grandmother had unspeciﬁed kidney
disease. A kidney-focused NGS panel analysis identiﬁed hetero-
zygous nonsense pathogenic c.685C>T, p.(Arg229*) variant in
PAX2.
Later
ocular
evaluation
revealed
bilateral
optic
disc
dysplasia.
36-years-old patient 2 referred to clinical geneticist after his
daughter was diagnosed with bilateral kidney hypoplasia, caused
by heterozygous missense pathogenic c.250G>A, p.(Gly84Ser)
variant in PAX2. Patient presented with persistent proteinuria,
observed since 20 years of age, CKD 3 stage. Two kidney biopsies
were performed since that time: the ﬁrst one showing signs of IgA
nephropathy, the second one – focal segmental glomerulo-
sclerosis. Sanger sequencing analysis conﬁrmed known familial
mutation in PAX2 gene, ocular evaluation revealed optic disc pits.
Conclusion: Hereditary kidney diseases are rare and still
underdiagnosed due to variable expressivity and wide range of
clinical manifestations even within single families. Reported patients
demonstrate this variability and expands knowledge about dis-
orders, caused by PAX2 mutations, reported in literature. It also
suggests that ocular evaluation should be performed for a better
clinical diagnosis, when kidney pathology is present.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.007.B CD55-deﬁciency in Jews of Bukharan descent is
caused by the Cromer Dr(a-) blood type variant
Alina Kurolap1, David Hagin2;3, Tal Freund2, Sigal Fishman3;4, Noa
Henig1, Eli Brazowski5, Josepha Yeshaya6, Tova Naiman1, elon
pras3;7, Jacob N. Ablin3;8, Hagit Baris Feldman1;3
1Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, The Genetics Institute and
Genomics Center, Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel; 2Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical
Center, Allergy and Clinical Immunology Unit, Department of
Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel; 3Tel Aviv University, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tell Aviv, Israel; 4Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, The
Gastroenterology Institute, Tel Aviv, Israel; 5Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical
Center, The Institute of Pathology, Tel Aviv, Israel; 6American Medical
Genetics LaboratoryHerzliya, Herzliya, Israel; 7Sheba Medical Center,
The Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Ramat Gan, Israel;
8Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Internal Medicine H, Tel Aviv,
Israel.
Background/Objectives: The complement system regulator CD55
was initially found to carry the Cromer blood group antigens, and
its complete loss-of-function was recently revealed to cause a
severe monogenic syndrome characterized by protein-losing
enteropathy and susceptibility to venous thrombosis.
Methods: Patient 1 was diagnosed using ﬂow cytometry and
targeted Sanger sequencing. Patient 2 was diagnosed by unre-
lated exome sequencing. Additional testing on Patient 1 sam-
ples included RNA analysis and B-cell immunophenotyping.
A population screen was performed using enzymatic restriction
method.
Results: Both patients are Bukharan Jewish (BJ) and presented
with
CD55-deﬁciency
of
variable
severity;
testing
revealed
homozygosity for the CD55:c.596C>T;p.Ser199Leu variant. RNA
analysis conﬁrmed that this missense variant causes aberrant
splicing and deletion of 44bp in exon 5, leading to premature
termination and low CD55 protein levels. Furthermore, Patient 1
exhibited a mildly abnormal B-cell immunophenotyping proﬁle.
The variant is highly prevalent in BJs (carrier frequency: 1:17).
Conclusion: The CD55 p.Ser199Leu variant is known as the
Cromer Dr(a-) genotype, yet this is the ﬁrst report in terms of
CD55-deﬁciency.
The
phenotypic
variability,
ranging
from
abdominal pain on a high-fat diet to the full CD55-deﬁciency
phenotype, is likely related to modiﬁers affecting the proportion
of the variant that is able to escape aberrant splicing. The high
frequency in the BJ population suggests that many similar patients
are un- or mis-diagnosed. Establishing the diagnosis of CD55-
deﬁciency in a timely manner may have critical effects on patient
management and quality-of-life, since treatment with the com-
plement inhibitor eculizumab is highly effective in ameliorating
disease manifestations.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Alina Kurolap Patent with Alexion Phar-
maceuticals
on
eculizumab
treatment
protocol
for
CD55-
deﬁciency (WO/2018/217638), which does not include any royal-
ties., David Hagin: None declared, Tal Freund: None declared, Sigal
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
376
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Fishman: None declared, Noa Henig: None declared, Eli Brazowski:
None declared, Josepha Yeshaya: None declared, Tova Naiman:
None declared, elon pras: None declared, Jacob N. Ablin: None
declared, Hagit Baris Feldman Patent with Alexion Pharmaceu-
ticals on eculizumab treatment protocol for CD55-deﬁciency (WO/
2018/217638), which does not include any royalties, Advisory
board member for the C5-inhibitor Pozelimab clinical trial by
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.
P04.008.C Asthma exacerbations in the UK Biobank: a
Genome-Wide Association Study
Ahmed Edris Mohamed1;2, Katherine Fawcett2, Ian P. Hall3, Martin
D Tobin2, Lies Lahousse1
1Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ghent University, Department of
Bioanalysis,
Ghent,
Belgium;
2University
of
Leicester,
Genetic
Epidemiology Group, Department of Health Sciences, Leicester,
United Kingdom; 3University of Nottingham, Faculty of Medicine &
Health Sciences, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Asthma exacerbations affect morbidity
and mortality of the disease, and increase the burden to both
patient and healthcare system. We aimed to assess the effects of
genetic variants on asthma exacerbation risk in UK Biobank par-
ticipants with asthma.
Methods: Within the UK Biobank study, individuals with
asthma were identiﬁed as those self-reporting doctor-diagnosed
asthma, or with a code for asthma in hospital inpatient and/or
General Practitioners (GP) records. Exacerbations were identiﬁed
as either asthma–related hospitalization, GP record of asthma
exacerbation, or an Oral Corticosteroid (OCS) burst prescription.
A logistic regression model adjusted for age, sex, and smoking
status was used to assess the association between genome-wide
imputed SNPs and risk of an asthma exacerbation.
Results: We identiﬁed 11,604 individuals with asthma with at
least one exacerbation (cases), and 37,890 individuals with
asthma with no recorded exacerbations (controls). While no
variants reached genome wide signiﬁcance (p < 5x10-8), two
SNPs (rs1449836 (chr14, YWHAQP1/TUBBP3) and rs34643691
(chr15; intergenic variant)) were suggestively associated with
asthma exacerbation risk (P < 1x10-7). Rs1449836 has been pre-
viously associated with response to metformin, and is located in
a genetic region previously associated with inﬂammatory auto-
immune diseases.
Conclusion: We identiﬁed two SNPs suggestively associated
with risk of asthma exacerbations. Further research and replication
of these ﬁndings may be needed to ascertain genetic variants’ role
in the severity of asthma and its clinical presentation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ahmed Edris Mohamed: None declared,
Katherine Fawcett: None declared, Ian P. Hall Research collabora-
tions with GSK, Boehringer Ingelheim and Orion outside of sub-
mitted work., Martin D Tobin GSK and Orion for collaborative
research projects outside of the submitted work., Lies Lahousse:
None declared.
P04.009.D A screening of the genetic causes of Familial
Pulmonary Fibrosis in patients from the Canary Islands (Spain)
Eva Tosco-Herrera1, Aitana Alonso-Gonzalez1;2, Ibrahim Véliz-Flores3,
Felipe Rodríguez de-Castro3, Rosario Perona4, Beatriz Fernández-Vara4,
Desirée Alemán-Segura3, Angel Rodríguez-León3, Antonio Iñigo-
Campos5, Luis A. Rubio-Rodríguez5, Alejandro Mendoza-Alvarez1, JOSÉ
MIGUEL LORENZO-SALAZAR5, Rafaela González-Montelongo5, Carlos
Flores1;5;6
1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria,
Universidad
de
La
Laguna,
Santa
Cruz
de
Tenerife,
Spain;
2Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago, Spain; 3Servicio
de Neumología Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria “Dr Negrín”,
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain; 4Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas CSIC-UAM, Spain, Spain; 5Genomics Division, Instituto
Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Santa Cruz de Tenerife,
Spain;
6CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Pulmonary Fibrosis (PF) is a rare pro-
gressive scarring lung disease with poor prognosis. A signiﬁcant
role of rare and common genetic variation underlying its etiology
is known. We relied on whole-exome sequencing (WES) to screen
the genetic causes of familial PF (FPF) from Canary Islands
patients.
Methods: We recruited 54 subjects from 11 families. WES was
obtained using a HiSeq4000 Illumina system and small germline
variant identiﬁed with BWA-GATK v3.8 against the GRCh37/hg19
reference. Relative telomere length (TL) was measured by quan-
titative PCR and severe reduction denoted when length was <10th
percentile compared to age-matched controls. Rare (AF<1%) non-
synonymous exonic and splicing variants from known PF or
interstitial lung diseases genes were considered for manual
review.
Results: Initial analysis excluded common genetic variants
among affected individuals. A total of 22 rare variants from 15
genes were prioritized and classiﬁed for pathogenicity according
to ACMG recommendations. Pathogenicity was supported only for
a variant in NAF1 gene (NM_138386.3:c.1104T>G) found in one
family and the TL of the index case was in the 1st percentile. The
variant was absent from gnomAD, local population controls
(n = 920), and from healthy relatives (n = 2).
Conclusion: Our results evidence the complexity of this dis-
ease and the challenges of variant interpretation. Further studies
are ongoing examining the remaining of the WES data and
additional families.
References:.
Grants: Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (RTC-2017-6471-1;
AEI/FEDER, UE); ITER agreement (OA17/008); Gobierno de Canarias
&
Fondo
Social
Europeo
“Canarias
Avanza
con
Europa”
(TESIS2021010046), Ministerio de Universidades (modality Mar-
garita Salas).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.010.A The value of genomic testing for the kidney patient
and for pre-transplantation donor evaluation
Georgia Christopoulou1, Stavroula Samara1, Aikaterini Oikonomaki1,
Vassilis
Filiopoulos2, Stathis
Tsiakas2, Christina Melexopoulou2,
Ioannis Boletis2, Pantelis Constantoulakis1
1Genotypos M.S.A., Athens, Greece;
2National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, School of Medicine, “Laikon” University Hospital,
Nephrology Department and Renal Transplant Unit, Athens, Greece.
Background/Objectives: The spectrum of kidney genetic disease
is extremely broad and phenotypes are variable and overlapping,
involving extra-kidney manifestations in some disease groups.
Elucidating potential genetic causes is challenging due to the
number of genes involved and unknown disease mechanisms.
Exome sequencing (ES) may unveil the genetic background in
patients, allowing deﬁnitive diagnosis and/or timely interventions
while it may provide valuable information for kidney-donor
candidates.
Methods: Thirty-three individuals (kidney-patients/donor-can-
didates) were referred to our lab, by a single reference clinic for ES,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
377
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
performed on DNA extracted from peripheral blood: libraries
preparation was performed with Clinical Exome (Sophia Genetics)
or Whole Exome (Twist Bioscience) and sequenced on Illumina
NextSeq-550 (Illumina). Bioinformatics analyses were conducted
by SOPHiA DDM® bioinformatics pipelines.
Results: Pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were detected
in 19 patients: 10 in collagen-genes, 5 PKD1 and 1 INF2 conﬁrming
suspected diagnosis i.e., Alport syndrome, autosomal dominant
polycystic kidney disease and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis,
respectively. All cases were consistent with biopsy, imaging and
urine/blood tests. Copy number variation analysis revealed a
NPHP1 homozygous deletion (nephronophthisis) and a COL4A5
heterozygous deletion (Alport syndrome). In 9 cases results were
negative either failing to elucidate genetic disease or clearing
genetic burden for 5 kidney-donor candidates. In 5 cases, variants
of unknown signiﬁcance were detected giving eligibility to 1
donor, rejecting 2.
Conclusion: ES permitted timely, accurate diagnosis con-
ﬁrmation for kidney-patients allowing appropriate intervention,
maintenance treatment or transplantation programming. Further,
it provided valuable information for donor-candidates regarding
their and the recipient’s best interest. Incorporating exome
sequencing in Nephrology may lead to higher-quality healthcare.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict
of
Interest:
Georgia
Christopoulou
Full
time
employee:
Genotypos
M.S.A.,
Stavroula
Samara
Full
time
employee: Genotypos M.S.A., Aikaterini Oikonomaki Full time
employee: Genotypos M.S.A., Vassilis Filiopoulos: None declared,
Stathis Tsiakas: None declared, Christina Melexopoulou: None
declared, Ioannis Boletis: None declared, Pantelis Constantoulakis
Full time employee: Genotypos M.S.A.
P04.011.B Novel pathogenic ALG8 variants and evidence for
somatic loss of heterozygosity in 542 autosomal dominant
polycystic liver disease patients
Melissa M. Boerrigter1, Rene H.M. te Morsche1, Anja Geerts2, Anne
Hoorens3, J.P.H. Drenth1
1Radboud University Medical Center, Department of Gastroenterol-
ogy and Hepatology, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
2Ghent University
Hospital, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ghent,
Belgium;
3Ghent University Hospital, Department of Pathology,
Ghent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Autosomal dominant polycystic liver
disease (ADPLD) is caused by pathogenic variants in at least 6
different genes. ALG8 has been linked to ADPLD in 5 isolated
cases. We aim to identify novel pathogenic variants in ALG8 by
different next-generation sequencing techniques and to conﬁrm
loss of heterozygosity in liver cyst tissue in ADPLD patients.
Methods: We performed whole exome sequencing in a cohort
of 60 genetically undiagnosed ADPLD patients and targeted
sequencing of all ALG8 exons using MiniSeq in 482 genetically
undiagnosed ADPLD patients. We performed expression analysis
by immunohistochemistry on liver cyst tissue with a hepatocyte-
speciﬁc, a cholangiocyte-speciﬁc, and an ALG8 antibody.
Results: We screened 542 ADPLD patients and identiﬁed 8
heterozygous variants in ALG8 (nonsense n = 4, frameshift n = 2,
splice site n = 1, missense n = 1) in 16 ADPLD patients. A 19-
member family included 4 patients with severe ADPLD who
shared the novel ALG8 variant c.160C>T p.(Gln54*). This variant
was also present in 7 asymptomatic family members with 0-2 liver
cysts. The 7 other variants were found in 1 small family and
10 singletons. All patients had mild to severe ADPLD and 0-6
kidney cyst that did not affect renal functioning. We found
evidence for somatic loss of heterozygosity, as ALG8 immunor-
eactivity was absent in the cyst lining and cyst bordering hepa-
tocytes of a patient carrying the c.1501delG variant.
Conclusion: Our results are consistent with a pathogenic role
of ALG8 in ADPLD. Loss of heterozygosity of ALG8 in liver cyst
lining is a key event in the pathogenesis of ADPLD.
References: -.
Grants: -.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.012.C Clinical exome sequencing as a valuable diagnostic
tool for glomerulopathies: a cohort study
Angelo Corso Faini1, Valeria Bracciamà1, Silvia Kalantari1, Giulia
Margherita Brach del Prever1, Martina Callegari1, Licia Peruzzi2,
Roberta Fenoglio3, Dario Roccatello3;4, Tiziana Vaisitti1, Antonio
Amoroso1, Silvia Deaglio1
1Transplant Regional Center-Piedmont, Immunogenetics and Trans-
plant Biology, AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza, Department of
Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy; 2Nephrology Dialysis
and Transplantation, Regina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Turin,
Italy; 3SCU Nephrology and Dialysis (ERKnet member)-CMID, Center
of Research of Immunopathology and Rare Diseases, San Giovanni
Hospital, Turin, Italy; 4Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences,
University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
Background/Objectives:
The
diagnosis
of
glomerulopathies
remains a hard task, as different diseases can present with similar
characteristics and bioptic evidence is often non-speciﬁc. In this
complex scenario, genetic analyses may play an important role.
Methods: Adult and pediatric patients were recruited from
multiple centers of the Piedmont region (Italy), exploiting a pre-
existing transplantation network. When referred to our center,
patients had already undergone nephrological counselling and
suspicion of glomerulopathy was raised. Clinical exome sequen-
cing (CES) was performed, and analysis was restricted to a panel of
genes associated with glomerulopathies.
Results: CES was performed on a diagnostic cohort of 166
patients. Alport syndrome scored the highest percentage of
solved cases (59%), followed by glomerulonephritis (35%), non-
nephrotic proteinuria (29%), FSGS (12%) and nephrotic proteinuria
(19%). Of note, 54% of clinically undiagnosed glomerulopathies
were solved. Overall, results show a diagnostic rate of 36% which
is in line with published data1.
Conclusion: Our data conﬁrm genetic analysis is a valuable
diagnostic resource when a precise glomerulopathy is suspected
and – unexpectedly – also when the clinical suspicion is less
deﬁned. Analysis by CES i) shows a high diagnostic rate; ii) allows a
precise diagnosis avoiding invasive procedures (biopsy); iii) pre-
vents ineffective treatment; iv) speeds up the enrollment in
transplantation awaiting lists and v) allows to determine recur-
rence risk, post-transplantation prognosis and living-donor elig-
ibility. Taken together, our results strongly support genetic
analysis as a ﬁrst-line diagnostic tool in kidney disease.
References: 1. Connaughton et. al, Kidney Int., 2019,95(4):914-
928.
Grants: Ministero dell’Istruzione, Progetto strategico di Eccel-
lenza Dipartimentale #D15D18000410001.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.013.D Clinical exome sequencing (CES) as a tool for
genetic diagnosis of Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney
Disease (ADPKD)
Valeria Bracciamà1, Angelo Corso Faini1, Silvia Kalantari1, Giulia
Margherita Brach del Prever1, Martina Callegari1, Licia Peruzzi2,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
378
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Roberta Fenoglio3, Dario Roccatello3;4, Silvia Deaglio1, Antonio
Amoroso1, Tiziana Vaisitti1
1Transplant Regional Center-Piedmont, Immunogenetics and Trans-
plant Biology, AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza & Department of
Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy; 2Nephrology Dialysis
and Transplantation, Regina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Turin,
Turin, Italy; 3SCU Nephrology and Dialysis (ERKnet member)-CMID,
Center of Research of Immunopathology and Rare Diseases, San
Giovanni Hospital, Turin, Turin, Italy; 4Department of Clinical and
Biological Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease (ADPKD #173900, #613095, #600666) is the most common
inherited nephropathy and is predominantly caused by mutations
in PKD1 and PKD2. Genetic testing of PKD1 is challenging for the
presence of homologous pseudogenes with genetic and allelic
heterogeneity. Due to phenocopies, diagnostic criteria are unable
to provide a deﬁnitive diagnosis. We propose NGS-based strategy
for genetic diagnosis of patients with ADPKD.
Methods: CES was performed in 121 subjects with clinical
suspicion of PKD. Patients were recruited by the hospitals of the
Piedmont region (Italy). PKD1 and PKD2 were analyzed and for
negative cases additional cystogenes were investigated. Identiﬁed
variants were segregated and validated by Sanger sequencing.
Results: Causative variants in PKD1 and PKD2 were identiﬁed in
78 patients, 56% of them presenting family history. 31 cases
resulted negative or unconclusive. Most of the diagnostic genetic
variants affected PKD1 (78%) and PKD2 (9%). 20 patients had more
than one variant in the same gene or the 2 different cystogenes.
Furthermore, we identiﬁed 12 possible alternative diagnoses
among which 5 patients with biallelic mutations in PKHD1 and two
patients with variants in TSC1 and DSTYK, respectively.
Conclusion: Identiﬁcation of the speciﬁc molecular basis of a
disease is essential to avoid genetic misdiagnosis, unnecessary
and invasive therapies and for early detection of renal and
extrarenal comorbidities. The broad phenotypic and genetic het-
erogeneity of cystic kidney diseases make CES a time- and cost-
efﬁcient diagnostic approach for these indications.
References: Cornec-Le Gall, et al., Lancet. 2019.
Grants: Ministero dell’Istruzione, Progetto strategico di Eccel-
lenza Dipartimentale #D15D18000410001.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.014.A Transcriptomic landscape of pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumours
Olesja Rogoza1, Helvijs Niedra1, Rihards Saksis1, Aija Gerina-Berzina2,
Soﬁja Vilisova2, Julie Earl1, Ignacio Ruz Caracuel3, Bozena Smolkova4,
Georgina Kolnikova5, Peter Dubovan6, Peter Makovicky4, Eythimios
Koniaris7, Agapi Kataki8, Vita Rovite1
1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Research Group of
Molecular and Functional Genomics, Riga, Latvia; 2Pauls Stradins
Clinical University Hospital, Oncology Clinic, Riga, Latvia; 3Ramón y
Cajal Health Research Institute (IRYCIS), Ramón y Cajal University
Hopsital,
Madrid,
Spain;
4Biomedical
Research
Center,
Slovak
Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia; 5National Cancer Institute,
Department of Pathology, Bratislava, Slovakia;
6National Cancer
Institute, Department of Surgical Oncology of Slovak Medical
University, Bratislava, Slovakia; 7Hippokration General, Hospital of
Athens, Department of Pathology, Athens, Greece; 8Hippokration
General, Hospital of Athens, First Department of Propaedeutic
Surgery, Athens, Greece.
Background/Objectives:
Pancreatic
neuroendocrine
tumours
(PanNETs) arise from the neuroendocrine cells in pancreatic islets
and account for approximately 12% of digestive system NETs, with
an overall 5-year survival rate of 85%. PanNETs are heterogeneous
lesions, classiﬁed according to cell proliferation rate and differ-
entiation grade. In this study, we aimed to create a well-deﬁned
cohort of PanNETs and characterize the transcriptomic landscape
on a molecular level to discover novel markers and therapeutic
strategies for better tumour management options.
Methods: PanNET FFPE samples used in this study were
obtained from different consortium members from Greece, Slo-
vakia, and Spain. RNA was then extracted from FFPE samples and
libraries prepared. Transcriptome sequencing was then carried out
on DNBSEQ-G400 platform (MGI) to identify differentially expres-
sed genes (DEGs) in tumour and non-tumour tissues.
Results: We have sequenced transcriptomes of 72 PanNET
FFPE samples and detected different transcriptome proﬁles that
distinguish tumour and non-tumour tissues of the pancreas. In
total, we were able to ﬁnd 265 DEGs. Among these were insulin
regulation pathway genes and other markers related to tumour
pathogenesis pathways, cell proliferation, and invasion, for
example, ISL1, SYCN, KLK1, CUZD1 and others.
Conclusion: The results of the PanNET transcriptomic land-
scape highlight the heterogeneity of PanNETs, which is dependent
on various tumour characteristics. Transcriptome analysis is valu-
able for understanding PanNET tumour biology, which will help to
discover new markers and develop new therapeutic approaches
for PanNETs.
References:.
Grants:
European
Regional
Development
Fund
project
“Establishing an algorithm for the early diagnosis and follow-up of
patients with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NExT)”, grant
number 1.1.1.5/ERANET/20/03.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.015.B Four years’ experience in cystic ﬁbrosis neonatal
screening in Luxembourg: 2018-2021
Marizela Kulisic1, Dominique Bourgeois1, Anna-Maria Charatsi2;3,
Meriem Mastouri2;3, Caroline Eisele2, Flore Nzuangue3, Isabel De La
Fuente Garcia2, Barbara KLINK1, Patricia Borde4
1Laboratoire national de santé (LNS), National Center of Genetics,
Dudelange, Luxembourg; 2Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg (CHL),
Paediatric Department, Kannerklinik, Luxembourg, Luxembourg;
3Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg (CHL), Pneumology Department,
Luxembourg, Luxembourg; 4Laboratoire national de santé (LNS),
Department of Medical Biology, Dudelange, Luxembourg.
Background/Objectives: Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) newborn screening
(NBS) was introduced in Luxembourg in January 2018. Biochemical
and genetic testing is centralized at the Laboratoire national de
santé (LNS) and we present the results of the ﬁrst 4 years.
Methods: Immunoreactive Trypsinogen (IRT) is assessed for all
newborns (app 7000/year) on day 3 of life (D3). In case of high IRT-
D3 (≥60ng/mL), CFTR genetic testing using the CF-EU2v1 (Your-
gene Health) kit to detect 50 frequent CFTR pathogenic variants is
performed, and a second IRT test on day 21 (D21). Patients
screened positive (one or two pathogenic variant detected and/or
IRT-D21 ≥40ng/mL) are referred to the Paediatric National CF
centre for sweat testing and further multi-disciplinary clinical fol-
low up. In case of positive sweat test without conﬁrmed molecular
diagnosis, complete CFTR gene sequencing is performed.
Results: IRT-D3 level was above the threshold in 0.6% new-
borns in 2018, 0.97% in 2019, 1.38% in 2020 and 1.32% in 2021. CF
was diagnosed in 10 infants (n = 3; n = 4; n = 2; n = 1 respec-
tively). The positive predictive value (PPV) was 15%. All patients
had at least one CFTR pathogenic variant detected by the kit (55%
of them were F508del). In four cases, the second rare CF-causing
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
379
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
variant was detected by sequencing (4382delA, E664X, I502T,
S489L). The incidence of CF was 1/2454 live births.
Conclusion: CF NBS in Luxembourg is in line with current
recommendations for standards of CF care. To improve the PPV,
we will adapt the protocol and consider cases with no mutation
and IRT-D3<100ng/ml as screened negative.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.017.D Genetic revision of the Hungarian cystic ﬁbrosis
registry
Anna Deák1, Katalin Koczok1, Beáta Bessenyei1, László Madar1,
Zsuzsanna Szűcs1, Gabriella Csorba1, Istvan Balogh1;2
1University of Debrecen,
Department of Laboratory
Medicine,
Division of Clinical Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary;
2University of
Debrecen, Department of Human Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary.
Background/Objectives:.
In order to develop a diagnostic strategy for cystic ﬁbrosis and
to facilitate mutation-speciﬁc treatments, the genetic revision of
the Hungarian cystic ﬁbrosis Registry was performed.
Methods: 528 patients’ data and samples were used for the
revision. First we reviewed the patients’ existing genetic ﬁndings.
Wherever necessary, a comprehensive three-level genetic analysis
of the CFTR gene was done.
Results: According to our study, of the 528 patients present in
the Registry 395 (74.8%) had two pathogenic CFTR mutation. We
completed and corrected 94 patients’ previously incomplete
genetic status. 73 different pathogenic variants were detected, in
which 6 aberrations were not previously reported. The ﬁve most
common mutations were: F508del (68.3%); CFTRdele2,3 (3.7%);
G542X (3.2%); 2184insA (2.7%); W1282X (2.3%). Based on geno-
type and age, 192 patients (36.4%) are eligible for the available
lumacaftor-ivacaftor
combination
therapy.
Soon
ivacaftor-
tezacafor-elexacaftor combination will be an option for 364
(68.9%) patients.
Conclusion: Due to the revision, we could identify the patients
who can beneﬁt from mutation-speciﬁc drugs instead of symp-
tomatic therapy. In addition, the obtained data have been used to
map the Hungarian distribution of mutations in the CFTR gene,
which will help to develop a diagnostic strategy.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.018.A Gene expression proﬁling through Whole
Transcriptome Sequencing predicts novel mechanisms in
Hirschsprung Associated Enterocolitis
Francesca
Rosamilia1,
FRANCESCA
CALCATERRA2;3,
Francesco
Caroli4, Marta Rusmini5, Alice Grossi5, Alessio Pini Prato6, domenico
mavilio2;3, Isabella Ceccherini5, francesca lantieri1
1University of Genoa, Health Science Department (DISSAL), Biosta-
tistics Unit, Genoa, Italy; 2University of Milan, Department of Medical
Biotechnologies and Translational Medicine, Milan, Italy;
3IRCCS
Humanitas Research Hospital, Laboratory of Clinical and Experi-
mental Immunology, Milan, Italy; 4IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini,
University of Genoa, UOC Genetica Medica, Genoa, Italy; 5IRCCS
Istituto Giannina Gaslini,
UOSD, Laboratory
of Genetics and
Genomics of Rare Diseases, Genoa, Italy; 6Azienda Ospedaliera SS
Antonio E Biagio E Cesare Arrigo, Umberto Bosio Center for Digestive
Diseases, The Children Hospital, Alessandria, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Hirschsprung (HSCR) associated Enter-
ocolitis (HAEC) is a common life‐threatening complication in HSCR,
likely due to a gut immune system impairment. We have recently
identiﬁed a HAEC susceptibility variant in the Oncostatin‐M
receptor gene, also implied in Inﬂammatory Bowel Diseases (IBDs),
through Whole‐Exome Sequencing on HSCR and HAEC patients.
This study also conﬁrmed the immune system impairment in
HAEC, however no data is available on possibly different gene
expression in HAEC versus HSCR patients.
Methods: We have carried out a transcriptome analysis on
Intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) derived from biopsies of the gut
of 6 HAEC patients, 6 HSCR-only patients and 4 paediatric patients
affected by neither Hirschsprung nor inﬂammatory related dis-
eases. For the sequencing, the Ion AmpliSeq Transcriptome
Human Gene Expression Kit was used.
Results: We found a clear clustering between the three dif-
ferent groups of patients. Several transcripts were nominally sig-
niﬁcantly over- and under-expressed in HAEC vs HSCR-only
patients, among which several transcripts also involved in IBDs
pathogenesis. Very preliminary results showed an enrichment in
immune and inﬂammatory pathways in the HAEC group, although
further analyses are still in progress.
Conclusion: We have identiﬁed several differentially expressed
genes between HSCR patients that had developed HAEC vs those
without HAEC occurrence, including genes or pathways already
affected in several intestinal pathological conditions. This could
lead to the identiﬁcation of key factors in the HAEC pathogenesis,
possibly shared with other intestinal inﬂammatory diseases.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.019.B Association between arterial hypertension and
liver-related outcomes using polygenic risk scores – a
population-based study
Fredrik Åberg1, Katri Kantojärvi2, Ville Tapio Männistö3, Anna But4,
Veikko Salomaa2, Teemu Niiranen2;5, Martti Färkkilä6, Panu Luukko-
nen7;8;9, Satu Männistö2, Annamari Lundqvist2, Markus Perola2, Antti
Jula2
1Helsinki University Hospital, Transplantation and Liver Surgery
Clinic, Helsinki, Finland; 2Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare,
Helsinki,
Finland;
3University
of
Eastern
Finland
and
Kuopio
University Hospital, Department of Medicine, Kuopio, Finland;
4Helsinki University Hospital, Abdominal Center, Helsinki, Finland;
5Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, Department of
Medicine, Turku, Finland; 6Helsinki University and Helsinki University
Hospital, Abdominal Center, Helsinki, Finland; 7Minerva Foundation
Institute for Medical Research, Helsinki, Finland;
8University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Department of Medicine,
Helsinki, Finland; 9Yale University, Department of Internal Medicine,
New Haven, United States.
Background/Objectives: Arterial hypertension (HTA) is associated
with liver disease, but the causality remains unclear. We investi-
gated whether genetic predisposition to HTA is associated with
incident liver disease in the general population, and if anti-
hypertensive medication modiﬁes this association.
Methods: Participants of the Finnish health-examination sur-
veys, FINRISK 1992-2012 and Health 2000, were followed for
incident liver-related outcomes (ICD-10 codes: K70-K77, C22.0) and
initiation of antihypertensive medication through the linkage with
national registers. Polygenic risk scores (PRS) for systolic (SBP) and
diastolic (DBP) blood pressure were derived from GWAS where
over 1 million people were studied (Evangelou et al. 2018). PRSs
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
380
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
were calculated with PRS-CS method. Cox regression analyses
were adjusted for multiple confounders.
Results: In the fully-adjusted Cox regression models, both
measured systolic blood pressure and clinically deﬁned HTA were
associated with increased risk of liver-related outcomes. Similarly,
the PRSs for systolic and diastolic blood pressure were associated
with liver-related outcomes. Recent initiation of antihypertensive
medication was associated with reduced rates of liver-related
outcomes in persons with high genetic HTA risk.
Conclusion: HTA and a genetic predisposition for HTA are
associated with liver-related outcomes in Finnish population. New
initiation of antihypertensive medication attenuates this associa-
tion in persons with a high genetic risk for HTA.
References: Evangelou E. et al. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41588-018-0205-x.
Grants: Mary and Georg Ehrnrooth Foundation, Medicinska
Understödsföreningen Liv och Hälsa, Finska Läkaresällskapet,
Academy of Finland (#338544) and Sigrid Jusélius Foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.020.C Whole Exome Analysis to identify related genes
that predispose to the progression of Non-Alcoholic Fatty
Liver (NAFL) to Non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH)
Chiara
Catalano1,
Carla
Debernardi1,
Gian
Paolo
Caviglia1,
Elisabetta Casalone1, Chiara Rosso1, Angelo Armandi1, Alessandra
Allione1, Alessia Russo1, Elisabetta Bugianesi1, Giuseppe Matullo1;2
1University of Turin, Department of Medical Sciences, Turin, Italy;
2AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza, Medical Genetics Unit, Turin,
Italy.
Background/Objectives: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
is a chronic liver disease that includes a wide range of liver
damage ranging from simple steatosis (non-alcoholic fatty liver;
NAFL) to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)(1). The genetic
factors underlying the progression from NAFL to NASH remain
partially explored. We performed Whole Exome Sequencing (WES)
analysis to better characterize the genetic landscape of NAFL
vs NASH.
Methods: The study includes patients with biopsy-proven
NAFLD enrolled at the Liver Unit of the Department of Medical
Sciences, University of Turin. DNA samples from 157 subjects (111
NASH; 46 NAFL) were used for WES analysis (Illumina Novaseq6000).
Results: For variant analysis, we ﬁltered based on the patho-
genic/likely-pathogenic
status
according
to
ClinVar’s
clinical
annotation and Allele Frequency (Max AF) less than 5%. Pre-
liminary results on a subset of 112 patients (76 NASH; 36 NAFL)
revealed that NASH subjects have on average fewer mutations
than NAFL subjects (Wilcox test p-value = 0.014). We identiﬁed
113 genes exclusively mutated in NASH patients. The majority of
them is involved in pathways such as DNA repair, primary cilium
formation and lipid metabolism, which are all linked to the
pathophysiology of the progressive form of the disease.
Conclusion: WES analysis allows the detection of novel genetic
alterations that could be useful to identify genes and pathways
that may help in risk stratiﬁcation in patients with NAFLD.
References: 1)Armandi, et al. Insulin Resistance across the
Spectrum of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease. Metabolites 2021.
Grants: Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca
(MIUR) Project “Dipartimenti di Eccellenza 2018–2022”.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.021.D Genetics of transient congenital hypothyroidism
Nikolina Zdraveska1, Violeta Anastasovska1;2, Mirjana Kocova2
1Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje (UKIM), University
Children Hospital, Skopje, Macedonia;
2Ss. Cyril and Methodius
University in Skopje (UKIM), Skopje, Macedonia.
Background/Objectives: The etiology of transient congenital
hypothyroidism (TCH) is heterogeneous and can result from
maternal thyroid autoimmune disease, antithyroid medications,
iodine deﬁciency or iodine excess iodine in the perinatal period
or due to a genetic cause usually related to mild thyroid
dyshormonogenesis.
Methods: The study cohort included 11 patients with TCH from
unrelated families including 9 cases with normal sized eutopic
thyroid gland and 2 cases with goiter. All patients had CH without
extrathyroidal manifestations. Genomic DNA was extracted from
peripheral blood leukocytes using standard techniques, and San-
ger sequencing was used to screen for TSHR, DUOX2, and DUOXA2
genes were screened for mutations in all coding exons and exon/
intron boundaries ampliﬁed by PCR speciﬁc primers. In cases for
whom pertechnetate scan data were lacking, SLC5A5 (NIS) was
also screened.
Results: Heterozygous DUOX2 variants were identiﬁed in 18%
of the TCH cases. The p.E1546G mutation was previously reported
to be associated with transient CH. An additional novel hetero-
zygous DUOX2 variant p.D1440N was detected affecting a con-
served amino acid within the NADPH-oxidase domain in which
other pathogenic mutations have been identiﬁed, supporting the
phenotype characteristics of mild, goitrous CH. Two novel
monogenic TSHR mutations were identiﬁed p.L452P and p.E107D.
TSHR variants were associated with mild CH and normal sized
thyroid gland. In both cases TSH normalization was readily
achieved after levothyroxine initiation without requiring supra-
physiological FT4 levels.
Conclusion: Identiﬁcation of genetic causes of TCH is impor-
tant for delineation form permanent forms and possible earlier re-
evaluation, as infants with TCH usually receive thyroid hormone
replacement.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.022.A A comprehensive stepwise approach to study a
large group of Egyptian referral patients with disorders of sex
development (DSD)
Mona Mekkawy1, Inas Mazen2, Alaa Kamel1, Heba Hassan3, Mona
Essawi3, Mohamad Abdelhamid3, Ola Eid1, Amal Mahmoud1, Aya
Elaidy2, Shereen Adel1, Hala Soliman3, Ken McElreavey4, anu
bashamboo5
1National Research Centre, Human Cytogenetics, Cairo, Egypt;
2National Research Centre, Clinical genetics, Cairo, Egypt; 3National
Research Centre, Medical Molecular genetics, Cairo, Egypt; 4Institut
Pasteur, Developmental Genetics and Stem Cell Biology, Paris,
France;
5Institut Pasteur, Developmental Genetics and Stem Cell
Biology, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: Disorders of sexual development (DSD)
include conditions affecting urogenital development, associated
with atypical chromosomal, gonadal, or phenotypic sex. The
phenotype variability result from a wide range of genetic altera-
tions that may be chromosomal, CNVs, monogenic, digenic or
polygenic (Mazen et al., 2021). The study aimed to improve the
diagnostic strategy of DSD patients by applying a stepwise
approach.
Methods: The study included 599 Egyptian DSD patients, over
a period of 6 years. They underwent clinical examination, hor-
monal and imaging studies, cytogenetic and FISH analysis and
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
381
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Sanger sequencing. Detection of copy number variations (CNV)
using MLPA was applied on 35 patients. Whole exome sequencing
(WES) was applied on 18 patients and chromosomal microarray
(CMA) was conducted for ﬁve patients with associated anomalies.
This study was approved by NRC Ethics Committee.
Results: Sex chromosomal abnormalities were found in 41%,
while autosomal abnormalities were detected in 2.3%.
Sanger sequencing identiﬁed pathogenic variants in 33.7%.
MLPA identiﬁed deletions of SOX9 in two patients. The detection
rate of WES reached 66.7%, while CMA analysis revealed patho-
genic copy number variations in two patients.
Conclusion: The study reports a large number of DSD patients
from the same ethnic group with a wide cytogenetic spectrum
and characteristic mutational proﬁle with novel and rare variants.
References: Mazen I, Mekkawy M, Kamel A, et al. (2021)
Advances in genomic diagnosis of a large cohort of Egyptian
patients with disorders of sex development. Am J Med Genet A.
185:1666-1677.
Grants: STDF–IRD Joint Innovative Projects Fund, Grant/Award
Number: 4632.
In house NRC projects: 2013-2019.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.024.C NEK8-associated nephropathies: do autosomal
dominant forms exist?
Cybel Mehawej1, Eliane Choueiry1, ramy ghabril2, sima tokajian3,
Andre Megarbane1;4
1Lebanese American University, Department of Human Genetics,
Gilbert and Rose-Marie Chagoury School of Medicine, Byblos,
Lebanon; 2University of Balamand, Department of Clinical Pediatrics,
Pediatric Nephrology Unit, Saint George University Hospital, Beirut,
Lebanon; 3Lebanese American University, Department of Natural
Sciences, School of Arts and Sciences, Byblos, Lebanon; 4Institut
Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, Lebanon.
Background/Objectives: Nephronophthisis (NPHP) is a group of
autosomal recessive renal diseases characterized by a reduced
ability of the kidneys to concentrate solutes, chronic tubulointer-
stitial nephritis and cystic kidney disease. It represents the most
common genetic cause of childhood renal failure. To date, around
20 different genes, encoding primary cilia proteins, have been
linked to NPHP. These contribute to one third of cases with NPHP
while the majority of patients remain molecularly undiagnosed.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was carried out on
a two-year-old Lebanese boy with infantile NPHP characterized by
multicystic kidney dysplasia, kidney insufﬁciency and enlarged
kidneys in addition to chronic anemia. The candidate variant,
detected by WES, was then tested in the patient and his parents
by Sanger sequencing. Copy number variations analysis (CNV) was
subsequently performed in the proband.
Results: Our studies enabled the detection of a heterozygous
de-novo variant in NEK8 (NM_178170: pArg45Trp) in the proband.
CNV analysis excluded the presence of big deletions or insertions
in this gene.
Conclusion: In conclusion, here we report a de-novo hetero-
zygous variant in the NEK8 gene in infantile NPHP. This variant was
detected at a de-novo state in a patient presenting with the same
clinical features as the proband (and reported in VarSome).
This suggests that autosomal dominant forms of NEK8-linked
nephropathies may exist. Reporting further patients is essential to
conﬁrm these ﬁndings and assess whether dominant forms of the
disease are restricted to a speciﬁc mutational spot or are linked to
variants scattered throughout the NEK8 gene.
References: NA.
Grants: NA.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.025.D Lipid metabolism is altered in alpha-1 antitrypsin
deﬁciency derived-patients organoids
Sara Perez-Luz1, Jaanam Lalchandani1, Nerea Matamala1, Iago
Justo2, Alberto Marcacuzco2, Cristina Garﬁa2, Loreto Hierro Llanillo3,
Gema Gomez-Mariano1, Beatriz Martinez-Delgado1
1Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Molecular
Genetics, Madrid, Spain; 2Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain;
3Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Alpha-1 antitrypsin deﬁciency (AATD) is
a genetic disorder due to mutations in SERPINA1 gene presenting
clinical manifestations in liver and lungs. More than 90% of severe
deﬁciency patients are homozygous for PiZ (Glu342Lys) mutation
located in exon 5, which produces an altered protein (AAT-Z)
prone to accumulate in hepatocytes. The aggregated polymers
avoid protein secretion into the circulation, resulting in plasma
levels 10% to 15% of the levels of normal M homozygous while
they related to different hepatic alterations such as ﬁbrosis,
hepatocarcinome or lipid alterations.
Methods: We have used hepatic organoids derived from
patient homozygous for the Z mutation and HepG2 cells over-
expressing Z-AAT to verify the relationship among AAT-Z protein
and lipid accumulation by detecting neutral lipids using oil red O
staining. In addition, we performed a lipidomic analysis to deter-
mine the lipidic species accumulated in our model as well as a
transcriptomic study to reveal differential expressed genes, which
could explain the aforementioned results.
Results: Our results show how Z-AAT protein accumulation
triggered an increase in lipid content in hepatocytes and identi-
ﬁed speciﬁcally three species presenting a more notably incre-
ment as measured by mass spectrography. Furthemore, the
transcriptomic analysis expose several genes somehow related to
lipid metabolism whose variation suggest involvement in such
lipid deposits.
Conclusion: AAT polymers are associated to intracellular lipid
accumulation mainly because the altered expression of lipogenic
genes without ruling out the possibility that lipid accumulation
could be cause, as well as consequence, and hence responsible of
some clinical features associated with DAAT.
References:.
Grants: AESI/PI/307/20.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.027.B Beneﬁts of whole exome sequencing to advance
the genetic diagnosis in patients with differences (disorders)
of sex development
Hannes Syryn1, Hannah Verdin1, Julie Van De Velde1, Marianne
Becker2, Cécile Brachet3, Marieke den Brinker4, Sylvia Depoorter5, Julie
Fudvoye6,
Daniel
Klink7,
Philippe
Lysy8;8,
Guy
Massa9,
Nele
Reynaert10, Anne Rochtus10, Willem Staels11, Marlies Van Loocke10,
Martine Cools12, Elfride De Baere1
1Ghent University Hospital, Center for Medical Genetics, Department
of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium; 2Centre Hospitalier de
Luxembourg, Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology (DECCP),
Luxembourg, Luxembourg; 3Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine
Fabiola, Paediatric Endocrinology Unit, Brussels, Belgium; 4Antwerp
University
Hospital,
Department
of
Paediatric
Endocrinology,
Antwerp, Belgium; 5General Hospital Sint-Jan Bruges-Ostend, Depart-
ment of Child Endocrinology, Bruges, Belgium;
6CHU de Liège,
Department of Pediatrics, Liège, Belgium;
7ZNA Queen Paola
Children’s Hospital, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
382
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Antwerp, Belgium;
8Cliniques universitaires Saint Luc, Pediatric
Endocrinology, Brussels, Belgium; 9Jessa Hospital, Department of
Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, Hasselt, Belgium; 10Uni-
versity Hospitals Leuven, Department of Paediatric Endocrinology,
Leuven, Belgium;
11University Hospital of Brussels, Division of
Pediatric Endocrinology, Jette, Belgium; 12Ghent University Hospital,
Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Differences of sex development (DSD)
are heterogeneous conditions affecting the development of
chromosomal, gonadal or anatomical sex. Although over 75 genes
have been associated with DSD, the diagnostic yield of whole
exome sequencing (WES) studies is typically not higher than 35%
in a clinical setting. Here, we investigated the beneﬁts of WES for
the genetic diagnosis in patients with DSD.
Methods: Between 2016 and 2022, 144 unrelated index patients
with a clinical diagnosis of DSD or the broader DSD umbrella
underwent WES-based panel testing interrogating the coding regions
of 130 genes implicated in DSD, primary ovarian insufﬁciency and
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Variants were extracted and
classiﬁed according to the ACMG guidelines. Copy number variant
(CNV) analysis was performed using the ExomeDepth algorithm.
Results: In 13% of patients, we identiﬁed a likely pathogenic (LP)
or pathogenic (P) rare variant in 12 distinct DSD genes, including
AR (6), NR5A1 (2), WT1 (2), ATRX, CYP21A2, DHX37, HSD3B2, HSD17B3,
RXFP2, SRD5A2, SRY, and TXNRD2. The majority are sequence
variants; four defects are CNVs identiﬁed using ExomeDepth.
Interestingly, in two brothers displaying bilateral cryptorchidism
and infertility an intragenic RXFP2 deletion was found to occur in
trans with a heterozygous missense variant, corroborating its role in
familial bilateral cryptorchidism.
Conclusion: We demonstrate the beneﬁt of WES-based genetic
testing of DSD in a clinical context. The low detection rate
emphasizes the need for more stringent inclusion criteria on the
one hand and for advanced genome analysis to solve missing
heritability in this condition.
References:.
Grants: BESPEED, FWO1802220N, FWO1801018N.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.028.C Unique pipeline for the assessment of novel genetic
variants leads to conﬁrmation of PCD diagnosis
Nina Stevanovic1, Marina Andjelkovic1, Anita Skakic1, Vesna
Spasovski1, Maja Stojiljkovic1, Marina Parezanovic1, Milena Ugrin1,
Sonja Pavlovic1
1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University
of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Background/Objectives: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a
disease caused by impaired ciliary motility and mainly affects the
lungs and reproductive organs. Inheritance is autosomal recessive
and X-linked with more than 40 disease-causing genes, wherefore
PCD patients have diverse clinical manifestations, thus making
diagnosis difﬁcult. The utility of next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technology for diagnostic purposes allows a better understanding
of the PCD genetic background. However, the identiﬁcation of
speciﬁc disease-causing variants is challenging. The objective of
this study was to create a unique guideline that will enable the
standardization of the assessment of novel variants within PCD
associated genes.
Methods: The study included designing a pipeline for the classi-
ﬁcation of the rare genetic variants detected using NGS. The pipeline
included in silico (translation, 3D-model, protein-protein interactions,
sequence conservation, posttranslational modiﬁcations) and func-
tional analysis (expressional analysis, Western Blot) of the variants.
Results: The designed pipeline consists of three steps: sequen-
cing, detection, and identiﬁcation of genes/variants; classiﬁcation of
variants according to their effect; and variant characterization using
in silico structural and functional analysis. The pipeline was vali-
dated by the analysis of the variants detected in a disease-causing
gene (DNAI1) and the novel candidate gene (SPAG16).
Conclusion: The application of the pipeline resulted in the
identiﬁcation of disease-causing variants, as well as pathogenicity
validation, through the analysis on transcriptional, translational,
and posttranslational levels.The application of created pipeline
leads to the conﬁrmation of PCD diagnosis and enables a shift
from candidate to disease-causing gene.
References:.
Grants: This work was funded by MESTD, Republic of Ser-
bia(451-03-68/2022-14/200042).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.029.D TSHB R75G is a founder variant and prevalent
cause of low or undetectable TSH in Indian Jews
Marina Eskin-Schwartz1;2, David Shaki3;4, Noam Hadar5, Emily
Bosin6, Lior Carmon2;3, Samuel Refetoff7, Eli Hershkovitz2;3, Ohad
Shmuel Birk1;5, Alon Haim2;8
1Soroka Medical Center, Genetics Institute, Beer Sheva, Israel; 2Ben-
Gurion University of the Negev, the Faculty of Health Sciences, Beer
Sheva, Israel; 3Soroka Medical Center, Pediatric Endocrinology Unit,
Beer Sheva, Israel; 4Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, the Faculty of
Health Sciences, Beer Sheva, Israel; 5Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, the Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, the Faculty
of Health Sciences and National Institute for Biotechnology in the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel; 6Soroka Medical Center, Endocrinology
Laboratory, Beer Sheva, Israel; 7The University of Chicago, Depart-
ments of Medicine and Pediatrics and the Committee on Genetics,
Chicago, Illinois, United States; 3Soroka Medical Center, Pediatric
Endocrinology Unit, Beer Sheva, Israel.
Background/Objectives: Bi-allelic loss-of-function mutations in
TSHB, encoding the beta-subunit of TSH, cause congenital hypo-
thyroidism. Homozygosity for the TSHB p.R75G variant, previously
described in South Asian individuals, does not alter TSH function,
but abrogates its detection by some immune-detection-based
platforms, leading to erroneous diagnosis of hyperthyroidism. We
set out to identify and determine carrier rate of the p.R75G variant
among clinically euthyroid Bene Israel Indian Jews, to examine
possible founder origin of this variant worldwide and to determine
phenotypic effects of its heterozygosity.
Methods: Molecular genetic studies of Bene Israel Jews and
comparative studies with South Asian cohort were performed.
TSHB p.R75G variant was tested by Sanger sequencing and RFLP.
Haplotype analysis in the vicinity of the TSHB gene was performed
using SNP arrays.
Results: Clinically euthyroid individuals with low or undetect-
able TSH levels from three apparently unrelated Israeli Jewish
families of Bene Israel ethnicity, originating from the Mumbai
region of India, were found heterozygous or homozygous for the
p.R75G TSHB variant. Extremely high carrier rate of p.R75G TSHB in
Bene Israel Indian Jews (~4%) was observed. A haplotype block of
239.7kB in the vicinity of TSHB shared by Bene Israel and indivi-
duals of South Asian origin was detected.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings highlight the high prevalence of the
R75G TSHB variant in euthyroid Bene Israel Indian Jews, demon-
strate that heterozygosity of this variant can cause erroneous
detection of subnormal TSH levels, and show that R75G TSHB is an
ancient founder variant, delineating shared ancestry of its carriers.
References:.
Grants:.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
383
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.030.A Genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with
PHEX-related hypophosphatemia: identiﬁcation of novel
variants and a case of mosaicism
Irene Ambrosetti1;2, Giulia Olivucci1;2, Claudio Graziano3, Giulia
Lanzoni1, Giulia Severi1, Enrico Ambrosini1, Soﬁa Cesarini1;2, Elena
Bonora2, Cesare Rossi1, Marco seri1;2
1U.O. Genetica Medica - IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di
Bologna, Bologna, Italy;
2Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e
Chirurgiche, Alma Mater Studiorum - Università di Bologna, Italy,
Bologna, Italy;
3U.O. Genetica Medica - AUSL della Romagna -
Cesena (FC), Cesena, Italy.
Background/Objectives: X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH) is an
X-linked dominant disorder caused by inactivating mutations in
the PHEX gene. The clinical phenotype ranges from isolated
hypophosphatemia to severe manifestations of rickets, such as
bowing of the lower extremities, bone pain, low stature, and
dental anomalies.
Methods: Medical records from 2008 to 2021 were retro-
spectively reviewed to collect clinical, biochemical and molecular
ﬁndings for patients carrying pathogenic PHEX variants, detected
through Sanger or Next Generation Sequencing on DNA extracted
from peripheral blood lymphocytes.
Results: We report a series of seven unrelated patients from
our clinical center carrying pathogenic PHEX variants. In particular,
we identiﬁed one intragenic deletion and ﬁve distinct nonsense or
frameshift variants (one of which was present in two unrelated
patients); three of the variants we identiﬁed were novel and one
was present as a somatic mosaicism in a male patient. To our
knowledge, only 12 cases of somatic mosaicism for a PHEX
mutation in hemizygous males have been reported in the litera-
ture; we reviewed their clinical and biochemical features, con-
ﬁrming the wide phenotypic variability among mosaic male
patients with XLH.
Conclusion: While some reports suggested a dosage effect,
with a milder clinical phenotype in mosaic males, our case and a
review of the literature show a broad range of severity in these
patients, overlapping that of male and female patients with
germline mutations.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.031.B Exome sequencing in adult nephropathy of
unknown origin: a population study
Alice DOREILLE1;2, Yannis Lombardi1, Hugo Garcia1, Radoslava
Saraeva-Lamri3,
Marine
Dancer3,
Laure
Raymond3,
Laurent
Mesnard1;2
1Tenon Hospital, Paris, France; 2Sorbonne Université, Paris, France;
3Euroﬁns Biomnis, Génétique, Lyon, France.
Background/Objectives: Despite the importance of an etiological
diagnosis, up to 20% of nephropathies remain of undetermined
origin. Increased availability of genome-wide testing, such as
exome sequencing (ES), may allow many cases of undetermined
kidney disease to be reclassiﬁed. Here, we report the largest
French cohort of ES in adult nephrology.
Methods: Between September 2018 and February 2021, 538
unrelated patients underwent an ES (Twist Human Core Exome kit,
100 base pair-end sequenced on NextSeq500- Illumina). CNV
research was done from the same assay, calling was based on
model built by GATK4. Variant co-segregation was investigated by
Sanger sequencing in relatives when needed.
Results: Of 538 unrelated patients, ES resulted in a molecular
diagnosis in 135 patients (diagnostic yield of 25%). Seven patients
had a conclusive result with identiﬁcation of a pathogenic CNV
(5% of positive diagnoses). The mean age of the patients was 43
years [± 13]. 80% of the patients were analysed in solo exome. The
genetic diagnosis had various consequences: allowing for a pre-
symptomatic diagnosis (63%), assisting in the selection of a
potential related living donor (7.5%), not considering immuno-
suppressive therapy (11%), ruling-out potential recurrence on the
graft (20%), prescribing further investigations in the context of
retrophenotyping (36%).
Conclusion: With a high diagnostic yield, major clinical and
therapeutic consequences and a measured cost, our study shows
the interest of ES with analysis integrating CNV detection in inde-
terminate adult nephropathies. The diagnoses made were often
unexpected, validating the interest of a genome-wide approach.
References:.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P04.032.C Exome sequencing in isolated population: new
insights into nephropathies of unknown origin in New
Caledonia
David De Saint Gilles1, nicolas quirin2, Marine Dancer3, Nadège
BATAIL3, yves doussy4, thomas lamy2, Laure Raymond3, Laurent
Mesnard1, Alice DOREILLE1
1Tenon Hospital, Paris, France; 2Medipole, Dumbéa Sur Mer, New
Caledonia; 3Euroﬁns Biomnis, Lyon, France; 4ATIR, Dumbéa, New
Caledonia.
Background/Objectives:
Recently,
exome
sequencing
(ES)
has shown a good diagnostic yield in adult nephrology. New
Caledonia has a very high incidence of Chronic Kidney Disease
(CKD) with a clear predominance of indeterminate nephro-
pathies (40%) and a young population (60% of dialyzed
patients < 65 y/o). Given its insularity, genetics offer very inter-
esting perspectives for New Caledonian patients with nephro-
pathy of unknown origin.
Methods: Since November 2019, ES is offered to adult patients
with CKD of unclear origin with early-onset (< 45 y/o) or with a
family history of kidney disease, regardless of age.
Results: From November 2019 to January 2022, 84 unrelated
patients received a solo ES as a ﬁrst-line exploration. The
sequenced population was predominantly of Melanesian (60%)
and Polynesian (30%) origin. ES identiﬁed pathogenic diagnostic
variants in 15 patients (19%). Twenty-two patients (26%) pre-
sented a variant of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS). None of the 84
patients carried APOL1 risk alleles. This exome-wide approach had
major consequences (allow a new look on the whole clinical pic-
ture, description of new pathogenic variants, selection of a related
living donor for 15 patients, a renal biopsy could be avoided in
one relative).
Conclusion: With a diagnostic yield of 19% and major clinical
impact, nephropathies of unknown origin in New Caledonia
appear as an interesting indication of ES. As the Oceanian popu-
lations are absent from Gnomad most variants required co-
segregation and retrophenotyping studies to reach ACMG 4/5
rank. Thus an important number of variants remained VUS.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
384
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P04.033.D Stringent variant assessment in pulmonary ﬁbrosis
reveals a stronger genetic predisposition in female than in
male patients
Samuel Wilkinson1, Amy Slater2, Matthew Edwards3, Shibu John4,
Deborah Morris-Rosendahl5
1Royal Brompton & Hareﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, Clinical Genetics
and Genomics, London, United Kingdom; 1Royal Brompton & Hareﬁeld
NHS Foundation Trust, Clinical Genetics and Genomics, London, United
Kingdom; 3Royal Brompton & Hareﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, London,
United Kingdom; 1Royal Brompton & Hareﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust,
Clinical Genetics and Genomics, London, United Kingdom; 1Royal
Brompton & Hareﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, Clinical Genetics and
Genomics, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Pulmonary ﬁbrosis (PF) is a severely
progressive and fatal ﬁbrotic interstitial lung disease, with a late
age of onset (55-75 years) and an average survival rate of 3 years
post diagnosis. The phenotype is strongly associated with a
reduction in telomere length and pathogenic variants in telomere-
associated genes, have been found in approximately 8-15% of
familial PF cases. Genetic testing provides diagnostic accuracy in
symptomatic patients, the possibility of predictive testing in family
members and can aid in disease course prognostication and risk
stratiﬁcation when considering lung transplantation.
Methods: 180 adult patients with PF (mean age 59 years, 102
female and 78 male) were referred for genetic testing and
sequenced on our custom “Respigene” panel for inherited
respiratory conditions. Analysis was bioinformatically targeted to
25 genes associated with familial pulmonary ﬁbrosis (FPF).
Results: Sixteen patients (9%, 11 female and 5 male) were
found to have a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant in the
RTEL1, TERT, PARN or SFTPC genes; 48 patients (27%, 27 female, 21
male) harboured at least one variant of uncertain signiﬁcance
(VUS). The MUC5B rs3570590 risk-associated variant was detected
in 23.69% of PF patients, compared to 18.94% in patients with a
non-ILD respiratory condition.
Conclusion: Female patients appear more likely to have a
genetic cause to their PF than male patients. Functional studies
are required to reﬁne the pathogenicity of the many VUSs
detected. The presence of the MUC5B risk allele at a signiﬁcantly
higher frequency in PF patients than in patients with other
respiratory conditions, was conﬁrmed.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P02
SKELETAL, CONNECTIVE TISSUE, ECTODERMAL AND SKIN
DISORDERS
P05.001.B Disruption of zfhx4 leads to defects in zebraﬁsh
craniofacial development matching human characteristics of
nonsyndromic cleft lip with cleft palate
Selina Hölzel1;2, Nina Ishorst1;2, Carola Greve1;3, Franziska Degen-
hardt1;4, Öznur Yilmaz2, Tobias Lindenberg2, Dmitriy Drichel5, Carlo
Maj6, Michael Nothnagel5;7, Jayne Y. Herir-Kwa8, Joris A. Veltman8;9,
Berina Zametica1, Teresa Kruse10, Stefanie Nowak1, Carine Carels11;12,
Iris van Rooij13, Kerstin Ludwig1, Benjamin Odermatt2, Elisabeth
Mangold1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany; 2Institute of Anatomy,
Division of Neuroanatomy, University of Bonn, School of Medicine &
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany;
3LOEWE Centre for
Translational Biodiversity Genomics, Frankfurt am Main (current
address), Frankfurt am Main, Germany; 4Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University
Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen (current address),
Duisburg, Germany; 5Cologne Center for Genomics, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany; 6Institute for Genomic Statistics and
Bioinformatics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine and University
Hospital
Bonn, Bonn,
Germany;
7University
Hospital
Cologne,
Cologne, Germany;
8Department of Human Genetics, Donders
Institute, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
9Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-
Tyne, United Kingdom; 10Department of Orthodontics, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany; 11Department of Human Genetics, KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 12Orthodontics, University Hospitals KU
Leuven,
Leuven,
Belgium;
13Department
for
Health
Evidence,
Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud university medical
center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without
cleft palate (nsCL/P) is a frequent congenital anomaly with high
heritability estimates.1,2 Despite the discovery of several common
nsCL/P risk loci, major fractions of its complex genetic background
yet remain unrevealed.³.
Methods: In order to identify copy number variants that might
be causal for nsCL/P we reanalyzed an exome sequencing dataset
comprising 50 Central European nsCL/P trios. Here, we identiﬁed a
heterozygous 86 kb de novo deletion that affects exons 3-11 of 11
of the ZFHX4 gene. ZFHX4 encodes the transcription factor Zinc
Finger Homeobox 4 which recently has been shown to be enri-
ched for de novo mutations in patients with nonsyndromic oro-
facial clefting.4 To functionally characterize the role of ZFHX4 in
craniofacial
development,
we
knocked
down
the
zebraﬁsh
orthologue zfhx4 in wild type zebraﬁsh larvae (zﬂ) by a transla-
tional blocking morpholino (TB MO).
Results: Cartilage staining of TB MO injected zﬂat 4 days post-
fertilization showed underdeveloped and abnormally shaped
cartilaginous jaw and ethmoid plate structures, and therefore
matched human characteristics of nsCL/P. Moreover, preliminary
data of transient CRISPR/Cas9 zfhx4 Fo-knockout in zﬂreplicated
these observations.
Conclusion: In conclusion, our human genetic ﬁndings and
subsequent functional studies in zﬂindicate the importance of
ZFHX4 in the process of craniofacial development and conﬁrm its
role as susceptibility gene for nsCL/P.
References: 1Mangold, et al., 2011. Trends Mol Med0., 2Grosen,
et al., 2011. Epidemiology., ³Welzenbach, et al., 2021. HGG
Advances., 4Bishop, et al., 2020. Am J Hum Genet.
Grants: S.H.: BonnNI Q-614.1254.; E.M.: DFG, MA 2546/6-1.;
K.U.L.: DFG, LU 1944/3-1.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.002.C LRP4 intracellular variant may lead to high bone
mass with bone fragility: a functional analysis
Caroline Caetano da Silva1, Genevieve Baujat2, Adrien Bloch1,
Manon
Ricquebourg1,
Kelvin
Valmorin1,
Martine
Cohen-Solal1,
Corinne Collet1;3
1INSERM U1132, Paris, France; 2INSERM UMR 1163, IMAGINE Institute,
Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France; 3UF de Génétique
Moléculaire, Hôpital Robert Debré, Département de Génétique, Paris,
France.
Background/Objectives: The LRP4 receptor is associated to
bone and musculoskeletal diseases1. We identiﬁed a novel
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
385
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
missense variant located in the intracellular domain in LRP4 in a
6-years-old patient, with an atypical bone phenotype char-
acterized by osteocondensation and fractures. Another patient
presented a rare LRP4 variant in extracellular domain with high
bone mass, without fractures. Our goal was to conﬁrm the
pathogenicity of the variants and to unravel the dysregulates
pathways.
Methods: A CRISPR-Cas9 approach was used to generate
mutated osteosarcoma cells (U2OS) for functional analysis.
Results: We generated two heterozygous mutant cell lines, one
with
the
mutation
in
intracellular
domain
c.5317_5320del
p.(Thr1773Argfs*3)
and
other
in
the
extracellular
domain
c.4699_4727del p.(Arg1567Glnfs*7). Both mutant cells presented a
slightly decrease in apoptosis compared to control. An increased
mineralization was observed in the intracellular mutant, as well a
higher RUNX2 and ALPL expression by RT-qPCR. The extracellular
mutant had a lower mineralization/differentiation and an increase
in BMP2 expression. RNAseq analysis in both mutant cells revealed
1700 and 1400 under and over expressed genes for intracellular
mutant and 100 and 40 under and over expressed genes for
extracellular mutant.
Conclusion: Mineralization and expression of target genes
differ according to the variant localization, showing that the
pathways and the pathogenicity are not the same. This approach
will allow to study new functions of LRP4 in bone.
References: 1. Shen, et al. “LRP4 in neuromuscular junction and
bone development and diseases.” Bone (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bone.2015.05.012.
Grants: European Union’s Horizon 2020, grant agreement
766347.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.003.D Developmental genomics on split-hand/foot
malformation, further indication of allelic series and gene
dosage effects
Ruizhi Duan1, Hadia Hijazi1;2, Haowei Du1, Jawid Fatih1, Christopher
Grochowski1, Shalnini Jhangiani3, Jennifer Posey1, Zeynep Coban
Akdemir1;4, V. Reid Sutton1, Claudia Carvalho1;5, Davut Pehlivan1;6,
James Lupski1;3;6;7
1Baylor College of Medicine, Department of molecular and human
genetics,
Houston,
United
States;
2Johns
Hopkins
University,
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Baltimore, United
States; 3Baylor College of Medicine, Human Genome Sequencing
Center, Houston, United States; 4UTHealth School of Public Health,
Houston, United States; 5Paciﬁc Northwest Research Institute, Seattle,
United States; 6Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, United States;
7Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Houston,
United States.
Background/Objectives: Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is
a rare form of congenital limb anomaly with unclear molecular
etiology, presumably because of a failure to maintain the central
portion of apical ectodermal ridge (AER) during limb bud
proximal-distal (P/D) axial development.
Methods: Family-based genomics and rare variant analyses
were implemented using exome sequencing (ES) combined with
whole-genome array-based comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) to investigate 5 SHFM cases that originated from diverse
world geographical populations.
Results: We identiﬁed one novel pathogenic variant of WNT10B
in two unrelated Turkish families; one family with a de novo 7Mb
large chromosomal deletion encompassing the entire HOXD ter-
ritory; two families involving copy number gain of Chr17p13.3
including BHLHA9. Notably, breakpoint junction analyses for all
three CNV alleles provided evidence for microhomology-mediated
break-induced replication (MMBIR) as the putative molecular
mutational mechanism facilitated by Alu/Alu-mediated rearran-
gement (AAMR). In contrast to heterozygous duplication of
BHLHA9 associated with SHFLD3, homozygous duplication CNV
was observed in association with the Gollop-Wolfgang Complex,
implicating semi-dominant inheritance.
Conclusion: Genes acting on limb patterning are sensitive to a
gene dosage effect and often associated with an allelic series.
Novel variant identiﬁcations involving these genes/loci provide
potential insights that further elucidate the developmental
genomics of SHFM. We extend a gene dosage model which
could potentially, in an adjuvant way, assist interpreting the
interconnections
among
allelic
series,
clinical
phenotypical
severity, and reduced penetrance of the BHLHA9-related CLM
spectrum.
References: da Rocha et al. Clinical Genetics. 2021; 100(5):615-
623.
Grants:
BHCMG,
UM1
HG006542;
BCM-GREGoR;
U01
HG011758; NIH R35NS1050.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ruizhi Duan: None declared, Hadia
Hijazi: None declared, Haowei Du: None declared, Jawid Fatih:
None declared, Christopher Grochowski: None declared, Shalnini
Jhangiani: None declared, Jennifer Posey J.E.P. was supported by
NHGRI K08 HG008986, and is the principal investigator of Baylor
College of Medicine Genomics Research Elucidates Genetics of
Rare (BCM-GREGoR; U01 HG011758), Zeynep Coban Akdemir:
None declared, V. Reid Sutton: None declared, Claudia Carvalho:
None declared, Davut Pehlivan D.P. is supported by the Inter-
national Rett Syndrome Foundation (IRSF grant #3701-1), James
Lupski United States (U.S.) National Human Genome Research
Institute
(NHGRI)
and
National
Heart
Lung
and
Blood
Institute (NHBLI) to the Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian
Genomics (BHCMG, UM1 HG006542) and Baylor College of
Medicine Genomics Research Elucidates Genetics of Rare (BCM-
GREGoR; U01 HG011758), U.S. National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) (R35NS105078 to J.R.L.); and
Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA), (512848 to J.R.L.) and
Spastic
Paraplegia
Foundation
(SPF)
(to
J.R.L.),
J.R.L.
has
stock ownership in 23andMe, J.R.L. is a paid consultant for
Regeneron Genetics Center; The Department of Molecular and
Human Genetics at Baylor College of Medicine receives revenue
from clinical genetic testing conducted at Baylor Genetics (BG);
J.R.L. serves on the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board (SAB) of BG., J.R.L. is
a
co-inventor
on
multiple
United
States
and
European
patents related to molecular diagnostics for inherited neuro-
pathies, eye diseases, genomic disorders and bacterial genomic
ﬁngerprinting.
P05.004.A Weill-Marchesani syndrome: natural history and
genotype-phenotype correlation from 18 cases
Pauline Marzin1;2, jean-luc alessandri3, Klaus Dieterich4, Christine
Francannet5, Sandra Mercier6, Caroline Michot1;2, Oana Moldovan7,
Gianmaria Miolo8, Massimiliano Rossi9, Sophie Rondeau10;11, Valérie
Cormier-Daire1;2
1Institut Imagine, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Fédération
de Génétique e, Paris, France; 2Université de Paris, UMR1163, INSERM,
Paris, France; 3CHU de la Réunion - Hôpital Félix Guyon, Bellepierre,
Pôle Femme-Mère-Enfants, Saint-Denis, France;
4Univ. Grenoble
Alpes, Inserm, U1209, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Institut of Advanced
Biosciences, Grenoble, France; 5CHU de Clermont-Ferrand - Hôpital
d’Estaing, Service de génétique médicale, Pôle Femme et Enfant,
Clermont-Ferrand, France; 6CHU de Nantes - Hôtel Dieu, Service de
génétique médicale - Unité de Génétique clinique, Nantes, France;
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
386
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
7Hospital de Sta. Maria - Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Norte, EPE,
Serviço de Genética Médica (Centro de desenvolvimento infantil),
Lisbones, Portugal; 8Azienda Ospedaliera Santa Maria degli Angeli,
Dipartimento di Medicina di Laboratorio di Citogenetica e Genetica
Molecolare, Porderone, Italy; 9CHU de Lyon HCL - GH Est-Hôpital
Femme Mère Enfant, Service de génétique, Bron Cedex, France;
10Institut Imagine, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Fédéra-
tion de Génétique, Paris, France; 11Université de Paris, UMR1163,
INSERM, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives:
Weill-Marchesani
syndrome
(WMS)
belongs to the acromelic dysplasia group, deﬁned by short stature,
brachydactyly and progressive joint stiffness. WMS is characterized
by ophthalmological abnormalities such as microspherophakia,
severe myopia secondary to lens shape anomaly, and lens ectopia.
Cardiovascular defects have been reported. Monoallelic variations in
FBN1 are associated with a dominant WMS, while biallelic variations
in ADAMTS10, ADAMTS17 and LTBP2 are responsible for recessive
WMS. These four genes code for components of the extracellular
matrix.
Objectives: Natural history description of WMS and genotype-
phenotype correlation establishment.
Methods: Retrospective multicenter study. Inclusion criteria:
clinical diagnosis of WMS with identiﬁed mutations.
Results: 18 individuals, 11 females and 7 males, with a mean
age of 20 years (from 1.5 to 59 years) were included. Eight
have a mutation in FBN1 without speciﬁc localization, 6 in
ADAMTS10, 4 in ADAMTS17, none in LTBP2. All individuals pre-
sented with eye anomalies including lens ectopia (10/18), high
myopia (9/18), microspherophakia (8/18), glaucoma (5/18), and
cataract (4/18). 10/18 have a short stature (-2 to -4 DS), 12/18
joints limitation, 12/18 brachydactyly. 7/18 individuals have
cardiac defect such as valvulopathy (pulmonary stenosis 2/7,
aortic stenosis 1/7, mitral insufﬁciency 3/7, mitral thickening
1/7). Other manifestations included: recurrent laryngitis (1),
hepatomegaly (1), carpal tunnel syndrome detected at 22 years
of age (1).
Conclusion: Apart from ophthalmological ﬁndings which are
mandatory for diagnosis, phenotype of WMS seems to be more
variable than initially described, notably, only half of patients
presented with short stature. No genotype-phenotype correlation
emerges from this cohort.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.005.B Potential therapeutic targets for hypermobile
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome from proteome and secretome
analyses of patients’ dermal ﬁbroblasts
Valeria Cinquina1, Nicola chiarelli1, Nicoletta Zoppi1, Daniele
Capitanio2, Virginia Bassi1, Marina Venturini3, Cecilia Gelﬁ2, Marco
Ritelli1, Marina Colombi1
1University of Brescia, Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine,
Brescia,
Italy;
2University
of
Milan,
Department
of
Biomedical Sciences for Health, Milano, Italy; 3Spedali Civili University
Hospital, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Brescia,
Italy.
Background/Objectives: Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
(hEDS) is a connective tissue disorder without a known genetic
etiology and speciﬁc therapies, which is mainly characterized by
generalized joint hypermobility and musculoskeletal complaints.
Patients’ dermal ﬁbroblasts exhibit a widespread extracellular
matrix
(ECM)
disarray
and
myoﬁbroblast-like
characteristics
including α-SMA cytoskeleton organization. Control ﬁbroblasts
treated with hEDS cells-derived conditioned media (hEDS-CM)
acquire this pathological phenotype.
Methods: A comprehensive proteomic study based on top-
down and bottom-up approaches was performed by comparing
the intra- and extracellular proteome of patients’ and controls’
ﬁbroblasts. We also performed in vitro studies to deﬁne the
effect of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) inhibitor dox-
ycycline on ECM organization and ﬁbroblast-to-myoﬁbroblast
transition (FMT).
Results: Cellular proteome analyses unveiled protein changes
essential to actin cytoskeleton dynamics, energy metabolism
and redox balance, proteostasis, intracellular trafﬁcking and
secretion. Secretome proﬁling of hEDS-CM mainly revealed an
MMPs dysfunction as a possible disease driver by causing a
detrimental feedback loop of excessive ECM degradation cou-
pled with myoﬁbroblast differentiation. Doxycycline-mediated
MMPs inhibition rescued in patients’ cells a control-like ECM
organization
and
induced
a
partial
reversal
of
their
myoﬁbroblast-like phenotype. Furthermore, the addition of
doxycycline to hEDS-CM abolishes its capability to induce in
control cells ECM disarray and FMT.
Conclusion: Altogether, these data provide evidence on sev-
eral putative disease targets for the development of therapeutic
strategies with a potential beneﬁt for patients’ management.
References:.
Grants: This research was funded by The Ehlers-Danlos Society
(grant numbers: 2018.02c. LOI.26; Molecular Studies in hEDS and
HSD $1 Million Grant).
Conﬂict of Interest: Valeria Cinquina: None declared, Nicola
chiarelli:
None
declared,
Nicoletta
Zoppi:
None
declared,
Daniele Capitanio: None declared, Virginia Bassi: None declared,
Marina Venturini: None declared, Cecilia Gelﬁ: None declared,
Marco Ritelli: None declared, Marina Colombi Principal investi-
gator funded by The Ehlers-Danlos Society (grant numbers:
2018.02c. LOI.26; Molecular Studies in hEDS and HSD $1 Million
Grant).
P05.006.C Mutation spectrum in Bulgarian patients with
skeletal tissue disorders, revealed by clinical exome
sequencing
Ivanka Dimova1, Kalina Mihova2, Kunka Kamenarova2, Nevyana
Ivanova2, Darina Kachakova-Yordanova2, Radka Kaneva2
1Medical University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 2Medical University Soﬁa,
Molecular Medicine Center, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Identifying a molecular diagnosis for an
individual with a skeletal dysplasia can lead to improved clinical
care, guide future medical management and treatment, and
inform assessment of risk for familial recurrence. We aimed in
revealing the type and frequency of genetic mutations in Bul-
garian patients with skeletal tissue disorders.
Methods: We performed next generation sequencing (NGS) by
using TruSight One kit (clinical exome) and MiSeq platform of
Illumina in 26 patients with clinical diagnosis, suspicious for ske-
letal tissue disorder.
Results: We found pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants in
10 and 2 patients, respectively. Six were missense mutation, 3 –
nonsense, 2 - frameshift and 1 splicing variant. The highest fre-
quency of mutations was detected for Osteogenesis imperfecta.
The Table below represents our ﬁndings.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
387
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Gene
Gene variant
Genetic diagnosis
Pathogenic variants
COL1A1
c.252dupC
(p.Glu85Argfs*84)
c.581G>A (p.Gly194Asp)
c.1251delC (p.Ser418-
Leufs*123)
c.2644C>T (p.
p.Arg882Ter)
Osteogenesis imperfecta
FBN1
c.8051+2T>A
c.1546C>T (p.Arg516Ter)
Marfan and associated
syndromes
COL2A1
c.1510G>A (p.Gly504Ser)
FGFR2
c.314A>G (p. Tyr105Cys)
Crouzon syndrome
FGFR3
c.1626C>G
(p.Asn542Lys)
Hypochondroplasia-like
phenotype
NSD1
c.1831C>T (p.Arg611Ter)
Sotos syndrome
Probably pathogenic variants
COL5A1
c.4819G>A
(p.Gly1607Ser)
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,
classical type
SKI
c.1877A>T
(p.Lys626Met)
Shprintzen-Goldberg
syndrome
Conclusion: We put genetic diagnosis in 46% of the patients
with clinical diagnosis of skeletal tissue disorder by using clinical
exome sequencing. These ﬁndings demonstrate the utility of NGS
testing for individuals with a suspected skeletal dysplasia or
growth disorder.
References: Scocchia, A., et al. Diagnostic utility of next-
generation sequencing-based panel testing in 543 patients with
suspected skeletal dysplasia. Orphanet J Rare Dis 16, 412 (2021).
Grants: Д01-285-17.12.2019.
Д01-395-18.12.2020.
Д01-302-17.12.2021.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.007.D The familiar and the sporadic form of
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome- case reports
Lenka Horáková1, Gabriela Křečková1, Monika Koudová1, Marie
Trková1, Ivo Mařík2, Jitka Štekrová3, Katerina Hirschfeldova3
1GENNET - Center of Medical genetics and reproductive medicine,
Prague, Czech Republic; 2Ambulatory Centre for Defects of Locomotor
Apparatus, Prague, Czech Republic; 3First Faculty of Medicine Charles
University, The Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech
Republic.
Background/Objectives: Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I
(TRPS I) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutation
in the TRPS1 gene coding a transcriptional repressor of GATA-
regulated genes. TRPS1 haploinsufﬁciency reduces activity of
genes regulating the growth of bone and cartilage with clinical
picture of TRPS I: abnormal bones in the ﬁngers and toes, joint
abnormalities, distinctive facial features and other symptoms (ﬁne,
sparse hair, pear-shaped nose, prominent ears, brachydactyly,
cone shaped epiphyses of the phalanges, dystrophic nails, short
stature, small breasts, hip dysplasia). We report 2 cases. The ﬁrst
case is the 16 years old girl with growth retardation and typical
facial features. The proband´s mother manifested the same facial
signs and. The 2nd sporadic case is 12 years old girl with similar
facial signs, disproportion between leg length and scoliosis.
Methods: In the ﬁrst case we carried out a NGS amplicon
analysis of TRPS1 gene. In the second case SNP array (OmniEx-
press-24 v1.3 chip, Illumina) was performed and result was con-
ﬁrmed by MLPA (Salsa MLPA KIT Illumina P-228 TRPS1-LGS).
Results: In the ﬁrst case a missense mutation c.2761C>T (p.
Arg921Ter) in exon 6 of TRPS1 gene of maternal origin and in the
second case de novo 155kb microdeletion involving exons 3-5 of
TRPS1 gene were found.
Conclusion: Correct diagnosis based on characteristic facial
features in combination with targeted genetic testing is essential
for conﬁrmation of diagnosis with adequate follow up and ther-
apeutic care and is very important for possibility to provide
appropriate genetic counselling.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.008.A Molecular characterization and investigation of the
role of genetic variation in phenotypic variability and
response to treatment in a large pediatric Marfan syndrome
cohort
Josephina (Jeannette) Meester1, Silke Peeters1, Lotte Van Den
Heuvel1, Aline Verstraeten1, Lut Van Laer1, Bart Loeys1;2
1University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Center of
Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium; 2Radboud University Medical
Center, Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: In a large cohort of 373 paediatric
patients with Marfan syndrome (MFS) with a severe cardiovascular
phenotype, we explored the proportion of patients with MFS with
a pathogenic FBN1 variant and analysed whether the type/loca-
tion of FBN1 variants was associated with speciﬁc clinical char-
acteristics and response to treatment. Patients were recruited on
the basis of the following criteria: aortic root z-score > 3, age
6 months to 25 years, no prior or planned surgery, and aortic root
diameter < 5 cm.
Methods: Targeted resequencing and deletion/duplication
testing of FBN1 and related genes were performed.
Results: We identiﬁed (likely) pathogenic FBN1 variants in 91%
of patients. Ectopia lentis was more frequent in patients with
dominant-negative (DN) variants (61%) than in those with hap-
loinsufﬁcient variants (27%). For DN FBN1 variants, the prevalence
of ectopia lentis was highest in the N-terminal region (84%) and
lowest in the C-terminal region (17%). The association with a more
severe cardiovascular phenotype was not restricted to DN variants
in the neonatal FBN1 region (exon 25-33) but was also seen in the
variants in exons 26 to 49. No difference in the therapeutic
response was detected between genotypes.
Conclusion: Important novel genotype-phenotype associa-
tions involving both cardiovascular and extra-cardiovascular
manifestations were identiﬁed, and existing ones were con-
ﬁrmed. These ﬁndings have implications for prognostic counsel-
ling of families with MFS.
References: PMID: 35058154.
Grants: FWO Flanders: 12X8520N and G044720N.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.009.B Serum calciﬁcation propensity T50 associates with
disease severity in patients with pseudoxanthoma elasticum
Lukas Nollet1;2;3, Matthias Van Gils1;2;3, Suzanne Fischer4, Laurence
Campens5, Swapna Karthik6, Andreas Pasch6;7;8, Julie De Zaeytijd9,
Bart Leroy1;9;10, Daniel Devos11, Tine De Backer5, Paul Coucke1;2,
Olivier Vanakker1;2;3
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
388
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium; 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium;
3Ectopic Mineralization Research Group, Ghent,
Belgium;
4Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium;
5Department of Cardiology, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 6Calciscon AG, Nidau, Switzer-
land; 7Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Johannes Keppler
University, Linz, Austria; 8Department of Nephrology, Lindenhofspital,
Bern, Switzerland; 9Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 10Division of Ophthalmology, The Chil-
dren’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, United States; 11Depart-
ment of Radiology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a
currently intractable Mendelian disorder characterized by pro-
gressive ectopic calciﬁcation in the skin, eyes and arteries. Ther-
apeutic trials in PXE are severely hampered by the lack of reliable
biomarkers. Serum calciﬁcation propensity T50 is a novel blood
test measuring the functional anti-calcifying buffer capacity of
serum. Here, we evaluated T50 in PXE patients aiming to investi-
gate its determinants and suitability as a potential biomarker for
disease severity.
Methods: Fifty-seven PXE patients were included and demo-
graphic, clinical, imaging and biochemical data were collected
from medical health records. PXE severity was assessed using
Phenodex
scores.
T50
was
measured
using
a
validated,
nephelometry-based assay. Multivariate models were then created
to investigate T50 determinants and associations with disease
severity.
Results: Mean age of patients was 45.2 years, 68.4% was
female and mean serum T50 was 347 minutes. Multivariate
regression analysis identiﬁed serum fetuin-A (p < 0.001), phos-
phorus (p = 0.007) and magnesium levels (p = 0.034) as signiﬁcant
determinants of T50, while no correlations were identiﬁed with
serum calcium, eGFR, plasma PPi levels or ABCC6 genotype. After
correction for covariates, T50 was found to be an independent
predictor of ocular (p = 0.013), vascular (p = 0.013) and overall
disease severity (p = 0.016) in PXE.
Conclusion: In this cross-sectional cohort study, shorter serum
T50 – indicative of higher calciﬁcation propensity – associated
with a more severe phenotype in PXE patients. This study indi-
cates for the ﬁrst time that serum T50 might be a reliable and
clinically relevant biomarker in PXE and may act as a surrogate
endpoint in future therapeutic trials.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Lukas Nollet: None declared, Matthias Van
Gils: None declared, Suzanne Fischer: None declared, Laurence
Campens: None declared, Swapna Karthik Swapna Karthik is an
employee of Calciscon AG., Swapna Karthik is a stockholder of
Calciscon AG., Andreas Pasch Andreas Pasch is an employee of
Calciscon AG., Andreas Pasch is a stockholder of Calciscon AG.,
Julie De Zaeytijd: None declared, Bart Leroy: None declared, Daniel
Devos: None declared, Tine De Backer: None declared, Paul
Coucke: None declared, Olivier Vanakker: None declared.
P05.010.C Genetic and functional studies of novel candidate
genes for Psoriatic Arthritis Mutilans
Sailan Wang1, Pernilla Nikamo1, Raquel Vaz1, Fulya Taylan1, Jesper
Eisfeldt1, Xiaowei Zheng1, Leena Laasonen1, Isabel Tapia-Paez1,
Mona Stahle1
1karolinska institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Psoriatic arthritis mutilans (PAM) is the
most severe and rare clinical subtype of psoriatic arthritis (PsA)
characterized by severe destruction of the distal joints. The pre-
valence of PAM in the Nordic countries is estimated to 3.69 cases
per million inhabitants.
Methods: In this project, we aim to study the genetic basis of
PAM in a unique Nordic PAM cohort consisting of 61 well-
characterized patients1 by the whole genome sequence (WGS)
and whole exome sequence (WES).
Results: Using next generation sequencing we found three
very rare variants in the same gene in four unrelated patients. The
gene found suggest involvement of the Reactive oxygen species
(ROS) in development of PAM. To measure ROS generation in
patients’ blood we are using the very sensitive Electron Para-
magnetic Resonance (EPR) method. In addition, we are creating
cell models to study the effects of the mutations in global
expression, and we plan to use zebraﬁsh models to study the
consequences of these variants in vivo.
Conclusion: In summary, identifying the genetic cause of PAM
is very valuable as it gives affected individuals the opportunity for
diagnosis, important information about prognosis and treatment.
References: 1.Gudbjornsson, B et al. “Psoriatic arthritis mutilans
(PAM) in the Nordic countries: demographics and disease status.
The Nordic PAM study.” Scandinavian journal of rheumatology vol.
42,5 (2013): 373-8. https://doi.org/10.3109/03009742.2013.771211.
Grants: 1) KI- China Scholarship Council (CSC202008320311 to
Sailan Wang). 2) 2021: Sällsyntafonden. Funding: 35 000 SEK. Role:
solo applicant.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.011.D Expanding the allelic and locus heterogeneity of
Multiple osteochondromas
Artem Borovikov1, Nailya Galeeva1, Tatiana Markova1, Elena
Zinina1, Tatiana Nagornova1, Ekaterina Zakharova1, Aysylu Murta-
zina1, Ilya Kanivets2;3, Sergey Korostelev2, Maria Orlova1, Aleksander
Polyakov1, Elena Dadali1, Olga Schagina1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation;
2Genomed LTD, Moscow, Russian Federation; 3FSBEI FPE RMACPE
MOH Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives: Multiple osteochondromas (MO) is a
skeletal dysplasia characterized by the growth of two or more
osteochondromas, caused by pathogenic nucleotide variants in
EXT1 or EXT2 genes in 70%-90% of patients. Another rarer disease
characterized by multiple osteochondromas but with additional
enchondromas is metachondromatosis, associated with the loss-
of-function variants in the PTPN11 gene. The clinical similarity of
the two diseases suggests that atypical forms of metachon-
dromatosis can be misdiagnosed as MO. This study aims to
characterize the genotype proﬁle of the Russian population and
ﬁnd additional molecular causes in patients with MO.
Methods: DNA sequencing (Sanger Method and NGS panel)
and MLPA analysis were performed to identify SNV and CNV in the
sample of 348 patients from 153 families. Patients were divided
into groups according to the severity of the disease, using a three-
degree clinical scale with two subgroups.
Results: Germline pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants
were identiﬁed in 137 (89%) families. 122 unique disease-causative
variants (53 novel and 69 known) and 15 recurrent (4 novel) were
identiﬁed including frameshift (34,4%), nonsense (26,2%), mis-
sense (12,3%), splicing (15,5%) variants, genomic rearrangements
(5,7%) and in-frame deletion (0,8%). In 16 families with the clinical
picture of MO with no signiﬁcant ﬁndings in EXT1 and EXT2 genes,
ﬁve loss-of-function variants in the PTPN11 gene were found.
Conclusion: Our work expanded the allelic and locus hetero-
geneity of MO and showed that some of the undiagnosed patients
with MO could have pathogenic variants in the PTPN11 gene.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
389
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.013.B A biallelic gain-of-function variant in MSGN1 causes
a new skeletal dysplasia syndrome
Asuman Koparir1, Caroline Lekszas1, Kemal Keseroglu2, Aboulfazl
Rad3, Atefeh Hasanzadeh4, Ehsan Ghayoor Karimiani5, Nakul
Narendran6, Ertugrul Ozbudak7;8, Barbara Vona1;3;9;10, Thomas Haaf1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Julius Maximilians University Würz-
burg, Würzburg, Germany;
2Division of Developmental Biology,
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, United
States;
3Department
of
Otolaryngology-Head
&
Neck
Surgery
Tübingen
Hearing
Research
Centre,
Eberhard
Karls
University
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany;
4Cellular and Molecular Research
Center, Sabzevar University of Medical Sciences, Sabzevar, Iran;
5Department of Medical Genetics, Next Generation Genetic Polyclinic,
Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran;
6University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, United States;
7Division of Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
United States; 8Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, United States; 9Institute of Human
Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany;
10Institute for Auditory Neuroscience and InnerEarLab, University
Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Mesogenin1 (MSGN1, OMIM: *612209), a
basic-Helix–Loop–Helix transcription factor, is expressed in the
presomitic mesoderm (PSM) and plays a crucial role in formation
of PSM progenitor cells during somitogenesis. We aimed at
identifying the molecular basis of a patient with severe skeletal
dysplasia in a single family through utilization of whole-exome
sequencing and subsequent Sanger sequencing.
Methods: The proband displays short stature and multiple
skeletal problems, including mesomelic dysplasia of the arms with
complete humero-radio-ulna synostosis, arched clavicles, pelvic
dysplasia, short and thin ﬁbulae, proportionally short vertebrae,
hyperlordosis and mild kyphosis. To test the pathogenicity of the
detected mutation, we overexpressed either wild-type (WT) or the
mutant msgn1 in zebraﬁsh via mRNA injection and analyzed tbxta
(i.e., T/brachyury/ntl) expression in the tailbud.
Results: A novel homozygous c.374G>T (p. Arg125Leu) mis-
sense variant was detected in MSGN1 (NM_001105569.2) in a
patient. MSGN1 resides in a ~13.2 Mb homozygous interval on
chromosome 2. We found overexpression of WT or the mutant
msgn1 signiﬁcantly reduces tbxta expression in the tailbud com-
pared to uninjected WT embryos (p < 0.0001). In addition, we also
found the mutant msgn1 has a more severe effect than WT msgn1
(p = 0.0186, Kruskal-Wallis), causing a gain-of-function.
Conclusion: In contrast to loss-of-function effect, gain-of-
function of MSGN1 explains mild affected vertebrae of the pro-
band. Furthermore, as somite segments from 9 to 13 are known to
contribute to the forelimb muscle, these might potentially be
related with mesomelic shortening in our case. Our ﬁndings
highlight a new skeletal dysplasia syndrome caused by a gain-of-
function mutation in MSGN1.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.014.C MN1-related disorders in two Bulgarian patients
Mila Sleptsova1, Tihomir Todorov1, Slavena Atemin1;2, Mihaela
Mladenova1;2, Daniela Avdjieva-Tzavella3, Albena Todorova1;2
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
2Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical
University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 3Department of Clinical Genetics,
University Pediatric Hospital Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic variants in the MN1 gene
are a known cause of CEBALID syndrome, which is characterised
mainly by craniofacial and structural brain abnormalities, and
global
developmental
and
variable
intellectual
delay.
Pre-
dominantly nonsense and frameshift variants have been reported
as pathogenic so far. The syndrome is with autosomal dominant
inheritance (Mak et al., 2019). We report two patients which pre-
sented with similar clinical characteristics and were found to carry
heterozygous variants in the MN1 gene.
Methods: Whole Exome Sequencing was performed for both
patients and a panel of genes was analysed. Variants ﬂagged
through the analysis were conﬁrmed and segregated in the
patients’ families via Sanger sequencing.
Results: The ﬁrst case is a patient with craniofacial dysostosis,
low-set ears, polycystic kidney dysplasia and congenital intellec-
tual delay. The following variant in MN1 was found in a hetero-
zygous state: c.3743G>A, p.Trp1248Ter. The segregation analysis
conﬁrmed the variant occurs de novo.
The second case is a patient which presents with craniofacial
malformations. The c.2486C>A, p.Ser829Tyr variant was found in a
heterozygous state. The segregation analysis conﬁrmed the var-
iant occurs de novo.
Conclusion: Those cases provide insight into the diversity of
MN1 variants that could be disease-causing. Although no mis-
sense variants have been reported as pathogenic so far, functional
studies might be worth looking into.
References: Mak, C., Doherty, D., Lin, A., et al., 2019. MN1
C-terminal truncation syndrome is a novel neurodevelopmental
and craniofacial disorder with partial rhombencephalosynapsis.
Brain, 143(1), pp.55-68.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.015.D Functional analyses of pathogenic variants in
SNRPE associated with the rare hair loss disorder
hypotrichosis simplex
Nicole Cesarato1, Yasmina Gossmann1, F. Buket Basmanav1, Regina
C. Betz1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic variants in SNRPE cause
autosomal-dominant hypotrichosis simplex. The extent of scalp
and body hair involvement shows great interindividual varia-
bility, even within the same family. In particular, all of the
affected individuals present with scanty or no eyebrows, while
some of them show also hypotrichosis of scalp and body hair.1
SNRPE encodes a core protein of the U snRNPs, key factors of
the minor and major spliceosomes. It is yet not clear how
pathogenic variants in this gene cause the hair loss phenotype
and which speciﬁc signaling pathways are involved. We aim
at understanding the function of SNRPE in relevance to hair
biology.
Methods: We transfected HEK293T and/oror HaCaT cells with
wild type and mutant SNRPE constructs and performed immu-
noﬂuorescence, co-immunoprecipitation and WB. We silenced the
endogenous SNRPE mRNA, performed RNAseq.
Results: SNRPE mutants are less expressed than the wild
type and are partially degraded via the proteasome; they
are also incorporated in the minor spliceosome. They show
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
390
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
mislocalization in the cytosol, seeming to fail to enter the
nucleus. RNAseq data on HaCaT cells downregulated for the
endogenous SNRPE show an alteration of many physiological
processes and a reduction in KRT81 expression levels, previously
linked to monilethrix.
Conclusion: The mechanism by which mutations in SNRPE
cause hypotrichosis is still unclear. However, mutant forms of
SNRPE are probably unable to exert their function. Down-
regulation of SNRPE in HaCaT affects the expression of KRT81,
known to cause monilethrix.
References: 1 Pasternack et al., 2013.
Grants: I-1443-422.13/2017 (German-Israeli Foundation).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.016.A Age-speciﬁc effects of body size on fracture risk in
later life: A lifecourse Mendelian randomization study
Grace Marion Power1, Jonathan Tobias1;2, Timothy M. Frayling3,
Jessica Tyrrell3, April Hartley2, Jon Heron1, George Davey Smith1, Tom
G. Richardson1
1University of Bristol, MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, Population
Health Sciences, Bristol, United Kingdom;
2University of Bristol,
Musculoskeletal Research Unit, Bristol, United Kingdom; 3University of
Exeter, Genetics of Complex Traits, College of Medicine and Health,
Exeter, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Musculoskeletal conditions, including
fractures, can have severe and long-lasting consequences. Higher
body mass index in adulthood is widely acknowledged to be
protective for most fracture sites. However, the association
between weight and bone health is complex and confounding
bias may have distorted earlier ﬁndings. Employing a lifecourse
Mendelian
randomization
(MR)
approach,
this
investigation
explores how prepubertal and adult body size independently
inﬂuence fracture risk in later life.
Methods: Using data from a large UK-based prospective
cohort, univariable and multivariable MR were conducted to
simultaneously estimate the effects of age-speciﬁc genetic proxies
for body size (n = 453,169) on the odds of fracture in later life
(n = 416,795). A two-step MR framework was additionally applied
to elucidate potential mediators.
Results: Univariable and multivariable MR indicated strong
evidence that higher body size in childhood reduced fractures in
later life (OR, 95% CI: 0.89, 0.82 to 0.96, P = 0.005 and OR, 95% CI:
0.76, 0.69 to 0.85, P = 1x10-6, respectively). Conversely, higher
body size in adulthood increased fracture risk (OR, 95% CI: 1.08,
1.01 to 1.16, P = 0.023 and OR, 95% CI: 1.26, 1.14 to 1.38, P = 2x10-
6, respectively). Two-step MR analyses suggested that the effect of
higher body size in childhood on reduced fracture risk was
mediated by its inﬂuence on higher estimated bone mineral
density in adulthood.
Conclusion: This investigation provides novel evidence that
higher body size in childhood reduces fractures in later life and
higher body size in adulthood is a risk factor, opposing ﬁndings
from earlier research. Protective effect estimates previously
observed are likely attributed to childhood effects.
References:.
Grants:
MR/N0137941/1;MC_UU_00011/1;MC_UU_00011/
1;MR/T002239/1;SBF004\1079.
Conﬂict of Interest: Grace Marion Power GMP is employed
part-time by Clifton Insight outside of this work., Jonathan Tobias:
None declared, Timothy M. Frayling: None declared, Jessica Tyrrell:
None
declared,
April
Hartley:
None
declared,
Jon
Heron:
None declared, George Davey Smith: None declared, Tom G.
Richardson TGR is employed part-time by Novo Nordisk outside of
this work.
P05.017.B Genetic risk factors for developmental dysplasia of
the hip in the Trøndelag Health Study
Kaya Kvarme Jacobsen1, Sigrid Børte2;3, Lene Bjerke Laborie4;5,
Hege Kristiansen6;7, Annette Schäfer6, Trude Gundersen8;9, Tetyana
Zayats10;11;12,
Bendik
Kristoffer
Slagsvold
Winsvold2;3;13,
Karen
Rosendahl14;15
1Helse Førde, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Førde, Norway;
2Oslo University Hospital, Department of Research and Innovation,
Division
of
Clinical
Neuroscience,
Oslo,
Norway;
3Norwegian
University of Science and Technology (NTNU), K. G. Jebsen Center
for Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Nursing,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Trondheim, Norway; 4Helse
Bergen, Department of Radiology, Bergen, Norway;
5Helse Vest,
Bergen, Norway;
6Helse Førde, Department of Pediatrics, Førde,
Norway;
7University of Bergen, Department of Clinical Science,
Bergen, Norway; 8Helse Bergen, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Bergen, Norway;
9University of Bergen, Department of Clinical
Medicine, Bergen, Norway; 10Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
United States;
11Broad Institute, Stanley Center for Psychiatric
Research, Boston, United States; 12University of Oslo, PROMENTA,
Oslo, Norway; 13Oslo University Hospital, Department of Neurology,
Oslo, Norway; 14University Hospital of Northern Norway, Department
of Radiology, Tromsø, Norway; 15University of Tromsø, Department
of Medicine, Tromsø, Norway.
Background/Objectives: Developmental dysplasia of the hip
(DDH) is a congenital condition affecting 2-3% of all infants1. DDH
increases the risk of osteoarthritis, is the cause of 30% of all total
hip arthroplasties (THAs) in adults <40 years of age and can result
in loss of life quality2. We aim to explore the genetic background
of DDH in order to improve diagnosis, management and longterm
outcome.
Methods: We used the large, ongoing, longitudinal Trøndelag
Health Study (HUNT) database3, Case deﬁnition was based on ICD-
9/-10 diagnoses of DDH, or osteoarthritis secondary to DDH.
Analyses were performed using SAIGE software, with covariates
including sex, batch, birth year and principal components. We
included only SNPs with MAF ≥0.01, R2 ≥0.8 and HWE ≥0.0001.
Signiﬁcance level was set at p < 5x10-8. The regional ethical
committee approved the study.
Results: Analysis included 69,500 individuals, of which 408
cases, and 8,531,386 SNPs. Two SNPs near COL11A1 were sig-
niﬁcantly associated with DDH; rs713162 (β = -0.43, SE = 0.07,
p = 8.4x10-9) and rs6577334 (β = -0.43, SE = 0.08, p = 8.9x10-9).
COL11A1 has previously been associated with acetabular dysplasia
and osteoarthritis4,5.
Conclusion: This large, genome-wide case-control study indi-
cates an association between COL11A1 and DDH and is an
important contribution to investigating the etiology of DDH, with
further research needed.
References: 1Rosendahl et al, 1996, Pediatric Radiology.
2Engesæter et al, 2011, Acta Orthopaedica.
3Ferreira et al, 2017, Nat Genet.
4Raine et al, 2013, BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders.
5Versteeg et al, 2016, Osteoarthrits and Cartilage.
Grants: Helse Vest (F-12550-D11544).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.018.C Satisfaction with resilient denture liner versus
acrylic resin telescopic prostheses for patients with
ectodermal dysplasia: A non randomized crossover clinical
trial
Yasmine H. Mohsen1, Mohamed Abdel Kader1, Nouran Abdel Nabi2,
Iman A. W. Radi2
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
391
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Human Genetics and Genome Research Institute, National Research
Centre, Orodental Genetics, Giza, Egypt; 2Faculty of Dentistry, Cairo
University, Prosthodontic Department, Cairo, Egypt.
Background/Objectives: Ectodermal dysplasia is a rare genetic
disorder that manifests dry skin, sparse hair, xerostomia, complete
or partial anodontia of deciduous and/or permanent teeth and
malformed teeth. The crowns are usually conical anteriorly. The
roots are stunted having a huge pulp chamber. Enamel usually
forms a delicate layer, decreasing in thickness towards cervical
line. Xerostomia is mostly present due to absence of salivary
glands or reduction in their number. Alveolar ridges are com-
monly ﬂat due lack of tooth formation, it is the main reason for the
low vertical dimension of the face and the senile appearance of
the patient. These oral features can hinder proper restoration
of teeth.
Methods: In this non-randomized clinical trial, ectodermal
dysplasia patients with partial anodontia were recruited. Over-
dentures were constructed for the patients, that were later relined
opposing to the teeth with a soft liner. Follow up was done 1 week
and 3 months following denture delivery and denture relining.
After each stage, patient satisfaction, retention, and periodontal
health parameters were assessed. Patient satisfaction was asses-
sed with a validated, reliable questionnaire.
Results: A statistical signiﬁcant difference was found between
the
groups
regarding
retention
(P = 0.025),
probing
depth
(P < 0.001), and gingival index (P = 0.011) favouring the acrylic
resin coping-retained overdentures 3 months after overdenture
delivery.
Conclusion: The resilient denture liner-retained maxillary
complete overdenture improved patient satisfaction and tooth
mobility of anterior teeth, while minimally jeopardizing the peri-
odontal condition of the abutment teeth in children with ecto-
dermal dysplasia.
References:.
Grants: Supported by a research grant from the National
Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
Conﬂict of Interest: Yasmine H. Mohsen National research
centre, Mohamed Abdel Kader: None declared, Nouran Abdel
Nabi: None declared, Iman A. W. Radi: None declared.
P05.019.D Identiﬁcation of a novel deep intronic variant in
CRTAP by genome sequencing as the cause of osteogenesis
imperfecta
Gandham SriLakshmi Bhavani1, Prajna Udupa1, Shalini Nayak1,
Neethukrishna Kausthubham1, Ashwin Dalal2, Katta Girisha1
1Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, Department of Medical Genetics, Manipal, India; 2Centre
for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Diagnostics Division,
HYDERABAD, India.
Background/Objectives: CRTAP is one of the 21 genes known
to be associated with Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI). Biallelic
variants in CRTAP (cartilage-associated protein) cause autosomal
recessive OI type VII. CRTAP forms a complex with P3H1 in
the endoplasmic reticulum and binds to pro-alpha collagen
chains to mediate post-translational modiﬁcation of collagen
triple helix.
Methods: Detailed clinical evaluation and a complete skeletal
survey were performed. We did exome sequencing followed by
genome sequencing to identify the genetic aetiology. RNA was
extracted from the fetal ﬁbroblasts for transcript analysis.
Results: Antenatal sonography at 19 weeks of gestation
showed shortening of long bones and rocker bottom feet. Peri-
natal pathological evaluation showed protruding thoracic cage,
depressed nasal bridge with anteverted nares, and long philtrum.
Radiographic ﬁndings were short and bowed legs with multiple
fractures at different stages of healing, and generalized osteope-
nia. Exome sequencing did not reveal any signiﬁcant pathogenic
variants. Genome sequencing identiﬁed a deep intronic homo-
zygous variant in intron 3, c.794-1403A>G. RNA studies revealed
that it affects splicing and results in two different abnormal
transcripts. The detected variant generates the novel splice donor
site and utilizes upstream acceptor sites resulting in the formation
of two different transcripts of 68 bp and 75 bp cryptic exons in
CRTAP mRNA.
Conclusion: The deep intronic variant is associated with
alteration of splicing, leading to the generation of two abnormal
transcripts. This novel splicing effect in CRTAP is the likely cause of
lethal form of OI in the fetus.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.020.A Pathogenic LEF1 variants disrupt WNT signaling to
cause ectodermal dysplasia associated with limb
malformations
Salem Alawbethani1;2, Maria Asif1;2;3, William Dufour4;5, Anne-
Sophie Jourdain4;6, Genevieve Baujat7, Christian Becker1, Birgit
Budde1, Lyndon Gallacher8;9, Theodoros Georgomanolis1, Jamal
Ghoumid4;5, Wolfgang Höhne1, Stanislas Lyonnet7, Iman Ali Ba-
Saddik10, Sylvie Manouvrier-Hanu4;5, Susanne Motameny1, Angelika
A Noegel2;3, Lynn Pais11, Clemence Vanlerberghe4;5, Prerana Wagle12,
Sue White8;9, Marjolaine Willems13, Peter Nürnberg1;3, Fabienne
Escande4;6, Florence Petit4;5, Muhammad Sajid Hussain1;2;3
1CCG - Cologne Center for Genomics, Köln, Germany; 2Center for
Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany; 3Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Köln, Germany;
4University of Lille, Lille, France; 5Chu De Lille, Lille, France; 6Chu, Lille,
France; 7Necker Hospital, Paris, France; 8Victorian Clinical Genetics
Services, Parkville, Australia;
9University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Australia; 10Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Aden, Aden, Yemen; 11Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, United States; 12Cologne Excellence Cluster
on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD),
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany; 13Hospital Center Uni-
versity De Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
Background/Objectives:
Ectrodactyly
ectodermal
dysplasia
without cleft lip/palate (MIM 129810) is reported with clinical
manifestation of split-hand/foot malformation accompanied by
ectodermal anomalies like hypotrichosis and abnormal dentition.
This disorder has received insufﬁcient attention in the past. We
aim to delineate the underlying genetic determinants of this
disorder.
Methods: Whole exome and transcriptome sequencing, Pull
down assay, Immunoblotting, Immunoﬂuorescence.
Results: We recruited 12 individuals from 5 unrelated families
manifesting a syndrome with variable expression of limb mal-
formations and/or ectodermal dysplasia. The phenotypic spectrum
includes various limb malformations, such as radial ray defects,
polydactyly or split hand/foot, and ectodermal dysplasia in some
individuals. We identiﬁed four novel LEF1 variants — monoallelic
in 11 affected individuals and biallelic in one. We have shown that
out of four, only the p.Met23dup impaired interaction with
β-catenin due to its location in a highly conserved β-catenin
binding domain of LEF-1. Whole transcriptomic proﬁling further
conﬁrmed that Wnt/ β-catenin signaling pathway is impaired. We
have seen signiﬁcant differential expression of transcripts already
known as downstream targets of the Wnt/ β-catenin signaling
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
392
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
pathway and HOX family — both Wnt and HOX are crucial for
embryonic developmental events.
Conclusion: Our functional data show that two molecular
mechanisms are at play: haploinsufﬁciency or loss of DNA-binding
are responsible for a mild to moderate phenotype, while loss of
β-Catenin binding due to biallelic variants is associated with a
severe phenotype. Our ﬁndings establish mono- and biallelic
variants in LEF1 as a cause for a syndrome comprising limb mal-
formations and ectodermal dysplasia.
References:.
Grants: CHU Lille, CMMC, DAAD, NHGRI, NHLBI.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.021.B Contribution of SHOX gene sequencing in the
etiological diagnosis of short stature
Camille Porteret1, Sylvie Patri1, Florence Compain1, Pascaline
Letard1, Sylvie Roullaud2, Gwenaël Le Guyader1, Fabienne Dufernez1,
Matthieu Egloff1
1Poitiers University Hospital, Poitiers, France; 2Angoulême Hospital,
Angoulême, France.
Background/Objectives: Analysis of the SHOX gene is common in
clinical practice, as an abnormality justiﬁes a treatment by growth
hormone. Our study aims to determine the interest of SHOX
sequencing when large rearrangements analyses are inconclusive,
and in relation with the precise clinical context1.
Methods: We analyzed the clinical and genetic data of 163 pro-
bands referred to our laboratory for analysis of the SHOX locus for
Idiopathic Short Stature (ISS) or Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD),
after Turner syndrome was excluded by karyotyping. All patients
underwent CNV analysis by MLPA followed by gene sequencing.
Results: Out of the 163 patients analyzed, 15 had a CNV
affecting SHOX or its regulatory regions: 11 pathogenic deletions
and 4 duplications (2 likely benign and 2 VUS). In the 152 patients
without pathogenic CNV, 5 had SNVs or indels. The only patient
carrying a variant classiﬁed as pathogenic also exhibited major
clinical signs of LWD. The remaining variants were classiﬁed as
benign for one rare polymorphism, likely benign because of
inheritance.
Conclusion: In our cohort, the diagnostic yield of SHOX
sequencing was 33% (1/3) for patients with signs of LWD, whereas
it was zero in patients with ISS. Thus this analysis seems ques-
tionable in the context of ISS and could be limited to patients with
signiﬁcant signs of LWD (i.e. a positive “Rappold revisited” score1).
References: 1Hirschfeldova et al. Journal of Human Genetics, 2016.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.022.C Body mass index and the risk of rheumatic disease:
linear and nonlinear Mendelian randomization analyses
Torgny Karlsson1, Fatemeh Hadizadeh1, Mathias Rask-Andersen1,
Åsa Johansson1, Weronica Ek1
1Uppsala University, Department of Immunology, Genetics and
Pathology and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: While the association between obesity
and risk of rheumatic disease is well established, the causal rela-
tion is not fully established. Here we estimate the causal effect of
body mass index (BMI) on the risk of developing ﬁve types of
rheumatic disease.
Methods: Linear and nonlinear mendelian randomization (MR)
was used to estimate the effect of BMI on the risk of developing of
rheumatic disease and to identify sex-speciﬁc effects. Primary MR
analyses were performed in 361,952 participants from the UK
Biobank cohort.
Results: We found that a one standard deviation increase in
BMI increases the risk for rheumatoid arthritis (IRR = 1.52; 95%
CI = 1.36-1.69),
osteoarthritis
(IRR = 1.49;
1.43-1.55),
psoriatic
arthropathy (IRR = 1.80; 1.31-2.48), gout (IRR = 1.73; 1.56-1.92),
and inﬂammatory spondylitis (IRR = 1.34; 1.14-1.57). BMI was also
found to be a stronger risk factor for psoriatic arthropathy (sex-
interaction P = 3.3 × 10-4) and gout (P = 4.3 × 10-3) in females
compared to males. Nonlinear effects of BMI were identiﬁed for
osteoarthritis and gout in males, and for gout in females. The
nonlinearity for gout was more extreme in males compared to
females, and was similar to what was observed for urate levels.
Conclusion: Higher BMI causes an increased risk for rheumatic
disease, an effect that is more pronounced in females compared
to males for both gout and psoriatic arthropathy. These results
give further insight into etiology and pathology of rheumatic
disease.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the Swedish Research
Council, the Marcus Borgströms, the Åke Wibergs, A and M Rud-
bergs
foundations,
Vleugels
foundation
and
Hedströms
foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.023.D MED12 somatic mutation in Paget’s disease of bone
Nerea
Gestoso-Uzal1;2;3,
Luis
Antonio
Corchete2;3,
Ana-Belén
Herrero1;2;3, Javier del Pino-Montes2;4, Juan Francisco Blanco-
Blanco2;5, Rogelio González-Sarmiento1;2;3
1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain;
2Biomedical Research Institute of
Salamanca (IBSAL), University Hospital of Salamanca-USAL-CSIC,
Salamanca, Spain; 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of
Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain;
4Rheumatology Service, University Hospital of Salamanca-IBSAL,
Salamanca, Spain; 5Traumatology and orthopedic surgery service,
University Hospital of Salamanca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is a
metabolic bone disease characterized by an increase in bone
turnover in a disorganized way. Germinal mutation in SQSTM1
gene constitutes the most important known genetic factor
predisposing to PDB, but it can not explain the etiopathogenesis
of all the patients. Moreover, PDB is a focal disorder that does
not affect to all the bone tissue. The aim of this study was to
identify somatic mutations that can determine the development
of PDB.
Methods: DNA was extracted from both pagetic and normal
bone tissue from one PDB patient following a standard phenol/
chloroform procedure. Whole exome sequencing was performed
to identify pagetic bone-exclusive mutations.
Results: We identiﬁed 40 somatic variants in the pagetic bone
that did not appear in the normal tissue, including 11 exonic
variants. We found just one nonsense mutation, c.103C>T; p.E35*,
in MED12 gene. Somatic mutation of MED12 has been associated
with uterine myomas, characterized by uncontrolled but benign
cell proliferation. Moreover, it has been reported that MED12
mutation causes a blockade of autophagy, as it occurs with
reported mutations in SQSTM1(1).
Conclusion: Our results suggest that somatic alteration of
MED12 gene could be responsible of PDB development.
References: 1. A. El Andaloussi, A. Al-Hendy, N. Ismail, T. G.
Boyer, S. K. Halder, Reprod. Sci. 27, 823 (2020).
Grants: This study was funded by FIS-FEDER: PI18/01476.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
393
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P05.024.A Syntaxin-18 defects in human and zebraﬁsh cause
trafﬁc jams and unravel key roles in early bone development
Brecht Guillemyn1, Hanna De Saffel1, Jan Willem Bek1, Piyanoot
Tapaneeyaphan1, Adelbert De Clercq1, Tamara Jarayseh1, Sophie
Debaenst1, Andy Willaert1, Peter Byers2, Paul Coucke1, Bettina
Blaumeiser3, Delﬁen Syx1, Fransiska Malfait1, Soﬁe Symoens1
1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Department of Biomolecular
Medicine, Ghent, Belgium; 2University of Washington, Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology - Department of Medicine,
Seattle, United States; 3University of Antwerp, Department of Medical
Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Membrane fusion is a key process in all
living organisms. SNAREs are required for fusogenic action, where
they zipper up at the juncture of membranes, enabling fusion and
cargo transfer. Syntaxin-18 (STX18), an endoplasmic reticulum-
resident SNARE, is crucial for membrane fusion events, vesicular
transport and secretion of collagens. Currently, STX18 is not linked
to any human disease.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was applied for a
fetus with lethal osteogenesis imperfecta, presenting with multiple
fractures, abnormal cartilage formation, tibial bowing, irregularly
formed mandible, and severe cranial undermineralization. Protein
modelling and overexpression studies were performed and stx18
zebraﬁsh crispants (uppercut18) were generated using CRISPR/Cas9.
Results:
WES
revealed
a
homozygous
missense
variant
p.(Arg10Pro) in STX18, affecting a critical residue in the cytoplasmic
N-terminal alfa-helical domain of syntaxin-18, leading to stable
mutant STX18 protein. Uppercut18 had severe craniofacial mal-
formations, curved backbones and underdeveloped ﬁns, and all
died at 11-12dpf. Strikingly, uppercut18 revealed impaired cartilage
and skeletal development; and interestingly, displayed (1) altered
bone remodelling, (2) general upregulated mRNA and protein levels
of components acting within the forming stx18-complex and
secretory pathway, and (3) altered behaviour including decreased
movement and an increased light-to-dark-transition response.
Conclusion: Our study provides evidence for a link between
genetic defects in STX18 and human bone disease, expanding the
phenotype of the SNAREopathies, and our in vivo data describes
for the ﬁrst time an essential role for syntaxin-18 during skeletal
development and its involvement in neurological pathways.
References: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1161748, https://
doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02784,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.
2016.11.010.
Grants: Research Foundation Flanders (12Q5920N,1842318N),
Ghent University.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.025.B Comprehensive molecular screening using NGS
custom gene panel identiﬁes ultra-rare types of Osteogenesis
imperfecta and OI-like disorders
Kinga Sałacińska1, Lena Rutkowska1, Iwona Pinkier1, Dominik
Salachna1, Izabela Michałus2, Elżbieta Jakubowska-Pietkiewicz3,
Łukasz Kępczyński1, Agnieszka Gach1
1Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital - Research Institute, Department
of Genetics, Lodz, Poland;
2Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital -
Research Institute, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic
Diseases, Lodz, Poland; 3Medical University of Lodz, Department of
Paediatric Propedeutics and Bone Metabolic Diseases, Lodz, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare
connective tissue disorder, presenting genetic and phenotypic
heterogeneity. The molecular etiology reaches XXI types, of which
types I-IV (90% of patients) are associated with mutations in genes
encoding collagen type I. Other cases are caused by aberrations in
one out of 17 non-collagen genes inﬂuencing collagen biosynth-
esis or related molecular pathways, which prevalence is below 1
per 1 000 000 births or remains unknown.
Methods: The study included 158 patients suspected with
Osteogenesis imperfecta, aged 6 months to 44 years, presenting a
broad spectrum of clinical manifestation. NGS custom gene panel,
encompassing all known genes for OI types I-XIX and OI-like dis-
orders, was performed.
Results: We have identiﬁed 9 families with pathogenic
mutations located in six non-collagen genes (IFITM5, SERPINF1,
FKBP10, WNT1, P4HB, LRP5) associated with an ultra-rare OI type V,
VI, XI, XV and OI-like disorders as Cole-Carpenter syndrome, Pri-
mary Osteoporosis, Idiopathic Juvenile Osteoporosis. This unique
group of patients constituted 7% of the study population with a
proven molecular diagnosis of congenital bone fragility. Of 10
non-collagen variants, four have not been reported previously.
Conclusion: Obtained results reﬂect phenotypic and genetic
variety of skeletal disorders, as primary patients with mutations in
non-collagen genes were classiﬁed as having OI type I (LRP5,
WNT1, P4HB), type III (FKBP10, IFITM5) and type IV (SERPINF1,
IFITM5). Thus, comprehensive molecular screening is crucial for
correct diagnosis, genetic counselling and appropriate treatment.
References:
PMID:
24715559;
PMID:
20301472;
OMIM
Database.
Grants: Young Scientist Grant 2016/IV/57-MN.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.026.C Biallelic loss of function variants in EXOC6B are
associated with impaired primary ciliogenesis and cause
spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia with joint laxity type 3
Pelin Simsek-Kiper1, Prince Jacob2, Priyanka Upadhyai2, ekim
taskiran3, Vishal Singh Guleria2, beren karaosmanoglu3, gozde
imren3, rahşan göçmen4, Gandham SriLakshmi Bhavani2, Neethuk-
rishna Kausthubham2, hitesh shah5, Gulen Eda Utine1, koray
boduroglu1, Katta Girisha2
1Department of Pediatric Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Hacettepe
University, Ankara, Turkey, Ankara, Turkey; 2Department of Medical
Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of
Higher Education, Manipal, India, Manipal, India; 3Department of
Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Hacettepe University, Ankara,
Turkey, Ankara, Turkey;
4Department of Radiology, Faculty of
Medicine Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, Ankara, Turkey;
5Department of Pediatric Orthopaedics, Kasturba Medical College,
Manipal, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India,
Manipal, India.
Background/Objectives:
Spondylo-epi-metaphyseal
dysplasia
with joint laxity type 3 (SEMDJL3) is characterized by multiple joint
dislocations and is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in
EXOC6B. Only four molecularly-conﬁrmed individuals have been
reported hitherto and the underlying mechanism is yet to be
elucidated.
Methods:
Using
exome
sequencing,
we
identiﬁed
c.2122+15447_2197-59588del and c.401T>G biallelic variants in
EXOC6B in two individuals from unrelated families with different
ethnicities. Immunoﬂuorescence and immunoblotting assays were
performed in proband 1 (P1), and osteogenic differentiation assay
and total mRNA sequencing in proband 2 (P2). RT-PCR and RT-
qPCR were performed for both in patient derived ﬁbroblasts.
Results: P1 at age 3 years demonstrated leptodactyly (slender
metacarpals and metatarsals), delayed carpal ossiﬁcation, lumbar
lordosis with bilateral hip, and knee dislocations. P2 at age 13
years had intellectual disability with central nervous system
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
394
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
anomalies including hydrocephalus, hypoplastic mesencephalon,
and thin corpus callosum in addition to the known features of
SEMDJL3. Increased levels of EXOC6B mRNA, absent protein in
ﬁbroblast-derived cell lysates, shortening of primary cilia length
with minor variability of primary cilia frequency in P1 as compared
to control derived ﬁbroblasts were observed. The expression of
EXOC6B mRNA and osteogenic differentiation potential was
reduced in dermal ﬁbroblasts of P2 as compared to that of control
ﬁbroblasts. Pathways related to the extracellular matrix were also
distrubed in P2.
Conclusion: Our study provides the ﬁrst evidence of the
impairment of exocytosis potentially deregulating primary cilio-
genesis in two subjects with SEMDJL3 that might represent yet
another ciliopathy with central nervous system involvement and
joint dislocations.
References:.
Grants: India Alliance Fellowship (IA/CRC/20/1/600002).
Conﬂict of Interest: Pelin Simsek-Kiper: None declared, Prince
Jacob: None declared, Priyanka Upadhyai: None declared, ekim
taskiran: None declared, Vishal Singh Guleria: None declared,
beren karaosmanoglu: None declared, gozde imren: None
declared, rahşan göçmen: None declared, Gandham SriLakshmi
Bhavani: None declared, Neethukrishna Kausthubham: None
declared, hitesh shah: None declared, Gulen Eda Utine: None
declared,
koray
boduroglu:
None
declared,
Katta
Girisha
Founding Director of Suma Genomics Pvt. Ltd. (Incubatee at
Manipal Universal Technology Business Incubator).
P05.027.D Genetic anomalies and diagnostic yield in an 11-
year birth cohort of craniosynostosis patients
Linda Gaillard1, Anne Goverde2, Annelies de Klein2, Irene Mathijs-
sen1, Marieke van Dooren2
1Erasmus Medical Center-Sophia Children’s Hospital, University
Medical Center, Department of Plastic, Reconstructive and Hand
Surgery, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2Erasmus Medical Center-Sophia
Children’s Hospital, University Medical Center, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Craniosynostosis is a rare congenital
anomaly, deﬁned by premature fusion of one or more cranial
sutures. Craniosynostosis can occur in isolation or as part of a
clinical syndrome. The genetic cause of craniosynostosis may
impact the clinical course and treatment of patients with cranio-
synostosis. Knowledge on the genetic etiology therefore is key to
ensure adequate counseling and to improve clinical management
of craniosynostosis patients. In line with this, the Dutch craniosy-
nostosis guideline recommends genetic diagnostic testing in
patients with craniosynostosis. This study aims to assess both the
prevalence of the different subtypes of craniosynostosis in an 11-
year birth cohort of craniosynostosis patients as well as the
diagnostic yield of genetic testing.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective cohort study among
patients who presented at the outpatient clinic of the Erasmus
University Medical Center, The Netherlands. We included all
patients, born between 2010-2021, with radiologically conﬁrmed
craniosynostosis and assessed diagnostic yield of genetic testing.
Results: We included 993 patients (n = 334 female/659 male),
of whom 856 presented with single-suture craniosynostosis
(449 sagittal, 268 metopic, 116 unicoronal, 14 unilambdoid, 9
frontosphenoidal) and 136 patients presented with multisutural
craniosynostosis, and one unknown (preliminary results).
Conclusion: This study will discuss the prevalence of chro-
mosomal and monogenic (likely) pathogenic variants and provide
an update on the diagnostic yield of genetic testing in our 11-year
birth cohort craniosynostosis patients. Finally, we will compare the
diagnostic yield for different types of craniosynostosis with the
long term aim of improving genetic testing strategies and
counseling.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.028.A The stop-loss variant c.690A>C in RAB33B results in
milder phenotype of Smith-McCort dysplasia-2
Ashwin Dalal1;2, Prince Jacob2, Katta Girisha2, Prajna Udupa2,
debashish ghosh2, Gandham SriLakshmi Bhavani2, hitesh shah2
1Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics - CDFD, Hyderabad,
India; 2Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal, India.
Background/Objectives: Smith-McCort dysplasia-2 (SMC-2) is a
rare spondylo-epiphyseal-metaphyseal dysplasia, caused by bial-
lelic loss of function variants in RAB33B. RAB33B has dual functions
in membrane trafﬁcking and in the autophagy process. Studies
investigating the dynamics of the autophagy with relation to
RAB33B in patients with SMC2 have not been reported.
Methods: We identiﬁed a biallelic stop-loss variant, c.690A>C
in RAB33B in two siblings (P1 and P2) by exome sequencing.
Functional studies were done using immunoﬂuorescence, immu-
noblotting, and qPCR in ﬁbroblast cells of P1 and P2.
Results: P1 and P2 at age 13 years and 15 years respectively
presented with short trunk, barrel-shaped chest, brachydactyly,
plump interphalangeal joints, limited extension of elbow joints,
and progressive joint pain. Convex vertebral endplates, reduced
hip joint spaces, short metacarpals (4th and 5th), abnormal carpal
bone morphology were observed in their radiographs. The mutant
RAB33B showed loss of its Golgi body localization which led to
aggregation of collagens in cytosol. Abundance of cytoplasmic
RAB33B led to increased ﬂux of autophagy, causing accelerated
clearance of the aggregated collagen by aggrephagy. Thus, the
equilibrium of RAB33B localization to Golgi body and phagophore
membrane is modulated by the mutant RAB33B, leading to dif-
ferential crosstalk of Golgi body-RAB33B-autophaosome in the
patient ﬁbroblasts.
Conclusion: Mislocalization of mutant RAB33B at Golgi body
with simultaneous increased autophagy probably underlie the
milder phenotype of SMC-2. Our work highlights the emerging
role of autophagy in collagen degradation and in skeletal
dysplasia.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.029.B Inversion of LMX1B - a novel cause of nail-patella
syndrome in a Swedish family
Hillevi Lindelöf1;2, Eva Horemuzova1, Ann Nordgren1;2, Ulrika Voss3,
Anna Hammarsjö1;2, Giedre Grigelioniene1;2
1Karolinska Institutet, Department of molecular medicine and
surgery, Stockholm, Sweden; 2Karolinska University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Clinical Genetics, Stockholm, Sweden; 3Karolinska University
Hospital, Department of Pediatric Radiology, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Nail-patella syndrome (OMIM #161200)
is a rare autosomal dominant disorder with an estimated pre-
valence of 1 in 50 000. The characteristic clinical ﬁndings are dif-
ferent nail and skeletal abnormalities including underdeveloped
nails, hypoplastic or absent patellae and iliac horns. It is caused by
missense or truncating variants in LMX1B, resulting in hap-
loinsufﬁciency. In this case report, we present an unusual cause of
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
395
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
NPS in a family of ﬁve affected individuals where Sanger
sequencing failed to detect any pathogenic variants in the
LMX1B gene.
Methods: We describe a large inversion disrupting the LMX1B
gene in ﬁve affected family members with mild but variable
clinical features of nail-patella syndrome.
Results: Whole genome sequencing revealed an inversion
stretching approximately 4,2 Mb and disrupting LMX1B and ABL1
which was conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing of the breakpoints.
Conclusion: This expands the molecular spectrum of nail-
patella syndrome, indicating that genomic rearrangements should
be considered a possible cause in patients where standard genetic
investigations fail to detect any pathogenic variants in LMX1B.
References: Sweeney, E., Fryer, A., Mountford, R., Green, A., &
McIntosh, I. (2003). Nail patella syndrome: a review of the phe-
notype aided by developmental biology. J Med Genet, 40(3), 153-
162.
Grants: The Swedish Rare Diseases Research foundation (Säl-
lsyntafonden), Sällskapet Barnavård and Karolinska Institutet,
Swedish Research Council, through the regional agreement on
medical training and clinical research (ALF) between Stockholm
County Council and Karolinska Institutet, Promobilia Foundation
and Frimurare Barnhuset foundation in Stockholm.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.031.D de novo c.784G>A variant in LMNA disturbs nuclear
proteostasis and results in progeroid manifestations
Shruti Pande1, Debasish Kumar Ghosh1, Jeevan Kumar1, Dhanya
Yesodharan2, Sheela Nampoothiri2, Periyasamy Radhakrishnan3,
Chilakala Gangi Reddy4, Akash Ranjan4, Katta Girisha3;5
1Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, Manipal, Department of Medical Genetics, Udupi, India;
2Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre Cochin,
Kerala, India, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Cochin, India; 3Suma
Genomics Private Limited Manipal, Udupi, India; 4Computational and
Functional Genomics Group Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and
Diagnostics Hyderabad, Telangana, India, Hyderabad, Telangana,
India; 5Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of
Higher Education, Manipal, Department of Medical Genetics, UDUPI,
India.
Background/Objectives: Variants in LMNA lead to collapse of
nuclear systems network and underlie some disorders of pre-
mature aging, including Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.
Methods: We identiﬁed a de novo heterozygous nonsynon-
ymous variant, c.784G>A (LMNAE262K) in exon 4 of LMNA
(NM_170707.4) in a sixteen-years old male by exome sequen-
cing. We performed immunocytochemistry to see expression
and localization of the mutant LMNA and immunoblotting to
quantify the mutant LMNA in patient ﬁbroblasts. To study the
LMNA secondary structure, recombinant wild type and mutant
were
cloned
and
circular
dichroism
spectroscopy,
atomic
force microscopy, dynamic light scattering and isothermal
titration calorimetry were performed. Computation tools and
molecular dynamics simulation were used to assess the stability
of LMNAE262K.
Results: The proband had micrognathia, sparse scalp hair,
eyebrows and eyelashes, narrow nasal bridge with broad nasal tip
and dental crowding. His ﬁbroblasts showed nuclear aggregates
of the mutant LMNA with its mislocalization from the nuclear
envelope. Structural destabilization of mutant region results in the
clustering of multiple hydrophobic residues, making LMNA
unstable and prone to aggregation. LMNAE262K also disrupts the
consensus binding site of E2-SUMO ligase UBE2I, further reducing
the clearance of mutant LMNA in patient ﬁbroblasts. Aggregates
of LMNAE262K temporally sequester HSPA1A1, PSMD8, MRE11 and
KU80, resulting in impaired nuclear proteostasis and loss of DNA
damage repair response in proband ﬁbroblasts.
Conclusion: LMNAE262K in the rod2 domain causes structure-
function destabilization of LMNA, leading to nuclear proteotoxicity
in premature aging.
References:.
Grants: India Alliance (IA/CRC/20/1/600002) funded this work.
Conﬂict of Interest: Shruti Pande: None declared, Debasish
Kumar Ghosh: None declared, Jeevan Kumar: None declared,
Dhanya
Yesodharan:
None
declared,
Sheela
Nampoothiri:
None declared, Periyasamy Radhakrishnan: None declared, Chi-
lakala
Gangi
Reddy:
None
declared,
Akash
Ranjan:
None
declared, Katta Girisha Suma Genomics, Private Limited, Manipal
(Director).
P05.032.A A novel SLC35D1 variant causing milder phenotype
of Schneckenbecken dysplasia in a large pedigree
Leyla Ozer1, Suleyman Aktuna1, Evrim Unsal1, volkan baltaci1
1Mikrogen Genetik Tani Merkezi, Genetics, ANKARA, Turkey.
Background/Objectives:
SLC35D1
gene
mutations
causes
Schneckenbecken dysplasia(SD) which is an rare autosomal
recessive disorder and characterized by the snail-like pelvis, ﬂat-
tening of vertebral bodies, short and broad long bones with a
dumbbell-like appearance, thoracic hypoplasia. Here we reported
a family with novel SLC35D1 variant and milder phenotype of SD
(1, 2).
Methods: The clinical features of 5 patients were represented
in Table 1. Whole exome sequencing was done using the Next-
Seq500 Sequencer. The detected variant which was predicted as
the causative variant was validated by Sanger sequencing in the
proband and her parents. Sanger sequencing were studied for the
other affected individuals in the family.
Results: Whole Exome sequencing of the proband revealed a
homozygous missense variant of SLC35D1 gene; c.401T>C. A,
p.Met134Thr. Affected sibling and her cousins with same pheno-
type have homozygous missense variant too. The parents and
their healthy girl are heterozygous carriers.
Conclusion: Patients with mild phenotypic ﬁndings who carry
SLC35D1mutation were reported for the ﬁrst time in this study.
This report will have signiﬁcant consequences since it has the
largest SD family with alive patients (ages ranged 4-31 years old)
reported to date.
References: 1. Song Z. Roles of the nucleotide sugar trans-
porters (SLC35 family) in health and disease. Molecular Aspects of
Medicine. 2013; 34: 590–600.
2. Furuichi T et al. Identiﬁcation of loss-of-function mutations of
SLC35D1 in patients with Schneckenbecken dysplasia, but not
with other severe spondylodysplastic dysplasias group diseases. J
Med Genet. 2009 ; 46(8): 562–568.
Grants: Table 1. Clinical features of the patients.
.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
396
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P05.033.B Mapping active regulatory signals at early
embryonic stage of face development
Catia Attanasio1, Marion Leleu2, Alexandre Reymond3
1KU Leuven, Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium;
2University of
Lausanne, Bioinformatics Competence Center, Lausanne, Switzer-
land;
3University of Lausanne, Center for Integrative Genomics,
Lausanne, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives:.
While craniofacial malformations are among the most common
congenital anomalies in humans at frequency 1/1600, their
genetic causes remain largely unknown. Previous studies have
shown that deletion or mutation of craniofacial enhancers modi-
ﬁes the activity of craniofacial gene(s) and affects face morphol-
ogy. To reveal the complex regulatory networks that control
craniofacial development and gain insights into the effect of non-
coding variation, we mapped 3D interactions between craniofacial
enhancers and genes.
Methods: We isolated the four facial prominences, i.e., mand-
ible, maxillary, lateral and medial nasal prominences of E11.5
mouse embryo and performed Capture Hi-C to identify chromatin
interactions at all gene promoters.
Results: We identiﬁed an average of 163’000 interactions per
tissue, for a total of 327’459 unique loops. These are chieﬂy cis-
interactions, which account for >98% of all detected interactions,
with a median distance of interacting fragments of 280kb. Chro-
matin interactions between a gene and an intergenic space
account for 77% of all detected interactions. Importantly, enrich-
ment analyses of matched tissue and developmental stage epi-
genomics data (e.g. H3K27ac binding sites) show a signiﬁcant
enrichment of craniofacial regulatory sequences in our interacting
fragments, supporting the biological signiﬁcance of these cranio-
facial interactions’ maps. We recapitulate previously reported
interactions, reveal new interesting regulatory landscape of cra-
niofacial genes and link GWAS non-coding lead SNPs for cranio-
facial phenotypes to candidate target gene(s).
Conclusion: Our data provide a starting point to disentangle
the gene regulatory signals controlling craniofacial development
and point toward new candidate regions for determining the
genetic origins of many craniofacial-associated disorders.
References:.
Grants: PRO-Femmes grant (UNIL, Switzerland).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.034.C Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia: A diagnostic
challenge with genetic heterogeneity
Tuğba Nur Daşar1, ekim taskiran2, gizem ürel-demir1;3, beren
karaosmanoglu2, gozde imren2, güney yılmaz4, Yasemin Alanay1;5,
Gulen Eda Utine1, Koray Boduroğlu1, Pelin Simsek-Kiper1
1hacettepe university, department of pediatrics, division of pediatric
genetics, ankara, Turkey;
2hacettepe university, department of
medical genetics, ankara, Turkey; 3mersin city research and training
hospital, department of pediatrics, division of pediatric genetics,
mersin, Turkey; 4hacettepe university, department of orthopedics,
ankara, Turkey;
5acıbadem university, department of pediatrics,
division of pediatric genetics, istanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) is a
rare genetic skeletal disorder with clinical and genetic hetero-
geneity. MED is caused by mutations in the genes encoding
important cartilage extracellular matrix proteins, enzymes, and
transporter proteins including COMP, MATN3, COL9A1, COL9A2,
COL9A3, CANT1 and SLC26A2. Disproportionate short stature, joint
pain, and early-onset osteoarthritis are the main clinical features
(1). In this study we aimed to investigate the clinical and molecular
ﬁndings along with natural course of the disease in a group of
patients with MED.
Methods: The molecular etiology was investigated with Sanger
sequencing and whole exome sequencing. The clinical ﬁndings of
mutation positive patients were reviewed.
Results: A total of 36 patients with a clinical diagnosis of MED
was evaluated and the genetic etiology was revealed in 20
(55.5%); 11 were male and 9 were female. COMP (n = 12, 60%),
MATN3 (n = 6, 30%) and SLC26A2 (n = 2, 10%) mutations were
detected in a decreasing order. The most frequent complaints for
referral were difﬁculty in walking, fatigue and joint pain. Propor-
tionate short stature was detected in %15 of patients. Orthopedic
follow-up was required in most of the patients. In patients with
SLC26A9 mutations characteristic ﬁndings of double layered
patella and pes equinovarus were not present.
Conclusion: MED is genetically heterogenous yet with uni-
dentiﬁed gene mutations in the etiology. The diagnosis should be
considered even in the absence of characteristic clinical ﬁndings.
Multidisciplinary follow-up is mandatory.
References: 1. Dennis EP, Greenhalgh-Maychell PL, Briggs MD.
Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia and related disorders: Molecular
genetics, disease mechanisms, and therapeutic avenues. Dev Dyn.
2021;250(3):345-359.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.035.D Further delineating the clinical spectrum of
p.Arg444Cys variant in LRP5: a case report and a systematic
review of the literature
Elena Luppi1;2, Guido Zavatta2;3, Nicole Balducci4, Dario Cocciadi-
ferro5, Uberto Pagotto2;3, Marco seri1;2
1IRCCS
Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria
di
Bologna,
Medical
Genetics Unit, Bologna, Italy; 2Alma Mater Studiorum University of
Bologna, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences (DIMEC),
Bologna, Italy; 3IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna,
Unit of Endocrinology and Prevention and Care of Diabetes, Bologna,
Italy; 4IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Ophthal-
mology Unit, Bologna, Italy;
5Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital,
IRCCS, Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, Rome, Italy.
Background/Objectives: The LRP5 protein plays a key role in
retinal vasculature development and helps regulate bone mineral
density (BMD) homeostasis. Loss-of-function variants in LRP5 were
associated
with
familial
exudative
vitreoretinopathy
(FEVR),
osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome and early-onset osteo-
porosis/osteopenia.
We describe the clinical and genetic features of a family with
osteopenia as the presenting feature, displaying the p.Arg444Cys
variant in LRP5.
Methods: Clinical and familial data were based on physical
examination and medical records. Next-generation sequencing of
an in-silico panel encompassing 20 genes correlated with bone
fragility and detection of index mutation were performed with
Twist Custom Panel (clinical exome-twist Bioscience) kit.
A systematic review of the p.Arg444Cys variant in LRP5,
according to PRISMA guidelines, was performed.
Results: Our proband is a 36-year-old male who suffered from
scoliosis and recurrent vertebral fractures even during bispho-
sphonate treatment. The genetic testing revealed the hetero-
zygous variant c.1330C>T (p.Arg444Cys) in the LRP5 gene
(NM_002335.4), segregating in his father and his 30-year-old sister.
Both of them experienced less severe osteopenia and denied
visual impairment, supporting the variant’s role in reduced BMD.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
397
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Ophthalmic examination excluded signs of vitreoretinopathy in
our proband and his father.
We systematically review 1384 records and we found four
studies reporting the same variant. To our knowledge, the
p.Arg444Cys variant was previously identiﬁed only in patients with
FEVR with or without osteopenia.
Conclusion: We reported a patient displaying the p.Arg444Cys
variant in LRP5 and familial low BMD without eye involvement,
expanding the clinical spectrum of this variant. Further clinical and
biochemical assessment of the other family carriers are ongoing.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.036.A Genetic basis of cleft lip and palate
Eleonore Pairet1;2, Peyman Ranji1, Raphaël Helaers1, Vera Lucia Gil-
da-Silva-Lopes3, Benedicte Bayet4, Elin Malek Abrahimians4, Naima
Deggouj4, Sara Castelein4, Nicole Revencu2;4, Miikka Vikkula1
1De Duve Institute UCLouvain, Human Molecular Genetics, Woluwe-
Saint-Lambert, Belgium; 2Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc (UCLou-
vain), Center for Human Genetics, Bruxelles, Belgium; 3UNICAMP
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Medical Genetics, Campinas,
Brazil; 4Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc (UCLouvain), Centre labio-
palatin Albert de Coninck, Bruxelles, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P) is the most
common cranio-facial malformation often divided into syndromic
CL/P (syCL/P) and non-syndromic CL/P (nsCL/P). In general,
patients with syCL/P follow Mendelian inheritance, whilst those
with nsCL/P are thought to have a complex etiology.
Methods: We analyzed 81 a priori non-syndromic index CL/P
patients from a continuously growing cohort of 1400 CL/P patients
by whole exome sequencing (WES). We looked for Mendelian
mutations using Highlander as well as copy number variations
using ExomeDepth.
Results: We unraveled pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants
in 12 families in COL2A1, CTNND1, TP63, CHD7, PHF8, IRF6, and
GHRL3. We also identiﬁed, and validated by molecular karyotyp-
ing, a deletion in TP63 in 2 siblings.
Conclusion: We identiﬁed mutations in 16 % of index cases by
WES, providing an accurate diagnosis as well as the possibility of
genetic counseling. In some cases, we identiﬁed pathogenic var-
iants in syCL/P genes in a priori nsCL/P cases, demonstrating that
patients with CL/P without cardinal signs or familial history of a
syndrome may still carry a mutation in a gene linked to syCL/P. We
also identiﬁed a new phenotype in blepharocheilodontic syndrome
2: imperforate anus. These results show that WES is an important
tool for identifying the genetic cause of CL/P. For the remaining
patients for which we have not identiﬁed pathogenic variants in
candidate genes, we will enlarge our research towards the rest of
the genes in the human genome to identify new genes for clefts.
References:.
Grants: FNRS n°40000521.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.037.B Novel SDR9C7 mutation causes lamellar ichthyosis
in a Spanish patient
Carlos Gutiérrez-Cerrajero1;2;3, Nerea Gestoso-Uzal1;2;3, Daniel Salete
Granado1;2, Janet Sotolongo-Ravelo1, David Diez-Castro1;2, Ana-
Belén Herrero1;2;3, Ángela Hernández-Martín4, Rogelio González-
Sarmiento1;2;3
1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain;
2Biomedical Research Institute of
Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain; 3Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), Salamanca, Spain; 4Department
of Dermatology, Niño Jesús Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Ichthyoses are a group of diseases
characterized by dry, scaly skin and a disruption of skin barrier
function(1). Lamellar ichthyosis (LI) is a severe variant (1) and
SDR9C7 has recently been identiﬁed as one of the causal genes for
LI. To date, four mutations in SDR9C7 have been linked to LI: two
in Lebanese families in 2016, one in a Japanese woman in 2016
and one in a Pakistani family in 2017. Here we present a ﬁfth
mutation in a Spanish patient.
Methods: The patient was admitted to Hospital Niño Jesús in
Madrid. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood by
standard phenol/chloroform protocol, mutations were found using
whole-exome sequencing and validated by Sanger sequencing.
Candidate mutations were analysed using the predictors SIFT and
Polyphen, as well as the databases ClinVar and Varsome.
Results: The patient shows ichthyosis with dark scales and
sporadic superﬁcial desquamation, hyperactivity and microcephaly.
Whole exome sequencing revealed the patient was homozygous for
mutation c.95G>A, p.Gly32Asp in SDR9C7 and Sanger sequencing
validated it. The parents were heterozygous for this mutation. This
mutation was not included in ClinVar, but SIFT, Polyphen and Var-
some predicted its effect to be pathogenic or likely pathogenic.
Conclusion: We report the discovery of a novel mutation in
SDR9C7 that causes LI. This is the ﬁrst mutation discovered
worldwide and the ﬁrst in a European patient.
References: 1. V. Oji et al., J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 63, 607–641
(2010).
Grants: This project was funded by FIS-FEDER PI20/01569.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.038.C Novel RIPK4 variants cause ectodermal dysplasia
and alter cell-cell adhesion
Chiara De Luca1, Rosanna Monetta1;1, Elisabetta Botti2, Manuel
Belli3, Maria Grazia Palmerini1, Marco Salvatore4, Lucia Militti5,
Arianna Di Daniele1, Elena Cicchetti1, Daniele Castiglia6, Francesco
Brancati1, Paola Fortugno7
1University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy;
2University of Rome Tor
Vergata, Rome, Italy; 3University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy; 4Istituto
superiore di sanità, Rome, Italy;
5ASL1 Abruzzo, L’Aquila, Italy;
6Istituto dermopatia dell’Immacolata IRCCS, Rome, Italy; 7IRCCS San
Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Ectodermal Dysplasia Syndactyly Syn-
drome (EDSS1) is caused by mutations in PVRL4 encoding nectin-
4, a component of adherens junctions. EDSS1 shares cutaneous
syndactyly (a mild form of pterygia) with other conditions such as
Bartsocas-Papas syndrome caused by biallelic mutation in RIPK4, a
key player in epidermal development, differentiation, and skin
integrity. Here we report two siblings with a phenotype resem-
bling EDSS1, with biallelic variants in RIPK4 and studied their
functional effect.
Methods: Exome sequencing. Western blotting, autopho-
sphorylation, proteasome inhibition and immunoﬂuorescence
analyses in patient’s primary keratinocytes
and transfected
HEK293 cell line. Immunoﬂuorescence, haematoxylin and eosin
staining and transmission electron microscopy on patient’s skin.
Results: Our siblings featured ectodermal dysplasia, plantar
hyperkeratosis associated to syndactyly of hands and feet sugges-
tive of EDSS1. After excluding PVRL4 variants, exome sequencing
revealed biallelic likely pathogenic variants in RIPK4, inherited from
heterozygous unaffected parents. Reverse phenotyping revealed
that one brother was born with “closed eyes” (ankyloblepharon) and
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
398
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
oral synechiae, surgically treated at birth, typically seen in RIPK4-
related disorders. Functional studies showed that RIPK4 deﬁciency
impaired cell adhesion organization downregulating PVRL4/nectin-
4 expression through IRF6 transcription factor. Also, PKP1/DSG1/
DSP altered expression or localization was detected and desmo-
somes showed abnormal morphology at electron microscopy.
Conclusion: This work further expands the clinical spectrum
seen in RIPK4-pathies highlighting epithelial fusions as diagnostic
handles for the disease. In adults, the phenotype coincides with
EDSS1. Such clinical overlap is mirrored at functional level, as
outlined by this newly uncovered RIPK4-IRF6-nectin-4 axis.
References: Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM.
Grants: GR2013-02356227 and RC2020-2756828.
Conﬂict of Interest: Chiara De Luca full-time, Rosanna Monetta
full-time, Elisabetta Botti full-time, Manuel Belli full-time, Maria Grazia
Palmerini full-time, Marco Salvatore full-time, Lucia Militti: None
declared, Arianna Di Daniele: None declared, Elena Cicchetti: None
declared, Daniele Castiglia full-time, RC2020-2756828, Francesco
Brancati full-time, GR2013-02356227, Paola Fortugno full-time.
P05.039.D A unique COL2A1 phenotype as a result of partial
gene deletion
Sena Cetin1;2, Mustafa Gunes1;2, Filiz Ozen2, Elif Yilmaz Gulec1;2
1Istanbul Medeniyet University Medical School, Department of Medical
Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey; 2Istanbul Goztepe Prof. Dr. Suleyman Yalcin
City Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Monoallelic COL2A1 (OMIM *120140)
pathogenic variants cause various syndromes associated with
several skeletal and ocular disorders such as achondrogenesis,
chondrodysplasia, SED congenita, Spondyloperipheral dysplasia,
Kniest dysplasia, Stickler syndrome type I, avascular necrosis of the
femoral head.
Methods: A 24-year-old male patient referred with the com-
plaint of short stature, skeletal deformities, arthralgia in weight
bearing joints, easy fatiguability and high degree myopia. The
patient and his skeletal survey were evaluated and multigene
panel
was
performed
and
followed
by
multiplex
ligation-
dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) assay.
Results: The patient had acro-mesomelic short stature with
short and deformed forearms, legs, hands and feet. X-ray images
showed bilateral thickened and short metatarsal and metacarpal
bones, bilateral short ulnas, shortened and wide phalanxes. Pelvis
MRI showed bilateral avascular necrosis of the femoral heads.
Ophthalmologic examination revealed retinal detachment due to
high degree myopia. Heterozygous deletion between exons 51-54
was detected in MLPA performed as a result of suspected CNVs
detected in exon sequencing.
Conclusion: To date, the majority of variants reported in
COL2A1 are single nucleotide changes. Only 2 cases with COL2A1
whole exon deletion have been reported, which have the phe-
notype of Stickler Syndrome Type 1(1). Our case is unique having
a novel phenotype, which possess overlapping features of various
COL2A1 related disorders with a monoallelic large deletion.
References: (1) Richards, Allan J et al. “Stickler syndrome and
the vitreous phenotype: mutations in COL2A1 and COL11A1.”
Human mutation vol. 31,6 (2010): E1461-71. https://doi.org/
10.1002/humu.21257.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.040.A Sudden cardiac death - a new phenotypic aspect of
PLACK syndrome?
Ceren Damla Durmaz1;2, Aysel Ünal2
1Hacettepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey; 2University of Health Sciences, Gazi Yaşargil
Training and Research Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics,
Diyarbakır, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: PLACK syndrome (Peeling skin, Leuko-
nychia, Acral punctate keratoses, Cheilitis and Knuckle pads syn-
drome, OMIM 616295) is an extremely rare genodermatosis
caused by biallelic mutations in CAST. Here, we report a previously
unreported CAST variant in a family with PLACK syndrome which
may reveal an unexplored aspect of this syndrome for the ﬁrst
time: the sudden cardiac death (SCD).
Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was employed to
explore the molecular etiology of a dermatological phenotype
comprised of punctate palmoplantar keratoderma, angular chei-
litis and hyperkeratosis of the knees in two sisters (4 and 8
years old).
Results:
A
novel
homozygous
nonsense
mutation
(NM_001042440.5: c.1759C>T; p.Gln587Ter) in CAST was identiﬁed
in both sisters, which segregated with the dermatological phe-
notype in family. During the follow-up, dilated cardiomyopathy
became evident in the proband and resulted in SCD similar to her
two affected brothers who died suddenly at 3 and 4 years. WES
did not reveal any other pathogenic variants that may explain
cardiomyopathy/sudden cardiac death.
Conclusion: CAST encodes calpastatin, an endogenous inhi-
bitor of calpain. Calpain responds to increased Ca2+ in myocardial
cells, leading to myocyte death by cleaving structural and func-
tional proteins of myocytes during cardiac ischemia, which is
inhibited by calpastatin. Although SCD/cardiomyopathy is not a
known feature present in the seven reported families with PLACK
syndrome, considering the function of CAST in myocardium, SCD/
cardiomyopathy may be a hidden phenotypic feature of the
syndrome. Whether this phenotype is speciﬁc to the variant
identiﬁed here is yet to be explored.
References: PMID:24333421.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.041.B Identiﬁcation of candidate mutations related to
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis in the Caucasian population -
focusing on post-zygotic alternations
Monika Horbacz1, Marek Rocławski2, Marcin Ceynowa2, Rafał
Pankowski2, Arkadiusz Piotrowski1
1Medical University of Gdansk, International Research Agenda 3P-
Medicine Laboratory, Gdansk, Poland; 2Medical University of Gdansk,
Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Gdansk, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis is a
multidimensional and multicausal spine deformity with frequency
from 1-4 % in general population. Most studies focused on
germline mutation analysis, omitting post-zygotic variation lead-
ing to pathological effects in organisms. Post-zygotic changes pop
up in the human body de novo during a lifetime and usually is not
inherited. “Benign” diseases research shows that a combination of
germline and somatic variation that explore in the human body
early in a lifetime may negatively impact and speed up the
manifestation of the disease.
Methods:
Whole-exome
sequencing
were
performed
to
determine scoliosis-related genes in the Caucasian population of
32 adolescent patients with severe scoliosis, with a signiﬁcant
focus on mosaic variations. Types of biological material used:
blood and articular processes.
Results: We identiﬁed recurrent missense germline and
somatic variants located in OBSCN, NEB and other genes.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
399
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: Mentioned genes encode proteins that are fun-
damental components in the assembly and functioning of verte-
brate
striated
muscles.
Germline
and
somatic
variations
coexistence across them might cause muscle weakness and cor-
relate with scoliosis manifestation and its advanced level.
References: Cheng, J. C. et al. Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 1, (2015).
Forsberg, L. A. et al. Nat. Rev. Genet. 18, 128–142 (2017).
Mustjoki, S. et al. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 2039–2052 (2021).
Murphy, S. et al. Expert Rev. Proteomics 16, 241–256 (2019).
Grants: Project POWR.03.05.00-00-z082/18 co-ﬁnanced by the
European Union through the European Social Fund under the
Operational
Programme
Knowledge
Education
Development
2014–2020.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.042.C A case with spondyloenchondrodysplasia with
immune dysregulation (SPENCDI) caused by a novel missense
ACP5 mutation
nuray ozturk1, Dilek Uludağ Alkaya2, Gokcen Karamik1, banu nur1,
Beyhan Tüysüz2, ercan mihci1
1Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Pediatric Genetics, Antalya,
Turkey; 2İstanbul University Cerrahpaşa Faculty of Medicine, Pediatric
Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives:
Spondyloenchondrodysplasia
with
immune dysregulation (SPENCDI) is a rare autosomal recessive
immunoosseous dysplasia, characterized by enchondromatous
metaphyseal and vertebral lesions with immune dysfunction and
neurologic involvement. SPENCDI is caused by biallelic muta-
tions in the ACP5 gene which encodes tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase, a protein functioning in the type I interferon
pathway. Here, we present a case with a novel variant in the
ACP5 gene.
Methods: The patient is a 7-year-old male who initially pre-
sented with short stature and gait disturbance at the age of 5. He
is the ﬁrst child of consanguineous parents born at term. At the
age of 2, he presented to hospital with toe walking, the neuro-
logical examination exhibit spasticity and hyperreﬂexia. Brain-
Spinal MRI and EMG were normal. At the age of 5, his height was
95 cm (−3,2 SD), skeletal survey revealed metaphyseal irregula-
rities and platyspondyly. Cranial CT revealed calciﬁcations in the
basal ganglia. He was hospitalized for autoimmune hemolytic
anemia at age 7. Bone marrow aspiration, autoimmune and
immunological screenings were normal.
Results:
Whole-exome
sequencing
analysis
displayed
a
homozygous missense variant of c.389G>T (p.Trp130Leu) in the
ACP5 gene, later conﬁrmed by sanger sequencing. It was pre-
dicted as a “pathogenic” change conforming ACMG criteria in
VARSOME database and wasn’t reported in the literature. Parents
were found to be heterozygous carriers of the variant.
Conclusion: SPENCDI is a clinically heterogeneous disease with
distinctive skeletal ﬁndings and pleiotropic extra-osseous pheno-
type. We aimed to raise awareness of SPENCDI, which has multi-
system involvement and a signiﬁcant risk of morbidity and
mortality. References:.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-016-0252-y.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.043.D Identiﬁcation of effector cell types for orofacial
clefting through integration of murine single-cell expression
data and GWAS results
Anna
Siewert1,
Julia
Welzenbach1,
Benedikt
Reiz2,
Elisabeth
Mangold1, Henning Dickten2, Kerstin Ludwig1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Genomics, Bonn, Germany; 2FASTGe-
nomics, Comma Soft AG, Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Orofacial clefting (OFC) is among the
most common human birth defects. Although about 60 risk loci
have been identiﬁed to date, the functional consequences of the
identiﬁed variants are still largely unknown, as are the cell types in
which the candidate genes exhibit their effects. We here analyzed
the gene expression patterns of OFC candidate genes in recently
published single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data from
embryonic mice.
Methods: We re-analyzed scRNA-seq data from the mouse face
(~8,000 cells at E11.5)[1] and whole embryos (~1.4 million cells
E9.5–E13.5)[2] using Seurat v4 and scCATCH. The analyses were
reproducibly run on the FASTGenomics platform.
Results: We observed predominant expression of OFC candi-
date genes in epithelial cells (e.g. Irf6, Grhl3, Tfap2a), and in a
combination of chondrocytes, osteoblasts and progenitor cells of
connective tissue, jaw and teeth (e.g. Fgfr1, Fgf10, Mmp16). Fur-
thermore, we found that Irf6, Grhl3 and Tfap2a are co-expressed in
an epithelial cell sub-population and additional OFC candidate
genes are speciﬁcally expressed in Irf6+ epithelial cells.
Conclusion: Epithelial cells are involved in processes of pro-
liferation and patterning of the mesenchyme and are therefore
one of the crucial cell types during craniofacial development. Our
results further suggest a distinct epithelial cell sub-population in
which OFC candidate genes are active during this developmental
timeframe. We will follow this up by studying a more systematic
enrichment of OFC candidate genes on a cell-type and single-cell
level using single-cell disease relevance scores[3].
References: [1] Li et. al 2019.
[2] Cao et. al 2019.
[3] Zhang et. al 2021.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Anna Siewert: None declared, Julia Wel-
zenbach: None declared, Benedikt Reiz Comma Soft AG, Elisabeth
Mangold: None declared, Henning Dickten Comma Soft AG, Ker-
stin Ludwig: None declared.
P05.044.A Exploring genotype-phenotype correlations,
penetrance and expressivity of HOXD13 associated
synpolydactyly in a cohort of 17 families with HOXD13
variants
Annika Gottschalk1, Henrike Sczakiel1;2;3, Wiebke Hülsemann4,
Sarina Schwartzmann1, Angela Abad Perez1, Malte Spielmann5;6,
Stefan Mundlos1;2, Denise Horn1, Martin Atta Mensah1;7;7
1Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut für
Medizinische Genetik und Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany;
2Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development & Disease,
Berlin, Germany; 3Berlin Institute of Health at Charité – Universi-
tätsmedizin Berlin, BIH Biomedical Innovation Academy, BIH Charité
Junior Clinician Scientist Program, Berlin, Germany; 4Kinderkranken-
haus Wilhelmstift, Handchirurgie, Hamburg, Germany; 5Universität
zu Lübeck, Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany; 6Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Human Molecular Genomics
Group, Berlin, Germany;
7Berlin Institute of Health at Charité –
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, BIH Biomedical Innovation Academy, BIH
Charité Digital Clinician Scientist Program, Berlin, Germany.
Background/Objectives:
The
homeobox
transcription
factor
HOXD13 is an important regulator of embryonic limb development.
Mutations leading to haploinsufﬁciency of HOXD13 – typically
expansions of a polyalanine repeat in exon 1 – cause synpolydactyly
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
400
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
type 1. How these contribute to genotype-phenotype correlations,
penetrance and expressivity of HOXD13 associated synpolydactyly
remains mostly illusive. We present a large cohort of 43 affected
individuals from 17 families with HOXD13 variants.
Methods: 41 patients with synpolydactyly suggestive of
HOXD13 haploinsufﬁciency were selected for analysis of HOXD13
(NM_000523.4) by Sanger sequencing, microsatellite analysis and
next generation sequencing.
Results: We identiﬁed 15 causative variants and 2 variants of
uncertain signiﬁcance in HOXD13. The most frequent variants (12/17)
were repeat expansions of the alanine stretch (5 expansions by 8
and 7 by 7 alanines). Additionally, we identiﬁed 3 (likely) pathogenic
variants (one frameshift, one stop-gain, one single amino acid
deletion) and 2 missense variants of uncertain signiﬁcance. Pedigree
and/or segregation analysis of these index patients revealed a total
of 43 affected individuals. The observed phenotypes ranged from
unaffected carriers to severe osseous synpolydactyly with pheno-
typic heterogeneity occurring not only across but also within families
and asymmetrically affected individuals. We could also corroborate a
previously suggested genotype-phenotype correlation of longer
alanine repeat expansions with more severe phenotypes.
Conclusion: In a large cohort of 43 affected individuals from 17
families with HOXD13–associated synpolydactyly we could identify
variable penetrance and expressivity of HOXD13 variants and
conﬁrm a positive correlation of alanine repeat expansion length
and phenotypic severity.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.045.B Incontinentia pigmenti female with the NEMOdel4-
10 deletion in the IKBKG/NEMO gene in a mosaic form
Ezia
Spinosa1,
Michele
Salvia1,
Carmela
Casale1,
Alessandra
Pescatore1, Annalaura Torella2;3, Giulio Piluso2, Vincenzo Nigro2;3,
Vincenzo Piccolo4, Andrea Diociaiuti5, Maya El Hachem5, Matilde
Valeria Ursini1, Francesca Fusco1
1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics “Adriano Buzzati- Traverso” IGB-
CNR, Naples, Italy; 2Dipartimento di Medicina di Precisione, Università
della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Naples, Italy; 3Telethon Institute of
Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy; 4Dermatology Unit,
University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy; 5Dermatology
Unit, Bambino Gesù. Children’s Hospital—IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
Background/Objectives:
Incontinentia
pigmenti
(IP;
OMIM#308300) is an X-linked dominant disease, generally lethal in
male, caused by mutations in IKBKG/NEMO gene, essential for NF-
κB activation. The IP phenotype is characterized by typical skin
lesions and by neuroectodermal defects that contribute to a wide
variability of severity of disease.
Here we report the case of IP female with neurological and ocular
impairment, carrying the recurrent deletion in NEMO/IKBKG gene as
a somatic mutation. Moreover, the patient showed also a de novo
pathogenic variant c.1708_1709del, p.Ser570fs*27in MED13L gene.
Methods: An IP female patient with severe form of IP, con-
ﬁrmed by skin biopsy, was analyzed in the IP locus on DNA from
blood and the presence of NEMOdel4-10 was detected by long-
range PCR and quantiﬁed by QPCR.
Results: The IP locus analysis revealed the presence of de novo
NEMOdel4-10 deletion and excluded the presence of the risk
alleles for IP (MER67dup, NEMOPdel). Somatic mosaicism was
strongly suggested by quantitative analysis of the ratio of allele
mutated versus wild-type allele in genomic DNA from blood.
Consistent with somatic mosaicism, the sample of patient had
lower ratios of mutant versus wild-type allele compared to the
fully heterozygote IP female control.
Conclusion: Postzygotic genetic mosaics for the IKBKG/NEMO
mutation are reported only in IP male, indeed the IP phenotype is
almost entirely restricted to females heterozygous for IKBKG/
NEMO gene mutation. This is the ﬁrst report demonstrating
mosaicism as a cause of IP in female. To note that the contribute
of
constitutive
alteration
in
MED13L
gene
(NM_015335.5:
c.1708_1709del) will be discussed.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.046.C Two new PRKG1 gene mutations among Polish
patients with Marfan syndrome and related disorders
Maria
Pilarska-Deltow1,
Marzena
Skrzypczak-Zielinska2,
Anna
Junkiert-Czarnecka1, Aneta Bąk1, Marta Heise1, Olga Haus1
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Collegium
Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń,
Bydgoszcz, Poland; 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Poznań, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Hereditary connective tissue disorders
are a group of over two hundred diseases described so far, with
Marfan syndrome (MFS) as the best known. MFS overlaps symp-
toms with such marfanoid syndromes as Loeys-Dietz and the
vascular subtype of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, making differential
diagnosis extremely difﬁcult. MFS and MFS-like syndromes are
caused by damage to the connective tissue of different systems.
One of the main features of MFS-like syndromes is ascending
aorta dissection, and aortic aneurysm. According to current
knowledge, PRKG1 gene is on the list of genes related to the
pathogenesis of aneurysms.
Methods: NGS of 12 gene panel sequencing was performed for
105 Polish patients with suspicion of Marfan or a Marfan-like
syndrome. Control group consisted of 100 people, healthy at the
time of the examination, without family history of MFS or MFS-like
syndromes.
Results: As the result of the analysis, two mutations in PRKG1
gene
were
detected.
Both,
c.1040C>G
(p.Ser347Cys)
and
c.1075A>C (p.Lys359Gln) mutations were new, not registered in
internet databases or reported in the literature. They also were
absent in the control group. According to VarSome, c.1040C>G
was classiﬁed as VUS, and c.1075A>C as pathogenic mutation. The
patient with the ﬁrst mutation was a 12-year-old boy with physical
features of MFS. The 9-year-old girl with the second mutation had
only excessive joint mobility. They both had no cardiovascular
problems, possibly due to their young age.
Conclusion: The results of the study expands the mutational
spectrum of PRKG1 and may help in prevention, early diagnosis
and treatment/management of MFS and MFS-like syndromes.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.047.D Internal Skeletal Dysplasia Registry within the
electronic database of Department of Clinical Genetics
University Children’s Hospital in Belgrade - basis for a
personalised medicine in the future
Marija
Mijovic1,
Goran
Cuturilo1;2,
Jelena
Ruml
Stojanovic1,
Aleksandra Miletic1, Brankica Bosankic1, Hristina Petrovic1
1University Children’s Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics,
Belgrade, Serbia;
2Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade,
Belgrade, Serbia.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
401
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Skeletal dysplasia are heterogeneous
group of genetic disorders affecting skeletal development. Pro-
gress in molecular genetic testing and up-to-date knowledge from
pre-clinical trials have been leading to novel therapeutic approa-
ches for genetic skeletal disorders despite the challenges of drug
development in rare diseases. Timely diagnosis and patients’
information availability is crucial for early and proper application
of new treatment options.
Methods: We systematically analyzed data from the internal
electronic database of our genetic service in order to create an
internal sub-register of patients with genetic skeletal disorders.
Results: In the past six years, 137 patients with suspected
genetic skeletal disorders have been referred to the Department
of Clinical Genetics, University Children’s Hospital in Belgrade.
Next generation sequencing was performed for 64 patients with
suspected heterogeneous skeletal dysplasia, among them there
are conﬁrmed cases of very rare or severe skeletal diseases. Also,
single gene sequencing or speciﬁc mutation analysis was per-
formed for 27 patients according to clinical suspicion. Other
patients are clinically monitored or their proposed genetic testing
is in progress. We categorized all patients according to the latest
classiﬁcation of genetic skeletal disorders. The FGFR3 chon-
drodysplasia group has 19 pediatric patients, with three familial
cases of achondroplasia.
Conclusion: The Internal Skeletal Dysplasia Registry should
allow for better monitoring of data and visibility results of genetic
testing for these patients so that they are timely included speciﬁc
treatments in the context of personalised medicine in the future.
References: Non applicable.
Grants: Non applicable.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.048.A A most unusual phenotype in a patient with a
mosaic ASXL1 deletion
Destrez Alban1, Guillaume Jedraszak2, Severine Fritot3, Catherine
Gondry4, Sophie Bryselbout5, Marie-Christine Plancq6, Cica Gbaguidi7,
Bénédicte DEMEER8
1CHU Amiens Picardie / UPJV / Institut Faire Faces, Department of
maxillo-facial surgery / UR 7516 CHIMERE, Amiens, France; 2CHU
Amiens Picardie, Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Amiens, France;
3CHU Amiens Picardie, Department of pediatric physical medicine
and rehabilitation, Amiens, France; 4CHU Amiens Picardie, Depart-
ment of Radiology, Amiens, France; 5CHU Amiens Picardie, Depart-
ment of Ophthalmology, Amiens, France; 6CHU Amiens Picardie,
Department of Pediatric orthopaedics, Amiens, France; 7CHU Amiens
Picardie, Department of maxillo-facial surgery, Amiens, France; 8CHU
Amiens Picardie / UPJV / Institut Faire Faces, Department of medical
genetics / UR 7516 CHIMERE, Amiens, France.
Background/Objectives: Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS), caused
by loss of function mutation in ASXL1, is characterized by dis-
tinctive facial features and posture, growth failure, intellectual
disability, and variable anomalies.
Methods: We report a patient carrying a mosaic ASXL1 deletion
(arr[hg19]20q11.21(31,004,670-31,147,256)x1) found in approxi-
mately 30% of cells from both lesional facial tissue and blood.
Results: She is the ﬁrst child of unrelated parents, with no
familial history. Diagnosis of bilateral cleft of the lip and the palate
(BCLP) was made on the 24GW ultrasound. She was born at 37GW
with BW:2.680kg, BH:46cm, BHC:32.5cm. A right partial ablepharon
and a temporal cutaneous band, 2 scalp cutaneous outgrowths and
scalp defect, a left interrupted superior eyelid with irregular arched
eyebrows and a pseudo temporal cutaneous band, altogether
deﬁning a left Tessier #2, #9 and right Tessier #3, #9 facial cleft, and a
right microtia were diagnosed. She had hypoplasia of the right hand
with metacarpophalangeal joint hyperextension contrasting with
ﬂessum of the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints. On her
left-side she had foot hypoplasia, tarsal malformation, instep fatty
hypertrophy, IV and V hypoplasia. She had normal psychomotor
development. At age 6 years, when last seen, she had normal
growth parameters and no intellectual disability. Left upper limb
hyperplasia became more evident as she grew.
Conclusion: We consider the deletion as causal and the
asymmetry due to the mosaicism. Nethertheless, because of most
unusual phenotype, further molecular studies were discussed. No
mosaic mutation of KRAS or FGFR1 was found on DNA from
lesional tissue, WES studies are ongoing.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P05.049.B A progeroid syndrome with severe osteogenesis
imperfecta segregates with an intronic TAPT1 homozygous
variant that creates a knockout allele
nasrinsadat nabavizadeh1;2;3, Annkatrin Bressin4, PohHui Chia1,
Ricardo Moreno Traspas1, Nathalie Escande-Beillard1;3, Carine Bon-
nard1, Zohreh Hojati2, Scott Drutman5, Jean-Laurent Casanova5;6;7,
mohammad Shboul8, Andreas mayor4, Bruno Reversade1;3;9
1Laboratory of Human Genetics & Therapeutics, Genome Institute of
Singapore, A*STAR, Singapore., Singapore, Singapore; 2Division of
Genetics, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology & Microbiology,
Faculty of Biological Science and Technology, University of Isfahan,
Isfahan, Iran., Isfahan, Iran;
3Medical Genetics Department, Koç
University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey., Istanbul, Turkey;
4Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany., Berlin,
Germany;
5St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious
Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, Rockefeller University, New York, NY, New
York, United States; 6Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious
Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM U1163, Necker Hospital for Sick
Children, Paris, France., Paris, France; 7University of Paris, Imagine
Institute, Paris, France., Paris, France;
8Department of Medical
Laboratory Sciences, Jordan University of Science and Technology,
Irbid, Jordan., Irbid, Jordan; 9Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
A*STAR, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore., singapore, Singapore.
Background/Objectives: Exome sequencing has introduced a
paradigm shift for the identiﬁcation of germline variations
responsible for Mendelian diseases. However, non-coding regions,
which make up 98% of the genome, contain structural, regulatory,
and transcribed information that cannot be captured. The lack of
functional annotation for intronic and intergenic variants makes
RNA sequencing a powerful companion diagnostic.
Methods: Here, we identiﬁed ﬁve patients with a recessive
Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) syndrome characterized by bone
defects and neonatal progeria. We integrated results obtained
from homozygosity mapping, genome and RNA sequencing to
ﬁnd the causative gene.
Results: We delineated a non-coding TAPT1 mutation (c.1237-
52G>A) that segregated with the disease. This private mutation,
which is predicted to serve as an alternative splicing branchpoint,
results in exon 12 skipping and creates a protein-null allele.
Functional studies performed on patients’ ﬁbroblasts support the
notion that 1) TAPT1 resides in the ER/Golgi, 2) is not an essential
receptor for human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and 3) controls
pathways involved in collagen and extracellular matrix biology.
Conclusion: Overall, our work highlights the power of tran-
scriptomic approaches in identifying genetic defects as well as in
illuminating the molecular mechanisms and underlying dysregu-
lated pathways in human diseases.
References:.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
402
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Grants: This work was supported by a Strategic Positioning
Fund on Genetic Orphan Diseases (GODAFIT) and a Use-Inspired
Basic Research (UIBR) grant from Agency for Science, Technology
and Research (A*STAR) in Singapore to B.R. This work was also
funded by the Max Planck Society (to A.M.) and the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, grant 418415292 to A. M.).
Conﬂict of Interest: nasrinsadat nabavizadeh: None declared,
Annkatrin Bressin: None declared, PohHui Chia: None declared,
Ricardo Moreno Traspas: None declared, Nathalie Escande-Beillard:
None declared, Carine Bonnard: None declared, Zohreh Hojati:
None declared, Scott Drutman: None declared, Jean-Laurent
Casanova: None declared, mohammad Shboul: None declared,
Andreas
mayor:
None
declared,
Bruno
Reversade
Principle
investigator.
P06
CARDIOVASCULAR DISORDERS
P06.001.C Diagnostic yield of a NGS panel in a Brugada
syndrome cohort
Eline Simons1, Ewa Sieliwonczyk1, Maaike Bastiaansen1, Ilyas
Louarroudi1, Bart Loeys1, Maaike Alaerts1
1University of Antwerp, Center of Medical Genetics, Edegem, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a rare
inherited cardiac arrhythmia disorder affecting 1/2000 individuals.
Its diagnosis requires presence of a spontaneous or sodium
channel blocker induced ST-segment elevation on an electro-
cardiogram (ECG). BrS patients are at risk for ventricular ﬁbrilla-
tions which could lead to sudden cardiac death. In general, only
for 25-30% of the patients a genetic diagnosis can be established
in one of the BrS associated genes, of which 20-25% carry a variant
in the SCN5A gene.
Methods: We collected clinical history, ECG parameters and
genetic results of 294 BrS patients (61% male) screened with a
diagnostic panel for inherited primary electrical disorders covering
initially 51 and in a later version 60 genes.
Results: In total, 43.5% of patients carried a variant of uncertain
signiﬁcance (VUS, class 3; n = 102) or (likely) pathogenic variant
(class 4 and 5; n = 26) following the ACMG guidelines. Most of the
class 4/5 variants are found in the SCN5A gene (23/26), whereas
the remainder were identiﬁed in KCNE1/LMNA/SCN2B. 43.9% of
patients had a Shangai score above 3.5 (deﬁnite BrS) of which
14.7% carried a class 4/5 variant. Only 4.2% of patients with a
Shangai score between 2 and 3 carried a (likely) pathogenic var-
iant. Of the 22.4% of patients with a familial history, 20% carried a
class 4/5 variant.
Conclusion: The overall diagnostic yield in our cohort is 8.8%,
increasing to 15% in BrS patients with a deﬁnite diagnosis, or 20%
in clear familial patients, which is slightly lower than reported in
literature.
References:.
Grants: Research Foundation Flanders.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.002.D Clinical characteristics, genetic ﬁndings and
arrhythmic outcomes of patients with catecholaminergic
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia across the globe
Danny Radford1;2, Emma Coakley-Youngs1;2, Meltem Altinsoy2;3,
sharen lee2, elham mahmoudi2;4, Levent pay5, Göksel Çinier6, pawel
matusik2;7, George Bazoukis2;8, Sebastian Garcia-Zamora2, Jeremy
Man Ho Hui2, Yan Hiu Athena Lee2, Konstantinos Letsas9, Ziliang
Chen2;10, Kamalan Jeevaratnam11, Adrian Baranchuk2;12, Tong
Liu2;13, Gary Tse2
1Kent and Medway Medical School, Canterbury, United Kingdom;
2Cardiovascular Analytics Group, Hong Kong, China; 3Diskapi Yildrim
Beyazit Training and Research Hospital, Department of Cardiology,
Istanbul, Turkey; 4Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran;
5Dr Siyami Ersek Hospital Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery
Training and Research Hospital, Department of Cardiology, Istanbul,
Turkey;
6Dr Siyami Ersek Hospital Thoracic and Cardiovascular
Surgery Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey; 7Jagiello-
nian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland;
8University of
Nicosia, Nicosia, Cyprus; 9Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens,
Athens, Greece;
10Tianjin Institute of Cardiology, Tiajin, China;
11University
of
Surrey,
Guildford,
United
Kingdom;
12Queen’s
University, Kingston, Canada; 13Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China.
Background/Objectives: Catecholaminergic polymorphic ven-
tricular tachycardia (CPVT) is a rare cardiac ion channelopathy. This
study examined the clinical characteristics, genetic basis and
arrhythmic outcomes of CPVT patients globally.
Methods: PubMed was systematically searched for case reports
or series on CPVT. Clinical characteristics, genetic ﬁndings and
primary outcome of spontaneous ventricular tachycardia/ven-
tricular ﬁbrillation (VT/VF) were analysed.
Results: A total of 442 patients (mean presentation age: 15±12-
years-old, 52% male) were included. On presentation, 368 patients
(83%) were initially symptomatic and 214 (48%) had VT. PVCs were
present in 356 patients (81%) and VT was present in 352 patients
(80%). Genetic tests were performed on 257 (58%) patients with a
yield of 98%. RyR2, CASQ2, TERCL and KCNJ2 mutations were
found in 232(89%), 27(10%), 2 (0.8%) and 1 (0.4%) patients,
respectively. Out of 336 patients, 302 (90%) were prescribed beta-
blockers, 88 (29%) were prescribed ﬂecainide, 82 (27%) were
prescribed propranolol, 26 (9%) were prescribed atenolol, 24 (8%)
were prescribed verapamil, 4 (1%) were prescribed propafenone.
Out of 442, implantable-cardioverter deﬁbrillator (ICD) were
inserted for 120 (27%) patients and sympathectomy was per-
formed on 32 (7%) of patients. On follow-up, 73 patients (38%)
had VT/VF.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst systematic review and meta-
analysis of CPVT cases globally. Most patients had symptoms on
initial presentation and approximately half had VT as the pre-
senting complaint. RyR2 mutations accounts for the majority
(89%) of the CPVT cases, followed by CASQ2 (10%), then
TERCL and KCNJ2 mutations (1%). Most patients received beta-
blocker therapy. 7% had sympathectomy and 27% had ICDs
implanted.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.003.A Association of the genetic variation in the long
non-coding RNA FENDRR with the risk of developing
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Elías Cuesta Llavona1, Rebeca Lorca1, Israel David Duarte Herrera1,
Belén Alonso1, Sara Iglesias Álvarez1, Jose Julian Rodriguez Reguero1,
Eliecer Coto1, Juan Gómez1
1Central University Hospital of Asturias, Oviedo, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is
the most common hereditary heart disease. However, in around
40-60% of cases no pathogenic variants are identiﬁed in the
exome. Studies suggest that there are other genetic factors that
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
403
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
could explain part of the risk of developing HCM. A group of
candidate genes to be evaluated are those that encode lncRNAs.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the possible association of
lncRNAs with the risk of developing HCM.
Methods: We sequence a total of 238 index cases of HCM (58 ±
16 years old, 63% male) and 212 controls (70 ± 7 years old; 45%
male) through a panel of 10 lncRNAs coding genes that have been
associated with cardiovascular disease (H19, KCNQ1OT1, MHRT,
CARMEN, FENDRR, TINCR, ANRIL, MIAT, PVT1, MALAT1) with
semiconductor chips and the Ion GeneStudio S5 Sequencer (Ion
Torrent). The Chi-square test were used to compare allelic fre-
quencies in the polymorphisms identiﬁed.
Results: We observed that FENDRR rs39527 A> G, rs39529 G>C
and rs40384 T>C polymorphisms were signiﬁcantly associated
with the risk of developing HCM in our cohort (0.006 patients vs
0.03 controls; p = 0.0274; OR: 0.2381; IC: 0.0660-0.8594).
Conclusion: In summary, this study identiﬁed the signiﬁcant
protective effect of the rare allele in the FENDRR rs29527,
rs39529 and rs40384 polymorphisms on this disease in a Spanish
population. These variants could involve a change in the
structure of FENDRR that would modify the regulation of
gene expression controlled by this lncRNA. However, the
functional relevance of this change requires experimental
validation.
References:.
Grants: FIS PI17/00648.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.005.C Pathogenic variants are distributed among
different genes when comparing adult LQTS patients to
infants
Alexander Moscu-Gregor1, Christoph Marschall1, Sabine Lippert1,
Sebastian Eck1, Konstanze Hörtnagel1, Imma Rost1
1MVZ Martinsried GmbH, Medicover Group, Martinsried, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Congenital long-QT-syndrome (LQTS) is
a rare heart disease characterized by a prolonged ventricular
repolarization leading to a QTc of more than 460 ms. Patients are
usually between 5 and 18 years old when diagnosed. However,
little is known about the genetic background of severe LQTS in the
very young (especially neonates/infants). This raises the question
which variants in which genes are responsible for the early
manifestation.
Methods: Between January 2017 and December 2021, 1391
index patients with suspected LQTS were referred to our labora-
tory for genetic testing. All the genes for which there was at least
limited evidence of association with LQTS were examined. The
patients were sorted by age (neonate/infant/toddler/>4years), and
it was determined which genes were affected in each age group.
Results: Of the 36 toddlers examined, 8 were conﬁrmed
genetically positive. All 8 patients carried variants exclusively in
the KCNQ1 gene, indicating that this gene is overrepresented
when compared to the 1271 older (>4years) patients (≈45% of
positive cases). Additionally, pathogenic variants of one gene were
detected in neonates or infants with severe LQTS only: CACNA1C.
Conclusion: In the very young patients (<4 years), the variants
are distributed among different genes than in adults. This can be
used for variant classiﬁcation according to ACMG/ACGS guide-
lines. Criterion PP4, which refers to phenotype speciﬁcity, could be
assigned to CACNA1C variants if a severe LQTS phenotype is
present in a neonate/infant. Moreover, PP4 could be modiﬁed to a
moderate or strong pathogenic criterion for KCNQ1 variants
detected in toddlers.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.006.D Heart transcriptome proﬁle of a novel transgenic
mouse model for arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
Martina Calore1, Soﬁa Compagno2, Sara Vencato2, Robin Colpaert1,
Claudia Sacchetto1, Alessandra Lorenzon2, Tommaso Becchi2, Nicola
Facchinello3, Chiara Romualdi2, Leon de WIndt1, Paola Braghetta3,
Libero Vitiello2, Alessandra Rampazzo2
1Maastricht University, Department of Molecular Genetics, Maastricht
University,
The
Netherlands,
Maastricht,
Netherlands;
2Padova
University, Department of Biology, University of Padova, Italy.,
Padova, Italy; 3Padova University, Department of Molecular Medi-
cine, University of Padova, Italy, Padova, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM)
is one of the most commonly inherited cardiomyopathies, char-
acterized by the progressive substitution of the myocardium with
ﬁbrofatty tissue (1). Clinically, ACM is characterized by ventricular
arrhythmias, syncope, and sudden cardiac death and shows wide
phenotypic heterogeneity (1). Of the known disease genes, des-
mosomal proteins plakophilin-2 (PKP2), desmoplakin (DSP), and
desmoglein-2 (DSG2) are most commonly mutated (2). To study
the pathogenic mechanisms of ACM, we generated a novel mouse
model for the disease.
Methods: We generated transgenic mice overexpressing
desmoglein-2 carrying the p.G100R mutation (TgG) found in an
affected patient. To establish the transcriptomic ACM signature,
we performed RNA seq on cardiac samples from 6 month-old TgG
and control mice.
Results: TgG mice present several of the clinical features of
ACM, such as ﬁbrous replacement, and increased distance
between cardiomyocyte membranes. Importantly though, we did
not detect the same reductions of the canonical Wnt/b-catenin
signalling pathway reported in other ACM models, indicating that
additional pathways must be perturbed in TgG. Enrichment ana-
lysis and network construction identiﬁed upregulation of immune-
and extracellular matrix-related processes, as well as epigenetic
mechanisms, such as histone acetyltransferase activity. By con-
trast, downregulated processes included the MAPK and TGF-ß
pathways.
Conclusion: Collectively, these ﬁndings identiﬁed numerous
processes potentially altered in TgG mice that could pave the way
for further studies focused on ACM pathogenic mechanisms.
References:
(1)
Thiene
et
al.,N
Engl
J
Med
(1988)
318:129–1331988.
(2) Calore et al.,Cell Tissue Res (2015)360:491–500.
Grants: Hartstichting DCVA2017-2018ARENA-PRIME, Beat the
beat donation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.007.A Identiﬁcation of rare genetic variants associated
with stroke outcome
Estefanía Alcaide1;2;3;4, Núria Martínez-Gil1;2;3;4, Georgia Escara-
mís5;6, Uxue Lazcano7, Marina Mola-Caminal7, Cristòfol Vives-Bauza8,
Jordi Jiménez7, Israel Fernández–Cadenas9, Susanna Balcells1;2;3;4,
Raquel Rabionet1;2;3;4
1Universitat de Barcelona, Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadística,
Barcelona, Spain;
2Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de
Barcelona (IBUB), Barcelona, Spain; 3Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de
Déu (IRSJD), Barcelona, Spain; 4CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain; 5CIBER-
ESP, Barcelona, Spain;
6Institut de Neurociències, Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 7Hospital Del Mar, Servei de Neurologia,
Barcelona, Spain; 8Universitat de les Illes Balears, Biologia, Palma de
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
404
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Mallorca, Spain; 9Hospital de la Santa Creu i de Sant Pau, Barcelona,
Spain.
Background/Objectives: Stroke is a cerebrovascular disease that
may lead to an important adult disability. There is a large varia-
bility in the functional outcome after a stroke, which may be in
part regulated by genetic factors. With the aim to further inves-
tigate the genetics of stroke outcome, we performed exome
sequencing followed by targeted resequencing in a set of 702
patients.
Methods: A pilot study was performed with 90 exomes of
extreme stroke recovery scores (modiﬁed Rankin Scale (mRS) at
90 days 0-1 vs 3-5) and target genes involved in functional
outcome were selected. 702 samples were sequenced by tar-
geted next-generation sequencing using a capture assay that
included these targets along with selected regions based on
previous GWAS results. Here, we performed continuous (mRS 0-
6) and dichotomic (mRS 0-1 vs 3-5 and 0-1 vs 3-6) analyses with
Bayesian-based rare variant association (BATI)1 adjusting for
multiple testing and selecting rare variants with a CADD score
>20.
Results: These analyses highlighted coding rare variants in
CNTN5 and VNN2 genes. Coding variants in VNN2, a protein that
may act in cell adhesion and migration of neutrophils, were sig-
niﬁcantly enriched in cases with better outcome. In contrast, rare
variants in CNTN5, a protein involved in synaptogenesis, are
associated with a poor outcome.
Conclusion: CNTN5 and VNN2 appear to be linked to stroke
outcome. Further functional experiments are needed to understand
how mutations in these genes lead to differences in recovery.
References: 1Susak et al., PLoS Comput Biol. 2021 17(2):e1007784.
Grants:.
“La Fundació de la Marató de Tv3” (Reg.70/307_Proj.201726).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.008.C Penetrance and disease expression of (likely)
pathogenic variants associated with inherited
cardiomyopathies in the general population
Mimount Bourﬁss1, Marion van Vugt1, Abdulrahman Alasiri1, Bram
Ruijsink1;2, Jessica Van Setten1, Amand Schmidt1;3, Dennis Dooijes4,
Esther Puyol-Antón2, Birgitta Velthuis5, Peter van Tintelen4, Anneline
te Riele1;6, Annette Baas4, Folkert Asselbergs3;4
1University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Cardiology,
Utrecht, Netherlands;
2King’s College London, London, United
Kingdom;
3University College London, London, United Kingdom;
4University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Genetics, Utrecht,
Netherlands;
5University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of
Radiology,
Utrecht,
Netherlands;
6Netherlands
Heart
Institute,
Utrecht, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: (Likely) pathogenic variants associated
with arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM), dilated cardio-
myopathy (DCM) and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) are
recommended to be reported as secondary ﬁndings in genome
sequencing studies. This provides opportunities for early diag-
nosis, but also fuels uncertainty in variant carriers (G+), since
disease penetrance is incomplete. We assessed the prevalence
and disease expression of G+ in the general population.
Methods: We calculated the prevalence of (likely) pathogenic
variants associated with ACM, DCM and/or HCM extracted from
two databases in the UK Biobank. Furthermore, we analysed the
frequency of cardiomyopathy/heart failure diagnosis in individuals
carrying these variants (G+). In undiagnosed individuals, we
analysed early signs of disease expression.
Results: We found a prevalence of 1:578, 1:251 and 1:149 for
(likely) pathogenic variants associated with ACM, DCM and HCM
respectively. Compared to controls, cardiovascular mortality was
higher in DCM G+, but similar in ACM and HCM G+. More spe-
ciﬁcally, cardiomyopathy or heart failure diagnosis were more
frequent in DCM G+ and HCM G+, but comparable in ACM G+. In
contrast, ACM G+ had more ventricular arrhythmias. Left ven-
tricular ejection fraction was reduced in undiagnosed DCM G+
individuals.
Conclusion: In the general population, (likely) pathogenic
variants associated with ACM, DCM or HCM are not uncommon.
Although G+ have increased mortality and morbidity, disease
expression in these carriers from the general population remains
low (1.2-4%). Decisions on application of cascade screening and
frequency of cardiological examination should be based on mul-
tiple factors, such as the gene, variant type and family history.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Mimount Bourﬁss: None declared, Marion
van Vugt: None declared, Abdulrahman Alasiri: None declared,
Bram Ruijsink: None declared, Jessica Van Setten: None declared,
Amand Schmidt Servier and Pﬁzer funding for unrelated work,
Dennis
Dooijes:
None
declared,
Esther
Puyol-Antón:
None
declared, Birgitta Velthuis: None declared, Peter van Tintelen:
None declared, Anneline te Riele: None declared, Annette Baas:
None declared, Folkert Asselbergs: None declared.
P06.009.C Using genotyping and whole-exome sequencing
data to improve genetic risk prediction in deep venous
thrombosis
Valeria Lo Faro1, Therese Johansson1;2, Åsa Johansson1
1Uppsala University, Department of Immunology, Genetics and
Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden; 2Womher,
Uppsala University, Centre for Women’s Mental Health during the
Reproductive Lifespan, Uppsala, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is the
formation of blood clots in the deep veins. Blood clots traveling to
the lung can cause organ damage or sudden death. More than
60% of DVT risk is inﬂuenced by genetic factors, such as the Lei-
den mutation in F5 (FVL). Characterizing the genetic contribution
and stratifying individuals based on their genetic makeup can
favourably impact risk prediction.
Methods: We performed a genome-wide association study and
constructed a polygenic risk score (PRS) in the 60% (N = 284,591)
of the UK Biobank cohort. The remaining 40% (N = 198,362) was
employed to evaluate the PRS, and to perform gene-based test on
exome-sequencing data to investigate effects by rare variants.
Results:
We
identiﬁed
and
replicated
a
new
variant
(rs11604583) near TRIM51 gene, and a rare variant (rs187725533),
associated with 2.2-fold higher risk of DVT, in CREB3L1 gene. The
top PRS decile was associated with 3.4-fold risk of DVT, an effect
that was still 2.3-fold, when excluding FVL carriers. Cumulative risk
of DVT at the age of 70 years for FVL carriers in the top PRS decile
is of 10%, contraposed to 5% for non-carriers.
Conclusion: We showed that common and rare variants
inﬂuence DVT risk, and that the PRS improve risk prediction on top
of FVL. This suggests that individuals classiﬁed with high PRS score
could beneﬁt from early genetic screening.
References: Stone et al. “Deep vein thrombosis: pathogenesis,
diagnosis, and medical management.” Cardiovasc Diagn Ther (2017).
Grants: This work was funded by the Swedish Heart-Lung
foundation (nr.20200687).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
405
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P06.010.D Clinical utility of genetic testing in pediatric
patients with polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
Magdalena Pelc1, Dorota Jurkiewicz1, Paweł Kowalski1, Agnieszka
Madej-Pilarczyk1, Joanna Kosińska2, Malgorzata Rydzanicz2, Piotr
Stawiński2;3, Maria Posadowska4, Katarzyna Pręgowska4, Monika
Brzezinska4, Elżbieta Ciara1, Dorota Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, Pau-
lina Halat-Wolska1, Beata Chałupczyńska1, Marzena Gawlik1, Dorota
Siestrzykowska1, Dorota Wicher1, Krystyna Chrzanowska1, Rafał
Płoski2, Katarzyna Bieganowska4
1The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Department of Medical
Genetics, Warsaw, Poland; 2Warsaw Medical University, Department
of Medical Genetics, Warsaw, Poland; 3Institute of Physiology and
Pathology of Hearing, Department of Genetics, Warsaw, Poland; 4The
Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Department of Cardiology,
Warsaw, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Primary electrical disorders affect the
myocyte transmembrane ion channels and predispose to malig-
nant arrhythmias, including polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
(PVT), which is rare in children. Genetically determined channe-
lopathies, such as catecholaminergic PVT (CPVT), long/short QT
(LQTS/SQTS) and Brugada syndromes, may be the cause of these
arrhythmias. They present with incomplete penetrance and vari-
able expressivity.
Methods: Next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis of genes
associated with inherited arrhythmia conditions was performed in
33 Polish patients with documented PVT.
Results: Sixteen patients had a clinically signiﬁcant variant in:
RYR2, KCNH2, KCNJ2, CALM1, SCN5A or 1p13.2 duplication
encompassing KCND3. In one CPVT patient two novel biallelic
RYR2 variants co-occurred, and in another with LQTS con-
comitance of RYR2 and KCNH2 defects implied digenic etiology.
Additionally, in two probands a rare variant of unknown sig-
niﬁcance (VUS), favouring pathogenic, in MYBPC3 was noted.
Five known VUS in KCNH2, SCN5A, SCN10A, TRPM4 were
denoted possibly benign due to high frequency in an in-house
Polish database.
Conclusion: Genetic testing has an essential role in PVT diag-
nosis, inﬂuencing risk stratiﬁcation, preventive and therapeutic
management and genetic counseling. NGS-based testing in PVT
patients provides good diagnostic yield (~55%), however variant
classiﬁcation criteria should consider the unique characteristics of
primary arrhythmias and population aspects. In PVT patients,
concomitance of two or more pathogenic variants (biallelic/
digenic) may occur, resulting in exacerbation of the phenotype,
and phenotypic overlap may be observed in RYR2 or SCN5A-
positive cases. Rarely, PVT may be associated with underlying
cardiomyopathy.
References:.
Grants: Partially supported: CMHI-M31/18.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.012.B Family screening of relatives with vascular Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome, an asset in preventing arterial events
Jean-Michaël
Mazzella1,
Boris
Oehmichen1,
Clarisse
Billon1;2,
Michael Frank1, Xavier Jeunemaitre1;2, Tristan Mirault1;2
1Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges
Pompidou, Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires Rares, Paris,
France; 2University of Paris, INSERM, U970, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS)
is a rare inherited disorder leading to mainly arterial complica-
tions, due to pathogenic COL3A1 variations. Ong et al (Lancet
2010) showed that the introduction of celiprolol signiﬁcantly
reduced arterial events. Screening of relatives allows speciﬁc and
multidisciplinary management, but the beneﬁt of celiprolol in
those without arterial events remains uncertain. We wanted to
evaluate the occurrence of arterial events during vEDS relatives
follow-up.
Methods: All vEDS relatives diagnosed in our department since
2004 were included. We retrospectively analyzed several criteria
(duration of follow-up, presence of arterial events, introduction
and dose of celiprolol…).
Results: n = 72 relatives had at least one outpatient visit.
Arterial events were found in n = 36 (50%), symptomatic (n = 20)
or silent (n = 16). Median age was 44.5yrs vs. 23.0yrs for n = 36
without any arterial event (p < 10-3). During follow-up, n = 7 (19%)
had a ﬁrst arterial event at 29yrs and were all treated with celi-
prolol. Duration of treatment was 3yrs at the onset of the ﬁrst
silent event and 10yrs for the ﬁrst symptomatic event. Celiprolol
was introduced in n = 27 (75%) after genetic diagnosis disclosure.
Treated relatives had a follow-up duration about 4yrs vs. 2yrs for
the untreated ones (p = 0.01).
Conclusion: These results conﬁrm the importance of family
screening of vEDS relatives. Despite the introduction of celiprolol,
some relatives have presented an arterial event during follow-up.
However, our data are probably too low to assess the occurrence
of events. A study on probands without arterial events at ﬁrst
outpatient visit could conﬁrm the beneﬁt of celiprolol in all vEDS
patients.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.014.D Cardiovascular and Connective Tissue Disorder
features in FLNA-related PVNH patients: progress towards a
reﬁned delineation of this syndrome
Clarisse Billon1;2, Salma Adham3, Natalia Hernandez Poblete4, Anne
Legrand1;2, Michael Frank1;2, Laurent Chiche5, Stephane Zuily6,
Karelle Benistan7, Laurent Savale8, Khaoula Zaafrane Khachnaoui9,
Anne-Claire
Brehin10,
Laurence
Bal11,
Tiffany
Busa12,
Melanie
FRADIN13, Chloe Quelin13, Bertrand Chesneau14, Denis Wahl6, Patricia
Fergelot4, Cyril GOIZET4, Tristan Mirault1;2, Xavier Jeunemaitre1;2,
Juliette Albuisson1;2;15
1AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Genetics Department,
National Referral Center for Rare Vascular Diseases, Paris, France; 22
Université de Paris, INSERM, U970 PARCC, Paris, France; 3University
Hospital Center Saint Eloi Hospital, Vascular department, Montpel-
lier, France; 4Chu Bordeaux - Site Pellegrin, Department of Medical
Genetics, Bordeaux, France; 5University Hospitals Pitié Salpêtrière -
Charles Foix, Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery,
Tertiary Aortic Center, Paris, France; 6Hospital Center Regional And
University De Nancy Hospital Central, Vascular Medicine Division
and Regional Competence Center for Rare Vascular And Systemic
Autoimmune Diseases, Nancy, France; 7Raymond Poincaré Uni-
versity Hospital - (AP-HP), Centre de Référence des Syndromes
d’Ehlers-Danlos non Vasculaires, Garches, France; 8Bicetre Hospital,
Service de Pneumologie, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France;
9Hospital
L’archet, Medical Genetics Unit 2, Nice, France; 10Hospital Center
University De Rouen, Normandy Center for Genomic and Persona-
lized Medicine, Rouen, France;
11Marseille University Hospital
Timone, Regional reference center in Marfan and Related Syndroms,
Aortic Center, Marseille, France;
12Marseille University Hospital
Timone, Département de Génétique Médicale, Marseille, France;
13South Hospital, Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre de Référence
Maladies Rares CLAD-Ouest, Rennes, France;
14Hospital Center
University De Toulouse, Département de Génétique Médicale, Centre
de Référence du syndrome de Marfan et des syndromes apparentés,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
406
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Toulouse, France; 15Centre G.f Leclerc, Platform of Transfer in Cancer
Biology, Dijon, France.
Background/Objectives: FLNA Loss-of-Function (LoF) causes
periventricular
nodular
heterotopia
type
1
(PVNH1),
an
acknowledged cause of seizures of various types. Neurological
symptoms are inconstant, and cardiovascular (CV) defects or
connective tissue disorders (CTD) have regularly been asso-
ciated. We aimed at reﬁning the description of CV and CTD
features in patients with FLNA LoF and depicting the multi-
systemic nature of this condition.
Methods: We retrospectively evaluated FLNA variants and
clinical presentations in FLNA LoF patient with at least one CV or
CTD feature, from three cohorts: ten patients from the French
Reference Center for Rare Vascular Diseases, 23 patients from the
national reference diagnostic lab for ﬁlaminopathies-A, and 59
patients from literature review.
Results: Half of patients did not present neurological symp-
toms. Most patients presented a syndromic association combining
CV and CTD features. CV anomalies, mostly aortic aneurysm and/
or dilation were present in 75% of patients. CTD features were
present in 75%. Variants analysis demonstrated an enrichment of
coding variants in the CH1 domain of FLNA protein.
Conclusion: In FLNA LoF patients, the absence of seizures
should not be overlooked. When considering a diagnosis of
PVNH1, the assessment for CV and CTD anomalies is of major
interest as they represent interlinked features. We recommend
systematic study of FLNA within CTD genes panels, regardless of
the presence of neurological symptoms.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.015.A Genome-wide epistasis for cardiovascular severity
in Marfan study design: patient organization driven research
Lotte Van Den Heuvel1;2;3, Josephina (Jeannette) Meester1;2, Silke
Peeters1;2, romain alderweireldt4, Aline Verstraeten1;2, Paul Coucke3,
Bart Loeys1;2
1University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium; 2Antwerp University
Hospital, Edegem, Belgium;
3Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium;
4Foundation 101 Genomes, Brussel, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an auto-
somal dominant connective tissue disorder with manifestations
in the ocular, skeletal and cardiovascular system. Morbidity
and mortality are mostly determined by aortic disease. Although
mutations in FBN1 are the well-established genetic cause of
MFS, there is a poor correlation with regards to phenotypical
outcome, especially cardiovascular. Wide intra- and interfamilial
phenotypical
variability
is
observed,
but
the
underlying
mechanisms remain largely elusive. Consequently, the identiﬁ-
cation of genetic variation that modiﬁes these effects will add
important novel insights.
Methods:
A
worldwide
collaborative
project
driven
by
researchers and a Belgian patient organization, ‘Foundation 101
Genomes’ (F101G), was established to maximize the number of
patients to study the genetic basis of phenotypical variability.
RNA-sequencing will be integrated with WGS to reveal MFS aor-
topathy genetic modiﬁers, which will be validated using CRISPR/
Cas9 in IPSC-VSMC models.
Results: Our research institutions already gathered DNA and
PBMCs of 35 patients carrying the most common FBN1 missense
variant
(p.Ile2585Thr;c.7754T>C).
International
collaborations
yield at least 200 patients carrying this speciﬁc variant. Together
with F101G, we created a website to guide patients to partici-
pate in our research.
Conclusion: Despite the large number of patients already
included, more patients are needed to identify genetic modiﬁers for
MFS aortopathy. Understanding how mother nature by itself
modiﬁes the outcome of the primary FBN1 mutation will indivi-
dualize current treatment protocols to deliver true precision medi-
cine and offer promising new leads to novel therapeutic strategies.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Lotte Van Den Heuvel Fonds voor weten-
schappelijk
onderzoek,
Josephina
(Jeannette)
Meester:
None
declared, Silke Peeters: None declared, romain alderweireldt: None
declared, Aline Verstraeten: None declared, Paul Coucke: None
declared, Bart Loeys Fonds voor wetenschappelijk onderzoek.
P06.016.B Casq2 deletion: a zebraﬁsh model of CPVT
Ewa Sieliwonczyk1, Bert Vandendriessche1, Charlotte Claes1, Evy
Mayeur2, Maaike Alaerts1, Bart Loeys1, Dorien Schepers1
1Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem,
Belgium; 2Laboratory for Molecular, Cellular and Network Excitability,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
Background/Objectives:
Autosomal
recessive
mutations
in
CASQ2 are the second most common genetic defect identiﬁed in
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT),
one of the most lethal inherited cardiac arrhythmias. Recent
ﬁndings suggest an autosomal dominant inheritance is also pos-
sible for CASQ2.(1) We developed a zebraﬁsh knockout model,
which will be used to further explore this hypothesis.
Methods: The casq2 knockout was generated on the back-
ground of a transgenic zebraﬁsh line expressing cardiac dual
voltage and calcium reporters (Ace2N-mNeon and R-GECO) with
CRISPR/Cas9. Loss of expression was conﬁrmed by RT-qPCR. The
voltage and calcium signals were measured with a Leica SP8 light
sheet microscope at 3 days post-fertilization, after overnight
exposure to the adenylate cyclase activator forskolin.
Results: The casq2 knockout line contains a 5 base pair dele-
tion in exon 2. Casq2-/- embryos showed a decreased heart rate at
baseline compared to wildtype. Delayed afterdepolarizations
(DADs) induced by forskolin were observed signiﬁcantly more
often in casq2-/- embryos (table 1).
Table 1:
DADs
No DADs
p-value
Casq2-/- 5μM
Forskolin
8 (57%)
6 (43%)
0.018 (Fisher’s
exact test)
Casq2+/+ 5μM
Forskolin
2 (12%)
15 (88%)
Conclusion: The casq2 knockout is the ﬁrst zebraﬁsh model of
the classical CPVT genes. Similar to the human phenotype, we
observe bradycardia at rest and a sensitivity to DADs upon sti-
mulation. This model will provide a promising opportunity for
further testing of CASQ2 inheritance patterns.
References: (1) Ng K, et al. Circulation, 2020. 142(10):932.
PMID:32693635.
Grants: Fund for Scientiﬁc Research, Flanders (FWO) and the
Antwerp University Research Fund (BOF).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
407
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P06.017.C A trans-ancestry Mendelian Randomisation study to
estimate the causal effects of cardiometabolic factors on
coronary artery disease in British Pakistanis and Bangladeshis
Diana Dunca1, Qinqin Huang2, Neneh Sallah3, Hilary Martin4,
Thomas Lumbers3, Karoline Kuchenbäcker5
1University College London, UCL Genetics Institute, London, United
Kingdom;
2Wellcome Sanger Institute, Department of Human
Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 3University College London,
Institute of Health Informatics, London, United Kingdom; 2Wellcome
Sanger Institute, Department of Human Genetics, Cambridge, United
Kingdom; 5University College London, Division of Psychiatry, London,
United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: British people with South-Asian ancestry
have a higher risk of coronary artery disease (CAD) than other
ancestry groups. Statistical power can be a limiting factor when
extending Mendelian Randomisation (MR) analyses to non-
European populations, because ancestry-matched GWAS for risk
factors (RFs) of interest might not be sufﬁciently large.
Methods: We compared different strategies for trans-ancestry
MR to assess the effect of cardiometabolic RFs (BMI, triglycerides,
HDL-cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, systolic and diastolic blood
pressure) on the risk of CAD in 22,000 British Pakistani and Ban-
gladeshi (BPB) individuals from the Genes&Health cohort. We used
an ancestry-matched sample to derive instruments in a two-
sample MR of CAD in Genes&Health, with summary statistics for
RFs from the BPB group in the UK Biobank. However, insufﬁcient
number of genome-wide signiﬁcant instruments were identiﬁed in
the UK Biobank BPB population. Therefore, we used a less strin-
gent p-value threshold (p < 5x10-5) for selecting instruments,
incorporating results from large European GWASs, and using a
subset of loci with evidence of transferability.
Results: We found that most of the associations were not
signiﬁcant in the ancestry-matched MR. We found a risk increasing
effect for LDL-cholesterol and risk decreasing effect for HDL-
cholesterol when using the variants from the large European
GWAS as instruments, and also for the subset of loci that were
transferable. The associations for BMI with CAD were signiﬁcant
only for transferable loci.
Conclusion: Incorporating ﬁndings from European GWAS can
increase power for MR in other ancestry groups. We demonstrated
the importance of considering transferability of RF loci to ensure
casual inference.
References:.
Grants: No.206194,No.116074,MR/S003754/1.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.018.D Whole exome/genome sequencing joint analysis in
a family with oligogenic familial hypercholesterolemia
Youmna Ghaleb1;2, Sandy Elbitar1;2, Anne Philippi3, Petra El
Khoury1;2, Yara Azar1;2;4, Miangaly Andrianirina1, Alexia Loste1;4,
Yara Abou-khalil1;2;4, Gaël Nicolas4;5, Marie Le Borgne1;4, Philippe
Moulin6;7, Mathilde Di Filippo7;8, Sybil Charriere6;7, Michel Farnier9,
Cécile Yelnik10;11, Valérie Carreau12, Jean Ferrières13, Jean-Michel
Lecerf14, Alexa Derksen15;16;17, Geneviève Bernard15;17;18, Marie-Soleil
Gauthier16, Benoit Coulombe16;19, Lütjohann Dieter20, Bertrand Fin21,
anne boland21, robert olaso21, Jean-François Deleuze21;22, Jean-Pierre
Rabes1;23, Catherine Boileau1;4;24, Marianne Abifadel1;2, Mathilde
VARRET1;4
1INSERM, Laboratory for Vascular Translational Science (LVTS),
F-75018 Paris, France, Paris, France; 2Laboratory of Biochemistry
and Molecular Therapeutics (LBTM), Faculty of Pharmacy, Pôle
Technologie-Santé (PTS), Saint-Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon,
Beirut, Lebanon; 3Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016,
CNRS UMR-8104, Paris, France, Paris, France; 4Université de Paris and
Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, France, Paris, France;
5INSERM
U1149, CNRS ERL 8252, Centre de Recherche sur l’inﬂammation,
Paris, France;, Paris, France; 6Hospices Civils de Lyon, Louis Pradel
Cardiovascular Hospital, Department of Endocrinology, nutrition and
metabolic diseases, Bron, France;
7CarMen Laboratory, INSERM
U1060, INRAE U1397, Université Lyon 1, Oullins, France;, Lyon,
France; 8Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bron,
France;
9EA 7460 Physiopathologie et Epidémiologie Cérébro-
Cardiovasculaires (PEC2), Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté,
Dijon, France;, Dijon, France; 10Département de Médecine Interne et
Immunologie Clinique Centre de Référence des Maladies Auto-
immunes Systémiques Rares du Nord et Nord-Ouest de France
(CeRAINO) CHU de Lille, Lille, France;, Lille, France; 11U1167 Risk
Factors and Molecular Determinants of Aging-Related Diseases
Inserm CHU de Lille Univ. Lille, Lille, France, Lille, France; 12Depart-
ment of Endocrinology and Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease,
Institute of Cardio Metabolism and Nutrition (ICAN), La Pitié-
Salpêtrière Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France;, Paris, France; 13Depart-
ment of Cardiology and INSERM UMR 1295, Toulouse Rangueil
University Hospital, Toulouse, France, Toulouse, France; 14Nutrition
Department, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 59019 Lille Cedex, France;, Lille,
France; 15Child Health and Human Development Program, Research
Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec,
Canada, Montréal, Canada; 16Translational Proteomics Laboratory,
Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec,
Canada,
Montréal,
Canada;
17Department
of
Neurology
and
Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada, Mon-
tréal, Canada;
18Division of Medical Genetics, Department of
Specialized Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal,
Québec, Canada, Montréal, Canada; 19Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada,
Montréal, Canada;
20Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical
Pharmacology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Bonn,
Germany;
21Université
Paris-Saclay,
CEA,
Centre
National
de
Recherche en Génomique Humaine, 91057, Evry, France and
Laboratory of Excellence GENMED (Medical Genomics), Evry, France;
22Centre d’Etude du Polymorphisme Humain, Fondation Jean
Dausset, Paris, France, Paris, France;
23Ambroise Paré University
Hospital, APHP., Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics,
Paris, France; 24Genetic Department, AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat, F-75018
Paris, France., Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: Autosomal Dominant Hypercholester-
olemia (ADH) is a genetic disorder caused by pathogenic variants
in LDLR, APOB, PCSK9 and APOE genes. We sought to identify a
new candidate gene responsible of the ADH phenotype in
patients
with
no
pathogenic
variants
in
known
ADH
causing genes.
Methods: We performed linkage analysis, whole exome and
whole genome sequencing in one French family, with affected
and non-affected members presenting a high ADH polygenic risk
score
(wPRS).
We
also
performed
functional
studies
in
HEK293T cells of the four LRP6 mutants.
Results: Linkage analysis, whole exome and whole genome
sequencing in one French family, with affected and non-affected
members presenting a high ADH polygenic risk score (wPRS)
allowed us to identify p.(Pro398Ala) in CYP7A1, p.(Val1382Phe) in
LRP6 and p.(Ser202His) in LDLRAP1. Six other variants were iden-
tiﬁed in 6 from 160 unrelated ADH probands: p.(Ala13Val) and
p.(Aps347Asn)
in
CYP7A1,
p.(Tyr972Cys),
p.(Thr1479Ile)
and
p.(Ser1612Phe) in LRP6 and p.(Ser202LeufsTer19) in LDLRAP1. All
these six probands presented a moderate wPRS. Serum analysis of
carriers of p.(Pro398Ala) variant in CYP7A1 showed no differences
in bile acids synthesis when compared to non-carriers serums.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
408
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Functional studies in HEK293T cells of the four LRP6 mutants
showed contradictory results. None of the family members het-
erozygous carriers of the LDLRAP1 p.(Ser202His) variant alone
presented ADH.
Conclusion: Altogether, each variant alone does not seem to
contribute sufﬁciently to the elevation of LDL-C and it is the oli-
gogenic combination of two or three variants that is necessary to
reveal the ADH phenotype.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.019.A Contribution of SCN5A copy number variations to
the genetic diagnosis of Brugada syndrome
Laura Cazón1, Luis De la Higuera Romero1, Marlene Perez Barbeito1,
Rosalía Peteiro1, Iria Gómez Diaz1, Paula Rebolo1, Paula Velez1, Maria
Sanchez1, Anahi Sanluis Verdes1, Guillermo Smith Ramos1, Emilia
Maneiro1, Xusto Fernandez1, Almudena Amor1, María Valverde1,
Soledad García Hernández1;2, Ivonne Cárdenas Reyes1, Martin Ortiz
Genga1, Juan Pablo Ochoa3
1Health in Code, Scientiﬁc Committee, A Coruña, Spain; 2Hospital
Universitario Clínico San Cecilio, Cardiology, Granada, Spain; 3Health in
Code, Cardiology director scientiﬁc committee, A Coruña, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Loss-of-function variants in SCN5A are
identiﬁed in 15-25% of Brugada syndrome (BrS) cases. Most of
them are single-nucleotide variants, small insertions / deletions,
and splicing errors, whereas information on copy number varia-
tions (CNVs) is still limited. The objective of this study is to
determine the contribution of CNVs to the genetic diagnosis
of BrS.
Methods: A total of 977 consecutive unrelated probands with
suspected BrS were genotyped by next-generation-sequencing
(NGS) using a panel of genes that included SCN5A. Filtering and
classiﬁcation of NGS data was performed using a custom pipeline;
CNVs were detected using a read depth approach and conﬁrmed
by orthogonal molecular techniques.
Results: Actionable variants in SCN5A were identiﬁed in 128
probands (13%): 83 were pathogenic/ likely pathogenic and 47
variants of unknown signiﬁcance but favoring pathogenic. CNV
analysis could be performed in 888 (90.9%) of the probands and
revealed six carriers of CNVs in SCN5A (table 1).
Gender
Age
SCN5A CNV
Conﬁrmation
technique
Male
13
630kb deletion (8 whole
genes, including SCN5A)
SNP-array
Female
43
143kb deletion (SCN5A
exons 1-16 and SCN10A
exons 15-27)
SNP-array
Male
Unknown
Deletion exon 4
Sanger
sequencing
Male
35
Deletion exons 8-10
MLPA
Male
40
Deletion exons 13-27
Sanger
sequencing
Female
61
Deletion exon 22
MLPA
Conclusion: SCN5A CNVs were detected in 0.6% of the BrS
probands, but they represented 7.2% of pathogenic / likely
pathogenic
variations
identiﬁed
in
our
cohort.
This
result
emphasizes the importance of a complete genetic study including
CNVs in the diagnosis of BrS.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Laura Cazón Full time, Luis De la Higuera
Romero Full time, Marlene Perez Barbeito Full time, Rosalía Peteiro
Full time, Iria Gómez Diaz Full time, Paula Rebolo Full time, Paula
Velez Full time, Maria Sanchez Full time, Anahi Sanluis Verdes Full
time, Guillermo Smith Ramos Full time, Emilia Maneiro Full time,
Xusto Fernandez Full time, Almudena Amor Full time, María Val-
verde Full time, Soledad García Hernández Full time, Ivonne Cár-
denas Reyes Full time, Martin Ortiz Genga Full time, Juan Pablo
Ochoa Full time.
P06.020.B Spontaneous coronary artery dissection: role of the
genetic background in pathogenesis and management
Marta Casula1, lucia trevisan2;3, Fabio Gotta3, Daniela Marchetti4,
laura pezzoli4, antonio zingarelli3, Paola Mandich2;3, Maria Iascone4
1Università degli Studi di Genova, genoa, Italy; 2Università degli Studi
di Genova, dinogmi, Genova, Italy; 3IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San
Martino, Genova, Italy; 4ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Laboratorio di
Genetica Medica, Bergamo, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Spontaneous coronary artery dissec-
tion (SCAD) is a rare, non-atherosclerotic disease of the coronary
vascular
tunics,
frequently
starting
as
an
acute
coronary
syndrome. Recent genetic studies on SCAD have identiﬁed
a
possible
correlation
with
inherited
connective
tissue
disorders and a possible predisposition linked to CGG repeat
expansion in FMR1 gene. This study explored rare genetic fac-
tors that may contribute to the pathogenetic mechanisms
underlying SCAD.
Methods: After the SCAD event between January 2010 and
February 2021, fourteen patients referred to the Cardiology
Department of IRCCS Policlinico San Martino underwent clinical
genetic evaluation, whole-exome sequencing analyses (trio or
singleton), and FRAXA analyses. This study was approved by local
Ethical Committee.
Results: Although none of the 14 patients enrolled showed
clinical features associated with connective tissue disorders, in the
21% of our cohort, we identiﬁed variants in genes involved in
the formation and in the integrity of connective tissue. We
also detected an intermediate allele in the FMR1 gene in one
patient and a de novo variant in a new candidate gene in
another one.
Conclusion: Despite the small number of patients analysed, we
identiﬁed several genetic risk factors for SCAD and a promising
novel candidate gene. Although further studies are needed, this
work could contribute to give insight into the pathogenetic
pathways of this rare condition.
References: Tassanakijpanick N. et al, Cardiovascular problems
in the Fragile X premutation; Front Genet. 2020.
Amrani-Midoun A. et al, Recent advances on the genetics of
spontaneous coronary artery dissection; CircGenomPrecisMed 2021.
Grants: This project was not supported by any grant.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.021.C Polygenic risk scores predict overweight and
obesity in the Dutch population
Bahar Sedaghati-khayat1, Linda Broer1, Annemieke Verkerk1, André
Uitterlinden1;2, Joyce Van Meurs1;2, Jeroen van Rooij1
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
409
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Erasmus MC, Department of Internal medicine, Rotterdam, Nether-
lands;
2Erasmus MC, Department of Epidemiology, Rotterdam,
Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Obesity, the ﬁfth leading risk of global
deaths, has grown to epidemic proportions. Its etiology is largely
unknown but it has a substantial hereditary component. Global
GWAS have identiﬁed 941 genetic variants inﬂuencing body-mass
index explaining 6% of heritability. This study combined these
variants into a polygenic risk score (PRS) to assess obesity-risk in a
Dutch Caucasian population cohort.
Methods: The PRS was tested in 11,209 participants of the
Rotterdam Study (mean±SD age = 65.7±10.2 years) to predict BMI
as a continuous and categorical outcome (under-weight, normal-
weight, overweight, obese, and morbid-obese). We evaluated the
risk conveyed by PRS as a linear instrument (per 1 SD) and cate-
gorical (highest 10% vs. middle 50% of the PRS distribution).
Results: The PRS was associated with BMI (beta-estimate = 0.9
[95% conﬁdence interval 0.7-1.1];p < 1 × 10−16). One SD increase
of the PRS signiﬁcantly increased the risk of being underweight,
over-weight, obese and morbid-obese by 0.8, 1.3, 1.8 and 2.2 fold
times, respectively. Similarly, the top 10% of the population with
the highest BMI-PRS showed increased risks of 1.1, 1.5, 2.6 and 4.5
for these BMI categories, respectively. The risk increased expo-
nentially in the PRS distribution tails, up to 8.2 of the top 1% PRS
for morbid-obese vs. normal-weight.
Conclusion: These results conﬁrm that the PRS signiﬁcantly
impacts BMI in a Dutch Caucasian elderly population. Identifying the
biological pathways affected by an individuals’ genetic background
could aid in targeted and personalized intervention strategies long
before the onset of obesity. BMI-PRS utility is being investigated as
part of the Genotyping on all patients (GOALL) project.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.022.D Novel loss of function KCNA5 pathogenic variants
in pulmonary arterial hypertension
Natalia
Gallego1;2;3,
Alba
Vera-Zambrano4;5;6,
Mauro
Lago-
Docampo7;8,
Juan
Felipe
Franco-González9,
Daniel
Morales-
Cano10;11,
Alejandro
Cruz-Utrilla12;13,
Marta
Villegas4;14,
Pilar
Escribano-Subias12;13, Jair Tenorio1;2;3, Francisco Perez Vizcaino4;14,
Diana Valverde Pérez7;8, Teresa González5;6, Angel Cogolludo4;14
1Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM)-IdiPAZ,
Madrid, Spain; 2CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red
de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain; 3ITHACA, European
Reference Network on Rare Congenital Malformations and Rare
Intellectual Disability, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain;
4Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine,
University
Complutense
of
Madrid,
Instituto
de
Investigación
Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón (IiSGM), Madrid, Spain; 5Department
of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain;
6Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas
“Alberto Sols” CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain; 7CINBIO, Universidad de
Vigo, Vigo, Spain; 8Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Galicia Sur (IIS
Galicia Sur), SERGAS-UVIGO, Vigo, Spain; 9Department of Structural
and Chemical Biology, Centre for Biological Research Margarita
Salas, CIB-CSIC, Madrid, Spain;
10Atherosclerosis Research Unit,
Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Den-
mark;
11Experimental
Pathology
of Atherosclerosis
Laboratory,
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain; 12CIBER Enfermedades Cardiovasculares (CIBERCV),
Madrid, Spain; 13Unidad Multidisciplinar de Hipertensión Pulmonar,
Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid,
Spain; 14Ciber Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Reduced expression and/or activity of
Kv1.5 channels (encoded by KCNA5) is a common hallmark in
human or experimental pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH).
Genetic variants in KCNA5 have been found in PAH patients.
However, their functional consequences and potential impact on
the disease is largely unknown. Herein, we aimed to characterize
the functional consequences of 7 KCNA5 variants found in a
cohort of PAH patients.
Methods: Potassium currents were recorded by patch-clamp
technique in HEK293 cells transfected with WT or mutant Kv1.5
cDNA. Flow cytometry, western blot and confocal microscopy
techniques were used for measuring protein expression and cell
apoptosis in HEK293 and human pulmonary artery smooth muscle
cells (hPASMC).
Results:
KCNA5
variants
(namely,
p.Arg184Pro
and
p.Gly384Arg) resulted in a loss of potassium channel function as
assessed by electrophysiological and molecular modelling analy-
sis. The p.Arg184Pro variant also resulted in a pronounced
reduction of Kv1.5 expression. Transfection with p.Arg184Pro or
p.Gly384Arg variants decreased apoptosis of hPASMCs compared
with the WT, demonstrating that KCNA5 dysfunction in both
variants affects cell viability. Thus, in addition to affect channel
activity, both variants were associated with a clear impairment in a
key PASMC process linked to the disease. The estimated pre-
valence of dysfunctional KCNA5 variants in the PAH population
analysed was around 1 %.
Conclusion: Our data indicates that some KCNA5 mutations
present in PAH patients have critical consequences for channel
function. This encourages the idea that KCNA5 pathogenic var-
iants may be a developing or contributing factor for PAH.
References:.
Grants: PI18/01233, FCHP unrestricted grant.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.023.A Genetic testing outcomes in a cohort of 21,159
children with heart disease
Robert Nussbaum1, Flavia Facio2, Ana Morales2, Asia Mitchell2, John
Garcia3, Dianalee McKnight2, Tom Callis4, Chad Moretz5, Matteo
Vatta6, Swaroop Aradhya2
1Invitae, San Francisco, United States; 2Invitae, Medical Affairs, San
Francisco,
United
States;
3Invitae,
Systems
Development,
San
Francisco, United States;
4Invitae, CNP US Sales, San Francisco,
United States; 5Invitae, Health Economics and Outcomes Research,
San Francisco, United States;
6Invitae, Clinical Operations, San
Francisco, United States.
Background/Objectives: Pediatric heart conditions affect 1/77 US
children. Guidelines recommend cardiogenetic testing in children
and at-risk relatives. We investigated outcomes in a large pediatric
cohort undergoing genetic testing for a wide range of cardioge-
netic conditions.
Methods: Probands <18 years had next generation sequencing
and deletion/duplication analysis for cardiogenetic conditions (up
to 224 genes). A positive result was deﬁned as a single patho-
genic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) variant in a gene associated with an
autosomal dominant or X-linked disorder, or two P/LP variants in a
gene associated with a recessive disorder. Outcomes were com-
pared to cardiogenetic testing results of 61,368 adults by t-tests
with multiple comparison correction.
Results: 21,159 probands were tested (median = 10.03 years,
SD = 5.75) and positive result were reported in 16.6%. Cascade
testing was pursued in 3.9% of families (mean 3.48 relatives/
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
410
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
family; 59.1% aged <10 years). Positive results were more frequent
in children than in adults (16.6% vs 15.3%), and were particularly
enriched in genes associated with syndromic disorders relative to
non-syndromic ones (41.4% vs 29.7%). Families with probands
aged <10 had cascade testing more often in comparison to those
with older probands (4.6%; p = 0.0069).
Conclusion: One in six children referred for cardiogenetic testing
received a positive result, highlighting opportunities for manage-
ment. Cascade testing was pursued more often than in families with
probands <10 years in comparison to those with adult probands.
These ﬁndings provide rationale for family-based care to identify
patients who can beneﬁt from genetics-guided interventions.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Robert Nussbaum: None declared, Flavia
Facio Invitae, Ana Morales Invitae, Asia Mitchell Invitae, John
Garcia Invitae, Dianalee McKnight Invitae, Tom Callis Invitae, Chad
Moretz Invitae, Matteo Vatta Invitae, Swaroop Aradhya Invitae.
P06.024.B Identiﬁcation of novel loss-of-function genes
associated with carotid intima-media thickness
Abdulrahman Alasiri1;2, Marion van Vugt1, Jessica Van Setten1,
Folkert Asselbergs1;3;4, Sander van der Laan1;5
1University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Cardiology,
Utrecht, Netherlands; 2King Abdullah International Medical Research
Center, Medical Genomics Research Department, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia; 3University College London, Health Data Research UK and
Institute of Health Informatics, Utrecht, Netherlands;
4University
College London, Institute of Cardiovascular Science, Utrecht, Nether-
lands;
5University
Medical
Center
Utrecht,
Central
Diagnostic
Laboratory, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Ultrasound measurement of the carotid
intima-media thickness (cIMT) of the carotid artery is frequently
employed as a biomarker for subclinical atherosclerosis and the
extent of vascular remodelling. Large-scale genetic studies iden-
tiﬁed common genetic risk factors for cIMT. Here, we aimed to
identify loss-of-function (LoF) genes that are inactive in one or two
copies (i.e. full knockouts) associated with cIMT.
Methods:
We
used
LoFTK
(https://github.com/
CirculatoryHealth/LoFTK) to annotate LoF genes from UK Bio-
bank exomes and UCC-SMART imputed genotypes. We performed
LoF-wide association studies (LoFWAS) in both cohorts and con-
ducted a meta-analysis to identify genes associated with cIMT. We
explored tissue- and cell-speciﬁc expression in carotid athero-
sclerotic plaques.
Results: We identiﬁed four genes associated with cIMT in our
meta-analysis. Three of these genes (PPP1R21, HSD3B2 and ULK2)
were inactive in one copy, while one gene (KIR3DL1) was a full
knockout. Single-cell RNA sequencing revealed cellular subtype-
speciﬁc expression patterns of PPP1R21, ULK2, and KIR3DL1 in
carotid plaques.
Conclusion: We identiﬁed 4 novel genes associated with cIMT.
Our study provides insights into LoF genes and cIMT that under-
pin the genetic and biological mechanisms of atherosclerosis.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.025.C A novel rare pathogenic variant in TLN1 in a family
with systemic capillary leak syndrome
naama elefant1, Shira Yanovsky-Dagan2, danit Oz-Levi3, Racheli
Sion-Sarid4, Doron Lancet5, Vardiella Meiner1, Ben Goult6, Vasso
Kostourou7, Tamar Harel1;2
1Hadassah Medical Center, Department of clinical genetics, Jerusa-
lem, Israel; 2Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Faculty of Medicine,
Jerusalem, Israel; 3My Heritage, or-yehudah, Israel; 4Edith Wolfason
Medical Center, Holon, Israel;
5Weizmann Institue of Science,
Department of Molecular Genetics, rehovot, Israel; 6University of
Kent, School of bioscience, Canterbury, Israel; 7Biomedical Sciences
Research Center “Alexander Fleming”, Institute of Immunology,
athens, Greece.
Background/Objectives: Systemic capillary leak syndrome (SCLS)
is a rare life threatening disorder that presents with episodes of
severe hypotension, hypoalbuminemia, and hemoconcentration
due to profound vascular leak. The condition was ﬁrst described
by Clarkson in 1960, yet its etiology remains unknown. Current
hypotheses include abnormal endothelial cell response to normal
stimulation, or normal endothelial cell response to dysregulated or
excessive systemic signaling or inﬂammation. We describe three
individuals with SCLS from an extended pedigree suggestive of
AD inheritance with incomplete penetrance.
Methods: We conducted exome sequencing analysis on per-
ipheral blood of two family members, followed by Sanger
sequencing for segregation in additional family members. cDNA
analysis from blood and ﬁbroblast samples was used to determine
the consequence of a variant of interest.
Results: A rare novel heterozygous variant in the TLN1 gene
(c.7188+2T>C) was identiﬁed in all three family members with
SCLS. This variant causes in-frame skipping of exon54 and is
predicted to affect the c-terminal actin binding domain in the
Talin-1 protein (domain ABS3).
Conclusion: Talin-1 (TLN1) has a key role in cell adhesions via
the linkage of integrins to the actin cytoskeleton and by activation
of integrins. Studies have shown that Talin-1 regulates VE-
Cadherin localization, which plays an important role in endothe-
lial cell barrier function. Based on our ﬁndings we suggest that
pathogenic variants in TLN1 underlie SCLS. Future studies are
warranted to further investigate the mechanism of the disease
and to explore possible therapeutic options.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.026.D Phenotypic and genetic factors modifying the risk
of developing cardiomyopathy symptoms for PLN-p.Arg14del
carriers
Esteban Lopera-Maya1, Shuang Li1, Remco de Brower1, Ilja Nolte2,
Justin van Breen1, Jan Jongbloed3, Morris Swertz1;4, Harold Snieder2,
Lude Franke1, R.A. de Boer3, Cisca Wijmenga1, Patrick Deelen1, Paul
van der Zwaag1, Serena Sanna1;5
1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands;
2University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Epidemiology, Groningen, Netherlands;
3University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Cardiology,
Groningen, Netherlands; 4University of Groningen, University Medical
Center
Groningen,
Genomics
Coordination
Center,
Groningen,
Netherlands; 5National Research Council (CNR), Institute for Genetic
and Biomedical Research (IRGB), Cagliari, Italy.
Background/Objectives: The phospholamban (PLN) p.Arg14del
Dutch founder variant has been associated with dilated and arrhyth-
mogenic cardiomyopathy.1 Some carriers show life-threatening
symptoms, while others remain asymptomatic or show only mild
symptoms at old age. To understand the mechanisms behind this
incomplete penetrance, we aimed to identify protective factors in
asymptomatic PLN-Arg14del carriers in a large population cohort.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
411
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: We identiﬁed 74 (0.2%) carriers in 36,339 genotyped
individuals of the Dutch Lifelines cohort2, of which 48 were
asymptomatic according to their ECG and questionnaires. We
interrogated 38 quantitative measurements and 97 polygenic
scores (PGS) of cardio-metabolic traits, performed a GWAS, and a
rare variant burden analysis in 82 risk loci. We used the non-
standard
approach
of
comparing
asymptomatic
carriers
to
asymptomatic non-carriers, and conﬁrmed the results by com-
paring each group to symptomatic carriers.
Results: Compared to the asymptomatic non-carriers, the
asymptomatic carriers showed lower QRS (p = 0.002), an effect
that replicated in another Lifelines subset (N = 20,221) and in the
ACM patient registry (N = 592). Furthermore, symptomatic carriers
showed a higher correlation between PGSPR and PR (p = 0.022)
and between PGSQRS and QRS (p = 1.9x10-5). These results indicate
symptomatic PLN-Arg14del carriers have an increased sensitivity
for common genetic variation affecting cardiac rhythm.
Conclusion: We have used a population cohort to identify
protective factors for PLN-Arg14del carriers. These results can
improve risk prediction models for cardiac outcomes and guide
future studies on genetic diseases with incomplete penetrance.
References: 1van der Zwaag et al, Eur J Heart Fail 2012.
2Scholtens et al, Int J Epidemiol 2015.
Grants: UMCG-HAP-2017-2 324.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.027.A NGS analysis in a patient with conduction disorders
and dilated cardiomyopathy: a case report of R222Q SCN5A
variant, beneﬁting from mutation speciﬁc target therapy
Martina Callegari1, Francesca Bianchi2, Valeria Bracciamà1, Giulia
Margherita Brach del Prever1, Angelo Corso Faini1, Silvia Kalantari1,
Tiziana Vaisitti1, Stefano Grossi2, Antonio Amoroso1, Silvia Deaglio1
1Transplant Regional Center-Piedmont, Immunogenetics and Trans-
plant Biology, AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza, Department of
Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Torino, Italy;
2Division of
Cardiology, Mauriziano Umberto I Hospital, Turin, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Mutations in SCN5A, which encodes the
alpha-subunit of cardiac sodium channel Nav1.5., are reported non
only in patients with Brugada Syndrome but also in those with
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). In these patients, cardiac dilation
is preceded by conduction system abnormalities. Genetic diag-
nosis in these cases can determine therapeutic choices with
consequences on patient’s quality of life and survival.
Methods: We performed Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
analysis as part of the routine work-out of a 53-year-old woman
with a history of ventricular extrasystoles (burden > 50%) since the
age of 20, syncopal sinus pauses with required PM implantation,
atrial ﬁbrillation and hypokinetic cardiomyopathy with dilation of
left ventricle and atrium and mild left ventricular ejection fraction
reduction. Due to worsening of NYHA class, several ablation pro-
cedures targeting the frequent ventricular arrhythmia were per-
formed, with later recurrence. Genetic analysis focused on genes
associated with DCM and arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.
Results: We identiﬁed a heterozygous pathogenic variant
(p.Arg222Gln) in SCN5A, previously reported to be responsive to
sodium channel blockers. Hydroquinidine treatment led to nor-
malization of ventricular cell potentials. Patient showed almost
complete regression of arrhythmic manifestations and NYHA class
improvement.
Conclusion: Identiﬁcation of R222Q in SCN5A was fundamental
for the patient’s prognosis. This paradigmatic case underlines the
importance of NGS analysis for optimal therapeutic management
of patients with conduction disorders and DCM. For these
patients, genetic studies should be considered integral compo-
nents of the diagnostic phase.
References: Mann SA et al, JACC 2012.
Grants: Ministero dell’Istruzione, Progetto Strategico di Eccel-
lenza Dipartimentale #D15D18000410001.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.028.B Yield of 3 years of diagnostic testing of TNNI3K in
Arrhythmia and Cardiomyopathy Patients
Karolina Andrzejczyk1, Caroline Pham1, Kaylin Palm1, Leander
Beekman1, Alexa Vermeer2, Janneke Nijman2, Imke Christiaans3,
Doris Škorić-Milosavljević2, Ronald Lekkane Dit Deprez2, Philip
Jansen2, Niels Vos2, Svitlana Podliesna1, Connie R. Bezzina1, Elisabeth
Lodder1;2
1Amsterdam University Medical Center, Clinical and Experimental
Cardiology, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 2Amsterdam University Medical
Center,
Human
Genetics,
Amsterdam,
Netherlands;
3University
Medical Center Groningen, Clinical Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Genetic variants in TNNI3K have been
associated with supraventricular arrhythmias (SVTs), conduction
disease (CCD), and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in a limited
number of papers thus far. The yield in diagnostic screening of this
gene in cardiac diseases has not yet been evaluated, we here aim
to ﬁll this gap. As pathogenic variants in TNNI3K have been shown
to affect the level of autophosphorylation, we evaluated this for
identiﬁed variants.
Methods: We collected and analysed clinical data of indivi-
duals with variants in TNNI3K. These variants were identiﬁed by (i)
systematic clinical genetic screening of gene panels in patients
with cardiomyopathies and/or arrhythmias between 08-2018 and
12-2021 at the Amsterdam UMC, and (ii) collaboration with mul-
tiple centres in the Netherlands. Functional in vitro studies were
performed to assess the effects of the identiﬁed variants on
TNNI3K auto-phosphorylation.
Results: We identiﬁed 19 rare coding variants in TNNI3K in 24
probands. Among these two novel likely pathogenic variants
(p.H592T and p.I512T) were found in eight families. Individuals
harbouring these variants demonstrated SVTs, CCD, DCM, and/or
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Functional studies revealed sig-
niﬁcantly increased auto-phosphorylation levels in both TNNI3K
variants.
Conclusion: Screening of rare variants in TNNI3K adds to the
diagnostic yield for cardiac diseases. However, considering the
current lack of validation of the functional tests, co-segregation
analysis is paramount for the classiﬁcation of identiﬁed variants.
References: The Diverse Roles of TNNI3K in Cardiac Disease
and Potential for Treatment. Doi: Caroline Pham, Noelia Muñoz-
Martín, Elisabeth Lodder.
Grants: Netherlands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research (VIDI-
91718361).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.029.C Common rearrangements of the LDLR gene in the
Czech population likely arise from one mutational event
Katerina Konecna1, Lukas Tichy1, Tomas Freiberger2
1University Hospital Brno, Centre of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Brno, Czech Republic;
2Center of Cardiovascular and Transplant
Surgery, Brno, Czech Republic.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
412
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Mutations in the low-density lipoprotein
receptor gene (LDLR) are the most common cause of familial
hypercholesterolemia in the Czech Republic. Out of all Czech
probands with an LDLR mutation, nearly 10% are carriers of a
deletion or duplication spanning whole exons. We characterized
the breakpoints of 8 large rearrangements of the LDLR gene. One
of the goals was to analyze the breakpoint of all probands carrying
a speciﬁc rearrangement to verify the hypothesis that all probands
of each rearrangement have identical breakpoints inherited from a
common ancestor.
Methods: The breakpoint sequence was determined by PCR
ampliﬁcation and Sanger sequencing.
Results: We sequenced the breakpoint of 8 rearrangements of
the LDLR gene, including the four most common rearrangements
in Czech population (number of probands ranging from 8 to 28),
and four less common rearrangements (1-4 probands). For all
analyzed rearrangements, all Czech probands with a speciﬁc
rearrangement
shared
identical
breakpoint
position
and
sequence, suggesting shared origin from a common ancestor. All
breakpoints except for one were located inside an Alu element. In
5 out of 8 breakpoints, there was high homology (>75%) between
the two Alu repeats in which the break occurred.
Conclusion: Most common rearrangements of the LDLR gene
in the Czech population likely arise from one mutational event. Alu
elements likely played a role in generation of the majority of
rearrangements within the LDLR gene, but not all.
References:.
Grants: Supported by the Ministry of Health, Czech Republic,
grant number NU20-02-00261.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.030.D Characterising the phenotype and outcomes of
cascade-tested individuals carrying a pathogenic sarcomere-
variant
Wajeeh Chaudhry1, Catherine McWilliam1, Anna-Maria Choy2,
David Goudie1, jonathan berg1
1School of Medicine - University of Dundee, Division of Population
Health and Genomics, Dundee, United Kingdom; 2School of Medicine
- University of Dundee, Division of Molecular and Clinical Medicine,
Dundee, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Cascade testing of relatives of indivi-
duals with pathogenic genetic variants causing hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy is recommended. Little is known of the clinical
outcomes in cascade-identiﬁed individuals. We quantiﬁed clinical
endpoints in such individuals.
Methods: All individuals reviewed by Genetics in NHS Tayside
for a personal or family history of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
between January 2010 and December 2018 were included. Case-
note review included genetic testing, echocardiography and
clinical outcomes.
Results: 282 individuals from 64 families were included with a
total follow-up of 2493 patient years (mean: 8.8±6.3). Of 200
patients under review; 121 were probands (mean age: 65.6 ± 13.9)
and 79 cascade-identiﬁed (mean age: 48.3 ± 17.0). Causative genes
were: MYBPC3 (n = 46);MYH7 (n = 12);TNNT2 (n = 2);TNNI3(n = 1);
PKP2 (n = 1);CSRP3 (n = 1);GLA (n = 1).
Baseline asymmetrical myocardial hypertrophy was recorded in
45.6% of cascade-identiﬁed individuals. The mean age-adjusted
interventricular
septal
size
for
cascade-identiﬁed
individuals
(13.8mm;95% CI:12.6-15.0) was lower than that of probands
(19.8mm,95%CI:18.8-20.7; p < 0.001) but higher than the control
group (10.5mm,95% CI:9.1-11.9; p < 0.001). Age-adjusted multi-
variant event analysis demonstrated decreased risk of adverse
cardiac events in cascade-identiﬁed patients compared to pro-
bands
(hazard
ratio
0.27;95%
CI:0.15-0.49;
p < 0.001),
and
increased compared to controls (hazard ratio:0.26;95% CI:0.09-
0.71; p = 0.009). The lifetime incidence of atrial ﬁbrillation, ven-
tricular tachycardia, heart failure and acute coronary syndromes
are higher in proband patients versus cascade-tested carrier
patients (p < 0.05).
Conclusion:
Although
cascade-tested
individuals
carrying
pathogenic sarcomere gene variants exhibit a milder phenotype
and decreased risk of major adverse cardiac events compared to
probands, these individuals still have a high rate of complication
justifying their identiﬁcation and follow-up.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.031.A Prenatal Long QT syndrome associated with
homozygous KCNH2 pathogenic variants
Ana Grangeia1;2, Márcia Baixia3, Soﬁa Granja Da Silva4, Susana
Guimarães5, Carla Ramalho6;7;8, Raquel Silva3, Sérgio Castedo1;2;3,
Renata Oliveira1
1São João Universitary Hospital Center, Genetics, Porto, Portugal;
2Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto - FMUP, Porto,
Portugal; 3IPATIMUP - Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular
da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; 4São João Universitary
Hospital Center, Pediatric Cardiology, Porto, Portugal; 5São João
Universitary Hospital Center, Anatomic Pathology, Porto, Portugal;
6São João Universitary Hospital Center, Obstetrics, Porto, Portugal;
2Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto - FMUP, Porto,
Portugal; 8I3s, Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Porto,
Portugal, Porto, Portugal.
Background/Objectives: Long QT syndrome type 2 is an inher-
ited autosomal dominant disorder usually caused by heterozygous
pathogenic variants in the KCNH2 gene. However, homozygous
KCNH2 variants have been proposed to cause a more severe car-
diac phenotype associated with QT prolongation and functional
atrioventricular conduction disturbances before and immediately
after birth. Only three families with homozygous KCNH2 variants
have been reported so far.
Methods:.
Results:
We
report
an
asymptomatic
Portuguese
con-
sanguineous couple, whose ﬁrst child, presented in the prenatal
period chaotic foetal rhythm (periods of tachycardia and complete
atrioventricular block) and hydrops. She was born at 33 weeks
of gestation requiring a pacemaker implantation at day one of
life. Postnatal echocardiogram showed left ventricular non-
compaction cardiomyopathy. She died at 18 months of age
from sudden death. Dilated cardiomyopathy NGS panel study did
not identify any pathogenic variant. The second child was a
healthy female, now 3 years old. During their third gestation,
foetal hydrops was detected associated with global left ventricular
dysfunction and cardiomegaly. The pregnancy was terminated at
24 weeks of gestation. Necropsy conﬁrmed foetal hydrops and
dilated cardiomyopathy. Considering a potential disease recur-
rence, a comprehensive cardiomyopathy NGS panel was per-
formed
in
the
index
case
and
a
homozygous
frameshift
pathogenic variant [c.785del, p.(Gly262Alafs*98)] was identiﬁed in
the KCNH2. The same variant was found in the foetus (homo-
zygous) and in the mother (heterozygous). Genetic screening of
the father and healthy sister is ongoing.
Conclusion: This report illustrates the severe cardiac pheno-
type, of prenatal onset, associated with a homozygous KCNH2
pathogenic variant.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
413
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.033.C Mutations in the GTPBP3 are associated with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with rapid progression to burn
out phase complicated by severe systolic dysfunction and
ventricular tachycardia
Petya Angelova1, Vasil Velchev2, Nikolay Stoyanov2, Slavena
Atemin1;3, Vanyo Mitev1, Albena Todorova1
1Medical University Soﬁa, Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 2University Hospital “St. Anna”, Depart-
ment of Cardiology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
3Genetic Medico-Diagnostic
Laboratory “Genica”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: About 100 genes have been associated
with cardiomyopathies with genotype-phenotype correlations
often hard to establish. Genetic testing may help to conﬁrm the
genetic diagnosis and assess the risk of inheritance in the family.
Methods: A 26-year old Caucasian male with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM) and suspected Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome was referred for genetic testing by his cardiologist.
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed, followed by
Sanger sequencing segregation analysis in the family.
Results: The targeted PRKAG2 gene screening turned out to be
negative.
WES
revealed
the
following
variants:
c.247G>C
(p.Ala83Pro) and c.1265C>T (p.Thr422Met) in the GTPBP3 gene in
heterozygous
state,
as
well
as
c.752C>T
(p.Thr251Ile)
and
c.1760C>T (p.Pro587Leu) in the POLG gene. Family segregation
analysis showed that the patient’s mother is a carrier of the
c.247G> C variant and the patient’s paternal grandmother is a
carrier of the variant c.1265C> T in the GTPBP3 gene. The ﬁndings
of the family segregation analysis are in accordance with an
autosomal recessive model of inheritance of the disease. Both
variants in the POLG gene are found paternally inherited in the
patient’s healthy half-brother, thus are not considered disease-
causing.
Conclusion: WES led to the detection of two heterozygous
variants in the GTPBP3 gene. Variants in this gene have been
reported in patients with HCM, associated with combined oxida-
tive phosphorylation deﬁciency 23. These heterozygous variants
represent the probable cause of the observed clinical symptoms in
the patient.
References:.
Grants: The ﬁnancial support of Medical University Soﬁa, Grant
№D-125/2021 is gratefully acknowledged.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.034.D Novel ALPK3 variants cause infantile and late onset
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a single family
Tomer Poleg1, ofek freund1, Matan M. Jean1, Nadav Agam1, Amit
Safran1, Vadim Dolgin1, Marina Eskin-Shwartz1;2, Ohad Shmuel
Birk1;2
1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute
for Biotechnology in the Negev and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-
Gurion University of the Negev., Beer Sheva, Israel; 2Genetics institute,
Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University., Beer Sheva, Israel.
Background/Objectives: Cardiomyopathies are clinically hetero-
geneous disorders that impair heart function and are the leading
cause of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in both children
and adults. Of these, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) char-
acterized by increased left ventricular wall thickness and dilated
cardiomyopathy (DCM) displaying ventricular dilatation, are most
common. Alpha-protein kinase 3 (ALPK3) plays an essential role in
sarcomere organization. Its mutations have been recently repor-
ted to be causative of the recessively inherited severe pediatric-
onset DCM and HCM, accompanied by skeletal involvement and
facial dysmorphism, as well as of the dominantly inherited adult-
onset cardiomyopathy. We have ascertained kindred with multiple
family members affected by infantile or late onset cardiomyo-
pathy and aimed to elucidate the genetic basis of cardiomyopathy
in the affected individuals.
Methods: The family members underwent clinical assessment
and genotyping using whole-exome sequencing and Sanger
sequencing.
Results: Compound heterozygosity for two novel variants in
ALPK3 has been identiﬁed in two identical twin sisters, with severe
infantile onset HCM and facial dysmorphism. Both their father and
grandfather died by sudden death at young age, without speciﬁc
diagnosis. Their uncle was diagnosed with adult-onset cardiomyo-
pathy at the age of 56, and has been found to be heterozygous for
the truncating ALPK3 variant, identiﬁed in both of his nephews.
Conclusion: We report two novel variants in ALPK3 in a kin-
dred with individuals affected by both infantile onset and adult
onset cardiomyopathy, and provide additional evidence for the
reported phenotypic spectrum of ALPK3-related cardiac disease.
References:.
Grants: The Morris Kahn Family Foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.035.A Multidisciplinary and standardised post-mortem
genetic analysis in a representative Czech cohort of sudden
cardiac death (SCD) victims, together with genetic screening
of their living relatives, yields high diagnostic yield in cases
with positive family history and renders primary prevention
of SD in affected families
Pavel Votypka1, Petra Peldova1, Patricia Norambuena2, Stepanka
Pohlova-Kucerova3, Terezia Tavacova4, Milan Macek Sr1, Milan
Macek1, Jan Janousek4, Josef Kautzner2, Alice Krebsová2
1Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and Motol University
Hospital, Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech
Republic; 2Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Depart-
ment of Cardiology, Prague, Czech Republic;
3Charles University
Faculty of Medicine Hradec Kralove, Department of Forensic
Medicine, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic; 4Charles University 2nd
Faculty of Medicine and Motol University Hospital, Children Heart
Centre, Prague, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: Post mortem genetic analysis in SCD,
together with the cardiologic examination of victim´s relatives,
represents a multidisciplinary approach for its prevention. We
assessed the molecular aetiology of SCD in a representative cohort
and evaluated how its results facilitate prevention of SCD.
Methods: A total of 115 SCD cases (34 females/81 males; av.
age 34.1 years; period 2016-2021) was ascertained. Following
genetic consultation and cardiological examination of victims´
living relatives 100 candidate genes in 106/115 cases on the
MiSeq platform (Illumina) followed by SOPHiA GENETICS DDM
bioinformatics (Switzerland) were examined. Class IV-V variants
were validated by Sanger DNA sequencing and segregation
analyses.
Results: In total 20 sudden arrhythmic death (SADS), 22
-sudden unexplained (infant) death (SUD/SUID), 12- hereditary
cardiomyopathy (HCM) and 14 - dilated cardiomyopathy/left
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
414
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
ventricular noncompaction (DCM/LVNC), 22 - arrhythmogenic
right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), 7 – sudden infant death
(SIDS) and 11 - acute aortic dissection were diagnosed. Positive
family history (pFH) of cardiac disease or SCD was identiﬁed in 27/
115 (23.4 %; median age 41.0 years) of victims, whereas in cases
without pFH their median age was signiﬁcantly lower – 30.0 years.
Molecular aetiology (i.e. presence of Class 4 -5 variants) was
detected in a total 21/106 cases (19.8%) in RYR2, KCNH2, KCNQ1,
SCN5A, FLNC, GLA, TTN, TNNT2, RBM 20, MYPN, MYBPC3, FHL1,
TGFBR1 and COL3A1. Diagnostic yield in cases with pFA reached
13/27 cases (48.1 %).
Conclusion: We demonstrate the utility of post mortem car-
diogenetic examination in individuals older than 40 years of age.
References:.
Grants:
NV18-02-00237
and
the
Czech
SCD
Research
Consortium.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.036.B Molecular analysis of cardiomyopathies using next
generation sequencing technologies in Slovak patients
Jarmila Bernasovská1, Iveta Boronova1, Michaela Zigová1, Eva
Petrejčíková1
1University of Presov, Institute of Biology, Presova, Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: The aim of the study was to analyze a
panel of genes associated with dilated or hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy based on previously published results in order to
identify the subjects at risk.
Methods: The method of next-generation sequencing by Illu-
minaHiSeq 2500 platform was used to detect sequence variants in
28 individuals diagnosed with dilated or hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. Detected variants were ﬁltered and the functional
impact of amino acid changes was predicted by computational
programs.
Results: DNA samples of the 28 patients were analyzed by
whole exome sequencing. We identiﬁed six nonsynonymous
variants that were shown to be pathogenic in all used prediction
softwares: rs3744998 (EPG5), rs11551768 (MGME1), rs148374985
(MURC), rs78461695 (PLEC), rs17158558 (RET) and rs2295190
(SYNE1). Two of the analyzed sequence variants had minor allele
frequency
(MAF)<0.01:
rs148374985
(MURC),
rs34580776
(MYBPC3).
Conclusion: Our data support the potential role of the detec-
ted variants in pathogenesis of dilated or hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy; however, the possibility that these variants might not
be true disease-causing variants but are susceptibility alleles that
require additional mutations or injury to cause the clinical phe-
notype of disease must be considered.
References: Rocarati,M.,Latronico,M.V.G.,Musumeci,M. et al.:
Unexpectedly low mutation rates in beta-myosin heavy chain and
cardiac miosin ﬁnding protein genes in Italian patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Cell Physiol, 226,2894-2900, 2011.
Yamada T, Nomura S. Recent Findings Related to Cardiomyo-
pathy and Genetics. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Nov 20;22(22):12522.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222212522. PMID: 34830403; PMCID:
PMC8623065.
Grants: KEGA 032PU-4/2021.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.037.C Aortic rupture force in mice modelling hereditary
aortic diseases
Nicolo Dubacher1;2, Kaori Sugiyama3;4, Jeffrey Smith5, Vanessa
Nussbaumer1, Sylvan Caspar1, Marc Schönholzer1, Janine Meien-
berg1, Hiromi Yanagisawa3, Mary Sheppard6;7, Gabor Matyas1;8
1Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Swiss
Foundation for People with Rare Diseases, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzer-
land;
2Translational Cardiovascular Technologies, Department of
Health Sciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 3Life Science Center
for
Survival
Dynamics,
Tsukuba
Advanced
Research
Alliance,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan;
4Institute For Advanced
Research of Biosystem Dynamics, Research Institute for Science and
Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan; 5Saha Cardiovascular
Research Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, United States;
6Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of
Kentucky, Lexington, United States; 7Saha Aortic Center, University of
Kentucky, Lexington, United States; 8Zurich Center for Integrative
Human Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Individuals suffering from hereditary
aortic diseases (ADs) are at increased risk for aortic dissections and
ruptures. We established an objective approach to measure the
rupture force of the murine thoracic aorta, thereby explaining the
outcomes of clinical studies and assessing an added value of old
drugs in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS). Here, we applied
our approach to six additional mouse AD models.
Methods: We used two mouse models for Marfan syndrome
(MFS) as well as one smooth-muscle-cell-speciﬁc Efemp2 knockout
(SMKO) and three CRISPR/Cas9-engineered knock-in models
(Ltbp1, Mfap4, and Timp1). Moreover, one mouse MFS model was
subjected to 4-week-long losartan treatment previously shown to
reduce aneurysm growth. As previously described, 1.5-mm-long
sections of the murine thoracic aorta were mounted on a tissue
puller and uniaxially stretched until rupture.
Results: The aortic rupture force was signiﬁcantly lower in
both MFS and SMKO models, but mice with knock-in mutations
in the genes Ltbp1, Mfap4, and Timp1 did not present with an
impaired aortic integrity. As expected, the losartan treatment
of MFS-modelling mice led to the reduction of aneurysm for-
mation, which, surprisingly, had no impact on the aortic
rupture force.
Conclusion: We show for the ﬁrst time that our read-out sys-
tem is able to characterize the aortic biomechanical integrity of
mice modelling not only vEDS but also related ADs. Furthermore,
aneurysm progression alone may not be a sufﬁcient read-out for
aortic rupture, as blood-pressure-lowering therapies preventing
aortic aneurysms might still not strengthen the weakened aortic
wall. These results may contribute to better medical therapies of
hereditary ADs.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.038.D Functional characterization of iPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes from Brugada syndrome patients of a
genetically unresolved family reveals distinct underlying
mechanisms
Dogan Akdeniz1, Aleksandra Nijak1, Eline Simons1, Bert Vanden-
driessche1, Dieter Van de Sande1, Erik Fransen1, Ewa Sieliwonczyk1,
Dorien Schepers1, Dirk Snyders1, Emeline Van Craenenbroeck2, Johan
Saenen2, Alain Labro3, Maaike Alaerts1, Bart Loeys1
1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium;
2Antwerp University
Hospital, Edegem, Belgium; 3Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Brugada syndrome (BrS) is an inherited
cardiac arrhythmia characterized by a speciﬁc ECG pattern of ST-
segment elevation, predisposition to ventricular ﬁbrillation and
sudden cardiac death. Over 20 genes have been associated with
the disorder, however roughly 70% of patients remains without a
genetic diagnosis.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
415
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: In a large family with six mutation-negative BrS
patients, we performed a SNP-based linkage analysis and whole-
genome sequencing (WGS) on three patients. From two patients,
one unaffected relative and an unrelated healthy control indivi-
dual
iPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes
(iPSC-CMs)
were
created.
Molecular and electrophysiological characterization of the iPSC-
CMs was performed using qPCR, immunocytochemistry, patch-
clamping and calcium imaging.
Results: We detected signiﬁcant linkage with a chromosome 2
locus (LOD-score 3.16). In the WGS-data, no interesting shared
candidate variants were identiﬁed, also not in the linked locus.
Studying the iPSC-CM models, one patient showed signiﬁcantly
reduced sodium current density, a positive shift in sodium channel
voltage dependence of activation and reduced action potential
amplitude and upstroke velocity. The second patient showed
changes in calcium transient duration and rise time, while in both
patients arrhythmia-like events occurred during the calcium
recordings.
Conclusion: Characterization of iPSC-CMs of two patients from a
BrS family showing signiﬁcant linkage on chromosome 2, showed
one patient with a sodium current loss-of-function phenotype
consistent with previously reported BrS phenotypes, while the other
one only showed calcium handling abnormalities. These results
suggest different underlying disease mechanisms within one family,
underscoring the complex nature of BrS.
References:.
Grants: Research Foundation Flanders, University of Antwerp
BOF, ERC.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.039.A WES and its application for diagnostic purposes in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Albena Todorova1, Petya Angelova1, Slavena Atemin1;2, Nikolay
Stoyanov3, Tihomir Todorov2, Mila Sleptsova2, Krasimira Hristova4,
Mariana Gospodinova5, Vanyo Mitev1, Vasil Velchev3
1Medical University of Soﬁa, Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory
“Genica”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 3University Hospital “St. Anna”, Department
of Cardiology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 4Medical Center for Cardiovascular
Disorders, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 5University Hospital “St. Ivan Rilski”, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is
a common genetically heterogeneous disorder with an autosomal
dominant inheritance and incomplete penetrance. More than 50
genes are associated with HCM and it is the most common cause
of cardiac death due to cardiac failure. Genetic testing is strongly
recommended for patients with clinically suspected HCM due to
echocardiography/ECG data, family history for the disease and/or
anamnestic data. The phenotype-genotype correlations are difﬁ-
cult to interpret: patients with the same genetic variant could
express different clinical presentation, even in the same family.
Methods: A group of 20 HCM patients was screened for
pathogenic variants by use of WES (Whole Exome Sequencing).
The analysis included a panel of 242 genes associated with car-
diomyopathy. The WES data is interpreted by GenesearchNGS
software.
Results: The genetic diagnosis was clariﬁed in 9 cases. Patho-
genic variants were detected in the following genes: MYBPC3 - 4
variants; TNNI3; LAMP2; RBM20; MYLK2 and JPH2. The suspected
clinical diagnosis of Danon disease was genetically conﬁrmed by
mutation in the LAMP2 gene. Severe hypertrophic and restrictive
cardiomyopathy is provoked by TNNI3 mutation. The gene
RBM20 seems to be a promising candidate gene for HCM.
Conclusion: The application of WES for diagnostic purposes in
HCM cases turned out to be very useful in order to study the
molecular bases of cardiomyopathies. In total 45% of our cases are
genetically diagnosed. Moreover, the affected families are offered
adequate genetic counselling and prenatal diagnostics.
References:.
Grants: The ﬁnancial support of Medical University-Soﬁa, Grant
№D-125/2021 is gratefully acknowledged.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.040.B APOE molecular spectrum in a French cohort with
primary dyslipidemia
Yara Abou Khalil1;2;3, Oriane Marmontel4;5, Olivier Blureau6, Cathe-
rine Boileau1;2;7, Marianne Abi-Fadel1;3, Mathilde Di Filippo4;5, Alain
Carrié6, Jean-Pierre Rabes8;9, Mathilde VARRET1;2
1INSERM, Laboratory for Vascular Translational Science (LVTS),
F-75018 Paris, France, Paris, France;
2Université de Paris and
Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, Paris, France;
3Laboratory of
Biochemistry
and
Molecular
Therapeutics
(LBTM),
Faculty
of
Pharmacy, Pôle Tech-nologies-Santé (PTS), Saint-Joseph University,
Beirut, Lebanon; 4CarMen Laboratory, INSERM U1060, INRAE U1397,
Université Lyon 1, Oullins, France;
5Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, bron, France;
6INSERM UMRS 1166, Faculty of Medicine Pitié-Salpêtrière, Sorbonne
University, Paris, France; 7Genetic Department, AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat,
F-75018 Paris, Paris, France;
8Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular
Genetics,
Ambroise
Paré
University
Hospital,
APHP,
Boulogne Billancourt, France; 9UFR Simone Veil-Santé, University of
Versailles-Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, Paris-Saclay University, Mon-
tigny-le-Bretonneux, France.
Background/Objectives: Primary hypercholesterolemia is char-
acterized by elevated LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) levels isolated in
case of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia (ADH) or
associated with elevated triglycerides levels in case of familial
combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL), both leading to cardiovascular
diseases (CVD). Along with LDLR-APOB-PCSK9, rare APOE gene
variants were reported in ADH and FCHL. We explored the APOE
molecular spectrum in a French ADH/FCHL cohort of 5,743 unre-
lated probands.
Methods: NGS was performed on coding DNA sequence and
ﬂanking introns (exon padding+/- 30 bp) of the LDLR, PCSK9,
APOB and APOE genes and on the 12 SNPs of the polygenic
score..
Results: The LDLR, PCSK9, APOB and APOE sequencing revealed
76 carriers of a rare APOE variant, without a mutation in the ﬁrst
three genes. Among the 31 variants 5 were described in ADH/
FCHL: p.Leu167del, p.Leu46Pro, p.Arg163Cys, p.Arg269Gly and
p.Gly145Asp. Twelve novel missense, ﬁve synonymous, two
intronic and seven variants in regulatory regions were also iden-
tiﬁed. Sixteen variants were predicted in silico pathogenic or likely
pathogenic, and their carriers had a signiﬁcantly lower polygenic
risk score than carriers of predicted benign variants. We did not
observe any correlation between the LDL-C levels and the poly-
genic risk score which is in favour of a major effect of APOE
potentially pathogenic variants. The p.Leu167del carriers were
associated with a more severe phenotype and our data suggest
that APOE variant carriers are better responders to statins than
carriers of a LDLR mutation.
Conclusion: Altogether, we show that the APOE variants
account for a signiﬁcant part of ADH and FCHL.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
416
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P06.041.C Discovery of rare variants associated with resting
heart rate
Julia Ramírez1, Stefan van Duijvenboden1, Lahiru Thomas Soor-
iyabandara2, Andrew Tinker1, Patricia Munroe1
1Queen Mary University of London, William Harvey Research
Institute, London, United Kingdom;
2University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Resting heart rate (RHR) is associated
with cardiovascular disease. Genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have identiﬁed common variants at 437 loci, but their
biological processes are not fully characterised. Identiﬁcation of
rare variants may help to pinpoint candidate genes.
Methods: We ﬁrst performed a rare variant GWAS (RV-GWAS)
for RHR in 388,223 individuals ﬁltering by allele count > 10. Next,
whole exome sequencing (WES) analysis in 161,539 individuals
was done to explore consistency of ﬁndings and discover coding
variants. All participants were of European ancestry from UK
Biobank.
Results: The RV-GWAS identiﬁed 29 rare variants (9 at known
RHR loci). At novel loci, we observe three missense variants in
genes AKTIP, TBX5 and DBH. AKTIP encodes an AKT interacting
protein, and a knockout mouse model has shown heart abnorm-
alities. The rare variants at TBX5 and DBH are identical to those
reported for blood pressure traits. The WES analysis identiﬁed 6
rare variants. Three variants overlapped the RV-GWAS and three
variants were novel. We observe a missense variant in HIGD1B, a
gene with no prior associations with cardiovascular phenotypes.
At a second novel locus, a knockout mouse model of TBC1D32
demonstrates several cardiovascular abnormalities.
Conclusion: We identiﬁed 35 rare variants associated with RHR
across the RV-GWAS and WES, highlighting potential novel can-
didate genes. Ongoing studies are focused on gene-based testing
and validation.
References: (1) Mensah-Kane et al. Front Genet 18; 12:569323
(2021); (2) Lee et al. AJHG 95, 1, 5-23 (2014); (3) Silvestri V et al.
Cancer 123, 210-8 (2017).
Grants:
MRC
grant
MR/N025083/1,
European
Union-
NextGenerationEU.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.042.D Cardiac Arrhythmia Syndrome with ST-Segment
Depression
Enrica Marchionni1, Ruggiero Mango2, Valentina Ferradini3, Fran-
cesca
Di
Lorenzo1,
Giovanni
Parlapiano1,
Giuseppe
Novelli1;3,
Federica Sangiuolo1;3
1Medical Genetics Unit, Tor Vergata University Hospital, Department
of Oncohematology, Rome, Italy; 2Cardiology Unit, Department of
Emergency and Critical Care,Tor Vergata University Hospital, Rome,
Italy; 3Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Biomedicine
and Prevention, Tor Vergata University Hospital, Rome, Italy.
Background/Objectives: We report a large three-generation Ita-
lian family presenting with a peculiar ECG pattern and sudden
cardiac death (SCD) in several individuals.
Methods: The proband was referred at 59 y.o. after a resusci-
tated cardiac arrest. She presented with recurrent atrial ﬁbrillation
and an abnormal ECG pattern, showing a concave-upward ST-
segment depression in leads I, II, aVL, aVF and V2-6. Coronary
angiographic studies were normal. She soon after died of SCD as
well as her younger sister and several other family members,
including her son, father, paternal grandmother, two uncles and
three cousins. The proband’s older sister and her son were clini-
cally screened and presented similar ECGs patterns.
Results: Firstly, genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral
blood of the proband and Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
analysis was performed through a targeted panel of 61 genes
associated with channellopathies and cardiomyopathies. NGS
analysis failed to evidence the underlying genetic cause in the
proband. Secondly, genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral
blood of the proband’s older sister, her affected son and the
healthy father. Trio-based Exome Sequencing (ES) was performed
but failed to evidence the underlying genetic cause.
Conclusion: The intriguing ECG pattern of the present family
fulﬁlled the proposed clinical criteria of ST-segment depression
syndrome recently observed in ﬁve other families and segregating
as an autosomal dominant trait1. Extensive examination of the
NGS data revealed no coding variants segregating with the dis-
ease in any of the families reported to date. Genome sequencing
is ongoing to reveal the likely underlying genetic cause.
References: 1PMID:30380381.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.043.A The genetic landscape and clinical implication of
pediatric Moyamoya angiopathy in a multiethnic cohort
Paolo Zanoni1, Katharina Steindl1, Heinrich Sticht2, Beatrice Oneda1,
Pascal Joset1, Ivan Ivanovski1, Anselm Horn2, Elena Cabello1,
Alessandra Baumer1, Julia Laube1, Markus Zweier1, Anita Rauch1;3;4,
Nadia Khan5
1University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Genetics, Schlieren-Zurich,
Switzerland; 2Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Insti-
tute of Biochemistry, Erlangen, Germany; 3University of Zurich, Zurich
Center for Integrative Human Physiology, Zurich, Switzerland;
4University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Neuroscience Center Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland; 5University Children’s Hospital Zurich, Moya-
moya Center, Zurich, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: To perform a comprehensive genotype-
phenotype analysis in paediatric Moyamoya Angiopathy (MMA)1,2
patients with focus on clinical implications.
Methods:
We
performed
molecular
karyotyping,
exome
sequencing and automated structural assessment of missense
variants on a series of 88 paediatric MMA patients and correlated
genetic, angiographic and clinical ﬁndings.
Results: The two largest subgroups consisted of RNF213 and
neuroﬁbromatosis patients. While deleterious RNF213 variants
were associated with a severe MMA clinical course with early
symptom onset, frequent posterior cerebral artery involvement
and higher stroke rates in multiple territories, NF1 patients had a
similar infarct burden compared to non-NF1 individuals and were
often diagnosed incidentally during routine MRIs. Additionally, we
found that MMA-associated RNF213 variants have lower predicted
functional impact compared to those associated with aortic dis-
ease. We also raise the question of MMA as a feature of recurrent
as well as rare chromosomal imbalances and further support the
association of MMA with STAT3 deﬁciency.
Conclusion: We provide a comprehensive characterization at
the genetic and clinical level of a large exclusively pediatric MMA
population. Due to the clinical differences we found across genetic
subgroups we propose genetic testing for risk stratiﬁcation as part
of the routine assessment of pediatric MMA patients.
References: 1. Scott RM, Smith ER. Moyamoya Disease and
Moyamoya Syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(12):1226-1237.
2. Kim SK, Cho BK, Phi JH, et al. Pediatric moyamoya disease: An
analysis of 410 consecutive cases. Ann Neurol. 2010;68(1):92-101.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
417
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Grants: This project was in part supported by the UZH
Research Priority Program Itinerare (A.R.).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.044.B Prevalence and clinical consequences of multiple
pathogenic variants in dilated cardiomyopathy
Sophie Stroeks1, Ida Lunde2;3, Debby Hellebrekers4, Godelieve Claes4,
Ingrid Krapels4, Hiroko Wakimoto2, Els Vanhoutte4, Arthur van den
Wijngaard4, Michiel Henkens1, Anne Raafs1, Maurits Sikking1, Jos
Broers5, Miranda Nabben1;4;5, Elizabeth Jones1;6, Stephane Hey-
mans1;6, Han Brunner4;7, Job Verdonschot1;4
1Maastricht University, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht
(CARIM), Maastricht, Netherlands; 2Harvard Medical School, Genetics,
Boston, United States; 3Akershus University Hospital, Diagnostics and
Technology, Oslo, Norway; 4Maastricht University Medical Center,
Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands;
5Maastricht University,
Genetics and Cell Biology, Maastricht, Netherlands;
6KU Leuven,
Cardiovascular Sciences, Leuven, Belgium;
7Radboud University
Medical Center, Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) was
considered a monogenetic disease which can be caused by over
50 genes. Evidence suggests that the combination of multiple
pathogenic variants leads to greater disease severity and earlier
onset. So far, not much is known about the prevalence and dis-
ease course of multiple pathogenic variants in patients with DCM.
To gain insight in these knowledge gaps, we 1) systematically
collected clinical information of a well-characterized DCM cohort
and 2) created a mouse model.
Methods: Complete cardiac pheno- and genotyping was per-
formed in 854 consecutive DCM patients. Patients were followed
for an average of 54 months. Endomyocardial biopsies were taken
from patients for RNA-sequencing. Compound heterozygous
digenic (LMNA/TTNΔA), monogenic (LMNA/WT) and WT/WT mice
were created and phenotypically followed over time. Heart tissue
was used for RNA-sequencing.
Results: 131 (likely) pathogenic (LP/P) variants were found in
854 consecutive tested DCM patients (15.4%). Three of the 131
patients had a second LP/P variant (2.3%). These three patients
had a comparable disease onset, disease severity, and clinical
course compared to DCM patients with one LP/P. The LMNA/
TTNΔA mice also had no functional differences compared to the
LMNA/WT mice after 40 weeks of follow-up, although RNA-
sequencing suggests increased cardiac stress and sarcomere
insufﬁciency in the LMNA/TTNΔA mice.
Conclusion: 2.3% of DCM patients with one LP/P also have a
second LP/P in a different gene. Although the second LP/P does
not seem to inﬂuence the disease course of DCM in patients and
mice, the ﬁnding of a second LP/P can be important for their
relatives.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.045.C Speciﬁc de novo variants in RNF213 cause a
monogenic early-onset multisystemic disease ranging from
childhood stroke to Leigh-like syndrome
Theresa Brunet1;2, Victoria Lieftüchter3, Dominic Lenz4, Philipp Peters3,
Robert Kopajtich2, Benedikt Zott5;6;7, Hanna Zimmermann8, Irina
Hüning9, Diana Ballhausen10, Christian Staufner4, Alyssa Bianzano4,
Joanne Hughes11, Robert Taylor12;13, Robert McFarland12;13, Tamara
Žigman14, Danijela Petković Ramadža14, Rohlfs Meino3, Ute Hehr15,
Neal Sondheimer16;17;18, Stacy Hewson16, NIKOLAOS MARINAKIS19,
Konstantina Kosma19, Jan Traeger-Synodinos19, Holger Prokisch1;2,
Thomas Meitinger1, Ingo Borggräfe20;21, Juliane Spiegler22, Ivo Baric14,
Marco Paolini23, Lucia Gerstl20, Matias Wagner1;2;20
1Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of
Human Genetics, Munich, Germany., Munich, Germany; 2Institute of
Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany.,
Munich, Germany;
3Department of Pediatrics, Dr. von Hauner
Children’s Hospital, University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-Univer-
sität München, Munich, Germany., Munich, Germany; 4Centre of
Child and Adolescent Medicine, Department of Pediatric Neurology
and Metabolic Medicine, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany; 5Institute of Neuroscience, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany; 6Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany; 7Department of Neuror-
adiology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany; 8Institute of Neuroradiology, University Hospital,
LMU Munich, Munich, Germany;
9Institute of Human Genetics,
University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, Lübeck, Germany; 10Pediatric
Metabolic Unit, Pediatrics, Woman-Mother-Child Department, Uni-
versity of Lausanne and University Hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland;
11National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders,
Children’s Health Ireland at Temple Street, Dublin, Ireland., Dublin,
Ireland; 12Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Translational
and Clinical Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences Newcastle
University Newcastle upon Tyne United Kingdom., Newcastle, United
Kingdom; 13NHS Highly Specialised Services for Rare Mitochondrial
Disorders, Royal Victoria Inﬁrmary, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK., Newcastle, United
Kingdom; 14Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Center
Zagreb and University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb,
Croatia., Zagreb, Croatia;
15Center for Human Genetics, and
Department of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Regens-
burg, Germany., Regensburg, Germany; 16Division of Clinical and
Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON,
Canada., Torono, Canada;
17Program in Genetics and Genome
Biology Program, Sick Kids Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.,
Toronto,
Canada;
18Departments
of
Pediatrics
and
Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada., Toronto,
Canada; 19Laboratory of Medical Genetics, St. Sophia’s Children’s
Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens,
Greece., Athens, Greece;
20Department of Pediatric Neurology,
Developmental Medicine and Social Pediatrics, University of Munich,
80337 Munich, Germany., Munich, Germany;
21Epilepsy Center,
University of Munich, 80337 Munich, Germany., Munich, Germany;
22Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital of Würzburg, 97080
Würzburg, Germany., Würzburg, Germany; 23Department of Radi-
ology, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany., Munich,
Germany.
Background/Objectives: RNF213, encoding a giant E3 ubiquitin
ligase, has been recognized for its role as key susceptibility gene
for Moyamoya disease (MMD). To date, only single case descrip-
tions have also implicated an association of speciﬁc variants in
RNF213 with an early-onset form of MMD with full penetrance. We
aimed to systematically elucidate the clinical spectrum associated
with de novo variants in RNF213 and to evaluate genotype-
phenotype correlations.
Methods: Patients were identiﬁed through reanalysis of exome
sequencing data of an unselected cohort from a single tertiary
care center. Additional patients were ascertained via Genematcher
and ClinVar. Phenotypic characterization including cMRI analyses
and segregation analysis were performed.
Results: Nine individuals from eight unrelated families with
heterozygous (8 de novo, 1 inherited) missense variants in RNF213
clustering within or around the RING domain were identiﬁed. 6/9
individuals had ischemic stroke between the age of birth and 23
years, ﬁve of which showed MRI alterations suggestive of Moya-
moya disease. In contrast, 2 individuals had bilateral basal ganglia
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
418
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
T2 hyperintensities and high CSF lactate. Additionally, ﬁve indivi-
duals had recurrent episodes of elevated liver enzymes and three
cases had cardiomyopathy. Secondary structural epileptic ence-
phalopathy was frequent (6/9) requiring antiepileptic medication.
Conclusion: De novo missense variants in RNF213 clustering in
the E3 RING or a region distal to it lead to a monogenic syndrome
with two clinical presentations. Most patients presented with
neonatal or childhood onset stroke and Moyamoya alterations
whereas a second group had a Leigh-like phenotype. Hereby, we
establish RNF213 as a Mendelian Disease Gene with symptoms
beyond MMD.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P06.048.B The challenging choice of gene panel size: our
experience with hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy
Sebastian Suchet1, Philippe Meyer1, Eva Hammar Bouveret1,
Maurice Beghetti1, Frédéric Masclaux1, Michel Guipponi1, Julie
Wacker1, Agathe Py1, Judith Schwaiger2, Marc Abramowicz1, Jean-
Louis Blouin1, Christiane Gruner2, Siv Fokstuen1
1University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; 2University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Implementation of next generation
sequencing (NGS) has led to a rapid expansion in the number of
genes included in diagnostic genetic testing for cardiomyopathies.
This tendency is changing with the evidence-based assessment of
genes conducted by ClinGen. Our aim was to evaluate the
mutation detection rate and the involved genes in patients with
isolated hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy (HCM and DCM)
according to the gene panel size.
Methods: Our NGS approach consist of targeted exome
sequencing. Before September 2019, we have used in-house gene
panels including 65/78 cardiomyopathy genes. Since October
2019, we switched to Genomics England PanelAPP, including 144/
140 high-evidence based genes causative for the different sub-
types of cardiomyopathy.
Results: Between 2015 and 2021, a total of 135 patients with
non-syndromic HCM or DCM underwent genetic testing. Our
mutation detection rate was 49 % (36/74) with the in-house panels,
38% (23/61) with the PanelAPP panel and 44 % (59/135) overall.
Comparing the two panel sizes we didn’t see any difference in the
genes found with causative variants. All the genes with pathogenic
or likely pathogenic variants identiﬁed with the large PanelAPP
panel were already included in our smaller in-house panels.
Conclusion: Our results conﬁrm the lack of major clinical
beneﬁt of large panels in isolated HCM or DCM and support the
recommendations of the 2021 European Society of Cardiology
heart failure guidelines, which suggest to use small evidence-
based panels and to consider additional large panel only if there is
a clear family history or a speciﬁc phenotype.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07
METABOLIC AND MITOCHONDRIAL DISORDERS
P07.001.C Loss of centrosomal gene ALMS1 alters cell
metabolism through the TGF-β pathway
Brais Bea Mascato1, Diana Valverde Pérez1
1University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Alström syndrome (AS) is a rare auto-
somal recessive disease that is associated with mutations in the
ALMS1 centrosomal gene. The main manifestations of this syn-
drome are retinitis pigmentosa, obesity and type 2 diabetes melli-
tus. The depletion of the ALMS1 gene has been associated with the
alteration of different processes regulated through the primary
cilium, such as the Notch signalling pathway or TGF-β. Despite this,
little is known about which cellular processes associated with the
TGF-β pathway can be altered in the absence of ALMS1.
Methods: In this study we analyse the gene expression proﬁle
by RNA-seq of a cell line hTERT-BJ-5ta deﬁcient in ALMS1, after
stimulating the TGF-β pathway. We also performed a LFQ pro-
teomic analysis by LC-MS/MS under the same conditions, to
integrate the level of gene and protein expression. Finally, we
validate the data obtained by western blot and ﬂuorescence
microscopy.
Results: RNA-seq data showed an enrichment mainly asso-
ciated with TGF-β coordinated pathways such as PI3K/AKT, MAPKs
or p53. Proteomic analysis showed an association between ALMS1
deﬁciency and alterations in cell metabolism and the lumen of
intracellular
organelles such
as
the
endoplasmic reticulum.
Observing the overlap of both datasets reinforced the relationship
of ALMS1 with the endoplasmic reticulum and lipid-dependent
signalling pathways. Finally, an over-activation of the AKT pathway
was observed in the absence of ALMS1.
Conclusion:
ALMS1
deﬁciency
disrupted
cross-signalling
between the TGF-β pathway and other dependent pathways in
immortalised ﬁbroblasts. Furthermore, altered cross-signalling has
implications for cellular metabolism and leads to over-activation of
the AKT pathway.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.002.D ASAH1-related disorders: Expanding phenotypic
spectrum requires updated thinking on diagnostic testing
Kathleen Crosby1, Alexander Solyom2
1Aceragen, Durham, United States; 2Aceragen, Basel, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic variants in the ASAH1 gene
cause acid ceramidase deﬁciency, which causes a spectrum of
phenotypes. Farber disease, with typical symptoms including joint
disease, subcutaneous nodules, and dysphonia, along with other
symptoms like osteolysis; and SMA-PME (spinal muscular atrophy
with progressive myoclonic epilepsy).
Methods: Data including range of symptoms, age at symptom
onset, time to diagnosis and outcome were assessed. Sources
included recent literature and the Observational and Cross-
Sectional Cohort Study of the Natural History and Phenotypic
Spectrum of Farber Disease (NCT03233841). This systematic clin-
ical study of patients with Farber disease included prospective
evaluations, with 45 patients enrolled.
Results: 266 cases of ASAH1-related disorders were reviewed
for phenotypic classiﬁcation. 129 cases were classiﬁed as severe
Farber disease with onset of symptoms and death before the age
of 4 years; 66 cases as moderate to attenuated Farber disease with
symptom onset in childhood and survival ranging from late
childhood to the 6th decade; and 17 cases as unclassiﬁed Farber
disease. 46 cases were classiﬁed as SMA-PME. Additional patients
included 3 cases of late-onset SMA without epilepsy, one case of
PME without SMA, 2 cases of SMA who later developed Farber
disease symptoms, and 2 cases with both SMA-PME and Farber
disease symptoms in childhood.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
419
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: ASAH1-related disorders including Farber disease,
SMA-PME, or variations of these phenotypes, are likely under-
diagnosed. The broad phenotypic spectrum highlights the need
for increased clinical suspicion and expanded inclusion of the
ASAH1 gene in genetic testing for individuals presenting without
textbook symptoms of acid ceramidase deﬁciency.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Kathleen Crosby Aceragen, Aceragen,
Alexander Solyom Aceragen, Aceragen.
P07.003.A Use of whole genome sequencing to determine the
genetic basis of suspected mitochondrial disorders
Katherine Schon1, Rita Horvath2, Wei Wei2, Claudia Calabrese2,
Arianna Tucci3, Kristina Ibañez3, Thiloka Ratnaike2, Robert Pit-
ceathly4, Enrico Bugiardini4, Ros Quinlivan4, Michael Hanna4, Emma
Clement5, Emma Ashton6, John Sayer7, Paul Brennan8, Dragana
Josifova9, Louise Izatt9, Carl Fratter10, Victoria Nesbitt10, Timothy
Barrett11, Dominic McMullan11, Audrey Smith12, Charulata Desh-
pande12, Sarah Smithson13, Richard Festenstein14, Natalie Canham15,
Mark Caulﬁeld3, Henry Houlden4, Shamima Rahman16, Patrick
Chinnery1
1University of Cambridge, Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; 1University of Cambridge, Department
of Clinical Neurosciences, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 3Queen Mary
University London, William Harvey Research Institute, London, United
Kingdom; 4University College London, Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, London, United Kingdom; 5Great Ormond Street Hospital
for Children NHS Foundation Trust, Department of Clinical Genetics
and Genomic Medicine, London, United Kingdom; 6Great Ormond
Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, NHS North
Thames Genomic Laboratory Hub, London, United Kingdom; 7New-
castle University, Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Faculty
of
Medical
Sciences,
Newcastle,
United
Kingdom;
8Newcastle
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Northern Genetics Service, New-
castle, United Kingdom;
9Guy’s Hospital, Department of Clinical
Genetics, London, United Kingdom; 10Oxford University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, NHS Highly Specialised Services for Rare
Mitochondrial, Oxford, United Kingdom; 11Birmingham Women’s and
Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, West Midlands, Oxford and Wessex
Genomics Laboratory Hub, Birmingham, United Kingdom; 12Man-
chester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom;
13University Hospitals Bristol, Department of Clinical Genetics, Bristol,
United Kingdom; 14Imperial College, Department of Brain Sciences,
London, United Kingdom; 15Liverpool Women’s Hospital, Liverpool
Centre for Genomic Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom; 16Great
Ormond
Street
Hospital
for
Children
NHS
Foundation
Trust,
Metabolic Unit, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Diagnosis of mitochondrial disorders is
challenging because they are clinically and genetically hetero-
geneous. WES has been effective for diagnosing mitochondrial
disorders and discovering new disease genes. However, it is not
possible to make a diagnosis in ~40%. WGS can diagnose
pathogenic variants affecting the mtDNA and the nuclear gen-
ome, so it has the potential to make diagnoses in more families
and shorten the ‘diagnostic odyssey’.
Methods: 319 families with suspected mitochondrial disorders
were referred to the 100,000 Genomes Project after excluding
common genetic causes. Human Phenotype Ontology terms were
recorded, median 7 per participant. Short read WGS was analysed.
Variants were prioritised using phenotype-based gene panels,
Exomiser and comparison to ClinVar. mtDNA variants were called
using an in-house pipeline. Copy number variants and short tan-
dem repeats for thirteen neurological disorders were analysed.
Results: A deﬁnite or probable genetic diagnosis was identiﬁed
in 98 families (31%), with an additional 6 possible diagnoses (2%).
In total, 95 different genes were implicated. 37.5% of families had
a mitochondrial diagnosis and 62.5% had a non-mitochondrial
diagnosis. Diagnostic yield was higher in trios/quads (62/148)
compared to singletons (23/102) (p = 0.005) and in children (64/
143) compared to adults (46/202) (p < 0.001).
Conclusion: WGS is a useful diagnostic test in patients with
suspected mitochondrial disorders yielding a diagnosis in a further
31% after excluding common causes. The majority of diagnoses
were non-mitochondrial disorders, including developmental dis-
orders with intellectual disability, epileptic encephalopathies,
metabolic disorders, cardiomyopathies and leukodystrophies.
These would have been missed using a targeted approach, with
some having speciﬁc treatments.
References: BMJ 2021;375;e066288.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Katherine Schon Addenbrooke’s Chari-
table Trust. Medical Research Council (MRC) International Centre
for Genomic Medicine in Neuromuscular Disease (MR/S005021/1).,
Rita Horvath Wellcome Trust Investigator (109915/Z/15/Z).
Medical Research Council (UK) (MR/N025431/1).
European Research Council,.
Newton Fund (UK/Turkey, MR/N027302/1).
Evelyn Trust.
Lily Foundation, Wei Wei: None declared, Claudia Calabrese:
None declared, Arianna Tucci: None declared, Kristina Ibañez:
None declared, Thiloka Ratnaike: None declared, Robert Pitceathly
Medical Research Council Clinician Scientist Fellowship (MR/
S002065/1).
Medical Research Council strategic award to establish an
International Centre for Genomic Medicine in Neuromuscular
Diseases (ICGNMD) (MR/S005021/1), Enrico Bugiardini: None
declared, Ros Quinlivan: None declared, Michael Hanna Medical
Research Council strategic award to establish an International
Centre
for
Genomic
Medicine
in
Neuromuscular
Diseases
(ICGNMD) (MR/S005021/1), Emma Clement: None declared, Emma
Ashton: None declared, John Sayer: None declared, Paul Brennan:
None declared, Dragana Josifova: None declared, Louise Izatt:
None declared, Carl Fratter: None declared, Victoria Nesbitt: None
declared, Timothy Barrett: None declared, Dominic McMullan:
None declared, Audrey Smith: None declared, Charulata Desh-
pande: None declared, Sarah Smithson: None declared, Richard
Festenstein: None declared, Natalie Canham: None declared, Mark
Caulﬁeld: None declared, Henry Houlden MRC, Wellcome Trust,
Shamima Rahman BioMedical Insights - Payment to institution.
Neurovive - Payment to institution.
Partners4Access - Payment to institution.
Pﬁzer- Payment to institution.
Epirium - Consultancy fee.
Stealth Biotherapeutics - Payment to institution.
Taysha Gene Therapies, Inc. - Consultancy fee.
Modis Therapeutics, Inc., a wholly.
owned subsidiary of Zogenix, Inc. - Consultancy fee.
Pretzel Therapeutics, Inc. - Consultancy fee.
Access Inﬁnity - Payment to institution, Editor, Journal of
Inherited Metabolic Disease.
Senior Editor, Annals of Human Genetics.
Special Adviser to HFEA, Patrick Chinnery PFC is a Wellcome
Trust Principal Research Fellow (212219/Z/18/Z), and a UK NIHR
Senior Investigator, who receives support from the Medical
Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit (MC_UU_00015/9),
the Medical Research Council (MRC) International Centre for
Genomic Medicine in Neuromuscular Disease (MR/S005021/1), the
Leverhulme Trust (RPG-2018-408), an MRC research grant (MR/
S035699/1), an Alzheimer’s Society Project Grant (AS-PG-18b-022)
and the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
420
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Research Centre based at Cambridge University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust and the University of Cambridge.
P07.004.B Genome-wide expression analysis in Fabry disease
human podocyte cell line
Sarah Snanoudj1, celine derambure2, Céline Lesueur1, Lénaïg
Donval3, Stéphane Marret3, Soumeya Bekri1, Abdellah Tebani1
1Department of Metabolic Biochemistry, UNIROUEN, INSERM U1245,
CHU Rouen, Normandie University, Rouen, France;
2Normandie
University, UNIROUEN, IRIB, Inserm U1245, Normandy Center for
Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France; 3Department of
Neonatal Pediatrics, Intensive Care and Neuropediatrics, UNIROUEN,
INSERM U1245, CHU Rouen, Normandie University, Rouen, France.
Background/Objectives: Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked lyso-
somal disease due to alpha-galactosidase A deﬁciency. This
enzyme is involved in glycosphingolipid metabolism and its
alteration leads to cellular dysfunction and microvascular pathol-
ogy. Different organs are involved with kidney as a main organ
target. The rise of omics sciences has prompted a paradigm shift,
in both research and medicine. These approaches may open new
insights into the pathophysiology of multifactorial complex dis-
eases. We performed genome-wide expression analysis in an FD
human podocyte model.
Methods: RNAseq-based genome-wide expression analysis
was done on human immortalized alpha-galactosidase A deﬁcient
podocytes generated using CRISPR/Cas9 technology, and control
podocytes. Differential expression analysis was performed using
DESeq2 package.
Results: Two hundred and forty-seven genes were differentially
expressed, with 111 genes overexpressed and 136 under-expressed
in FD compared to controls. Genes known to be involved in
angiogenesis (ITGB3), autophagy (TIA1, SMG1) and oxidative stress
(CBR3, BLVRA) were among these genes. The STRIPAK complex,
related to autophagy, and the NADP/NADPH pathway (oxidative
stress) were among the most altered pathways. The downregulated
genes included MOB1A linked to the Hippo pathway which parti-
cipates in kidney podocytes homeostasis maintenance.
Conclusion: These preliminary results unveil Fabry disease-
related transcriptomic expression patterns. Further characteriza-
tion of these disrupted cellular pathways could enable deeper
understanding of FD pathophysiology.
References:.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: Sarah Snanoudj University Hospital of
Rouen, University of Rouen Normandy, celine derambure University
of Rouen Normandie, Céline Lesueur University Hospital of Rouen,
Lénaïg Donval: None declared, Stéphane Marret University Hospital
of Rouen, University of Rouen Normandie, Soumeya Bekri University
Hospital of Rouen, University of Rouen Normandy, Abdellah Tebani
University Hospital of Rouen, University of Rouen Normandy.
P07.005.C Rapid exome sequencing for children with severe
acute encephalopathy, a case series
Clair Habib1, Tamar Paperna1, Rinat Zaid1, Josef Ben Ari2, Sarit
Ravid3, Galit Tal4, Karin Weiss1, Tova Hershkovits1
1Rambam Health Care Campus, The Genetics Institute, Haifa, Israel;
2Rambam Health Care Campus, Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Haifa,
Israel; 3Rambam Health Care Campus, Pediatric Neurology depart-
ment, Haifa, Israel; 4Rambam Health Care Campus, Metabolic Clinic,
Haifa, Israel.
Background/Objectives: Increasingly, next generation sequen-
cing (NGS) is becoming an invaluable tool in the diagnosis of
acute neurological disorders where a monogenic etiology is not
suspected such as acute encephalopathy\encephalitis.
Here, we describe a brief series of pediatric patients hospita-
lized in the pediatric intensive unit. All presented with severe
acute encephalopathy initially suspected to be of infectious or
inﬂammatory origin, but subsequently diagnosed with a mono-
genic disorder.
Methods: Rapid exome sequencing was performed during the
initial hospitalization of three unrelated patients. Data analysis and
initial report was performed in-house in a few hours. All patients
were of Muslim Arab descent with a history of consanguinity,
previously healthy ranging from 1.5-3 years. One patient pre-
senting with acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANEC) had a sister
who presented with ANEC one year prior.
Results: Exome sequencing was diagnostic in all three cases.
One patient had a homozygous pathogenic variant in MOCS2,
c.3G>A p.(Met1Ile) associated with late onset Molybdenum
cofactor deﬁciency B. A second patient harbored a homozygous
likely pathogenic variant in NDUFS8 c.441G>C p.(Met147Ile). Sur-
prisingly, the initial work-up was not suggestive of this disorder.
Finally,
a
likely
pathogenic
homozygous
missense
variant
c.359T>C p.(Ile120Thr) in the DBR1 gene was identiﬁed in the
patient presenting with ANEC which segregated as expected in
the family.
Conclusion: This case series demonstrates use of rapid exome
sequencing is shifting the paradigm of diagnostics even in critical
care situations and should be considered early on in children with
acute encephalopathy. Timely diagnosis can direct initial treat-
ment as well as informing decisions regarding long term care.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.006.D Analysis of the mitochondrial 13513G>A mutation:
A case report of ﬁve Hungarian patients
Vera Várhegyi1, Fruzsina Szabo1, Zoltan Grosz1, Viktor Molnár1,
Noemi Agnes Varga1, Petra Zsidegh2, Agnes Herczegfalvi3, Viktória
Szabó4, Anita Maasz5, Judit Bene5, Kinga Hadzsiev5, Aniko Gal1,
Maria Judit Molnar1
1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary; 2Semmelweis University, 1st Depart-
ment of Pediatrics, Budapest, Hungary; 3Semmelweis University, 2nd
Department of Pediatrics, Budapest, Hungary;
4Semmelweis Uni-
versity, Department of Ophthalmology, Budapest, Hungary; 5Uni-
versity of Pécs, Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic mutations in the mito-
chondrial DNA (mtDNA) underlying primary mitochondrial disease
result in a wide variety of clinical phenotypes. The m.13513 G>A
(p.D355N) mutation in the MT-ND5 gene has been reported in the
literature in the background of Leigh syndrome, MELAS, and
MELAS / LHON overlap syndrome. In the present study, we sought
to answer the question about the proportion of this mtDNA
alteration that occurs among the Hungarian population.
Methods: In this study, 537 patients were examined for the
m.13513 G>A mutation by bidirectional sequencing. DNA isolation
was performed in 390 cases from blood and in 147 cases from
postmitotic tissue (muscle, urinary squamous cell).
Results: Among the studied patients, the mtDNA G13513A
mutation was detected in ﬁve cases. The heteroplasmy ratio was
in 50 - >95%. Clinical symptoms ranged from a broad spectrum
of phenotypes such as Leigh syndrome, ataxia, strabismus,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
421
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
neuropathy, visual impairment, and renal failure. In four cases, the
disease was associated with early onset Leigh syndrome, while in
one patient, clinical symptoms manifested in adulthood with
multisystemic involvement, with severe visual and renal impair-
ment and hypoacusis.
Conclusion: The m.13513 G>A mtDNA alteration was present
in about 1% of the total investigated cohort, while in the cases
examined from postmitotic tissues this proportion was found to
be 2.88%. Based on the above, we recommend a more compre-
hensive study of the m.13513 G>A mutation from postmitotic
tissue.
References:.
Grants: Hungarian Brain Research Program, NKFIH_FK_132812,
NKFIH_139010, Semmelweis University Startup grants, János
Bolyai Research Scholarship, UNKP-21-5 Research Scholarship.
Conﬂict of Interest: Vera Várhegyi part-time, Fruzsina Szabo
full time, Zoltan Grosz full time, Viktor Molnár full time, Noemi
Agnes Varga full time, Petra Zsidegh full time, Agnes Herczegfalvi
full time, Viktória Szabó full time, Anita Maasz full time, Judit Bene
full time, Kinga Hadzsiev full time, Aniko Gal full time, Maria Judit
Molnar full time.
P07.007.A Severity of ATAD3A-related pontocerebellar
hypoplasia correlates with severity of mutations
Martina Skopkova1, Vibhuti Rambani1, Hana Stufkova2, Viktor
Stranecky3, Katarina Brennerova4, Miriam Kolníková5, Michaela
Pietrzykova6, Hana Hansikova2, Daniela Gasperikova1
1Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Biomedical Research Center
SAS, Department of Metabolic Disorders, Bratislava, Slovakia; 2First
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University
Hospital in Prague, Laboratory for Study of Mitochondrial Disorders,
Department of Paediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Prague,
Czech Republic; 3First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and
General University Hospital in Prague, Research Unit for Rare
Diseases,
Department
of
Paediatrics
and
Inherited
Metabolic
Disorders, Prague, Czech Republic; 4Medical Faculty of Comenius
University and National Institute of Children’s Diseases, Department
of Paediatrics, Bratislava, Slovakia; 5Medical Faculty of Comenius
University and National Institute of Children’s Diseases, Department
of Paediatric Neurology, Bratislava, Slovakia; 6Medical Faculty of
Comenius University and University Hospital in Bratislava, Depart-
ment of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Medical Biology, Genetics and
Clinical Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Background/Objectives:
Diagnostics
of
ATAD3A-related
dis-
orders is challenging from two reasons. Firstly, the ATAD3 locus
contains three paralogous genes, making it difﬁcult target for both
sequencing and CNV analysis. Secondly, the clinical picture and
severity are heterogeneous, ranging from recessive neonatal-
lethal pontocerebellar hypoplasia through milder dominant Harel-
Yoon syndrome to, again, neonatal-lethal but dominant cardio-
myopathy. Fourteen different recessive variants in 17 families have
been described with so far.
Methods: We report two families, each with two affected
children. Patients and their parents were analysed using WES
followed by CNV analysis (ExomeDepth). Variants were veriﬁed
using Sanger sequencing and long-range PCR. Enzymological and
biochemical studies were performed in muscle and cultivated
ﬁbroblasts of one proband.
Results: Decreased activity of complex IV and decreased levels
of nuclear-encoded subunits of respiratory chain conﬁrmed
mitochondriopathy in the Family 1 proband. Compound hetero-
zygous p.Leu77Val and exon 3-4 deletion in the ATAD3A gene
were found in all four affected members of both families. The
p.Leu77Val variant had previously been described as mild by
functional studies (Yap et al., 2021), exon 3-4 deletion is con-
sidered loss-of-function with severe impact. This novel combina-
tion of high- and mild-impact variants resulted in strikingly
homogenous phenotype in our patients - less severe and with
longer life-span than in case of bi-allelic loss-of function variants.
Conclusion: Clinical picture and severity of ATAD3A-related
disorders are dependent on the type of mutation and correlate
with predicted severity of variants and their combinations.
References: Yap et al., Genome Med 2021.
Grants: APVV-17-0296, AZV MZCR NV19-07-00136.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.008.B Unraveling a case of Niemann-Pick disease using
long read sequencing and adaptive sampling
Deniz Karadurmus1, Sylvain Brohée1, Sandrine Mary1, Valérie
Benoit1, Anne Destree1, Dominique Roland1, Pascale Hilbert1
1Institut de Pathologie et Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: These last years, Oxford Nanopore
Technology (ONT) emerged as a promising actor for structural
variants identiﬁcation and repetitive regions analysis by long read
sequencing. Moreover, ONT recently added the adaptive sampling
option on its sequencing devices, i.e. a software-controlled
enrichment method which allows to target genomic regions of
interest without any speciﬁc wet-lab enrichment procedure. This
method has been shown to identify structural variants not
detected by conventional genetic testing (1). Therefore, we used
this approach to analyze the unsolved case of a patient affected
by the autosomal recessive Niemann-Pick disease, but in whom
only one pathogenic mutation was previously identiﬁed in NPC1
gene despite extensive genetic testing.
Methods: Adaptive sampling of ONT was performed using
1.5 μg of DNA, on the basis of a custom bed ﬁle targeting NPC1
and surrounding genes.
Results: We reached a mean fold-enrichment of 7 on targeted
region, along with mean depth coverage of 25.5X. Our result
suggested an inversion of 70kb, involving NPC1 and its adjacent
gene ANKRD29. This was then conﬁrmed by PCR and Sanger
sequencing. Moreover, segregation study showed that this inver-
sion was in trans with the known point mutation, conﬁrming
Niemann-Pick diagnostic at molecular level.
Conclusion: The adaptive sampling option proposed by ONT
appears extremely ﬂexible and allows easy case-by-case adjust-
ment and analysis. While still perfectible, we believe that this
approach could be a valuable help in daily practice of genetics
experts, in conjunction with classic genetic testing.
References: 1. Miller et al., PMID: 34216551.
Grants: Institut de Pathologie et Génétique Research Funds.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.009.C Follow-up of family members of children with
mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome
Celia Azevedo Soares1;2, Margarida Paiva Coelho3;4, Anabela
Bandeira3;4, Rute Martins4, Rosa Ribeiro4, Natalia Tkachenko1, Ana
Maria Fortuna1;2, Esmeralda Martins2;3;4
1Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Serviço de Genética
Médica, Porto, Portugal;
2Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel
Salazar/Universidade do Porto, Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in
Biomedicine, Porto, Portugal; 3Centro Hospitalar Universitário do
Porto,
Serviço
de
Pediatria
Médica,
Porto,
Portugal;
4Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Centro de Referência de Doenças
Hereditárias do Metabolismo, Porto, Portugal.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
422
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Leigh syndrome (LS) is a genetic neu-
rometabolic disorder characterized by central nervous system
degeneration. Some patients have missense pathogenic variants
in mtDNA inherited from the matrilineal lineage. Disease´s
expressivity is dependent on the heteroplasmy level at a given
tissue. Given this variable expressivity, we reviewed the features of
family members of a cohort of patients with mtDNA-associated LS
(MALS) in their matrilineal lineage. With this revision, we aim to
understand the necessity of a structured follow-up for extended
family members.
Methods: We reviewed ﬁve families with children with MALS
syndrome followed at Centro Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto.
Results: All mothers were asymptomatic at the time of their
children´s diagnosis,
but
two mothers
initiated potentiality
mitochondrial-related complains after their child diagnosis. The
mother of a child with MALS associated to m.10191T>C variant,
presented headaches and abnormal subcortical white-matter T2
MRI signal, suggestive of adult onset-LS, with exclusion of auto-
immunity and infections. The familial variant was not detected in
this woman peripheral blood. A mother of a child with MALS
associated to m.8993T>G variant, showed a heteroplasmy level of
75%, and presented complains of headaches and fatigue. Her MRI
showed left cerebellar cortico-subcortical hypodense area, sug-
gestive of previous ischemic event. In this second family, two
family members by the matrilineal lineage present complains
suggestive of neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa.
Conclusion: Follow-up guidelines should be established for
MALS family members at risk and genetic counseling should be
offered to all family members in the matrilineal lineage of an
index case.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.010.D ATAD3 knockout model in zebraﬁsh
Shlomit Ezer1;2, Nathan Ronin3;4, Shahar Rotem-Bamberger3;4, Shira
Yanovsky-Dagan1, Adi Inbal3;4, Tamar Harel1
1Hadassah Medical Center, Department of Genetics, Jerusalem, Israel;
2Hebrew University, Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel; 3Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Department of Medical Neurobiology,
Jerusalem, Israel; 4The Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada,
Jerusalem, Israel.
Background/Objectives:
ATAD3A
encodes
a
mitochondrial
expressed protein which spans the inner and outer mitochondrial
membranes. It is involved in mitochondrial dynamics, mtDNA
maintenance, cholesterol metabolism, ER-mitochondria interac-
tion and more. ATAD3A pathogenic variants have been shown to
cause distinct neurological diseases in humans. We aimed to
generate an atad3-null line in zebraﬁsh, in order to further char-
acterize the gene and its role in health and disease and to test
possible remedies.
Methods: Using CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing, we created two
lines of heterozygous ﬁsh with frameshift variants which can be
bred to produce atad3-null embryos. We examined the phenotype
and mitochondrial content of the mutant embryos, and compared
the transcriptome of wild-type and mutant embryos at 3 days
post-fertilization (dpf) via RNAseq. Results were validated by
quantitative real-time PCR at 3dpf and 5dpf.
Results:
Atad3-null
embryos
demonstrated
microcephaly,
small eyes, pericardial edema and thinning of the musculature,
closely correlating with the human disease. Mitochondrial content
was reduced. Transcriptome analysis revealed an expected decline
in most mitochondrial pathways in the mutant embryos. In
addition, we witnessed an unexpected global upregulation of
cytosolic tRNA synthetases, presumably secondary to ER stress.
Conclusion: Zebraﬁsh atad3-null embryos can be used as a
reliable model of human ATAD3A-associated disorders. ER stress
signals seem to have a role in the pathogenesis, and blocking ER
stress by small compounds may serve as a potential therapeutic
pathway.
References: Harel, T., et al. (2016). Am J Hum Genet 99, 831-
845.
Grants: ISF 1663/17 to TH.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.011.A Impact of GCSH-deﬁciency: a protein at the
crossroad of one-carbon metabolism and cellular respiration
Laura Arribas1, Mike Swanson2, Elsebet Østergaard3, Cristina
Dallabona4, Kostas Tsiakas5, Maja Hempel6, Cecile Acquaviva7,
Joseph Farris8, Nicholas Stence9, Martina Magistrati4, Stefanos
Koutsoukos10, Elaine Spector2, Kathryn Kronquist2, Mette Christen-
sen3, Helena Karstensen3, Rene G. Feichtinger11, Melanie Achleitner11,
Lawrence Merritt2, Belén Pérez1, Magdalena Ugarte1, Stephanie
Grunewald12,
Anthony
Riela13,
Natalia
Julve14,
Jean-baptiste
Arnoux15, Hans A. Mayr11, Kastouri Haldar8, René Santer5, Allan
Lund3, Claudia Donnini4, Pilar Rodríguez1, Johan Van Hove2
1Universidad Autónoma Madrid, Centro de Diagnóstico de Enferme-
dades Moleculares, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa,
CBM-CSIC, Departamento de Biología Molecular, Madrid, Spain;
2University of Colorado, Department of Pediatrics, Aurora, Colorado,
United States;
3Rigshospitalet - Copenhagen University Hospital,
Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Copenhagen, Denmark; 4University of Parma, Department
of Chemistry, Life Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, Parma,
Italy; 5Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Hamburg
Eppendorf,
Hamburg,
Germany;
6Insitute
of
human
genetics,
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany;
7CHU de Lyon, Services Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, Centre
de Biologie Est, Lyon, France; 8University of Notre Dame, Boler-
Parseghian Center for Rare and Neglected Disease, and Department
of
Biological
Sciences,
Notre
Dame,
Indiana,
United
States;
9University of Colorado, Radiology Department, Aurora, Colorado,
United States; 10University of Colorado, Department of Pediatrics,
Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Aurora, United States;
11University
Children’s
Hospital,
Paracelsus
Medical
University,
Salzburg, Austria; 12Great Ormond Street Hospital, Institute for Child
Health, Department of Metabolic Medicine, London, United Kingdom;
13Texas Child Neurology, Piano, TX, United States; 14IMED Valencia
Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Valencia, Spain; 15Necker Enfants
Malades Hospital, Centre de Reference des Maladies Hereditaires du
Metabolisme, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives:
Post-translational
lipoylation
of
the
2-ketoacid dehydrogenases (2KDH) is essential in the bioener-
getics metabolism of eukaryotes. The GCSH-protein, lipoylated
subunit of the glycine cleavage enzyme, has been proposed as the
only acceptor of lipoate for transferring to other 2KDH in mam-
mals but, this dual function remains unproven. We present an
extensive analysis of the nucleotide variations identiﬁed in a
cohort of six patients with genetic conﬁrmation of bi-allelic
changes in the GCSH gene.
Methods: The patient’s phenotyping included clinical record
evaluation, biochemical analysis and brain MRIs. Genetic analysis
was based on exome sequencing. Pathogenicity of nucleotide
changes was assessed by in silico modelling and functional ana-
lysis in patient’s cells, knock-down models and puriﬁed recombi-
nant proteins.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
423
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: The clinical presentations ranged from very severe
early presentation with a fatal outcome to late milder courses.
Patients had increased glycine levels in plasma and cerebrospinal
ﬂuid and mostly normal lactate. Genetic analysis identiﬁed four
missense changes, one nonsense and two genomic rearrange-
ments. Functional studies showed decreases in GCSH-protein
amount, lipoylation status and mitochondrial respiration either in
patient’s cells or after overexpressing missense GCSH-proteins in
two GCSH knock-down models generated in COS7 and S. cerevi-
siae. Puriﬁed recombinant GCSH protein studies resembled those
results.
Conclusion: We unravel the ﬁnal step in post-translational
lipoylation in mammals and describe a cohort of patients with
pathogenic GCSH variants responsible for a new variant-form of
NKH combining deﬁcient GCS complex and bioenergetics defects.
References:.
Grants: Partially granted for the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e
Innovación/Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (AEI/FEDER UE)
PI19/01155.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.013.C Biallelic variants in PYROXD2 cause a severe
infantile metabolic disorder affecting mitochondrial function
Nicole Van Bergen1;2, Daniella Hock3, Lucy Spencer1, Sean Massey1,
Tegan Stait1, Zornitza Stark2;4;5, Sebastian Lunke2;6, Ain Roesley4,
Heidi Peters2;7, Joy Lee2;7, Anna Le Fevre4, Oliver Heath7, Cristina
Mignone8, Joseph Yang2;9;10, Monique Ryan11, Colleen D’Arcy12,
Margot Nash13, Sile Smith14, Nikeisha Caruana3;15, David Thor-
burn1;2;4, David Stroud1;3, Sue White2;4, John Christodoulou1;2;16,
Natasha J Brown2;4
1Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Brain and Mitochondrial
Research Group, Parkville, Australia;
2University of Melbourne,
Department
of
Paediatrics,
Parkville,
Australia;
3University
of
Melbourne, Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology and
Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, Parkville,
Australia; 4Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children’s
Research Institute, Parkville, Australia; 5Australian Genomics Health
Alliance, Parkville, Australia; 6University of Melbourne, Department of
Pathology, Parkville, Australia; 7Royal Children’s Hospital, Depart-
ment of Metabolic Medicine, Parkville, Australia; 8Royal Children’s
Hospital, Medical Imaging Department, Parkville, Australia; 9Royal
Children’s Hospital, Department of Neurosurgery, Neuroscience
Advanced Clinical Imaging Service, Parkville, Australia; 10Murdoch
Children’s Research Institute, Developmental Imaging, Parkville,
Australia; 11Royal Children’s Hospital, Neurology Department, Park-
ville, Australia; 12Royal Children’s Hospital, Anatomical Pathology
Department, Parkville, Australia; 13Royal Children’s Hospital, General
Medicine, Parkville, Australia; 14Royal Children’s Hospital, Paediatric
Intensive Care Unit, Parkville, Australia; 15Victoria University, Institute
for Health and Sport, Footscray, Australia; 16University of Sydney,
Discipline of Child and Adolescent Health, Camperdown, Australia.
Background/Objectives: Pyridine Nucleotide-Disulﬁde Oxidor-
eductase Domain 2 (PYROXD2) is a mitochondrial inner mem-
brane/matrix-residing protein reported to regulate mitochondrial
function. Little is known about the clinical importance or precise
biological function of PYROXD2. We report biallelic variants in
PYROXD2 in a patient with suspected mitochondrial disease.
Methods: A male infant presented with acute unresponsive
episodes and extreme metabolic acidosis. He developed pro-
gressive neurological deterioration on a background of postnatal-
onset poor growth and microcephaly. He died at 6.5 months age.
Magnetic resonance brain imaging showed changes resembling
Leigh syndrome. The proband and his unaffected parents under-
went genome sequencing and RNA-seq analysis. Functional assays
were conducted to assess mitochondrial function using patient
ﬁbroblasts. Proteomic differences between the proband and
control ﬁbroblasts were investigated with high-resolution tandem
mass spectrometry and quantitative protein analysis.
Results: No causative variants were found through standard
trio analysis of known disease-causing genes, including analysis of
the mitochondrial genome. A genome-wide analysis identiﬁed
compound heterozygous variants in PYROXD2.
Functional assays revealed increased mitochondrial superoxide
levels and a heightened sensitivity to culturing in galactose media,
a known mitochondrial stressor, indicating impaired mitochon-
drial activity in ﬁbroblasts.
Proteomic results demonstrated decreased levels of subunits of
the mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I, and both the small
and large subunits of the mitochondrial ribosome, suggesting a
mitoribosomal defect.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings support the critical role of PYROXD2
in human cells, suggest that the biallelic PYROXD2 variants are
associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and are the likely cause
of the proband’s clinical presentation.
References:.
Grants: Australian Government GHFM76747.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.014.D MITODIAG: A French network of diagnostic
laboratories for mitochondrial diseases
Cécile Rouzier1;2, Emmanuelle Pion3, Céline Bris4, Patrizia Bon-
neau4;5, Valérie Desquiret4;5, Jean-Paul BONNEFONT6, Giulia Barcia6,
Alessandra Pennisi6, Julie Steffann6, Pauline Gaignard7, Elise Lebigot7,
Samira Ait-el-mkadem Saadi1;2, Sylvie Bannwarth1;2, Konstantina
Fragaki1;2, Benoit Rucheton8, Bruno Francou1, Marie-Laure Martin
Négrier9, Aurélien Trimouille9, Cecile Acquaviva10, Cécile Pagan10,
Anne-Sophie Lèbre11, Gaelle Hardy12, Stéphane Allouche13, Pascal
Reynier4;5, Mireille Cossee14, Annamaria Molon15, Shahram Attar-
ian16, Véronique Paquis-Flucklinger1;2, Vincent Procaccio4
1Service de génétique médicale, Centre de référence des maladies
mitochondriales, CHU Nice, Nice, France; 2Université Cote d’Azur,
CNRS, INSERM, IRCAN, Nice, France;
3Filnemus, laboratoire de
génétique moléculaire, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France; 4Service
de génétique, Institut de Biologie en santé, Centre National de
référence Maladies Neurodégénératives et Mitochondriales, CHU
Angers, Angers, France; 5Service de biochimie, Institut de Biologie en
santé, Centre National de référence Maladies Neurodégénératives et
Mitochondriales,
CHU
Angers,
Angers,
France;
6Fédération
de
génétique médicale, Service de génétique moléculaire du GH
Necker-enfants malades, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris,
France; 7Laboratoire de Biochimie, Pôle BPP, CHU Paris Sud, Hôpital
Bicêtre-le Kremlin Bicêtre, Paris, France;
8Pôle de biologie et
pathologie, CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France; 9Unité fonctionnelle
d’histologie moléculaire, Service de pathologie, CHU Bordeaux-GU
Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France;
10Service de biochimie et biologie
moléculaire Grand Est, UM Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme,
Centre de biologie et pathologie Est, CHU Lyon HCL, GH Est, Lyon,
France; 11Laboratoire de génétique, Hématologie et Immunologie,
CHU Reims, Reims, France; 12Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire:
maladies héréditaires et oncologie, Service de biochimie, biologie
moléculaire et toxicologie environnementale, CHU Grenoble et des
Alpes, Institut de biologie et pathologie, Grenoble, France; 13Service
de biochimie, Pôle Biologie, Pharmacie et Hygiène, CHU Caen,
Hôpital de la Côte de Nacre, Caen, France;
14Laboratoire de
Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Montpellier, PhyMedExp, Université de
Montpellier, INSERM, CNRS, Montpellier, France; 15Filnemus, Assis-
tance Publique Hôpitaux Marseille, Marseille, France; 16Service de
Neurologie, FILNEMUS, Hôpital La Timone, CHU, Marseille, France.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
424
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Mitochondrial diseases (MD) are char-
acterized by a huge heterogeneity which poses signiﬁcant diag-
nostic challenges for clinicians and around 50% of patients are still
undiagnosed. Since 2000, the French Network of Mitochondrial
Diseases Diagnostic Laboratories, called MITODIAG, has been
created and works in close collaboration with the two National
Reference Centers, CARAMMEL and CALISSON, and the Neuro-
muscular rare disease network FILNEMUS, in order to improve the
diagnosis and health care for patients with MD.
Methods: We describe here the organization of the MITODIAG
network, the evolution of genetic diagnosis in MD in France these
last years and the interactions with national platforms of genome
core sequencing facilities named AURAGEN and SEQOIA.
We also report the ﬁrst clinical and genetic description of a
cohort of more than 400 patients tested by NGS, in whom a
diagnosis could be conﬁrmed by the identiﬁcation of pathogenic
variants in nuclearly-encoded genes.
Results: 3/4 of the patients are children under 18 with often
early and severe phenotypes, of mostly autosomal recessive
inheritance. In these patients, 30% of pathogenic variants are
located in complex I genes or genes involved in mitochondrial
translation. In adults, diseases are more heterogeneous, from
moderate to very severe, mainly with neuromuscular symptoms
due to pathogenic variants in mtDNA maintenance machinery.
Conclusion: These data will be implemented in the MITO-
MATCHER database in order to improve phenotype-genotype
correlations and facilitate development of therapeutic strategies.
Collaborations between MITODIAG and FILNEMUS will also facil-
itate patient follow-up in diagnostic wandering and will facilitate
the identiﬁcation of diagnosis for these patients.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.015.A Interpreting the pathogenicity of genetic variants
in rare diseases: lessons from Fabry disease
Dominique
P.
Germain1;2,
Thierry
Levade3;4,
Eric
Hachulla5,
Bertrand Knebelmann6, Didier LACOMBE7, Vanessa Leguy-Seguin8,
Karine NGUYEN PHONG9, Esther Noel10, Jean-Pierre Rabes2;11
1French Referral Centre for Fabry Disease, AP-HP University Paris
Saclay, Medical Genetics, Garches, France; 2University of Versailles-
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, Medical Genetics, Montigny le Breton-
neux, France;
3INSERM UMR1037, Cancer Research Center of
Toulouse (CRCT) and Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, France;
4Clinical Biochemistry Laboratory, Reference Center for Inherited
Metabolic
Diseases,
Federative
Institute
of
Biology,
University
Hospital of Toulouse, Toulouse, France; 5Claude Huriez Hospital,
University of Lille, Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Lille,
France; 6AP-HP, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, University of Paris,
Nephrology-Dialysis Department, Paris, France; 7University Hospital
of Bordeaux and INSERM U1211, Medical Genetics, Bordeaux, France;
8François Mitterrand Hospital, Dijon University Hospital, Internal
Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Dijon, France; 9APHM, Timone
Children Hospital, Medical Genetics, Marseille, France; 10Strasbourg
University Hospital, Internal Medicine, Strasbourg, France; 11Ambroise
Paré University Hospital, APHP. Université Paris-Saclay, Biochemistry
and Molecular Genetics, Boulogne-Billancourt, France.
Background/Objectives: Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked genetic
disease due to pathogenic variants in GLA (Gene ID: 2717). Over
1,000 GLA variants were identiﬁed, a signiﬁcant number through
screening protocols in newborns and at-risk populations more
susceptible to disclose variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS).
This, together with the non-speciﬁcity of symptoms, challenges
physicians at the time of diagnosis. Here, a panel of FD specialists
convened to study how expertise compares with the traditional
approach in interpreting variants.
Methods: Several highly controversial GLA VUS (p.Ser126Gly,
p.Ala143Thr, p.Asp313Tyr), were re-analyzed through the review of
patients’ records.
Results: Experts’ input was found to signiﬁcantly contribute to
an accurate interpretation of variants. The proper use of surrogate
biomarkers can optimize the interpretation of variants. When a
(likely) benign GLA variant is disclosed, other genes (e.g., sarcomeric
genes in case of HCM) should be investigated. Comparing allele
frequencies (AF) of GLA VUS is useful in excluding VUS which AF is
higher than the disease prevalence or the frequency of the most
common pathogenic allele. While databases and in silico prediction
softwares are useful tools, they may yield conﬂicting results.
Conclusion: In genetics, the traditional approach to interpret-
ing the pathogenicity of variants was developed by the American
College of Medical Genetics. Our data suggest that through their
in-depth knowledge of disease phenotypes, biomarkers, alleles
frequencies, and literature data, highly specialized experts bring
an important additional value. These lessons from FD give insights
for better interpreting the pathogenicity of allelic variants in other
genetic diseases.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Dominique P. Germain speaker’s honor-
aria from Takeda, Amicus, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme., consultant for Sanoﬁ-
Genzyme, Idorsia, Takeda., Thierry Levade hotel/travel grants from
Sanoﬁ-Genzyme,
Takeda,
BioMarin,
Enzyvant,
Orphan.,
Eric
Hachulla speaker’s honoraria and/or travel grants from Sanoﬁ-
Genzyme, GSK, Actelion, Sobi., Bertrand Knebelmann speaker’s
honoraria from Travere, Sanoﬁ, Alnylam, Reata; hotel/travel grants
from Sanoﬁ, Travere, Reata., Didier LACOMBE speaker’s honoraria
and hotel/travel expenses from Amicus, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme., Vanessa
Leguy-Seguin speaker’s honoraria from Sanoﬁ-Genzyme; hotel/
travel grants from Amicus, Orphan, Takeda, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme.,
Karine NGUYEN PHONG speaker’s honoraria, travel grants from
SanoﬁGenzyme; grants from Amicus therapeutics., Esther Noel
speaker’s honoraria and/or travel grants from Amicus Ther-
apeutics, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme., Jean-Pierre Rabes hotel/travel expen-
ses from Amicus Therapeutics; speaker’s honoraria from Amgen.,
consultant for Sanoﬁ-Genzyme.
P07.016.B Detection of single nucleotide and copy number
variants in the Fabry Disease-associated GLA gene using
nanopore sequencing
Omer Murik1, Tzvia Mann1, David Zeevi1, Albina Nowak2;3, gheona
Altarescu1
1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Medical Genetics Institute, Jerusalem,
Israel; 2University Hospital of Zürich, Department of Endocrinology
and Clinical Nutrition, Zürich, Switzerland; 3Psychiatric University
Hospital Zurich (PUK), Zürich, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: More than 900 variants have been
described in the GLA gene. Some intronic variants and copy
number variants in GLA can cause Fabry disease but will not be
detected by classical Sanger sequence. We aimed to design and
validate a method for sequencing the GLA gene using long-read
Oxford Nanopore sequencing technology.
Methods: 57 male and 42 female Fabry patients were blindly
analyzed, both by conventional Sanger sequence and by long-
read sequencing of a 13kb PCR amplicon. We used minimap2 to
align the long-read data and Nanopolish and Snifﬂes to call
variants.
Results: All the variants (100%) detected by Sanger (including a
deep intronic variant) were also detected by long-read sequencing.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
425
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
One patient had a deletion that was not detected by Sanger
sequencing but was detected by the new technology.
Conclusion: Our long-read sequencing-based method was
able to detect multiple missense variants and an exonic deletion,
with the added advantage of intronic analysis. It can be used as an
efﬁcient and cost-effective tool for screening and diagnosing
Fabry disease. Furthermore, our approach can be easily imple-
mented for other monogenic diseases and improve diagnostic
precision and efﬁciency.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.018.D An interactive website visualizing newborn
screening programs worldwide
Eyyüb Selim Ünlü1, Sümeyye Karakaya1, Gülbin Gökçay2, Gülden
Gökçay3
1Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey;
2Institute of Child Health, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey;
3Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Department of
Pediatric Nutrition and Metabolism, Istanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Newborn screening (NBS) strategies
have been proven to be successful diagnostics for several life-
threatening inherited metabolic disorders and other genetic
conditions. Governments are expanding nationwide NBS pro-
grams to improve public health. However, due to various chal-
lenges, worldwide NBS programs are not yet optimal. Monitoring
worldwide NBS programs could accelerate the ongoing efforts for
optimization.
Methods: We reviewed the last 10 years of literature to reveal
country-level
NBS
programs.
A
user-friendly
website
(www.nbsww.org), consisting of an interactive world map, a ﬁlter
table, and individual pages for each country, has been developed.
Data sources are available with a link to corresponding publica-
tions. A data collection form is placed to receive user contributions
to keep the content of the website up-to-date.
Results: We identiﬁed 115 countries’ nationwide NBS pro-
grams. The current status of NBS programs is heterogeneous,
covering conditions ranging from a minimum of 0 to a maximum
of 41 conditions. Expanded NBS is implemented in 35 (30%) of
these countries while 57 (50%) screens less than 5 conditions.
Most screened conditions are primary congenital hypothyroidism,
phenylketonuria, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, screened by 82
(71%), 75 (65%), 50 (43%) programs, respectively.
Conclusion: The nationwide NBS programs were reported by
presenting a website that allows monitoring and facilitates eva-
luation of the current situation.
References: Martínez-Morillo, E., Prieto García, B., & Álvarez
Menéndez, F. V. (2016). Challenges for Worldwide Harmonization
of
Newborn
Screening
Programs.
Clinical
chemistry,
62(5),
689–698.
Grants: The Scientiﬁc And Technological Research Council Of
Turkey grant 2209-A.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.019.A Psychosine in dried blood spots of newborns at risk
of Krabbe disease due to GALC p.Y319C homozygosity
Amy White1, Joseph Orsini2, Maria Escolar3, Dawn Peck1, Gisele Bentz
Pino1, April Studinski1, Dimitar Gavrilov1, Devin Oglesbee1, Matthew
Schultz1, Silvia Tortorelli1, Dietrich Matern1
1Mayo Clinic, Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Rochester, MN,
United States; 2Wadsworth Center, NY State Department of Health,
Albany, NY, United States; 3University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Department of Pediatrics, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
Background/Objectives: GALC p.Y319C (c.956A>G) is considered
a variant of uncertain signiﬁcance. However, several patients
homozygous for p.Y319C presented with symptoms consistent
with Krabbe disease (KD) at 3 years of age and older (1). We report
on psychosine (PSY) in dried blood spots (DBS) from GALC
p.Y319C homozygous neonates.
Methods: PSY concentrations were measured in DBS (2) col-
lected in the neonatal period from individuals homozygous for
p.Y319C and identiﬁed through newborn screening for KD
(n = 11).
Results: Neonatal DBS PSY was >2.0 nM (2.1-2.8 nM) in four of
eleven p.Y319C homozygotes. Ten of eleven subjects are asymp-
tomatic to date (age range: 4 months – 6.3 years, average age: 2.5
years). One patient identiﬁed through newborn screening (PSY: 2.8
nM) displayed clinical signs by 4 years of age and received a
hematopoietic stem cell transplant.
Conclusion: A third of p.Y319C homozygotes had PSY con-
centrations above the reference threshold of 2 nM. The infant with
the highest neonatal PSY DBS concentration was the only case
developing signs of KD. Ongoing clinical monitoring of these
individuals is required to determine whether they are at risk for
KD. When KD is considered for newborn screening, programs
should deﬁne whether all or speciﬁc KD forms (infantile vs. later
onset KD) are the primary target of screening because this deci-
sion will determine if molecular genetic testing of GALC is
required as part of the screening process.
References: 1. Bascou et al. al. Front Neurol. 2020;11:563724.
2. Herbst et al. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2020;6(2):29.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Amy White: None declared, Joseph
Orsini: None declared, Maria Escolar Forge Biologics, NIH
R01NS061965-01(PI). The Legacy of Angels Foundation (PI),
Forge Biologics, Dawn Peck: None declared, Gisele Bentz Pino:
None declared, April Studinski: None declared, Dimitar Gavrilov:
None
declared,
Devin
Oglesbee:
None
declared,
Matthew
Schultz: None declared, Silvia Tortorelli: None declared, Dietrich
Matern Neurogene advisory board (4 hrs; compensation passed
on to Mayo Clinic).
P07.020.B Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy stroke-like
episodes and lactate acidosis (MELAS), disease spectrum,
lessons from large cohort
Ralitza Gavrilova1, Benjamin Cox2
1Mayo Clinic, Neurology, Clinical Genomics, Rochester, United States;
2Mayo Clinic, Neurology, Rochester, United States.
Background/Objectives: Evaluate MELAS mutation cohort clinical
spectrum, clinical/genetic factors associated with severe or later
presentation.
Methods: Retrospective review 81 Mayo Clinic patients with/
without meeting MELAS criteria. Clinical, MRI characteristics,
mutations/heteroplasmy reviewed. MELAS, standard onset SLE
<40 or late >40.
Results: 42 MELAS, 30 symptomatic non-MELAS, and 9
asymptomatic. MELAS, signiﬁcantly lower BMI (mean 18.6 vs 25.1,
22.0), trend higher heteroplasmy (means 39.3%, 29.3%, 21.8%).
MELAS and non-MELAS had similar age of ﬁrst symptom (mean
20.3 vs 21.5); non-MELAS higher SNHL presentation (51.6%
v24.4%,
p = 0.014).
Neurologic
(seizures/SLE/ataxia/dementia)
common MELAS ﬁrst symptom (39%), versus non-MELAS (19.4%).
MELAS, signiﬁcant seizure prevalence (88.1% vs 16.7%), and higher
mortality (43% vs 13%). MELAS cohort, 13 late and 29 standard-
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
426
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
onset. Mean age of ﬁrst symptom 14.2y in standard (range 0-36),
34.1 in late (range 16-53). Trend (p = 0.18) towards higher het-
eroplasmy in standard (mean 44.8% vs 25.3%). Late-MELAS, sig-
niﬁcantly longer time from ﬁrst symptom to SLE (mean 16.6 vs
9.3y), no different duration to death. Longer life expectancy in
late-MELAS (mean death 62 vs 30y). Standard-MELAS higher
incidence neurologic symptoms at onset (51.7% vs 15.4%); late-
onset higher prevalence diabetes (69.2% vs 13.8%), nephropathy
(53.8% vs 10.3%). Late-MELAS tended more systems involved
(mean 4.1 vs 2.7).
Conclusion: Standard-MELAS more likely to present with
neurologic symptoms compared to later onset, who are more
likely to suffer diabetes, nephropathy, greater organ-involvement.
Many MELAS present late >40y. Non-MELAS suffer substantial
neurologic symptoms. Lower BMI in MELAS and higher rates SNHL
in non-MELAS may be useful differentiator at onset.
References: N/A.
Grants: N/A.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ralitza Gavrilova Mayo Clinic, Benjamin
Cox Mayo Clinic, Neurology fellow.
P07.021.C Development and validation of a new neonatal
screening test
Michaella Georgiadou1, Charalambos Loizides1, Skevi Kyriakou1,
Achilleas Achilleos1, Christos Lemesios1, Michalis Nicolaou1, Chriso-
valando Soteriou1, Haris Kkoufou1, Louiza Constantinou1, Krystallo
Christou1, Antonia Matsentidou1, Michalis Spyrou1, Stelia Pissaridou1,
Demetra Panayiotou1, Kyriakos Tsangaras1, Elena Kypri1, Marios
Ioannides1, George Koumbaris1, Philippos Patsalis1
1NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Background/Objectives: Many genetic conditions affect normal
development in newborns, infants or young children. These dis-
orders can cause death, serious life-long disability or chronic dis-
ease if not treated early. Also, they have a vast array of symptoms,
making diagnosis complicated. Therefore, prompt identiﬁcation
and timely treatment is essential to prevent or minimize the
impact of the conditions. Our aim was to develop an NGS-based
product, which tests for 106 neonatal conditions including:
metabolic, endocrine, haemoglobin, hearing loss, pulmonary and
musculoskeletal disorders.
Methods: Custom target capture sequences (TACS) were
designed to capture all gene exons, and intron-exon boundaries.
The TACS were immobilized on streptavidin-coated magnetic
beads. Sequencing libraries were constructed and subjected to in-
solution hybridization with the immobilized TACs. The captured
sequences were ampliﬁed and sequenced using NGS. A blind
validation study was performed to assess the sensitivity and
speciﬁcity of single nucleotide variant (SNV), indel and copy
number variant (CNV) detection.
Results: SNVs and indels were detected at sensitivity of 100%
(CI: 87-100%) and speciﬁcity of 100% (CI: 99.8-100%). The algo-
rithm was designed to detect CNVs at high-resolution with esti-
mated high sensitivity and speciﬁcity when applied to single or
few exon CNV. Each positive call was conﬁrmed with an ortho-
gonal method.
Conclusion: We have developed and validated a neonatal
screening test for 106 disorders that when detected early, can
prevent or reduce serious health consequences such as develop-
mental delay, cognitive impairment, neurological and physical
problems and premature death.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Michaella Georgiadou NIPD Genetics,
Charalambos Loizides NIPD Genetics, Skevi Kyriakou NIPD
Genetics, Achilleas Achilleos NIPD Genetics, Christos Lemesios
NIPD Genetics, Michalis Nicolaou NIPD Genetics, Chrisovalando
Soteriou NIPD Genetics, Haris Kkoufou NIPD Genetics, Louiza
Constantinou NIPD Genetics, Krystallo Christou NIPD Genetics,
Antonia Matsentidou NIPD Genetics, Michalis Spyrou NIPD
Genetics, Stelia Pissaridou NIPD Genetics, Demetra Panayiotou
NIPD Genetics, Kyriakos Tsangaras NIPD Genetics, Elena Kypri
NIPD Genetics, Marios Ioannides NIPD Genetics, George Koum-
baris NIPD Genetics, Philippos Patsalis NIPD Genetics.
P07.022.D Beyond the exome: identiﬁcation and
characterization of non-coding variants in inborn errors of
metabolism
Alejandro
Soriano-Sexto1;2;3;4;5,
Fátima
Leal1;2;3;4;5,
Patricia
Alcaide1;2;3;4;5, Magdalena Ugarte1;2;3;4;5, Pilar Rodríguez1;2;3;4;5, Belén
Pérez1;2;3;4;5
1Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Madrid, Spain;
2Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Madrid, Spain;
3CIBERER, Madrid, Spain;
4IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain;
5Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Inborn errors of metabolism (IEM) are a
large group of rare diseases that include more than 1450 defects.
Historically, the search for mutations contributing to IEM has been
limited to exons, whereas regulatory elements have remained
poorly investigated. Our aim here consisted in applying a com-
bination of multiple omics to identify non-coding variants
responsible for disease-state which scape exome sequencing, thus
reducing the diagnostic gap.
Methods: Genomic analyses by whole exome or whole gen-
ome sequencing and functional studies (minigenes and luciferase
reporters) were carried out in DNA and RNA extracted from
patients’ ﬁbroblasts. The enzymatic activity was also evaluated in
these cells when possible.
Results: We have selected a cohort of unsolved patients with
clinical or biochemical diagnosis of different IEM (hyperpheny-
lalaninemia, galactosemia, mucopolysaccharidosis or citrulline-
mia among others). Human Phenotype Ontologies (HPO) and
biochemical signatures were used to ﬁlter the obtained variants.
We prioritized either no candidate variants or only one. There-
fore, all remaining undiagnosed. We have attained a complete
genetic diagnosis for several patients by combination of tran-
scriptomic and genomic analyses and functional genomics. We
have identiﬁed pseudoexons insertions caused by deep intronic
variants such as c.[83+658C>G;83+758T>A] in PTS or c.598-
757G>A in ASS1 and novel variants located in promoter regions
like c.-82_-71delins-103_-86 in PTS or c.-87T>C in IDUA. The
pathogenic role of all of these changes was assessed by mini-
genes studies or luciferase reporter studies conﬁrming their
clinical signiﬁcance.
Conclusion: The non-coding portion of the genome should be
interrogated when searching for disease-causing mutations.
References:.
Grants: PI19/01155, ERT18TRL746, B2017/BMD3721.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.023.A Three novel SLC2A1 mutations in GLUT1DS
pediatric patients
Alessia Mauri1;2, Alessandra Duse1, Sara Olivotto3, Stefania Bova3,
Pierangelo Veggiotti1;3, Cristina Cereda2
1University of Milan, Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences,
L. Sacco, Milan, Italy; 2Neonatal Screening and Metabolic Disorders
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
427
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Unit, V. Buzzi Children’s Hospital, Milan, Italy; 3Pediatric Neurology
Unit, V. Buzzi Children’s Hospital, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: GLUT1 deﬁciency syndrome (GLUT1DS;
#606777) is a rare genetic metabolic disease, characterized by
infantile seizures, neurodevelopmental delay, and movement
disorders. GLUT1DS is caused by heterozygous (or rarely, homo-
zygous) mutations in the SLC2A1 gene, which encodes GLUT1, a
glucose transporter across the blood-brain barrier. Most com-
monly these variants arise de novo resulting in sporadic cases,
although several familial cases with AD pattern have been
described.
Methods: We performed SLC2A1 sequencing analysis on 26
pediatric patients with clinical suspicion of GLUT1DS, and relatives.
Results: Herein, we reported three novel SLC2A1 mutations
causing GLUT1DS: two sporadic cases (a, b), and one familial case (c).
In the proband of the ﬁrst sporadic case (a), characterized by 3
months-onset epileptic encephalopathy, we found a novel de novo
c.114+1G>A splicing variant in SLC2A1 gene. In silico analysis showed
that the identiﬁed variant affects the donor splice-site of intron 2-3,
leading probably to exon 2 skipping and exon 1-3 junction.
In the other sporadic case (b), which the proband presents
epileptic
discharges
and
movement
disorders,
the
analysis
revealed in SLC2A1 a novel de novo frameshift variant c.370delC
(p.(Leu124TrpfsTer12)), predicted to result in NMD.
The proband of the familial case (c) shows febrile seizures,
while the father and grandfather present paroxysmal exercise-
induced dyskinesia without epilepsy. Despite the clinical familial
heterogeneity, we identiﬁed a novel SLC2A1 heterozygous mis-
sense variant c.1363A>G (p.Thr455Ala), reported as disease caus-
ing in all three patients.
Conclusion: Our report described three novel variants in both
sporadic and familial cases, thus expanding the genotypic spec-
trum of SLC2A1 mutations causing GLUT1DS.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.024.B Establishing the mutational spectrum of Hungarian
patients with familial hypercholesterolemia
László Madar1;2, Lilla Juhász3, Zsuzsanna Szűcs1, Lóránt Kerkovits4,
Mariann Harangi3, Istvan Balogh5;6
1University of Debrecen,
Department of Laboratory
Medicine,
Division of Clinical Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary;
2University of
Debrecen, Doctoral School of Molecular Cell and Immune Biology,
Debrecen, Hungary; 3University of Debrecen, Department of Internal
Medicine, Division of Metabolic Diseases, Debrecen, Hungary; 4South-
Budapest Center Hospital St. Imre Teaching Hospital, Department of
Nephrology, Budapest, Hungary; 1University of Debrecen, Depart-
ment of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Genetics, Debrecen,
Hungary; 6University of Debrecen, Department of Human Genetics,
Debrecen, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is
one of the most common autosomal dominantly inherited dis-
eases affecting the cholesterol metabolism which, in the absence
of treatment, leads to the development of cardiovascular com-
plications. The disease is still underdiagnosed, even though an
early diagnosis would be of great importance for the patient to
receive proper treatment and to prevent further complications. No
studies are available describing the genetic background of Hun-
garian FH patients.
Methods: In this work, we present the clinical and molecular
data of 44 unrelated individuals with suspected FH. Sequencing of
ﬁve FH-causing genes (LDLR, APOB, PCSK9, LDLRAP1 and STAP1)
has been performed by next-generation sequencing (NGS). In
cases where a copy number variation (CNV) has been detected by
NGS, conﬁrmation by multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli-
ﬁcation (MLPA) has also been performed.
Results: We identiﬁed 47 causal or potentially causal (including
variants of uncertain signiﬁcance) LDLR and APOB variants in 44
index patients. The most common variant in the APOB gene was
the c.10580G>A p.(Arg3527Gln) missense mutation, this being in
accordance with literature data. We detected 40 mutations in the
LDLR gene in a total of 37 patients of which 3 patients carried
mutations in compound heterozygous form.
Conclusion: Our study revealed one novel mutation in the
LDLR gene, while most of the mutations that are present in the
Hungarian population, have already been described. Indicating
the importance of establishing a genetic diagnosis, the timing of
initiation of lipid-lowering therapies may greatly inﬂuence the
onset and severity of expected complications.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.025.C Biochemical and clinical effects of vitamin E
supplementation in Hungarian Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome
patients
Katalin Koczok1, László Horváth2, Zeljka Korade3, Zoltán András
Mezei4, Gabriella P. Szabó5, Ned A. Porter6, Eszter Kovács1, Károly
Mirnics7, Istvan Balogh1;8
1University of Debrecen,
Department of Laboratory
Medicine,
Division of Clinical Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary;
2University of
Debrecen, Department of Pharmaceutical Surveillance and Econom-
ics, Debrecen, Hungary;
3University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Department of Pediatrics, Omaha, United States;
4University of
Debrecen, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Debrecen, Hungary;
5University
of
Debrecen,
Department
of
Pediatrics,
Debrecen,
Hungary; 6Vanderbilt University, Department of Chemistry, Nashville,
United States; 7University of Nebraska Medical Center, Munroe-Meyer
Institute, Omaha, United States; 8University of Debrecen, Department
of Human Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a
severe
monogenic
inborn
error
of
cholesterol
biosynthesis
resulting in low cholesterol and high 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-
DHC) levels. 7-DHC-derived oxysterols likely contribute to disease
pathophysiology, thus antioxidant treatment might be beneﬁcial
because of high oxidative stress.
Methods: In a 3-year prospective study we investigated the
effects of vitamin E supplementation in six SLOS patients already
receiving dietary cholesterol treatment. Plasma vitamin A and E
concentrations were determined by a HPLC method. At baseline
plasma 7-DHC, 8-DHC and cholesterol levels were determined by a
LC-MS/MS method. The clinical effect of the supplementation was
assessed by performing structured parental interviews.
Results: At baseline, patients were characterized by low or low-
normal plasma vitamin E concentrations (7.19-15.68 μmol/L), while
vitamin A concentrations were found to be normal or high (1.26-
2.68 μmol/L). Vitamin E supplementation resulted in correction or
signiﬁcant elevation of plasma vitamin E concentration in all
patients. We observed reduced aggression, self-injury, irritability,
hyperactivity, attention deﬁcit, repetitive behavior, sleep dis-
turbance, skin photosensitivity and/or eczema in 3/6 patients, with
notable individual variability. Clinical response to therapy was
associated with a low baseline 7-DHC+8-DHC/cholesterol ratio
(0.2-0.4).
Conclusion: We suggest that determination of vitamin E status
is important in SLOS patients. According to our results, the lower
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
428
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
level of vitamin E is most likely attributable to increased con-
sumption due to oxidative stress, rather than malabsorption.
Supplementation of vitamin E should be considered and might be
beneﬁcial.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.026.D Missense variant in PDK1 associated with severe
developmental delay and epilepsy
Raquel Vaz1, Josephine Wincent1;2, Najla Elﬁssi3, Kristina Forsblad4,
Maria Pettersson1;2, Karin Naess3, Anna Wedell5;6;7, Anna Wreden-
berg3;5, Anna Lindstrand1;2, Soﬁa Ygberg5;8
1Karolinska Institutet, Department of Molecular Medicine and
Surgery, Stockholm, Sweden; 2Karolinska University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Clinical Genetics, Stockholm, Sweden; 3Karolinska Institutet,
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm,
Sweden;
4Akademiska Sjukhuset, Uppsala, Sweden;
5Karolinska
University Hospital, Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Stock-
holm, Sweden; 6Karolinska Institutet, Science for Life Laboratory,
Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Stockholm, Sweden;
7Karolinska Institutet, Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Stockholm,
Sweden;
8Karolinska
Institutet,
Department
of
Women’s
and
Children’s Health, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
(PDC), located in the mitochondrial matrix, is responsible for the
conversion of pyruvate into acetyl-CoA, used for energy produc-
tion in the cells. PDC activity is tightly regulated by phosphor-
ylation, via kinases and phosphatases (PDK/PDP), that respond to,
for example, the amount of substrate in the cell (e.g. pyruvate or
NADH) and hypoxia. Mutations in all subunits of the PDC and in
PDK3 have been reported and the clinical presentation often
includes lactic acidosis, neurodevelopmental delay, and seizures.
Here we report a missense mutation in PDK1, a gene not pre-
viously associated with disease.
Methods: Genetic analysis was done using trio genome
sequencing. Functional studies in zebraﬁsh were done by over-
expressing human wild type and mutant PDK1 in early-stage
embryos.
Results: A de novo missense variant in PDK1 (c.1139G>A,
p.Gly380Asp) was identiﬁed in a patient with developmental delay
and seizures. In zebraﬁsh, mutant PDK1 fails to phosphorylate
PDHE1 (pyruvate dehydrogenase) resulting in abnormal PDC
activity which, consequently, affects mitochondria activity. This, in
turn, affects muscle activity, seen by reduced bouts of movement
when
compared
to
control
embryos,
and
neuronal
development delay.
Conclusion: Here, we report genetic and functional evidence
suggesting that loss of function of PDK1 causes a similar clinical
presentation as other PDC genes.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.027.A History of a diagnostic errancy: how new
technologies may allow for a diagnosis after 40 years
Sabrina Bertoli1, Jean-Hubert Caberg1, François Boemer1, Vincent
Bours1, Philippe Lousberg1, Saskia Bulk1
1University Hospital of Liège, Human Genetics, Liège, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: This clinical case demonstrates that
subtle metabolic impairments may not be detected by basic
screening performed in routine diagnostics. In addition to meta-
bolic diagnostics, it’s imperative to use more precise molecular
biology techniques.
Methods: 46 year old woman, born at full term after a preg-
nancy and normal delivery, of non-consanguineous parents pre-
sented with mild developmental delay since infancy. A waddling
walk was noted at the age of 5.Legge-Calvé-Perthes disease
diagnosed at the age of 6, necessitating a bilateral hip prosthesis.
She underwent surgery for severe scoliosis in childhood.
In her twenties, she was diagnosed with a demyelinating
sensory-motor polyneuropathy leading to amyotrophy of the 4
limbs with predominance in the lower limbs.
At age 45, she presented cardiac arrhythmias diagnosed as
probable arythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia.
Clinical and genetics investigations over a period of over 40
years had not revealed an explanation for the developmental
delay, neuropathy and cardiac condition (Normal EEG and brain
MRI).
Results: Normal caryotype and CHG-array, normal metabolic
analysis including mucopolysaccharides and oligosaccharides,
GJP1 gene analysis.
Genetic analysis of a cardiac arrhythmia panel was normal.
Analysis of a neurodevelopmental panel (859 genes) revealed a
compound heterozygous GNPTAB mutation, conﬁrming a diag-
nosis of mucolipidosis type III. Re-evaluation of skeletal X-rays
conﬁrmed associated skeletal changes.
Conclusion: Due to her mild phenotype, a clinical diagnosis of
classic mucolipidosis was never evoked.Routine metabolic diag-
nostic testing may not be sensitive enough to diagnose mild
forms of metabolic conditions, gene panels must absolutely cover
the genes for storage diseases.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.028.B Discovery of Type 2 Diabetes genes using an
accessible tissue
David Davtian1, Jochen Schwenk2, Mark McCarthy3, Anubha
Mahajan4, Mun-Gwan Hong2, Emmanouil Dermitzakis5, Hae Kyung
Im6, Ewan Pearson1, Ana Viñuela7, Andrew Brown1
1University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom; 2KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden; 3University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom; 4Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford,
United
Kingdom;
5University
of
Geneva,
Geneva,
Switzerland;
6University of Chicago, Chicago, United States;
7University of
Newcastle, Newcastle, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Transcriptome Wide Association Study
(TWAS) methods use reference expression datasets to link genes
to disease. Ideally, these should use samples from a disease rele-
vant tissue, which may be difﬁcult to collect, limiting sample size.
We evaluate the power to discover Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) causal
genes using a well powered whole blood expression reference
against smaller reference datasets from disease relevant tissues.
Methods: Predictive models were built using whole blood
expression and proteomic data (DIRECT consortium, n = 3029),
pancreatic islets eQTL data (INSPIRE consortium, n = 420) and
eQTL data from 49 tissues (GTEx consortium). These models were
combined with GWAS summary statistics (DIAGRAM consortium,
n = 898,130) to calculate gene-T2D association scores using
S-PrediXcan.
Results: We found 97 signiﬁcant associations between T2D and
predicted gene expression levels using whole blood from DIRECT.
We recapitulate known T2D genes such as CAMK1D, PAM, and
CKDN1C and ﬁnd more associations using the larger reference
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
429
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
dataset (43 using islets and from 2 to 84 in GTEx). There is a
correlation between the sample size and the discovery power
(R2 = 0.9, p = <2e-16). We also ﬁnd DIRECT implicated genes to be
enriched around GWAS loci compared to GTEx tissue derived
genes, meaning a higher proportion of DIRECT genes have sup-
porting genetic evidence. However, the DIRECT reference also
misses important T2D genes, such as TCF7L2 or IGF2BP2, which
were only captured when using islets models.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings indicate that large studies in non-
relevant tissues identify disease causal genes but miss relevant
tissue speciﬁc signals.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.029.C Mitochondrial ATP-synthase deﬁciency causes a
clinical, biochemical and genetical disease spectrum
Andrea Pietra1;2, Marco seri1;2, Leonardo Caporali3, Valerio Carelli3;4,
Duccio Maria Cordelli5, Valentina Del Dotto3, Veronica Di Pisa5,
Claudio Fiorini3, Emanuela Iovino1, Chiara La Morgia3, Francesca
Montanari1;2, Giulia Olivucci1;2, Flavia Palombo3, Tommaso Pip-
pucci2, Emanuela Scarano6, Giulia Severi2, Caterina Garone1
1Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, Department of Medical
and Surgical Sciences, Bologna, Italy; 2IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria di Bologna, UO Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy; 3IRCCS
Institute of Neurological Sciences, Neurogenetics Unit, Bologna, Italy;
4Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, Department of
Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, Bologna, Italy; 5IRCCS Istituto
delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, UOC di Neuropsichiatria dell’Età
Pediatrica, Bologna, Italy; 6IRCCS Sant’Orsola Hospital, Rare Diseases
Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Bologna, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Mitochondrial Complex V is composed
by 18 protein subunits of which 16 are nuclear DNA encoded and
2 mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encoded (MT-ATP8 and MT-ATP6).
Damaging genetics variants in protein subunits causes enzymatic
activity
deﬁciency
and,
consequently,
severe
mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy.
Methods: Biochemical, histochemical and molecular genetics
analyses including next generation sequencing of the whole
mitochondrial genome were performed in biological samples
(skeletal muscle, urine epithelium and blood) of probands and
relatives from two unrelated families.
Results: Proband of family 1, is a 9 years-old male presenting
with cerebellar ataxia, psychomotor delay and hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy; brain MRI imaging showed cerebellar vermis
hypoplasia and corpus callosum dysmorphism. The latter were
also presented in an asymptomatic sister. Proband of family 2, is a
48 years-old male presenting with progressive retinitis pigmen-
tosa, cataract, sensorineural deafness and ataxia. Our analyses
revealed in both patients a biochemical deﬁciency of mt-ATP-
synthase conﬁrmed by the inheritance of novel pathogenetic
variants in MT-ATP8 gene in family 1 (m.8535A>G (p.Lys57Ter) and
MT-ATP6 gene (m.8858G>A (p.Gly111Asp) in family 2 with high
level of hereroplasmy (95-98%) in patients’ tissues while absent or
very low level of heteroplasmy in unaffected family members.
Conclusion: Our study identiﬁes novel variants in a very rare
mitochondrial disorder due mitochondrial ATP-synthase deﬁ-
ciency and describes a clinical spectrum with a common and
predominant feature represented by cerebellar ataxia and a vari-
able multisystemic involvement.
References:.
Grants: Italian Minister of University and Research - Rita Levi
Montalcini Program - Rientro cervelli RLM2017; CARISBO ricerca
medica traslazionale e clinica 2021.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.031.A Biallelic SLC25A36 mutation causes
hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia syndrome
Amit Safran1, Regina Proskorovski-Ohayon1, Neta Loewenthal2,
orna staretz-chacham3, Ohad Shmuel Birk4
1Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Faculty of Health Sciences, Beer
Sheva, Israel; 2Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Division of Pediatrics,
Soroka Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel; 3Soroka Medical Center,
Metabolic Clinic, Beer Sheva, Israel;
4Soroka University Medical
Center, Genetics Institute, Beer Sheva, Israel.
Background/Objectives:
Hyperinsulinism/Hyperammonemia
(HIHA) syndrome, the second most common form of congenital
hyperinsulinism,
is
characterized
by
recurrent
symptomatic
hypoglycemia
combined
with
persistently
elevated
serum
ammonia levels. HIHA syndrome has been shown to be caused by
dominant activating mutations in GLUD1, encoding the intra-
mitochondrial enzyme glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH). In this
study, we present four children from consanguineous Bedouin
kindred that were diagnosed with an autosomal recessive con-
sistent HIHA syndrome phenotype with no mutations in GLUD1.
Methods: Genome-wide linkage analysis of ten family mem-
bers was performed using 750K SNP arrays, HomozigosityMapper
and SuperLink softwares. Whole exome sequencing was per-
formed for one affected individual and analyzed using the Qiagen
Clinical
Insight
software
and
our
in-house
database
of
~700 samples.
Results: A single ~16 Mbp homozygous disease-associated
locus was identiﬁed on chromosome 3, between rs6439033 and
rs55940906 (maximal LOD score of 2.65). Using our ﬁltering ana-
lysis pipeline only one homozygous variant was found within the
locus: a novel highly conserved SLC25A36 c.284+3A>T splice site
mutation. The variant was validated by Sanger sequencing and
segregated as expected within the family. The mutation changes
the 5’ splice site consensus sequence and leads to exon
3 skipping.
Conclusion: In parallel to two recent independent studies, we
report a homozygous mutation in SLC25A36 as causing HIHA
syndrome phenotype. The SLC25A36/PNC2 encodes a mitochon-
drial transporter that imports/exports pyrimidine and guanine
nucleotides. Our study reinforces the involvement of SLC25A36 in
the development of the HIHA syndrome through a recessive mode
of inheritance.
References:.
Grants: The Morris Kahn Family Foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.032.B Reverse phenotyping enables diagnosis of Smith-
Lemli-Opitz syndrome in an oligosymptomatic female
Angela Abad Perez1, Natalie Weinhold2, Dorothea Haas3, Denise
Horn1
1Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Medical Genetics
and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany; 2Charité – Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Department of Pediatrics Endocrinology, Gastroenterology
and Metabolic medicine, Berlin, Germany;
3University Hospital
Heidelberg, Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic Medicine,
Center for Child and Adolescent Medicine, Heidelberg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a
multiple congenital malformation and intellectual disability syn-
drome. It is caused by biallelic sequence variants in DHCR7, which
encodes the enzyme 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) reductase.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
430
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Biochemically, cholesterol concentration is low, whereas con-
centration of 7- and 8-DHC is elevated. The spectrum of clinical
severity of SLOS is wide and some patients with mild manifesta-
tions have been reported.
Methods: Next generation sequencing and analysis of the
DHCR7 gene (NM_001360.2) by Sanger sequencing were per-
formed on two siblings with clinically diagnosed SLOS and their
parents. Analysis of 7- and 8-DHC in the affected individuals was
performed using gas chromatography mass spectrometry.
Results: We describe a 33-year-old female with normal psy-
chomotor development and apart from mild microcephaly no
major or minor anomalies. Her two daughters were clinically
diagnosed with SLOS. Analysis of DHCR7 revealed the same
paternally inherited pathological variant c.452G>A;p.(Trp151*) in
both affected daughters. Each daughter carried a different,
maternally inherited pathogenic variant: c.89G>C;p.(Gly30Ala) and
c.278C>T;p.(Thr93Met), for which the mother was compound
heterozygous. Plasma concentrations of 7- and 8-DHC in this
female were elevated, conﬁrming the diagnosis of SLOS.
Conclusion:
Biallelic
pathogenic
DHCR7
variants
c.89G>C;p.(Gly30Ala) and c.278C>T;p.(Thr93Met), accompanied by
the typical biochemical features are associated with mild micro-
cephaly as sole manifestation for SLOS. Both variants have been
previously described in combination with other pathogenic var-
iants, respectively. The genotype of this female leading to only
mild microcephaly has not been reported in the literature.
References: Opitz et al., 1987; Fitzky et al., 1998; Blahakova
et al., 2007.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.033.C Trio-exome sequencing reveals Infantile Liver
Failure Syndrome Type 1 (ILFS1) in an infant with recurrent
hepatorenal failure and status epilepticus
Stefanie Beck-Wödl1;2, Tobias Haack2;3, Olaf Riess2;3, Ute Grassh-
off2;3, Mona Grimmel2;3, Marc Sturm3, Marisa Mendes4, Ralf A.
Husain5
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of
Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany; 2ZSE, Rare Disease Center, Tuebin-
gen, Germany; 3Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics,
Tuebingen, Germany; 4Metabolic Unit, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam UMC, Netherlands;
5Jena University Hospital, Department of Neuropediatrics, Jena,
Germany.
Background/Objectives: Biallelic variants in LARS1, coding for the
cytosolic leucyl-tRNA synthetase, cause infantile liver failure syn-
drome 1 (ILFS1), a rare disorder of aminoacylation. Especially in
infancy-onset of inborn errors of metabolism an early diagnosis is
crucial to guide downstream clinical management and treatment
decisions.
Methods: We report on a female child born in the 32nd week of
gestation with intrauterine growth restriction, metabolic acidosis,
hypoglycemia showing in the further course failure to thrive,
developmental delay, hepatomegaly, low albumin and microcytic
anemia. Many metabolic and endocrine causes were ruled out. At
the age of 12 and 16 months episodes of acute liver and renal
failure occurred most probably after viral infections with extreme
hyperglycemia under moderate diazoxide dosing (6 mg/kg/d)
during the ﬁrst episode and status epilepticus and prolonged
encephalopathy during the second episode. A third episode with
infection-triggered status epilepticus but without liver failure
occurred at the age of 35 month. Trio exome sequencing was
performed during the ﬁrst episode and revealed compound-
heterozygous variants of unknown signiﬁcance in the LARS1 gene.
Results: With the exclusion of other probable causes and LARS1
activity in ﬁbroblasts of 8 % of control ﬁbroblasts we concluded
the pathogenicity of the LARS1 variants. A high-protein diet as
recommended was probably protective.
Conclusion: In children with acute liver failure rare genetic
causes should be considered early. Next generation sequencing
shows advantages over a step-wise approach because even a
distinct phenotype can be recognized only in retrospect in
extremely rare disorders.
References: PMID: 30349989.
Grants: No afﬁliations.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.034.D Next-generation diagnosis in patients with
suspected mitochondrial neuromuscular diseases through a
deep phenotyping and a in silico panel approach
Flavia Palombo1, Chiara La Morgia1, Claudio Fiorini1, Marianto-
nietta Capristo1, Maria Lucia Valentina2, Giulia Severi3, Leonardo
Caporali1, Gaetano Cantalupo4, Caterina Garone5, Marco seri3,
Valerio Carelli1;2
1IRCCS ISNB, Bologna, Italy; 2DIBINEM UNIBO, Bologna, Italy; 3U.O.
Genetica
Medica,
IRCCS
Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria
di
Bologna,
Bologna,
Italy;
4U.O.C.
di
Neuropsichiatria
Infantile,
Dipartimento ad Attività Integrata Materno Infantile - AOUI di
Verona, Verona, Italy; 5Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences,
Alma Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Mitochondrial neuromuscular diseases
are highly heterogeneous disorders occurring at any age and with
several clinical features including neurologic, muscular, cardiac,
visual and auditory symptoms. These characteristics make the
traditional diagnostic approach long, expensive and often incon-
clusive. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) has revolutionized the
study of rare genetic diseases and has found a wide application in
clinical setting allowing to end the diagnostic odyssey typical of
many heterogeneous genetic disorders, such as mitochondrial
diseases.
Methods: WES strategy analysis based on standardized phe-
notyping by the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) terms and the
use of in silico gene panels, in a heterogeneous cohort of 153
patients with suspected mitochondrial neuromuscular diseases.
The cohort can be subdivided in patients with isolated optic
atrophy (AO, 54), syndromic optic atrophy (AOplus, 16), pro-
gressive external ophthalmoplegia isolated or syndromic (CPEO,
34), adult-onset (EM, 16) and neonatal-onset encephalomyopathy
(EMped, 22) and myopathy (MIO, 11).
Results: This strategy allowed to reach a diagnostic yield of
46.4%. In patients who had already undergone pre-sequencing
panel (79%), very rare genes were identiﬁed. In addition, candi-
date genes could be identiﬁed in 4.5% of patients. The diagnosis
of mitochondrial disease was conﬁrmed in 50% of patients. The
phenotypic traits most associated with mitochondrial genes are
optic atrophy and ptosis, while the presence of phenocopies was
high in the EMped and in the MIO patients.
Conclusion: The application of WES and a diagnostic algorithm
that relies on phenotyping and ﬁltering by in silico panels repre-
sents an effective diagnostic strategy in patients with suspected
mitochondrial diseases.
References:.
Grants: GR-2016-02361449.
Conﬂict of Interest: Flavia Palombo: None declared, Chiara La
Morgia PI/SI for clinical trials sponsored by GenSight. Biologics and
Santhera, Santhera Pharmaceuticals, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Reg-
ulatory Pharma Net, Thenewway srl, First Class srl and Biologix,
Chiesi Farmaceutici, Regulatory Pharma Net and Thenewway srl,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
431
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Claudio Fiorini: None declared, Mariantonietta Capristo: None
declared, Maria Lucia Valentina: None declared, Giulia Severi: None
declared, Leonardo Caporali: None declared, Gaetano Cantalupo:
None declared, Caterina Garone: None declared, Marco seri: None
declared, Valerio Carelli Stealth BioTherapeutics, Chiesi, GenSight
Biologics, Stealth.
BioTherapeutics, Santhera Pharmaceuticals, and Chiesi.
P07.035.A Investigation of the role of the DNM2 gene in
mitochondrial dynamics by siRNA gene silencing
Fruzsina Szabo1, Domonkos Trager2, András Gézsi1, Anna Süveges1,
Emese Bato3, Krisztina Takács-Vellai4, Csilla Nemes5, Aniko Gal1
1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary; 2Budapest University of Technology
and Economics, Budapest, Hungary; 3Xenovea Ltd, Szeged, Hungary;
4Biological Anthroplogy, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hun-
gary; 5Dr. Kenessey Albert Hospital, Balassagyarmat, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: The Dynamin2 protein (DNM2) has
diverse roles in cell functions, including in clathrin mediated
endocytosis at the plasma membrane and together with DRP1, in
mitochondrial division. DNM2 depletion blocks mitochondrial
division and results in an elongated, hyper-fused mitochondrial
network.
Methods: The silencing was performed for 72 hours. The efﬁ-
ciency of siRNA gene silencing was analysed by real-time PCR and
Western blotting. RNA sequencing was performed on the properly
transfected samples on Illumina NextSeq platform. The bioinfor-
matics analysis focusing on mRNA expression changes.
Results: Gene silencing of siRNA was performed in 3 parallel
measurements with 3 different siRNAs. Scrambled siRNA and non-
transfected HeLa cells were used as controls for the experiments.
After a bioinformatical analysis very strong signiﬁcance for 12
genes were found. These genes are involved in regulation of
cytoskeletal function and trafﬁcking, muscle function, and steroid
biogenesis.
Conclusion: In DNM2 depletion samples, the downregulation
of the FBLIM1, KRT13, KRT19, TMEM139, TMEM45A genes are
involved in cytoskeletal function and trafﬁcking, so they might be
indirectly modify mitochondrial dynamics. TNNC1 plays a major
role in the regulation of muscle function, so the decrease in
expression found may be related to the formation of centro-
nuclear nuclei. CYP4F3 gene expression was also signiﬁcantly
decreased. It is a monooxidase involved in cholesterol and steroid
biosynthesis. Its relationship with DNM2 is currently in question. A
validaton of RNASeq results currently in process.
References: -.
Grants: The study was supported by the Semmelweis Uni-
versity StartUp, NKFIH_ 132812 and UNKP-21-5 grants.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.036.B Correlation between GLA rare variants and
phenotype in Hungarian patients with Fabry disease
Tamás Szlepák1, Robert Sepp2, Eva Rakoczi3, Krisztina Nemeth4,
Tamas Gyimesi5, Sandor Molnar6, Gyorgy Fekete4, Maria Judit
Molnár1
1Semmelweis University, Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare
Disorders, Budapest, Hungary; 2University of Szeged, Second Depart-
ment of Internal Medicine and Cardiology Center, Szeged, Hungary;
3University of Debrecen, Department of Rheumatology, Debrecen,
Hungary; 4Semmelweis University, 2nd Department of Paediatrics,
Budapest, Hungary; 5University of Pécs, 2nd Department of Internal
Medicine and Nephrological Center, Pécs, Hungary; 6Soproni Erzsébet
Teaching Hospital and Rehabilitation Institute, Neurology-stroke,
Sopron, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Fabry disease (FD) is the second most
common metabolic disorder with high morbidity and mortality.
Hundreds of mutations and non-coding haplotypes in the GLA
gene have been described; however, many are variants of
unknown signiﬁcance, prompting doubts about the diagnosis and
treatment.
Methods: We identiﬁed GLA mutations in patients with suspi-
cion of FD in Hungary for the last couple of decades. Identiﬁcation
of patients’ genotype was done with Sanger sequencing. Patients
tested were participating in FD screening projects or showed
typical signs of FD or had low enzyme activity. The detected
variants were classiﬁed using the current ACMG guideline, Fabry
databases and literature.
Results: We found 24 different rare variants in 51 patients
overall, of which 16 were classiﬁed as pathogenic, 4 likely
pathogenic and 4 likely benign. Of the identiﬁed variants, 13 cause
classic and 7 later onset phenotype. We also identiﬁed 2 variants
that have conﬂicting interpretations of pathogenicity. Four of the
damaging rare variants were only found in Hungarian patients
so far.
Conclusion: We present a descriptive clinical study includ-
ing 51 patients with 24 different GLA variants. We identiﬁed 4
novel rare damaging variants of the GLA gene. In order to
better characterise VUS, not only probands but also all asymp-
tomatic variant carriers from Fabry families should be followed
prospectively. Data sharing has great importance. These data,
in the future, will help to distinguish symptoms attributable
to FD from nonspeciﬁc comorbidities in benign GLA variants
carriers.
References:.
Grants: Nothing to disclose.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.037.C Molecular diagnosis of Fabry disease in patients
with chronic renal failure of unknown etiology
Marina Parezanovic1, Maja Stojiljkovic1, Marina Andjelkovic1, Nina
Stevanovic1, Vesna Spasovski1, Milena Ugrin1, Jovana Komazec1,
Natasa Tosic1, Sonja Pavlovic1, Dejan Celic2, Jelica Vucenovic3, Anita
Skakic1
1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University
of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia; 2Clinic for Nephrology and Clinical
Immunology, Clinical Center of Vojvodina, University of Novi Sad,
Novi Sad, Serbia; 3General Hospital Sremska Mitrovica, Hemodialysis
Center, Sremska Mitrovica, Serbia.
Background/Objectives: Fabry disease (FD) is a rare X-linked
disorder caused by variants in the GLA gene leading to the deﬁ-
ciency of lysosomal α-galactosidase-A and progressive accumula-
tion of globotriaosylceramide affecting the heart, nervous system,
and kidneys. FD has overlapping phenotypes and often remains
undiagnosed. Therefore, the precise molecular-genetic diagnosis
and the earliest possible treatment are essential to avoid sig-
niﬁcant disease progression.
Methods: We analyzed 95 (34 female and 61 male) hemodia-
lysis patients with clinical suspicion of FD using Sanger sequen-
cing of all coding exons (7) and ﬂanking intron regions of the GLA
gene, and measured the relative expression of the GLA gene in
available samples.
Results: The genetic analysis revealed 3 patients with a mis-
sense variant (p.Asp313Tyr), and 10 patients with combinations of
non-coding variants, described as complex intronic haplotypes
(CIHs). CIH1 (c.-10C>T, c.370-81_370-77delCAGCC, c.640-16A>G,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
432
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
c.1000-22C>T), the most frequent haplotype, was detected in 7
(7.4%) patients. Lyso-Gb3 biomarker levels were within the normal
range in each tested patient. However, RT-qPCR analysis revealed
decreased relative expression of GLA gene in PBMC of 2 female
patients with CIH1 and one female patient carrying only c.-10C>T
variant by 9,1%, 7,4%, 46,3%, respectively, pointing out that fur-
ther analyses are needed to conﬁrm/exclude FD in these patients.
Conclusion: Because the effects of CIHs are not yet fully
understood, our work highlights the importance of analyzing
intronic regions of the GLA gene as genetic modiﬁers and the
need to include expression analysis in the diagnostic algorithm.
References:.
Grants: Genetic and biomarker analyses are sponsored by
Takeda GmbH, Serbia.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.038.D An unusual case of combined hypolipidaemia and
premature peripheral vascular disease
Zuzana
Pös1;2;3,
Milad
Khedr4,
Jan
Radvanszky1;2;5,
Rastislav
Hekel2;3;5;6, Tomas Szemes2;3;5, Adela Penesova7, Lakshminarayan
Ranganath4, Andrea Zatkova1
1Biomedical Research Centre of the Slovak Academy of Sciences,
Institute of Clinical and Translational Research, Bratislava, Slovakia;
2Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia; 3Geneton
Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia;
4Royal Liverpool University Hospital,
Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolic Medicine,
Liverpool, United Kingdom; 5Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius
University, Department of Molecular Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia;
6Slovak Centre of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava,
Slovakia; 1Biomedical Research Centre of the Slovak Academy of
Sciences, Institute of Clinical and Translational Research, Bratislava,
Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: Monogenic hypobetalipoproteinemias
include a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by very
low plasma levels of total cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol (LDL), and apolipoprotein B (apoB) that are relatively
uncommon in general population. It is thought that low LDL can
protect from CVD, but this is not what we found in a case we
present. We report on a 57 years old male patient (with BMI 21 kg/
m2) with combined hypolipidaemia who presented with pre-
mature peripheral vascular disease. We also presented his two
sons aged 32 and 27 years, who also manifested tendency to low
lipid levels.
Methods: We used Illumina exome analysis in all three indivi-
duals. Variant ﬁltering by QCI was performed using two different
approaches: one based on candidate genes and the other one
based on clinical symptoms.
Results: No pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants within
main
hypocholesterolaemia/dyslipidaemia
candidate
genes
(ANGPTL3, SAR1B, APOB, PCSK9 or MTTP) were found in any of
them. However, all three individuals share a novel ABCA1 variant,
possibly responsible for decreased HDL levels. The proband and
one of his sons share also the splicing variant rs138326449
within the APOC3 gene, shown to be associated with decreased
TG levels.
Conclusion: We can hypothesize that in our patient despite his
low TGs and LDL levels obtained thanks to the presence of the
protective APOC3 variant, atherosclerosis developed due to the
impaired cholesterol efﬂux caused by ABCA1 variant.
References:.
Grants: APVV-18-0319; VEGA_2/0167/20; VEGA_02/0040/20;
ITMS: 313011V446 co-ﬁnanced by the European Regional Devel-
opment Fund (LISPER).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.039.A Untreated PKU patients without intellectual
disability: SHANK gene family as a candidate modiﬁer
Kristel Klaassen1, Maja Djordjevic2;3, Anita Skakic1, Bozica Kecman2,
Marina Parezanovic1, Marina Andjelkovic1, Nina Stevanovic1, Vesna
Spasovski1, Milena Ugrin1, Radoje Drmanac4;5;6, Sonja Pavlovic1,
Maja Stojiljkovic1
1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University
of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia; 2Mother and Child Health Care Institute
of Serbia „Dr Vukan Cupic“, Belgrade, Serbia; 3School of Medicine,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;
4Complete Genomics
Incorporated, San Hose, United States; 5MGI, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenz-
hen, China; 6BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
Background/Objectives: Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inborn error
of metabolism caused by variants in the phenylalanine hydro-
xylase (PAH) gene. Although PKU is a monogenic disease, decades
of research and clinical practice have shown that the correlation
between the genotype and corresponding phenotype is not
simple at all. Attempts have been made to discover modiﬁer
genes for PKU cognitive phenotype but without any success so far.
Methods: We conducted whole genome sequencing of 4 sub-
jects from unrelated non-consanguineous families who presented
with pathogenic mutations in the PAH gene, high blood pheny-
lalanine concentrations and near-normal cognitive development
despite no treatment.
Results: We used cross sample analysis to select genes com-
mon for more than one patient. Thus, the SHANK gene family
emerged as the only relevant gene family with variants detected
in 3 of 4 analyzed patients. We detected two novel variants,
p.Pro1591Ala in SHANK1 and p.Asp18Asn in SHANK2, as well as
SHANK2:p.Gly46Ser,
SHANK2:p.Pro1388_Phe1389insLeuPro
and
SHANK3:p.Pro1716Thr variants that were previously described.
Computational analysis indicated that the identiﬁed variants do
not abolish the function of SHANK proteins. However, changes in
posttranslational modiﬁcations of SHANK proteins could inﬂuence
functioning of the glutamatergic synapses, cytoskeleton regula-
tion and contribute to maintaining optimal synaptic density and
number of dendritic spines.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings are linking SHANK gene family and
brain plasticity in PKU for the ﬁrst time. We hypothesize that
variant SHANK proteins maintain optimal synaptic density and
number of dendritic spines under high concentrations of pheny-
lalanine and could have protective modifying effect on cognitive
development of PKU patients.
References:.
Grants: MESTD-RS 451-03-68/2022-14/200042.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.040.B Clinical, genetic and therapeutic aspects in Menkes
disease: study of a French cohort and systematic literature
review
Paul Rollier1;2, Marie-Pierre Moizard3;4, Annick Toutain5, Sophie
Blesson5, Eric Bieth6, Chrystèle Bonnemains7, Aline Cano8, Brigitte
Chabrol8, Annabelle Chaussenot9, Léna Damaj10, François Feillet7,
Sylvie Joriot11, Manoelle Kossorotoff12, Christian Richelme13, Domin-
ique Bonneau14, Sylvie Odent1, Magalie Barth14
1Rennes University Hospital, Clinical Genetics, RENNES, France;
2Rennes University Hospital, Molecular Genetics and Genomics,
RENNES, France;
3Tours University Hospital, Molecular Genetics,
TOURS, France; 4INSERM, U1253, TOURS, France; 5Tours University
Hospital, Clinical Genetics, TOURS, France;
6Toulouse University
Hospital, Medical Genetics, TOULOUSE, France; 7Nancy University
Hospital, Pediatrics, NANCY, France;
8Marseille Public University
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
433
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Hospital, Pediatric Neurology, MARSEILLE, France; 9Nice University
Hospital,
Medical
Genetics,
NICE,
France;
10Rennes
University
Hospital, Pediatric Neurology, RENNES, France;
11Lille University
Hospital,
Pediatric
Neurology,
LILLE,
France;
12Necker-Enfants
Malades
Hospital,
Pediatric
Neurology,
PARIS,
France;
13Nice
University Hospital, Pediatric Neurology, NICE, France;
14Angers
University Hospital, Medical Genetics, ANGERS, France.
Background/Objectives:
Menkes
disease
has
multi-organ
involvement with neurological, cutaneous, urological, vascular
and bone complications and historically death before 3 years.
Copper histidinate (CuHis) is the only speciﬁc treatment but with
variable results. The objective was to describe clinical and
genetic characteristics of a French cohort and discuss ther-
apeutic management.
Methods: A cohort was constructed from genetic diagnoses
(ATP7A) of Menkes in France and compared with a literature sys-
tematic review.
Results: Diagnostic yield was 81% (71/88 cases) with 50%
undescribed variants. 24.6% are intragenic deletions/duplica-
tions, 50.8% are loss-of-function and 24.6% are missense. Mis-
senses are distributed exclusively from exon 7 onwards and can
result on splicing defect. Of the 24 individuals (clinical sub-
cohort), average age at diagnosis was 4.68±2.16 months.
Symptoms at diagnosis are hypotonia (96%), epilepsy (88%), pili
torti (38%), skin pallor (44%). Neonatal hypothermia (53%) and
cephalhaematomas (27%), although non-speciﬁc, are over-
represented. CuHis was started on 55% of individuals (mean
age 5.1±2.8 months), without signiﬁcant improvement on sur-
vival or development, or of genotype-phenotype correlation
distinguishing best responders. Comparing with the literature,
CuHis is only effective (survival and neurodevelopment) when
initiated in infants who are not yet neurologically impaired.
Epilepsy occurred in all individuals in our cohort even when
CuHis was started before ﬁrst seizures. CuHis may also provide
better control of urological complications but not on vascular
and bone phenotypes.
Conclusion: Menkes disease remains a non-curable disease
with limited therapeutic range and poor prognosis. CuHis should
only be offered in ﬁrst intention in presymptomatic individuals.
References:.
Grants: No funding source.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.041.C Novel MECR mutation in a Czech patient with
childhood-onset dystonia, optic atrophy, and basal ganglia
abnormality
Lukáš Ryba1, Zuzana Korandová2, Eliška Koňaříková2, Tomáš
Mráček2,
Markéta
Havlovicová1,
Markéta
Vlčková1,
Emílie
Vyhnálková1
1Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University
Hospital Motol, Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague,
Czech Republic; 2Institute of Physiology, Czech Academy of Science,
Prague, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: Gene MECR encodes a highly conserved
mitochondrial trans-2-enoyl-coenzyme-A-reductase which has a
crucial role in mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis (mFAS). Here we
report a 12-year-old patient with recessive mutations in MECR who
presented with childhood-onset dystonia, hypoplasia and atrophy
of the optical nerves, and abnormal MRI signaling of basal ganglia
and dorsal mesencephalon.
Methods: Family-based whole-exome sequencing of DNA
extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes was followed
by bioinformatics analysis of the TRIO using the software
VarAFT. Functional measurements of mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) were performed on skin ﬁbrocytes
via high-resolution respirometry (OroborosOxygraph). Western
blot was used to detect individual mitochondrial proteins and to
study the assembly of OXPHOS complexes.
Results: Within gene MECR, we found a novel variant c.610G>C
p.(Ala204Pro)
and
previously
described
variant
c.772C>T
p.(Arg258Trp) in a compound heterozygous state. Functional
measurements of OXPHOS on ﬁbrocyte cell line found a statisti-
cally signiﬁcant decrease of the mitochondrial electron transport
chain (ETC) capacity, complex I and IV capacity, and overall mild
decrease of respiration. Western blot showed a decreased quantity
of complexes I and IV.
Conclusion: We described a novel variant c.610G>C in MECR in
an individual with a phenotype consistent with previously
described cases of the MECR-related neurologic disorder (1). The
pathogenicity of the variant was conﬁrmed by functional analysis.
References: 1. Heimer G, Kerätär JM, Riley LG, et al. MECR
Mutations Cause Childhood-Onset Dystonia and Optic Atrophy, a
Mitochondrial Fatty Acid Synthesis Disorder. Am J Hum Genet.
2016;99(6):1229-1244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.09.021.
Grants: IGA MZČR (NT/13770-4/2012 to MMJr, NT/14200 to
MH), Norway Grants (PDP3-NorwayGrants) and COST–LD14073.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.042.D False positive newborn screening for maple syrup
urine disease in patients with hydroxyprolinemia
Dimitar Gavrilov1, Amy White1, Faisal Asumda1, Noemi Vidal Folch1,
Laura Davis-Keppen2, Isum Ward2, Kari Casas3, Matthew Schultz1,
Devin Oglesbee1, Silvia Tortorelli1, Dietrich Matern1
1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, United States;
2USD Sanford School of
Medicine, Sioux Falls, United States; 3University of North Dakota
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Fargo, United States.
Background/Objectives: Newborn screening (NBS) for maple syrup
urine disease (MSUD) by tandem mass spectrometry utilizes leucine
as primary marker. The isobaric amino acids leucine, isoleucine,
alloisoleucine and hydroxyproline (OH-Pro) are not distinguished by
this method. Hydroxyprolinemia is an autosomal recessive benign
condition (1) and therefore should not be identiﬁed by NBS.
Methods: Of six healthy newborns with NBS results pre-
sumptive positive for MSUD two were hospitalized until MSUD
was excluded. The other four patients had plasma and urine col-
lected for amino acid (PAA) and organic acid (UOA) analyses at an
outpatient visit. Original NBS specimens of two cases were avail-
able for retrospective measurement of leucine, isoleucine, valine,
alloisoleucine and OH-Pro (2).
Results: PAA and UOA analyses excluded MSUD and disclosed
elevations of OH-Pro (237-424 mmol/L; controls <61) in all six
cases. OH-Pro but not leucine, isoleucine, valine or allo-isoleucine,
was elevated in the NBS specimens of two cases. Molecular
genetic analysis of PRODH2 is underway.
Conclusion: MSUD is a critical condition that requires rapid
initiation of treatment. However, hydroxyprolinemia is more
common and therefore a cause of false positive NBS results (1).
Total parenteral nutrition can also cause false positive results (2).
Employing a second-tier NBS test in the original dried blood spot
specimen to differentiate between branch-chain amino acids and
OH-Pro can avoid the cost and anxiety associated with false
positive results of NBS for MSUD.
References: 1. Staufner et al. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2016;39:625-32.
2. Oglesbee et al. Clin Chem 2008;54:542-9.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Dimitar Gavrilov: None declared, Amy
White: None declared, Faisal Asumda: None declared, Noemi Vidal
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
434
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Folch: None declared, Laura Davis-Keppen: None declared, Isum
Ward: None declared, Kari Casas: None declared, Matthew Schultz:
None declared, Devin Oglesbee: None declared, Silvia Tortorelli:
None declared, Dietrich Matern Advisory board, Novogene, 4 hrs
(honorarium passed on to my employer, Mayo Clinic).
P07.043.A Clinical and metabolomic peculiarities in
monogenic disorders affecting urea cycle or mitochondrial
ATP synthase
Botezatu Alina1, Adina Chis2;3, Calin Deleanu4;5, Cecilia Lazea6,
Gabriella Horvath7, Melinda Baizat8, Ligia Blaga9, Simona Bucerzan6,
Alina Nicolescu4;5, Romana Vulturar2;3
1Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Medicine,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania; 2“Iuliu Hațieganu” University of Medicine and
Pharmacy,
Cluj-Napoca,
Romania,
Department
of
Molecular
Sciences,
Cluj-Napoca,
Romania;
3Babeș-Bolyai
University
Cluj-
Napoca,
Romania,
3-Cognitive
Neuroscience
Laboratory,
Cluj-
Napoca, Romania; 4“P. Poni” Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry,
Romanian Academy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania;
5“C. D. Nenitescu”
Centre of Organic Chemistry, Romanian Academy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania; 6“I. Hațieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-
Napoca, Romania, Ist Paediatric Clinic - Cluj Children Hospital, Cluj-
Napoca, Romania;
7Faculty of Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, Division of Biochemical Diseases,
Department of Pediatrics, Cluj-Napoca, Romania;
8Neonatology
Department, Clinical Hospital Zalau, Cluj-Napoca, Romania; 9“Iuliu
Hațieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania, Neonatology Department, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Background/Objectives: The clinical-biochemical ﬁndings in
born errors of metabolism (IEMs) are sometimes nonspeciﬁc.
A metabolomic approach involves a quantitative analysis of a
set of metabolites present in urine or/and plasma linking them
to a selected metabolic pathway and/or particular metabolic
condition.
Methods: Results from plasma and/or urine amino acids ana-
lyzed by a two-dimensional thin-layer-chromatography (2D-TLC)
as an urgent selective screening in patients from pediatric clinical
departments were compared with urinary NMR spectroscopic
results in several IEMs. 1H-NMR urine spectroscopy constitutes a
complementary technique in the diagnosis of several IEMs, pro-
viding an overall view of metabolism, giving a “ﬁngerprint” of
almost all hydrogen nuclei in a metabolite.
Results: We summarize clinical data and biochemical com-
parative markers obtained using these two methods in several
urea cycle disorders (ornithine transcarbamylase - OTC and
argininosuccinic aciduria - AAS), and a mitochondrial disorder -
the TMEM70 defect evolving with mild or severe hyperlacta-
taemia. In TMEM70 defect, several plasma amino acids were
outside the normal ranges as nonspeciﬁc changes, but the
diagnostic was established by molecular DNA investigation.
Contrary, the orotic acid and argininosuccinic acid were rapidly
detected using urinary NMR spectroscopy in ornithine trans-
carbamylase defect. In AAS, the urinary 2D-TLC method was
useful for rapid identiﬁcation of high concentration of arginino-
succinic acid.
Conclusion: The 2D-TLC and 1H-NMR spectroscopy methods
available for a rapid evaluation may be a versatile association for
several speciﬁc molecules. Identiﬁcation of such bio-markers
demonstrated important potential for including more rare dis-
eases into current national screening programme and research.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.045.C Shifting the border of pathogenicity with a DEL9
mutation in the CEL gene
Maria Grossmann1, Janek Wilk2, Andrea Bier1, Silke Reif1, Manuela
Timmer1, Christian Jänecke1, Vivien Klaschka1, Beate Küchler2,
Albrecht Kobelt3, Stefan Krüger1, Jens Plaschke1;2
1Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, member of Praxisnetz
Humangenetik Deutschland, Dresden, Germany; 2MEWIGEN, Dres-
den, Germany;
3Praxis für Medizinische Genetik, Zentrum für
Diagnostik am Klinikum Chemnitz, Chemnitz, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) is a group of autosomal dominantly inherited disorders of
non-autoimmune diabetes mellitus with usual onset in adoles-
cence or young adulthood. Most MODY mutations are located in
genes GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A and HNF1B. Rarely, mutations in other
contributing genes (APPL1, ABCC8, BLK, CEL, INS, KCNJ11, KLF11,
NEUROD1, PAX4, PDX1) are causative for MODY.
In the last exon of the CEL gene, single-base deletions within
the 33bp VNTR (Variable Number of Tandem Repeat) region
causing different C-terminal aberrant proteins have been descri-
bed. The pathogenic potential is higher for mutations located in
more 5’ VNTR parts. For DEL1 (named after the affected repeat
number) and DEL4 a negative gain-of-function effect has been
established by functional studies. In contrast, DEL13 was con-
sidered as benign variant due to a behavior like wildtype, whereas
DEL9 showed intermediate effects and was concluded to be likely
benign because of observation in healthy controls.
Here we report two sisters (34 and 37 years) and their mother
(61 years) affected by MODY.
Methods: NGS analysis for all above-mentioned 14 genes was
performed.
Results: For all three patients we identiﬁed the CEL mutation
NM_001807.6:c.1941delC, p.(Val648Cysfs*45) in a heterozygous
state affecting VNTR repeat 9 (DEL9 regarding individual VNTR
haplotype).
Conclusion: Due to co-segregation in this family we consider
the CEL DEL9 as pathogenic. This shifts the previously assumed
border of pathogenicity to a more 3’end of the gene.
References:
Gravdal
et
al.
J
Biol
Chem.
Jan-Jun
2021;296:100661.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P07.046.D MELAS: clinical and laboratory-based diagnostic
algorithm
Sebastian Romeo Pintilie1, Ilinca Maria Farcas2, Alina Botezatu1,
Laura Damian3, Adina Chis4;5, Romana Vulturar4;5
1”Iuliu Hatieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-
Napoca, Romania; 2University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom;
3Emergency Clinical County Hospital, Rheumatology, Center for Rare
Autoimmune and Autoinﬂammatory Diseases, Cluj-Napoca, Roma-
nia; 4Babes-Bolyai University, Cognitive Neurosciences Laboratory,
Cluj-Napoca, Romania; 5”Iuliu Hatieganu” University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Molecular Sciences, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Background/Objectives:
Mitochondrial
Encephalopathy
with
Lactic Acidosis Syndrome (MELAS) is a mitochondrial disease
caused by point mutations or deletions in the mitochondrial or
even nuclear genome. The pathogenesis of MELAS is not fully
understood, so several hypotheses have been proposed. Some of
the most obvious processes involved are related to the accumu-
lation of RNA19 in active metabolic tissues, mitochondrial
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
435
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
proliferation due to energy and nitric oxide deﬁciency, impaired
glucose metabolism with lactic acidosis.
Methods: Following a review of the current literature on the
diagnosis methods and criteria of MELAS, we have developed a
quick algorithm for helping clinicians in establishing the diagnosis
of MELAS.
Results: The Hirano et al. (1992) and Yatsuga et al. (2012) cri-
teria remain the benchmark for selecting patients suspected of
MELAS, based on their clinical picture such as: seizures, headache
with vomiting, and myopathy. However, to secure the diagnosis,
performing PCR-RFLP in a common set of affected-genes, includ-
ing the prevalent m.3243A>G substitution, should be done ﬁrst on
a MELAS-suspected, only then followed by full mitochondrial and
even nuclear genomic testing or, if sequencing is not possible, by
allele-speciﬁc oligonucleotide (ASO) dot blot hybridization, which
is more sensitive than PCR.
Conclusion: Beside the proposed clinical algorithm, muscle
biopsy/blood lactate cannot provide certain evidence for MELAS
diagnosis, which is why molecular testing should be prioritized
over other clinical tests when establishing a diagnosis; yet a
genetic test positive for a mutation in the mitochondrial DNA
should still be correlated with any of the ﬁrst two tests.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08
IMMUNOLOGY AND HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
P08.001.A The value of genetic data from 665,460 individuals
in predicting anemia and ability to donate blood
Jarkko Toivonen1, Johanna Castrén1, FinnGen Consortium2, Mikko
Arvas1
1Finnish Red Cross Blood Service, Helsinki, Finland;
2FinnGen
Consortium, Helsinki, Finland.
Background/Objectives: We aim to ﬁnd out whether genetic
information has signiﬁcant effect in predicting iron deﬁciency
anemia or blood donation ability.
Methods: Genetic data from FinnGen release 6 (230,000 par-
ticipants), Blood Service Biobank (30,000 participants) and UK
Biobank (400,000 participants) was analyzed. In addition, age, sex,
weight, height, anemia status and blood donation histories were
used when available.
We performed GWAS for anemia and blood donation ability
and computed polygenic risk score weights for anemia, ferritin1
and hemoglobin2. A Bayesian logistic regression for anemia was
ﬁtted on all FinnGen participants and for donation ability on blood
donors, stratiﬁed into three demographic groups.
Results: A single signiﬁcant SNP rs199598395 in gene RNF43
was revealed by our anemia and deferral GWAS. The meta-analysis
from FinnGen and UKBB for anemia provided three more sig-
niﬁcant lead SNPs. The largest effect of the genetic data in anemia
model was by the RNF43 SNP for pre-menopausal females (OR 4.3,
CI 2.6 – 6.7) and in the deferral model again the RNF43 SNP for
pre-menopausal females (OR 3.2, CI 1.9 – 5.4). PRSs didn’t have
signiﬁcant effects in either model.
Conclusion: A single SNP can have a strong effect on predic-
tion of both anemia and blood donation ability. PRSs are not yet
informative enough to be usable predictors.
References: 1 Bell et al. A genome-wide meta-analysis yields 46
new loci associating with biomarkers of iron homeostasis. Com-
mun Biol 4, 156 (2021).
2 Vuckovic et al. The Polygenic and Monogenic Basis of Blood
Traits and Diseases. Cell. 2020 Sep 3;182(5):1214-1231.e11.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jarkko Toivonen Full-time employee at
Finnish Red Cross Blood Service. Signiﬁcant contribution., Johanna
Castrén Full-time employee at Finnish Red Cross Blood Service.
Signiﬁcant contribution., FinnGen Consortium: None declared,
Mikko Arvas Full-time employee at Finnish Red Cross Blood Ser-
vice. Signiﬁcant contribution.
P08.002.B Added value of reanalysing whole exome- and
whole genome sequencing data with an extended gene panel
and structural variant calling in patients suspected of having
primary immune deﬁciency
Sara Mørup1, Lusine Nazaryan-Petersen2, Migle Gabrielaite2, Joanne
Reekie3, Hanne V. Marquart4, Hans Jakob Hartling4, Rasmus Marvig2,
Terese L. Katzenstein5, Tania N. Masmas6, Jens D. Lundgren1;5, Daniel
D. Murray1, Marie Helleberg3;5, Line Borgwardt2
1Copenhagen university hospital, Rigshospitalet, Persimune, Centre
of excellence for health, immunity, and infections, Copenhagen,
Denmark; 2Copenhagen university hospital, Rigshospitalet, Center for
genomic medicine, København Ø, Denmark; 3Copenhagen university
hospital, Rigshospitalet, Persimune, Centre of excellence for health,
immunity, and infections, København Ø, Denmark; 4Copenhagen
university hospital, Rigshospitalet, Department of clinical immunol-
ogy, København Ø, Denmark;
5Copenhagen university hospital,
Rigshospitalet, Department of infectious diseases, København Ø,
Denmark; 6Copenhagen university hospital, Rigshospitalet, The child
and adolescent department, København Ø, Denmark.
Background/Objectives: Knowledge of genetic variation under-
lying Primary Immune Deﬁciency (PID) is steadily increasing(1).
Reanalysis of genome-wide sequencing data from patients sus-
pected of PID may improve the diagnostic rate.
Methods: We included patients monitored at the Department
of Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Denmark, for a suspected
PID, who had been analysed during 2015-2020 using a targeted
PID gene panel (457 PID-related genes) on whole exome- (WES) or
whole genome sequencing (WGS) data. A literature review was
performed to extend the PID gene panel used for reanalysis of
single nucleotide variation (SNV) and small indels. Structural var-
iant (SV) calling was added on WGS data.
Results: In total, genetic data from 94 patients (86 adults) was
reanalysed a median of 23 months after the initial analysis (38 WES
and 56 WGS). The extended gene panel included 208 additional
PID-related genes. The total proportion of patients with ACMG
class 3-5 variants increased from 43 (46 %) to 50 (53 %). The
proportion of patients with a causal genetic diagnosis was con-
stant, but after reanalysis 13 patients (14 %) had a new potentially
disease causing/contributing variant of unknown signiﬁcance
(VUS) identiﬁed. Among these, 8 of 94 (9 %) had a SNV and 5 of 56
(9 %) patients had a SV.
Conclusion: These data indicate a possible diagnostic gain of
reassessing WES/WGS data from patients with suspected PID.
Reasons for the possible gain included improved knowledge of
genotype-phenotype correlation, expanding the gene panel, and
adding SV analyses.
References: (1) PMID: 31953710.
Grants: This work is funded by Danish National Research
Foundation (DNRF126).
Conﬂict of Interest: Sara Mørup: None declared, Lusine
Nazaryan-Petersen:
None
declared,
Migle
Gabrielaite:
None
declared, Joanne Reekie: None declared, Hanne V. Marquart: None
declared, Hans Jakob Hartling: None declared, Rasmus Marvig:
None declared, Terese L. Katzenstein Gilead Sciences., Advisory
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
436
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
boards for Gilead Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline/ViiV and MSD.,
Teaching for Takeda and CSLBehring., Tania N. Masmas: None
declared, Jens D. Lundgren: None declared, Daniel D. Murray:
None declared, Marie Helleberg Advisory boards for AstraZeneca,
Gilead, GSK, MSD, Roche and Sobi., Teaching for Gilead and GSK.,
Line Borgwardt: None declared.
P08.003.C Copy number variants in pediatric patients with
suspected inborn errors of immunity
Breanna Beers1, Morgan Similuk1, Magdalena Walkiewicz1, Michael
Kamen1, Michael Setzer1, Colleen Jodarski1, Rachel Gore1, Bryce
Seifert1, Rajarshi Ghosh1, Rylee Duncan1, Devin Hunt1, Madison
Mixer1, Kathleen Jevtich1, Yunting Yu1, Luis M. Franco1, Steven
Holland1, Jia Yan1
1National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, United States.
Background/Objectives: Exome sequencing (ES) results do not
rule out genetic contribution to disease, including contribution
from structural variation. We evaluated 332 pediatric patients with
suspected inborn errors of immunity (IEI) to determine the relative
contribution of ES and chromosomal microarray (CMA).
Methods: ES and CMA customized for exonic coverage of
immune-related genes were performed to study 332 unrelated
pediatric probands referred to the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious
Diseases
Centralized
Sequencing
Program
for
suspected IEI.
Results: Nearly one-third (107/332) of patients’ phenotypes
involved 10 or more top-level Human Phenotype Ontology cate-
gories,
most
commonly
the
immune
system,
integument,
respiratory system, digestive system, and blood/blood-forming
tissues, in decreasing frequency.
Of the 332 probands, 131 (39.5%) received at least one molecular
diagnosis. In total, 113/131 (86.2%) probands were diagnosed by ES
alone; 15/131 (11.5%) were diagnosed by CMA alone, including two
de novo changes. ES and CMA both contributed to diagnoses for 3/
131 (2.3%) probands, including two compound heterozygotes.
Nine of the 18 patients with CMA contribution to diagnosis had
copy number variants in at least one gene not listed by the
International Union of Immunological Sciences as causative of IEI.
Six were primarily neurological, one was cardiovascular, one was
metabolic, and one was respiratory.
Conclusion: CMA ﬁndings contributed to over one-in-ten (18/
131) molecular diagnoses. Although most diagnoses were made
by ES, CMA can increase the likelihood of molecular diagnosis
when ES is inconclusive. Half of CMA diagnoses at least partially
involved non-immune phenotypes, and so would not typically
appear on commercial panels for immune disorders.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.004.D Trio-based sequencing in patients with sporadic
inborn errors of immunity: a retrospective cohort study
Caspar van der Made1;2, Anne Hebert1, Annet Simons1, Janneke
Schuurs-Hoeijmakers1, Esther van Rijssen3, Simon van Reijmersdal1,
Evelien Zonneveld-Huijssoon4, Stefanie Henriet5, Wendy Van Zelst-
Stams1, David Koolen1, Erika Leenders1, Etienne Janssen6, Gijs
Santen7, Sonja de Munnik1, Simone Kersten1, Hans Koenen3, Mihai
Gheorghe
Netea2,
Ruben
Smeets3,
Frank
van
de
Veerdonk2,
Alexander Hoischen1;2
1Radboud
University
Medical
Center,
Department
of
Human
Genetics,
Nijmegen,
Netherlands;
2Radboud
University
Medical
Center, Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for
Infectious Diseases (RCI), Nijmegen, Netherlands; 3Radboud Univer-
sity Medical Center, Laboratory Medicine, Laboratory for Medical
Immunology, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
4University Medical Center
Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands; 5Rad-
boud University Medical Center, Department of Pediatric immunol-
ogy,
Pediatrics,
Nijmegen,
Netherlands;
6Maastricht
University
Medical Center+, Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht,
Netherlands; 7Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Human
and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: De novo variants (DNVs) are currently
not routinely evaluated as part of diagnostic whole exome
sequencing (WES) in patients with inborn errors of immunity (IEI).
This study explored the additional value of systematic DNV
assessment in a retrospective cohort of 123 patients with
sporadic PIDs.
Methods: Patient-parent trios sequenced at the Radboud
University Medical Center were eligible for inclusion when 1) the
IEI in-silico gene panel was analysed and 2) the phenotype of the
index patient suggested sporadic disease. Exome-wide analysis
was performed to retain rare, coding, non-synonymous de novo
SNVs. Variants were further prioritized based on gene and variant
level metrics. In immune cells from one selected patient, func-
tional validation experiments were performed at the level of RNA
splicing, NF-κB signalling and cytokine production.
Results: Candidate DNVs were identiﬁed in 15 (12.2%) trios, in
addition to 12 (9.8%) with inherited (likely) pathogenic mutations.
These potentially disease-causing DNVs were identiﬁed in the
known IEI genes NLRP3 and RELA, and novel candidate genes
including PSMB10, DDX1, KMT2C and FBXW11. Furthermore, the
FBXW11 canonical splice site DNV, carried by a patient with
autoinﬂammatory disease, was shown to cause defective RNA
splicing, increased NF-κB signalling and elevated IL-1β production.
Conclusion: This retrospective cohort study advocates the
implementation of trio-based sequencing in routine diagnostics of
patients with sporadic IEI to improve the solve rate. Furthermore,
we have provided functional evidence in support of a causal role
for
FBXW11
loss-of-function
mutations
in
autoinﬂammatory
disease.
References:.
Grants: This research was part of a Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences PhD grant.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.005.A Genetic characterization of non-familial
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis patients: monogenic
defects in HAVCR2, TNFRSF9 and MADD genes
Laura Batlle-Masó1;2, Clara Franco-Jarava3, Laura Viñas-Gimenez3,
Marina Garcia-Prat1, Alba Parra-Martinez1, Cristina Díaz-de-Heredia4,
Anna Maria Cueto-González5, Marta Codina-Sola5, Berta Campos5,
Eduardo Tizzano5, Jacques G Rivière1, Pere Soler-Palacin1, Laia
Alsina6, Monica Martínez-Gallo3, Ferran Casals2;7, Roger Colobran3;5
1VHIR - Vall d’Hebron Institut de Recerca / HUVH - Hospital
Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Immu-
nodeﬁciencies Unit, Barcelona, Spain;
2Genomics Core Facility,
Department of Experimental and Health Science - Universitat
Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain; 3VHIR - Vall d’Hebron Institut
de Recerca / HUVH - Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Immunology
Division - Translational Immunology Research Group, Barcelona,
Spain; 4HUVH - Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Department of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Barcelona, Spain;
5HUVH -
Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Department of Clinical and
Molecular Genetics, Barcelona, Spain; 6Institut de Recerca Sant Joan
de Déu - Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Clinical Immunology and
Primary Immunodeﬁciencies Unit, Barcelona, Spain; 7Universitat de
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
437
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Barcelona, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics,
Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives:
Hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis
(HLH) is a severe and life-threatening syndrome characterized by a
strong hyperactivation of the immune system. Familial HLH (FHL)
is caused by biallelic variants in the genes PRF1, UNC13D, STX11
and STXBP2. Non-familial HLH (nFHL) may be caused by other
genetic entities or may be sporadic or secondary to other
conditions.
Methods: To elucidate other genetic mechanisms driving nFHL
we studied a cohort of 31 nFHL patients (25 European, 5 North-
African and 2 Asian). All cases had an immunological diagnosis of
HLH but remained unsolved at a genetic level after excluding
pathogenic variants in FHL genes.
Results: Using WES data, we ﬁrst evaluated the possibility of
the disease being casued by a monogenic defect. We found the
genetic diagnosis for three of the patients i) one patient who
carried a compound heterozygous variant at HAVCR2, ii) one with
a homozygous nonsense variant at TNFRSF9, and iii) one with a
homozygous deletion at MADD. Next, we looked for pathogenic
variants over-represented in our cohort in comparison to healthy
populations, identiﬁed monoallelic variants that could be acting as
risk factors, and explored the digenic model in genes of the
cytotoxic pathway.
Conclusion: Altogether, we showed that WES is a valuable
diagnostic tool in nFHL patients, provided new insights into the
physiopathology of the disease, and insisted on the importance of
a genetic diagnosis on the clinical management and genetic
counseling of the patients and their families.
References:.
Grants:.
2018_FI_B00072 by Generalitat de Catalunya, RTI2018-096824-
B-C22 by Spanish Government-ERDF, PI17/00660-PI20/00761 by
Instituto de Salud Carlos III-ERDF.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.006.B First description of a bone marrow failure
syndrome in Spain caused by compound heterozygous
truncating mutations in ERCC6L2
Perla Bandini1;2, Nina Borràs1;2, Laura Martin-Fernandez1;2, Eugenia
Fernández-Mellid3, Paula Melero-Valentín3, Natàlia Comes1;2, Lorena
Ramírez1;2, Patricia Cadahia Fernández3, Matilde Rodriguez Ruíz3,
Manuel Mateo Perez Encinas3, Francisco Vidal1;2;4, Irene Corrales1;2
1Banc de Sang i Teixits (BST), Coagulopaties Congènites, Barcelona,
Spain; 2Vall d’Hebron Institut de Recerca, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona (VHIR-UAB)., Medicina Transfusional, Barcelona, Spain;
3Hospital Clínico Universitario de Santiago de Compostela (CHUS –
SERGAS)., Servicio de Hematología, Santiago de Compostela, Spain;
4Instituto Carlos III (ISCIII)., Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red
de Enfermedades Cardiovasculares (CIBERCV)., Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Biallelic variants in ERCC6L2 have been
recently described to cause inherited bone marrow failure syn-
drome type 2 (BMFS-2) which is characterized by hypocellular
bone marrow and, frequently, microcephaly. We describe the case
of two siblings diagnosed at 8 and 14 years with medullary aplasia
and
thrombocytopenia
(60-80e9platelets/L)
without
extra-
hematopoietic manifestations. The aim was to identify the mole-
cular defect associated with the patients’ phenotype using a
whole exome sequencing (WES) strategy.
Methods: WES was performed using the DNA Prep with
Enrichment
protocol
(Illumina)
and
sequenced
in
NextSeq500 system (Illumina). Variants were identiﬁed with BWA
Enrichment and annotated and ﬁltered with Variant Interpreter
(Illumina). Family based trio analysis including the affected siblings
and their parents (unaffected) was carried out using recessive
inheritance pattern.
Results:
Two
truncating
ERCC6L2
pathogenic
variants,
according to ACMG guidelines, were identiﬁed in both patients: 1)
NM_020207:c.1930C>T (p.Arg644Ter) in exon 13, the second most
recurrent
variant,
only
found
in
homozygous
state;
2)
NM_020207:c.2156del (p.Gly719AspfsTer50), located in exon 15,
previously described in a single patient.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst description in Spain of medullar
aplasia caused by ERCC6L2 mutations. Our ﬁndings contribute to
the small worldwide cohort of 20 families with BMFS-2, with
only four caused by compound heterozygous mutations in
ERCC6L2. Early detection of the genetic defect will help in
clinical management, which is relevant due to the susceptibility
of BMFS-2 patients to myelodysplastic syndrome and acute
myeloid leukaemia.
References: PMID: 29633571; 29987015; 29146883; 30936069.
Grants: ISCIII (PI18/01492 and CIBERCV), co-funded by ERDF, “A
way to make Europe”. Fundació Privada Catalana de l’Hemofília.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.007.C A homozygous STING1 gene variant causes STING-
associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI) in two
patients
Rensheng Wan1, Sandra Von Hardenberg1, lisa isabel olfe1, Bernd
Auber1, Martin Wetzke2, Doris Steinemann1
1Hannover Medical School, Department of Human Genetics, Hann-
over, Germany; 2Hannover Medical School, Department of Pediatric
Pneumology, Allergology and Neonatology, Hannover, Germany.
Background/Objectives:
Stimulator
of
interferon
response
cGAMP interactor 1 (STING1) gain of function (GoF) variants cause
STING-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI; AD
inheritance). While most causative heterozygous variants arise de
novo, Lin et al. (2020) showed that STING1 variant p.(R281W)
causes SAVI only in homozygous state. Here we report two further
patients carrying STING1 homozygous variant p.(R281W).
Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) and whole genome
sequencing (WGS) were applied respectively to identify causative
variant in patient 1 and 2.
Results: STING1 (NM_198282.3): c.841C>T p.(R281W) was
identiﬁed in two patients and classiﬁed as “pathogenic”. Patient 1
presented with recurrent severe hypoxaemia, hypoventilation,
diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, interstitial lung disease, without skin
vasculitis. Segregation analysis within the consanguineous family
showed that healthy parents and one brother carried variant
heterozygously. The interferon signature was highly elevated in
patient 1 but not in healthy heterozygous family members. This
correlates to published cases displaying that the heterozygous
p.(R281W) variant did not affect the interferon signature. No sig-
niﬁcant improvement was observed after therapy with Janus
kinase inhibitor Baricitinib. Patient 2 showed hypoventilation with
scarring ﬁbrotic changes, bronchiectasis, tachypnea, failure to
thrive with marked dystrophy, hypocalcemia, and also no skin
vasculitis.
Conclusion: Our report supports the possibility that p.(R281W)
causes an atypical SAVI phenotype without demonstrating vas-
culopathy. It is important to consider an autosomal recessive
inheritance pattern when evidence of STING-associated vasculo-
pathy is given.
References: No references.
Grants: German Research Foundation (DFG) under Germany’s
Excellence Strategy - EXC 2155 - RESIST project number
390874280.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
438
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
R. Wan holds DAAD scholarship.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.009.A Inﬂuence of HBG2, BCL11A and HMIP
polymorphisms on the clinical phenotype in Iraqis with beta-
thalassemia
Nasir AS Al-Allawi1, Sulav D Atroshi2, Christian Oberkanins3, Regir K
Sadullah4, Adil A Eissa1, Gernot Kriegshäuser5, Shaima SM Al-Zebari6,
Shatha MA Qadir2
1Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of Duhok,
Duhok, Iraq; 2Department of Hematology, Azadi Teaching Hospital,
Duhok, Iraq;
3ViennaLab Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria;
4Medical
Laboratory Technology Department, College of Health and Medical
Techniques, Duhok Polytechnic University, Shekhan, Iraq; 5IHR LABOR
Medical Diagnostic Laboratories, Vienna, Austria; 6Research Center,
College of Science, University of Duhok, Duhok, Iraq.
Background/Objectives: The variability in β-thalassemia pheno-
type has been attributed to several genetic modiﬁers. The sig-
niﬁcance of the latter varies in different populations. The objective
of the current study was to determine the signiﬁcance of six genetic
modiﬁers as they relate to phenotype in Iraqi β-thalassemia patients
and to create a genetic scoring system that could predict pheno-
type in patients from this part of the world.
Methods: A total of 224 Iraqi patients homozygous or com-
pound heterozygous for β-thalassemia were assessed for ﬁve
polymorphisms at HbF QTLs, namely: rs7482144 C>T at HBG2,
rs1427407 G>T and rs10189857 A>G at BCL11A, and rs28384513
A>C and rs9399137 T>C at HMIP.
Results: The enrolled patients had a median age of 14 years,
with 96 males and 128 females. They included 144 thalassemia
major (TM) and 80 thalassemia intermedia (TI) patients. Multi-
variate logistic regression revealed that three genetic modiﬁers,
namely β+ alleles, HBG2 rs7482144 and BCL11A rs1427407, could
signiﬁcantly predict phenotype (TM versus TI) with an overall
prediction rate of 82.1%. A cumulative favorable allele score
based on these signiﬁcant predictors had an area under curve
of 0.862 (95% CI 0.816-0.909), which was highly signiﬁcant
(P = 3.2656E-19).
Conclusion: The current study identiﬁed three genetic pre-
dictors of phenotype in Iraqi patients with β-thalassemia, with an
overall prediction rate of 82.1%. Furthermore, the population-
speciﬁc cumulative favorable allele scoring system created had a
good ability to discriminate between TM and TI. The application of
the latter may help in providing more informed management and
therapeutic options in this region.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.012.D Genetics in inborn errors of immunity: pediatric
autoinﬂammatory phenotypes and the underlying genetic
causes in 125 families
Yvonne Poker1, Sandra Von Hardenberg1, Winfried Hofmann1,
Michelle
Tang1,
Ulrich
Baumann2,
Nicolaus
Schwerk2,
Martin
Wetzke2, Viola Lindenthal3, Bernd Auber1, Brigitte Schlegelberger1,
Hagen Ott4, Philipp von Bismarck5, Dorothee Viemann6, Frank
Dressler2, Christian Klemann2, Anke Katharina Bergmann1
1Department of Human Genetics, Hanover, Germany; 2Department
of Pediatric Pneumology, Allergology and Neonatology, Hanover,
Germany;
3Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Hematology/
Oncology, Oldenburg, Germany; 4Division of Pediatric Dermatology,
Children’s Hospital Auf der Bult, Hanover, Germany; 5Department of
Pediatrics, University Medical Center Schleswig‐Holstein, Hanover,
Germany; 6Translational Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, Würz-
burg, Germany.
Background/Objectives:
Diagnosis
of
monogenic
autoin-
ﬂammatory diseases (AID) requires an accurate description of the
patients´ phenotype and the identiﬁcation of highly penetrant
genetic variants in single genes is pivotal.
Methods: In a routine genetic diagnostic setting, we per-
formed whole exome sequencing (WES) of 125 pediatric patients
with suspected monogenic AID. Datasets were analyzed in a step-
wise approach to identify the most feasible diagnostic strategy:
First, we analyzed a virtual gene panel including 13 genes asso-
ciated with known AID and, if no genetic diagnosis could be
established, followed by the analysis of a virtual panel including
420 genes published by the International Union of Immunological
Societies associated with all known inborn errors of immunity (IEI).
Subsequently WES data were analyzed without pre-ﬁltering for
known AID/IEI genes.
Results: Analyzing 13 genes yielded a deﬁnite diagnosis in
16.0% (n = 20). The diagnostic yield was increased by analyzing
420 genes to 21.8% (n = 26). Importantly, expanding the analysis
to WES data did not increase the diagnostic yield in our cohort,
neither in single WES analysis nor in trio-WES analysis.
However variants of unknown signiﬁcance were detected in
43.2%, (n = 54) which could become clinically relevant in the
future.
Conclusion: The study highlights that analyzing virtual gene
panels based on WES that include the majority of known genes
causing AID or differential diagnosis can rapidly conﬁrm the
diagnosis for a large number of pediatric patients. WES data or
trio-WES data analysis as a ﬁrst-tier diagnostic analysis in patients
with suspected monogenic AID is of minor use.
References: /.
Grants: /.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.013.A Transcriptomes of MPO-deﬁcient patients with
generalized pustular psoriasis reveals expansion of CD4+
cytotoxic T cells and an involvement of the complement
system
Stefan Haskamp1, Benjamin Frey2, Ina Becker2, Imke Atreya2, Carola
Berking2, Rotraut Mößner3, Dagmar Wilsmann-Theis4, Steffen Uebe1,
Philipp Kirchner1, Ulrike Hüffmeier5
1FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany; 1FAU Erlangen-Nürn-
berg, Erlangen, Germany;
3University of Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany;
4University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany;
5FAU Erlangen-
Nürnberg, Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) is a
severe psoriatic subtype characterized by epidermal neutrophil
inﬁltration. Although variants in IL36RN and MPO have been
shown to affect immune cells contributing to GPP’s pathogenesis,
a systematic analysis of neutrophils and of a wide variety of PBMC
subsets and their differential gene expression dependent on MPO
genotypes was not performed yet.
Methods:
We
assessed
transcriptomes
of
MPO-deﬁcient
patients using single cell RNA-sequencing (scRNAseq) of periph-
eral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and RNA-sequencing of
neutrophils in relatively stable disease state.
Results: Cell type annotation by multimodal reference map-
ping of scRNAseq data was veriﬁed by ﬂow cytometry of surface
and
intracellular
markers;
proportions
of
CD4+
cytotoxic
T-lymphocytes
(CTLs)
and
other
CD4+
effector
cells
were
increased in GPP, while frequencies of naïve CD4+ T cells were
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
439
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
signiﬁcantly lower. The expression of the marker gene for CD4+
CTLs and CD8+ effector memory T-cells (TEMs) FGFBP2 was ele-
vated in GPP patients with disease-contributing variants com-
pared to healthy and diseased non-carriers (p = 0.0015) based on
quantitative
RT-PCR.
Differentially
expressed
genes
(DEGs)
involved in the complement system were enriched in patients’
neutrophils.
Conclusion: Future studies assessing affected cell types and
pathways will show their contribution to GPP’s pathogenesis, and
indicate whether ﬁndings can be transferred to the situation in
affected skin and whether depletion or inactivation of CD4+ CTLs
may be a reasonable therapeutic approach.
References:.
Grants: CRC1181, project A05.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.014.B Filaggrin loss-of-function mutations are associated
with the persistence of egg and milk allergy
Ingo Marenholz1;2, Birgit Kalb2;3, Alexander CSN Jeanrenaud1;2, Lara
Meixner3, Ahla Ghauri1;2, Aleix Arnau-Soler1;2, Katharina Blümchen4,
Rupert Schlags5, Gesine Hansen6, Jürgen Seidenberg7, Susanne Lau3,
Bodo Niggemann3, Kirsten Beyer3, Young-Ae Lee1;2
1Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Ger-
many; 2Clinic for Pediatric Allergy, Experimental and Clinical Research
Center, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; 3Depart-
ment of Pediatric Respiratory Medicine, Immunology, and Intensive
Care Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany;
4Department of Allergy, Pulmonology and Cystic Fibrosis, Children’s
Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany;
5Department of
Pediatric Pneumology and Allergology, Wangen Hospital, Wangen,
Germany; 6Department of Pediatric Pneumology, Allergology and
Neonatology,
Hannover
Medical
School,
Hannover,
Germany;
7Department of Pediatric Pneumology and Allergology, Neonatology
and Intensive Care, Medical Campus of University Oldenburg,
Oldenburg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: A genetic defect in the epidermal bar-
rier protein ﬁlaggrin plays a major role in the etiology of eczema
and associated allergic airways diseases. However, it is still con-
troversial to what extend loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in the
ﬁlaggrin gene (FLG) contribute to the development of food aller-
gies. We tested association of FLG LOF mutations with allergic
reactions to diverse foods and investigated their effect on the
persistence of early food allergies.
Methods: We recruited 890 children with challenge-proven
food allergy for the German Genetics of Food Allergy Study
(GOFA). All children were genotyped for the four most common
LOF mutations in FLG; R501X, 2282del4, R2447X, and S3247X.
Associations between FLG mutations and food allergies were
analyzed by logistic regression using the German Multicenter
Allergy Study cohort as control population.
Results: FLG mutations were associated with allergies to
diverse foods including hen’s egg (HE), cow’s milk (CM), peanut,
hazelnut, ﬁsh, soy, cashew, walnut, and sesame with similar risk
estimates. Effects remained signiﬁcant after adjusting for the
eczema status. Interestingly, FLG mutations increased the risk of a
persistent course of HE and CM allergy.
Conclusion: Using the gold standard for food allergy diagnosis,
we demonstrate that FLG LOF mutations confer risk of any food
allergy independent of eczema. They predispose to the persis-
tence of HE and CM allergy and should be considered in the
assessment of tolerance development.
References:.
Grants: The study was funded in part by the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (CHAMP; 01GL1742C), and the German
Research Foundation (Clinical Research Group 339 “Food@”;
Project B2).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.015.C Ethnicity-speciﬁc GWAS to explore the genomic
architecture of platelet count in the Northeast Indian
subcontinent
Kate Burley1, Dragana Vuckovic2, David van Heel3, Andrew
Mumford4
1University of Bristol, School of Physiology, Pharmacology and
Neuroscience, Bristol, United Kingdom; 2Imperial College London,
School of Public Health, London, United Kingdom; 3Queen Mary
University of London, Barts and The London School of Medicine and
Dentistry, London, United Kingdom; 4University of Bristol, School of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Bristol, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Blood cell traits are highly heritable, yet
most known genomic associations have been identiﬁed in broad
population sub-groups. We compared the genomic determinants
of platelet count (PLT) in Pakistanis and Bangladeshis, a genetically
distinct population from the Northeast Indian subcontinent where
thrombocytopenia (PLT<150 x109/L) is reported in 35%.1.
Methods: Data were analysed from British Bangladeshi (BAN,
n = 20,292) and British Pakistani (PAK, n = 9,237) individuals
(https://www.genesandhealth.org/).
Associations
between
TOPMed-imputed genotypes and mean PLT were calculated using
BOLT-LMM and LD score regression software. Variants were
annotated using the Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor.
Results: PLT was slightly lower in BAN (mean 266.4 x109/L)
than PAK (mean 271.5 x109/L, p = 1.16e-10) but respective rates of
thrombocytopenia (1.5% vs 1.8%) and trait heritability (0.214 vs
0.216) were comparable. PLT was lower (mean 255.2 x109/L) and
had higher heritability (0.230) in a previously reported European
(EUR) population (n = 166,066).2 Genetic correlation for PLT was
higher between BAN and PAK (rg 1.11, SE 0.2) than for BAN and
EUR (rg 0.82, SE 0.07). GWAS-signiﬁcant variants in BAN were in
regions associated with PLT in EUR, except for a MAST2 intronic
loci previously associated with PLT in East Asian populations.
Conclusion:
Loci
associated
with
PLT
were
concordant
between BAN and PAK, and largely reproduced previous ﬁndings
in EUR. Thrombocytopenia observed in the Northeast Indian
subcontinent was not reproduced in the British BAN population in
which there was also no discernible genomic explanation for
lower PLT.
References: 1. Nania et al., J Thromb Haemost. 2005, 2, 2581-
1582.
2. Astle et al., Cell 2016, 167, 1415-1429.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.016.D Italian ancestral HLA haplotype predisposing to
severe COVID-19 by low spike and high IFNα binding afﬁnity
Susanna Croci1;2, Silvia Brugiapaglia3;4, Ticiana D.J. Farias5, Paola
Magistroni6, Kristina Zguro2, Claudia Curcio3;4, Chiara Fallerini1;2,
Francesca Fava1;2;7, Francesco Pettini2, Margherita Baldassarri1;2,
Mirella Bruttini1;2;7, Gen-Covid Multicenter Study7, Paul Norman5,
Alessandra Renieri1;2;7, Ilaria Meloni1;2, Simone Furini2, Antonio
Amoroso6;8, Franco Novelli3;4;9
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy; 2Med Biotech Hub
and Competence Center, Department of Medical Biotechnologies,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy; 3Department of Molecular Biotech-
nology and Health Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy;
4Laboratory of Tumor Immunology Center for Experimental Research
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
440
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
and Medical Studies, Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino,
Turin, Italy; 5Division of Biomedical Informatics and Personalized
Medicine, Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University
of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, US,
Aurora, United States;
6Immunogenetics and Transplant Biology,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, Città della Salute e della Scienza
di Torino, Turin, Italy;
7Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliero-
Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy; 8Department of Medical Sciences,
University of Turin, Italy, Turin, Italy;
9Molecular Biotechnology
Center, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Validated association between COVID-
19 and the most obvious candidate genes, e.g. HLA, is still missing.
A weak association with class I HLA- C*04:01 was found for
infection in Sardinians and for severity in another mixed popula-
tion. Auto-antibodies to interferon type I have been implicated in
the severity of COVID-19 in two studies.
Methods: The binding afﬁnity between HLA molecules and
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and IFNα subunits was evaluated in
silico. The presence of antibodies against one or more of the 12
IFNα subunits was evaluated in 160 hospitalized COVID-19
patients. The 10 most frequent haplotypes in the Italian popula-
tion were tested in 1.997 SARS-CoV-2 infected patients (hospita-
lized versus not hospitalized).
Results: The presence of auto-antibodies against at least one
IFNα subunit was detected in 26% of patients. The haplotype
A*24:02-B*35:02-C*04:01-DRB1*11:04-DQB1*03:01 was found to
predispose to severity (p = 0.0018; p = 0.07 after Bonferroni cor-
rection) in patients <50 years. The haplotype includes alleles able
to bind spike with low afﬁnity (i.e. C*04:01 and DRB1*11:04) and
IFNα with high afﬁnity (i.e. DRB1*11:04).
Conclusion: One of the 10 most frequent ancestral haplotype of
the Italian population predisposes to severity likely reducing both
innate immunity through IFNα auto-antibodies induction and
adaptive immunity through weaker spike protein presentation.
References: Daga S et al. Employing a systematic approach to
biobanking and analyzing clinical and genetic data for advancing
COVID-19 research. Eur J Hum Genet. 2021 Jan 17:1-15.
Grants: FISR 2020 / Tuscany Region COVID-19 / INTERVENE - GA
No. 101016775 / Soka Gakkai PAT-COVID.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.017.A High prevalence of Netherton syndrome in Latvian
population caused by founder SPINK5 variant
INGA NARTISA1;2, Lota Ozola3, Ineta Grantina3, Gita Taurina2, Rasa
Insberga2, Linda Gailite1, Natalja Kurjane1;2
1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia; 2Children’s Clinical University
Hospital Clinic of Medical Genetics and Prenatal Diagnostics, Riga,
Latvia; 3Children’s Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia.
Background/Objectives: Netherton syndrome (NTS) is a rare
autosomal recessive inborn error of immunity caused by biallelic
SPINK5 loss-of-function variants. NTS is characterized by skin and
immune system abnormalities, but with variable expressivity.
Therefore, we aimed to clinically and molecularly characterize NTS
in individuals with homogenous genotype and ethnicity.
Methods: We selected all Latvian NTS patients diagnosed in
Children’s Clinical University Hospital by using exome sequencing
(ES). Unrelatedness, as well as haplotype lengh for variant’s age
estimation in individuals with homozygous pathogenic variant
was analysed using high-quality variants from ES.
Results: We identiﬁed pathogenic biallelic variants in 9 indi-
viduals (age 1 month to 17 years) from 7 families, conﬁrming NTS
diagnosis. Clinically, all patients have ichthyosis, hair abnormal-
ities, developmental delay, high total IgE levels (371-6977 kU/L),
and recurrent skin and respiratory infections with variable severity.
Surprisingly, 5/7 families had the same homozygous SPINK5 var-
iant (NM_006846.4:c.1048C>T,p.(Arg350*)) and two siblings car-
ried
the
same
variant
in
compound
heterozygous
state
(c.1048C>T,p.(Arg350*); c.1430+4A>G,r.spl.). Therefore, we sus-
pected that the variant is founder in Latvian population. NTS
prevalence
in
Latvian
population
is
higher:
1:256,000
(vs.
~1:1,000,000 in France by Dreifus I. et. Al. 2014) and carrier fre-
quency is estimated 1:300. Assuming a ‘correlated’ genealogy, the
mutation arose 47.4(95%CI 14.9-167.2) generations and 1175 years
(assuming one generation 25y) ago.
Conclusion: We report high prevalence of NTS in Latvia due to
a common founder variant that arose ~50 generations ago.
Interestingly, despite similar ethnical and identical genotype, NTS
expressivity was variable among the individuals.
References:.
Grants: Latvian Council of Science project:lzp-2020/1-0269.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.018.B Microenvironmental determinants of clonal
hematopoiesis expansion rate
Taralynn Mack1;2, Michael Raddatz3, Joshua Weinstock4, Jaiswal
Siddhartha5, Alexander Bick2
1Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Vanderbilt Genetics Institute,
Nashville, United States;
2Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Division of Genetic Medicine, Nashville, United States; 3University of
California, Department of Medicine, Los Angeles, United States;
4University of Michigan School of Public Health, Department of
Biostatistics, Ann Arbor, United States; 5Stanford University School of
Medicine, Department of Pathology, Stanford, United States.
Background/Objectives: Clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate
potential (CHIP) is a clonal expansion of blood cells caused by
somatic mutations. CHIP confers risk of multiple aging diseases
including blood cancer and cardiovascular disease. It is presently
unknown what causes CHIP clones with identical driver mutations
to expand at different rates in humans. Here, we leverage
genetically predicted traits to identify factors that modify CHIP
clonal growth rate.
Methods:
We
used
the
passenger-approximated
clonal
expansion rate (PACER) method to quantify clonal growth rate for
4,370 individuals with CHIP mutations in the NHLBI TOPMed
cohort. [1] We calculated polygenic risk scores (PRS) for DNA
methylation clocks, inﬂammation related lab values, disease traits,
and circulating protein levels. We tested for associations between
PRS and PACER score with linear regression, controlling for cov-
ariates and correcting for multiple-hypothesis testing.
Results: CHIP clonal growth rate was signiﬁcantly associated
with both genetically predicted and measured methylation clocks
(p < 0.01). No associations were identiﬁed with any of the
inﬂammation-related lab values, proteins or diseases. An unbiased
proteome wide search identiﬁed circulating levels of myeloid zinc
ﬁnger 1, anti-müllerian hormone, TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor
1 and glycine N-methyltransferase as altering CHIP clonal expan-
sion rate (p < 4.1 x 10-6).
Conclusion: An aging microenvironment was associated with
increased CHIP expansion rate as well as four speciﬁc circulating
micro-environment proteins. Contrary to prior murine models, we
do not identify inﬂammation as a root cause of CHIP clonal
expansion rate in humans.
References:
[1]
Weinstock
(2021)
bioRxiv
https://doi.org/
10.1101/2021.12.10.471810.
Grants: HBPRP T32 HL144446.
Conﬂict of Interest: Taralynn Mack: None declared, Michael
Raddatz: None declared, Joshua Weinstock: None declared, Jaiswal
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
441
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Siddhartha TenSixteen Bio, TenSixteen Bio, Alexander Bick Ten-
Sixteen Bio, TenSixteen Bio.
P08.019.C Assessing new RNA-based biomarkers in multiple
sclerosis
Giulia Cardamone1;2, Federica Airi3, Giuseppe Liberatore4, Giulia
Solda’1;3,
Valeria
Rimoldi1,
Eduardo
Nobile-Orazio4;5,
Rosanna
Asselta1;3, Elvezia Maria Paraboschi1;3
1Humanitas University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Pieve
Emanuele, Italy;
2Institute of Biochemistry I, Goethe-University,
Frankfurt, Germany; 3IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano,
Italy; 4Neuromuscular and Neuroimmunology Service, IRCCS Huma-
nitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Italy; 5Milan University,
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine,
Milano, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an auto-
immune neurodegenerative disease characterized by chronic
inﬂammation, and demyelination. Accumulating evidence sug-
gests a pathogenic link between MS and abnormalities in alter-
native splicing (AS) [1], a process that increases the information
content of the transcriptome through the expression of different
mRNAs from single genes [2]. Our objective is to deﬁne an AS-
based signature able to discriminate patients from controls,
starting from a blood sample.
Methods: RNA was extracted from peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells of 29 relapsing-remitting MS patients and 20 controls.
Fluorescent RT-PCR assays, focusing on three speciﬁc AS events
were performed, and PCR products were separated using capillary
electrophoresis. The relative exon inclusion level (percent-spliced
in, psi) was calculated for each sample.
Results: For each AS event, we divided the psi range in quantiles
and we assigned each sample to its relevant class. We calculated a
risk score for each sample, resulting from the sum of the quantiles
they ﬁt in in each AS assay. We used this score to perform a ROC
analysis. Using this 3-marker-AS signature, we obtained a good
predictive model (AUC = 0.72, speciﬁcity = 0.9, sensitivity = 0.48).
We are testing the predictive value of our model on an independent
cohort (32 MS cases and 50 matched controls).
Conclusion: Considering that the current diagnostic methods
for MS are based on complicated procedures, the implementation
of a diagnostic test, centered on RNA biomarkers use, would be
useful in a clinical perspective.
References: 1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2019.05.010.
2. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.biochem.72.121801.161720.
Grants: This work is supported by Fondazione Regionale per la
Ricerca Biomedica (FRRB), Early Career Award.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.020.D Immunodeﬁciency 68 - a life-threatning primary
immunodeﬁciency
Joana Azevedo Silva1, Rosário Leite1, Osvaldo Moutinho1, Márcia
Martins1
1Centro Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real,
Portugal.
Background/Objectives: MYD88 deﬁciency is an inherited dis-
ease of the immune system that leads to abnormally frequent
severe infections by pyogenic bacteria such as Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
that can develop into sepsis and meningitis. Infections can be fatal
in infancy and childhood and become less frequent around the
age of 10.
Diagnostic and genetic counselling.
Methods: Case Report: First male child of a healthy non-
consanguineous couple, with congenital oculocutaneous hypo-
pigmentation, nystagmus and ophthalmoscopy of the left eye
compatible with partial oculocutaneous albinism. WES revealed a
heterozygous mutation in TYR gene. At ten months, he had an
inguinal abscess due to Escherichia Coli, with blood culture posi-
tive to Campylobacter. Normal Immunodeﬁciency investigation. At
fourteen months, the child presented a periorbital cellulitis and, at
21 months, a right thumb recurrent cellulitis to Methicillin-
susceptible Staphylococcus aureus. He died at 29 months from
fulminant meningitis due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Results: An WES trio analysis was performed and revealed
ac.625C>T(Arg209Cys) in the MYD88 gene in homozygosity.
Conclusion: The MYD88 gene encodes a cytosolic adapter
protein that plays a central role in the innate and adaptive
immune response that interferes in the activation of numerous
proinﬂammatory genes. The phenotypic characteristics observed
in the present case are consistent with those described in the
literature, with a severe meningitis responsible for the child’s
death. This condition has an autosomal recessive pattern and both
parents are heterozygous, with no signs or symptoms of this
disease. To our knowledge, there are less than 30 affected indi-
viduals described in the literature.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.021.A Differential diagnostic algorithm for Inherited
Macrothrombocytopenia enables the genetic characterization
of 52 families in a single tertiary referral centre
Catarina Monteiro1;2;3;4, ana gonçalves1;3;4, mónica pereira2;3;4,
catarina lau3;4;5, marta gonçalves3;4;5, eugenia cruz2, sara morais2;3;4,
Rosário Santos1;3;4
1Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães (CGMJM), Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUPorto), Unidade de Genética
Molecular, Porto, Portugal; 2Serviço de Hematologia Clínica, Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUPorto), Unidade de Trombose
e Hemostase, Porto, Portugal; 3UMIB - Unidade Multidisciplinar de
Investigação Biomédica, ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas
Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal;
4ITR -
Laboratory for Integrative and Translational Research in Population
Health, Porto, Portugal; 5Serviço de Hematologia Clínica, Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUPorto), Unidade de Diagnós-
tico Hematológico Margarida Lima, porto, Portugal.
Background/Objectives:
Inherited
Macrothrombocytopenias
(IMTP) are platelet (PLT) disorders characterized by reduced PLT
counts, increased PLT volume and often disproportionate bleed-
ing, with up to 30 genes currently implicated. We aimed to
develop an efﬁcient diagnostic algorithm for IMTP, contributing
towards the understanding of these disorders and their under-
lying defects in our population.
Methods: The proposed algorithm comprises three assessment
steps: (i) clinical data (personal/family history, physical examina-
tion, bleeding tendency); (ii) preliminary laboratory tests including
PLT counts and indices [mean PLT volume (MPV) and immature
PLT fraction (IPF)], PLT morphology and function assays (occlusion
time by PFA100/200 and lumi-aggregometry); (iii) ﬂow cytometry
to assess surface glycoproteins and PLT size (forward scatter
indices). PLT phenotypic patterns orientate towards candidate
gene(s); in the absence of a suspected underlying cause, targeted
next-generation sequencing (NGS) is used.
Results:
The
algorithm
distinguished
patient
subgroups,
guiding appropriate molecular approaches. The genetic cause was
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
442
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
identiﬁed in 37 families by direct Sanger sequencing and in 15
families by NGS. Differential diagnosis achieved was: 4 biallelic
Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS), 5 monoallelic BSS, 1 Platelet-type
vWD, 13 ITGB3/ITGA2B-related thrombocytopenia (-RT), 9 ACTN1-
RT, 9 TUBB1-RT, 3 GFI1B-RT, 7 MYH9-related disease (-RD) and 1
DIAPH1-RD.
Conclusion:
Knowledge
emerging
from
new
genotype-
phenotype correlations, particularly by reassessment of PLT
function and phenotype in NGS-diagnosed cases, will be incor-
porated into the algorithm for further reﬁning. Genetic diagnosis
is essential for prognosis and preventive treatments, to ﬂag syn-
dromic entities with probable multi-organ involvement, as well as
for determining carrier status.
References:.
Grants: FCT grants to CM (UI/BD/150741/2020), UMIB and ITR
(UIDB/00215/2020; UIDP/00215/2020; LA/P/0064/2020).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.022.B Making the invisible visible: Understanding what’s
helpful in learning to live with a suspected Inborn Error of
Immunity
Madison Mixer1, Rylee Duncan1, Michael Setzer1, Morgan Similuk1
1National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, United States.
Background/Objectives:
Prior
research
has
established
the
potential for negative quality-of-life consequences among indivi-
duals with suspected Inborn Errors of Immunity (IEI). Relatively
underrepresented in this literature, however, are qualitative
methods that explore patient perceptions of their challenges and
opportunities. This study aims to interrogate psychosocial impacts
of having an IEI to better understand how patients adapt to their
condition.
Methods: A survey including open-ended questions was sent
to patients enrolled on the Centralized Sequencing Protocol and
were suspected of having an IEI. Here, we present responses to the
question: What has been most helpful in learning to live with your
illness? And why?.
Results: Out of 1038 invited participants, 252 (24% response
rate) responses were coded and analyzed thematically (59%
female, mean age = 48 years). Many patients reported that they
beneﬁt from competent providers with a nuanced understanding
of their disease and who provide effective treatments. Patients
also reported seeking support in coping from family, friends, and
the disease community. Many also reported the beneﬁt of lifestyle
changes and reconceptualizing their illness to gain a sense of
control. An important minority of individuals indicated they had
not found anything helpful in living with their illness.
Conclusion: Beyond encouraging further biomedical research
into new disease associations and therapies, patient responses
suggest
healthcare
providers
can
promote
adaptation
by
encouraging patients to play an active role in their treatment and
connecting them to support systems and psychological inter-
ventions. Patients who claim no adaptation can beneﬁt from
practices to better identify their challenges and corresponding
interventions.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.023.C Mutation spectrum of Fanconi anemia associated
genes in ﬁve patients from Azerbaijan
AGHARZA AGHAYEV1;2, Valeh Hüseynov1, Güven Toksoy2, Samira
Hasanova1, Güler Mammadova1, Zehra Oya Uyguner2
1National Hematology and Transfusiology Center, Department
of Medical Genetics, Baku, Azerbaijan; 2Istanbul Medical Faculty,
Istanbul University, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul,
Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genetic
disorder caused mutations in genes which protein products are
involved in replication, cell cycle control and DNA repair. FA
proteins are required for the proper repair of DNA interstrand
crosslinks (ICL), a deleterious type of DNA damage that covalently
binds DNA strands. FA is characterized by congenital malforma-
tions, bone marrow failure, and predisposition to malignancies.
Presently, 22 autosomal and one X linked genes are held
responsible from >85% of the disease and the FANCA mutations
accounts for almost 60%-70%.
Methods: 5 patients, with FA clinic are included into this
investigation. We performed exome sequencing and copy number
variant analyses and detected variants considered to be patho-
genic are veriﬁed by Sanger. Mutation un-identiﬁed patients and
patients carrying heterozygous pathogenic variants are further
tested by MLPA.
Results:
Three
known
variants
in
four
alleles
(c.[2679G>A];[2679G>A], c.[1343A>G];[2495_2497delTCT], and two
novel
variants
in
four
alleles
(c.[495delC];[495delC],
c.[2941T>C];[2941T>C] in FANCA, and a novel variant in two alleles
(c.[283_284delCT];[283_284delCT]) in FANCF are identiﬁed.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst study looking at clinical and
genetic features of FA in Azerbaijan. We aimed to identify the
mutation frequencies of FA genes, outcome, overall condition, and
genetic features of patients in Azerbaijan to optimize manage-
ment, identify the most common genes, describe new mutations,
and offer prenatal diagnosis and counseling to the affected
families.
References: Toksoy, Güven, et al. “Clinical and Molecular
Characterization of Fanconi Anemia Patients in Turkey.” Molecular
syndromology 11.4 (2020):183-196.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P08.024.D Variant of CXCL8 gene associated with IBD
pathogenesis?
Oliwia
Zakerska-Banaszak1,
Marzena
Skrzypczak-Zielinska1,
Joanna Zuraszek1, Aleksandra Zielińska1, Ryszard Słomski1
1Institute of Human Genetics PAS, Poznan, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Inﬂammatory bowel diseases (IBD) is a
group of chronic pathologies of the digestive system with not
well known etiology. Interleukin 8 encoded by the CXCL8 gene is
a cytokine that is a chemotactic factor responsible for the tar-
geted migration of leukocytes to the site of inﬂammation. Its
pro-inﬂammatory properties suggest that it plays a key role in
the development of the inﬂammatory process. The aim of this
analysis was to examine the two variants rs4073 (c.-251A>T) and
rs188378669 (c.91G>T, p.Glu31Ter) in CXCL8 gene distribution in
a group of IBD patients and populations.
Methods: Using pyrosequencing, Competitive Allele-Speciﬁc
PCR (CASP) and Sanger sequencing, the two variants, rs4073 (c.-
251A>T) and rs188378669 (c.91G>T, p.Glu31Ter) of the CXCL8
gene were analyzed in a group of 353 IBD patients and 200 sub-
jects from Polish population in order to check if there is any
correlations of them with a disease.
Results: Polymorphism c.91G>T, located in exon 2 of CXCL8
gene, causing premature termination of the polypeptide chain
and consequently forming a non-functional protein was observed
signiﬁcantly more often in a group of IBD patients (MAF of 2.12%)
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
443
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
compared to population group (MAF of 0.25%) p = 0,012, OR =
8,661, C.I.=[1,140-65,816].
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report concerning the correlation
of IBD presence and p.Glu31Ter variant in CXCL8 gene, what
suggest the role of CXCL8 gene in IBD pathogenesis.
References: Dakal TC et al. Predicting the functional con-
sequences of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms
in IL8 gene. Sci Rep 2017.
McGovern DP et al. Genetics of Inﬂammatory Bowel Diseases.
Gastroenterology 2015.
Grants:-.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
P09.001.A Parental mosaicism is underestimated in rare
intellectual disability syndromes
Soﬁa Frisk1;2, Alexandra Wachtmeister1, Tobias Laurell1;3, Anna
Lindstrand1;2, Nina Jäntti1;2, Helena Malmgren1;2, Kristina Lagerstedt-
Robinson1;2, Bianca Tesi1;2, Fulya Taylan1, Ann Nordgren1;2
1Karolinska Institutet, Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Stockholm,
Sweden;
2Karolinska University Hospital, Clinical Genetics, Solna,
Sweden; 3Södersjukhuset, Hand surgery, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: De novo variants are a common cause
to rare intellectual disability syndromes, associated with low
recurrence risk. However, when such variants occur pre-zygotically
in parental germ cells, the recurrence risk might be higher. Still,
the recurrence risk estimates are mainly based on empirical data
and the prevalence of germline mosaicism is often unknown.
Methods: To establish the prevalence of mosaicism in parents
of children with intellectual disability syndromes caused by de
novo variants, we performed droplet digital PCR on DNA extracted
from blood (43 trios), and sperm (31 fathers).
Results: We detected low-level mosaicism in sperm-derived
DNA but not in blood in the father of a child with Kleefstra syn-
drome caused by an EHMT1 variant. Additionally, we found a
higher level of paternal mosaicism in sperm compared to blood in
the father of a child with Gillespie syndrome caused by an ITPR1
variant.
Conclusion: By employing droplet digital PCR, we detected
paternal germline mosaicism in two intellectual disability syn-
dromes. In both cases, the mosaicism level was higher in sperm
than blood, indicating that analysis of blood alone may under-
estimate germline mosaicism. Therefore, sperm analysis can be
clinically useful to establish the recurrence risk for parents and
improve genetic counselling.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by grants from the Swedish
Research Council, the Region Stockholm (combined residency and
PhD training program), Karolinska Institutet, the Swedish Brain
Foundation, the Swedish Rare Diseases Research Foundation
(Sällsyntafonden) and The Hållsten Research Foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.003.C A novel splice site mutation in the CNOT3 gene is
associated with syndromic intellectual disability with clinical
variability
Lucia Bruno1;2, Flavia Privitera3;4, Caterina Lo Rizzo5, Michele
Carullo4;5, Kristina Zguro4, Simone Furini4, Alessandra Renieri1;4;5,
Francesca Ariani1;4;5
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy; 2Med
Biotech Hub and Competence Center, Department of Medical
Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy; 3Medical
Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy; 4Med Biotech
Hub and Competence Center, Department of Medical Biotechnolo-
gies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy; 5Genetica Medica,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Variants in CNOT3 have been associated
with intellectual developmental disorder with speech delay, aut-
ism, and dysmorphic features (IDDSADF). To date, 22 mutated
patients are known, and the phenotype is poorly described.
Methods: Via Exome sequencing, we detected the ﬁrst splice
site mutation) in intron 2 in CNOT3 (c.26-2A>G). In silico tools
revealed a damaging effect on the splicing due to an alteration on
the canonical splice site at 3’end, no longer recognized. Analysis of
the transcript conﬁrmed its damaging effect, consisting of intron 2
retention and of an in-frame duplication of exons 1 and 2.
Results: This is the third family with an inherited mutation in
CNOT3, associated with a condition displaying intrafamilial varia-
bility. In fact, the proband showed intellectual disability (ID), lan-
guage delay, structural cerebral anomalies, cardiac defects,
physical dysmorphisms, whereas his mother manifested a mild ID
and shared her son’s dysmorphisms.The mutation was related to
anorectal dysplasia, ﬁrstly detected in CNOT3-patients.
Conclusion: The rectum is generated from the differentiation
of the endoderm in the primordial gastrointestinal tract during the
4th week of the fetal life. CNOT3 takes part in the mesendoderm
differentiation, which originates mesoderm and endoderm, sug-
gesting a connection between its alterations and rectal atresia.This
study contributes to deﬁne the CNOT3 phenotypic spectrum and
highlights its clinical variability.
References: R. Meyer, et al., Inherited cases of CNOT3-
associated
intellectual
developmental
disorder
with
speech
delay, autism, and dysmorphic facies, Clinical Genetics 2020.
Martin R, et al., De novo variants in CNOT3 cause a variable
neurodevelopmental disorder. Eur J Hum Genet. 2019.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.004.D Missense variants in ANKRD11 cause KBG
syndrome by impairment of stability or transcriptional
activity of the encoded protein
Elke de Boer1;2, Charlotte Ockeloen1, Rosalie A. Kampen3, Juliet
Hampstead1;4, Alexander Dingemans1;2, Dmitrijs Rots1;2, Tazeen
Ashraf5;6, Rachel Baker7, Mouna Barat-Houari8, Brad Angle7, Nicolas
Chatron9;10, Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon11;12, Orrin Devinsky13,
Christele Dubourg14;15, Frances Elmslie16, Kristin Monaghan17, Houda
Elloumi17, Laurence
Faivre11;18;19, Sara Fitzgerald-Butt20, David
Geneviève21, Jacqueline Goos22, Benjamin Helm20;23, Usha Kini24,
Amaia Lasa-Aranzasti25, Gaetan Lesca9;10, sally ann Lynch26, Irene
Mathijssen22, Ruth McGowan27, Sylvie Odent28, Rolph Pfundt1,
Audrey Putoux9;29, Jeroen van Reeuwijk1;2, Gijs Santen30, Erina
Sasaki24,
Arthur
Sorlin11;18,
Peter
van
der
Spek22,
Alexander
Stegmann31, Sigrid Swagemakers22, Irene Valenzuela25, Eléonore
Viora-Dupont18, Antonio Vitobello11;12, Stephanie Ware20;32, Mathys
Weber18, Christian Gilissen1;4, Karen Low33, Simon Fisher2;3, Lisenka
Vissers*1;2, Maggie Wong3, Tjitske Kleefstra1;2;34
1Radboudumc, Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 2Donders
Institute, NIjmegen, Netherlands; 3MPI for Psycholinguistics, Nijme-
gen, Netherlands; 44. RIMLS, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 5Great Ormond
Str Hospital for Children NHS, London, United Kingdom; 6Guys and St
Thomas’ NHS, London, United Kingdom;
7Advocate Children’s
Hospital, Park Ridge, United States; 8CHU Montpellier, Montpellier,
France;
9Hospices
Civils
de
Lyon,
Lyon,
France;
10Institut
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
444
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
NeuroMyoGene, Lyon, France; 11Université de Bourgogne Franche-
Comté, Dijon, France; 12Laboratoire de Génétique chromosomique et
moléculaire, Dijon, France; 13NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New
York, United States; 14Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomi-
que, Rennes, France; 15University of Rennes, Rennes, France; 16St
George’s, London, United Kingdom; 17GeneDx, Gaithersburg, United
States; 18Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du
Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l’Interrégion Est,
Dijon, France; 19Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine TRANS-
LAD, Dijon, France; 20Indiana University, Indianapolis, United States;
21Montpellier University, Montpellier, France; 22Erasmus MC, Rotter-
dam, Netherlands; 23Indiana University Fairbanks School of Public
Health, Indianapolis, United States;
24Oxford University Hospitals
NHS, Oxford, United Kingdom; 25Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain;
26Children’s Health, Dublin, Ireland;
27Queen Elizabeth University
Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom; 28CHU Rennes, Rennes, France;
29Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, Lyon, France;
30Leiden UMC, Leiden, Netherlands;
31Maastricht UMC+, azM,
Maastricht, Netherlands; 32Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, United States; 33University Hospital Bristol, Weston NHS,
Bristol, United Kingdom;
34Vincent van Gogh Institute, Venray,
Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Although haploinsufﬁciency of ANKRD11
is among the most common genetic causes of neurodevelopmental
disorders [1], the role of rare ANKRD11 missense variation remains
unclear. We characterized the clinical, molecular and functional
spectra of ANKRD11 missense variants.
Methods: We collected clinical information of individuals with
ANKRD11 missense variants and evaluated phenotypic ﬁt to KBG
syndrome. We assessed pathogenicity of variants by in silico
analyses and cell-based experiments.
Results: We identiﬁed 29 individuals with (mostly de novo)
ANKRD11 missense variants, who presented with syndromic neuro-
developmental disorders and were phenotypically similar to indivi-
duals with KBG syndrome caused by ANKRD11 protein truncating
variants or 16q24.3 microdeletions. Missense variants signiﬁcantly
clustered in Repression Domain 2. Cellularly, most variants caused
reduced ANKRD11 stability. One variant resulted in decreased pro-
teasome degradation and loss of ANKRD11 transcriptional activity.
Conclusion: Our study indicates that pathogenic heterozygous
missense variants in ANKRD11 cause the clinically recognizable
KBG syndrome. Disrupted transrepression capacity and reduced
protein stability each independently lead to ANKRD11 loss-of-
function, consistent with haploinsufﬁciency. This highlights the
diagnostic relevance of ANKRD11 missense variants, but also
poses diagnostic challenges, as the KBG-associated phenotype
may be mild, and inherited pathogenic ANKRD11 (missense) var-
iants are increasingly observed, warranting stringent variant clas-
siﬁcation and careful phenotyping.
References: 1. Ockeloen, C.W., et al., Further delineation of the
KBG syndrome caused by ANKRD11 aberrations. Eur J Hum Genet,
2015. 23(9): p. 1270.
Grants: Aspasia grants, Dutch Research Council (015.014.036,
015.014.066), Netherlands Organization for Health Research and
Development (91718310), the Max Planck Society, Solve-RD pro-
ject (Horizon 2020, No 779257).
Conﬂict of Interest: Elke de Boer: None declared, Charlotte
Ockeloen: None declared, Rosalie A. Kampen: None declared, Juliet
Hampstead: None declared, Alexander Dingemans: None declared,
Dmitrijs Rots: None declared, Tazeen Ashraf: None declared, Rachel
Baker: None declared, Mouna Barat-Houari: None declared, Brad
Angle: None declared, Nicolas Chatron: None declared, Anne-Sophie
Denommé-Pichon: None declared, Orrin Devinsky: None declared,
Christele Dubourg: None declared, Frances Elmslie: None declared,
Kristin Monaghan This co-author is an employee of GeneDx, Inc,
Houda Elloumi This co-author is an employee of GeneDx, Inc,
Laurence
Faivre:
None
declared,
Sara
Fitzgerald-Butt:
None
declared, David Geneviève: None declared, Jacqueline Goos: None
declared, Benjamin Helm: None declared, Usha Kini: None declared,
Amaia Lasa-Aranzasti: None declared, Gaetan Lesca: None declared,
sally ann Lynch: None declared, Irene Mathijssen: None declared,
Ruth McGowan For this centre, the WGS data were generated in the
Scottish Genomes Partnership. The Scottish Genomes Partnership
was funded by the Chief Scientist Ofﬁce of the Scottish Government
Health Directorates [SGP/1] and The Medical Research Council
Whole Genome Sequencing for Health and Wealth Initiative (MC/
PC/15080)., Sylvie Odent: None declared, Rolph Pfundt: None
declared, Audrey Putoux: None declared, Jeroen van Reeuwijk:
None declared, Gijs Santen: None declared, Erina Sasaki: None
declared, Arthur Sorlin: None declared, Peter van der Spek: None
declared, Alexander Stegmann: None declared, Sigrid Swage-
makers: None declared, Irene Valenzuela: None declared, Eléonore
Viora-Dupont: None declared, Antonio Vitobello: None declared,
Stephanie Ware: None declared, Mathys Weber: None declared,
Christian Gilissen: None declared, Karen Low: None declared, Simon
Fisher This work was ﬁnancially supported the Max Planck Society,
Lisenka Vissers* This work was ﬁnancially supported by Aspasia
grants of the Dutch Research Council (015.014.066). In addition, the
collaborations in this study were facilitated by ERN ITHACA, one of
the 24 European Reference Networks (ERNs) approved by the ERN
Board of Member States, co-funded by European Commission. The
aims of this study contribute to the Solve-RD project which has
received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement No 779257.,
Maggie Wong This work was ﬁnancially supported by the Max
Planck Society, Tjitske Kleefstra This work was ﬁnancially supported
by Aspasia grants of the Dutch Research Council (015.014.036) and
the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Develop-
ment (91718310) In addition, the collaborations in this study were
facilitated by ERN ITHACA, one of the 24 European Reference Net-
works (ERNs) approved by the ERN Board of Member States, co-
funded by European Commission. The aims of this study contribute
to the Solve-RD project which has received funding from the Eur-
opean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant agreement No 779257.
P09.005.A A novel pathogenic FMR1 splice site variant in a
man with normal intelligence and Klinefelter syndrome - A
case report
Malou Schadeck1, Nicole Meier1, Eva Wohlleber1, Juergen Kohlhase1
1SYNLAB Center for Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: We describe a 30-year-old man referred
to genetic counselling regarding a possible Marfan syndrome. He
presented with marfanoid features such as tall stature, an aortic
root enlargement, and a systemic score of 7 points.
Methods: We performed whole exome sequencing based on
the marfanoid phenotype including HPO-terms for cardiac defects.
Results: No variants associated with Marfan syndrome were
detected. The exome based CNV (copy number variation) analysis
revealed a duplication of all X-chromosomal genes, strongly sug-
gesting a Klinefelter syndrome (KS) (karyotype 47,XXY), that does
not fully explain the patient’s phenotype. Exome analysis detected
a novel splice-site variant c.1738-1G>A, p.? in the FMR1 gene. The
variant has not been described previously. Splice-site in silico
prediction tools (SSF, MaxEnt, NNSplice and GeneSplicer) indi-
cated a disrupted splice acceptor site of intron 16.
KS is a sex-chromosomal disorder with a frequency of ca. 1:500
men. Phenotypic features can include tall stature, gynecomastia
and often azoospermia.
In more than 99% of patients diagnosed with a Fragile-X-
syndrome the mutational mechanism is a CGG-trinucleotid repeat-
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
445
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
expansion in FMR1, whereas other types of FMR1 mutations,
affecting the coding region or splicing of FMR1, account for less
than 1% of cases. Males previously described to carry FMR1 splice
mutations had moderate to severe mental retardation.
Conclusion: We describe a patient with normal intelligence
despite a pathogenic splice variant in FMR1, probably due to a
skewed X-inactivation because of his Klinefelter syndrome.
References: 1. Intragenic FMR1 disease-causing variants: a
signiﬁcant mutational mechanism leading to Fragile-X syndrome,
Quartier et al. (2017).
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.006.B Deep phenotyping of patients with developmental
disorders and their relatives to support interpretation of rare
inherited copy number variants
Elise Pelgrims1, Laurens Hannes1;2, Marta Atzori1, Catia Attanasio1,
Jeroen Breckpot1;2, Ann Swillen1;2
1KU Leuven, Department of human genetics, Leuven, Belgium; 2UZ
Leuven, Centre for human genetics, Leuven, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: In patients with developmental dis-
orders (DD), copy number variants (CNV) inherited from seemingly
unaffected parents are typically disregarded in variant inter-
pretation. However, understanding the phenotypic contribution of
inherited rare variants is crucial for genetic counselling. Therefore,
an extended family-oriented approach is proposed, including
deep familial phenotyping and multi-omics in carriers and non-
carriers.
Methods: Deep phenotyping (including medical, develop-
mental and behavioral, using standardized instruments) of carriers
and non-carriers within the nuclear family, enables familial seg-
regation analysis of a CNV with DD (sub)phenotypes. Trio whole
genome sequencing is used to identify additional pathogenic
variants causing or contributing to the phenotype. RNA and
capture Hi-C sequencing on EBV cell lines is used to examine the
regulatory effect of the CNV. This combined approach was applied
to interpret a rare paternally inherited deletion ([GRCh37]
4:141693186-142147039x1) in a 15-year-old boy with moderate
intellectual disability, ASD, DCD, hypotonia and facial dysmorphic
features.
Results: CNV carriers (FSIQ; index 40, father 71) scored sig-
niﬁcantly lower on cognitive abilities compared to non-carriers
(FSIQ; mother 100, sibling 92). Behavioral proﬁles of carriers were
more overlapping than proﬁles of non-carriers. De novo, recessive,
X-linked and paternally inherited variant analyses of SNV, indels
and additional CNVs were negative. RNA-seq shows four differ-
entially expressed genes in the CNV or ﬂanking regions (INPP4B,
SETD7, MAML3, ZNF330). Their contribution to DD is subject to
further study.
Conclusion:
This
multi-omics
approach
and
correlation
through deep familial phenotyping is suggestive of a contributory
effect of this CNV to DD in this family.
References:.
Grants: This work is supported by a KULeuven grant (C24M/19/
075).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.007.C Establishing the neurodevelopmental phenotype
and genotype-phenotype correlations in individuals with a
TRIP12 mutation
Mio Aerden1, Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon2, Saskia Koene3,
Amelie Piton4, Eric Legius1, Miel Theunis1, Tzung-Chien Hsieh5, Peter
Krawitz5, Mala Misra-Isrie6, Sandra Whalen7, Dagmar Wieczorek8,
Theresia Herget9, Guillaume Debray10, Nuria Brämswig11, Vanesa
López González12, Guillaume Jouret13, Berta Almoguera Castillo14,
Maria Isis Atallah Gonzalez15, Maria Kibaek16, Lucia Bruno17, Katrin
Ounap18, Fernando Santos-Simarro19, Hilde Van Esch1
1University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven, Department of Human
Genetics, Leuven, Belgium;
2Université de Bourgogne, INSERM
UMR1231 Equipe GAD, Dijon, France; 3Leiden University Medical
Center,
Department
of
Clinical
Genetics,
Leiden,
Netherlands;
4Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Laboratoire de Diagnostic
Génétique, Strasbourg, France;
5University of Bonn, Institute of
Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Bonn, Germany; 6Amsterdam
University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amster-
dam, Netherlands; 7UF de Génétique Clinique, Centre de Référence
des Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, APHP,
Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France; 8Heinrich-Heine-Universi-
tät, Institut für Humangenetik, Düsseldorf, Germany; 9Universitätskli-
nikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institut für Humangenetik, Hamburg,
Germany;
10Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Liège, Center of
Human
Genetics,
Liège,
Belgium;
11Universität
Duisburg-Essen,
Institut für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany;
12Hospital Clinico
Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Sección de Genética Médica,
Servicio de Pediatria, Murcia, Spain; 13Laboratoire National de Santé,
National Center of Genetics, Dudelange, Luxembourg; 14Fundación
Jiménez Díaz Hospital, Department of Genetics and Genomics,
Madrid, Spain; 15Lausanne University Hospital, Division of Genetic
Medicine, Lausanne, Switzerland;
16Odense University Hospital,
Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense, Denmark; 17University of
Siena, Medical Genetics Unit, Siena, Italy; 18Tartu University Hospital,
Department of Clinical Genetics, Tartu, Estonia; 19Hospital Universi-
tario La Paz, Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Haploinsufﬁciency of TRIP12 causes a
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by intellectual dis-
ability associated with epilepsy, autism and dysmorphism, also
named Clark-Baraitser syndrome. Less than 25 individuals har-
boring pathogenic TRIP12 variants have been reported. We aim to
further delineate the TRIP12-associated phenotype and review
genotype-phenotype correlations. In addition, characteristic facial
traits are objectiﬁed through image analysis based on deep-
learning algorithms.
Methods: 37 individuals were recruited through a collaborative
call via ERN-ITHACA. Clinical data was collected and the pictures of
21 individuals were uploaded into the GestaltMatcher database
for analysis of facial morphology.
Results: One inherited and 35 de novo TRIP12 variants were
identiﬁed, including frameshift (n = 16), nonsense (n = 6), mis-
sense (n = 5) and splice (n = 3) variants as well as intragenic
deletions (n = 5) and a multigene deletion disrupting TRIP12.
Though variable in severity, global developmental delay was
noted in all individuals, with language deﬁcit most pronounced.
Half of the individuals showed autistic features, but there was no
clear correlation with the mutation type. Susceptibility to obesity
seemed to be a recurrent feature in older individuals. Seizures
were reported in a minority and proved to be refractory in indi-
viduals with a missense variant.
Facial analysis shows a clear gestalt including deep-set eyes
with narrow palpebral ﬁssures, downturned corners of the mouth
and large, low-set ears with prominent earlobes.
Conclusion: We report the largest cohort to date of individuals
with pathogenic TRIP12 variants, further delineating the associated
phenotype including introduction of a facial gestalt and expand-
ing genotype-phenotype correlations. These ﬁndings will improve
future counseling and patient guidance.
References: /.
Grants: /.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
446
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P09.008.D The clinical beneﬁt of trio-based whole-exome
sequencing for the detection of rare pathogenic sequence
variants in paediatric patients with undiagnosed
neurodevelopmental disorders
Marketa Wayhelova1;2, Vladimira Vallova1;2, Jan Smetana2, Petr
Broz2, Aneta Mikulasova3, Renata Gaillyova4, Petr Kuglik1;2
1University Hospital Brno, Centre of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Brno, Czech Republic; 2Masaryk University, Department of Experi-
mental Biology, Faculty of Science, Brno, Czech Republic; 3Newcastle
University, Biosciences Institute, Newcastle upon Tyne, United King-
dom; 4University Hospital Brno, Department of Medical Genetics and
Genomics, Brno, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: Thanks to more than 50% diagnostic
yield the whole-exome sequencing (WES) has become an effective
and powerful approach to identify molecular genetic causes of
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) and multiple congenital
abnormalities (MCA).
Methods: We present our experience with WES as an effective
tool for the detection of rare and novel pathogenic sequence
variant using the commercial kit Human Core Exome (Twist Bios-
ciences) and Illumina NovaSeq 6000. Our pilot study included 45
families (trios or quatros) of children with severe NDDs and MCA.
Results: Using our in-house bioinformatic pipeline and unique
algorithm for variant prioritization we identiﬁed recurrent de novo
pathogenic sequence variants in clinically relevant SHANK3,
GRIN1, NSD1, CDK13 genes, novel de novo pathogenic variants in
KDM1A, KMT2E, GNAI1, MEIS2, SMARCA2, RAI1 and CHD8 genes,
pathogenic X-linked variants in EDA and OPHN1 genes of mater-
nal origin, pathogenic sequence variants in ZGRF1 of paternal
origin and biallelic pathogenic sequence variants in the BLM gene.
Moreover, two pathogenic sequence variants in the CTNNB1 and
DYNC1H genes were present as low-level mosaicism in healthy
fathers. All clinically important variants including secondary ﬁnd-
ings (in ”ACMG“ genes) were manually veriﬁed using Sanger
sequencing and interpreted based on relevant information in
integrated databases of genomic variants, relevant scientiﬁc lit-
erature, and individual anamnesis.
Conclusion: With an achieved diagnostic yield of 37.5% (18/48
children with NDDs and MCA), trio-based WES represents as an
effective ﬁrst-tier diagnostic test in the genetic evaluation of
children with NDDs.
References:.
Grants: Supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic,
grant nr. NU20-07-00145. All rights reserved.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.009.A RAB11B-associated neurodevelopmental disorder -
conﬁrmed and extended to milder manifestations through 13
individuals with 5 novel variants
Natalie Ahmad1, Walid Fazeli2, Sophia Schließke1, Gaetan Lesca3,
Zeynep Gokce-Samar4, Kristopher Kahle5, Kedous Mekbib5, Jennifer
Burton6, George Hoganson6, Andrea Petersen7, Sara Gracie7, Leslie
Granger7, Enrika Bartels8, Henry Oppermann1, Sheng Chih Jin9, Adam
Kundishora5, Marianne Till3, Shane Dangerﬁeld10, Dave Viskochil10,
Katherine Anderson11, George E Tiller12, Wolfram Kunz13, Sebastian
Burkart14, Matias Simons14, Ingrid M Wentzensen15, Hui Yang15, Rami
Abou Jamra1, Sonja Neuser1
1University of Leipzig Medical Center, Institute of Human Genetics,
Leipzig, Germany; 2University Hospital Bonn, Department of Pediatric
Neurology, Bonn, Germany; 3Lyon University Hospital, Department of
Medical Genetics, Lyon, France; 4Lyon University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Epileptology, Lyon, France;
5Yale University School of
Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery, New Haven, United States;
6University of Illinois College of Medicine, Peoria, United States;
7Randall Children’s Hospital, Portland, United States; 8Institute of
Clinical Genetics and Tumor Genetics, Bonn, Germany; 9School of
Medicine, Washington University, Department of Genetics, St. Louis,
United States; 10University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United States;
11University of Vermont Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics,
Burlington, United States;
12Kaiser Permanente, Department of
Genetics, Los Angeles, United States;
13University Hospital Bonn,
Department of Epileptology, Bonn, Germany; 14University Hospital
Heidelberg, Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany;
15GeneDx Inc., Gaithersburg, United States.
Background/Objectives: The family of Rab GTPase proteins are
molecular
switches
acting
through
GDP/GTP-exchange
and
involved in vesicle trafﬁcking. RAB11B has been associated with a
Mendelian neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) in 2017 as two
recurrent de novo missense-variants (amino acids 22,68) were
identiﬁed in ﬁve children with severe intellectual disability (ID),
absent speech, ataxic gait, and decreased cortical white matter. No
additional cases have since been reported. We aim at conﬁrming
the relevance of RAB11B and delineating the genotypical and
phenotypical spectrum.
Methods: Through international matchmaking, we gathered
eight individuals with RAB11B variants identiﬁed through exome
sequencing or array CGH. Clinical details of novel and previously
reported ﬁve individuals were standardized to HPO-terms. We per-
formed a cross-sectional analysis regarding the clinical manifesta-
tions. Three-dimensional analysis using a ProteinDataBank structure
was done by manual inspection of variant localization in PyMol as
well as cluster calculation according to mutation3d-algorithm.
Results: The variant spectrum comprises six missense-variants
(four novel; amino acids 21,33,72,75) as well as one 319kb dupli-
cation, all except one conﬁrmed de novo. In silico parameters
indicate damaging effects. All variants affect or lay close by the
GTP-binding sites and ﬁve of them showed signiﬁcant clustering.
Data from 13 individuals conﬁrm main clinical ﬁndings to be NDD/
ID (75%), muscular hypotonia (75%) and small cerebral cortex
(70%). However, cognitive function ranges from severe ID (67%) to
few cases with normal cognitive development only with epilepsy.
Conclusion: Conﬁrmation of RAB11B as an NDD gene and
extension to milder manifestations, generally de novo-variants
within the GTP-binding regions are highly suspicious as disease-
causing.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Natalie Ahmad: None declared, Walid
Fazeli: None declared, Sophia Schließke: None declared, Gaetan
Lesca: None declared, Zeynep Gokce-Samar: None declared, Kris-
topher Kahle: None declared, Kedous Mekbib: None declared,
Jennifer Burton: None declared, George Hoganson: None declared,
Andrea Petersen: None declared, Sara Gracie: None declared,
Leslie Granger: None declared, Enrika Bartels: None declared,
Henry Oppermann: None declared, Sheng Chih Jin: None declared,
Adam Kundishora: None declared, Marianne Till: None declared,
Shane Dangerﬁeld: None declared, Dave Viskochil: None declared,
Katherine Anderson: None declared, George E Tiller: None
declared, Wolfram Kunz: None declared, Sebastian Burkart: None
declared, Matias Simons: None declared, Ingrid M Wentzensen
employee of GeneDx Inc., Hui Yang employee of GeneDx Inc.,
Rami Abou Jamra: None declared, Sonja Neuser: None declared.
P09.010.B Comparison of methylation epi-signatures in
KMT2B and KMT2D-related human disorders
Sunwoo Lee1, Eguzkine Ochoa1, Katy Barwick2, Laura Cif3, Fay
Rodger1;4, France Docquier1;4, Belen Perez2, Graeme Clark1;4, Jose-
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
447
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Ezequiel Martin Rodriguez1;4, Siddharth Banka5, Manju Kurian2,
Eamonn R Maher1
1University of Cambridge, Department of Medical Genetics, Cam-
bridge, United Kingdom; 2UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child
Health, Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease in Children,
Developmental Neurosciences, London, United Kingdom; 3Unite des
Pathologies Cerebrales Resistantes, Unite de Recherche sur les
Comportements et Mouvements Anormaux, Hopital Gui de Chauliac,
Centre Hospitalier R´gional Montpellier, Departement de Neurochir-
urgie, Montpellier, France; 4Stratiﬁed Medicine Core Laboratory NGS
Hub, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom;
5University of Manchester and Manchester Centre for Genomic
Medicine, St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester University Foundation NHS
Trust, Health Innovation Manchester, Division of Evolution, Infection
and Genomics, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology,
Medicine, and Health, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Many neurodevelopmental disorders
caused by mutations in genes regulating chromatin function and/
or structure display abnormal DNA methylation patterns (epi-
signatures) in peripheral blood. DYT-KMT2B is unique among
“chromatin neurodevelopmental disorders” in that the most pro-
minent clinical feature and most frequent presentation is child-
hood
onset
dystonia
rather
than
developmental
delay
or
congenital anomalies (as seen in many chromatin neurodevelop-
mental disorders such as Kabuki syndrome).
Methods: To investigate peripheral blood methylation epi-
signatures in KMT2B-related dystonia (DYT-KMT2B), we undertook
genome-wide methylation proﬁling of ~2M CpGs using a next-
generation sequencing based assay and compared the ﬁndings to
those in controls and patients with Kabuki syndrome Type 1 (KS1-
KMT2D).
Results: Methylation proﬁling revealed 1,812 signiﬁcantly dif-
ferentially methylated CpG positions (DMPs) (FDR < 0.05) in 10
DYT-KMT2B samples compared to controls, covering 40 CpG.
Multi-dimensional scaling analysis showed that the DYT-KMT2B
samples clustered together and separately from 29 control indi-
viduals and 10 individuals with pathogenic variants in KMT2D.
Most DMPs were speciﬁc to one disorder and that all (DYT-KMT2B)
and most (KS1) methylation alterations in CpG islands were gain of
methylation events. Analysis of genes associated with CpG islands
suggested potential; candidate genes for the molecular patho-
genesis of DYT-KMT2B.
Conclusion: Using higher resolution methodology for methyla-
tion proﬁling, we conﬁrmed a peripheral blood methylation signature
for DYT-KMT2B. Methylation episgnatures could be used to aid
pathogenicity interpretation of KMT2B variants and can complement
mechanistic investigations of the pathogenesis of DYT-KMT2B.
References:.
Grants: This research was co-funded by the NIHR Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre and Rosetrees Trust.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.011.C Exome sequencing detects two novel variants in
SNRPN in two patients with Prader-Willi/ Prader-Willi-like
syndrome
Arrate Pereda1, Purvi Majethia2, Guiomar Perez de Nanclares1, Anju
Shukla2
1Bioaraba Health Research Institute, Rare Diseases Research Group,
Molecular
(Epi)Genetics
Laboratory,
Araba
University
Hospital-
Txagorritxu,
Vitoria-Gasteiz,
Spain;
2Kasturba
Medical
College,
Department of Medical Genetics, Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, Manipal, India.
Background/Objectives: Imprinting disorders (IDs) are a group of
congenital
disorders
caused
by
(epi)genetic
alterations
in
imprinted chromosomic regions. Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is
one of the best known IDs, and is consequence of the loss of
paternally expressed genes (MAGEL2, NDN, SNURF-SNRPN and
SNORD116) within the 15q11.2-q13, caused either by a CNV
(65–75% of cases), a upd(15)mat (20–30%), or an epimutation
(1–3%) (1). Recently, point variants in SNRPN have been reported
as causative of PWS in two independent families (2, 3) and in this
report we described two new cases.
Methods: Two independent probands were referred for
genetic testing due to seizures, mild intellectual disability and
obesity (P1); and clinical suspicion of PWS (P2). After negative MS-
MLPA testing for 15q11 region, exome sequencing (ES) was car-
ried out. Variant conﬁrmation and cosegregation studies were
analysed by Sanger sequencing. Parental origin of the allele was
tested by allele-speciﬁc RT-PCR ampliﬁcation, and sequencing.
Results: ES studies identiﬁed a novel missense variant in SNRPN
in each proband. Complementary studies determined that each
variant was carried in the proband’s paternal allele.
Conclusion: According to these and previous results (2, 3),
genetic testing for SNRPN point variants should be performed in
PWS patients with negative results for classical causes.
References: 1. C. K. Cheon, Ann. Pediatr. Endocrinol. Metab. 21,
126 (2016).
2. K. Pellikaan et al., Genes (Basel). 12, 875 (2021).
3. Y. Huang et al., J. Med. Genet. 6, 1–4 (2021).
Grants: ESPE RU Grant 2020 (UE19_ESPE); Institute of Health
Carlos III (PI20/00950); Basque Department of Health (GV2021/
111056).
Conﬂict of Interest: Arrate Pereda ESPE RU Grant 2020
(UE19_ESPE); Institute of Health Carlos III (PI20/00950), Purvi
Majethia: None declared, Guiomar Perez de Nanclares ESPE RU
Grant 2020 (UE19_ESPE); Institute of Health Carlos III (PI20/00950);
Basque Department of Health (GV2021/111056), Anju Shukla:
None declared.
P09.012.D LoF variants can cause TUBB-associated disorder
Olga Levchenko1, Elena Dadali1, Sabina Nagieva1, Alexander
Lavrov1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives: TUBB encodes one of nine beta-tubulin
proteins and is widely expressed in all tissues, especially in the
developing brain. Pathogenic variants in TUBB are associated with
two main phenotypes: cortical dysplasia, complex, with other
brain malformations 6 (OMIM: 615771) and symmetric circumfer-
ential skin creases, congenital, 1 (OMIM: 156610). Both diseases
are autosomal dominant and result in impaired intellectual
development. There are only 10 pathogenic variants currently
described and none of them demonstrate loss of function (LoF)
effect. We report for the ﬁrst time that LoF variants in TUBB may
be responsible for impaired intellectual development.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed
using the IlluminaTruSeq® ExomeKit, IDT xGen® Exome Research
Panel, and Illumina NextSeq 500.
Results: A 38-year-old man was born from a full-term preg-
nancy with a weight of 2600 g and length of 48 cm. Motor
development was delayed: he could seat at 10 months, walk at 1
year 8 months. He cannot speak. On examination: normal height
and weight, thoracolumbar kyphosis, strabismus, ocular hyperte-
lorism, short ﬁlter, protruding lower jaw, no focal neurological
symptoms. Karyotype is 47, XYY, normal methylation status of the
FMR1 promotor. WES revealed variant of unknown signiﬁcance
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
448
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
NM_178014.4(NP_821133.1):p.(Tyr208*) in TUBB gene, which has
low tolerance to LoF (pLI = 0.98). Segregation analysis by Sanger
sequencing revealed de novo status of the variant. The proband’s
clinical features overlap with both TUBB-associated phenotypes.
Conclusion: We propose that LoF variants in TUBB can cause
TUBB-associated disorder.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.013.A Delineating the MAPK8IP3-related
neurodevelopmental disorder reveals consistent variant
speciﬁc phenotypes
Tobias Bartolomaeus1, Rami Abou Jamra1, Johannes Lemke1,
International Study Group Mapk8ip32, Konrad Platzer1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leipzg, Germany; 2International Study Group MAPK8IP3, New York,
United States.
Background/Objectives: We and others have recently described
de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 gene as a cause of neurodevelop-
mental disorder (NDD) with intellectual disability (ID), seizures,
microcephaly, and brain anomalies.
Methods: We present an overview of 18 published and 20
novel individuals with causative MAPK8IP3 variants and a HPO
based phenotypic analysis.
Results: Missense variants were identiﬁed in 31 individuals,
truncating variants in six, and whole gene deletion in one. About
58% (22/38) harbour one of the previously reported recurrent
missense
variants
p.Arg578Cys
(10),
p.Leu444Pro
(3),
or
p.Arg1146Cys/His (9). ID ranges from mild to profound. Additional
symptoms encompass brain anomalies (22/26), obesity (9/16),
spasticity or dystonia (16/21), seizures (10/27), ataxia (6/8),
microcephaly (5/15), and precocious puberty (4/6). The recurrent
variant p.Arg578Cys is consistently associated with severe ID,
spasticity, hypoplastic corpus callosum, white matter abnormal-
ities, seizures, small hands and feet and early-onset obesity with
insatiable
appetite.
In
contrast,
recurrent
variants
affecting
Arg1146 are less frequently linked with obesity or seizures but
instead with autism and ataxia. Three individuals do not fall into
the MAPK8IP3—related NDD spectrum: two brothers with the de
novo variant p.Ser984Leu have recurrent pain during urination
with one of them also mildly delayed. Another six year old boy
with the de novo variant p.Pro822Ser initially showed infantile
spasm, which subsequently resolved with normal development.
Conclusion: MAPK8IP3-related NDD encompasses ID and
consistent variant-speciﬁc phenotypes including novel observa-
tions of obesity, precocious puberty and small hands and feet.
Causality of novel de novo variants remain to be elucidated.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.014.B BAFﬂing: Microduplications of ARID1A and ARID1B
cause a novel clinical and epigenetic distinct BAFopathy
Eline van der Sluijs1, Sebastien Moutton2;3, Denisa Weis4, Kym
Boycott5;6, Claudia Arberas7, Margherita Baldassarri8;9, Claire Bene-
teau10;11, Charles Coutton12;13, Tabib Dabir14, Koenraad Devriendt15,
Laurence
Faivre2;16,
Khadije
Jizi17;18,
Jennifer
Kerkhof19,
Mira
Kharbanda20, Katherine Lachlan21, Michael Levy19, Angelica Maris22,
Nathalie Marle23, Haley McConkey19, Maria Antonietta Mencarelli8,
David Mowat24;25, Claire Nicolas2;16, olivier pichon10, Julia Rankin26,
Raissa Relator19, Jill A. Rosenfeld27;28, Norbert Winer29;30, Jeremy
Woods31;32, Bekim Sadikovic19, Marielle Alders33, Gijs Santen1
1Leiden University Medical Center, Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Nether-
lands; 2FHU TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Centre de Référence Anomalies du
Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Dijon, France; 3Maison de
Santé Protestante Bordeaux Bagatelle, CPDPN, Pôle mère enfant,
Talence, France; 4Johannes Kepler University Linz, Institute of Medical
Genetics, Linz, Austria; 5University of Ottawa, Children’s Hospital of
Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada;
6Children’s
Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Department of Genetics, Ottawa, Canada;
7Hospital de Niños Dr. Ricardo Gutiérrez, Sección Genética Médica,
Buenos Aires, Argentina; 8Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese,
Genetica Medica, Siena, Italy; 9University of Siena, Medical Genetics,
Siena, Italy; 10Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes, Service de
Génétique médicale, Nantes, France; 11Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
de Nantes, UF de Foetopathologie et Génétique, Nantes, France;
12Université Grenoble-Alpes, Grenoble, France;
13Hôpital Couple-
Enfant, CHU de Grenoble, Département de Génétique et Procréation,
Grenoble, France;
14Belfast City Hospital, Department of Genetic
Medicine, Belfast, United Kingdom;
15University Hospitals Leuven,
Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium; 16INSERM - Bourgogne
Franche-Comté University, Genetics of Developmental Disorders, Dijon,
France; 17Université de Montréal, Department of Pediatrics, Montréal,
Canada; 18Centre de recherche et Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Sainte-Justine, Montréal, Canada; 19Western University, Verspeeten
Clinical Genome Centre, London Health Sciences Centre, and
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, London, Canada;
20University Hospital Southampton, Princess Anne Hospital, Wessex
Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, UK., United Kingdom; 21Uni-
versity Hospital Southampton, Princess Anne Hospital, Wessex Clinical
Genetics Service, Southampton, United Kingdom;
22Universidade
Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil; 23CHU de Dijon, Dijon,
France, Laboratoire de Génétique Chromosomique et Moléculaire, Pôle
de Biologie, Dijon, France; 24Sydney Children’s Hospital, Center for
Clinical Genetics, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia; 25University of
New South Wales, School of Women’s and Children’s Health, Faculty of
Medicine and Health, Kensington, New South Wales, Australia; 26Royal
Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Exeter, United Kingdom;
27Baylor College of Medicine,
Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Houston, United
States; 28Baylor Genetics Laboratories, Houston, United States; 29Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes, Service de Gynécologie-Obstétri-
que, Nantes, France; 30Université de Nantes, NUN, INRAE, UMR 1280,
PhAN, Nantes, France; 31Valley Childrens Hospital, Department of
Genetics, Madera, CA, United States; 32Stanford University, Palo Alto,
CA, United States;
33Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: The clinical relevance of ARID1B whole
gene duplications has been unclear until now. ARID1B and ARID1A
have the same role within the BAF complex and are mutually
exclusive. ARID1A duplications appear to lead to a distinct clinical
syndrome, while ARID1B duplications have not been linked to a
clinical phenotype.
Methods: To investigate whether an ARID1B duplication phe-
notype exists, and how this relates to the ARID1A phenotype, we
included patients with an ARID1A or ARID1B duplication, com-
pared their phenotypes and determined DNA methylation.
Results: We included data of 9 ARID1A and 11 ARID1B dupli-
cation patients. Duplication size ranges between 0.1-1.2 Mb with
1-44 genes for ARID1A and 0.4-10.3 Mb with 2-101 genes for
ARID1B. Main features shared by ARID1A and ARID1B patients were
intellectual disability, microcephaly, growth delay and cryptorch-
idism. Even though there is overlap between the two groups, the
phenotype of ARID1A patients appeared to be more severe
compared to that of ARID1B patients. DNA methylation Episign
analysis showed that ARID1A and ARID1B duplication patients
have a similar DNA methylation pattern in blood, which is differ-
ent from controls and opposite to the pattern of more common
ARID1A or ARID1B loss-of-function variants.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
449
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: We report for the ﬁrst time that duplications of
ARID1B lead to a clinical phenotype with signiﬁcant overlap with
ARID1A duplications, and that these patients have overlapping
episignatures providing further evidence for an overlapping
phenotype distinct from other BAFopathies. A new type of
BAFopathies caused by a duplication, rather than haploinsufﬁ-
ciency, is emerging here.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.015.C Expanding Rett syndrome landscape: identiﬁcation
of candidate genes from a WES study
Elisabetta Di Fede1, Angela Peron2;3;4, Elisa Colombo1, Simone
Tamburri1;5, Diego Pasini1;5, Cristina Gervasini1;6, Aglaia Vignoli1;7
1Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of Health Sciences,
Milan, Italy;
2ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, Human Pathology and
Medical Genetics, Milan, Italy; 3Università degli Studi di Milano, Child
Neuropsychiatry
Unit,
Epilepsy
Center,
Department
of
Health
Sciences, Milan, Italy;
4University of Utah School of Medicine,
Department of Pediatrics, Salt Lake City, United States;
5IEO
European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Department of Experimental
Oncology, Milan, Italy; 6Università degli Studi di Milano, Aldo Ravelli
Center for Neurotechnology and Experimental Brain Therapeutics,
Milan, Italy; 7ASST Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Child
NeuroPsychiatry Unit, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodeve-
lopmental disorder (incidence of 1:10,000 live female births) most
frequently affecting girls during infancy, after an early normal
development. The genetic cause is known for about 90% of
patients (MECP2 mutations in the classic form, CDKL5 and FOXG1
mutations for the two variants), while the 10% remain without
molecular diagnosis.
Methods: We applied whole exome sequencing (WES) analysis
to Rett-like probands and their healthy parents. We enrolled in the
study patients negative for mutations in RTT genes to identify the
genetic cause and expand the knowledge of the pathogenetic
mechanisms underlying RTT.
Results: We found one girl (#1) being compound heterozygote
for two unreported variants in NBEA gene, encoding for a brain-
speciﬁc protein involved in vesicle trafﬁcking. In addition, patient
#2 was found being carrier of a de novo missense mutation in
DYNC1H1, known to be associated to a recently classiﬁed neuro-
developmental disorder. Finally, in patient #3 was identiﬁed a
novel heterozygous missense variant in SLC35F1, mainly expres-
sed in the brain and coding for a putative solute carrier whose role
is currently under investigation.
Conclusion: The identiﬁcation of new RTT genes could expand
the genotype-phenotype correlation for RTT syndrome, and the
characterization of new candidate RTT genes could give insights
into the pathogenesis of this neurodevelopmental disorder.
References: Neul et al., 2010; Mulhern et al., 2018; Poirier et al.,
2013; Szafranski et al., 2015; Di Fede et al., 2021.
Grants: Grant Aldo Ravelli Center for Neurotechnology and
Experimental Brain Therapeutics and Intramural funding of Uni-
versità degli Studi di Milano.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.016.D A novel missense mutation in SLC2A1 gene
responsible for Glut1 Deﬁciency Syndrome
Renata Szalai1;2, Agnes Till3, Judit Bene2;3, Anita Maasz2;3, Kinga
Hadzsiev2;3
1University of Pecs, Department of Medical Genetics, Pecs, Hungary;
2University of Pecs, Szentagothai Research Center, Pecs, Hungary;
1University of Pecs, Department of Medical Genetics, Pecs, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Glut1 Deﬁciency Syndrome (Glut1DS) is
a brain energy failure disease caused by impaired glucose trans-
port across brain tissue barriers. The deﬁnite diagnosis of Glut1DS
is conﬁrmed by the presence of characteristic clinical features,
hypoglycorrhachia, and a pathogenic variant in SLC2A1 gene. The
type of genetic mutation correlates with severity of disease; mis-
sense variants (mild severity); splice site, nonsense variants,
insertions, deletions (moderate and severe severity); complete
gene microdeletions (severe severity). Heterozygous de novo
pathogenic variants in SLC2A1 responsible for the phenotype of
81-89% of Glut1DS patients. Ketogenic dietary treatment (KDT)
can achieve seizure freedom within a couple of days with nor-
malization of EEG changes, frequently allowing for the withdrawal
of any antiepileptic medications.
Methods: We present a patient with positive family history
(mother with intellectual disability and seizures) and characteristic
features for Glut1DS, including mild microcephaly, developmental
and speech delay, paroxysmal eye movement abnormality and
starvation-induced atypical absence seizures. NGS-based targeted
custom epilepsy gene panel analysis was performed using QIA-
GEN QIAseq library kit and Illumina sequencing technology.
Results: NGS analysis identiﬁed a c.1288G>T (p.Gly430Cys)
heterozygous, likely pathogenic variant in SLC2A1 gene. This
alteration is a missense variant, has never been reported. Appli-
cation of KDT resulted in marked clinical improvement of the
motor and seizure symptoms in our patient.
Conclusion: Accurate molecular diagnosis is critical for the
clinical management and prognosis of subjects suspected with
Glut1 deﬁciency, especially in case of mild severity, where early
diagnosis and intervention would substantially inﬂuence the
cognitive and motor functions.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.017.A AutoCaSc: Prioritizing candidate genes for
neurodevelopmental disorders
Johann Lieberwirth1, Benjamin Büttner1, Chiara Klöckner1, Konrad
Platzer1, Maximilian Radtke1, Meret Wegler1, Bernt Popp1, Rami
Abou Jamra1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leipzig, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Exome sequencing(ES) in individuals
with developmental disorders (DD) remains inconclusive in ~50%.
Evaluation unsolved cases to identify candidate genes is sub-
jective, slow, and uncomparable between labs. We developed
AutoCaSc to prioritize candidate genes.
Methods: webAutoCaSc was developed in Python and vcfAu-
toCaSc was designed for VCFs scoring from the command line.
The tools automate our ﬁne-tuned candidate scoring scheme
(CaSc), which is composed of the four categories “Variant attri-
butes”, “Inheritance”, “Gene constraint” and “Gene plausibility”.
The ﬁrst three categories were implemented as decision trees,
while “Gene plausibility” is a precomputed score of expression,
model organism, protein-protein interaction, literature, and de
novo occurrence in DD cohorts.
Results: As a proof of principle, we injected into two public ES
trios 79 variants in recently published DD genes, thus simulating
the identiﬁcation of candidate genes and variants. AutoCaSc
consistently (94.5%) scored all variants and genes in the top three
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
450
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
ranks (mean rank of 1.5 and 2.3 in the two ES trios). Furthermore,
in 93 in-house trios, AutoCaSc identiﬁed all previously identiﬁed
candidate variants by a human evaluator. AutoCaSc placed these
in the top ranks while evaluating additional highly scoring variants
that were missed in the initial manual evaluation. weAutoCaSc is
thus in standard use at our institute and is publically available:
https://autocasc.uni-leipzig.de/.
Conclusion: AutoCaSc enables anybody to quickly screen a
variant of interest for its plausibility for DDs even if the gene is still
not described. We provide usage recommendations, based on our
experience in projects describing novel DD genes to accelerate
deciphering the genetics of DD.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.018.B Novel in-frame deletion in RBMX leads to X-linked
intellectual disability by disturbed RNA processing, splicing
regulation and potentially reduced SH3 binding
Joseﬁn Johansson1, Sarah Lidéus1, Filip Mihalic2, Mauno Vihinen3,
Carina Frykholm1, Sanna Gudmundsson4;5, Adam Ameur1, Per
Jemth2, Marie-Louise Bondeson1, Maria Wilbe1
1SciLifeLab, Uppsala University, Immunology, genetics and pathology
(IGP), Uppsala, Sweden; 2Uppsala University, Medical Biochemistry
and Microbiology, Uppsala, Sweden; 3Lund University, Experimental
Medical Science, Lund, Sweden; 4Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Boston, United States;
5Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Division of
Genetics and Genomics, Boston, United States.
Background/Objectives: RNA binding motif protein X‐linked
(RBMX) encodes the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein G
(hnRNP G) important for regulation of splicing, sister chromatid
cohesion and genome stability. Deletion of the RGG/RG motif in
hnRNP G have been associated with Shashi syndrome, however
other hnRNP G domains’ association to X-linked intellectual dis-
ability (XLID) remains unknown.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing, whole genome sequen-
cing, and X-chromosome inactivation studies were used to
genetically characterize a Swedish ﬁve-generation family with
XLID. The variant effect on biological processes and alternative
splicing events were investigated by transcriptomics analyses of
an SH-SY5Y cell line overexpressing the mutant or wildtype RBMX.
The variant effect on hnRNP G was investigated by using predic-
tion tools and ﬂuorescence polarization assays with SH3 domains
and peptides spanning the variant.
Results: A novel in-frame RBMX deletion segregated with dis-
ease in this family, where affected individuals were hemizygous,
and asymptomatic individuals were non-carriers or heterozygous
females with skewed X-chromosome inactivation. The affected
individuals presented poor phenotypic overlap with Shashi syn-
drome, suggesting a different disease mechanism. Transcriptomics
analyses revealed differentially expressed splicing events and
enrichment for genes involved in RNA processing and neurode-
velopment. Protein analyses imply a novel SH3-binding motif in
hnRNP G and potentially lower afﬁnity binding to SH3 domains
caused by the variant.
Conclusion: We present a novel in-frame deletion in RBMX as a
cause to XLID, by disrupted RNA processing, splicing regulation
and potentially reduced SH3-binding. The results implies that
disruption of different motifs impact the severity of disease.
References:.
Grants: Swedish Society for Medical Research and Sävstaholm
Foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.019.C Genome Sequencing is a sensitive ﬁrst-line test to
diagnose individuals with intellectual disability
Anna Lindstrand1;2, Marlene Ek1;2, Malin Kvarnung1;2, Britt M.
Anderlid1;2, Erik Björck1;2, Jonas Carlsten1;2, Jesper Eisfeldt1;2;3, Giedre
Grigelioniene1;2, Peter Gustavsson1;2, Anna Hammarsjö1;2, Hafdís
Helgadóttir1;2, Maritta Hellström Pigg1;2, Ekaterina Kuchinskaya1;2,
Kristina Lagerstedt-Robinson1;2, Lars-Åke Levin4, Agne Lieden1;2,
Hillevi Lindelöf1;2, Helena Malmgren1;2, Daniel Nilsson1;2;3, Eva
Svensson5, Martin Paucar Arce1;2, Ellika Sahlin1;2, Bianca Tesi1;2,
Emma Tham1;2, Johanna Winberg1;2, Max Winerdal1;2, Josephine
Wincent1;2, Maria Johansson Soller1;2, Maria Pettersson1;2, Ann
Nordgren1;2
1Karolinska Institutet, Department of Molecular Medicine and
Surgery, Solna, Sweden; 2Karolinska University Hospital, Department
of Clinical Genetics, Solna, Sweden; 3Science for Life Laboratory,
Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Solna, Sweden;
4Linköping University, Department of Health, Medicine and Caring
Sciences, Linköping, Sweden; 5Karolinska University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Pediatric Neurology, Huddinge, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Individuals with intellectual disability
(ID) and/or neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) are currently
investigated with several different approaches in clinical genetic
diagnostics. A molecular diagnosis can facilitate better indivi-
dualized health care, improved genetic counselling and quality
of life.
Methods: We compare the results from three diagnostic
pipelines in patients with ID/NDD; genome-ﬁrst (n = 100), genome
as a secondary test (n = 129) or chromosomal microarray (CMA)
with or without FMR1 screening (n = 421).
Results: The diagnostic yield was 37% (genome-ﬁrst), 26%
(genome as a secondary test) and 12% (CMA/FMR1). Notably, the
age of diagnosis was delayed by 1 year when genome was done
as a secondary test and the cost per diagnosed individual was
36% lower with genome-ﬁrst compared to CMA/FMR1. Further-
more,
91%
of
those
with
a
negative
result
after
CMA/
FMR1 screening (338 individuals) have not yet been referred for
additional genetic testing and remain undiagnosed.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings strongly suggest that genome ana-
lysis outperforms other testing strategies and should replace tra-
ditional CMA and FMR1 screening as a ﬁrst-line genetic test in
individuals with ID/NDD. Genome is a sensitive, time- and cost-
effective method that results in a conﬁrmed molecular diagnosis
in 37% of all referred patients.
References: None.
Grants: The Swedish Research Council, the Swedish Brain
Foundation, the Swedish Rare Diseases Research Foundation, the
Hållsten Research Foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.020.D Characterization of de novo variants in PPP2R5C
expands the spectrum of PP2A-related neurodevelopmental
disorders
Iris Verbinnen1, Elise Brimble2, Lisa Lenaerts1, David Geneviève3,
Laurence
Faivre4,
Julien
Thevenon5,
Jessica
X.
Chong6,
Mike
Bamshad6;7, Karynne Patterson7, Elysa Marco8, Dmitriy Niyazov9,
Aida Telegraﬁ10, Sumit Punj10, Kimberly Foss11, William Dobyns6;11;12,
Ghaydda Mirzaa6;11, Chin-To Fong13, Sue White14, Lynn Pais15, Emily
O’Heir15;16, Celia van der Merwe17;18, Raphaela Itzikowitz19, Kirsty
Donald19, Tony Roscioli20;21;22, Kerith-Rae Dias22;23, Carey-Anne
Evans22;23, Alessandro Mussa24, Raffaela Cervini25, Elisa Giorgio26,
Anna Ruiz27, Juan Pablo Trujillo Quintero28, Rachel Rabin29, John
Pappas29, Xiaodong Wang30, j Wang30, Hua Yuan31, Maura R.Z.
Ruzhnikov32, Veerle Janssens1
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
451
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Univ. of Leuven, Lab of Protein Phosphorylation & Proteomics, Dept.
of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Leuven, Belgium;
2Invitae, San
Francisco, CA, United States; 3Montpellier Univ., Génétique clinique,
Dépt. de Génétique Médicale, Maladies Rares et Médecine Personna-
lisée, Centre de Référence Anomalies du développement SOOR,CHU
Montpellier, INSERM U1183, ERN ITHACA, Montpellier, France; 4Hôpital
d’enfants, CHU Dijon Bourgogne – Hôpital François Mitterrand, Centre
de génétique, Dijon, France; 5Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, CNRS UMR 5309,
Inserm U1209, Institute of Advanced Biosciences, Grenoble Cedex,
France; 6Univ. of Washington School of Medicine, Div. of Genetic
Medicine, Dept. Pediatrics, Seattle, WA, United States;
7Univ. of
Washington, Dept. of Genome Sciences, Seattle, WA, United States;
8Cortica Healthcare, San Rafael, CA, United States; 9Univ. of Queens-
land, Medical Genetics Ochsner Health System, Queensland, Australia;
10GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States;
11Seattle Children’s
Research Institute, Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle, WA,
United States; 12Univ. of Washington, Dept. Neurology, Seattle, WA,
United States; 13Univ. of Rochester Medical Center, Dept. Pediatrics,
Rochester, NY, United States;
14Royal Children’s Hospital, VCGS,
Victoria, Australia; 15Broad Institute, Center for Mendelian Genomics,
Cambridge, MA, United States; 16Boston Children’s Hospital, Div. of
Genetics & Genomics, Dept. Pediatrics, Boston, MA, United States;
17Broad Institute, Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Cambridge,
MA, United States;
18Massachusetts General Hospital, Analytic &
Translational Genetics Unit, Boston, MA, United States; 19Red Cross War
Memorial Children’s Hospital, Dept. Pediatrics & Child Health, Cape
Town, South Africa; 20Sydney Children’s Hospital, Centre for Clinical
Genetics, Sydney, Australia; 21Prince of Wales Hospital, NSW Health
Pathology Randwick Genomics, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 22Univ. of
NSW, NeuRA, Prince of Wales Clinical School, Sydney, Australia; 23Univ.
of NSW, Prince of Wales Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, Sydney,
NSW, Australia;
24Univ. of Torino, Regina Margherita Children’s
Hospital, Dept. Public Health & Pediatric Sciences, Torino, Italy; 25Maria
Vittoria Hospital, Child Neuropsychiatry Dept., Torino, Italy; 26Univ. of
Pavia, Dept. Molecular Medicine, Pavia, Italy; 27Universitat Autònoma
de Barcelona, Genetics Lab, Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari, Institut
d’Investigació i Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT, Sabadell, Spain; 28Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Unitat de Genètica Clínica, Servei de
Medicina Pediàtrica, Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari, Institut d’Inves-
tigació i Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT, Sabadell, Spain; 29NYU Grossman
School of Medicine, Clinical Genetic Services, Dept Peds, New York, NY,
United States; 30Cipher Gene, Ltd, Genetic Testing Company, Beijing,
China; 31Guangxi Medical Univ., Dept. Pediatrics, The First Afﬁliated
Hospital, Nanning, Guangxi, China;
32Stanford Medicine, Div. of
Medical Genetics, Dept. Pediatrics, Stanford, CA, United States.
Background/Objectives: Protein Phosphatases of type 2A (PP2A)
regulate brain function and development by catalyzing phospho-
Ser/Thr dephosphorylations in various substrates. PP2A holoen-
zymes comprise a catalytic C, scaffolding A and regulatory B-type
subunit, which determines substrate speciﬁcity and enzyme reg-
ulation. De novo mutations in genes encoding Aα-, B56δ- and Cα-
subunits were recently identiﬁed as new genetic causes of intel-
lectual disability and (neuro)developmental delay (ID/NDD). A
single case report describes an overgrowth phenotype associated
with a de novo mutation in PPP2R5C, encoding the regulatory
B56γ-subunit.
Methods: Matchmaker Exchange and international collabora-
tions enabled us to identify 12 additional individuals with de novo
PPP2R5C mutations, and 2 individuals with a PPP2R5C variant of
unclear inheritance. Variants were biochemically characterized for
interaction with other PP2A subunits and a potential PP2A sub-
strate, and for phosphatase activity.
Results: Besides ID/NDD, clinical features of PPP2R5C-affected
cases included hypotonia and commonly, epilepsy, behavioral and
brain size abnormalities (macrocephaly). Most PPP2R5C variants
affected the same, highly conserved B56 acidic loop or other
orthologous amino acids that are also recurrently mutated in
PPP2R5D-affected cases. Six variants were new. All de novo var-
iants showed varying defects in A, C and/or substrate binding,
while phosphatase activity, measured on phospho-peptide sub-
strates, did not seem majorly affected. Both variants of unsure
inheritance behaved normally in these assays, and were thus
classiﬁed as likely non-pathogenic (VUS).
Conclusion: We report the ﬁrst cohort of patients with
pathogenic de novo PPP2R5C variants that show impaired func-
tionality and are a novel cause of ID/NDD, with high clinical and
biochemical similarities to PPP2R5D-affected cases.
References:.
Grants: JGA/FWO.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.021.A Copy number detection from exome sequencing
data for patients with neurodevelopmental disorder: an
effective approach
Erika D’haenens1, Sarah Delbaere2, Toon Rosseel2, Marieke De
Bruyne1, Hannes Syryn1, Bert Callewaert1, Björn Menten1, Annelies
Dheedene1
1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent - Ghent University Hospital,
Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium; 2Center for
Medical Genetics Ghent - Ghent University Hospital, Department of
Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Copy number variant (CNV) sequencing
and exome-based gene panel analysis became state-of-the art in
routine diagnostics. However, small CNVs may not be routinely
detected or reported and in recessive disease, the combination of
both a CNV and single nucleotide variant (SNV) affecting the
causal gene may underlie the phenotype.
Methods: In our center, we implemented ExomeDepth, a read
depth-based analysis tool (Plagnol, 2012) for CNV detection in
exome sequencing data.
Results:
ExomeDepth
analysis
established
the
molecular
diagnosis in seven patients suffering from a neurodevelopmental
disorder (NDD) for whom SNV and CNVseq analysis did not pro-
vide conclusive results. A patient with a clinical diagnosis of
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome harboured a ~30 kb triplication in
UBR1, with both parents carrying the mono-allelic intragenic UBR1
duplication. In a second patient a de novo 350bp deletion of exon
9 of the MYT1L gene was detected and conﬁrmed by qPCR. The
deletion was not detected by former molecular karyotyping
(CNVseq analysis). In ﬁve other patients read-depth analysis
revealed a CNV in a gene related to an autosomal recessive NDD,
following the identiﬁcation of a pathogenic SNV on the other
allele (FARSA2, KIAA0586, MMACHC, VPS13B, SLC7A7).
Conclusion: We conclude that ExomeDepth is an efﬁcient tool
to detect CNVs in exome sequencing data, even for CNVs with
sizes below the detection limit of CNVseq. Given the added value
of exome-based CNV detection via ExomeDepth in the diagnostic
yield for NDDs patients, we implemented this tool in our routine
exome analysis strategy.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.022.B Retrospective analysis of molecularly diagnosed
KBG syndrome in Estonia during 2015-2021
Helen Lokke1;2, Rita Teek2, Riina Žordania2, Laura Roht1;2, Kai
Muru1;2, Ulvi Thomson3, Tiia Reimand1;2, Katrin Ounap1;2
1University of Tartu, Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of
Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Tartu linn, Estonia; 2Tartu
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
452
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
University Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics, United Labora-
tories, Tartu linn, Estonia; 3West-Tallinn Central Hospital, Centre for
Neurological Diseases, Tallinn, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: KBG syndrome (MIM # 148050) is
an autosomal dominant inherited syndrome characterized by
cognitive impairment, behavioral issues, short stature, char-
acteristic facial features and macrodontia of the upper central
incisors. It is caused by a heterozygous variant in ANKRD11
gene or deletion of chromosomal region 16q24.3 that includes
ANKRD11 gene.
Methods: Retrospective analysis of performed NGS analyses
during 2015-2021 in order to obtain detection estimation and a
clinical summary of all molecularly diagnosed KBG syndrome
patients.
Results:
We
diagnosed
KBG
syndrome
in
12
patients
(7 males, 5 females). In all patients a frameshift pathogenic
variant in ANKRD11 gene was identiﬁed; in 7/12 of them, the
detected variant was a novel one. The age of diagnosis
was
8
months
-
41
years
(average
age
9
years).
The
following common clinical features were evaluated: cognitive
impairment (6/7), speech delay (10/11), behavioral issues (4/6),
short stature (4/11), epilepsy (3/12), mild hearing loss (2/11),
hypertelorism (6/11), protruding ears (6/11), thin upper lip or thin
lips (6/11), macrodontia (2/3), clinodactyly of F5 (5/11) and
brachydactyly (4/11). Average age of autonomous walking was
16 months.
Conclusion: Clinically relevant variants in ANKRD11 gene were
found in 0.2% (12/6076) of the total amount of NGS panels done
in Estonia. KBG syndrome is one of the most common monogenic
autosomal-dominant neurodevelopmental syndromes, which we
have detected by NGS panel. We present a patient with a pre-
viously described pathogenic variant in ANKRD11 gene with no
cognitive delay or behavioral problems.
References: N/A.
Grants: Estonian Research Council grant PRG471.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.023.C White matter abnormality as a rare feature in
Helsmoortel-van der Aa syndrome
Gergely Büki1;2, Agnes Till1, Anna Zsigmond1, Attila Gyenesei2, Bence
Galik2, Kinga Hadzsiev1;2, Judit Bene1;2
1University of Pécs Medical School, Department of Medical Genetics,
Pécs, Hungary; 2University of Pécs, Szentágothai Research Centre,
Pécs, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome
(HVDAS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by de novo
mutations in the ADNP gene, characterized by autism spectrum
disorder (ASD), impaired intellectual development, hypotonia
and dysmorphic facial features. The global developmental delay
is often associated with attention deﬁcit-hyperactivity disorder
and delayed speech. Among the heterogeneous clinical picture,
numerous brain abnormalities have been described, although
white matter abnormalities were less frequent. Hereby we
demonstrate two patients with HVDAS who showed signiﬁcant
signal intensity change in their white matter.
Methods: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) and brain mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) was applied in both patients.
Libraries were sequenced on Illumina NovaSeq 6000 instrument
with 100bp paired-end chemistry. Library preparation was
carried out with Twist Human Core Exom Kit Library Prep
Kit. Targeted sequencing was applied for conﬁrmation and
veriﬁcation.
Results: WES data analysis revealed two frameshift mutations,
a known
(c.64dupA)
mutation
in Patient
1,
and
a novel
(c.1223dupA) mutation in Patient 2. Patient 1 presented ASD,
delayed speech, psychomotor development. Patient 2 manifested
ASD, delayed speech, psychomotor development, intellectual
disability, facial dysmorphism, hypotonia, epilepsy, visual dis-
turbance, hirsutism. MRI showed signiﬁcant aspeciﬁc white matter
signal intensity change in both patients, furthermore corpus cal-
losum dysplasia in Patient 2.
Conclusion: ADNP is a human transcription factor essential in
brain development, however, according to our current knowledge
only a few cases have been associated with abnormality of the
white matter so far. Both of our patients presented such
abnormality, and it suggests that it could be a potential rare
feature in HVDAS.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.024.D Deep phenotypic characterisation in patients with
proximal 22q11.2 duplication
Jente Verbesselt1, Inge Zink2;3, Jeroen Breckpot1;4, Ann Swillen1;4
1KU Leuven, Department of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium; 2KU
Leuven, Department of Neurosciences, Research Group Experimental
Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Leuven, Belgium; 3UZ Leuven, Department
of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, MUCLA, Leuven,
Belgium; 4UZ Leuven, Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: 22q11.2 duplication (22q11.2dup) is
associated with variable clinical and neurodevelopmental features
and a high rate of familial transmission. This study contributes to
the phenotypic characterisation of 22q11.2dup.
Methods: In this retrospective study, we analysed digital
medical records of 38 patients with proximal 22q11.2dup, focus-
ing on physical and neurodevelopmental features, including
longitudinal data in a subgroup (n = 17). Phenotypes of patients
with de novo (n = 12) and inherited (n = 19) duplications were
compared.
Results: Common clinical features include nutritional problems
(59%), transient hearing impairment (50%), congenital heart
defects (29%) and neurological abnormalities (44%). Develop-
mental delays are reported in infancy, while learning (64%),
attention (64%), speech-language (56%) and motor problems
(56%) are present in primary school. ADHD is diagnosed in 33%.
Average IQ is in the borderline range (IQ77), with 23% having mild
intellectual disability (IQ55-70). Longitudinal IQ-data indicate that
53% show a growing into deﬁcit trajectory. No signiﬁcant differ-
ences between the group with inherited and de novo 22q11.2dup
were observed, apart from a trend towards more failure to thrive
in the latter.
Conclusion: This study conﬁrms a heterogeneous phenotype
in patients with 22q11.2dup and provides for the ﬁrst time long-
itudinal IQ-data. Only index patients were included, potentially
resulting in ascertainment bias. Therefore, future studies should
also include family members diagnosed through segregation
analysis. When children are diagnosed with 22q11.2dup, health-
care professionals should be aware of an increased risk of nutri-
tional,
neurological
and
hearing
problems,
and
initiate
neurodevelopmental support early in life, given the high risk of
developmental delay, speech-language, motor and attention
problems.
References:.
Grants: NIMH (U01MH119759).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
453
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P09.025.A Low-level parental somatic mosaicism detected by
exome sequencing in cohort of patients with
neurodevelopmental disorders
Vladimira Vallova1;2, Marketa Wayhelova1;2, Jan Smetana1, Petr
Brož1, Aneta Mikulasova3, Renata Gaillyova4, Petr Kuglik1;2
1Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Experimental
Biology, Brno, Czech Republic; 2University Hospital Brno, Centre of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic; 3Newcastle
University, Biosciences Institute, Newcastle upon Tyne, United King-
dom; 4University Hospital Brno, Department of Medical Genetics and
Genomics, Brno, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: Low-level somatic mosaicism leading to
neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) and autism is more pre-
valent than previously thought. Due to limitations in its detection
by routine molecular techniques, e.g. chromosomal microarrays or
Sanger sequencing, detected single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) or
small indel variants are often misinterpreted as de novo in the
affected offspring. However, low-level somatic mosaicism in par-
ents may signiﬁcantly increase the risk of passing pathogenic
variants to the offspring. We present our experience with exome
sequencing as an effective approach for the detection of low-level
parental somatic mosaicism for clinically relevant SNVs in patients
with NDDs.
Methods: Our study included 45 families (trios or quatros) of
infants with NDDs examined using the commercial kit Human
Core Exome (Twist Biosciences) and Illumina NovaSeq 6000.
Results:
Using
a
customized
bioinformatic
pipeline,
we
detected SNVs or indel variants classiﬁed as pathogenic or likely
pathogenic in 18/48 children (37.5%). Two SNVs classiﬁed as
pathogenic in probands were detected in parental blood samples
as low-level mosaicism (10-15%), both in fathers. The father of
patient with c.7059G>C variant in DYNC1H gene exhibited learn-
ing disabilities, a phenotype possibly related to the mosaic
change. The father harbouring mosaic variant c.911dup in CTNNB1
gene was clinically unaffected.
Conclusion: Our data demonstrate the importance of con-
sidering the possibility of parental mosaicism whenever exome
sequencing is performed for precise genetic counselling.
References:.
Grants: Supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic,
grant nr. NU20-07-00145. All rights reserved.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.026.B GenIDA, an international participatory database to
better understand the natural history and comorbidities of
genetic forms of neurodevelopmental disorders
Jean Louis Mandel1;2, Pauline Burger1, Axelle strehle1, Florent colin1,
timothée mazzucotelli1, nicole Collot1, Sarah Baer3, Benjamin
Durand3, Amelie Piton1;4, Romain Coutelle5, Elise Schaefer3, Pierre
parrend6;7, Laurence Faivre8;9, David Geneviève10, Valentin Ruault10,
Roseline
caumes11,
Thomas
Smol12,
jamal
ghoumid11,
Joost
Kummeling13,
Charlotte
Ockeloen13,
Tjitske
Kleefstra13,
David
Koolen13
1IGBMC - Department of Neurogenetics and Translational Medicine,
Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France; 2Institute for Advanced
Studies of the University of Strasbourg (USIAS), Université de
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France;
3Service de génétique médicale,
Institut de Génétique Médicale d’Alsace (IGMA), Hôpitaux Universi-
taires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France;
4Unité de Génétique
Moléculaire, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France; 5INSERM U-1114, Clinique Psychiatrique, Hôpitaux Universi-
taires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France;
6Icube, Université de
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France;
7ECAM Strasbourg-Europe, ECAM
Strasbourg-Europe,
Schiltigheim,
France;
8Centre
de
Référence
Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, FHU
TRANSLAD, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France; 9Inserm
UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement,
Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France; 10Université de Montpellier,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Montpellier, CLAD Sud Languedoc‐
Roussillon, INSERM, Montpellier, France; 11Clinique de Génétique,
CHU Lille, Lille, France; 12Institut de Génétique Médicale, CHU Lille,
Lille, France; 13Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for
Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives:
GenIDA
is
an
international
online
research project initiated to better characterise the clinical mani-
festations and natural history of genetic forms of intellectual dis-
ability with or without autism or epilepsy.
Methods: Clinical information reported and updated by the
patient’s family using a structured questionnaire is analysed to
identify new medically relevant information for families and pro-
fessionals concerned with a given condition. The current ques-
tionnaire consists of 41 multiple-choice questions exploring
physical parameters, cognitive and behavioural aspects, the pre-
sence or absence of neurological disorders or problems affecting
major physiological functions (cardiac, renal, etc.). Five open-
ended questions explore families’ perception of the events that
most affect their relative’s health and quality of life, the secondary
effects of treatments, etc.
Results: Currently, the questionnaire is available in 7 languages
and has been completed for 1415 patients, the main cohorts
being Koolen-de Vries/KdVS (n = 244), Kleefstra (174) and KBG (43)
syndromes. For the KdVS, epilepsy, which affects almost 50% of
patients, is of much greater concern than sleep problems. Other
cohorts have grown signiﬁcantly over the past year (DDX3X: 45;
MED13L: 43; DYRK1A: 23; KMT2A: 32; POGZ: 18). Comparing sev-
eral aspects of these 5 conditions reveals major differences:
behavioural problems and sleep disorders appear to be more
frequent in KMT2A and POGZ patients, while movement disorders
are more frequent in DDX3X patients.
Conclusion: This validates the interest of our participatory
approach: through their direct involvement, families can reveal
aspects of the pathology that were previously underestimated.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.027.C Optical Genome Mapping Analysis of FMR1
Expansions in Fragile X Syndrome and Multi-site Validation
Alessio Venier1, Martin Muggli1, Bahar Ramandi1, Neil Miller1, Joyce
Lee1, Andy Wing Chun Pang1, Henry B. Sadowski1, Yannick Delpu1,
Alex Hastie1, Mark Oldakowski1
1Bionano Genomics, San Diego, United States.
Background/Objectives: Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is associated
with intellectual disability, and is usually due to CGG expansion in
FMR1 [1]. Phenotype severity being correlated with expansion
size, accurate sizing is crucial. The repetitive nature of these
regions presents difﬁculties: 1. PCR is unable to traverse through
long repeats; 2. Sequencing is limited short-read lengths; 3.
Southern-blot is inaccurate, time-consuming, and expensive.
Optical genome mapping (OGM) has the potential to address
some of these shortcomings [2].
Methods: OGM images ultra-long DNA molecules, labeled at
speciﬁc motifs linearized in nanochannel arrays, and can be used for
SV and CNV calling. We developed a targeted analysis workﬂow for
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
454
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
FMR1 analysis. To evaluate the capability of measuring repeat arrays
in ranges consistent with normal, premutation, and full mutation,
we analyzed 75 FXS samples and 20 control subjects.
Results: In annotated samples, we observed alleles consistent
with annotation across the entire range of repeat counts. Sensi-
tivity was measured at 97% with 100% PPV for expansions >200
repeats [3]. The largest expansion detected was ~1000 repeats. In
controls, we measured CN below the full mutation cutoff in all
cases. Repeatability studies were carried out to show analytical
consistency. EnFocus™analysis report provides pass/fail for QC
metrics as well as analytic measurement quality using internal
control regions on each autosome chromosome.
Conclusion: OGM performance for FMR1 repeat lengths show
a much higher dynamic range compared to PCR, NGS, and higher
precision compared to Southern-blot.
References: 1. Paulson, Handb. Clin. Neurol. 2018.
2. Sahajpal, Genes 2021.
3.https://bionanogenomics.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/
30457-Bionano-Solve-Theory-of-Operation-Bionano-EnFocus-
Fragile-X-Analysis.pdf.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Alessio Venier Full-time employee Bio-
nano Genomics, Martin Muggli Bionano Genomics Employee,
Bahar Ramandi Bionano Genomics Employee, Neil Miller Bionano
Genomics Employee, Joyce Lee Bionano Genomics Employee,
Andy Wing Chun Pang Bionano Genomics Employee, Henry B.
Sadowski Bionano Genomics Employee, Yannick Delpu Bionano
Genomics Employee, Alex Hastie Bionano Genomics Employee,
Mark Oldakowski Bionano Genomics Employee.
P09.028.D An atypical Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome 2
associated with EP300 exon 20 skipping
Silvia Carestiato1, Lisa Pavinato1, lorena sorasio2, Simona Cardar-
opoli3, emily todd4, Alessandro Bruselles5, Silvia De Rubeis6;7;8, Joseph
Buxbaum6;7;8, Marco Tartaglia9, Giovanni Battista Ferrero10, Alfredo
Brusco11;12
1University of Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy;
2Santa Croce e Carle Hospital, Pediatrics, Cuneo, Italy; 3University of
Torino, Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, Torino, Italy;
4UCHealth Adult Genetics Clinic - Anschutz Medical Campus, Adult
Medical Genetics Clinic, Aurora, United States; 5Istituto Superiore di
Sanità, Department of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Roma,
Italy;
6Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, United States; 7The
Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, United States; 8Department of
Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
United States; 9Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù IRCCS, Genetics
and Rare Diseases Research Division, Roma, Italy; 10University of
Torino, Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Orbassano,
Italy; 1University of Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, Torino,
Italy; 12Città della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Medical
Genetics Unit, Torino, Italy.
Background/Objectives: EP300 gene encodes p300, a ubiqui-
tously expressed histone acetyltransferase that regulates tran-
scription via chromatin remodeling. EP300 haploinsufﬁciency is
associated
with
Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome
2
(RSTS2,
MIM#613684). The phenotypic and mutational spectrum of this
condition is broad and genotype–phenotype correlations have
been proposed, suggesting clinical features depend upon the
protein domain involved.
Methods: Trio exome analysis and genematcher exchange were
conducted. Splicing analysis on cDNA from patient#1-derived
PBMCs and Sanger sequencing on single bands extracted from
agarose gel were performed.
Results: We identiﬁed two unrelated patients with de novo
heterozygous variants in EP300 (NM_001429.4) affecting exon
20 splicing: patient#1 with c.3671+5G>C, and patient#2 with
c.3671+5_3671+8delGTAA. Both patients presented a severe
RSTS2-like clinics, including ASD, speech delay, hearing loss,
microcephaly, developmental delay and intellectual disability,
accompanied
with
ocular,
respiratory
and
cardiovascular
abnormalities.
Patient#2
developed
colorectal
cancer
and
deceased at 35 years old. Both splicing variants were predicted
to affect exon 20 donor site (splice site score: -39% and -41%,
respectively; visual Alamut). Splicing analysis on cDNA from
patient#1 showed an in-frame exon-20 skipping, also expected
for patient#2. In silico 3D protein modeling showed that loss of
exon 20 (27 a.a.) leads to a possible alteration of p300 structure
between RING_CBP-p300 and HAT-KAT11 domains. To further
corroborate our data, we will study DNA methylation proﬁles
and p300 protein expression.
Conclusion: We suggest a novel EP300-related RSTS2 asso-
ciated with in-frame exon 20 skipping. Our results further highlight
the need of assessing the pathogenic role of splicing variant
surrounding the invariant donor/acceptors splicing sites.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.029.A Heterozygous and homozygous variants in STX1A
cause a neurodevelopmental disorder with or without
epilepsy
Johannes Luppe1, Heinrich Sticht2, François Lecoquierre3, Alice
Goldenberg3, Kathleen Gorman4, Emanuele Agolini5, Silvana Briu-
glia6, Outi Kuismin7, Carlo Marcelis8, Antonio Vitobello9, Anne-Sophie
Denommé-Pichon9, Sophie Julia10, Johannes Lemke1, Rami Abou
Jamra1, Konrad Platzer1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leipzig, Germany;
2Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-
Universitaet Erlangen-Nuernberg, Erlangen, Germany; 3Laboratory of
Molecular Genetics, Hospital Center University De Rouen, Rouen,
France; 4Temple Street Children’s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland;
5Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy; 6Clinic of Genetics,
Messina, Italy; 7Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki,
Finland;
8Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
9University of Burgundy-
Franche Comté, Dijon, France; 10Federative Institute of Biology, CHU
de Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
Background/Objectives:
The
neuronal
SNARE
complex
is
responsible for synaptic vesicle exocytosis. Therefore, one of its
core proteins syntaxin 1A (STX1A) has long been suspected to play
a role in neurodevelopmental disorders.
Methods:
We
assembled
eight
individuals
harbouring
single amino acid deletions, missense and splicing variants in
STX1A who present with a spectrum of neurodevelopmental
delay and epilepsy. For all missense variants and single amino
acid deletions, we applied in silico modelling of functional
effects on interaction with other SNARE components and
STXBP1.
Results: In our detailed phenotypic description, we observed
an epileptiform characterized phenotype in the individuals with
missense variants in contrast to intellectual disability with
autistic behaviour in carriers of both single amino acid deletions
and the homozygous splicing variant. In silico modelling showed
impaired interaction with STXBP1 due to missense variants and
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
455
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
impaired SNARE complex function caused by single amino acid
deletions.
Conclusion: Different lines of evidence presented here support
that rare heterozygous and homozygous variants in STX1A cause a
neurodevelopmental disorder with two different phenotypic pre-
sentations: (1) an STX1A-related developmental epileptic ence-
phalopathy and (2) an STX1A-related intellectual disability and
autism spectrum disorder. Our description thus expands the group
of disorders called SNAREopathies.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.030.B The performance of GS as a ﬁrst-tier test for
neurodevelopmental disorders
Bart van der Sanden1;2, Gaby Schobers1;2, Jordi Corominas
Galbany1;3, David Koolen1;3, Margje Sinnema4, Jeroen van Reeu-
wijk1;2, Connie Stumpel4;5, Tjitske Kleefstra1;2, Bert B.A. de Vries1;2,
Martina Ruiterkamp-Versteeg1, Nico Leijsten1, Michael Kwint1, Ronny
Derks1, Hilde Swinkels1, Amber den Ouden1, Rolph Pfundt1, Tuula
Rinne1, Nicole de Leeuw1;2, Alexander Stegmann4, Servi Stevens4,
Arthur van den Wijngaard4, Han Brunner1;2;4;5, Helger Yntema1;2,
Christian Gilissen1;3, Marcel Nelen1, Lisenka Vissers*1;2
1Radboud university medical center, Department of Human Genetics,
Nijmegen, Netherlands; 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 3Radboud Institute for Molecular
Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 4Maastricht University Medical
Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands;
5GROW School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht,
Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Genome sequencing (GS) can identify
novel diagnoses for patients who have exhausted routine diag-
nostic procedures. We tested whether GS is a better ﬁrst-tier
genetic diagnostic test than current exome-based standard of care
(SOC) by assessing the technical and clinical validity of GS for
patients with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD).
Methods: Using a prospective parallel design, we performed
both GS and exome sequencing in 150 consecutive NDD patient-
parent trios. Diagnostic yield was calculated from disease-causing
variants affecting exonic sequence of known NDD genes as pri-
mary outcome measure.
Results: GS (30%, n = 45) and SOC (28.7%, n = 43) had similar
diagnostic yield. All 43 conclusive diagnoses obtained in SOC
were also identiﬁed by GS. These 43 conclusive diagnoses
included a mixture of single nucleotide variants (SNVs, n = 26),
insertion-deletion variants (InDels, n = 13), copy number variants
(CNVs, n = 3), and a repeat expansion (n = 1). All 31 possible
diagnoses obtained by SOC were also identiﬁed by GS. SOC,
however, required integration of multiple test results (aver-
age 1.5; range 1-6) to obtain these conclusive and possible
diagnoses. GS yielded two more conclusive diagnoses, and four
more possible diagnoses than ES-based SOC (35 vs 31). Inter-
estingly, all six likely pathogenic variants detected only by GS
were CNVs.
Conclusion: Our data provide the technical and clinical validity
of GS to serve as routine ﬁrst-tier genetic test for patients with
NDD. The additional diagnostic yield from GS is limited. Still, GS
comprehensively identiﬁed all variants in a single experiment,
suggesting that GS could constitute a more efﬁcient genetic
diagnostic workﬂow for patients with NDD.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.031.C Systematic evaluation of EHMT1 protein altering
variants uncovers unexpected insights on EHMT1 functions
and Kleefstra syndrome pathogenesis
Dmitrijs Rots1, Ayumi Yamada2, Aidin Foroutan3;4, Haley McCon-
key4, Jennifer Kerkhof4, Marielle Alders5, Isabelle Maystadt6, Simon
Holden7, Meena Balasubramanian8;9, Giuseppe Merla10, Gijs San-
ten11, Alyce Belonis12, Arianne Bouman1, Joost Kummeling1, Malou
Heijligers13, Mieke van Haelst14, Michael Parker8, Soo-Mi Park7, Kay
Metcalfe15,
David
Geneviève16;17,
Nicolas
Chatron18,
Audrey
Putoux19, Laurent Pasquier20, Christele Dubourg21, Gertrud Strobl-
Wildemann22, Astrid Plomp5, Maaike Vreeburg13, Diana Baralle23,
Nicola Foulds23, Ingrid Scurr24, Gerarda Cappuccio25, Nicola Brunetti-
Pierri25, Annet Van Hagen14, Emilia K.Bijlsma11, Helen Firth7,
Francesca Forzano26, Louisa Kalsner27, Janna A Hol28, Carolina
Courage29, Els Vanhoutte13, Siddharth Banka15, Hanka Venselaar30,
N. Nadif Kasri1, Hans van Bokhoven1, Han Brunner1, Lisenka Vissers*1,
Yoichi Shinkai2, Bekim Sadikovic3;4, Tjitske Kleefstra1
1Radboud University Medical Center, Department of human genetics,
Nijmegen, Netherlands; 2RIKEN CPR, Cellular Memory Lab, Wako,
Japan; 3Western University, Department of Pathology and Labora-
tory Medicine, London, Canada; 4London Health Sciences Centre,
Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre, London, Canada; 5Amsterdam
University Medical Centres, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands, Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam, Nether-
lands;
6Institute of Pathology And Genetics, Center for Human
Genetics, Charleroi, Belgium; 7Cambridge University Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust, Department of Clinical Genetics, Cambridge,
United
Kingdom;
8Shefﬁeld
Children’s
NHS
Foundation
Trust,
Shefﬁeld
Clinical
Genetics
Service,
Shefﬁeld,
United
Kingdom;
9University of Shefﬁeld, Academic Unit of Child Health, Shefﬁeld,
United Kingdom; 10University of Naples Federico II, Department of
Molecular
Medicine
and
Medical Biotechnology,
Napoli,
Italy;
11Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, Netherlands;
12Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Division of Human
Genetics, Cincinnati, United States; 13Maastricht University Medical
Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands; 14Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, the Netherlands, Department of Clinical Genetics,
Amsterdam, Netherlands; 15Manchester Centre for Genomic Medi-
cine, Manchester, United Kingdom; 16Montpellier University, INSERM
U1183, Montpellier, France; 17Génétique clinique, Département de
Génétique Médicale, Maladies Rares et Médecine Personnalisée,
Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement SOOR, ERN
ITHACA, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France; 18Hospices Civils de
Lyon, Service de Génétique - Centre de Référence Anomalies du
Développement,
Bron,
France;
Institut
NeuroMyoGene,
CNRS
UMR5310, INSERM U1217, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon,
France; 19Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de Génétique - Centre de
Référence Anomalies du Développement, Bron, France; Centre de
Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, Équipe GENDEV, INSERM U1028
CNRS UMR5292, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France;
20Reference Center for Rare Diseases “Intellectual Deﬁciencies”,
Hôpital Sud - CHU Rennes, Department of Medical Genetics, Rennes,
France;
21Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique, CHU,
Rennes, F-35033, France, Univ Rennes, CNRS, IGDR, UMR 6290,
Rennes, France; 22Praxis für Humangenetik, Ulm, Germany; 23Uni-
versity of Southampton and University Hospital Southampton,
Faculty of Medicine, Southampton, United Kingdom; 24University
Hospitals Bristol, Department of Clinical Genetics, Bristol, United
Kingdom; 25Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli,
Italy; 26Guy’s & St Thomas’ National Health System Foundation Trust,
Clinical Genetics Department, London, United Kingdom; 27Connecti-
cut Children’s Medical Center and University of Connecticut School of
Medicine, Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, Farmington,
United
States;
28Erasmus
Medical
Centre,
Rotterdam,
United
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
456
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Kingdom;
29Helsinki University Hospital, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Helsinki, Finland; 30Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Radboudumc, Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular
Informatics, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: EHMT1 is a histone-3 lysine-9 (H3K9)
methyltransferase acting in heterodimer with EHMT2. EHMT1
haploinsufﬁciency causes Kleefstra syndrome (KS), but the role of
EHMT1 protein altering variants’ (PAV) is unknown. Therefore, we
have systematically collected and evaluated EHMT1 PAVs.
Methods: We collected 30 different EHMT1 PAVs, identiﬁed in
40 individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), and
evaluated them on: 1)patients’ phenotype similarity to KS, 2)pre-
dicted effects on the protein’s 3D structure, and 3)KS-episignature
on DNA methylation array. Additionally, we studied EHMT1-
EHMT2 heterodimerization capacity and methyltransferase-activity
in-vitro for selected variants.
Results: Out of the 30 analysed PAVs, we concordantly classi-
ﬁed nine as benign and 17 as pathogenic. All pathogenic PAVs
located in the ANK-repeat domain (n = 11), a H3K9me1-2 “reader”,
or in the pre-SET/SET-domain (n = 6), which is responsible for the
EHMT1-EHMT2 heterodimerization and methyltransferase-activity.
Surprisingly, in four individuals with non-KS NDD and without KS-
episignature, we identiﬁed three clustering SET-domain PAVs (two
de-novo and one sib-pair) predicted to disrupt methyltransferase-
activity, but not EHMT1-EHMT2 heterodimerization. This suggests
that loss of only EHMT1 methyltransferase-activity is not respon-
sible for KS. Indeed, unlike other PAVs, only KS-causing SET-
domain PAVs, disrupted EHMT1-EHMT2 heterodimerization in-
vitro. Finally, we identiﬁed one individual without KS-phenotype
and KS-episignature but with a de-novo PAV that completely dis-
rupted the RING-like domain (functions unknown).
Conclusion: Disruption of EHMT1 “reader” or EHMT1-EHMT2
heterodimerization functions is sufﬁcient to cause KS. However,
the effects of loss of EHMT1 methyltransferase-activity or of RING-
like domain are unknown but may result in novel syndromic NDDs
e.g. via loss of the recently-described EHMT1-mediated non-
histone protein methylation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Dmitrijs Rots: None declared, Ayumi
Yamada: None declared, Aidin Foroutan: None declared, Haley
McConkey: None declared, Jennifer Kerkhof: None declared, Mar-
ielle Alders: None declared, Isabelle Maystadt: None declared,
Simon Holden: None declared, Meena Balasubramanian: None
declared, Giuseppe Merla: None declared, Gijs Santen: None
declared,
Alyce
Belonis:
None
declared,
Arianne
Bouman:
None
declared,
Joost
Kummeling:
None
declared,
Malou
Heijligers: None declared, Mieke van Haelst: None declared,
Michael Parker: None declared, Soo-Mi Park: None declared, Kay
Metcalfe: None declared, David Geneviève: None declared, Nicolas
Chatron: None declared, Audrey Putoux: None declared, Laurent
Pasquier: None declared, Christele Dubourg: None declared,
Gertrud Strobl-Wildemann: None declared, Astrid Plomp: None
declared,
Maaike
Vreeburg:
None
declared,
Diana
Baralle:
None declared, Nicola Foulds: None declared, Ingrid Scurr: None
declared, Gerarda Cappuccio: None declared, Nicola Brunetti-
Pierri: None declared, Annet Van Hagen: None declared, Emilia
K.Bijlsma: None declared, Helen Firth: None declared, Francesca
Forzano: None declared, Louisa Kalsner: None declared, Janna A
Hol: None declared, Carolina Courage: None declared, Els Van-
houtte: None declared, Siddharth Banka: None declared, Hanka
Venselaar: None declared, N. Nadif Kasri: None declared, Hans van
Bokhoven: None declared, Han Brunner: None declared, Lisenka
Vissers*: None declared, Yoichi Shinkai: None declared, Bekim
Sadikovic: None declared, Tjitske Kleefstra Dutch Research Council
grants 015.014.036 and 1160.18.320.
P09.032.D A novel, recurrent TCF4 missense variant causes
non-speciﬁc intellectual disability without Pitt-Hopkins
syndrome
Bernt Popp1, Thierry Bienvenu2, Irina Giurgea3, Julia Metreau4,
Cornelia Kraus5, André Reis5, Jan Fischer6, Heinrich Sticht7, Chris-
tiane Zweier5;8
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leizpig, Germany;
2INSERM U1266, Institut de Psychiatrie et de
Neurosciences de Paris, Université de Paris, Paris, France; 3Départe-
ment de Génétique Médicale, INSERM Childhood Genetic Diseases,
AP-HP. Sorbonne Université, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France; 4APHP,
Service de neurologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Universitaire Bicetre, Le
Kremlin-Bicetre, France; 5Institute of Human Genetics, Universitätskli-
nikum Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg
FAU, Erlangen, Germany; 6Institute for Clinical Genetics, University
Hospital Carl Gustav Carus at the Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany; 7Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany; 8Department of
Human Genetics, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Haploinsufﬁciency of TCF4 by deletions,
truncating variants or loss-of-function missense variants clustering
within the DNA-binding and protein interacting bHLH domain
cause Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS). This speciﬁc neurodevelop-
mental disorder (NDD) is characterized by severe intellectual dis-
ability (ID), epilepsy, postnatal microcephaly, hyperbreathing and
typical facial dysmorphism. Only few deletions and variants,
mostly located in the very N-terminal part of TCF4 have been
associated with milder or atypical phenotypes.
Methods: By personal communication, we now assembled four
cases with the novel, recurrent, de novo missense variant
c.1165C>T, p.(Arg389Cys) in TCF4. This variant was independently
identiﬁed by diagnostic exome or ID panel sequencing in different
centers and is located upstream of the bHLH domain.
Results: In three of the individuals, the variant was initially
classiﬁed as of unknown signiﬁcance due to its location outside
the bHLH domain and a rather unspeciﬁc neurodevelopmental
phenotype not suggestive of PTHS. Recurrence of the identical
variant in four individuals allowed reclassiﬁcation to pathogenic.
All four individuals presented with moderate to severe ID with
prominent language delay and impaired speech. Microcephaly
occurred only in one of the four individuals, and no breathing
anomalies or epilepsy were reported. Facial gestalt was unsuspi-
cious. Interestingly, the variant is located in the AD2 activation
domain next to a highly conserved Φ-x-x-Φ-Φ-motif and might
alter interaction with coactivator proteins independently from the
bHLH domain.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings of a recurrent missense variant out-
side the bHLH domain in four individuals with a rather non-
speciﬁc ID phenotype delineates a novel genotype-phenotype
correlation for TCF4-related NDDs.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.033.A Update on the phenotype of symptomatic females
with ARX pathogenic variants, including 9 new patients
Mathilde Gras1;2, Solveig Heide1;2, Boris Keren1;2, Sandra Whalen1;3,
Stéphanie Valence1;4, Anna Jansen5, Katrien Stouffs5, Jennesson
Mélanie6, Poirsier Céline6, Gaetan Lesca7, Christel Depienne8;9,
Rastetter Agnes9, Caroline Nava9, Curie Aurore10, Mathieu MILH11,
Perrine Charles1;2, Cyril Mignot1;2, DELPHINE HERON1;2
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
457
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1AP-HP, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France; 2Groupe Hospitalier Pitié
Salpêtrière et Trousseau, Département de Génétique et CRMR
Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de causes rares, Paris, France; 3Hôpital
Trousseau, UF de Génétique Clinique, Paris, France;
4Hôpital
Trousseau, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Paris, France;
5Universitair
Ziekenhuis, Brussel, Belgium; 6CHU de Reims Champagne Ardennes,
Service de génétique, Reims, France; 7Hospices Civils de Lyon (HCL),
Service de génétique, Lyon, France;
8Institut für Humangenetik
Universitätsklinikum, Essen, Germany; 9Sorbonne Université, Institut
du Cerveau et de la moëlle épinière (ICM), Paris, France; 10Hospices
Civils de Lyon (HCL), Service de neuropédiatrie, Lyon, France; 11AP-
HM, Hôpital La Timone, Service de neuropédiatrie, Marseille, France.
Background/Objectives: The X-linked Aristaless-Related Homeo-
box (ARX) gene encodes a transcription factor that is essential for
brain development. ARX-related disorders are well-described in
male patients and encompasses syndromic and nonsyndromic
intellectual disability with or without brain malformations and
epilepsy. By contrast, the phenotype in females is poorly
delineated.
Methods: We report the clinical and molecular data of nine
novel female patients with de novo ARX pathogenic variants and
review the data of the 63 females with truncating or missense
variants from the literature.
Results: Half of the female carriers have a normal neuro-
development, whereas the other half have a neurodevelopmental
disorder (NDD) comprising: isolated learning disabilities (8.3%),
mild to moderate ID (20.8%), developmental and epileptic ence-
phalopathy (19.4%). NDD was signiﬁcantly more prevalent in the
group of women carrying de novo variants (84%). Agenesis of the
corpus callosum (ACC) was observed in 65% of cases and affected
more signiﬁcantly the group of patients with NDD. Among the 10
previously reported de novo variants in female patients, all but
two were truncating variants. We report here ﬁve de novo mis-
sense variants, which are all located in the homeodomain of the
protein, affecting the ARX transcriptional activity. None of the de
novo cases from our cohort had skewed XCI in blood.
Conclusion: ARX pathogenic variants in female patients are
characterized by a broad clinical spectrum ranging from no
symptoms to DEE phenotype, frequently associated with ACC.
These new data will help prenatal counseling when an ARX variant
is found in a female fetus with corpus callosum anomaly.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.034.B BRAT1 biallelic variations: phenotypic spectrum
and phenotype-genotype correlation from 91 cases
Camille Engel1, Stéphanie Valence2, Geoffroy Delplancq1, Reza
Marooﬁan3, Paul Kuentz4, Christelle Cabrol1, elise brischoux-boucher1,
Vincenzo Salpietro5;6, Laurent Villard7, Martine Doco-Fenzy8, Sylvie
Odent9, Deborah Morris-Rosendahl10;11, Maha Zaki12, Marion Gerard13,
Alfredo Brusco14;15, Audrey Putoux16, Cathryn Poulton17, Christine
Coubes18, Cyril Mignot19, Dalal Bubshait20, Dror Kraus21, Fowzan
Alkuraya22, Ingrid Scheffer23, Hartmut Engels24, Johanna Wagner25,
Joseph Gleeson26;27, Kerstin Kutsche28, Laure Massingham29, Laurent
Pasquier30, lynette penney31, Maria Roberta Cilio32, Marie-Coralie
Cornet33, Marilena Carmela Di Giacomo34, Marlène Rio35, Matias
Wagner36;37, Pasquale Striano5;6, Rachel Straussberg38;39, Rauan
Kaiyrzhanov40, Siddarth Srivastava41, Valentina Baglioni42, Antonio
Vitobello43;44, Christelle Rougeot45, Enza Maria Valente46, Henry
Houlden3, Joanna Goffeney47, Ange-Line Bruel43;44, Amy Schneider48,
lionel vanmaldergem1, lydie BURGLEN49, Juliette Piard1
1CHU
de
Besançon,
Human
Genetics,
Besançon,
France;
2Hôpital Armand Trousseau, APHP Sorbonne Université, Neurologie
Pédiatrique, Paris, France; 3UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology,
University College London, Neuromuscular Diseases UCL Queen
Square Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom; 4CHU de
Besançon, Cytogenetics, Besançon, France;
5University of Genoa,
Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal
and Child Health, Genoa, Italy; 6IRCCS Giannina Gaslini Institute,
Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, Genoa, Italy; 7AP-
HM, Hôpital d’Enfants de La Timone, Génétique Médicale, Marseille,
France; 8CHU de Reims, Génétique, Reims, France; 9CHU de Rennes -
Hôpital Sud, Génétique Clinique, Rennes, France; 10Imperial College
London, London, United Kingdom; 11Royal Brompton, Guy’s and St
Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, Clinical Genetics and Genomics
Laboratory, London, United Kingdom; 12National Research Centre,
Clinical Genetics, Cairo, Egypt; 13Côte de Nacre University Hospital
Center, Clinical Gentetics, Caen, France;
14University of Torino,
Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy; 15Città della Salute e della Scienza
University Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, Torino, Italy; 16Hospices
Civils de Lyon, Génétique, Bron, France; 17King Edward Memorial
Hospital, Genetic Service of Western Australia, Perth, Australia;
18Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve - CHU de Montpellier, Génétique
Médicale, Maladies Rares et Médecine Personnalisée, Montpellier,
France; 19Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital - APHP, Genetics, Paris, France;
20King Fahd Hospital of the University, College of Medicine, University
of Dammam, Pediatrics, Dammam, Saudi Arabia;
21Schneider
Children’s Medical Center of Israel, Neurology, Petah Tiqva, Israel;
22King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Genetics,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; 23Austin Health and Royal Children’s Hospital,
Florey Institute and Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Genetics,
Melbourne, Australia; 24University of Bonn, School of Medicine &
University Hospital Bonn, Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany; 25Center
for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CiPSM), Ludwig-Maximilians-
Universität München, Pharmacy-Center for Drug Research, Munich,
Germany; 26Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California
San
Diego,
Neurosciences,
San
Diego,
United
States;
27Rady
Children’s Institute for Genomic Medicine - Rady Children’s Hospital,
San Diego, United States; 28University Medical Center Hamburg-
Eppendorf, Human Genetics, Hamburg, Germany;
29Hasbro Chil-
dren’s Hospital, Division of Medical Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, Providence, United States; 30Centre Hospitalier Universi-
taire de Rennes, Génétique Clinique, Rennes, France; 31IWK Health
Centre, Dalhousie University, Pediatrics, Halifax, Canada; 32Saint-Luc
University
Hospital,
Catholic
University
of
Louvain,
Pediatrics,
Bruxelles, Belgium; 33University of California, Pediatrics, San Francisci,
United States;
34SIC Anatomia Patologica, “San Carlo” Hospital,
Medical Genetics Service and Laboratory of Cytogenetics, SIC
Anatomia Patologica, Potenza, Italy;
35Necker Hospital, APHP -
Institut Imagine, Genetics, Paris, France;
36Technical University
Munich, Human Genetics, Munich, Germany;
37Helmholtz Center
Munich, Neurogenomics, Neuherberg, Germany; 38Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; 39Neurology Institute,
Schneider Children’s Medical Center of Israel, Petach Tikva, Israel;
40UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College
London, London, United Kingdom;
41Boston Children’s Hospital,
Neurology, Boston, United States; 42Institute of Child and Adolescent
Neuropsychiatry, Sapienza University of Rome, Department of
Human Neurosciences, Rome, Italy;
43Université de Bourgogne,
Inserm UMR 1231 GAD « Génétique des Anomalies du Développe-
ment », Dijon, France; 44Hôpital d’Enfants - CHU de Dijon, Centre de
Génétique, Dijon, France; 45Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Neuropé-
diatrie, Bron, France; 46University of Pavia, IRCCS Mondino Founda-
tion, Department of Molecular Medicine, Pavia, Italy;
47CHU de
Besançon - Hôpital Jean Minjoz, Neuropediatrics, Besançon, France;
48Epilepsy Research Centre - Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and
Health Sciences, Department of Medicine, Austin Health, Melbourne,
Australia; 49AP-HP, Sorbonne Université, Hôpital Trousseau, Centre de
Référence des Malformations et Maladies Congénitales du Cervelet,
Département de Génétique, Paris, France.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
458
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives:
Biallelic
variations
in
BRAT1
were
described in 40 patients from 29 families, presenting with epileptic
encephalopathy or cerebellar ataxia.
Methods: Thanks to an international collaboration, we col-
lected data of 51 new patients, allowing us to describe a large
series of 91 patients.
Results: Data analysis showed two distinct phenotypes and an
intermediate one. In the ﬁrst group, 43 patients exhibited a neo-
natal epileptic encephalopathy. Prenatal signs were present in 16
of them (57%). None of them had any psychomotor acquisition
and all had epilepsy with neonatal onset. Neurological examina-
tion showed microcephaly (91%) and limb rigidity (90%). Brain MRI
showed cerebral atrophy (58%). They all died prematurely.
In the second group, 36 patients presented cerebellar ataxia,
with acquisition of walking (85%) and language (69%). Axial
hypotonia was found in 23 patients (85%). Epilepsy was rare (14%).
Brain MRI always showed cerebellar atrophy. No patient in this
group died.
Study of phenotype-genotype correlation showed that patients
with epileptic encephalopathy harbour two predicted amorphic
variations in most cases (25/33; 76%) and a recurrent inframe
deletion/duplication in a tenth of cases (4/33; 10%). In contrast,
patients with cerebellar ataxia present at least one missense var-
iation (23/27; 85%).
Conclusion: BRAT1 bi-allelic variations are associated with a
broad phenotypic spectrum whose most severe end, observed in
patients with two amorphic variations, is associated with epileptic
encephalopathy and early death. On the opposite, patients with
at least one missense variation seem to have a moderate phe-
notype including variable intellectual disability, ataxia and cere-
bellar atrophy.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.036.D Clinical interpretation of aCGH results in patients
with neurodevelopmental disorders by geneticists: impact on
diagnostic yield
Giulia Olivucci1, Giulia Severi1, Paola Visconti2, Annio Posar2;3, Maria
Cristina Scaduto2, Claudio Graziano4, Marco seri1;5, Pamela Magini1
1IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, U.O. Genetica
Medica, Bologna, Italy; 2IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di
Bologna, UOSI Disturbi dello Spettro Autistico, Bologna, Italy;
3Università di Bologna, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e
Neuromotorie, Bologna, Italy; 4AUSL della Romagna, U.O. Genetica
Medica, Cesena, Italy; 5Università di Bologna, Dipartimento di Scienze
Mediche e Chirurgiche, Bologna, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD)
are complex diseases with signiﬁcant health and social implica-
tions. Genetic alterations play an important role in their patho-
genesis and array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is
recommended as ﬁrst-tier genetic test. We aimed to evaluate the
diagnostic yield (DY) of aCGH in our cohort of NDD patients,
comparing different clinical groups.
Methods: We enrolled 420 patients with developmental delay
(DD), intellectual disability (ID) or autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
who underwent aCGH analysis and genetic counseling between
2017 and 2021. Copy number variants (CNVs) were classiﬁed
according to American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG)
guidelines. Parental investigation, when necessary, was carried out
by quantitative PCR.
Results: We identiﬁed at least one class 3, 4 or 5 CNV in 207
patients. After clinical evaluation, considering patients’ phenotype
and CNV inheritance, DY of aCGH in our cohort was 18,1% (18,6%
in patients with DD/ID, 14,1% in patients with ASD associated with
DD/ID and 9,1% in patients with isolated ASD). DY was 17,3% in
non-syndromic patients and 18,4% in patients with NDD asso-
ciated with congenital malformations, abnormal brain MRI, dys-
morphisms or epilepsy (19,6% in patients with 2 or more of the
conditions listed above).
Conclusion: We observed a global DY comparable to that
reported in published large cohorts and a reduction of DY in
isolated ASD. As expected, DY was slightly higher in patients with
more complex clinical phenotype. This highlights the importance
of accurate evaluation by a clinical geneticist to identify patients
with NDD who should be tested by aCGH.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.037.A Further characterization of Borjeson-Forssman-
Lehmann syndrome in females due to de novo variants in
PHF6
Celine Gerber1, Anna Fliedner2, Oliver Bartsch3, Siren Berland4, Malin
Dewenter3, Marte Haug5, Ian Hayes6, Paul Mark7, Isabelle Maystadt8,
Deniz Karadurmus8, Katharina Steindl9, Antje Wiesener10, Markus
Zweier9, Heinrich Sticht11, Christiane Zweier1;2
1Department of Human Genetics, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; 2Institute of Human Genetics,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Ger-
many; 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of
the Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany; 4Department
of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway;
5Department of Medical Genetics, St. Olav’s University Hospital,
Trondheim, Norway; 6Genetic Health Service New Zealand, Auckland
Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand;
7Spectrum Health Division of
Medical and Molecular Genetics, Grand Rapids, Michigan, United
States;
8Center for Human Genetics, Institute of Pathology and
Genetics, Gosselies, Belgium; 9Institute of Medical Genetics, University
of Zurich,
Zürich, Switzerland;
2Institute
of Human
Genetics,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Ger-
many;
11Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
Background/Objectives: While inherited hemizygous variants in
PHF6 cause X-linked recessive Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syn-
drome (BFLS) in males, de novo heterozygous variants in females
are associated with an overlapping but distinct phenotype. This
includes moderate to severe intellectual disability, characteristic
facial dysmorphism, dental, ﬁnger and toe anomalies and linear
skin hyperpigmentation.
Methods: By personal communication with colleagues, we
assembled clinical and mutational data on ten additional female
individuals with BFLS due to variants in PHF6. Testing was either
performed targeted by Sanger sequencing or MLPA or by exome
or panel sequencing. X-inactivation in blood was determined in six
individuals. Structural modeling was performed for missense
variants.
Results: We conﬁrm the distinct female phenotype of BFLS to
include variable intellectual disability, a recognizable facial gestalt
and various other anomalies. Skewed X-inactivation in blood and
streaky skin pigmentation point to a functional mosaicism. Var-
iants occurred de novo in nine individuals, of whom one was only
mildly affected and inherited it to her more severely affected
daughter. The mutational spectrum comprises a 2-exon deletion,
ﬁve truncating and three missense variants, the latter all located in
the PHD2 domain and predicted to severely destabilize the
domain structure. This observation supports the hypothesis of
more severe variants in females contributing to gender-speciﬁc
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
459
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
phenotypes in addition to or in combination with effects of
X-inactivation and functional mosaicism.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings therefore further delineate the clin-
ical and mutational spectrum of female BFLS and provide further
insights into possible genotype-phenotype correlations between
females and males.
References:.
Grants: German Research Foundation ZW184/3-1.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.038.B The largest cohort of KBG patients: deﬁning the
evolving phenotype
Lorenzo Loberti1;2, Lucia Bruno1;2, Stefania Granata1;2, Gabriella
Doddato1;2, Francesca Fava1;2, Michele Carullo1;2, Elisa Rahikkala3,
Guillaume Jouret4, Leonie Menke5, Damien Lederer6, Pascal Vrie-
lynck7, Lukáš Ryba8, Nicola Brunetti-Pierri9, Amaia Lasa-Aranzasti10,
Anna Maria Cueto-González10, Laura Carmen Trujillano Lidon10,
Irene Valenzuela10, Eduardo Tizzano10, Alessandro Spinelli11, Irene
Bruno12, Aurora Currò13, Franco Stanzial13, Francesco Benedicenti13,
Diego Lopergolo14, Filippo Maria Santorelli14, Constantia Aristidou15,
Georgios Tanteles15, Isabelle Maystadt6, Tinatin Tkemaladze16, Tiia
Reimand17, Helen Lokke17;18, Katrin Ounap17;18, Maria Haanpää19,
Andrea Holubová8, Veronika Zoubková8, Martin Schwarz8, Riina
Žordania17, Kai Muru17;18, Laura Roht17;18, Annika Tihveräinen19, Rita
Teek17, Ulvi Thomson20, Margherita Baldassarri1;2, Maria Antonietta
Mencarelli1;2;21, Caterina Lo Rizzo1;2;21, Mirella Bruttini1;2;21, Francesca
Mari1;2;21, Francesca Ariani1;2;21, Alessandra Renieri1;2;21, Anna Maria
Pinto1;2;21
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy; 2Med Biotech Hub
and Competence Centre, Department of Medical Biotechnologies,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy; 3PEDEGO Research Unit, University of
Oulu MRC Oulu and Department of Clinical Genetics Oulu, Oulu
University, Oulu, Finland; 4Médecin génétique - Conseil Génétique
National
Center
of
Genetics
Laboratoire
national
de
santé,
Dudelange, Luxembourg;
5Department of Pediatrics, Amsterdam
UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 6Institut de
Pathologie et de Génétique; Centre de Génétique Humaine, Gosselies,
Belgium; 7Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique a.s.b.l, Brussell,
Belgium;
8Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague,
Czech Republic; 9University of Naples “Federico II”, Naples, Italy;
10Area of clinical and molecular genetics, Vall d’Hebron University
Hospital, Vall d’Hebron, Barcellona, Spain; 11Regional Coordinating
Center for Rare Diseases, Udine, Italy; 12Institute for Maternal and
Child Health, IRCCS, Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy; 13Genetic Counsel-
ing Service, Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of Bolzano,
Bolzano, Italy; 14IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Molecular Medicine
for Neurodegenerative and Neuromuscular Disease Unit, Pisa, Italy;
15Clinical Genetic Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics,
Nicosia, Cyprus;
16Molecular and Medical Genetics, Tbilisi State
Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia; 17Department of Clinical Genetics,
United Laboratories, Tartu
University Hospital, Tartu,
Estonia;
18Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia;
19Department of Genomics and Clinical Genetics, Turku University
Hospital, Finland, Turku, Finland; 20Centre for Neurological Diseases,
West-Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallin, Estonia;
21Genetica Medica,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.
Background/Objectives: KBG syndrome is characterized by dis-
tinctive facial gestalt, skeletal features, short stature, and variable
clinical ﬁndings. With aging, some clinical features become more
recognizable, allowing a differential diagnosis. We aimed to better
characterize KBG-associated clinical features progression.
Methods: In the context of an ERN ITHACA collaborative study,
we collected the largest cohort of KBG patients (47) followed over
time. A combined array-CGH and NGS approach on genomic DNA
investigated both genomic CNV and SNV.
Results: Intellectual disability (81%) ranged from mild to
moderate with severe ID identiﬁed in one patient. Epilepsy was
present in 25%. Short stature was consistent over time, while OFC,
about -2SD at birth, normalized over years. Macrodontia, oligo-
dontia and dental agenesis was present in 30,2%, representing the
second most relevant clinical feature along with skeletal anoma-
lies (44%, 28% with 5th ﬁnger clinodactyly). Two patients pre-
sented microdontia. Cerebral anomalies, among which enlarged
cisterna magna and broad anterior fontanella, were identiﬁed in
35%. Heart defects were reported in 16,3%. In 28% of cases pre-
natal ultrasound anomalies were reported (increased NT, poly-
hydramnios, IUGR). Except for three splicing variants, leading to a
premature termination, mutations were almost all frameshift,
scattered along ANKRD11.
Conclusion: Our results, broadening the spectrum of KBG
phenotype progression, suggest to consider a wider range of
dental anomalies including microdontia before excluding diag-
nosis. Cerebral anomalies, previously sporadic reports, represent a
moderately frequent feature. NGS approaches, following evidence
of increased NT, should include ANKRD11.
References:.
Grants:
ERN-ITHACA,
Regione
Toscana
CCRM.
Estonian
Research Council PRG471.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.039.C Inherited pathogenic variants in
neurodevelopmental disorders: a potential pitfall in trio-
based analysis of clinical exomes
Annelies Dheedene1, Erika D’haenens1, Evelien Pouillie1, Sarah
Delbaere1, Olivier Vanakker1, Bert Callewaert1, Björn Menten1
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University & Ghent University
Hospital, Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: The use of clinical exome sequencing
(ES) has led to a steep increase in the diagnostic yield in patients
with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs).
Methods: ES data of > 2000 patients and both parents (when
available) were analyzed for a panel of 1441 NDD related genes.
Variant classiﬁcation was based on ACMG/AMP and ACGS
guidelines.
Results: We identiﬁed a class 4 or 5 variant explaining the
phenotype in 21% of cases. In 60% of these probands, the variant
occurred de novo, while in 40% the causal variant(s) was/were
inherited. Of the probands with inherited variants, 12.5% had an
X-linked disorder, 46% an autosomal recessive disorder, and 41.5%
an autosomal dominant disorder. Furthermore, we reported a
variant of unknown signiﬁcance (class 3) in an additional 25% of
the probands.
Conclusion: With a diagnostic yield between 21% and 46%,
we conﬁrm that exome sequencing is a game-changer in the
diagnostic workup of patients with NDDs. Although the majority
of causal variants occurred de novo, several (likely) pathogenic
variants were observed in seemingly healthy parents. Analysis
pipelines focusing solely on de novo or bi-allelic defects, may
therefore miss molecular diagnoses. Our data add evidence that
reduced penetrance is currently underreported in several NDDs
and we should be cautious to rely on the “de novo paradigm for
neurodevelopmental disorders” both in laboratory analysis and
genetic counseling.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
460
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P09.040.D Altered gene expression proﬁles impair the
nervous system development in patients with 15q13.3
microdeletion
Marek Körner1, Linnaeus Bundalian2, Akhil Velluva3, Maximilian
Radtke2, Julia Hentschel2, Tobias Bartolomaeus2, Pia Zacher2, Rami
Abou Jamra2, Diana Le Duc2
1Institute of Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany; 2Institute of Human Genetics, University Clinics Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany; 3Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthro-
pology, Genetics, Leipzig, Germany.
Background/Objectives: The 15q13.3 microdeletion has a wide
range of pleiotropic effects ranging from apparently healthy to
severely affected individuals with intellectual disability, epilepsy,
and neuropsychiatric disorders. Previous studies have investigated
several genes within the deletion as potential drivers, but the
pathomechanism and the underlying basis of the variable phe-
notype remain elusive.
Methods: We analyzed the effects of the 15q13.3 microdele-
tion using native RNA-seq data from blood of 3 probands and 4
control subjects. We assessed differentially expressed genes
(DEGs), gene ontology (GO) enrichment, protein-protein interac-
tion (PPI) functional modules, as well as gene expression in dif-
ferent brain developmental stages.
Results: The haploinsufﬁciency of genes within the deleted
region was not transcriptionally compensated, suggesting a
dosage effect may contribute to the pathomechanism. We
observed
network-wide
dysregulatory
effects
implying
the
phenotype is not caused by a singular critical gene. A signiﬁcant
proportion of DEGs, which are silenced in the adult brain, have
maximum expression during the prenatal stage of brain devel-
opment. Based on DEGs and their PPI partners we identiﬁed
altered functional modules related to immune and inﬂammatory
processes, as well as nervous system development.
Conclusion: 15q13.3 microdeletion has an ubiquitous impact
on transcriptome pattern, especially dysregulation of genes
involved in brain development. The impact on immune and
inﬂammatory responses cannot be fully assessed based on the
test material, i.e. blood. Possibly, the high phenotypic variability
could stem from an increased vulnerability during brain devel-
opment, without an underlying driving pathomechanism.
References:.
Grants: Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung 2020_EKEA.42 to DLD,
“Clinician Scientist Programm, Medizinische Fakultät der Uni-
versität Leipzig”.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.041.A Clinical description, molecular delineation, and
genotype-phenotype correlation in KBG syndrome: 67 new
patients and review of the literature
Elena Martinez-Cayuelas1, Isabel Lorda2;3, Fiona Blanco-Kelly2;3,
Rosario
Lopez-Rodriguez2,
Fermina
Lopez-Grondona2,
Saoud
Tahsin-Swaﬁri2;3, Rebeca Losada1, Beatriz Moreno1, Maria Rodrigo1,
Carmen
Ayuso2;3,
Aitor
López-González4,
Antonio
Martinez-
Monseny4, Irene Valenzuela Palafoll5, Anna Maria Cueto-González5,
Sixto Garcia-Minaur6, Fernando Santos-Simarro6, Jaime Cruz7, Juan
Francisco Quesada Espinosa7, Jaime Sánchez del Pozo7, Ana Rosa
Arteche López7, Blanca Gener Querol8, Isabel Llano Rivas8, Alberto
Fernández-Jaén9, Raquel Bernardo Fonz10, Sergio Aguilera Albesa10,
Pablo Prieto11, Javier Lopez Pisón12, Vanessa Lopez13, Ignacio
Málaga14, María Palomares Bralo3;6, Soraya Ramiro León15, Beatriz
Martínez Menéndez15, Belén Gil-Fourier15, Jesús Eirís16, Juan José
García Peñas17, Begoña De Azúa Brea18, Nadia Irazabal19, Irene
Madrigal20, Maria Isabel Alvarez20, Sara ALVAREZ21, María García21,
Berta Almoguera Castillo2;3
1Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital, Department of Pediatrics,
Madrid, Spain; 2Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Genetics and Genomics, Madrid, Spain; 3Center for Biomedical
Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain;
4Sant Joan de Deu Hospital, Department of Genetic and Molecular
Medicine. Pediatric Institute of Rare Diseases (IPER), Barcelona, Spain;
5Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Department of Clinical and
Molecular Genetics, Barcelona, Spain; 6La Paz University Hospital,
Structural and Functional Genomics-INGEMM, Madrid, Spain; 712 de
Octubre University Hospital, Department of Genetics and Genomics,
Madrid, Spain; 8Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo, Spain; 9Quir-
ónsalud University Hospital, Department of Pediatric Neurology.,
Madrid, Spain; 10Navarra University Hospital, Pediatric Neurology Unit.
Department of Pediatrics, Navarra, Spain;
11Salamanca University
Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Salamanca, Spain; 12Miguel Servet
University Hospital, Zaragoza, Spain; 13Virgen de la Arrixaca University
Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Murcia, Spain; 14Asturias
Central University Hospital, Pediatric Neurology Unit. Department of
Pediatrics, Oviedo, Spain; 15Getafe University Hospital, Madrid, Spain;
16Santiago University Hospital, Santiago, Spain; 17Niño Jesús University
Hospital, Madrid, Spain; 18Son Llátzer University Hospital, Mallorca,
Spain; 19Can Misses University Hospital, Ibiza, Spain; 20Barcelona Clínic
Hospital, Barcelona, Spain; 21NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: KBG syndrome is a highly variable
neurodevelopmental
disorder
caused
by
loss-of-function
sequence
variants
and
large
deletions
involving
ANKRD11.
Despite several attempts, to date no correlation has been reported
between KBG features and ANKRD11 aberration. We present the
clinical and molecular characteristics of 67 new patients with KBG
syndrome and perform a genotype-phenotype correlation lever-
aging data on 273 patients previously published.
Methods: 67 patients with KBG syndrome were recruited
through a Spanish collaborative effort. 43 clinical features were
assessed using a phenotypic questionnaire developed for this
project. The frequency of the features was calculated and those with
a frequency >50% of the patients were used to perform a genotype-
phenotype correlation in the 67 patients and 273 KBG patients from
the literature comparing the main features of the syndrome in
patients with four different types of ANKRD11 variants.
Results: The most frequent features were those related to
neurodevelopment (95%), comorbidites (82.8%), macrodontia
(80.9%), triangular face (71%), characteristic ears (76%), nose
(75.9%) and eyebrows (67.3%). The genotype-phenotype correla-
tion yielded signiﬁcant associations with the triangular face (71.1%
in SNVs vs 45.2% in CNVs, p = 0.015), short stature (62.5% inside
exon 9 vs. 27.8% outside; p = 0.009) and macrodontia (with larger
deletions, p = 0.028). ID/ADHD/ASD (70.4% in c.1903_1907del vs.
89.4%; p = 0.012) and a higher phenotypic score in patients with
SNVs (p = 0.005).
Conclusion: We present a detailed phenotypic description of
KBG syndrome in the largest series of patients reported to date
and provide evidence of a genotype-phenotype correlation
between some KBG features and speciﬁc ANKRD11 aberrations.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Elena Martinez-Cayuelas: None declared,
Isabel Lorda: None declared, Fiona Blanco-Kelly: None declared,
Rosario Lopez-Rodriguez: None declared, Fermina Lopez-Grondona:
None declared, Saoud Tahsin-Swaﬁri: None declared, Rebeca
Losada:
None
declared,
Beatriz
Moreno:
None
declared,
Maria Rodrigo: None declared, Carmen Ayuso: None declared, Aitor
López-González: None declared, Antonio Martinez-Monseny: None
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
461
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
declared, Irene Valenzuela Palafoll: None declared, Anna Maria
Cueto-González:
None
declared,
Sixto
Garcia-Minaur:
None
declared, Fernando Santos-Simarro: None declared, Jaime Cruz:
None declared, Juan Francisco Quesada Espinosa: None declared,
Jaime Sánchez del Pozo: None declared, Ana Rosa Arteche López:
None declared, Blanca Gener Querol: None declared, Isabel Llano
Rivas: None declared, Alberto Fernández-Jaén: None declared,
Raquel Bernardo Fonz: None declared, Sergio Aguilera Albesa: None
declared, Pablo Prieto: None declared, Javier Lopez Pisón: None
declared, Vanessa Lopez: None declared, Ignacio Málaga: None
declared, María Palomares Bralo: None declared, Soraya Ramiro
León: None declared, Beatriz Martínez Menéndez: None declared,
Belén Gil-Fourier: None declared, Jesús Eirís: None declared, Juan
José García Peñas: None declared, Begoña De Azúa Brea: None
declared, Nadia Irazabal: None declared, Irene Madrigal: None
declared, Maria Isabel Alvarez: None declared, Sara ALVAREZ Full
time employee at NIMGenetics, María García Full time employee at
NIMGenetics, Berta Almoguera Castillo: None declared.
P09.042.B De novo missense variants in SLC32A1 cause a
neurodevelopmental disorder with epilepsy due to impaired
GABAergic neurotransmission
Konrad Platzer1, Heinrich Sticht2, Caleb Bupp3, Mathily Ganapathi4,
Elaine Pereira5, Gwenaël Le Guyader6, Frederic Bilan6, Lindsay
Henderson7,
Holger
Taschenberger8,
Nils
Brose8,
Maximilian
Radtke1, Rami Abou Jamra1, Sonja Wojcik8
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leipzig, Germany;
2Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-
Universitaet Erlangen-Nuernberg, Erlangen, Germany;
3Spectrum
Health Medical Genetics, Grand Rapids, United States; 4Department
of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, United States;
5Department of Pediatrics, Columbia
University Irving Medical Center, New York, United States; 6Depart-
ment of Genetics, Poitiers University Hospital Center, Poitiers Cedex,
France;
7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, United States;
8Department of
Molecular Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Göttingen, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Rare inherited missense variants in
SLC32A1, the gene that encodes the vesicular GABA transporter
(VGAT), have recently been shown to cause genetic epilepsy with
febrile seizures plus. We aimed to clarify if de novo missense
variants in SLC32A1 can also cause a neurode-velopmental dis-
order with epilepsy.
Methods: Using exome sequencing, we identiﬁed four indivi-
duals with a neurodevelopmental disorder with epilepsy and de
novo missense variants in SLC32A1. To assess causality, we per-
formed functional evaluation of the identiﬁed variants in a murine
neuronal cell culture model.
Results: The main phenotype comprises moderate to severe
intellectual disability, early onset epilepsy within the ﬁrst 18 months
of life and a choreatic, dystonic or dyskinetic movement disorder. In
silico modeling and functional analyses reveal that three of these
variants, which are located in helices that line the putative GABA
transport pathway, result in reduced quantal size, consistent with
impaired ﬁlling of synaptic vesicles with GABA. The fourth variant,
located in the VGAT N-terminus, does not affect quantal size, but
increases presynaptic release probability, leading to more severe
synaptic depression during high frequency stimulation. Thus, var-
iants in VGAT can impair GABAergic neurotransmission via at least
two mechanisms, by affecting synaptic vesicle ﬁlling and by altering
synaptic short-term plasticity.
Conclusion: This work establishes de novo missense variants in
SLC32A1 as a novel cause for a neurodevelopmental disorder with
epilepsy.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Konrad Platzer: None declared, Heinrich
Sticht: None declared, Caleb Bupp: None declared, Mathily Gana-
pathi: None declared, Elaine Pereira: None declared, Gwenaël Le
Guyader: None declared, Frederic Bilan: None declared, Lindsay
Henderson GeneDx, Holger Taschenberger: None declared, Nils
Brose: None declared, Maximilian Radtke: None declared, Rami
Abou Jamra: None declared, Sonja Wojcik: None declared.
P09.044.D Whole exome sequencing for the diagnosis of
genetically unexplained severe or syndromic
neurodevelopmental disorders
Ilaria Palmieri1;2, Antonio Manuel Di Silvestre3, Valentina Serpieri1;2,
Marta Di Biagio1;2, Simone Gana4, Enza Maria Valente1;2
1IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Neurogenetic Research Center, Pavia,
Italy; 2University of Pavia, Department of Molecular Medicine, 27100,
Italy; 3University of Pavia, Department of Internal Medicine and
Medical Therapeutics, Pavia, Italy;
4IRCCS Mondino Foundation,
Medical Genetics Unit, Pavia, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs),
including intellectual disability (ID), global developmental delay
(GDD), and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), represent the most
prevalent chronic medical conditions encountered in pediatric
primary care. Identiﬁcation of an underlying genetic etiology may
improve prognostic predictions, ensure personalized manage-
ment, clarify recurrence risk, and direct patients and families to
condition-speciﬁc resources and supports. Whole exome sequen-
cing (WES) was reported to reach a deﬁnite diagnosis in about
40% NDD patients (1). Here we assess the diagnostic yield reached
by WES in our diagnostic lab for unexplained severe non-
syndromic and syndromic ID, GDD, or ASD patients, negative at
array-GCH and fragile-X testing.
Methods: WES was performed on 30 patients with severe non-
syndromic GDD/ID and/or level 3 ASD (12 complicated with epilepsy),
and on 67 syndromic NDD patients recruited over a 3-year period
regardless of their age (mean 13 years), gender and familial history.
Results: A deﬁnite genetic diagnosis was reached in 44/97
(45%) probands, including 9/30 (30%) with severe non-syndromic
NDD, and 35/67 (52%) with syndromic NDD. Of note, for syn-
dromic patients, the diagnostic rate increased linearly with the
number of concurrent clinical features, raising from 48% (2 con-
current features) up to 75% (4 features).
Conclusion: This study conﬁrms that WES is a powerful diag-
nostic tool for NDDs, especially in case of severe or syndromic
presentations, and should therefore be included in the diagnostic
workout for these common disorders.
References: 1. Srivastava S et al. 2014. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ana.24251.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.045.A Array-CGH in a large cohort of unexplained
syndromic and non-syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders
Marta Di Biagio1;2, Simone Gana3, Antonio Manuel Di Silvestre4,
Edoardo Errichiello1;2, Enza Maria Valente1;2, Elena Rossi1;2
1IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Neurogenetics Research Center, Pavia,
Italy; 2University of Pavia, Department of Molecular Medicine, Pavia,
Italy; 3IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Medical Genetics Unit, Pavia, Italy;
4University of Pavia, Department of Internal Medicine and Ther-
apeutics, Pavia, Italy.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
462
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs),
including intellectual disability (ID), global developmental delay
(GDD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), are non-progressive
disorders typically diagnosed from infancy to adolescence, and
characterized by deﬁcits in cognition, language, behavior, and/or
motor skills. Here we aimed at comparing the diagnostic yield of
array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) for the diagnosis of
syndromic versus non-syndromic NDDs in our diagnostic laboratory.
Methods: aCGH was performed using a 180K platform (Agilent
Technologies) on 156 patients with syndromic NDDs and 117 with
non-syndromic NDDs recruited over a 3-year period regardless of
their age (mean 11 years), gender (M:F = 174:96) and family history.
Results: 30 pathogenic unbalanced rearrangements (21 dele-
tions, 9 duplication) were identiﬁed in 25 patients. The most fre-
quent rearrangements affected chromosomes 15 and 16; four
probands carried more than one pathogenic copy number var-
iants. The overall detection rate was 9% (25/270), with a similar
rate in syndromic (13/156, 8%) and non-syndromic cases (12/114,
10%). In three patients, a double diagnosis was achieved through
an integrated approach which combined aCGH and whole-exome
sequencing (WES).
Conclusion: Our data show that aCGH remains a cost-effective,
rapid and powerful ﬁrst-level diagnostic strategy, able to diagnose
about 10% NDDs patients regardless of their clinical presentation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.046.B Genetics of anomalies of the corpus callosum:
lessons from a cohort of 403 individuals
Solveig Heide1, Stéphanie Valence2, Christel Depienne3, Thierry
Billette de Villemeur2, moutard marie-laure2, Anne Sophie Pellen1,
Anne Faudet1, des portes vincent4, Laurent Guibaud5, rivier francois6,
Laurence Faivre7, elise brischoux-boucher8, Audrey Putoux9, Perrine
Charles10, agnes guet11, Sandra Whalen12, cecile laroche13, Alexan-
dra Afenjar14, Melanie FRADIN15, Daphné Lehalle10, linda mouthon16,
Marie Vincent17, Didier LACOMBE18, Caroline Nava19, Agnès Rastet-
ter20, Tania Attie-Bitach21, Catherine Garel22, Thomas Courtin10, Cyril
Mignot10, Boris Keren19, DELPHINE HERON1
1APHP.Sorbonne Université, GH Pitié Salpêtrière, Service de Génétique
Clinique and referral center for rare disease « intellectual disability of
rare causes », PARIS, France; 2APHP.Sorbonne Université - Hôpital
d’Enfants Armand-Trousseau,
Service
de
Neuropédiatrie,
PARIS
CEDEX 12, France; 3Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Human-
genetik, ESSEN, France; 4CHU de Lyon HCL - GH Est, Service de
neurologie pédiatrique, BRON, France; 5Hopital Femme Mere Enfant
Hospices civils de Lyon, Bron, France; 6CHU de Montpellier - Hôpital
Gui de Chauliac, Département de neuropédiatrie, MONTPELLIER
CEDEX 5, France;
7CHU Dijon Bourgogne - Hôpital François
Mitterrand, Centre de génétique, DIJON, France; 8CHRU de Besançon
- Hôpital Saint-Jacques, Centre de génétique humaine, BESANÇON
CEDEX, France; 9CHU de Lyon HCL - GH Est-Hôpital Femme Mère
Enfant, Service de génétique, BRON, France;
10APHP.Sorbonne
Université, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Service de Génétique
clinique et Médicale, PARIS, France; 11HU PARIS NORD SITE LOUIS
MOURIER APHP, neuropediatrie, Colombes., France; 12CHU Paris Est -
Hôpital d’Enfants Armand-Trousseau, GENETIQUE MEDICALE, PARIS,
France; 13CHU de Limoges - Hôpital de la mère et de l’enfant,
Département de pédiatrie médicale, LIMOGES, France; 14CHU Paris
Est - Hôpital d’Enfants Armand-Trousseau, Service de Neuropédiatrie
et Génétique, PARIS, France; 15Centre Hospitalier de Saint-Brieuc,
Service de Neurologie, 22023 SAINT-BRIEUC CEDEX 1, France; 16HU
PARIS SITE RAYMOND POINCARE APHP, Service de génétique,
Garches, France; 17CHU de Nantes - Hôtel Dieu, Service de génétique
médicale - Unité de Génétique clinique, NANTES CEDEX 1, France;
18CHU de Bordeaux-GH Pellegrin, Service de génétique médicale Pôle
pédiatrie, BORDEAUX CEDEX, France; 19APHP Sorbonne Université GH
Pitié Salpêtrère, centre de génétique moléculaire et chomosomique,
Paris, France; 20INSTITUT DU CERVEAU ET DE LA MOELLE, Génétique
et physiopathologie de l’épilepsie, PARIS, France; 21Hôpital Necker-
Enfants Malades, Service de Génétique Moléculaire, PARIS, France;
22APHP.Sorbonne Université - Hôpital d’Enfants Armand-Trousseau,
Service de radiologie, PARIS CEDEX 12, France.
Background/Objectives: The corpus callosum is the main cerebral
commissure. Its complex development occurs between the 11th
and 15th week of gestation and involves multiple cellular and
molecular events. Anomalies of the corpus callosum (AnCC) are
among the most common brain malformations in humans. Their
etiologies are numerous and involve many different genetic causes.
AnCC are currently identiﬁed by ultrasonography during the
pregnancy which leads to difﬁculties in terms of prenatal and
genetic counseling. Indeed, the neurodevelopment prognosis
associated is very large, from normal development to severe
intellectual disability (ID). The fetal prognosis depends to the
underlying etiology of the AnCC.
Methods: We describe the clinical and genetic aspects of a
cohort of 403 individuals with AnCC. 38 (9.4%) of them had a
chromosomal anomaly and 105/292 (36%) had a least one
sequence variant (found by exome/genome sequencing or by
targeted sequencing) explaining the AnCC.
Results: In our series, genetic causes of AnCC were identiﬁed
(50 %) when it was associated with developmental delay and/or
ID, mostly in genes responsible for monogenic syndromes with ID.
In all “solved” cases, AnCC was a trait with incomplete penetrance.
By contrast, when AnCC was associated with a normal neurode-
velopment, the diagnosis rate falls with only few recurrent genes
identiﬁed (including DCC).
Conclusion: This conﬁrmed that AnCC may result from the
disruption of multiple developmental steps from early midline
telencephalic patterning to neuronal speciﬁcation and guidance
of commissural axons. Our poor knowledge of genetic causes of
isolated AnCC leads us to consider other pathogenic mechanisms
such as oligo/polygenic inheritance.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.047.C Assessment of the transcriptomic consequences of
NIPBL pathogenic variants in edited induced pluripotent stem
cells
kevin cassinari1, anne rovelet-lecrux1, celine derambure1, Myriam
Vezain1, Sophie Coutant1, anne-claire richard1, nathalie drouot1,
Juliette Coursimault1, Gabriella Vera1, Alice Goldenberg1, Pascale
Saugier-Veber1, Camille Charbonnier1, Gaël Nicolas1
1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245, CHU Rouen, FHU G4
Génomique, Department of Genetics and reference Center for
Developmental Disorders, Rouen, France.
Background/Objectives: Cohesins play a critical role in gene
expression regulation. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a
transcriptomopathy related to cohesin complex alterations. NIPBL,
the main CdLS gene, encodes the cohesin loading factor. Gene
expression consequences of NIPBL pathogenic variants might be
used as potential CdLS biomarkers.
Methods: By CRISPR/Cas9, we introduced each of the following
NIPBL pathogenic variants in an induced pluripotent stem cell
(iPSC)
line,
in
a
heterozygous
state:
p.Arg45*,
p.Arg834*,
p.Ser1466Lysfs*13 and p.Arg2298Cys, as well as frameshift indels
in the corresponding exons. We assessed NIPBL total mRNA levels
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
463
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
by RT-ddPCR, performed RNAseq and measured protein levels of
NIPBL and its partner MAU2 by western-blotting.
Results: Both RT-ddPCR and RNAseq showed a decrease in
NIPBL RNA levels for all cells carrying premature stop codon
variants, except for the p.Arg45* variant, where NIPBL mRNA
level was slightly increased. The differential expression analysis
highlighted a pattern of up or downregulated genes. For all
conditions, including the missense variant, a 50% decrease
of MAU2 protein levels was observed, without MAU2 mRNA
modiﬁcation.
Conclusion: We propose new edited iPSC models for CdLS. Our
results support previously established data suggesting that var-
iations in the 5’ end of NIPBL coding sequence escape nonsense
mediated decay, possibly due to translation reinitiation1. We will
confront our results to RNAseq and MAU2 western blot on
patients’ blood, to assess their diagnostic potential.
References: (1) Parenti et al., PMID 32433956.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.048.D Identiﬁcation of a causal mutation in DLG3 in the
MRX20 family
Jolien Huyghebaert1, Ligia Monica Mateiu1, Ellen Elinck1, Kirsten
Van Rossem1, Claudio D’Incal1, Michael K. McCormack2;3, Alice
Lazzarini4, Geert Vandeweyer1, Frank Kooy1
1University of Antwerp and University Hospital Antwerp, Depart-
ment of Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium; 2Rowan University
School
of
Osteopathic
Medicine,
Department
of
Pathology,
Stratford, New Jersey, United States;
3Rutgers Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, Department of Psychiatry, Piscataway,
New Jersey, United States; 4Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, Department of Neurology, New Brunswick, New Jersey,
United States.
Background/Objectives: Here, we describe one of the 105 his-
torical families that received MRX numbers. MRX20 is one of the
larger pedigrees which presents with intellectual disability. In 1995
Lazzarini et al. (AJMG 57: 552-7) could map the causal region to
the centromeric region on the X-chromosome. In this study we
identiﬁed the causal gene and investigated its possible effects
with contemporary techniques.
Methods: DNA and RNA was extracted from Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) cell lines of 19 family members. Whole exome sequencing
(WES) was performed on two affected and one unaffected sample.
Results were conﬁrmed using Sanger Sequencing in all available
members of the pedigree.
RNA sequencing (RNAseq) was performed in 7 affected and 4
unaffected male samples. Pathway analysis was done using the
ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) tool. Differential expression of 11
genes were validated using quantitative PCR (qPCR). Data analysis
was performed using qBASE+ and Graphpad.
Results: A causal c.194delC mutation in the DLG3 gene was
identiﬁed, aside from two other variants of unknown signiﬁcance
that also segregated in the family; SSX1 (c.358G>T) and USP27x
(c.56A>G). Fourteen differentially expressed genes were identiﬁed.
Currently, 7 out of 11 were conﬁrmed using qPCR: BCL11A,
PPP1R16B, WWTR1, LDHA, NMT2, PEX26 and CDCA4. Pathway
analysis resulted in 4 related networks.
Conclusion: A causal mutation in DLG3 was identiﬁed in the
MRX20 family. Fourteen genes were found to be signiﬁcantly
differentially expressed, of which 7 out of 11 could be conﬁrmed.
Further research is ongoing.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.049.A Multiomics approach identiﬁes altered molecular
pathways in MECP2-duplication syndrome and Rett syndrome
patients
Ainhoa Pascual-Alonso1;2, Clara Xiol1;2, Dmitrii Smirnov3;4, Robert
Kopajtich3;4,
Christina
Ludwig5,
Holger
Prokisch3;4,
Judith
Armstrong2;6;7
1Fundació Per la Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat,
Spain; 2Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat,
Spain; 3Technical University of Munich, Institute of Human Genetics,
Munich, Germany; 4Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Munich, Germany;
5Technical University of Munich,
Bavarian Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Center, Freising, Germany;
6Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Genomic Unit, Molecular and Genetic
Medicine Section, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain; 7Instituto de Salud
Carlos III (ISCIII), CIBER-ER (Biomedical Network Research Center for
Rare Diseases), Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2),
located in the Xq28, is a multifunctional gene. Loss-of-function
mutations in MECP2 trigger Rett syndrome (RTT), whereas its
duplication causes MECP2 duplication syndrome (MDS). Both
syndromes are characterized by neurodevelopmental delay and
intellectual
disability.
Although
the
disease-causing
genetic
alterations are known, the molecular pathomechanism remains
unknown. We aim to understand which are the molecular path-
ways altered in RTT and MDS.
Methods: RNA and protein were extracted from skin ﬁbroblasts
of 18 MDS patients, 21 RTT patients and 15 healthy controls. We
performed transcriptomics and proteomics analysis using DESeq
and LIMMA in a case-control approach. Enrichment of the differ-
entially expressed genes (DEG) was evaluated.
Results: Transcriptomics and proteomics analysis showed a
number of pathways that are signiﬁcantly altered in both syn-
dromes. Since MECP2’s functionality is dysregulated in an opposed
way, we checked whether signiﬁcantly upregulated genes in MDS
were downregulated in RTT. The analysis revealed pathways
involved in DNA replication and RNA processing.
Conclusion: We present the multiomics analysis of one of the
biggest cohorts of RTT and MDS patients described so far. We
could identify altered pathways in RTT and MDS patients regu-
lated in opposite direction and, hopefully, contribute to the
understanding of these two syndromes.
References:.
Grants: This research was funded with the grants 2020 FI-
B00888 (Government of Catalonia and European Social Fund),
FPU18/02152 and PI20/0289 (Spanish Government) and PCP/
00282 (parent association “Síndrome duplicación MECP2: Miradas
que hablan”).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.050.B Uncovering BOD1 mutation effect and its
correlation to syndromic intellectual disabilities
Nadine Hamdan1, Olivier De Backer1, Eliane Choueiry2, Cybel
Mehawej2
1Namur Research Institute for Life Sciences (NARILIS), University of
Namur, Namur, Belgium; 2Departement of Human Genetics, Gilbert
and Rose-Marie Chagoury School of Medecine, Lebanese American
University, Byblos, Lebanon.
Background/Objectives: We and others showed that inherited
autosomal recessive nonsense mutations in BOD1 gene resulted a
syndromic intellectual disability mostly combined with endocrine
dysfunction. BOD1 has shown to: direct chromosome orientation
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
464
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
in mitosis, form a complex with a methyltransferase SET1B that
regulates expression of some fatty acid metabolic genes and its
downregulation showed also synaptic defects and learning deﬁ-
ciency is drosophila.
Our project aims to determine the consequences of p.R151*
nonsense mutation and to start investigating at molecular, cellular
and organism levels the mechanisms linking BOD1 deﬁciency to
syndromic ID.
Methods: Two HEK293 cell models were obtained by either
introducing p.R151* BOD1 mutation or deleting BOD1 coding
region by CRISPR/Cas9. We are also developing BOD1 knockout
mouse model to investigate its developmental and physiological
function.
Results: HEK293 cells with p.R151* mutation express a trun-
cated protein that was observed by Western blot analysis when
proteasome is inhibited, indicating that mutated allele mutation is
probably amorph, with complete loss of function. HEK293T clones
with BOD1 KO display an altered morphology suggesting modiﬁed
cell adhesion properties. The electrophoretic proﬁle of BOD1 KO
clones indicate an alteration of protein expression that remains to
investigate.
Contrary
to
what
was
observed,
after
RNA
interference-mediated knockdown of BOD1, we didn’t observe
alterations of ADIPOR1 expression in the kO cells.
Conclusion: Our observations indicate that p.R151* mutation
corresponds to an amorpha allele. We showed that BOD1 is not
essential for survival or proliferation of HEK293T cells but its
deprivation leads to an altered colony morphology on uncoated
plastic surface.
References:.
Grants: University of Namur.
Conﬂict of Interest: Nadine Hamdan: None declared, Olivier
De Backer Professor Full time Job, University of Namur, Eliane
Choueiry: None declared, Cybel Mehawej: None declared.
P09.051.C MED13L missense variations cause multifaceted
functional consequences underlying severe phenotypes
Thomas Smol1;2, Frederic Frenois1, Morgane Billotte1, Odile Boute1;3,
Roseline caumes1;3, Leonie Menke4, Amara Nassar-Sheikh Rashid4,
Caroline Thuillier2, Samra Holuigue1, Didier Monte5, Catherine
Roche2, Sylvie Manouvrier1;3, Florence Petit1;3, Alexis Verger5, jamal
ghoumid1;3
1Univ. Lille, ULR 7364 - RADEME - Maladies RAres du DÉveloppement
embryonnaire et du Métabolisme, Lille, France; 2CHU Lille, Institut de
Génétique Médicale, Lille, France; 3CHU Lille, Clinique de Génétique,
Lille, France; 4Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children’s Hospital,
Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands;
5CNRS ERL 9002 Integrative Structural Biology, Inserm U 1167 – RID-
AGE, Univ. Lille, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic MED13L variants cause a
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a moderate-to-
severe intellectual disability. The majority of the patients carry a
protein-truncating variation leading to haploinsufﬁciency and a
typical phenotype. Few patients with a missense variant were
reported with a broader and more severe phenotype. The exact
biological consequences underlying atypical phenotypes remain
unknown.
Methods: We selected ﬁve MED13L reported pathogenic var-
iants located in exon 15, 17, and 30, causing either a severe
phenotype (p.Pro866Leu, p.Pro869Ser and p.Cys1131Tyr) or a
typical phenotype (p.Gly1899Arg and p.Thr2162Met). To unravel
pathogenic mechanisms, we analyzed MED13L wild type and
mutant subcellular localization, integration into CDK8-module
(CKM) and core Mediator complex, proteasome-mediated degra-
dation, and phosphorylation.
Results: The p.Pro866Leu and p.Pro869Ser variants were likely
to induce a hyper-phosphorylated status of the MED13L823-930
domain while residues Cys1131 and Thr2162 are predicted to be
critical for MED13L proper folding. Cytoplasmic relocalization and
reduced integration into CKM and core Mediator complex were
observed only with the p.Gly1899Arg.
Conclusion: MED13L missense variants are likely to be respon-
sible for different pathogenic mechanisms. MED13L variants asso-
ciated with typical phenotypes (p.Gly1899Arg and p.Thr2162Met)
probably induce a loss of function, while variants associated with
severe phenotypes probably cause a dominant-negative effect. This
study highlights potential novel MED13L functions that should now
be properly deciphered.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.052.D Biallelic mutations in CACTIN encoding component
of spliceosome machinery cause severe intellectual disability,
speech impairment and epilepsy
Uzma Abdullah1, Maria Asif2, Maryam Anayat1, Ghulam Nasseer
Udin1, Muhammad Sajid Hussain2
1Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University Rawalpindi, University
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology (UIBB), Rawalpindi,
Pakistan; 2University of Cologne, Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG),
Cologne, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Intellectual disability (ID) is a condition
of signiﬁcant limitation of cognitive functioning and adaptive
behaviour,
with
50%
of
aetiology
attributed
to
genetic
predisposition.
Methods: We recruited two consanguineous Pakistani families
(A an B) manifesting severe ID and developmental delay. The
probands were subjected to whole exome sequencing (WES) and
variants were further prioritized based on population frequency,
predicted pathogenicity and functional relevance.
Results: The WES data analysis of family A identiﬁed a homo-
zygous missense variant CACTIN (NM_001080543.1:c.1040A>T;-
p.(Asp347Val)), co-segregating with the disease. The gene is highly
intolerant to loss of function variants (pLOF = 0.14) and has never
been implicated in any inherited disorder. Its encodes Cactin
which is a critical component of post-catalytic spliceosome that
mediates exon ligation by stabilizing the position of the branch
helix. CACTIN depleted cells show global splicing defects, while its
knock down in zebraﬁsh leads to embryonic lethality or extensive
dysmorphogenesis. Family B segregated a novel missense sub-
stitution (NM_024298.4:c.757G>A;p.(Glu253Lys)) of MBOAT7, a
known gene of ID. Both of the identiﬁed variants were absent in
gnomAD and 1000 Genomes and predicted to be ‘deleterious’ by
several in silico tools.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings indicate that CACTIN is novel gene that
when disrupted leads to intellectual disability. These also provide
additional evidence to the role of MBOAT7 in aetiology of ID.
References: Nil.
Grants: Nil.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.054.B Variability in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: two
cohorts side by side
Julián Nevado1;2;3, Raquel Blanco-Lago4, Cristina Bel-Fenellós5,
Maria Angeles Mori1;2;3, Pilar Barrúz-Galián1, Ignacio Málaga4, Harry
Pachajoa6, Franco Cammarata-Scalissi7, Elena
Mansilla1;2;3, Fe
Amalia García Santiago1;2;3, Jair Tenorio1;2;3, Isabel Vallcorba1;2;3,
Pablo LAPUNZINA1;2;3
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
465
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM)-IdiPAZ, Hospital
Universitario La Paz., Madrid, Spain; 2CIBERER, Centro de Investiga-
ción Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain;
3ITHACA-European Reference Network-Hospital la Paz, Madrid, Spain;
4Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias (HUCA), Servicio de
Neuropediatría, oviedo (Asturias), Spain; 5Facultad de Educación,
UCM, Dpto. Investigación y Psicología en Educación, Madrid, Spain;
6Universidad ICESI, Cali, Colombia; 7Hospital Regional de Antofa-
gasta, Servicio de Pediatría, Antofagasta, Chile.
Background/Objectives:
Wolf-Hirschhorn
syndrome
(WHS)
results from the loss of genetic material at 4pter. It is a neurode-
velopmental disorder of genetic cause that have great phenotypic
heterogeneity, including global developmental delay, micro-
cephaly, delayed/absent speech, dysmorphic features, and epi-
lepsy. We compare clinical, genetics, and follow-up characteristics
between the Spanish and Latin-American subpopulations.
Methods: We describe a cohort of 134 patients with WHS
(Spain, 72; Latino-America, 62). Patients were characterized by
deep phenotyping, SNP-arrays, and other genetic approaches.
We estimated an individual severity score (The global functional
assessment of the patients (GFAP)) in our two cohorts using
different features taken from two questionnaires and weighed
them by HPO-term frequencies, on a numerical scale. Principal
Component analysis was performed to validate our GFAP scale.
Results: The whole cohort (134) has a mean age of 7.81 years
and shows a predominance of female sex over males (2:1).
Although no differences between the two cohorts were observed
at neonatal variables nor dysmorphic traits or physical aspects, we
do ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences at several comorbidities, different
items affecting developmental delay and clinical management of
the epilepsy, although both subpopulations showed similar GFAP
functional numbers.
Conclusion: No great functional differences can be made
comparing both subpopulations, but do see signiﬁcant changes at
some of the variables collected (mainly related to the clinical and
genetic managements of the cases).We used our GFAP scale as a
base to develop a potential Clinical Outcome Assessment for each
individual.
References: None.
Grants: FIS PI18/01433 from ISCIII. Ministry of Health. Spain.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P09.056.A Supporting evidence on the role of a novel STXBP1
variant underlying discordant phenotypes in a family with a
common apparently balanced translocation
Constantia Aristidou1;2, athina theodosiou1;2, angelos alexandrou1,
ioannis papaevripidou1, paola evangelidou1;2, carolina sismani1;2
1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Department of
Cytogenetics and Genomics, Nicosia, Cyprus; 2The Cyprus School of
Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics,
Nicosia, Cyprus.
Background/Objectives: Familial apparently balanced transloca-
tions (ABTs) segregating with discordant phenotypes are chal-
lenging for interpretation and counselling. We report an individual
with intellectual disability, epilepsy and a t(1;7)(p36.1;q22) inher-
ited from his non-affected mother. All possible mechanisms that
could explain the differential phenotypes were thoroughly inves-
tigated; whole-genome mate-pair sequencing further demon-
strated that the common translocation was identical and truly
balanced. Subsequent family-based Whole-Exome Sequencing
(WES)
revealed
a
novel,
de
novo
splice
donor
variant
(NM_003165.6:c.1110+2T>G)
in
the
STXBP1
gene,
which
is
essential for neurotransmitter release through syntaxin regulation.
Methods: In order to assess the impact of this candidate var-
iant on mRNA splicing, RNA was extracted from lymphoblastoid
cell lines of the patient and a control sample. Reverse transcription
PCR (RT-PCR) was performed, using STXBP1-speciﬁc primers
ﬂanking the identiﬁed variant and β-actin primers, followed by
bidirectional sequencing.
Results: The expected wild-type STXBP1 allele was observed in
both samples but lower quantities were seen in the patient.
However, when a primer speciﬁcally amplifying the mutated allele
was used, a PCR product was obtained only in the patient, indi-
cating the incorporation of intronic sequences into the STXBP1
transcript. Sequencing of the RT-PCR products revealed that ﬁf-
teen new amino acids are eventually inserted at position 371 of
the STXBP1 protein (NP_003156.1) followed by a premature
stop codon.
Conclusion:
This
study
supports
our
previous
ﬁndings
describing familial ABTs as coincidental in individuals with dis-
cordant phenotypes. The novel, de novo STXBP1 variant identiﬁed
by WES affects normal splicing and segregates with the patient’s
phenotypes, thus expanding the mutational spectrum of the
STXBP1 gene.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10 NEUROGENETIC AND PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
P10.001.D High diagnostic rate of trio exome sequencing in
consanguineous families with neurogenetic diseases
AYSE SEMRA HIZ1;2;3, Yavuz Oktay3;4, Ana Töpf5, Nora Szabo6,
GUNGOR
SERDAL7,
Ahmet
Yaramis8,
Ece
Sonmezler1,
Leslie
Matalonga9, Uluc Yis2, Katherine Schon10;11, Ida Paramonov9, İpek
Polat Kalafatcilar1;2, Fei Gao11;12, Aliz Rieger13, Nur Arslan3;14,
Elmasnur Yilmaz15, Burcu Ekinci1, Pinar Pulat Edem2, Mahmut
Aslan7, Bilge Ozgor7, Ashwati Nair16, Reza Marooﬁan17, Henry
Houlden17, Kiran Polavarapu18, Andreas Roos18;19;20, Juliane S.
Müller10;21, Denisa Hathazi10;22, Patrick Chinnery10;11, Steven Laurie9,
Sergi Beltran9, Hanns Lochmüller9;18;23, Rita Horvath10;21
1Izmir International Biomedicine and Genome Institute, Dokuz Eylul
University, Izmir, Turkey; 2Dokuz Eylul University, School of Medicine,
Department of Paediatric Neurology, Izmir, Turkey; 3Izmir Biomedi-
cine and Genome Center, Dokuz Eylul University Health Campus,
Izmir, Turkey; 4Dokuz Eylul University, School of Medicine, Depart-
ment of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey;
5John Walton Muscular
Dystrophy Research Centre, Institute of Translational and Clinical
Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United King-
dom; 6Epilepsy-Neurology Polyclinic of Buda Children’s Hospital, New
Saint
John’s
Hospital
and
Northern
-Buda
United
Hospitals,
Budapest, Hungary; 7Inonu University, Faculty of Medicine, Turgut
Ozal Research Center, Department of Paediatric Neurology, Malatya,
Turkey; 8Pediatric Neurology Clinic, Diyarbakir, Turkey; 9CNAG-CRG,
Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, Barcelona, Spain;
10Department of Clinical Neuros-
ciences, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge
Biomedical
Campus,
Cambridge,
United
Kingdom;
11Medical Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, United
Kingdom; 12Department of Clinical Neurosciences, School of Clinical
Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus,
Cambridge,
United
Kingdom;
13Rehabilitation
Centre
for
the
Physically Handicapped, Budapest, Hungary; 14Dokuz Eylul Univer-
sity, School of Medicine, Department of Paediatric Nutrition and
Metabolism, Izmir, Turkey;
15Izmir International Biomedicine and
Genome Institute, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey; 16GKT School
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
466
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
of Medical Education, King’s College London, London, United
Kingdom; 17Neurogenetics Laboratory, National Hospital for Neurol-
ogy and Neurosurgery, University College London, London, United
Kingdom; 18Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada; 19Leibniz-Institut für Analy-
tische Wissenschaften, ISAS e. V., Dortmund, Germany; 20Department
of Pediatric Neurology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany;
21Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Van Geest Centre for
Brain Repair, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; 22Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
John Van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, School of Clinical Medicine,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 23Department
of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Medical Center–University
of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Consanguineous marriages are common
in Turkey (~25%). They increase the risk for autosomal recessive
genetic diseases most of which mainly affect the nervous system
and muscles. Access to molecular diagnostic methods and other
advanced diagnostic tools are limited in the majority of children
with
neurogenetic
diseases
in
Turkey.
Although
the
next-
generation sequencing reduces the diagnostic odyssey, the
diagnosis success rate is still low for neurogenetic diseases which
impose a substantial clinical and economic burden.
Methods: We recruited 246 children with clinically undiag-
nosed neurogenetic diseases from 190 consanguineous families.
All patients underwent deep phenotyping and trio exome
sequencing. Advanced bioinformatics platforms were used to
integrate the data (RD-Connect GPAP).
Results: We identiﬁed causative variants in 119 known dis-
ease genes (72%) and likely pathogenic variants in 27 novel
genes (14%) with an 86% overall diagnostic yield. The majority
of the causative variants were homozygous (82%) and the
remaining were de novo (9.3%), X-linked recessive (5.2%), and
compound heterozygous (3.5%) variants. Protein synthesis/
degradation defects and metabolic disease-related pathways
were mostly revealed by pathway analysis. We also provided
prevention of transmission and targeted treatments in 24
patients (10%).
Conclusion:
We
generated
an
important
genomic
data
resource to better understand the genetic causes of childhood
neurogenetic disorders, provided improved diagnosis and tar-
geted treatments. We also demonstrated the superiority of trio
exome sequencing over singleton exome sequencing and tar-
geted gene panels.
References: Kurul, S. H. et al. High diagnostic rate of trio exome
sequencing in consanguineous families with neurogenetic dis-
eases. Brain (2021). https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awab395.
Grants: TUBITAK Newton-Katip Celebi Fund (216S771).
Conﬂict of Interest: AYSE SEMRA HIZ TUBITAK (The Scientiﬁc
and Technological Research Council of Turkey) Project No.
216S771, Yavuz Oktay TUBITAK (The Scientiﬁc and Technological
Research Council of Turkey) Project No. 216S771, Ana Töpf: None
declared, Nora Szabo: None declared, GUNGOR SERDAL TUBITAK
(The Scientiﬁc and Technological Research Council of Turkey)
Project No. 216S771, Ahmet Yaramis TUBITAK (The Scientiﬁc and
Technological Research Council of Turkey) Project No. 216S771,
Ece Sonmezler: None declared, Leslie Matalonga: None declared,
Uluc Yis: None declared, Katherine Schon: None declared, Ida
Paramonov: None declared, İpek Polat Kalafatcilar: None declared,
Fei Gao: None declared, Aliz Rieger: None declared, Nur Arslan:
None declared, Elmasnur Yilmaz: None declared, Burcu Ekinci:
None declared, Pinar Pulat Edem: None declared, Mahmut Aslan:
None declared, Bilge Ozgor: None declared, Ashwati Nair: None
declared, Reza Marooﬁan: None declared, Henry Houlden: None
declared, Kiran Polavarapu: None declared, Andreas Roos: None
declared, Juliane S. Müller: None declared, Denisa Hathazi: None
declared, Patrick Chinnery: None declared, Steven Laurie: None
declared, Sergi Beltran: None declared, Hanns Lochmüller Newton
Fund [UK/Turkey, MR/N027302/1], Rita Horvath Newton Fund [UK/
Turkey, MR/N027302/1].
P10.002.A Genetic overlap between dystonia and other
neurologic disorders: a study of 1,100 exomes
Ivana Dzinovic1;2, Sylvia Bösch3, Matej Škorvánek4;5, Ján Necpál6,
Jana Švantnerová7, Petra Pavelekova4;5, Petra Havránková8, Eugenia
Tsoma9, Elisabetta Indelicato3, Eva Runkel10, Valentin Held11, David
Weise12;13, Wibke Janzarik14, Matthias Eckenweiler14, Steffen Ber-
weck15;16, Volker Mall17;18, Bernhard Haslinger19, Robert Jech8,
Juliane Winkelmann1;2;20, Michael Zech1;2
1Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich,
Germany; 2School of Medicine, Institute of Human Genetics, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany; 3Department of Neurology,
Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria; 4Department of
Neurology, P.J. Safarik University, Kosice, Slovakia; 5Department of
Neurology, University Hospital of L. Pasteur, Kosice, Slovakia;
6Department of Neurology, Zvolen Hospital, Zvolen, Slovakia; 7Second
Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University,
University Hospital Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia; 8Department of
Neurology, Charles University, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General
University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic;
9Ukraine,
Ukraine, Ukraine; 10Klinikum Aschaffenburg-Alzenau, Aschaffenburg,
Germany; 11Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty Mannheim,
Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany; 12Klinik für Neurologie,
Asklepios Fachklinikum Stadtroda, Stadtroda, Germany; 13Department
of Neurology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany; 14Department of
Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, University Medical Center,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany;
15Ludwig
Maximilian
University
of
Munich,
Munich,
Germany;
16Hospital for Neuropediatrics and Neurological Rehabilitation, Centre
of Epilepsy for Children and Adolescents, Schoen Klinik Vogtareuth,
Vogtareuth, Germany;
17Lehrstuhl für Sozialpädiatrie, Technische
Universität
München,
Munich,
Germany;
18kbo-Kinderzentrum
München, Munich, Germany; 19Department of Neurology, Klinikum
rechts der Isar, Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine,
Munich, Germany; 20Lehrstuhl für Neurogenetik, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Although shared genetic factors have
been previously reported between dystonia and other neurologic
conditions, no sequencing study exploring such links is available.
In a large dystonic cohort, we aimed at analyzing the proportions
of causative variants in genes associated with disease categories
other than dystonia.
Methods: Gene ﬁndings related to whole-exome sequencing-
derived diagnoses in 1,100 dystonia index cases were compared
with expert-curated molecular testing panels for ataxia, spastic
paraplegia, neuropathy, epilepsy, and intellectual disability.
Results: Among 220 diagnosed patients, 21% had variants in
ataxia-linked genes; 15% in spastic-paraplegia-linked genes; 12%
in neuropathy-linked genes; 32% in epilepsy-linked genes; and
65% in intellectual-disability-linked genes. Most diagnoses (76%)
were related to genes listed in ≥1 studied panel; 69% of the
involved loci were found in the non-dystonia panels but not in an
expert-curated gene list for dystonia.
Conclusion: Our study indicates a convergence in the genetics
of dystonia and other neurologic phenotypes, informing diagnostic
evaluation strategies and pathophysiological considerations.
References:.
Grants: This study was funded by Technische Universität
München; Helmholtz Zentrum München; Medizinische Universität
Innsbruck; Charles University Prague; Czech Ministry of Education;
European Joint Programme on Rare Diseases; Slovak Grant
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
467
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
and Development Agency; Operational Programme Integrated
Infrastructure,
ERDF;
Else
Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung;
German
Research Foundation; and European Reference Network for Rare
Neurological Diseases.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.003.B Contribution of schizophrenia polygenic burden to
longitudinal phenotypic variance in 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome
Alexandre Reymond1, Valentina Mancini2, Kristi Läll3, Maude
Schneider2;4, Luciana Romano5, Lili Milani3, Reedik Mägi3, Emma-
nouil Dermitzakis5, Stephan Eliez2, Maris Alver1;3;5
1University of Lausanne, Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne,
Switzerland;
2University of Geneva, Developmental Imaging and
Psychopathology Laboratory, Geneva, Switzerland;
3Institute of
Genomics, University of Tartu, Estonian Genome Center, Tartu,
Estonia;
4University
of
Geneva,
Clinical
Psychology
Unit
for
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, Faculty of Psychology
and Educational Sciences, Geneva, Switzerland;
5University of
Geneva, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Geneva,
Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: While the recurrent 22q11.2 deletion is
one of the strongest genetic risk factors for schizophrenia (SCZ),
variability of its associated neuropsychiatric endophenotypes
reﬂects its incomplete penetrance for psychosis development.
Methods: To assess whether this phenotypic variability is
linked to common variants associated with SCZ, we studied the
association between SCZ polygenic risk score (PRS) and long-
itudinally acquired phenotypic information of the Swiss 22q11.2DS
cohort (n = 97, 50% females, mean age 17.7yr, mean visit interval
3.8yr).
Results: The SCZ PRS with the best predictive performance was
ascertained in the Estonian Biobank (n = 201,146) with LDpred.
The inﬁnitesimal SCZ PRS model showed the strongest capacity in
discriminating SCZ cases from controls with one SD difference in
SCZ PRS corresponding to an odds ratio (OR) of 1.74 (95% CI
1.59–1.90,
P = 2.99 × 10-33).
Social
anhedonia
(OR = 2.09,
P = 0.0002), avolition (OR = 1.61, P = 0.001) and ideational rich-
ness (OR = 1.78, P = 0.003) within negative symptoms course, and
dysphoric mood (OR = 2.00, P = 0.002) and stress intolerance
(OR = 1.76, P = 0.0002) within general symptoms course showed
the strongest associations with SCZ PRS in 22q11.2 patients.
Genetic liability for SCZ was additionally associated with full scale
cognitive decline (β = –0.25, P = 0.02) and with longitudinal
volumetric reduction of the right and left hippocampi (β=–0.28,
P = 0.005; β=–0.23, P = 0.02, respectively).
Conclusion: Our results indicate that the polygenic contribu-
tion to SCZ acts upon the threshold-lowering ﬁrst hit (i.e., the
deletion). It modiﬁes the endophenotypes of 22q11.2DS and
augments the derailment of developmental trajectories for
negative and general symptoms, cognition, and hippocampal
volume.
References:.
Grants:
NCCR
51NF40-158776;
SNF
1003A_182632;
SNF
320030_179404; ETAg PUTJD901.
Conﬂict of Interest: Alexandre Reymond: None declared,
Valentina Mancini: None declared, Kristi Läll: None declared,
Maude
Schneider:
None
declared,
Luciana
Romano:
None
declared, Lili Milani: None declared, Reedik Mägi: None declared,
Emmanouil Dermitzakis E.T.D is currently an employee of GSK. The
work presented in this manuscript was performed before he
joined GSK., Stephan Eliez: None declared, Maris Alver: None
declared.
P10.004.C Get your molar tooth right: Joubert syndrome
misdiagnosis unmasked by whole exome sequencing
Fulvio D’Abrusco1, Filippo Arrigoni2, Valentina Serpieri3, Romina
Romaniello4, Caterina Caputi5, Filippo Manti5, Bosanka Jocic-
Jakubi6;7, Elisabetta Lucarelli8, Elena Panzeri9, Maria Clara Bona-
glia10, Luisa Chiapparini11, Anna Pichiecchio12;13, Lorenzo Pinelli14,
Andrea Righini15, Vincenzo Leuzzi5, Renato Borgatti13;16, Enza Maria
Valente1;3
1University of Pavia, Dept. of Molecular Medicine, Pavia, Italy;
2Scientiﬁc Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Neuroimaging Lab, Bosisio
Parini, Italy; 3IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Neurogenetics Research
Center, Pavia, Italy;
4Scientiﬁc Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea,
Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit, Bosisio Parini, Italy;
5Università di Roma La Sapienza, Unit of Child Neurology and
Psychiatry, Department of Human Neuroscience, Rome, Italy; 6Sultan
Qaboos University Hospital, Child Health Department, Muscat,
Oman;
7Clinical
Center
Nis,
Pediatric
Clinic,
Child
Neurology
Department, Nis, Serbia; 8Scientiﬁc Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea,
Unit for Severe Disabilities in Developmental Age and Young Adults,
Brinidisi, Italy; 9Scientiﬁc Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Molecular
Biology Laboratory, Bosisio Parini, Italy; 10Scientiﬁc Institute, IRCCS
Eugenio Medea, Cytogenetics Laboratory, Bosisio Parini, Italy;
11Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Neuroradiology
Unit, Milan, Italy; 12IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Neuroradiology Unit,
Pavia, Italy; 13University of Pavia, Dept. Of Brain and Behavioral
Sciences, Pavia, Italy;
14ASST Spedali Civili, Neuroradiology Unit,
Pediatric Neuroradiology Section, Brescia, Italy; 15V. Buzzi Children’s
Hospital, Paediatric Radiology and Neuroradiology Department,
Milan, Italy;
16IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Child Neurology and
Psychiatry Unit, Pavia, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Joubert Syndrome (JS) is a recessively
inherited ciliopathy, characterized by a speciﬁc cerebellar and
brainstem malformation recognizable on brain imaging as the
“Molar Tooth Sign” (MTS). Clinical signs include infantile hypo-
tonia, developmental delay and intellectual disability of variable
degree, ataxia, ocular-motor apraxia and variable organ invol-
vement. In recent years, the genetic diagnosis of JS has been
mostly based on the analysis of next-generation-sequencing
targeted gene panels. Recognition of the MTS is crucial to
address the patient to the appropriate genetic testing. However,
the MTS is not always properly diagnosed, resulting either in
false negative diagnoses (patients with the MTS not addressed
to JS genetic testing) or in false positive diagnoses (patients with
a different brain malformation wrongly addressed to JS genetic
testing).
Methods: We report on six cases referred for JS genetic testing
based on inappropriate recognition of MTS.
Results: While the analysis of JS-related genes was negative,
whole exome sequencing (WES) disclosed pathogenic variants in
other genes causative of distinct brain malformations: LAMA1
(Poretti-Boltshauser syndrome), SHANK3 (Phelan-McDermid syn-
drome), GTPBP2 (Jaberi-Elahi syndrome), NLGN4X (X-linked mental
retardation and autism susceptibility) and 16p11.2 deletion.
Reassessment of brain MRIs conﬁrmed that the initial suspicion of
MTS was incorrect.
Conclusion: This study highlights that the diagnostic yield of
NGS-based targeted panels is strictly related to the accuracy of the
diagnostic referral based on clinical and imaging assessment, and
that WES has an advantage over targeted panel analysis when the
diagnostic suspicion is not straightforward.
References: PMID: 34846692.
Grants: Ricerca Corrente 2021, RF-2019-12369368, PADAPORT.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
468
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P10.005.D A complex chromosome 21 rearrangement causes
APP triplication and autosomal dominant early onset
Alzheimer disease
Emma Ehn1;2, Jesper Eisfeldt3, Håkan Thonberg4, José Lafﬁta1;2,
Jacqueline
Schoumans5,
Anne
Remes6,
Matti
Viitanen7,
Anna
Lindstrand3;4, Inger Nennesemo8;9, Caroline Graff1;2
1Karolinska Institute, Division for Neurogeriatrics, Centre for Alzhei-
mer Research, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and
Society, Stockholm, Sweden; 2Karolinska University Hospital Solna,
Unit for Hereditary Dementias, Stockholm, Sweden;
3Karolinska
Institute, Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Stockholm, Sweden;
4Karolinska
University
Hospital
Solna,
Department
of
Clinical
Genetics,
Stockholm,
Sweden;
5Centre
Universitaire
Hospitalier
Vaudois (CHUV), Département de Médicine de Laboratoire et
Pathologie, Lausanne, Switzerland; 6University of Helsinki, Depart-
ment of Neurology, Helsinki, Finland; 7Karolinska Institute, Division
for Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences
and Society, Huddinge, Sweden; 8Karolinska Institute, Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden;
9Karolinska University
Hospital, Department of Pathology, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Amyloid-β precursor protein (APP) gene
copy number variation can cause early onset autosomal dominant
Alzheimer disease (EO-ADAD). We present a parent and a child
with symptom onset at age 64 and 34 years respectively. Neuro-
pathology conﬁrmed the AD diagnosis with Braak stages V-VI and
extensive cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA).
Methods: Array comparative genomic hybridization (array-
CGH) of genomic DNA from blood identiﬁed increased APP copies,
with seemingly more copies in the child. Follow-up analysis with
genome sequencing (GS) allowed for a detailed analysis of the APP
copy number and the breakpoint junctions in both individuals.
Results: The GS analysis, using FindSV (TIDDIT, CNVnator) and
visualization in IGV, resolved the genomic architecture of the
complex structural variant with novel breakpoints; a triplication
with three APP copies that was mosaic in the parent (20% of cells).
All involved segments, including an inverted middle segment, are
in cis. Further characterization of mosaicism will be explored using
digital droplet PCR on tissue from different body organs and brain
regions.
Conclusion: Structural chromosomal rearrangements in neu-
rodegenerative disorders (NDS) likely contribute to the missing
heritability. A GS-ﬁrst approach allows for efﬁcient screening of
structural variants and provides more patients with a genetic
diagnosis. In our study, the presence of the triplication in 100% of
the cells in the child, while the parent was mosaic, is the expla-
nation for the anticipation with 20 years earlier onset of AD in
the child.
References:.
Grants: Emma Ehn was supported by the Region Stockholm
(combined residency and PhD training program).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.006.A Sensorimotor polyneuropathy is an
underestimated feature of ENTPD1 associated spastic
paraplegia
Dilsu Dicle Erkan1, Ulkuhan Oztoprak2, Naz Guleray1;3
1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics, Ankara,
Turkey; 2Dr Sami Ulus Maternity and Children’s Health and Disease
Training and Research Hospital, Pediatric Neurology, Ankara, Turkey;
3Dr Sami Ulus Maternity and Children’s Health and Disease Training
and Research Hospital, Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
Background/Objectives:
Spastic
paraplegia
type-64
(SPG64;
OMIM615683) is an ultra-rare form of complicated hereditary
spastic paraplegia. SPG64, caused by biallelic ENTPD1 mutations, is
associated with impaired purinergic neurotransmission. Here, we
report a novel ENTPD1 variant which adds novel dysmorphic
ﬁndings, thalamus atrophy and sensorimotor polyneuropathy to
phenotypic spectrum of SPG64.
Methods: Clinical exome sequencing was conducted utilizing
Illumina-TruSight-One panel and analyzed by SophiaDDM.
Results: The previously unreported nonsense ENTPD1 variant
NM_001776: c.1174C>T (p.Gln392Ter) is located in the extra-
cellular loop domain and is linked to a severe SPG64 phenotype in
the proband, associated with early age-of-onset (2 years) and total
loss of ambulation at 6 years. Segregation was in accordance with
autosomal recessive inheritance in the family.
Conclusion: Only 9 individuals with SPG64 from 5 families have
been described with clinical details and the full phenotypic
spectrum remains inadequately characterized. Based on our
comprehensive follow-up for 4 years and comparison with
reported individuals, the clinical spectrum of SPG64 can include
cognitive decline (9/10), speech abnormality (7/10), dystonia (3/
10) and brain abnormalities (3/7). Additionally, presence of sen-
sorimotor polyneuropathy in the proband, accompanied by tha-
lamus
atrophy
possibly
secondary
to
sensory
neuropathy,
suggests that the clinical spectrum of SPG64 is broader than
previously reported. Early-stage neuropathy suspected in a pre-
vious individual with SPG64 supports that neuropathy may be an
overlooked phenotypic component of SPG64. Moreover, neuro-
pathy may also be associated with impaired purine metabolism
since purines are acting as neurotransmitters in peripheral ner-
vous system. Our study highlights the importance of evaluating all
future patients for clues of neuropathy.
References: PMID:33771085.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.007.B Intermediate and expanded HTT alleles and risk for
α-synucleinopathies
Sergio Pérez Oliveira1, Israel David Duarte Herrera1, Maria Victoria
Alvarez Martinez1;2, Pau Pastor3, Ignacio Álvarez Fernandez3, Laura
Molina-Porcel4;5, Irene Rosas1, Manuel Menendez-Gonzalez2;6, Iban
Aldecoa5;7, Marta Blázquez-Estrada2;6, Miguel Aguilar3, Daniela
Corte8, Maria J Martí9;10, Juan Pascual Sanchez10;11, Jon Infante10;12,
Isabel Gonzalez Aramburu10;12, Maria Teresa Periñan10;13, Daniel
Macias-García10;13,
Laura
Muñoz
Delgado10;13,
Pilar
Gómez-
Garre10;13, Pablo Mir Rivera10;13;14, Alberto Lleo Bisa10;15, Daniel
Alcolea10;15, Beatriz De la Casa Fages16, Francisco Grandas16, Jordi
Clarimón10;15
1Central University Hospital of Asturias, Laboratory of Genetics,
Oviedo, Spain; 2Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de
Asturias (ISPA), Oviedo, Spain;
3Hospital Universitari Mútua de
Terrassa and Fundació Docència i Recerca Mútua de Terrassa,
Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology, Terrassa, Spain; 4Hospital Clínic
i Provincial de Barcelona and Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi I Sunyer, Alzheimer’s disease and other cognitive disorders
unit, Neurology, Barcelona, Spain; 5Hospital Clínic de Barcelona,
Pathology Department, Biomedical Diagnostic Center, Barcelona,
Spain; 6Central University Hospital of Asturias, Neurology, Oviedo,
Spain;
7Neurological Tissue Bank of the Biobank-Hospital Clinic-
IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain; 8Central University Hospital of Asturias,
Biobank of Principado de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain; 9Hospital Clínic de
Barcelona, Parkinson’s Disease and Movement Disorders Unit,
Neurology, Barcelona, Spain; 10Carlos III Health Institute, CIBERNED,
Madrid, Spain; 11Centro Alzheimer Fundación Reina Sofía Gestión
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
469
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Pública, Madrid, Spain; 12Marqués de Valdecilla University Hospital,
Neurology, Santander, Spain; 13Virgen del Rocío University Hospital,
Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology, Sevilla, Spain;
14Medical
School, Medicine, Sevilla, Spain; 15Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant
Pau, Neurology, Barcelona, Spain;
16Instituto De Investigación
Sanitaria Gregorio Marañon, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Previous studies suggest a link between
CAG repeat number in the HTT gene and non-Huntington neu-
rodegenerative diseases. The main objective is to analyze whether
expanded HTT CAG alleles and/or their size are associated with the
risk for developing α-synucleinopathies or their behavior as
modulators of the phenotype.
Methods: We genotyped the HTT gene CAG repeat number
and APOE-Ɛ isoforms in a case-control series including patients
with
either
clinical
or
neuropathological
diagnosis
of
α-
synucleinopathy.
Results: We identiﬁed three PD patients who carried low-
penetrance HTT repeat expansions representing 0.29% of the PD
cohort, whereas none of the DLB or MSA patients nor any healthy
control carried pathogenic HTT expansions. In addition, a clear
increase of the number of HTT CAG repeats was found among DLB
and PD groups inﬂuenced by the male gender, and with the
presence of APOE4 allele among DLB patients. HTT Intermediate
alleles’ (IAs) distribution frequency was increased in the MSA
group compared with controls (8.8% vs 2.9%, respectively). These
differences were indeed statistically signiﬁcant in the MSA group
with neuropathological conﬁrmation. Two MSA HTT CAG IAs car-
riers with ≥32 HTT CAG repeats showed isolated polyQ inclusions
in pons and basal nuclei, which are two critical structures in the
neurodegeneration of MSA.
Conclusion: Our results pointed to a link between, HTT CAG
number, HTT IAs and expanded HTT CAG repeats with other non
HD brain pathology and also support the hypothesis that they can
share common neurodegenerative pathways.
References:.
Grants: PI21/0467 to VA, and PI21/00886 to PP.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.008.C Founder effect in Joubert syndrome: identiﬁcation
of four shared haplotypes enriched in distinct European
geographical regions associated to recurrent variants
Valentina Serpieri1, Giulia Mortarini2, Tommaso Biagini3, Ilaria
Palmieri1, Fulvio D’Abrusco2, Concetta Mazzotta2, Roberta Battini4;5,
Enrico Bertini6, Eugen Boltshauser7, Renato Borgatti8;9, Stefano
D’Arrigo10, Nardo Nardocci11, Rita Fischetto12, Alfonso Romano13,
Franco Stanzial14, Pietro Strisciuglio13, Tommaso Mazza3, Enza Maria
Valente1;2
1IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Neurogenetic Research Center, Pavia,
Italy; 2University of Pavia, Dept. of Molecular Medicine, Pavia, Italy;
3IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Bioinformatic Lab, CSS-Mendel
Institute, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; 4IRCCS Stella Maris Founda-
tion, Pisa, Italy; 5University of Pisa, Dept. of Clinical ad Experimental
Medicine, Pisa, Italy;
6Bambino Gesù Children Research Hospital
IRCCS, Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders,
Rome, Italy; 7University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Dept. of Pediatric
Neurology (emeritus), Zurich, Switzerland; 8IRCCS Mondino Founda-
tion, Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Pavia, Italy; 9University of
Pavia,
Dept.
of
Brain
and
Behavioral
Sciences,
Pavia,
Italy;
10Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Dept. of
Developmental Neurology, Milan, Italy; 11Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico Carlo Besta, Dept. of Child Neurology, Milan, Italy;
12Giovanni XXIII Children’s Hospital, Clinical Genetics Unit, Dept. of
Pediatric Medicine, Bari, Italy; 13University Federico II Naples, Dept. of
Medical Translational Sciences Section of Pediatrics, Naples, Italy;
14Regional Hospital of Bolzano, Genetic Counseling Service, Dept. of
Pediatrics, Bozen, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Joubert syndrome (JS) is a neurodeve-
lopmental ciliopathy characterized by peculiar mid-hindbrain
malformation, the “molar tooth sign”. The >40 known causative
genes account for 65-75% cases. While most pathogenic variants
are novel or extremely rare, we report on 10 recurring variants in
six genes, including three already known “founder variants”.
Methods: We compared the frequencies of these variants in
two unrelated JS cohorts (one Italian-European and one from the
United States), in three Italian control cohorts and in the gnomAD
database.
Results: Six variants were markedly enriched in both JS cohorts
compared to controls, while three others were enriched only in
European JS. Genotyping of microsatellite markers across the gene
loci identiﬁed four novel founder haplotypes: (1) a 2.29Mb Medi-
terranean haplotype across MKS1 c.1476T>G; (2) a 2.02Mb Sardi-
nian haplotype around KIAA0586 c.1006C>T; (3) a ~1.4Mb
European haplotype encompassing KIAA0586 exon 8-10 deletion;
(4) a 747Kb Italian haplotype across RPGRIP1L c.1843A>C.
Of note, we and others showed that at least two (MKS1
c.1476T>G and KIAA0586 c.428delG) are hypomorphic variants
which do not cause JS when homozygous, but only when in trans
with a more deleterious variant. Functional studies for MKS1
c.1476T>G, showed a similarly reduced percentage of ciliated cells
between
healthy
homozygous
parent
and
compound-
heterozygous affected son, but a much more severe reduction
of ciliary length in the patient, conﬁrming the hypomorphic effect.
Conclusion: This study contributes to understand the complex
genetic landscape of rare genetically heterogeneous diseases such
as JS, and to explain their variable prevalence in distinct areas.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.010.A Perinatal stroke: the importance of genetic testing
Liene Thys1, Diane Beysen1, Sandra Kenis1, Katrien Janssens2, Marije
Meuwissen2
1Antwerp University Hospital, Paediatric neurology, Edegem, Belgium;
2Antwerp University Hospital, Medical genetics, Edegem, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Perinatal stroke is a group of cere-
brovascular disorders with an incidence ranging from 1/1600 to 1/
4000 live births. It is related to several neonatal and maternal risk
factors, such as coagulation disorders, infection, asphyxia, etc.
However, in some patients no traditional risk factors can be
identiﬁed, hence a genetic cause might underlie the pathophy-
siology of stroke in these patients.
Methods: In our cohort of 76 cases with (presumed) perinatal
stroke, 36 cases with ischemic stroke and 40 cases with intracranial
haemorrhage were identiﬁed. All cases underwent genetic inves-
tigations using single nucleotide polymorphism array and a whole
exome sequencing based gene panel.
Results: A genetic diagnosis was conﬁrmed in 7/76 cases
(9.21%). The diagnostic yield was highest in cases with haemor-
rhagic stroke (6/40 patients, 15%), with an important contribution of
COL4A1 pathogenic variants (4/6 diagnosed cases with haemor-
rhagic stroke, 66.67%). Furthermore, trisomy 12p and cardiofacio-
cutaneous syndrome due to a de novo pathogenic BRAF variant
were diagnosed in two haemorrhagic stroke cases. In the ischemic
stroke group, only one diagnosis was made, comprising a de novo
mosaic JAG1 variant in an atypical case of Alagille syndrome.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings highlight the added value of genetic
testing in cases with (presumed) perinatal stroke. A higher yield
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
470
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
was present in patients with haemorrhagic stroke, where we could
establish a signiﬁcant contribution of COL4A1 pathogenic variants.
The added value in ischemic stroke seems less substantial, how-
ever needs further investigation.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the Marguerite-Marie
Delacroix support fund (RVC/B-458).
Conﬂict of Interest: Liene Thys This work was supported by
the Marguerite-Marie Delacroix support fund (RVC/B-458)., Diane
Beysen This work was supported by the Marguerite-Marie Dela-
croix support fund (RVC/B-458), Sandra Kenis: None declared,
Katrien Janssens: None declared, Marije Meuwissen This work was
supported by the Marguerite-Marie Delacroix support fund (RVC/
B-458).
P10.011.B Evaluation of microRNA from serum extracellular
vesicles in adolescents at risk for psychiatric disorders
Jessica
Honorato
Mauer1,
Gabriela
Xavier2;3,
Vanessa
Ota1,
Amanda Bugiga1, Adrielle Martins1, Mirian Boim1, Paula Asprino4,
Samar Chehimi5;6, Fernanda Mafra5;6, Renata Pellegrino5;6, Pedro
Pan1, Rodrigo Bressan1, Giovanni Salum7, Sintia Belangero1, Marcos
Santoro1
1Federal University of São Paulo (Unifesp), São Paulo, Brazil; 2Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, United States; 3Massachu-
setts General Hospital, Boston, United States; 4Hospital Sírio-Libanês,
São Paulo, Brazil; 5Center for Applied Genomics at Children’s Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, United States; 6University of Pennsyl-
vania, Philadelphia, United States; 7Federal University of Rio Grande
do Sul (Ufrgs), Porto Alegre, Brazil.
Background/Objectives: Exosomes are small extracellular vesicles
(EVs) detected in body ﬂuids, their content commonly enriched for
microRNAs. They can cross the blood-brain barrier and therefore may
reﬂect alterations in the brain. Here, we longitudinally evaluate
microRNA content in serum EVs from adolescents, to identify those
associated with incidence and remission of Psychiatric Disorders (PDs).
Methods: We selected 119 individuals who were evaluated
twice over a three-year follow-up: controls (N = 30); incident cases
(N = 34); remitted cases (N = 29); and persistent cases (N = 26).
EVs were isolated from serum using differential centrifugation and
precipitation kit. We characterized EV size, concentration and
membrane proteins. microRNA was isolated from EV samples and
sequenced.
Results: EV characterization indicated the presence of general
and brain-associated EV protein markers. miR-4433b-5p, miR-584-
5p, miR-625-3p, miR-432-5p and miR-409-3p were differentially
expressed comparing Major Depression cases (n = 38) vs. controls
(n = 56) in the second timepoint (FDR-adjusted p-value <0.1). miR-
625-3p and miR-432-5p were previously associated with Schizo-
phrenia and miR-409-3p with Major Depression and cognition.
miR-382-5p, miR-625-3p, miR-134-5p and miR-151a-3p were dif-
ferentially expressed longitudinally in male individuals regardless
of diagnosis (n = 66). miR-134-5p regulates synaptic plasticity
processes, considered important in pubertal brain development.
Conclusion: We were able to observe differences in EV
microRNA expression associated with diagnosis of Major Depres-
sion, as well as with age in males, and characterize EV samples. We
expect to identify more microRNA associated with incidence and
remission of PDs.
References: Salum, et al., IntJ MethodsPsychiatrRes. 2015;
Geaghan M, Cairns MJ., BiolPsychiatry. 2015; Rao, et al., Neu-
rosciBiobehav Rev. 2016.
Grants: NARSAD Young Investigator Grant 573974/2008-0;
FAPESP 2020/02247-7; CAPES Scholarship.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.012.C Familial 1p36.31p36.23 deletion encompassing
CAMTA1 associated with variable intellectual disability and
ataxia phenotype
Mariana Soeiro e Sá1, rosário silveira-santos1, Ana Sousa1, Ana
Berta Sousa1
1Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa
Norte, Department of Medical Genetics, Lisbon, Portugal.
Background/Objectives: Intragenic CAMTA1 rearrangements are
rare and have been associated with varied neurobehavioral phe-
notypes, including developmental delay/intellectual disability
(DD/ID) and nonprogressive cerebellar ataxia (OMIM#614756).
From the few families reported, the phenotypic spectrum appears
to be very variable, with cognition ranging from normal to mod-
erate ID, and cerebellar signs from unsteady gait to overt ataxia.
Methods: The proband is a 9-year-old girl, referred due to
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and learning difﬁculties, with a
history of impairment in gross and ﬁne motor skills and unstea-
diness while running. Brain MRI was normal. Her maternal half-
sister had mild ID, ASD, attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) and a diagnosis of intrauterine CMV infection causing
postlingual unilateral deafness. She also had marked impairment
of gross and ﬁne motor skills; brain MRI showed possibly CMV-
related abnormalities, but no cerebellar involvement. Their mother
had no ID or ataxia, but reported mild global DD, learning difﬁ-
culties, and ADHD in childhood, plus a history of frequent falls.
Results:
ArrayCGH
identiﬁed
an
interstitial
deletion
in
1p36.31p36.23 (6967159_8402554; hg19) encompassing exons 4
to 23 of CAMTA1. FISH studies conﬁrmed the deletion to be
maternally inherited and present in the proband’s half-sister.
Conclusion: This family illustrates the variable phenotype
associated with intragenic rearrangements in CAMTA1, namely
regarding cognition and motor impairment. Although, to our
knowledge, the deletion found in this family is larger than pre-
viously reported (encompassing several genes downstream of
CAMTA1), the phenotype is similar to other families, further con-
tributing to establish CAMTA1 as a gene associated with a neu-
rodevelopmental phenotype with variable cerebellar involvement.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.013.D Fine-mapping and transcriptome wide association
study of anorexia nervosa prioritises WDR6 and immune
pathways as potential causal factors
Danielle Adams1, William Reay1;2, Murray Cairns1;2
1The University of Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia; 2Hunter Medical
Research Institute, Newcastle, Australia.
Background/Objectives: Anorexia nervosa is the leading cause of
mortality among psychiatric disorders worldwide. Currently no
medications are approved for anorexia treatment, and thus,
identiﬁcation of clinically actionable risk factors for this disease is
pivotal to reducing disease burden.
Methods: We performed a transcriptome wide association
study (TWAS) and conditional analysis across 17 tissues, leveraging
mRNA, protein, and mRNA alternative splicing weights to identify
genes, proteins, and transcripts, respectively, associated with
anorexia risk. We utilised the largest anorexia GWAS available to
date (N = 72,517). Probabilistic ﬁnemapping was then applied to
further prioritise genes that may represent true causal signals.
Results: TWAS identiﬁed 134 genes, 4 proteins, and 16
transcript isoforms signiﬁcantly associated with anorexia after
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
471
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Benjamini-Hochberg correction. A conditional analysis of these
signiﬁcantly associated genes considering other proximal genes
resulted in 97 genes that remained independently associated.
Moreover, ﬁnemapping prioritised ﬁve genes with strong evi-
dence of a causal effect on anorexia (PIP > 0.8 in 90% credible set),
with eight other genes exhibiting moderate evidence (PIP > 0.4).
Upregulation of the gene encoding WD repeat domain 6 (WDR6)
was identiﬁed as an anorexia risk gene through both ﬁnemapping
and conditional analysis. Genes prioritised by ﬁnemapping were
also overrepresented amongst the immune system process gene
ontology pathway.
Conclusion: We identify novel candidate risk genes for anor-
exia through integration of anorexia genetic associations with
models of genetically regulated mRNA, protein, and splicing.
There was strong evidence to support a role for WDR6 in anorexia
pathogenesis, whilst other prioritised genes were found to be
plausibly linked to immunological function.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Danielle Adams: None declared, William
Reay Employee of the University of Newcastle, Murray Cairns
Employee of the University of Newcastle.
P10.014.A Fatal familial Insomnia in the Basque Country:
descriptive analyses of a case series
Africa Manero Ruiz de Azua1, Izaro Kortazar Zubizarreta2, Arrate
Pereda3, Hasier Eraña4;5, Jorge Moreno Charco4;5, Guiomar Perez de
Nanclares Leal1, Joaquín Castilla4;6;7
1Bioaraba Health Research Institute, Molecular (Epi)Genetics Labora-
tory, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain;
2Bioaraba Health Research Institute,
Department of Neurology, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain; 1Bioaraba Health
Research
Institute,
Molecular
(Epi)Genetics
Laboratory,
Vitoria-
Gasteiz, Spain; 4Center for Cooperative Research in Biosciences (CIC
bioGUNE), Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA)., Derio,
Spain; 5ATLAS Molecular Pharma S. L., Derio, Spain; 6Ikerbasque.
Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain; 7Carlos III National
Health Institute, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades infecciosas, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Fatal familial insomnia (FFI) is a rare
prionopathy characterized by sleep disturbances, dysautonomia,
motor and cognitive dysfunction, thalamus neuronal loss and
gliosis. Although, the most prevalent genetic form of prion disease
worldwide occurs at codon 200 of the PRNP resulting in the typical
genetic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD)(1), in some regions as
Germany and Basque Country(2), the most common mutation is
located at the codon 178 of the PRNP (D178N) causing FFI.
Methods: The Basque Country Brain Bank database was
screened for patients with FFI diagnosed from 2010 to 2021
according to standard diagnostic criteria, including genetics and
neuropathological data. Epidemiological and clinic-genetic data
were analyzed.
Results: A total of 16 (12 male and 4 female) were detected. All
carried the D178N variant. The mean age of onset was 54 years
with a disease course of 11 months. The brain MRI (88%) and the
electroencephalography (81%) were usually normal, whereas
polysomnography was pathological in 92% of the cases. Most
(75%) of the patients were homozygous for Met129 polymorphism
and in the remaining 25%, the mutation was in cis with Met
variant. There was no family history in 25% of the cases.
Most classical diagnostic examinations were normal with
homogeneous consistency in this Basque FFI population.
Conclusion: Whereas classical clinical analyses are non-conclusive,
genetic study together with the polysomnography are essential in the
diagnosis of cases with suspected fatal familial insomnia.
References: 1. Kovács et al., Hum. Genet. 2005 1182. 118,
166–174 (2005).
2. De Pedro-Cuesta et al., Prion. 15, 94 (2021).
Grants: Not funded.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.015.B Phenotypic spectrum in four cases presenting
16p11.2 reciprocal CNVs associated with additional rare gene
variants – pleiotropic clinical outcomes
Teodora Barbarii1, Diana Barca2;3, Raluca Tudorache4, FLORINA
MIHAELA NEDELEA5;6, Georgeta Cardos5, Dana Craiu2;7
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Carol Davila”, Bucharest,
Romania, Medical Genetics, Bucharest, Romania; 2Clinical Hospital
“Prof. Dr. Alexandru Obregia”, Bucharest, Romania, Expertise
Center for Rare Pediatric Neurology Disorders, Pediatric Neurology
Clinic, Bucharest, Romania; 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy
“Carola Davila”, Bucharest, Pediatric Neurology, Bucharest, Roma-
nia; 2Clinical Hospital ”Prof. Dr. Alexandru Obregia”, Bucharest,
Romania, Expertise Center for Rare Pediatric Neurology Disorders,
Pediatric Neurology Clinic, Bucharest, Romania;
5“Filantropia”
Clinical Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Genetics,
Bucharest, Romania; 6University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Carola
Davila”, Bucharest, Medical Genetics, Bucharest, Romania; 7Uni-
versity of Medicine and Pharmacy “Carola Davila”, Bucharest,
Department
of
Neurosciences,
Pediatric
Neurology
Discipline,
Bucharest, Romania.
Background/Objectives: Chromosomal rearrangements in the
16p11.2 region are considered among the most frequent etiolo-
gies of neurodevelopmental and autism spectrum disorders with
variable penetrance and highly pleiotropic clinical outcomes. Our
study characterizes four cases diagnosed with reciprocal 16p11.2
CNVs and additional rare and novel variants in genes located
outside the affected 16p11.2 region.
Methods: Four pediatric patients, two girls (A, B) and two boys
(C, D), were referred to the clinic for various symptoms including
global developmental delay, nonspeciﬁc dysmorphic features,
early onset seizures, movement disorders and autistic traits. Brain
MRI revealed abnormalities in three of them. Patients were
recommended genetic investigations for diagnosis: A performed a
WES test, B and C, an epilepsy gene panel test, and D, a chro-
mosomal microarray analysis.
Results: 16p11.2 CNVs were revealed in all cases: micro-
duplication for patient A and microdeletions for the rest. Addi-
tionally, VUS variants were detected: one heterozygous PRRT2
missense variant in trans to the CNV for each patient A and B, and
a TUBB4A inframe deletion variant for patient C. The additional
variants detected for B and C have not been described to date.
Testing is about to be continued for D.
Conclusion: Our study highlights the challenges encountered
when establishing genotype-phenotype correlations in pediatric
patients diagnosed with 16p11.2 CNVs associated with other
rare gene variants, emphasizing that such diverse phenotypes
are the result of CNVs interaction with the rest of the genome.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst reported case presenting
an association between a 16p11.2 CNV and a TUBB4A gene
variant.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.016.C Evaluation of a nurse led care service for patients
with neuroﬁbromatosis
Gunjan Garg1, Jane Fleming1, Yemima Berman1
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
472
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Royal North Shore Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics, St
Leonards, Australia.
Background/Objectives: Neuroﬁbromatoses (NF) are a group of
complex
genetic
disorders
requiring
multidisciplinary
care.
Inconsistent and fragmented care has been reported to lead to
disease complications that could have been prevented. We
implemented a nurse led care (NLC) service to provide extra
support to NF patients.
The aim of the study was to audit the consultations of the
clinical nurse specialist (CNS) and evaluate patient experience,
enablement and satisfaction with the NLC service.
Methods: The audit included 163 patient encounters with 114
patients with NF that received NLC (May 2020-May 2021). The 58-
item anonymous online survey included validated scales and was
distributed to all audit patients.
Results: The CNS’ main role was identiﬁed as ‘coordination of
care’ (40%). 57 surveys were analysed (50% response-rate) with
over 80% of patients reporting a positive or very positive experi-
ence. Mean patient satisfaction scores (50/75) were also favour-
able. Statistically signiﬁcant association was found between
patient satisfaction scores and patients’ views and concerns being
listened to X 2 (2, (n = 50) = 6.34(p = 0.04); ﬂexibility of getting a
time with the nurse X 2 (3, (n = 57) = 12.13(p = 0.007); patients’
involvement in making decisions about their treatment plan X 2
(4, (n = 57) = 12.83(p = 0.01) and being given enough information
to manage their care at home X 2 (2, (n = 44) = 12.85(p = 0.002).
Conclusion: This study shows nurse led care is associated with
positive patient satisfaction and experience and supports its
introduction as a model of care for management of patients with
rare diseases.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.017.D Genotypic spectrum and its clinical implication in
disorders with epilepsy in Indian population: A preliminary
experience
Purvi Majethia1, Vivekananda Bhat1, Karthik Nair1, Dhanya Lakshmi
Narayanan1, Shrikiran Aroor2, Ramesh Bhat2, Suvasini Sharma3,
Praveen b.k4, Yatheesha b.l5, Siddaramappa J Patil6, Nutan Kamath7,
Shahyan Siddiqui8, Rajagopal Kadavigere9, Stephanie Bielas10, Katta
Girisha1, Anju Shukla1
1Department
of
Medical
Genetics,
Kasturba
Medical
College,
Manipal, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India;
2Department of Paediatrics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal,
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India; 3Neurology
Division, Department of Pediatrics, Lady Hardinge Medical College
and Associated Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital, New Delhi, India;
4Department of Pediatrics, Father Muller Medical College Hospital,
Mangalore, India; 5Paediatric neurology, Dheemahi Child Neurology
and Development center, Shimoga, India; 6Department of Paedia-
trics, Narayana Hrudayalaya Hospitals/ Mazumdar-Shaw Medical
Center, Bangalore, India;
7Department of Paediatrics, Kasturba
Medical College, Mangalore, Manipal Academy of Higher Education,
Manipal, India; 8Department of Neuroimaging and Interventional
Radiology, STAR Institute of Neurosciences, STAR Hospitals, Hyder-
abad, India;
9Department of Radiodiagnosis, Kasturba Medical
College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal,
India;
10Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States.
Background/Objectives: Rapid advancement in identiﬁcation of
underlying genetic mechanisms in disorders with epilepsy has
attributed to improved management including precision medicine
as well as informed genetic counseling in families with these
disorders.
Methods: We recruited 71 families (75 individuals) with neu-
rodevelopmental disorders with epilepsy from October 2019 till
date. Targeted testing and/or genomic testing after detailed
clinical evaluation was carried out. The implications on genetic
counseling and therapy were evaluated in individuals with deﬁ-
nitive molecular diagnosis.
Results: Molecular diagnosis was achieved in a total of 54 out of
71 families (76%): two (4%) by targeted testing, ten (18%) by
Mendeliome, and 42 (78%) by exome sequencing. Of these,
monogenic disorders were identiﬁed in ﬁfty-three families: auto-
somal recessive in 30 families (56%), autosomal dominant in 19
families (36%), X-linked in four families (9%), and imprinting/
microdeletion syndrome (Angelman syndrome) in one family (Table
1). Thirty (55%) of 57 disease-causing variants were novel. One novel
disease-gene association with pathogenic variants in GCSH was
identiﬁed. We also report genotypic and phenotypic expansion of
extremely rare and recently described disorders with pathogenic
variants in SHMT2, SLC25A10, SNRPN, TRAPPC12, MINPP1 and
FGF13. Reproductive counseling was offered to 72% (39/54) of
families. Therapeutic implications were noted in 30% of individuals
(16/54) with deﬁnitive diagnosis. Strong evidence of recommended
therapies was available in 50% (8/16) families, emerging evidence in
6% (1/16), and sparse evidence in 44% (7/16) families.
Conclusion: The above-mentioned cohort is a part of an
ongoing study of disorders with epilepsy.
References:.
Grants: 1R01HD093570-01A1(NIH,USA).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.018.A Identity-by-descent analysis of a large Tourette’s
syndrome pedigree from Costa Rica implicates genes involved
in neuronal development and signal transduction
Niamh Ryan1, Cathal Ormond1, Yi-Chieh Chang2, Javier Contreras3,
Henriette Raventos3, Michael Gill1, Elizabeth Heron1, Carol A.
Mathews2, Aiden Corvin1
1Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland;
2University of Florida,
Department of Psychiatry, Gainesville, United States;
3University
Of Costa Rica Rodrigo Facio Campus, San Pedro, Costa Rica.
Background/Objectives: Tourette Syndrome (TS) is a poorly
understood, substantially heritable neuropsychiatric disorder that
typically begins in early childhood. Identifying rare variants that
make a signiﬁcant contribution to risk in affected families may
provide important insights into the molecular aetiology of this
disabling condition. We report data from a large pedigree (>500
individuals), densely affected by TS and co-morbid psychiatric
disorders from a genetically isolated Costa Rican population. The
pedigree spans 11 generations and shares ancestry from six
founder-couples.
Methods: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) data was gener-
ated for 19 individuals from this pedigree. Identity-by-descent
(IBD) analysis was performed, ﬁltering haplotypes on the following
criteria: >1Mb in length; shared by at least three affected indivi-
duals sharing ancestry from the same founder couple(s); and
absent in Costa Rican control samples.
Results: The IBD pipeline identiﬁed eleven haplotypes. Fine-
mapping of these haplotypes using the WGS data identiﬁed
rare (MAF< 0.01) and ultra-rare (MAF< 0.001) coding and non-
coding variants in candidate genes. In particular we identiﬁed
a rare deleterious missense variation in RAPGEF1 and two
ultra-rare putatively deleterious intronic variants in ERBB4
and IKZF2.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
473
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: RAPGEF1 has recently been implicated in a
family study of neuropsychiatric symptoms, supported by a
zebraﬁsh model of this gene. ERBB4 participates in many critical
functions, such as neurodevelopment and synaptic plasticity,
while IKZF2 is a transcription factor shown to play a role in
neuronal development. Together, these variants represent bio-
logically relevant targets for investigation in other pedigree and
population-based TS data.
References:.
Grants: Project supported by the National Institute of Health
and Science Foundation Ireland.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.019.B A different light on COL4A2 variant interpretation
Merlijn
Nemegeer1,
Dorien
Schepers1,
Bart
Loeys1,
Marije
Meuwissen1
1University of Antwerp, Center of Medical Genetics, Edegem, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic variants in COL4A1 and
COL4A2 are known to cause a phenotype with a broad spectrum
of neurological ﬁndings. COL4A2 variants are less frequent com-
pared to COL4A1 variants. This has caused a biased representation,
as COL4A2 is rarely considered separate from COL4A1 variants. In
this study we re-assessed the current knowledge on COL4A2
variants.
Methods: After PubMed search, we collected all COL4A2 var-
iants published until February 2022 and reviewed the LOVD and
Clinvar database. All variants were reclassiﬁed using current ACMG
guidelines.
Results: Twenty-three articles described 97 cases with 49 dif-
ferent COL4A2 variants. Remarkable was the discordance between
published class and the classiﬁcation using ACMG guidelines in
more than 30% of the variant descriptions. In some cases, a strong
discordance was noted between pathogenicity based on com-
putational results, functional testing or population frequencies. A
striking example is the COL4A2 variant, p.Glu1123Gly. Functional
testing in 2012 showed a cellular phenotype, but current popu-
lation frequency suggests this variant to be incompatible with
monogenic disease.
Interestingly, the prevalence of conﬁrmed de novo cases (12%)
was distinctly lower compared to the previously reported 40% in
COL4A1 variants. Screening of family members carrying the
familial variant detected brain MRI abnormalities in 59% of the
cases, even in clinically unaffected cases.
Conclusion: These results show that COL4A2 variant inter-
pretation is complicated due to phenotypic variability, and con-
ﬂicting predictions of pathogenicity. Additional research about the
pathogenic mechanism of COL4A2 variants is imperative for cor-
rect interpretation of COL4A2 variants.
References:.
Grants: Stichting ’t Trekpaert, Moordrecht, The Netherlands.
DOCPRO grant, University of Antwerp.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.020.C A novel autosomal dominant locus for essential
tremor: when linkage analysis can still drive gene discovery
Verdiana Pullano1, Alessandro Brussino1, Maria Soﬁa Cotelli2,
Orazio Palumbo3, Pietro Palumbo3, Paola Dimartino4, Simona
Cardaropoli5, Elisa Giorgio6;7, Lisa Pavinato1, Tommaso Pippucci8,
Massimo Carella3, Barbara Borroni9, Alfredo Brusco1;10
1University of Turin, Department of Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy;
2Valle Camonica Hospital, Neurology Unit, Esine, Brescia, Italy; 3IRCCS
“Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”, Division of Medical Genetics, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy;
4University of Bologna, Department of
Medical and Surgical Sciences, Bologna, Italy; 5University of Turin,
Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, Turin, Italy; 6University
of Pavia, Department of Molecular Medicine, Pavia, Italy; 7IRCCS
Mondino
Foundation,
Laboratory
of
Molecular
Medicine
and
Cytogenetics, Pavia, Italy; 8Polyclinic Sant’Orsola-Malpighi University
Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, Bologna, Italy; 9Centre for Neurode-
generative Disorders, University of Brescia, Department of Clinical
and Experimental Sciences, Brescia, Italy; 10Città della Salute e della
Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Essential tremor (ET) is a common
movement disorder with a prevalence of approximately 1%
worldwide. Although a considerable effort has been made in
recent years trying to identify genomic markers for ET, the
responsible genes have been elusive.
Methods: We studied a three-generation Italian family segre-
gating early-onset autosomal dominant ET (7 affected, 4 unaf-
fected cases, 1 spouse). Postural and action tremor started slowly
and symmetrically in their twenties and progressed gradually with
age; the neurological examination was otherwise unremarkable.
We performed exome sequencing in two affected cousins, but no
pathogenic variant was found. Using the CytoScan HD Arrays
(Affymetrix), we performed SNP genotyping. Linkage analysis
calculation was done using Merlin software.
Results: We identiﬁed an approx. 43 Mb region on chromo-
some
10p11.21-q22.3,
between
markers
rs7477871
and
rs12253494, containing several stretches of SNPs with a LOD score
above 2 (up to 2.475). In the region, 313 unique encoding tran-
scripts were identiﬁed, 161 of which are OMIM genes. Among
them, 104 transcripts are expressed in brain, even if none was
suggestive for ET pathology.
Conclusion: Our linkage analysis, even if below the sig-
niﬁcant threshold, highlighted a single region of 43 Mb on
chromosome 10, as potentially in linkage with an autosomal
dominant form of ET. An in-depth sequencing analysis of this
region in two individuals of the family by whole genome
sequencing is undergoing that hopefully will help us with this
“gene hunt”.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.021.D Variant-speciﬁc changes in RAC3 function disrupt
corticogenesis in neurodevelopmental phenotypes
Marcello Scala1;2, Masashi Nishikawa3, Hidenori Ito3, Hidenori
Tabata3, Tayyaba Khan4, Andrea Accogli1, Laura Davids5, Anna
Ruiz6, Pietro Chiurazzi7;8, Gabriella Cericola9, Björn Schulte10, Kristin
Monaghan11, Amber Begtrup11, Annalaura Torella12;13, Michele
Pinelli12,
Anne-Sophie
Denommé-Pichon14;15;16,
Antonio
Vito-
bello14;16, Caroline Racine14;15, Maria Margherita Mancardi17, Court-
ney Kiss18, Andrea Guerin18, Wendy Wu4;19, Elisabeth Gabau Vila20,
Bryan C.
Mak21, Julian
A. Martinez-Agosto21;22;23, Michael
B.
Gorin21;24;25, Bugrahan Duz26, Yavuz Bayram27;28, Claudia M. B.
Carvalho Fonseca29;30, Jaime Vengoechea5, David Chitayat31;32;33,
Tiong Yang Tan34, Bert Callewaert35, Bernd Kruse36, Lynne M.
Bird37;38, Laurence Faivre15;16, Marcella Zollino7;8, Saskia Biskup10;39,
Undiagnosed Disease Network40, Telethon Undiagnosed Diseases
Program41, Pasquale Striano1;2, Vincenzo Nigro12;13, MariaSavina
Severino42,
Valeria
Capra43,
Gregory
Costain4;32;33;44,
Koh‑ichi
Nagata3;45
1University of Genoa, Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation,
Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health, Genova, Italy;
2Giannina Gaslini Institute, Pediatric Neurology and Muscular
Diseases Unit, Genova, Italy; 3Aichi Devlopmental Disability Center
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
474
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Central Hospital, Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute for
Developmental Research, Kasugai, Japan;
4The Hospital for Sick
Children, Genetics and Genome Biology, Research Institute, Toronto,
Canada;
5Emory Healthcare, Department of Human Genetics,
Atlanta, United States; 6Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Genetics
Laboratory, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic, Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari,
Institut d’Investigació i Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT, Bellaterra, Spain;
7Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Dipartimento Universitario
Scienze della Vita e Sanità Pubblica, Sezione di Medicina Genomica,
Roma, Italy; 8Agostino Gemelli University Policlinic, Genetica Medica,
Roma, Italy; 9Helios Klinikum Hildesheim, Neuropediatric Depart-
ment, Hildesheim, Germany; 10Praxis für Humangenetik Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany; 11GeneDx, Gaithersburg, United States; 12Tigem,
Pozzuoli, Italy; 13Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Depart-
ment
of
Precision
Medicine,
Caserta,
Italy;
14Chu
De
Dijon,
Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, UF Innovation en diagnostic
génomique des maladies rares, Plateau Technique de Biologie, Dijon,
France; 15Chu De Dijon, Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence
Anomalies
du
Développement
et
Syndromes
Malformatifs
de
l’interrégion Est, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France;
16niversité de Bourgogne Franche-Comté, INSERM UMR1231 Génét-
ique des Anomalies du Développement, Dijon, France; 17Giannina
Gaslini Institute, Unit of Child Neuropsychiatry, Department of
Medical and Surgical Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, Genova, Italy;
18Queen’s University, Division of Medical Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, Kingston, Canada; 19Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada;
20Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Paediatric Unit, Parc Taulí
Hospital Universitari, Institut d’Investigació i Innovació Parc Taulí
I3PT, Bellaterra, Spain;
21University of California, Los Angeles,
Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine,
Los Angeles, United States; 22University of California, Los Angeles,
Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, United States;
23University of California, Los Angeles,
Department of Psychiatry & Biobehavioral Sciences, David Geffen
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, United States;
24University of
California, Los Angeles, Department of Ophthalmology, Jules Stein
Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, United
States;
25University of California, Los Angeles, Brain Research
Institute, Los Angeles, United States;
26Haseki Education and
Research Hospital Polyclinics, Haseki Training and Research Hospital,
Istanbul, Turkey; 27Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of
Genomic Diagnostics, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Philadelphia, United States; 28University of Pennsylvania,
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, United States; 29Paciﬁc
Northwest Research Institute, Seattle, United States; 30Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, United States; 31University of Toronto, The
Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada;
32University of Toronto, Department of Molecular Genetics, Toronto,
Canada; 33The Hospital for Sick Children, Division of Clinical and
Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, Toronto, Canada;
34University of Melbourne, Victorian Clinical Genetics Services,
Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, and Department of Paedia-
trics, Parkville, Australia;
35Ghent University Hospital, Center for
Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium;
36Helios Klinikum Hildesheim,
Neuropediatric Department, Hildesheim, Germany; 37University of
California San Diego, Department of Pediatrics, La Jolla, United
States; 38Rady Children’s Hospital - San Diego, Genetics/Dysmorphol-
ogy, San Diego, United States;
39CeGaT, Tübingen, Germany;
40Harvard Medical School, Department of Biomedical Informatics,
Boston, United States;
41Tigem, Telethon Undiagnosed Diseases
Program, Pozzuoli, Italy; 42Giannina Gaslini Institute, Neuroradiology
Unit, Genova, Italy; 43Giannina Gaslini Institute, Medical Genetics
Unit,
Genova,
Italy;
44University
of
Toronto,
Department
of
Paediatrics, Toronto, Canada; 45Nagoya University, Department of
Neurochemistry, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.
Background/Objectives: Variants in RAC3, encoding the small
GTPase RAC3 which is critical for the regulation of actin cytoske-
leton and intracellular signal transduction, are associated with a
rare neurodevelopmental disorder with structural brain anomalies
and facial dysmorphism.
Methods: We investigated a cohort of 10 unrelated partici-
pants with neurodevelopmental phenotypes and an overlapping
pattern of complex brain malformations. We performed exome
sequencing and examined the pathophysiological signiﬁcance of
novel and previously reported RAC3 variants (p.P29L, p.P34R,
p.A59G, p.Q61L, and p.E62K). We then focused on the four variants
in the Switch II region (p.Q61L, p.E62del, p.D63N, and p.Y64C),
variation hot spot and essential for the small GTPases biochemical
activity.
Results: In vitro analyses revealed that all tested RAC3 variants
were biochemically and biologically active to variable extent,
showing different afﬁnities to downstream effectors. Acute
expression of the four Switch II variants in embryonic mouse brain
using in utero electroporation caused defects in cortical neuron
morphology and migration, leading to cluster formation during
corticogenesis.
Conclusion: Our results indicate that RAC3 variants cause
morphological and functional defects in cortical neurons during
brain development through variant-speciﬁc mechanisms, leading
to heterogeneous neurodevelopmental phenotypes.
References: [1] Stankiewicz, Front Cell Neurosci, 2014 [2]
Dvorsky, EMBO Rep, 2004. [3] Azzarelli, Front Cell Neurosci, 2015.
[4] de Curtis, Cells, 2019. [5] Reijnders, AJHG, 2017. [6] Costain,
GIM, 2019. [7] Hiraide, JHG, 2019. [8] White, AJHG, 2018. [9]
Nishikawa, Med mol morph, 2021. [10] Nishikawa, Cell sig, 2019.
Grants: JP19H03629; JP19K07059; JP20K22888; JP21K15895;
15ek0109040h0002;
NHGRI/NHLBI
UM1HG006542;
NHGRI
U01HG011758.
Conﬂict of Interest: Marcello Scala: None declared, Masashi
Nishikawa Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS)
KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (B) (Grant Number
JP19H03629), Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (C) (Grant
Number JP19K07059), Grant-in-Aid for Research Activity Start-up
(Grant
Number
JP20K22888),
Grant-in-Aid
for
Early-Career
Scientists (Grant Number JP21K15895), a grant-in-aid of the
Practical Research Project for Rare/Intractable Diseases from Japan
Agency
for
Medical
Research
and
Development
(AMED)
(15ek0109040h0002), Hidenori Ito Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (B)
(Grant Number JP19H03629), Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research
(C) (Grant Number JP19K07059), Grant-in-Aid for Research Activity
Start-up (Grant Number JP20K22888), Grant-in-Aid for Early-Career
Scientists (Grant Number JP21K15895), a grant-in-aid of the
Practical Research Project for Rare/Intractable Diseases from Japan
Agency
for
Medical
Research
and
Development
(AMED)
(15ek0109040h0002), Hidenori Tabata Japan Society for the Pro-
motion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc
Research (B) (Grant Number JP19H03629), Grant-in-Aid for Scien-
tiﬁc Research (C) (Grant Number JP19K07059), Grant-in-Aid for
Research Activity Start-up (Grant Number JP20K22888), Grant-in-
Aid for Early-Career Scientists (Grant Number JP21K15895), a
grant-in-aid of the Practical Research Project for Rare/Intractable
Diseases from Japan Agency for Medical Research and Develop-
ment (AMED) (15ek0109040h0002), Tayyaba Khan: None declared,
Andrea Accogli: None declared, Laura Davids: None declared,
Anna Ruiz: None declared, Pietro Chiurazzi: None declared, Gab-
riella Cericola: None declared, Björn Schulte: None declared, Kristin
Monaghan: None declared, Amber Begtrup: None declared,
Annalaura Torella: None declared, Michele Pinelli: None declared,
Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon: None declared, Antonio Vitobello:
None declared, Caroline Racine: None declared, Maria Margherita
Mancardi: None declared, Courtney Kiss: None declared, Andrea
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
475
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Guerin: None declared, Wendy Wu: None declared, Elisabeth
Gabau Vila: None declared, Bryan C. Mak: None declared, Julian A.
Martinez-Agosto: None declared, Michael B. Gorin: None declared,
Bugrahan Duz: None declared, Yavuz Bayram: None declared,
Claudia M. B. Carvalho Fonseca United States National Institutes of
Health
(NHGRI/NHLBI
UM1HG006542;
NHGRI
U01HG011758),
Jaime
Vengoechea:
None
declared,
David
Chitayat:
None
declared, Tiong Yang Tan: None declared, Bert Callewaert: None
declared, Bernd Kruse: None declared, Lynne M. Bird: None
declared, Laurence Faivre: None declared, Marcella Zollino: None
declared, Saskia Biskup: None declared, Undiagnosed Disease
Network: None declared, Telethon Undiagnosed Diseases Pro-
gram: None declared, Pasquale Striano: None declared, Vincenzo
Nigro: None declared, MariaSavina Severino: None declared,
Valeria Capra: None declared, Gregory Costain: None declared,
Koh‑ichi Nagata Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS) KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (B) (Grant
Number JP19H03629), Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (C)
(Grant Number JP19K07059), Grant-in-Aid for Research Activity
Start-up (Grant Number JP20K22888), Grant-in-Aid for Early-
Career Scientists (Grant Number JP21K15895), a grant-in-aid of
the Practical Research Project for Rare/Intractable Diseases from
Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED)
(15ek0109040h0002).
P10.022.A Elucidating the role of RLS-associated MEIS
transcription factors during neural development
Volker Kittke1;2, Elena Dvoretskova3, Chen Zhao1, Nazanin Mirza-
Schreiber1, Daniel Lam1;4, Barbara Schormair1;2, Konrad Oexle1,
Christian Mayer3, Juliane Winkelmann1;2
1Helmholtz Zentrum München - Deutsches Forschungszentrum für
Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH), Institute of Neurogenomics,
München, Germany;
2Technical University of Munich, School of
Medicine, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany;
3Max
Planck Institute for Biological Intelligence, Planegg, Germany;
4Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Global Computa-
tional Biology & Digital Sciences, Biberach an der Riß, Germany.
Background/Objectives: The strongest risk variant associated
with restless legs syndrome (RLS) is located within the gene
encoding the TALE homeobox transcription factor MEIS1. Both
MEIS1 and its close homolog MEIS2, also located in a RLS risk locus,
are expressed in various neural cell types throughout the devel-
oping and adult central nervous system. The functional role of
MEIS in RLS pathogenesis, as well as the cell types involved, still
remain elusive.
Methods: Using lentiviral vectors, we manipulated MEIS1 and
MEIS2 expression in human neural stem cells in vitro and mea-
sured global changes in gene expression and DNA methylation.
Furthermore, we performed single-cell RNA-sequencing in Meis-
deﬁcient developmental mouse models and quantiﬁed the effects
on gene expression in different neuronal subtypes. Direct target
genes of MEIS transcription factors were identiﬁed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation.
Results: We identiﬁed MEIS target genes active in early
development in mouse models and human NSCs. In the mouse
brain, preliminary results suggest MEIS transcription factors con-
trol the differentiation of striatal projection neurons. MEIS targets
in hNSC were enriched for regulators of Wnt signalling and axon
development.
Conclusion: We linked the genetic risk factors MEIS1 and MEIS2
to speciﬁc neural cell types and brain regions during develop-
ment. This brings us one step closer to understanding the com-
plex pathophysiology underlying RLS.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by grants from the ERA-NET
NEURON network (No. 01EW1605) and the German Research
Foundation (No. 390857198).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.023.B De novo variants in ATP2B1 lead to
neurodevelopment delay
Meer Jacob Rahimi1, Nicole Urban2, Meret Wegler1, Heinrich Sticht3,
Michael Schaefer2, Bernt Popp1, Frank Gaunitz4, Manuela Morleo5;6,
Vincenzo Vincenzo Nigro5, Maitz Silvia7, Grazia Mancini8, Claudia
Ruivenkamp9, Eun-Kyung Suk10, Tobias Bartolomaeus1;11, Andreas
Merkenschlager12, Daniel Koboldt13, Dennis Bartholomew14, Alex-
ander Stegmann15, Margje Sinnema15, Irma Duynisveld16, Ramona
Salvarinova17,
Simone
Race17,
Bert
B.A.
de
Vries18,
Aurélien
Trimouille19, Sophie Naudion20, Daphna Marom21, Uri Hamiel21,
Noa Henig21, Florence Demurger22, Nils Rahner23, Enrika Bartels23, J.
Austin Hamm24, Abbey M. Putnam24, Richard Person25, Rami Abou
Jamra1, Henry Oppermann1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Hospitals and
Clinics, Leipzig, Germany; 2Rudolf-Boehm-Institute of Pharmacology
and Toxicology, University of Leipzig Hospitals and Clinics, Leipzig,
Germany; 3Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany; 4Department of Neurosur-
gery, University of Leipzig Hospitals and Clinics, Leipzig, Germany;
5Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy;
6Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania “Luigi
Vanvitelli”, Naples, Italy; 7Clinical Pediatric Genetic Unit, Pediatric
Clinic, Fondazione MBBM, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy;
8Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 9Leiden University Medical Center,
Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands; 10Praxis für Humangenetik-
Friedrichstrasse, Berlin, Germany;
11CeGaT GmbH and Praxis für
Humangenetik, Tübingen, Germany; 12Department of Neuropedia-
trics, University of Leipzig Hospitals and Clinics, Leipzig, Germany;
13Institute for Genomic Medicine at Nationwide Children’s Hospital,
Columbus, United States;
14Division of Genetic and Genomic
Medicine at Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, United States;
15Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical
Center+ (MUMC+), Maastricht, Netherlands; 16Severinus Institute for
Intellectual Disability, Veldhoven, Netherlands;
17Division of Bio-
chemical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of British
Columbia, BC Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, Canada; 18Department
of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands; 19Service de Pathologie Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Bordeaux, Bordeaux 33000, France ; MRGM, Maladies Rares:
Génétique et Métabolisme, lNSERM U1211, Université de Bordeaux,
Bordeaux, France; 20Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospita-
lier Universitaire de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France;
21The Genetics
Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center and Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; 22service de génértique,
CHBA, Vannes, France; 23Institute for Clinical Genetics Bonn, Bonn,
France;
24Pediatric Genetics, East Tennessee Children’s Hospital,
Knoxville, United States; 25Clinical Genomics Program, GeneDx, Inc.,
Gaithersburg, United States.
Background/Objectives: We describe a cohort of 12 unrelated
individuals with probable causative variants in ATPase plasma
membrane Ca2+ transporting 1 (ATP2B1) ascertained through
international matchmaking efforts. All probands share the phe-
notype of mild to moderate global developmental delay and other
common, but non-signiﬁcant clinical features like autism (5/11),
seizures (6/12), and distal limb abnormalities (4/12), such as clin-
odactyly and arachnodactyly. Nine probands had missense var-
iants of which seven were in speciﬁc functional domains; the other
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
476
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
three individuals carry nonsense variants. Nine variants in ATP2B1
were proven de novo, while the parents of the remaining three
individuals were unavailable for segregation. ATP2B1 encodes a
plasma membrane calcium-transporting protein, which plays a
central role in calcium homeostasis and is mainly expressed in the
central nervous system.
Methods: All missense variants were structurally analysed via
3D protein modelling. We introduced all nine missense variants in
transfected HEK293 cells and investigated intracellular localization.
Afterwards we performed Ca2+ imaging to investigate Ca2+
export capacity of the transfected cells.
Results: 3D structural protein modeling suggested that the
variants have a destabilizing effect on the protein. All variants lead
to a signiﬁcant decrease in Ca2+ export capacity compared with
the wild-type construct. These nine variants also exhibited incor-
rect intracellular localization of ATP2B1, which suggests a loss of
function mechanism.
Conclusion: The genetic and phenotypic similarities among
probands as well as the functional analyses imply that de novo
variants in ATP2B1 cause a novel monogenic neurodevelopmental
disorder.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: Meer Jacob Rahimi: None declared, Nicole
Urban: None declared, Meret Wegler: None declared, Heinrich
Sticht: None declared, Michael Schaefer: None declared, Bernt
Popp: None declared, Frank Gaunitz: None declared, Manuela
Morleo: None declared, Vincenzo Vincenzo Nigro: None declared,
Maitz Silvia: None declared, Grazia Mancini: None declared, Clau-
dia Ruivenkamp: None declared, Eun-Kyung Suk: None declared,
Tobias Bartolomaeus: None declared, Andreas Merkenschlager:
None declared, Daniel Koboldt: None declared, Dennis Bartholo-
mew: None declared, Alexander Stegmann: None declared, Margje
Sinnema: None declared, Irma Duynisveld: None declared, Ramona
Salvarinova: None declared, Simone Race: None declared, Bert B.A.
de Vries: None declared, Aurélien Trimouille: None declared,
Sophie Naudion: None declared, Daphna Marom: None declared,
Uri Hamiel: None declared, Noa Henig: None declared, Florence
Demurger: None declared, Nils Rahner: None declared, Enrika
Bartels: None declared, J. Austin Hamm: None declared, Abbey M.
Putnam: None declared, Richard Person RP is an employee of
GeneDX, Inc., Rami Abou Jamra: None declared, Henry Opper-
mann: None declared.
P10.024.C GABBR1 monoallelic de novo variants linked to
neurodevelopmental delay and epilepsy
Lucia Cediel1, Michal Stawarski2, Xavier Blanc1, Lenka Nosková3,
Martin Magner3;4, Konrad Platzer5, Janina Gburek-Augustat5, Dustin
Baldridge6,
John
Constantino6,
Emmanuelle
Ranza1,
Bernhard
Bettler2, Stylianos Antonarakis1
1Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine, Geneva, Switzer-
land; 2Pharmazentrum, University of Basel, Department of Biomedi-
cine, Basel, Switzerland; 3Charles University and General University
Hospital in Prague, Department of Paediatrics and Inherited
Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech
Republic; 4Charles University and University Thomayer Hospital in
Prague, Czech Republic, Department of Paediatrics, Prague, Czech
Republic; 5University of Leipzig Medical Center, Institute of Human
Genetics, Leipzig, Germany; 6Washington University in St. Louis, St.
Louis, United States.
Background/Objectives: GABAB receptors are obligatory het-
erodimers providing prolonged inhibition in the central nervous
system. The two receptor subunits are encoded by the GABBR1
and GABBR2 genes. Variants in the GABBR2 gene have been
associated with a Rett/like phenotype (OMIM 617903), epileptic
encephalopathy (OMIM 617904) and milder forms of develop-
mental delay with absence epilepsy. To date, however, the phe-
notypes associated with pathogenic variants of the GABBR1 gene
remain to be established.
Methods: Through GeneMatcher, we have ascertained 4
patients
each
with
a
monoallelic
GABBR1
de
novo
non-
synonymous variant; these cases presented with neurodevelop-
mental delay (motor and/or language delay) ranging from mild to
profound severity, and in one case, epilepsy. Further phenotypic
features include varying degrees of intellectual disability, learning
difﬁculties, psychiatric disorders including autism, ADHD, ODD,
sleep disorders and muscular hypotonia.
Results: We functionally characterized the four de novo
GABBR1 variants, E368D, A397V, A535T and G673D in transfected
HEK293 cells. All four variants analyzed lead to a deﬁcit in GBR-
mediated inhibition that likely leads to an increase in the excita-
tion/inhibition balance in the central nervous system. Variant
G673D in TM3 renders the receptor completely inactive, consistent
with failure of the receptor to reach the cell surface. E368D is
located near the orthosteric binding site and reduces potency and
efﬁcacy of GABA at the receptor. GABA exhibits normal potency
and decreased efﬁcacy at A397V and A535T.
Conclusion: Characterization of GABBR1-related variants pro-
vides a rationale for understanding disease phenotypes and points
to possible therapeutic strategies.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.025.D Development of methods and tools in NPCs and
zebraﬁsh towards modeling of DNA sequence variants in
patients with pachygyria by using genome editing
technologies
Aykut Kuruoglu1, AYSE SEMRA HIZ1;2;3, Ozge Cark1, Pınar Gencpi-
nar1;4, Ramazan Ugur Bora1, Gokhan Karakulah1;2, Gunes Ozhan1;2,
Yavuz Oktay2;5
1Izmir International Biomedicine and Genome Institute, Dokuz Eylul
University, Izmir, Turkey; 2Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center,
Dokuz Eylul University Health Campus, Izmır, Turkey; 3Dokuz Eylul
University, School of Medicine, Department of Paediatric Neurology,
Izmir, Turkey; 4Izmir Katip Celebi University, Department of Pediatric
Neurology, Izmir, Turkey; 5Dokuz Eylul University, School of Medicine,
Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: The main bottleneck in identiﬁcation of
DNA variants that cause neurogenetic diseases is functional ana-
lysis of VUS. The aim of this study was to develop a methodology
for modelling candidate causative variants observed in patients
with pachygyria by using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing in NPCs
and zebraﬁsh.
Methods: DNA from 20 patients with pachygyria/lissencephaly
were analyzed by aCGH and WES, and variants were prioritized.
Mutant lines were generated in NPCs and Zebraﬁsh by using
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing, and compared to models where one
of three key genes (TUBG1, LIS1, DAB1) that are known to play role
in pachygyria/lissencephaly. Characterization of NPCs were per-
formed with a 3D matrigel chamber system (IC-Chip) and phe-
notypic changes were observed in developing zebraﬁsh at 3 dpf
and 5dpf. The comparison of target mutant lines and selected
variant lines was made with qPCR.
Results: A delay in migration was observed in mutant NPC lines
of 3 selected genes compared to control group. WES identiﬁed two
candidate variants, CGREF1 and NOL9. Expression changes of lis-
sencephaly and microcephaly-related and neuronal differentiation
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
477
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
genes
in
CGREF1-KO-zebraﬁsh
and
CGREF1-KO-NPCs
were
observed. A severe phenotype including small-head and eyes, and
abnormal liver/gut development was observed in Tubg1 mutant
zebraﬁsh.
Conclusion: Our results provide evidence that variants that
cause defects associated with NPC migration can be tested using
NPC and zebraﬁsh models in a time- and cost-efﬁcient manner.
Multi-omic analysis could further expand the use of this approach
to other groups of neurogenetic defects.
References:.
Grants: This Project was supported by TUBITAK-COST Action
with 217S944 code number.
Conﬂict of Interest: Aykut Kuruoglu: None declared, AYSE
SEMRA HIZ: None declared, Ozge Cark: None declared, Pınar
Gencpinar: None declared, Ramazan Ugur Bora: None declared,
Gokhan Karakulah: None declared, Gunes Ozhan: None declared,
Yavuz Oktay TUBITAK-COST 217S944.
P10.026.A Rare compound heterozygous missense variants in
CSMD3 are associated with developmental delay, intellectual
disability, and structural brain anomalies
Kaisa Teele Oja1;2, Sander Pajusalu1;2, Anneke Kievit3, Marjon van
Slegtenhorst3, Gina Ravenscroft4;5, Vildan Göknur Haliloglu6, Ginevra
Zanni7, Eugenio Maria Mercuri8, Ikeoluwa A. Osei-Owusu9, Anne
O’Donnell-Luria9, Pilvi Ilves1;10, Katrin Ounap1;2
1University of Tartu, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tartu, Estonia;
2Tartu University Hospital, United Laboratories, Department of
Clinical Genetics, Tartu, Estonia;
3Erasmus MC, Department of
Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 4Harry Perkins Institute
of Medical Research, QEII Medical Centre, Neurogenetic Diseases
Group, Nedlands, Australia; 5University of Western Australia, School
of Biomedical Sciences, Nedlands, Australia; 6Hacettepe University
Children’s Hospital, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ankara,
Turkey;
7Bambino
Gesù
Children’s
Hospital,
Department
of
Neurosciences, Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative
Disorders, Rome, Italy;
8Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A.
Gemelli, Pediatric Neurology Unit, Rome, Italy; 9Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, Program in Medical and Population Genetics,
Cambridge, United States; 10Tartu University Hospital, Radiology
Clinic, Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: CUB and Sushi multiple domains 3
(CSMD3) encodes a large transmembrane protein. It is highly
expressed in adult and fetal brain tissue. CSMD family genes have
been associated with neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders
and their connection to neurodevelopment has been suggested.
Studies have indicated that CSMD3 regulates dendritic branching
and might regulate dendritic morphology. Recently another gene
from this family (CSMD1) was associated with cerebellar agenesis
and bilateral polymicrogyria.
Methods: We have collected clinical information about 4
patients with rare biallelic variants in CSMD3 gene.
Results: Three male and one female patient were all Caucasian
and they were aged between 6 and 23 years during last evalua-
tion. Phenotypes were varying with the common feature of motor
development delay (ranging from mild to severe). Most patients
(3/4) had hypotonia. Two patients had mild intellectual disability
(ID), one had moderate to severe ID and in one case this infor-
mation was not available. Cerebral MRI was done in 2 cases – one
had type 2 lissencephaly and polymicrogyria, and the other had
cerebellar agenesis and hypoplasia of corpus callosum. Micro-
cephaly was present in both cases, but was either not docu-
mented or not present in the other two. Whole exome sequencing
revealed different compound heterozygous rare missense variants
in CSMD3 in all cases.
Conclusion: In conclusion, CSMD3 gene is likely associated
with neurodevelopmental phenotype and might be connected to
brain structural anomalies as well as ID. Further research is needed
to conﬁrm this ﬁnding.
References:.
Grants: Estonian Research Council grants PRG471, MOBTP175,
PSG774.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.027.B A WDR47 variant suggests a phenotypic relation
with microcephaly in humans
Zafer Yüksel1, Saeed Al Tala2, Ira Schwaab1, Berit Kerner1
1Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH, Division of Human Genetics, Ingel-
heim, Germany; 2Armed Forces Hospital Southern Region, Pediatric
Directorate and Genetic Unit, Khamis Mushait, Saudi Arabia.
Background/Objectives: Microcephaly is deﬁned by a head cir-
cumference of more than three standard deviations (SD) below
the mean for age and gender. Most of the causative genes for
microcephaly-related phenotypes encode proteins that play cru-
cial roles in cellular processes, such as cytokinesis, centromere and
kinetochore function, transmembrane or intracellular transport,
and autophagy. WDR47 belongs to a group of genes that parti-
cipate in key microtubule-mediated processes, including neural
stem
cell
proliferation,
radial
migration,
and
growth
cone
dynamics.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed in a
blood sample of a 12-month-old male who presented with
microcephaly, persistent head lag, abnormality of ocular smooth
pursuit, myoclonic seizure and hyperreﬂexia. His older sibling died
at six years of age due to a similar neurodevelopmental disease.
Results: WES revealed a homozygous missense variant in
WDR47 (OMIM: 615734) [NM_001142550.1: c.1973C>T p.(Pro658-
Leu)] in the affected boy. Both parents are heterozygous carriers. A
crucial role in neuronal development is supported by mouse
models.
Wdr47-deﬁcient mice exhibited lethality, primary progressive
microcephaly, ﬁber tract hypoplasia, a reduced corpus callosum
area, thinner cortices, hyperactivity and sensory-motor gating
abnormalities.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report of a pathogenic variant in
WDR47 in humans. WDR47 may be associated with a neurode-
velopmental disorder in which microcephaly is a prominent
feature.
References: Kannan M, Bayam E, Wagner C, et al. WD40-repeat
47, a microtubule-associated protein, is essential for brain develop-
ment and autophagy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017;114(44):E9308-
E9317. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1713625114.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Zafer Yüksel Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH,
Saeed Al Tala: None declared, Ira Schwaab Bioscientia Healthcare
GmbH, Berit Kerner Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH.
P10.029.D Heterozygous UCHL1 is a novel cause of autosomal
dominant neurodegeneration with spasticity, ataxia,
neuropathy, and optic atrophy
Joohyun Park1, Arianna Tucci2, Valentina Cipriani2;3;4, German
Demidov1, Clarissa Rocca5, Jan Senderek6, Michaela Butryn7, Ana
Velic8, Tanya Lam9;10, Evangelia Galanaki5, Elisa Cali5, Letizia
Vestito2, Reza Marooﬁan5, Natalie Deininger1, Maren Rautenberg1,
Jakob Admard1, Gesa-Astrid Hahn11, Claudius Bartels12, Nienke van
Os13, Rita Horvath14, Patrick Chinnery14;15, May Yung Tiet14, Channa
Hewamadduma16;17, Marios Hadjivassiliou17, George K Tofaris18,
Nicholas Wood19, Stefanie Nicole Hayer20;21, Friedemann Bender20;21,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
478
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Benita Menden1, Isabell Cordts22, Joachim K. Krauss23, Christian
Blahak24, Tim Strom25, Marc Sturm1, Bart Van De Warrenburg13,
Holger
Lerche26,
Boris
Macek8,
Matthis
Synofzik20;21,
Stephan
Ossowski1, Dagmar Timmann-Braun27, Marc Wolf28;29, Smedley
Damien2, Olaf Riess1;30, Ludger Schoels20;21;30, Holger Hengel20;21,
Henry Houlden2, Tobias Haack1;30
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; 2William Harvey Research Institute,
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, London, United Kingdom; 3UCL Institute of Ophthalmol-
ogy, London, United Kingdom; 4UCL Genetics Institute, London,
United
Kingdom;
5University
College
London
Queen
Square
Institute of Neurology, Department of Neuromuscular Diseases,
London, United Kingdom; 6Friedrich-Baur-Institute at the Depart-
ment of Neurology, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany;
7German
Center
for
Neurodegenerative
Diseases
(DZNE),
Magdeburg,
Germany;
8Proteome Center Tübingen, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany; 9Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust,
London, United Kingdom;
10St George’s Hospital NHS Trust,
London, United Kingdom;
11CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany;
12Otto-von-Guericke University, Department of Neurology, Magde-
burg, Germany;
13Radboud University Medical Center, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
14University of Cambridge, Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
Cambridge, United Kingdom;
15University of Cambridge, MRC
Mitochondrial Biology Unit & Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
Cambridge, United Kingdom;
16University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld
Institute for translational neurosciences (SITRAN), Shefﬁeld, United
Kingdom; 17Shefﬁeld Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust and University
of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom; 18Nufﬁeld Department of
Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United King-
dom;
19University College London Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences,
London, United Kingdom;
20Center for Neurology and Hertie-
Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of Tübingen,
Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tübingen, Germany;
21German Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tübingen,
Germany; 22Technical University Munich, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Munich, Germany;
23Hannover Medical School, Department of
Neurosurgery, Hannover, Germany;
24Ortenau Klinikum Lahr-
Ettenheim, Department of Neurology, Lahr, Germany; 25Technische
Universität
München,
Institute
of
Human
Genetics,
Munich,
Germany; 26Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Department
of Neurology and Epileptology, Tübingen,
Germany;
27Essen
University Hospital, Department of Neurology and Center for
Translational Neuro- and Behavioral Sciences(C-TNBS), Essen,
Germany; 28Medical Faculty Mannheim, Department of Neurology,
Mannheim, Germany; 29Klinikum Stuttgart, Department of Neurol-
ogy, Stuttgart, Germany; 30University of Tübingen, Center for Rare
Diseases, Tübingen, Germany.
Background/Objectives:
Hereditary
ataxias
and
hereditary
spastic paraplegias are rare neurodegenerative disorders that
often show overlapping clinical features as well as shared
genetic basis. Bi-allelic variants in UCHL1 (Ubiquitin C-terminal
hydrolase L1) have been associated with a progressive early-
onset neurodegenerative disorder, autosomal recessive spastic
paraplegia type 79. Our objective was to investigate candidate
variants/genes in extended exome and genome datasets within
national and international networks using cohort-based burden
analyses.
Methods: Gene burden analyses were performed on exome
and genome data in independent cohorts of hereditary ataxia and
spastic paraplegia patients from Germany and the UK on a total of
3,169 patients and 33,141 controls. Detailed clinical information
including in-depth neurological assessments on affected patients
were subsequently collected, and additional independent families
were ascertained through national and international collaborators.
Mass-spectrometry-based proteomics was conducted on patients’
ﬁbroblasts.
Results: Gene burden analysis prioritized UCHL1 in both
independent cohorts from Germany and UK as a candidate gene
for an autosomal dominant disorder. In total, we identiﬁed 33
cases from 17 unrelated families, carrying 12 heterozygous pre-
dicted loss-of-function variants (in 14 families) and an inframe
insertion (in 3 families). Affected individuals mainly presented with
spasticity (23/30), ataxia (27/30), neuropathy (11/20) and optic
atrophy (10/17). The mass-spectrometry-based proteomics data
showed an approximately 50% reduction of UCHL1 expression in
patients’ ﬁbroblasts indicating haploinsufﬁciency as the likely
pathological mechanism.
Conclusion: Our bioinformatic analysis, in-depth clinical and
genetic work-up and functional studies establish haploinsufﬁ-
ciency of UCHL1 as a novel disease mechanism in spastic ataxia.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Joohyun Park: None declared, Arianna
Tucci MRC Clinician Scientist investigator (MR/S006753/1), Mem-
ber of The Genomics England Research Consortium, Valentina
Cipriani: None declared, German Demidov: None declared, Clarissa
Rocca: None declared, Jan Senderek: None declared, Michaela
Butryn: None declared, Ana Velic: None declared, Tanya Lam: None
declared, Evangelia Galanaki: None declared, Elisa Cali: None
declared, Letizia Vestito: None declared, Reza Marooﬁan: None
declared, Natalie Deininger: None declared, Maren Rautenberg:
None declared, Jakob Admard: None declared, Gesa-Astrid Hahn:
None declared, Claudius Bartels: None declared, Nienke van Os:
None declared, Rita Horvath RH is a Wellcome Trust Investigator
(109915/Z/15/Z), who receives support from the Medical Research
Council (UK) (MR/N025431/1 and MR/V009346/1), the European
Research Council (309548), the Newton Fund (UK/Turkey, MR/
N027302/1), the Addenbrookes Charitable Trust (G100142), the
Evelyn Trust, the Stoneygate Trust, the Lily Foundation and an
MRC strategic award to establish an International Centre for
Genomic Medicine in Neuromuscular Diseases (ICGNMD) MR/
S005021/1. This research was supported by the NIHR Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre (BRC-1215-20014). The views expres-
sed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NIHR
or the Department of Health and Social Care., Patrick Chinnery PFC
is a Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellow (212219/Z/18/Z),
and a UK NIHR Senior Investigator, who receives support from the
Medical
Research
Council
Mitochondrial
Biology
Unit
(MC_UU_00015/9), the Medical Research Council (MRC) Interna-
tional Centre for Genomic Medicine in Neuromuscular Disease
(MR/S005021/1), the Leverhulme Trust (RPG-2018-408), an MRC
research grant (MR/S035699/1), an Alzheimer’s Society Project
Grant (AS-PG-18b-022). This research was supported by the NIHR
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre (BRC-1215-20014). The
views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.,
May Yung Tiet: None declared, Channa Hewamadduma: None
declared, Marios Hadjivassiliou: None declared, George K Tofaris
MRC Senior Clinical Fellowship (MR/V007068/1), Nicholas Wood:
None declared, Stefanie Nicole Hayer: None declared, Friedemann
Bender: None declared, Benita Menden: None declared, Isabell
Cordts: None declared, Joachim K. Krauss: None declared, Christian
Blahak: None declared, Tim Strom: None declared, Marc Sturm:
None declared, Bart Van De Warrenburg This project was sup-
ported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German
Research Foundation) No 441409627, as part of the PROSPAX
consortium under the frame of EJP RD, the European Joint Pro-
gramme on Rare Diseases, under the EJP RD COFUND-EJP N°
825575 and by grant 779257 “Solve-RD” from the Horizon 2020
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
479
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
research and innovation programme, members of the European
Reference Network for Rare Neurological Diseases (ERN-RND),
Holger Lerche: None declared, Boris Macek: None declared, Mat-
this Synofzik This project was supported by the Deutsche For-
schungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) No
441409627, as part of the PROSPAX consortium under the frame
of EJP RD, the European Joint Programme on Rare Diseases, under
the EJP RD COFUND-EJP N° 825575 and by grant 779257 “Solve-
RD” from the Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme,
member of the European Reference Network for Rare Neurological
Diseases (ERN-RND), Stephan Ossowski: None declared, Dagmar
Timmann-Braun DT received funding from the German Reseach
Foundation, EU and Bernd Fink Foundation, unrelated to the
present study., Marc Wolf: None declared, Smedley Damien
Member of The Genomics England Research Consortium, Olaf
Riess
This
project
was
supported
by
the
Deutsche
For-
schungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) No
441409627, as part of the PROSPAX consortium under the frame
of EJP RD, the European Joint Programme on Rare Diseases, under
the EJP RD COFUND-EJP N° 825575 and by grant 779257 “Solve-
RD” from the Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme,
member of the European Reference Network for Rare Neurological
Diseases (ERN-RND), Ludger Schoels members of the European
Reference Network for Rare Neurological Diseases (ERN-RND),
Holger Hengel HH was supported by the intramural fortüne pro-
gram (#2554-0-0) and by the DFG under the project number HE
8803/1–1., member of the European Reference Network for Rare
Neurological Diseases (ERN-RND), Henry Houlden: None declared,
Tobias
Haack
TBH
was
supported
by
the
Deutsche
For-
schungsgemeinschaft
(DFG,
German
Research
Foundation:
418081722, 433158657).
P10.030.A Link of disorders in the schizo-affective spectrum
and comorbidity with neurobiological correlates
Lisa Sindermann1, Udo Dannlowski2, Susanne Meinert2, Elisabeth
Johanna Leehr2, Lena Waltemate2, Hannah Lemke2, Alexandrea
Winter2, Katharina Thiel2, Katharina Brosch3, Tina Meller3, Frederike
Stein3, Per Hoffmann1;4, Axel Krug3, Tilo Kircher3, Till Andlauer5, Eva
Beins1, Markus M Nöthen1, Andreas Forstner1;6
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany; 2Institute for Transla-
tional Psychiatry, Westphalian Wilhelms-University Münster, Münster,
Germany; 3Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Philipps-
University and University Hospital Marburg, Marburg, Germany;
4Human Genomics Research Group, Department of Biomedicine,
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; 5Department of Neurology,
School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany; 6Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research
Center Jülich, Jülich, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Disorders of the schizoaffective spec-
trum such as major depression, bipolar disorder, schizoaffective
disorder and schizophrenia are common mental disorders with
overlapping symptomatology and high comorbidity rates. The
speciﬁc genetic architecture of mental disorder comorbidity and
its
association
with
brain
phenotypes,
however,
is
poorly
understood.
Methods: We focused on a subsample from the FOR2107 study
comprising n = 470 patients with a single disorder in the schi-
zoaffective spectrum (SD), n = 310 patients with additionally one
or more comorbidities (COM), and n = 649 healthy controls (HC).
We investigated group differences regarding a) the global severity
index, b) a cross-disorder polygenic risk score (PRS) calculated with
PRS-CS, using summary statistics of a large GWAS across mental
disorders (Lee et al., 2019), and c) neurostructural alterations in
gray matter using a whole-brain approach. An explorative sub-
analysis investigating only medication-free individuals (n = 246
patients) was also performed.
Results:
The
global
severity
index
signiﬁcantly
differed
between groups (COM > SD > HC). SD and COM patients displayed
increased cross-disorder PRS compared to HC. However, they were
not different from each other. Patients displayed decreased
volume in the insula and the middle temporal gyrus compared to
HC. These neurostructural associations did not withstand correc-
tion for multiple testing in the medication-free individuals.
Conclusion: Our analyses identiﬁed phenotypic and genetic
differences between SD and COM compared to HC. They did not
provide strong evidence that SD and COM patients differed sig-
niﬁcantly from each other at the genetic and brain structural
levels. Future studies are needed to further assess the neurobio-
logical correlates of comorbidity.
References: Lee et al., 2019, PMID:31835028.
Grants: DFG, grant FOR2107.
Conﬂict of Interest: Lisa Sindermann: None declared, Udo
Dannlowski: None declared, Susanne Meinert: None declared, Eli-
sabeth Johanna Leehr: None declared, Lena Waltemate: None
declared, Hannah Lemke: None declared, Alexandrea Winter: None
declared, Katharina Thiel: None declared, Katharina Brosch: None
declared, Tina Meller: None declared, Frederike Stein: None
declared, Per Hoffmann: None declared, Axel Krug: None declared,
Tilo Kircher Dr. Kircher received unrestricted educational grants
from Servier, Janssen, Recordati, Aristo, Otsuka, neuraxpharm. This
funding is not associated with the current work., Till Andlauer:
None declared, Eva Beins: None declared, Markus M Nöthen: None
declared, Andreas Forstner: None declared.
P10.031.B The usefulness of array CGH for identiﬁcation copy
number variants in children with autism spectrum disorders
Agata Kucińska1, Wanda Hawuła1, Lena Rutkowska1, Agnieszka
Gach1
1Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital - Research Institute, Department
of Genetics, Lodz, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is one
of the most common neurodevelopmental disorders characterized
by impairment in social interaction, communication and stereo-
typic behavior. Copy number variants (CNVs) are clinically relevant
in the pathogenesis of ASD and occur in approximately 7-9% of
cases. We aimed to demonstrate the clinical utility of dedicated
array Comparative Genome Hybridization (aCGH) in isolated and
complex ASD.
Methods: Array CGH was performed using 4x180k CytoSure
Autism Research Array (OGT; UK). DNA was extracted from per-
ipheral blood. The tested group comprised 155 pediatric patients
divided in two cohorts: 93 patients with ASD and 62 patients with
ASD and additional clinical features including dysmorphia, intel-
lectual disability, epilepsy and psychomotor retardation.
Results: The strategy allowed for the identiﬁcation of 38 rare
exonic chromosomal imbalances classiﬁed as pathogenic or likely
pathogenic in 13 of 155 patients (8.4 %) and variants of uncertain
signiﬁcance (VUS) in 22 of 155 patients (14.2%). The range of CNVs
size varies between 284 b and 4.04 Mb. In the group of isolated
ASD 11 variants were classiﬁed as VUS and one as likely patho-
genic. Among patients with complex ASD nine harbored patho-
genic variants, three likely pathogenic and 10 VUS imbalances.
Conclusion: Overall, we have evaluated the usefulness of
dedicated aCGH in the detection of clinically relevant CNVs in a
cohort of 155 patients with ASD. Our results support the relevance
of performing chromosomal microarray analysis especially in the
case of complex ASD.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
480
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.032.C A case with 9q33.3 microdeletion pointing to the
existence of a new syndrome unrelated to STXBP1 gene
deletion
Davit Babikyan1;2
1Center Of Medical Genetics And Primary Health Care, Yerevan,
Armenia; 2Yerevan State Medical University, Yerevan, Armenia.
Background/Objectives: Several microdeletions of the 9q33.3-
q34.11 chromosomal region have been reported with a range of
clinical phenotypes mostly restricted on patients with seizures and
STXBP1 gene point mutations or deletions. New cases showed a
variable and incomplete penetrance of clinical features, including
seizures in patients with or without STXBP1 gene deletion. Here
we report a female patient with microcephaly, hypogenesis of
corpus
callosum,
severe
psychomotor
development
delay,
absence of speech, but with no episode of seizures.
Methods: WES analysis was performed on DNA samples from
the patient and her parents using the AgilentV6 WES and NEB
DNA library preparation kits followed with data analysis using
SophiaDDM platform.
Results: A 493 kb microdeletion was identiﬁed in the chr9q33.3
region (chr9: 126,914,782-127,407,898) encompassing 3 OMIM
genes - RALGPS1, GARNL3 and SLC2A8 related to the region
identiﬁed in patients with 9q33.3-q34.11 microdeletions. The
clinical presentation of the patient was similar to the ones of
previously reported cases with several common features including
intellectual disability, psychomotor developmental delay with
delayed or absent speech. The parents were not carriers of the
microdeletion.
Conclusion: In addition to the previously reported cases, the
microdeletion identiﬁed in our patient is one of the smallest and
encompasses the minimal critical region with two genes RALGPS1
and GARNL3. This re-conﬁrms that the minimal causative region
responsible for the clinical spectrum with no seizures in patients
with 9q33.3 microdeletion does not encompass STXBP1 and
instead includes two other genes, and which could be considered
as a new 9q33.3 microdeletion syndrome.
References: No.
Grants: No.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.033.D DNA methylation analysis in precision medicine:
Accurate biomarker and predictor of onset. The example of
KMT2B-associated dystonia
Nazanin Mirza-Schreiber1, Michael Zech1;2, Barbara Schormair1;2,
Juliane Winkelmann1;2;3, Konrad Oexle1;2
1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Neurogenomics, München,
Germany; 2Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute
of Human Genetics, München, Germany; 3Munich Cluster for Systems
Neurology (SyNergy), München, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Alterations of DNA methylation relate to
disease-associated changes in cellular organization states. These
alterations therefore allow for deriving disease-speciﬁc bio-
markers. Here we report a blood biomarker for histone lysine
methyltransferase (KMT2B)-deﬁcient dystonia. Dystonia is a pre-
valent, heterogeneous movement disorder, and KMT2B-deﬁciency
is a leading monogenic subtype.
Methods: The biomarker was derived by training a support
vector machine classiﬁer on an episignature of 113 DNA CpG sites
showing signiﬁcant epigenome-wide association with KMT2B
deﬁciency.
To reﬁne our classiﬁer and to increase sensitivity we stepwise
re- trained the classiﬁer with previously classiﬁed VUS samples.
With this approach we aim to capture KMT2B mutations with
moderate epigenetic effects but still causing dystonia.
Results: All CpG sites of the episignature showed increased
methylation levels in cases. The mean of their normalized
methylation levels correlated well with the age at onset of dys-
tonia (p = 0.003) – being lower in patients with late or incomplete
penetrance – thus serving as a predictor of disease onset and
severity. The SVM classiﬁer was accurate both when tested on the
general population and on samples with various other deﬁciencies
of the epigenetic machinery. It was able to successfully evaluate
variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS) from multiple batches.
Conclusion: Our data show that episignatures do not only
function in diagnostics but may also provide predictors of disease
course and, potentially, markers of therapeutic success. KMT2B-
deﬁcient patients are known to proﬁt exceptionally well from
deep brain stimulation. The episignature-based biomarker will
serve to identify them with high accuracy.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.034.A Uncovering the phenotypic, genetic, and causal
relationships of depression with other psychiatric and non-
psychiatric disorders
Zhiyu Yang1;2, Petros Drineas3, Peristera Paschou1
1Purdue University, Department of Biological Sciences, West Lafayette,
United States; 2University of Helsinki, Molecular Medicine Finland,
Helsinki, Finland;
3Purdue University, Department of Computer
Sciences, West Lafayette, United States.
Background/Objectives: Depression, as one of the most pre-
valent psychiatric traits and one of the leading causes of health
loss worldwide, is known to be highly heritable and is frequently
observed comorbid with other mental and physical illnesses. This
observation motivated us to look deeper into its genetic and
potentially causal connections with other disorders.
Methods: In this study, we utilized data from the UK biobank
to systematically evaluate relationships between depression and
other heritable traits, from both phenotypic and genetic aspects.
We compressed 6,300 ICD codes into 412 heritable PheCode items
and constructed a comorbidity network across depression and a
wide range of diseases among 300,000+ European ancestry par-
ticipants. Subsequently, we examined the genetic correlation for
each pair of phenotypic connection observed from the network.
We also looked into causality relationships through mendelian
randomization for all pairs of signiﬁcantly correlated disorders and
further uncovered horizontal pleiotropic genetic variants and
genes contributing to disease aetiologies.
Results: We found gastro-oesophageal reﬂux disease (GORD),
body mass index and osteoarthritis as direct causes for depression,
with GORD lying in the center of the causal network. Genes
broadly expressed in various tissues, such as NEGR1, TCF4 and
BTN2A1 were identiﬁed to underlie the pathways that lead not
only to depression but also other related diseases.
Conclusion: Our work highlights the broad connections
between depression and diverse traits, indicating a complex
aetiology and possible existence of subtypes for depression. Our
ﬁndings highlight the value of cross-trait analysis towards better
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
481
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
understanding
of
the
neurobiology
of
complex
psychiatric
disease.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.035.B The diagnostic yield of NGS-based gene panels in
epilepsy
Laura Frey1, Anna Munzig-Schmidt1, Karin Mayer1, Sabine Lippert1,
Oliver Wachter1, Sebastian Eck1, Julia Philippou-Massier1, Konstanze
Hörtnagel1, Hanns-Georg Klein1, Imma Rost1
1MVZ Martinsried - Medicover, Martinsried, Germany.
Background/Objectives: We report the yield of NGS panels
applied for routine diagnostics in suspected monogenic epilepsy
syndromes during the years 2019-2021.
Methods: We analyzed 181 (23 adult and 158 pediatric)
patients with epilepsy of unknown etiology who underwent
diagnostic testing using targeted gene panels (range 3-143
genes). The pathogenicity of variants was assessed according to
ACMG criteria. Diagnostic yield was determined for all individuals
according to age at genetic diagnosis.
Results: Panel analysis identiﬁed pathogenic or likely patho-
genic variants in 36 of 181 patients, resulting in an overall diag-
nostic yield of 19,9 %. The yield depended on the age of the
patient at diagnosis as well as the epilepsy syndrome. The yield
was highest among infants aged 6-12 months (72,7 %, 8/11) and
toddlers aged 12-24 months (60 %, 9/15). Accordingly, benign
familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE) exhibited the highest diagnostic
yield among epilepsy syndromes (69,2 %, 9/13), followed by
Dravet syndrome (50 %, 4/8). 17 different genes harbored
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants with PRRT2 (8 patients),
PCDH19 (6 patients) and SCN1A (4 patients) being most frequently
affected. Missense variants were the most common type con-
tributing to diagnosis (44 %, 16/36). Frameshift variants, nonsense
variants and CNVs accounted for 31 % (11/36), 14 % (5/36) and 11
% (4/36) of cases, respectively.
Conclusion: In our diagnostic setting NGS epilepsy gene
panels have an overall diagnostic yield of approximately 20 %. We
observed the highest probability of genetic diagnosis in infants
whereas the detection rate decreased with increasing age at the
time of genetic diagnosis.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.036.C Deciphering new genetic components of psychiatric
disorders through multivariate association studies
Antoine
Auvergne1,
Traut
Nicolas1,
Hanna
Julienne1,
Lucie
Troubat1, Toro Roberto1, Hugues Aschard1
1Institut Pasteur, Department of Computational Biology, Paris,
France.
Background/Objectives: The study of imaging-derived pheno-
types and their associated genetic and environmental factors has
become central to mental disorder research. However, the
dimensionality and high correlation of imaging phenotypes cau-
ses severe computational and analytical challenges. Here, we
applied novel methods we recently developed to investigate
shared genetic components between neuroanatomical pheno-
types and psychiatric disorders.
Methods: We ﬁrst performed multitrait genome-wide associa-
tion study (GWAS) of brain volume phenotypes in 26,000
individuals from the UKBIOBANK and ENIGMA cohorts using JASS,
a robust and computationally efﬁcient multitrait analysis pipeline.
We next conducted an unsupervised clustering of top univariate
and multivariate association signals to identify clusters of variants
displaying similar multitrait association patterns. Genetic variants
from each cluster were then assessed for association with psy-
chiatric disorders.
Results: Our multitrait analysis detected substantially more
associated variants than univariate brain volume GWAS, with
over 80% increase in power. Among top variants, we identiﬁed
multiple clusters with marked enrichment for association with
speciﬁc psychiatric diseases. In particular, a cluster of highly
pleiotropic variants associated with all brain volumes considered
was associated with bipolarity (P = 1.8e-7). Another cluster,
capturing shared genetics between putamen, pallidum and
caudate volume, showed strong association with schizophrenia
(P = 1.5e-17),
supporting
the
role
of
genetics
in
the
previously reported association between basal ganglia and
schizophrenia.
Conclusion: Our analyses demonstrate that data-driven mul-
titrait analysis of imaging-derived phenotypes can help decipher
the genetic components of psychiatric disorders.
References:.
Grants:
This
research
was
supported
by
the
FRM
(ECO202106013759). This research has been conducted using the
UK Biobank Resource under Application Number 18584.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.037.D Phenotypic spectrum overview of patients with
neurodevelopmental disorders sharing one recurrent copy
number variant (CNV) and carrying different additional CNVs
Martina Servetti1, Livia Pisciotta1;2, Elisa Tassano3, Maria Cermi-
nara1;4, Marco Fontana4, Chiara Bagliani1, Lino Nobili1;5, Silvia
Boeri1;5, Giulia Rosti1;4, Margherita Lerone4, Maria Teresa Divizia4,
Federico Zara1;4, Patrizia Ronchetto3, Aldamaria Puliti1;4
1University
of
Genoa,
Dept.
of
Neurosciences,
Rehabilitation,
Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health (DiNOGMI),
Genova, Italy; 2ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Child Neuropsychiatry
Unit, Milano, Italy; 3IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Human Genetics
Laboratory, Genova, Italy; 4IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Medical
Genetics Unit, Genova, Italy; 5IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Child
Neuropsychiatry Unit, Genova, Italy.
Background/Objectives:
Patients
with
neurodevelopmental
disorders (NDDs) may have different clinical presentation even
within the same diagnostic category. We aimed to characterize
the phenotype of patients sharing one recurrent CNV and car-
rying additional different CNVs. To evaluate possible synergistic
effects among multiple CNVs and their fall-out on patient’s
phenotype.
Methods: We re-evaluated array-CGH
results from
518
patients with NDDs with non-benign CNVs classiﬁed as patho-
genic, likely pathogenic and variants of uncertain signiﬁcance
(1). Pathogenic variants included syndromic/recurrent CNVs
(according to Decipher and SFARI databases), CNVs > 3 Mb
and those < 3 Mb and encompassing known NDD-associated
genes.
Protein-protein
interaction
and
gene
enrichment
analyses were used to show potential interplay among CNV-
encompassed genes.
Results: We found that among patients with pathogenic var-
iants (131), 8% (11) have one additional, inherited or de novo CNV.
These double hits could explain the complex phenotypic spec-
trum of the patients. Among major results, three patients sharing a
syndromic 15q13.3 deletion associated with additional different
CNVs, and patients sharing one small CNV, involving a known NDD
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
482
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
gene, in addition to different CNVs involving other NDD-
associated genes with potential synergistic effects.
Conclusion: It is worth to further investigate patients with
pathogenic CNVs and analyse modiﬁer effects of multiple CNVs on
patient’s phenotype. A better understanding and classiﬁcation of
these patients can be useful for disease prognosis, management
of the patients, keeping with the developing idea of precision
medicine.
References: 1. Servetti et al, Front. Genet. 2021.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.038.A Modelling the combined effects of rare and
common genetic variants, with opposite effects on cognition,
on autism spectrum disorder risk
Zoe Schmilovich1;2, Elise Douard3;4, Guillaume Huguet3;4, Patrick
Dion2;5, Sebastien Jacquemont3;4, Guy Rouleau2;5
1McGill University, Human Genetics, Montreal, Canada; 2Montreal
Neurological Institute, Montreal, Canada; 3Université de Montreal,
Montreal, Canada; 4CHU Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Canada; 5McGill
University, Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal, Canada.
Background/Objectives: Common and rare variants contribute to
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) [1]. Rare de novo and inherited
CNVs that substantially increase ASD-risk also have negative
effects on cognition [2,3,4]. Conversely, there is a positive genetic
correlation between ASD and cognition, such that common var-
iants which increase ASD-risk also increase intelligence (IQ) in the
general population [5].
Methods: Deletion and duplication CNVs, annotated by a
constraint score (LOEUF), and PRS for intelligence (PRSIQ) were
identiﬁed in 6,929 ASD cases and 32,663 unaffected individuals.
The sum of LOEUF represented the individual-level burden of
deleterious rare variants. A sliding window modelled the risk for
ASD across LOEUF and PRSIQ categories. The cumulative risk for
ASD across both LOEUF and PRSIQ categories was modelled using
a double-sliding window approach.
Results: Intolerant (LOEUF<0.35) and tolerant (0.35≤LOEUF<1)
genes disrupted by gene dosage signiﬁcantly increased ASD-risk,
even after adjusting for their effects on cognition. High and low
PRSIQ increased and decreased ASD-risk, respectively, and this
effect was heightened after adjusting for cognition. A combination
of highly intolerant genes (LOEUF < 0.2) and a high PRSIQ
(≥1 standard deviations from the control population mean) was
associated with the highest risk for ASD for deletions (OR =
13.81;p = 2e-02) and duplications (OR = 1.81;p = 2e-02).
Conclusion: Our results suggest that a combination of genetic
variants that both increase and decrease cognition may be key
elements to ASD-risk.
References: 1-Weiner (2017); 2-Satterstrom (2020); 3-Huguet
(2018); 4-Douard (2020); 5-Grove (2019).
Grants: Transforming Autism Care Consortium (Fonds de
Recherche Québec ‐ Santé).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.039.B GRIN2A null variants confer a high risk for early-
onset mental disorders and potentially enable precision
medicine approaches
Johannes Lemke1, Ilona Krey1, Bernt Popp1, Vincent Strehlow1, Dirk
Wittekind2, Tim Benke3, Steffen Syrbe4
1Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany; 2Department of
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Leipzig, Germany; 3Departments of
Pediatrics, Pharmacology, Neurology, and Otolaryngology, Denver,
United States; 4Division of Pediatric Epileptology, Center for Pediatrics
and Adolescent Medicine, Heidelberg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Mental disorders are considered com-
plex and highly polygenic and numerous loci have been asso-
ciated with a small risk increments for mental disorders, each. One
of these loci is 16p13.2 spanning GRIN2A, a gene encoding the
GluN2A subunit of the NMDA receptor.
Methods: Therefore, we investigated the presence of psy-
chiatric diagnoses within our registry of 236 individuals with
GRIN2A-related disorders.
Results: Carriers of null variants were signiﬁcantly more likely
to develop mental disorders compared to carriers of missense
variants. GRIN2A-related mental disorders comprised the whole
spectrum of psychiatric diseases, but most prominently mood and
anxiety disorders followed by psychotic disorders. Literally all
GRIN2A-related mental disorders manifested in childhood or
adolescence and thus had a signiﬁcantly earlier onset compared
to the general population. In some individuals, the mental dis-
order appeared to be the foremost clinical diagnosis.
Conclusion: Thus, we identiﬁed GRIN2A to be the ﬁrst gene
ever associated with a monogenic mental disorder, demonstrating
that the genetic background of this disease spectrum is not
necessarily as polygenic or complex as previously thought. Like-
wise, we uncovered a completely novel phenotypic facet of this
genetic entity, changing our perception of isolated seemingly
non-syndromic mental disorders in general. Moreover, we recently
observed that treatment with NMDA receptor co-agonists appears
to be beneﬁcial in GRIN2A-related disorders due to null variants,
even with respect to psychotic features. Thus, the NMDA receptor
appears to be a promising target of precision medicine approa-
ches to ameliorate mental disorders due to GRIN2A null variants
and maybe even beyond.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.040.C Generation and characterisation of induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived microglia to study the inﬂuence
of genetic risk for depression on microglial functions
Eva Beins1, Ronja Hollstein1, Kerstin Ludwig1, Per Hoffmann1,
Markus M Nöthen1, Andreas Forstner1;2
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany;
2Institute of Neu-
roscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Jülich, Jülich,
Germany.
Background/Objectives: Microglia, the resident immune cells of
the brain, have been implicated in the pathology of psychiatric
disorders, including depression. These ﬁndings are mostly based
on animal models, while results from humans are limited. Recent
advances in induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) research pro-
vide new possibilities to study human microglia. Here, we
established the differentiation of iPSC into microglia (iMG) to
study the inﬂuence of genetic risk for depression on microglial
function.
Methods: In pilot experiments, sequential differentiation of
iPSC into primitive macrophage precursors (PMP) and iMG was
established following published protocols1.The progression of
differentiation was monitored at several stages using ﬂow cyto-
metry, immunocytochemistry and transcriptomics (3’mRNA-Seq).
Furthermore, iMG were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
and/or dexamethasone to study inﬂammatory and glucocorticoid
(“stress”) signalling. Prospectively, we plan to analyse iMG of
depressed patients and healthy controls, selected based on
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
483
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
genome-wide genotype data and polygenic risk scores for
depression.
Results: First results indicate successful differentiation from
iPSCs to PMP and iMG, based on surface expression of macro-
phage/microglia markers (CD11b, CX3CR1, P2RY12) and in vitro
microglia-like morphology. Transcriptome analysis conﬁrmed cell
type-speciﬁc gene expression signatures throughout differentia-
tion as well as differential expression of inﬂammatory and
glucocorticoid-response genes after stimulation.
Conclusion: The generation of iMG from donors with different
genetic backgrounds will provide a valuable tool to study human
microglial function in the context of depression or other psy-
chiatric disorders and enable analyses of gene-environment
interactions (e.g. “stress”) in a deﬁned cellular model.
References: 1Reich et al. 2021 (PMID: 33613545).
Grants: DFG EXC2151–390873048.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.041.D Eating disorders: Age of onset and its associated
genetic risk factors
Helena Davies1, Christopher Hübel1;2;3, jonathan kelly4, agnes
ayton5, rachel Bryant-waugh6, molly davies1;2, Jessica Mundy1, janet
treasure7, Gerome Breen1;2
1King’s College London, Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychia-
try Centre, London, United Kingdom;
2UK National Institute for
Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre for Mental
Health, South London and Maudsley Hospital, London, United
Kingdom;
3National Centre for Register-based Research, Aarhus
Business and Social Sciences, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Aarhus,
Denmark; 4Beat, Norwich, United Kingdom; 5Oxford Health NHS
Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom;
6Maudsley Hospital,
Maudsley Centre for Child and Adolescent Eating Disorders, London,
United Kingdom; 7King’s College London, Psychological Medicine,
London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Eating disorders have a heritability of
16-83%1 and a median age of onset of 18 years2. UK-based studies
on age of onset of eating disorders and how this is inﬂuenced by
genetics are lacking.
Methods: Participants self-reported eating disorder diag-
noses, symptoms, and age of onset in either the Eating Disorders
Genetics Initiative UK (EDGI UK) or the Genetic Links to Anxiety
and Depression (GLAD) Study (n = 8,945). We associated poly-
genic scores calculated with PRS-CS with age of onset.
Results: Median age of onset was younger in females than
males: binge eating (18 vs. 21 years), low weight (18 vs. 20 years),
and purging (16 vs. 19 years). More males reported onset older
than 25 years for binge eating (41.3% vs. 18.4%), purging (29.1%
vs. 10.3%), and low weight (33.2% vs. 17.6%), and onset below 10
years for low weight (2.9% vs. 0.3%). Preliminary polygenic score
analyses indicate that a one standard deviation increase in edu-
cational attainment polygenic score was associated with earlier
age of onset across all phenotypes: purging by 0.41 years
(p = 0.04), low weight by 0.51 years (p = 0.04), and binge eating by
0.52 years (p = 0.01).
Conclusion: Eating disorders primarily begin in the 16-25 age
group. Genetics driving educational attainment may be associated
with younger age of onset. Our results highlight the need for
sufﬁcient
investment
into
adult
clinical
services,
increased
awareness efforts about eating disorders in adulthood, and early
screening.
References:.
Grants: Funded by NIHR BioResource and the NIHR Maudsley
Biomedical Research Centre.
Conﬂict of Interest: Helena Davies: None declared, Christo-
pher Hübel: None declared, jonathan kelly: None declared, agnes
ayton: None declared, rachel Bryant-waugh: None declared, molly
davies: None declared, Jessica Mundy: None declared, janet
treasure: None declared, Gerome Breen Prof Breen has received
honoraria, research or conference grants and consulting fees from
Illumina, Otsuka, and COMPASS Pathﬁnder Ltd.
P10.042.A Population-level study of CNVs and their associated
risk of psychiatric disorders in a Danish case-cohort
Seyedmorteza Vaez1;2, Simone Montalbano1;2, Xabier Calle San-
chez1;2, iPSYCH Collaborators2, Armin Raznahan3, Wesley Kurt
Thompson2;4, Thomas Werge1;2;5, Dorte Helenius Mikkelsen1;2, Andres
Ingason1;2;5
1Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Mental Health Services Capital
Region of Denmark, Roskilde, Denmark; 2The Lundbeck Foundation
Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research (iPSYCH), Copenhagen
and Arhus, Denmark; 3Section on Developmental Neurogenomics,
Human Genetics Branch, National Institute of Mental Health
Intramural Research Program, Bethesda, United States;
4Herbert
Wertheim School of Public Health and Human Longevity, University
of California, San Diego, United States; 5Lundbeck Foundation Center
for
GeoGenetics,
GLOBE
Institute,
University
of
Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
Background/Objectives: Recurrent copy number variants (CNVs)
have been shown to increase the risk of neuropsychiatric disorders
in clinical case-control studies. Yet, little is known about their
pathogenic impact at the level of an individual or an entire
population. We sought to estimate the true population prevalence
of recurrent CNVs and their associated risk of psychiatric disorders.
Methods: We applied the iPSYCH2015 case-cohort (1), includ-
ing all individuals born in Denmark in 1981-2008 and diagnosed
with a major psychiatric disorder by 2015, and a random com-
parison sample from the same birth cohort. Samples were geno-
typed and recurrent CNVs at 30 loci called with PennCNV (2) and
veriﬁed by visual inspection. Population-representative hazard
ratios (HR) were derived using a Cox proportional hazard model
with inverse probability of sampling (IPS) weights (3).
Results: The population prevalence of several CNVs was higher
than in the UK Biobank (4). Overall, the carrier rate in cases was
higher than in the comparison sample with HR varying widely
across disorders and CNVs.
Conclusion: The population-based iPSYCH study enables esti-
mating of true prevalence and associated risk conferred by CNVs
of ascertained psychiatric disorders, thus paving the way for
implementing genetic predictions into clinical practice.
References: 1. Byberg-Grauholm et al., 2020 (https://doi.org/
10.1101/2020.11.30.20237768). 2. Wang et al., 2007 (https://
doi.org/10.1101/gr.6861907).
3.
Barlow
et
al.,
1999
(https://
doi.org/10.1016/s0895-4356(99)00102-x). 4. Crawford et al., 2019
(https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2018-105477).
Grants: This work was supported by grants from the Lundbeck
Foundation
(R165–2013–15320,
R155–2014–1724,
and
R248–2017–2003), and the NIH (R01 MH124789-01).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.043.B Investigation of polygenic scores in patients with
social anxiety disorder
Angelina Vogelsang1, Man Long Chung2, Lisa Sindermann1, Friederike
David1, Christina Elling2, Laura-EfﬁSeib-Pfeifer3, Stefanie Heilmann-
Heimbach1, Per Hoffmann1;4, Stefan Herms1, Börge Schmidt5, Katharina
Domschke6;7, Vanessa Nieratschker8, Udo Dannlowski9, Elisabeth
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
484
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Johanna Leehr9, Eric Leibing10, Markus M Nöthen1, Franziska Geiser11,
Johannes Schumacher12, Carlo Maj13, Rupert Conrad2, Andreas
Forstner1;14
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany;
2Department of
Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Hospital
Bonn, Bonn, Germany; 3Department of Psychology, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany; 4Human Genomics Research Group, Depart-
ment of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; 5Institute
for Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, University
Hospital of Essen, Essen, Germany; 6Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany;
7Centre for
Basics in Neuromodulation, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Freiburg,
Freiburg,
Germany;
8Department
of
Psychiatry
and
Psychotherapy,
Tübingen
Center
for
Mental
Health
(TüCMH),
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; 9Institute for Transla-
tional Psychiatry, University of Münster, Münster, Germany; 10Uni-
versitätsmedizin Göttingen, Clinic of Psychosomatic Medicine and
Psychotherapy, Göttingen, Germany; 11Department of Psychosomatic
Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Hospital Bonn, Medical
Faculty, Bonn, Germany; 12Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Marburg, Marburg, Germany; 13Institute of Genomic Statistics and
Bioinformatics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; 14Institute of
Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Jülich, Jülich,
Germany.
Background/Objectives: Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is a com-
mon anxiety disorder (AD). It has a heritability of around 10-50%
and is highly comorbid with depressive symptoms and major
depressive disorder (MDD). Large AD genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) have been conducted, but sample sizes in genetic
analyses of SAD have been limited. Therefore, the genetic basis of
SAD and its subphenotypes is still largely unknown.
Methods: We computed polygenic risk scores (PRS) using
PRSice-2 and summary statistics of depression (Howard et al.,
2019) and MDD GWAS (Wray et al., 2018). PRS were calculated in a
large cohort comprising n = 1304 patients with SAD from our
Social Phobia Research project and external collaborators, and
n = 4140 controls from the Heinz Nixdorf Recall study. The asso-
ciation between the PRS and case-control status as well as SAD
subphenotypes (depressive, SAD-speciﬁc, anxiety symptoms) was
investigated by using R.
Results: Preliminary analyses revealed a signiﬁcant association
between the PRS of depression and SAD case-control status. The
depression PRS was also nominally associated with depressive
symptoms in SAD patients, but this association did not withstand
stringent Bonferroni correction.
Conclusion: Our preliminary results suggest that the genetic
risk for depression might contribute to depressive symptoms in
SAD patients. Beyond that, we did not identify strong contribu-
tions of genetic risk factors for depression/MDD to SAD sub-
phenotypes. Further systematic analyses of PRS of AD and
additional subphenotypes (e.g., comorbid MDD) are currently
ongoing and will be presented at the upcoming conference.
References: Howard et al. (2019), PMID: 30718901.
Wray et al. (2018), PMID: 29700475.
Grants: Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung (2019_A127).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.044.C Investigation of the association between loci with
opposite directional effects across multiple neuropsychiatric
disorders and human brain structure
Lydia M. Federmann1;2, Lisa Sindermann2, Christiane Jockwitz1;3,
Friederike David2, Alexander Teumer4, Dominique I. Hilger1, Markus
M. Nöthen2, Katrin Amunts1;5, Udo Dannlowski6, Thomas Mühlei-
sen1;5;7, Svenja Caspers1, Sven Cichon1;7;8, Andreas Forstner1;9
1Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre
Jülich, Jülich, Germany; 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of
Bonn, School of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn,
Germany; 3Institute for Anatomy I, Medical Faculty & University
Hospital Düsseldorf, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany;
4University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany; 5Cécile and
Oskar Vogt Institute for Brain Research, Medical Faculty, Heinrich
Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany; 6Institute for Translational
Psychiatry, Münster, Germany; 7Department of Biomedicine, Basel,
Switzerland; 8Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland;
9Institute of Human Genetics,
University of Bonn, School of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn,
Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives: In a genome-wide association study
(GWAS) meta-analysis, Lee et al. (2019) reported eleven SNPs to
show opposite effects on multiple neuropsychiatric disorders. The
pathogenic
mechanisms
of
these
antagonistic
effects,
i.e.
increased risk for one disorder along with reduced risk for another,
and their potential inﬂuence on brain structure have not been
explored yet.
Methods: To investigate the association between antag-
onistic SNPs and brain structural phenotypes, we reviewed the
summary statistics of large ENIGMA GWAS of subcortical volume,
cortical thickness (CT), surface area (SA), and total intracranial
volume (ICV). After false discovery rate correction for all SNP-
phenotype pairs, we assessed for each signiﬁcant association if
large ENIGMA case-control brain imaging studies have pre-
viously reported those structural alterations in patients with
neuropsychiatric disorders.
Results: Seven antagonistic SNPs were signiﬁcantly associated
with at least one structural phenotype. The SNPs were associated
with the SA in widespread cortical regions (e.g. rs6748341 with the
SA in the bilateral pars opercularis), the CT in the cingulum, and
the inferior parietal lobule, the volume of the caudate nucleus, and
ICV. Analyzing case-control imaging studies provided further evi-
dence that some of the identiﬁed SNP-brain phenotype associa-
tions might be involved in disease development.
Conclusion: Our study supports the notion that several
antagonistic SNPs associated with neuropsychiatric disorders
inﬂuence brain structure, which might explain how antagonistic
SNP alleles modulate the risk of developing a speciﬁc disorder.
Future case-control genomic imaging analyses and a more reﬁned
characterization of underlying brain networks are required to
strengthen the preliminary ﬁndings.
References: Lee et al. (2019) PMID:31835028.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.045.D Whole exome sequencing followed by reverse
phenotyping in patients with neurodevelopmental disorders
identiﬁes rare genetic syndromes and reveals novel clinical
and genetic variants
Nevyana Ivanova1, Kalina Mihova1, Daniela Avdjieva-Tzavella2;3,
Valentina Peycheva1, Ivan Litvinenko2;4, Genoveva Tacheva5;6, Iliyana
Aleksandrova7,
Velina
Guergelcheva8;9,
Veneta
Bojinova-
Tchamova10, Vanyo Mitev11, Ivanka Dimova12, Albena Jordanova1,
Radka Kaneva1
1Medical University - Soﬁa, Molecular Medicine Center / Department
of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 2Medical
University - Soﬁa, Pediatrics, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 3SBAL Children’s Hospital
„Prof. Dr. Ivan Mitev“, Genetics Clinic, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 4SBAL Children’s
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
485
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Hospital „Prof. Dr. Ivan Mitev“, Neurologic Clinic, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
2Medical
University
-
Soﬁa,
Pediatrics,
Soﬁa,
Bulgaria;
6SBAL
Children’s Hospital „Prof. Dr. Ivan Mitev“, Pediatrics, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
7Medical University - Soﬁa/ University Hospital for Neurology and
Psychiatry “Sveti Naum”, Children Neurological Clinic, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
8UMBAL
“Soﬁamed”,
Neurology
Clinic,
Soﬁa,
Bulgaria;
9Soﬁa
University “St.Kliment Ochridski”, Medical Faculty, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
10University Hospital for Neurology and Psychiatry “Sveti Naum”,
Children Neurological Clinic, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 11Medical University -
Soﬁa, Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 12Medical
University - Soﬁa, Molecular Medicine Center / Department of
Medical Genetics, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: The complex nature of neurodevelop-
mental disorders offers a real challenge when it comes to clinical
and molecular diagnostics. The classical gene panel approach to
the whole exome sequencing data analysis is hindered by the
“blurred” clinical picture of complex, overlapping and variable
clinical phenotypes. Looking outside a particular gene panel and
back to clinical data made possible to “recognize” rare syndromes
and to identify novel clinical and genetic variants.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing analysis using gene
panels and non-targeted analysis followed by reverse phenotyp-
ing in 10 patients with neurodevelopmental disorders who had
already been excluded for the common types of genetic defects
for the suspected particular condition.
Results: We have identiﬁed potentially disease-causing var-
iants in six cases. Three of them are due to de novo mutations in
genes GFAP, KCNC3 and KMT2E. The other three were associated
with homozygous or compound heterozygous variants in TTC37,
RUBCN and ALDOA genes that relate to disorders with autosomal
recessive inheritance. The patient carrying the KCNC3 variant
exhibit non-characteristic for this locus clinical phenotype with a
major clinical feature of focal epilepsy underlined by a mild
developmental delay. A homozygous mutation in the ALDOA gene
was found in patient with autism and mental retardation. Up to
the moment, the role of this gene in autistic spectrum disorders
has been only discussed but not established clear-cut.
Conclusion: The combined whole exome sequencing – reverse
phenotyping approach is very effective method for the diag-
nostics that could provide new insides in of rare genetic disorders.
References: -.
Grants:
D83/04.06.2021,
D01-285/17.12.2019,
D01-395/
18.12.2020, D01-302/17.12.2021.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.046.A Dysfunctional CTDP1 impairs the cell cycle
indicating its essential role in neurodevelopment
Hamide Yildirim1, Boyan Dimitrov2, Elyssa Cannaerts2, Karen
Sermon3, Alexander Gheldof2, Katrien Stouffs2, Anna Jansen4
1Vrije Universiteit Brussel, NEGE, Jette, Belgium; 2UZ Brussel, Jette,
Belgium; 3Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Jette, Belgium; 4Antwerp Uni-
versity Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Malformations of cortical development
(MCDs) constitute a diverse range of disorders that are common
causes of neurodevelopmental delay and epilepsy. The underlying
molecular mechanism of several MCDs have been elucidated,
although many still remain unknown.
Methods: Trio exome analysis in a girl with congenital
arthrogryposis,
unilateral
auditory
neuropathy,
absent
optic
chiasma and grey matter heterotopia revealed the presence of
two novel variants in the C-terminal domain phosphatase 1
(CTDP1) gene. CTDP1 functions as a phosphatase which depho-
sphorylates the C-terminus of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) and may
potentially be involved in MCD, re-enforced by its essential role for
normal embryo development.
CTDP1 expression was analysed both on mRNA level using
qPCR and protein (FCP1) level by western blot (WB) analysis. The
protein’s phosphatase activity on the C- terminal domain was
studied using WB. Finally, cell cycle analysis was performed by
DNA staining using propidium iodide.
Results: qPCR data showed a signiﬁcant downregulation of
CTDP1 expression in patient versus controls. WB revealed a
decreased protein level and more phosphorylated RNAPII in
patient cells. Lastly, a disturbed cell cycle was observed in the
patient compared to the controls.
Conclusion: Our preliminary data show that the expression of
CTDP1, as well as FCP1 and the phosphatase activity are altered in
the patient. Alterations caused by abnormal FCP1 function in the
cell cycle are associated with disturbed cell cycle proteins (p27,
cyclin B). Together, these results provide us a preliminary evidence
that FCP1 plays a role in early brain development and cell growth
by regulating the cell cycle.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Hamide Yildirim Marguerite-Marie Dela-
croix foundation, Boyan Dimitrov: None declared, Elyssa Can-
naerts: None declared, Karen Sermon: None declared, Alexander
Gheldof: None declared, Katrien Stouffs: None declared, Anna
Jansen: None declared.
P10.047.B X-chromosome inactivation is an easy assay to
further investigate cases without a diagnostic exome
sequencing
Chiara Giovenino1, Slavica Trajkova1, Lisa Pavinato1, Simona
Cardaropoli2, Verdiana Pullano1, Silvia Carestiato1, Anthony Batta-
glia1, Paola Salmin3, Diana Carli2, Alessandro Mussa2, Silvia De
Rubeis4;5;6, Joseph Buxbaum4;7;8, Tommaso Pippucci9, Paola Dimar-
tino10, Alessandro Bruselles11, Marco Tartaglia12, Haley McCon-
key13;14, Jennifer Kerkhof13;14, Sadegheh Aghshenas13;14, Bekim
Sadikovic13;14,
Giorgia
Mandrile15,
Giovanni
Battista
Ferrero15,
Alfredo Brusco1;3
1University of Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy;
2University of Torino, Department of Public Health and Pediatrics,
Torino, Italy; 3Città della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital,
Torino, Italy; 4Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, United States;
5Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Psychiatry,
New York, United States; 6The Mindich Child Health and Develop-
ment Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
United States; 7Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department
of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, New York, United States; 8Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Neuroscience,
New York, United States; 9Sant’Orsola Malpighi University Hospital,
Bologna, Italy; 10University of Bologna, Department of Medical and
Surgical Sciences, Bologna, Italy;
11Istituto Superiore di Sanità,
Department of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Roma, Italy;
12Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù IRCSS, Genetics and Rare
Diseases Research Division, Roma, Italy; 13London Health Sciences
Centre, Molecular Diagnostics Program, Verspeeten Clinical Genome
Centre, London, Canada;
14Western University, Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, London, Canada; 15University
of Torino, Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Torino,
Italy.
Background/Objectives: Non-random X-chromosome inactiva-
tion (skewed-XCI) is suggestive of an X-linked genetic disease if
detected in mothers of affected males (skewing towards the
normal
allele)
or
affected
females
(skewing
towards
the
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
486
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
deleterious allele). We explored skewed-XCI in a cohort of
unsolved neurodevelopmental disease (NDD) cases, negative at
FRAXA, array-CGH and trio Exome Sequencing (ES).
Methods: XCI test by methylation-sensitive ﬂuorescent PCR
screening on blood-extracted DNA. Episignature analysis using
Episign.
Results: We examined 66 NDD females and 115 mothers of
affected NDD males and found an excess of extreme XCI (>90%) in
both groups (7/66: 11%; p = 0.03; 10/115: 9%; p = 0.04). We re-
analyzed ES data and found overlooked causal X-chromosome
variants in 6/17. Five occurred in genes encoding chromatin
remodeling proteins; in four, we conﬁrmed the corresponding
episignature: (i) [c.1204G>A;p.(D402N)] likely pathogenic (LP) var-
iant in KDM5C (female; 90:10 XCI); (ii) deletion of exons 3-4 in ATRX
(male; mother 100:0 XCI); (iii) [c.1322G>A;p.(Arg441Glu)] LP variant
in ZMYM3 (male; mother 100:0 XCI); (iv) [c.1526C>T;p.(Pro509Leu)]
LP variant in OTUD5, a recently described novel disease gene (two
brothers, mother 100:0 XCI).
We also found the de novo [c.890G>T;p.(Cys297Phe)] VoUS in
PHF6 in a 10-year-old girl with DD/ASD whose episignature
apparently did not conﬁrm PHF6-associated disease. Finally, we
found the TAF1 VoUS [c.805G>A;p.(Gly269Arg)] in a female (100:0
XCI) and her brother with ID, still under investigation, since no
affected female has been described so far.
Conclusion: Our work recommends XCI as an easy assay to
further study cases without a diagnostic ES, guiding molecular re-
evaluation and further analysis for X-linked genes.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.048.C Association of pathogenic variants in SCN2A and
COL4A2 mimics the neurometabolic phenotype - a case of
SCN2A-related encephalopathy and COL4A2-related brain
small vessel disease
Katarzyna Połatyńska1, Łukasz Kępczyński2, Małgorzata Rydza-
nicz3, Rafał Płoski3, Kinga Sałacińska2, Łukasz Przysło1, Piotr Grzelak4,
Agnieszka Gach2
1Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital - Research Institute, Department
of Developmental Neurology and Epileptogy, Łódź, Poland; 2Polish
Mother’s Memorial Hospital - Research Institute, Department of
Genetics, Łódź, Poland; 3Medical University of Warsaw, Department
of Medical Genetics, Warszawa, Poland; 4Polish Mother’s Memorial
Hospital - Research Institute, Department of Radiology, Łódź, Poland.
Background/Objectives: SCN2A gene encodes Na(v)alpha1.2
protein – alpha-2 subunit of voltage-gated type 2 sodium
channel, expressed in central nervous system excitatory neurons.
Pathogenic variants of SCN2A gene are associated with variable
spectrum of neurodevelopmental and paroxysmal phenotypes
as developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, benign familial
infantile seizures, episodic ataxia, intellectual disability, and
autism spectrum disorders with or without seizures. COL4A2
gene encodes alpha-2 chain of type IV collagen, ubiquitously
present in basement membranes. COL4A2 pathogenic variants
are associated with broad spectrum of systemic disorders
affecting various systems; central nervous system affecting
phenotypes include brain small vessel disease and intracerebral
hemorrhages.
Methods: Here we report a case of male infant with
neurometabolic-like presentation: drug-resistant epilepsy, pyr-
amidal tetraplegia, creatine kinase and lactic acid elevation,
abnormal NMR neuroimaging, the course was complicated by
Rotavirus infection, Bordatella pertussis pneumonia, and Klebsiella
pneumoniae sepsis.
Results: Whole exome sequencing (WES) in the proband
revealed two clinically signiﬁcant de novo variants (absent in both
biological
parents)
in
SCN2A
(NM_021007.3):
c.4972C>T
(p.Pro1658Ser)
and
COL4A2
(NM_001846.4):
c.2989G>A
(p.Gly997Arg).
Conclusion: Congenital dysfunction of SCN2A and COL4A2
genes
mimics
neurometabolic-like
phenotype
in
described
patient. As both SCN2A- and COL4A2-related disorders are char-
acterized by variable penetrance and diverse expression, clinical
features and molecular ﬁndings presented here, broaden the
knowledge of both disorders pathogenesis and their role as
modifying factors for each other.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.049.D The inﬂuence of polymorphisms of selected genes
on human chronotype
Roman Solc1
1Charles university, Faculty of science, Department of anthropology
and human genetics, Prague, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: Circadian rhythms are the very impor-
tant human biorhythms. Their disorders can have unpleasant
health, psychological and social consequences. However, the
rhythm of life in conﬂict with the physiological setting of the
“biological clock” can also bring problems, including health pro-
blems. On the contrary, respecting these rhythms can be used
positively in medicine, but also in economics. According to their
individual settings, we can distinguish people of different chron-
otypes (so-called „larks“, „owls“ and neutral), whereas this chron-
otype is largely determined genetically.
Methods: We genotyped thirteen polymorphisms in seven
candidate genes (clock genes CLOCK, PER1, PER2, PER3 and BMAL1
and clock-related metabolic genes SIRT1 and PGC-1α) in 57 pro-
bands with extreme chronotype (38 „larks“ and 19 „owls“) and
analyzed the potential association between the polymorphisms
and the probands chronotype (deﬁned using MEQ score). We also
used the relative risk ratio (RR).
Results: The analyzes show two results statistically signiﬁcant
at α = 0,05, and some more results at α = 0,1). We found a strong
association between the minor allele A in rs3736265 (PGC-1α) and
the extreme evening chronotype (p = 0,0331; RR = 2,98) and a
strong association between the minor allele C in rs1801260
(CLOCK) and the extreme morning chronotype (p = 0,0165; RR =
1,17). From the other ﬁndings the most interesting is an asso-
ciation between the minor allele C in rs2640909 (PER3) and the
extreme morning chronotype (p = 0,0683; RR = 2,06).
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings identify new polymorphisms asso-
ciated with the human chronotype and conﬁrm the need to focus
not only on clock genes but also on clock-related metabolic genes.
References: No.
Grants: No.
Conﬂict of Interest: Roman Solc Charles university, Faculty of
science.
P10.050.A Investigating the efﬁcacy of combined ketogenic
diet and anti-inﬂammatory therapy in a mouse model of early-
onset Tay-Sachs disease
Orhan Kerim Inci1, Volkan Seyrantepe1
1Izmir Institute of Technology, Molecular Biology and Genetics, İzmir,
Turkey.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
487
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Tay-Sachs disease is a rare genetic dis-
order caused by abnormal GM2 ganglioside accumulation pre-
dominantly
in
the
central
nervous
system
(CNS)
due
to
β-hexosaminidase A (HEXA) enzyme deﬁciency. Recently, our
research group generated Hexa-/-Neu3-/- mouse model that
mimics neuropathology of early-onset Tay-Sachs disease (1). We
showed that undegraded GM2 accumulation resulted in neuronal
cell death and activated neuroinﬂammation inducing astrogliosis
and microgliosis-based pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and chemo-
kines secretion (2). The high fat, low-carbohydrate ketogenic diet
(KD) has broad potential usage in the treatments of neurological
disorders and there is growing evidence that KD is also anti-
inﬂammatory. In this study, we aim to show KD and anti-
inﬂammatory drug therapy in the treatment of neuroinﬂammation
in Hexa-/-Neu3-/-.
Methods: Hexa-/-Neu3-/- mice were fed until 4.5 months old
under the following groups: (i) control diet (CD), (ii) ad-libitum KD
(10-day), (iii) ad-libitum CD with propagermanium (8mg/kg/daily
for 21-day) and (iv) KD with propagermanium (21-day). Neuroin-
ﬂammation markers were analyzed by qRT-PCR and immunohis-
tochemical (IHC) analysis.
Results: Administration of KD and propagermanium in Hexa-/-
Neu3-/- mice signiﬁcantly reduced the expression levels of Ccl2,
Ccl3, Ccl5, Cxcl10 in the cortex and cerebellum compared to Hexa-/-
mice. Consistent with qRT-PCR analysis, IHC staining for glial ﬁbril-
lary acidic protein (GFAP) displayed decreased astrogliosis.
Conclusion: Altogether, our results clearly suggest that keto-
genic diet and propagermanium could be potential combined
therapeutic strategy to reduce neuroinﬂammation in an early-
onset Tay-Sachs disease mouse model.
References: (1) Seyrantepe V et al 2018 (2) Demir SA et al 2020.
Grants: The research was supported by TUBITAK grant
no:218S824 and COST Action-CA17103.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.051.B High diagnostic yield in children and adolescents
with psychiatric disorders
Carmen Manso1, Nino Spataro2, Juan Pablo Trujillo Quintero1, Núria
Capdevila1, anna brunet2, Neus Baena2, Miriam Guitart2, montserrat
pamias3, diego palao4, Anna Ruiz2
1Pediatric Unit. ParcTaulí Hospital Universitari. Institut d’Investigació i
Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona.
Sabadell, Spain., sabadell, Spain; 2Genetics Laboratory. Parc Taulí
Hospital Universitari. Institut d’Investigació i Innovació Parc Taulí
I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. Sabadell, Spain., sabadell,
Spain; 3Children and adolescescents Mental Health Service. Parc Taulí
Hospital Universitari. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. Sabadell.
Spain. CIBERSAM, sabadell, Spain; 4Mental Health Service. Parc Taulí
Hospital Universitari. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. Sabadell.
Spain. CIBERSAM, sabadell, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Psychiatric disorders are more prevalent
in children with mild to borderline intellectual functioning. Rare
pathogenic variants in neurodevelopmental genes increase the
risk for psychiatric disorders and may explain the comorbidity.
Despite these patients represent up to 35% of those attended at
mental health services, genetic diagnosis is usually not offered.
The identiﬁcation of mentioned variants could lead to improved
clinical care.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing was performed on 50 out
of 150 enrolled young affected by a psychiatric condition diag-
nosed following DSM-5 criteria, and either mild intellectual dis-
ability(IQ 55-69) or borderline intellectual functioning(IQ 70-85).
Severity and interference of IQ and psychiatric comorbidity was
evaluated using several psychometric tests. Inheritance pattern
was assessed through Sanger sequencing. ACMG/AMP guidelines
were used for variant classiﬁcation.
Results: Inheritance pattern was assessed on 43 candidate
variants after applying a stringent customized variant ﬁltering and
prioritization process. 15 were classiﬁed as pathogenic/likely
pathogenic resulting in a 30% diagnostic yield. In details, 80% of
the variants were de novo, 3 inherited. Among the reported var-
iants we identiﬁed 8 loss of function, 4 missense and 3 copy
number variants. Most of the genes harbouring these variants
have been involved in neurodevelopmental disorders.
Conclusion: The high diagnostic yield obtained from our
exome sequencing approach demonstrates the need to offer
genetic testing in children with psychiatric disorders and comor-
bid mild to borderline intellectual functioning.
References:
Homann
OR,
et
al.
Molecular
Psy-
chiatry.2016;21(12):1690-5.
Wolfe K, et al. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Dis-
abilities.2018;31(2):273-84.
Grants: Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 2019,PI19/01902.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.053.D Czech family conﬁrms the new 1p36.13-1p36.12
microdeletion syndrome and the involvement of the critical
region with UBR4 and CAPZB genes
Vlasta Cejnova1, Pavel Seeman1;2, Sarka Cerna1, Ladislava Renner-
ova3, Marie Trkova4, Jana Lastuvkova1
1Regional Health Corporation, Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem,
Department of Medical Genetics, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic;
22nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University Hospital
Motol, Neurogenetic laboratory, Department of Paediatric Neurology,
Prague, Czech Republic; 3Regional Health Corporation, Hospital in
Teplice, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Teplice, Czech Republic;
4Gennet, Center for Fetal Medicine and Reproductive Genetics,
Prague, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: In 2020 Aagaard Nolting and coauthors
described a new 1p36.13-1p36.12 microdeletion syndrome char-
acterized by learning disability, behavioral abnormalities and
ptosis caused by a deletion of 1 Mb in the smallest region of
overlap. They described seven patients from 5 families with these
characteristic features and considered the genes UBR4 and CAPZB
as the most likely candidate genes for the features of this new
syndrome.
Methods: Clinical, molecular cytogenetic (array CGH; Agilent
SurePrint G3 8x60K) and genotype-phenotype analysis.
Results: We present a Czech family where the daughter and
her mother have congenital ptosis, intelectual subnormality and
behavioral abnormalities and recently detected and electro-
physiologically veriﬁed also demyelinating polyneuropathy. Array
CGH revealed a 2,2 Mb microdeletion at 1p36.13 (chr1:17815790-
20018021 (GRCh37/hg19)) in both patients affecting also the UBR4
and CAPZB genes. This deletion was not detected in the healthy
grandmother of the daughter and the grandfather already died on
cancer. Polyneuropathy was not reported in the seven patients in
the original publication.
Conclusion: Our Czech family with two similarly affected
patients, daughter and mother conﬁrms the new 1p36.13-1p36.12
microdeletion syndrome and the involvement of the critical region
with UBR4 and CAPZB genes. The demyelinating polyneuropathy
detected in both our patients clinically and electrophysiologically
may be part of this new syndrome, but may also have another
independent cause in our family. The microdeletion at 1p36.13-
1p36.1 seems to be very rare.
References: Aagaard Nolting et al. A new 1p36.13-1p36.12
microdeletion
syndrome
characterized by
learning
disability,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
488
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
behavioral abnormalities, and ptosis. Clin Genet. 2020 Jun;97(6):927-
932. https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13739.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.054.A Polygenic relationships between human longevity
and psychiatric disorders
Kajsa-Lotta Georgii Hellberg1, Seyedmorteza Vaez1, Morten Krebs1,
Janith Don2, Vivek Appadurai1, Jesper Gådin1, Thomas Perls3, Paola
Sebastini4, Laura H. Goetz2, Dave Duggan2, Andres Ingason1,
Thomas Werge1, Nicholas J. Schork2, Andrew Schork1
1Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark; 2Translational
Genomics Institute (TGEN), Pheonix, United States; 3Boston University,
Boston, United States; 4Tufts Clinical Translational Science Institute,
Boston, United States.
Background/Objectives: Psychiatric disorders (PD) have complex,
polygenetic
architectures
involving
interrelationships
among
common and rare genetic factors and environmental exposures.
There are broad genetic correlations among PDs and psycholo-
gical and behavioral traits that represent risk (RF) or protective
factors (PF). Psychiatric patients have increased mortality and
genes associated with longevity (PLS) may capture PF. Genetic
relationships among PDs, RFs, PFs and longevity have not been
fully described.
Methods: LD-score regression to estimated genetic correla-
tions between PDs and RF, PF, and longevity using published
GWAS. We estimate correlations among polygenic scores (PGS)
from these GWAS in >100,000 individuals from the iPSYCH study.
Multiple logistic regression and sequential model ﬁtting estimate
contributions of multiple PGS for PDs, RFs, PFs, and PLS in models
for each PD.
Results: Most genetic correlations among PDs, RFs, PFs, and
longevity are in expected directions (e.g., longevity negative
with ADHD), but some are opposite (e.g., longevity positive with
Autism). Each class of PGS makes signiﬁcant, independent
contributions in joint models predicting PDs, especially for ADHD
and MDD, where PLS remain signiﬁcant after adjustment for all
other PGS.
Conclusion: We present genetic relationships among longevity
and PDs, RFs, and PFs. We show PGS from multiple domains,
including longevity, signiﬁcantly increases explained variance. This
has implications for the role of PF and PGS in psychiatric clinical
and research applications.
References:.
Grants: Lundbeck fellowship R335-2019-2318.
NIH grants: UH2 AG064706, U19 AG023122, U24 AG051129,
U24 AG051129-04S1.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.056.C Deciphering the mechanism of a de-novo GRIA2
mutation related to a neurodevelopmental disorder
Lina Berkun1, Amit Porecki2, Yael Stern-Bach2, Reeval Segel1
1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Medical Genetics Institute, Jerusalem,
Israel; 2The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Jerusalem, Israel.
Background/Objectives: GRIA2 encodes the GluA2 unit of the
AMPA-type glutamate receptors. AMPA receptors are a major
mediator of fast excitatory neurotransmission in the brain. They
promote the formation of new synapses and trigger activity-
dependent processes that underlie learning and memory. GRIA2
mutations cause intellectual disability (ID) and intractable seizure.
We studied a de-novo missense variant in GRIA2 (L772W) detected
by exome sequencing in a 1.5-year-old girl with severe ID,
microcephaly without seizures.
Methods:
The
GluA2(L772W)
homomeric
mutation
was
expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes. Currents were recorded
using the two-electrode voltage clamp conﬁguration. Receptor
maturation and surface expression were determined by Western-
blot analysis, coupled with glycosylation (oocytes) and biotinyla-
tion (HEK293 cells) assays.
Results: The mutant protein was expressed normally, it
reached the cell membrane and maturated into functional
receptor but had altered kinetics. This variant causes faster
desensitization, thus limiting the duration of channel opening.
Conclusion: We believe that reduction of channel opening
duration due to this GRIA2 mutation may explain the neurological
phenotype, either by directly reducing neuronal excitability or by
compensatory mechanisms which may cause a reactive increase
in the calcium permeable GluA1 receptors, thus increasing the
neuronal excitatory activity leading to cell death. We plan to
investigate this variant in its natural surrounding using human
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from our patient
and a healthy close relative.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.057.D Identiﬁcation of shared genes and pathways
between psychiatric GWAS and monogenic
neurodevelopmental disorders
Philip Jansen1;2, Eva van Walree3, Siemon de Lange1, Danielle
Posthuma3
1VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 2Amsterdam UMC, locatie
VUmc, Human Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 3VU University,
Complex Trait Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Large genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) rapidly identiﬁed novel risk genes for psychiatric dis-
orders. Mendelian neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) caused
by single gene mutations show overlapping behavioural symp-
tomatology, however the extent to which genes are shared
between psychiatric GWAS and monogenic NDD needs to be fully
explored.
Methods: We carry out genetic overlap analyses between ﬁve
large-scale psychiatric GWAS (ADHD, autism, bipolar disorder,
depression, schizophrenia, sample size range: N = 46,077−807,553)
and monogenic neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Consistent
gene-mapping was done in FUMA for each GWAS. Overlap analyses
were carried out with monogenic disease genes in the Develop-
mental Disease Gene - Phenotype (DDG2P) database. Using various
bioinformatic resources, we analysed gene properties and gene-
expression of genes implicated in psychiatric disorders, NDDs
or both.
Results: We found signiﬁcant enrichment of psychiatric GWAS
genes in all monogenic NDDs (enrichment = 1.18, P = 1.70 × 10-5),
and NDDs genes related to abnormal brain development (enrich-
ment = 1.39, P = 1.10 × 10-9). Of all psychiatric disorders, ADHD
showed the strongest overlap with NDDs (P = 0.009), and bipolar
the lowest (P = 0.96). We show that differences in gene function
(synaptic and neurogenesis), properties (pLI score, missense sensi-
tivity) and expression patterns predict involvement of genes in
GWAS, NDD or overlapping in both. No enrichment of psychiatric
GWAS genes was observed in known copy number variant regions
that are associated with a high risk of psychiatric symptoms.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings demonstrate novel insights into
partly shared genetic etiologies between polygenic psychiatric
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
489
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
disease and monogenic NDDs, and highlight mechanisms and
gene properties that explain overlap seemingly separate mono-
genic and polygenic disease etiology.
References:.
Grants: ZonMW VENI grant (NWO:09150162010138).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.058.A PCDH19 is regulated by neurosteroids and their
receptors
Rebekah de Nys1;2, Tarin Ritchie1;2;2, Rudrarup Bhattacharje1;2,
Raman Kumar1;2, Jozef Gecz1;2;3
1The University of Adelaide, Adelaide Medical School, Adelaide,
Australia; 2The University of Adelaide, Robinson Research Institute,
Adelaide, Australia; 3South Australian Health and Medical Research
Institute, Adelaide, Australia.
Background/Objectives: Protocadherin 19 (PCDH19) Clustering
Epilepsy (CE) is a disorder of cellular mosaicism. We and others
identiﬁed altered steroidogenesis and deregulated Nuclear Hor-
mone Receptor (NHR)-related gene expression in the affected
individuals. We reported PCDH19 as a co-regulator of Estrogen
Receptor (ER) α activity on gene expression. Little is known if
PCDH19 is regulated by steroids and what is the effect of proto-
cadherins, not just PCDH19, on NHRs Androgen Receptor (AR)
and/or Progesterone Receptor (PR). We utilised disease relevant
models to investigate (a) the impact of neurosteroids on PCDH19
gene and (b) functional interaction between delta2 proto-
cadherins and NHRs.
Methods: We treated T47D and embryonic mouse neurons
with estradiol (E2), progesterone (P4) or dihydrotestosterone
(DHT) separately or in combination and assayed PCDH19 expres-
sion via RT-qPCR, and performed RNA-sequencing on CE and
control primary skin ﬁbroblasts. We determined Protocadherin-
NHR interactions
by
co-immunoprecipitation
using epitope-
tagged protocadherins (PCDH10, PCDH12, PCDH17 and PCDH19)
and NHRs (ERα, AR or PR).
Results: PCDH19 expression was repressed in T47D cells
treated with E2, P4 and DHT, and embryonic mouse neurons
with E2. Congruent with this, RNA-sequencing of skin ﬁbroblasts
of CE girls revealed signiﬁcant AR upregulation. AR (but not ERα
or PR) co-immunoprecipitated with PCDH10, PCDH12, PCDH17
and PCDH19.
Conclusion: We show that NHRs play a major role in the reg-
ulation of PCDH19 expression and provide evidence of an inter-
action of PCDH19 with AR. This further supports our hypothesis
that dysregulation of the steroid hormone receptor pathway
contributes to CE pathogenesis.
References:.
Grants: PCDH19 Alliance Grant, USA.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.059.B Relative prevalence of AD SCA subtypes in the
Czech republic – data from the Centre for Hereditary Ataxias
in Prague
Emílie Vyhnálková1, Martin Vyhnálek2, Alena Zumrová2, Jaroslav
Jeřábek2, Jaroslava Paulasová Schwabová2, Michaela Danková2,
Lucie Šťovíčková2, Markéta Havlovicová1, Zuzana Musova1
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Motol University Hospital,
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic; 2Centre for Hereditary Ataxias, Motol
University Hospital, Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: The classiﬁcation of autosomal domi-
nant spinocerebellar ataxias (AD SCA) is based on ﬁndings of
speciﬁc gene variants. Testing of the most common forms of AD
SCA has been introduced since 2000 in the Czech Republic.
Methods: Initial testing for SCA1-3, 6-8, 12, 17, and 28 is used
routinely in patients with suspicion of AD SCA. We present a
summary of AD SCA subtypes diagnosed in the Centre for Her-
editary Ataxias in Motol University Hospital Prague, member of the
ERN-RND network.
Results: The centre performed testing in 1700 probands with
chronic and slowly progressive ataxia. In total, 162 patients from 111
unrelated families were diagnosed with AD SCA. The most common
subtypes are SCA2 (70 patients from 39 families), SCA17 (22 patients
from 14 families), and SCA1 (18 patients from 11 families). SCA28
was suspected in 9 patients from 6 families (1 patient with known
pathogenic variant, rare variants of unknown signiﬁcance in others).
SCA8, a subtype with reduced penetrance, was detected in 30
patients from 28 families. Other SCA subtypes were rare (SCA6 was
found in 9 patients, SCA3 detected in 3 patients, and SCA7 found in
one patient). SCA12 has not been detected.
Conclusion: The most common AD SCA subtypes in the Czech
Republic are SCA2, SCA17, and SCA1. The estimated prevalence of
genetically conﬁrmed AD SCA is 1.5 /100 000. Rare variants
revealed in SCA28 gene need further investigation.
References:.
Grants: The authors are members of the European Reference
Network for Rare Neurological Diseases, Project ID 739510.
Conﬂict of Interest: Emílie Vyhnálková Motol University Hos-
pital Prague, Martin Vyhnálek Motol University Hospital Prague,
Alena Zumrová Motol University Hospital Prague, Jaroslav Jeřábek
Motol University Hospital Prague, Jaroslava Paulasová Schwabová
Motol University Hospital Prague, Michaela Danková Motol Uni-
versity Hospital Prague, Lucie Šťovíčková Motol University Hospital
Prague, Markéta Havlovicová Motol University Hospital Prague,
Zuzana Musova Motol University Hospital Prague.
P10.060.C Brain mosaic mutations as a cause of drug-resistant
epilepsy including mesial temporal lobe epilepsy
Katherine Benson1;2, Robert Carton2, Michael Doyle2;3;4, Hugh
Kearney2;3, David Henshall2, Gianpiero Cavalleri1;2, Norman Delanty1;2;3
1Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, School of Pharmacy and
Biomolecular Sciences, Dublin, Ireland; 2Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland, FutureNeuro SFI Research Centre, Dublin, Ireland; 3Beaumont
Hospital, Epilepsy Programme, Department of Neurology, Dublin,
Ireland; 4Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in collaboration with
Blackrock Clinic, Dublin, StAR MD Programme, Dublin, Ireland.
Background/Objectives: The contribution of somatic mutations
in epilepsy is becoming apparent, in particular in malformations of
cortical development (MCD). The aim of this study was to evaluate
the diagnostic yield of brain somatic mutations in germline epi-
lepsy genes, somatic epilepsy genes, and brain expressed pik3k-
mtor genes in drug-resistant epilepsy.
Methods: Surgical epilepsy cases, were clinically phenotyped
and sub-divided based on the histopathology of resected brain
tissue. Matched blood-derived and brain-derived DNA samples,
were sequenced using high coverage (~500X) targeted next-
generation sequencing for 229 genes. Variants were identiﬁed
using MuTect-2 and annotated using ANNNOVAR. Variants were
ﬁltered for those which had a variant allele frequency >0.05%,
were absent in gnomAD, matched the inferred inheritance pattern
and passed manual quality control inspection in Integrative Gen-
ome Viewer. Candidate variants were conﬁrmed using high-
coverage amplicon sequencing.
Results: 41 patients were successfully sequenced. 9 patients
yielded 13 candidate somatic variants. 5 variants in 5 patients
were validated using amplicon sequencing (genes: CBL, KCNB1,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
490
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
ALG13, MTOR and FLNA). The overall diagnostic yield across 41
patients was 12%. Within the hippocampal sclerosis (HS), MCD and
non-lesional focal patient sugroups, the yield was 13.6%/20%/0%
respectively.
Conclusion: This study has provided new insights into the
aetiology of HS, a condition not previously associated with
somatic variants. The diagnostic yield in MCD is consistent with
previous studies, conﬁrming the importance of MTOR and related
genes in this condition.
References:.
Grants: Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) Grant Number 16/RC/
3948 and co-funded under the European Regional Development
Fund and by FutureNeuro industry partners.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.061.D Joint effects of rare GBA variants and polygenic risk
score on Parkinson’s disease risk
Zied Landoulsi1, Sinthuja P Pachchek1;2, Dheeraj Bobbili1, Rejko
Krüger1;2;3, Patrick May1
1Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine (LCSB), University of
Luxembourg, Esch-Sur-Alzette, Luxembourg; 2Transversal Translational
Medicine, Luxembourg Institute of Health (LIH), Strassen, Luxembourg;
3Department of Neurology and Parkinson Research Clinic, Centre
Hospitalier de Luxembourg (CHL), Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
Background/Objectives: Rare homozygous mutations within the
Glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene were linked to lysosomal storage-
disorder, whereas rare heterozygous mutations in GBA contribute
to an increased risk for Parkinson’s disease (PD). We aimed to
investigate how a polygenic risk scores (PRS) deﬁned by common
GWAS variants and different types of rare GBA (GBAr) variants
(benign, mild, severe) jointly inﬂuence the PD risk.
Methods: We used genotyping and rare variants data from a
Luxembourgish PD cohort of 805 controls and 792 patients, and
stratiﬁed these samples based on PRS percentile and GBAr carrier
status. The PRS was calculated genome-wide (gPRS) and for genes
involved in lysosomal (lysoPRS) and mitochondrial (mitoPRS)
pathways. We compared GBAr carrier frequencies in each PRS
category and different groups of PRS risk (low, intermediate, high),
and assessed the combined effect of PRS and GBAr carrier status
on PD risk.
Results: Overall GBAr carriers were more frequent in the high-
risk compared to the low-risk group for gPRS and lysoPRS, but not
for mitoPRS. For all types of PRS, severe GBAr were less frequent in
the high-risk than in the low-risk PRS group. PD risk was higher
among GBAr carriers than non-carriers in low-risk and high-risk for
gPRS and lysoPRS. However, for mitoPRS, PD risk was higher
among GBAr carriers compared to non-carriers in low but not in
the high PRS group.
Conclusion: Our results indicate that the GBAr-conferred risk
could be signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by PRS. Speciﬁcally, lysoPRS
could give more insight into how lysosomal dysfunction leads to
neurodegeneration in PD.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.062.A Unique Ataxia oculomotor apraxia 2 (AOA2, OMIM
#606002) case in Israel: Expanding the phenotypic spectrum,
highlighting novel variants and possible identiﬁcation of a
poison exon
Penina Ponger1, Alina Kurlop1, Hoﬁt Gadot1, adi mory1, Yael Winai1,
Nir Giladi1, Tatyana Gurevich1, Daphna Marom1, yuval yaron1, Hagit
Baris Feldman1
1Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Background/Objectives: SCAN2 is a rare progressive adolescent-
onset cerebellar ataxia characterised by elevated serum alpha-
fetoprotein (AFP) and oculomotor apraxia. SCAN2 is caused by bi-
allelic variants in SETX, encoding senataxin, involved in DNA repair
and RNA maturation.
Methods: WES trio was followed by SETX RNA analysis,
extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells and converted
to cDNA to enable splicing analysis. qRT-PCR was performed to
assess overall and mutant SETX mRNA expression.
Results: Proband is of non-consanguineous Persian Jewish
family. Phenotype includes early childhood clumsiness, functional
deﬁcits in late adolescence, ocular apraxia, dysarthria, appendi-
cular and truncal ataxia and cerebellar atrophy, especially of the
vermis and anterior lobes in MRI. Serum AFP levels are within
normal range. WES trio of proband and parents revealed two
novel SETX variants in trans, maternal nonsense variant in exon 6
(c.568C>T; p.Gln190*), and paternal deep intronic variant in intron
12 (c.5549-107A>G). Intronic variant analysis and SETX mRNA
expression revealed activation of a cryptic exon. This insertion
introduces a premature stop codon (p.Met1850Lysfs*18). qRT-PCR
analysis revealed that the intronic c.5549-107A>G variant induces
aberrant splicing and leads to 20-30 times higher levels of cryptic
exon activation compared to WT samples (mother and healthy
controls). In combination with a second deleterious allele, this
variant
leads
to
low
levels
of
SETX
mRNA
and
disease
manifestations.
Conclusion: Our case expands the phenotypic spectrum of
SCAN2 and emphasizes the need for tailored molecular work-up
to ensure timely diagnosis. Deep-intronic variant analysis reveals a
previously undescribed poison exon in the SETX gene which may
contribute to therapy development.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Penina Ponger: None declared, Alina
Kurlop: None declared, Hoﬁt Gadot: None declared, adi mory:
None declared, Yael Winai: None declared, Nir Giladi: None
declared, Tatyana Gurevich: None declared, Daphna Marom: None
declared,
yuval
yaron
Geenox,
Hagit
Baris
Feldman:
None
declared.
P10.064.C CANVAS: molecular analysis, expansion size
determination, and clinical features in Italian patients
Daniela Di Bella1, Stefania Magri1, Elisa Sarto1, Marinella Corbetta1,
Maria Balzo1, cinzia gellera1, Chiara Pisciotta2, Ettore Salsano2,
Davide Pareyson2, Mario Fichera1, Lorenzo Nanetti1, Caterina
Mariotti1, Franco Taroni1
1Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Unit of Medical
Genetics and Neurogenetics, Milan, Italy; 2Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico Carlo Besta, Unit of Rare Neurodegenerative and
Neurometabolic Diseases, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives:
CANVAS
is
an
adult-onset,
slowly-
progressive
neurodegenerative
disorder,
whose
phenotypic
spectrum is expanding, ranging from late-onset ataxia to sensory
neuropathy, caused by a biallelic intronic AAGGG expansion in the
RFC1 gene. Expansions with alternative sequence conformations
have been identiﬁed whose pathogenic role remains to be
established.
Objectives: 1) To screen Italian patients with full or partial
CANVAS phenotype (n = 223) or late-onset (n = 216) ataxia for
RFC1 expansion; 2) to assess the frequency of RFC1 expansion
carrier in a control population; 3)to sequence the expanded alleles
to determine their repeat structure and role in disease.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
491
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: The RFC1 locus was analysed by a PCR ﬂanking the
repeat, followed by ﬂuorescent repeat-primed PCRs (Cortese,
2019). A long-read sequencing approach has been set up for the
sequencing of the expanded allele.
Results: Biallelic RFC1 expansion was identiﬁed in 32.3% (72/
223) probands with a CANVAS spectrum phenotype, and in 12.5%
(27/216) of patients with ataxia. Heterozygous carrier rate was
10.6% in patients (16/151) and 10% (36/360) in controls. Approx.
5% of alleles showed complex repeat conformations with uncer-
tain pathogenicity.
Conclusion: Biallelic RFC1 expansion accounts for a large pro-
portion of ataxia phenotypes in Italian patients (12-32%), and
should always be considered in the diagnostic algorithm of
patients with sporadic ataxia, ranking ﬁrst in late-onset cerebellar
and sensory ataxia. Given the high carrier rate, RFC1 expansion
might be the most common cause of ataxia in Italian patients.
Sequencing data conﬁrm the complex architecture of the expan-
ded repeat which may have crucial implications for diagnosis and
counseling.
References: Cortese A (2019) Nature Genetics 51:649-658.
Grants: FRRB-CP-20/2018.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.065.D A newly implemented NGS-based methods to
detect GBA variants in patients with Parkinson disease
Giada Cuconato1, Ilaria Palmieri2, Edoardo Monfrini3, Marco
Percetti3, Marco Morelli4, Ettore Zapparoli4, Alessio Di Fonzo3, Enza
Maria Valente1;2
1University of Pavia, Molecular Medicine, Pavia, Italy;
2IRCCS
Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy; 3IRCCS Foundation Ca’ Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy; 4IRCCS San Raffaele,
Milano, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Heterozygous variants in the GBA gene,
encoding for the lysosomal enzyme β-glucocerebrosidase, are the
commonest genetic risk factor for Parkinson disease (PD),
accounting for 5-15% of all PD cases. Sequencing of the whole
GBA coding region (11 exons) is a cumbersome task, both
employing conventional techniques such as Sanger sequencing as
well as more innovative strategies such as next-generation-
sequencing (NGS). In particular, the high degree of homology
(96-98%) between GBA and its pseudogene GBAP1 often leads to
recombination events that eventually produce complex alleles
which are misaligned through the standard NGS pipeline. Here we
tested an implemented NGS-based technology on a selected pool
of 22 patients, including 15 patients known to carry different GBA
variants (identiﬁed through Sanger sequencing) and 7 controls.
Methods: The NGS experiment was designed starting from a
long-range PCR to amplify a unique 12kb amplicon encompassing
GBA. This was used as template to create libraries, which were
ampliﬁed using Nextera technology and then run on an Illumina
MiSeq instrument. In parallel to standard bioinformatic analysis,
we employed a custom pipeline, forcing the alignment of reads
against the genomic coordinates of GBA gene only.
Results: All GBA variants were correctly called and identiﬁed
using
this
approach;
furthermore,
comparing
(*.bam)
ﬁles
obtained with standard vs forced alignment, the latter showed a
signiﬁcant increase in read depth and mapping quality.
Conclusion: The proposed NGS-based approach appears a
reliable and valid alternative for GBA sequencing, holding promise
to increase the speed and the accuracy of variant detection
compared to conventional strategies.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.066.A Combining extended genealogies and genotypes
for a unique view of the genetic architecture of major
depressive disorder
Morten Krebs1, Kajsa-Lotta Georgii Hellberg1, Vivek Appadurai1,
Henrik Ohlsson2, Xabier Calle Sanchez1, Bjarni Vilhjalmsson3, Silviu
Bacanu4, Jonathan Flint5, Cai Na6, Noah Zaitlen7, Andres Ingason1,
Alfonso Buil1, Andy Dahl8, Kenneth Kendler9, Thomas Werge1,
Andrew Schork1
1Research Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark;
2Family
Medicine
and
Clinical
Epidemiology,
Lund,
Sweden;
3Department of Economics and Business Economics - National
Centre for Register-based Research, Aarhus, Denmark; 4Stat Gen,
VIPBG, Dept of Psychiatry, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, United States; 5Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences,
UCLA, Los Angeles, United States;
6Helmholtz Pioneer Campus,
München, Germany; 7Departments of Computational Medicine and
Neurology, Los Angeles, United States;
8University of Chicago,
Department of Medicine, Section of Genetic Medicine, Chicago,
United States; 9Virginia Commonwealth University, Virginia Insti-
tute for Psychiatric and Behavioral Genetics, Richmond, United
States.
Background/Objectives:
State-of-the-ﬁeld
complex
disorder
genetics
leverages
population-scale
biobanks
with
broad
demographic, health, survey, and genetic data. This presents an
opportunity for Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), where genetic
predictors underperform, clinical heterogeneity is etiologically
enigmatic, and missing heritability persists. Combining geno-
types, family history, and adjacent phenotypes in large data can
advance each aim, but requires new approaches.
Methods: We introduce Pearson-Aitken framework for Family
Genetic Risk Scores (PA-FGRS) to estimate individual liability scores
from uniquely complex pedigrees of individuals in the iPSYCH
case-cohort. We compute multiple psychiatric PA-FGRS and poly-
genic scores (PGS) for N = 37,555 MDD cases and 49,303 controls.
We test discriminative utility of PA-FGRS and PGS with regression,
compare GWAS on diagnoses and PA-FGRS, and compare multi-
variate PA-FGRS+PGS proﬁles of MDD cases with different clinical
outcomes using multinomial regression.
Results: We construct genealogies including >2,000,000 rela-
tives of iPSYCH individuals and show PA-FGRS has important
advantages in simulations. Combining PA-FGRS with PGS explains
as much additional variance in MDD as PGS alone (~3%). Clinical
heterogeneity is widely associated with variability in genetic
proﬁles, e.g., recurrent MDD increased PA-FGRS and PGS for MDD
and bipolar. In iPSYCH, GWAS on PA-FGRS liabilities identiﬁed 3
more loci than binary diagnoses.
Conclusion: Approaches that integrate multiple data types in
population
biobanks
give
important
new
perspectives
on
genetic architectures of complex disorders like MDD. Clinical and
research aims could be more data integrative and better attend
to heterogeneity.
References:.
Grants: Lundbeck Foundation fellowship R335-2019-2318.
Lundbeck Foundation PhD Grant R230-2016-3565.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.067.B Genetic variability of inﬂammation and oxidative
stress in Alzheimer’s disease biomarkers
David Vogrinc1, Katja Goricar1, Milica Gregorič Kramberger2, Vita
Dolzan1
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Institute of Biochemistry
and Molecular Genetics, Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Ljubljana,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
492
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Slovenia;
2University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Department of
Neurology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: Neuroinﬂammation and oxidative stress
are important processes involved in Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
Numerous risk factors, including complex genetic background, can
affect the immunological processes of the brain and further pro-
mote disease progression from mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
Our aim was to evaluate the association of common polymorph-
isms with cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) biomarkers and cognitive test
results in patients with dementia and AD.
Methods: Our study included 54 AD patients, 14 MCI patients
with pathological CSF biomarker levels and 20 MCI patients with
normal CSF biomarker levels. Isolated DNA from blood was gen-
otyped for polymorphisms in SOD2, CAT, GPX1, IL1B, MIR146A, IL6,
TNF, CARD8, NLRP3, GSTP1, NOS1, KEAP1 and NFE2L2 using com-
petitive allele-speciﬁc PCR. Association of polymorphisms with CSF
biomarker
levels
and
cognitive
tests
was
evaluated
using
nonparametric tests.
Results: In the whole cohort, carriers of two polymorphic IL1B
rs16944 alleles had higher CSF Aβ1-42 (p = 0.025), while carriers of
at least one polymorphic NFE2L2 rs35652124 allele had lower CSF
Aβ1-42 (p = 0.040) levels. In AD group, only IL1B rs16944 remained
signiﬁcant (p = 0.029). Signiﬁcant associations with mini-mental
state exam (MMSE) were observed for CAT rs1001179 (p = 0.022),
GSTP1 rs1138272 (p = 0.005), KEAP1 rs1048290 and rs9676881
(both p = 0.019), NFE2L2 rs35652124 (p = 0.030). In AD group,
signiﬁcant association of IL1B rs1071676 (p = 0.004), KEAP1
rs1048290 and rs9676881 (both p = 0.035) with MMSE were
observed.
Conclusion: Polymorphisms in inﬂammation and antioxidant
genes may be associated with CSF biomarkers and cognitive test
score and could serve as additional biomarkers contributing to
early diagnosis of cognitive decline.
References:.
Grants: ARRS P1-0170.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.068.C Genetic modulators of GBA expressivity in
synucleinopathies
Giada Melistaccio1, letizia straniero1, valeria rimoldi1, Alessio Di
Fonzo2;3, Giulia Solda’1;4, anna zecchinelli5, stefano duga1;4, gianni
pezzoli6, Rosanna Asselta1;4
1Humanitas University, Biomedical Sciences, Pieve Emanuele, Italy;
2IRCCS Foundation Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Milano, Italy; 3University of Milan, Department of Pathophysiology
and Transplantation, Milano, Italy; 4Humanitas Research Hospital,
Milano, Italy; 5Parkinson Institute ASST “Gaetano Pini-CTO”, Milano,
Italy; 6Fondazione Grigioni per il Morbo di Parkinson, Parkinson
Institute, Milano, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Heterozygous mutations in GBA are
associated with an increased risk of the synucleinopathies Par-
kinson’s disease (PD) and Lewy body dementia (LBD), which
encompasses Parkinson’s disease dementia and dementia with
Lewy bodies (DLB). As it is not clear why individuals with the same
GBA variant could eventually develop PD or LBD we focused on
genetic modulators of GBA mutations expressivity. To this end, we:
compared the burden of rare deleterious variants (minor allele
frequency <1%) in dementia-related genes; assessed the role of a
second GBA variant; and evaluated the impact of the APOE-ε4
haplotype, among LBD cases, PD patients, and healthy controls all
carriers of at least one GBA mutation.
Methods: We studied a cohort of 203 healthy individuals, 196
PD and 139 LBD patients heterozygous for at least a GBA mutation
using an NGS custom panel including 10 dementia-related genes.
The frequency of APOE haplotypes was assessed through a Taq-
Man™Genotyping Assay.
Results: We showed a signiﬁcantly increased burden of rare
mutations in dementia-related genes in the DLB cohort compared
to healthy controls (12.82% vs 3.86%, P = 0.02). We also found that
a second GBA variant is more frequent in LBD vs PD patients
(9.56% vs 3.96%, P = 0.04), and that the APOE-ε4 allele is sig-
niﬁcantly enriched in the DLB cohort compared to healthy con-
trols (17.57% vs 8.13%, P = 0.018).
Conclusion: Our data suggest that there is a correlation
between the analyzed risk factors and the development of a
dementia phenotype in GBA mutation carriers.
References:.
Grants: PRIN Grant no:2017228L3J.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.069.D Two de novo pathogenic variants in different genes
identiﬁed by a whole exome sequencing TRIO approach
explain and complement the phenotype in a patient with
syndromic intellectual disability and autism
Eva Barroso1, Marina Martinez-Matilla1, Gemma Cartagena1, Jesús
Ferre-Fernández1, Alba Velo1, Maria Berbel1, Rocio Garcia-Jimenez1,
Iryna Boyko1, Sandra Garcia-Herrero1, Carmen Fernández-Vizcaino1,
Daniel Sanchez-Valero1, Cristian Perez-Garcia1, Alberto Fernández-
Jaén2, Javier Garcia Planells1
1Igenomix, Genomic Precision Diagnostic, Paterna, Spain; 2Hospital
Universitario Quirónsalud Madrid, Pediatric Neurology, Pozuelo de
Alarcón, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Five-years-old boy presented with a
complex phenotype, including intellectual disability, autism, and
attention deﬁcit spectrum disorder with dysmorphic features as
microcephaly
and
hypertelorism.
CGH-array,
karyotype
and
X-fragile tests were normal. Whole exome sequencing (WES) TRIO
diagnostic was performed to elucidate the genetic cause under-
lying his phenotype.
Methods: WES for proband and progenitors were performed
from DNA using Nextera DNA Flex Pre-Enrichment Library Prep
and Illumina Exome Panel and sequenced on the NovaSeq 6000
System (Illumina). Raw data were processed by the Igenomix in-
house bioinformatics pipeline.
Detected variants were prioritised according to their possible
pathogenicity following the recommendations of the American
College of Medical Genetics using the in-house developed soft-
ware GPDxViewer.
Results: Two de novo pathogenic variants were found in the
proband: c.1139_1140delTT; p.(Phe380fs) in the CUL3 gene and
c.1001+2T>A in the NARS1 gene. CUL3 is associated with Neuro-
developmental disorder with or without autism or seizures
(MIM#619239) and NARS1 with Neurodevelopmental disorder with
microcephaly, impaired language, epilepsy, and gait abnormalities
(MIM#619092),
both
with
autosomal
dominant
inheritance
pattern.
Conclusion: Each variant contributes to different parts of the
complex phenotype present in the proband and as a result, the
patient has a combination of two different disorders.
These results also highlight the importance of being thorough
in the variant analysis to avoid missing those variants that could
complement or complete the explanation of the phenotype as
a whole.
In disorders with such a heterogeneous genetic basis as autism
and intellectual disability, WES-TRIO emerges as the diagnostic
approach with the highest efﬁciency.
References:.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
493
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.070.A Novel mutation in ENG causes autosomal dominant
isolated cerebral arteriovenous malformation at young age
Matan M. Jean1, ofek freund1, Nadav Agam1, Amit Safran1, Tomer
Poleg1, Marina Eskin-Shwartz1;2, Anat Horev3, Ohad Shmuel Birk1;2
1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute
for Biotechnology in the Negev and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-
Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel; 2Genetics institute,
Soroka Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel;
3Neurology Department, Soroka Medical Center, and Clalit Health
Services, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel.
Background/Objectives: Cerebral arteriovenous malformation
(CAVM) constitute abnormal vessels shunting blood from the
arterial to the venous circulation, resulting in high ﬂow lesions
prone to rupture. CAVMs account for ~2% of all haemorrhagic
strokes. Most CAVM cases are sporadic, although few are due to
autosomal dominant inheritance of a genetic mutation, most
commonly
in
the
context
of
Hereditary
Hemorrhagic
Tel-
angiectasia (HHT), an autosomal dominant genetic disorder char-
acterized by epistaxis, telangiectasias, and multiorgan vascular
dysplasia. We studied a case of father and daughter with isolated
CAVM ruptures at young age, aiming to identify mutations that
cause CAVM.
Methods: Magnetic resonance angiography, whole exome
sequencing and validation through PCR and Sanger sequencing.
Results: A father and daughter presented with isolated CAVM,
with ruptures at an early age. Both were examined clinically and
did not present telangiectasias. A frameshift mutation in ENG
(endoglin) chr9:127816006 AG>A HET. (hg38) was found in both
affected father and daughter.
Conclusion: Mutations in ENG have been reported to cause
HHT1, a subtype of HHT with higher risk for developing CAVM
than other subtypes of the disease. This new mutation is unique in
causing CAVM at a very young age and without skin presentation
of telangiectasias. Thus, genetic testing is important for diagnosis
of HHT in families with history of isolated CAVM ruptures.
References: 1) C. Stapf et. al. (2002). Cerebrovascular Diseases.
2) Abdalla, S. A., & Letarte, M. (2006). Journal of Medical
Genetics.
Grants: The Morris Kahn foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.071.B Genetic diagnoses for complex
neurodevelopmental disorders in the international
NeuroWES-Macedonia project
Slavica Trajkova1, Elena Sukarova-Angelovska2, Aleksandar Petlich-
kovski3, Enza Ferrero1, Simona Cardaropoli4, Chiara Giovenino1,
Verdiana Pullano1, Lisa Pavinato1, Silvia Carestiato1, Elisa Giorgio5,
Alessandro Mussa4, Tommaso Pippucci6, Paola Dimartino7, Ashkan
Golshani8, Sarah Takallou8, Haley McConkey9;10, Jennifer Kerkhof9;10,
Bekim
Sadikovic9;10,
Silvia
De
Rubeis11;12;13;14,
Joseph
Bux-
baum11;12;13;14;15;16, Giovanni Battista Ferrero17, Alfredo Brusco1;18
1University of Turin, Department of Medical Sciences, Turin, Italy;
2University Clinic for Children’s Diseases, Department of Endocrinol-
ogy and Genetics, Skopje, Macedonia; 3University “Sv. Kiril I Metodij”,
Institute for Immunobiology and Human Genetics, Skopje, Macedo-
nia; 4University of Turin, Department of Public Health and Pediatrics,
Turin, Italy; 5University of Pavia, Department of Molecular Medicine,
Pavia, Italy;
6Polyclinic Sant’Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital,
Medical Genetics Unit, Bologna, Italy;
7University of Bologna,
Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Bologna, Italy;
8Carleton University, Department of Biology and Ottawa Institute
of Systems Biology, Ottawa, Canada;
9London Health Sciences
Centre, Molecular Diagnostics Program, Verspeeten Clinical Genome
Centre, London, Canada; 10Western University, London, Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, London, Canada; 11Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Seaver Autism Center for
Research and Treatment, New York, United States; 12Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Psychiatry, New York, United
States; 13Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, The Mindich Child
Health and Development Institute, New York, United States; 14Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Friedman Brain Institute, New
York, United States; 15Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, New York, United
States; 16Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of
Neuroscience, New York, United States;
17University of Turin,
Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Turin, Italy; 18Uni-
versity Hospital, Torino, Italy, Città della Salute e della Scienza, Turin,
Italy.
Background/Objectives: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD)
are genetically and clinically heterogeneous diseases that include
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD), intellectual disability (ID), and
epilepsy.
Methods: To improve Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) diag-
nostics in NDD, we exploited detailed clinical characterization,
X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) proﬁles, epigenetic signatures
and novel in vitro functional models.
Results: We collected and deeply phenotyped 203 NDD cases
from Macedonia with ASD (69/203), ASD/ID (31/203), ID (42/203),
or syndromic NDD (61/203). We solved 26% (52/203), with the
highest diagnostic rate in syndromic NDD (31/61; 51%), and the
lowest in ASD cases (5/69; 7%). Notably, we found two cases
with a dual molecular diagnosis, and one family with two dif-
ferent de novo variants in two similarly affected brothers
(TRIP12:L1044Ffs*3, and FBN:A1728V).
In three unrelated boys, whose mothers each had a 100%
skewed XCI, we found variants in novel candidate genes, pre-
viously overlooked by WES analysis (ZMYM3:R441Q, PDZD4:K730N,
and AMOT: G343R). Because chromatin remodeling genes were
frequently mutated (14/52; 27%), we exploited episignatures, and
conﬁrmed the pathogenic role of variants in EZH2, HIST1H1,
PQBP1. We found 18 strong novel disease-gene candidates (8%),
which included PHLPP1, AARSD1, UBE2I and CASKIN1. The PHLPP1-
mutated cases showed functional alteration of the AKT-mTOR
pathway using dental pulp stem cells (SHED); the variants in
AARSD1, involved in aminoacyl-tRNA editing, caused growth
impairment in a mutagenized yeast model.
Conclusion: The combination of deep phenotyping, XCI ana-
lysis and episignature proﬁling not only improved the WES diag-
nostic yield but identiﬁed several potentially novel NDD genes.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.072.C Novel de-novo heterozygous H3-3A mutation
causes neuro-developmental disorder
OHAD LANDAU1, Ginat Narkis2, Ohad Shmuel Birk1;2
1Ben-Gurion university of the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel; 2Genetics
Institute, Soroka Medical Centre, Beer-sheva, Israel.
Background/Objectives: A non-consanguineous Jewish Moroccan
family presented with a phenotype of a neuro-developmental dis-
order (NDD) of global developmental delay, low muscle tone and
epilepsy, affecting an individual at the latest generation.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
494
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: Whole exome sequencing data of the affected
individual and healthy parents (Trio) were analyzed and ﬁltered for
known benign variants using our in-house databases along with
open access databases (1000 genomes, NHLBI ESP, ExAC etc.).
Results: No mutations or likely-pathogenic variants were found
in genes previously associated with NDDs. A novel de-novo het-
erozygous p.Q126R missense mutation in H3.3 Histone A (H3-3A)
was identiﬁed. The mutation was veriﬁed by Sanger sequencing
and was found to fully segregate in the affected kindred as
expected for a dominant effect of a de-novo mutation. In-silico
analysis of the p.Q126R variant showed putative multiple effects
on the mature protein. Proliferation assay (XTT) of patient-derived
ﬁbroblasts versus matched controls indicated decreased pro-
liferation of cells harboring the mutation.
Conclusion: Variants in H3-3A were mainly associated with
cancer and only recent studies have shown H3-3A as a novel
contributor to NDDs1. Our data suggest the de-novo p.Q126R
mutation is the likely cause of the aforementioned NDD.
References: 1 - Bryant L et al. Histone H3.3 beyond cancer:
Germline mutations in Histone 3 Family 3A and 3B cause a pre-
viously unidentiﬁed neurodegenerative disorder in 46 patients. Sci
Adv. 2020 Dec 2;6(49): eabc9207.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.073.D Interaction between polygenic risk score and rare
variants in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Jay Ross1;2, Zoe Schmilovich1;2, Karina Kwan3, Dan Spiegelman2;4,
Angela Genge2, Nicolas Dupre5;6, Patrick Dion2;4, Sali Farhan1;4, Guy
Rouleau1;2;4
1McGill Univeristy, Human Genetics, Montreal, Canada;
2McGill
Univeristy, Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, Montreal,
Canada; 3McGill Univeristy, Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics
and Occupational Health, Montreal, Canada;
4McGill Univeristy,
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal, Canada; 5Universite Laval,
Division of Neurosciences, CHU de Québec, Quebec, Canada;
6Universite Laval, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Quebec, Canada.
Background/Objectives: The genetic background of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) consists of common small-effect alleles and
rare penetrant alleles. Here, we tested whether risk for ALS was
affected by high polygenic risk score (PRS), carrying rare ALS-
associated variants, or both.
Methods: 330 ALS cases and 349 unaffected controls from
Québec, Canada were included. SNP-chip genotyping was gen-
erated for all samples, and targeted or whole exome sequencing
was used to screen 26 ALS genes. We used ALS GWAS summary
statistics1 to estimate PRS for ALS. From sequencing, only protein-
altering variants rarer than 0.1% were included. Individuals were
subdivided into cases and controls, and rare variant carriers or
non-carriers. Logistic regression was used to assess association of
ALS risk with PRS and rare variant status.
Results: 4,309 SNPs were included in the PRS, which explained
1.16% of phenotypic variation. The upper PRS quartile showed an
odds ratio of 2.05 for ALS risk. Risk for ALS was signiﬁcantly asso-
ciated with PRS and rare variants independently (p = 2.58 × 10-5
and 4.90 × 10-3, respectively), but the interaction was not signiﬁcant.
PRS only differed signiﬁcantly between non-carrier cases and non-
carrier controls (p = 0.0087).
Conclusion: ALS PRS was informative only between cases and
controls not carrying a rare variant, suggesting that rare variants in
ALS genes have a substantial effect on disease risk. Rather than
modifying the penetrance of rare risk variants, ALS PRS differ-
entiates cases and controls only in the absence of these variants.
References: 1. van Rheenen. 2016. Nat Genet.
Grants: Canadian Institutes for Health Research – FRN 159279.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.074.A GIPR and GLP1R genetic polymorphisms and
alcohol dependence
Evangelia Eirini Tsermpini1, Anja Plemenitaš Ilješ2, Katja Goricar1,
Vita Dolzan1
1University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry
and Molecular Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia;
2University Clinical
Centre Maribor, Department of Psychiatry, Maribor, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: Alcohol dependence affects approxi-
mately 4% of the general population. It leads to decreased quality of
life for patients and their families and present a huge burden to
society. Gastric inhibitory polypeptide receptor (GIPR) and glucagon-
like peptide one receptor (GLP1R) are expressed in the reward-related
brain areas and modulate dopamine levels and glutamatergic neu-
rotransmission, which results in behavioral changes. The present
study investigated the association of common genetic polymorph-
isms in GLP1R and GIPR with alcohol dependence.
Methods: Three groups of male Slovenian participants have
been included: 88 hospitalized alcohol-dependent patients, 96
abstinent alcohol-dependent patients, and 94 healthy blood donors
and were genotyped for GLP1R rs10305420 and rs6923761 and GIPR
rs1800437. In the statistical analysis, Kruskal-Wall and Mann-
Whitney tests were used for additive and dominant genetic models.
Results: Polymorphic GIPR rs1800437 GC+CC genotypes were
more frequent in hospitalized alcohol-dependent than controls
(P = 0.020). The association remained statistically signiﬁcant after
adjustment for age, education, smoking, environment, and part-
nership (P = 0.040). Similar associations were observed when
comparing alcohol-dependent patients with controls (P = 0.047),
but the signiﬁcance was lost after adjustment (P = 0.086). Regarding
psychosymptomatology, rs1800437 GC+CC genotypes were asso-
ciated with Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsory Scale (YBOCS)
obsession (P = 0.045), YBOCS compulsion (P = 0.032), and Buss-
Durkee Hostility Inventory (BDHI) (P = 0.046) scores. No signiﬁcant
associations were observed for GLP1R rs10305420 and rs6923761.
Conclusion: Our data indicate that GIPR rs1800437 may play
some role in susceptibility to alcohol dependence, and obsession,
compulsion, aggression, and hostility symptoms. However, further
studies with larger cohorts are needed to conﬁrm these pre-
liminary ﬁndings.
References:.
Grants: ARRS P1-0170.
Conﬂict of Interest: Evangelia Eirini Tsermpini: None declared,
Anja Plemenitaš Ilješ: None declared, Katja Goricar: None declared,
Vita Dolzan ARRS P1-0170.
P10.076.C Expanded phenotype of Snijders Blok-Campeau
syndrome related to CHD3 pathogenic variant with
precocious puberty and pituitary microadenoma
radu parascan1, eric allain2;3;3;3;3, philippe pierre robichaud3, BEN
AMOR MOUNA3
1Centre de formation médicale du Nouveau-Brunswick, moncton,
Canada; 2Dr Goerge L Dumont hospital, moncton, Canada; 3Dr
George L Dumont hospital, moncton, Canada.
Background/Objectives: Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome is
an autosomal dominant genetic disorder often associated
with missense mutations in the CHD3 gene that affects chro-
matin remodelling in human cells. This syndrome is also
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
495
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
characterized by a distinct neurodevelopmental phenotype.
Here, we present a case of a young female diagnosed with
Snijders-Block Campeau syndrome with previously unreported
clinical features, including precocious puberty and pituitary
microadenoma.
Methods: The patient was investigated by a multidisciplinary
team, she had extensive genetic testing, including CGH, metabolic
work-up and targeted exome sequencing.
Results: Sequencing data revealed a heterozygous de novo
likely pathogenic variant in the CHD3 gene and no other notable
structural nor punctual variants. This case demonstrates a unique
clinical manifestation of Snijders Blok-Campeau syndrome related
to a de novo likely pathogenic variant in the CHD3 gene:
NM_001005271.2: c.5609G>A.
Conclusion: We believe that central precocious puberty can be
part of the clinical manifestation of Snijders Blok-Campeau syn-
drome and this ﬁnding can expand the phenotypic spectrum of
this disorder.
References: Snijders Blok, L., Rousseau, J., Twist, J., Ehresmann,
S., Takaku, M., Venselaar, H., Rodan, L. H., Nowak, C. B., Douglas, J.,
Swoboda, K. J., Steeves, M. A., Sahai, I., Stumpel, C. T., Stegmann, A.
P., Wheeler, P., Willing, M., Fiala, E., Kochhar, A., Gibson, W. T., …
Campeau, P. M. (2018). CHD3 helicase domain mutations cause a
neurodevelopmental syndrome with macrocephaly and impaired
speech and language. Nature Communications, 9(1). https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06014-6.
Grants: New Brunswick health research foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: radu parascan: None declared, eric allain:
None declared, philippe pierre robichaud: None declared, BEN
AMOR MOUNA NBHRF clinical research scholarship.
P10.078.A genetic testing in turkish pituitary adenoma
patients: preliminary ﬁndings
Ceren Alavanda1, özcan sönmez2, fatih bayraklı2, a.ilter guney1
1Faculty of Medicine, Marmara University, Department of Medical
Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey; 2Faculty of Medicine, Marmara University,
Department of Neurosurgery, Istanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Pituitary adenomas are the third most
common intracranial tumors after meningioma and glioma. Its
incidence was determined as 15%. There is no familial predis-
position in 95% of the patients, while the remaining 5% is familial.
Although germline mutations of genes such as MEN1, MEN4, AIP,
NF1, RET, CDKN1B, SDHs can be detected, these mutations are not
found in most of the patients.
Methods: DNA was isolated from peripheral blood after
obtaining informed consent from patients. AIP gene sequencing
(Illumina Miseq) was performed to eight patients and customized
gene panel (50 genes-Illumina NovaSeq) was performed to 32
patients. Variants with MAF <%0,1 were ﬁltered and retained
variants were searched in Clinvar. ACMG classiﬁcation was used to
determine the pathogenicity.
Results: Fourty patients (19 women and 21 men) with age range
between 15-71 were included in our study. Five patients had
microadenoma and 35 patients had macroadenoma. The most
common pathological subtype was GHoma (14/37). Two patients
had atypical adenomas with high Ki67 and p53 levels. In four
patients pathogenic variants were detected in MEN1, AIP, MLH1 and
MUTYH genes. In one patient who also had pheochromocytoma,
variant of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS) was detected in SDHD gene.
In another patient, missense VUS was detected in AIP gene.
Conclusion: We detected pathogenic variants in 10% of our
patients, contributing to the follow-up and treatment of both
patients and their families which implicate the importance of
genetic testing in pituitary adenoma patients.
References: Aﬂorei ED, Korbonits M. Epidemiology and etio-
pathogenesis of pituitary adenomas. J Neurooncol.2014;117(3):379-
394. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11060-013-1354-5.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.079.B Identiﬁcation of molecular signatures and
pathways involved in Rett syndrome-spectrum disorders
using a multi-omics approach
Clara Xiol1;2, Ainhoa Pascual-Alonso1;2, Dmitrii Smirnov3;4, Robert
Kopajtich3;4,
Christina
Ludwig5,
Holger
Prokisch3;4,
Judith
Armstrong2;6;7
1Fundació per la Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat,
Spain; 2Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat,
Spain; 3Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich,
München, Germany; 4Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, München, Germany; 5Bavarian Biomolecular Mass Spec-
trometry Center, Technical University Munich, Freising, Germany;
6CIBER-ER (Biomedical Network Research Center for Rare Diseases),
Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain; 7Genomic Unit,
Molecular and Genetic Medicine Section, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,
Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neuro-
developmental disorder whose classical form is mainly caused by
mutations in the MECP2 gene. There are also atypical forms, gen-
erally caused by mutations in CDKL5 or FOXG1, and RTT-like forms,
with considerable clinical overlap with typical RTT but caused by
mutations in other genes. Since the pathomechanism by which the
dysfunction of these genes causes disease is not yet fully under-
stood, there is no treatment available. Therefore, the aim of this
study is to characterize the molecular alterations in RTT-spectrum
patients to identify common and speciﬁc molecular signatures and
discover pathways involved in the pathogenesis of these disorders.
Methods: Primary ﬁbroblast cell cultures were obtained from
33 RTT-spectrum patients (21 with typical RTT, 6 with atypical RTT
and 6 with RTT-like) and 15 healthy controls. RNA and protein
were isolated and genome-wide differential expression was eval-
uated by RNAseq and quantitative TMT proteomics.
Results: Differential expression analysis revealed common
molecular signatures in RTT-spectrum patients and enrichment
analysis identiﬁed altered pathways associated with these sig-
natures. Spliceosome components and genes involved in oxidative
phosphorylation were signiﬁcantly enriched within altered genes in
all RTT-spectrum patients. Moreover, we found speciﬁc alterations
that distinguish patients with mutations in certain genes from other
RTT-spectrum patients with overlapping phenotypes.
Conclusion: Integrative multi-omics contribute to the under-
standing of the pathomechanisms behind RTT-spectrum disorders
and could uncover new biomarkers to monitor disease status as
well as potential therapeutic targets for treating these disorders.
References:.
Grants: PI20/0289, FPU18/02152, 2020/FI-B/00888, PCP/00282.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.081.D Digenic inheritance of STUB1 variants and TBP
polyglutamine expansions solves the enigma of SCA17 and
SCA48 incomplete penetrance
Stefania Magri1, Lorenzo Nanetti1, cinzia gellera1, Elisa Sarto1,
Maria Balzo1, Elena Rizzo1, Alessia Mongelli1, Alfredo Brusco2;3,
Caterina Mariotti2, Daniela Di Bella1, Franco Taroni1
1Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Unit of Medical
Genetics and Neurogenetics, Milan, Italy; 2Univeristà degli Studi di
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
496
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Torino, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, Turin, Italy; 3A.O.U. Città
della Salute e della Scienza, Unità di Genetica Medica, Turin, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17),
characterized
by
cerebellar-cognitive-behavioural
features,
is
caused by a CAG/CAA repeat expansion in the TBP gene. TBP
alleles with >49 CAG/CAA are fully penetrant. By contrast, inter-
mediate TBP alleles with 41-49 CAG/CAA (TBP41-49), are char-
acterized by reduced penetrance, since ~50% of carriers in SCA17
families are healthy and ~1% of subjects in the general population
carry TBP41-47 alleles. Objective: To unravel the genetic factors
underlying missing heritability in SCA17.
Methods: Using NGS approaches, we investigated 40 TBP41-54
index patients, their affected (n = 55) and unaffected (n = 51)
relatives, and a cohort of ataxia patients (n = 292).
Results: All but one (30/31) index cases with intermediate TBP41-
46 alleles carried a heterozygous pathogenic variant in the STUB1
gene encoding the chaperone-associated E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP.
No STUB1 variant was found in patients carrying TBP47-54 alleles. TBP
expansions and STUB1 variants cosegregate in all affected family
members, while the presence of either one alone was never asso-
ciated with disease. STUB1 pathogenic variants were previously
associated with the autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia
SCAR16 and the autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia SCA48.
Conclusion:
Our
data
reveal
an
unexpected
interaction
between STUB1 and TBP in the pathogenesis of SCA17 and raise
questions on the existence of SCA48 as a monogenic disease, with
crucial implications for diagnosis and counselling. They provide a
convincing explanation for the incomplete penetrance of inter-
mediate TBP alleles and demonstrate a dual inheritance pattern
for SCA17, which is a monogenic dominant disorder for TBP≥47
alleles and a digenic TBP/STUB1 disease (SCA17-DI) for inter-
mediate expansions.
References:.
Grants: FRRB_CP2_20_2018.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.083.B Loss of C-terminal Mediator Complex subunit-11
impairs fetal brain development and cause severely
progressive neurodegeneration
Elisa Cali1, Clarissa Rocca1, Yavuz Şahin2, Aisha Mohamed Saeed
Mohamed Al Shamsi3, Salima EL CHEHADEH4, Myriam CHAABOUNI5,
Kshitij Mankad6, Evangelia Galanaki1, Stephanie Efthymiou1, Sniya
Sudhakar6, Alkyoni Athanasiou-Fragkouli1, Tamer Celik7, Nejat Narli8,
Sebastiano Bianca9, David Murphy1, Andrea Accogli10;11, Masoud
Edizadeh2, Rosaria Nardello12, Patrizia De Marco13, Martino Rug-
gieri14, Federico Zara13;15, Pasquale Striano16, Yavuz Sahin17, lihadh
algazali18, Marie Therese Abi Warde19, Benedicte Gerard20, Giovanni
Zifarelli21, Christian Beetz21, Sara Fortuna22, Miguel Soler23, Enza
Maria Valente24;25, Reza Marooﬁan1, Vincenzo Salpietro1;15;16, Henry
Houlden1
1University College London, Department of Neuromuscular Diseases,
London, United Kingdom; 2Genoks Genetic Laboratory, Department
of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey; 3Tawam Hospital, UAE, United
Arab Emirates; 4Service de génétique médicale, Institut de Génétique
Médicale d’Alsace (IGMA), Centre de Référence des Déﬁciences
Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Centre de Recherche en Biomédecine
de
Strasbourg
(CRBS),
Hôpitaux
Universitaires
de
Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France; 5Lgcgenetics, Centre medical les Jasmins, Centre
urbain nord, Tunis, Tunisia;
6Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children NHS Trust, Department of Radiology, London, United
Kingdom;
7Department of Pediatric Neurology, Private Practice,
Adana, Turkey; 8Department of Neonatology, Cukurova University,
Adana, Turkey; 9Medical Genetics, Referral Center for Rare Genetic
Diseases, ARNAS Garibaldi, Catania, Italy;
10Division of Medical
Genetics, Department of Specialized Medicine, Montreal Children’s
Hospital, McGill University Health Centre (MUHC), Montreal, Canada;
11Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal,
Canada; 12Department of Health Promotion, Mother and Child Care,
Internal
Medicine
and
Medical
Specialities
“G.
D’Alessandro”,
Palermo, Italy; 13Unit of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Giannina
Gaslini, Via Gerolamo Gaslini 5, 16147 Genoa, Italy., Genova, Italy;
14Unit of Rare Diseases of the Nervous System in Childhood,
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Section of
Pediatrics and Child Neuropsychiatry, AOU “Policlinico”, PO “G.
Rodolico”, Catania, Italy; 15Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilita-
tion, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health, University
of Genoa, Genova, Italy; 16Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases
Unit, IRCCS “Istituto Giannina Gaslini”, Genova, Italy, Genova, Italy;
17Department of Medical Genetics, Biruni University, Instanbul,
Turkey; 18Department of clinical genetics & pediatrics, College of
Medicine & Health Science, UAE, United Arab Emirates; 19Pediatric
Neurology
Department,
CHU
Strasbourg,
Strasbourg,
France;
20Laboratoires de Diagnostic Génétique, Unité de génétique molécu-
laire,
Nouvel
Hôpital Civil,
Strasbourg,
France;
21CENTOGENE,
Rostock, Germany; 22Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy; 23CONCEPT Lab, Italian
Institute of Technology (IIT), Genova, Italy; 24Neurogenetics Research
Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy; 25Department of
Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
Background/Objectives: The Mediator (MED) is an evolutionarily
conserved multi-subunit protein complex that modulates the
activity of several transcription factors and different critical com-
ponents of the overall transcriptional machinery. Genetic defects
of different MED subunits have been implicated in severe brain
developmental
disorders
with
microcephaly
and
neurodegeneration.
Methods: Exome or genome sequencing were performed in
ﬁve unrelated families identiﬁed via different research networks
and Matchmaker Exchanges. Deep clinical and brain imaging
evaluations were performed by pediatric neurologists and neu-
roradiologists. The functional impact of the candidate variant on
both MED11 RNA and protein was assessed by RT-PCR and Wes-
tern Blotting using patient-derived ﬁbroblast cell lines and by
computational approaches.
Results: A recurrent, segregating homozygous variant in
MED11 (c.325 C>T; p.Arg109Ter) was identiﬁed in all eight affected
children. The variant results in a premature stop codon and a
putative protein lacking the
last nine residues of MED11
C-terminal. The phenotype was characterized by microcephaly,
profound neurodevelopmental delay, exaggerated startle reaction,
refractory myoclonic epilepsy and diffuse severe brain degenera-
tion with premature death. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR and Western
blot revealed levels of protein and transcript similar to healthy
carriers and age- and sex-matched controls, suggesting the variant
does not cause non-sense mediated decay (NMD) but instead
disrupts the C-terminal domain of MED11.
Conclusion: Loss of the C-terminal of MED subunit 11 may
affect its binding efﬁciency to other MED subunits, thus impacting
the complex stability and function and leading to a rare and
severe prenatal-onset developmental and degenerative neurolo-
gical condition.
References:.
Grants: Wellcome Trust (WT093205MA and WT104033AIA).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.084.C The genetics of manic symptoms assessed by the
Mood Disorder Questionnaire
Jessica Mundy1, Christopher Hübel1, jonathan coleman1, Brett
Adey1, Gursharan Kalsi1, Henry Rogers1, Lee Sang Hyuck1, molly
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
497
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
davies1, Thalia Eley1, Robin Murray2, Evangelos Vassos1, Gerome
Breen1
1Social Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, London,
United Kingdom; 2Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience,
London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Mania affects ~1% of the population.
Together with depression, it is characteristic of bipolar disorder, a
severe psychiatric disorder closely related to other disorders,
including depression and schizophrenia [1-2]. The Mood Disorder
Questionnaire (MDQ) is used to screen for manic symptoms in at-
risk groups and the general population [3]. We investigated the
heritability of mania and calculated genetic correlations with other
traits.
Methods: We created a continuous mania trait using MDQ data
from the Genetic Links to Anxiety and Depression Study and
healthy volunteers in the NIHR BioResource (n = 26,450) in the UK.
We performed a genome-wide association study of mania and
calculated genetic correlations using Linkage Disequilibrium Score
Regression, applying multiple testing correction.
Results: The continuous mania trait had a SNP-based herit-
ability of 0.06 (SE = 0.02). Mania showed a signiﬁcant, positive
genetic correlation with major depressive disorder (rg = 0.45,
SE = 0.10, p = 4.5x10-6), attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
(rg = 0.54, SE = 0.11, p = 8.8x10-7), posttraumatic stress disorder
(rg = 0.61, SE = 0.12, p = 8.5x10-7), alcohol dependence (rg = 0.48,
SE = 0.12, p = 8.6x10-5), and number of sexual partners (rg = 0.26,
SE = 0.06, p = 1.6x10-5). Mania showed a signiﬁcant, negative
genetic correlation with educational attainment (rg = -0.44, SE =
0.06, p = 3.41x10-12). However, mania did not show signiﬁcant
genetic correlations with bipolar disorder or its subtypes.
Conclusion: Caution should be paid when assessing bipolar
disorder quantitative traits via the MDQ in epidemiological stu-
dies. When applied to the general population, the MDQ may
capture symptoms of general distress rather than mania.
References: [1] Daly (1997).
[2] Mullins et al. (2021).
[3] Hirschfeld et al. (2000).
Grants: Funded by the NIHR Maudsley Biomedical Research
Centre and the Lord Leverhulme Charitable Grant.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jessica Mundy: None declared, Christo-
pher Hübel: None declared, jonathan coleman: None declared,
Brett Adey: None declared, Gursharan Kalsi: None declared, Henry
Rogers: None declared, Lee Sang Hyuck: None declared, molly
davies: None declared, Thalia Eley: None declared, Robin Murray:
None declared, Evangelos Vassos: None declared, Gerome Breen
Prof Breen has received honoraria, research or conference grants
and consulting fees from Illumina, Otsuka, and COMPASS Path-
ﬁnder Ltd., Prof Breen has received honoraria, research or con-
ference grants and consulting fees from Illumina, Otsuka, and
COMPASS Pathﬁnder Ltd., Prof Breen has received honoraria,
research or conference grants and consulting fees from Illumina,
Otsuka, and COMPASS Pathﬁnder Ltd.
P10.085.D Neuropsychiatric risk in children with intellectual
disability of genetic origin: IMAGINE - The UK National Cohort
Study
Jeanne Wolstencroft1, Marianne Van Den Bree2, Jeremy Hall2,
Michael Owen2, David Skuse1, Imagine Consortium1;2, F. Lucy
Raymond3
1NIHR BRC Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London,
United Kingdom; 2Cardiff University, Medical Research Council Centre
for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Division of Psycholo-
gical Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff, United Kingdom;
3University of Cambridge, School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge,
United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Children with intellectual disability (ID)
frequently have multiple co-morbid neuropsychiatric conditions
and poor physical health. Genomic testing is increasingly recom-
mended as a ﬁrst-line investigation for these children. We aimed
to determine the impact of genomics, inheritance and socio-
economic deprivation on neuropsychiatric risk in children with
intellectual disability of genetic origin as compared to the general
population.
Methods: IMAGINE is a prospective study using online mental
health and medical assessments in a cohort of 2770 children with
ID and pathogenic genomic variants, identiﬁed by the UK’s
National Health Service.
Results: Assessments completed on 2397 young people with
ID (4-19 years, M 9.2, SD 3.9) with a rare pathogenic genomic
variant. 1339 (55.9%) were male. 1771 (73.9%) of participants had
a pathogenic copy number variant (CNV), 626 (26.1%) a patho-
genic single nucleotide variant (SNV). Participants were repre-
sentative of the socioeconomic spectrum of the UK general
population.
The relative risk of co-occurring neuropsychiatric diagnoses,
compared with the UK national population, was high: Autism
Spectrum Disorder 29.2 (95% CI 23.9 to 36.5), Attention Deﬁcit
Hyperactivity Disorder 13.5 (95% CI 11.1 to 16.3). In children with a
CNV, those with a familial variant tended to live in more socio-
economically deprived areas. Both inheritance and socioeconomic
deprivation
contributed
to
neuropsychiatric
risk
in
those
with a CNV.
Conclusion: Children with genomic variants and ID are at a
greatly enhanced risk of neuropsychiatric difﬁculties. CNV variant
inheritance and socioeconomic deprivation also contribute to
the risk.
References:.
Grants: UK Medical Research Council and Medical Research
Foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jeanne Wolstencroft: None declared,
Marianne Van Den Bree Grant from Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Jer-
emy Hall Grant from Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Michael Owen Grant
from Takeda Pharmaceuticals, David Skuse: None declared, Ima-
gine Consortium: None declared, F. Lucy Raymond: None declared.
P10.086.A Single-cell deconvolution of cerebellar cortex
uncovers increased proportions of astrocytes and granule cell
loss in essential tremor
Charles-Etienne Castonguay1, Calwing Liao1, Miranda Medeiros1,
Gabrielle Houle1, Alex Rajput2, Patrick Dion1, Guy Rouleau1
1McGill University, Montreal, Canada; 2University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Canada.
Background/Objectives: Essential tremor (ET) is one of the most
common movement disorders, affecting 1% of the worldwide
population. Not much is known about its pathophysiology. Some
histopathological studies of ET cerebellum have noted reduced
numbers of Purkinje cells (PCs), but this ﬁnding remains con-
troversial [1]. We sought to replicate these ﬁndings using decon-
volution of bulk-RNA sequencing (bulk RNA-seq) data to compare
cell type proportions between ET and healthy control cerebellar
cortices.
Methods: MuSiC was used to deconvolute bulk RNA-seq of 16
ET and 16 control cerebellar cortex using cerebellar single-cell
data [2]. A permutation test (100k iterations without replacement)
was used to test cell type proportions between ET and control
samples.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
498
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: Most cell types including both PC subtypes did not
differ between ET and control samples. Astrocytes proportions
were signiﬁcantly increased in ET samples compared to controls
(Beta = 0.0382, q-val = 0.0196). Granule cells were signiﬁcantly
decreased in ET cerebellum compared to control cerebellum
(Beta = -0.0563, q-val = 0.0221).
Conclusion: Using deconvolution of bulk RNA-seq, we found
increased proportions of astrocytes as well as decreased numbers
of granule cells in ET cerebellum compared to controls. PC pro-
portions did not differ between ET and control samples. Although
astrogliosis has been previously described in ET, decreased num-
bers of granule cells is a novel ﬁnding in ET.
References: [1] Rajput, A.H., Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. (2013).
[2] Lake B.B., Nature Biotechnology. (2018).
Grants: Canadian Institutes of Health Research - CGSM.
Fonds de recherche du Québec en santé - Formation de
maîtrise.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.090.A Biallelic variants in the ESCRT-II subunit SNF8 cause
either early-onset lethal leukoencephalopathy or childhood
onset optic atrophy
Melanie Brugger1, Yan Zhen2, Leonardo Caporali3, Andreas Brech4,
Vigdis Sørensen4, Robert Kopajtich1;5, Benedikt Zott6, Kornelia
Kreiser7, Gertrud Strobl-Wildemann8, Francesca Clementina Radio9,
Antonella Lauri9, Rosalba Carrozzo10, Claudio Fiorini11, Chiara La
Morgia3, Lucia Ziccardi12, Viviana Cordeddu13, Giuseppe Zampino14,
Maria Arelin15, Christiane Blechschmidt16, Holger Prokisch1;5, Rachel
Michaelson-Cohen17, Hagit Daum18, Rami Abou Jamra19, Thomas
Arzberger20, Juliane Winkelmann21;22;23, Nikolina Sekulic24, Valerio
Carelli25, Marco Tartaglia26, Harald Stenmark4, Matias Wagner1;5
1Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany; 2Institute for Cancer
Research, Oslo, Norway; 3IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di
Bologna, Bologna,
Italy;
4Institute
for
Cancer
Research,
Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway;
5Institute of Neurogenomics,
Munich, Germany; 6Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University of
Munich, Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiol-
ogy, Munich, Germany; 7University Hospital Ulm, Department of
Radiology and Neuroradiology, Ulm, Germany; 8Praxis für Human-
genetik,
Ulm,
Germany;
9Ospedale
Pediatrico
Bambino
Gesù,
Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Rome, Italy; 10Labora-
tory of Molecular Medicine, Bambino Gesù, Children’s Hospital,
Department of Neurosciences, Rome, Italy; 11University of Bologna,
Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences (DIBINEM),
Bologna, Italy;
12IRCCS-Fondazione Bietti, Rome, Italy;
13Istituto
Superiore
di
Sanità,
Dipartimento
di
Oncologia
e
Medicina
Molecolare, Rome, Italy; 14Center for Rare Diseases and Birth Defects,
Department of Woman and Child Health and Public Health, Rome,
Italy;
15Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Department for
Women and Child Health, Leipzig, Germany; 16Hospital Nürnberg,
Department of Neuropathology, Nürnberg, Germany; 17Shaare Zedek
Medical Center, Department of Gynecology, Jerusalem, Israel;
18Hadassah Medical Organization and Faculty of Medicine, Depart-
ment of Genetics, Jerusalem, Israel;
19University Medical Center
Leipzig, Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany; 20University
Hospital Munich, Center for Neuropathology and Prion Research,
Munich, Germany; 21Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Munich, Germany; 22Chair of Neurogenetics, Neurological
Clinic and Polyclinic, Munich, Germany; 23Munich Cluster for Systems
Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany;
24Centre for Molecular
Medicine Norway (NCMM), Oslo, Norway; 25University of Bologna,
Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences (DIBINEM),
Bologna, Italy;
26Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division,
Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy.
Background/Objectives: We report ﬁve individuals from three
unrelated families presenting with severe leukoencephalopathy
and three adults from two unrelated families presenting with mild
developmental delay and optic atrophy in which biallelic variants
in the gene encoding the ESCRT-II subunit SNF8 could be
identiﬁed.
Methods: Exome sequencing was performed in affected indi-
viduals which were collected using GeneMatcher. Patients were
phenotyped including MRI and neuropathologic examinations.
Proteomic proﬁling of patient derived ﬁbroblasts as well as
immunoﬂuorescence and electron microscopy studies were used
to assess ligand-induced EGFR degradation and autolysosome
formation.
Results: Cases with leukoencephalopathy had severe devel-
opmental delay and secondary microcephaly, three of four passed
away within the ﬁrst two years of life. Loss of ESCRT II subunits was
conﬁrmed in patient derived ﬁbroblasts by proteomic proﬁling.
Patient derived ﬁbroblasts showed no detectable defects in
cytokinesis or degradation of growth factor receptors but dis-
played an accumulation of autolysosomes which could be repro-
duced by knockdown of SNF8 in control ﬁbroblasts. Electron
microscopy showed accumulation of vesicular structures and
immunohistopathological evaluation of brain tissue in one indi-
vidual revealed increased LC3B staining both in line with auto-
lysosome accumulation. Additionally, adult cases presented with
loss of function variants in compound-heterozygosity with a
recurrent missense variant. This variant could be observed in
homozygosity in a control individual suggestive of a hypomorphic
effect.
Conclusion: Loss of ESCRT II due to biallelic SNF8 variants is
associated with two allelic diseases characterized by impaired
autophagic ﬂux: early-onset leukoencephalopathy and adult-onset
optic atrophy the latter associated with a hypomorphic effect.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.091.B Genetic abnormalities in neurodevelopmental
disorders with multidimensional impairment
Cyril Hanin1, Paloma Torres1, Isabelle Millet1, Joana Matos1,
Marianna
Giannitelli1,
Cora
Cravero1,
Anne
Sophie
Pellen1;2,
DELPHINE HERON2, Boris Keren3, Cyril Mignot2, Charline Grossard1,
Ingrid Zammouri1, Astrid De Foucaud1, Angele Consoli1, Claudine
LAURENT-LEVINSON1, David Cohen1
1Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, AP-HP.SU, Sorbonne Université,
Referral Center for Rare Diseases with Psychiatric Expression, PARIS,
France;
2Hôpital
de
la
Pitié
Salpêtrière,
AP-HP.SU,
Sorbonne
Université, Referral Center for Intellectual Disability, PARIS, France;
3Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, AP-HP.SU, Sorbonne Université, UF de
génomique du développement, PARIS, France.
Background/Objectives: Many neurodevelopmental disorders
(NDD) in children are complex with multiple domains of dys-
function (Xavier and Cohen, 2020). These cases have been termed
Multidimensional Impairment (MDI), but they could be considered
“diagnostically homeless” because DSM-5 does not include MDI.
Here, we evaluate the prevalence of genetic abnormalities in MDI
as a step toward establishing the utility of this diagnosis.
Methods: We evaluate complex NDD cases using both cate-
gorical and dimensional approaches (e.g. intelligence, language,
motor coordination, executive functions). In 2016, we established
a secure computerized database of genetic data for these cases.
Between 2017 and 2019, we diagnosed MDI in 637 patients of
whom 133 had a genetic assessment, using DNA microarrays to
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
499
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
detect Copy Number Variants, and sometimes other methods such
as whole genome or exome sequencing..
Results: We found a genetic abnormality in 82 (61%) of the 133
patients that can be classiﬁed as follows: (1) 49 known genetic
abnormalities associated with complex NDD (e.g. del22q11.2); (2)
12 genetic abnormalities associated with severe ASD/DI (e.g. a
class 4 mutation in GRIA3 on Xq25); (3) 19 genetic abnormalities
not previously described in NDD (e.g. duplication Xq21.1 spanning
chrX:82,161,602-82,795,961).
Conclusion: Our referral center sample may be biased toward
more severe and rare cases, but the high frequency of genetic
abnormalities found in MDI suggests that more systematic genetic
evaluation is warranted in these cases.
References: Weisbrot DM, Carlson GA. Child Adolesc Psychia-
tric Clin N Am. 2021;30:445-457.
Xavier J, Cohen D. Handbook of Clinical Neurology: neurode-
velopmental and cognitive disabilities 2020;174:159-169.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: Cyril Hanin: None declared, Paloma Torres:
None declared, Isabelle Millet: None declared, Joana Matos: None
declared, Marianna Giannitelli: None declared, Cora Cravero: None
declared, Anne Sophie Pellen: None declared, DELPHINE HERON:
None declared, Boris Keren: None declared, Cyril Mignot: None
declared, Charline Grossard: None declared, Ingrid Zammouri:
None declared, Astrid De Foucaud: None declared, Angele Consoli:
None declared, Claudine LAURENT-LEVINSON: None declared,
David Cohen Dr Cohen has served as a consultant to Janssen,
Otsuka, Lundbeck and Nestle.
P10.094.A Investigation of causal association between ALS
and Autoimmune disorders
Paria Alipour1;2, Konstantin Senkevich2;3, Despoina Manousaki4;5;6,
Dan Spiegelman2;3, Patrick Dion1;2, Guy Rouleau1;2;3
1Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal,
Canada;
2Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada;
3Department of Neurology and
Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, Canada; 4Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Canada; 5Department of Pediatrics, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Canada; 6Research Center of the Sainte-Justine University
Hospital, Montreal, Canada.
Background/Objectives: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is
reported to be associated with different autoimmune disorders
according to epidemiological studies. This study aims to explore
the causal relationship between ALS and these various traits.
Methods: Following selection of 11 different traits, we used
largest available GWAS summary statistics of autoimmune disorders
with European ancestry participants. Applying two-sample Men-
delian randomization (MR) we investigated the causal association
between exposures (autoimmune disorders) and an outcome (ALS
in our case). MR uses the SNPs strongly associated with exposure to
establish the causal association between exposure and outcome.
The MR analysis was performed using R package TwoSampleMR.
Results: After applying Bonferroni correction for multiple
testing, MR analyses shows no causal relationship between auto-
immune disorders and ALS. The variance in the exposure variables
explained by SNPs ranged from 8.1E-04 to 3.1E-01. All instruments
had F-statistics of >10, which is above the standard cut-off indi-
cating sufﬁcient instrumental strength. The SNPs within the
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region were excluded in the
analyses. We also performed reverse MR between ALS and auto-
immune disorders and did not ﬁnd any causal relationship.
Conclusion: Our MR study did not support the direct causal
relationship between ALS and autoimmune disorders in European
population. The associations observed in epidemiological studies
could be, in part, attributed to shared biology, confounders
and bias.
References: Turner, M.R., et al., Neurology, 2013. 2. Hemani, G.,
et al., elife, 2018.
Grants: Canada’s federal funding agency for health research.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P10.095.B A novel Adnp mutant mouse model reveals
involvement of the WNT signaling pathway in the
Helsmoortel-Van der Aa syndrome
Claudio D’Incal1;2, Elisa Cappuyns1, Jolien Huyghebaert1, Ellen
Elinck3, Debby Van Dam4, Elke Callus4, Peter De Deyn4, Takuro
Horii5, Izuho Hatada5, Wim Vanden Berghe4, Frank Kooy4
1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium;
2Centre of Medical
Genetics (Cognitive genetics) and Epigenetic Signaling lab, Antwerp,
Belgium; 3University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium; 4University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium; 5Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan.
Background/Objectives: Loss-function mutations in the Activity-
Dependent Neuroprotective Protein Homeobox (ADNP) gene have
been linked to the Helsmoortel – Van der Aa Syndrome (HVDAS), a
complex neurological disorder characterized by autism, intellec-
tual disability amongst many additional abnormalities. Mutations
in the ADNP gene are almost exclusively de novo with the
p.Tyr719* being the two most frequent mutation.
Methods: We introduced a frameshift mutation in the murine
Adnp gene with CRISPR/Cas9 technology to create a mouse model
for the human disorder and we studied the effect of the
Leu822Hisfs*6 mutation in a heterozygous model. Mutant mice
underwent a behavioural testing battery including Morris water
maze, elevated plus maze test, and the marble burying test. RNA
sequencing and differential proteome analysis were performed on
the frontal cortex of mutant and wild-type littermate controls.
Results: Adnp mutant mice carry a 14 base pair deletion,
resulting in a frameshift in exon 5, a mutation akin to that
observed in patients. A 30% reduction of Adnp mRNA and protein
levels were observed in the mutant mice. Behavioural testing
showed an increased anxiety, cognitive impairments together and
increased repetitive behaviour, a hall mark of autism. A combi-
nation of RNA sequencing and differential proteome analysis of
the frontal cortex of Adnp mutant mice identiﬁed a down-
regulation of the WNT signalling pathway, impacting neuronal
development and development.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings constitute the baseline behavioural
and molecular characterization of a new mouse model for the
HVDAS, and identify the WNT signalling pathway as a potential
target for future therapy of the disorder.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Claudio D’Incal PhD student and Aca-
demic Assistant, Elisa Cappuyns: None declared, Jolien Huyghe-
baert: None declared, Ellen Elinck: None declared, Debby Van
Dam: None declared, Elke Callus: None declared, Peter De Deyn:
None declared, Takuro Horii: None declared, Izuho Hatada: None
declared, Wim Vanden Berghe: None declared, Frank Kooy: None
declared.
P10.096.C Constitutional thinness and anorexia nervosa differ
on a genomic level
Christopher Hübel1;2, Mohamed Abdulkadir3, Moritz Herle1, Alish
Palmos1, Gerome Breen1, Ruth Loos4, Nadia Micali3, Cynthia M
Bulik5;6
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
500
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1King’s College London, London, United Kingdom; 2Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark;
3University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland;
4Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, United States; 5Karolinska Insitutet,
Stockholm, Sweden; 6University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, United States.
Background/Objectives: Constitutional thinness and anorexia
nervosa both present with low weight (e.g., BMI <18.5 kg/m2).
However, individuals with anorexia nervosa additionally fear
gaining weight and engage in weight loss behaviours not seen in
constitutional thinness. Body composition regulation and anorexia
nervosa are both heritable. It is unclear how constitutional thin-
ness differs from anorexia nervosa on a genomic level.
Methods: We calculated genetic correlations among constitu-
tional thinness, anorexia nervosa and traits genetically correlated
with anorexia nervosa, to investigate similarities and differences.
Additionally, we identiﬁed individuals with constitutional thinness
in the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC)
and performed polygenic score analyses.
Results: Our results suggest that, in contrast to anorexia ner-
vosa, attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (rgAN = 0.02 vs.
rgCT = -0.24) and alcohol dependence (rgAN = 0.07 vs. rgCT = -0.44)
are signiﬁcantly genetically correlated with constitutional thinness.
A higher polygenic score for posttraumatic stress disorder is
associated with an increased risk of constitutional thinness in the
ALSPAC cohort (OR = 1.27; Q = 0.03) whereas posttraumatic stress
disorder shows no genetic correlation with anorexia nervosa
(rg = -0.02).
Conclusion: Even though both anorexia nervosa and con-
stitutional thinness are marked by low BMI, they differ on a
genomic level.
References:.
Grants: BRC at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust and King’s College London, GSTT Charity (TR130505),
Maudsley Charity (980), MRF (ref: MR/R004803/1), Wellcome (Grant
ref: 102215/2/13/2 and 217065/Z/19/Z), NIMH (R21 MH115397;
R01MH120170; R01MH119084; R01MH118278; U01 MH109528),
Vetenskapsrådet (award: 538-2013-8864), Lundbeck Foundation
(Grant no. R276-2018-4581), MRC UK (MR/T027843/1).
Conﬂict of
Interest: Christopher
Hübel:
None declared,
Mohamed
Abdulkadir:
None
declared,
Moritz
Herle:
None
declared, Alish Palmos: None declared, Gerome Breen NIHR UK,
Maudsley Charity, Guy’s and St. Thomas’s Trust, Compass Path-
ways Ltd, Otsuka Ltd, Ruth Loos NIH US, Nadia Micali NIH, Cynthia
M Bulik Shire, Lundbeckfonden, NIH USA, Shire, Idorsia, Pearson
(author, royalty recipient).
P11 NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDERS
P11.001.D Gene variant and neuromuscular ﬁndings from a
Long-Chain Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorder gene panel
program
Vanessa Rangel Miller1, Peter Baker II2, Omid K. Japalaghi1, Nicola
Longo3, Deborah Marsden1, Heather McLaughlin4, Tom Pulles5, Kate
Simmons1, Jillian Yong4, Nicole Miller1
1Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, United States; 2University
of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, United States;
3University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United States; 4Invitae Corpora-
tion, San Francisco, United States;
5Ultragenyx Europe GmbH,
Allschwil, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Long-chain fatty acid oxidation dis-
orders (LC-FAOD) are rare, life-threatening, autosomal recessive
conditions
that
can
be
diagnosed
clinically
with
plasma
acylcarnitine analysis and molecular testing. Undiagnosed LC-
FAOD may present with hypoglycaemia, cardiomyopathy, cardiac
arrhythmias, and neuromuscular symptoms.
Methods: Patients with a clinical diagnosis or suspicion of LC-
FAOD are eligible for this no-charge NGS gene panel which
includes 6 genes associated with LC-FAOD plus 18 genes asso-
ciated with disorders that cause abnormal acylcarnitine proﬁles.
Results: As of 28 October 2021, LC-FAOD gene variants were
identiﬁed in 153 (37%) of 417 patients tested, including 83 var-
iants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS), 8 likely pathogenic (LP), and
102 pathogenic (P) variants. Twenty-three patients had positive (2
P/LP) LC-FAOD results and 19 had potential positive (2 variants, at
least 1 VUS) results. VUS resolution analysis led to the reclassiﬁ-
cation of 6 variants from VUS to LP or P. Five patients had variants
in two or more LC-FAOD genes and 22 had variants in one LC-
FAOD gene and one or more non-LC-FAOD genes. Fifty-one
patients had only one LC-FAOD gene variant identiﬁed.
The most common neuromuscular symptoms among patients
ages ≥13 (76 reported) were myopathy (42), elevated creatine
kinase (36), and rhabdomyolysis (30), and among patients <13 years
(83 reported) were elevated creatine kinase (22), and myopathy (12).
Conclusion: Program results demonstrate the diverse compo-
sition of gene variants in patients referred for LC-FAOD genetic
testing. Approaches to resolve VUS and identify previously
undetected variants in patients with suspected LC-FAOD are
important and necessary.
References:.
Grants: None, sponsored by Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc.
Conﬂict of Interest: Vanessa Rangel Miller Ultragenyx Phar-
maceutical Inc., Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical Inc., Peter Baker II
Ultragenyx (ended 2021, unspent), Omid K. Japalaghi Ultragenyx,
Nicola Longo Clinical Trial Support: Aeglea, Amicus Therapeutics,
Audentes/Astellas, AvroBio, BioMarin, Chiesi/Protalix, Genzyme/
Sanoﬁ, Hemoshear, Homology, Horizon Pharma, Moderna, Nestle’
Pharma, Pﬁzer, PTC Ther./CENSA, Reneo, Retrophin/Travere Ther,
Shire/Takeda, Synlogic, Ultragenyx, Speaker: Cycle Pharmaceu-
ticals, Alnylam, Amicus Therapeutics, BioMarin, BridgeBio/CoA
Ther,
Chiesi/Protalix,
Genzyme/Sanoﬁ,
Hemoshear,
Horizon
Pharma, Jaguar Gene Therapy, Leadiant Biosciences, Moderna,
Nestle’ Pharma, PTC Ther./CENSA, Recordati, Reneo, Shire/Takeda
Synlogic, Ultragenyx, Data Safety Monnitoring Board: ACI Clinical
(Applied Ther, Taysha), CTI-Clinical Trial (Vtesse), Deborah Marsden
Ultragenyx, Ultragenyx, Heather McLaughlin Invitae, Invitae, Tom
Pulles Ultragenyx, Ultragenyx, Kate Simmons Ultragenyx, Ultra-
genyx, Jillian Yong Invitae, Invitae, Nicole Miller Ultragenyx,
Ultragenyx.
P11.002.A Extended clinical spectrum associated with de novo
variant in CLTC gene
Kristi Tael1;2, Nadezda Sapovalova3, Eve Õiglane-Shlik3, Sanna
Puusepp1;2, Bjarne Udd4;5, Katrin Ounap1;2
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Tartu, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tartu, Estonia;
2Tartu
University Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics, United Labora-
tories, Tartu, Estonia; 3Tartu University Hospital, Children’s Clinic,
Tartu, Estonia;
4Folkhalsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland;
5Tampere Neuromuscular Center, Tampere, Finland.
Background/Objectives: De novo heterozygous variants in CLTC,
which encode the clathrin heavy chain protein, are associated
with a variable phenotype from mild to severe intellectual dis-
ability (ID), microcephaly, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, and
epilepsy. Congenital heart defects and kidney anomalies have also
been described. No thorough muscle investigations are in pub-
lished CLTC patients so far.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
501
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: The boy is a second child of non-consanguineous
parents born after 10 years infertility from in vitro fertilization. He
was born at term by caesarean section, with normal growth
parameters and Apgar scores (8/9). At 13 months, he was inves-
tigated due to developmental delay and muscular hypotonia,
which was more prominent in proximal muscles. There was more
subcutaneous tissue in the thighs and upper arms compared to
other parts of the body. His motor development corresponded to
6 months and communication skills to 4 months. Magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) of the leg and pelvis muscles showed mas-
sive general muscular hypotrophy without clear dystrophic
replacement and a peculiar amyoplasia of the medial gastro-
cnemius. Electroneuro-myography and muscular biopsy indicated
a possible congenital myopathy or congenital myotonic dystro-
phy. MRI of the brain was normal.
Results: Trio exome sequencing revealed a pathogenic de
novo missense variant NM_004859.4(CLTC):c.2669C>T p.(Pro890-
Leu), and was conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.
Conclusion: Muscular hypotonia is a constant clinical ﬁnding in
previously reported patients with CLTC gene variant. We present a
patient with marked general muscular hypotonia, which may
cause more pronounced delay in motor development.
References:.
Grants: Estonian Research Council grant PRG471.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.004.C Three novel MTM1 pathogenic variants identiﬁed in
patients with X-linked myotubular myopathy presented by
severe neonatal hypotonia: diagnostic algorithm, genotype-
phenotype correlations
Katarína Kušíková1, Martina Witsch-Baumgartner2, Martina Skop-
kova3, Daniela Gasperikova3, Miriam Kolníková1, Ognian Kalev4,
Serge Weis4, Denisa Weis5
1Department of Pediatric Neurology, Medical School, Comenius
University and National Institute of Children’s Diseases, Bratislava,
Slovakia;
2Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria; 3Department of Metabolic Disorders,
Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Biomedical Research Center
SAS, Slovakia, Bratislava, Slovakia;
4Division of Neuropathology,
Department of Pathology and Molecular Pathology, Kepler University
Hospital Neuromed Campus, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz,
Austria; 5Department of Medical Genetics, Kepler University Hospital
Med Campus IV, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, Austria.
Background/Objectives: X-linked myotubular myopathy (X-MTM,
OMIM: 310400) is a rare neuromuscular disorder (prevalence
1:50,000 males), caused by mutations in the MTM1 gene (OMIM:
300415). The most severe is the classic form manifested in neo-
nates as ﬂoppy infant, areﬂexia, and early ventilatory support
dependence. Due to the severity of clinical manifestations with
early mortality, and potential therapy options (current clinical trials
for X-MTM1), early diagnosis is essential. According to previously
published data it seems that severe genotype is related to the
truncating mutation while non-truncating mutations are respon-
sible for moderate or mild phenotype. However, an exact
genotype-phenotype correlation still remains unclear2.
Methods: We present 3 detailed case reports of patients (2
Austrian, 1 Slovakian) with severe neonatal hypotonia, where
X-MTM was diagnosed according to diagnostic algorithm (in-
house approach presented) using exact clinical evaluation, histo-
pathological ﬁndings in muscle biopsy sample and molecular
genetics approach using whole exome sequencing.
Results: 3 novel hemizygous pathogenic variants were found
in MTM1 gene: (NM_000252.2): c.438_439delCA (p.His146Glnfs*10),
2)
(NM_000252.3):
c.(342+1_343-1)_(444+1_445-1)del,
and
3)
(NM_000252.3):
c.(1053+1_1054-1)_(1467+1_1486-1)del
(p.Leu352_Gln489). Histopathological ﬁndings in biopsied muscle
(n = 2) were consistent with X-MTM.
Conclusion: A comprehensive diagnostic approach is essential
for the early diagnosis of neonatal forms of NMDs. The easiest and
time-saving approach is an immediate muscle biopsy in case of
postnatal severe muscular hypotonia. Subsequent molecular
examinations serve to conﬁrm the diagnoses, render a prognosis
and potential treatment.
References:
1.
Lawor
MW,
Dowling,
JJ.
Neuromuscular
Disorders, 2021.
2. Oliveira J et al. European Journal of Human Genetics, 2013.
Grants: APVV-17-0296.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.005.D Interactome-based multi-omics approach to study
disease activity in the early phases of Multiple Sclerosis
Valentina Nale1, Alice Chiodi1, Antonino Giordano2;3, Béatrice
Pignolet4, Ferdinando Clarelli2, Elisabetta Mascia2, Silvia Santoro2,
Laura Ferrè2;3, Miryam Cannizzaro2;3, Matteo Gnocchi1;5, Marco
Moscatelli1;5, Kaalindi Misra2, Melissa Sorosina2, Luciano Milanesi1,
Massimo Filippi2;3;6, Roland Liblau4, FEDERICA ESPOSITO2;3, Ettore
Mosca1
1Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council,
Segrate (MI), Italy; 2IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Division of
Neurosciences, Milan, Italy; 3IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute,
Neurology, Milan, Italy; 4CHU Toulouse, Neurosciences, Toulouse,
France; 5Territorial Research Area of Milan 4, Segrate (MI), Italy; 6Vita-
Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an auto-
immune disease of the Central Nervous System (CNS), character-
ized by high clinical heterogeneity. Here, we analysed multi-omics
data using molecular networks to disentangle the biological basis
of MS inﬂammatory activity by identifying relevant gene networks
and pathways implicated in disease activity [1].
Methods: Relapsing remitting MS patients were characterized
as EDA (Evidence of Disease Activity) or NEDA (No-EDA) at 2 years
of follow-up. GWAS (n = 1533): PLINK and MAGMA for gene-wise
statistics. Differential methylation analysis (n = 243): minﬁ; differ-
ential expression analysis (mRNA and miRNA) (n = 243): Deseq2.
Gene-gene interactions: STRING and iRefIndex. Tissue-speciﬁc
gene-gene interactions: HumanBase. miRNA-mRNA interactions:
mirTarbase and miRNet. Identiﬁcation of gene networks sup-
ported by multi-omics evidences: dmﬁnd and mND. Gene-
pathway associations: MSigDB. Enrichment analysis and pathway
cross talk analysis: Ulisse.
Results: We mapped the results of EDA-NEDA GWAS and EDA-
NEDA differential methylation/expression analysis onto genome-
wide
molecular
networks.
We
found
brain-speciﬁc
and
lymphocyte-speciﬁc networks of genes that carry variants asso-
ciated with EDA, and interact with “core” (recurring) network
regions. The integrative analysis revealed gene networks that are
supported by genomics, epigenomics and transcriptomics. Net-
work analysis shed light on key genes involved in multiple con-
nections and/or connectors between diverse pathways.
Conclusion: Our network-based multi-omics analysis provides
an in-depth knowledge of genes and pathways which appear to
be associated with inﬂammatory activity in MS, including novel
candidates that require further study.
References: [1] https://www.ﬁndingms.com.
Grants: MoH GR-2016-02363997, FRRB ERAPERMED2018-233
GA 779282.
Conﬂict of Interest: Valentina Nale: None declared, Alice
Chiodi: None declared, Antonino Giordano: None declared,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
502
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Béatrice Pignolet: None declared, Ferdinando Clarelli: None
declared, Elisabetta Mascia: None declared, Silvia Santoro: None
declared, Laura Ferrè: None declared, Miryam Cannizzaro: None
declared, Matteo Gnocchi: None declared, Marco Moscatelli: None
declared, Kaalindi Misra: None declared, Melissa Sorosina: None
declared, Luciano Milanesi: None declared, Massimo Filippi Sig-
niﬁcant; Roche, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Teva Phar-
maceutical Industries, Bayer, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis,
Roche, SanoﬁGenzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries.,
Modest; Bayer, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sanoﬁ
Genzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries., Roland Liblau
Signiﬁcant. GlaxoSmithKline and BMS, Modest. Biogen, Merck,
Roche, Novartis, and Sanoﬁ-Genzyme., FEDERICA ESPOSITO Mod-
est; Merck Serono and Novartis, Modest. Merck Serono, Ettore
Mosca: None declared.
P11.006.A Late onset neuropathy caused by a heterozygous
variant in the SCL12A6 gene
Sissel Löseth1;2, Helle Hoyer3, Kim Le4, Eric Delpire5, Einar Kinge6,
Asgeir Lande7, Hilde Tveitan Hilmarsen3, Toril Fagerheim8, Øivind
Nilssen2;8, Geir Julius Braathen3
1University Hospital of North Norway, Department of Neurology
and Clinical Neurophysiology, Tromsø, Norway; 2The Artic Uni-
versity of Norway, Department of Clinical Medicine, Tromsø,
Norway; 3Telemark Hospital Trust, Department of Medical Genetics,
Skien, Norway;
4Akershus University Hospital, Department of
Neurology and
Clinical
Neurophysiology, Lørenskog, Norway;
5Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Department of Anesthe-
siology, Nashville, United States; 6Sandvika Neurocenter, Sandvika,
Norway; 7Oslo University Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics,
Oslo, Norway; 8University Hospital of North-Norway, Department of
Medical Genetics, Tromsø, Norway.
Background/Objectives: The SLC12A6 gene encodes the potas-
sium chloride cotransporter, KCC3, which is involved in main-
taining cell volume and intracellular chloride levels in neurons [1].
Pathogenic variants in SLC12A6 are known to cause autosomal
recessive motor and sensory neuropathy with corpus callosum
agenesis and mental retardation (HMSN/ACC). In recent years,
heterozygous de novo SLC12A6 variants have been described in
patients with early onset predominantly motor neuropathy [2-4].
Methods: At two Norwegian centres performing genetic ana-
lysis of peripheral neuropathies, the SLC12A6 gene was analysed
by next-generation sequencing as part of the diagnostic routine.
Family members were examined by Sanger sequencing. For
functional characterization, the mutant KCC3 cotransporter was
modelled in Xenopus oocytes.
Results: In ﬁve families presenting with late onset peripheral
neuropathy, the heterozygous SLC12A6 variant, NM_001365088.1
c.1655G>A (p.(Gly552Asp) was found to segregate with the dis-
ease in ten affected patients and to be absent in two unaffected
family members. Clinical and neurophysiological evaluations
revealed a predominant sensory axonal polyneuropathy with
slight to moderate motor components. Functional characterization
of the p.(Gly552Asp) variant showed a signiﬁcant reduction in
function, demonstrated through reduction of potassium inﬂux.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings further expand the spectrum of
SLC12A6 disease to involve late onset autosomal dominant axonal
neuropathy with predominant sensory deﬁcits.
References: 1. Flores, et al., Neurochem Int, 2019. 123.
2. Kahle, et al., Sci Signal, 2016. 9(439).
3. Park, et al., J Med Genet, 2020. 57(4).
4. Shi, et al., Neuromuscul Disord, 2021. 31(2).
Grants: HH received funds from the South Eastern Norway
Regional Health Authority (HSØ).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.007.B Audiologic and vestibular ﬁndings in patients and
asymptomatic carriers with DM1 and its association with CTG
repeats in the DMPK gene. Case-control study
María de la Luz Arenas-Sordo1, Diana J Gutiérrez-Tinajero2, Marla
Trujillo-Bracamontes3, Berenice Rivera-Mercado3, Adriana Martínez-
García Ramos4, Nadia Mireya Murillo-Melo5, Oscar Hernández-
Hernández5, Jonathan J Magaña-Aguirre5
1Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación Luis Guillermo Ibarra Ibarra,
Genetics, Mexico City, Mexico; 2Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación
Luis Guillermo Ibarra Ibarra, Audiology, Mexico City, Mexico;
3Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación Luis Guillermo Ibarra Ibarra,
Audiology, Mexico city, Mexico; 3Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación
Luis Guillermo Ibarra Ibarra, Audiology, Mexico city, Mexico;
5Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitación Luis Guillermo Ibarra Ibarra,
Genetics, Mexico city, Mexico.
Background/Objectives: Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is a
neuromuscular disease, caused by an unstable mutation of CTG
repeats in the DMPK gene. The present work shows the results
from audio vestibular ﬁndings in patients and pre-symptomatic
carriers, and their correlation with a CTG repeats in DPMK gene.
Methods: 58 patients and 10 pre-symptomatic carriers and
their controls were analyzed. All of them had an audiologic and
vestibular evaluation. A correlation index between the repeats
number and each one of the ﬁndings was made.
Results: 69% of the patients had familial background, 48% had
sensorial hearing loss, (p = 0.0001); falls in high frequencies
(p = 0.001). The vestibular manifestations were present in 21
patients (36.2%), p = 0.00001. Nistagmus was present in 2
patients, none of the controls, the DHI test, in its 3 scales showed
some degree of disability in 53.4% (p = 0.00001). The 3 correla-
tions that show p statistically signiﬁcant were DGI and DHI with
CTG number repeats (-0.3215/p = 0.0313 and 0.3143/p = 0.0355
respectively) and high frequency audiometry (0.3422/ p = 0.0230),
with evolution time.
Classic DM1 group showed Muscular Impairment and CTG
expansion tract between 121 and 1021, while pre-symptomatic
group registered no muscular impairment, with a CTG tract
between 50 and 110.
Conclusion: The falls in high frequencies and superﬁcial
hearing loss were the most frequent ﬁndings in both, classical and
pre-sympotomatic DM1 patients. correlation between CTG repeat
number with ocular saccades test and in the DGI were low in
patients with classical DM1; With the time of evolution association
was only with high frequency audiometry.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.008.C Mosaic collagen 6-related myopathy mimicking a
hemihypotrophy syndrome
Miriam Elbracht1, Annette Lischka1, Stefan Nikolin2, Joachim Weis2,
Ingo Kurth1, Katja Eggermann1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany; 2Institute of Neuropathology, Medical
Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
Background/Objectives:
Somatic
mosaicism as a cause of
genetic-related disorders is well known but the detection in rou-
tine diagnostic workup of monogenic disorders is challenging.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
503
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: We present a patient with hemihypotrophy and rele-
vant leg/arm length and circumference difference (right > left).
Mildly elevated CK levels, progressing muscular weakness and pain
led to MRI examination which showed marked reduction and fatty
degeneration of the muscles of the left side. Muscle biopsy in the
affected area revealed a chronic myopathy with connective tissue
and fat proliferation combined with a moderately chronic neuro-
genic muscle atrophy. Electron microscopy revealed ﬁne ﬁla-
mentous, dense deposits in the extracellular matrix in close proximity
to the sarcolemma, consistent with altered collagen synthesis.
Results: Exome sequencing of blood DNA showed no patho-
genic variant using standard ﬁlter settings, but in exome sequencing
of the affected muscle DNA the variant NM_004369.3:c.6210+1G>A
in the COL6A3 gene was identiﬁed in approximately 18% of the
reads. This canonical splice-site variant has already been described
as pathogenic in the literature and in the ClinVar database (Bethlem
myopathy, Ulrich congenital muscular dystrophy, OMIMG: 120250).
Further investigation of the exome data from the blood DNA
revealed that the variant was present in about 13% of the reads,
being slightly below the internal cut-off value. Sanger sequencing
conﬁrmed somatic mosaicism in both tissues.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings show that mosaicism for a structural
myopathy may not only manifest as milder generalized disorder,
but may mimic a hemihypotrophy syndrome. Careful evaluation of
NGS data with regard to low-grade and sometimes tissue-speciﬁc
mosaicism is needed.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.009.D Exome sequencing in understanding the etiology
of hypotonia
Arya Shambhavi1, Amita Moirangthem2, Haseena Sait2, Somya
Srivastava2, Renu Suthar3, Shubha Phadke2
1Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Medical
Genetics, Lucknow, India; 1Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, Medical Genetics, Lucknow, India; 3Post Graduate
Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh, Chandigarh,
India.
Background/Objectives: Hypotonia is a common feature in
neuromuscular disorders having varied etiologies. NGS has a good
diagnostic yield (upto 59%) given the phenotypic and genotypic
variability seen in Hypotonia1,2. This study aims to provide infor-
mation about the diagnostic yield and expand the genotypic
spectrum
in
patients
presenting
with
hypotonia
in
Indian
population.
Methods: Patients with hypotonia with unknown etiology
based on preliminary evaluation were enrolled. Exome sequencing
was done followed by genotype-phenotype correlation.
Results: Forty cases (10 consanguineous) were recruited and
exome sequencing was performed where causative variant(s)
were identiﬁed in 34 cases, suggesting a diagnostic yield of 85%.
Of these 34 cases, pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were
identiﬁed in 21 cases. Of the 34 cases, 22 novel variants were
identiﬁed in 18 genes. Biallelic variations were identiﬁed in 17
autosomal recessive genes, heterozygous variations in 8 auto-
somal dominant genes and hemizygous variation in one X-linked
gene. One patient was homozygous for two genes (PYCR1 and
FBLN5) and the variants segregated in the family suggesting
blended phenotype.
Conclusion: The diagnostic yield in our cohort is 85%. We have
identiﬁed 22 novel variants in 18 genes. Additionally, our study
expands the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of the genetic
forms of hypotonia.
References: 1. AlBanji, Mohammed H et al. “Utility of Hypo-
tonia Diagnostic Investigations: A 12-year Single Center Study.”
Molecular genetics and metabolism reports vol. 25 100665 (2020).
2. Sharma, Sonal et al. “Diagnostic yield of genetic testing in
324 infants with hypotonia.” Clinical genetics vol. 100,6 (2021):
752-757.
Grants: DBT (BT/PR26428/MED/12/783/2017).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.010.A FSHD analysis pipeline by Bionano optical genome
mapping - a ﬁeld report
Monika Morak1, Constanze Kurschat1, Jenny Schiller1, Soheyla
Chahrokh-zadeh1, Julia Philippou-Massier1, Imma Rost1, Hanns-
Georg Klein1, Uwe Heinrich1
1MVZ Martinsried, Martinsried, Germany.
Background/Objectives: The autosomal-dominantly inherited
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy-1 (FSHD1) is caused by
contractions of D4Z4 repeats to less than 10 on the permissive
4qA-haplotype on chromosome 4q35. We tested the practicability
of the Bionano EnFocus™FSHD Analysis pipeline.
Methods: Optical genomic mapping data were generated on
Bionano Genomics Saphyr with data quality recommended
(minimum 80x with total DNA >=150 kb, output 1300 Gb, map
rate 70,7-92,4%) from 80 patients with clinical indication not
implicating FSHD diagnosis and two positive FSHD-controls, and
were analysed by FSHD1.
Results: In our FSHD-negative patient dataset, the FSHD
pipeline analysis was successful in 64 cases and gave normal
results with repeats ranging from 11 to 61 on 4qA-alleles. Eleven
cases had low coverage (<20 locus-spanning reads per allele),
and ﬁve were not analysable, e.g. due to merged data.
The reads were discriminated between chromosome 4 and the
homologous region on chromosome 10, the respective haplo-
types A or B were assigned, and for each allele the number of
D4Z4 repeats was analysed.
In 14% of the cases, shorter/incomplete reads were called as
additional alleles (+/-1-2 repeats) and were removed manually,
whereas a third allele in two patients (3%) indicated a mosaicism of
repeat length. Alleles with >30 repeats were underrepresented (65%).
In two commercial FSHD1-positive samples, the respective
repeat contractions on one 4qA-allele were correctly detected and
distinguishable from chromosome 10.
Conclusion: A validated Bionano optical genomic mapping
method allows a reliable analysis for FSHD1 with the Bionano
EnFocus™FSHD Analysis pipeline integrated in the software.
References: -.
Grants: -.
Conﬂict of Interest: Monika Morak: None declared, Constanze
Kurschat: None declared, Jenny Schiller: None declared, Soheyla
Chahrokh-zadeh: None declared, Julia Philippou-Massier: None
declared, Imma Rost: None declared, Hanns-Georg Klein partner of
IMGM laboratory, Uwe Heinrich: None declared.
P11.011.B Functional characterization of mutations causal to
rare muscle disorders in genes encoding intermediate
ﬁlament proteins
Shamita Sanga1, chandrayee
mukherjee2, kaushik
sengupta2,
moulinath acharya1
1National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kalyani, India; 2Saha
Institute of Nuclear Physics, Biophysics and Structural Genomics
Division, Kolkata, India.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
504
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Mutations in the DES gene encoding
cytoplasmic desmin proteins and LMNA gene encoding A-type
lamins, are a common cause of familial desminopathy and lami-
nopathy. Here, we provide evidence of the pathological role of
two novel desmin and lamin mutations occurring in two patients
of Indian origin.
Methods: Exome sequencing was performed to identify
pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutations in DES and LMNA gene
in two Indian origin patients with muscle disorder. Two novel
mutations, NM_001927.4:c.448C>T;p.(Arg150*) in the DES gene
leading to formation of truncated desmin protein and the mis-
sense mutation NM_001282625.1:c.590T>C;p.(Leu197Pro) in the
LMNA gene were identiﬁed. The variants were validated by sanger
sequencing and segregation analysis was also performed. The
pathological role of these mutations were determined in cultured
primary human skeletal muscle cells (HSkMC). Confocal imaging
was performed to observe any defect in the localization of these
two proteins.
Results: Analysis of the confocal micrographs elucidated the
formation of aggregates and migration of truncated desmin pro-
teins into the nucleus of the cells transfected with mutant desmin
constructs. On the other hand, c.590T>C change in the LMNA
gene also showed formation of aggregates and disappearance of
laminar rims in the nuclei of the muscle cells.
Conclusion: The formation of desmin and lamin aggregates
and absence of laminar rim in the nuclei of the muscle cells
provides a clue to explain pathogenicity of c.448C>T and c.590T>C
in desminopathies and laminopathies, respectively. The aggre-
gates might disturb the cellular homeostasis and organelle posi-
tioning thereby impacting the mechano-transduction signalling.
References:.
Grants: NIBMG intramural funds to M.A.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.013.D Delineating genetic heterogeneity behind a
disease: dystonia
Zsóﬁa Nagy1, András Salamon2, Margit Pál1, Péter Klivényi2, Marta
Szell1
1University of Szeged, Department of Medical Genetics, Szeged,
Hungary; 2University of Szeged, Department of Neurology, Szeged,
Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Dystonia is characterized by muscle
contractions leading to abnormal movements and/or postures.
Genetic variants associated with dystonia may be inherited auto-
somal, X-linked or mitochondrial. Penetrance of the variants might
be reduced. In our study we aimed to investigate the role of variants
in genes previously associated with focal dystonic disorders. This is
the ﬁrst comprehensive genetic study in a Hungarian cohort.
Methods: 110 unrelated patients diagnosed with cervical
dystonia or blepharospasm were recruited for this study. Next
generation panel sequencing was used to assess 24 dystonia
related genes, selected based on literature. Variants of interest
were validated via bidirectional Sanger sequencing. Deep phe-
notyping and family screening was also performed in some cases.
Results: 37 variants of interest in 13 genes were uncovered. We
identiﬁed 3 likely pathogenic variants in the LRRK2 gene and one
novel stop gain variant in the COL6A3 gene. 31 variants may be
classiﬁed as variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS), including one
novel variant in the KMT2B and two in the CACNA1B gene. In the
TOR1A gene a VUS associated with spasmodic dysphonia was
uncovered. A variant associated with mitochondrial membrane
protein-associated neurodegeneration was also detected.
Conclusion: We identiﬁed several known dystonia related
genetic variants and putative novel ones. With our study we aim
to provide genotype-phenotype correlations from a population-
speciﬁc aspect.
References:.
Grants: Hungarian Brain Research Program (Grant No. 2017-
1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002).
Szeged Scientists Academy under the sponsorship of the
Hungarian Ministry of Innovation and Technology (FEIF/433-4/
2020-ITM_SZERZ).
“Nemzeti Fiatal Tehetségeiért Ösztöndíj” - NTP-NFTÖ-21-B-0100
(András Salamon).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.014.A Non-invasive biomarker discovery in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis
Christa Caggiano1, Marco Morselli2, Barbara Celona3, Robert
Henderson4,
Catherine
Lomen-Hoerth5,
Fleur
Garton6,
Matteo
Pellegrini2, Noah Zaitlen1
1University of California, Los Angeles, Neurology, Los Angeles, United
States; 2University of California, Los Angeles, Molecular, Cell and
Developmental Biology, Los Angeles, United States; 3University of
California San Francisco, Cardiovascular Research Institute, San
Francisco, United States; 4Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital,
Neurology, Herston, Australia; 5University of California San Francisco,
Neurology, San Francisco, United States; 6The University of Queens-
land, Institute for Molecular Biosciences, Saint Lucia, Australia.
Background/Objectives: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a
neurodegenerative disease with complex pathogenesis. Although
there are several candidates1, there is no clinical biomarker for
ALS. A biomarker, however, could expedite diagnosis, monitor
disease progression, or prioritize patients for clinical trials2. Here,
we propose using cell-free DNA (cfDNA) as a non-invasive bio-
marker for ALS. CfDNA is an ideal candidate because it is enriched
in ALS patients, is informative about tissue-speciﬁc cell death, and
can be extracted from a standard blood draw3.
Methods: To study cfDNA in ALS with the potential to be
clinically relevant, we developed a capture panel technology that
has a projected cost of under $300 per sample. The panel was
designed to capture methylation sites that are informative for
tissue status. Using this technology, we captured over four thou-
sand regions and performed next-generation sequencing of 48
cases and 48 controls. Sequencing data was combined with
supervised machine learning to predict ALS disease status using
the methylation status of the reads and clinical covariates.
Results: With this approach, we replicated past ﬁndings of
higher skeletal muscle cfDNA in ALS patients (logit p-value: 0.026).
Furthermore, our model could accurately predict ALS disease
status (cross-validated AUC: 0.95, AUPRC: 0.95), which may reach
the level of clinical utility.
Conclusion: Together, these results demonstrate that cfDNA
may be a valuable predictive biomarker in ALS.
References: 1. Bowser et al. (2011) 2. Taga & Maragakis (2018),
3. Caggiano et al. (2021).
Grants:
NIH
5F31NS122538,
ALS
Finding
a
Cure,
UCSF
Weill Award.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.015.B SMN1 and SMN2 status in Georgian SMA patients
Dodo Agladze1;2;3, Oleg Kvlividze3;4, Lali Margvelashvili1;3, Saba
Iordanishvili5,
Nana
Kvirkvelia6;7,
Teona
Shatirishvili8;9,
Nana
Tatishvili8;9
1Pediatric Surgery Center (KidCo), Tbilisi, Georgia;
2Todua Clinic,
Tbilisi, Georgia; 3Georgian Foundation for Genetic and Rare Diseases
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
505
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
(GeRaD), Tbilisi, Georgia;
4New Vision University, Tbilisi, Georgia;
5Petre Shotadze Tbilisi Medical Academy, Tbilisi, Georgia;
6Petre
Sarajishvili Institute of Neurology, Tbilisi, Georgia; 7Ivane Javakhishvili
Tbilisi State University, Tbilisi, Georgia;
8Davit Tvildiani Medical
University, Tbilisi, Georgia; 9Iashvili Central Children Hospital, Tbilisi,
Georgia.
Background/Objectives: Spinal muscular atrophy is an autosomal
recessive inherited disorder affecting 1:10000 individuals, causing
the progressive degeneration, muscle weakness and atrophy. It is
considered to be one of the most life limiting condition in infants.
The aim of the study was to determine the genotype of the
Georgian patients diagnosed with SMA.
Methods: 51 patients clinically diagnosed with SMA were
tested for SMN1 and SMN2 status. Quantitative RT- PCR was per-
formed. Ampliﬁcation of SMN1 exon 7/8 and SMN2 exon 7 was
used to detect the number of copies.
Results: From tested 51 individuals only in 41 (80%) diagnose
was conﬁrmed, 1 (2%) was a carrier. 35 (85%) of conﬁrmed cases
were homozygous for SMN1 exon 7 and 8 deletion, 6 (15%)
revealed 1 copy of exon 8. Patients with homozygous deletion
showed heterogeneity in SMN2 copy number. From 41 patients 23
(56%) have 3 copies of SMN2 gene, 15 (36.5%) 2 copies and 3
(7.5%) 4 copies. From 11 patients who need palliative care, 100%
are homozygous for SMN1 exon7/8 deletion and do not have
more than 2 copies of SMN2 gene.
Conclusion: As well as in most other populations SMA phe-
notype in Georgian patients is highly dependent on the disease
genotype. There is a strong correlation between the clinical fea-
tures of the disorder and the number of SMN1 and SMN2 genes
copies. Type 1 SMA is affecting nearly 30% of the patients.
Implementation of National SMA screening program is highly
recommended.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.016.C An unusual case of TPI1 deﬁciency causing early-
onset dystonia without hemolytic anemia
Arthur Sorlin1, Emmanuel Scalais2, Jimena Murgia1, Ben Flies1,
Guillaume Jouret1, Fernand Pauly3, Richard van Wijk4, Christian
Müller1, Philippe Theis1, Lucas Herissant1, Christophe Olinger1,
Dominique Bourgeois1, Daniel Stieber1, Barbara KLINK1
1Laboratoire national de santé, National Center of Genetics,
Dudelange,
Luxembourg;
2Centre
Hospitalier
de
Luxembourg,
Neurologie pédiatrique, Luxembourg, Luxembourg; 3Centre Hospita-
lier de Luxembourg, Service National d’Évaluation et de Rééducation
Fonctionnelles, Luxembourg, Luxembourg;
4Universitair Medisch
Centrum Utrecht, Laboratorium voor Rode Bloedcel Onderzoek,
Afdeling Klinische Chemie en Haematologie, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Triosephosphate isomerase deﬁciency
(TPID) is a rare, severe autosomal recessive enzymopathy, char-
acterized by congenital hemolytic anemia, progressive neuro-
muscular
dysfunction
beginning
in
early
childhood,
cardiomyopathy, increased susceptibility to infections, and neu-
rodegeneration (OMIM 615512).
Methods: We used trio exome sequencing to study DNA from
a 10 years old girl affected with early-onset dystonia and epilepsy.
Results: Exome sequencing revealed two compound hetero-
zygous mutation in the Triosephosphate isomerase gene, TPI1.
The pathogenicity of these two novel mutations (a frameshift
variation and a missense in the ﬁrst exon) was conﬁrmed by an
enzyme activity assay, showing a strongly decreased TPI activity.
However, this patient’s phenotype is unusual, as repeated exams
showed the absence of nonspherical hemolytic anemia, which is
considered a hallmark of TPID. Some phenotypic variability has
been described, including patients with anemia without neurolo-
gic involvement, or severe forms with death in childhood due to
respiratory failure, but an isolated dystonia without anemia was
never reported two our knowledge.
Conclusion: The identiﬁcation of these two novel variations, in
association with an unusual phenotype, provides the opportunity
to enhance the current knowledge about this rare and poorly
understood disorder. We would like to gather data from more
patients with classic or atypical TPID, which will pave the way
towards a better comprehension of the disease mechanism.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.017.D Primary hypogonadism in a patient with
CONDSIAS: coincidence or spectrum?
Gorjan Milanovski1, Iskra Bitovska2, Meri Kirijas1, Boban Dobrevski1,
Teodora Brnjarchevska Blazevska1, Ivan Barbov3, Aleksandar Petlich-
kovski1, Zoran Gucev4, Todor Arsov1;5
1Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine –
Skopje, Institute of Immunobiology and Human Genetics, Skopje,
Macedonia; 2Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of
Medicine – Skopje, University Clinic for Endocrinology, Skopje,
Macedonia; 3Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty
of Medicine – Skopje, University Clinic for Neurology, Skopje,
Macedonia; 4Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty
of Medicine – Skopje, University Children Hospital, Skopje, Macedo-
nia;
5Centre for Personalised Immunology, Australian National
University, Canberra, Australia.
Background/Objectives: ADP-ribosylation is a posttranslational
modiﬁcation of proteins in response to cellular stressors, with
excessive poly-ADP-ribose accumulation triggering the cell-death
cascade. Two genes (ADPRHL2, PARG) encode speciﬁc PAR-
degrading enzymes and bi-allelic pathogenic ADPRHL2 variants
are reported to cause the ultra-rare autosomal recessive Child-
hood-onset, neurodegeneration, stress-induced, with variable ataxia
and seizures (CONDSIAS, OMIM 618170).
Methods: We present a 34-year old male patient with a 20-year
long history of progressive generalized hypotonia and hypo-
trophy, ataxia, reduced superﬁcial and deep sensation, mild
intellectual disability, hypogonadism, and normal brain MRI scan.
Laboratory examination detected very low testosterone and high
FSH levels and testicular MRI demonstrated profound testicular
hypoplasia and DEXA scan conﬁrmed signiﬁcant osteoporosis.
Results: Trio whole-exome sequencing using Illumina NGS
platform, identiﬁed a homozygous pathogenic missense ADPRHL2
variant c.1004T>G; p. Val335Gly. This variant has been previously
reported in several unrelated patients with CONDSIAS and was
shown to inﬂuence enzyme activity and reduce cell survival in the
setting of oxidative stress. The variant is present within the gno-
mAD database with an extremely low frequency (0.00009544).
Conclusion: To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst case of CON-
DSIAS associated with primary hypogonadism, raising the inter-
esting question whether the hypogonadism is part of the
underling genetic spectrum, or whether it is a coincidental ﬁnding.
This case also raises the question about the potential role of tes-
tosterone/steroid hormones in ADPRHL2 deﬁciency, given the
milder phenotype, no history of seizures, normal brain MRI and
the repeated history of adverse muscular effect of testosterone
supplementation in our patient.
References:.
Grants:.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
506
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.018.A HINT1-Neuropathy in France: Let’s expand
genotypic and phenotypic spectrum
Victor Morel1, Emmanuelle Campana-Salort2, Florence Esselin3,
Ulrike Walther-Louvier4, Giorgia Querin5, Philippe Latour6, Valérie
Delague7, Nicolas Levy1;7, Tanja Stojkovic8, Shahram Attarian2;7,
Nathalie Bonello-Palot1;7
1APHM, CHU Timone, Génétique Médicale, Marseille, France; 2APHM,
CHU Timone, Centre de référence des Maladies Neuromusculaires et de
la SLA, Marseille, France; 3CHU Montpellier, Centre de référence des
Maladies
du
Motoneurone
et
des
Maladies
Neuromusculaires,
Montpellier, France;
4CHU Montpellier, Service de Neuropédiatrie,
Centre de référence des Maladies Neuromusculaires AOC (Atlantique-
Occitanie-Caraïbe), Montpellier, France; 5APHP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpê-
trière, Service de Neuromyologie, Paris, France; 6CHU de Lyon, GH Est,
Service de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire Grand Est, Bron, France;
7Aix Marseille Univ, Inserm, U1251-MMG, Marseille Medical Genetics,
Marseille, France; 8APHP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Centre de Référence
des Maladies Neuromusculaires Nord/Est/Ile de France, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: Inherited peripheral neuropathy (IPN) is
a heterogeneous group of disorders due to mutations in more
than 90 genes. In 2012, the ﬁrst cases of IPN associated with HINT1
variants were described in 33 families sharing the same pheno-
type1. A novel disease was discovered: Autosomal Recessive
Axonal Neuropathy with Neuromyotonia (ARAN-NM OMIM
#137200). HINT1 is involved in the regulation of transcription, cell-
cycle control and possibly in neuropsychiatric pathophysiology 2.
To date, only 3/127 patients have been described with neu-
ropsychiatric symptomatology or neurodevelopmental disorder.
Methods: Herein, we report 6 French patients with ARAN-NM
identiﬁed by Next Generation Sequencing. We conducted a lit-
erature review and compared phenotypic and genotypic features
with our cohort.
Results: We identiﬁed a novel HINT1 mutation involved in
ARAN-NM: c.310G>C (p.Gly104Arg) and the ﬁrst African patient.
This cohort is comparable with literature data regarding age of
onset (8,5yo), neuronal involvement (sensorimotor 3/6 and motor
pure 3/6) and skeletal abnormalities (scoliosis 2/6, feet anomalies
5/6). However, we describe neuropsychiatric features in 5 out of
6 individuals.
Conclusion: We expand genotypic et phenotypic spectrum of
ARAN-NM. Neuropsychiatric features could be part of HINT1-
related disease and we should further study the clinical phenotype
of the patients previously described.
References: 1. Zimoń, M., Baets, J., … Jordanova, A. (2012).
Loss-of-function mutations in HINT1 cause axonal neuropathy with
neuromyotonia. Nature Genetics, 44(10), 1080–1083.
2. Varadarajulu, J., … Martins-de-Souza, D. (2012). Differential
expression of HINT1 in schizophrenia brain tissue. European
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 262(2), 167–172.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.019.B Targeted screening of the C9orf72 and ATXN2 gene
in Bulgarian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients
Slavko Ormandzhiev1, Tihomir Todorov1, Teodor Angelov2, Teodora
Chamova2, Vanyo Mitev3, Albena Todorova1;3, Ivaylo Tarnev2;4
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
2University Hospital Aleksandrovska, Clinic of Neurology, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria;
3Medical University of Soﬁa, Department of Medical
Chemistry
and
Biochemistry,
Soﬁa,
Bulgaria;
4New
Bulgarian
University, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a
neurodegenerative disease, characterized by progressive degen-
eration of the upper and lower motor neurons, leading to muscle
weakness, hypotrophy, swallowing and respiratory failure.
The cause of ALS is not fully elucidated, but there are 35
associated genes and 2 gene loci with an unidentiﬁed gene. The
most common are C9orf72, SOD1, TARDBP and FUS found in
approximately 10% of patients. It has been established that
intermediate length polyglutamine (polyQ) expansions (~27–33
Qs) are a signiﬁcant risk factor for ~4.7% of ALS cases.
Methods: Expansions in the C9orf72 and ATXN2 genes were
analysed by in-house short PCR and triplet repeat-primed PCR
assay (TP-PCR), followed by fragment analysis.
Results: From 200 ALS patients included in the current study, 7
(3,5%) were diagnosed with C9orf72 repeat expansion, carrying more
than 145 GGGGCC repeats. In addition, 7 ATXN2 expansions ranging
from 27 to 30 CAG repeats and 2 borderline expansions of 26 CAG
repeats were identiﬁed. Furthermore, two asymptomatic family
members were genetically proved to be ATXN2 expansion carriers.
Conclusion: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a rare neurode-
generative disease for which there is a lack of genetic data for
Bulgarian patients. The obtained results enrich the worldwide
database and shed light onto genetically characterized Bulgarian
ALS patients. Affected patients and their families can be offered
adequate medical-genetic consultation and prenatal diagnostics.
References:.
Grants: The ﬁnancial support of the Medical University Soﬁa,
grant №D-90/24.06.2020 and №D-42/08.03.2021 is gratefully
acknowledged.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.021.D A recurrent variant in the SOD1 gene – is a frequent
pathogenic or a rare benign variant?
Olga Shatokhina1, Ilya Kanivets2, Denis Pyankov2, Fedor Konova-
lov3, Oksana Ryzhkova1
1Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for Medical
Genetics, The Shared Resource Centre (SRC) “Genome”, Moscow,
Russian Federation; 2Genomed Ltd, Moscow, Russian Federation;
3Independent Clinical Bioinformatics Laboratory, Moscow, Russian
Federation.
Background/Objectives: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a
progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by the death
of motor neurons in the brain, brainstem, and spinal cord,
resulting in fatal paralysis. In this study, we report a recurrent
variant c.401A>G (p.Glu134Gly) in the SOD1 gene is the most
frequent genetic cause for ALS with incomplete penetrance.
Methods: DNA samples of more than 10000 patients were
tested by using clinical and whole exome sequencing.
Results: Among Russian patients variant c.401A>G in the SOD1
have been identiﬁed in 6 cases. In 3 of them (50%) the variant was
identiﬁed in patients with ALS. Their ages ranged from 32 to 50
years. The variant was also identiﬁed in 3 patients with diagnosis
unrelated to ALS. Two of them have not yet reached the middle
age of manifestation of this disease. The mother of one of the
probands with ALS, carrying the variant, had no clinical manifes-
tations of the disease. A notable feature in our study is that three
probands live in the same region.
Conclusion: The variant was classiﬁed as likely pathogenic
according to the guidelines for massive parallel sequencing
(ACMG) data interpretation (criteria PM1, PM2, PP3, PP5). Despite
this the question of the pathogenicity of this variant remains
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
507
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
open, due to the fact that half of the cases were found in one
region, including in patients without ALS. Interpreting such var-
iants beyond the primary cause of the disease can be challenging
and time-consuming for both clinicians and labs.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.022.A The Middle Eastern Genomes Project: Leveraging
consanguinity in inherited diseases
Alan Pittman1, Paria Najarzadeh Torbati2, Mina Zamani3, Luke
Peacock1, Chris Carroll1, Kate Everett1, Ehsan Ghayoor Karimiani1;2,
Hamid Galehdari3, Reza Marooﬁan4, Yalda Jamshidi1
1St George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom;
2Department of Medical Genetics, Next Generation Genetic Polyclinic,
Mashhad, Iran; 3Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences,
Ahvaz, Iran; 4UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London,
United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Consanguineous marriages are common
in the Middle East and associated with an increased burden of
autosomal recessive genetic conditions. We have characterised
two thousand individuals with a variety of conditions including
inherited neuromuscular disease. The variant frequency data,
enriched for homozygous variants, and particularly homozygous
loss of function variants, provides an invaluable opportunity to
gain scientiﬁc and clinical insights into gene function, as well as
providing support for candidate disease gene identiﬁcation and
variant interpretation.
Methods: Homozygosity mapping and whole exome/genome
sequencing was carried out and analysed according to best
practice and included single nucleotide, copy number and mito-
chondrial variant analysis. Candidate disease variants were asses-
sed based on predicted effect on protein structure and function,
amino acid conservation, and population frequency, and by family
segregation using Sanger sequencing.
Results: We have detailed frequency and functional prediction
data on 2.7 million coding variants, including approximately
100,000 putative loss-of-function variants and 1.5 million missense
variants. Likely pathogenic/pathogenic variants were detected in
46% cases in different disease-causing genes, including novel
genes ﬁrst identiﬁed in this population.
Conclusion: Our results provide novel insights into genotype-
phenotype relationships and identify high frequency disease
variants in this unique population, suggesting the utility of
population speciﬁc sequencing efforts. The availability of genetic
data from the Middle East, currently an underrepresented group in
large genomic databases, will support both local genetic diag-
nostics as well as facilitating the assignment of pathogenicity to
variants found in other populations and provide opportunities for
discovery of new disease-gene associations.
References:.
Grants: Muscular Dystrophy UK 19GRO-PG12-0395.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.023.B RYR1 variants in Czech patients with
neuromuscular disorders and malignant hyperthermia
Jana Zídková1;2, Tereza Kramářová2;3, Kamila Reblová2, Martina
Klincová4,
Dagmar
Štěpánková4,
Edita
Ošťádalová3,
Lenka
Fajkusova2;3
1University
Hospital
Brno
and
Faculty
of
Medicine,
Masaryk
University, Centre for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Brno, Czech
Republic;
2Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Institute of
Medical Genetics and Genomics, Brno, Czech Republic; 3University
Hospital Brno, Centre of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Brno, Czech
Republic; 4University Hospital Brno and Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk
University, Department of Paediatric Anaesthesiology and Intensive
Care Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: The RYR1 gene encodes the skeletal
muscle ryanodine receptor, which serves as a calcium release
channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The RYR1 pathogenic
variants are involved in wide spectrum of neuromuscular disorders
with both dominant and recessive inheritance and are the main
cause of malignant hyperthermia (MH).
Methods: We use panel sequencing with 300 genes related
with neuromuscular disorders for variant detection and CNV
analysis in patients with neuromuscular disease or suspected
malignant hyperthermia. For structural analysis, we used both an
open channel structure (PDB code: 5gL1 and 5t9v) and a closed
structure (PDB code: 5gky).
Results: The aim of our study was to get an overview of the
occurrence of the RYR1 mutations in Czech population. We
detected pathogenic / likely pathogenic variants in 17 patients
with recessive neuromuscular disease and 10 patients with
dominant type. MH susceptibility was conﬁrmed in 31 patients.
We performed the structural analysis of the 48 described diag-
nostics MH variants. Based on this analysis, we suggested the rules
associated with pathogenicity: i) about 80% of variants are asso-
ciated with a change in charge, ii) about 10% of variants are
present at the subunit interface, iii) about 10% of the variants
represent substitutions on methionine, threonine, serine or tyr-
osine, which can be oxidized/phosphorylated.
Conclusion: Detection of pathogenic variants in RYR1 gene is
important
for
understanding
the
phenotypic
variability
of
RYR1 –related disorders. Structural analysis allow us to capture
variants potentially related with MH.
References:.
Grants: The work was supported by the grant of AZV ČR NU21-
06-00363.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.024.C Severe neonatal respiratory distress is part of the
clinical spectrum of congenital myopathy with tremors
associated with dominant MYBPC1 variants
Pierre-Louis Lanvin1, Solène Conrad1, Magot Armelle2;3, Bertrand
Isidor1;4, Mathilde Nizon1;4, Marie Vincent1;4, Damien Sternberg5;6,
Xavier Micaelli7, Pereon Yann2;3, Sandra Mercier1;3;4
1CHU Nantes, Department of medical genetics, Nantes, France;
2CHU Nantes, Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Nantes,
France;
3Reference Centre for Neuromuscular Disorders AOC,
Filnemus, Euro-NMD, Nantes, France; 4Nantes Université, CNRS,
INSERM, l’institut du thorax, Nantes, France;
5APHP, Metabolic
Biochemistry Department, Genetics Center, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospi-
tal, Paris, France; 6Group, Center of Research in Myology, APHP
Sorbonne University, Paris, France;
7CHD Vendée, Service de
Pédiatrie, La Roche Sur Yon, France.
Background/Objectives: Congenital myopathies are phenotypi-
cally and genetically heterogeneous. While MYBPC1 variants were
previously described in Distal Arthrogryposis type 1B, Complex
Congenital Arthrogryposis or Lethal Congenital Contractural Syn-
drome, heterozygous missense variants in the MYBPC1 gene have
been recently identiﬁed in 11 patients from ﬁve families with
congenital myopathy with tremor (MYOTREM, MIM 618524)1. All
variants are located at highly conserved residues in the M-motif.
We report one new patient with MYOTREM expanding the clinical
spectrum to severe neonatal respiratory distress.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
508
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: Trio Whole Genome Sequencing has been carried
out as part of the France Genomic Medicine 2025 Plan.
Results: The patient presented with neonatal respiratory dis-
tress due to stridor, severe axial and peripheral hypotonia, weak
spontaneous movements and myogenic tremors of the jaw and
four limbs on stimulation. We identiﬁed a de novo heterozygous
missense variant in MYBPC1: c.742G>A; p.(Glu248Lys) in a 16
month-old girl. This variant has been previously described as
pathogenic
in
MYOTREM.
Motor
skill
abilities
improved
over time as previously reported. She sat up unaided at
15 months and started crawling and standing at 16 months.
Gastrostomy
supplementation
could
be
discontinued
at
13 months. Despite gradual improvement, she remained highly
dependent on non-invasive ventilation (12-hour daily depen-
dence at 16 months).
Conclusion: This observation extends the clinical spectrum of
MYOTREM, which should be considered in the differential diag-
nosis of neonatal hypotonia associated with severe respiratory
distress. Early diagnosis is essential to reassure parents about
good motor prognosis in adulthood.
References: 1 Stavusis et al, Ann Neurol, 2019.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.025.D Deep intronic mutations, alternative splicing and
complex chromosomal rearrangements in the DMD gene:
genetic diagnosis of dystrophinopathies through mRNA
analysis
Alba Segarra-Casas1, maria josé rodriguez1, aurelio hernández-
laín2;3, María Teresa Sánchez Calvín4, cristina domínguez2;5, andrea
campo-barasoain6, Marcos Madruga7, eloy rivas8;9, Carlos Ortez5;10,
Daniel Natera-de Benito5;10, anna codina10, Andrés Nascimento5;10,
pia gallano1;5, lidia gonzalez-quereda1;5
1Hospital de Sant Pau, IIB-Sant Pau - UAB, Genetics Department,
Barcelona, Spain; 2Hospital 12 de Octubre Research Institute (i+12),
Madrid, Spain; 3Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Department of
Neuropathology, Madrid, Spain;
4Hospital Universitario 12 de
Octubre, Genetics Department, Madrid, Spain;
5Center for the
Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid,
Spain; 6Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Pediatric Depart-
ment, Sevilla, Spain;
7Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío,
Pediatric
Neurology
Department,
Sevilla,
Spain;
8Instituto
de
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del
Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain; 9Hospital Universi-
tario Virgen del Rocío, Pathology Department, Sevilla, Spain;
10Neuromuscular Unit, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Institut de
Recerca Sant Joan de Déu - UB, Neuropaediatrics Department,
Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Becker and Duchenne Muscular Dys-
trophy (BMD/DMD) are X-linked muscular dystrophies caused by
alterations in the DMD gene. An early genetic diagnosis of the
disease allows anticipatory care, an optimal management of the
disease, be eligible for mutation-speciﬁc therapies and genetic
and reproductive counselling. It has been estimated that 5-7% of
the patients remain genetically undiagnosed despite an extensive
study in the genomic DNA (1). Here, we evaluate the diagnostic
utility of mRNA sequencing of the DMD gene in dystrophinopathy
patients.
Methods: In eight patients with a clear clinical suspicion of
dystrophinopathy supported by the presence of alterations in
muscle biopsy and without a precise genetic diagnosis after MLPA
and NGS, we extracted RNA from muscle biopsy and evaluated the
whole mRNA of the DMD gene. Droplet Digital PCR was performed
to quantify transcript isoforms.
Results:
Through
cDNA
sequencing,
we
have
identiﬁed
alterations in DMD mRNA in all the patients. We have detected the
presence of two novel pseudoexons, transcript isoforms related
with mild BMD and chromosomal rearrangements.
Conclusion: The mRNA analysis of the DMD gene is a useful
technique to fulﬁl the genetic diagnosis of dystrophinopathy
patients. It enables the identiﬁcation of alterations in mRNA pro-
cessing that cannot be detected through MLPA and NGS.
References: 1. Dent KM, Dunn DM, Von Niederhausern AC,
et al. Improved molecular diagnosis of dystrophinopathies in an
unselected clinical cohort. Am J Med Genet. 2005;134A(3):295–8.
Grants: This study was granted by FIS PI18/01585, funded by ISCIII.
ASC was supported by FPU20/06692 (Ministerio de Universidades).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.026.A Evaluation of molecular-genetic testing results of
myotonic dystrophies in the last 30 years in Slovakia
Eva Tothova Tarova1;2, Zuzana Pös1, Ludevit Kadasi1;3, Peter
Spalek4, Jan Radvansky1;3
1Biomedical Research Centre, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Institute
for Clinical and Translational Research, Bratislava, Slovakia; 2Faculty
of Education, J. Selye University, Department of Biology, Komarno,
Slovakia;
3Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University in
Bratislava, Department of Molecular Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia;
4Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, University Hospital Bratislava,
Bratislava, Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: Myotonic dystrophies (DM) are genetic
disorders with two known genetic forms and overlapping multi-
organ symptomatology. DM1 and DM2 are caused by tandem
repeat expansions in the DMPK and in the CNBP genes, respec-
tively. We report the statistical results of molecular-genetic testing
of DM suspected patients.
Methods: We retrospectively evaluated the ﬁndings of 739
individuals tested for DM1 and DM2 belonging to 610 families.
They consisted of approved DM1 and DM2 patients and patients
with no DM expansions detected. Symptomatology in all three
groups was assessed; however, only the main complaints and
clinical ﬁndings when ordering molecular-genetic testing, i.e., do
not reveal the complex symptomatology of patients.
Results: DM1 expansion was conﬁrmed in 69 families (102
patients). DM2 expansion was conﬁrmed in 94 families (142
patients). 390 families remained without conﬁrmed expansions.
DM2 seems to be more common in Slovakia than DM1. The age of
molecular diagnosis was a decade higher in the DM2 group (49.02
years) than in the DM1 group (40.97 years). DM1 and DM2 were
identiﬁed in both sexes equally, while DM2 was more commonly
identiﬁed among women. The most commonly reported symp-
toms, i.e., myogenic ﬁndings and myotonia on EMG, muscle
weakness, and cataracts, were identiﬁed in all three groups,
although slightly different frequencies.
Conclusion: No single symptom or combination of symptoms
was identiﬁed that would differentiate between the DM1 and DM2
groups, or even patients suspected but not proved to have DM.
References:.
Grants: APPV-18-0319; VEGA-2/0167/20.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.027.B Neuromuscular disease diagnosis: the experience of
a reference laboratory in Brazil
Fernanda Teixeira Bellucco1;2, Maria Arismendi Gonçalves1, Anelisa
Gollo Dantas1;2, Ana Eduarda Campos1, Betânia Machado Loures1,
Helena
Ribeiro
Barbosa1,
Jacqueline
H.
R.
Fonseca1,
Márcia
Gonçalves Ribeiro1;3, Mateus de Oliveira Torres1, Milene Mulatinho1,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
509
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Priscila Soares Rodrigues1;2, Thiago Cavole1, Cecilia Micheletti1;4,
Armando Fonseca1
1DLE - Diagnósticos Laboratoriais Especializados, São Paulo, Brazil;
2Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Morphology and Genetics, São
Paulo, Brazil; 3Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil; 4Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Department of Pediatrics,
São Paulo, Brazil.
Background/Objectives: Neuromuscular diseases (NMD) are a
group of disorders that involve injury or dysfunction of peripheral
nerves or muscle. Many NMDs have a genetic origin, and around
600 genes related to more than a thousand neuromuscular dis-
eases were described to date. Onset may occur in the neonatal
period, childhood, or adult life, pointing to the importance of
identifying these diseases’ etiology. We aim to describe genetic
ﬁndings in molecular analysis of patients with symptoms of NMDs.
Methods: We performed a descriptive, cross-sectional study,
with retrospective collection of DNA sequencing results per-
formed in a clinical reference laboratory from Brazil, from 1996 to
2021. Four gene panels were carried out: mitochondriopathies
(196 genes); muscular dystrophies, myopathies and myasthenic
syndrome (80 genes); myopathies and muscular dystrophies (200
genes) and neuromuscular diseases (82 genes).
Results: 79 patients (40 males/39 females) suspected of having
NMDs with age ranging from 2 to 78 years old were evaluated.
Pathogenic mutations were detected in 33 patients (41.8%),
involving 27 different NMD-relates genes (ACTA1, ATP2A1, CAPN3,
CHRNE, COL6A1, DMD, DOK7, ECHS1, GAA, HEXA, ITGA7, LAMA2,
LMNA, MT-TL1, PDHA1, PNPLA2, POMT2, POMT1, PYGM, RAPSN,
RYR1, SGCB, SURF1, OPA1, TPM2, TTN, WFS1). 32 patients carried
variants of unknown signiﬁcance (40.5%), and 1 patient (1.2%) had
a pseudodeﬁciency variant.
Conclusion: High-throughput sequencing enables the genetic
diagnosis of NMD patients, supports evidence-based treatment
and the familiar genetic counseling. The identiﬁcation and clas-
siﬁcation of these genetic variants are essential to improve the
knowledge of the etiology of the NMD diseases.
References:.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.028.C GGPS1-associated muscular dystrophy with and
without hearing loss
Clarissa Rocca1, Rauan Kaiyrzhanov1, Maha Zaki2, Heba Hosny3,
Christian Beetz4, Mojtaba Movahedinia5, Sandrine Vuillaumier-
Barrot6;6, Arnaud Isapof7, Mohammad Yahya Vahidi Mehrjardi8,
Nasrin Ghasemi8, Sandra Whalen9, Henry Houlden1, Reza Marooﬁan1
1UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, Department of Neuromus-
cular Diseases, London, United Kingdom; 2National Research Centre,
Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research,
Cairo, Egypt; 3Genetic Department, National Institution of Neuromotor
Systems, Cairo, Egypt;
4CENTOGENE GmbH, Rostock, Germany;
5Pediatric Neurology Division, Myelin Disorders Clinic, Children’s Medical
Center, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran; 6Department of Biochemistry, AP-HP, Bichat
Hospital, Paris, France; 7Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital
Armand Trousseau, APHP, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France; 8Yazd
Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical Sciences Campus, Yazd, Iran;
9APHP UF de Génétique Clinique, Centre de Référence des Anomalies du
Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, APHP, Hôpital Armand
Trousseau, ERN ITHACA, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: Geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase 1
(GGPS1) gene is a member of the prenyltransferase family
encoding a protein with geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP)
synthase activity. Ultra-rare biallelic pathogenic variants in GGPS1
have been associated with Muscular Dystrophy/Hearing Loss/
Ovarian Insufﬁciency Syndrome. We describe nine cases from two
new families with defective GPPS1 gene and provide follow-up
details from the previously reported family with two affected.
Methods: Two families were collected as part of the SYNaPS
Study Group collaboration, and the third family was followed up
from the report by Tucker et al. (2020). Exome sequencing and
segregation analysis by Sanger sequencing were utilized to
identify and conﬁrm the GGPS1 variants.
Results: More than 70% of cases presented with delayed motor
milestones, short stature, hypotonia, progressive generalized or
proximal muscle weakness, and muscular dystrophy. Sensorineural
hearing loss was reported in three cases, while hearing remains
clinically intact in the remaining eight cases. One 30-year-old
female case reached puberty and had no clinical signs of primary
ovarian insufﬁciency. Ultra-rare likely pathogenic homozygous
missense GGPS1 variants (NM_004837.4):c.269A>G; p.(Asn90Ser)
and c.439A>G; p.(Met147Val) were identiﬁed, which segregated
with the phenotype within both families.
Conclusion: This report consolidates the disease-causing role
of GGPS1 biallelic variants and demonstrates that hearing loss and
ovarian insufﬁciency might be variable features of the GGPS1-
associated muscular dystrophy.
References: Tucker EJ, Rius R, Jaillard S, et al. Genomic
sequencing highlights the diverse molecular causes of Perrault
syndrome: a peroxisomal disorder (PEX6), metabolic disorders
(CLPP, GGPS1), and mtDNA maintenance/translation disorders
(LARS2, TFAM). Hum Genet 2020; 139(10):1325-1343.
Grants: Wellcome Trust [WT093205MA, WT104033AIA].
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.029.D New phenotype of myopathy in ASCC1-related
disorder
Margarita Sharova1, Dariya Guseva1, Aysylu Murtazina1, Olga
Novoselova2, Alexey Kurenkov3, Mikhail Skoblov1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation;
2Genomed ltd, Genetic diagnostic lab, Moscow, Russian Federation;
3National Medical Research Center for Children’s Health the Russian
Federation Ministry of Healthcare, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives: Spinal muscular atrophy with congenital
bone fractures 2 (SMABF2) is a severe neuromuscular disorder
caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous variants in
the ASCC1 gene. There are only eight families described with the
disease. We are presenting a case of a patient with the myopathy
phenotype and two novel variants in ASCC1 gene.
Methods: 3 y.o. boy underwent neurological examination and
genetic investigation in the RCMG. WES of proband’s DNA sample
was performed on Illumina NextSeq500. The functional effect of
splicing variant was investigated using RT-PCR analysis. The
expression analysis was performed by qPCR.
Results: Proband was born with muscular hypotonia, ulna
fracture. Early motor skills were delayed. Neurological examination
at 3 y.o. revealed severe muscular hypotonia, hyporeﬂexia with
muscular patter on the NCS. WES identiﬁed two novel variants in
ASCC1 gene: splicing variant c.311-2A>G and decreased coverage
of exons 2 and 3 (ΔEx2,3) seemed as deletion. The analysis of
c.311-2A>G by RT-PCR showed the presence of two isoforms: with
truncated exon 5 without frameshift and exon 5 skipping. Splicing
variant validated on proband’s and father’s DNA. The deletion was
validated in heterozygous state in proband’s and mother’s cDNA.
The increased expression of the transcript with ΔEx2,3 in 1.8 times
was shown. Also, we suggested that ΔEx2,3 transcript could
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
510
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
produce a new truncated protein p.Glu2_Met86del from new
Kozak sequence in exon 4.
Conclusion: We believed that a detailed analysis of this case
could explain new phenotype of the proband.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.030.A Mutational spectrum and clinical features of GNE
myopathy in Russia
Aysylu Murtazina1, Sergey Nikitin1, Galina Rudenskaya1, Inna
Sharkova1, Olga Shchagina1, Alena Chukhrova1, Oksana Ryzhkova1,
Olga Shatokhina1, Anna Orlova1, Artem Borovikov1, Ilya Kanivets2;3,
Sergey Korostelev2, Elena Dadali1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation;
2Genomed LTD, Moscow, Russian Federation; 3FSBEI FPE RMACPE
MOH, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives: GNE myopathy (MIM 605820) is the
most common distal myopathy in several countries. However, the
genetic and clinical spectrum of Russian patients is unknown. Here
we summarized the mutational spectrum and clinical features of
30 patients with GNE myopathy from Russia.
Methods: Massive parallel sequencing was performed for all
probands, followed by Sanger DNA sequencing for segregation
analysis. Clinical data, including manual muscle testing and the
GNE myopathy functional activity scale (GNEM-FAS), were col-
lected for 24 patients from 20 families. Muscle MRI was performed
in 8 patients.
Results: As a result of molecular genetic analysis, novel
mutations were found: 2 frameshift mutations, 2 large deletions,
and 4 missense variants. In other cases, 12 known missense
mutations
were
identiﬁed.
One
novel
missense
mutation
c.169_170delGCinsTT, p.Ala57Phe was identiﬁed in 4 families in a
homozygous state and 3 unrelated patients in a compound het-
erozygous state. All families with this novel frequent mutation in
our cohort were originally from the 3 neighboring areas of Eur-
opean Russia. GNEM-FAS scores were analyzed for 21 patients, and
scores varied from 2 to 97 (mean (SD) 55 (31)). Two patients have
atypical clinical features: one has severe quadriceps atrophy, and
another patient has a prominent asymmetry of muscle involve-
ment, both cases were supported by muscle MRI.
Conclusion: We reported the clinical and genetic spectrum of
the largest Russian group of patients with GNE myopathy. The
novel variant c.169_170delGCinsTT is a frequent mutation in the
European part of Russian Federation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.031.B RFC1 intronic repeat expansions on a Spanish late-
onset neuromuscular disorder cohort
Paula Fernández-Álvarez1, Desireé Martinez Cruz1, Daniel Sánchez-
Tejerina2, Victoria Gonzalez-Martinez2, Jorge Hernandez-Vara2, Raúl
Juntas Morales2, Elena Garcia-Arumí1, Eduardo Tizzano1
1Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Department of Clinical and
Molecular Genetics, Barcelona, Spain;
2Vall d’Hebron University
Hospital, Department of Neurology, Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: CANVAS syndrome (Cerebellar Ataxia,
Neuropathy, and Vestibular Areﬂexia Syndrome) is associated with
biallelic AAGGG intronic expansions in RFC1. A pattern of
progression from isolated sensory neuropathy to full CANVAS
manifestations has been proposed.
Methods: We studied a cohort of 19 patients with late onset
manifestations compatible with CANVAS. Conventional PCR (C-
PCR) ﬂanking the reference allele (AAAAG)11, was used to assert
the presence of the wild-type allele. The screening of expansions
of the non-pathogenic (AAAAG and AAAGG) and pathogenic
(AAGGG) alleles was performed by repeat-primed PCR (RP-PCR).
We characterized the motif with Long-range-PCR (LR-PCR) and
Sanger sequencing.
Results: C-PCR showed no product in 9 patients suggesting
that they did not carry the wild-type allele, 3 patients had larger
products, compatible with an expansion of the reference allele,
and the remaining 6 had the reference allele (AAAAG)11. RP-PCR
showed biallelic expansions of the AAGGG repeat in the 9 patients
with failed C-PCR and conﬁrmed the normal result in the 6 pre-
viously normal patients. RP-PCR of the remaining 3 patients
showed that 2 were heterozygous for the expanded wild-type
allele, whereas one (patient 11) showed an expansion of the
pathogenic AAGGG allele and of an AAAAG allele, suggesting
compound heterozygosity. LR-PCR conﬁrmed RP-PCR results in all
patients, except in patient 11, who carried a pathogenic AAGGG
allele and an expanded AAGAG allele of unknown signiﬁcance,
previously described in Canadian and Brazilian populations.
Conclusion: We conﬁrmed the clinical diagnosis in 47% (9/19)
patients: 4 showed full CANVAS, whereas the remaining 5 pre-
sented with different PNS involvement.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.032.C Biallelic founder mutation in PDE2A causes
paroxysmal dyskinesia with Intellectual disability in Pakistani
families
Hammad Yousaf1, Ambrin Fatima2, Saadia Maryam Saadi1, Shahid
M Baig1;2, Mathias Toft3;4, Zafar Iqbal3
1National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering
(NIBGE), college, PIEAS Islamabad, Pakistan, Faisalabad, Pakistan;
2Department of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, The Aga Khan
University, Karachi, Pakistan;
3Department of Neurology, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; 4Institute of Clinical Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
Background/Objectives:
Intellectual
developmental
disorder
with paroxysmal dyskinesia or seizures (IDDPADS, OMIM# 619150)
is an ultra-rare childhood-onset movement disorder manifesting
paroxysmal dyskinesia slowly progressive global developmental
delay, impaired cognitive development and seizures (variable). We
investigated three unrelated Pakistani families with six affected
individuals born to cousin marriages. Belonging to diverse age
groups (13 - 60 years), patients presented with severe develop-
mental delay, cognitive abnormalities, speech impairment and
seizures with onset in early years of age.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was used to detect
potentially pathogenic variants and identify shared regions of
homozygosity.
Results: We identiﬁed a rare homozygous missense variant
c.1490T>C (NM_002599.5), (p.Phe497Ser) in Phosphodiestrerase2A
(PDE2A) gene. The identiﬁed variant segregates with the pheno-
type in all three families. To assess the possibility of a founder
mutation, we performed homozygosity mapping which revealed a
shared 5.5 Mb homozygous region at Chr11: q13.4-q13.5 among
all three families. PDE2A is involved in hydrolysis of second mes-
sengers, cAMP and cGMP. It is activated by binding of cGMP to
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
511
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
GAF-B domain of the protein. The function of PDE2A is very critical
for temporal regulation of these second messengers consequently
modulating critical cellular processes like proliferation, neuronal
function, apoptosis and differentiation. So far, only ﬁve variants
and ﬁve patients are reported with disrupted PDE2A.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings add important details to the clinical
and genetic spectrum of PDE2A, and highlight c.1490T>C, (p.
Phe497Ser) as a founder mutation in Pakistani families.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P11.033.D The rare case of a patient with
neurodevelopmental disorder with epilepsy and hypoplasia of
the corpus callosum and a homozygous LNPK gene mutation
Ouranio Anastasiou1, Andri Miltiadous1, Petroula Gerasimou1,
yiannos kyprianou1, Jason Chi1, Paul Costeas1, Violetta Christoﬁdou
Anastasiadou2
1Karaiskakio
Foundation,
Molecular
Genetics,
Nicosia,
Cyprus;
2Archbishop Makarios III Children’s Hospital, Clinical Genetics,
Nicosia, Cyprus.
Background/Objectives: The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) has a
variety of cellular functions that require the acquisition of distinct
states. It is well established that ER dictates a tight regulation through
a wide number of proteins. Perturbation of these ER-shaping pro-
teins are known to cause distinct phenotypes such as Alzheimer’s
and Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia. Lunapark (LNPK) is a recently
discovered transmembrane protein which is involved in the regula-
tion of ER-shaping. The protein consists of an N-terminal domain,
two transmembrane domains, and a unique zinc-ﬁnger domain and
has been shown to act as a stabilizer to the negative membrane
curvature. However, even though the role of LNPK has been estab-
lished, its association with disorders remains unexplored. A study by
Breuss et al. found an association between homozygous mutations
in LNPK with a neurodevelopmental disorder in three patients.
Methods: n/a.
Results: Here we report the fourth documented case in the
literature of a Cypriot patient from a non-consanguineous family
with clinical features similar to those described by Breuss et al. and
a homozygous mutation in LNPK gene. The patient was presented
to the clinic with generalized hypotonia, severe developmental
delay, absent speech, corpus callosum hypoplasia and movement
challenges.
Whole
exome
analysis
revealed
a
homozygous
pathogenic, splice site variant c.258-2A>G in LNPK gene, in
agreement with the previous study.
Conclusion: Further investigation using functional studies for
the identiﬁed variant and molecular and clinical characterization
of other patients with similar phenotype are a prerequisite in
order to shed light into the mechanistic role of LNPK in human
diseases.
References: n/a.
Grants: n/a.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ouranio Anastasiou full, Andri Miltiadous
full, Petroula Gerasimou full, yiannos kyprianou full, Jason Chi full,
Paul Costeas full, Violetta Christoﬁdou Anastasiadou full.
P11.034.A Genetic defects causing Amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis in Czech Republic
Nazli S Kara1, Magui Khazaal2, Nela Navratilova1, Lucia Markova,3,
Lenka Slachtova1
11st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Department of
Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic; 11st Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Department of Biology and
Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic; 3General Faculty Hospital,
Department of Neurology, Prague, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a
rare progressive neurodegenerative disorder that affects motor
neurons in the brain and spinal cord. ALS is a multifactorial dis-
order with genetic defects affecting various pathways, including
RNA metabolism, cytoskelet, or protein degradation. Such diver-
sity challenges both ALS treatment and diagnosis. There is no
cure, only symptomatic treatment. Incidence rates of ALS change
across the countries, creating a need for population-speciﬁc stu-
dies.1 Our aim was to identify genetic defects causing ALS in
Czech population and to compare the data with previous studies
in Caucasian population.
Methods: We have collected blood samples from over 50
patients with familial and sporadic ALS of Czech origin. After DNA
extraction, samples were analysed for the most common genes
causing ALS, such as C9ORF72 and SOD1.
Results: We found a typical distribution of about 10% of
familial vs sporadic ALS in our cohort based on the patient’s his-
tory, and conﬁrmed the ﬁndings by molecular genetic analyses of
selected genes.
Conclusion: Our study shows the ﬁrst preliminary data for
Czech Republic, with a typical distribution of common patholo-
gical variants causing ALS in Caucasians.2 Next we plan on
enlarging the sample size and collecting the clinical data, and
further genetic analyses.
References: 1. Cronin, et al (2007), Neurology, 68(13), 1002-
1007. 2. Mejzini, et al (2019). Frontiers in Neuroscience 06 (2019).
Grants: PRIMUS UK, Alzheimer NF.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12 MULTIPLE MALFORMATION/ANOMALIES SYNDROMES
P12.002.D A novel FLCN-related syndrome that leads to
intellectual disability, developmental delay and
immunodeﬁciency
Fulya Taylan1;2, Carolina Maya Gonzalez1, Behzad Khoshnood3,
Tessa Campbell4, Johan Bobeck5, Yenan Bryceson4, Magnus Nor-
denskjöld1;2, Ann Nordgren1;2
1Karolinska Institutet, Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Stockholm,
Sweden; 2Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; 3Kar-
olinska Institutet, Department of Neurobiology, Stockholm, Sweden;
4Karolinska Institutet, Department of Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden;
5Kalmar County Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Kalmar, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: FLCN forms complexes with the FLCN-
interacting proteins 1 and 2 (encoded by FNIP1/2) that modulate
mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and AMP-
activated protein kinase (AMPK) which have opposite roles in
cells[1]. The balance between mTORC1 and AMPK depends on the
FLCN/FNIP complex[2]. Here, we present a 14-year-old boy with
intellectual disability, short stature, dysmorphic features, late
psychomotor development, hearing impairment and immunode-
ﬁciency, where whole genome sequencing (WGS) detected a
homozygous ultra-rare variant in FLCN.
Methods: WGS analysis, quantitative real-time PCR and wes-
tern blot were performed to identify the variant and investigate its
effect on expression. Immune parameters were evaluated with
ﬂow cytometry analysis (FCA).
Results: WGS identiﬁed a homozygous, ultra-rare missense
(NM_144997.7:c.43G>A; p.(Gly15Ser)) variant in FLCN ﬁtting to
autosomal recessive inheritance. In the patient ﬁbroblasts, the
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
512
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
expressions of FLCN and FNIP1 were increased while no signiﬁcant
change at the protein level was observed. FCA showed hypo-
gammaglobinaemia (IgM, IgG) and low B and NK cells.
Conclusion: Overexpression of FLCN and FNIP1 signals dysre-
gulation of the balance between mTORC1 and AMPK pathways,
resulting in disruption of homeostasis in the cells. Patients with
FNIP1 mutations had a remarkable phenotypic overlap with our
patient[3]. Therefore, we conclude that the FLCN variant causes a
novel FLCN-related syndrome with phenotypic overlap with the
FNIP1 immunodeﬁciency.
References: 1. Takagi, Y., et al., Oncogene, 2008. 27(40): p.
5339-47. 2. Gonzalez, A., et al., Cell Metab, 2020. 31(3): p. 472-492.
3. Saettini, F., et al., Blood, 2021. 137(4): p. 493-499.
Grants: The Swedish Childhood Cancer Fund.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.003.A Familial cleft tongue caused by a unique translation
initiation codon variant in TP63
Julia Schmidt1, Gudrun Schreiber2, Janine Altmüller3;4;5;6, Holger
Thiele5;6, Peter Nürnberg5;6, Yun Li1, Silke Kaulfuß1, Rudolf Funke2,
Bernd Wilken2, Gökhan Yigit1, Bernd Wollnik1;7
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany; 2Department of Pediatric Neurology, Klinikum
Kassel, Kassel, Germany; 3Core Facility Genomics, Berlin Institute of
Health at Charité, Berlin, Germany; 4Max Delbrück Center for Molecular
Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin, Germany; 5Center for
Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany; 6Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University Hospital
Cologne, Cologne, Germany;
7Cluster
of Excellence “Multiscale
Bioimaging: from Molecular Machines to Networks of Excitable Cells”
(MBExC), University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Variants in transcription factor p63 have
been linked to several autosomal dominantly inherited mal-
formation syndromes. These disorders show overlapping pheno-
typic characteristics with various combinations of the following
features: ectodermal dysplasia, split-hand/foot malformation/syn-
dactyly, lacrimal duct obstruction, hypoplastic breasts and/or
nipples, ankyloblepharon ﬁliforme adnatum, hypospadias and
cleft lip/palate.
Methods/Results: We describe a family with six individuals
presenting with a striking novel phenotype characterized by a
furrowed or cleft tongue, a narrow face, reddish hair, freckles and
various foot deformities. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) identi-
ﬁed a novel heterozygous variant, c.3G>T, in TP63 affecting the
translation initiation codon (p.1Met?). Sanger sequencing con-
ﬁrmed dominant inheritance of this unique variant in all six
affected family members.
Conclusion: In summary, our ﬁndings indicate that hetero-
zygous variants in TP63 affecting the ﬁrst translation initiation
codon result in a novel phenotype dominated by a cleft tongue,
expanding the complex genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of
TP63-associated disorders.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.004.B Incomplete penetrance and variable clinical
expression of a Belgian TGFB3 founder variant suggests the
presence of a genetic modiﬁer
Melanie Perik1, Emmanuela Govaerts2, Steven Laga3, Inge Goo-
vaerts1, Josephina (Jeannette) Meester1, Aline Verstraeten1, Lut Van
Laer1, Bart Loeys1
1University of Antwerp, Antwerp University Hospital, Center for
Medical Genetics, Functional and Cardiogenomics, Antwerp, Belgium;
2AZ Dimpna, Geel, Belgium; 3Antwerp University Hospital, Cardiac
surgery, Antwerp, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic TGFB3 variants cause Loeys-
Dietz syndrome type 5, an aortic aneurysm-presenting connective
tissue disorder.
Methods: We provide the results of an haplotype analysis as
well as a medical record review of clinical features of 29 indivi-
duals from ﬁve families segregating an identical pathogenic
TGFB3 variant, p.Asp263His, which affects a critical integrin-
recognizing RGD motif.
Results: In ﬁve families with the p.Asp263His variant, we
identiﬁed a shared haplotype (min 1.92Mb-max 4.14Mb), sug-
gesting the presence of a founder originating ±400 years ago.
Remarkably, only 4/29 patients presented with aortic aneurysms/
dissections. One 31-years old male presented with a type A dis-
section, while another 66-years old male underwent a Bentall
procedure because of severe insufﬁciency of a bicuspid aortic
valve and a sinus of Valsalva aneurysm (50mm, z-score = 5.2). Two
other male mutation carriers presented with a pathologically
enlarged ascending aorta or aortic root aneurysm at older age (75
and 80 years). None of the 25 other TGFB3 founder mutation
carriers (10-84 years, 14 males/11 females) had aortic aneurysms.
Additional cardiovascular observations are ventricular septal
defect, valve insufﬁciency and variable conduction abnormalities.
We also observed minor systemic involvement such as easy
bruising, inguinal hernia and ruptured ligaments and tendons.
Conclusion: The low penetrance for aortic involvement sug-
gests that the pathogenic TGFB3 variant is not sufﬁcient to cause
the aneurysm phenotype. No aggravating cardiovascular risk fac-
tors were documented in the aneurysm-presenting patients.
Comparative whole genome- and RNA-sequencing of iPSC-
vascular smooth muscle cells of affected and unaffected variant
carriers
is
currently
being
performed
to
pinpoint
genetic
modiﬁers.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Melanie Perik full, Emmanuela Govaerts
full, Steven Laga full, Inge Goovaerts full, Josephina (Jeannette)
Meester full, Aline Verstraeten full, Lut Van Laer full, DOCPRO:
FFB170247, Bart Loeys full, Genomia – ERC-COG-2017-771945.
P12.005.C Delineation of a KDM2B-related
neurodevelopmental disorder and its associated DNA
methylation signature
Marie-Claire Cornips1, Richard van Jaarsveld1, Jack Reilly2, Michael
Hadders3, Emanuele Agolini4, Kwame Anyane-yeboa5, Marie-José
Van den Boogaard1, Ellen van Binsbergen1, Raymond Caylor6,
Andrea Ciolﬁ7, Joke Verheij8, Paolo Fontana9, Saskia MJ Hopman1,
Maria Iascone10, Margaret Mary Javier11, Erik-Jan Kamsteeg12,
Jennifer Kerkhof13, Jun Kido14, Hyung-Goo Kim15, Tjitske Kleefstra12,
Abbe Lai16, Dorit Lev17, Michael Levy13, Suzanne Lewis11, Angie
Lichty6, Idit Maya18, Haley McConkey13, Andre Megarbane19, Vincent
MIchaud20, Marcello Niceta7, Severine Audebert Bellanger21, Roberta
Onesimo22, Rolph Pfundt12, Bernt Popp23, Eloise Prijoles6, Dmitrijs
Rots12, Saida Ken24, Jolanda Schieving25, Marco Tartaglia7, Romano
Tenconi26, Kevin Uguen21, Nienke Verbeek1, Chris Walsh16, elise
brischoux-boucher27,
Keren
Yosovich28,
Christopher
Yuskaitis29,
Giuseppe Zampino30, Bekim Sadikovic13, Marielle Alders31, Renske
Oegema1
1UMC Utrecht,
Department
of Genetics, Utrecht,
Netherlands;
2London Health Sciences Centre, Molecular Genetics Laboratory,
Molecular Diagnostics Division, London, Canada;
3UMC Utrecht,
Oncode Institute and Center for Molecular Medicine, Utrecht,
Netherlands; 4Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Translational
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
513
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Cytogenomics Research Unit, Rome, Italy;
5Columbia University,
Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, New York,
United States;
6Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, United
States;
7Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Genetics and Rare
Diseases, Rome, Italy; 8UMCG, University of Groningen, Department
of Genetics. In Memoriam., Groningen, Netherlands; 9A.O.R.N. San
Pio, Medical Genetics Unit, Benevento, Italy; 10ASST Papa Giovanni
XXIII,
Laboratorio
di
Genetica
Medica,
Bergamo,
Italy;
11The
University of British Columbia, Medical Genetics, Vancouver, Canada;
12Radboud University Medical Center, Human Genetics, Nijmegen,
Netherlands; 13London Health Sciences Centre, Verspeeten Clinical
Genome Centre, London, Canada; 14Kumamoto University, Depart-
ment of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto,
Japan; 15Neurological Disorders Research Center, Qatar Biomedical
Research Institute, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar;
16Boston Children’s Hospital, Division of Genetics and Genomics and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, United States; 17Wolfson
Medical Centre, Institute of Medical Genetics, Holon, Israel; 18Rabin
Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, The Raphael Recanati Genetic
Institute, Petach-Tikva, Israel; 19Gilbert and Rose-Marie Chagoury
School of Medicine, Lebanese American University, Human Genetics,
Beirut, Lebanon; 20CHU Bordeaux, Department of Medical Genetics,
Bordeaux, France; 21Centre Hospitalier Regional Universitaire, Service
de Génétique médicale et de biologie de la reproduction, Brest,
France; 22Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Department of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology and Cell and Gene Therapy, Rome, Italy;
23Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Institute of
Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany; 24Yokohama City University
Graduate School of Medicine, Department of Human Genetics,
Yokohama, Japan; 25Radboud University Medical Center, Depart-
ment of Child Neurology, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 26Università di
Padova, Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics, Padova, Nether-
lands; 27Université de Franche-Comté, Centre de Génétique Humaine,
Besançon, France; 28Edith Wolfson Medical Cente, Molecular Genetic
Laboratory, Holon, Israel; 29Boston Children’s Hospital, Department
of
Neurology,
Boston,
United
States;
30Fondazione
Policlinico
Universitario A. Gemelli, Center for Rare Disease and Congenital
Defects, Rome, United States;
31Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, Department of Clinical Genetics, Genome Diagnostics
laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Mutations in genes involved in the
epigenetic machinery are an emerging cause of neurodevelop-
mental
disorders
(NDDs).
Lysine-demethylase
2B
(KDM2B)
encodes an epigenetic regulator but has not been convincingly
recognized as a NDD gene to date.
Methods: We assessed 24 heterozygous missense and loss-of-
function variants in KDM2B in 33 individuals and reviewed their
clinical data. We applied genome-wide methylation arrays on
leukocyte-derived DNA samples to establish a KDM2B-speciﬁc
epigenetic signature.
Results: For 21 individuals their variants were classiﬁed as
pathogenic, in another 12 they remained variants of unknown
signiﬁcance. We observed a clustering of variants in the DNA-
binding CXXC domain. Affected individuals presented with
developmental delay and/or intellectual disability (20/21), autism
(8/21), AD(H)D (7/21), cardiac anomalies (10/21), single kidney (4/
21), ophthalmological abnormalities (6/21) and subtle facial dys-
morphism. We established a KDM2B-speciﬁc epigenetic signature,
characterized by hypermethylation of CpG-dinucleotides and with
a stronger subsignature of the CXXC-domain variants. We identi-
ﬁed two distinct episignatures in individuals with concurrent
deletions of SHANK3 or SETD1B respectively, conﬁrming their dual
diagnosis.
Conclusion: Heterozygous KDM2B variants cause a NDD with
frequent congenital anomalies and a distinct DNA methylation
signature. Importantly, we were able to detect the KDM2B
episignature in the context of a dual diagnosis, demonstrating the
robustness of this assay.
References:.
Grants: NM is supported by Japan Agency for Medical
Research and Development (AMED). BP is supported by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). CAW is supported by a
grant from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke (NINDS).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.006.D A novel missense variant in FLNC causes syndromic
dominant cardiomyopathy in a large family
Ingrid E Christophersen1;2, Øyvind H Hald3;4, Yngve Sejersted1, Mari
Ann Kulseth1, Øyvind Evju1, Emily H Marshall5, Karoline B Rypdal6;7,
Marit K Smedsrud8, Inga M Sara9, Andreas D Rosenberger10, Kjell A
Arntzen11;12;13, Jens Pahnke14;15;16, Nathan R Tucker5;17, Ida Lunde6;7,
Marie Falkenberg Smeland3
1Oslo University Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo,
Norway; 2Bærum Hospital, Vestre Viken Hospital Trust, Department of
Medical Research, Gjettum, Norway; 3University Hospital of North
Norway, Department of Medical Genetics, Tromsø, Norway; 4Uni-
versity Hospital of North Norway, Department of Oncology, Tromsø,
Norway;
5Masonic Medical Research Institute, Utica, NY, United
States; 6Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Oslo University
Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; 7Akershus University
Hospital,
Division
of
Diagnostics
and
Technology,
Lørenskog,
Norway; 8Oslo University Hospital, ProCardio Center for Innovation,
Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Oslo, Norway;
9University
Hospital of North Norway, Department of Pediatrics, Tromsø,
Norway; 10The University Hospital of North Norway, The National
Neuromuscular Centre of Norway, Tromsø, Norway;
11University
Hospital of North Norway, Department of Neurology, Tromsø,
Norway; 12UiT - The Arctic University of Norway, Department of
Clinical Medicine, Tromsø, Norway; 13University Hospital of North
Norway, The National Neuromuscular Centre of Norway, Tromsø,
Norway; 14University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Pathology,
Section of Neuropathology,
Translational
Neurodegeneration Research and Neuropathology Lab, Oslo, Nor-
way; 15LIED, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany; 16University of
Latvia, Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Rīga,
Latvia; 17Cardiovascular Disease Initiative, The Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic variants in FLNC (ﬁlamin C)
cause cardiomyopathies and myopathies with known genotype-
phenotype correlations (1). A few cases have been described with
accompanying manifestations, such as congenital cardiac defects.
We present a large family with dominant cardiomyopathy and
extra-cardiac manifestations caused by a novel missense variant
in FLNC.
Methods: Eleven affected individuals (age 0-73 years) in four
generations underwent clinical evaluation. We performed whole-
exome sequencing in three affected individuals, followed by
Sanger sequencing of a shared variant in all other family mem-
bers. Functional effects of the identiﬁed genetic variant were
experimentally explored by overexpression in C2C12 myoblasts.
Results: Clinical evaluation revealed hypertrophic cardiomyo-
pathy in children and adults, congenital but transient myopathy
with contractures, and congenital malformations: cardiac defects,
micrognathia, cleft palate, small/absent uvulas, short stature and
hernias. Exome sequencing identiﬁed a novel missense variant in
FLNC (NM_001458.4: c.7118A>C: p.Tyr2373Ser) in a highly con-
served position in Ig-like domain 21. Overexpression of the variant
versus wild-type FLNC showed intracellular accumulation of
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
514
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
ﬁlamin C protein, suggesting misfolded protein aggregation as
mechanism of disease.
Conclusion: We report a novel pathogenic missense variant in
FLNC, causing syndromic cardiomyopathy and myopathy in a
four-generation family. Our ﬁndings expand the clinical spectrum
of FLNC related disease, and gives unique insight in the lifespan
course of the disease.
References: 1) Verdonschot JAJ et al. A mutation update for
the FLNC gene in myopathies and cardiomyopathies. Hum Mutat
2020 Jun;41(6):1091-1111.
Grants: The National Neuromuscular Centre of Norway, Uni-
versity Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ingrid E Christophersen Recipient of
research grant from The Norwegian Research Council.
Recipient of research grant from the South-Eastern Health
Authorities.
Recipient of research grant from Vestre Viken Hospital Trust,
Øyvind H Hald: None declared, Yngve Sejersted: None declared,
Mari Ann Kulseth: None declared, Øyvind Evju: None declared,
Emily H Marshall: None declared, Karoline B Rypdal: None
declared, Marit K Smedsrud: None declared, Inga M Sara: None
declared, Andreas D Rosenberger: None declared, Kjell A Arntzen:
None declared, Jens Pahnke: None declared, Nathan R Tucker:
None declared, Ida Lunde: None declared, Marie Falkenberg
Smeland: None declared.
P12.007.A Investigating Rho dysregulation in Adams-Oliver
syndrome as a model of vascular development
Clare Benson1, Daniel Osborn1, Laura Southgate1
1St George’s, University of London, Molecular and Clinical Sciences,
London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a
genetically
heterogeneous
developmental
disorder,
pre-
dominantly characterised by scalp, limb and cardiovascular
anomalies. Of the six known causal genes, DOCK6 and ARHGAP31
encode Rho GTPase regulators of CDC42 and RAC1. In AOS,
DOCK6 depletion or ARHGAP31 gain-of-function have been
shown to inactivate CDC42/RAC1, affecting cytoskeletal dynamics.
Nonetheless, the molecular mechanisms of CDC42 and RAC1
dysregulation in disease progression remain largely unexplored.
AOS is hypothesised to be a disorder of vasculogenesis, therefore
we sought to model Rho GTPase dysregulation in zebraﬁsh to
examine embryonic vascular development.
Methods: A novel Tg(dock6:mCherry) zebraﬁsh reporter line
was developed to examine dock6 expression during embry-
ogenesis. Models of Rho dysregulation were generated by mor-
pholino
and
CRISPR
technology.
Whole-mount
in
situ
hybridisation was used to assess the expression of known endo-
thelial markers kdrl and ﬂi1 in our disease models. Vascular ana-
lysis was conducted by microangiography.
Results: Depletion of dock6 and arhgap31 resulted in cardio-
vascular defects, with dock6 embryos additionally displaying eye
abnormalities. Microangiography revealed asymmetric and trun-
cated intersomitic vessels and impaired optic vessel formation in
both models. In arhgap31 morphants, kdrl and ﬂi1 were dimin-
ished throughout the vasculature. Conversely, dock6 knockdown
induced aberrant patterning of the trunk vasculature and reduced
marker expression in the caudal vein plexus (CVP).
Conclusion: The observed defects in models of Rho dysregu-
lation indicate a possible vascular origin to AOS. Speciﬁcally, dock6
depletion leads to compromised CVP patterning and intersomitic
vessel
development.
Future
work
to
investigate
arhgap31-
mediated regulation of ﬂi1 and kdrl may support the delineation
of novel pathways driving AOS pathogenesis.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.008.B Luscan-Lumish syndrome: Nine new cases and
review of the literature
Jair Tenorio1, Pedro Arias1, julian nevado1, Natalia Gallego1,
fernando santos-simarro1, ignacio arroyo2, alfredo santana3, teresa
vendrell4, mercedes artigas5, gabriel martos6, the sogri consortium1,
Pablo LAPUNZINA1
1La Paz University Hospital, INGEMM, Madrid, Spain; 2Hospital San
Pedro de Alcantara, Pediatric department, Cáceres, Spain; 3Hospital
Materno Infantil de Gran Canaria, Medical genetic unit, Las Palmas
de Gran Canaria, Spain;
4Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron:
Urgències, Clinical and molecular genetic unit, Barcelona, Spain;
5Navarrabiomed, Genetic Unit, Pamplona, Spain; 6Hospital Infantil
Universitario Niño Jesús, Pediatric department, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Luscan-Lumish syndrome (LLS) is a
relative recent overgrowth disorder. Clinical features of patients
with LLS also included neurodevelopmental disorders such as
intellectual disability, autistic behavior and epilepsy. Since the
initial description, only few cases have been reported in the lit-
erature, with the lack of deep phenotyping and molecular
underlying mechanism. LLS is caused by pathogenic variants in
SETD2, which encoded a methyltransferase (MTs) protein involved
in histone regulation, playing an important role in gene expression
regulation.
Methods: Analysis by custom NGS panel, from a cohort of
>2000 cases with overgrowth disorders from the Spanish Con-
sortium. This panel was designed in-house and included 214
genes. We have also reviewed the clinical and molecular features
of the cases described in the literature so far.
Results: Here, we report nine additional individuals with LLS, in
which pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants. Most common
clinical features of the patients included overgrowth, intellectual
disability, and neurodevelopmental disorders with variable degree
of severity. We have also seen that autism behaviour in quite
common, and can appear without overgrowth.
At molecular level, we have detected nine new variants not
reported previously in the literature, expanding the causative
variants in LLS. The majority of the variants detected were non-
sense and frameshift, which is in line with low tolerance of SETD2
for this kind of changes according to the pLI score (pLI = 1).
Conclusion: In summary, we report nine additional cases with LLS
and reviewed clinical and molecular features of all cases described.
References:.
Grants: FIS PI21/01053.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.009.C A large, ten-generation family with autosomal
dominant preaxial polydactyly/triphalangeal thumb:
Historical, clinical, genealogical and molecular studies
luis francisco gonzalez alvarez1, Jair Tenorio2, fernando poletta3,
fernando santos-simarro2, Pedro Arias2, Natalia Gallego2, ieda orioli4,
Stefan Mundlos5, Eduardo castilla4, victor martinez-glez2, maria luisa
martinez
frias6,
victor
l.
ruiz-pérez7,
julian
nevado2,
Pablo
LAPUNZINA2
1Cervera de Buitrago, Centro de Salud Area 6, Cervera de Buitrago,
Spain; 2La Paz University Hospital, INGEMM, Madrid, Spain; 3CEMIC,
Buenos Aires, Argentina; 4CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina; 5Max-
Planck-Institut für molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany; 6Carlos III
Health Institute, esearch Center on Congenital Anomalies (CIAC),
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
515
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Madrid, Spain;
7Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas “Alberto
Sols”. IIBm (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives:.
Methods:.
Results: We present a large, ten-generation family of 273
individuals with 84 people having preaxial polydactyly/tripha-
langeal thumb due to a pathogenic variant in the zone of polar-
izing activity regulatory sequence (ZRS) within the exon 5 of
LMBR1. The causative change maps to position 396 of the ZRS,
located at position c.423+4909C>T (chr7:156791480; hg38; LMBR1
ENST00000353442.10; rs606231153 NG_009240.2 in the intron 5
of LMBR1. The ﬁrst affected individual with the disorder was
traced back to mid-1700, when some settlers and workers estab-
lished in Cervera de Buitrago, a small village about 82 Km north to
Madrid. Clinical and radiological studies of most of the affected
members have been performed for 42 years (follow-up of the
family by LFGA). Recently, molecular studies have conﬁrmed a
pathogenic variant in the ZRS that segregates in this family. Cur-
rently, four affected individuals at child-bearing age have been
included in a pre-implantation genetic diagnosis program with the
aim to avoid the transmission of the disease.
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest
family with preaxial polydactyly/triphalangeal thumb reported
so far.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.010.D Biallelic mutations in TIE1 in a family with
congenital lymphedema, intestinal lymphectasia and cutis
aplasia
Aasem Abu Shtaya1, Rivka Sukenik Halevy2;3, lily bazak1, Gabriel
Arie Lidzbarsky1, Claudia Gonzaga-Jauregui4, Yael Goldberg1;3, lina
basel-salmon1;3;5;6
1Rabin Medical Center, Recanati Genetic Institute, Petah Tikva, Israel;
2Meir Medical Center, Genetics Institute, Kfar Saba, Israel; 3Tel Aviv
University, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel; 4Regeneron
Genetics Center, Tarrytown, New York, United States; 5Schneider
Children’s Medical Center of Israel, Pediatric Genetics Clinic, Petah
Tikva, Israel; 6Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Petah Tikva, Israel.
Background/Objectives: Intestinal lymphangiectasis (IL) is a very
rare condition; it occurs due to dilatation of the intestinal lym-
phatic vessels resulting in lymphatic leakage to the bowel lumen
leading to protein loss and edema.
Congenital cutis aplasia (CAA) is also a rare phenotype, occur-
ring mainly on the scalp; up to 90% of cases present as sporadic
isolated lesions, but can rarely be associated with additional
abnormalities as part of a genetic disorder.
We report co-occurrence of IL, CAA and lymphedema in two male
siblings. One sibling died in infancy due to sagittal sinus bleeding.
Methods: Exome sequencing performed in the proband, par-
ents and two healthy siblings.
Results: Sequencing revealed compound heterozygosity for
c.1502G>A;
p.Ser501Asn
and
c.2536G>A;
p.Gly846Arg
(NM_005424.5) in TIE1 in the proband. Three asymptomatic family
members were heterozygous for one or the other variant.
Conclusion: The TIE1 gene encoding TIE1 orphan receptor is
associated with autosomal dominant (AD) Lymphatic malforma-
tion 11 (MIM #619401) characterized by peripheral edema, with
onset in the second-third decade of life. Biallelic variants in this
gene have been reported to cause extensive edema in knock-out
mice suggesting a loss of function mechanism. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report of possible autosomal recessive
inheritance of this disorder in humans with a more severe phe-
notype than the AD form. However, the possibility of AD inheri-
tance with incomplete penetrance cannot be excluded.
To conclude, we suggest that biallelic deleterious variants in
TIE1 might lead to a more severe phenotype with previously
unreported clinical features including CAA and IL.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.012.B Cardiac involvement and TBCK-related
neurodevelopmental disorder: is it a new feature of this
condition?
Gioia Mastromoro1, Daniele Guadagnolo1, Nader Khaleghi Hashe-
mian1, Laura Bernardini2, Antonella Giancotti3, Antonio Novelli4,
Viviana Caputo1, Cira di Gioia3, Gerardo Piacentini5, Antonio Pizzuti1
1Sapienza University of Rome, Experimental Medicine, Roma, Italy;
2Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy;
3Sapienza University of Rome, Roma, Italy; 4Bambino Gesù Pediatric
Hospital,
Roma,
Italy;
5Fatebenefratelli
San
Giovanni
Calibita
Hospital, Roma, Italy.
Background/Objectives: TBCK (TBC1 Domain-Containing Kina-
se;MIM*616899) encodes a protein that plays a role in actin
organization, cell growth/proliferation by regulating the mTOR
signaling pathway. Deleterious homozygous or compound het-
erozygous TBCK variants determine Hypotonia, infantile, with
psychomotor retardation and characteristic facies 3 (MIM#616900).
We report on three affected sibs, presenting also with cardiac
malformations.
Methods: A couple of ﬁrst cousins had previously been studied
because their ﬁrst child presented developmental delay, dys-
morphisms, hyperthricosis and right-sided aortic arch, and a
deceased daughter had showed similar features and Tetralogy of
Fallot. Whole exome sequencing, performed on the infant detected
the homozygous c.1532G>A;p.(Arg511His) pathogenic variant in
the TBCK gene, resulting in a compatible clinical picture. The couple
was referred again to perform prenatal diagnosis on their current
pregnancy. The ultrasound scan had showed cystic hygroma and
hypoplastic nasal bone, previously unreported in TBCK-related
cases. We thereby requested chromosomal microarray analysis,
whole exome sequencing and early fetal echocardiography.
Results: Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed 8.6% runs
of homozygosity. The homozygous TBCK variant was detected by
whole exome sequencing, without further pathogenic or candi-
date variants. Early fetal echocardiography identiﬁed hypoplasia of
left ventricle and aortic arch. The couple opted for pregnancy
termination. Fetopsy conﬁrmed the sonographic ﬁndings and
revealed a hypoplastic aorta arising from right ventricle and cor-
pus callosum agenesis.
Conclusion: This is one of the very few families reported with
TBCK mutations. Interestingly, the cardiac phenotype segregates
with mutations and cardiac involvement could be considered a
new feature of this variant causing Hypotonia, infantile, with
psychomotor retardation and characteristic facies 3.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.013.C Mouse in vivo and in vitro models to understand
neural pathobiology associated with ACTB loss of function
Andrew Thom1, Filipa Lopes2, Leo Zeef3, Catherine Lawrence4;5, Neil
Roberts2, Adrian S. Woolf2, Siddharth Banka1;6
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
516
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1University of Manchester, Division of Evolution, Infection and
Genomics, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology,
Medicine and Health., Manchester, United Kingdom; 2University
of Manchester, Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative
Medicine,
School
of
Biological
Sciences,
Faculty
of
Biology,
Medicine and Health, Manchester, United Kingdom; 3University of
Manchester, The Bioinformatics Core Facility, Manchester, United
Kingdom; 4University of Manchester, Division of Neuroscience and
Experimental Psychology, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health,
Manchester, United Kingdom; 5University of Manchester, Geoffrey
Jefferson Brain Research Centre, Manchester Academic Health
Science Centre, Northern Care Alliance NHS Group, Manchester,
United Kingdom; 6Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital,
Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Heterozygous loss of function variants
in ACTB encoding β-actin cause a human syndrome featuring
developmental delay. We hypothesised that mouse in vivo and
in vitro models would further our understanding of the neural
pathobiology of this human genetic disease.
Methods: We used two models: mice with a heterozygous Actb
deletion in early embryogenesis, using Cre-Lox technology; and
mouse N2a neuroblastoma cells with siRNA-mediated Actb
knockdown. In each, Actb expression is predicted to be reduced
but not absent, thus modelling ACTB haploinsufﬁciency.
Results: In wild type mouse brains, as assessed by immuno-
histochemistry, β-actin was widespread and was most prominent
in microglial-like cells. Neonatal mice with heterozygous deletion
of Actb had normal brain weights. Nevertheless, RNA sequencing
identiﬁed
signiﬁcantly
deregulated
transcripts
including,
as
expected, downregulated Actb, but with increased Acta2 (encod-
ing a smooth muscle actin) and transcripts encoding ﬁlamin (an
actin binding protein) and vinculin (another cytoskeletal protein).
We exposed N2a cells to Actb siRNA, resulting in decreased Actb
mRNA and β-actin protein. Versus cells exposed to control siRNA,
knockdown cells showed slower migration, with increases in
neurite length and number as well as prominent secondary
branches. There was no effect on proliferation. These cells showed
changed levels of several of the transcripts altered in Actb mutant
mouse brains.
Conclusion: Actb knock-down neural cells provide clues
regarding altered cell biology and we hypothesise that similar
changes occur in vivo. In heterozygous deleted Actb brains, an
altered signature at the transcript level may suggest druggable
targets to ameliorate the pathobiology.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.014.D Mildly skewed X-chromosome inactivation as a
mechanism for the expression of Allan-Herndon-Dudley
syndrome phenotype in a female patient
Bianca Pereira Favilla1, Caroline Olivati2;3, Erika Lopes Freitas4,
Bibiana Santos4, Maria Isabel Melaragno1, Vera Ayres Meloni1;2,
Flavia Balbo Piazzon2;5;6
1Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Department of Morphology and
Genetics, São Paulo, Brazil; 2Rare Rosy Clinic, São Paulo, Brazil;
3Fleury Medicina e Saúde, São Paulo, Brazil;
4Mendelics Análise
Genômica, São Paulo, Brazil; 5University of Liège, Department of
Pediatrics, Liège, Belgium; 6University of São Paulo, Neurometabolic
Unit, São Paulo, Brazil.
Background/Objectives: Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome (AHDS)
is an X-linked condition characterized by neuropsychomotor
development delay, intellectual disability, neurological impair-
ment, and abnormal thyroid hormone proﬁle. It mainly affects
males, as female carriers are usually asymptomatic or present only
abnormal thyroid blood tests. In rare cases of symptomatic
female
carriers,
X-chromosome
abnormalities
and
skewed
X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) may play a role in the expression
of the phenotype.
Methods: We describe a 16-year-old female patient with mild
intellectual disability, dysmorphic facial features, marfanoid
habitus, joint hypermobility, lumbar hyperlordosis, mild thoracic
scoliosis, genu recurvatum, high serum levels of 3,3,5´-triio-
dothyronine (T3), and normal to low levels of thyroxine and
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Karyotyping, whole-exome
sequencing, Sanger sequencing, and XCI analysis through
Human Androgen receptor assay (HUMARA) were performed.
Results: The proposita and her parents presented normal
karyotypes. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a de novo rare
missense variant in SLC16A2: c.1388C>T:p.Pro463Leu, conﬁrmed
by Sanger sequencing. Haplotype analysis using a single nucleo-
tide polymorphism (rs5937843) in cis with the variant showed that
the missense variant was in the X chromosome originated from
the father. HUMARA revealed the inactivation of the maternal and
paternal alleles in ratios of 71% and 29%, respectively. Thus, the
chromosome carrying the normal SLC16A2 allele was preferentially
inactive.
Conclusion: Skewed XCI may have played a role in the
expression of a mild AHDS phenotype in the patient. Together
with SLC16A2 variants, skewed XCI may be investigated in females
with AHDS phenotypic features even when X-chromosome
abnormalities are absent.
References:.
Grants: #2019/21644-0, #2020/16422-5 São Paulo Research
Foundation (FAPESP).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.016.B In vitro effect of TRAF7 germline and somatic
missense variants on its subcellular localization and cell shape
Aina Prat-Planas1;2, Laura Castilla-Vallmanya1;2, Mónica Centeno-
Pla1;2;3, Daniel Grinberg1;2, Raquel Rabionet1;2, Roser Urreizti2;3,
Susanna Balcells1;2
1University of Barcelona, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and
Statistics, Faculty of Biology (IBUB), Barcelona, Spain; 2Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain; 3Hospital Sant Joan
de Déu, Clinical Biochemistry Department, Esplugues de Llobregat,
Spain.
Background/Objectives: TRAF7 syndrome is an ultra-rare neu-
rodevelopmental disorder characterized by intellectual disability,
motor delay, cardiac alterations and dysmorphic features. It is
caused by germline mutations in TRAF7, which codes for an E3
ubiquitin ligase acting in different signalling pathways. Somatic
mutations in this same gene have been associated with
tumorigenic processes. Our aim was to explore the effects of
germline and somatic missense variants on TRAF7 subcellular
localization.
Methods: We selected ﬁve TRAF7 variants (one benign
(p.H478Y),
2
tumorigenic
(p.L519P,
p.N520S),
2
syndromic
(p.L519F, p.R655Q)) and introduced them in a TRAF7 expressing
vector by site-directed mutagenesis. We then transfected these
constructs into HeLa cells and performed immunocytochemistry
to study their effects on TRAF7 subcellular localization. We also
assessed colocalization with its partner MEKK3.
Results: Wild-type TRAF7 was found throughout the cyto-
plasm in aggregate-like structures. Upon transfection with TRAF7
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
517
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
pathogenic mutants, aggregate size was larger and cell shape
was modiﬁed. TRAF7 syndromic mutations presented an aber-
rant behaviour, with 86-95% of transfected cells being rounded
(compared to 27-37% in WT/benign conditions). Additionally,
tumorigenic and syndromic mutations showed higher levels of
large protein aggregates in comparison to WT/benign condi-
tions. Finally, TRAF7 and MEKK3 presented a high degree of
colocalization, and no differences were noted between TRAF7
variants.
Conclusion: The pathogenic mutations caused drastic cell
shape and TRAF7 subcellular localization modiﬁcations after their
transfection. These modiﬁcations could be used as biomarkers to
test the pathogenicity of newly identiﬁed variants in patients with
an unclear neurodevelopmental presentation.
References:.
Grants:
Spanish
Government
(CIBERER-U720;
PID2019-
107188RB-C21; SAF2016-75948-R).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.017.C Two novel cases of IQSEC2 syndromic mental
retardation revealed an intronic variant disrupting expression
of different transcripts isoforms
Estrella Lopez-Martín1, Beatriz Baladron1, Lidia Mielu1, Jose Ignacio
Alvarado1, Sara Monzon2, Sarai Varona2, Isabel Cuesta de la Plaza2,
Gema Gomez-Mariano1, Marina Gutierrez1, Lidia López1, Francisco
Javier Alonso1;3, Eva Bermejo-Sanchez1, Manuel Posada1, Beatriz
Martinez-Delgado1;3
1Instituto
de
Salud
Carlos
III,
Instituto
de
Investigación
de
Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain; 2Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Bionformatics Unit, Madrid, Spain; 3Centro de Investigación Biomé-
dica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Grupo CIBERER 758.,
Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives:
Pathogenic
hemizygous
or
hetero-
zygous mutations in the IQSEC2 gene cause X-linked mental
retardation-1 (MRX1) characterized by a variable phenotype. It
affects both males and females typically through loss of function
in males and haploinsufﬁciency in heterozygous females. IQSEC2
gene is one of the described genes that scape X chromosome
inactivation. It is expressed in neurons and participates in cytos-
keletal organization, dendritic spine morphology, and excitatory
synaptic organization.
Methods: The diagnostic activity of the SpainUDP (Undiag-
nosed Rare Disease Program) revealed two unrelated cases, one
male and one female, with de novo IQSEC2 variants detected by
trio-based whole exome sequencing. The female case had an
undescribed frameshift mutation and the male case showed an
intronic variant in intron 6, with unknown effect. IQSEC2 gene
expression was analyzed by RT-PCR and QT-PCR speciﬁc for the
three transcripts isoforms.
Results: Expression analysis revealed that the intronic variant
created an alternative donor splicing site and an aberrant pro-
duct, with the inclusion of 19bp leading to a frameshift and
premature stop codon. Moreover, quantitative expression of the
three different IQSEC2 transcripts in both cases comparing to
their progenitors showed a higher reduction of all isoforms in
the male, but expression was less reduced in the female case,
with no decrease of the short IQSEC2 isoform expression.
Conclusion: Our study allowed us to establish an intronic
variant in IQSEC2 as the cause of the disease leading to the
diagnosis. Different expression level of the IQSEQ2 isoforms might
be implicated in the disease manifestations.
References:.
Grants: SpainUDP Program (ISCIII).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.018.D Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome type 1: How
placental immunohistochemistry can rapidily predict the
diagnosis
Giacomo Fiandrino1, Alessia Arossa2, Silvia Kalantari3, Elisa Gior-
gio4;5, Francesco Bassanese6;7, Annachiara Scatigno2;7, Anna Mer-
oni2;7, Chiara Melito2, Stefania Cesari1, Gioacchino D’Ambrosio1,
Stefania Longo8, Stefano Ghirardello8, Tiziana Angelica Figar8, Marco
Paulli1;4, Arsenio Spinillo2;7, Enza Maria Valente4;5, Fabio Sirchia4;9
1IRCCS San Matteo Foundation, Anatomic Pathology Unit, Pavia,
Italy; 2IRCCS San Matteo Foundation, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Pavia, Italy; 3University of Turin, Medical Sciences, Turin,
Italy; 4University of Pavia, Department of Molecular Medicine, Pavia,
Italy; 5IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy; 6IRCCS San Matteo
Foundation, Pediatric Clinic, Pavia, Italy; 7University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy; 8IRCCS San Matteo Foundation, Neonatal Intensive Care Unit,
Pavia, Italy; 9IRCCS San Matteo Foundation, Medical Genetics Unit,
Pavia, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Glypican-3 (GPC3) is an oncofetal pro-
tein involved in cellular signalling, strongly expressed in placenta
and absent or diminished in postnatal life, but often increased in
human malignancies (i.e. hepatocellular carcinoma and germinal
tumours). Germline loss-of-function variants of GPC3 gene are
associated with Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome type 1 (SGBS1),
an exceedingly rare recessive X-linked overgrowth disease char-
acterized by typical facial features, congenital abnormalities and
an increased risk of tumours during childhood.
Methods: A clinical suspicion of SGBS1 was postulated for a
newborn
with
prenatal
history
of
overgrowth
and
poly-
hydramnios, presenting at birth with neonatal weight and length
>99th centile, coarse face, iris coloboma, supernumerary nipples
and
splenomegaly.
Prenatal
genetic
testing
for
Beckwith-
Wiedemann syndrome (the most common genetic overgrowth
syndrome) and SNP-arrays resulted normal. In order to support the
diagnostic
hypothesis,
placental
GPC3
immunohistochemical
expression was investigated. In parallel, we assessed placental
GPC3 expression in 20 probands representative of multiple dis-
orders associated with fetal macrosomia and/or placentomegaly,
including
pregestational/gestational
diabetes
and
placental
mesenchymal dysplasia, as well as in healthy controls.
Results: Whole genome sequencing in the proband identiﬁed
a likely pathogenic maternally inherited missense variant in GPC3:
c.1645A>G; (p.Ile549Val).
GPC3
immunohistochemistry
demonstrated
full-thickness
negativity on all parenchymal sections of the SGBS1 case. On
the contrary, we demonstrated preservation of GPC3 placental
antigenicity in all the other overgrowth conditions and in healthy
controls.
Conclusion: Evaluation of GPC3 expression in the placenta
may prove useful in the differential diagnosis of fetal macrosomia,
allowing targeted genetic testing and earlier diagnosis both in
prenatal and in neonatal setting.
References:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-014-0138-0,
https://doi.org/10.14670/HH-16.71.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.019.A TSC1/TSC2 mosaicism accounts for ~10% of all
diagnoses of tuberous sclerosis and genome sequencing fails
to identify a third causative gene
Angela Peron1;2;3, Rosa Maria Alfano3, Barry Moore4, Mark Nellist5,
Brent Pedersen4, Francesca La Briola6, Luigina Spaccini7, Federica
Natacci8, Maria Paola Recalcati9, Valentina Chiesa6, Rosangela
Arancio10, Ugo Cavallari11, Chiara Vannicola6, Graziella Cefalo10,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
518
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Maitz Silvia12, Cristina Gervasini13, Pierangelo Veggiotti14, Aglaia
Vignoli1;15,
Gaetano
Bulfamante1;3, John
Carey2, Maria
Paola
Canevini1;15
1Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of Health Sciences,
Milano, Italy;
2University of Utah, Division of Medical Genetics,
Department of Pediatrics, Salt Lake City, United States; 3ASST Santi
Paolo e Carlo, San Paolo Hospital, Human Pathology, Milano, Italy;
4University of Utah, Department of Human Genetics, Utah Center for
Genetic Discovery, Salt Lake City, United States; 5Erasmus Medical
Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands;
6ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, San Paolo Hospital, Child Neuropsychiatry
Unit - Epilepsy Center, Milano, Italy; 7Vittore Buzzi Children’s Hospital
- ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco, Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Milano, Italy; 8Foundation IRCCS Ca’
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Medical Genetics Unit,
Milano, Italy; 9Istituto Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Medical Cytoge-
netics Laboratory, Cusano Milanino, Italy; 10ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo,
San Paolo Hospital, Pediatrics Unit, Milano, Italy; 11ASST Grande
Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Medical Genetics Unit, Depart-
ment of Laboratory Medicine, Milano, Italy; 12MBBM Foundation, San
Gerardo Hospital, Clinical Pediatric Genetics Unit, Pediatrics Clinics,
Monza, Italy; 13Università degli Studi di Milano, Medical Genetics,
Department of Health Sciences, Milano, Italy;
14Vittore Buzzi
Children’s Hospital - ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco, Pediatric Neurology
Unit, Milano, Italy; 15ASST Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda,
Child Neuropsychiatry Unit - Epilepsy Center, Milano, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Aims: 1. To investigate the molecular
basis of tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) in patients with no
mutation identiﬁed (NMI); 2. To evaluate the rate of mosaicism in a
real-world setting and delineate the phenotype of mosaic
patients.
Methods: Pilot study: chromosomal microarray (8x60K), trio
genome
sequencing
(60X),
deep-coverage
TSC1/TSC2
NGS
(>2000X), and HaloPlex custom capture array of the TSC1/TSC2
genomic regions on 10 individuals with TSC and NMI. Complete
study: deep-coverage TSC1/TSC2 sequencing on 200 patients and
deep phenotyping of those with mosaicism.
Results: Pilot study: we identiﬁed mosaic pathogenic variants
in TSC1/TSC2 in 8/10 patients and deep-intronic inherited VUSs in
2/10. Genome sequencing failed to identify causative variants in
other relevant genes. Complete study: we identiﬁed 24 patients
with mosaic pathogenic variants in TSC1 (n = 2) or TSC2 (n = 22),
deﬁning a rate of mosaicism of 12%. Mosaic variant allele fre-
quency (VAF) was 1%-32% in blood, 2%-35% in saliva. Extensive
phenotypic analysis showed that 82% of individuals with mosaic
variants displayed normal cognitive level, and the number of
several manifestations - although present - was often insufﬁcient
to meet diagnostic criteria. Notwithstanding, we observed a high
frequency of pulmonary/renal manifestations, which were as
severe as those seen in non-mosaic individuals.
Conclusion: We demonstrated for the ﬁrst time that at least
one in 10 individuals with TSC carries a mosaic pathogenic variant
in TSC1/TSC2 and that mosaic patients have a distinctive pheno-
typic severity. We did not obtain evidence for a third TSC locus.
Our ﬁndings have implications for surveillance and counselling.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Angela Peron Italfarmaco, Italfarmaco,
Rosa Maria Alfano: None declared, Barry Moore: None declared,
Mark Nellist: None declared, Brent Pedersen: None declared,
Francesca La Briola Italfarmaco, GW, Italfarmaco, Luigina Spaccini:
None declared, Federica Natacci: None declared, Maria Paola
Recalcati:
None
declared,
Valentina
Chiesa:
None
declared,
Rosangela Arancio: None declared, Ugo Cavallari: None declared,
Chiara Vannicola: None declared, Graziella Cefalo: None declared,
Maitz Silvia: None declared, Cristina Gervasini: None declared,
Pierangelo Veggiotti: None declared, Aglaia Vignoli Italfarmaco,
Italfarmaco, Gaetano Bulfamante: None declared, John Carey:
None declared, Maria Paola Canevini Italfarmaco, Italfarmaco.
P12.020.B Further delineation of SMG9-related heart and
brain malformation syndrome
Amal Alhashem1;2, Norah Altuwaijiri3, Fowzan Alkuraya3
1Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Pediatric, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia;
2Alfaisal univeristy, Collage of medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; 3King
Faisal
Specialist
Hospital
&
Research
Centre,
Developmental
medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Background/Objectives:
SMG9-deﬁciency
syndrome,
(MIM
#616920), is a recently described autosomal recessive disorder
associated with intellectual disability and multiple malformations.
To date, seven affected individuals have been reported. Here, we
describe two previously unpublished cases that expand the phe-
notypic spectrum of SMG9-related heart and brain malformation
syndrome.
Methods: The proband born with midbrain atrophy, inter-
rupted inferior vena cava. Baby suffered from hypotonia, chronic
lung infections, was on continuous positive airway pressure, and
died after respiratory cardiac arrest at 25 months of age, he
underwent exome sequencing which revealed homozygous var-
iant in SMG9. He had another sister diagnosed antenatally to have
a banana-shaped cerebellum, scoliosis, a narrow chest, and ecto-
pia cordis with an anterior abdominal wall defect, died soon after
birth. Her carrier testing for SMG9 showed the same homozygous
mutation.
Results: Whole exome sequence for the boy reviled homo-
zygous
splicing
variant
in
SMG9
(NM_019108.4:
exon7:
c.701+4A>G), which was also found in his sister. This is the ﬁrst
time ectopia cordis, jejunal atresia and involvement of brainstem
and basal ganglia have been documented.
Conclusion:
Since
the
severe
phenotypic
presentation
observed in the proband’s sibling is the ﬁrst to include ectopia
cordis, a defect in the anterior abdominal wall, further character-
ization of the phenotypic spectrum of SMG9-related heart and
brain malformation syndrome is imperative to conclude if a
mutation in SMG9 alone is responsible for these major abnorm-
alities. These new features should inform the management and
anticipatory health supervision of children as we learn more about
this newly emerging syndrome.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.021.C Novel variant in OTUD5 detected in a patient with
multiple congenital anomalies-neurodevelopmental
syndrome and suggested in a fetus in the same family
Irina Hüning1, Inga Nagel2, Helga Rehder3, Malte Spielmann1;2
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany;
2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany;
3Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.
Background/Objectives: The OTUD5 gene at Xp11.23 encodes
ovarian tumor deubiquitinase 5 protein, a deubiquitinating
enzyme member of the ovarian tumor family. Recently 3 families
with 16 male patients were reported with a new X-linked recessive
disorder
(Multiple
congenital
anomalies-neurodevelopmental
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
519
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
syndrome; MCAND; OMIM 301056), arising from pathogenic mis-
sense OTUD5 variants (Tripolszki et al. 2021; Saida et al. 2021). Here
we report a 29-year-old male patient with MCAND and a trun-
cating variant in OTUD5 as well as a male fetus of the same family,
a putative carrier of the same variant.
Here we report two additional patients with MCAND and a
novel truncating variant in OTUD5 in the index patient, suggesting
that also truncating variants in OTUD5 are responsible for MCAND
and supporting the data on intrafamilial variability.
Methods:.
Results: The index patient presents with severe intellectual
impairment, hypotonia, distinctive dysmorphic facial features,
intrauterine growth retardation, scoliosis, strabismus, biﬁd tongue,
tetralogy of Fallot, single transverse palmar crease, self-injurious
behavior, hypoplasia of corpus callosum, cryptorchidism and short
stature. Single exome analysis showed the hemizygous variant
OTUD5: c.1492C>T; p.(Gln498*).
In 1990 the mother of the patient had a spontaneous abortion
at 14 weeks of gestation. The male fetus showed clinical features
consisting with MCAND. Unfortunately fetal DNA was no longer
available for molecular analysis.
Conclusion: Here we report two additional patients with
MCAND and a novel truncating variant in OTUD5 in the index
patient, suggesting that also truncating variants in OTUD5 are
responsible for MCAND and supporting the data on intrafamilial
variability.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.022.D Fourth patient with metaphyseal chondromatosis
with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria caused by a recurrent IDH1
mosaic mutation
Bianca Greiten1, Anna-Sophie Liegmann1, Franka Rust2, Inga
Nagel2, Stephanie Colling3, Yorck Hellenbroich1, Malte Spielmann1;2,
Irina Hüning1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany;
2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany;
3Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
Background/Objectives:
Mutations
in
the
isocitrate
dehy-
drogenase (IDH) enzyme IDH1 lead to elevated levels of D-2-
hydroxyglutarate (D-2HG) by changing the enzymatic activity of
the IDH enzyme. Mutations of the IDH1 gene as somatic mosaics
cause metaphyseal chondromatosis with urinary excretion of D-2-
hydroxy-glutaric acid (MC-HGA). MC-HGA is a rare disorder char-
acterized
by
metaphyseal
disorganization,
chondrodysplasia,
urinary excretion of D-2HG and cerebral involvement.
Methods: We report on a 7-months-old girl with MC-HGA.
Prenatal ultrasound revealed shortened long bones of the upper
and lower extremities, intrauterine growth retardation and an
enlargement
of
the
subarachnoid
space.
Echocardiography
showed a patent foramen ovale and tricuspid insufﬁciency. The
patient had generalized hypotonia, motor delay and ﬂexion con-
tractures of the right 3rd and 4th ﬁngers. She presented with short
stature and a relatively large head circumference. Dysmorphic
features included low-set ears, epicanthus, short nose with slightly
anteverted nostrils, long philtrum, small upper lip, retrognathia
and a prominent forehead. The girl suffered from hearing loss.
Cerebral MRI showed enlarged subarachnoid space, immature and
altered gyration, subdural hygroma, small pons, poorly developed
tentorium cerebelli and falx cerebri as well as cerebral atrophy.
Urine analysis showed an excessive excretion of hydroxy-glutaric-
acid.
Results: Whole exome sequencing showed a de novo
pathogenic variant c.395G>A, p.(Arg132His) in the IDH1 gene
in somatic mosaicism. The variant was found in 59 of 152
reads (38,8%). This missense mutation is predicted to be likely
pathogenic.
Conclusion: The phenotype of our patient overlaps with the
phenotype of the previously reported three patients in the lit-
erature and thus marks the fourth case.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.023.A Whole exome sequencing (WES) and functional
analyses suggest synergistic effects of deleterious variants in
two candidate genes for Poland Syndrome
Maria Cerminara1;2, Carlotta Vaccari2, Ilaria Musante2;3, Maria
Teresa Divizia3, Margherita Lerone3, Michele Torre4, Maria Victoria
Romanini4, Simone Bossi5, Martina Servetti2, Renata Bocciardi2;3,
Nicoletta Pedemonte3, Genny Del Zotto6, Filippo Maria Senes7,
Maura Valle8, maria grazia calevo9, Marco Fontana3, Davide
Cittaro10, Dejan Lazarevic10, Federico Zara1;2, Maria Francesca
Bedeschi11, Aldamaria Puliti1;2
1IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, UOC Genetica Medica, Genova, Italy;
2Università di Genova, DiNOGMI Dipartimento di Neuroscienze,
Riabilitazione, Oftalmologia, Genetica e Scienze Materno-Infantili,
Genova, Italy; 1IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, UOC Genetica Medica,
Genova, Italy;
4IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, UOC Chirurgia
Pediatrica, Genova, Italy; 2Università di Genova, DiNOGMI Diparti-
mento di Neuroscienze, Riabilitazione, Oftalmologia, Genetica e
Scienze Materno-Infantili, Genova, Italy;
6IRCCS Istituto Giannina
Gaslini, Core Facilities, Dipartimento Integrato Servizi e Laboratori,
Genova, Italy;
7IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, UOC Ortopedia,
Genova, Italy;
8IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, UOC Radiologia,
Genova, Italy; 9IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, UO Epidemiologia e
Biostatistica, Genova, Italy; 10IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Centro di
Genomica Traslazionale e Bioinformatica, Milano, Italy;
11IRCCS
Fondazione Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, UOSD
Genetica Medica, Milano, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Poland Syndrome (PS, OMIM 173800) is
a rare congenital condition characterized by pectoral muscle
agenesis/hypoplasia variably associated with ipsilateral thoracic
and/or upper limb anomalies. Most cases of PS are sporadic,
familial recurrence has been observed with phenotypic hetero-
geneity. Different inheritance patterns have been reported and
polygenic/multifactorial mechanisms have been hypothesized in
some cases. The genetic etiology of PS remains unknown. In this
study
we
aimed
at
investigating
the
genetic
mechanisms
underlying PS.
Methods: A cohort of 30 PS patients were analysed by WES,
and potentially deleterious variants prioritized by custom ﬁltering
strategies including the use of Oligogenic Resource for Variant
Analysis Platform (ORVAL). Functional analyses of identiﬁed var-
iants included in vitro mutagenesis followed by cell imaging and
gene reporter assays.
Results: In a familial case with pectoral muscle hypoplasia,
thoracic and mammary gland anomalies deleterious missense
variants were found in two genes: MUSTN1, expressed in the
nucleus and involved in the development of pectoral muscle and
cartilage, and PARD3B localized at the cell membrane and involved
in cell polarity, and mammary gland development. Both mutant
proteins displayed altered cell localization likely impairing their
function. One further PS sporadic patient, with a similar complex
phenotype, showed a 5’UTR variant of MUSTN1 causing a reduced
expression of MUSTN1.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
520
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: These results suggest that PS may be due to a
digenic inheritance mechanism with the MUSTN1 variant respon-
sible for the pectoral muscle defects and PARD3B substitution for
the asymmetry and mammary gland anomalies.
References: Romanini et al., Semin Pediatr Surg. 2018.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.024.B A fatal progeroid syndrome caused by a recessive
RAF1 loss-of-function mutation
Nathalie Escande-Beillard1;2, Samantha Wong1, yu xuan tan1, kiat
yi
tan1,
Abigail
loh1,
engin
Ozkan3,
Hülya
Kayserili4,
Bruno
Reversade1;2
1Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Singapore, Singapore;
2Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey; 3University of Chicago, Chicago,
United States; 4Koç University Hospital, Istanbul (EUR), Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Somatic and germline gain-of-function
point mutations in RAF, the ﬁrst oncogene to be discovered in
humans, delineate a group of tumor-prone syndromes known as
RASopathies. In this study, we document the ﬁrst human pheno-
type resulting from the germline loss-of-function of the proto-
oncogene RAF1 (a.k.a. CRAF).
Methods: Whole exome sequencing followed by Sanger
sequencing were performed. HEK293T wildtype and mutant were
grown in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium. RAF1 mutant cells
were generated with CRISPR/Cas9 method. Cell death was asses-
sed by adding SYTOX® Green Nucleic Acid Stain. For western
blotting, cells or Xenopus embryos were lysed in RIPA buffer
supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktails and phosphatase
inhibitors. RAF1 mutants mRNA were injected into 4-cell stage
Xenopus laevis embryos, and harvested at various developmental
stages for subsequent protein extraction or WISH analyses.
Results: In a consanguineous family, we uncovered a homo-
zygous p.Thr543Met mutation segregating with a neonatal lethal
progeroid syndrome with cutaneous, craniofacial, cardiac and limb
anomalies. Structure-based prediction and functional tests using
human knock-in cells showed that threonine 543 is essential to: 1)
ensure RAF1’s stability and phosphorylation, 2) maintain its kinase
activity towards substrates of the MAPK pathway and 3) protect
from
stress-induced
apoptosis.
When
injected
in
Xenopus
embryos, unlike RAF1WT, mutant RAF1T543M failed to phenocopy
the effects of overactive FGF/MAPK signaling conﬁrming its
hypomorphic activity.
Conclusion: Collectively, our data disclose the genetic and
molecular etiology of a novel segmental progeroid syndrome,
which highlights the importance of RAF1 for human development
and homeostasis.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.025.C ATRIP-deﬁcient patient expands molecular and
clinical spectrum of Seckel syndrome
Lynn Backers1;2, Simon J Tavernier3;4, Mattias Van Heetvelde1;2,
Bram Parton1;2, Ria Roelandt5, Evi Duthoo6, Elien Beyls6, Marieke De
Bruyne2, Kim De Leeneer2, Ans Baeyens6, Anne Vral6, Filomeen
Haerynck7, Kathleen Claes1;2
1Ghent University, Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent,
Belgium; 2Ghent University Hospital, Center for Medical Genetics,
Ghent, Belgium; 3VIB-UGent Center for Inﬂammation Research, Unit
of Molecular Signal Transduction in Inﬂammation, Ghent, Belgium;
4Ghent University, Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology,
Ghent, Belgium; 5VIB-UGent Center for Inﬂammation Research, VIB
Single Cell Core, Ghent, Belgium; 6Ghent University, Human Structure
And Repair, Radiobiology Research Unit, Ghent, Belgium; 7Ghent
University, Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent,
Belgium.
Background/Objectives: We report the second ATRIP-deﬁcient
patient clinically diagnosed with Seckel Syndrome (SS). The
ATRIP protein is required for ATR stabilization by complex for-
mation and is crucial for localization of the ATR-ATRIP complex
to
regions
of
DNA
damage
and
ATR
activation.
Besides
the typical clinical SS characteristics (primary dwarﬁsm, facial
dysmorphia, skeletal abnormalities, microcephaly and mental
retardation), our patient suffers from an immunodeﬁciency.
However a link between ATRIP and the immune system was not
previously reported.
Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES), transcriptomics,
western blot, micronucleus assays, ﬂow cytometry and single cell
RNA-Sequencing.
Results: The patient is homozygous for a splice variant
(c.829+5G>T) in ATRIP leading to out-of-frame exon 5 skipping.
Western blot showed absence of ATRIP protein and analysis of
micronuclei in response to DNA damage by mitomycin C and
ionizing radiation revealed defective DNA repair. Downstream
substrates of the ATR-ATRIP complex are currently investigated.
WES ruled out a pathogenic variant in 460 genes linked to
inborn errors of the immune system. Immunophenotyping
reveals low absolute B cell numbers, aberrant T cell subsets,
decreased plasmacytoid dendritic cells, low CD56dimCD16+
natural killer cells and increased low density neutrophils. Addi-
tionally, a ﬁrst look at scRNA-Seq data suggests a recombination
deﬁciency during B and T cell development, as was published for
ATR-deﬁcient SS patients (1), and allows to further elaborate the
immune phenotype.
Conclusion: We expanded the molecular and clinical spectrum
of SS and further validations will provide insights into the link with
the immune system and will contribute to the disease mechanism.
References: (1) https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20050595.
Grants: FWOTBM2018000102.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.026.D Differential alternative splicing analysis to link
variation in ZRSR2 to a novel syndrome with oral, digital and
brain anomalies
Laurens Hannes1;2, Marta Atzori1, Elise Pelgrims1, Ann Swillen1,
Alejandro Sifrim1, Catia Attanasio1, Jeroen Breckpot1;2
1Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Department of Human Genetics,
Leuven, Belgium; 2University Hospitals Leuven, Center for Human
Genetics, Leuven, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: ZRSR2, located on Xp22.2, is part of the
minor spliceosome complex which recognises U12-type introns
representing 0.35% of human introns. Minor spliceosome defects
have been associated with developmental disorders. Somatic
mutations in ZRSR2 are found in myelodysplastic syndromes,
germline variation in ZRSR2 has not been implicated in impaired
human development yet.
Methods: We describe a 24-months-old boy presenting upper
limb bilateral postaxial polydactyly, doubled ﬁrst ray of the feet, a
tongue
nodule,
seizures,
pituitary
abnormalities
and
poly-
microgyria. A maternal uncle died neonatally with holoprosence-
phaly, polydactyly and ambiguous genitalia. A son of a maternal
aunt of the mother died prenatally with brain and limbs anoma-
lies. Unfortunately DNA of these male relatives was not preserved.
Whole
exome
sequencing
and
segregation
analysis
of
6
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
521
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
informative males was performed, followed by whole tran-
scriptome RNA-SEQ on ﬁbroblasts from the extra digit and tongue
nodule, and on EBV cell lines of the index and mother.
Results: WES showed a maternally inherited frameshift
c.1207_1208delAG (p.Arg403Glyfs*24) in the last exon of ZRSR2,
compatible with X-linked recessive inheritance. This variant is
absent in reference databases, but has been described as
a variant of unknown signiﬁcance in a family with 5 male foe-
tuses with holoprosencephaly. Whole transcriptome differential
expression and alternative splicing analysis of minor spliceo-
some gene targets showed a similar effect on U12-dependant
splicing as seen in somatic ZRSR2 mutations in myelodysplastic
syndrome.
Conclusion: Genetic and functional data associate this ZRSR2
variant to a novel syndrome with variable expression of oral,
digital and brain (holoprosencephaly) anomalies.
References:.
Grants: KUL C24M/19/075.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.027.A Assessing the burden of rare CNVs on miRNA genes
in CAKUT
Ivana Kolic1, Kristina Mitrovic1, Ivan Zivotic1, Ana Djordjevic1, Jelena
Filipovic-Trickovic2, Maja Zivkovic1, Aleksandra Stankovic1, Ivan
Jovanovic1
1“Vinča” Institute of Nuclear Sciences, National Institute of the
Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Department of radio-
biology and molecular genetics, Belgrade, Serbia; 2“Vinča” Institute of
Nuclear Sciences, National Institute of the Republic of Serbia,
University of Belgrade, Department of physical chemistry, Belgrade,
Serbia.
Background/Objectives: Rare copy number variants (rCNVs) are
the common genetic cause of Congenital Anomalies of the Kidney
and Urinary Tract (CAKUT).1 miRNAs located in rCNVs represent
well-founded functional variants for human CAKUT research.
However, the impact of rCNVs on miRNA genes in CAKUT is
unknown. Thus, burden assessment was performed to identify
chromosomes with non-random representation of miRNA genes
in rCNVs associated with CAKUT.
Methods: A comprehensive literature mining of rCNV regions
associated with CAKUT was performed. The total cumulative
length of rCNVs per chromosome was the sum of corresponding
CNV-DNA regions, taking into account overlapping. Mapping of
miRNAs onto cumulative rCNV regions gave counts of affected
miRNA loci. The correlation analysis was performed between the
number of miRNA genes overlapping rCNVs, and the fractional
lengths
of
cumulative
rCNVs
regions
in
relation
to
the
chromosome size.
Results: A statistically signiﬁcant positive correlation was
observed for duplications and deletions respectively (Spearman
correlation p < 0.0001, r = 0.9, r = 0.8). However, a deviation from
the best ﬁt line for chromosome 16, for both rare duplications and
deletions, was observed due to the high overrepresentation of
miRNA genes in identiﬁed rCNVs.
Conclusion: The current ﬁnding of the high overall burden of
rCNVs on miRNA genes in chromosome 16 suggests that miRNAs
located on this chromosome could serve as candidates for the
investigation of miRNA role in CAKUT development.
References: Verbitsky, M. et al.(2019) J.Nat Genet. 51,117-127.
Grants: This research was supported by the Science Fund of
the Republic of Serbia, PROMIS, #6066923, miFaDriCa, and Serbian
Ministry of Education, Science and Technological development.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.028.B Heart defects, oral clefts, and polydactyly caused by
novel compound heterozygous variants in WDPCP gene
involved in ciliogenesis
Ana
Rita
Ferreira
Pacheco
Quental1,
Carlos
Mariz2,
Carla
Ramalho3;4;5, João Parente Freixo5;6, Pedro Louro1, Miguel Leão1
1Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Serviço de Genética
Médica, Porto, Portugal; 2Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São
João, Serviço de Cirurgia Pediátrica, Porto, Portugal;
3Centro
Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Serviço de Obstetrícia, Porto,
Portugal; 4Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal; 5i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde,
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; 6CGPP-IBMC, Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Background/Objectives: Ciliopathies are a group of disorders
with overlapping phenotypes, caused by dysfunctional cilia.
WDPCP is a planar cell polarity protein, which is involved in the
recruitment of molecules essential for ciliogenesis. Wdpcp mutant
mouse exhibited developmental defects including anophtalmia,
polydactyly, kidney cysts, heart defects, and facial clefts. In
humans, only four patients with biallelic pathogenic variants in
WDPCP gene have been reported, presenting with congenital
heart
defects,
hamartomas
of
tongue,
and
polysyndactyly
(CHDTHP), or Bardet-Biedl Syndrome 15.
Methods: In trio-whole exome sequencing (WES) was per-
formed to identify candidate variants.
Results:
We
describe
a
2-year-old
girl
born
to
non-
consanguineous parents. Pregnancy was achieved by ICSI due to
male infertility. Prenatal ultrasound revealed multiple anomalies
including heart defects, cleft lip/palate, and polydactyly. Chromo-
somal microarray analysis and an Ellis-van Creveld Syndrome gene
panel were negative. Delivery occurred at term and the newborn
presented left cleft lip and palate, postaxial polydactyly of the left
hand and hallux duplication bilaterally. Echocardiography revealed
a large atrial septal defect and left atrioventricular regurgitation.
WES identiﬁed two novel compound heterozygous variants in
WDPCP gene: NM_001354044.1:c.1486T>G, p.(Cys496Gly), and
NM_001354044.1:c.852_860delinsG, p.(Asp285Alafs*4).
Conclusion: Only two patients with CHDTHP have been
reported so far. Interestingly, our patient is the ﬁrst one presenting
oral clefts, resembling the phenotype of the Wdpcp knockout
mice. This study further expands the molecular and phenotypic
spectrum of this rare and still poorly known disorder, contributing
to a deeper understanding of WDPCP function in ciliogenesis. To
the patient´s family, molecular diagnosis allowed proper genetic
counselling and informed reproductive choices.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.029.C C20orf24: a potential novel gene responsible for
Cerebrofaciothoracic Dysplasia
Esra Isik1, Durdugül Ayyıldız Emecen2, Tahir Atik2, Ozgur Cogulu2,
Ferda Ozkinay2
1Ege University, Pediatric Genetics, Izmir, Turkey; 2Ege Üniversitesi,
Pediatric Genetics, Izmir, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Cerebrofaciothoracic Dysplasia (CFTD) is
a rare syndrome characterized by intellectual disability, dys-
morphic facial features and skeletal anomalies. Biallelic loss of
function variants in the TMCO1 were found to be responsible for
CFTD. However, due to no mutations in the coding region of
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
522
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
TMCO1 could be identiﬁed in some patients, it has been con-
sidered that CFTD could be a genetically heterogeneous disorder.
Methods: The molecular etiology of CFTD was investigated
using whole exome sequencing in Illumina NextSeq 550 platform.
Results: A 3 years old boy was the ﬁrst child of consanguineous
healthy parents. He had global developmental delay and dys-
morphic facial features. Skeletal survey revealed craniosynostosis
and rib anomalies. Regarding clinical and radiological ﬁndings
CFTD was considered in the patient. Any TMCO1 variants could not
be found via sequence analysis. WES revealed a homozygous
variant (c.75G>A, p.Trp25Ter) in C20orf24 gene. In C20orf24 gene,
the c.75G>A variant which causes a premature termination codon
at 25th position of C20orf24 mRNA, a highly conserved amino acid
during evolution, has not been reported in public databases
to date.
Conclusion: C20orf24 is a protein coding gene, and its function
has not yet been fully elucidated. Recently, Lewis and Hegde
suggested that TMCO1 and C20orf24 seemed to be interaction
partners
to
form
an
Oxa1
superfamily
insertase
complex.
Regarding studies analyzing structure of integral membrane pro-
tein biogenesis, we consider that biallelic variants in the C20orf24
gene may cause similar phenotype with loss of function TMCO1
variants. However, functional studies are needed to show the
relationship between C20orf24 variants and CFTD.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.030.D Pathogenicity assessment of DISP1 variants
associated with midline anomalies spectrum
Alinoe
Lavillaureix1;2,
Paul
Rollier1;2,
Artem
Kim2,
Christele
Dubourg2;3,
Wilfrid
Carre2;3,
Veranika
Panasenkava2,
Svetlana
Mironov2, Helene Guyodo2, Marjoleine Broekema4, Boris Keren5,
Sandra Whalen6, Jeanne Médéric7, Laurence Faivre8, Clemence
Vanlerberghe9,
Luisa
Mittendorf10,
Fanny
Laffargue11,
marie
detayrac2;3, valerie dupe2, Sylvie Odent1;2
1South Hospital, Génétique clinique, Centre de Référence Maladies
Rares CLAD-Ouest, ERN-ITHACA, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France;
2University Rennes 1 - Ufr Médecine, Univ Rennes, CNRS, INSERM,
IGDR (Institut de génétique et développement de Rennes) - UMR
6290, ERL U1305, Rennes, France;
3CHU Rennes - Pontchaillou
Hospital, Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique, CHU de Rennes,
Rennes, France; 4Amsterdam UMC, locatie VUmc, Department of
Human Genetics, clinical genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 5Uni-
versity Hospitals Pitié Salpêtrière - Charles Foix, Département de
génétique, Unité de génomique du développement, APHP, GH Pitié
Salpêtrière, Paris, France; 6Hôpital Armand-Trousseau Ap-Hp, Unité
Fonctionnelle de génétique clinique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau,
Assistance publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre de Référence Maladies
Rares des anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs,
Paris, France; 7Chru Hospitals Of Tours, Service de génétique clinique,
Tours, France; 8Chu Dijon, Génétique clinique, Centre de Référence
Maladies Rares CLAD, Dijon, France;
9Chu De Lille, Service de
génétique clinique, Lille, France; 10Leipzig, Department of Human
Genetics, clinical genetics, Leipzig, Germany;
11Clermont-Ferrand,
CHU, Service de génétique clinique, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
Background/Objectives: Holoprosencephaly (HPE; MIM# 236100)
results from incomplete midline division of the prosencephalon.
The clinical spectrum is very wide, ranging from severe HPE with
cyclopia to HPE microforms with midline craniofacial defects.
HPE genes belong to the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) pathway, a
complex molecular cascade allowing ventralization during early
central nervous system development. DISP1 is a positive factor
necessary for the efﬁcient secretion of the SHH morphogen and
the establishment of its concentration gradient along the midline
of the neural tube. We describe the ﬁrst cohort of HPE patients
with DISP1 variants.
Methods: We describe 22 individuals from 18 unrelated
familes, regrouping DISP1 variants retained during molecular
diagnosis in our lab, along with collaborative and previously
published ﬁndings.
Results: 13 patients have microform HPE or lobar HPE, 8/13
with orofacial cleft. 4/13 have single median incisor and piriform
aperture stenosis, a rare association described previously in
patients with SHH variants. 9 additionnal patients from 6 families
present with severe HPE (alobar or semilobar), 2/9 with cyclopia, 3/
9 with orofacial cleft.
We further delineate the clinical spectrum of DISP1-related HPE,
provide insight into the underlying pathomechanism and describe
various factors modulating the phenotypic output of DISP1
variants.
Conclusion: DISP1 is major gene of holoprosencephaly. Auto-
somal recessive inheritance and haploinsufﬁciency lead to HPE
microforms. Severe HPE can be caused by oligogenic transmission.
The accumulation of rare and pathogenic variants in different
genes negatively impact SHH and lead to HPE, more or less severe
depending on the early role of the genes involved: “SHH-disorder”.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.031.A Losses and gains including PURA cause reciprocal
ID syndromes: results of a large-scale study on 5q31.3 copy
number variations
Margot Reijnders1, Laura Hamilton2;3, Diana Baralle2;3, David
Hunt2;3, Nicole de Leeuw4
1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands;
2University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom; 3Wes-
sex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton,
United Kingdom; 4Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Deletions in the 5q31.3 region have
been occasionally reported to cause an intellectual disability (ID)
syndrome. Previously, we reported a cohort of patients with PURA-
syndrome caused by de novo nucleotide variants in PURA, located
at 5q31.3.
Methods: To further investigate the contribution of PURA in
copy number variants (CNVs) in the 5q31.3 region, we (1) re-
analyzed available CNV data of ID patients available in South-
ampton (UK) and Nijmegen/Maastricht (Netherlands), (2) asked
genetic centers in the UK and the Netherlands to re-evaluate
diagnostic genetic data on 5q31.3 CNVs and (3) contacted clin-
icians of patients reported in the DECIPHER database.
Results: This led to the identiﬁcation of eight patients with a de
novo loss and eight patients with a de novo gain including PURA.
Depending on the size and involvement of neighboring ID genes
such as KDM3B, PPP2CA and PITX1, losses lead to severe ID, feeding
difﬁculties with low weight, multiple congenital malformations
and/or (prenatal) death. We show that gains cause a milder reci-
procal syndrome with moderate ID, aggressiveness and obesity as
common features. Severe laryngomalacia is present in 3/8
microdeletion patients and in one patient reported in literature,
but has never been observed in patients with PURA-syndrome
before. By analyzing the smallest region of overlap, we suggest
NRG2 and UBE2D2 as candidate genes for the development of
laryngomalacia.
Conclusion: Close international collaboration led to the clinical
delineation of 5q31.3 losses and identiﬁcation of a novel,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
523
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
reciprocal ID syndrome caused by 5q31.3 gains, showing the
power of data sharing for studies on rare syndromes.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P12.032.B Homozygous NRP1 truncating variant in a
multiplex family with conotruncal heart defects, lymphatic
malformations and genitourinary anomalies
Umut Altunoglu1, Mert Kaya2, Tugba Kalayci3, Zehra Oya Uyguner3
1Koç University, School of Medicine, Medical Genetics Department,
Istanbul, Turkey; 2Koç University, Graduate School of Health Sciences,
Istanbul, Turkey;
3Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty,
Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Neuropilins (NRP1 and NRP2) are cell
surface proteins conserved across species, acting as coreceptors
for signal proteins including members of semaphorin and
VEGF families. They participate in a multitude of processes:
development of the cardiovascular system, (lymph)angiogenesis,
neuronal patterning and immune function. NRP1 deﬁcient mice
display embryonic lethality due to a severely abnormal cardio-
vascular phenotype, resembling those of Vegf and Vefgr2
knockouts. Shaheen et al. (2015) reported a homozygous null
mutation in the proband of a multiplex family with truncus
arteriosus.
Methods: Exome sequencing in the proband was performed in
a consanguineous multiplex family with conotruncal anomalies.
Affected and unaffected family members were screened for the
candidate variant to reveal segregation.
Results: We present a 32-day-old girl born to 1st cousins once-
removed, with a severe congenital heart defect comprising atrial
and ventricular septal defects with patent ductus arteriosus, left
microphthalmia with cystic lymphatic malformation, and renal
anomalies. Weight was 3500 g (14p), height 52.5 cm (31p) and
head circumference 37 cm (46p). Cranial MRI was unremarkable.
The parents had a medical abortion due to a huge para-
pharyngeal lympangioma, and two children deceased due to
severe coarctation of the aorta and tetralogy of Fallot, respec-
tively. Chromosomal array was normal. WES revealed homo-
zygous nonsense c.1213C>T; p.(Arg405*) in NRP1 [NM_003873],
segregating with the phenotype in unaffected parents and sister,
and one deceased affected sibling. Parental echocardiograms
were normal.
Conclusion: This is the second report of a family with homo-
zygous truncating variants in NRP1, further supporting NRP1 as a
human disease gene.
References:
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80534-6,
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81402-6,
https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.022017899,
https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-
2015-102992.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13 CANCER GENETICS
P13.001.C Development of genomic instability score for
ovarian cancers from a limited panel of genes
Leman Raphael1;2, Etienne Muller1;2, Nicolas goardon1;2, Imène
Chentli2, Aurore Tranchant2, Angelina Legros2, Laurent Castera1;2,
Alain Morel3, Christel Brunet4, Véronique Bocly4, Eric Fernandez4,
Florence Coulet4, Dominique Vaur1;2
1Normandie University, Inserm U1245, Rouen, France; 2Centre François
Baclesse, Laboratoire de biologie et génétique des cancers, Caen,
France; 3Institut de Cancérologie de l’Ouest - Paul Papin, Angers, France;
4Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique, UF d’Onco-
Angiogénétique et Génomique des tumeurs solides, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: High-grade serous ovarian cancers with
a deﬁciency of homologous recombination DNA repair (HRD) are
sensitive to the combination of bevacizumab and olaparib as
maintenance therapy. HRD status is determined by mutational
scars within the tumor genome. To date, only the method
developed by the commercial company Myriad Genetics® (MG)
has been clinically validated to identify HRD status. In this study,
we developed a new method to identify HRD status and suitable
with the most of molecular biology laboratory constraints.
Methods: We computed a score from the genomic scars, i.e.
chromosomic breaks, genomic deletion/duplication and allelic
imbalance of polymorphisms. We used sequencing data from
limited panel of 127 genes to detect these events. The score
training was performed on a collection of 146 samples from
ovarian cancer with HRD status previously deﬁned by MG. Among
these samples, 32 samples were managed and sequenced by
another laboratory to assess the robustness of our method.
Results: Our new score reached an accuracy of 92.46 % (Chi-
Square p-value < 0.00001) compared to MG HRD status, with a
sensitivity of 95.38 % and speciﬁcity of 90.12 %. The pearson
coefﬁcient between the two scores was 0.810 (p-value < 0.00001).
We observed similar results for the 32 samples analyzed by the
second platform.
Conclusion: Our score showed a signiﬁcant correlation with
MG data, conﬁrmed on data from different platforms. Thus, our
method is robust enough to be deployed in other molecular
biology laboratories. The validation of the method on clinically
characterized samples is in progress.
References: No references.
Grants: No grants.
Conﬂict of Interest: Leman Raphael Centre François Baclesse,
Etienne Muller CERBA, Nicolas goardon Centre François Baclesse,
Imène Chentli Centre François Baclesse, Aurore Tranchant Centre
François Baclesse, Angelina Legros Centre François Baclesse,
Laurent Castera Centre François Baclesse, Alain Morel Institut de
Cancérologie de l’Ouest, Christel Brunet Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière,
Véronique Bocly Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Eric Fernandez Hôpital
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Florence Coulet Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Domin-
ique Vaur Centre François Baclesse.
P13.002.D Imprinting relaxation of an ovarian dysgerminoma
in a patient with Prader-Willi syndrome
Carolina Maya Gonzalez1, Sandra Wessman2;3, Bianca Tesi1;2;4,
Fulya Taylan3;4, Glenn McCluggage5, Ekaterina Kuchinskaya4, Anna
Poluha6, Stefan Holm7, Ricard Nargård7, Teresita Diaz de Stahl2,
David Gisselsson Nord8, Kristina Lagerstedt1;3, Ann Nordgren1;3
1Karolinska Institutet, Department of Molecular Medicine and
Surgery,
Centre
for
Molecular
Medicine,
Stockholm,
Sweden;
2Karolinska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Stock-
holm,
Sweden;
3Karolinska
Institutet,
Department
of
Clinical
Pathology and Cytology, Stockholm, Sweden; 4Karolinska Institutet,
Department of Clinical Genetics, Stockholm, Sweden; 5Belfast Health
and Social Care Trust, Department of Pathology, Belafast, United
Kingdom;
6Uppsala University Hospital, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Uppsala, Sweden; 7Karolinska Institutet, Department of
Women’s and Children’s Health, Stockholm, Sweden; 8Lund Uni-
versity, Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Lund, Sweden.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
524
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a rare
intellectual disability syndrome characterized by dysmorphic fea-
tures, short stature, obesity, hypotonia, hyperphagia and hypo-
gonadism. PWS is caused by lack of expression of paternally
inherited imprinted genes on chromosome 15q11-q13. Loss-of-
imprinting has previously been reported in a testicular seminoma
of a patient with PWS caused by maternal UPD[1]. Here, we pre-
sent the genetic and microscopic ﬁndings of an ovarian tumour in
a 13-year-old girl with PWS due to a paternal 15q11.2-13 deletion.
Methods: Microscopic examination of tumour tissue including
immunohistochemical staining was performed.
Tumour and
germline DNA were analysed with 30X whole genome sequencing
and germline genome was evaluated for pathogenic variants in
153 known childhood cancer predisposition genes. Methylation
sensitive MLPA was carried out to assess the methylation status in
the tumour-DNA at the PWS locus compared to a control
imprinted region (11p15).
Results:
Tumour
morphology
and
immunohistochemical
staining were consistent with a dysgerminoma. Additionally,
bilateral microscopic sex-cord stromal tumours were found. MLPA
analysis revealed that methylation was reduced by 50% in the
PWS locus in the tumor compared to blood, while preserved in
other imprinted regions. A somatic pathogenic activating KIT
mutation was detected in the tumor (NM_000222.3:c.1676T>G
AF:20%). No additional germline aberrations were found.
Conclusion: We present a second case of locus-speciﬁc loss-of-
imprinting in a germ-cell tumour from a patient with PWS and
propose imprinting relaxation as a possible mechanism of carci-
nogenesis in PWS.
References: [1] Eldar-Geva T, et al. Molecular Genetics and
Genomic Medicine. 2018;6(5).
Grants: The Swedish Childhood Cancer Fund.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.003.A Primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma is
hallmarked by large-scale copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity
Stefania
Tuveri1,
Koen
Debackere2,
Lukas
Marcelis3,
Nicolas
Dierckxsens1, Jonas Demeulemeester1, Eftychia Dimitriadou1, Daan
Dierickx4, Pierre Lefesvre5, Karen Deraedt6, Carlos Graux7, Lucienne
Michaux1, Jan Cools1, Thomas Tousseyn3, Joris Vermeesch1, Iwona
Wlodarska1
1Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven,
Belgium; 2Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Laboratory for Experimental
Hematology, Leuven, Belgium; 3University Hospitals Leuven, Depart-
ment of Pathology, Leuven, Belgium; 4University Hospitals Leuven,
Department of Hematology, Leuven, Belgium;
5Free University
Hospital, Department of Pathology, Brussels, Belgium; 6Hospital East
Limburg, Anatomo-pathology, Genk, Belgium; 7Mont-Godinne Uni-
versity Hospital, Department of Hematology, Yvoir, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Development of primary mediastinal
B-cell lymphoma (PMBL), an aggressive subtype of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, is driven by cumulative genomic aberrations. To
identify the driver mutational events, we screened PMBL cases by
SNP arrays.
Methods: PMBL samples were investigated by SNP arrays
(Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12v2.1 BeadChip), ﬂuorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), immunohistochemistry (IHC), whole-exome
sequencing (WES) and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) [Nova-
Seq 6000 (Illumina), Oxford Nanopore Technology sequencing].
Results: The screen uncovered an extreme burden of copy-
neutral loss of heterozygosity (CN-LOH) in PMBL which distin-
guishes this tumour from other B-cell malignancies, including
the biologically related diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (respectively
on average per patient 4.04 and 1.8). We identiﬁed large-scale
CN-LOH lesions in 90.9% (30/33) of diagnostic PMBLs and both
investigated PMBL-derived cell lines. The cohort showed 133
extra-large (25.3-248.4 Mb) CN-LOH lesions affecting up to 14
chromosomes per case. Notably, CN-LOH stretches non-randomly
clustered on chromosome 6p (60%), 15 (37.2%) and 17q (40%),
and frequently co-occurred with homozygous mutations in MHC I
(6p21), B2M (15q15) and GNA13 (17q23) genes, as yielded by
preliminary whole-exome/genome sequencing data.
Conclusion: Altogether, our ﬁndings implicate large-scale CN-
LOH as a novel mutational process contributing to the molecular
pathogenesis of PMBL. The prevalent occurrence of segmental CN-
LOH in a heterozygous diploid context, alongside the lack of
common CNVs and/or recurrent scars in regions ﬂanking CN-LOH
regions revealed by long-read sequencing, points to a key role of
mitotic homologous recombination. This mechanism usually fol-
lows DSB and likely acts as an errant DNA repair mechanism
leading to CN-LOH.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Stefania Tuveri Research Foundation-
Flanders (FWO 1S74420N), Koen Debackere: None declared, Lukas
Marcelis: None declared, Nicolas Dierckxsens: None declared,
Jonas
Demeulemeester
Research
Foundation-Flanders
(FWO
12J6921N), Eftychia Dimitriadou: None declared, Daan Dierickx
Kom op tegen Kanker, Pierre Lefesvre: None declared, Karen
Deraedt: None declared, Carlos Graux: None declared, Lucienne
Michaux: None declared, Jan Cools: None declared, Thomas
Tousseyn Mandate for Fundamental and Translational Research
from the “Stichting tegen Kanker” (2°14-083), Joris Vermeesch
KULeuven grant C1/018, Iwona Wlodarska: None declared.
P13.004.B Overview of cancer predisposition syndromes in a
national, unselected cohort of 836 children with a neoplasm
Jette Bakhuizen1;2, Saskia MJ Hopman1;2, Machteld I Bosscha3,
Charlotte J Dommering4, Marry M van den Heuvel-Eibrink1, Janna A
Hol2, Lennart A Kester1, Marco J Koudijs1, Karin PS Langenberg1, Jan
LC Loeffen1, Annette C Moll3, Max M van Noesel1;5, Stephanie E
Smetsers1,
Johannes
HM
Merks1,
Roland
Kuiper1,
Marjolijn
Jongmans1;2
1Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Nether-
lands; 2University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Genetics,
Utrecht, Netherlands; 3Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amster-
dam, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Department of Ophthalmology,
Amsterdam,
Netherlands;
4Amsterdam
UMC,
Vrije
Universiteit
Amsterdam, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Nether-
lands; 5University Medical Center Utrecht, Division Imaging & Cancer,
Utrecht, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: The diagnostic approach of cancer
predisposition syndromes (CPSs) in children with cancer is shifting
from a phenotype-driven approach towards a genotype-ﬁrst
approach. To decide on best practice in CPS diagnostics, it is
essential to evaluate the yield of universal germline sequencing
and to compare it with targeted genetic testing based on clinical
selection. However, a reliable comparison is difﬁcult since recent
reports on a phenotype-driven approach in large, unselected
childhood cancer cohorts are lacking.
Methods: Medical records of newly diagnosed children with
cancer in the Netherlands between 01/06/2018 and 31/12/2019
were screened for medical history and clinical genetic assessment.
In this period, it was standard practice that pediatric oncologists
checked for characteristics of CPSs and selected children for
referral to clinical geneticists.
Results: In 72/836 patients (8.6%) a CPS was identiﬁed (26
different conditions), of which the majority (96%) was identiﬁed
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
525
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
by a phenotype-driven approach. Down syndrome and NF1 were
the most common CPSs diagnosed. In 42/72 patients (58%) a CPS
was identiﬁed after these children had developed a neoplasm. The
speciﬁc type of neoplasm was the most frequent indicator for
referral to a clinical geneticist and targeted genetic testing,
whereas family history played a small role.
Conclusion: The mostly phenotype-driven diagnosis of CPSs in
our unselected cohort revealed a CPS prevalence similar to that in
earlier genotype-based studies, but the spectrum of CPS diagnosis
is clearly different. This study can be used as a reference cohort for
future genotype-driven studies.
References: NA.
Grants: JJB was funded by KiKa (355).
Conﬂict of Interest: Jette Bakhuizen JJB was funded by the
KiKa Foundation (project number 355)., Saskia MJ Hopman:
None declared, Machteld I Bosscha: None declared, Charlotte J
Dommering: None declared, Marry M van den Heuvel-Eibrink:
None declared, Janna A Hol: None declared, Lennart A Kester:
None declared, Marco J Koudijs: None declared, Karin PS Lan-
genberg: None declared, Jan LC Loeffen: None declared, Annette
C Moll: None declared, Max M van Noesel: None declared, Ste-
phanie E Smetsers: None declared, Johannes HM Merks: None
declared, Roland Kuiper: None declared, Marjolijn Jongmans:
None declared.
P13.005.C constitutional mismatch repair deﬁciency (cmmrd)
presentation in two unrelated saudi patients with early onset
malignancies
Al-Jouhara Asiri1, balsam almaarik2, rasha saleh2, saleh albanyan3
1Princess Nourah Bint Abdul Rahman University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia; 2King Khalid University Hospital East Building, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia; 3King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Background/Objectives: Biallelic germline mismatch repair gene
mutations are rare events that cause constitutional mismatch
repair
deﬁciency
(CMMRD)
syndrome.
They
frequently
go
undiagnosed and often presents with fatal pediatric malignant
brain tumors, early onset colorectal cancer, leukemia, lymphoma,
and other malignancies. CMMRD may also present with non-
neoplastic features such as cafe au lait macules (CALMs).
Methods: Case series of two cases of CMMRD.
Results:
We
present
two
cases
of
CMMRD
without
prior established diagnosis. The cases were of two 13-year-old
children
who
presented
with
Neurological
and/or
gastro-
intestinal symptoms, skin ﬁndings and suggestive family history
of Lynch syndrome. Both cases were the product of con-
sanguineous marriages. The ﬁrst case of a 13-year-old boy, who
has unfortunately passed away due to a high-grade brain
glioma, and his testing revealed a homozygous pathogenic
variant in MSH6 (c.2772_2773del). While the second case, is of a
13-year-old girl who has locally advanced rectal cancer has
revealed
a
homozygous
pathogenic
variant
in
PMS2
(c.1376C>G), she has a brother with multiple CALMs and a sister
that passed away of a brain tumor at the age of 3 but she was
not tested beforehand.
Conclusion: We hope to raise awareness of CMMRD and its
phenotype. Such awareness is needed especially in regions where
consanguinity is prevalent, in aims to identify similar cases and to
provide familial counseling, surveillance and timely intervention.
Prompt recognition and prevention is crucial due to its early age
of presentation and the aggressiveness of the disease.
References: The abstract does not contain references.
Grants: The abstract does not contain grants.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.006.D Constitutional mosaicism: a critical issue in the
deﬁnition of BRCA inherited cancer risk
Elena Tenedini1;2, Simonetta Piana3, Angela Toss1, Marco Marino2,
Elena Barbieri4, Lucia Artuso2, Marta Venturelli4, Elisa Gasparini5,
Vincenzo Dario Mandato6, Isabella Marchi4, Sara Castellano1, Mario
Luppi1;4, Tommaso Trenti2, Laura Cortesi4, Enrico Tagliaﬁco1;2
1University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Department of Medical
and Surgical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Modena, Italy; 2Modena University Hospital, Department of Labora-
tory Medicine and Pathology, Diagnostic Hematology and Clinical
Genomics Unit, Modena, Italy; 3Azienda USL-IRCCS Reggio Emilia,
Pathology Unit, Reggio Emilia, Italy; 4Modena University Hospital,
Department of Oncology and Hematology, Modena, Italy; 5Azienda
USL-IRCCS Reggio Emilia, Oncology Unit, Reggio Emilia, Italy;
6Azienda USL-IRCCS Reggio Emilia, Unit of Obstetrics and Gynecol-
ogy, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Low-frequency constitutional variants
represent alterations that inform the personal and familiar inher-
ited
cancer
risk
deﬁnition
and
precision
medicine
cancer
strategies.
Methods: Following the standard procedure for BRCA diag-
nostic testing, peripheral blood and ovarian cancer FFPE sections
were collected from a woman with a diagnosis of high-grade
serous carcinoma. The tissue’s DNA was NGS-sequenced for BRCA
genes and Sanger conﬁrmation of the pathogenic variant was
assessed in the blood. A second blood draw, a buccal swab along
with sections from her previous triple negative breast carcinoma
and from normal nasal mucosa were NGS-sequenced. Targeted
Sanger sequencing was performed in parents and offspring.
Results: The DNA from the patient’s ovarian carcinoma was
sequenced and a BRCA1 nonsense pathogenic variant was iden-
tiﬁed. Its presence was conﬁrmed in her peripheral blood, though
with lower-than-expected heterozygous frequency. Further ana-
lyses in secondary normal tissues revealed the patient as a con-
stitutional mosaic for this variant. In addition, they showed that
both her breast and ovarian neoplastic tissues harbored this var-
iant with high frequency. A cascade screening of family members
revealed that both parents were negative, but one of the
daughters was a previously undiagnosed heterozygous carrier.
Conclusion: Constitutional mosaicism is a renowned mechan-
ism for multiple hereditary cancer-associated genes and enables
access to personalized therapies and preventive cancer strategies.
To improve the current standard of constitutional analysis, we
propose a new algorithm for the BRCA diagnostic routine to
increase the sensitivity of germinal assessment and decrease the
number of false negatives when pathogenic or likely pathogenic
variants occur at low frequencies.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.008.B Yield of cancer surveillance in PTEN Hamartoma
Tumour Syndrome
Nicoline Hoogerbrugge1, Meggie Drissen1, Kevin Kwinten2, Alma
Hoxhaj3, Dorien Van der Biessen-van Beek4, Tanya Bisseling4, Anne
van Altena2, Joanne de Hullu2, Iris Nagtegaal5, Romana Teodora
Netea-Maier6, Martin Gotthardt3, Ritse Mann3, Janet Vos1
1Radboud University Medical Center, Human Genetics, Nijmegen,
Netherlands;
2Radboud University Medical Center, Gynecology,
Nijmegen, Netherlands; 3Radboud University Medical Center, Radi-
ology, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 4Radboud University Medical Center,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
526
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Gastroenteology, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 5Radboud University Med-
ical Center, Pathology, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 6Radboud University
Medical Center, Endocrinology, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Patients with PTEN Hamartoma Tumour
Syndrome (PHTS) are at high hereditary cancer risk and advised
surveillance for breast (BC), endometrial (EC), thyroid (TC) and
colorectal (CRC) cancer. Current PHTS guidelines are expert
opinion-based only. We aimed to assess the yield of cancer
surveillance.
Methods:
A
single-institution
retrospective
cohort
study
including adult PHTS patients between 2005-2021.
Results: BC: 39 women, median age ﬁrst examination 38 yr,
underwent 156 annual surveillance rounds with MRI and mam-
mography. BC was diagnosed in 7/39 women (CDR: 45/1000
rounds) and benign breast lesions in 18/39 women.
EC: 25 women, median age ﬁrst examination 39 yr, underwent
93 rounds with annual trans vaginal ultrasound, and endometrial
biopsy. No EC was diagnosed. Endometrial hyperplasia with and
without atypia was diagnosed in 28%.
TC: 85 patients, median age ﬁrst examination 36 yr, underwent
324 annual surveillance rounds with ultrasound. TC was diagnosed
in 2/85 patients (age 17, 22) and another 2/85 had a thyroid
adenoma. Nodular progression occurred in 16%.
CRC: 35 patients, median age ﬁrst examination 45 yr, under-
went 58 rounds with max. 5 yearly colonoscopy. CRC was diag-
nosed in 1/35 patient (age 41), and no advanced adenomas were
found. Polyps were detected in 30/35 (86%), including hamarto-
mas
(13/30),
non-advanced
adenomas
(14/30)
and
gang-
lioneuromas (13/30).
Conclusion: Our unique data show that surveillance in PHTS
contributes to early detection of cancer. Our ﬁndings support
surveillance for BC, EC,TC and CRC, and offer guidance to optimize
the age and frequency of current surveillance recommendations
for this rare disease.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.009.C POLE and POLD1 germline variants in familial
glioma
Christine A. M. Weber1, Frank Brand1, Alisa Förster1, Robert Geffers2,
Bernd Auber1, Amir Samii3, Joachim K. Krauss4, Bettina Wiese4;5,
Christian Hartmann6, Ruthild G. Weber1
1Hannover Medical School, Department of Human Genetics, Hann-
over, Germany; 2Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Genome
Analytics Research Group, Braunschweig, Germany; 3International
Neuroscience Institute, Department of Neurosurgery, Hannover,
Germany; 4Hannover Medical School, Department of Neurosurgery,
Hannover, Germany; 5Diakovere Krankenhaus gGmbH, Henrietten-
stift, Department of Neurology, Hannover, Germany;
6Hannover
Medical School, Institute of Pathology, Department of Neuropathol-
ogy, Hannover, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic variants in the DNA poly-
merase genes POLE and POLD1 cause polymerase proofreading-
associated polyposis, a dominantly inherited disorder with an
increased risk of colorectal carcinomas and other tumors. Tumors
with POLE/POLD1 variants, particularly in the exonuclease domain,
commonly show an accumulation of somatic mutations, making
them susceptible to checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. Here,
we explored the role of POLE/POLD1 germline variants in glioma
predisposition.
Methods:
Whole-exome
sequencing
was
performed
on
germline DNA of 53 tumor families with at least one glioma case
each. For genotype-phenotype correlations, gliomas from patients
with POLE/POLD1 germline variants are being characterized with
respect to histology, immunophenotype, mutational burden and
signature. Cellular assays are being performed to investigate the
mutational rate in POLE/POLD1-deﬁcient versus wildtype cells, and
upon stable expression of POLE/POLD1 variants versus wildtype.
Results: Rare heterozygous POLE/POLD1 missense variants
predicted to be deleterious were detected in eight patients
diagnosed with glioblastoma, astrocytoma, or oligodendroglioma
from 7/53 (13%) families, co-segregating with the tumor pheno-
type in both families with available DNA from two tumor patients.
The other tumor types diagnosed in these families were breast,
colorectal, lung, prostate and uterus cancer, and meningioma. In
primary gliomas of POLE/POLD1 variant carriers, enlarged nuclei or
multinucleated cells were observed in 3/8 cases, and evidence for
hypermutation in 3/7 cases. Immunophenotyping is ongoing. An
increased mutation rate in POLE-deﬁcient versus POLE-wildtype
LN-229 glioblastoma cells was observed in an HPRT1 mutation
assay.
The
effects
of
the
POLE/POLD1
variants
are
being
investigated.
Conclusion: POLE/POLD1 variants may predispose to glioma
and render patients susceptible to immunotherapy.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.010.D Investigating genetic susceptibility to male breast
cancer by multigene panel testing: an Italian population-
based case-control study
Agostino
Bucalo1,
Valentina
Silvestri1,
Giulia
Conti1,
Virginia
Valentini1, Mina Karimi1, Ines Zanna2, Maria Grazia Tibiletti3, Antonio
Russo4, Liliana Varesco5, Anna Coppa6, Daniele Calistri7, Laura
Cortesi8, Alessandra Viel9, Bernardo Bonanni10, Siranoush Manou-
kian11, Marco Montagna12, Paolo Radice13, Domenico Palli2, Paolo
Peterlongo14, Laura Ottini1
1Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Molecular Medicine,
Rome, Italy; 2Cancer Risk Factors and Lifestyle Epidemiology Unit,
Institute for Cancer Research, Prevention and Clinical Network
(ISPRO), Florence, Italy; 3ASST Settelaghi and Centro di Ricerca per lo
studio dei tumori eredo-familiari, Università dell’Insubria, Diparti-
mento di Patologia, Varese, Italy; 4Section of Medical Oncology,
University of Palermo, Department of Surgical and Oncological
Sciences, Palermo, Italy; 5IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino,
Genoa, Italy; 6Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Experi-
mental Medicine, Rome, Italy; 7Istituto Scientiﬁco Romagnolo per lo
Studio e la Cura dei Tumori (IRST), Meldola, Italy; 8University of
Modena and Reggio Emilia, Department of Oncology and Haema-
tology, Modena, Italy;
9Unità di Oncogenetica e Oncogenomica
Funzionale, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico di Aviano (CRO), IRCCS,
Aviano, Italy; 10Division of Cancer Prevention and Genetics, European
Institute of Oncology (IEO), IRCCS, Milan, Italy; 11Unità di Genetica
Medica, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori (INT),
Dipartimento di Oncologia Medica ed Ematologia, Milan, Italy;
12Immunology and Molecular Oncology Unit, Veneto Institute of
Oncology IOV - IRCCS, Padua, Italy; 13Unità di Ricerca Medicina
Predittiva: Basi molecolari Rischio genetico e Test genetici, Diparti-
mento di Ricerca, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori (INT),
Milan, Italy;
14Genome Diagnostics Program, IFOM – The FIRC
Institute of Molecular Oncology, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: About 20% of male breast cancer (MBC)
patients report BC family history (FH) and personal history (PH) of
cancer other than BC, suggesting a role of genetic susceptibility.
BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants (PVs) are responsible for about 15%
of MBCs. The aims of this study were to evaluate the role of PVs in
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
527
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
non-BRCA1/2 genes in MBC susceptibility and to identify possible
distinctive clinical-pathologic features in PV carriers.
Methods: A population-based, case-control study including
725 BRCA1/2 PV negative MBCs and 917 healthy male controls,
enrolled in the frame of the Italian multicenter study on MBC, was
performed using a custom 50-gene panel in NGS. Statistical ana-
lyses
were
performed
using
chi-square
test
and
logistic
regression model.
Results: Overall, MBCs were more likely to carry PVs in cancer
genes compared with controls (5% vs 2.3%, p = 0.003). PALB2 PVs
were identiﬁed in 1% of MBCs and were signiﬁcantly associated
with increased MBC risk (OR: 4.6, 95% CI: 1.00-22.3; p = 0.04). BLM
and FANCM emerged as possible genes associated with MBC risk
in the case-control analysis (p = 0.02, each). PV carriers were more
likely to have a PH of cancer (p = 0.02) and FH of cancer
(p = 0.007), not limited to BC.
Conclusion: Our results support a central role of PALB2 in MBC
susceptibility in the Italian population. Overall, our data indicate
that a multigene testing approach may beneﬁt from appropriately
selected patients, particularly those with family and personal his-
tory of multiple cancers, with implications for clinical management
of MBC patients and their relatives.
References:.
Grants: Study supported by AIRC (IG21389) to LO.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.011.A Germline NGS gene panel testing in routine care of
Breast and Ovarian cancer patients in Estonia 2016-2020
Mikk Tooming1;2, Kadri Rekker2, Kadri Toome2, Olga Fjodorova2,
Hanno Roomere2, Piret Laidre2, Ülle Murumets2, Katrin Ounap1;2,
Tiina Kahre1;2
1Institute of Clinical Medicine, Department of Clinical Genetics, Tartu,
Estonia; 2Tartu University Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics,
Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives:
Targeted
NGS
gene
panels
have
replaced the standard single-gene testing for hereditary cancer
diagnostics of Breast cancer (BC) and Ovarian cancer (OC) in
Estonia. The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of
pathogenic variants (PV) in hereditary BC and OC patients and
healthy individuals with positive family history (HI) from Estonia
during the years 2016-2020.
Methods: The study included 2200 patients referred to the
Department of Clinical Genetics at Tartu University Hospital for
analysis of suspected hereditary BC and OC or HI carrier screening.
Individuals were analyzed using Illumina TruSight Cancer or Tru-
Sight Hereditary Cancer gene panel.
Results: Analyzed group consisted of 1080 (49.1%) BC patients,
366 (16.6%) OC patients, 27 (1.3%) BC/OC patients and 727 (33%)
HI group. NGS revealed PV ﬁndings in 363/2200 (16.5%) cases.
Altogether, PVs were found in 195/1080 (18.1%) BC patients, 98/
366 (26.7%) OC patients, 7/27 (26%) BC/OC patients and 63/727
(8.7%) HI group. Respectively, BRCA1/2 PVs were in found 113/
1080 (10.4%) BC patients, 69/366 (18.9%) OC patients, 6/27 (22.2%)
BC/OC patients and 39/727 (5.4%) HI. Furthermore, nonBRCA1/2
(ATM, BARD1, BRIP1, CDH1, CHEK2, NF1, PALB2, RAD51C, RAD51D,
TP53) PVs were found in 93/1080 (8.6%) BC patients, 29/366 (7.9%)
OC patients, 1/27 (3.7%) BC/OC patients and 29/727 (4%) HI.
Conclusion: The diagnostic efﬁcacy of NGS gene panels is in
between 18-26% in BC and OC cases, which is similar to the lit-
erature data. Detection rate with NGS panel is ~7% higher com-
pared to BRCA1/2 gene testing.
References:.
Grants: Estonian Research Council grant PRG471.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.012.B MLH1 variant c.836T>G, a Tyrolean hypomorphic
founder mutation?
Sukanya Horpaopan1;2, Esther Schamschula1, Simon Schnaiter1,
Heidi Fiegl3, Susanne Sprung4, Ulrich Strasser5, Hannes Dapoz5, Pia
Traunfellner1, Albert Amberger1, Renate Lunzer1, Ingrid Weber1,
Johannes Zschocke1, Katharina Wimmer1
1Medical University Innsbruck, Institute of Human Genetics, Innsbruck,
Austria; 2Naresuan University, Faculty of Medical Science, Phitsanulok,
Thailand; 3Medical University Innsbruck, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Innsbruck, Austria; 4Medical University Innsbruck, Institute
of Pathology, Neuropathology, and Molecular Pathology, Innsbruck,
Austria; 5Tyrolpath Obrist Brunhuber GmbH, Zams, Austria.
Background/Objectives: Correct classiﬁcation of mismatch repair
gene variants is of utmost important for appropriate counseling,
surveillance, and treatment of suspected Lynch syndrome patients
and their entire families.
Methods: We used multiple lines of evidence to classify MLH1
variant NM_000249.3:c.836T>G, reported twice in ClinVar, as likely
benign and of uncertain signiﬁcance, respectively.
Results: NM_000249.3(MLH1):c.836T>G, found in ﬁve Tyrolean
patients with cancers showing MLH1 and/or PMS2 expression loss
and no MLH1 hypermethylation (PP4_Strong), is absent in Gno-
mAD (PM2_Supporting). Full-length transcripts with c.836G pre-
dicted to cause p.(Val279Gly) with a MAPP+PolyPhen-2 prior
probability of 0.9 (PP3_Moderate) represented only ~25% of
transcripts in blood lymphocytes of four carriers. Use of a novel 5′
splice site created by the variant is observed in ~20% and skipping
of exon 10 in <10% of transcripts. Minigene experiments con-
ﬁrmed both splice effects, which are predicted to cause loss of 16
amino acids, p.(Val279_Ser295delinsGly), in the MLH1 N-terminal
domain and p.(His264fs*2), respectively. Ignoring that they are
leaky, both splice effects render a very strong argument for
pathogenicity (PVS1).
Conclusion: Considering its missense and newly characterized
splice effects, we classify c.836T>G according to the draft InSiGHT
ACMG criteria as (likely) pathogenic. Ongoing studies explore
whether this variant has an attenuated penetrance, which is
suggested by the lack of a strong Lynch syndrome family history
of the ﬁve patients and its accidental ﬁnding in one patient with a
concomitant MSH6 pathogenic variant and two different cancers
with MSH6 expression loss.
References:.
Grants: Ernst Mach-Grant of Austrian Agency for Education and
Internationalization (OeAD).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.013.C Molecular characterization of an embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma occurring in a patient with Kabuki
syndrome: report and literature review in the light of tumor
predisposition syndromes
Sietse Aukema1, Selina Glaser2, Mari van den Hout3, Sonja Dahlum2,
Rien Blok1, Morten Hillmer2, Julia Kolarova2, Raf Sciot4, Dina Schott1,
Reiner Siebert2, Connie Stumpel1
1Maastricht University Medical Centre, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands; 2Ulm University and Ulm Uni-
versity Medical Center, Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany;
3Maastricht University Medical Center, Department of Pathology,
Maastricht, Netherlands; 4University Hospital, University of Leuven,
Department of Pathology, Leuven, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a MCA/ID syn-
drome in which most patients have a KMT2D germline variant.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
528
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
With the publication of several case reports of patients with KS
and a concomitant malignancy the topic of tumor predisposition
in KS has received increased attention. We describe a patient with
KS who developed an ERMS. To get more insight into a potential
tumor predisposition in KS we performed molecular (epi)genetic
analyses on tumor tissue and a literature review.
Methods: Exome sequencing and DNA-methylation proﬁling
(EPIC-array) was performed on tumor DNA. For DNA methylation-
based sarcoma classiﬁcation we used the DKFZ-Sarcoma classi-
ﬁer(1). We conducted a literature search for reports of patients
with KS and a malignancy.
Results: DNA-methylation proﬁling mapped the case to
ERMS. Exome sequencing revealed variants in ERCC5 and TP53.
Copy number variant analysis revealed (partial) gains of chro-
mosomes 2,3,7,8,12,15, and 20, and focal deletions in 11p.
Sanger re-sequencing of the germline variant suggested a gain
of the wild-type KMT2D allele in the trisomy 12. Including our
patient literature review identiﬁed 18 patients with KS and a
malignancy. Overall, the landscape of malignancies in patients
with KS was reminiscent of that of the pediatric population
in general. No secondary malignancy, bilateral-/multifocal or
meta-synchronous malignancies were reported. Histopathologi-
cal and molecular data were infrequently reported and did not
include next generation sequencing and/or DNA-methylation
proﬁling.
Conclusion: Although, based on our (molecular) analyses and
literature review, a tumor predisposition cannot be conﬁrmed or
ruled out we found no strong arguments pointing towards KS as a
tumor predisposition syndrome.
References: (1) Koelsche,Nat.Commun.2021.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.014.D Severe neurovascular manifestations in PTEN-
related hamartoma tumour syndrome
Anna Gerasimenko1, Patrick Benusiglio1, Florence Coulet1, Olivier
Naggara2;3, Mélanie Eyries1, Cyril Mignot1;4, Annouk Bisdorff5
1APHP. Sorbonne Université, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière,
Département de Génétique, Paris, France; 2APHP - CHU Necker-
Enfants Malades, Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Paris, France;
3CH Sainte-Anne, Paris, Service de Neuroradiologie, Paris, France;
4Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, Paris, France; 5Service de
Neuroradiologie, APHP- Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: PTEN-related hamartoma tumor syn-
drome (PHTS) is an overgrowth and cancer susceptibility syn-
drome associated with germline pathogenic variants (PV) in the
PTEN gene. Brain anomalies such as dysplastic ganglioma of the
cerebellum are common, although there are no central nervous
system surveillance recommendations. Brain vascular anomalies in
the context of PHTS were scarcely studied. The aim of our study
was to systematically search for cerebral vascular anomalies in a
series of PHTS patients, with a focus on cranial dural arteriovenous
ﬁstulae (dAVF) and their clinical consequences.
Methods: We retrospectively studied brain imaging in 58 adult
and pediatric PHTS patient s (MRI in 57 patients) who underwent
germline testing at the AP-HP.Sorbonne-University neurodeve-
lopmental, vascular and cancer genetics laboratory.
Results:
A
benign
developmental
venous
anomaly
was
observed in 6 patients and DAVF in two (3.4%) patients. The ﬁrst
patient was a 36 yrs old man with severe epilepsy with a fatal
evolution after 6 years of repetitive endovascular embolizations.
The second was a 21-year-old woman who presented with intra-
cranial hypertension as a consequence of the dAVF, subsequently
cured by embolization.
Conclusion: In the present observational study, occurrence
of cranial dAVF, a condition that may be associated with
debilitating or life-threatening evolution, seems to be higher
than in the general population. A screening brain imaging may
be discussed at diagnosis in PHTS, ideally using MRI with
dynamic MR angiography and perfusion imaging. In parallel,
clinicians should be wary of neurological symptoms in their
PHTS patients.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.015.A Searching for germinal variants of TET2, IDH1,
SETD2, CHD1 and ASXL1 epigenetic genes in Polish prostate
cancer patients - preliminary results
Marta
Heise1,
Piotr
Jarzemski2,
Aneta
Bąk1,
Anna
Junkiert-
Czarnecka1,
Maria
Pilarska-Deltow1,
Maciej
Borysiak2,
Beata
Pilarska2, Olga Haus1
1Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in
Toruń, Poland, Department of Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine,
Bydgoszcz, Poland;
2Department of Urology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Jan Biziel University Hospital in Bydgoszcz, Poland,
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
Background/Objectives: The epigenetic variants are present in all
human cancers and associated with genetic alterations to drive a
cancer phenotype. Thus, we searched for germinal variants of ﬁve
epigenetic genes in Polish prostate cancer patients.
Methods: The material of investigation was DNA from 97 men
with prostate cancer (PC) from all over Poland. NGS and Sanger
sequencing.
Results: In 11/97 (11,3%) PC patients 13 variants of analyzed
genes were detected. These were eight missense variants of TET2
(2), IDH1 (1), SETD2 (3), CHD1 (1) and ASXL1 (1), four silent variants
of TET2 (3) and CHD1 (1) and one duplication of ASXL1. Bioin-
formatic analysis of variants was performed using VarSome data-
base. TET2 c.2218C>T and ASXL1 c.1934dupG were predicted as
pathogenic, ASXL1 c.3623C>T, SETD2 c.3383C>G, TET2 c.2370G>A,
c.4161C>T and IDH1 c.565A>G as VUS (variants of uncertain sig-
niﬁcance), CHD1 c.2321A>T and c.1434C>T, SETD2 c.1643C>A and
c.3229A>G and TET2 c.972A>G were predicted as benign and
TET2 c.3251A>G as likely benign. Two prostate cancer patients
were both carriers of two variants, one of them was a carrier of
ASXL1 c.1934dupG and TET2 c.2370G>A and the second one a
carrier of CHD1 c.2321A>T and TET2 c.972A>G.
Conclusion: The results of the preliminary investigation point
at the need to study germinal variants of epigenetic genes to help
fully understand the pathogenesis of prostate cancer, identify men
at PC high risk and predict the disease recurrence risk after radical
prostatectomy.
References: Soo You J, Jones PA: Cancer genetics and epige-
netics: two sides of the same coin? Cancer Cell. 2012, 22: 9-20.
Grants: MN-1/WL/2020.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.017.C Rapid progression to Richter’s syndrome in patient
with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and near triploid
karyotype
Marija Dencic Fekete1, Tatjana Terzic1, Ljubomir Jakovic2, Vladi-
slava Djurasinovic2, Teodora Karan Djurasevic3, Milica Radojkovic4,
Sonja Pavlovic3, Andrija Bogdanovic2
1Institute for pathology, Medical faculty of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia;
2Clinic for hematology, University Clinical Center, Serbia, Belgrade,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
529
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Serbia; 3Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia; 4Clinical
Center Dr Dragiša Mišović, Clinic of Internal Medicine, Belgrade,
Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
Background/Objectives: The presence of aneuploidy in patients
with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), except for trisomy 12, is
quite uncommon. The frequency of hyperdiploidy or near-
tetraploidy ocurrs in 1-3% of the CLL patients and usually confer
poor prognosis.
Methods: Cytogenetic, Fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH)
and Polymerase chain reaction analyses were performed and
complemented with immunophenotyping by ﬂow cytometry and
pathohistological examination.
Results: Our patient showed splenomegaly, more than three
enlarged lymph node regions and elevated serum LDH and β2
microglobulin levels, at presentation. Highly progressive disease
was proven by other diagnostic methods, including the surface
expression of CD38 and CD49d in the immunophenotype. The
FISH result revealed a trisomy of 13q14 region and the C-MYC
gene as the most prevalent aberrations, followed by a trisomy of
the 11q, CEP12, IGH gene disruption and a tetrasomy of chro-
mosome 12. In the patient’s karyotype, multiple structural and
numerical changes of chromosomes not covered with the FISH
probes, were observed, as well. In addition, the mutational analysis
of the TP53 gene was positive for the frameshift mutation in
exon 6.
Conclusion: In our report, the presence of the near-triploid
karyotype was designated as an uncommon and very rare event in
both CLL and RS. Utilization of comprehensive diagnostic techni-
ques is highly recommended in patients with a progressive phase
of CLL, primarily due to adequate choice of management strategy.
The current case conﬁrms poor prognosis of the previously
reported CLL patients with aneuploidy.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.018.D MS-MLPA reliably detects promoter methylation as
well as deletion of MGMT gene in patients with glioblastoma
Halka Lhotska1, Tatiana Aghova1, Hana Cechova2, Karla Svobo-
dova1, Libuse Lizcova1, Dora Konecna3, Filip Kramar3, Petr Hrabal4,
David Netuka3, Zuzana Zemanova1
1General University Hospital in Prague, Center of Oncocytogenomics,
Prague, Czech Republic;
2Institute of Hematology and Blood
Transfusion, Department of HLA, Prague, Czech Republic;
31st
Faculty of Medicine of Charles University and Military University
Hospital Prague, Department of Neurosurgery and Neurooncology,
Prague, Czech Republic; 41st Faculty of Medicine of Charles University
and Military University Hospital Prague, Department of Pathology,
Prague, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most com-
mon primary malignant brain tumor with very poor prognosis. The
good response of the patients with GBM to temozolomide treat-
ment is associated with low expression of MGMT gene (localized
on 10q26.3), which may be affected by methylation or deletion.
However, the appropriate methods of analysis and the cut-off
levels for the detection of MGMT gene promoter methylation
remain to be discussed.
Methods: We examined the brain tissue and peripheral blood
of 70 patients with GBM, IDH-wildtype, WHO grade 4 using MS-
MLPA method, ME012 kit (MRC Holland). We evaluated the spe-
ciﬁcity and sensitivity of individual MS-MLPA kit probes via ROC
curve analysis and heatmap function in R software. The deletion of
MGMT gene was conﬁrmed by I-FISH with MGMT probe (Empire
Genomics).
Results: We found two MS-MLPA probes to be the most spe-
ciﬁc. The ﬁrst one localized -263nt upstream and the second
+165nt downstream of the MGMT gene transcription start. We
conﬁrmed methylation of the MGMT gene promoter in 38% of
patients. In 87.5% of them, we found deletion of 10q26.3 region
along with the promoter methylation. In 14% of patients, only
deletion of 10q26.3 was found.
Conclusion: The results of our study show that the MS-MLPA
method can reliably detect not only methylation but also deletion
of the MGMT gene. The comprehensive analysis of the MGMT gene
may lead to more precise and personalized treatment of the
patients with GBM.
References:.
Grants: Supported by RVO-VFN64165, NU21-04-00100, GIP-22-
NL-02-846.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.019.A Germline mutations in WNK2 are associated with
serrated polyposis syndrome
Yasmin Soares de Lima1;2, Coral Arnau2;3, Jenifer Muñoz2;3, Cristina
Herrera-Pariente2;3, Leticia Moreira2;3, Teresa Ocaña3, Marcos Díaz-
Gay1;4, Sebastià Franch-Expósito1;5, Miriam Cuatrecasas2;3, Sabela
Carballal2;3, Anael Lopez-Novo6, Lorena Moreno2, Guerau Fernan-
dez3;7, Aránzazu Díaz de Bustamante8, Sophia Peters9, Anna
Sommer9, Isabel Spier9;10, Iris te Paske11, Yasmijn Wanderwaarden11,
Antoni Castells2, Luis Bujanda12, Gabriel Capellá13, Verena Steinke-
Lange14, Khalid Mahmood15, Jihoon E. Joo15, Julie Arnold16;17, Susan
Parry16, Finlay A. Macrae15;17, Ingrid Winship15;17, Christophe Rosty18,
Joaquin Cubiella19, Daniel Rodriguez-Alcade20, Elke Holinski-Feder14,
Richarda De Voer11, Daniel Buchanan15;17, Stefan Aretz9;10, Clara
Ruiz-Ponte6, Laura Valle13, Francesc Balaguer2;3, Laia Bonjoch1;2;3,
Sergi Castellvi-Bel1;2;3
1IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain;
2Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain;
3CIBEREHD, Barcelona, Spain; 4University of California, San Diego,
United States; 5Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
United States; 6Fundación Publica Galega de Medicina Xenómica,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain; 7Hospital Sant Joan de Déu and
Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain; 8Hospital
Universitario de Móstoles, Móstoles, Spain; 9University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany; 10University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany; 11Radboud
University
Medical
Center,
Nijmegen,
Netherlands;
12Hospital
Donostia-Instituto Biodonostia, San Sebastián, Spain; 13Investigació
Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain; 14MGZ-Medical
Genetics Center, Munich, Germany; 15The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne,
Australia;
16New
Zealand
Familial
Gastrointestinal
Cancer Service, Auckland, New Zealand; 17Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Melbourne, Australia; 18University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia;
19Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Ourense, Ourense, Spain;
20Hospital Universitario de Móstoles, Móstoles, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Serrated polyposis syndrome (SPS) is
characterized by multiple serrated polyps and colorectal cancer
(CRC) predisposition. WNK2 was previously suggested as a new
candidate gene to SPS (1). We aimed at supporting WNK2 as a
new genetic predisposition gene to SPS with functional evidence
and replication in additional SPS cohorts.
Methods: We performed a gene-panel sequencing of 211 SPS
patients and assessed sequencing data of 297 external SPS cases.
We produced a cellular model for WNK2 using CRISPR/Cas9 and
lentiviral delivery system. Functional assays monitored the MAPK
pathway, cell cycle progression, survival and adhesion.
Results: Five germline potentially pathogenic variants among
our cohort and 10 among the external cohort were identiﬁed in
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
530
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
WNK2. Genetic variants c.2105C>T (p.Pro702Leu), c.4820C>T
(p.Ala1607Val) and c.6157G>A (p.Val2053Ile) were functionally
characterized, displaying higher phospho-PAK1/2 and phospho-
ERK1/2 levels, increased CCDN1 expression, higher clonogenic
capacity and upregulated MMP2 levels.
Conclusion: Potentially pathogenic variants in WNK2 were
identiﬁed in 3.24% of SPS patients (17/524). WNK2 genetic variants
seems to disrupt ERK1/2 MAPK pathway, affecting cellular func-
tions as cell cycle progression, survival and adhesion capacity,
supporting the role of WNK2 as a new germline predisposition
gene to SPS.
References: 1- Soares de Lima Y et al. Germline and Somatic
Whole‐exome
Sequencing
Identiﬁes
New
Candidate
Genes
Involved in Familial Predisposition to Serrated Polyposis Syn-
drome. Cancers 2021; 13(4):1–21.
Grants: LCF/BQ/DI18/11660058 (ID100010434) Marie Skło-
dowska-Curie no. 713673, Fundació La Marató 2019-202008-10,
Fondo de Investigación Sanitaria/FEDER (17/00878, 20/00113),
AECC (PRYGN211085CAST), Generalitat de Catalunya (GRPRE
2017SGR21), COST Action CA17118, CIBEREHD, CIBERONC and
CIBERER.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.020.B Evaluating the potential of polygenic risk score to
improve colorectal cancer screening
Coral Arnau-Collell1, Ana Diez-Villanueva2, Beatriz Bellosillo3, Josep
M Augé4, Jenifer Muñoz1, Elisabet Guino2, Leticia Moreira1, Anna
Serradesanferm5, Àngels Pozo5, Isabel Torà5, Laia Bonjoch1, Gemma
Ibañez-Sanz2, Mireia Obon-Santacana2, Ferran Moratalla-Navarro2,
Rebeca Sanz-Pamplona2, Carmen Márquez Márquez6, Rebeca Rueda
Miret3, Rocio Pérez Berbegal6, Gabriel Piquer Velasco3, Cristina
Hernández Rodríguez7, criprev consortium8, Jaume Grau5, Antoni
Castells1, Josep M Borràs9, Xavier Bessa6, Victor Moreno2, Sergi
Castellvi-Bel1
1Gastroenterology Department, Hospital Clínic, Institut d’Investiga-
cions
Biomèdiques
August
Pi
i
Sunyer
(IDIBAPS),
Centro
de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y
Digestivas (CIBEREHD), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain;
2Catalan Institute of Oncology, Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute (IDIBELL), Consortium for Biomedical Research in Epidemiol-
ogy and Public Health (CIBERESP) and University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain; 3Pathology Department, Hospital del Mar, IMIM
(Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute)., Barcelona, Spain;
4Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clínic of
Barcelona, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS)., Barcelona, Spain; 5Department of Preventive Medicine
and Epidemiology, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Institut d’Investiga-
cions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain;
6Gastroenterology Department, Hospital del Mar, IMIM (Hospital del
Mar Medical Research Institute), Barcelona, Spain;
7Unitat de
Prevenció i Registre del Càncer, Servei d’Epidemiologia i Avaluació,
Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain;
8CRIPREV, Barcelona, Spain;
9Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Barcelona and
IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Colorectal cancer (CRC) has a high
incidence and associated mortality worldwide. Screening pro-
grams are recommended for men and women over 50 y.o..
Intermediate screens such as fecal immunochemical testing (FIT)
select patients for colonoscopy with suboptimal sensitivity. Addi-
tional biomarkers could improve the current scenario.
Methods: We included almost 3,000 individuals with a positive
FIT test. They were classiﬁed as cases when a high-risk lesion for
CRC was detected after colonoscopy, whereas the control group
comprised individuals with low-risk or no lesions. Sixty-ﬁve CRC
risk genetic variants were genotyped. Polygenic risk score (PRS)
and additive models for risk prediction incorporating sex, age, FIT
value and PRS were generated.
Results: Risk score was higher in cases compared to controls
(per allele OR = 1.04; 95%CI 1.02-1.06; P-value < 0.0001). We also
observed a 2-fold increase in CRC risk for subjects in the highest
decile of risk alleles (≥65), compared to those in the ﬁrst decile
(≤54) (OR = 2.22, 95%CI 1.59-3.12, P-value < 0.0001). The model
combining sex, age, FIT value and PRS reached the highest
accuracy for identifying patients with a high-risk lesion (cross-
validated AUROC: 0.639; 95%CI 0.619-0.660).
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst investigation analyzing PRS in a
two-step CRC screening program. PRS could improve current CRC
screening. However, its capacity is limited and should be com-
plemented by additional biomarkers such as microbiome or
environmental factors.
References:.
Grants: PERIS (SLT002/16/00398), Fondo de Investigación
Sanitaria/FEDER (PI17/00878, PI20/00113), Fundació La Marató de
TV3 (2019-202008), AECC (PRYGN211085CAST), Generalitat de
Catalunya (GRPRE 2017SGR21), CIBEREHD, CIBERESP and COST
Action CA17118.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.022.D Diagnostic uncertainties in hereditary
leiomyomatosis: complementary role of genetic analysis and
immunohistochemical staining
Avgi Andreou1, Anne Warren2, Saba Sharif3;4, Beverley. Speight5,
Laura Butland6, Abhijit Dixit6, Marc Tischkowitz1;5, Eamonn R Maher1
1University of Cambridge, Academic Department of Medical Genetics,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; 2Cambridge University NHS Foundation
Trust, Department of Histopathology, Cambridge, United Kingdom;
3Birmingham Women’s and Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Clinical
Genetics Department, Birmingham, United Kingdom; 4Great Ormond
Street Hospital, Clinical Genetics Unit, London, United Kingdom;
5Addenbrooke’s Hospital, East Anglian Medical Genetics Service,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; 6Nottingham City Hospital, Department
of Clinical Genetics, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Multiple cutaneous and/or uterine leio-
myomas are associated with hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal
cell cancer (HLRCC) syndrome but also occur with other disorders
or are sporadic. HLRCC is caused by heterozygous germline var-
iants in FH and is an important diagnosis to make because of the
RCC risk. Though mutation analysis of FH may detect a pathogenic
variant, detection of a rare variant of unknown clinical signiﬁcance
(VUS) or negative testing can leave diagnostic uncertainty. Here
we report our ﬁndings from a patient series with multiple leio-
myomas in which genetic ﬁndings were inconclusive and the role
of immunohistochemistry in resolving diagnostic uncertainty.
Methods: Eight individuals with multiple cutaneous and/or
uterine leiomyomas were evaluated. Genetic analysis identiﬁed an
FH variant (initially classiﬁed as a VUS) in 6 cases. Immunohisto-
chemical (IHC) staining for FH expression and detection of S-(2-
succino)-cysteine (2-SC) was performed [1].
Results: IHC on leiomyoma and normal tissue revealed 2-SC
positivity in 100% (6/6) and FH protein loss in 67% (4/6) of cases
with a germline FH variant. All variants with 2-SC tumour positivity
were upgraded to likely pathogenic/pathogenic. Two individuals
with multiple leiomyomas and a family history of leiomyomatosis
but no detectable germline FH variant demonstrated retention of
FH expression and negative staining for 2-SC and a diagnosis of
HLRCC was excluded.
Conclusion: We propose a management pathway for the
investigation of suspected HLRCC in individuals with multiple
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
531
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
leiomyomas that incorporates genetic testing and IHC for 2-SC
and FH in a complementary fashion to resolve diagnostic
uncertainty.
References: 1. Bardella et al. 2011.
Grants: CRUK.
Conﬂict of Interest: Avgi Andreou: None declared, Anne
Warren: None declared, Saba Sharif: None declared, Beverley.
Speight: None declared, Laura Butland: None declared, Abhijit
Dixit: None declared, Marc Tischkowitz: None declared, Eamonn R
Maher Invited speaker fees from MSD.
P13.024.B Incidence of Pediatric Cancer Predisposition in
Czechia
Lucie Slamova1;2, Michal Zapotocky2, Lucie Šrámková2, Martina
Bittoova1, Leona Cerna1, Monika Koudová1
1GENNET - Center of Medical genetics and reproductive medicine,
Department of Genetics, 17000, Czech Republic; 2Second Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Depart-
ment of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Prague, Czech
Republic.
Background/Objectives: Genetic predisposition plays important
role in cancer development especially when enviromental factors
couldn´t be the key player. However the ﬁeld of pediatric cancer
predisposition is not yet fully understood (Ripperger, 2017).
Accurate incidence need to be validated under new ﬁndings. Our
main objective is determine the incidence of predisposing genetic
variants in Czechia.
Methods: NGS analyses using targeted gene panels (226
genes) were redesigned for pediatric cohort (add 64 genes). The
study of the variants was carried out with the help of the ClinVar,
professional HGMD, as well as in silico predictions. The variants
were classiﬁed as benign, likely benign, VUS (variant of uncertain
signiﬁcance), likely pathogenic, pathogenic. All patients enrolled in
the study were reffered to genetic counseling under hema-
tooncology department between January 2020 and December
2021. 217 patients (M 111, F 104) fulﬁlled the criteria and agreed
to participate in the study, all parents and/or patients signed
informed consent.
Results: A pathogenic variant connected to cancer predis-
position was detected in 31 patients (31/217;14%), in following
genes TP53, NF1, RB1, PALB2, EXT2, BRCA1, WNR, ABRAXAS1,
STK11, HOXB13, NBN, MUTYH, ATM, CHEK2, FANCA, SBDS, FANCG,
FANCI, remarkable enrichment in neurooncology group for var-
iants in MUTYH, CHEK2, WNR. Likely pathogenic variant was found
in 14 patients (14/217;6,%). Reckon up the incidence to 20,7%.
Interestingly variant of uncertain signiﬁkance was discovered in 55
cases and needed to be futher validated (55/217;25%).
Conclusion: For the ﬁrst time accurate incidence for cancer
predisposition in Czech pediatric cohort was determined (20,7%).
References: Ripperger, 2017, AJMG, https://doi.org/10.1002/
ajmg.a.38142.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.025.C The Manchester Scoring System in 2022:
performances before and after raking in breast and ovarian
cancer patients undergoing multigene panel testing
Patrick Benusiglio1, Lucas Ducrot2, Jasmine Hasnaoui1, Florence
Coulet1, Camille Desseignes1, Geoffroy Canlorbe3, Diarietou Gueye4,
Catherine Uzan3, Erell Guillerm1, Gregory Nuel2
1Sorbonne Université, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de
Génétique, Paris, France;
2Sorbonne Université, Laboratoire de
Probabilités, Statistiques et Modélisation, Paris, France; 3Sorbonne
Université, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Gynécologie
Obstrétrique, Paris, France; 4Sorbonne Université, Institut Universi-
taire de Cancérologie, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: Recent recommendations from the USA
state that most breast and ovarian cancer patients (BC/OC) should
be offered germline testing. However, European oncogeneticists
still need to select a subset of suggestive cases, as resources
would not allow for near-universal testing. Clinical criteria, pre-
diction models or scores are used in this context. We have
adapted the Manchester Scoring System (MSS-P) to French prac-
tice and multigene panels, and report its performances in a large
series of cases.
Methods:
We
included
1219
BC/OC
patients
referred
between 2016 and 2020 to the AP-HP.Sorbonne University
Oncogenetics laboratory, Paris, and who underwent germline
panel testing (BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, TP53, RAD51C, RAD51D,
ATM, CHEK2, PTEN, CDH1, MMR). MSS-P correlation with the
identiﬁcation of pathogenic variants was assessed using AUC/
ROC curves. For a subset of 210 patients, MSS-P was compared
to BOADICEA. Curves were also re-calculated using the raking
method as a correction, matching cases statistics to those of
unselected BC/OC cases.
Results: MMS-P performances were average, with an AUC of
0.61. Sensitivity was 0.95, 0.75 and 0.55 at the 9, 12 and 15-point
thresholds. Speciﬁcity was 0.14, 0.36 and 0.63, respectively.
Negative and positive predictive values varied very little with
thresholds, with estimations of 0.93-0.96 and 0.10-0.13, respec-
tively. The BOADICEA AUC on a subset of cases was similar to MSS-
P (0.61). MSS-P performances, though, were improved after raking,
with an AUC of 0.74.
Conclusion: Improved performances after raking suggest that
MSS-P should actually be used by gynaecologists and oncologists
to select BC/OC patients for Oncogenetics referral.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Patrick Benusiglio AstraZeneca, Lucas
Ducrot: None declared, Jasmine Hasnaoui: None declared, Flor-
ence Coulet: None declared, Camille Desseignes: None declared,
Geoffroy
Canlorbe:
None
declared,
Diarietou
Gueye:
None
declared, Catherine Uzan: None declared, Erell Guillerm: None
declared, Gregory Nuel: None declared.
P13.026.D ENIGMA effort to standardize the classiﬁcation of
variants disrupting splicing of in-frame exons using BRCA1
exon 18 as an example
Joanna Domènech-Vivó1, Hélène Tubeuf2;3, Romy L.S. Mesman4,
Aurelie Drouet2, Mélanie Girardi2, María Concepción Alonso-Cerezo5,
Diana Baralle6;7, Nadia Boutry-Kryza8, Dave Bunyan6;9, Helen J
Byers10;11, Kathleen Claes12, D Gareth Evans13, Miguel de la Hoya14,
Sophie
krieger15;16;17,
Conxi
Lázaro18;19,
Mélanie
Leone8,
Eva
Machackova20, Mireia Menéndez18, Alejandro Moles-Fernández1,
Gemma Montalban21, Elke van Veen13, JUDITH BALMAÑA1;22,
Amanda B. Spurdle23, Orland Diez1;24, Maaike Vreeswijk4, Alexandra
Martins2, Sara Gutiérrez-Enríquez1
1Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of
Oncology
(VHIO),
Vall
d’Hebron
Barcelona
Hospital
Campus,
Barcelona, Spain; 2Inserm U1245, UNIROUEN, Normandie University,
Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, FHU
Génomique G4, Rouen, France;
3Interactive Biosoftware, Rouen,
France; 4Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, Netherlands; 5Genética Clínica, Servicio de oncología
médica, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain; 6Faculty
of Medicine University of Southampton, Southampton, United
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
532
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Kingdom; 7University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, United
Kingdom; 8Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France; 9Wessex Regional
Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, United
Kingdom; 10Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United
Kingdom; 11Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health,
University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom; 12Center for medical genetics,
Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 13Manchester Centre for
Genomic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
Division of Evolution and Genomic Medicine, University of Manche-
ster, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester Universities NHS Foundation
Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom; 14Molecular Oncology Labora-
tory, CIBERONC, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, IdISSC (Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos), Madrid,
Spain; 15Laboratoire de Biologie et Génétique du Cancer, Centre
François Baclesse, Caen, France; 16Inserm U1245, Normandie Univ,
UNIROUEN,
Normandy
Centre
for
Genomic
and
Personalized
Medicine, Rouen, France; 17Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, Caen, France;
18Hereditary Cancer Program, Program in Molecular Mechanisms
and Experimental Therapy in Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, Catalan
Institute of Oncology, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain; 19Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid,
Spain; 20Department of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics; Masaryk
Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic; 21Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec - Université Laval Research Center, Genomics
Center, Québec, Canada;
22Medical Oncology Department, Vall
d’Hebron Hospital Universitari, Vall d’Hebron Barcelona Hospital
Campus, Barcelona, Spain;
23QIMR Berghofer Medical Research
Institute, Herston, Australia;
24Area of Clinical and Molecular
Genetics, Vall d’Hebron Hospital Universitari, Vall d’Hebron Barcelona
Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: BRCA1 germline pathogenic variants are
associated with high risk of breast/ovarian cancer. Variants indu-
cing complete skipping of in-frame exons or causing partial/leaky
splicing defects are challenging to classify, due to lack of knowl-
edge about the functionality of the generated in-frame proteins or
the minimal level of full-length transcripts (FL) required for normal
function. In the ENIGMA consortium, we performed a compre-
hensive study of variants affecting BRCA1 exon 18 (BRCA1e18) to
identify those spliceogenic and characterize their severity to
estimate the threshold of FL levels for sufﬁcient normal BRCA1
function.
Methods: Patients’ RNA (n = 30), minigene (n = 160), and
mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) complementation assays
were combined to determine the impact of BRCA1e18 variants
on RNA splicing and the minimal level of BRCA1 FL required for
function.
Results: Variants in which we detected a complete skipping of
BRCA1e18(Δ18) were not functional by the saturation genome
editing assay[1], and neither were those that induced 50% Δ18 in
minigenes (25% expected in patients). In contrast, synonymous
and intronic variants causing up to 10% of Δ18 were considered
functional. Complete deletion of BRCA1e18 in mESC leads to a
non-functional protein supporting that Δ18 is not a rescue
transcript.
Conclusion: This data evidences that the leakiness rate of
BRCA1e18 skipping and residual FL levels are critical to determine
the pathogenicity of variants affecting this exon.
References: [1] G.Findlay et al.,”Accurate classiﬁcation of
BRCA1
variants
with
saturation
genome
editing”,
Natur-
e,2018,v562,pp217-222.
Grants: PI19/01303, ISCIII, Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación,
funded by FEDER funds-a way to build Europe-and AGAURFI-
DGR2020.
Conﬂict of Interest: Joanna Domènech-Vivó: None declared,
Hélène Tubeuf H. Tubeuf was employed by Interactive Biosoftware
for the time period October 2015-September 2018 in the context
of a public-private PhD project partnership between INSERM and
Interactive Biosoftware (CIFRE fellowship #2015/0335), Romy L.S.
Mesman: None declared, Aurelie Drouet: None declared, Mélanie
Girardi: None declared, María Concepción Alonso-Cerezo: None
declared, Diana Baralle: None declared, Nadia Boutry-Kryza: None
declared, Dave Bunyan: None declared, Helen J Byers: None
declared, Kathleen Claes: None declared, D Gareth Evans: None
declared, Miguel de la Hoya: None declared, Sophie krieger: None
declared, Conxi Lázaro: None declared, Mélanie Leone: None
declared, Eva Machackova: None declared, Mireia Menéndez:
None
declared,
Alejandro
Moles-Fernández:
None
declared,
Gemma Montalban: None declared, Elke van Veen: None declared,
JUDITH BALMAÑA: None declared, Amanda B. Spurdle: None
declared, Orland Diez: None declared, Maaike Vreeswijk: None
declared, Alexandra Martins: None declared, Sara Gutiérrez-Enrí-
quez: None declared.
P13.027.A In vivo cancer co-driver identiﬁcation and
dependency mapping via evaluation of CRISPR-induced repair
outcomes in Xenopus tropicalis cancer models
Dieter Tulkens1;2, Thomas Naert1;2, Suzan Demuynck1, Marthe
Boelens1;2,
David
Creytens3,
Pieter
Van
Vlierberghe2;4;5,
Kris
Vleminckx1;2
1Ghent University, Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology,
Ghent, Belgium; 2Ghent University, Cancer Research Institute Ghent,
Ghent, Belgium; 3Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Ghent, Belgium; 4Ghent University, Center
for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium; 5Ghent University, Department
of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: With the emergence of CRISPR/Cas9
techniques, Xenopus is receiving increased attention with regard
to modeling of human genetic diseases. X. tropicalis is especially
uniquely placed for these applications because it combines the
general
amphibian
features
of
large
externally
developing
embryos, which are straightforward to inject with genome editing
reagents, a relatively short life cycle and a true diploid genome.
Methods: We use targeted microinjections of multiplexed
genome editing reagents in early developing embryos and rapid
F0 screening of such mosaic mutant animals. This allows rapid
identiﬁcation of cooperative driver genes in speciﬁc cancer con-
texts. Additionally, we use an in-house developed methodology to
identify cancer dependencies built on principles of Darwinian cell-
speciﬁc clonal selection, opening possibilities for development of
new treatments.
Results: Over the last couple of years, we built multiple
genetically engineered Xenopus models (GEXMs) for several
human cancers. Furthermore, in a model for Gardner syndrome,
we validated an in vivo negative-selection screen that identiﬁed
the epigenetic regulator EZH2 as a druggable dependency factor
needed for desmoid tumor growth. A similar strategy is followed
to identify vulnerabilities in other GEXM tumor models.
Conclusion: We provide ﬁndings and perspectives important
for current and future (Xenopus) cancer research. The generation
of GEXMs even more closely mimicking the patient situation, will
be an extra valuable tool for a reliable and time-efﬁcient screening
of novel genetic dependencies and the discovery of extra
potential inhibiting compounds.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
533
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P13.028.B Lung metastases and subsequent malignant
transformation of a fumarate hydratase -deﬁcient uterine
leiomyoma
terhi ahvenainen1;2;3, Sara Khamaiseh1;2;3, amjad alkodsi1, miika
mehine1;2, riikka nevala4, anna äyräväinen1;2;5, ralf bützow1;6, pia
vahteristo1;2;3
1Applied Tumor Genomics Research Program, University of Helsinki,
helsinki, Finland;
2Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics,
University of Helsinki, helsinki, Finland; 3iCAN Digital Precision Cancer
Medicine Flagship, helsinki, Finland; 4Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Helsinki University Hospital (HUH) and Medical Faculty, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; 5Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Helsinki University Hospital, helsinki, Finland; 6Department of Pathol-
ogy, University of Helsinki and Laboratory of Helsinki University
Hospital (HUSLAB), Helsinki University Hospital, helsinki, Finland.
Background/Objectives:
Uterine
leiomyomas
are
common
benign smooth muscle tumors. Their potential to metastasize or
transform into leiomyosarcomas is extremely low. Here, we report
a patient who was diagnosed with a uterine leiomyoma and seven
and nine years later with pulmonary leiomyosarcomas.
Methods:
Histopathological
examination,
whole-exome
sequencing and 3’RNA sequencing.
Results: Histopathological re-evaluation conﬁrmed the cellular
leiomyoma diagnosis for the uterine tumor, whereas the pul-
monary tumors met the criteria of a leiomyosarcoma. Somatic
copy number analysis showed similar mutational proﬁles in all
three tumors, including a homozygous deletion in a rare leio-
myoma driver gene FH. Tumor evolution analysis conﬁrmed their
clonality.
Pulmonary
tumors
harbored
additional
alterations
affecting e.g. the cancer-associated genes NRG1, MYOCD, and
FGFR1. The uterine tumor showed similar gene expression pat-
terns as other FH-deﬁcient leiomyomas.
Conclusion: This data supports the occasional metastatic
capability and malignant transformation of uterine leiomyomas
with FH-deﬁciency and/or cellular histopathology. Identiﬁcation of
such tumors may provide early diagnosis and even cancer
prevention.
References:.
Grants: Sigrid Jusélius Foundation, Academy of Finland, Cancer
Foundation Finland, iCAN Digital Precision Cancer Medicine
Flagship.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.029.C Signiﬁcance of ARID1A mutations in colorectal
cancer
Dimitar
Dimitrov1,
Hristo
Ivanov1;2,
Nelly
Miteva-Marcheva1,
Gabriela Raycheva3;4, Janet Grudeva-Popova3;4, Aleksandar Linev2,
Ivan Zheliaskov2, Peter Shopov5, Momchil Topalov1, Vili Stoyanova1;2
1Medical University Plovdiv, Department of Pediatrics and Medical
Genetics, Plovdiv, Bulgaria; 2“St. George” University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Medical Genetics, Plovdiv, Bulgaria;
3Medical University
Plovdiv, Department of Clinical Oncology, Plovdiv, Bulgaria; 4“St.
George” University Hospital, Department of Medical Oncology,
Plovdiv, Bulgaria; 5Creator of PGx R package, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the
most common neoplasms and the leading cause of death
worldwide. It is a complex heterogeneous disease, arising from the
accumulation of many different genetic mutations.
Methods: The study included 15 patients with CRC. Circulating
tumor DNA was extracted from blood plasma and a target
sequencing of a panel of 484 target genes was performed.
Results: A somatic variant ARID1A/c.3999_4001delGCA was
identiﬁed in 13out of 15 patients. ARID1A is a tumor suppressor
gene that encodes a protein involved in the SWI/SNF protein
complex.Its function is to regulate the transcription of certain
genes by changing the structure of the chromatin around them.
The SWI/SNF protein complex acts as a tumor suppressor, pre-
venting uncontrolled cell growth and division.The majority of
mutations in the ARID1A gene are frame shifts or nonsense
mutations that contribute to mRNA breakdown and loss of protein
expression, 5% of ARID1A mutations are in-frame insertions or
deletions (indels).Recent studies show that variants in the ARID1A
gene have been found in many types of cancer, including color-
ectal cancer recent functional analysis revealed, that no or low
expression of ARID1A is observed in CRC patients.
Conclusion: Clearly mutations in ARID1A are involved in CRC,
but more research is needed to clarify their role in tumorigenesis.
References: Erfani M, et al., Altered ARID1A expression in col-
orectal cancer. BMC Cancer. 2020 Apr 25;20(1):350.
Grants:
Project
BG05M2OP001–1.002-0005
/29.03.2018
(2018–2023) - Center for Competence “Personalized Innovative
Medicine (PERIMED)”.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.031.A Multi-gene panel testing of melanoma patients
Alessia
Russo1,
Paola
Ogliara2,
Chiara
Catalano1,
Francesca
Restivo2, Francesca Vignolo2, Giovanni Birolo1, Flavia Palermo2,
Cecilia Bracco2, Debora Fiorito2, Francesca D’Alessio2, Guido Casalis
Cavalchini2, Enrico Grosso2;3, Antonella Maffè4, Silvana Ungari4,
Enrico Colombo5, Caterina Marchiò1;6, Pietro Quaglino1;2, Simone
Ribero1;2, Giuseppe Matullo1;2, Barbara Pasini1;2
1University of Turin, Turin, Italy; 2AOU Città della Salute e della
Scienza di Torino, Turin, Italy; 3USL di Aosta, Aosta, Italy; 4AO Santa
Croce e Carle di Cuneo, Cuneo, Italy;
5Università del Piemonte
Orientale, Novara, Italy; 6IRCCS di Candiolo (Torino) – FPO, Candiolo,
Italy.
Background/Objectives: Melanoma is characterized by a com-
plex and heterogeneous etiology, which involves environmental,
phenotypic and genetic risk factors. Approximately 5-10% of
melanoma cases occurs in a familial context. Carriers of mutations
in high-penetrance genes show a lifetime risk of 52%; however, in
the majority of families no causative mutations are identiﬁed. The
aim of our study is to ﬁnd novel genetic alterations that could be
useful to identify pathways involved in the development of the
disease.
Methods: We tested 306 patients with a diagnosis of familial or
multiple or juvenile malignant melanoma and belonging to cases
referred for testing at the Genetic Unit of Città della Scienza e della
Salute of Turin (Prof. B. Pasini).
Results: Patients ﬁrstly underwent screening of four estab-
lished familial melanoma susceptibility genes: CDKN2A, CDK4,
MITF, and TERT. Twenty-four out of 306 patients (7.8%) presented
24 pathogenic mutations in CDKN2A (19 cases) and MITF (4 cases)
genes. As expected, the most frequent mutation was the missense
variant CDKN2A c.301G>T present in 10 out of 19 patients. To
understand the genetic etiology of wild-type cases, we will screen
21 low to high-risk genes plus 256 melanoma-associated SNPs
through Next Generation Sequencing. Analysis of the ﬁrst 101
cases revealed pathogenic variants in MC1R, OCA2, PTEN, TYR and
SLC45A2 genes.
Conclusion: Extended testing beyond main high-risk genes
could identify new potentially actionable deleterious mutation.
Moreover, it allows investigating the combination effect of low to
moderate variants.
References:.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
534
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Grants: Eccellenza MIUR 2018-2022, Dip. Scienze Mediche -
Project n. D15D18000410001.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.033.C BRG1-dependent chromatin remodeling at the
promoters of lysosome-localized ABC transporters confers
multidrug insensitivity in paclitaxel-resistant non-small cell
lung cancer cells
Karolina Gronkowska1, Agnieszka Robaszkiewicz1
1University of Lodz, Department of General Biophysics, Lodz, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Paclitaxel (PTX) is an important ﬁrst-line
drug for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but
it leads to the development of resistance to many other structu-
rally unrelated compounds. This phenomenon that is known as
Multidrug Resistance (MDR) is frequently conferred by the over-
expression of membrane-anchored ABC transporters capable of
transfer of xenobiotics across membranes. Furthermore, enhanced
lysosomal function has been shown to be characteristic of pacli-
taxel resistance in cancer cells. ATP-dependent chromatin remo-
deling complexes are an important part of the epigenetic
mechanism of transcriptional regulation. Knowing that ATPase
BRG1 is involved in the expression of ABC transporters in breast
cancer cells, we examined the role of BRG1 in the expression of
genes responsible for MDR, paying particular attention to those
that occur in the lysosomal membrane and may contribute to
increased drug accumulation in lysosomes.
Methods: The expression of ABC transporters was analysed by
qPCR and Western Blot. Enrichment of ABC genes promoters in
BRG1 was measured by ChIP-qPCR. Drug accumulation was ana-
lysed by confocal microscopy.
Results: PTX exposure has been shown to promote the
expression of MDR-associated ABC transporters and BRG1. Fur-
thermore, BRG1 has been shown to interact with promoter
sequences of genes for ABC proteins. The silencing of BRG1
expression decreases ABC transporter expression and reduces
drug accumulation in lysosomes.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that speciﬁc BRG1 inhibitors may
have potential applications in overcoming resistance acquired after
paclitaxel therapy by reducing drug accumulation in lysosomes.
References:.
Grants: National Centre for Research and Development: LIDER/
22/0122/L-10/18/NCBR/2019.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.034.D Development of APC-speciﬁc ACMG/AMP variant
classiﬁcation guidelines
Xiaoyu Yin1;2, Isabel Spier3;4;5, Marcy Richardson6, Marta Pineda5;7;8,
Deborah Ritter9;10, Tina Pesaran6, Gabriel Capellá5;7;8, Sean V.
Tavtigian11, John-Paul Plazzer1;2, Andreas Laner12, Andrew Latch-
ford13, Ian M. Frayling14, Sharon E Plon9;10, Marc Greenblatt15, Finlay
A. Macrae1;2, Stefan Aretz3;4;5
1Royal Melbourne Hospital, Department of Colorectal Medicine and
Genetics, Parkville, Australia; 2University of Melbourne, Department
of Medicine, Parkville, Australia; 3University of Bonn, Institute of
Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, Bonn, Germany;
4University
Hospital Bonn, National Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes,
Bonn, Germany; 5European Reference Network on Genetic Tumour
Risk Syndromes (ERN GENTURIS), Project ID No 739547, Nijmegen,
Netherlands; 6Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, United States; 7Institut
Català d’Oncologia – IDIBELL, Hereditary Cancer Program, Barcelona,
Spain; 8Instituto Salud Carlos III, Centro de Investigación Biomédica
en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, Spain; 9Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, United States; 10Baylor College of Medicine, Texas
Children’s Cancer Center, Houston, United States; 11University of Utah
School of Medicine, Department of Oncological Sciences and
Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, United States; 12Medical
Genetics Center Munich, Department of Genomics, Munich, Germany;
13St Mark’s Hospital, Polyposis Registry, London, United Kingdom;
14University Hospital of Wales, Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff,
United Kingdom;
15University of Vermont College of Medicine,
Vermont Cancer Center, Burlington, United States.
Background/Objectives: To resolve the interpretative challenges
of
constitutional
variants
in
colorectal
cancer
predisposing
genes, a Hereditary Colon Cancer/ Polyposis Variant Curation
Expert Panel (VCEP) was established as a collaborative effort
between ClinGen and the International Society for Gastrointestinal
Hereditary Tumours (https://clinicalgenome.org/afﬁliation/50099/).
Under oversight of the ClinGen Sequence Variant Interpretation
working group, our subcommittee reviews APC variants under-
lying Familial adenomatous polyposis and aims to improve variant
classiﬁcation through the development of gene-speciﬁc speciﬁ-
cations and the implementation of expert-reviewed pathogenicity
assertions.
Methods: APC-speciﬁc speciﬁcations of the variant guidelines
by the American College of Medical Genetics and the Association
of Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) were cross-examined in tel-
econferences based on database analyses, literature review and
expert opinions. A balanced selection of 57 variants underwent
pilot testing to further reﬁne and ﬁnalise the APC-speciﬁc classi-
ﬁcation criteria.
Results: Three of the 28 original criteria were left unchanged
(BS4, BP1, BP5), whilst eight were removed (PM1, PM3, PM4, PP2,
PP4, PP5, BP3, BP6). Gene, disease-based and/or evidence strength
modiﬁcation were applied to the remaining 17 criteria. Major
speciﬁcations were noted for PVS1 (including variants at the 5’ and
3’ of the gene and splice variants) and allele frequency criteria
(BA1, BS1 and PM2). Moreover, a point system for the phenotypic
description of variant carriers was developed.
Conclusion: A list of prioritised APC variants will be classiﬁed
by the VCEP regularly, whose consensus will represent the most
authoritative classiﬁcation of pathogenicity for widespread clinical
use. The reclassiﬁcations will be publicly available through both
ClinVar and the InSiGHT APC databases (www.lovd.nl/APC).
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Xiaoyu Yin: None declared, Isabel Spier:
None declared, Marcy Richardson: None declared, Marta Pineda:
None declared, Deborah Ritter: None declared, Tina Pesaran: None
declared, Gabriel Capellá: None declared, Sean V. Tavtigian: None
declared, John-Paul Plazzer: None declared, Andreas Laner: None
declared, Andrew Latchford: None declared, Ian M. Frayling I’m a
member
of
CanVIG-UK
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/
submitters/506655/, Sharon E Plon Scientiﬁc Advisory Panel for
Baylor Genetics, Marc Greenblatt: None declared, Finlay A. Macrae
Councillor for InSiGHT, Stefan Aretz: None declared.
P13.035.A The interplay between pathology, molecular
alterations and outcomes in esophageal adenocarcinoma
Arianna
Orsini1,
Isotta
Bozzarelli1,
Federica
Isidori1,
Roberto
Fiocca2;3, Luca Mastracci2;3, Marialuisa Lugaresi1;4, Maria Antonietta
D’Errico5;6, Deborah Malvi5;6, Paola Spaggiari7, Anna Tomezzoli8,
Luca Albarello9, Ari Ristimäki10, Luca Bottiglieri11, Sheila Krishna-
dath12, riccardo rosati13, Uberto Fumagalli Romario14, Giovanni de
Manzoni15, Jari Räsänen16, Sandro Mattioli4, Elena Bonora1;17
1University of Bologna, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences
(DIMEC), Bologna, Italy;
2University of Genova, Department of
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
535
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Surgical and Diagnostic Sciences (DISC), Genova, Italy; 3Ospedale
Policlinico San Martino IRCCS, Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Genova,
Italy; 4Maria Cecilia Hospital, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Cotignola,
Italy; 5IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Pathol-
ogy Unit, Bologna, Italy;
6University of Bologna, Department of
Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine (DIMES), Bologna,
Italy; 7Humanitas University, Unit of Anatomic Pathology, Milano,
Italy; 8Azienda Ospedaliera di Verona, Unit of Anatomic Pathology,
Verona, Italy;
9San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Pathology Unit,
Milano, Italy; 10HUSLAB and HUS Diagnostic Center, Department of
Pathology, Helsinki, Finland; 11Istituto Europeo di Oncologia, Unit
of
Anatomic
Pathology,
Milano,
Italy;
12University
Hospital
Antwerp, Laboratory of Experimental Medicine and Pediatrics
(LEMP), Antwerp, Belgium;
13San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute,
Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Milano, Italy; 14European
Institute of Oncology, Digestive Surgery, Milano, Italy; 15University
of Verona, Department of Surgery, General and Upper G.I. Surgery
Division, Verona, Italy; 16Helsinki University Hospital, Department
of General Thoracic and Esophageal Surgery, Helsinki, Finland;
17IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Unit of
Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a
severe malignancy with increasing incidence in Western countries
over the past few decades. EAC pathogenesis is still poorly
understood and the survival rate is low1. Therefore, there is a need
to better clarify EAC risk factors to improve patient identiﬁcation
and treatment.
Methods: 207 EAC cases classiﬁed according to EACGSE2 were
included.
DNA
was
extracted
from
formalin
ﬁxed
parafﬁn
embedded surgical specimens and sequenced for 26 cancer-
related genes (#226722257; IDT) with high coverage on NextSeq
500 (Illumina). Data analysis was performed using an in-house
pipeline3.
Results: A total of 353 variants were identiﬁed across the
whole cohort. TP53 was the most frequently altered gene (134/
207 cases carrying at least one mutation; 64.73%). TP53 missense
variants correlated with a worse cancer-speciﬁc survival in the
histological glandular poorly differentiated group (Log Rank
P = 0.0047) and, globally, in the Higher Risk group2 (Log Rank
P = 0.0005). Loss-of-function variants in HNF1A, tumor suppressor
gene not previously associated with EAC, were found in 7 cases,
together with other gene alterations. HNF1A mutant samples
showed a decreased immunostaining in the tumor, correlated
with an increase in the number of variant alleles.
Conclusion: A speciﬁc type of mutations (missense changes in
TP53) negatively affect cancer-speciﬁc survival of EAC. HNF1A was
identiﬁed as a new EAC-mutated gene and its loss might con-
tribute to EAC development and progression.
References:
1.
Coleman
et
al.,
Gastroenterology
2018;154:390–405. 2. Fiocca et al., Cancers 2021;13:5211. 3. Isidori
et al., CTG 2020;11:e00202.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Arianna Orsini PhD student, Isotta Boz-
zarelli post-doc, Federica Isidori post-doctoral fellow, Roberto
Fiocca MD, Luca Mastracci MD, Marialuisa Lugaresi MD, Maria
Antonietta D’Errico MD, Deborah Malvi PhD, Paola Spaggiari MD,
Anna Tomezzoli MD, Luca Albarello MD, Ari Ristimäki MD, Luca
Bottiglieri MD, Sheila Krishnadath MD, riccardo rosati MD, Uberto
Fumagalli Romario MD, Giovanni de Manzoni MD, Jari Räsänen
MD, Sandro Mattioli MD, Elena Bonora PhD.
P13.036.B Joint effects of the CHEK2 c.1100delC mutation and
treatment on contralateral breast cancer risk
Maartje Schreurs1, Anna Morra2, Antoinette Hollestelle1, Muriel A
Adank3, Marjanka K Schmidt2, Maartje J Hooning1
1Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Medical Oncology, Rotterdam,
Netherlands;
2The Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Division of Molecular Pathology, Amsterdam,
Netherlands;
3The Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Family Cancer Clinic, Amsterdam, Nether-
lands.
Background/Objectives: Breast cancer (BC) patients with a
CHEK2 c.1100delC germline mutation have an increased risk of
contralateral breast cancer (CBC). Studies in general population-
based BC cohorts showed that radiation treatment for the ﬁrst BC
increases CBC risk, while systemic therapy decreases CBC risk. We
aimed to assess, in the largest dataset available to date, the joint
effects of CHEK2 c.1100delC status and adjuvant therapy on
CBC risk.
Methods: The study dataset derived from the international
Breast Cancer Association Consortium consisted of 69,345 women
(including 748 CHEK2 c.1100delC carriers) from European ancestry
diagnosed with invasive, stage I-III BC between 1980 and 2018.
Delayed entry Cox regression models, stratiﬁed by country, were
used to estimate the association of adjuvant therapy with CHEK2
mutation status and time to CBC. Analyses were adjusted for age
at diagnosis, ER-status, nodal status, size and grade of ﬁrst BC.
Potential differential effects of adjuvant therapy by CHEK2
c.1100delC status were tested by including interaction terms in
the multivariable model. Multiple imputation was used to handle
missing values.
Results: Within this dataset, chemotherapy (HR = 0.81; 95%
CI = 0.68-0.95) and endocrine therapy (HR = 0.71; 95%CI = 0.59-
0.84) reduce CBC risk, while there was no effect of radiation
therapy on CBC risk found (HR = 1.02; 95%CI = 0.87-1.18). Fur-
thermore, there was no evidence of differential effects of che-
motherapy (Pinteraction =0.45), endocrine therapy (Pinteraction
=0.91) or radiation (Pinteraction = 0.20) by CHEK2 c.1100delC
status on CBC risk.
Conclusion: Preliminary results showed no evidence that
CHEK2 c.1100delC carriers may respond differently to any adju-
vant treatment than non-carriers.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.037.C Protein expression analysis in NOMO1 knockout
cells, a recurrent alteration in early-onset colorectal cancer
Abel Martel-Martel1;2;3, Paula García-Vallés1;2;4, Jésica Pérez-Gar-
cía1;2;4, Luis Antonio Corchete1, Diego Iglesias-Corral1;2;4, Juan-Luis
García1;4, Manuel Fuentes1;4, Ana-Belén Herrero1;2;4, Jose Perea1,
Rogelio González-Sarmiento1;2;4
1Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain; 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University
of Salamanca (USAL), Salamanca, Spain; 3Medical Oncology Service,
University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; 4Institute of
Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of
Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Early-onset colorectal cancer (EOCRC; age
younger than 50 years) incidence has been steadily increasing over
the last decades worldwide. Recently, we have detected a homo-
zygous deletion of the NOMO1 gene in more than 70% of EOCRC
patients, suggesting that it could be a molecular marker associated
with EOCRC. However, the mechanisms of NOMO1 in EOCRC car-
cinogenesis are currently unknown. In this work, we analyzed the
changes in protein expression between NOMO1 Knockout and
NOMO1 wild type cell lines by liquid chromatography-mass spec-
trometry (LC-IMS/MS).
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
536
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: CRISPR/Cas9 technology was used to generate
NOMO1-KO HCT116 (EOCRC) and HS-5 (bone marrow) cell lines.
0.5 μg of total protein was digested with trypsin and used for LC-
IMS/MS analysis. Raw ﬁles were analyzed by MaxQuant software
using Andromeda. Data search was against the Human UniProt
Reference Proteome and WebGestalt tool was used for proteome
data analysis.
Results: A total of 12 overexpressed (such as HMGA1) and 16
infraexpressed proteins (such as NOMO, NCLN, CTND1, HMGB1
and LMNB1) showed up in common between the two cell lines.
Interestingly, CTND1, HMGA1 and LMNB1 alterations are asso-
ciated with a modiﬁcation to migration capability, which may
explain the increased migratory ability that we observed in
NOMO1 KOs.
Conclusion: NOMO1 loss leads to protein expression changes
that could explain its implication in the development of EOCRC.
Further studies are being performed to explore other signaling
pathways deregulated by the loss of NOMO1 that might play a
relevant role in the pathogenesis of the disease.
References:.
Grants: Study funded by PI20/01569.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.038.D Combined conventional cytogenetic and genomic
testing in hematological malignancies: the added value of the
old and the new
TARA KELLY1, Despoina Iakovaki1, Pavlos Pollakis1, Vasiliki Katsini1,
Stavroula Samara1, Aikaterini Oikonomaki1, Georgia Christopoulou1,
Pantelis Constantoulakis1
1Genotypos M.S.A., Athens, Greece.
Background/Objectives: Conventional karyotyping and FISH are
the gold standards for the genetic diagnosis, monitoring and
prognosis of hematological malignancies. Genomics have intro-
duced new approaches to these clinical questions. We aim to
show the synergistic value of traditional and exome sequencing
approaches in hematological-patient management.
Methods: In 20 prospective cases, karyotype/FISH/exome
analyses were requested to investigate hematological malig-
nancies. Bone marrow or peripheral blood samples were pro-
cessed with karyotype/FISH with standard procedures. Exome
sequencing was performed on DNA extracted from the same
samples: libraries preparation was performed with Clinical Exome
(Sophia Genetics)
or Whole Exome
(Twist
Bioscience)
and
sequenced on Illumina NextSeq-550 (Illumina). Bioinformatics
analyses
were
conducted
by
SOPHiA
DDM®
bioinformatics
pipelines.
Results: Exome sequencing single-nucleotide-variation (SNV)
analysis revealed actionable variants in 17 cases, while copy
number variation (CNV) analysis detected large deletions/dupli-
cations in 11 cases. Cytogenetic analyses revealed clinically sig-
niﬁcant ﬁndings in 13 cases. Discrepant results between exome
and cytogenetic analysis were either due to balanced aberrations,
limits of detection, the chromosomal constitution complexity, test
failure or test not performed.
Conclusion: Chromosomal analysis is superior to exome
sequencing CNV analysis due to its ability to detect clinically
signiﬁcant balanced abnormalities and complex clones. Never-
theless, exome CNV analysis may detect critical deletions/
duplications thus complementing chromosomal analysis or even
reveal crucial information where chromosome analysis is una-
vailable. On the other hand, incorporating exome sequencing in
routine hematologic diagnosis, actionable gene variants can be
detected allowing diagnosis/prognosis conﬁrmation and most
importantly, consist eligibility criteria for targeted therapies or
inclusion in clinical trials.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: TARA KELLY Full time employee: Geno-
typos M.S.A, Despoina Iakovaki Full time employee: Genotypos
M.S.A., Pavlos Pollakis Full time employee: Genotypos M.S.A.,
Vasiliki Katsini Full time employee: Genotypos M.S.A., Stavroula
Samara Full time employee: Genotypos M.S.A., Aikaterini Oikono-
maki Full time employee: Genotypos M.S.A., Georgia Christopou-
lou
Full
time
employee:
Genotypos
M.S.A.,
Pantelis
Constantoulakis Full time employee: Genotypos M.S.A.
P13.039.A Characterization of MRTFB loss in colorectal cancer
cell lines
Diego Iglesias-Corral1;2;3, Abel Martel-Martel1;2;4, Jésica Pérez-
García1;2;3, Juan Manuel Ruiz Robles1;2;3, Luis Antonio Corchete1,
Juan-Luis García1;3, Ana-Belén Herrero1;2;3, Jose Perea1, Rogelio
González-Sarmiento1;2;3
1Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain; 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University
of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Sala-
manca, Spain; 4Medical Oncology Service, University Hospital of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the
most frequent and deadliest tumours worldwide. The early-onset
subtype (EOCRC, cases diagnosed under 50 years of age) has
become especially relevant due to its poor prognosis along with
its rapid incidence increase during the last decades. In the search
for new EOCRC biomarkers, we found the region including MRTFB
(myocardin-related transcription factor B) to be more frequently
lost in patients below the age of 50. Thus, MRTFB is proposed as an
EOCRC biomarker candidate.
Methods: MRTFB knockout (KO) colorectal cancer cell line HCT-
116 was generated using CRISPR-Cas9 technology. KO clones were
validated by Sanger and qPCR and MRTFB depletion was tested by
Western blot. Characterization of the MRTFB-KO cell line was then
carried out. MTT viability assays were performed to assess cell
proliferation and cell cycle assays to check cell cycle status.
Apoptosis assays were used to evaluate potential differences in
cell death. Cell migration capability was evaluated by wound
healing and transwell assays.
Results: Viable MRTFB clones were generated and validated,
still no differences were found between the KO and the wild
type (WT) cell lines during the characterization studies involving
proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle. Preliminary results show a
small increase in cell migration capability in the MRTFB-KO
cell line.
Conclusion: Preliminary results show no differences between
the studied KO and WT cell lines phenotypes regarding cell via-
bility. Further studies will be carried out to conﬁrm the increased
migratory capability seen in MRTFB-KO clones.
References:.
Grants: Study funded by PI20/01569.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.040.B Androgen receptor-independent pathways in the
response to enzalutamide in breast cancer cell lines
Nuria Arroyo-Garrapucho1;2;3, María Ovejero-Sánchez1;2;3, Paloma
Martín-Bejarano Soto1;2;3, Pamela Vázquez-Cárdenas1;2;3, Ana-Belén
Herrero1;2;3, Rogelio González-Sarmiento1;2;3
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
537
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Biomedical Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain; 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University
of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca, CSIC, Sala-
manca, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Breast cancer (BC) is the leading
female cancer worldwide. Some patients develop resistance to
traditional treatments after a variable period of time and
some subtypes of breast cancer, like triple negative breast
cancer, lack targeted therapies. The androgen receptor (AR) is
emerging as a novel factor in breast cancer. It has been
demonstrated that both AR and its inducible proteins are
expressed in 60-80% of BCs. Thus, we evaluated BC cell line
response to enzalutamide, an AR inhibitor, as a potential ther-
apeutical alternative.
Methods: AR+ BC cell lines (BCCLs): BT549, BT474 and MCF7
and AR- HCC1937 and HCC1569 were used. MTT and apoptosis
assays
were
performed
to
test
enzalutamide
and
dihy-
drotestosterone sensitivity. Stable AR+ cell lines (HCC1937,
HCC1569) were constructed using lentiviral vectors. Western blot
and RT-qPCR were used to validate AR status.
Results: Our results show that enzalutamide inhibits cell
growth and induces apoptosis in both AR+ and AR- BCCLs.
Additionally,
dihydrotestosterone
stimulation
decreases
enzalutamide-mediated cell viability inhibition regardless of AR
status. Response to enzalutamide treatment is independent of AR
status in AR- and AR+ HCC1937 and HCC1569.
Conclusion: Our study suggests that enzalutamide could
mediate its action through AR-independent pathways.
References: Anestis, A., Zoi, I., Papavassiliou, A. G., & Kar-
amouzis, M. V. (2020). Androgen receptor in breast cancer—clin-
ical and preclinical research insights. Molecules, 25(2), 358.
Grants: This study was funded by FIS-FEDER PI20/01569.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.041.C Di-genically inherited highly penetrant
adenomatous polyposis- and colorectal cancer syndrome
Esther Schamschula1, Miriam Kinzel2, Annekatrin Wernstedt1, Klaus
Oberhuber1,
Hendrik
Gottschling1,
Simon
Schnaiter1,
Nicolaus
Friedrichs3,
Johannes
Zschocke1,
Richard
Gallon4,
Katharina
Wimmer1
1Medizinische Universität Innsbruck, Institute of Human Genetics,
Innsbruck, Austria; 2Medicover Humangenetik - Berlin-Lichtenberg,
Berlin, Germany;
3University Hospital Cologne, Department of
Pathology, Cologne, Germany;
4Newcastle University, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Most cases of adenomatous hereditary
polyposis- and colorectal cancer (CRC) syndrome (HPCS) result
from heterozygous APC or bi-allelic MUTYH germline pathogenic
variants (PVs). Rare monogenic recessive or dominant adenoma-
tous HPCS resulting from different constitutional DNA repair
defects have also been uncovered. Nevertheless, many HPCS cases
remain unexplained.
Methods: To explore genetic aetiology in two teenage sib-
lings with multiple adenomas and CRC, we performed compre-
hensive PMS2-mutation analysis including transcript analysis,
massive-parallel sequencing of a polyposis gene panel, germline
microsatellite instability (gMSI)-testing, and tumour mutational
proﬁling.
Results: Absence of polyposis in both parents and PMS2-
expression loss in the neoplastic and surrounding mucosa
cells of both siblings’ CRCs initially suggested constitutional
mismatch-repair deﬁciency (CMMRD) as the underlying condi-
tion. However, we identiﬁed only a maternally inherited het-
erozygous
PMS2-exon
12
deletion,
NM_000535.7:c.2007-
786_2174+493del1447, in both siblings, and excluded CMMRD
by showing absence of gMSI, its pathognomonic feature. A
paternally inherited POLD1 variant NP_002682.2:p.Asp316Asn,
previously associated once with classical polymerase proof-
reading (PP-)associated polyposis (PPAP), was identiﬁed in both
siblings. The patients’ extreme phenotypes suggest that their
constitutional PP-defect is compounded by, and may even
increase their propensity for, somatic MMR-deﬁciency from
second hits in PMS2. Indeed, both siblings’ CRCs were ultra-
mutated (>100Mut/Mb) with mutational signature SBS20 ren-
dering strong evidence for concurrent Pol δ-associated PP- and
MMR-deﬁciency.
Conclusion: These siblings represent the ﬁrst cases of a di-
genic severe adenomatous HPCS, which may escape detection
due to the nature of the underlying PMS2-PV and the combined
somatic MMR- and PP-deﬁciency, which is occasionally seen in
related monogenic HPCS.
References:.
Grants: FWF-Projekt: KLI 734-B26.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.042.D Tumour radio-sensibility by PX478, a hypoxia-
inducible factor 1-alpha inhibitor
David Diez-Castro1;2, Pablo Berrocal2, Janet Sotolongo-Ravelo1;2,
Luis Perez-Romasanta3, Ana-Belén Herrero1;2;4, Rogelio González-
Sarmiento1;2;4
1Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain; 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; 3Oncology service, Hospital University
of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; 4Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University-CIC, Salamanca, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Hypoxia is a common situation in the
solid tumours’ microenvironment. It is associated with resistance
to radiotherapy and with poor clinical results. The activation of
Hypoxia-inducible Factor (HIF) signalling pathway plays a pivotal
role in the tumour adaptation to hypoxia. HIF proteins regulate
the transcription of several genes implicated in angiogenesis,
apoptosis,
metastasis
or
tumoral
growth
and
their
over-
expression correlates with a poor prognosis after radiotherapy.
So, HIF inhibitors are used to improve the cell response to
radiotherapy. Here, we study the effects of PX478, a ﬁrst-
generation HIF-1-alpha inhibitor, on tumoral cell lines under
hypoxic and normoxic conditions.
Methods: HT29 (Colon), MCF7 (Breast), HCC1937 (Breast), VCAP
(Prostate), CAL33 (Head and Neck) cell lines were used to test PX478
radio-sensibility through MTT, cell cycle and apoptosis assays.
Western blot was used to analyse the expression of HIF-1-alpha.
Results: Western blot analysis showed that the expression of
HIF-1-alpha was partially inhibited by PX478 in a dose-dependent
manner. PX478 inhibited cell proliferation and decreased cell
survival in normoxia but especially in hypoxic conditions. In
addition, the compound increased the radio-sensibility of HT29
and results in other cell lines are pending.
Conclusion: PX478 inhibited the expression of HIF-1-alpha in a
dose-dependent manner. This drug had a strong effect on cell sur-
vival and increased radio-sensibility, especially in hypoxic conditions.
References: Albadari N; Deng S, Li W. Expert Opin. Drug Discov.
2019. https://doi.org/10.1080/17460441.2019.1613370.
Grants: This project was ﬁnanced by Gerencia Regional de
Salud, JCyL (GRS2171/A/2020).
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
538
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.043.A Second-hit in ATM in a case of gallbladder cancer:
hints at driver mechanism, therapeutic targetand cancer
susceptibility redeﬁnition
Daniele Guadagnolo1, Gioia Mastromoro1, Nader Khaleghi Hashe-
mian1,
Camilla
Savio2;3,
Fabio
Libi2;3,
soha
sadeghi2;3,
Aldo
Germani2;3, Simona Petrucci2;3, Maria Piane2;3, Laura De Marchis4,
Paolo Marchetti5, Simona Pisegna5, Antonio Pizzuti1
1Sapienza university of Rome, department of Experimental Medicine,
Roma, Italy; 2Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Clinical
and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine and Psychology, Rome,
Italy;
3Sant’Andrea University Hospital, Rome, Italy;
4Sapienza
University of Rome, Department of Radiological, Oncological and
Pathological Sciences, Rome, Italy; 5Sapienza University of Rome,
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Rome, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Invasive biliary cancers are severe neo-
plasms with limited therapeutic options. The molecular bases are
not fully elucidated, and targeted therapies are lacking.
Methods: A 65-year-old man presented with metastatic gall-
bladder cancer, biliary type. His father and his uncle had prostate
cancer at age 70 and 63. Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
analysis of 324 genes implied in cancer development and pro-
gression was performed on tumor sample to identify potential
molecular therapeutic targets. Variants with possible germ-line
origin were conﬁrmed on DNA extracted from peripheral blood
lymphocytes with Sanger sequencing.
Results: NGS on tumoral DNA identiﬁed the pathogenic
c.4611_4611+9del,
p.(Pro1480Tyrfs5*),
rs80969040
and
c.901+1G>A,
variants
in
the
ATM
gene
(MIM*607585;NM_
000051;NP_000042.2). The c.4611_4611+9del was demonstrated
to be of germ-line origin in heterozygosity. It has a frequency of 8/
1000000 in GnomAD v.2.1.1. The presence of a germ-line mutation
and a concurrent somatic pathogenic variant suggest a second-hit
mechanism for ATM in this case. In accordance with recent cases
published in the literature, this means that heterozygous ATM
variants might lead to biliary/gallbladder cancer susceptibility and
that ATM loss-of-function might be implied in biliary/gallbladder
cancer tumorigenesis. The ﬁnding lead to the proposal a PARP-
inhibitor drug in conjunction with standard chemotherapy pro-
tocols. This class of drugs might be considered even in sporadic
cases with loss of ATM.
Conclusion: ATM variants might lead to biliary/gallbladder cancer
susceptibility, and the gene might be a driver in biliary cancer
development. This can lead to diagnostic and therapeutic changes.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.044.B Clinical and histopathological features predictive of
BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants in ovarian cancer patients:
single-center experience and meta-analysis
Giovanni Innella1;2, Lea Godino2, Giulia Erini1, Daniela Turchetti1;2
1University of Bologna, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences,
Center for Studies on Hereditary Cancer, Bologna, Italy;
2IRCCS
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Unit of Medical
Genetics, Bologna, Italy.
Background/Objectives: BRCA1/2 testing is currently recom-
mended in almost-all ovarian cancer patients to inform treatment
and prevention. In order to identify prior predictors of BRCA1/2
germline variants, we compared features of ovarian cancer
patients carrying BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants versus non-carriers
among our patient series and in the literature.
Methods: Features of ovarian cancer patients tested for
BRCA1/2 at our laboratory were registered and analysed. A sys-
tematic literature review, performed according to PRISMA guide-
lines, was synthesized using meta-analysis (PROSPERO 2021:
CRD42021271815).
Results: Among 869 ovarian cancer patients, 188 carried
germline BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants (21.6%); young age at
diagnosis (56.6±11.1 vs 60.4±12.1 years, p < 0.001), personal
breast cancer history (23.0% vs 8.6%, p < 0.001), family history of
breast/ovarian cancer (53.5%/29.3% vs 30.3%/5.6%, p < 0.001),
serous histotype, (87.1% vs 68.1%, p < 0.001), high grade (97.6%
vs 81.6%, p < 0.001) and advanced stage (76.3% vs 66.6%,
p = 0.04) were signiﬁcantly more frequent in germline BRCA1/2
carriers than in non-carriers, while there were no statistically-
signiﬁcant differences regarding personal history of non-breast/
ovarian cancers. According to the meta-analysis of 34 papers,
predictors of BRCA1/2 alterations were: personal breast cancer
history (OR 4.45, 95% CI: 3.58-5.52, compared to no personal
breast cancer history), serous histotype (OR 2.49, 95% CI: 2.20-
2.82, compared to other histotypes), grade 3 (OR 2.43, 95% CI:
2.01-2.93, compared to grade 1-2) and stage III/IV (OR 1.87, 95%
CI: 1.65-2.11, compared to stage I/II).
Conclusion: Our results reinforce previous evidence on fea-
tures associated to BRCA variants, providing data on the prior
probability of ﬁnding alterations that may prove helpful in coun-
selling patients and prioritizing testing.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.045.C Barrett’s esophagus after esophageal atresia
corrective surgery
Erwin Brosens1;2, Chantal ten Kate1;3;4, Tom Brands1;2, Rene Wijnen3,
Annelies de Klein1;2, Manon C.W. Spaander4
1Erasmus MC-Sophia Children’s Hospital, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2Erasmus MC Cancer Institute,
Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 3Erasmus
MC-Sophia Children’s Hospital, Department of Pediatric Surgery and
Intensive Care, Rotterdam,
Netherlands;
4Erasmus MC Cancer
Institute, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Rotter-
dam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: The surgical correction of Esophageal
Atresia (EA) can impact the natural reﬂux barrier many patients
suffer from motility problems, chronic gastroesophageal reﬂux
and reﬂux esophagitis. These are risk factors for the development
of Barrett’s Esophagus (BE), a metaplastic lesion in which
esophageal
squamous
epithelium
is
replaced
with
gastric
columnar epithelium. EA patients have an increased population
risk and earlier age of onset of BE. Recent advances have identiﬁed
speciﬁc BE patient subclusters associations to the risk of devel-
oping esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Interestingly, BE in EA
patients seems to progress into EAC as well as esophageal
squamous
cell
carcinoma
and
could
represent
a
distinct
subpopulation.
Methods: We compared the transcriptomes of mucosal eso-
phageal biopsies of adults born with EA who developed BE to
those of BE patients who did not have EA/TEF in their medical
history. Differential expression analysis was done using DESeq2
after deconvolution using Granulator. To evaluate differences in
isoforms-exon usage we used DEXSeq, aberrant splicing was
evaluated using FRASER (Find Rare Splicing Events in RNA-seq),
Chromosomal stability using SuperFreq and mutational signatures
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
539
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
and driver gene variation were determined with VarScan and
FreeBayes.
Results: Using this experimental set-up, we created genomic
signatures. Initial analysis revealed differences in some of these
signatures as well as increased inﬂammatory, stress response and
activation of oncological processes.
Conclusion: Results hint at differences in tissue homeostasis
between BE patients with and without EA in their medical history.
It is worthwhile to investigate these differences more system-
atically in a larger study population.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.046.D MiRNA expression in non-small cell lung cancer
Veronika Petkova1, Dora Marinova2, Silva Kyurkchiyan1, Gergana
Stancheva1, Evgeni Mekov3, Darina Kachakova-Yordanova1, Yanina
Slavova4, Dimitar Kostadinov5, Vanyo Mitev1, Radka Kaneva1
1Medical University of Soﬁa, Molecular Medicine Center, Depart-
ment of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
2University of Ruse, Department of Health Care, UMHAT “Medika”,
Ruse, Bulgaria;
3Medical University of Soﬁa, Department of
Occupational Diseases, UMHAT ‘Sveti Ivan Rilski’, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
4University of Ruse, Department of Public Health and Social
Activities, UMHAT “Medika”, Ruse, Bulgaria; 5Medical University of
Soﬁa, Department of Pulmonary Diseases, MHATPD ‘Sveta Soﬁa’,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-
coding RNAs expressed in various tissues and cell types.They can
help understanding the carcinogenesis of lung cancer and serve
as potential diagnostic biomarkers for differentiating lung ade-
nocarcinoma (LUAD) and squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC).The aim
of the present study is to analyse and compare the expression
patterns of miRNAs in LUAD and LUSC samples.
Methods:
The
expression
of
24
NSCLC
patient-
s(12LUAD,12LUSC) was evaluated by SurePrint human miRNA
microarrays (Agilent Technologies).The validation of the selected
miRNAs was performed on enlarged cohort(50LUAD,50LUSC) by
qRT-PCR.The normalization of data, statistical and target predic-
tion analyses were performed using R version 3.0.2 and GSEA with
the Python package,GSEApy(version0.9.12).
Results: We assessed the expression levels of 2549 human
mature miRNAs and found 107 to be signiﬁcantly differentially
expressed(FC>2.0;p < 0.05) between the LUAD and adjacent nor-
mal tissues. 240 miRNAs were signiﬁcantly differentially expres-
sed(FC>2.0;p < 0.05) between the LUSC and adjacent normal
tissues. 26 miRNAs were common for LUAD and LUSC but showed
different expression pattern.After bioinformatics analyses we
chose the most suitable miRNAs and validated them in an
extended cohort by qRT-PCR.GO and pathway enrichment analysis
was performed to investigate relationship between miRNA and
targeted mRNA.
Conclusion: Our results were in agreement with previous
observations that different panels of miRNAs including miR-
375&miR-21 have better potential to discriminate between LUAD
and LUSC.The expression patterns of validated miRNAs and their
target genes revealed both common and subtype speciﬁc signal
pathways for LUAD and LUSC.However further analysis in enlarged
samples and validation is necessary to ascertain their diagnostic
potential in NSCLC.
References: None.
Grants:
DH03/14/19.12.2016,D01-285/17.12.2019,D01-395-
18.12.2020,D01-302-17.12.2021.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.047.A Characterization of driver mutations in the erb-b2
receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (ERBB2) gene
Atena Yasari1, Theresa Mair1, Monika Heinzl1, Irene Tiemann-Boege1
1Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria.
Background/Objectives: We adapted duplex sequencing to
screen a unique type of mutagenesis that confers a selective
growth advantage in ERBB2 gene [1-3]. We hypothesize that a
series of driver mutations in this oncogene are expanding in
sperm and testis. Some of these mutations lead to aberrant ERBB
signaling that could induce the clonal expansion of mutant germ
cells with paternal age and testis speciﬁc-mosaicism.
Methods: Further, we characterized the clonal expansion of
candidate hotspot mutations in the testis by droplet digital PCR
(ddPCR), along with the analysis of the functional changes in the
downstream activation of the ERBB2 signaling pathway by bio-
physical methods [4-7].
Results: Some of the mutations were identiﬁed as hotspot
pathogenic variants that could be expanding at low, sub-clonal
levels in the male germline. Further, the functional analysis
showed that the selected variants have a signiﬁcant activation
increase compared to the wild-type constructs [6-8].
Conclusion: The identiﬁed variants found at low levels might
contribute to tumor development creating a microenvironment
that promotes malignancy.
References: 1 Arnheim, N. et al. Annu Rev Genomics Hum
Genet 2016. 2 Goriely, A. et al. Am J Hum Genet 2012. 3 Shinde, D.
N. et al. Hum Mol Genet 2013. 4 Kennedy, S. R. et al. PLoS
Genet 2013. 5 Salk, J. J. et al. Nat Rev Genet 2018. 6 Salazar, R. et al.
bioRxiv 2021.04.26.441422 2022. 7 Lanzerstorfer, P. et al. PLoS
One 2014. 8 Motsch, V. et al. Sci Rep 2019.
Grants: FWFP30867000, REGGEN ATCZ207.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.048.B Genomic landscape of endometrial polyps
miika mehine1;2, Siiri Reinikka1;2, Pernilla von Nandelstadh1;2, terhi
ahvenainen1;2, Susanna Nousiainen1;2, Vilja Jokinen1;2, Annukka
Pasanen1;3, ralf bützow1;3, Nanna Sarvilinna4, Esa Pitkänen1;5, pia
vahteristo1;2
1University of Helsinki, Applied Tumor Genomics Research Program,
Helsinki, Finland; 2University of Helsinki, Department of Medical and
Clinical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland;
3University of Helsinki and
HUSLAB, Helsinki University Hospital, Department of Pathology,
Helsinki, Finland;
4Helsinki University Hospital and University of
Helsinki, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki, Finland;
5University of Helsinki, Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland
(FIMM), HiLIFE, Helsinki, Finland.
Background/Objectives: Endometrial polyps are common gyne-
cological lesions affecting approximately 10% of women. While
polyps are non-cancerous, some may undergo malignant trans-
formation. The pathogenesis of polyps is largely unknown. The
aim of this study was to characterize the genomic landscape of
endometrial polyps.
Methods: Twenty-four fresh frozen endometrial polyps from 24
patients and corresponding blood samples from 18 of the patients
were whole-genome (WGS) and whole-exome sequenced (WES).
WGS and WES data were combined to increase the sequencing
coverage. Presence of somatic single nucleotide (SNV), copy
number, and structural variants were analyzed and ﬁltered using
the corresponding blood samples and a panel of normals.
Results: We identiﬁed HMGA1 and HMGA2 rearrangements in
18/24 (75%) polyps. These rearrangements recurrently involved
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
540
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
7p15.1, RAD51B, LRMDA and TRAF3IP2 as translocation partners.
The SNV analysis revealed a high mutational burden comparable
to cancers. Polyps carry recurrent low-allelic fraction mutations in
cancer genes, including well-established cancer driver mutations
in KRAS, PIK3CA, PIK3R1, and PTEN.
Conclusion: Most polyps harbor chromosomal alterations
affecting HMGA1 and HMGA2. Cancer-associated driver mutations
indicate that endometrial polyps may act as precursor lesions to
cancer. These ﬁndings contribute to our understanding on polyp
pathogenesis, and provide tools for the development of perso-
nalized, non-invasive treatment options.
References:.
Grants: Sigrid Jusélius Foundation, Academy of Finland, Cancer
Foundation Finland, iCAN Digital Precision Cancer Medicine Flag-
ship, Finnish Cultural Foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.049.C Digenic contribution of Cancer driver genes and
TNFRSF13B rare variants in malignancies predisposition
Elena Pasquinelli1;2, Debora Maffeo1;2, Ludovica Mercuri1;2, Mirjam
Lista1;2, Lucia Bruno1;2, Kristina Zguro2, Simone Furini2, Gabriella
Doddato1;2, Rossella Tita3, Mirella Bruttini1;2;3, Maria Antonietta
Mencarelli3,
Alessandra
Fabbiani1;2;3,
Margherita
Baldassarri1;2;3,
Francesca Fava1;2;3, Caterina Lo Rizzo3, Anna Maria Pinto3, Anna
Carrer1;2;3, Lorenzo Loberti1;2;3, Pietro Ilardi1;2;3, Marianna Manara1;2;3,
Francesca Mari1;2;3, Alessandra Renieri1;2;3, Francesca Ariani1;2;3
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy; 2Med Biotech
Hub and Competence Center, Department of Medical Biotechnolo-
gies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy; 3Genetica Medica,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy.
Background/Objectives:
Mutations
in
the
TNFRSF13B
gene
encoding TACI (Transmembrane Activator and CAML Interactor)
were previously associated with common variable immunodeﬁ-
ciency (CVID). A normal function of immunity-related genes and
their signaling pathways safe-guards against the development of
tumor, whereas its impairment might increment the likelihood of
their recurrence.
Methods: By Exome Sequencing (ES) we analyzed a series of 60
individuals divided into a control group (30 patients) and an
affected cohort from different forms of cancer (30 patients).
Results: We focused on cancer patients in whom at least one
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in cancer genes belong-
ing to ERN-GENTURIS panel have been detected. Simultaneously,
data analysis in the same patients identiﬁed recurrent hetero-
zygous stop-variants (c.431C>G, p.Ser144*; c.706G>T, p.Glu236*;
c.198C>A, p.Cys66*; c.579C>A, p.Cys193*) and a missense-variant
(c.310T>C, p.Cys104Arg) (CADD 25.7) in the TNFRSF13B gene. The
signiﬁcant association (p < 0.005) of heterozygous rare pathogenic
or likely pathogenic variants in TNFRSF13B in cancer patients
suggests a possible digenic inheritance of cancer driver genes and
TNFRSF13B.
Conclusion: In conclusion, this study supports a major role of
the immune system (and especially the cell-mediated system) in
the malignancies predisposition. Analysis of additional cases and
families will be necessary to more precisely assess the risk asso-
ciated with TNFRSF13B variants.
References: RACHID, Rima, et al. TACI mutation in common
variable immunodeﬁciency and IgA deﬁciency. Current allergy and
asthma reports, 2006, 6.5: 357-362.
MORTAZ, Esmaeil, et al. Cancers related to immunodeﬁciencies:
update and perspectives. Frontiers in immunology, 2016, 7: 365.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.050.D Identiﬁcation and characterisation of BMPR1A and
SMAD4 germline variants in patients with colorectal
adenomatous polyposis
Anna Sommer1, Iris te Paske2, J. Garcia-Pelaez*3;4;5, Leslie Mata-
longa6, Dieter Wolf7, Rita Katharina Knaust7, Sophia Peters1, Verena
Steinke-Lange7;8,
Elke
Holinski-Feder7;8,
Andreas
Laner7,
Carla
Oliveira3;4;5, Nicoline Hoogerbrugge2, Richarda De Voer2, Isabel
Spier1;9, Stefan Aretz1;9
1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn,
Bonn,
Germany;
2Department
of
Human
Genetics,
Radboud
university medical center, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences,
Nijmegen,
Nijmegen,
Netherlands;
3I3S,
Instituto
de
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal; 4Ipatimup, Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunol-
ogy of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; 5Faculty of Medicine,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; 6CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic
Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barce-
lona, Spain;
7MGZ - Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich,
Munich, Germany;
8Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität
München, Munich, Germany;
9Center for Hereditary Tumor Syn-
dromes, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Colorectal polyposis syndromes are rare
inherited disorders with a high colorectal cancer lifetime risk. The
European Reference Network GENTURIS aims to uncover causal
germline variants for unexplained polyposis in a large multicentre
cohort. Therefore, whole-exome sequencing (WES) data from
unsolved patients are re-analysed within the European Solve-RD
project.
Methods: Germline-WES data from 211 unrelated patients with
adenomatous or serrated polyposis from multiple centres in the
Netherlands and Germany were re-evaluated to identify rare,
(likely) pathogenic variants. Transcript analyses were performed to
evaluate potential splice variants.
Results: In a ﬁrst analysis of known polyposis genes, one
truncating, pathogenic variant in SMAD4 c.1231_1232delAG;p.(-
Ser411Leufs*17), and two presumed splice variants c.67G>C and
c.868+2dup in BMPR1A were identiﬁed. Aberrant splicing could be
conﬁrmed for c.868+2dup by RNA-Seq, and is likely for c.67G>C
based on conventional transcript analysis. Surprisingly, the var-
iants were found in three unrelated patients with an adenomatous
polyposis phenotype. Histologic reclassiﬁcation by an experienced
gastrointestinal pathologist conﬁrmed the adenomas, just the
polyps in the SMAD4 variant carrier seemed likely juvenile when
being aware of the affected gene.
Conclusion: Pathogenic germline variants in the BMPR1A and
SMAD4 genes cause juvenile polyposis. In casuistic reports, single
pathogenic BMPR1A variants were described as causative of a
mixed or untypical polyposis. The observed genotype-phenotype
discrepancy supports a broader disease spectrum of BMPR1A and
SMAD4 germline variants and challenges to classify juvenile polyps
correctly. Given the phenotypic variability, germline mutation
screening in patients with a suspected adenomatous polyposis
should be extended by other polyposis genes.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.051.A Somatic variant PARP4 c.3509C>T identiﬁed in
ctDNA in patients with colorectal cancer, preliminary results
Hristo Ivanov1;2, Gabriela Raycheva3;4, Janet Grudeva-Popova3;4,
Peter Shopov5, Nelly Miteva-Marcheva1, Ivan Zheliazkov1, Aleksandar
Linev1, Dimitar Dimitrov1, Momchil Topalov1, Vili Stoyanova1;2
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
541
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Medical University Plovdiv, Department of Pediatrics and Medical
Genetics, Plovdiv, Bulgaria; 2University Hospital St George, Medical
Genetics, Plovdiv, Bulgaria; 3Medical University Plovdiv, Department
Clinical Oncology, Plovdiv, Bulgaria; 4University Hospital St George,
Department Medical Oncology, Plovdiv, Bulgaria; 5Creator of PGx R
package(v1.0.0, Shopov & Hitov, 2021), Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most
common cancer worldwide and affects both genders equally.
Tumors arising from the colorectal tract are heterogeneous dis-
eases that result from the accumulation of distinctive genetic
mutations. The aim of this study is to identify genetic alterations in
patients with colorectal cancer by liquid biopsy.
Methods: ctDNAs were isolated from 15 patients with color-
ectal cancer and a target sequencing of a panel of 484 target
genes was performed.
Results: A somatic variant PARP4(c.3509C>T, p.Thr1170Ile)
was identiﬁed in 10 (66%) out of 15 patients. A recent study
found different PARP4 variants in 13,46% patients with color-
ectal cancer. The c.3509C>T variant was also detected at sig-
niﬁcant high frequency in patients with primary thyroid and
breast cancers. A gene set meta-analysis identiﬁed PARP4 as a
candidate prognostic factor for CRC metastasis. Gene expression
and proteomic analysis showed a trend of PARP4 in down-
regulation in more aggressive CRC cell lines, implying its
potential as a prognostic candidate.
Conclusion: The results of our study and these exploratory
analyses need to be conﬁrmed, and functional experiments
demonstrating the role of PARP4 in CRC need to be performed.
References: Sha, et al. Research Advances in the Role of the
Poly ADP Ribose Polymerase Family in Cancer. Front Oncol. 2021
Dec 16;11:790967.
Long et al. Novel Biomarker Candidates for Colorectal Cancer
Metastasis: A Meta-analysis of In Vitro Studies. Cancer Inform.
2016;1511-17.
Grants:
Project
BG05M2OP001–1.002-0005
/29.03.2018
(2018–2023) - Center for Competence “Personalized Innovative
Medicine (PERIMED)”.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.052.B Synergistic effect of Chloroquine and Non-
Homologous End Joining inhibitors through induction of DNA
damage and inhibition of DNA repair in ovarian cancer
María Ovejero-Sánchez1;2;3, Jorge Rubio-Heras2, Mª del Carmen
Vicente de la Peña2, Carmen Sicilia-Navarro2, Rogelio González-
Sarmiento1;2;3, Ana-Belén Herrero1;2;3
1Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain; 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University
of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University-CIC, Salamanca, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the deadliest
gynecologic malignancy; therefore, new therapeutic strategies are
needed. We have previously shown that Chloroquine (CQ)
induced DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) that are repaired by
homologous recombination (HR) (1). The aim of this study was to
analyze whether Non-Homologous End Joining (NHEJ), the other
main pathway that repairs DSBs, was also involved in the repair of
CQ-induced lesions and then, if the combination of CQ with NHEJ
inhibitors (NHEJi) could be effective against OC.
Methods: OC cell lines (A2780, IGROV-1, OVCAR-8 and SK-OV-3)
were used. DSBs were detected monitoring phosphorylation of
H2AX by immunoﬂuorescence. MTT, cell cycle and apoptosis
assays were performed to test NHEJi (KU-57788, NU-7026, SCR7
pyrazine) anticancer activity. Synergistic interaction between
Chloroquine and the three NHEJi was assessed using Chou-Talalay
method.
Results: CQ induced DSBs that were completely repaired after
the removal of this compound but persisted in the presence of
NHEJ inhibitors. These results revealed that CQ-induced lesions are
also repaired by this DNA repair mechanism. The combination of
CQ with NHEJi caused a synergistic effect in all cell lines analyzed.
The triple combination Chloroquine, NHEJi and an HR inhibitor,
Panobinostat, exerted a stronger synergistic effect than the dou-
ble combinations.
Conclusion: Our study suggests that the Chloroquine-NHEJi
combination could be a novel therapeutic strategy against OC.
References: M. Ovejero-Sánchez, R. González-Sarmiento, A. B.
Herrero, Neoplasia. 23, 515–528 (2021).
Grants: This project was funded by FIS-FEDER PI20/01569 and
project CSI264P20.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.053.C Whole genome and transcriptome sequencing
reveals a complex rearrangement affecting MLH1 and LRRFIP2
in a family with Lynch syndrome
Ulrike Faust1, Dennis Witt1, Kristin Bosse1, Rebecca Buchert1, Gertrud
Strobl-Wildemann2, Marc Sturm1, Jakob Admard1, Nicolas Casadei1,
Olaf Riess1, Tobias Haack1, Christopher Schroeder1
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University
Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; 2MVZ Humangenetik Ulm,
Ulm, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Lynch syndrome is a highly penetrant
autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome associated
with a high risk of colorectal, gynecological and other cancers. The
purpose of this study was to use combined genome and tran-
scriptome sequencing (GS, TS) to search for a potential causative
genomic rearrangement in a family with suspected Lynch syn-
drome and no pathogenic germline variant in all four MMR genes
MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 by conventional sequencing.
Methods: Genomic DNA and RNA from blood was used for GS
and TS. Sequencing data was analyzed using an open-source
bioinformatic data analysis pipeline (megSAP). An in-house soft-
ware (GSvar) was used to further prioritize potentially clinically
relevant DNA variants.
Results: We performed GS and TS in the 56-year-old index
patient, diagnosed with colon cancer and cholangiocarcinoma
and identiﬁed a complex structural variant containing exons 16-19
of MLH1 as well as a deletion of neighboring exons 28-4 in
LRRFIP2. Subsequent TS revealed two fusion transcripts: MLH1
exon 1-15 and LRRFIP2 exon 29, and LRRFIP2 exon 1-3 fused with
MLH1 exon 16-19, conﬁrming our initial ﬁnding. Meanwhile
additional family members were found to be carriers of the
pathogenic variant by direct sequencing of the inversion break-
points in MLH1 intron 15 and LRRFIP2 intron 3.
Conclusion: Genomic rearrangements in the MLH1 gene have
been reported to account for an important proportion of the muta-
tion spectrum in HNPCC. We demonstrate that GS and TS are an
effective strategy for the characterization of genomic rearrangements
in patients showing no mutation by conventional screening methods.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.054.D Pathogenic germline variants of TP53 gene are rare
in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Šárka Pavlová1;2, JItka Malcikova1;2, Johana Gombíková1, Jana
Šmardová3, Karla Plevová1;2;4, Jana Kotašková1;2, Barbara Dvořáčková1,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
542
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Barbara Kunt Vonková1, Kristýna Zavacká1;2, Veronika Navrkalová1;2,
Jakub Trizuljak1;2;4, Michael Doubek1;2;4, Sarka Pospisilova1;2;4
1University Hospital Brno and Medical Faculty, Masaryk University,
Department of Internal Medicine - Hematology and Oncology, Brno,
Czech Republic; 2Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk
University Brno, Brno, Czech Republic; 3Faculty of Science, Masaryk
University, Department of Experimental Biology, Brno, Czech Republic;
4University Hospital Brno and Faculty of Medicine Masaryk University,
Institute of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Brno, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: In chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL),
B-cell malignancy with the median age at diagnosis >65 years,
TP53 defects are routinely examined. We analysed TP53 gene
variants and their germline/somatic origin in 706 CLL patients.
Methods: Tumour and non-tumour gDNA were subjected to
amplicon-based NGS. Variants were interpreted according to
TP53Website and TP53Database; functional yeast assay (FASAY)
was performed for germline variants.
Results: In 102/706 (15%) patients, exonic or splice site TP53
variants >10% VAF other than common population variants
(Pro72Arg, Pro36=, Arg213=) were identiﬁed. Six of them (6%)
were non-pathogenic variants of germline origin (~50% VAF;
Asp49=; Ile254Val; Arg283Cys; Arg290His; Gly360Ala). None was
accompanied by a second allele defect, and the patients were free
of personal or family history suggesting Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In
a patient with Gly360Ala, another pathogenic TP53 variant
expanded after treatment.
Of the remaining 96 patients, the variant origin could be
assessed in 81. Germline origin was excluded in 80 cases, while it
was conﬁrmed in one patient carrying the heterozygous variant
Arg158Cys. This variant has been reported with conﬂicting inter-
pretations of pathogenicity due to contradictory results of func-
tional
assays.
Our
FASAY
results
showed
intermediate
functionality. CLL was the ﬁrst tumour of the patient (aged 56)
without a family history of cancer.
Conclusion: Germline (likely) pathogenic TP53 variants are
infrequent in CLL, which corresponds to late disease onset but
should be considered, especially if the activity of mutated protein
is partially retained. Rare population variants should not be mis-
interpreted as pathogenic.
References:.
Grants: MEYS-CZ_MUNI/A/1330/2021, MH-CZ_RVO_65269705,
MH-CZ_AZV_NU21-08-00237,
AZV_NU20-08-00137,
AZV_NV19-
03-00091.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.055.A Investigating the effect of estradiol levels on the
risk of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer: a mendelian
randomization study
Weronica Ek1, Daniel Schmitz1, Julia Höglund1, Fatemeh Hadiza-
deh1, Torgny Karlsson1, Åsa Johansson1
1Uppsala University, Immunology, Genetics and Pathology and
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: High levels of estrogen are associated
with increased risk of breast and endometrial cancer and have
been suggested to also play a role in the development of ovarian
cancer. Cancerogenic effects of estradiol, the most prominent
form of estrogen, has been highlighted as a side effect of estrogen
replacement therapy. However, whether high levels of endogen-
ous estrogens, produced within the body, promote cancer
development, has not been fully established.
Methods: Here we performed both two and one-sample Men-
delian randomization (MR), using hitherto unexploited genetic
instruments, to estimate the effect of endogenous estradiol on the
risk of developing breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer.
Results: We showed that higher estradiol levels increase the
risk of ER-positive breast cancer (OR = 2.43 [95% CI 1.07-5.51]), as
well as ER-positive and negative breast cancers combined (OR =
1.99 [95% CI 1.02-3.87]). A signiﬁcant effect was also identiﬁed for
ovarian cancer (OR = 2.26 [95% CI 1.09-4.71]). However, we could
not establish a clear link to the risk of endometrial cancer (OR =
1.93 [95% CI 0.77-4.80]).
Conclusion: Our results suggest that high production of estradiol
in the body triggers the development of breast and ovarian cancer.
References:.
Grants: This work was funded by the Swedish Cancer Society
19 0383 Pj (ÅJ) and 21 0447 FE (WEE), and the Åke Wiberg
Foundation M19-0349/M20-0057 (WEE).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.056.B In-frame deletions and insertions in TP53 gene
identiﬁed in leukemia patients result in p53 protein
inactivation
JItka Malcikova1;2, Šárka Pavlová1;2, Johana Gombíková1, Jana
Šmardová3, Karla Plevová1;2;4, Jana Kotašková1;2, Barbara Dvořáčk-
ová1, Eva Zapletalová1, Veronika Navrkalová1;2, Michael Doubek1;2;4,
Sarka Pospisilova1;2;4
1University Hospital Brno and Medical Faculty Masaryk University,
Department of Internal Medicine - Hematology and Oncology, Brno,
Czech Republic; 2Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk
University, Brno, Czech Republic;
3Faculty of Science, Masaryk
University,
Department
of
Experimental
Biology,
Brno,
Czech
Republic; 4University Hospital Brno and Faculty of Medicine Masaryk
University, Institute of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Brno, Czech
Republic.
Background/Objectives: In tumours, in-frame deletion/insertions
in the TP53 gene are generally presumed to have a deleterious
effect on protein function due to disruption of protein structure.
However, functional data are missing for most of them. This fact
causes controversy during their interpretation.
Methods: TP53 variants resulting in an in-frame deletion and/
or
insertion
of
amino
acids
identiﬁed
during
routine
TP53 screening in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) were
subjected to functional analysis of separated alleles in yeast
(FASAY) [PMID:7732013]. FASAY assesses the ability of the p53
protein to bind to RGC promoter sequences and induce tran-
scription of the reporter gene in yeast cells.
Results: We have identiﬁed 12 in-frame TP53 variants among
1465 patients examined with NGS (Table 1) and three via func-
tional screening of an independent CLL cohort (Table 2). In FASAY,
all these variants clearly showed the loss of ability to activate
transcription of the reporter gene.
Table 1:
c.320_331del
p.(Tyr107_Arg110del)
c.329_337del
p.(Arg110_Phe113delinsLeu)
c.339_341del
p.(Phe113del)
c.480_485dup
p.(Met160_Ala161dup)
c.513_516delinsC
p.(Glu171_Val172delinsAsp)
c.516_584del
p.(Val173_Ser185del)
c.652_654dup
p.(Val218dup)
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
543
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
c.745_747del
p.(Arg249del)
c.764_766del
p.(Ile255del)
c.834_836del
p.(Gly279del)
c.845_846insTGG
p.(Arg282_Arg283insGly)
c.846_847insTGGAAAAGG
p.(Arg282_Arg283insTrpLysArg)
Table 2:
c.472_477del
p.(Arg158_Ala159del)
c.754_756del
p.(Leu252del)
c.754_762del
p.(Leu252_Ile254del)
Conclusion: Although we cannot exclude that functional in-
frame deletions/insertions may occur, we showed that all tested
in-frame deletions/insertions identiﬁed in patients with CLL
resulted in the loss of the transactivation function of p53 protein.
References:.
Grants: MEYS-CZ_MUNI/A/1330/2021, MH-CZ_RVO_65269705,
MH-CZ_AZV_NU21-08-00237,
AZV_NU20-08-00137,
AZV_NV19-
03-00091.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.057.C Identiﬁcation of new pathogenic mutations in
BRCA1 through homologous recombination assays
Paloma Martín-Bejarano Soto1;2;3, Nuria Arroyo-Garrapucho1;2;3,
Eva María Sánchez-Tapia1;2;3, Rosario Vidal-Tocino1;4, Teresa Martín-
Gómez1;4, Raquel Seijas-Tamayo1;4, Rogelio González-Sarmiento1;2;3,
Ana-Belén Herrero1;2;3
1Biomedical Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca,
Spain; 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University
of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Sala-
manca, Spain; 4Medical Oncology Service, University Hospital of
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
Background/Objectives: BRCA1 is a tumor suppressor fre-
quently mutated in breast and ovarian cancer syndrome that
plays an essential role in homologous recombination (HR), a
DNA
double-strand
break
repair
mechanism
necessary
to
maintain genome integrity. Hundreds of mutations in BRCA1 are
classiﬁed as variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS), since their
effect on protein function has not been determined. In this
study, we use different functional assays to quantify the efﬁ-
ciency of HR of VUS identiﬁed in the Genetic Counselling Unit of
Salamanca in the last 20 years.
Methods: VUS were re-analysed using ClinVar, VEP and Var-
some databases. QuickChange II Site-directed mutagenesis kit was
used to generate plasmids containing the studied VUS. HeLa and
HCC1937-derived cell lines carrying HR reporter cassettes were
transfected with the BRCA1 variants and HR proﬁciency, deter-
mined by the reconstitution of the green ﬂuorescent protein, was
analyzed by ﬂow cytometry.
Results: 39 previously identiﬁed VUS were re-analysed and 16
were still classiﬁed as such. Seven variants (~43%) decreased
BRCA1-mediated HR in the HeLa system. c.32T>G and c.5202T>G,
located in the RING and BRCT domains, respectively, exhibited the
strongest HR deﬁciency and were also tested and validated in the
HCC1937 system. The identiﬁed pathogenic mutations are being
introduced in the genome of HCC1937 (BRCA1 -/-) for further
functional characterization.
Conclusion: The HR-based functional assays are effective
methods to analyze VUS in BRCA1 and have allowed the re-
classiﬁcation of 16 VUS in benign or pathogenic.
References:.
Grants: This project was funded by CSI264P20.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.058.D Next-Generation Sequencing of circulating DNA: an
innovative approach to detect, monitor and treat head and
neck cancer
maria palmieri1;2, Viola Bianca Serio1;2, Margherita Baldassarri1;2,
Caterina Lo Rizzo3, Maria Antonietta Mencarelli3, Anna Maria Pinto3,
Francesca Mari1;2;3, Alessandra Fabbiani1;2;3, Anna Carrer1;2;3, Valen-
tina Caputo1;2;3, Stefania Granata1;2;3, Francesca Fava1;2;3, Pierguido
Ciabatti4, Simone Boccuzzi5, Lorenzo Salerni6, Ignazio Martellucci7,
Marco Mandalà6, Alessandra Renieri1;2;3, Elisa Frullanti1;2
1Medical Genetics, Medical Biotechnolgies, siena, Italy;
2Med
Biotech Hub and Competence Center, Medical Biotechnolgies,
siena, Italy; 3Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria
Senese, siena, Italy; 4Otolaryngology Unit, Azienda Usl Toscana sud
est, Arezzo, Italy; 5Otolaryngology Unit, Azienda Usl Toscana sud
est, Grosseto, Italy; 6University of Siena, Otolaryngology Unit, siena,
Italy; 7Oncology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Senese, siena,
Italy.
Background/Objectives: Head and neck cancers are very het-
erogeneous, aggressive and difﬁcult to treat. Existing screenings
are mainly limited to clinical and radiological examinations. We
previously demonstrated that liquid biopsy is able to detect key
mutations characterizing tumors and monitor cancer progression
1. The aim of this study is to molecularly proﬁle patients with head
and neck cancer using this novel approach to improve treatment
options and post-treatment surveillance.
Methods: NGS-liquid biopsy using cell-free DNA (cfDNA) was
performed in a cohort of 41 patients with head and neck cancer.
Results: Pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in 34 out 41
patients. The most frequently mutated genes were TP53, MET,
PIK3CA, SMAD4 and BRCA1/2. We found a total of 91 pathogenic
variants in 34 different genes. Our approach was also successful to
identify somatic mutations with allele frequencies as low as 0.05%
in patients who were not yet in an advanced clinical stage
allowing a prompt therapeutic response against actionable genes.
Conclusion: Our results demonstrated that NGS of cfDNA in
head and neck cancers is able to identify key mutations involved
in the disease progression mechanism in 83% of cases in a non-
invasive way revealing the genetic tumor proﬁle of head and neck
cancers in real-time detecting potential therapeutic targets.
References: 1. Palmieri M et al. J Cancer Metastasis Treat.
2020;6:55.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.059.A Overview of the genetic predisposition from a large
cohort of medulloblastoma
Mathilde Filser1, Adrien Borgel1, Alexandre Perrier1, Marie-Charlotte
Villy2, Léa Guerrini-Rousseau3, Christine Bourneix1, Mathilde War-
coin2, Marion Gauthier-Villars2, Fatoumata Simaga2, François Doz4,
Olivier
Delattre1,
Chrystelle
Colas2,
Franck
Bourdeaut4,
Julien
Masliah-Planchon1
1Institut Curie, Oncogenetic Department, Paris, France; 2Institut Curie,
Clinical Oncogenetic Department, Paris, France; 3Gustave Roussy,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
544
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Pediatric Department, Villejuif, France;
4Institut Curie, Pediatric
Department, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: Medulloblastoma is among the most
frequent brain neoplasia in the paediatric population and repre-
sents 60% of childhood intracranial embryonal tumours. In 2016,
the World Health Organization deﬁned four subgroups of
medulloblastoma: WNT, SHH, Group 3 and Group 4. The estab-
lishment of risk factors is uncompleted, the genetic factors being
the only one partially elucidated.
The aim of this study was to establish a review of the genetic
predisposition in medulloblastoma.
Methods: From our large cohort of 610 grouped medullo-
blastomas received at the Genetic Somatic laboratory since 2000,
404 beneﬁted from a tumour genomic screening including the
common medulloblastoma predisposition genes SUFU, PTCH1 and
TP53.
Results: 36.6% (148/404) of our patients presented somatic
alterations in those genes and the SHH subgroup was conﬁrmed
as the most frequent one (72.3%; 133/184). Among the 73 cases
for which a germline analysis was possible, we identiﬁed nine
cases of germline alterations of SUFU, four of PTCH1 and two of
TP53.
In addition, we described germline alterations in the following
genes: APC, ELP1, GPR161, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, MUTYH, NF1, NF2,
SMO and TCF4.
Conclusion: Our study performed on a large panel of medul-
loblastomas conﬁrms the previously published data regarding well
characterized even though rare predisposition genes and high-
lights the need to orientate the patient in a genetic counselling,
especially if presenting a SHH medulloblastoma. We also describe
new predisposition genes that will be crucial to identify before
deciding the treatment, to help the clinicians in their decision-
making.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.060.B Microsatellite instability is common in non-
colorectal and -endometrial malignant tumors of Lynch
syndrome patients
Lisa Elze1, Rachel van der Post2, Janet Vos3, Arjen Mensenkamp1,
Mirjam de Hullu1, Iris Nagtegaal2, Nicoline Hoogerbrugge1, Richarda
De Voer1, Marjolijn Ligtenberg1
1Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Human Genetics,
Nijmegen,
Netherlands;
2Radboud
Institute
for
Molecular
Life
Sciences (RIMLS), Pathology, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
3Radboud
Institute For Health Sciences, Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands.
Background/Objectives: Lynch syndrome (LS) is caused by
germline pathogenic variants (PVs) in the mismatch repair (MMR)
genes. LS patients have a high risk to develop MMR deﬁcient
(dMMR) colorectal and endometrial cancers, which also present
with microsatellite instability (MSI). Currently, in LS patients the
incidence of MSI in other cancer types (hereafter ‘non-canonical’
cancers) is largely unknown. MSI presence in these non-canonical
cancers is important as MSI may predict response to immune
checkpoint inhibitors. Here we aim to identify the frequency
of MSI.
Methods: Full tumor history was retrieved from a complete,
historical clinic-based cohort (1990-2020) of 1,751 conﬁrmed LS
patients from the Dutch pathology registry. Out of 1,751 LS
patients, 746 patients (43%) had developed cancer of which
284 (38%) developed non-canonical cancers. In total, 206
non-canonical cancers were available for further investigation.
MSI, somatic second hit alterations and dMMR were analyzed
using targeted sequencing and immunohistochemistry of MMR
genes in each non-canonical cancer.
Results: MSI was present in 58% (119/206) of cancers, which
was higher in LS-associated cancers (small bowel, stomach, renal
pelvis, ureter, brain and ovary) compared to non-associated can-
cers (82% vs. 41%). LS patients with MSH2 and MLH1 PVs more
often presented with MSI non-canonical cancers compared to
patients with MSH6 or PMS2 PVs (MLH1: 74%, MSH2: 77%, MSH6:
40%, PMS2: 18%, P < 0.1).
Conclusion: Non-canonical cancers in LS patients are also
frequently MSI, especially LS-associated cancers. LS patients may
beneﬁt from optimized treatment if MSI testing is considered for
all cancer types they develop.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.061.C The highest frequency of BRCA1 c.3700_3704del
detected among Albanians from Kosovo
Ivana Maleva Kostovska1, Simona Jakovchevska1, Milena Jaki-
movska Özdemir1, Sanja Kiprijanovska1, Katerina Kubelka-Sabit2;3,
Dzengis Jasar2;3, Marina Iljovska4, Emilija Lazareva4, Snezhana
Smichkoska4, Dijana Plaseska-Karanﬁlska1
1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre for
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Geogri D. Efremov”, Skopje,
Macedonia;
2Clinical Hospital Acibadem Sistina, Dept. of Histo-
pathology and Cytology, Skopje, Macedonia;
3University “Goce
Delcev”, Medical Faculty, Stip, Macedonia; 4Ss. Cyril and Methodius
University, Medical Faculty, University Clinic of Radiotherapy and
Oncology, Skopje, Macedonia.
Background/Objectives: The spectrum of BRCA1/2 mutations
varies among populations; however some mutations may be fre-
quent in particular ethnic groups due to the “founder” effect. The
c.3700_3704del mutation was previously described as a recurrent
BRCA1 variant in Eastern European countries. This study aimed to
investigate the frequency of c.3700_3704del BRCA1 mutation in
Albanian breast and ovarian cancer patients from North Mace-
donia and Kosovo.
Methods: A total of 327 patients with invasive breast and/or
ovarian cancer (111 Albanian women from North Macedonia and
216 from Kosovo) were screened for 13 recurrent BRCA1/2
mutations. Targeted NGS with a panel of 94 cancer-associated
genes including BRCA1 and BRCA2 was performed in a selected
group of 118 patients.
Results: We have identiﬁed 21 BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants,
17 (14 BRCA1 and 3 BRCA2) in patients from Kosovo (7.9%) and 4
(1 BRCA1 and 3 BRCA2) in patients from North Macedonia (3.6%).
All BRCA1/2 mutations were found in one patient each, except for
c.3700_3704del BRCA1 mutation which was observed in 14
unrelated families, all except one originating from Kosovo. The
c.3700_3704del mutation accounts for 93% of BRCA1 mutation
positive cases and is present with a frequency of 6% among breast
cancer patients from Kosovo.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report of BRCA1/2 mutations
among breast and ovarian cancer patients from Kosovo. The
ﬁnding that BRCA1 c.3700_3704del represents a founder mutation
in Kosovo with the highest worldwide reported frequency sup-
ports the implementation of fast and low-cost screening protocol,
regardless of the family history and even a pilot population-based
screening in at-risk population.
References:.
Grants:.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
545
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.062.D Cytogenetic evaluation in myelodysplastic
syndrome
Can Berk Leblebici1, Sule Altıner1, Arzu Vicdan1, Nuket Y Kutlay1,
TIMUR TUNCALI1, Halil Gürhan Karabulut1, Sadiye Ekinci1, Hatice Ilgın
Ruhi1
1Ankara University, Medical genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a
hematological malignancy that is characterized by prolonged
cytopenia in the bone marrow (BM) and has a risk of conversion to
acute myeloid leukemia. Morphological changes in the bone
marrow are often required for diagnosis, this also needs to be
correlated with other laboratory tests such as cytogenetic analysis.
Cytogenetic risk grouping according to IPSS-R (Revised Interna-
tional Prognostic Scoring System) is important in patient follow-
up. In this study, conventional cytogenetic(CC) and ﬂuorescent
in situ hybridization(FISH) results of MDS are presented.
Methods: The results of cytogenetic analysis of BM materials of
patients with MDS were evaluated retrospectively referred to our
department, in the period of 2019-2021.
Results: A total of 152 patients were included in the study. Of
these, 89 (58.5%) were male and 63 (41.5%) were female. The age
range of the patients was 19-89 (mean age 65.2). CC and FISH
results are summarized in the table below.
First Diagnosis
Follow-up
2.time
3.time
CC
(n = 137)
FISH
(n = 143)
CC
(n = 48)
FISH
(n = 46)
CC
(n = 25)
FISH
(n = 18)
Normal
88
89
29
24
22
12
Pathological
49
54
19
22
3
6
One change
29
36
3
14
1
4
Two
changes
11
8
9
1
0
0
Three or
more
changes
9
10
7
7
2
2
Table 1: Outline of the cytogenetics results.
Conclusion: CC ﬁndings provide important data for the diag-
nosis and prognosis of MDS, and additional cytogenetic methods,
especially FISH, are clearly beneﬁcial in the diagnosis and follow-
up of disease.
References: 1- https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.97112.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Can Berk Leblebici Ankara University
Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics, Sule Altıner Ankara Uni-
versity Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics, Arzu Vicdan Ankara
University Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics, Nuket Y Kutlay
Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics, TIMUR
TUNCALI Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics,
Halil Gürhan Karabulut Ankara University Faculty of Medicine,
Medical Genetics, Sadiye Ekinci Ankara University Faculty of
Medicine, Medical Genetics, Hatice Ilgın Ruhi Ankara University
Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics.
P13.063.A Targeted gene panel investigations in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia patients
Agnes Mosolygo-Lukacs1, Maria Balogh1, Aniko Ujfalusi1
1University of Debrecen,
Department of Laboratory
Medicine,
Debrecen, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a
clinically heterogeneous disease with various genetical abnorm-
alities that can affect the treatment and survival of the patients.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) studies have described recur-
rently mutated genes in CLL. The aim of this study was to detect
pathogenic variants of commonly mutated genes in CLL and to
explore their associations with IGHV mutational status and cyto-
genetic abnormalities.
Methods: NGS analysis was performed on 75 blood samples
from CLL patients using Twist Custom Panel kit and Illumina
NextSeq according to the manufacturers’ instructions.
Results: Overall, 42 of 75 patients (56%) harbored at least one
mutation, the majority of variants (63%) was clonal. The most
frequently mutated gene was TP53, followed by NOTCH1, BRIC3
and SF3B1. Subclonal variants (5-10% VAF) were also detected in
17/75 patients (22%), particularly in BIRC3 and NOTCH1 genes.
TP53 and NOTCH1 variants occured mostly in unmutated-IGHV
CLL cases. Patients with mutated-IGHV harbored mainly BIRC3
and FBXW7 variants. 17p deletions co-occured with TP53 clonal
mutations in 6 of 8 patients. SF3B1 and TP53 variants occured with
11q deletions in 6 of 8 cases. BIRC3 clonal and subclonal variants
were observed in 4 of 7 patients with favourable 13q deletions.
Conclusion: This study conﬁrmed the presence of high num-
ber of clonal and subclonal variants in the most frequently
mutated genes (TP53, NOTCH1, BRIC3, SF3B1) in CLL cases. These
NGS results complementing the IGHV mutational status and
cytogenetic data can contribute to better prognostic workup and
management of patients with CLL.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.064.B Analysis of circulating miRNA proﬁle in plasma
sapmles of glioblastoma patients
Dóra Géczi1;1, Bálint Nagy1, Melinda Szilágyi1, András Penyige1,
Álmos Klekner2, József Virga3, Zsuzsanna Birkó1
1University of Debrecen, Department of Human Genetics, Debrecen,
Hungary;
2University of Debrecen, Department of Neurosurgery,
Debrecen,
Hungary;
3University
of
Debrecen,
Department
of
Oncology, Debrecen, Hungary.
Background/Objectives:
Glioblastoma
multiforme
(GBM)
is
among the most aggressive cancers with a poor prognosis.
Treatment options are limited, clinicians lack efﬁcient prognostic
and predictive markers. Liquid biopsy represents a great advance
in this ﬁeld because it can be useful to monitor the evolution and
recurrence of the disease as well as the response of patients to
therapy. Circulating miRNAs – besides being important regulators
of cancer development – may have potential as diagnostic bio-
markers of GBM.
Methods: In this study, proﬁling of 798 human miRNAs was
performed on blood plasma samples from 6 healthy individuals
and 6 patients with GBM, using a NanoString nCounter Analysis
System. To validate our results, ﬁve miRNAs (hsa-miR-433-3p, hsa-
miR-362-3p, hsa-miR-195-5p, hsa-miR-133a-3p and hsa-miR-29a-
3p) were randomly chosen for RT-qPCR detection.
Results: 53 miRNAs were signiﬁcantly differentially expressed
in plasma samples of GBM patients when data were ﬁltered for
FC < 1 and FDR < 0,1. Target genes of the top 39 differentially
expressed miRNAs were identiﬁed, and we carried out functional
annotation and pathway enrichment analysis of target genes
via GO and KEGG-based tools. General and cortex-speciﬁc
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
546
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
protein–protein interaction networks were constructed from the
target
genes
of
top
miRNAs
to
assess
their
functional
connections.
Conclusion: We demonstrated that plasma microRNA proﬁles
are promising diagnostic and prognostic molecular biomarkers
that may ﬁnd an actual application in the clinical practice of GBM,
although more studies are needed to validate our results.
References:.
Grants: This study was supported by grant 2017-1.2.1-NKP-
2017-00002 “National Brain Research Program NAP 2.0”.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.065.C Study the signiﬁcance of miR-30 family members in
ovarian cancer
Alexandra Beke-Varga1, Éva Márton1, András Penyige1;2, Istvan
Balogh1;3, Bálint Nagy1, Melinda Szilágyi1
1University of Debrecen, Department of Human Genetics, Debrecen,
Hungary; 2University of Debrecen, Faculty of Pharmacy, Debrecen,
Hungary;
3University
of
Debrecen,
Department
of
Laboratory
Medicine, Debrecen, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Estrogens are able to trigger cell pro-
liferation and cell death in a dose dependent manner. MicroRNAs
are considered to play an important role in estrogen response. Our
aim was to characterize the function of miR-30s (tumor sup-
pressors) in the response of ovarian cells to estradiol (E2).
Methods: The applied human ovarian cell lines were PEO1
(expressing Estrogen Receptor α and β) and A2780 (ERβ). The
effect of high dose E2 was studied by determining cell prolifera-
tion, apoptosis, cellular lysis, mRNA and miR-30s expression.
Results: The basal expression of miR-30a-3p, miR-30a-5p, miR-
30d-5p and miR-30e-5p proved to be higher in PEO1 than in
A2780. The expression of miR-30a-5p, miR-30d-5p and miR-30e-5p
was induced to high dose E2 treatment (>50μM) where intensive
cell death was observed according to the induction of apoptosis
(TP53) and autophagy (BAG3, ATG2B) related genes. ERα-expres-
sing PEO1 cells had higher tolerance to high dose E2 than A2780
what might be caused by the induction of ERα mediated estrogen
response (GREB1, CA12). Bioinformatic analysis of miR-30s revealed
that several targets are shared by miR-30a-5p, miR-30d-5p and
miR-30e-5p that are involved in the regulation of cell proliferation
and cell death related pathways. The application of miR-30d-5p
mimic reduced cell proliferation and decreased the tolerance of
PEO1 cells to high dose E2.
Conclusion: MiR-30a-5p, miR-30d-5p and miR-30e-5p might
mediate the stress-response induced by high dose E2 in ovarian
cells. MiR-30d-5p might be a promising therapeutic target in
ovarian cancer.
References:.
Grants: FK138021 (National Research Development and Inno-
vation Ofﬁce, Hungary) and EFOP-3.6.3-VEKOP-16-2017-00009
projects.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.066.D Comparative analysis of transcriptomic changes
including mRNA and microRNA expression induced by
xenoestrogens in ovarian cells
Alexandra Beke-Varga1, Éva Márton1, Fatime Grimplinyi1, Bálint
Takács1, András Penyige1;2, Lajos Széles1, Istvan Balogh1;3, Bálint
Nagy1, Melinda Szilágyi1
1University of Debrecen, Department of Human Genetics, Debrecen,
Hungary; 2University of Debrecen, Faculty of Pharmacy, Debrecen,
Hungary;
3University
of
Debrecen,
Department
of
Laboratory
Medicine, Debrecen, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Xenoestrogens are natural (e.g. zear-
alenone; ZEA) or synthetic compounds (e.g. bisphenol A; BPA),
which mimic the effect of physiological estrogens. The exposure
to xenoestrogens increases the risk for ovarian cancer. The aim of
our study was to compare the transcriptomic changes induced by
physiological estradiol (E2) and xenoestrogens in ovarian cells.
Methods: PEO1 human ovarian cell line was treated with E2,
ZEA and BPA. Transcriptomic changes were studied by mRNA and
miRNA sequencing (Illumina NextSeq 500). Validation of data was
made by qPCR.
Results: Estrogen exposure induced remarkable transcriptomic
changes: 304, 283 and 62 genes were up-regulated (log2FC>1);
288, 255 and 44 genes were down-regulated (log2FC<-1) in
response to E2, ZEA and BPA. Furthermore, the expression of 12
(E2), 11 (ZEA) and 10 (BPA) miRNAs changed signiﬁcantly
(log2FC>1, or log2FC<-1). Functional enrichment analysis revealed
several pathways related to the regulation of cell proliferation,
apoptosis and migration. The effect of xenoestrogens was highly
comparable to E2: 319 genes were co-regulated in response to E2
and ZEA and the expression of 81 genes changed in response to
all the three estrogens tested. Furthermore the expression of miR-
197-5p, miR-5008-5p and miR-501-5p were down-regulated in
response to at least to two treatments. Correlation proved to be
high (r>0.9) between the data obtained from RNA sequencing
and qPCR.
Conclusion: Xenoestrogens induce relevant transcriptomic
changes that are comparable with E2. We identiﬁed key genes and
miRNAs that might contribute to the carcinogenic effect of
xenoestrogens.
References:.
Grants: FK138021 project, National Research Development and
Innovation Ofﬁce (Hungary).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.067.A Disequilibrium between BRCA1 and BRCA2 circular
and messenger RNAs plays a role in breast cancer
Corentin Levacher1, Mathieu Viennot2, Ludivine Beaussire1;3, Sophie
Coutant1,
Stéphanie
Baert-Desurmont4,
Marick
Laé2;3,
Philippe
Ruminy2, Claude Houdayer4
1INSERM U1245, Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Normandy Centre for
Genomic and Personalized Medicine, FHU-G4 Génomique, Rouen,
France; 2INSERM U1245, Cancer Center Henri Becquerel, University of
Normandy, UNIROUEN, FHU-G4 Génomique, Rouen, France; 3Depart-
ment of Pathology, Cancer Center Henri Becquerel, University of
Normandy, UNIROUEN, Rouen, France;
4Department of Genetics,
Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Norman-
die Univ, UNIROUEN, INSERM U1245 and Rouen University Hospital,
FHU-G4 Génomique, Rouen, France.
Background/Objectives: Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are single-
stranded covalent structures in closed loops produced by back-
splicing. As backsplicing and linear splicing compete against each
other, we hypothesize that a balance disruption between circRNAs
and messenger RNAs (mRNAs) could promote tumorigenesis and
used breast cancer and BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes as a model.
Methods: We develop a novel gene-targeted technique for
simultaneous quantitative and qualitative analyses of circRNAs
and mRNAs. A total of 114 probes, located at exon extremities,
were designed to explore all reported alternative transcripts
for BRCA1 and BRCA2. Following reverse transcription and
probing on cDNA, nearby probes were ligated and the number
of ligations quantiﬁed using unique molecular identiﬁers and
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
547
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
sequencing on a MiSeq. Hence, circRNAs and mRNAs were
identiﬁed and quantiﬁed.
This method was ﬁrst validated on a set of 169 formalin-ﬁxed,
parafﬁn-embedded tumour samples harbouring various BRCA
mutations (including splice mutations). Next, our hypothesis was
tested using another test set of 95 pairs of tumour and adjacent
normal breast tissues.
Results: On the validation set, all known circRNAs and mRNAs
and those resulting from splice mutations were correctly identi-
ﬁed. Four novel circRNAs were identiﬁed. On the test set, the ratio
of BRCA1 and BRCA2 circRNAs/mRNAs were signiﬁcantly lower in
tumour breast tissue compared to normal tissue (p = 6.9e-09 and
p = 1.5e-06 for BRCA1 and BRCA2, respectively).
Conclusion: We have validated an innovative method to study
linear and backsplicing and showed for the ﬁrst time that dis-
equilibrium between BRCA1 and BRCA2 circRNAs and mRNAs
plays a role in breast cancer.
References:.
Grants: Cancéropôle Nord-Ouest.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.068.B Comprehensive RNA and protein functional
assessments contribute to the clinical interpretation of MSH2
variants causing in-frame splicing alterations
Laëtitia
Meulemans1,
Stéphanie
Baert-Desurmont1;2,
Marie-
Christine Waill3, Gaia Castelain1, Audrey Killian1, Julie Hauchard1,
Thierry Frebourg1;2, Florence Coulet3;4, Alexandra Martins1, Martine
Muleris3;4, Pascaline Gaildrat1
1Inserm U1245, Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Normandy Centre for
Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France; 2Department of
Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France; 3Department of
Genetics, AP-HP.Sorbonne Université, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris,
France;
4Inserm UMR-S 938, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine,
CRSA, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: Spliceogenic variants in disease-causing
genes are often presumed pathogenic since most induce frame-
shifts resulting in loss-of-function. However, it was recently shown
in cancer predisposition genes that some may trigger in-frame
anomalies that preserve function1. Here, we addressed this
question by using MSH2, a DNA mismatch repair gene implicated
in Lynch syndrome, as a model system.
Methods: Eighteen MSH2 variants, mostly localized within
canonical splice sites, were analyzed by using minigene splicing
assays. Then, the biological impact of the resulting protein
alterations was assessed in a methylation tolerance-based
assay.
Clinicopathological
characteristics
of
variant
carriers
were collected.
Results: Three in-frame RNA biotypes were identiﬁed based
on variant-induced spliceogenic outcomes: exon skipping (E3/
E4/E5/E12), segmental exonic deletions (E7/E15) and intronic
retentions (I3/I6/I12/I13). The 10 corresponding protein isoforms
exhibit either large deletions (49-93aa), small deletions (12/16aa)
or insertions (3-10aa) within different functional domains.
We showed that all these modiﬁcations abrogate MSH2 function,
in agreement with the clinicopathological features of variant
carriers.
Conclusion: Altogether, these data demonstrate that MSH2
function is intolerant to in-frame indels caused by the spliceogenic
variants analyzed in this study, supporting their pathogenic nat-
ure. This work stresses the importance of combining com-
plementary
RNA-
and
protein-based
approaches
to
ensure
accurate clinical interpretation of in-frame spliceogenic variants.
References: 1Meulemans et al, Skipping Nonsense to Maintain
Function: The Paradigm of BRCA2 Exon 12. Cancer Research, 2020.
Grants: FHU-NGP, Geﬂuc, (#R18064EE), INCa/DGOS (AAP/CFB/
CI, FASDEC), the European Union/Région Normandie (ERDF), CNO
and EDnBISE.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.069.C Whole exome sequencing reveals new candidate
genes involved in non-MEN2 familial medullary thyroid cancer
Carmen Muñoz1, Cristina Tous Rivera1, Elena Navarro2;3, elena
lucena1, Raquel Fernández1;2, Guillermo Antiñolo1;2, Salud Borrego1;2
1University Hospital Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University of Seville,
Department of Maternofetal Medicine, Genetics and Reproduction,
Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, Seville, Spain;
2Center for
Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Seville,
Spain; 3University Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Endocrinology Service,
Seville, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is a rare
neuroendocrine tumor (2-5% of all thyroid cancer) derived from
the parafollicular C-cells. About 75% of all MTCs are sporadic; the
remaining 25% correspond to inherited cancer syndromes known
as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2), attributed to gain-
of-function mutations of the RET proto-oncogene in >98% of
cases. MEN2 includes three clinically differentiable types: MEN2A,
MEN2B, and familial MTC (FMTC). However, there are FMTC cases
in which RET is not affected and whose genetic cause remains
unknown (non-MEN2 FMTC). In this study, we aimed at identifying
possible causal variants involved in these rare familial forms.
Methods: We performed WES in nine non-MEN2 FMTC patients
belonging
to
ﬁve
different
families,
using
an
Illumina
NextSeq550 sequencer. Multi-sample analyses were launched and
annotated using the Varsome Clinical platform to study SNVs and
CNVs. After variant ﬁltering and prioritization, based on patho-
genicity predictors, functional evaluation, and expression proﬁles,
candidate variants were segregated and evaluated by Sanger
sequencing in additional family members.
Results: We have identiﬁed new pathogenic variants in het-
erozygosis, in genes not previously associated with the disease.
They are involved in diverse molecular functions, such as DNA
repair, post-transcriptional regulation and a phosphatase receptor
that regulates cell growth and differentiation. Further studies are
on-going to assess the role of the candidate variants in the onset
of the disease.
Conclusion: The determination of new genes involved in non-
MEN2 FMTC forms offers new pathways for further elucidation of
the molecular mechanisms that lead to the disease.
References: PMIDs:31717449;33407723.
Grants:
ISCIII-ERDF/ESF(PI19/01550;FI20/00192;CD20/00171);
Andalusian
Government(PEER-0470-2019);
I+D+i
Funding-
PAIDI2020(P20_00887).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.070.D Mutation Proﬁle of Metastatic Castration-Resistant
Prostate Cancer Patients Prior to Olaparib Treatment - EMA vs.
FDA
Vita Setrajcic Dragos1, Vida Stegel1, Gasper Klancar1, Petra Škerl1,
Anja Zagožen Klasinc1, Srdjan Novaković1
1Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Department of Molecular Diag-
nostics, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: Olaparib has been approved by EMA
and FDA for the treatment of patients with metastatic castration-
resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC). However, the indication for its
clinical use in the USA (FDA) and in the EU (EMA) differs
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
548
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
signiﬁcantly. Patients with mCRPC in the USA are eligible for
treatment if they harbor a somatic/germline mutation in ATM,
BARD1, BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CDK12, CHEK1, CHEK2, FANCL,
PALB2, RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, or RAD54L gene, whereas in
the EU only patients with BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations are
eligible.
Methods: During the year 2021, 98 consecutive prostate tumor
samples have been routinely genotyped for the presence of the
mutations in ATM, BARD1, BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CDK12, CHEK1,
CHEK2, FANCL, PALB2, RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, RAD54L genes,
using Illumina’s TruSightTumor 170 panel.
Results: Sequencing quality of 82% of samples was sufﬁcient
for data analysis. The most commonly mutated genes were BRCA2
(11%) and ATM (8%), followed by BRCA1 (3%), CHEK2 (2%)
whereas RAD51B, RAD51C, and CDK12 were mutated in 1% of
patients. More than half of patients (55%) did not harbor a
mutation in any of the investigated genes.
Conclusion: Based on the tumor genotype, 14% of patients
would be eligible for treatment with olaparib in the EU in com-
parison to 26% of patients in the USA.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.071.A Biallelic Pathogenic Variants in CHEK2 Predispose
to Multiple Primary Tumours
Snezana Stankovic1, Janet Vos2, Rachel van der Post3, Fulvia
Brugnoletti1;4, Saskia Koene5, Janneke Schuurs-Hoeijmakers1, Bianca
Hilhorst1, Lilian Vreede1, D Gareth Evans6, Katharina Wimmer7,
Alexander
Volk8,
Robin
de
Putter9,
Leila
Soikkonen10,
Arjen
Mensenkamp1, Maurizio Genuardi4;11, Marjolijn Ligtenberg1;3, Nico-
line Hoogerbrugge1, Richarda De Voer1
1Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University
Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands; 2Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud University
Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands;
3Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud
University Medical Center, Department of Pathology, Nijmegen,
Netherlands;
4Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Istituto di Medicina
Genomica, Rome, Italy; 5Leiden University Medical Center, Depart-
ment of Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands; 6The University of
Manchester,
Genomic
Medicine,
Manchester,
United
Kingdom;
7Institute for Human Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck,
Department of Genetics and Pharmacology, Innsbruck, Austria;
8Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; 9Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent
University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 10Oulu
University Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu, Finland;
11UOC Genetica Medica, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A.
Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Biallelic germline pathogenic variants
(PV) in CHEK2 are associated with an increased risk to develop
breast cancers (BC) and suggested to predispose to other cancer
types. Moreover, CHEK2-deﬁciency has been postulated to lead to
homologous DNA repair deﬁciency (HRD). We aimed to elucidate
the role of CHEK2-deﬁciency in the development of multiple pri-
mary tumours (MPT).
Methods: We collected individuals with a CHEK2-deﬁciency: i)
from individuals who developed two or more tumours before 65
years (n = 94) who underwent germline whole-exome sequencing
(WES), ii) by genotyping the CHEK2 c.1100delC PV in individuals
who developed MPTs before the age of 60 (n = 787) and iii)
identiﬁed through routine genetic testing, ERN GENTURIS centres
and literature (n = 35 CHEK2-deﬁcient cases). WES was performed
on DNA from six tumour types (n = 16 tumours) and the somatic
mutational signatures and cancer driver genes were analysed.
Results: We identiﬁed 3/94 (3%) and 3/787 (0.4%) MPT cases
with CHEK2-deﬁciency in cohorts i and ii, respectively. In total, we
collected 41 CHEK2-deﬁcient cases, 85% were women (n = 35)
and 76% developed at least one BC (n = 31). Next to BC, 51% of
the cohort (n = 21) developed at least one benign (n = 9) and/or
malignant (n = 19) tumour. CHEK2-deﬁcient tumours harboured
on average 3.14 variants/Mb (range 0.3–19.65). All tumours pre-
sented with clock-like SBS1 and SBS5 signatures and somatic PVs
in cancer driver genes.
Conclusion: Individuals with CHEK2-deﬁciency are predisposed
to develop MPTs. CHEK2-deﬁcient tumours do not show HRD-
associated mutational signatures. Our results suggest that indivi-
duals with MPTs should undergo germline genetic testing
for CHEK2.
References:.
Grants: KWF 12174.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.072.B MassArray-based diagnostics of hot spot mutations
in IDH1/2 and TERT genes and allelic losses of 1p/19q co-
deletions in gliomas
Edyta Borkowska1;2, Felipe Masiccano2, Robin Everts3, Shuko
Harada2, Alexander Mackinnon2
1Medical University of Lodz, Department of Clinical Genetics, Łódź,
Poland; 2University of Alabama at Birmingham, Division of Genomic
Diagnostics & Bioinformatics, Birmingham, United States; 3Agena
Bioscience, San Diego, United States.
Background/Objectives: Multiplex genetic analysis, for example
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), is increasingly utilized for
the routine identiﬁcation of clinically signiﬁcant biomarkers in
cancer because it provides diagnostic, prognostic, and ther-
apeutic guidance in a single workﬂow. However, NGS is expen-
sive, laborious, and requires complicated bioinformatics analysis.
The Agena MassARRAY system provides accurate, low cost,
multiplexed analysis of hundreds of clinically relevant mutations
with relatively simple analytics. In this study, we evaluated
the utility of this system for the detection of somatic hotspot
variants in the IDH1, IDH2 and TERT genes and the identiﬁcation
of deletions of chromosomes 1p and 19q in a cohort of glial
tumors.
Methods: Our custom panel was designed to identify 65
genetic alleles important for the diagnosis of glial tumors. Puriﬁed
DNAs from 60 routine formalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn embedded tissue
specimens was analyzed. Results were compared to orthogonal
testing (FISH, IHC and/or NGS). Visualization of the genetic data
was achieved using custom develop scripts in the R programming
environment.
Results: Results obtained using the MassArray were >95%
concordant to orthogonal FISH and NGS analysis. Testing requir-
ted less DNA, was simpler to performer, and turnaround time was
faster. A custom pipeline developed in R allowed visualization of
the data and faciliated accurate interpretation.
Conclusion: In the current study, we described an alternative,
multiplex method to NGS that is robust, fast, and inexpensive for
the identiﬁcation of 1p/19q co-deletion and variants of IDH1/2 and
TERT genes.
References:.
Grants: Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange Grant
No: PPN/WAL/2020/1/00017.
Conﬂict of Interest: Edyta Borkowska: None declared, Felipe
Masiccano: None declared, Robin Everts Agena Bioscience, own
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
549
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
stock options, Shuko Harada: None declared, Alexander Mack-
innon: None declared.
P13.073.C Systematic functional analysis by hybrid minigenes
of CHEK2 splice-site variants detected in the BRIDGES project
Lara Sanoguera-Miralles1;2, Alberto Valenzuela-Palomo1;3, Elena
Bueno-Martínez1;2, Ada Esteban-Sánchez4, Inés Llinares-Burguet1;3,
Alicia García-Álvarez1;3, Douglas F. Easton5, Peter Devilee6, Maaike
Vreeswijk6, Miguel de la Hoya4, Eladio A. Velasco1;3
1Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (IBGM), Splicing and
genetic susceptibility to cancer, Valladolid, Spain; 2Universidad de
Valladolid (UVa), Valladolid, Spain; 3Consejo Superior de Investiga-
ciones Cientíﬁcas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain; 4Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC), Molecular Oncology
Laboratory CIBERONC, Madrid, Spain; 5Centre for Cancer Genetic
Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom;
6Leiden
University Medical Center (LUMC), Department of Human Genetics,
Leiden, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: CHEK2 germline inactivating variants
moderately increase the risk of developing breast cancer. Our goal
was to functionally analyse CHEK2 candidate spliceogenic variants
identiﬁed in ~113,000 women in the large-scale sequencing pro-
ject BRIDGES (https://bridges-research.eu/).
Methods: A total of 128 CHEK2 variants of the intron-exon
boundaries were bioinformatically analysed. Fifty-two potentially
spliceogenic variants were found with splicing prediction pro-
grams, incorporated by site-directed mutagenesis into the mini-
genes mgChk2_ ex1-7 (exons 1 to 7), mgChk2_ex6-10 (exons 6 to
10) and mgChk2_e11-15 (exons 11 to 15), and functionally
assayed in MCF-7 and HeLa cells.
Results: The three wild type minigenes produced the full-
length transcripts of the expected size and sequence, with several
alternative transcripts, all of which had been previously reported
as physiological alternative events of CHEK2. Forty-nine variants
(94.2%) impaired splicing and 34 out of them produced severe
splicing anomalies. At least 113 transcripts were detected, 95 of
which could be characterized (68 protein-truncating isoforms).
Conclusion: According to the biological indicators of patho-
genicity (proportion of aberrant transcripts and predicted protein
impact), 32 CHEK2 variants could be classiﬁed as pathogenic or
likely pathogenic variants. Splicing functional assays with mini-
genes have been proven to be a straightforward and robust
method for the initial characterization of variant-splicing out-
comes and the clinical interpretation of variants of any disease-
gene.
References:.
Grants: Predoctoral fellowship from the AECC-Scientiﬁc Foun-
dation, Sede Provincial de Valladolid (2019–2023); European
Commision, BRIDGES grant (Id. 634935); ISCIII (PI17/00227 and
PI20/00225); Junta de Castilla y León (CSI242P18).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.075.A First estimates of diffuse gastric cancer risks for
carriers of CTNNA1 germline pathogenic variants
Marie Coudert1, Youenn Drouet2;3, Helene Delhomelle1;4, Magali
Svrcek5, Patrick Benusiglio6, Florence Coulet6, Dana Farengo Clark7,
Bryson Katona8, Liselotte P van Hest9, Lizet Van der Kolk10,
Annemieke Cats11, Jolanda M van Dieren11, Bita Nehoray12, Thomas
Slavin13, Isabel Spier4;14, Robert Hüneburg4;15, Silvana Lobo16;17;18,
Carla Oliveira4;16;17;19, Lise Boussemart20, Laure Masson21, Jean
Chiesa22, MATHIAS SCHWARTZ1;4, Bruno Buecher1;4, Golmard Lisa1;4,
Anne-Marie Bouvier23;24, Valérie Bonadona3;25, Dominique Stoppa-
Lyonnet1;4;26, Christine Lasset2;3, Chrystelle Colas1;4;26
1Institut
Curie,
Genetics,
Paris,
France;
2Centre
Léon
Bérard,
Département Prévention et Santé Publique, Lyon, France; 3Université
de Lyon, CNRS UMR 5558 LBBE, Villeurbanne, France; 4Full Member of
the European Reference Network on Genetic Tumor Risk Syndromes,
Paris, France; 5Sorbonne Université, AP-HP, Saint-Antoine hospital,
Department of pathology, Paris, France; 6Sorbonne Université, AP-HP,
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique Médicale, Paris,
France; 7University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, MS,
LCGC, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of
Medicine, University of, Philadelphia, United States;
8Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Phila-
delphia, United States; 9Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amster-
dam, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands;
10The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Family Cancer Clinic, Amsterdam,
Netherlands;
11The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Department of
gastrointestinal oncology, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 12City of Hope,
Division of Clinical Cancer Genomics, Duarte, United States; 13City of
Hope, Departments of Medical Oncology and Population Sciences,
Duarte, United States; 14University Hospital Bonn, Institute of Human
Genetics / National Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, Bonn,
Germany;
15University
Hospital
Bonn, Department
of Internal
Medicine /National Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, Bonn,
Germany; 16Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, i3S,
Porto, Portugal;
17University of Porto, IPATIMUP – Institut of
Molecular Pathology and Immunology, Porto, Portugal; 18Institute
of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of Porto,
International
Doctoral
Programme
in
Molecular
and
Cellular
Biotechnology Applied to Health Sciences (BiotechHealth), Porto,
Portugal; 19University of Porto, Faculty of Medicine, Porto, Portugal;
20CHU de Nantes - Hôtel Dieu, Service de Dermatologie, Nantes,
France; 21CHU de Rennes, Dermatologie, Rennes, France; 22CHRU
Hôpital Caremeau, Génétique, Nîmes, France; 23UMR 1231, Digestive
cancer registry of Burgundy, Dijon, France;
24Réseau FRANCIM
(réseau Français des registres du cancer), Toulouse, France; 25Centre
Léon-Bérard, Unité Clinique d’Oncologie Génétique, Lyon, France;
26INSERM U830, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic variants (PV) of CTNNA1 are
found in families evocative of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer
(DGC) but no risk estimates were available until now. The aim of
this study is to evaluate DGC risks for carriers of germline
CTNNA1 PV.
Methods: Authors of published CTNNA1 families updated
their data and unpublished families were identiﬁed through
international collaborations. The cumulative risk of DGC by age
for PV carriers was estimated with the Genotype Restricted
Likelihood (GRL) method, taking into account non-genotyped
individuals and conditioning on all observed phenotypes and
genotype of the index case to obtain unbiased estimates. A non-
parametric and the Weibull functions were used to model the
shape of penetrance function with the GRL. Kaplan-Meier inci-
dence curve and Standardized Incidence Ratios (SIR) were also
computed. A “leave-one-out” strategy was used to evaluate
estimate uncertainty.
Results: Thirteen families with 46 carriers of PV were included.
The cumulative risks of DGC at 80 years for carriers of CTNNA1 PV
are 49%, 57% and 77% respectively with the Weibull GRL, NP GRL
and Kaplan Meier methods. Risk ratios to population incidence
reach particularly high values at early ages and decrease with age.
At 40 years, they are equal to 65, 833 and 21,574 respectively with
the Weibull GRL, NP GRL and SIR methods.
Conclusion: This large series of CTNNA1 families provides the
ﬁrst risk estimates of GC. It will help to improve management and
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
550
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
surveillance for these patients and support inclusion of CTNNA1 in
germline testing panels.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.076.B Can genetic testing in healthy individuals prevent
inherited cancer? Genetic data analysis of a Spanish cohort
Cristian Perez-Garcia1, Jordi Perez-Lopez1, Daniel Sanchez-Valero1,
Rocio Garcia-Jimenez1, Gemma Cartagena1, Eva Barroso1, Marina
Martinez-Matilla1, Sandra Garcia-Herrero1, Javier Garcia Planells1
1Igenomix, Genomic Precision Diagnostic, Valencia, Spain.
Background/Objectives: A hereditary cancer risk assessment is
the key to identifying patients and families who may be at
increased risk of developing certain types of cancer. Recent stu-
dies show that more than 50% of individuals at risk have not
received genetic nor genetic counselling and have not been
identiﬁed. Improving the knowledge and access to testing by
individuals and families at high-risk for cancer provides signiﬁcant
improvements
for
prevention
and
early
treatment
of
inherited cancer.
Methods: We analysed the carrier rate of pathogenic/likely-
pathogenic variants in 31 genes associated to high risk of inher-
ited cancer in 30582 Spanish healthy individuals between Sep-
tember 2015 to August 2021. Genetic data was obtained by WES
and variants were pre-categorized using an in-house algorithm
according to ACMG criteria.
Results: 867 individuals out of 30582 (2,83%) presented
pathogenic/likely-pathogenic variants in 26 out of the 31 genes
related with cancer.
148 likely pathogenic and 295 pathogenic different variants
were identiﬁed in our cohort, being the most frequent genes
BRCA2 (76 variants) and ATM (71 variants). Genes with the most
presence in the population were ATM (111 carriers), BRCA2 (105
carriers) and CHEK2 (100 carriers).
Conclusion: We identiﬁed a moderate amount of healthy
individuals carrying variants in cancer related genes. These indi-
viduals have a high-risk of developing cancer and can beneﬁt from
a preventive cancer detection, have a regular screening or pre-
ventive treatment.
Awareness of the result may reduce any stress and anxiety that
comes from not knowing through an appropriate genetic coun-
selling programme.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Cristian Perez-Garcia IGENOMIX, Jordi
Perez-Lopez IGENOMIX, Daniel Sanchez-Valero IGENOMIX, Rocio
Garcia-Jimenez IGENOMIX, Gemma Cartagena IGENOMIX, Eva
Barroso IGENOMIX, Marina Martinez-Matilla IGENOMIX, Sandra
Garcia-Herrero IGENOMIX, Javier Garcia Planells IGENOMIX.
P13.077.C Triple-negative breast cancer in association with
RAD51C pathogenic variants
Ana Blatnik1, Ksenija Strojnik1, Marta Banjac1, Vida Stegel2, Vita
Setrajcic Dragos2, Petra Škerl2, Gasper Klancar2, Srdjan Novaković2,
Mateja Krajc1
1Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Department of Oncological Clinical
Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia;
2Institute of Oncology Ljubljana,
Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: RAD51C pathogenic variants (PV) are
associated with high risk of ovarian cancer (OC) in female carriers.
The association with breast cancer (BC) is less well established, but
there is some evidence triple-negative disease is more common in
RAD51C positive patients. The aim of our study was to investigate
the tumour and mutation spectrum in Slovenian RAD51C carriers,
with an emphasis on a possible association with speciﬁc BC
subtypes.
Methods: In order to identify carriers of RAD51C PV tested at
the Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, we analysed records for 5170
individuals who underwent genetic testing due to personal or
family history of cancer using TruSight Cancer/TruSight Hereditary
Cancer panels between January 2016 and December 2021. We
then analysed personal and family history data obtained from
medical records and the National registry of tested individuals
from cancer families for our RAD51C PV carriers.
Results: We identiﬁed 22 RAD51C PV carriers from 17 different
families, 20 female and 2 male. The majority of our probands (13/
17) had a positive personal or family history of BC. Of the 20
female carriers, 10 had OC (aged 46-80, median 59.5) and 10 had
BC (aged 34-65, median 50), with two carriers developing both BC
and OC. Five carriers developed triple-negative BC (aged 36-65,
median 53). Of our 17 families, 14 carried the c.572-1G>C p.? PV,
which appears to be a founder variant in the Slovenian
population.
Conclusion: Triple-negative BC is disproportionally frequent in
our RAD51C carriers and OC appears to be rare before age 50.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.078.D Alternative classiﬁcation of pediatric oncology
patients based on gut microbiota biomarker prediction with
machine learning
Katarina Soltys1;2, Sara Sardzikova2, Simona Ugrayova3, Ivan Hric3,
Gabor Beke4, Ivan Mikula5, Adela Penesova6, Viktor Bielik3, Marian
Grendar7, Lubos Klucar4, Peter Svec8, Alexandra Kolenova8
1Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia; 2Comenius
University in Bratislava, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of
Microbiology and Virology, Bratislava, Slovakia; 3Comenius University
in Bratislava, Faculty of Physical Education and Sport, Department of
Biological and Medical Science, Bratislava, Slovakia; 4Institute of
Molecular Biology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia;
5The Hebrew University, Faculty of Medicine, The Concern Founda-
tion Laboratories at The Lautenberg Center for Immunology and
Cancer Research, Israel-Canada Medical Research Institute, Jerusa-
lem,
Israel;
6Institute
of
Clinical
and
Translational
Research
Biomedical Center, SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia; 7Comenius University
in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Biomedical Center
Martin, Martin, Slovakia; 8Comenius University and National Institute
of Children´s Diseases, Department of Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: Pediatric oncology patients suffer not
only from the disease itself but also from additional complications
(febrile neutropenia, GvHD, gastrointestinal problems) associated
with changes in gut microbiome composition. However, it is still
not elucidated whether individual bacterial genera or higher tax-
onomical level group is responsible for functional differences.
Methods: 16S rRNA gene sequencing (V1-V9) of gut micro-
biome from feces was carried out on Illumina MiSeq (2x300bp).
Healthy controls (n = 14) and pediatric oncology patients (n = 30),
with prevailing ALL were involved. Pre-processing, taxonomic
classiﬁcation and diversity analysis were performed with QIIME2
Core 2020.8./DADA2/BLAST+ (Silva_132). Functional proﬁles were
predicted in R with Tax4Fun2 package. Statistical analysis was
carried
out
using
SPSS_21.0;
machine-learning
(ML)
using
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
551
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
randomForest SRC analysis and elastic network ML for biomarker
discovery and obtaining ROC curve.
Results: The ML analysis discriminated healthy individuals from
oncology patients receiving chemotherapy using joint predictors
Blautia,
Oscilibacter,
Parabacteroides,
Eubacterium_halii_group,
Enterococcus, Streptococcus (AUC 0,962). We have identiﬁed sig-
niﬁcantly discriminant Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio in oncology
patients in conditioning regime before transplantation (allo-HSCT).
The dominant effect of the therapy was supported by the best
joint predictors – Enterococcaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Clostridiaceae
and Lactobacillaceae (AUC 0,86) discriminating between children
with ALL from oncology department and from Transplantation
Unit, associated mainly but not exclusively with metabolism of
cofactors and vitamins, glycan biosynthesis and genetic informa-
tion processing.
Conclusion: We have shown the highest importance of family
level gut microbiota structure in pediatric oncology patients as
biomarkers that can predict the loss of gut microbiota function.
References:.
Grants: APVV-17-0099, ITMS2014+: 313021D075.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.079.A Clinical, splicing and functional analysis of a
predicted truncating BRCA1 variant that alters splicing,
increasing an in-frame Δ11q naturally occurring isoform
Lidia Feliubadaló1;1;2;3, Joanna Domènech-Vivó4, Mireia Menéndez1,
Alba Llop-Guevara5, Eva Tornero1, Alejandro Moles-Fernández4,
Montserrat de Miguel6, Miriam Potrony7, Marta Santamariña8;9;10,
Judit Sanz1;11, Ana Vega8;9;10, Violeta Serra5, Joan Brunet1;3, JUDITH
BALMAÑA4;12, Àlex Teulé1, Orland Diez4;13, Conxi Lázaro1;2;3, Sara
Gutiérrez-Enríquez4
1Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), Hereditary Cancer Program,
L’Hospitalet de Llobregat/Girona/Badalona, Spain; 2IDIBELL, Program
in Molecular Mechanisms and Experimental Therapy in Oncology
(Oncobell), L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain; 3Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madird, Spain;
4Vall
d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Hereditary Cancer Genetics
Group, Barcelona, Spain; 5Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO),
Experimental
Therapeutics
Group,
Barcelona,
Spain;
6Hospital
Universitario 12 de Octubre, Laboratorio Diagnóstico Genético de
Cáncer Hereditario, Servicio de Bioquímica, Madrid, Spain; 7Hospital
Clínic de Barcelona, Genètica Molecular, Servei de Bioquímica i
Genètica Molecular, Centre de Diagnòstic Biomèdic (CDB), Barcelona,
Spain;
8Fundación Pública Galega Medicina Xenómica (FPGMX),
SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; 9Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela (IDIS), Santiago de Compos-
tela, Spain; 10Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Madrid, Spain; 11ALTHAIA - Xarxa Assistencial Universitària
Manresa, Manresa, Spain;
12Vall d’Hebron Hospital Universitari,
Medical Oncology Department, Barcelona, Spain; 13Vall d’Hebron
Hospital Universitari, Area of Clinical and Molecular Genetics,
Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Protein truncating variants are expected
to produce loss of function by nonsense-mediated decay of the
transcript and/or absence of critical domains. However, spliceo-
genic variants can rescue some function by causing in-frame
deletions. Here we studied clinical, splicing, and functional effects
of BRCA1 variant c.791_794del.
Methods:
Cancer
history
was
retrieved
from
available
carrier families. Carrier RNAs underwent splicing analysis by
Sanger
sequencing
and
single-nucleotide
primer
extension.
Homologous recombination repair (HRR) was determined by
immunoﬂuorescence-based detection of RAD51 and BRCA1 nuclear
foci in tumours from carriers and a patient-derived xenograft (PDX).
Results: The variant was detected in 12 families with one or
more cases of breast/ovarian cancer (BC/OC), most carrying also
pathogenic variants in other BC/OC genes or showing poor variant
segregation with disease or milder-than-expected phenotype.
According to splicing in-silico predictions, c.791_794del increases
the strength of a cryptic donor site used to generate the Δ11q, a
BRCA1 naturally occurring in-frame splicing event. RNA analysis in
blood of three carriers and one PDX’s tumour revealed that carrier
alleles generate almost exclusively Δ11q transcripts. Tumour
samples from one carrier and its PDX presented a RAD51 score
compatible with a proﬁcient HRR, supported by the presence of
BRCA1 foci.
Conclusion: These results suggest that BRCA1 c.791_794del
confers a lower cancer risk than classical BRCA1 truncating var-
iants, driven by an increased Δ11q in-frame transcript. Further
studies will help to fully ascertain its associated cancer risk.
References:.
Grants: PI19/00553-PI19/01303, ISCIII, Ministerio de Ciencia e
Innovación, funded by FEDER funds—a way to build Europe;
AGAURFI-DGR2020.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.081.C Driver genes for chronic lymphocytic leukemia can
be affected not only by mutations but also by complex
genomic rearrangements
Karla Plevová1;2;3, Eva Ondrouskova1, Natalie Kazdova1, Tobias
Rausch4, Šárka Pavlová1;2, Jana Kotašková1;2;3, Kristýna Zavacká1;2,
JItka Malcikova1;2, Karol Pál2, Jakub Hynšt2, Michael Doubek1;2;3,
Marie Jarošová1;3, Valdimír Beneš2, Sarka Pospisilova1;2;3
1University Hospital Brno and Medical Faculty, Masaryk University,
Department of Internal Medicine - Hematology and Oncology, Brno,
Czech Republic; 2Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk
University, Brno, Czech Republic;
3University Hospital Brno and
Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Institute of Medical Genetics
and Genomics, Brno, Czech Republic; 4European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Genomics Core Facility, Heidelberg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL),
genomic complexity (GC) serves as an important prognostic
marker and a high number of chromosomal defects (≥5; high-GC)
is associated with an unfavorable prognosis. High-GC can be
induced by chromothripsis and/or related mechanisms (high-GC-
cth) (PMID: 34900721). This study aimed to characterize in detail
high-GC-cth in CLL.
Methods: We analyzed 327 samples from 201 CLL patients
using genomic arrays (CytoScanHD, ThermoFisher Sci.), 97 patients
(48%) were tested at multiple time-points. iFISH for the most
recurrent chromosomal changes in CLL and/or stimulated cyto-
genetics data were available for the cohort. Selected samples were
subjected to WGS analysis.
Results: High-GC-cth was identiﬁed in 52 samples (16%) from
38 patients (19%). High-GC-cth occurred in initial samples of 20
cases and persisted during the follow-up in all nine patients tested
repeatedly. In contrast, high-GC-cth newly developed at later time-
points in 18 cases due to clonal evolution. Consistent with pub-
lished data, high-GC-cth associated with TP53 gene aberrations
(deletions/mutations; 30 cases). In ﬁve of the remaining eight
TP53-intact patients, high-GC-cth was linked to ATM gene aber-
rations. Chr6 was most frequently affected by high-GC-cth (10
cases), followed by chr8 and chr9 (eight cases each). Cytogenetics
and WGS revealed additional chromosomes and loci involved in
genomic rearrangements indicated by arrays. Genomic break-
points recurred in the vicinity of genes known to be mutated in
CLL, suggesting additional mechanisms of their activation or
inactivation.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
552
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: Our detailed analysis reveals another layer of
genomic alterations shaping functions of genes essential for CLL
phenotypes.
References:.
Grants: MH-CZ_AZV_NU21-08-00237, MH-CZ_RVO_65269705,
MEYS-CZ_MUNI/A/1330/2021.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.082.D Omic data integration for hereditary susceptibility
to colorectal cancer
Anael Lopez-Novo1, Andres Dacal2, David Remedios3, Joaquin
Cubiella3, Maria Victoria Alvarez Sanchez4, María Jesús Ladra-
González5, Fernando Fernandez-Lopez5, Ana Alvarez-Castro6, Jose
Manuel Cameselle-Teijeiro7, Miriam Cuatrecasas8, Francesc Bala-
guer9, Sergi Castellvi-Bel9, Ceres Fernandez-Rozadilla1, Clara Ruiz-
Ponte1;10
1Fundacion Publica Galega de Medicina Xenomica, Instituto de
Investigacion Sanitaria de Santiago (IDIS), Grupo de Medicina
Xenomica-Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain;
2Servicio de Digestivo, Hospital Universitario
Lucus Augusti, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria de Santiago de
Compostela (IDIS), Lugo, Spain; 3Servicio de Digestivo, Complexo
Hospitalario Universitario de Ourense, Centro de Investigacion
Biomedica
en
Red
de
Enfermedades
Hepaticas
y
Digestivas
(CIBERehd),
Ourense,
Spain;
4Servicio
de
Digestivo,
Complexo
Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain; 5Servicio de Cirugia
Digestiva-Unidad de Coloproctologia, Complexo Hospitalario Uni-
versitario de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela,
Santiago de Compostela, Spain; 6Servicio de Digestivo, Complexo
Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain; 7Servicio de Anatomia Patologica, Complexo
Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain;
8Servicio de Anatomia Patologica, Institut
D’Investigacions
Biomediques
August
Pi
i
Sunyer,
Centro
de
Investigacion Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Hepaticas y
Digestivas (CIBERehd) and Tumor Bank-Biobank, Hospital Clinic,
Barcelona, Spain; 9Gastroenterology Department, Institut d’Investi-
gacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y
Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Hospital Clínic, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain; 10Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
Background/Objectives: The identiﬁcation of new colorectal
cancer (CRC) susceptibility genes through whole exome sequen-
cing (WES) has not been as successful as expected, possibly due to
the genetic heterogeneity of CRC. Our aim is to identify novel
candidate susceptibility genes by integrating WES and RNA-
seq data.
Methods: WES and RNA-seq were performed on paired
normal-tumor tissue from a phenotypically homogeneous cohort
of 19 MMR-proﬁcient CRC patients. Germline calling (Haplotype-
Caller) and annotation (ANNOVAR) were carried out on WES, RNA-
seq data, as well as GTEx data as a control group. Somatic calling
(MuTect2) and annotation (ANNOVAR) were also carried out on
WES data. Aberrant expression, aberrant splicing and monoallelic
expression analysis were performed following DROP pipeline (1).
SKATO were carried out on our WES data and using 267 non-
cancer individuals from the MGP Spanish (EGAC00001000222) as
controls.
Results: None of the patients harbor germline pathogenic
variants in already described Mendelian genes associated to her-
editary CRC syndromes. We did not ﬁnd rare variant (gnomAD
<1%) recurrence in genes in our CRC cohort. At the individual
level, RNA-seq expression analysis together with WES results
reported some candidate genes previously involved in different
types of cancers, metabolism of different metabolites or gastro-
intestinal physiology.
Conclusion: These results show the molecular heterogeneity
underling CRC in a phenotypically homogeneous cohort. The use
of RNA-seq together with WES allows prioritizing variants at the
individual level, increasing the probabilities to identify new CRC
predisposition genes. As a result, a more personalized genetic
diagnostic could be achieved.
References: 1. PMID: 33462443.
Grants: ISCIII and FEDER funds PI17/00509.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.083.A Somatic variant landscapes of solid papillary and
comedo subtypes of canine mammary tumors from a single
dog
Sruthi Hundi1;1, Marjo Hytönen1, Hannes Lohi1
1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Background/Objectives: Breast cancer (BC) is still the most
common cancer reported in women and mammary tumor (MT) is
also the most common malignancy in intact female dogs. The key
goal of this research is to study two rare and less explored sub-
types of canine mammary tumor, i) solid papillary subtype and ii)
comedo
subtype
and
compare
the
ﬁndings
with
human
discoveries.
Methods: An intact female dog diagnosed with simple invasive
carcinoma of these two sub-type was selected and cell popula-
tions from respective tumor sites and normal lobular cells were
isolated from the using the method of laser pressure catapulting
microdissection. Libraries of the cells isolated were prepared with
PicoPLEX tool kit and whole genome sequenced with about 15X
coverage. Data was aligned to latest canFam4, somatic variants
were called and analyzed.
Results: The number of non-silent mutations is sixfold higher
in comedo sub-type than in solid papillary sub-type. Genes related
to MAPK, mTOR and NF-kappaB signaling pathways and Adherens
junctions were enriched in Solid papillary. Genes related to ECM
receptor interaction, focal and cell adhesion, PI3K-AKT and cGMP-
PKG signaling pathways were enriched in Comedo.
Conclusion: The tumor mutation burden co-relates with the
already known fact in humans that comedo carcinoma is more
pathogenic than solid papillary sub-type of carcinoma. The pre-
sence of variants in cell proliferation signaling pathways and
junction is supporting the invasive nature of the tumor which was
identiﬁed as HER+ve and E Cadherin positivity.
References: PMs: 32680987; 33262909.
Grants: Partially supported by Cancer Foundation Finland.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.084.B Pan-cancer identiﬁcation of signatures of survival-
associated prognostic long non-coding RNAs
Lee Jin Lim1, Yu Jin1;2, Klara Chew3, Ashiley Thenpandiyan3, Henry
Yang3, Samuel Chong4, Caroline Lee1;2;5
1National University of Singapore, Biochemistry, Singapore, Singa-
pore; 2National Cancer Centre, Cellular and Molecular Research,
Singapore, Singapore; 3National University of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore; 4National University of Singapore, Pediatrics, Singapore,
Singapore; 5Duke-NUS Medical School, Cancer and Stem Cell Biology,
Singapore, Singapore.
Background/Objectives: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), which
play key roles in modulating gene expression, are frequently
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
553
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
dysregulated in cancers. Their prognostic and therapeutic value
currently remains unclear. Here, we aim to identify potentially
actionable, survival-associated (PAS) lncRNAs as possible prog-
nostic biomarkers in multiple cancers or therapeutic targets.
Methods: Survival-associated (SA) lncRNAs that are correlated
with at least one SA-gene (|R|≥0.8) in the same cancer and
survival-endpoint represent PAS-lncRNAs. Proﬁles of lncRNAs,
miRNAs and mRNAs of 33 cancer types from The Cancer Genome
Atlas were associated with four survival endpoints (Overall survival
(OS), Disease-free survival (DFS), Progression-free interval (PFI),
Diseases free interval (DFI)). PAS-lncRNAs that are associated with
≥1 survival-endpoint in ≥3 different cancer-types represent
potential pan-cancer prognostic biomarkers, while nodal PAS-
lncRNAs in PAS-(lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA) co-expression network
associated with ≥100 SA-mRNAs represent promising therapeutic
targets. Pathways modulated by the SA-genes of these PAS-
lncRNAs are then determined.
Results: Two prognostic pan-cancer PAS-lncRNAs capable of
distinguishing between patients with good and bad prognosis in
≥3 cancers were identiﬁed. Two nodal PAS-lncRNAs that poten-
tially modulate the expression of ≥100 SA-mRNAs in cancer-
associated pathways through miRNAs in Uveal Melanoma were
also identiﬁed.
Conclusion: These prognostic PAS-lncRNAs may facilitate the
design of potential clinically useful biomarkers and therapeutic
targets.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.085.C Insights from multigene panel testing in non-
Ashkenazi breast cancer patients – carrier rates and variant
classiﬁcation in a genetically diverse population
sari Lieberman1, Omer Murik2, Fouad Zahdeh2, Rachel Beeri1,
Pinhas Renbaum1, Michal Barzily1, tehila klopstock1, Orit Freireich1,
Malka BenUziyahu1, ariela tomer1, David Zeevi2, Tzvia Mann2, Oded
Olsha3, Hadar Goldvaser4;5, Tal Hadar6;7, Shani paluch-shimon7;8,
Shelley Shoval9, Eitan Friedman10;11, amnon lahad12;13, Rinat
Bernstein-Molho11;14, ephrat lahad1;7
1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Medical Genetics Institute, Jerusalem,
Israel; 2Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Translational Genomics Lab,
Medical Genetics Institute, Jerusalem, Israel; 3Shaare Zedek Medical
Center, Department of Surgery, Jerusalem, Israel;
4Shaare Zedek
Medical Center, Department of Medical Oncology, Jerusalem, Israel;
5Hebrew University, the Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel;
6Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Department of Breast
Surgery, Jerusalem, Israel; 7Hebrew University, Faculty of Medicine,
Jerusalem, Israel;
8Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center,
Breast Oncology, Jerusalem, Israel; 9Sheba Medical Center, Oncology
Division, Tel Hashomer, Ramat-Gan, Israel; 10Sheba Medical Center,
The Meiray Center High Risk Clinic, Tel Hashomer, Ramat-Gan, Israel;
11Tel Aviv University, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel;
12Hebrew University, Department of Family Medicine, Jerusalem,
Israel; 13Clalit Health Services, Jerusalem, Israel; 14Sheba Medical
Center, Department of Medical Oncology, Tel Hashomer, Ramat-Gan,
Israel.
Background/Objectives: There is limited information on the
landscape of inherited breast cancer (BC) in non-Ashkenazi Jews.
This heterogeneous, little tested population can offer insights into
novel variants in known BC-predisposition genes.
Methods:
In
2015-2021
consecutively
diagnosed
non-
Ashkenazi
BC
patients
underwent
multigene
panel
testing
(MGPT). MGPT was also offered to a control group of unaffected
non-Ashkenazi participants.
Results: Genetic testing was performed in 751 affected and
810 unaffected women. BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants (PV) were
identiﬁed in 23 (3.3%) affected vs. 5 (0.6%) unaffected women (P
<0.0002). Only 3 BRCA1 PVs were recurrent. PVs in other genes
were found in 30 (4.8%) affected vs. 8 (1%) unaffected women.
This included PVs in ATM, CHEK2, BRIP1, TP53, MRE11, FANCM,
NBN, PALB2 and PTEN.
9490 rare variants (<0.01 MAF) were observed in 28 genes: 695
(7.3%) exonic, 8789 (92.7%) non-coding. 541 exonic variants were
previously in ClinVar. Using frequencies from this cohort enabled
downgrading of 15 ClinVar variants of uncertain signiﬁcance
(VUSs) to Benign, based on MAF >0.01 among unaffected low-
family history (FH) women. MAF by sub-ethnicity downgraded
another 28 VUSs. Among non-coding variants, 68 were sig-
niﬁcantly more common in affecteds with signiﬁcant FH, sug-
gesting
possible
pathogenicity.
Conversely,
52
non-coding
variants were classiﬁed as benign based on higher frequency in
controls.
Conclusion: Non-Ashkenazi women exhibit expected rates of
PVs in known breast cancer genes, but low rates in affected with
substantial FH. Genetic analysis in diverse populations can con-
tribute to variant classiﬁcation, especially of non-coding variants
whose interpretation by standard tools is limited.
References:.
Grants: BCRF-095.
Conﬂict of Interest: sari Lieberman Modest, AstraZenca Israel,
Omer Murik: None declared, Fouad Zahdeh: None declared, Rachel
Beeri: None declared, Pinhas Renbaum: None declared, Michal
Barzily: None declared, tehila klopstock: None declared, Orit
Freireich: None declared, Malka BenUziyahu: None declared, ariela
tomer: None declared, David Zeevi: None declared, Tzvia Mann:
None declared, Oded Olsha: None declared, Hadar Goldvaser:
None declared, Tal Hadar: None declared, Shani paluch-shimon:
None declared, Shelley Shoval: None declared, Eitan Friedman:
None declared, amnon lahad: None declared, Rinat Bernstein-
Molho: None declared, ephrat lahad: None declared.
P13.086.D Expression of ST6GAL1 protein in thyroid cancers
Ivana Gunjača1, Benjamin Benzon1, mirjana babić leko1, Nikolina
Pleić1, Valdi Pešutić Pisac2, Ana Barić2, ante punda2, Ozren Polasek1,
Katarina Vukojević1, tatijana zemunik1
1University of Split School of Medicine, split, Croatia; 2University
Hospital of Split, split, Croatia.
Background/Objectives: ST6 β-galactoside α2,6-sialyltransferase
1 (ST6GAL1) is known as a cancer-associated glycosyltransferase. It
plays important role in tumor progression where elevated
expression of ST6GAL1 has been observed in several cancers, but
not in thyroid cancers. Previously, our GWA studies identiﬁed that
gene encoding ST6GAL1 was associated with plasma thyr-
oglobulin (Tg) levels. In thyroid pathologies, Tg levels are altered,
so the aim of the study was to analyze the expression of ST6GAL1
protein in papillary thyroid cancer (including follicular variant and
microcarcinoma) and follicular thyroid cancer.
Methods: We performed immunohistochemical analysis using
human thyroid tissue and analysed expression levels of ST6GAL1
protein in well-differentiated thyroid cancers in comparison to
normal thyroid tissue. We examined 9 papillary thyroid carcinomas
(PTC), 5 with classical papillary architecture and 4 follicular variants
of papillary thyroid carcinoma (FVPTC), 3 microcarcinoma, and 9
follicular thyroid carcinomas (FTC).
Results: In human thyroid tumors, ST6GAL1 protein levels were
higher in malignant thyroid tumors in comparison to normal
thyroid tissue. The analysis showed high ST6GAL1 expression level
in FVPTC (fold increase = 14.98, p = 0.0086) compared to normal
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
554
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
thyroid tissue, followed by classic PTC (fold in-crease = 7.55,
p = 0.0093) and FTC (fold increase = 3.37, p = 0.0008). Micro-
carcinomas had the expression levels closest to control (fold
increase = 2.38, p = 0.0055).
Conclusion: The results of this study showed that ST6GAL1
expression, compared to normal thyroid tissue, was increased in
all
examined
thyroid
tumors,
with
the
highest
expression
in FVPTC.
References:.
Grants: Research was funded by the Croatian Science Foun-
dation, no. 2593.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.087.A Germline intergenic duplications at Xq26.1 cause
an inherited basal cell carcinoma susceptibility syndrome
Yanshan Liu1, Siddharth Banka2, Yingzhi Huang3, Jonathan Hard-
man4, Derek Pye5, Antonio Torrelo6, Glenda Beaman2, Marcelo G.
Kazanietz7, Martin Baker7, Carlo Ferrazzano8, chenfu shi8, Gisela
Orozco9, Steve Eyre8, Michel van Geel10, Anette Bygum11, Judith
Fischer12, Zosia Miedzybrodzka13, Faris Abuzahra14, Albert Rueb-
ben15, Sara Cuvertino16, Jamie Ellingford16, Miriam Smith16, D Gareth
Evans16, Lizelotte Weppner-Parren17, maurice van steensel18, Iskander
chaudhry19, D Chas Mangham8, John Lear20, Ralf Paus8, Jorge
Frank21, William Newman22, Xue Zhang3
1Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, China; 2University of Manchester, Manchester Centre
for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom;
1Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China; 4Kings College London, London, United Kingdom;
5University
of
Manchester,
Centre
for
Dermatology
Research,
Manchester, United Kingdom; 6Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño
Jesús, Madrid, Spain;
7University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
United States; 8University of Manchester, Manchester, United King-
dom;
8University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom;
10University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands; 11Odense
University, Odense, Denmark;
12University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany;
13University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom;
14Zaandam Medical Center, Zaandam, Netherlands;
15University
Hospital
of
RWTH
Aachen,
Aachen,
Germany;
8University
of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; 17Jeroen Bosch Hospital,
Jeroen, Netherlands; 18Agency for Science, Technology and Research
(A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore;
19The Royal Liverpool University
Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom;
20Salford Royal Hospital,
Salford, United Kingdom;
21University Medical Center Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany; 2University of Manchester, Manchester Centre
for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome (BDCS;
MIM301845) is a rare X-linked dominant genodermatosis char-
acterized by follicular atrophoderma, congenital hypotrichosis and
multiple basal cell carcinomas (BCCs). Previous studies have linked
BDCS to an 11.4 Mb interval on chromosome Xq25-27.1 and
suggested that variants in ACTRT1 are responsible.
Methods: Exome/genome sequencing with array comparative
hybridisation with qPCR was used to deﬁne copy number variants.
Immunohistochemistry determined staining of candidate proteins
in skin and tumour tissue. Hi-C determined chromosomal TADs.
Results: In eight families with BDCS, we identiﬁed overlapping
18-135kb duplications (six in-herited and two de novo) at Xq26.1,
ﬂanked by ARHGAP36 and IGSF1. We detected ARHGAP36
expression near the control hair follicular stem cells compartment,
and found increased ARHGAP36 levels in hair follicles, BCCs and
trichoepitheliomas from patients with BDCS.
Conclusion: We provide compelling evidence for intergenic
Xq26.1 duplications as the ﬁrst exam-ple of inherited non-coding
copy number variants causing a cancer-predisposition syndrome.
Our proposed mechanism of BDCS-duplications likely impacting
control of ARHGAP36 in the follicular stem cell compartment
reconciles the genetic etiology and inheritance pattern of BDCS
and reveals ‘dysregulation’ as a mechanism for he-reditary cancer-
predisposition syndromes.
References: Br. J. Dermatol. 165, 201–203 (2011). Nature Med
23, 1226–33 (2017).
Grants: National Key Research and Development Program of
China, the CAMS Innovation Fund for Medical Sciences, the
National Natural Science Foundation of China and the Central
Research Institutes of Basic Research and Public Service Special
Opera-tions.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.088.B Identiﬁcation of new hereditary colorectal cancer
candidate genes
Mariona Terradas1, Isabel Quintana1, Noemi Gonzalez-Abuin1,
Gemma Aiza1, Paula Marciel1, Fátima Marín*1, Pilar Mur1, Matilde
Navarro2, Joan Brunet3, Gabriel Capellá1, Laura Valle1
1IDIBELL Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge, L’Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Spain; 2Catalan Institute of Oncology, L’Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Spain; 3Ico Institut Català d’Oncologia, Girona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Despite the multiple initiatives to iden-
tify new hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (CRC) genes,
their yield has been extremely low. In the past decade, only RPS20,
which explains less than 0.1% of familial CRC cases, has been
unequivocally linked to the disease. To maximize success, we
applied to exome sequencing data a speciﬁc strategy for variant
prioritization,
followed
by
gene
burden
tests
for
the
selected genes.
Methods: Our variant prioritization strategy for the identiﬁca-
tion of hereditary CRC genes from exome sequencing data was
based on different parameters, including, among standard criteria,
the selection of predicted pathogenic variants affecting genes
involved in pathways relevant in hereditary cancer, colorectal
carcinogenesis, and/or acting as cancer drivers. The strategy was
applied to exome sequencing data from 24 CRC-affected indivi-
duals from 15 families with CRC aggregation and/or early-onset
CRC diagnoses. The selected genes were next studied in 465
additional familial CRC patients. The results, together with germ-
line sequencing data from publicly available datasets of CRC and
population
controls,
were
included
in
gene-based
burden
analyses.
Results: We identiﬁed 20 candidate genes, all affecting TGF-
beta or Wnt-pathways, six of which showed positive association
with CRC in gene burden tests. We are currently performing the
characterization of the candidate genes and carrier families,
including the analysis of tumor molecular features.
Conclusion: The application of a well-designed variant prior-
itization strategy to exome sequencing data from familial/early-
onset CRC patients, followed by gene burden tests including data
from open-access repositories, facilitated the identiﬁcation of
candidate genes potentially involved in CRC predisposition.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.091.A Validation of genotype array analysis for the
assessment of homologous recombination deﬁciency (HRD) in
epithelial ovarian cancer
Simon Schnaiter1, Esther Schamschula1, Johannes Zschocke1, Heidi
Fiegl2, Daniel U. Reimer2, Alain Zeimet2, Katharina Wimmer1
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
555
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Institute
of
Human
Genetics,
Medical
University
Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria;
2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.
Background/Objectives: Genomic instability caused by homo-
logous recombination deﬁciency (HRD) - in 40-50% of cases due to
BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants (PVs) - is a predictive biomarker for
the response of different tumors to PARP-inhibitor therapy. In
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) it is also considered predictive for
sensitivity of platinum-based therapies. Currently, diagnostic
genomic instability testing is mostly based on the HRD-score by
Myriad Genetics.
Methods:
To
determine
HRD
positivity
we
examined
genome-wide copy number variation and loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) by genotyping 89 ovarian cancers, 26 of which contained
a BRCA1/2 PV, using the Global Screening Array (GSA-24
v3.0+Multi-Disease
Content;
Illumina).
Data
analysis
was
performed with Illumina GenomeStudio 1.6.3 (Genotyping Ana-
lysis
Module)
and
NxClinical
(Biodiscovery,
SNP-FASST2-
Segmentation Algorithm) software. For quantiﬁcation of HRD a
LOH-score based on Swisher et al (2017; PMID: 27908594) and an
Aneuploidy Normalized Telomeric Imbalance-Score (ANTI-Score,
unpublished) were deﬁned.
Results: The group of BRCA1/2-PV samples had signiﬁcantly
higher median scores than BRCA1/2-wildtype samples. LOH-score
and ANTI-scores were concordant (r = 0.83) with each other and
with the HRD-Score by Myriad (rLOH/MYRIAD = 0,82; rANTI/MYR-
IAD = 0,86). Based on the lowest scores determined in the BRCA1/
2-PV samples, we deﬁned the threshold for HRD-positivity as LOH-
score ≥14 and/or ANTI-score ≥6. Current investigations focus on
the correlation of the scores with the clinical outcome and in
depth sequence and epigenetic analysis of BRCA-wildtype sam-
ples with positive LOH/ANTI-scores. Applicability of our scores in
other tumor entities are tested.
Conclusion: Rapid and reliable HRD analysis is possible with a
standard genotyping array on DNA from native tumor tissue.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Simon Schnaiter Research Grant - Astra-
Zeneca, Esther Schamschula: None declared, Johannes Zschocke:
None declared, Heidi Fiegl: None declared, Daniel U. Reimer: None
declared, Alain Zeimet: None declared, Katharina Wimmer: None
declared.
P13.093.C Study the role of miR200s in the estrogen response
of ovarian cells
Éva Márton1, Alexandra Beke-Varga1, András Penyige1;2, Bálint
Nagy1, Lajos Széles1, Istvan Balogh1;3, Melinda Szilágyi1
1University of Debrecen, Department of Human Genetics, Debrecen,
Hungary; 2University of Debrecen, Faculty of Pharmacy, Debrecen,
Hungary;
3University
of
Debrecen,
Department
of
Laboratory
Medicine, Debrecen, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Ovarian cancer is the ﬁfth most com-
mon form of cancer death among women. Exposure to physio-
logical estrogens or xenoestrogens (zearalenone or bisphenol A)
increases the risk for cancer. We present a comprehensive study
about the effect of estradiol (E2), zearalenone (ZEA) and bisphenol
A (BPA) of human epithelial ovarian cell lines.
Methods: We applied the PEO1 (expressing Estrogen Receptor
α and β) and A2780 (ERβ) human ovarian cell lines. We studied the
effect of estrogens to cell proliferation, migration, mRNA and
miR200s expression.
Results: E2, ZEA and BPA induced cell proliferation and
migration in physiologically relevant doses in the case of the
PEO1 cell line, that was accompanied with the induction of
estrogen-responsive
genes
(GREB1,
CA12,
DEPTOR,
RBBP8).
However, A2780 did not respond to estrogens. The basal intra-
cellular and cell-free expression of miR200s was higher in PEO1,
which was accompanied with low ZEB1 and high E-cadherin
expression. These miRNAs showed a rapid but intermittent
upregulation in response to estrogens that was diminished by
an ERα-speciﬁc antagonist (MPP). MiRNA expression of cell
lysates correlated well with cell-free miRNA expression. The role
of ERα in the regulation of the MIR200B-MIR200A-MIR429 locus
was further supported by publicly available ChIP-seq data.
MiRNA expression of cell lysates correlated well with cell-free
miRNA expression.
Conclusion: MiR200s might be regulated by ERα. Cell-free
miR200s might be applicable biomarkers for estrogen sensitivity
of ovarian cells that support therapy selection in ovarian cancer
(e.g. the application of estrogen blocking agents).
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.094.D Small non-coding RNA proﬁle in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma patients
Nazerke Satvaldina1, Aigul Sharip2, Mukhtar Tuleutaev3, Ulan
Kozhamkulov1, Yuri Zhukov3, Marat Omarov3, Askhat Molkenov2,
Ainur Akilzhanova1, Ulykbek Kairov2, Baktybai Orazbekov3, Saule
Rakhimova1
1PI
“National
Laboratory
Astana”,
Genomic
and
personalized
Medicine, Center for Life Science, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan;
2PI
“National Laboratory Astana”, Bioinformatics and Systems Biology,
Center for Life Science, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan; 3Multidisciplinary
medical center of the akimat of Nur-Sultan city, Department of
Surgery №2, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan.
Background/Objectives: Esophageal cancer (EC) is the sixth
among number of new deaths for 36 cancer types worldwide
according to GLOBOCAN 2020 statistics. Among two main types of
EC esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the most fre-
quent type. Lack of signiﬁcant biomarkers complicates ESCC dif-
ferentiation in the early stages. Mounting evidence indicates that
small non-coding RNAs, especially microRNAs may serve as a
potential biomarker.
Methods: Two total RNA samples (#36 and #38) extracted from
tumor tissue of the patients with pathologically conﬁrmed
T3N0M0 ESCC. Small RNA libraries were prepared using NEXTFLEX
Small RNA-Seq kit v3 protocol (Perkin Elmer). The microRNA
control was included.
Results: Analysis and identiﬁcation of small types of RNAs on
COMPRSA pipeline has been implemented.The results of the fur-
ther sequences annotation analysis of the absolute values dis-
tribution of small RNA types in #36 and #38 samples are pmiRNA
-538,473 piRNA – 2335, 1938, tRNA – 386, 364, snoRNA – 444, 420,
snRNA – 318, 322 and circRNA – 62733, 39748 respectively.
Conclusion: Recent ﬁndings reveal that differently expressed
small RNA levels have correlation with clinicopathological char-
acteristics of ESCC patients, may affect to proliferation of ESCC
cells and advanced progression of cancer. Sequencing of non-
coding regions of the genome may shed a light to distinguish new
signiﬁcant diagnostic markers for esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.
References:.
Grants:
This
work
was
supported
by
NU
CRP
grant
021220CRP2222 and grant MES RK #AP09058660.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
556
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P13.096.B Two different pathogenic variants affecting the
translational initiation of the BMPR1A gene result in different
phenotypes in patients with hereditary polyposis syndromes
Marija
Staninova
Stojovska1,
Nadica
Matevska-Geshkovska1,
Elizabeta Krstevska Bozhinovkj1, Biljana Grozdanovska2, Nenad
Mitrevski2, Milco Panovski3, Aco Kostovski4, Aleksandar Dimovski1;5
1Faculty of Pharmacy, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Center for
Biomolecular Pharmaceutical Analyses, Skopje, Macedonia; 2Faculty
of Medicine, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Institute of Radio-
therapy and Oncology, Skopje, Macedonia; 3Faculty of Medicine, Ss.
Cyril and Methodius University, University Clinic for Abdominal
Surgery, Skopje, Macedonia;
4Faculty of Medicine, Ss. Cyril and
Methodius University, University Children’s Hospital, Skopje, Mace-
donia; 5Macedonian Academy for Sciences and Arts, Research Center
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, Macedonia.
Background/Objectives: Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) and
hereditary mixed polyposis syndrome (HMPS) share common
pathogenesis related to the disruption of the BMP pathway.
Methods:.
Results: Using NGS we detected two germline pathogenic var-
iants located in the 5’region of the BMPR1A gene in two unrelated
patients with familial history of polyposis; one novel splice variant (c.-
152-2A>G, p = ?) and one rare, start loss variant (c.1A>G, p.Met1Val).
The carrier of the splice variant presented a more severe phenotype
reminiscent of JPS (>150 juvenile polyps at 9yrs of age) compared to
the other patient which had a phenotype resembling the HMPS (~10
polyps of variable type and size at age of 35). The RNA analysis of the
splice site variant conﬁrmed the presence of an aberrant transcript
lacking whole exon 3, resulting in a loss of the normal initiation
codon. Additionally, this transcript was expressed at a reduced level,
probably due to decreased stability. While both transcripts can be
expected to result in an absent protein product, in silico analyses
showed that a possible identical protein can be constructed via a
rescue of translational initiation by the downstream in-frame
methionine at codon 29 in exon 4. This truncated protein would
lead to the loss of the signal peptide (residues 1-23), which is
necessary for normal membrane localization of the BMPR1A.
Conclusion: Since both variants potentially result in the same
truncated protein, the different clinical presentation of the disease
in these two families might be due to the differences in the
BMPR1A levels produced by the two different mutant alleles.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.098.D Molecular and infectious proﬁling of prostate
cancer
Elena Todorova1;2, Anita Kavrakova1;2, Bilyana Georgieva1, Kre-
mena Mesechkova1;2, Kamen Anachkov2, Krasimir Yanev3, Georgi
Ivanov3, Goran Derimachkovski4, Georgi Georgiev5, Vanyo Mitev1,
Albena Todorova1;2
1Medical University of Soﬁa, Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory
“Genica”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 3Alexandrovska Hospital, Department of
Urology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 4St. Soﬁa Hospital, Department of Urology,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 5Hill Clinic, Department of Urology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: The heterogeneous nature and clinical
behavior of prostate cancer (PCa) requires intensive investigations.
Bulgarian patients were tested for PCA3, TMPRSS2-ERG fusions and
GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation. The role of low, intermediate
and high-risk (hr) human papilloma viruses (HPVs) in PCa was
assessed.
Methods: Sixty urine specimens obtained after digital rectal
investigation (DRI) from suspected PCa patients and 55 “tru-cut”
PCa biopsies were analyzed. DNA isolation, DNA sequencing,
bisulﬁte conversion of DNA, PCR-based hybridization method,
cytological preparations and staining were applied.
Results: Fluctuations in the molecular proﬁle were registered in
most of the patients: neoplastic GSTP1 allele, PCA3 strongly ele-
vated expression/hyperexpression. A positive TMPRSS2-ERG fusion
status was detected in 4 cases.
hrHPVs were detected in 34% of urine specimens, where 96%
of hrHPVs are: 16, 33, 35, 31, distributed in the subgroup with
highest oncogenic potential. The frequency of hrHPVs in the
control group is signiﬁcantly lower (11%). The cytological exam-
ination on hrHPVs positive urine specimens showed inﬂammation,
atrophy, partially viral cytopathic effect and neoplastic ﬁndings
(high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), nuclear mar-
gination, tumor diathesis).
HPVs were detected in 9% of PCa “tru-cut” biopsies: low-risk
HPVs 42, 54/55; hrHPVs 18, 51. Histological examination showed a
presence of acinar adenocarcinoma in combination with benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), PIN and inﬂammation.
Conclusion: The selected molecular panel is useful for early
diagnostics and molecular proﬁling of PCa. Long-term active
infection with hrHPVs in prostate contributes to intraprostatic
inﬂammation, precancerous lesions and BPH, later to malignancy.
References:.
Grants:
Grant
D-44/08.03.2021,
Medical
University-Soﬁa,
Bulgaria.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.099.A Our experience with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome
in Bulgarian patients
Maria Glushkova1, Liliana Grozdanova1, Tihomir Todorov1, Albena
Todorova1;2
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
2Medical University of Soﬁa, Department of Medical Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL) is an
inherited disorder characterized by hemangioblastoms (HBs)
which can develop in the brain and spinal cord and provoke
headaches, vomiting, weakness and ataxia. Retinal angiomas can
occur in the light-sensitive tissue and may cause vision loss.
In total 17 Bulgarian VHL cases were genetically screened
for mutations in the VHL gene. One prenatal diagnosis was
performed.
Methods: DNA was isolated from blood for all patients and
from chorionic villus sampling of the pregnant woman for pre-
natal testing. The molecular genetic testing included direct Sanger
sequencing and MLPA.
Results: Eight of the patients turned out to be positive for
mutations in the VHL gene (47%). The detected mutations are four
missense, a nonsense mutation, an indel, a small deletion and a
large deletion. Prenatal testing was performed in a twenty-eight
year old patient with multiple retinal HBs and vision loss. Her
father had the same phenotype but milder clinical presentation.
The detected mutation was a deletion of exon 3 of the VHL gene.
The fetus did not carry the maternal mutation. All patients have
clinical symptoms typical for VHL.
Conclusion: In total 47% of the VHL Bulgarian patients were
genetically veriﬁed. The detected mutations in our patients are
already known in the literature. The genetic testing in VHL gene
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
557
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
provides the possibility for adequate genetic counselling, family
planning and prenatal diagnostics in affected families.
References: Glushkova M. et al. 2018 Int J Neurosci. 128(2):117-
124.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.100.B microRNA proﬁle in Bulgarian laryngeal squamous
cell carcinoma
Gergana
Stancheva1,
Silva
Kyurkchiyan1,
Veronika
Petkova1,
Stiliana Panova1, Diana Popova2, Radka Kaneva1, Todor Popov2
1Medical University - Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Department of Medical
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Molecular Medicine Center, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria; 2UMHAT “Tsarica Yoanna-ISUL”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Depart-
ment of Ear- Nose and Throat/Clinic of Ear- Nose and Throat, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(LSCC) is an aggressive malignancy with poor prognosis, which
despite modern treatment protocols, novel molecular markers are
required to improve survival. Deregulation of miRNA expression
plays key role in various pathological processes, as well as
angiogenesis and hypoxia.
Methods: Expression of 2549 miRNA in fresh-frozen tumour
materials and adjacent normal tissue was performed in 12 patients
with advanced primary LSCC, by SurePrint G3 Human MiRNA r21
Microarray Kit, 8 × 60K(Agilent Technologies). The expression of
miR-21-3p and miR-210-3p was evaluated in a group of 38 fresh
frozen LSCC and adjacent normal samples by qRT-PCR analysis.
Results: Expression levels of 2549 miRNA were assessed and
242 of those were signiﬁcantly dysregulated (cut-off>2.0(FC); BH-
FDR<0.05). After the analysis, a subset of 14 miRNAs was selected-
8 upregulated(miR-18a-5p, miR-181a-5p, miR-181b-5p, miR-21-3p,
miR-24-3p, miR-93-5p, miR-210-3p, miR-1246) and 6 down-
regulated (miR-140a-3p, miR-145-5p, miR-148a-5p, miR-204-5p,
miR-497, miR-874-3p). miR-21-3p and miR-210-3p revealed to be
an important and related to pathways of tumour angiogenesis
and hypoxia so they were investigated in a validation group of
patients. It was conﬁrmed increased expression levels of miR-21-
3p and miR-210-3p, respectively 78.94% and 39.47%. The ROC
curve analysis showed that miR-21-3p can distinguish laryngeal
tumour
from
normal
tissue
(AUC = 0.816;
95%
CI:0.720-
0.917;p = 1.76.10-6) with sensitivity of 84.2% and speciﬁcity of
73.7% whereas miR-210-3p did not.
Conclusion: Our study revealed the subset of 14 miRNAs sig-
niﬁcantly deregulated in our LSCC group. miR-21-3p and miR-210-
3p were signiﬁcantly overexpressed in validation group but miR-21-
3p only showed power to distinguish tumour from normal tissue.
References: None.
Grants:
D-77/04.06.2021,DN13/12/20.12.2017;D01-285/
17.12.2019,D01-395/18.12.2020,D01-302/17.12.2021.
Conﬂict of Interest: Gergana Stancheva Contracts D-77/
04.06.2021/MU/Bulgaria;
DN13/12/20.12.2017/NSF;
D01-285/
17.12.2019/MES/Bulgaria, D01-395/18.12.2020MES/Bulgaria, D01-
302/17.12.2021/MES/Bulgaria -in all collaborator, Silva Kyurkchiyan
Contracts D-77/04.06.2021/MU/Bulgaria; DN13/12/20.12.2017/NSF;
D01-285/17.12.2019/MES/Bulgaria,
D01-395/18.12.2020MES/Bul-
garia, D01-302/17.12.2021/MES/Bulgaria -in all collaborator, Ver-
onika Petkova DN13/12/20.12.2017/NSF; D01-285/17.12.2019/MES/
Bulgaria,
D01-395/18.12.2020MES/Bulgaria,
D01-302/17.12.2021/
MES/Bulgaria -in all collaborator, Stiliana Panova Contracts: D01-
285/17.12.2019/MES/Bulgaria,
D01-395/18.12.2020MES/Bulgaria,
D01-302/17.12.2021/MES/Bulgaria -in all collaborator, Diana Popova
Contracts: D-77/04.06.2021/MU/Bulgaria - principal investigator;
collaborator
-
DN13/12/20.12.2017/NSF/MES/Bulgaria,
Radka
Kaneva Contracts DN13/12/20.12.2017/NSF; D01-285/17.12.2019/
MES/Bulgaria,
D01-395/18.12.2020MES/Bulgaria,
D01-302/
17.12.2021/MES/Bulgaria -in all collaborator, Todor Popov Contracts:
collaborator - D-77/04.06.2021/MU/Bulgaria; principal investigator -
DN13/12/20.12.2017/NSF/MES/Bulgaria.
P13.101.C Country-speciﬁc calibration of Polygenic Risk
Scores for Breast Cancer in European ancestry populations
Kristia Yiangou1, Nasim Mavaddat2, Joe Dennis2, Andreas Hadji-
savvas1, Maria A. Loizidou1, Jacques Simard3, Antonis C. Antoniou2,
Douglas F. Easton2;4, Kyriaki Michailidou5, Breast Cancer Association
Consortium2
1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Department of
Cancer Genetics, Therapeutics and Ultrastructural Pathology, Nicosia,
Cyprus;
2University of Cambridge, Centre
for Cancer Genetic
Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; 3Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Québec—Université Laval Research Center, Genomics Center, Québec
City, Canada; 4University of Cambridge, Centre for Cancer Genetic
Epidemiology, Department of Oncology, Cambridge, United King-
dom; 5The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Biostatistics
Unit, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Background/Objectives: The 313-SNP breast cancer polygenic
risk score (PRS313), developed for women of European ancestry by
the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC), can be used in
predicting a woman’s risk of developing the disease. However,
calibration of the PRS is important for providing valid risk esti-
mates. Here we evaluated the distribution of PRS313 in different
countries. Analyses were based on 111,814 breast cancer cases
and 94,718 controls of European ancestry from studies partici-
pating in the BCAC, from 17 countries in Europe, together with
Australia, Canada, Israel, and the USA.
Methods: All samples were genotyped using either the
Oncoarray or iCOGS platforms. We computed the mean and
standard deviation (SD) of PRS313 and evaluated the association
between breast cancer risk and PRS313 in each country
separately. Fixed-effect meta-analysis was performed to calcu-
late the overall estimates for each country and across all coun-
tries. The country-speciﬁc estimates were compared to the
overall values.
Results: Relative to the overall mean, the mean standardized
PRS313 differed signiﬁcantly across Europe (p-value for hetero-
geneity <0.01), being highest in Greece (0.22), and Italy (0.10), and
lowest in Ireland (-0.12). The mean estimates for Australia, Canada,
Israel, and the USA are close to the overall mean.
Conclusion: The results indicate that the implementation of
the PRS313 for breast cancer risk prediction will require country-
speciﬁc calibration, which can be achieved by adjusting for the
population-speciﬁc mean.
References:.
Grants: Telethon.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.102.D Development of combined somatic copy number
alteration and fragmentation analysis for monitoring in
colorectal cancer patients using liquid biopsy
Ariane
Hallermayr1;2;3,
Verena
Steinke-Lange1;4,
Anna
Benet-
Pagès1;5, Tobias Wohlfrom1, Florentine Scharf1, Ellen Heitzer6;7;8,
Christopher Haberl9, Maike de Wit10;11, Holger Vogelsang12, Markus
Rentsch13;14, Elke Holinski-Feder1;4, Julia Romic-Pickl1;4
1MGZ – Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany; 2Petten-
kofer School of Public Health, Munich, Germany; 3Institute for Medical
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
558
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Information Processing, Biometry, and Epidemiology –IBE, LMU
Munich, Munich, Germany;
4Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV,
Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich,
Germany; 5Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München
- German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg,
Germany; 6Institute of Human Genetics, Diagnostic and Research
Center for Molecular Biomedicine (Austria), Medical University of Graz,
Graz, Austria; 7BioTechMed-Graz, Graz, Austria; 8Christian Doppler
Laboratory for Liquid Biopsies for Early Detection of Cancer, Graz,
Austria; 9Department of Oncology and Hematology, Barmherzige
Brüder, Klinikum St. Elisabeth, Straubing, Germany; 10Department of
Hematology, Oncology and Palliative Medicine, Vivantes Klinikum
Neukoelln, Berlin, Germany;
11Department of Oncology, Vivantes
Auguste-Viktoria-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany; 12Department of General,
Visceral, Thoracic and Endocrine Surgery, Klinikum Garmisch-Parten-
kirchen, Teaching Hospital, Ludwig Maximilian University Munich,
Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany; 13Department of General, Visceral
and Thorax Surgery, Klinikum Ingolstadt, Ingolstadt, Germany;
14Department of General, Visceral, Vascular and Transplant Surgery,
University Hospital Munich, Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich,
Campus Großhadern, Munich, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Liquid biopsy (LB) for non-invasive dis-
ease monitoring of cancer patients is progressing towards routine
clinical practice. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of ctDNA
provides a promising tool for real-time monitoring of treatment
response, as well as early diagnosis for all cancer patients.
Methods: For clinical validation of LIquid biopsy Fragmen-
tation, Epigenetic signature and Copy Number Alteration ana-
lysis (LIFE-CNA), we performed WGS in 208 plasma samples
collected from healthy individuals and colorectal cancer (CRC)
patients.
Results: Analysis of downsampled data of a small cohort
of 11 samples identiﬁed 5x coverage to be the minimal required
coverage to reliably distinguish healthy controls from CRC
patients based on SCNAs, global fragmentation proﬁles and
epigenetic signatures. Although sensitivity increased with higher
coverage, we show that 5x coverage is acceptable for sensitive
analysis of ctDNA for routine clinical practice, by keeping costs
per sample in the range of targeted hotspot assays. To deter-
mine the clinical validity of LIFE-CNA, ctDNA speciﬁc features
were compared with clinical data of CRC patients over all disease
stages which were treated with surgery and / or chemotherapy.
We were able to show that changes in ctDNA signals can be
associated with treatment response or disease progression.
Conclusion: We developed a cost-effective and sensitive
method for untargeted ctDNA analysis, which may expand the
detection of residual disease and recurrence, as well as treatment
monitoring to all cancer patients. The cost-effectiveness and
sensitivity of our approach form the basis to enable imple-
mentation of LIFE-CNA into routine clinical practice.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.103.A Hereditary cancer panels, beyond the expected
Jesús del Valle1;2, Lidia Feliubadaló1;2, Roser Lleuger-Pujol1;2, Xavier
Muñoz1;2, Eva Tornero1;2, Mònica Salinas1;2, Mireia Menéndez1;2,
Noelia Torres1;2, Eva Montes1;2, Marta Pineda1;2, Àngela Velasco1;2,
Sara González1;2, Joan Brunet1;2, Conxi Lázaro1;2
1Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL., Hereditary Cancer Program,
Oncobell Program, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain;
2Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid,
Spain.
Background/Objectives: The advent of NGS has drastically
changed the paradigm of genetic testing, nowadays a large pro-
portion of cases with hereditary cancer (HC) suspicion are ana-
lyzed using gene panels that include most known genes
associated with cancer predisposition. However, only genes rela-
ted to the phenotype and family history of the patient are usually
analyzed. In this work we set out to analyze the percentage of
pathogenic mutations identiﬁed in all clinically actionable genes
outside the initial suspected clinical gene set.
Methods: Germline variant analysis was performed using NGS
custom panel I2HCP (Castellanos 2017), which comprises 135-168 HC
genes. A total of 1,748 HC-index patients previously analyzed using a
phenotype-driven gene panel (Feliubadaló 2019) were reanalyzed
with the aim of including all clinically-actionable genes in our panel.
Results: A total of 23 new variants classiﬁed as (probably)-
pathogenic (PV) were identiﬁed. Our results also identiﬁed three
patients with PV in two different genes.
Gene
PV
ATM
3
BRIP1
3
CHEK2
3
CDKN2A
2
TP53
2
BARD1
1
CDH1
1
Biallelic MSH3
1
NF1 mosaic
1
PALB2
1
PMS2
1
PTEN
1
RB1
1
RET1
1
SDHC
1
Conclusion: These variants increased the mutational yield in
1.8% in our cohort of patients. Although many variants are in
genes of moderate/low penetrance, others are not, representing
incidental ﬁndings or putative new genotype-phenotype correla-
tions. In some instances, these ﬁndings could be used to improve
clinical follow-up of carriers and may prevent unexpected cancers
in these families.
References:.
Grants: PI19/00553.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.105.C Variability in the size of del(5q) and its clinical
implication in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)
Zuzana Zemanova1, Nikola Sejgunovova1, Karla Svobodova1, Halka
Lhotska1, Denisa Vidlakova1, Tatiana Aghova1, Libuse Lizcova1, Silvia
Izakova1, Iveta Mendlikova2, Sarka Ransdorfova2, Lucie Hodanova1,
Lenka Pavlistova1, Monika Belickova2, Jana Brezinova2, Jaroslav
Cermak2, Tomas Stopka3, Anna Jonasova3
1General University Hospital and First Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University in Prague, Center of Oncocytogenomics, Prague, Czech
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
559
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Republic; 2Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague,
Czech Republic; 3General University Hospital and First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, 1st Medical Department,
Prague, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives:
The
most
common
cytogenetic
abnormality in MDS is del(5q) occurring either as a sole aberration
or as a part of complex karyotypes (CK). Isolated del(5q) is asso-
ciated with favorable outcome, MDS with CK relate to poor
prognosis. It remains unclear whether deletion size matters for
different MDS phenotypes. The aim was to assess the relationship
between del(5q) extent and TP53 gene mutations, and to evaluate
the effect of deletion size on disease prognosis.
Methods: We performed a detailed analysis of the del(5q)
extent in a large cohort of 348 newly diagnosed MDS patients
using mBAND (MetaSystems) and aCGH/SNP (Illumina, Agilent).
Sequence analysis of TP53 gene was performed using NGS on a
454 GS Junior system (Roche) or MiSeq sequencing instruments
(Illumina).
Results: In the group of 175 cases with isolated del(5q), we
observed a smaller extent of deleted segment. The deletion ran-
ged between 5q14-5q33.3. TP53 mutations were found in 19.4% of
cases. In the group of 173 cases with CK, deletion often involved
entire long arm. Mutations of TP53 or LOH17p were detected in
49% of them. When both the prevalence of CK and the del(5q)
extent were considered, only karyotype complexity had a sig-
niﬁcant effect on patient´s overall survival.
Conclusion: More extensive deletions were associated with CK,
higher frequency of TP53 aberrations/mutations and poor prog-
nosis. Karyotype complexity is the main factor that negatively
affects the prognosis. However, we cannot exclude that isolated
large del(5q) may pose a higher risk of clonal evolution and
complex karyotype formation during the disease.
References:.
Grants:.
MH CZ-DRO-VFN64165, DRO-UHKT00023736..
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.106.D miR-210 reveals strong association with nodal
metastasis and HIF2a, but not HIF1a in advanced LSCC
Silva Kyurkchiyan1, Stiliana Panova1, Gergana Stancheva1, Veronika
Petkova1, Diana Popova2, Radka Kaneva1, Todor Popov3
1Medical Faculty, Medical University of Soﬁa, Molecular Medicine
Center, Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria; 2Medical Faculty, Medical University of Soﬁa, Department of
ENT, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 2Medical Faculty, Medical University of Soﬁa,
Department of ENT, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives:
Hypoxia
has
role
in invasion
and
metastasis pathways. Advanced laryngeal squamous cell carci-
noma (LSCC) is a disease with poor prognosis and presence of
locoregional metastases. Our aim was to study hypoxic-master
miR-210 its association with major hypoxia markers and nodal
metastasis status.
Methods: In the study 30 advanced tumour and corresponding
normal laryngeal samples were enrolled. Total RNA isolation,
reverse transcription and real-time qPCR were performed with
miRNeasy kit, miScript IIRT kit, and SYBR based detection (Qiagen).
SPSS v19 (IBM) was used in statistical analysis, and p-value less
than 0.05 was taken as signiﬁcant.
Results: Most of the patients were with positive nodal metas-
tasis status (67.5%) and overexpression of miR-210 (75%). Elevated
levels of miR-210 demonstrated strong association with the pre-
sence of nodal metastasis (p < 0.01). ROC analysis distinguish
patients developed nodal metastasis from those who are N-stage
negative with 75% sensitivity and 65% speciﬁcity at RQ = 2.001
(AUC = 0.694, p = 0.012). Moreover, Spearman correlation analysis
reveal potential co-expression and signiﬁcant correlation between
miR-210 and HIF2a (r = 0.409, p = 0.001), but not HIF1a, which is
most commonly expressed during hypoxia.
Conclusion: Our results reveal that one of best-studied
hypoxic-miRNA, miR-210, potentially could take a key role in
nodal metastasis development in advanced LSCC. Correlation
analysis reveal, that miR-210 may participates in latter stage dur-
ing hypoxia via HIF2 transcription factor, which molecule is
accumulated in prolonged hypoxia.
References: None.
Grants:
D-77/04.06.2021,DN13/12/20.12.2017;
D01-285/
17.12.2019,D01-395/18.12.2020,D01-302/17.12.2021.
Conﬂict of Interest: Silva Kyurkchiyan DN13/12/20.12.2017 -
collaborator.
D01-285/17.12.2019 - collaborator, Stiliana Panova D01-285/
17.12.2019,D01-395/18.12.2020,D01-302/17.12.2021- collaborator,
Gergana Stancheva D-77/04.06.2021- collaborator.
DN13/12/20.12.2017 - collaborator.
D01-285/17.12.2019,D01-395/18.12.2020,D01-302/17.12.2021-
collaborator, Veronika Petkova DN13/12/20.12.2017 - collaborator,
Diana Popova D-77/04.06.2021- principal investigator.
DN13/12/20.12.2017
-
collaborator,
Radka
Kaneva
D-77/
04.06.2021- collaborator.
DN13/12/20.12.2017 - collaborator.
D01-285/17.12.2019,D01-395/18.12.2020,D01-302/17.12.2021 -
collaborator, Todor Popov D-77/04.06.2021 - collaborator.
DN13/12/20.12.2017 - principal investigator.
P13.107.A An insertion in the MSH2 gene detected by Bionano
optical mapping and conﬁrmed by Nanopore sequencing in a
family with suspected Lynch Syndrome
Ragnhild Margethe Aaløkken1, June Åsheim1, Marianne Dalland1,
Eli Marie Grindedal1, Arvind YM Sundaram1, Pål Marius Bjørnstad1,
Wenche Sjursen2, Gregor Gilﬁllian1
1Oslo University hospital Ullevål, Medical genetics, Oslo, Norway; 2St.
Olav’s University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
Background/Objectives: Structural variants, also called SV’s, are
deﬁned as a lesion of DNA approximately 1kb or larger in size.
Humans harbour approximately 18 Mbp of structural variants per
diploid genome, and these variants are an important underlying
cause of genetic diseases. Despite the importance of SV’s, they are
difﬁcult to detect by sequencing-based technologies. Bionano is a
unique technology for detecting lesions by combining Nano-
Channel arrays with optical mapping to image high-molecular
weight DNA.
Methods: In this study, we investigated blood sampled from a
patient with a personal and family history of cancer that gave a
strong suspicion of Lynch Syndrome, a hereditary cancer syn-
drome caused by germline mutations in one of the four Mis-Match
Repair genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. However, no diag-
nostic tests, including sequencing, RNA-analyses and analysis of
MSH2 inversion, could conﬁrm the diagnosis.
Results: We therefore used Bionano technology to look for
structural lesions in the patient’s genome. The Bionano results
showed a large (about 40 kb) heterozygous insertion in the MSH2
gene. This ﬁnding was further conﬁrmed using Oxford Nanopore
sequencing, which produced reads spanning the entire insertion.
Conclusion:.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
560
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P13.108.B Beyond BRCA Genes: Frequency of genes with
breast cancer-associated variants in a single center
Ayşe Savaş1, Yusuf Bahap1, Hasan Huseyin Kazan1, Gulsum
Kayhan1, Mehmet Ergun1
1Gazi University Hospital, Medical Genetics Department, Ankara, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Breast cancer is a very common disease
accounting for 11.6% of all new cancer cases. There is a hereditary
predisposition in 5-10% of all breast cancer patients. Advances in
next-generation sequencing technology have enabled the dis-
covery of different genes other than BRCA1 and BRCA2, which are
the most common breast cancer susceptibility genes. In this study,
germline multigene panel results in breast cancer patients are
presented.
Methods: A hereditary cancer panel including 27 genes was
performed in 449 patients with breast cancer only and 18 patients
with multiple cancer, aged 19-77 years.
Results: A total of 69 pathogenic (P)/likely pathogenic (LP)
variants in 14 genes were detected in 67 (14.9%) patients with
breast cancer only and 9 (50%) patients with multiple cancer
history. Variants of unknown clinical signiﬁcance were detected in
37 (8.2%) patients. BRCA1/2 mutations, the most common cause of
hereditary breast cancer, were detected in 29 (6.5%) patients,
constituting 42% of all P/LP variants while the P/LP variants in
other genes were predominant. All the mutant genes in addition
to BRCA1/2 could be listed according to number of mutations as
PALB2, CHEK2, ATM, MUTYH, RAD50, NBN, BARD1, MRE11, TP53,
BRIP1, PMS2 and PIK3CA.
Conclusion: The use of multigene panels promotes the rapid
identiﬁcation of individuals with cancer. In breast cancer, other
genes in addition to BRCA genes should be scanned to explore the
genetic background of the disease.
References: Clinical Cancer Research, 23(20), 6113-6119.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.109.C Preliminary evaluation of highly sensitive
assessment of microsatellite instability in endometrial
aspirates as a tool for cancer risk individualization in Lynch
syndrome
Júlia Canet-Hermida*1, Fátima Marín*1, Eduard Dorca Duch2, Nuria
Dueñas1, Laura Costas3, Mònica Salinas1, Àngela Velasco4, paula
peremiquel trillas3, Sonia Paytubi3, Jordi Ponce5, Laura Cárdenas6,
Laia Alemany3, August Vidal2, Eugeni López Bonet7, Gabriel Capellá1,
Joan Brunet1;4, Xavier Matias Guiu2, Marta Pineda1
1Catalan Institute of Oncology, Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de
Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Hereditary Cancer Program, ONCOBELL Program,
CIBERONC, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain; 2Hospital
Universitari de Bellvitge, Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge
(IDIBELL), Pathology Department, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barce-
lona), Spain; 3Catalan Institute of Oncology, Institut d’Investigació
Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Cancer Epidemiology Research
Program, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain;
4Catalan
Institute of Oncology, Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Girona
(IDIBGI), Hereditary
Cancer Program, Girona, Spain;
5Hospital
Universitari de Bellvitge, Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge
(IDIBELL), Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, L’Hospitalet de
Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain;
6Hospital Universitari Josep Trueta,
Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IDIBGI), Department of
Gynecology and Obstetrics, Girona, Spain;
7Hospital Universitari
Josep Trueta, Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Girona (IDIBGI),
Pathology Department, Girona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Lynch syndrome (LS) women are at
increased risk of endometrial cancer (EC), characterized by
mismatch repair deﬁciency (MMRd) and microsatellite instability
(MSI). While risk-reducing gynaecological surgeries are effective
there is a need to empower carriers in their decision regarding
surgery
timing.
We
aim
at
exploring
the
usefulness
of
highly sensitive-MSI (hs-MSI) assessment in endometrial aspi-
rates for the individualization of gynaecological surveillance in
LS carriers.
Methods: Hs-MSI was assessed in prospectively collected
endometrial aspirates from 67 LS carriers, 30 controls with benign
lesions and 26 sporadic-EC cases. MMR, PTEN and ARID1A
expression patterns were evaluated in LS samples.
Results: High hs-MSI levels were detected in 20 aspirates from
MMRd EC cases (4 of 4 LS and 16 of 16 sporadic) being negative in
aspirates from controls and MMR-proﬁcient EC cases. Interestingly,
elevated hs-MSI scores were also detected in aspirates from LS
women with complex hyperplasia (3 of 3). In addition, high hs-MSI
was present in 10 of 49 aspirates from LS carriers showing histo-
logically normal endometrium. In normal endometrium hs-MSI
score positively correlated with density of MMRd-glands, presence
of MMRd-clusters and PTEN and ARID1A loss. Hs-MSI levels
increased in follow-up aspirates from 5 LS carriers.
Conclusion: Elevated hs-MSI scores were detected in aspirates
from pre/malignant lesions and normal endometrium in LS car-
riers, correlating with MMR protein loss. Further analyses of
sequential aspirates are needed to elucidate the predictive value
of hs-MSI in the identiﬁcation of LS carriers at higher risk of
developing EC.
References:.
Grants: PID2019-111254RB-I00; PIE16/00049.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.110.D Cancer cell line variant knowledge resource for
facilitated cell line identiﬁcation
Rahel Paloots1, Michael Baudis1
1University of Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: One of the known features of cancer is
the instability of its genome. Vast changes in the genome lead
to duplications and deletions in the chromosome, that can be
detected in most types of cancer. These chromosomal aberra-
tions are also called copy number variants. Cancer cell lines are
necessary tools for understanding the disease mechanisms as
well as the development of new cancer treatments. However,
they may not always be the best representation of their neo-
plasm of origin, due to cell line contamination and mis-
identiﬁcation, as well as higher numbers of accumulated
mutations in the cancer cell line genome. The analysis and
comparison of cancer cell line and their origin’s proﬁles provide
information on how similar different instances of cancer and/or
cancer cell lines are to each other.
Methods:.
Results: Here we build a cancer cell line variant resource for
easier cell line identiﬁcation and to enable ﬁnding the best
representation for the cell line. This resource is open-source and
uses the Beacon protocol for facilitated data sharing. To make this
cell line variant knowledge resource complete we have also
included cell line metadata and known single nucleotide variants
to our database.
Conclusion:.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
561
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P13.111.A Development of a pan-cancer comprehensive
genomic proﬁling assay for solid tumor cancers with
integration of MSI and TMB immunotherapy biomarkers
Alexia Eliades1, Irene Hadjidemetriou1, Marilena Elpidorou1, Achil-
leas Achilleos1, Charalambos Loizides1, Christos Lemesios1, Kyriakos
Tsangaras1, Elena Kypri1, Marios Ioannides1, George Koumbaris1,
Philippos Patsalis1
1NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Background/Objectives: Over the last few years, there is a sig-
niﬁcant increase in the availability of targeted therapies. As the
ﬁeld of precision therapy expands, there’s an increasing need for a
highly accurate comprehensive assay for testing different types of
genomic alterations such as single nucleotide variants (SNVs),
small insertions and deletion (Indels), copy number alterations
(CNAs) and rearrangements. In addition, new complex biomarkers
such as microsatellite instability (MSI) and tumor mutational bur-
den (TMB) can inform on eligibility to immunotherapy treatment.
Herein, we describe the development of a 221-gene assay that can
accurately detect all these therapy-associated biomarkers in a
single assay.
Methods: DNA extracted from a set of FFPE and contrived sam-
ples was subjected to library preparation and hybrid capture
enrichment with a 221-gene panel. Enriched libraries were then
subjected to next generation sequencing (NGS) on a NovaSeq plat-
form and analysed using in-house bioinformatics pipelines. A subset
of FFPE samples were also subjected to WES for TMB assessment.
Results: A combination of FFPE tumour samples, reference
material and contrived samples with known alterations and known
MSI status were used to evaluate the performance characteristics for
SNVs, Indels, CNAs and translocations. The assay demonstrated
100% sensitivity and 100% speciﬁcity for SNVs and Indels, CNAs,
rearrangements and MSI. TMB assessment showed high con-
cordance when compared with whole exome sequencing (WES).
Conclusion: Validation results demonstrate that the assay
provides a sensitive and accurate tissue-based NGS method for
assessing genomic alterations and immunotherapy biomarkers in
a single assay.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Alexia Eliades NIPD Genetics, Irene Had-
jidemetriou NIPD Genetics, Marilena Elpidorou NIPD Genetics,
Achilleas Achilleos NIPD Genetics, Charalambos Loizides NIPD
Genetics, Christos Lemesios NIPD Genetics, Kyriakos Tsangaras
NIPD Genetics, Elena Kypri NIPD Genetics, Marios Ioannides NIPD
Genetics, George Koumbaris NIPD Genetics, Philippos Patsalis
NIPD Genetics.
P13.113.C Clinical and molecular characterization of
individuals with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 and breast cancer:
genotype-phenotype relationships
Chiara Iacovino1, Niccolò Di Giosaffatte2;3, Valentina Pinna2,
Stefania
Cavone2,
Emanuele
Miraglia1,
FRANCESCA
PICECI-
SPARASCIO4,
Valentina
Guida4,
Paola
Daniele4,
Maria
Cecilia
D’Asdia4, Vincenzo Roberti1, Tommaso Mazza5, Elisabetta Flex6,
Laura Papi7, Marco Tartaglia8, Paola Grammatico9, Sandra Giustini1,
Alessandro De Luca2
1Policlinico Umberto I, Sapienza University of Rome, Department of
Dermatology and Venereology, Rome, Italy; 2Fondazione IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, Medical Genetics Division, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Foggia, Italy;
3Department of Experimental Medicine,
Sapienza University of Rome, Laboratory of Medical Genetics, San
Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy;
4Fondazione IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, Medical Genetics Division, Rome, Italy;
5Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Unit of Bioinfor-
matics, Rome, Italy; 6Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Department of
Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Rome, Italy;
7University of
Florence, Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical
Sciences “Mario Serio”, Florence, Italy; 8Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino
Gesù, IRCCS, Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Rome,
Italy; 9Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Experimental
Medicine, San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Laboratory of Medical
Genetics, Rome, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Women with NF1 have a moderately
elevated risk for breast cancer, especially under age 50; speciﬁc
NF1 mutation seem to predispose to BC. Aim of the study was to
better elucidate the relationship between NF1 and BC.
Methods: Retrospective analysis of 719 NF1 consecutive sub-
jects (311 males, 408 females) was performed in order to identify
BC cases. The NF1-BC cohort was stratiﬁed according to age at
diagnosis, histopathology, stage at diagnosis, other neoplasias,
and NF1 variation type and localization.
Results:
Analysis
identiﬁed
41
(5.7%)
females
NF1-BC
patients. BC was the most common tumor behind glioma.
Median age at diagnosis was 47.5 y; 44% of patients had BC
diagnosis <50 y. The most frequent hystotype and molecular
subtypes of BC were invasive ductal carcinoma and luminal B
subtype, respectively. 33% of patients presented with stage II
and and 21% with stage III BC. 10% had tumor relapse between
4 and 14 years from diagnosis. 27% had concomitant neoplasias.
Mutation analysis was conducted on 28 NF1-BC cases. 86% of
variants mapped in the ﬁrst half and 14% in the second half of
the NF1 gene. 3/4 missense variants mapped at the N-term of
the protein. 64% of NF1 variants localized within the CSRD or
TBD-GRD domains.
Conclusion: BC is one of the most common tumor in NF1. NF1-
related BC shows an earlier age at onset and a more aggressive
behavior compared with BC in the general population. The
peculiar mutation spectrum of NF1 patients with BC is consistent
with genotype-phenotype correlations.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.114.D The potential of high-throughput sequencing in
the evaluation and monitoring of microsatellite instability by
short homopolymer loci
Jakub Styk1;2;3, Jaroslav Budiš1;2;4, Jan Radvanszky1;2;5;6, Marcel
Kucharik1;2, Ondrej Pos1;2, Zuzana Pös1;2;6, Werner Krampl1;2;5,
Natalia Forgacova2;5, Diana Rusnakova1;2;5, Tatiana Sedlackova1;2,
Pavol Janega7, Vanda Repiska3, Tomas Szemes1;2;5
1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia; 2Comenius University Science
Park, Bratislava, Slovakia; 3Institute of Medical Biology, Genetics and
Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Brati-
slava, Slovakia; 4Slovak Center of Scientiﬁc and Technical Informa-
tion, Bratislava, Slovakia; 5Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty
of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia;
6Institute
for
Clinical
and
Translational
Research,
Biomedical
Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia;
7Institute of Pathological Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius
University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: Evaluation of microsatellite instability
(MSI) has broad clinical applications in some cancer patients’ follow
up treatment efﬁcacy. Conventional methods for MSI screening
have traditionally been low-throughput strategies for limited cancer
types. Currently, in the era of massively parallel sequencing (MPS),
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
562
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
there is a great potential to improve capabilities of the methods,
resulting in more reliable monitoring of MSI.
Methods: We designed a cost-effective PCR protocol to enrich
a set of homopolymer loci ranging from 7 – 30 base pairs obtained
from regions of the human genome associated with MSI across
various malignancies. The proposed system was standardised for
sequencing by Illumina MiSeq platforms. We annotated and
genotyped the sequenced data using the tool Dante.
Results: Our initial validations have shown that optimized PCR
conditions to enrich the homopolymer markers site can amplify
FFPE samples, standardly problematic for similar purpose. We
showed that biases resulting from the repetitive nature of
homopolymers could be alleviated by pre-analytical steps, such as
high ﬁdelity DNA polymerases and reduced number of PCR cycles,
and last but not least, by statistical and computational algorithms.
Conclusion: To sum it up, sequencing data can enable a more
accurate evaluation of genomic MSI events. However, due to
laboratory-induced
biases
caused
by
homopolymers,
further
laboratory and statistical improvements are required for MSI eva-
luation more precisely. With these promising results, we validate the
proposed strategy also in the circulating cell-free tumour DNA.
References:.
Grants: The presented work was supported by the OP Inte-
grated Infrastructure for the projects ITMS: 313011V578 co-
ﬁnanced by the European Regional Development Fund.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.115.A Beyond pathogenic RUNX1 germline variants: The
spectrum of somatic mutations in RUNX1 familial platelet
disorder with predisposition to hematologic malignancies
Alisa Förster1, Melanie
Decker1, Brigitte Schlegelberger1, Tim
Ripperger1
1Hannover Medical School, Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic germline variants in RUNX1
cause familial platelet disorder with predisposition to hematologic
malignancies (RUNX1-FPD). Accumulation of somatic alterations is
presumed to drive clonal hematopoiesis and, ﬁnally, malignant
transformation. The interplay of predisposing germline variants
and acquired variants remain to be elucidated to better under-
stand leukemic transformation.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 104 individuals with
causal RUNX1 germline variants who have been investigated for
somatic gene variants, which were previously reported in the lit-
erature or the RUNX1 database.
Results: Out of 104 individuals, 29 (28%) were investigated in a
non-malignant state (i.e., cytopenia). The majority of these
patients had no or only a single variant (62%). Regarding malig-
nant neoplasms, 45 (62%) were diagnosed with AML, 12 (16%)
with MDS, 7 (10%) with MDS/AML, 6 (8%) with ALL, and 6 (8%)
with other malignancies (e.g., CMML). On average, two somatic
variants were identiﬁed per patient. No somatic variant was
observed in only 10 (14%) patients with a hematologic malig-
nancy. In MDS and/or AML, 26 (40%) samples displayed somatic
RUNX1 alterations. BCOR, TET2, NRAS, PHF6 and BCORL1 were most
frequently mutated.
Conclusion: Retrospective analysis supports the theory of
stepwise malignant transformation in RUNX1-FPD. It highlights the
importance of somatic mutations in the development of frank
leukemia. Different somatic variants may explain clinical hetero-
geneity. Detailed analyses will provide insights in synergistic
effects of germline and somatic variants. This is key to enable
better stratiﬁcation during surveillance and may allow tailored
chemoprevention studies to avoid malignant transformation in
the future.
References:.
Grants: BMBF MyPred (01GM1911B).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.116.B Prognostic utility of targeted circulating cell-free
DNA versus formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded DNA mutation
analysis for advanced lung cancer
Madli Tamm1, Mart Kals1;2, Tarmo Annilo1, Kersti Oselin3, Katrin
Keerma1;3;4, Paula Ann Kivistik1, Miriam Nurm1;5, Margot Saare1;6,
Jana Jaal7;8, Neeme Tonisson1;9
1Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Estonian Genome Centre,
Tartu, Estonia; 2University of Helsinki, Institute for Molecular Medicine
Finland, Helsinki, Finland; 3Clinic of Oncology and Haematology,
North Estonia Medical Centre, Department of Chemotherapy, Tallinn,
Estonia; 4State Agency of Medicines, Tartu, Estonia; 5Institute of
Technology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia; 6Diagnostic Clinic,
East Tallinn Central Hospital, Central Laboratory, Tallinn, Estonia;
7Haematology and Oncology Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu,
Estonia; 8Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia; 9United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Department
of Genetics, Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: We evaluated the performance of cir-
culating
cell-free
DNA
(cfDNA)
and
formalin-ﬁxed
parafﬁn-
embedded (FFPE) tissue DNA analyses using a commonly
employed targeted therapeutic pathway in predicting the out-
comes of patients with lung cancer.
Methods: Patients (n = 106) donated blood samples at base-
line and progression (n = 22), with matched FFPE biopsy samples
being available for 75 patients. We set up a targeted sequencing
workﬂow for the analysis of mutations in nine cancer-related
genes. CfDNA concentration, number of mutations, and mutation
occurrence in speciﬁc genes were analyzed. To identify factors
associated with overall survival (OS), a multivariate analysis was
performed using Cox regression.
Results: Higher cfDNA concentrations were associated with
poorer OS (HR = 1.670, 95% CI 1.108-2.516, P = 0.014). OS was
better among patients with at least one mutation in cfDNA
(HR = 0.477, 95% CI 0.313-0.727, P = 0.0006). In baseline cfDNA,
patients with mutations of VAFs < 5% had signiﬁcantly better OS
(HR = 3.510, 95% CI 1.672-7.370, P = 0.009). Patients with slowly
progressing disease had signiﬁcantly more cfDNA mutations than
did those with rapid cancer progression (P = 0.045).
Conclusion: Our key ﬁnding was that cfDNA analysis performs
better than FFPE tissue analysis in the prediction of patients’ OS
and disease progression.
References: Tamm M, et al. (2022) Prognostic Utility of Tar-
geted Circulating Cell-Free DNA versus Formalin-Fixed Parafﬁn-
Embedded DNA Mutation Analysis for Advanced Lung Cancer. Int
J Oncol Res 5:033. https://doi.org/10.23937/2643-4563/1710033.
Grants: 2014-2020.4.01.15-0012, PRG555, PUT736.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.117.C Delineating Genotype and Parent of Origin Effect
on the Phenotype in MSH6-Associated Lynch syndrome
Anne-Sophie van der Werf-'t Lam1, Mandy Villasmil1, Msh6 study
group1, Diantha Terlouw1, Mar Rodriguez Girondo2, Manon Suerink1,
Maartje Nielsen1
1LUMC, Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands; 2LUMC, Department of
Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, Leiden, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: The reported severity in phenotype
differs in Lynch syndrome is largely unexplained. Genotype and/or
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
563
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
parent of origin effect (POE) have been suggested to inﬂuence
CRC or EC risk in Lynch syndrome (1). Previous studies have
focused on MLH1/MSH2 and PMS2. In this study we analyze this
for families with germline MSH6 variants.
Methods: Dutch MSH6 (likely) pathogenic variant carriers were
grouped based on RNA expression and parental origin. Genotype-
phenotype correlation and POE was estimated using hazard ratios
(HR) with a (weighted) cox regression. In total 1615 variant carriers
from 310 families were included.
Results: Variant carriers with retention of RNA expression
(group 1) did not have a signiﬁcantly different mean age of CRC
diagnosis compared to group 2 (no RNA expression) (59.71 years
vs. 58.83 years, p = 0.209) or EC diagnosis (54.7 years vs. 56.2
years, p = 0.083). There was no association between genotype and
CRC risk (HR = 1.08, 95% CI 0.72-1.62). However, a signiﬁcant lower
risk for EC was found in group 2 compared to group 1 (HR = 0.43,
95% CI 0.27-0.69). There was no association between POE and CRC
risk (HR = 0.93, 95% CI 0.62-1.37), or EC risk (HR = 0.87, 95% CI
0.55-1.37).
Conclusion: These data show that retained RNA expression is
associated with a higher lifetime risk for EC, but not for CRC. No
correlation was found for POE. Further research is needed to
elucidate the mechanism behind higher EC risk before variant
speciﬁc surveillance can be implemented.
References: 1.Ryan et al JAMA Oncol, 2017.3(12).
Grants: Dutch Digestive Disease Foundation (FP16-06).
Conﬂict of Interest: Anne-Sophie van der Werf-’t Lam MLDS
(Maag Lever Darm Stichting, FP16-06)., Mandy Villasmil: None
declared, Msh6 study group: None declared, Diantha Terlouw:
None declared, Mar Rodriguez Girondo: None declared, Manon
Suerink: None declared, Maartje Nielsen: None declared.
P13.118.D Predicting biology instead of disease risk by
overlapping oncological polygenic risk scores
Jeroen van Rooij1, Jard de Vries1, Bahar Sedaghati-khayat1, Joyce
Van Meurs1, Linda Broer1, André Uitterlinden1, Annemieke Verkerk1
1Erasmus Medical Center, Internal Medicine, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Polygenic risk scores (PRS) have been
constructed and validated for many cancer types. The most
advanced, such as breast, lung or colon cancer PRS, are making its
way into clinic and society. For example, through the “Genotyping on
all patients” (GOALL) and “Societal impact of genetic science” (SENSE)
personalized medicine and prevention programs in Rotterdam and
the Netherlands, respectively. In this project, we combine PRS for
different cancers and perform biological annotation and clustering to
partition genetic risk into cancer-related biological pathways.
Methods: we extract PRS from literature for the most common
cancers, and construct a network of disease-variant (GWAS results)
and variant-variant (based on LD) associations. The network is soft
clustered and visualized using R. All variants are annotated to
genes using Ensemble’s variant effect predictor and FUMA. Gene
enrichment analyses are performed using GSEA in R.
Results: First results indicate between 5-10% overlap in genetic
variants between cancer types, which varies per type. Tissue
development, cell cycle, DNA metabolic process and immune
response terms are enriched across all cancer types, while some
biological processes appear speciﬁc to one cancer type, such as
response to estradiol to breast cancer variants.
Conclusion:
Preliminary
results
indicate
shared
biology
between different cancer types, which can be ascertained by gene
annotation and enrichment analysis. Identifying through which
biological pathways an individual’s risk is cause might have
diagnostic and prognostic implications, e.g., altered treatment
options for breast cancer caused primarily through DNA meta-
bolism or hormone response variants.
References: NA.
Grants: NA.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.119.A A collaborative multicenter approach for the
classiﬁcation of mismatch repair gene variants in Spain:
results of a pilot study
Víctor Lorca Castellanos1, Alysson Turcios2, Anael Lopez-Novo3,
Maribel González-Acosta2, Elisabet Munté2, Zoila Caaveiro3, Daniel
Rueda4, Montserrat de Miguel4, José Luis Soto5, Miguel Urioste
Azcorra6, JUDITH BALMAÑA7, Gemma Llort8, Francesc Balaguer9,
Teresa Ramon y cajal10, Carmen Guillén-Ponce11, Núria Rodríguez-
Salas12, Conxi Lázaro2, Gabriel Capellá2, Clara Ruiz-Ponte3, Pilar
Garre1, Trinidad Caldés1, Marta Pineda2
1Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain; 2IDIBELL - Institut Català
d’Oncologia, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain;
3Fundación Pública
Galega
Medicina
Xenomica,
Santiago
de
Compostela,
Spain;
4Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain;
5Hospital
Universitario de Elche, Elche, Spain; 6Centro Nacional de Investiga-
ciones
Oncológicas,
Madrid,
Spain;
7Hospital
Universitari
Vall
d’Hebron,
Barcelona,
Spain;
8gllort@tauli.cat,
Sabadell,
Spain;
9Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain; 10Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant
Pau, Barcelona, Spain;
11Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal,
Madrid, Spain; 12Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Identiﬁcation of germline pathogenic
variants in mismatch repair (MMR) genes allows diagnosis of DNA
MMR deﬁciency-associated syndromes. The identiﬁcation of var-
iants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS) precludes diagnosis. Recently,
classiﬁcation guidelines have improved reproducibility and trans-
parency in variant classiﬁcation. Our main aim is to accelerate and
improve MMR variant classiﬁcation based on the creation of a
national registry of germline variants in Spain.
Methods: Twelve Spanish centers were invited to collaborate.
Clinical and molecular data from MMR VUS carriers were sub-
mitted on a consensus template form. Collected data were cura-
ted. Monthly team conferences were held to update and review
variant classiﬁcation according to Insight v2.4 and Insight-ACMG
v1 (pending to be approved by ClinGen) guidelines.
Results: A total of 255 VUS present in 324 index cases were
collected. Fifty-two of them were identiﬁed in 2 or more indi-
viduals. Classiﬁcation was revisited in a subset of 161 VUS
(enriched for recurrent, silent and splicing suspected variants).
Update of available information allowed the reclassiﬁcation of
20 variants according to Insight guidelines (8 class 1-2; 12 class
4-5). When using Insight-ACMG criteria 60 VUS were reassigned
(43 class 1-2; 17 class 4-5), increasing the reclassiﬁcation yield
from 12 to 37%.
Conclusion: The Spanish variant registry has accelerated
the exchange of revised data, essential to improve classiﬁcation.
The use of Insight-ACMG MMR-speciﬁc guidelines further increa-
ses reclassiﬁcation yield, mainly of silent/intronic VUS to likely
neutral variants.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.121.C A novel variation in PTCH1 gene causing Gorlin-
Goltz syndrome
Esra Dirimtekin1, esra arslan ateş2, Hamza Polat1, bilgen bilge
geçkinli1
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
564
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1marmara university school of medicine, medical genetics, istanbul,
Turkey; 2marmara university pendik training and research hospital
diagnosis center of genetic diseases, istanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives:
Gorlin-Goltz
Syndrome
(GGS)
also
known as basal cell nevus syndrome, is a rare multisystemic
autosomal dominant disorder. It’s estimated population frequency
is 1/150.000 to 1/570.000 worldwide. Multiple basal cell carcino-
mas of the skin, palmar and plantar pits, odontogenic keratocysts
and skeletal anomalies are the major presentation of GGS.Patho-
genic variations in PTCH1, PTCH2 and SUFU genes encoding
components of Hedgehog/ Patched signaling pathway, are asso-
ciated with GSS.
Methods: The index case was evaluated with detailed ana-
mnesis, pedigree, physical examination, laboratory and imaging
methods. Following DNA extraction from peripheral blood lym-
phocytes all coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of PTCH1,
PTCH2 and SUFU genes were analysed via next generation
sequencing (NGS). Segregation analysis of the identiﬁed variant
was performed using Sanger sequencing.
Results: A 11-year-old girl was referred to us because of
odontogenic keratocysts of jaws, palmar and plantar pits, multiple
basal cell carcinomas of the skin and trichoblastoma. She was born
to nonconsanguineous parents after an uneventful pregnancy.
Anthropometric measurements and neurodevelopmental char-
acteristics were compatible with her age. Frontal bossing and
congenital melanocytic nevus on forearm were present. Arachnoid
cyst of the brain and biﬁd ribs were detected on imaging studies.
Molecular genetic studies revealed a de novo novel heterozygous
PTCH1 variant (c.3076dupC; p.His1026Profs*119), expected to
cause a truncated protein.
Conclusion: GGS is a tumor prone multisystemic disorder in
which asymptomatic carriers and families may beneﬁt from early
molecular diagnosis and preimplantation genetic diagnosis. Here
we report a novel pathogenic variation related to GSS contributing
genotype-phenotype correlation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.122.D Faecal metagenomics and Whole Genome
Sequencing of patients with somatic APC variants suiting the
mutation signature caused by colibactin
Diantha Terlouw1, Arnoud Boot2, Quinten Ducarmon3, Sam Nooij3,
Manon Suerink4, Alexandra Langers5, Romy Daniëlle Zwittink3, Tom
van Wezel6, Maartje Nielsen4, Hans Morreau6
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands; 2Duke-NUS
Medical School, Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Singapore, Singapore;
3Leiden University Medical Center, Medical Microbiology, Leiden,
Netherlands;
4Leiden University Medical Center, Clinical Genetics,
Leiden, Netherlands; 5Leiden University Medical Center, Gastroenter-
ology, Leiden, Netherlands;
6Leiden University Medical Center,
Pathology, Leiden, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives:
Our
APC
mosaicism
analyses have
revealed a possible additional explanation for the development of
adenomas, namely colibactin produced by pks+ E.coli bacteria
amongst others. More research into the impact of colibactin on
colorectal mucosa and presence of putative carcinogenic bacteria
in feces samples is required.
Methods: Twenty-one patients were selected for faecal shot-
gun metagenomics and somatic Whole Genome Sequencing
(WGS). Two of these patients were negative controls, as Next
Generation Sequencing did not show an APC variant suiting the
colibactin mutational signatures (COSMIC: SBS88 or ID18) in any of
their adenomas. The other patients included had at least one
adenoma with an APC variant suiting SBS88 or ID18. WGS was
mainly performed on adenomas without a colibactin APC variant
while at least one other adenoma harbours such an APC variant.
Results: Fecal metagenomics shows genes involved in coli-
bactin production (pks island) in 60% of patients with ≥1 adenoma
with a colibactin APC variant. Although WGS of DNA isolated from
Formalin-Fixed Parafﬁn-Embedded material of adenomas is chal-
lenging, the mutational signature (SBS88) was slightly enriched in
patients with pks (4/8; 50%) compared to patients without pks in
their feces samples (2/7; 29%). The negative controls did not show
pks in their feces samples, nor the mutational signatures in their
adenomas.
Conclusion: These results show subtle additional evidence for
the carcinogenic inﬂuence of colibactin in patients with multiple
adenomas. However, to draw ﬁrmer conclusions, additional
negative controls will be analysed.
References:.
Grants: Dutch Cancer Society (11292).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.124.B Variants of uncertain signiﬁcance in DNA repair
genes: Clinical relevance and impact on therapeutic strategies
in Tunisian breast and ovarian cancer patients
Maroua Boujemaa1, Fatma Nouira2, Nouha Jandoubi1, Nesrine
Mejri1;3, Hanen Bouaziz1;4, Sonia Ben Nasr1;5, Sonia Abdelhak1,
Mohamed Samir Boubaker1;6, Hamouda Boussen1;3, Yosr Hamdi1;6
1Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Laboratory of Biomedical Genomics and
Oncogenetics, LR20IPT05, Tunis, Tunisia; 2ISBST, Biotechnopole Sidi
Thabet, Laboratory (BVBGR)-LR11ES31, Ariana, Tunisia; 3Abderrah-
man Mami Hospital, Faculty of Medicine Tunis, University Tunis El
Manar, Medical Oncology Department, Ariana, Tunisia; 4Salah Azaiez
Institute of Cancer, Surgical Oncology Department, Tunis, Tunisia;
5Military Hospital of Tunis, Department of Medical Oncology, Tunis,
Tunisia;
6Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Laboratory of Human and
Experimental Pathology, Tunis, Tunisia.
Background/Objectives: Variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS)
in cancer predisposing genes pose a critical challenge in clinical
care since their association with disease remains unclear. Here we
aim to evaluate the contribution of VUS in DNA repair genes to
hereditary breast and ovarian cancer in Tunisian families.
Methods: A total of 78 breast and ovarian cancer cases
investigated by NGS and negative for BRCA mutations were
included in this study. The pathogenicity of variants was assessed
using several in silico predictions tools, the stability predictor
DynaMut and molecular dynamics simulation with NAMD. Segre-
gation of variants with disease within the investigated families
was also evaluated.
Results: A total of 36 VUS were identiﬁed among of which 8 are
likely to be deleterious affecting ATM, CHEK2, ERCC3, FANCC,
FANCG and PMS2 genes. ATM_c.6115G>A and CHEK2_c.592+3A>T
were the most clinically relevant variants identiﬁed in families with
multiple breast cancer cases and segregation analysis has con-
ﬁrmed their cosegregation with disease. In addition, functional in
silico analysis revealed that the ATM variant may lead to protein
immobilization and rigidiﬁcation decreasing hence its activity.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings revealed that cancer predisposition
may be linked to VUS that need to be reclassiﬁed as pathogenic
for better disease management. This will help to improve the
genetic diagnosis and therapeutic strategies of cancer patients not
only in Tunisia but also in neighboring countries.
References: Monteiro, et al. Journal of medical genetics (2020)..
Grants: Tunisian Ministry of Health, Tunisian Ministry of Higher
Education and Scientiﬁc Research.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
565
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.125.C Gene expression analysis on single cell level
uncovers the subclonal architecture of chromosomes in a
leukemia patient with multiple chromosomal aberrations
Jana Kotašková1;2;3, Terézia Kurucová1, Kamila Réblová1;3, Martina
Vališová1;3, Andrea Marečková3, Michaela Bohúnová3, Šárka Pav-
lová1;3, JItka Malcikova1;3, Veronika Navrkalová1;3, Michael Dou-
bek1;2;3, Karla Plevová1;2;3, Sarka Pospisilova1;2;3
1Masaryk University, Central European Institute of Technology, Brno,
Czech Republic; 2University Hospital Brno and Faculty of Medicine,
Masaryk University, Institute of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Brno,
Czech Republic; 3University Hospital Brno and Faculty of Medicine,
Masaryk University, Department of Internal Medicine - Hematology
and Oncology, Brno, Czech Republic.
Background/Objectives: In cancer cells, the chromosomal chan-
ges are often multiple/complex and can be present only in sub-
clones prone to drive disease aggressiveness. Bulk analysis such as
WGS, WES, or genomic array cannot precisely determine the co-
occurrence of aberrations in individual cells. Therefore, we
employed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) technology to
study subclonal changes in the malignant cells of a patient with
relapsed/refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
Methods: We identiﬁed a patient with multiple chromosomal
changes based on the DNA analysis from separated CLL cells using
a genomic array (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc). Simultaneously, the
transcriptome was analysed using scRNAseq (Chromium system,
10x Genomics) in 2330 cells. Detailed data analysis was carried out
with Seurat R package. In addition, we used InferCNV tool to
detect the chromosomal aberrations in every tested cell.
Results: We detected several changes with a variable propor-
tion of affected cells using a genomic array. Unsupervised clus-
tering of scRNAseq data according to gene expression deﬁned
major clones bearing aberrations (loss on chromosomes 1, 9, 18,
del13q, del17p). Moreover, these clones were composed of cells
with additional aberrations deﬁning number of separate sub-
clones. The proportion of subclones was typically under the
detection limit of the genomic array and showed extreme intra-
clonal heterogeneity of the relapsed/refractory CLL case.
Conclusion: Genomic alterations inﬂuence the expression of
affected genes; this fact can be considered to reconstruct chro-
mosomal disruptions on a single cell level using scRNAseq and to
uncover the subclonal architecture of the malignancy.
References:.
Grants: MH-CZ_AZV_NU20-08-00314, MH-CZ_AZV_NV19-03-
00091, MEYS-CZ_MUNI/A/1330/2021, MH-CZ_RVO_65269705.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.126.D A Retrospective Cross-Sectional Analysis of Familial
Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Cases
Elanur Yilmaz1;2;3, Esra Yücel2, Hilal-Piril Saraçoğlu3, Emre Balik4,
Şahin Avcı2, Serpil Eraslan2, Dursun Bugra4, Hülya Kayserili1;2;3
1Koc University, Research Center for Translational Medicine (KUT-
TAM), İstanbul, Turkey; 2Koc University Hospital, Diagnostic Center for
Genetic Diseases, İstanbul, Turkey;
3Koç University, School of
Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey; 4Koç
University Hospital, General Surgery, Istanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Cancer is the second leading cause of
death globally. 1.8 million people receive a new diagnosis each
year. Colorectal cancers (CRC) constitute about 10% of all, and
among them, 30% are familial. Among all familial cancer
susceptibility syndromes, one of the best-known is Familial Ade-
nomatous Polyposis Coli (FAP), inherited autosomal dominantly
caused by the germline variants in the APC gene located on
chr:5q22. The incidence of FAP is estimated as 1:8-15.000 and
accounts for less than 1% of all CRC cases.
Methods: Between 2014-2020, 1024 patients have undergone
colorectal surgery and diagnosed with CRC. In all the cases, only
24 were considered as FAP,female:male ratio was 3:7, and the
mean age of diagnosis 31.6 (±7.1). Genetic testing and counseling
were offered to all FAP cases;ten took APC and hereditary onco-
panel testing.
Results: Pathogenic variants in APC were detected in six, and
STK11 and SDHD variants of unknown signiﬁcance(VUS) were
detected in two. Cascade screening was offered to all the
families, and only one with c.2510C>G(p.Ser837Ter) variant
accepted the offer. In seven individuals tested, one was found to
be the carrier for the pathogenic variant. Another patient with
APC
variant
(c.4464_4468delATTAC/p.L1488fs),
developed
a
desmoid tumor seven years after the colectomy operation,
which is in correlation with the incidence of desmoid tumor
occurrence (10-25%).
Conclusion: In conclusion, the risk of desmoid tumor devel-
opment should be considered in families with hereditary cancer
syndromes, especially in FAP. Furthermore, cascade screening
should be supported worldwide for the effective follow-up of
high-risk individuals in familial cancer syndromes.
References:.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.129.C Comparative analyses of long non-coding RNA and
associated microRNAs expression in plasma and ovarian tissue
samples of patients with ovarian cancer
Beata Soltesz1, Janos Lukacs2, Nikolett Nemeth3, András Penyige3,
Robert Poka3, Istvan Balogh3, Bálint Nagy3
1UNiversity of Debrecen, Department of Human Genetics, Debrecen,
Hungary;
2University of Debrecen, Institute of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Debrecen, Hungary; 3University of Debrecen, Depart-
ment of Human Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: Ovarian cancer is a leading cause of
gynaecological cancer mortality among women, due to non-
speciﬁc symptoms and late diagnosis. Early diagnosis should be
essential in the effective treatment. Some non-coding RNAs, as
long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) and microRNAs seem to be pro-
mising
biomarkers
in
non-invasive
diagnosis.
Metastasis-
associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT1) is an
lncRNA, which have a role in carcinogenesis and metastasis and
cal also be a prognostic factor in different types of cancer.
Methods: Nineteen ovarian cancer patients and six healthy
controls were involved in the study. Blood samples and ovarian
tissue were collected; the RNA was isolated and then cDNA was
synthesised. The expression of MALAT1 and microRNAs were
determined by using RT2 PCR and miRCURY system (Qiagen,
Germany). The interactions between ovary-speciﬁc circulating
microRNAs and MALAT1 were predicted using the miRNet tool.
Results: Shared interactions were predicted between MALAT1
lncRNA and hsa-miR-200b, hsa-miR-146a and hsa-miR-146b micro-
RNAs. Signiﬁcant difference was determined in the expression of
MALAT1 (p < 0.001) in tissue samples and miR-146b (p < 0.05) in
plasma samples, however no signiﬁcant difference was observed in
the expression of miR-146a, miR-200b and MALAT1 in plasma
samples among the cancer patients and controls.
Conclusion: The expression of MALAT1 and three MALAT1-
associated
microRNAs
were
determined
among
Hungarian
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
566
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
women, our results are promising, but more samples and the
extension of study are needed.
References: -.
Grants: -.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P13.130.B The effect of dietary habits on breast cancer
development in patients with BRCA1/2 pathogenic/likely
pathogenic variations
Gizem Keskin1, Hilal İrem Özdemir1, izen tuna1, özden hatırnaz ng2,
Busra Unal3, Nihat Bugra Agaoglu4
1Bahcesehir University, Nutrition and Dietetics, Istanbul, Turkey;
2Acıbadem University, Medical genetics, Istanbul, Turkey; 3Umraniye
Education and Research Hospital, Clinical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey;
4Umraniye Education and Research Hospital, Clinical Genetics,
Istanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives:
The
effect
of
nutrition
on
cancer
development has been proven. However, there is no concrete
data on the role of nutrition in the cancer development among
the patients with BRCA1/2 Pathogenic/Likely pathogenic variations
(PVs). We evaluated distinctions in the dietary habits between
breast cancer (BC) patients with BRCA1/2 PVs and healthy indivi-
duals (HI) with BRCA1-2 PVs.
Methods: We retrospectively screened 1000 patients that were
referred to the Genetic Cancer Clinic at Umraniye Training and
Research Hospital. Among these, 89 patients with germline PVs on
BRCA1/2 genes were included to the study. Sixty-one out of 89
were diagnosed with BC, whereas the remaining 28 were HI.
Dietary habits and anthropometric measures (AM) of these two
groups were compared by using the food consumption frequency
form and the Mediterranean Diet Score.
Results: We compared the eating habits of the BC patients
with germline BRCA1/2 PVs and HIs with the germline BRCA1/2 PVs
and found that the ratio of individuals who adhere to the Medi-
terranean Diet was higher among the HI (60.7%) than BC group
(39.3%). Besides, among the AM, body mass index of the cancer
patients was signiﬁcantly higher(p = 0.033). Moreover, smokers
were higher in BCs(p = 0.047).
Conclusion: To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst study evaluates
the dietary habits and AM in individuals with germline BRCA1/2 PVs.
Our study suggests that there is a difference in nutritional habits
between BC patients and HI. However, studies with larger groups
are needed to clarify the impact of nutritional habits on cancer
development in patients with germline cancer susceptibility.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14 GENOME VARIATION AND ARCHITECTURE
P14.001.D LRFN5 locus structure is associated with autism and
inﬂuenced by the sex of the individual and locus conversions
Gunnar Houge1, Helle Lybæk1, Michael Robson2, Nicole de Leeuw3,
Jayne Y. Herir-Kwa4, Aaron R. Jeffries5, Bjørn Ivar Haukanes1, Siren
Berland1, Diederik de Bruijn3, Stefan Mundlos2, Malte Spielmann6
1Haukeland University Hospital, Medical Genetics, Bergen, Norway;
2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany;
3Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of
Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 4Princess Máxima Center
for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Netherlands; 5University of Exeter,
Exeter, United Kingdom; 6UKSH, Institute for Human Genetics, Kiel,
Germany.
Background/Objectives: LRFN5 is a regulator of synaptic devel-
opment and the only gene in a 5.4 Mb topologically associating
domain (TAD). The LRFN5 locus is highly conserved despite
extensive copy number variation.
Methods: LRFN5 locus structure was studied by quantitative
chIP-on-chip
in
ﬁbroblasts,
supplemented
with
capture-HiC
determination of TAD structures. Locus interaction was indirectly
studied by allele counting.
Results: An association between locus structural changes and
developmental delay (DD) and/or autism was suggested by data
from DECIPHER and own records. More signiﬁcantly, we found
that maternal inheritance of a speciﬁc LRFN5 locus haplotype
segregated with an identical type of autism in distantly related
males. This autism-susceptibility haplotype had a speciﬁc TAD
pattern. We also found a male/female quantitative difference in
the amount histone-3-lysine-9-associated chromatin around the
LRFN5 gene itself (p < 0.01), possibly related to the male-restricted
autism susceptibility.
To better understand locus behaviour, the prevalence of a 60
kb deletion polymorphism was investigated. Surprisingly, in three
cohorts of individuals with DD (n = 8757), the number of deletion
heterozygotes was 20-26% lower than expected from Hardy-
Weinberg equilibrium. This suggests allelic interaction, also
because the conversions from heterozygosity to wild-type or
deletion homozygosity were of equal magnitudes. Remarkably, in
a control group of medical students (n = 1416), such conversions
were three times more common (p = 0.00001), suggesting a reg-
ulatory role of this allelic interaction.
Conclusion: LRFN5 regulation appears unusually complex and
inﬂuenced by gender and inter-allelic interaction, and LRFN5
dysregulation could be an epigenetic cause of autism.
References: This work is in press in Autism Research (2022).
Grants: HelseVest grant #911459.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.002.A Combining cytogenetic and genomic technologies
for deciphering challenging complex chromosomal
rearrangements
Rachel Michaelson-Cohen1;2;3, Omer Murik4, Sharon Zeligson1, Orit
Lobel1, Omri Weiss1, Ellie Picard2;5, Tzvia Mann4, Hagar Mor-
Shaked2;6, David A Zeevi4, Reeval Segel1;2
1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Medical Genetics, Jerusalem, Israel;
2Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, Jerusalem,
Israel; 3Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology,
Jerusalem,
Israel;
4Shaare
Zedek
Medical
Center,
Translational Genomics Laboratory, Jerusalem, Israel; 5Shaare Zedek
Medical Center, Pediatric Pulmonary Institute, Jerusalem, Israel;
6Hadassah Medical Organization, Department of Genetics, Jerusa-
lem, Israel.
Background/Objectives: Complex chromosomal rearrangements
(CCRs) are a class of structural variants (SVs) involving more than
two chromosome breaks, classically thought to be extremely rare.
As advanced technologies become more available, it has become
apparent that CCRs are more common than formerly thought and
are a substantial cause of human genetic disorders. Solving the
mechanism of CCRs by precisely identifying sequence-level
changes, and their order, are challenging, especially when repe-
titive sequences are involved.
Methods: Chromosomal microarray (CMA) and FISH analyses
were used for interpretation of SVs detected by whole exome
sequencing
(WES).
Breakpoint
junctions
were
analyzed
by
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
567
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Nanopore
sequencing,
a
novel
long-read
whole
genome
sequencing (WGS) tool.
Results: A large deletion identiﬁed by WES, encompassing
the FOXF1 enhancer, was the cause of alveolar capillary dys-
plasia and respiratory insufﬁciency, resulting in perinatal death.
CMA analysis of the deceased newborn’s mother revealed two
duplications encompassing the deleted region in the proband,
raising our hypothesis that the deletion resulted from CCR in the
mother. Breakpoint junctions of complex SVs were determined
at the nucleotide level using Nanopore long-read sequencing.
According to the sequencing results of breakpoint junctions, the
CCR in the newborn was considered as the consequence of at
least one double-strand break (DSB) during meiosis and reas-
sembly of DNA fragments by intra-chromosomal homologous
recombination.
Conclusion: The combination of CMA, FISH and long read NGS
enabled delineation of the exact breakpoints and proposed a
mechanism in which the CCR arises. We suggest an integrative
approach combining cytogenetic and genomic technologies for
deciphering challenging CCRs.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.003.B Hidden splice variants in stop-codons of the DMD
gene in Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy
Maria Orlova1, Maria Bulakh1, Alexander Polyakov1, Oksana
Ryzhkova1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives: The most common cause of Duch-
enne/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD) is gross deletions
and duplications. Frameshift deletion exons form Duchenne
muscular dystrophy phenotype, while non-frameshift mutations
are
milder
and
result
in
the
Becker
muscular
dystrophy
phenotype.
One of the mechanisms of the molecular pathogenesis of
DMD/BMD are variants affecting splicing in the DMD gene. It is
known that not only mutations in canonical regions, but also
missense, nonsense and intronic variants can affect splicing.
The aim of the study was to investigate the mechanism of the
inﬂuence of stop-codons on the mRNA sequence.
Methods: We performed the bioinformatician analysis of 656
variants leading to the formation of a premature termination
codon from the HGMD Professional database 2020.4. The splice
site prediction programs Splice AI, SPiP, and NetGene2 were used.
Results: Out of 554 nonsense variants in DMD, 54 variants were
predicted to affect splicing (9.7%). Of these, in 90% of cases a
frameshift was predicted.
For variants associated with BMD 7 of 47 nonsense variants
(14.8%) were predicted to affect splicing. For 100% splice variants
the programs predicted inframe deletions part of exon or skipping
of an exon entirely.
Conclusion: The results of the study are consistent with the
concept of differences in the phenotypes of DMD/BMD and allow
us to evaluate the mechanism of the inﬂuence of nonsense var-
iants on DMD gene splicing. The lack of predictions about the
effect of nonsense variants on splicing requires further study of
the inﬂuence of these variants on the molecular mechanism of the
pathogenesis of DMD/BMD.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.004.C Identiﬁcation of alternative transcripts of nsd1
gene responsible for sotos syndrome
Giuseppina Conteduca1, claudia cantoni2, Giovanni Candiano3,
Alessia Arado1, Chiara Baldo1, Marina Grasso1, Barbara Testa1,
Michela Malacarne1, Domenico Coviello1
1IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Laboratory of Human Genetics,
GENOVA, Italy;
2IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Laboratory of
clinacal and experimental immunology, GENOVA, Italy;
3IRCCS
Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Laboratory of Molecular Nephrology,
GENOVA, Italy.
Background/Objectives: NSD1 gene (nuclear-receptor-binding-
set-domain-protein) encodes a methyltransferase [1,] implicated in
the transcription and methylation of histone H3 at lysine 36 (H3-
K36), but the molecular mechanisms involved in these processes
remain largely unknown. Pathogenetic variants in NSD1 gene lead
to Sotos syndrome (SoS), and they have been involved also in cell
proliferation and drug resistance of some type of cancers [2].
Methods: Sequence analysis and array CGH were performed to
verify NSD1 alteration in 14 Sotos patients and NSD1 mRNA
expression by Real Time PCR was performed on ﬁbroblast cell lines
obtained from patients and from 8 controls. We sequence NSD1
cDNA isoforms observed in patients and controls.
Results: We describe the presence of two shorter NSD1 mRNA
isoforms not yet reported: NSD1 Δ5Δ7 (isoform2) and NSD1 Δ19-
23 (isoform 3) both in healthy subjects and in patients. We show
that the NSD1 mutations in patients were associated to a
decreased level of NSD1 mRNA. In addition, one SoS patient,
bearing the NSD1 variant c.6010-10G>A, expressed an additional
transcript derived from an aberrant splicing. Protein structure
prediction of NSD1 isoform 2 indicates the presence of a shorter
protein displaying only the PWWP1 domain that lacks the catalytic
SET domain, while Isoform 3 lacks PHD3 and PHD4 C-terminal
domains.
Conclusion: These results provide a basis to better elucidate
the role of alternative transcripts both in SoS and in tumor
progression.
References: 1. Douglas J et al. 2003 Am J Hum Genet.
4. Mohanty S et al 2020 Cancers.
Grants: AssiGulliver and Fondazione Sardegna.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.005.D Exploring the obscure clinical signiﬁcance of
uncommon uni-parental disomy (UPD)
Omri Weiss1, Sharon Zeligson1, Orit Lobel1, Malka BenUziyahu1, Adi
Ben Yehuda1, Shachar Zuckerman1, Shelly Lev-Hochberg1, Rachel
Beeri1, Efrat Burak1, Shira Shaviv1, Tal Dror1, Miriam Patt1, Reeval
Segel1;2
1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Centre, Jerusalem,
Israel; 2The Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Israel.
Background/Objectives: The use of next generation sequencing
and single nucleotide polymorphism based chromosomal micro-
array analysis (CMA) leads to detection of uniparental disomy
(UPD) in both pre- and post-natal settings. UPD may lead to dis-
ease by abnormal expression of imprinted genes or loss of het-
erozygosity (LOH) of mutations in recessive genes.
The unknown clinical signiﬁcance of many UPD segments is
challenging, especially in prenatal settings. Sharing UPD segments
detected in healthy individuals can resolve such uncertainty.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
568
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: We identiﬁed regions of homozygosity (ROH) sug-
gestive of UPD in CMA samples in Shaare Zedek Medical Centre
and correlated them to the clinical information.
Results: In our cohort, 14 samples had ROH suggestive of UPD.
Four causing UPD-imprinting disease and ten were ROH of
uncertain signiﬁcance. Of the ten, three were found in healthy
individuals tested for unrelated conditions and one was done due
to LOH of a mutation in the CASR gene, causing autosomal
recessive neonatal hyperparathyroidism.
We report four ROH indicative of UPD of uncertain signiﬁcance:
chr3 maternal (iso)UPD detected in the patient with hyperpar-
athyroidism; 18q12.1q22.3 (unknown parental origin) in a healthy
individual; maternal segmental UPD of 5p13.3q21.3 and paternal
mosaic (iso)UPD of chr22 in amniocenteses referred for advanced
maternal age. Pregnancy follow-up was normal and exome
sequencing validated UPD.
Conclusion: Our data, together with previously published UPD
segments, establish that UPD of chromosomes 3, 5, 18 and 22 are
not expected to cause imprinting-related disease. Further reports
of UPD from healthy individuals are necessary for mapping
imprinting free regions, allowing more informative genetic
counselling.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.006.A Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia: ﬁrst
demonstration of a branch point causative variant
Anna Sbalchiero1, Claudia Cantarini1, Chantal Nardiello1, Gennaro
Mariano Lenato2, Patrizia Lastella2, Giuseppe Spinozzi3, Fabio
Pagella3;4, Elina Matti3, Carla Olivieri1
1University of Pavia - Unit of General Biology and Medical Genetics,
Molecular Medicine, Pavia, Italy; 2UOS Sovraziendale di Assistenza e
Ricerca per le Malattie rare - Policlinico di Bari, UOC medicina interna
universitaria “C. Frugoni”, Bari, Italy; 3Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico
San Matteo, UOC of Otorhinolaryngology, Pavia, Italy; 4University of
Pavia, Surgical Sciences, Pavia, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia
(HHT) is a rare autosomal dominant disease leading to vascular
dysplasia caused by a pathogenic variant in one of the HHT gene:
ENG, ACVRL1, SMAD4, GDF2. We present a large HHT family with-
out a deﬁnite pathogenic variant; linkage analysis suggested the
ACVRL1 involvement. The c.526-22 A>G VUS in this gene, located
at a putative branch point, co-segregates with the disease in the
family. This represents the ﬁrst case of a branch point mutation
in HHT.
By analyzing the ACVRL1 transcript we aimed to demonstrate
the variant pathogenicity.
Methods: We performed WES (ﬁltering for the HHT genes) and
MLPA analysis on a clinically conﬁrmed case of the family. Co-
segregation of c.526-22 A>G was conﬁrmed by Sanger Sequen-
cing. To proof the variant pathogenicity, RNA was extracted from
peripheral blood of the patient and ﬁve healthy controls. After
retrotranscription and PCR, semi-quantitative and qPCR analyses
were performed. Sanger sequencing was carried out too.
Results: The variant is not present in GnomAD. Bioinformatics
and semi-quantitative analyses suggested a quantitative change
in the canonical coding RNA and the exon-5 skipping isoforms,
changing the ratio between the two. These data were conﬁrmed
by quantitative and sequencing analyses.
Conclusion: We report the ﬁrst case of a branch point patho-
genic variant in HHT. This is, to the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst
HHT-related variant modifying the quantity rather than quality of
the transcript.
References:.
Grants: Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research
to the DMM-University of Pavia “Dipartimenti di Eccellenza (2018-
2022)”.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.007.B Characterization of the mitochondrial genome
landscape in induced MSCs (iMSCs) derived from patients with
osteoarthritis and healthy donors
Aspasia Destouni1, Evanthia Mourmoura1, Vasileios Konteles1, Irene
Sfougataki2, Anny Mertzanian2, Thomas Brantzos3, Myrto Poulou3,
Varvara Trachana1, Maria Tzetis3, Evgenios Goussetis2, Aspasia
Tsezou1
1Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, Larissa, Greece;
2Bone MarrowTransplantation Unit, Aghia Sophia Children’s Hospi-
tal, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece; 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics,
Faculty of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,
Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece.
Background/Objectives: Osteoarthritis (OA) is an age-related
disease. Heteroplasmic mitochondrial variants accumulate with
advancing age, impairing respiration and cell metabolism. The
present study characterized the mtDNA landscape in OA and
healthy BM-MSCs, iPSCs and iPSCs-derived-MSCs (iMSCs).
Methods: Linearization of mtDNA, ultra-deep NGS and mtDNA
analysis were used to determined homoplasmic and hetero-
plasmic SNVs and short deletions.
Results: Homoplasmic variants were not different between
donors and cell types, while heteroplasmic variants were higher in
OA-MSCs compared to healthy-MSCs. Differences were observed
between OA-MSCS, -iPSCs and -iMSCs. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering showed a “purifying effect” for heteroplasmic variants in
OA patients during re-programming to iPSCs. The decreased var-
iant number remained stable during iPSCs differentiation while
~58% of heteroplasmic variants in OA and (~48%) in healthy
donors are coding. In OA donors, the variants with the highest
heteroplasmic fraction (HF~10%) are located in the control region
(DLOOP1, DLOOP2), whereas in healthy donors (HF>90%) in ATP6
and a t-RNA gene TQ. The majority of the heteroplasmic variants
fall in the r-RNA gene followed by ND1, ND2 genes in both groups.
Conclusion: We characterized the mtDNA landscape during
generation of iMSCs from OA and healthy MSCs-donors, sug-
gesting a decreased heteroplasmic variant load in OA-iPSCs, which
remains stable during differentiation to iMSCs. The ﬁndings indi-
cate that iMSCs might be valuable alternative to cell-based OA
treatment.
References: Wei et al, Nat Commun, 2021, 12:5241.
Grants: The study co‐ﬁnanced by EU and Greek national funds
through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneur-
ship and Innovation, under the call RESEARCH–CREATE–INNOVATE
(project code: T1EDK-00128).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.008.C Systematic characterisation of 5’untranslated
regions reveals key difference between and across gene-sets
Nechama Wieder1, Alex Geary1, Frederik Lassen1, Elston D’Souza1,
Maria Fernandes1, Robert Davies1, Nicola Whifﬁn1
1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Untranslated regions (UTRs) ﬂank the
coding sequence of a gene. 5’ and 3’ UTRs are not translated but
mediate post-transcriptional regulation via linear and structural
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
569
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
elements. To interpret 5’UTR variants in a clinical setting, further
understanding of these regions is required; what they normally
‘look like’ and how they vary between different categories
of genes.
Methods: We analysed 5’UTRs across all genes to determine
their overall landscape. 5’UTRs of disease genes (developmental
disorder (DD), cancer (C) and dosage sensitive (DS) genes sets)
were explored to establish enrichment for 5’UTR features as they
may be under tighter regulatory control. 5’UTR features investi-
gated were length, introns and the number and type of upstream
open reading frames (uORFs; cis-regulatory elements that down-
regulate protein translation).
Results: 5’UTR lengths range from one to over 2000 base pairs.
35% of genes have at least one intron. uORFs are present in 34%
of genes. 5’UTRs of disease gene-sets were signiﬁcantly longer
(DD:P = 1.1x10-41, C:P = 1.8x10-05, DS:P = 1.1x10-98), have more
uORFs (DD:P = 2.6x10-23, C:P = 0.0002, DS:P = 2.4X10-56) and
some have more introns (C:P = 0.03) than all gene 5’UTRs. DD
recessive genes reﬂected the inverse trend - signiﬁcantly shorter
5’UTRs (P = 1.6x10-05), signiﬁcantly fewer introns (P = 0.001) and
fewer uORFs (P = 0.002).
Conclusion: These disease gene-sets have more complex
5’UTRs and are enriched for cis-acting regulatory elements. 5’UTR
features may be important to subtly regulate translation levels.
Well-characterised 5’UTRs will aid in understanding of UTRs role
and interpreting variants.
References:.
Grants: Wellcome Trust.
Conﬂict of Interest: Nechama Wieder: None declared, Alex
Geary University of Oxford, Frederik Lassen: None declared, Elston
D’Souza University of Oxford, Maria Fernandes University of
Oxford, Robert Davies University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust, Nicola
Whifﬁn University of Oxford, Sir Henry Dale Fellowship/Wellcome
Trust.
P14.009.D Genomic analysis of germline and somatic lesions
at the FCGR locus; from reference genomes to clinico-
biological implications
Sarah Frampton1, Jade Forster2, Marine Armand1, Helen Parker1,
Khiyam Hussain3, Chantal Hargreaves4, Amatta Mirandari1, Nicolas
Carey1, Daniel Rose1, Russell Foxall3, Rosanna Smith3, Dean Bryant1,
Steve Beers3, Mark Cragg3, Jane Gibson1, Jonathan Strefford1
1University of Southampton, Cancer Genomics Group, Cancer
Sciences, Southampton, United Kingdom; 2University Hospital South-
ampton, The Wessex Investigational Sciences Hub laboratory,
Southampton, United Kingdom; 3Centre for Cancer Immunology,
Antibody and Vaccine Group, Southampton, United Kingdom; 4NIHR
Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Department of Clinical Immu-
nology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: In cancer treatment, monoclonal anti-
body (mAb) immunotherapies educe their functional response by
interacting with the Fc gamma receptors (FcγRs). The low-afﬁnity
locus (encoding FCGR2A, FCGR2B, FCGR2C, FCGR3A and FCGR3B)
contains a 98% homologous 85kb segmental duplication and is
highly polymorphic, harbouring multiple large copy number var-
iations (CNVs) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Short
sequencing reads often fail to map adequately, therefore we are
generating accurate genomic maps of the FCGR locus using long-
read Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT).
Methods: Utilising a healthy human cohort (n = 22) with dif-
ferent FCGR SNPs and CNV states, ONT adaptive sampling and
cas9-mediated enrichment (tiling of 10 ROI) were employed to
create comprehensive maps providing phased sequence, break-
point and methylation information.
Results: Samples sequenced to an average of 200x (read N50
35kb) with some reads spanning >100kb. ONT adaptive sampling
and cas9-targeting resulted in 6.2- and 500-fold increases in FCGR
sequencing respectively, with enrichment as high as 967-fold. The
bioinformatics pipeline of SNP and SV calling, phasing, de novo
assembly and methylation calling has enabled the exact break-
points of the CNVs to be identiﬁed, linkage disequilibrium rela-
tionships to be inferred and the connection between the FCGR
(epi)genomic landscape and transcriptional regulation to be
explored.
Conclusion: ONT transcriptomics for isoform quantiﬁcation
and expression analysis, and conﬁrmation of large structural var-
iants with BioNano optical mapping are both underway. ONT
sequencing represents an exciting opportunity to overcome the
difﬁculties of sequencing this complex region, facilitating greater
understanding of FcγR regulation and how their function may be
manipulated for the beneﬁt of cancer patients.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.010.A Whole-genome sequencing data reveals higher
number of structural variants in Chernobyl catastrophe clean-
up workers from Lithuania
Ingrida Domarkienė1, Gabrielė Žukauskaitė1, Alina Urnikyte1, Laura
Pranckeniene1, Svetlana Dauengauer-Kirlienė1, Justas Arasimavičius1,
Alma Molyte1, Aušra Matulevičienė1, Ingrida Pilypienė2, Vaidutis
Kučinskas1, Laima Ambrozaitytė1
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania;
2Clinic of Children`s Diseases, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Background/Objectives: Many of the Lithuanian Chernobyl cat-
astrophe clean-up workers (LCCW) are already diseased, thus, we
hypothesize that those, who experienced harsh exposures but
survived and age relatively healthy, might have speciﬁc genomic
variation which works in a protective way. Here we report initial
structural variation (SV) analysis from whole-genome sequencing
(WGS) data for 40 LCCW and 24 male control individuals of
Lithuanian origin from the general population.
Methods: Short-read WGS data was of good quality (Q30 value:
>90%) with the average coverage of ~38x. Structural variants were
called on Illumina DRAGENv.3.6.4 using the same methods as
Manta. SV (>49 bp) annotation was performed using AnnotSV with
default parameters. Wilcoxon rank sum test with continuity cor-
rection (α = 0.05) was performed using R 4.1.2.
Results: Deletions and insertions were more abundant than
duplications in both groups. There were signiﬁcant differences
in
average
numbers
of
deletions
(p = 0.007),
duplications
(p < 0.001), and insertions (p < 0.001) among LCCW and control
groups. The average number of SV in LCCW group was 9640
compared to 8987 in control group, and about 95% of SV was
new in both groups.
Conclusion: It is the ﬁrst WGS SV data analysis of the Cher-
nobyl catastrophe clean-up workers’ and Lithuanian origin gen-
omes. Further detailed SV characterization and integrative analysis
will provide useful information on local human population and
unique sample group of LCCW genomic variation. Current results
complementation with greater sample size data would be bene-
ﬁcial for analysis.
References:.
Grants: ADAPT (No.S-MIP-20-35) and ANELGEMIA (No.S-MIP-
20-34) funded by the Research Council of Lithuania.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
570
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P14.011.B Mobile element insertions as potential cancer
predisposition in high-risk HBOC patients
Janin Klein1, Annette Otto1, Gina Kastens1, Gunnar Schmidt1, Thilo
Dörk2,
Brigitte
Schlegelberger1,
Doris
Steinemann1,
Winfried
Hofmann1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany; 2Gynaecology
Research Unit, Hannover, Germany.
Background/Objectives: In more than 60% of patients at risk for
hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC), current diagnostic
tests fail to identify the causative variant. A currently underrated
type of predisposing event is the disruption of gene structures by
mobile element insertions (MEIs), since their systematic detection
has not been possible before the implementation of high-
throughput sequencing.
Methods: Panel sequencing data of 303 high-risk HBOC
patients were reanalyzed using the bioinformatic tool Mobster.
After ﬁltering for rare, novel events proximal to HBOC-associated
genes, one candidate MEI was further characterized by a minigene
assay and fragment analysis.
Results: Of 55 novel MEI predictions, 13 located to HBOC-
associated genes among which one predicted Alu element-
insertion in intron 54 of ATM manifested as a true event and the
most likely candidate to predispose for HBOC in two patients.
Transcript analysis showed the expression of an alternative ATM
transcript. Sanger sequencing revealed an exon skipping event
resulting in the exclusion of exon 54 which was evident in up to
37% of total ATM mRNA in the patients. These results were rein-
forced by the minigene assay.
Conclusion: Since the aberrant transcript is unlikely to be
translated into a functional protein due to a frameshift and sub-
sequent premature stop codon in exon 55, the Alu element-
insertion is a likely pathogenic variant associated with HBOC in
two families. Our work has important implications for the treat-
ment and surveillance of the patients and their families in addition
to valuable insights into the detection and characterization
of MEIs.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.012.C Multisite de novo mutations after paternal
exposure to ionizing radiation
Fabian Brand1, Manuel Holtgrewe2, Alexej Knaus1, Leonie Wein-
hold3, Dieter Beule2, Matthias C. Schmid3, Peter Krawitz1
1Institut für Genomische Statistik und Bioinformatik, Bonn, Germany;
2Berlin Institute of Health, Core Unit Bioinformatics, Berlin, Germany;
3Institut für medizinische Biometrie, Informatik und Epidemiologie
(IMBIE), Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives: In our ongoing study we evaluate the
effects of ionizing radiation on the offspring of exposed soldiers.
Methods: We sequenced the whole genome of 310 individuals
from 88 families. For 28 soldiers, we could obtain a retrospective
dosage estimation ranging up to 325mSv during their service
(Mean: 8.32mSv, Std: 48.51mSv). Other participants were not sig-
niﬁcantly exposed. The control cohort consists of 1275 families
with no known exposure to ionizing radiation.
Results: Our focus lies on speciﬁc mutational patterns such as
multisite de novo mutations (MSDNs; at least two de novo
mutations within 20bp), and de novo SVs and CNVs which are
linked to prolonged parental exposure to ionizing radiation.
After accounting for known confounders we found no sig-
niﬁcant difference (p = 0.26) in the mean number of (DNMs)
between both cohorts. We found on average 5.4 MSDNs/offspring
in the case cohort and 3.9 MSDNs/offspring in the control cohort.
We detected 43% more MSDNs per DNM in the case cohort
(p < 0.00001). The number of mutations in MSDN clusters is
increased by 33% on average (p = 0.018) in the offspring of radar
soldiers. Additionally, we identiﬁed ten candidates for large de
novo SVs in the case cohort, including two translocations.
Conclusion: All MSDNs, and structural variants are undergoing
extensive validation, which is also used to assert the parental
origin of the mutation in question. Our efforts are now focused on
statistical evaluations of the raw and validated datasets to draw
ﬁnal conclusions about the consequences of prolonged paternal
exposure to ionizing radiation on the following generation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.013.D Xq27.1 palindrome mediated interchromosomal
insertion as the likely cause of familial congenital bilateral
laryngeal abductor paralysis (Plott syndrome)
Felix
Boschann1,
Daniel
Julian
Acero-Moreno2,
Martin
Atta
Mensah1, Henrike Sczakiel1, Karolina Skipalova1, Manuel Holtgrewe3,
Stefan Mundlos1, Björn Fischer-Zirnsak1
1Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institute of
Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany; 2Kliniken der
Stadt Köln gGmbH, Division of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine,
Cologne, Germany; 3Berlin Institute of Health Charité – Universitäts-
medizin Berlin, Core Facility Bioinformatics, Berlin, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Bilateral laryngeal abductor paralysis is a
common cause of stridor in newborns. No convincing genetic
aberration has been reported for Plott syndrome (X-linked isolated
bilateral vocal cord paralysis, MIM: 308850). We aimed to study the
underlying cause in a large family with eight affected males, of
whom seven died shortly after birth.
Methods: We performed short read whole genome sequen-
cing (WGS) in an affected boy and his unaffected brother. FISH
analysis was conducted to conﬁrm the detected genomic rear-
rangement. Breakpoint speciﬁc PCRs and qPCR were used for
segregation analysis.
Results: In the affected boy, we identiﬁed a 404 kb large non-
coding insertion into the well-known intergenic region Xq27.1,
originating from chromosome 10q21.3. This genomic rearrange-
ment was conﬁrmed by FISH analysis. Breakpoint junction analysis
identiﬁed
patterns
likely
resulting
from
replication
based
mechanisms like MMBIR/FoSTeS. Segregation analysis conﬁrmed
strictly matrilineal inheritance of the derivative chromosome X.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings add Plott syndrome as a further
disease entity caused by interchromosomal insertions into the
intergenic region Xq27.1 and show that phenotypically distinct
diseases can result from the introduction of different regulatory
elements into the same genomic region. Thus demonstrating the
utility of WGS in the diagnosis of previously unsolved cases.
References: Boschann F, Moreno DA, Mensah MA, Sczakiel HL,
Skipalova K, Holtgrewe M, Mundlos S, Fischer-Zirnsak B. Xq27.1
palindrome mediated interchromosomal insertion likely causes
familial congenital bilateral laryngeal abductor paralysis (Plott
syndrome). J Hum Genet. 2022 Jan 31. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s10038-022-01018-z. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 35095096.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
571
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P14.014.A Unusual Suspects in hereditary melanoma: POT1,
POLE and BAP1
Ellie Maas1, brigid betz-stablein1, lauren aoude2, Hans Peter Soyer3;4,
Aideen McInerney-Leo1
1University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine,
WOOLLOONGABBA, Australia; 2The University of Queensland Dia-
mantina Institute, Surgical Oncology Group, WOOLLOONGABBA,
Australia; 3University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Dermatol-
ogy
Research
Centre,
Brisbane,
Australia;
4Princess
Alexandra
Hospital, Dermatology Department, Brisbane, Australia.
Background/Objectives: Three genes (POT1, POLE and BAP1),
have been reported in association with familial melanoma in the
past decade. Genotype-phenotype correlations of individuals with
mutations in these genes have not been well described.
Methods: Systematic searches collated 273-variants patho-
genic (BAP1 n = 136, POT1 n = 71, POLE n = 66) which were
identiﬁed and annotated from 69-sources to identify genotype-
phenotype correlations in these genes.
Results: Two high-cluster regions, predominantly associated
with cutaneous melanoma (CM), were identiﬁed in POT1 in the
oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide binding region one (36 amino
acids (aa)), and two (6aa). POLE had one high-cluster variant region
(292aa) in the exonuclease domain associated with diverse cancer
types. The highest proportion of variants in this cluster were
associated with endometrial cancer; however, there was one
hotspot (spanning 55aa) associated with CM. BAP1 had six high-
cluster regions with loss-of-function variants within 24aa asso-
ciated exclusively with CM (between nuclear localisation signal
domains). Two BAP1 clusters (31aa and 12aa) were both associated
with CM and uveal melanoma (UM) (located in unspeciﬁed regions
between the BRCA-1 associated ring domain (BARD) and the
BRCA1 binding domain); another two clusters had the pre-
dominant phenotype of UM (74aa and 21aa) located in the ubi-
quitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase (UCH)/BARD crossover domain,
and the BARD binding domain respectively. The remaining BAP1
cluster was associated with diverse cancer phenotypes of CM, UM
and malignant mesothelioma, and was located in the UCH domain
(11aa).
Conclusion: Genotype-phenotype correlations captured from
this research can be used to identify patient disease predisposition
based on mutation position and cluster regions in POT1, POLE or
BAP1.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ellie Maas: None declared, brigid betz-
stablein: None declared, lauren aoude: None declared, Hans Peter
Soyer HPS is a shareholder of MoleMap NZ Limited and e-derm
consult GmbH and undertakes regular teledermatological report-
ing for both companies. HPS is a Medical Consultant for Canﬁeld
Scientiﬁc Inc., Blaze Bioscience Inc., MoleMap Australia Pty Limited,
and a Medical Advisor for First Derm and Revenio Research Oy.,
Aideen McInerney-Leo: None declared.
P14.015.B Genetic and epigenetic effect of 22q12 large
deletions in rare NF2 patients
Viviana Tritto1, Marica Eoli2, Micaela Berni1, Rosina Paterra2, Luisa
Chiapparini3, Serena Redaelli4, Paola Riva1
1University of Milan, Department of Medical Biotechnology and
Translational Medicine, Segrate (Milan), Italy; 2IRCCS Foundation,
Carlo Besta Neurological Institute, Unit of Molecular Neuro-Oncology,
Milan, Italy; 3IRCCS Foundation, Carlo Besta Neurological Institute,
Department of Diagnostics and Applied Technology, Neuroradiology
Unit, Milan, Italy; 4University of Milano-Bicocca, School of Medicine
and Surgery, Monza, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 is an auto-
somal dominant tumor-prone disorder, mainly due to point
mutations or intragenic deletions of NF2 gene, encoding Merlin
protein, that inhibits proliferation pathways. However, rare large
22q12 microdeletions have been found in patients with complex
phenotype [1]. To identify the genetic and epigenetic mechanisms
resulting from 22q12 microdeletions, we characterized three NF2
microdeletion patients, two with extended deletions and severe
phenotype, including mental retardation, and one with a smaller
deletion and milder phenotype.
Methods: We carried out MLPA, aCGH, in silico analysis, Long-
Range PCR assays, and Sanger sequencing to characterize the
deletions’ breakpoints. We performed in silico analysis of 22q12
TADs and regulatory elements, together with gene expression
analysis of 19 genes ﬂanking patients’ deletions by RT-PCR, to
investigate a possible position effect generated by the chromatin
3D-structure alteration.
Results: Patient with milder phenotype shows 146 Kb deletion,
involving three genes. In patients with more severe phenotype,
deletions of 560 Kb and 1.8 Mb have been identiﬁed, counting 13
and 36 genes, respectively, and including AP1B1, a gene that
could be linked to patients’ mental retardation. Furthermore,
patients’ microdeletions alter from one to ﬁve TADs and the 22q12
regulatory landscape, and RT-PCR assays conﬁrmed the position
effect on some ﬂanking genes. Interestingly, PIK3IP1 over-
expression could be associated with the ischemic event occur-
red in patient with largest deletion.
Conclusion: Our results, providing new genotype-phenotype
correlations in NF2 microdeletion patients, could have an impact
on the identiﬁcation of prognostic markers, useful for patient
management, and potential therapeutic targets.
References: [1] PMID:10338003.
Grants: Academic fund.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.016.C A systematic annotation of the impact on splicing
of all possible substitutions within the SPINK1 coding
sequence
Hao Wu1;2, Jin-Huan Lin1;2, Wen-Bin Zou1;2, Emmanuelle Masson3;4,
sacha schutz3;4, David N. Cooper5, Gerald Le Gac3;4, Claude Férec3,
Zhao-Shen Li1;2, Zhuan Liao1;2, Jian-Min Chen3
1Changhai Hospital, The Secondary Military Medical University,
Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai, China; 2Shanghai Institute
of Pancreatic Diseases, Shanghai, China; 3Univ Brest, Inserm, EFS, UMR
1078, GGB, Brest, France; 4CHRU Brest, Service de Génétique Médicale et
de Biologie de la Reproduction, Brest, France; 5Institute of Medical
Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: In addition to mutations within splice
junctions, both missense and silent variants within the coding
region may affect pre-mRNA splicing. However, there are currently
no human genes for which the consequences for splicing of all
possible substitutions within the coding sequence have been
systematically annotated. Herein, we attempted to achieve such a
goal in the context of SPINK1.
Methods: All possible substitutions within the entire SPINK1
coding sequence were subjected to SpliceAI prediction [1]. The
accuracy of SpliceAI prediction was ﬁrst evaluated in the context
of 27 known variants previously analyzed using a Full-Length
Gene Splicing Assay (FLGSA) [2,3]. All three possible substitutions
in a dozen selected coding nucleotide sites were further subjected
to FLGSA as described [3].
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
572
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: SpliceAI prediction and experimentally obtained
ﬁndings concurred exactly with the previously analyzed 27 SPINK1
variants. As for the prospectively analyzed variants, there was an
excellent correction between SpliceAI prediction and experi-
mental validation. The use of FLGSA made it possible to correlate
precisely the predicted and experimentally obtained aberrant
splicing outcomes.
Conclusion: Having correlated SpliceAI-predicted and FLGSA-
derived ﬁndings from a large number of known and prospectively
generated variants, we were able to provide a systematic anno-
tation of the splicing effects of all possible substitutions within the
coding sequence of the SPINK1 gene with a high degree of
accuracy.
References: [1]. Jaganathan et al. Cell. 2019;176:535. [2]. Zou
et al. Gut. 2016;65:884. [3]. Wu et al. Genes. 2017;8:263.
Grants: The National Natural Science Foundation of China
(81800569 [HW]; 82000611 [J-HL]); The Shanghai Pujiang Program
(18PJD057 [HW]; 2020PJD061 [J-HL]).
Conﬂict of Interest: Hao Wu Department of Gastroenterology,
Changhai Hospital, the Secondary Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China, The National Natural Science Foundation of China
(no. 81800569); The Shanghai Pujiang Program, China (no.
18PJD057), Jin-Huan Lin Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai
Hospital, the Secondary Military Medical University, Shanghai,
China, The National Natural Science Foundation of China (no.
82000611); The Shanghai Pujiang Program (no. 2020PJD061), Wen-
Bin Zou Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, the
Secondary Military Medical University, Shanghai, China, Emma-
nuelle Masson Service de Génétique Médicale et de Biologie de la
Reproduction, CHRU Brest, F-29200 Brest, France, sacha schutz
Service de Génétique Médicale et de Biologie de la Reproduction,
CHRU Brest, F-29200 Brest, France, David N. Cooper Institute of
Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff,
United Kingdom, Gerald Le Gac Univ Brest, Inserm, EFS, UMR 1078,
GGB, F-29200 Brest, France, Claude Férec Univ Brest, Inserm, EFS,
UMR 1078, GGB, F-29200 Brest, France, Zhao-Shen Li Department of
Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, the Secondary Military Medi-
cal University, Shanghai, China, Zhuan Liao Department of Gastro-
enterology, Changhai Hospital, the Secondary Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China, Jian-Min Chen Univ Brest, Inserm, EFS,
UMR 1078, GGB, F-29200 Brest, France.
P14.017.D Identiﬁcation of a novel physiological
LRIG2 splicing variant associated with the development of
Urofacial Syndrome
Ornella Rondinone1, Alessia Mauri2, Giada Moresco2, Jole Cost-
anza3, Carlo Santaniello2, Patrizia Colapietro4, Pasqualina D’Ursi5,
Matteo Uggeri5, Giovanni Marﬁa6, Laura Guarnaccia6, Stefania
Navone6, Gianantonio Manzoni7, Dario Guido Minoli7, Federico
Grilli8, Donatella Milani8, Monica Miozzo1;9, Laura Fontana1
1Università degli Studi di Milano, Medical Genetics, Department of
Health Sciences, Milan, Italy; 2Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospe-
dale Maggiore Policlinico, Research Laboratories Coordination Unit,
Milan, Italy; 3Fondazione Istituto Nazionale di Genetica Molecolare,
INGM, Milan, Italy; 4Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of
Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Milan, Italy;
5Institute for
Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council (ITB-CNR), Milan,
Italy; 6Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Laboratory of Experimental Neurosurgery and Cell Therapy, Neuro-
surgery Unit, Milan, Italy; 7Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, Pediatric Urology Unit, Milan, Italy; 8Fondazione
IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Highly Intensive
Pediatric Care Unit, Milan, Italy; 9ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, Medical
Genetics Unit, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Urofacial Syndrome 1 (UFS1) is a rare AR
disorder characterized by congenital urinary bladder dysfunction
caused by mutations in the LRIG2 gene. LRIG2 is a transmembrane
protein involved in the regulation of growth factor signaling.
Although LRIG2 controls neuronal migration during embryonic
development, its role in bladder innervation and in the patho-
genesis of UFS is yet to be elucidated.
Methods: In two siblings with bladder dysfunction, by WES we
found a novel LRIG2 splicing variant c.1478-2A>G, that leads to
skipping of exon 13 and the loss of the ﬁrst Ig-like domain in the
LRIG2 protein. We proﬁled the expression of the LRIG2 isoforms in
patients and controls (normal and tumor CNS-derived tissues and
blood).
Results: In the probands only the skipped isoform was expres-
sed. Whereas we found the presence of the isoform with skipping of
exon 13 in all the analyzed control tissues, together with the
canonical one. Interestingly, no LRIG2 mutations were found in
controls, irrespective to the presence of the skipped isoform.
In silico protein modelling and binding dynamics allowed the
identiﬁcation of functional differences between the two LRIG2
isoforms (canonical and skipped). We found that the ﬁrst Ig-like
domain is fundamental for protein dimerization, suggesting a
reduced activity or a different mechanism of action of the LRIG2
isoform lacking this domain.
Conclusion: We hypothesize that the identiﬁed mutation could
force the skipping of exon 13, thus leading to the expression of
the novel LRIG2 isoform, which is physiological when it is
expressed at low levels compared to the canonical one.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.018.A BeSolveRD: The Belgian genome resource to
resolve rare diseases
Mathilde Geysens1, Wouter Bossuyt1, Elfride De Baere2, Kim De
Leeneer2, Koenraad Devriendt1, Annelies Dheedene2, Aimé Lumaka3,
Jeroen Luyten4, Gert Matthijs1, Björn Menten2, Marije Meuwissen5,
Olivier Monestier6, Catharina Olsen7, Leonor Palmeira3, Nicole
Revencu8;8, Julie Soblet9, Erika Souche1, Yves Sznajer8, Sonia Van
Dooren10, Catheline Vilain9, Kris Van Den Bogaert1, Joris Vermeesch1
1University hospitals Leuven-KU Leuven, Center for Human Genetics,
Leuven, Belgium;
2Ghent University Hospital, Center for Medical
Genetics, Ghent, Belgium; 3Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Liège,
Center for Medical Genetics, Liège, Belgium; 4University of Leuven,
Leuven Institute for Healthcare Policy, Leuven, Belgium; 5Universiteit
Antwerpen, Center for Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium; 6Institut
de Pathologie et Génétique, Center of Human Genetics, Gosselies,
Belgium; 7Université Libre de Bruxelles, Machine Learning Group,
Département d’informatique, Brussels, Belgium; 8Université Catholi-
que de Louvain, Center for Human Genetics, Brussels, Belgium;
9Université Libre de Bruxelles, Center of Human Genetics, Brussels,
Belgium;
10Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Center for Medical Genetics,
Brussels, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Despite the diagnostic implementation
of chromosomal microarrays/shallow whole genome sequencing
and whole exome sequencing (WES) for patients with intellectual
disabilities/developmental disorders (ID/DD), approximately half
remain undiagnosed using this standard of care (SoC). To (1)
technically validate whole genome sequencing (WGS) at different
genetic centers in Belgium, (2) investigate the clinical utility of
WGS for ID/DD diagnosis and (3) to assess the health economic
impact, the Belgian genetic centers engaged in a multicentric
prospective randomized control trial, called BeSolveRD.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
573
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: A total of 800 patients and both parents will be
recruited of which half will be processed by SoC and half by
WGS. We have performed ring trials to compare different
methods to generate WGS libraries, allowing the optimization
and validation of WGS in all centers. The WGS pipelines for SNV
detection of all centers and their performance have also been
assessed. Most pipelines use the same tools and perform very
similarly despite the different implementation. Finally, we have
created a federated database to share variant and sequence
information.
Results: We will present the process of collaboration, the
challenges and the intermediate output data.
Conclusion: Intermediate conclusions will be deduced from
the results gathered until May 2022.
References: /.
Grants: Illumina sponsored study.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.019.B Method optimisation for structural variant
detection in the human genome
Oguzhan KALYON1, Bilal Alobaidi1, Lois Batty1, Miguel Xavier1, Giles
Holt1, Aneta Mikulasova1, Joris Veltman1
11Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle upon
Tyne, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Structural variation (SV) has been tra-
ditionally difﬁcult to identify and characterize. Now, whole
genome sequencing (WGS) and optical genome mapping (OGM)
are both available for more comprehensive SV detection. Here,
we compared and optimized the accuracy of SV detection by
combining different bioinformatic tools and platforms into an
integrated workﬂow and applied this to both simulated and real
genomic data.
Methods: Two short-read WGS BAM ﬁles with gains and losses
(n = 841, size range 2kb–1Mb) were simulated. Different bioin-
formatics tools were tested for SV detection in these simulated
WGS data. In addition, we performed both WGS and OGM in
9 samples and compared SV detection.
Results: Simulated WGS data showed that the combination
of a depth of coverage method (CNVRobot) and a method based
on discordant read pairs and split reads (dysgu-SV) provided
the most efﬁcient and accurate method for SV detection. This
combination resulted in a true positive rate of SV detection of
99.3% and a false discovery rate of 0.02%. Next, we applied
this integrated approach in WGS data from 9 samples and
identiﬁed 96 SVs on average (mean size 8kb). In addition, we
identiﬁed 135 SVs on average (mean size 31kb) by OGM. Only
34% of SVs detected by the integrated WGS pipeline were
supported by OGM, which in general detected larger and more
complex SVs.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrates that combined bioinfor-
matic approaches provide highly accurate SV identiﬁcation in
WGS. By combining WGS with OGM we were able to obtain a
highly reliable SV dataset.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P14.020.C Review of secondary ﬁndings reported in the
qGenomics patient cohort, analyzed by exome sequencing
Marta Carreño1, Maria Segura-Puimedon1, Raquel Garcia1, Lidia
Carreño1, César Arjona1, Hector San Nicolás1, Cèlia Sintas1, Mònica
Vall1, Olaya Villa Marcos1, Marina Viñas-Jornet1, LLuís Armengol1
1qGenomics, NGS Clinical Department, Esplugues de Llobregat,
Spain.
Background/Objectives: A new update of the American College
of Medical Genetics (ACMG) recommendations for the reporting of
secondary ﬁndings (SF) in clinical exome and genome sequencing
was published last year, along with the new list of 73 medically
actionable genes ACMG SF v3.0. In it, an analysis of the impact of
the use of the previous list (ACMG SF v2.0) is also exposed. The
objective of our study was to calculate the frequencies of the SF
report in our cohort and to compare it to previous studies in
literature and with the frequencies obtained with the new list.
Methods: A retrospective investigation was carried out on
3638 patients, analyzed by whole exome sequencing during the
period between the publication of both ACMG lists (2017-2021).
Also, it was extended to 541 more patients, analyzed after the
ACMG list update.
Results: In our cohort, SF have been reported in 98 cases
(frequency of 2.69%), being BRCA2 and KCNQ1 genes the most
frequently reported. As expected, this frequency has increased up
to 3,51% with the use of the new list.
Conclusion: Although it is difﬁcult to compare different stu-
dies, the frequencies obtained ﬁt perfectly into the frequency
ranges described in the update. Currently, the new expanded list
has been implemented in our laboratory, continuing with the
objective of preventing and reducing patient morbidity and
mortality. Our purpose is to continue to analyze the diagnostic
potential of SF with the new ACMG SF v3.0 list.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Marta Carreño qGenomics, Maria Segura-
Puimedon qGenomics, Raquel Garcia qGenomics, Lidia Carreño
qGenomics, César Arjona qGenomics, Hector San Nicolás qGe-
nomics, Cèlia Sintas qGenomics, Mònica Vall qGenomics, Olaya
Villa Marcos qGenomics, Marina Viñas-Jornet qGenomics, LLuís
Armengol qGenomics.
P14.022.A Genetic diagnosis can be missed by classical
ﬁltering criteria for WES in Mendelian Disorders – diagnostic
strategies to approach challenging cases
Sarah L. Stenton1;2, Christiane Neuhofer1;2;3, Riccardo Berutti1;2,
Robert Kopajtich1;2, Dmitrii Smirnov1;2, Holger Prokisch1;2
1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany; 2Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum
Munich, Munich, Germany; 3Department of Neurology, Friedrich-
Baur-Institute, LMU Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich,
Germany.
Background/Objectives: More than 50% of patients with sus-
pected hereditary disorders ultimately remain without molecular
diagnosis. Variants with incomplete penetrance as well as het-
erozygous variants in autosomal recessive genes escape prior-
itization despite being potentially causative.
Methods: In case of reduced penetrance, segregation of
pathogenic
variants
doesn’t
follow
conventional
Mendelian
inheritance patterns. This required new ﬁltering approaches,
inclusion of gene burden tests in large cohorts and early inte-
gration of functional evidence.
Results: Variants of incomplete penetrance show higher allele
frequency than expected from the incidence of the disease. We
therefore eased the MAF ﬁltering criteria, applied statistical ana-
lysis of gene burden and included functional evidence by tran-
scriptome and proteome analysis to search for novel disease
genes with incomplete penetrance[1].
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
574
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
In the absence of statistical evidence functional analysis is of
paramount importance. In one family the unaffected grand-
father was found to carry the same hemizygous variant in a
complex I subunit gene as the index patient. Functional pro-
teomics studies provided convincing evidence of the patho-
genicity of the variant.
In another case a patient presented with a recognisable phe-
notype but unexpected inheritance pattern. Large scale proteome
analysis strongly argued for a heterozygous variant to cause the
clinical presentation of a disease considered to be recessive.
Conclusion: From a large body of data and long-standing
experience in molecular genetic diagnostics we show strategies to
approach cases unsolved in ﬁrst line diagnostics. We derive gen-
eral recommendations to address variation in reduced penetrance
genes and following unexpected inheritance patterns.
References: 1. Stenton et al. J Clin Invest. 2021 https://doi.org/
10.1172/JCI147734.
Grants: mitoNET, GENOMIT.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P15 CYTOGENETICS
P15.001.B International System for Human Cytogenomic
nomenclature (ISCN) – the challenge of the nomenclature
Ros Hastings1, Melody Tabiner2, Zandra Deans3
1Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Genomics
External Quality Assessment (GenQA), Oxford, United Kingdom;
1Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Genomics
External Quality Assessment (GenQA), Oxford, United Kingdom;
3NHS Lothian, Genomics External Quality Assessment (GenQA),
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: ISCN is an essential tool for reporting
cytogenomic and some molecular analysis results (e.g. QF-PCR,
MLPA) in a consistent and accurate manner to enable effective
communication between clinicians and scientists and use of
databases. Educational webinars plus a pilot online ISCN external
quality assessment (EQA) highlighting some key ISCN principles
were delivered to support laboratories reporting results, following
publication of ISCN 2020(1).
Methods: Ideograms and/or images plus written descriptions
of abnormalities were provided online. Participants were required
to input the correct ISCN for the result described. Each case
focussed on different aspects of ISCN: Constitutional karyotyping;
Constitutional
FISH;
Neoplasia
karyotyping;
Oncology
FISH;
Microarrays; Region speciﬁc assays (rsa).
Results: There were numerous errors, with some particularly
challenging case scenarios. Sixty-six participants answered at least
one case. Recurrent errors included:.
-Using ‘mat’ instead of ‘dmat’ for a maternally derived unba-
lanced segregant;.
-Including the normal control probe and/or cell numbers in
non-mosaic constitutional FISH;.
-Incorrect order for structural chromosome abnormalities;.
-Inappropriate omission of breakpoints for metaphase FISH;.
-Inconsistent use of terminology/punctuation.
Conclusion: This EQA highlighted the challenges of using ISCN.
More centres gave the correct ISCN for rsa than the other cases. It
was apparent from the submissions that FISH nomenclature was
the most demanding and that the differences between constitu-
tional and neoplastic ISCN were not fully understood.
This pilot demonstrated the continued need for training
webinars and additional ISCN EQAs to educate and promote
standardisation.
References: 1. McGowan-Jordan J., et al., (2020). ISCN 2020: An
International System for Human Cytogenomic Nomenclature. S.
Karger, Basel.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P15.003.D Comparative benchmarking of optical genome
mapping and chromosomal microarray reveals high
technological concordance in CNV identiﬁcation and
structural variant reﬁnement
Dana Jaber1, Hayk Barseghyan1, Andy Wing Chun Pang1;2;3, Alka
Chaubey1, Yannick Delpu1, Alex Hastie1
1Bionano Genomics, Inc., San Diego, United States;
2Center for
Genetic Medicine Research, Children’s National Hospital, Washing-
ton, United States; 3Genomics and Precision Medicine, School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, George Washington University,
Washington, United States.
Background/Objectives: Children with developmental delays
and/or congenital anomalies with suspected genetic etiology are
often tested for SVs by chromosomal microarray (CMA), karyotype,
fragile X testing, and sequencing [1]. Because CNV and SV are
often found to be causative, CMA is recommended as ﬁrst tier
testing for many indications [2]. Optical genome mapping (OGM)
is a technology that can detect not only CNVs, but also balanced
rearrangements compared with CMA [3-5]. We evaluated the
performance of OGM for reported genomic variants in comparison
with CMA for 61 chromosomal abnormalities from 55 patients
with variable phenotypes.
Methods: OGM was performed on samples from 55 patients
with CNVs previously identiﬁed by CMA. SVs identiﬁed by OGM
were ﬁltered by a control database to remove polymorphic var-
iants and a gene list to prioritize biologically relevant ﬁndings
before comparison against CMA and FISH.
Results: OGM successfully identiﬁed CNVs, SVs, and absence of
heterozygosity (AOH) in samples previously tested with CMA.
OGM results showed high concordance with CMA while also
characterizing the structure that CMA was unable to deﬁne
without FISH.
Conclusion: OGM has sufﬁcient analytical validity to detect
biologically relevant variants identiﬁed by CMA. OGM can also
identify rearrangements observed with FISH within the same
single assay in a genome-wide scale that may provide additional
biological utility compared to CMA.
References: 1. https://omim.org/.
2. Miller, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2010.
3. Cope, Mol. Genet. Genomic Med. 2021.
4. Mantere, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2021.
5. Mostovoy, Genetics. 2021.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Dana Jaber Bionano Genomics, Hayk
Barseghyan Bionano Genomics, Andy Wing Chun Pang Bionano
Genomics, Alka Chaubey Bionano Genomics, Yannick Delpu Bio-
nano Genomics, Alex Hastie Bionano Genomics.
P15.004.A Structural and copy number variant detection,
ﬁltering, annotation, and classiﬁcation by Optical Genome
Mapping in research of constitutional disorders
Dana Jaber1, Ben Clifford1, Hayk Barseghyan1;2;3, Andy Wing Chun
Pang1, Alka Chaubey1, Yannick Delpu1, Alex Hastie1
1Bionano Genomics, Inc., San Diego, United States;
2Center for
Genetic Medicine Research, Children’s National Hospital, Washing-
ton, United States; 3Genomics and Precision Medicine, School of
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
575
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Medicine and Health Sciences, George Washington University,
Washington, United States.
Background/Objectives: Identifying a breadth of variants and
presenting actionable ﬁndings is key to disease research, classiﬁ-
cation and stratiﬁcation. In contrast to methods like karyotyping,
chromosomal microarray (CMA), FISH or sequencing, optical
genome mapping (OGM) is sufﬁciently versatile to identify all
classes of SVs with high sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Variant calls are
managed within the Bionano Access software, where ﬁlters are
applied to prioritize classiﬁcation on variants likeliest to have a
biological impact.
Here, we demonstrate a comprehensive and lab-ready work-
ﬂow for whole genome OGM data analysis, alignment and anno-
tation using GRCh38, variant evaluation, and classiﬁcation.
Methods: For constitutional disorders, OGM data is analyzed
with the Solve 3.7 De Novo Assembly pipeline., with sample data
aligned to GRCh38 to resolve variants and annotate against a
common reference.
Results: We apply a workﬂow to ﬁlter based on size (≥1.5 kbp),
absence in assay-matched controls database (≤1%), and overlap
with gene. The resulting prioritized variant list presents ~20-30
variants on average, added to a curation list. With the variant
classiﬁer visualization, we evaluate each variant captured as
aligned to GRCh38, showing properties such as size and putative
impact to genes. Multiple analysts may independently classify and
supervisor can reconcile records to adjudicate classiﬁcations,
record large-scale genomic irregularities, download a report.
Conclusion: OGM is suited to identify variants which are bio-
logically relevant. The analytical approach annotates thousands of
genome-wide variants accurately, and the ﬁltering workﬂow
directs focus to the most promising. The subsequent classiﬁcation
and reporting tools provide utility for communicating signiﬁcance.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Dana Jaber Bionano Genomics, Ben Clif-
ford Bionano Genomics, Hayk Barseghyan Bionano Genomics,
Andy Wing Chun Pang Bionano Genomics, Alka Chaubey Bionano
Genomics, Yannick Delpu Bionano Genomics, Alex Hastie Bionano
Genomics.
P15.005.B Genetic determinants of mosaic loss of the X
chromosome in peripheral leukocytes of 800K women from 7
biobanks
Aoxing Liu1, giulio genovese2, yajie zhao3, po-ru loh2, Andrea
Ganna1, john perry3, mitchell machiela4
1institute for molecular medicine ﬁnland, helsinki, Finland; 2broad
institute of harvard and mit, cambridge, United States; 3institute of
metabolic science, university of cambridge, cambridge, United
Kingdom; 4national cancer institute, bethesda, United States.
Background/Objectives: Mosaic loss of the X chromosome
(mLOX) is the most frequently occurring age-related mosaic
chromosomal alteration detected in peripheral leukocyte DNA of
females, with a prevalence of 3.9% in women younger than 50 and
reaching 33.3% after age 70. However, little is known about the
genetic causes of mLOX and its epidemiological consequences.
Methods: We performed a GWAS meta-analysis of mLOX in
800K women of European ancestry (52K with mLOX) from 7 Bio-
banks to characterize the germline genetic architecture of mLOX.
Results: We identiﬁed 8 autosomal germline susceptibility loci,
including one locus in the MHC region and multiple loci located in
genes associated with blood cell counts (SP140L, SCML4, KRI1),
blood protein level (ADAMTS5), and chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(SP110). Rare variant analyses in UK Biobank exome sequencing
data identiﬁed additional rare variation in the BUB1B cancer pre-
disposition
gene
associated
with
increased
risk
of
mLOX
(P = 5.4x10-7). Allelic shift analyses were performed on X chro-
mosome data to identify germline variants for which one allele is
preferentially lost in mLOX cases with heterozygous genotypes.
Multiple such variants were identiﬁed over a large region span-
ning the centromere (P < 10-250), and at or near PLS3, ITM2A,
SAGE1, P2RY8, WAS and PS3.
Conclusion: Leveraging genotype data from 800k females, we
detected multiple germline variants associated with mLOX sug-
gesting susceptibility to mLOX exhibits relationships with blood
cell traits and cancer predisposition genes. Allelic shift analyses
further demonstrate the strong cis selection of speciﬁc X variants
providing novel insights into the genetic etiology of mLOX.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Aoxing Liu full employment, university of
helsinki, giulio genovese broad institute of harvard and mit, yajie
zhao university of cambridge, po-ru loh broad Institute of mit and
harvard, Andrea Ganna institute for molecular medicine ﬁnland,
john perry university of cambridge, mitchell machiela national
cancer institute.
P15.006.C Multi-omics analysis of DNA and RNA identiﬁes
disruption of MINK1 in a balanced translocation carrier with
congenital cataract and epilepsy
Jesper
Eisfeldt1;2;3,
Jakob
Schuy1,
Eva-Lena
Stattin4,
Anna
Lindstrand1;2
1Karolinska Institutet, Department of Molecular Medicine and
Surgery and Center for Molecular Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden;
2Karolinska University Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics,
Stockholm, Sweden; 3Karolinska Institutet Science Park, Science for
Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden; 4Uppsala University, Science for
Life Laboratory, Department of Immunology Genetics and Pathology,
Uppsala, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Genomic translocations are structural
variants which are copy number neutral. Chromosomal segments
are relocated forming fusing chromosomes which may result in
genes disruption and/or fusion transcripts. The translocation
breakpoints are commonly located in repetitive or insufﬁciently
mapped regions of the genome complicating the process of
resolving the rearrangement. In such cases, long-range information
is required to precisely pinpoint the breakpoints. MINK1 (Mis-
shappen-like kinase 1) has been linked to skeletal and neuronal
impairments and has also been mentioned in phenotypes like
cancer, platelet formation, Alzheimer and Rheumatoid arthritis.
Methods: The here presented case has been investigated with
a cascade of methods including karyotyping, paired-end and
linked-read as well as long-read genome sequencing.
Results: The presented case contains a balanced translocation
t(17,19) of which one breakpoint is located in the centromere of
chromosome 19. Only by the addition of long-read Oxford
nanopore technology, the centromeric breakpoint on chromo-
some 19 could be detected. The translocation disrupts MINK1
leading to reduced levels of transcripts which is observed in
patient-derived neuroepithelial stem cells.
Conclusion: Due to the unique translocation and the pro-
band’s phenotype matching the MINK1 linked literature, we sug-
gest
MINK1
as
novel
gene
causing
autism,
epilepsy,
and
osteoporosis.
References: -.
Grants: Swedish Research Council (2019-02078), Swedish Rare
Diseases Research foundation (Sällsyntafonden) and the Swedish
Brain Foundation (FO2020-0351).
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
576
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P15.007.D First Genome-ﬁrst identiﬁcation of a chromosomal
balanced rearrangement responsible for a recessive disease: a
case of renal tubular dysgenesis
Nicolas Chatron1;2, Claire Goursaud3, Charlotte Dubucs4;5, Jacque-
line Aziza5, Stéphane Decramer6, Blandine Hougas7, Dominique
Chauveau8, Julien Thevenon9;10, Damien Sanlaville1;2, Laurence
Michel-Calemard3
1Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de Génétique, Lyon, France; 2Univ
Lyon, UCBL1, INMG, CNRS UMR5310, INSERM U1217, Lyon, France;
3Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de Biochimie, Lyon, France; 4CHU de
Toulouse, Service de Génétique médicale, Toulouse, France; 5IUCT
Oncopôle, Service d’Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Toulouse,
France;
6CHU de Toulouse, Service de Pédiatrie – Néphrologie
Médecine Interne et Hypertension, Hôpital des Enfants, Toulouse,
France; 7Centre d’échographie des Carmes, Toulouse, France; 8CHU
de Toulouse, Département de Néphrologie et Transplantation
d’organes, Toulouse, France;
9CHU Grenoble Alpes, Service de
Génétique, Grenoble, France; 10Laboratoire AURAGEN, Lyon, France.
Background/Objectives: Sequence resolution of balanced struc-
tural variation is now possible at scale through genome sequen-
cing. Forty percent of karyotype visible de novo balanced
rearrangements could be considered pathogenic once reached
genic resolution and showing either direct disruption or a position
effect. For recessive diseases, simultaneous detection of structural
and nucleotide variants on both alleles makes genome sequen-
cing the most comprehensive approach. Herein, we report the
case of a stillborn male presenting with renal tubular dysgenesis
(RTD). A heterozygous paternal single nucleotide variant of
unknown signiﬁcance in AGTR1 was identiﬁed through panel
sequencing. Biallelic variants of AGTR1 are responsible for an
autosomal recessive form of frequently lethal RTD.
Methods: Genome sequencing was used as a ﬁrst-tier cyto-
genetics test also able to identify a differential diagnosis.
Results: A maternally inherited balanced reciprocal translocation
disrupting AGTR1 was identiﬁed by whole genome sequencing and
conﬁrmed through standard karyotyping, FISH techniques and
breakpoint PCR followed by Sanger sequencing.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report of a compound heterozygosity
for a nucleotide variant and a balanced rearrangement ﬁrst identi-
ﬁed through genome sequencing. We anticipate that such obser-
vation will now become possible. We also discuss the dual genetic
counselling on RTD and the risk of unbalanced rearrangement of this
balanced translocation. This case highlights the “compound exper-
tise” required to maximize the diagnostic yield of genomic testing.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16 NEW TECHNOLOGIES AND APPROACHES
P16.002.B Cost-effective, collaborative approach to prioritise
variants of unknown signiﬁcance from whole genome
sequencing data: unexplained end stage renal disease
exemplar
Katie Kerr1;2, Caoimhe McKenna2, Diya Thomas1, Jill Kilner1, Cheryl
Flanagan2, Shane McKee2, Amy Jayne McKnight1
1Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom; 2Belfast Health
& Social Care Trust, Northern Ireland Genomic Medicine Centre,
Belfast, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: The Northern Ireland Genomic Medicine
Centre (NIGMC) recruited 444 rare disease probands to the
100,000 Genomes Project for whole genome sequencing. Forty-
one probands had renal phenotypes, including nine participants
with unexplained end-stage renal disease (ESRD) who remained
undiagnosed following initial analysis by the NIGMC. We per-
formed individual ‘deep-dives’ to prioritise variants of unknown
signiﬁcance (VUS) for follow-up analyses.
Methods: The top ﬁve ranked variants from Exomiser were
prioritised for investigation. A custom-designed ‘deep-dive’ tem-
plate was used to extract relevant information from diverse
sources including: OMIM morbidity, gnomAD allele counts, REVEL
pathogenicity, and gnomAD Z / probability loss-of-function scores.
Findings were reviewed collaboratively with clinical geneticists
and academic research scientists from the NIGMC to identify
plausible VUS. The kidney speciﬁc public database NephroSeq was
utilised to further explore the biological function of genes
with VUS.
Results: Of the nine probands with unexplained ESRD, six
phenotypically plausible VUS were identiﬁed within ﬁve indivi-
duals. This included splice donor variants within pseudohy-
poaldosteronism associated WNK1, missense / frameshift variants
within the renal speciﬁc gene BBS9 associated with Bardet-Biedl
syndrome, and a splice region variant within LAMC1 which has
prior associations with increased ESRD risk.
Conclusion: This study highlights the potentials of deeply
reviewing VUS from WGS data for patients with unexplained ESRD,
as well as the beneﬁts of clinical and academic collaboration for
capitalising on VUS which could not feasibly within routine clinical
services. Further functional analysis of these VUS is underway,
including long read sequencing and functional follow-up.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.003.C CRISPR/Cas9-induced gene conversion between
ATAD3 paralogs
Shira Yanovsky-Dagan1, Ayala Frumkin1, James Lupski2;3;4, Tamar
Harel1;5
1Hadassah Medical Organization, Department of Genetics, Jerusa-
lem, Israel; 2Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular and
Human Genetics, Houston, TX, United States; 3Baylor College of
Medicine, Human Genome Sequencing Center, Houston, TX, United
States;
4Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, United States;
5Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Faculty of Medicine, Jerusalem,
Israel.
Background/Objectives: Pseudogenes are abundant within the
human genome, and have been long considered non-functional.
However, increasing evidence suggests that gene-pseudogene
interactions can occur at the DNA, RNA, or protein level. Pseu-
dogenes and paralogs can mediate non-allelic homologous
recombination (NAHR) or gene conversion events. The ATAD3
locus on chromosome 1p36.33 contains three paralogs situated in
tandem, and is therefore prone to NAHR-mediated deletions and
duplications associated with severe neurological phenotypes.
Methods: To study the ATAD3 locus further, we aimed to
generate biallelic loss-of-function variants by CRISPR/Cas9 gen-
ome editing in HEK293T cells, using a guide speciﬁc to ATAD3A.
Following limiting dilution and clonal expansion, wells were
Sanger-sequenced to determine the edited sequence. Primers
speciﬁc to ATAD3A, which do not amplify ATAD3B or ATAD3C,
were used to amplify the target locus for sequencing.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
577
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: Following limiting dilution and clonal expansion of
CRISPR/Cas9-edited cells, four wells showed a single population.
Unexpectedly, two of these were found to have an in-frame 13bp
sequence alteration at the cut-site that resulted from gene con-
version, with replacement of the targeted sequence of ATAD3A by
a donor sequence from its paralog, ATAD3B. Chromosomal
microarray did not show larger deletions or duplications at
the locus.
Conclusion: We highlight the complexity of CRISPR/Cas9
design and recombination repair mechanisms when targeting
genes that have paralogs or pseudogenes. Additionally, we sug-
gest that endogenous gene conversion may be used to repair
missense variants in genes with paralogs or pseudogenes.
References: Harel, T., et al. (2016). Am J Hum Genet 99, 831-845.
Grants: ISF 1663/17 to TH.
Conﬂict of Interest: Shira Yanovsky-Dagan: None declared,
Ayala Frumkin: None declared, James Lupski Stock ownership in
23andMe, J.R.L. is a paid consultant for Regeneron Genetics Cen-
ter, and is a co-inventor on multiple United States and European
patents related to molecular diagnostics for inherited neuro-
pathies, eye diseases, and bacterial genomic ﬁngerprinting. The
Department of Molecular and Human Genetics at Baylor College of
Medicine receives revenue from clinical genetic testing conducted
at Baylor Genetics (BG) Laboratories. J.R.L serves on the Scientiﬁc
Advisory Board of BG., Tamar Harel: None declared.
P16.004.D Application of droplet digital PCR to the molecular
characterization of recurrent deletions of the NF1 locus
Laurence PACOT1;2, Dominique Vidaud1;2, Lucie Orhant1, Nicolas
Vaucouleur1,
Theodora
Maillard1,
Ingrid
Laurendeau2,
Juliette
Nectoux1, Eric Pasmant1;2
1Hôpital Cochin, Fédération de génétique et médecine génomique,
AP-HP.Centre - Université de Paris, Service de médecine génomique
des maladies de système et d’organe, Paris, France; 2Cochin Institute,
Inserm U1016 - CNRS UMR8104 - Université de Paris, CARPEM, Paris,
France.
Background/Objectives:
Neuroﬁbromatosis
type
1
(NF1)
is
caused by loss-of-function variants in the NF1 gene, among which
~5-10% are deletion of the whole NF1 locus. Three recurrent types
of deletions have been described this far. They are caused by non-
allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) mediated by low-copy
repeats (LCR) at the NF1 locus. Here, we describe a new approach
using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) to quickly and easily distinguish
the recurrent deletions of the NF1 locus from atypical deletions.
Methods: A total of 121 index cases with an NF1 deletion were
included. All patients were phenotypically described and 109 had
an MLPA typing (1). Seven ddPCR probe sets distributed along the
NF1 locus were selected to closely delimitate the three recurrent
deletion types.
Results: Among the 121 deletions analyzed: 74 were type-1
(61%), 22 type-2 (18%), 5 type-3 (4%), and 20 showed an atypical
proﬁle (17%). Among the 109 patients who had an MLPA analysis,
106 had perfectly matched results with ddPCR. Two of the dis-
cordant results might be due to an atypical breakpoint located
between the telomeric ddPCR probe and the closest MLPA probe,
located 223kb telomerically. The third discordant result showed a
type-2 proﬁle in MLPA, but the results in ddPCR clearly indicate no
deletion of the SUZ12 gene, a proﬁle that was previously named
“group #2A” (2).
Conclusion: We developed a quantitative, sensitive, and efﬁ-
cient ddPCR approach to characterize recurrent deletions of the
NF1 locus.
References: (1) Pacot et al. Cancers 2021.
(2) Kehrer-Sawatzki & Cooper. Hum Genet 2021.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.005.A Next generation sequencing analysis in clinical
practice of cardiomyopathies diagnostics
Iveta Boronova1, Jarmila Bernasovská2, Eva Petrejčíková3, Michaela
Zigová3
1University of Prešov, Biology, Prešov, Slovakia; 1University of Prešov,
Biology, Prešov, Slovakia;
1University of Prešov, Biology, Prešov,
Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: The aim of our study was application of
NGS technology for evaluation of MYBPC3 gene sequence variants
included in the pathogenesis of cardiomyopathies. We point out
to advantages of NGS technologies and utilization of the modern
methods of molecular diagnostics in clinical practice.
Methods: The next-generation sequencing technology by
IlluminaHiSeq 2500 platform was used to detect sequence variants
in 37 Slovak patients with diagnosed cardiomyopathy by whole
exome sequencing. Detected sequence variants were evaluated
using Polyphen-2, SIFT and MutationTaster algorithms.
Results: We identiﬁed 47 sequence variants of 27 genes. Our
analyses were focused to evaluation of sequence variants of
MYBPC3 gene. NGS analyses identiﬁed the novel MYBPC3 gene
sequence variants: rs35078470, rs34580776, rs138753870 with
minor allele frequency (MAF)<0.01.
Conclusion: The results of the study support the potential role
of detected variants in Slovak patients with cardiomyopathy.
These sequence variants may be susceptibility alleles determining
clinical phenotype. The effect of this variant in pathogenesis of
cardiomyopathies requires functional studies.
References: Yamada T, Nomura S. Recent Findings Related to
Cardiomyopathy
and
Genetics.
Int
J
Mol
Sci.
2021
Nov
20;22(22):12522.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222212522.
PMID:
34830403; PMCID: PMC8623065.
TANJORE, R. R., et al., 2008. MYBPC3 gene variations in hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy patients in India. Vol. 24, No. 2, p. 127-
130. In: Canadian Journal of Cardiology. ISSN: 0828-282X.
Grants: KEGA 032PU-4/2021: “Innovation of the educational
process - implementation of new knowledges of Virology and NGS
technology in teaching of biological subjects”.
Conﬂict of Interest: Iveta Boronova University of Prešov, Grant
KEGA 032PU-4/2021, projec leader, Jarmila Bernasovská University
of Prešov, Grant KEGA 032PU-4/2021, co-investigator of the pro-
ject., Eva Petrejčíková University of Prešov, KEGA 032PU-4/2021,
representative of the project manager, Michaela Zigová University
of Prešov, KEGA 032PU-4/2021, co-investigator of the project.
P16.006.B Approaches for enhancing of HDR-based genome
editing efﬁcacy
Arina Anuchina1, Milyausha Zaynitdinova1, Anna Demchenko1,
Nadezhda Evtushenko2, Olesya Mishina1, Svetlana Smirnikhina1,
Alexander Lavrov1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Laboratory of genome editing,
Moscow, Russian Federation; 2Pirogov Russian National Research
Medical University, Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic
Technologies for Biomedicine, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives: There are many types of genome edit-
ing enhancing approaches. They include cell cycle synchroniza-
tion, activation of homology directed repair (HDR) and inhibition
of non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), fusion of Cas9 with DNA
repair participants, etc. In current study we decided to test
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
578
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
different methods for HDR enhancing: HDR activation by SCAI
protein, NHEJ inhibition through MAD2L2 knockdown, NUDT16L1
knockdown/overexpression and SCR7 treatment.
Methods: Experiments were performed in HEK293T cells with
stably integrated eGFP gene with mutation c.337delG (eGFPmut).
Genome editing by CRISPR-Cas9 (eSpCas9(1.1)) in combination
with ssODN should recover wt eGFP by insertion G nucleotide.
SCAI was used as Cas9-SCAI fusion protein, knockdown of MAD2L2
and NUDT16L1 was performed by siRNAs transfected 24h before
CRISPR-Cas9 plasmid. NUDT16L1 overexpression was achieved by
adding additional plasmid coding this gene 24h before CRISPR-
Cas9 plasmid. SCR7 were added with CRISPR-Cas9 plasmid. HDR
was analyzed by counting GFP+ cells by ﬂow cytometry and
through TIDER analysis.
Results: MAD2L2 knockdown increased corrected alleles per-
centage 3,7 times, NUDT16L1 knockdown - 1,8 times, SCR7
treatment - 1,7 times. GFP+ cells percentage increase was 10.2-
fold and 6-fold for MAD2L2 and NUDT16L1 knockdown, respec-
tively, and SCR7 treatment didn’t induce any differences in eGFP
ﬂuorescence. NUDT16L1 overexpression and Cas9-SCAI fusion did
not affect percentage of corrected alleles, however, decreased the
number of GFP-positive cells 2.5 times both.
Conclusion: Thus, we discovered that MAD2L2 and NUDT16L1
knockdown, and also SCR7 treatment enhance the efﬁciency of
CRISPR-induced homology directed repair. These methods could
possibly be combined in further experiments.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.007.C Solving a de-novo microdeletion PGT-M case by
combining long and short range PCR with NGS
Orit Freireich1, shira shaviv1, elina farhi1, David A Zeevi1, Omer
Murik1, gheona Altarescu1
1Shaare zedek medical center, jerusalem, Israel.
Background/Objectives: A 34yo endometrial cancer patient was
referred for PGT-M of a de-novo microdeletion in MSH2. It was not
possible to diagnose the deletion and to construct a haplotype
with standard molecular PGT techniques (informative markers
surrounding the deletion), as the microdeletion breakpoints were
unknown.
Methods: Precise deletion breakpoints were mapped by
transposase-based library prep and next generation sequencing
(NGS) of a long PCR amplicon derived from the patient’s genomic
DNA spanning exons 8-11 of MSH2. Forty single nucleotide
polymorphic (SNPs) sites within the deletion were genotyped in
the patient and spouse by high throughput short amplicon
sequencing. Haplotype informative SNP sites were used for PGT-M
of blastomere biopsies from the patient’s previously frozen
embryos.
Results: Long amplicon analysis revealed an 18kb sized het-
erozygous deletion in the patient with precise breakpoints in
introns 8 and 10 of MSH2. Forty highly polymorphic SNPs within
the deletion were then concurrently genotyped in both the
patient and her spouse by targeted short amplicon sequencing
resulting in the detection of 6 informative SNPs (i.e., hemizygous
in patient vs homozygous opposite allele in spouse). Using these
SNPs, together with informative deletion-ﬂanking microsatellites,
haplotype phasing of the de novo deletion was attained. PGT-M
was performed and diagnosis was achieved all embryos.
Conclusion: We describe state-of-the-art NGS technologies in
the detection of precise deletion breakpoints and in genotyping
long segments of genomic DNA where traditional methodology
made impossible to perform PGT-M. Accordingly, we highly
recommend this approach as a general solution for de-novo PGT-
M of microdeletions.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.008.D Assessing the digenic model in rare disorders using
population whole-genome sequencing data
Nerea Moreno-Ruiz1;2, Genomics England Research Consortium3,
Oscar Lao1, Juan Ignacio Aróstegui4;5, Haﬁd Laayouni1;6, Ferran
Casals2;7
1Institute of Evolutionary Biology (UPF-CSIC), Department of Experi-
mental and Health Sciences, Barcelona, Spain; 2Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, Genomics Core Facility, Department of Experimental and
Health Sciences, Barcelona, Spain;
3Genomics England, London,
United Kingdom; 4Hospital Clínic - Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdi-
ques August Pi i Sunyer, Department of Immunology, Barcelona,
Spain; 5Universitat de Barcelona, School of Medicine, Barcelona,
Spain;
6ESCI-UPF, Bioinformatics Studies, Barcelona, Spain;
7Uni-
versitat de Barcelona, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and
Statistics, Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: An important fraction of patients with
rare disorders remains with no clear genetic diagnostic, even after
whole-exome or whole-genome sequencing. This poses a difﬁculty
in giving adequate treatment and genetic counseling. The analysis
of genomic data in rare disorders mostly considers the presence of
single gene variants in coding regions that follow a concrete
monogenic mode of inheritance. A digenic inheritance, with var-
iants in two functionally-related genes in the same individual, is a
plausible alternative that might explain the genetic basis of the
disease in some cases. If this is the case, digenic disease combina-
tions should be absent or underrepresented in healthy individuals.
Methods: In this work, we develop a method to evaluate the
signiﬁcance of digenic combinations by interrogating whole-
genome data from the Genomics England 100,000 Genomes
Project cohort.
Results: We apply the method to previously reported digenic
combinations successfully validating one that has been suggested
to cause a rare immune disorder.
Conclusion: Beyond the validation of possible pathogenic
associations, we also suggest that this approach will be relevant
with the advent of new sequencing efforts in projects including
hundreds of thousands of samples.
References: This research was made possible through access
to the data and ﬁndings generated by the 100,000 Genomes
Project; http://www.genomicsengland.co.uk..
Grants: Grant SAF2015-68472-C2-2-R, Ministerio de Economía y
Competitividad
(Spain)
(FC),
RTI2018-096824-B-C22,
Agencia
Estatal de Investigación (Spain) (FC), Direcció General de Recerca-
Generalitat de Catalunya (2017SGR-702) (FC), CERCA Programme/
Generalitat de Catalunya (JIA), and RTI2018-096824-B-C21, Spanish
Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities co-ﬁnanced by
European Regional Development Fund (JIA).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.010.B Proximity extension assay in combination with
Next-Generation Sequencing for high-throughput proteome-
wide analysis in large population health studies
Cynthia Lawley1, Lotta Wik2, Niklas Nordberg2, John Broberg3,
Johan Björkesten4, Erika Assarsson4, Sara Henriksson2, Ida Grund-
berg5, Christina Westerberg2, Elin Liljeroth2, Adam Falck2, Martin
Lundberg4, Sarantis Chlamydas5, Tala Khosroheidari6, Yan Chen7,
Anders Malarstig7
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
579
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Olink, Population Health, San Francisco, United States;
2Olink,
Research & Development, Uppsala, Sweden; 3Olink, Data Science,
Uppsala, Sweden;
4Olink, Innovation Center, Uppsala, Sweden;
5Olink, Scientiﬁc Affairs, Uppsala, Sweden; 6Olink, Marketing, San
Diego, United States; 7Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Understanding the dynamics of the
human proteome is crucial for identifying biomarkers to be used as
measurable indicators for disease severity and progression, patient
stratiﬁcation, and drug development. The Proximity Extension Assay
(PEA) is a technology that translates protein information into
actionable insights across large samples sizes in both healthy and
disease samples. The high-throughput nature of the assay is
enabled by linking protein-speciﬁc antibodies to DNA-encoded tags
that can be read out on a next generation sequencer.
Methods: We have combined the PEA technology described
above with automated sample preparation and a high-throughput
sequencing readout for parallel measurement of ~3,000 proteins
for up to 384 samples at a time, generating over 1 million data
points per run.
Results: Characterizing the proteome alongside genetic and
clinical data enables a pQTL framework to not only validate known
clinical targets and identify new clinical targets but to also suggest
repurposing
opportunities
of
clinical
candidates
for
new
indications.
Conclusion: Here we will summarize results where proteomics
is impacting large population health studies (e.g., UK Biobank,
SCALLOP) to advance precision and personalized medicine.
References: Folkersen et al. 2020. Genomic and drug target
evaluation of 90 cardiovascular proteins in 30,931 individuals.
Nature
Metabolism,
2,
1135-1148.
https://www.nature.com/
articles/s42255-020-00287-2.
Wik et al 2021. Proximity extension assay in combination with
next-generation sequencing for high-throughput proteome-wide
analysis. Molecular and Cellular Proteomics. Volume 20, 100168,
January 01, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcpro.2021.100168.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Cynthia Lawley Olink, Illumina, Lotta Wik
Olink, Niklas Nordberg Olink, John Broberg Olink, Johan Björkesten
Olink, Erika Assarsson Olink, Sara Henriksson Olink, Ida Grundberg
Olink, Christina Westerberg Olink, Elin Liljeroth Olink, Adam Falck
Olink, Martin Lundberg Olink, Sarantis Chlamydas Olink, Tala
Khosroheidari Olink, Illumina, Yan Chen: None declared, Anders
Malarstig Pﬁzer.
P16.011.C Blood RNA-seq in diagnostic genomic medicine
Andrew Douglas1;2, Htoo Wai1, Carolina Jaramillo Oquendo1, Jenny
Lord1, David Hunt3, N Simon Thomas4, Diana Baralle1;3
1University of Southampton, Human Development and Health,
Southampton, United Kingdom; 2Oxford University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford,
United Kingdom; 3University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation
Trust, Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, United King-
dom; 4Salisbury District Hospital, Wessex Regional Genetics Labora-
tory, Salisbury, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) can identify
changes in splicing not readily apparent through DNA analysis,
allowing better functional interpretation of genetic variants of
uncertain signiﬁcance (VUSs). Blood is the most readily available
clinical tissue for RNA analysis. However, the degree to which
blood RNA-seq provides adequate coverage for analysing splicing
in different genes has not been well studied. Here, we have
investigated the sensitivity of RNA-seq for the detection of splicing
and other abnormalities.
Methods: RNA was extracted from blood in 56 patients with
likely genetic disorders, 33 with candidate VUSs. RNA-seq was
performed in three batches at 70M 150-bp paired-end reads per
sample with STAR alignment to GRCh38. Transcripts per million
(TPM) values were calculated for all genes using stranded raw read
counts. Splice junction and intronic reads were counted, ﬁltered
and annotated for skewed usage. UK Genomic Medicine Service
(GMS) PanelApp gene panels were used to ﬁlter outputs.
Results: 72% of GMS genes had TPM>1 and 65% of observed
annotated junctions had sufﬁcient average coverage to detect
alternative splicing occurring at a 0.5 usage level (55% at 0.25
usage, 42% at 0.1 usage). Genes with identiﬁed splicing abnorm-
alities were not consistently down-regulated when compared
across samples within the same RNA-seq batch. The RNA effects of
previously identiﬁed chromosomal microdeletions were generally
visible as contiguous regions of decreased gene expression.
Skewed X-inactivation was identiﬁed in one case.
Conclusion: Blood RNA-seq can detect not only splicing
abnormalities but also chromosomal microdeletions and skewed
X-inactivation.
References:.
Grants: NIHR Research Professorship awarded to Diana Baralle
(RP-2016-07-011).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.013.A Medical costs of children admitted to the neonatal
intensive care unit: the role and possible economic impact of
rapid exome sequencing in early diagnosis
Richelle Olde Keizer1;2, A. Marouane3, A. Chantal Deden3, Wendy
Van Zelst-Stams3, Willem de Boode4, Willem Keusters1, Lidewij
Henneman5, Johannes Kristian Ploos van Amstel6, Gerardus Fre-
derix1;6, Lisenka Vissers*2
1Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands;
2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Department of
Human
Genetics,
Nijmegen,
Netherlands;
3Radboud
University
Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Department
of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 4Radboud University
Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Amalia
Children’s Hospital, Department of Neonatology, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands; 5Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Department
of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 6Utrecht University
Medical Center, Department of Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Genetic disorders are likely under-
diagnosed in neonates admitted to the neonatal intensive care
unit (NICU) as testing is not always performed, not even for all
neonates presenting with congenital anomalies (CA), despite their
strong correlation with genetic defects. We modelled the cost
impact of implementing of trio-based rapid exome sequencing
(trio-rES) for neonates admitted at the NICU.
Methods: To determine baseline healthcare costs, we retro-
spectively
collected
postnatal
healthcare
data
of
neonates
admitted to level IV NICU at Radboudumc (October 2013-October
2015), and linked these to unit costs. Next, scenarios were based
on replacing current genetic tests by trio-rES, combined with
clinical preselection of neonates based on the presence/absence
of (multiple) CAs.
Results: Overall, on average €26,627 was spent per patient, of
which 2.3% involved genetic testing. We next modelled four
scenarios. First, implementing trio-rES for all neonates without
clinical preselection will increase overall healthcare costs by
22.2%. Contrastingly, implementation of trio-rES for neonates with
multiple CAs, but leaving neonates with an isolated CA untested,
will be cost-neutral. We next modelled trio-rES for all patients with
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
580
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
CAs, increasing the average per patient healthcare costs by 5.3%,
with a maximum of 5.5% when correcting for genetic diagnoses
that are undetectable by rES.
Conclusion: Implementation of trio-based rES for all neonates
with CAs will lead to a limited increase in overall healthcare
budget, but maximizes the potential for diagnosing neonates with
rare genetic disorders and personalized treatment options.
References: Not applicable.
Grants: ZonMw; 843002608 and 846002003. European Union’s
Horizon 2020; 779257.
Conﬂict of Interest: Richelle Olde Keizer: None declared, A.
Marouane: None declared, A. Chantal Deden: None declared,
Wendy Van Zelst-Stams: None declared, Willem de Boode: None
declared, Willem Keusters: None declared, Lidewij Henneman:
None declared, Johannes Kristian Ploos van Amstel: None
declared, Gerardus Frederix: None declared, Lisenka Vissers*
ZonMw; No. 843002608 and No. 846002003. European Union’s
Horizon 2020; No. 779257.
P16.014.B Proteoform Detection in Deep Plasma Proteomics
through Peptide Expression Correlation and Genomic
Mapping
Jian Huang1, Yingxiang Huang1, Margaret Donovan1, Daniel
Hornburg1, Marwin Ko1, Ryan Benz1, Theo Platt1, Asim Siddiqui1,
Seraﬁm Batzoglou1, Omid Farokhzad1
1Seer Inc., Redwood City, United States.
Background/Objectives: Biological complexity exceeds what can
be explained by the number of protein-coding genes, however, can
be largely explained by alterative splicing and post-translational
modiﬁcations of proteins yielding multiple molecular forms of a
protein (proteoforms). The ability to perform quantitative proteomic
experiments across a large cohort can improve proteoform infer-
ence by using peptide quantitative proﬁles. In this work, we
demonstrate the power of the Proteograph™Product Suite, which
leverages physiochemically distinct nanoparticles for unbiased,
deep, and rapid proteomics at scale to systematically infer proteo-
forms from plasma samples using peptide abundances and geno-
mic mapping.
Methods: Proteomes of 141 non-small cell lung cancer and
control plasma samples were proﬁled using Proteograph and LC-
MS/MS. For all detected peptides within a given protein group, we
calculated the Pearson pairwise correlation of abundances. To
identify clusters of similarly abundant peptides, we then applied
the silhouette method to obtain the optimal number of clusters
and used K-means clustering on the correlation of peptide
abundances, followed by ﬁltering to ensure clusters were distinct.
Next, peptides were mapped to known protein isoforms from the
Ensembl database. We then inferred the presence of a proteoform
if the known protein isoform explained the peptide clusters.
Results: Some identiﬁed proteoforms included BMP1, which
has dual role in cancer possibly explained by short and long
proteoforms, and Collagen XVIII, which has a short proteoform
byproduct with anti-angiogenic effects.
Conclusion: Overall, this work demonstrates Proteograph uti-
lity to generate unbiased and deep plasma proteome proﬁles
enabling the inference of biologically important proteoforms.
References: Blume et al. Nat. Comm. (2020).
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jian Huang Signiﬁcant. Employee of Seer
Inc., Modest. Own stocks at Seer Inc., Yingxiang Huang Sig-
niﬁcant. Employee of Seer Inc., Modest. Own stocks at Seer Inc.,
Margaret Donovan Signiﬁcant. Employee of Seer Inc., Modest.
Own stocks at Seer Inc., Daniel Hornburg Signiﬁcant. Employee
of Seer Inc., Modest. Own stocks at Seer Inc., Marwin Ko
Signiﬁcant. Employee of Seer Inc., Modest. Own stocks at Seer
Inc., Ryan Benz Signiﬁcant. Employee of Seer Inc., Modest. Own
stocks at Seer Inc., Theo Platt Signiﬁcant. Employee of Seer Inc.,
Modest. Own stocks at Seer Inc., Asim Siddiqui Signiﬁcant.
Employee of Seer Inc., Modest. Own stocks at Seer Inc., Seraﬁm
Batzoglou Signiﬁcant. Employee of Seer Inc., Modest. Own stocks
at Seer Inc., Omid Farokhzad Signiﬁcant. founder of Seer Inc.,
Modest. Own stocks at Seer Inc.
P16.015.C Genome-wide CpG methylation calling with
standard HiFi whole genome sequencing
Justin Blethrow1, Daniel Portik1, Kristofor Nyquist1, Aaron Wenger1,
Richard Hall1
1Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, United States.
Background/Objectives: Both the genome and epigenome con-
tribute to inherited disease. While genome sequencing has been
applied at large scale, epigenome sequencing remains more dif-
ﬁcult and expensive and less frequently used. Here we extend
PacBio HiFi sequencing to simultaneously generate accurate
genomes and epigenomes with a single library prep and
sequencing experiment.
Methods: In PacBio sequencing, the nucleotide incorporation
rate is sensitive to epigenetic modiﬁcations like 5-methylcytosine,
but the signal is spread over multiple positions and is challenging
to detect in single sequencing passes. HiFi sequencing observes
the same molecule across multiple serial passes, opening new
approaches to detect 5mC. We implemented a multilayer con-
volution neural network to combine kinetics from multiple passes
and assign a probability of methylation to each CpG. We trained
the model on fully unmethylated (whole-genome ampliﬁcation)
and fully methylated (M.SssI-treated) reads.
Results: HiFi methylation calling accuracy for individual CpG
sites in single reads (i.e. 1X coverage) is around 85%. At 30X
coverage for Genome in a Bottle samples, HiFi CpG methylation
correlates >95% with bisulﬁte sequencing, or >99% at the level of
CpG
islands.
HiFi
methylation
calling
also
recapitulates
biologically-relevant hypomethylation in the undifferentiated
haploid CHM13 cell line, including unique patterns across chro-
mosomes. In diploid samples – including rare disease samples –
HiFi reads can be phased by sequence to reveal parental
imprinting for genes like GNAS and DIRAS3.
Conclusion: HiFi sequencing provides an approach to generate
more accurate
genomes than short-read sequencing while
simultaneously providing the epigenome, offering the opportunity
to understand new aspects of evolution, disease, and diversity.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Justin Blethrow Employed by Paciﬁc
Biosciences, Daniel Portik Employed by Paciﬁc Biosciences, Kris-
tofor Nyquist Employed by Paciﬁc Biosciences, Aaron Wenger
Employed by Paciﬁc Biosciences, Richard Hall Employed by Paciﬁc
Biosciences.
P16.016.D By enabling same day synthesis of hydrolysis
probes on the SYNTAX System, Enzymatic DNA Synthesis
(EDS) promises to unleash the development of multiplexed
qPCR assays
Benoit Derrien1, Nadège Tardieu2, Henri Lachaize2, Anaïs Vallette2,
Erwan Grolleau2, Charles Rouillard2, Gabriel De Crozals3, Christine
Peponnet2, Florence Mahé1;4, Xavier Godron4
1DNA Script, Application, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France; 2DNA Script,
Synthesis Development, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France;
3DNA Script,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
581
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Surface Chemistry, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France;
4DNA Script, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
Background/Objectives:
Quantitative
PCR
(qPCR)
was
ﬁrst
developed in the early 90’s and has remained one of the gold
standard techniques used in modern day gene expression studies.
By implementing the synthesis of hydrolysis probes on the SYN-
TAX System, DNA Script opens access to the rapid on demand
synthesis of good quality qPCR probes.
Methods: Among the various qPCR approaches developed, the
most popular techniques utilize intercalating dyes and hydrolysis
probes. Compared to intercalating dyes, hydrolysis probes provide
several advantages including high speciﬁcity and the possibility of
multiplexing, thus enabling the detection of multiple target genes
within a single reaction.
Results: In this study, we demonstrate the performance of
hydrolysis probes generated using DNA Script’s proprietary
enzymatic DNA synthesis (EDS) technology. By combining EDS
and labelling chemistry within the SYNTAX System, we enable the
fully automated synthesis of 32 hydrolysis probes and their
associated primer pairs in less than 12 hours directly in the lab.
The labelling reaction enables the user to position the labels
inferentially at the 5’, 3’ or internally while blocking the 3’end of
the probe. Our qPCR probes are available in 5 different colours
and were tested within a multiplexed experimental design using
two different gene expression models: 1) the validation of a shRNA
cell line, 2) the analysis of the relative expression of two genes in
breast cancer tumours.
Conclusion: By enabling same day synthesis of hydrolysis
probes, the SYNTAX System alleviates one of the bottlenecks
associated with hydrolysis probes, providing next-day results.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.017.A RNAseq from dried blood spots cards improves
diagnosis in rare genetic diseases
Ruslan Al-Ali1, Mandy Radefeldt1, Najim Ameziane1, Sabrina
Lemke1, Christian Beetz1, Peter Bauer1
1CENTOGENE GmbH, Rostock, Germany.
Background/Objectives: A considerable fraction of genetic
diagnostic analyses remains negative or ambiguous even when
comprehensive approaches such es exome sequencing or gen-
ome sequencing are applied. This is largely due to non-coding
causative variants escaping attention (false-negative reports) or
misjudgement of in silico prediction tools (uncertain reports).
Transcriptome analysis helps to solve these issues but faces
challenges related to RNA stability in pre-analytical samples
and logistics of those precarious samples. We established RNA-
seq protocol that utilizes dried blood spots on easy-to-ship
ﬁlter cards.
Methods: Several types of ﬁlter cards were probed with EDTA
blood and stored under distinct conditions modelling typical
shipment conditions for differing durations. Subsequently, com-
pared protocols differed regarding RNA extraction, depletion of
unwanted RNA species, library preparation and next-generation
sequencing.
Results: A tentatively optimized protocol applies a proprietary
ﬁlter card (CentoCard®), uses four blood spots covering a total
area of ~3 cm2, and involves a hemoglobin RNA depletion and
polyA-tail capture. Up to 10 days from sampling preparation, we
obtain >100 ng RNA with RIN score of 3-6, and could generate
5-12 million uniquely mapped RNA-seq reads on average,
respectively. The sequence coverage for genes typically expressed
in blood was sufﬁcient to detect the pathological mutations and
thereby conﬁrm rare genetic disorders in our test cohort.
Conclusion: Further optimization will enable us to offer an
innovative genetic diagnostic service that combines DNA-based
and RNA-based data from the very same specimen, i.e. dried blood
spot ﬁltercard for achieving higher diagnostic yield and more
deﬁnite genetic diagnoses.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ruslan Al-Ali Employed by Centogene,
Mandy Radefeldt Employed by Centogene, Najim Ameziane Pre-
viously employed by Centogene, Sabrina Lemke Employed by
Centogene, Christian Beetz Employed by Centogene, Peter Bauer
Employed by Centogene.
P16.018.B Integrated heteroduplex correction in PacBio’s
circular consensus algorithm
Derek Barnett1, John Harting1, Walter Lee1, Armin Töpfer1, Fritz
Sedlazeck2, Jenny Ekholm1, Nina Gonzaludo1, Justin Blethrow1,
James Drake1, Zev Kronenberg1
1Paciﬁc Biosciences (PacBio), Menlo Park, United States;
2Baylor
College of Medicine, Human Genome Sequencing Center, Houston,
United States.
Background/Objectives: A heteroduplex is a double-stranded
sequence comprised of two non-complementary strands that can
form during PCR. These mixed-template artifacts produce mis-
leading results in downstream analysis, e.g., false haplotypes
during diplotyping. Unlike short-read technologies, PacBio Single-
Molecule Real-Time sequencing produces strand-level base calls.
Heteroduplex signatures can be directly observed and corrected
using the stranded sub-read data. Our new method is integrated
in the circular consensus sequence algorithm which generates
accurate HiFi data from sub-reads.
Methods: The transformation of PacBio subreads into high
accuracy HiFi reads is done by the circular consensus sequence
(CCS) algorithm. During CCS, an intermediate draft sequence is
generated, and subreads are mapped and aligned to the draft. The
heteroduplex algorithm (hd-ﬁnder) takes the subread alignments
and generates a read pileup whereby variants are identiﬁed. At
each site, the bases are sorted and counted by strand. The 2x2
count data is subjected to a Fisher’s exact test. The fraction of
signiﬁcant sites across the draft is used to determine if a read
contains heteroduplex. Heteroduplex ﬂagged reads are split by
strand and reprocessed resulting in two HiFi reads, one for each
strand.
Results: We demonstrate the accuracy of the hd-ﬁnder algo-
rithm is >94% by using a heteroduplex enriched amplicon library.
We also show that applying the hd-ﬁnder to ampliﬁed datasets
improves the quality of downstream analysis of important
human genes.
Conclusion: The heteroduplex algorithm is a powerful new
method for improving HiFi amplicon targets. The method has
been released (v6.3.) and is documented https://ccs.how/faq/
mode-heteroduplex-ﬁltering.html.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Derek Barnett Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc
Biosciences, John Harting Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc Biosciences,
Walter Lee Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc Biosciences, Armin Töpfer
Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc Biosciences, Fritz Sedlazeck Research
funding from Paciﬁc Biosciences and ONT, Jenny Ekholm Paciﬁc
Biosciences, Paciﬁc Biosciences, Nina Gonzaludo Paciﬁc Bios-
ciences, Paciﬁc Biosciences, Justin Blethrow Paciﬁc Biosciences,
Paciﬁc Biosciences, James Drake Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
582
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Biosciences, Zev Kronenberg Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc Bios-
ciences, Phase Genomics.
P16.019.C Characterizing genetic variants that affect splicing
using CRISPR activation in easily accessible patient cells
Thorkild Terkelsen1;2, Nanna S Mikkelsen2, Iben B Bentsen1;2, Jenny
Blechingberg1, Henning Andersen3, Rasmus O Bak2, Uffe B Jensen1;2
1Aarhus University Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus,
Denmark; 2Aarhus University, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus,
Denmark; 3Aarhus University Hospital, Department of Neurology,
Aarhus, Denmark.
Background/Objectives:
Analysis
of
cDNA
is
the
primary
method to study the impact of rare genomic variants on mRNA
splicing. Many disease genes are not expressed in easily acces-
sible patient cells such as skin ﬁbroblasts. We hypothesized that
CRISPR activation (CRISPRa) would allow splicing analysis of the
myelin protein zero gene (MPZ), where the full-length transcript
is exclusively expressed in Schwann cells of the peripheral ner-
vous system.
Methods: CRISPRa induces gene expression directed by
guide RNAs and a catalytically inactivated Cas9 protein fused to
transcriptional activators (e.g., dCas9-VPR). Thus, to activate full-
length MPZ expression in skin ﬁbroblasts, cells were electro-
porated with dCas9-VPR mRNA and synthetic guide RNAs that
targeted the ﬁrst transcriptional start site of MPZ. Normal
ﬁbroblasts and ﬁbroblasts from a patient with a disruptive
consensus donor splice site variant in intron 2 of MPZ were
analyzed by RT-qPCR and RNA-Seq. Cells were cycloheximide
treated before RNA extraction to protect the transcripts from
nonsense-mediated decay.
Results: CRISPRa strongly upregulated MPZ, including its full-
length isoforms, during the initial days after treatment, followed
by a normalization of gene expression. In patient ﬁbroblasts with
the disruptive splice donor site variant, we detected multiple
novel transcript isoforms that bypassed the splice site. The
abnormal transcripts were only detectable in patient ﬁbroblasts
after CRISPRa and absent from normal ﬁbroblasts induced to
express MPZ.
Conclusion: CRISPRa expands the application of cDNA analysis
to disease genes not expressed in easily accessible patient cells.
References:.
Grants: DFF grant number 9039-00337B.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.020.D Optical Genome Mapping in Routine Human
Genetic Diagnostics - Lessons Learned
Paul Dremsek1, Anna Schachner1, Mateja Smogavec1, Maria
Gerykova Bujalkova1, Franco Laccone1, Jürgen Neesen1
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Center for Pathobiochemistry and
Genetics, Vienna, Austria.
Background/Objectives: Optical Genome Mapping (OGM) is an
emerging method that promises to detect most classes of struc-
tural variants (SVs) of a nuclear genome in a single test. It holds
unique potential where other current methods struggle, e.g. ﬁne-
mapping of translocations or covering repetitive regions. As OGM-
systems are still in their infancy, their meaningful usage needs to
be explored. Here, we present our experience with the Saphyr
OGM-instrument (Bionano Genomics, CA, USA) in a human genetic
setting.
Methods: We analyzed a panel of >100 diagnostic cases with
the Saphyr OGM-instrument and other genetic methods (e.g.
chromosomal analysis, microarray, long-range sequencing) with
emphasis on chromosomal numerical aberrations, balanced and
unbalanced SVs and mosaics of potential clinical signiﬁcance.
Results: Comparison of the Saphyr-system to the other meth-
ods showed a high concordance of most variants. OGM char-
acterized all SVs with a resolution of several kilobases and could
localize rearranged genetic material in most instances. However,
we also encountered several variants of potential clinical rele-
vance that were systematically missed by the OGM-system,
whereas they were detected by karyotyping or microarray. Among
the reasons were insufﬁcient coverage, incomplete calling and
assembly artefacts.
Conclusion: While showcasing OGM’s unique advantages as
physical DNA imaging platform in clinical samples, we also pro-
vide documentation of typical pitfall scenarios. This is indis-
pensable for a prior understanding to infer certain variants with
detection biases. The results raise awareness for variation sig-
natures that are challenging for OGM data analysis, relying on
advanced interpretation beyond automated calling.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.021.A Performance equivalence of the newest generation
SeqStudio Flex Capillary Electrophoresis system with
established CE platforms
Stephen Jackson1, Archana Gupta1, Edgar Schreiber1
1Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, South San Francisco, United States.
Background/Objectives:
Fluorescent
capillary
electrophoresis
(CE) is a ﬂexible genomic analysis method that separates ﬂuor-
escently labeled DNA fragments based on size. It is the foundation
of Sanger sequencing and DNA fragment analysis. The simple
workﬂow, single-base resolution, rapid analysis time, small sample
volume, and ﬂexibility have resulted in widespread adoption for a
variety of applications used in basic, translational, and clinical
research. Applied Biosystems™is the leader and continues to
provide innovative solutions for CE analyses. We leveraged our
experience in the ﬁeld and incorporated many improvements and
innovations into our newest addition to our CE instrument port-
folio, the SeqStudio Flex.
Methods: In this poster, we demonstrate a broad spectrum of
genetic analysis applications and workﬂows that can be run on
this new instrument.
Results: These applications include cell line authentication
(CLA) and human sample matching, microsatellite instability (MSI)
analysis, multiplexed PCR analysis, genome editing efﬁciency
analysis, double-stranded DNA and NGS library QC, rare allele
conﬁrmation, and Sanger sequencing plasmids and viral genomes.
In all cases, we demonstrate that the data quality was equivalent
to data generated on our existing, gold-standard Applied Biosys-
tems™genetic analyzers.
Conclusion: These results will give investigators of human
genetic variation and function the conﬁdence to transition their
research to the new platform while taking full advantage of the
newest innovations.
References: N/A.
Grants: N/A.
Conﬂict of Interest: Stephen Jackson Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,
Archana Gupta Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Edgar Schreiber Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
583
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P16.022.B Efﬁcient, high sensitivity detection of oncogenic
variants with UMIs and target enrichment
Michael Bocek1, Lydia Bonar1, Jean Challacombe1, Richard Gantt1,
Derek Murphy1, Esteban Toro1
1Twist Bioscience, South San Francisco, United States.
Background/Objectives: Early detection can signiﬁcantly improve
clinical outcomes for a number of cancers, but many of the best
current screening methods require invasive procedures. A promis-
ing alternative approach is a liquid biopsy of cell-free DNA (cfDNA)
from plasma. Because tumors generally shed relatively large
amounts of DNA into the circulation, cancer can potentially be
detected by identifying oncogenic variants in cfDNA. This process
generally requires extremely deep sequencing, and in many cases is
limited by the accuracy of next-generation sequencing (NGS).
Methods: One approach to overcoming this limitation is
unique molecular identiﬁers (UMIs), short sequences that uniquely
tag each input DNA molecule prior to preparing NGS libraries. The
approach can further be improved by tagging each original strand
of the DNA molecule, in a technique termed duplex sequencing,
which can correct early PCR errors and/or single-strand DNA
damage events. Here we describe a new library preparation sys-
tem incorporating short, discrete UMI sequences to maximize
sequence distances for error correction.
Results: We show that this system can determine the conver-
sion efﬁciency of NGS libraries. Using the Twist cfDNA Pan-cancer
Reference Standards to simulate a low fraction of tumor DNA in a
healthy background, we demonstrate high sensitivity towards a
variety of oncogenic substitutions, indels and structural variants.
We demonstrate the baseline error rate using unmodiﬁed human
cfDNA, and use the system to determine the mutation frequency
in a synthetic biology application.
Conclusion: In summary, this study demonstrates the utility of
UMIs for a variety of applications in NGS.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Michael Bocek Currently employed with
Twist Bioscience, Lydia Bonar Currently employed with Twist
Bioscience, Jean Challacombe Currently employed with Twist
Bioscience, Richard Gantt Former employee of Twist Bioscience,
Derek Murphy Currently employed with Twist Bioscience, Esteban
Toro Currently employed with Twist Bioscience.
P16.023.C Targeted nanopore sequencing ushers in the era of
long-read sequencing in the clinic
Abderaouf Hamza1, Mathilde Filser1, Kevin Merchadou2, Laeititia
Maillot1, Éléonore Frouin2, Elodie Girard3, Albain Chansavang4;5,
Djihad
Hadjhadj5,
Eric
Pasmant4;5,
Franck
Bourdeaut6;7,
Tina
Alaeitabar3, Sonia Lameiras8, Sylvain Baulande8, Nicolas Servant3,
Victor Renault2, Olivier Delattre1;6;7, Julien Masliah-Planchon1
1Institut Curie, Unité de Génétique Somatique - Genetics Department,
Paris, France; 2Institut Curie, Unité de Bioinformatique Clinique -
Genetics Department, Paris, France; 3Institut Curie, INSERM U900 –
Bioinformatics, Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Computational Sys-
tems. Biology of Cancer., Paris, France; 4Cochin Hospital - Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de Génétique et Biologie
Moléculaire, Paris, France; 5Cochin Institute, INSERM U1016-CNRS
UMR8104, Paris, France; 6Institut Curie, SIREDO (Care, Innovation,
Research in Pediatric, Adolescent and Young Adults Oncology), Paris,
France;
7Institut Curie, INSERM U830 - Cancer, Heterogeneity,
Instability and Plasticity (CHIP), Paris, France; 8Institut Curie, ICGex
- NGS Platform, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: Nanopore sequencing offers attractive
prospects (e.g., methylation analysis and production of long reads,
allowing variant phasing and reliable structural variant (SV)
detection, including gene fusions), but its integration in clinical
laboratory workﬂows has been hampered by its low throughput.
Adaptive sampling (AS)(1), a novel modular target enrichment
method made possible by recent technological advances, can
offset this limitation. The goal of this study was to evaluate the use
of AS in a diagnostic laboratory setting.
Methods: We analysed 24 tumour samples and 2 germline
samples with AS, targeting 570 cancer genes. The analytical per-
formance of SV detection on AS data was compared to nanopore
whole genome sequencing (nWGS) and Paciﬁc Biosciences HiFi
whole genome sequencing (pbWGS) on two samples.
Results: On-target median read depth was 12X (min = 6X,
max = 30X) on a single ﬂow cell, a four-fold improvement over
baseline. Off-target reads were utilized to generate genome-wide
copy number variant (CNV) proﬁles. Base-pair level characteriza-
tion of causal SV was achieved for 24/26 samples. Relevant gene
fusions (C11orf95-RELA, YAP1-MAMLD1, ETV6-NTRK3, MNI-BEND2)
were detected in 5 samples. The analytical performance of AS was
comparable to nWGS and pbWGS. Input DNA quantity (2μg),
library preparation time (1h30), turnaround time (48h) and com-
putational
requirements
were
compatible
with
diagnostic
workﬂows.
Conclusion: Targeted nanopore sequencing is an exciting
addition to the clinical laboratory arsenal, offering single-assay
reliable SV and CNV detection. Long-read sequencing can now be
offered as a routine diagnostic tool, promising novel biological
insights and improved diagnostic yield.
References: 1.Payne, A. et al. (Nat. Biotechnol, 2020).
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Abderaouf Hamza Recieved equipement
used in this study from NVIDIA through its Academic Hardware
Grant Program., Mathilde Filser: None declared, Kevin Merchadou:
None declared, Laeititia Maillot: None declared, Éléonore Frouin:
None declared, Elodie Girard: None declared, Albain Chansavang:
None declared, Djihad Hadjhadj: None declared, Eric Pasmant:
None declared, Franck Bourdeaut: None declared, Tina Alaeitabar:
None declared, Sonia Lameiras: None declared, Sylvain Baulande:
None declared, Nicolas Servant: None declared, Victor Renault:
None declared, Olivier Delattre: None declared, Julien Masliah-
Planchon: None declared.
P16.024.D Automated tissue dissociation system for single cell
sequencing
Yang Ni1, Khalil Abou Elardat1
1Singleron Biotechnologies GmbH, Service Lab, Cologne, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Getting high quality single cell suspen-
sions is the ﬁrst step and essential for all downstream sample
processing procedures in single-cell, multi-omics studies today. An
established tissue dissociation workﬂow should meet the follow-
ing criteria: (1) high yield, (2) high cell viability, and (3) high
reproducibility. These standards are particularly important for
clinical researchers, as samples collected from patients are usually
in low amounts.
Methods: The Singleron PythoN automated tissue dissociation
system (abbreviated as PythoN) integrates tissue mincing, grind-
ing, enzymatic dissociation and cell straining into one “click-of-
button”, and has huge advantages over the traditional manual
protocol.
Results: First, PythoN has a broad input range of sample
weights, spanning from 10 to 500 mg. Internal testing data
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
584
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
showed that 660,000 single cells were successfully collected from
a mouse liver tissue as small as 14 mg. Thus, PythoN is well suited
for biopsy samples commonly seen in the clinic. Second, PythoN
combines both mechanical and enzymatic tissue dissociation,
being able to ﬁnish the whole procedure within 15 minutes, while
keeping cells at a high viability (>90%). Third, PythoN is fully
automated and programmable, which ensures the reproducibility
of sample preparation. Up to 30 programs can be saved in PythoN.
Key parameters, such as the motor speed of the grinder and the
number of strokes, can be customized, leaving users free space to
optimize their own protocols for new types of samples.
Conclusion: PythoN enables users to obtain high quality single
cell suspensions in a reproducible manner.
References: More information can be found on https://
www.singleronbio.com/product/detail-19.html.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Yang Ni Singleron Biotechnologies GmbH,
Khalil Abou Elardat Singleron Biotechnologies GmbH.
P16.026.B Enablement of long-read targeted sequencing
panels using Twist hybrid capture and PacBio HiFi sequencing
Sarah Kingan1, John Harting1, Ting Hon1, Yu-Chih Tsai1, Ian
McLaughlin1, Janet Ziegle1, Tina Han2, Leonardo Arbiza2, Susan Kloet3,
Loes Busscher3, Geoff Henno1, Edd Lee1, Nina Gonzaludo1
1Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States; 2Twist Bioscience,
South San Francisco, CA, United States; 3Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Targeted resequencing allows for high-
resolution characterization of gene panels at a scale and cost that
is more accessible than whole genome sequencing. While long-
read PacBio HiFi sequencing has been shown to accurately and
comprehensively interrogate complex clinically actionable loci,
such as pharmacogenomic targets, studies have been primarily
focused on single genes using PCR amplicon-based methods. We
describe a method to leverage Twist Bioscience target enrichment
probes for the design of custom gene panels sequenced with
HiFi reads.
Methods: PacBio partnered with Twist Bioscience to develop a
long-read hybrid capture protocol for custom gene panels of up to
2 Mb in size. The protocol follows a standard hybrid capture
workﬂow with DNA shearing, barcoding, and sample handling
optimized for long-read sequencing. The resulting enriched
material is used to construct a SMRTbell library sequenced on the
Sequel II system from PacBio. Up to 24 samples may be multi-
plexed with HiFi read length of 5-10 kb.
Results: We demonstrate that this method efﬁciently and
comprehensively covers gene targets using Coriell samples run
with multiple gene panels of varying sizes, which include complex
regions like pharmacogene CYP2D6.
Conclusion: This protocol can be utilized with custom gene
panels from Twist to efﬁciently capture genes of interest using
long-read HiFi sequencing. The demonstrated method allows for
scalable and cost-efﬁcient hybrid capture with long read lengths,
unbiased coverage, and high accuracy to fully capture all variant
types, including structural variation that can be inaccessible to
short-read sequencing and non-NGS technology.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Sarah Kingan Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc
Biosciences, John Harting Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc Biosciences,
Ting Hon Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc Biosciences, Yu-Chih Tsai
Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc Biosciences, Ian McLaughlin Paciﬁc
Biosciences, Paciﬁc Biosciences, Janet Ziegle Paciﬁc Biosciences,
Paciﬁc Biosciences, Tina Han Twist Bioscience, Twist Bioscience,
Leonardo Arbiza Twist Bioscience, Twist Bioscience, Susan Kloet:
None declared, Loes Busscher: None declared, Geoff Henno Paciﬁc
Biosciences, Paciﬁc Biosciences, Edd Lee Paciﬁc Biosciences,
Paciﬁc Biosciences, Nina Gonzaludo Paciﬁc Biosciences, Paciﬁc
Biosciences.
P16.027.C RMetSeq package for processing targeted MRE-seq
Aleksei Zarubin1, Sivtsev Aleksei1, Irina Zhalsanova1, Nikolay
Skryabin1
1Tomsk National Research Medical Center, Research Institute of
Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives:
Methylation-sensitive
restriction
enzyme sequencing or MRE-seq is one of the methods for
determining the level of DNA methylation. It usually involves
comparing the results of sequencing samples after exposure to
methyl sensitive and insensitive enzymes targeting the same
restriction sites. This approach has some limitations, which leads
to the fact that this method has not found wide application. We
propose a new approach to the design of experiments and ana-
lysis of MRE-seq data, which allows integration of this analysis with
standard NGS sequencing of exome and target panels with probe
enrichment.
Methods: DNA isolated from blood samples was sonicated in
300 and 500 bp modes. Thereafter, half of each sample was
treated with the HpaII. All samples were enriched using SureSelect
Custom DNA Target Enrichment Probes (which includes exomes of
37 genes of a total length of 168497 nucleotides) and sequenced
using MiSeq. Genotyping analysis was performed using GATK4.
The methylation level was assessed using the RMetSeq package
published on github.com/alekseizarubin/RMetSeq.
Results: The sequencing result of the fraction of the target
region with coverage greater than 50× was 95.9% and 95.7% for
the untreated and treated with restriction enzyme. But at the
same time, combining 50% of random reads from these samples
gave a fraction of 96.4%. These regions accounted for 573
restriction sites, with >50 x coverage.
Conclusion: Targeted MRE-seq and the RMetSeq package
make it possible to simultaneously determine the level of DNA
methylation without compromising the quality of genotyping in
standard sequencing using probe enrichment.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.029.A Molecular diagnostics of myotonic dystrophies
from short-read whole genome sequencing data
Ingrid
Lojová1;2,
Marcel
Kucharik3;4,
Zuzana
Pös1;3;4,
Andrea
Zatkova1, Jaroslav Budiš2;3;4;5, Ludevit Kadasi1;2, Tomas Szemes2;3;4,
Jan Radvansky1;2;3
1Institute of Clinical and Translational Research, Biomedical Research
Center of the Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia;
2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia; 3Comenius University Science
Park, Bratislava, Slovakia; 4Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia; 5Slovak
Center of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: Recently we are witnessing the spread
and diversiﬁcation of bioinformatic tools allowing tandem repeats
(TRs) characterisation from short-read massively parallel sequen-
cing (srMPS) data. The complexity of TRs, however, represents
speciﬁc challenges when considering the diagnostic possibilities
of repeat expansion disorders (REDs). We are reporting on speciﬁc
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
585
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
aspects of TRs detection and characterisation using myotonic
dystrophies (DM1/DM2) as model REDs.
Methods: Whole genome sequencing data, using srMPS, were
generated for 52 individuals, including 8 DM1,5 DM2, and two
patients having both DM1 and DM2 expansions. For TR char-
acterisation we used the modiﬁed version of a TR dedicated tool
Dante (Ref1). Validation of the results was performed using con-
ventional PCR and repeat-primed PCR.
Results: Using Dante we found high genotyping accuracy in
the DM1 simple repeat (when considering normal-range alleles),
however, the whole DM2 complex motif (TG-TCTG-CCTG) was not
inferable from srMPS. Despite this, we were able to identify all of
the DM1-CTG and DM2-CCTG expansions. Moreover, expanded
and permutation DM1 alleles harboring unexpected sequence
interruptions were also detected, although their identiﬁcation may
require speciﬁc error-rate settings.
Conclusion: We found that TRs characterisation and expansion
detection using srMPS are reliable when analyzing simple repeats
or speciﬁc parts of complex repeats. TRs having expected or
unexpected sequence interruptions may require, however, speciﬁc
attention. Moreover, the characterisation of highly complex
repeats, such as the whole CNBP-TG/TCTG/CCTG, may still present
challenges because of read length limitations.
References: Budis et al. Bioinformatics,35(8),1310-1317.
Grants: APVV-18-0319; VEGA_2/0167/20.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.031.C Implementation of the GA4GH Beacon protocol for
discovery and sharing of genomic copy number variation data
Michael Baudis1;2
1University of Zurich, Department of Molecular Life Sciences, Zürich,
Switzerland; 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Zürich, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Genomic copy number variations (CNV)
are frequent, causative events in rare diseases and represent the
majority of the mutational landscape in the most malignancies.
However, the complexity of genomic CNV patterns requires large
amounts of well-deﬁned genomic proﬁles for meaningful meta-
analyses.
Methods: The “Beacon” protocol of the Global Alliance for
Genomics and Health (GA4GH) represents an emerging standard
for an “Internet for Genomics”. While the initial version of the
protocol served as test bed for federated genomic query systems
connecting hundreds of international resources, version 2 of the
protocol provides extended, metadata-rich interactions various
access scenarios. Here, the Progenetix cancer genomics resource
(progenetix.org) - comprising the largest publicly accessible set of
cancer CNV data - has served as a testbed for Beacon v2 features.
Results: With Beacon v2 API as backbone of Progenetix - ser-
ving genome-wide CNV proﬁling data from more than 130’000 -
we demonstrate the use of the GA4GH Beacon v2 protocol for the
sharing vast amounts of genomic proﬁles, using a documented,
open API.
Conclusion: After the acceptance of the Beacon v2 protocol as
GA4GH standard, work will focus on its implementation in a wide
set of use cases, from clinical information systems to public
research databases. Importantly, an ELIXIR-supported study by
members of the ELIXIR h-CNV community (cnvar.org) explores
Beacon v2 powered CNV implementations by European genomics
resources, in human genetics / rare diseases and cancer genomics.
References: Huang Q et al. (2021). The Progenetix oncoge-
nomic resource in 2021. Database (Oxford), 2021 Jul 17.
Grants: ELIXIR Community-led Implementation Study (2021-
2023).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.032.D Optical genome mapping as a diagnostic tool in
cases of unresolved rare diseases
Detlef TROST1, Aïcha Boughalem1, Fernando Martin1, Viorica
Ciorna2, Patricia Blanchet3
1CERBA, Human genetics, St Ouen l’Aumone, France; 2CHR Metz-
Thionville, Génétique Médicale et Oncogénétique, Metz Cedex 03,
France;
3CHU Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Département de
Génétique Médicale, Centre de Référence « Anomalies du Dével-
oppement et Syndromes Malformatifs », Montpellier Cedex 5, France.
Background/Objectives:
The
usefulness
of
optical
genome
mapping (OGM) for genetic testing in patients presenting with a
rare genetic disease is currently evaluated. For patients for whom
all previous genetic testing did not identify an underlying genetic
variant, OGM might provide information that allows to end this
diagnostic odyssey.
Methods: In this cohort OGM was performed on cases of rare
diseases for 28 patient-parents TRIOs. All patients had normal or
inconclusive results for chromosomal microarray and diagnostic
exome sequencing.
Results: OGM identiﬁed putative disease related structural
variants in 3 of these cases (10,7 %). The identiﬁed variants overlap
with known disease genes that correlate to the patient’s pheno-
type. The size of the identiﬁed variants was below the resolution
of the diagnostic chromosomal microarray and difﬁcult to detect
with NGS testing. One patient was found to be composite het-
erozygous for a structural variant and a pathogenic single
nucleotide variant within a recessive disease gene and biparental
inheritance.
Conclusion: OGM allowed the identiﬁcation of putative disease
related variants in 10,7 % of our patients with negative chromo-
somal microarray and NGS testing.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P16.033.A Pilot study demonstrates the feasibility, the
diagnostic power and the utility of rapid whole genome
sequencing for critically ill pediatric patients in Belgium
Aimé Lumaka1, Corinne Fasquelle2, Guillaume Debray2, Serpil
Alkan3, Adeline Jacquinet2, Julie Harvengt2, François Boemer2, Leonor
Palmeira2, Benoit Charloteaux2, Anne Brysse2, Saskia Bulk2, Vincent
Rigo4, Vincent Bours1;2
1University of Liège, Human Genetic Laboratory, GIGA Institute, Liège,
Belgium;
2Centre
Hospitalier
Universitaire,
Center
for
Human
Genetics, Liège, Belgium;
3CHU de Liège - CHR de la Citadelle,
Neuropediatric Division, Liège, Belgium; 4CHU de Liège - CHR de la
Citadelle, Neonatology Division, Liège, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Genetic diseases are an important causes
of admission and death in pediatric intensive care units. Early
diagnostic orients the care and prevents irreversible harms. Whole
Genome Sequencing in short turnaround time (rWGS) represents a
valuable exploration in critically ill pediatrics patients. We evaluated
the feasibility, the efﬁciency and the utility of the rWGS in Belgium.
Methods: We leveraged the collaboration between two
pediatric institutions and the center for human genetics of the
University of Liège, Cloud-based computing data analysis services
and a high-throughput NGS platform to develop a rWGS workﬂow
intended to deliver diagnostics to critically ill pediatric patients
before hospital discharge. WGS was performed on NovaSeq
PE300cy in trio for 9 and in duo for 1 proband. The study was
approved by the Ethical Committee.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
586
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: Ten unrelated critically ill patients without any clear
diagnostic were recruited from the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
(4), the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (4) and the neuropediatric
unit (2). A deﬁnite diagnostic was reached in 6 out of 10 patients
in 39.29 hours (95% CI 38.3 - 40.3), including six clinically unsus-
pected diagnosis. rWGS-guided multidisciplinary care was imple-
mented in 5 patients and disease speciﬁc care in 1. Time
constraints and cost were identiﬁed as the main limitations to the
broad introduction of rWGS for critically ill pediatric patients.
Conclusion: We successfully implemented the fastest rWGS
platform in Europe. Our workﬂow has one of the highest rWGS
yields. This study establishes the path for a nation-wide semi-
center rWGS network in Belgium.
References:.
Grants:
Government
of
Wallonia,
Belgium:
WALGEMED/
RWAL1710180.
Conﬂict of Interest: Aimé Lumaka Sequencing reagents for 5
patients were donated by Illumina Inc., Corinne Fasquelle: None
declared, Guillaume Debray: None declared, Serpil Alkan: None
declared, Adeline Jacquinet: None declared, Julie Harvengt: None
declared, François Boemer: None declared, Leonor Palmeira: None
declared, Benoit Charloteaux: None declared, Anne Brysse: None
declared, Saskia Bulk: None declared, Vincent Rigo: None declared,
Vincent Bours: None declared.
P16.034.B Non-invasive preimplantation genetic testing for
optimizing of IVF treatments
Sabrina Frrederiksen1, Christina D. Fenger1, Mads Fruensgaard1,
Steen B. Laursen2, Hans Atli Dahl1
1Amplexa Genetics, Odense, Denmark;
2Fertilitetsklinik IVF-SYD,
Fredericia, Denmark.
Background/Objectives: The major contributor for unsuccessful
IVF cycles has been found to be embryo aneuploidy. The per-
centage of aneuploidy rate is known to increase with maternal age
increasing the problem of unsuccessful IVF treatments. Pre-
implantation genetic testing for aneuploidies (PGT-A) is a widely
used method to screen embryos for chromosomal abnormities.
Until now the method has required a TE biopsy making the
method invasive and thereby limited to few. The discovery of cell
free DNA (cfDNA) in the spent culture media (SCM) has made it
possible for the development of a non-invasive PGT-A screening
of the blastocysts.
Methods: Amplexa Genetics has implemented and validated
the niPGT-A method. The generated WGA is sequenced using the
Illumina sequencing platform and processed to identify chromo-
somal abnormalities.
Results: Amplexa Genetics has demonstrated that we can use
cfDNA SCM samples and generate WGA from all SCM samples
obtained. Clear calls could be obtained in 93% of all cases as either
euploid or aneuploid. We observed that increased maternal age
correlated with increased percentage of aneuploidy rate as
expected. Moreover, the identiﬁed aneuploidy is evenly dis-
tributed
between
losses
and
gains
of
all
23
autosomal
chromosomes.
Conclusion: The niPGT-A method can be used to screen
embryos for chromosomal abnormalities to the same extent as the
former and invasive PGT-A method.
References: Scott et al 2012, Hassold T, Hunt P et al 2001,
Nature Rev.
Grants: No Grants.
Conﬂict of Interest: Sabrina Frrederiksen Amplexa Genetics,
Christina D. Fenger Amplexa Genetics, Mads Fruensgaard: None
declared, Steen B. Laursen Fertilitetsklinik IVF-SYD, Hans Atli Dahl
Amplexa Genetics.
P16.035.C A novel enzymatic fragmentation library
preparation workﬂow that prevents sequencing artifacts and
increases scalability
Ross Wadsworth1, Zane Jaafar2, Josh Haimes2, Thomas Harrison2,
Lindsay Peterkin2, Kristin Scott3, Martin Ranik2, Kristina Giorda2, Eric
van der Walt1, Brian Kudlow2
1Watchmaker Genomics, Cape Town, South Africa; 2Watchmaker
Genomics, Boulder, United States; 3Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, United States.
Background/Objectives: There has been extraordinary progress
towards translational research and clinical genomics in the era of
NGS — throughput has grown while sequencing costs have gone
down. Now, gold standard sonication methods are being reeval-
uated in light of increased sequencing capacity and the need for
highly accurate and scalable workﬂows. Our goal was to create an
automation-friendly workﬂow and reduce sequencing artifacts to
enable highly sensitive clinical and translational applications.
Methods: Here, we utilized sophisticated enzyme engineering
and a multidimensional Design of Experiment approach to
develop a novel enzymatic library preparation method and ultra-
high ﬁdelity ampliﬁcation module. To assess performance, our
solution was compared to conventional enzymatic library pre-
paration workﬂows using samples ranging from 100 pg to 500 ng
of gDNA.
Results: Libraries generated using our optimized workﬂow
reduced chimeric reads and terminal hairpin artifacts 10-fold
compared to other enzymatic methods, and reached comparable
levels to mechanically sheared DNA controls. Library insert sizes
were highly tunable from 150 bp to 550 bp and were consistent
across the input titration. To assess the utility of ultra-low input
samples, libraries were prepared using a titration from 100 ng to
sub-nanogram inputs. Copy number variations (CNVs) were
detected across the titration with high sensitivity and speciﬁcity
using Hidden Markov Model analysis method.
Conclusion: Taken together, this enzymatic fragmentation and
library preparation workﬂow avoids library preparation artifacts
that convolute variant calling, is highly scalable, and suitable for
ultra-low input samples.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ross Wadsworth Watchmaker Genomics,
Zane Jaafar Watchmaker Genomics, Josh Haimes Watchmaker
Genomics, Thomas Harrison Watchmaker Genomics, Lindsay
Peterkin Watchmaker Genomics, Kristin Scott Watchmaker Geno-
mics,
Martin
Ranik
Watchmaker
Genomics,
Kristina
Giorda
Watchmaker Genomics, Eric van der Walt Watchmaker Genomics,
Brian Kudlow Watchmaker Genomics, Watchmaker Genomics.
P16.036.D Improved transcript detection sensitivity utilizing a
novel, rapid whole transcriptome sequencing workﬂow
Travis Sanders1, Lee French2, Julie Walker1, Jennifer Pavlica1, Clara
Ross1, Thomas Harrison1, Ross Wadsworth2
1Watchmaker Genomics, BOULDER, United States;
2Watchmaker
Genomics, Cape Town, South Africa.
Background/Objectives: mRNA-seq is a powerful tool for tran-
scriptome proﬁling but is not applicable to many clinically relevant
sample types. Template damage in FFPE samples generates 3’-
bias, while overabundant globin mRNAs in blood-derived samples
are uninformative. Whole transcriptome sequencing, where over-
abundant transcripts are depleted, supports these sample types
and offers a comprehensive view of the transcriptome - including
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
587
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
biologically relevant non-coding transcripts. However, these
workﬂows are typically long, labor-intensive, and difﬁcult to
automate. To address this need, we aimed to develop a highly
streamlined and automatable solution tailored for challenging
samples.
Methods: To simplify the protocol while minimizing off-target
effects, we built algorithms for optimal probe design and
streamlined probe hybridization. We speciﬁcally engineered
enzymes and reformulated buffers in parallel to improve yields. A
novel de-crosslinking step was integrated to improve FFPE per-
formance. Combining reactions, reducing incubation times, and
eliminating puriﬁcations streamlined the overall workﬂow. With
RNA extracted from whole blood and ﬁve FFPE blocks, we com-
pared our solution to commercial products using inputs ranging
from 10 to 500 ng.
Results: Libraries generated using our solution resulted in
improved library yields, unique transcript identiﬁcation, strand
speciﬁcity, and rRNA depletion efﬁciency on a per-FFPE-block
basis. Technical replicates showed excellent transcript abun-
dance correlation. Additionally, we observed less than 1% resi-
dual rRNA and globin mRNA with no measurable off-target
effects using a blood-derived, high-quality sample with as little
as 10 ng.
Conclusion: Our novel, simpliﬁed workﬂow delivers robust and
reproducible performance while enabling library construction
within ﬁve hours.
References: N/A.
Grants: N/A.
Conﬂict of Interest: Travis Sanders Watchmaker Genomics, Lee
French Watchmaker Genomics, Julie Walker Watchmaker Geno-
mics, Jennifer Pavlica Watchmaker Genomics, Clara Ross Watch-
maker Genomics, Thomas Harrison Watchmaker Genomics, Ross
Wadsworth Watchmaker Genomics.
P16.037.A Comprehensive de novo variant discovery with HiFi
long read sequencing
Erdi Kucuk1, Bart van der Sanden1, Luke O’Gorman1, Michael Kwint1,
Aaron Wenger2, William Rowell2, Zev Kronenberg2, christine lam-
bert2, shreyasee chakraborty2, primo baybayan2, Han Brunner1,
Alexander Hoischen1, Lisenka Vissers*1, Christian Gilissen1
1Radboud University Medical Center, Human Genetics, Nijmegen,
Netherlands; 2Paciﬁc Biosciences (PacBio), Menlo Park, United States.
Background/Objectives: Current technologies fail to accurately
explain almost half of neurodevelopmental disorder cases. Long
read sequencing (LRS) is promising to comprehensively identify
genomic variation in unresolved cases. Paciﬁc Biosciences (PacBio)
HiFi sequencing technology provides the highest accuracy among
LRS platforms and appears especially suitable for the detection of
de novo mutations (DNMs) across single-nucleotide variants
(SNVs), indels, and structural variants.
Methods: We sequenced the genomes of 8 trios with unex-
plained intellectual disability using LRS (PacBio Sequel II System,
30x HiFi) and short read sequencing (SRS; Illumina Novaseq 6000,
40x). Small indels and SNVs were called on LRS using DeepVariant
and SRS genomes using xAtlas. We then compared DNMs
between the two methods.
Results: We identiﬁed an average of 84 DNMs in LRS and 101
DNMs in SRS per trio (85% concordance between platforms) in
these 8 trios. 54 variants were uniquely detected by LRS. We were
able to design primers for 23 of these, 9 (38%) of which were
conﬁrmed as a DNM by Sanger sequencing. We also designed
primers for 47 DNMs called only by SRS and conﬁrmed 6/47 (13%).
Most false positive SRS DNMs (66%) were missing in the proband
samples, whereas most LRS false positive DNMs were inherited
(48%). Additionally, we phased on average 95% of LRS DNMs
compared to 30% in SRS.
Conclusion:
Our
results
show
that
current
PacBio
HiFi
sequencing technology achieves single base accuracies that are
sufﬁcient to robustly identify genome-wide de novo mutations,
including in regions missed by SRS.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Erdi Kucuk: None declared, Bart van der
Sanden: None declared, Luke O’Gorman: None declared, Michael
Kwint: None declared, Aaron Wenger Paciﬁc Biosciences, William
Rowell Paciﬁc Biosciences, Zev Kronenberg Paciﬁc Biosciences,
christine lambert: None declared, shreyasee chakraborty Paciﬁc
Biosciences, primo baybayan Paciﬁc Biosciences, Han Brunner:
None declared, Alexander Hoischen: None declared, Lisenka Vis-
sers*: None declared, Christian Gilissen: None declared.
P16.038.B Melter: towards achieving efﬁcient semi-automatic
reanalysis in rare disease
Henning Onsbring1, Daniel Nilsson2;3, Henrik Stranneheim1;4;5,
Valtteri Wirta1;4;6
1Karolinska Institutet, Science for Life Laboratory, Department of
Microbiology,
Tumour
and
Cell
Biology,
Stockholm,
Sweden;
2Karolinska Institutet, Science for Life Laboratory, Department of
Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Stockholm, Sweden; 3Karolinska
University Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics, Stockholm,
Sweden; 4Karolinska University Hospital, Genomic Medicine Center
Karolinska, Stockholm, Sweden;
5Karolinska University Hospital,
Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Stockholm, Sweden; 6KTH
Royal Institute of Technology, Science for Life Laboratory, School of
Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health,
Stockholm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Through introduction of comprehensive
genomic analyses, the proportion of rare disease patients receiv-
ing a molecular diagnosis has dramatically increased. However,
the majority of cases still remain without molecular diagnosis after
a primary analysis1, despite suspicion of an underlying genetic
disease. Reanalyses of manually selected cases have several times
led to identiﬁcation of a disease-causing variant that was missed
in the initial analysis. The accumulated pool of unsolved cases
constitutes a great opportunity for disease gene discovery.
Methods: We present a concept for systematic, automated
reanalysis of unsolved cases using speciﬁc triggers to initiate the
reanalyses. Such triggers include e.g., updates in clinical features
(HPO terms), in phenotype-speciﬁc gene panels, or in bioinfor-
matic tools or databases used for annotations. New variants not
seen in previous analyses and fulﬁlling predeﬁned threshold in our
variant prioritization scheme are presented for further manual
clinical inspection.
Results: Testing an automated approach for reanalysis of
previously unsolved cases in a pilot setting will allow measuring
the computational resources needed and allows for estimating the
effort needed for inspecting variants passed on to manual
inspection.
Conclusion: Comparing the change in diagnostic yield with
costs will determine if automated reanalysis of unsolved rare
diseases cases should be implemented in clinical routine.
References:.
1Stranneheim, H et al. Integration of whole genome sequen-
cing into a healthcare setting: high diagnostic rates across multi-
ple clinical entities in 3219 rare disease patients. Genome Med.
2021;13(1):40. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-021-00855-5.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
588
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P17 DIAGNOSTIC IMPROVEMENTS AND QUALITY CONTROL
P17.002.D Dried blood spot testing with AmplideX SMA Plus
Kit resolves SMN1 and SMN2 exon 7 copy numbers and more
Sarah Edelmon1, Walairat Laosinchai-Wolf1, Laura Blasco-Pérez2,
Mar Costa-Roger2, Ivon Cuscó2, Gary Latham1, Eduardo Tizzano2,
John Milligan1
1Asuragen a Bio-Techne brand, Research and Development, Austin,
Texas, United States; 2University Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Clinical and
Molecular Genetics, Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an
autosomal recessive disorder commonly caused by homozygous
absence of SMN1. SMN2, an SMN1 paralog, modulates SMA
severity. Breakthrough therapies rely on rapid quantiﬁcation of
SMN1 and SMN2 copies, and newborn screening using dried blood
spot (DBS) samples has become a public health priority. However,
most screening assays only determine presence/absence of SMN1
exon 7, excluding copy numbers (CN) for SMN1 and SMN2 and
disease-modiﬁer variants (c.859G<C).
Methods: We tested 42 DBS samples with three DNA isolation
methods on three genetic analyzer models (378 measurements
total) using the AmplideX® SMA Plus* Kit, which quantiﬁes SMN1
and SMN2 exon 7 CN and detects c.859G>C in a single-tube
workﬂow. Genotypes were determined using AmplideX PCR/CE
Reporter software. Reference values were determined using mat-
ched whole blood (n = 20) or MLPA and sequencing (n = 22).
Results: For each platform, SMN1 and SMN2 exon 7 CN and
variant status were 95-100% concordant with reference results,
including 10 SMA samples with no SMN1 copies. Conﬁrmed het-
erozygous or homozygous samples for 859G>C had unique peak
proﬁles, suggesting concordance for zygosity.
Conclusion: These data demonstrate that the AmplideX Kit can
accurately resolve SMN1 and SMN2 CN and variant status from DBS
samples. Further, the ability to generate complete results in under
4 hours may improve the time-to-result over current screening
approaches, which rely on follow-up conﬁrmatory diagnostic tests.
Given the narrow therapeutic window for maximum treatment
efﬁcacy, these beneﬁts may enable earlier decision on treatment
and improved patient outcomes.
References: *CE-IVD. For US export only.
Grants: Not applicable.
Conﬂict of Interest: Sarah Edelmon Asuragen, a Bio-Techne
brand, Asuragen, a Bio-Techne brand, Walairat Laosinchai-Wolf
Asuragen, a Bio-Techne brand, Asuragen, a Bio-Techne brand,
Laura Blasco-Pérez:
None
declared, Mar Costa-Roger:
None
declared, Ivon Cuscó: None declared, Gary Latham Asuragen, a
Bio-Techne brand, Asuragen, a Bio-Techne brand, Eduardo Tiz-
zano: None declared, John Milligan Asuragen, a Bio-Techne brand,
Asuragen, a Bio-Techne brand.
P17.003.A Standardising the variability of variant
classiﬁcation
Zandra Deans1, Dave Cregeen1, Jennifer Fairley1, Farrah Khawaja1,
Mark Sales1, Melody Tabiner2, Rebecca Treacy1, Ros Hastings2
1GenQA, Edinburgh, United Kingdom;
2GenQA, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Expansion of genome-wide testing for
disease-causing changes has increased the requirement to classify
variant pathogenicity. Multiple classiﬁcations are available for
different variant types, and clinical settings. GenQA has globally
delivered laboratory external quality assessments (EQAs) for var-
iant interpretation to aid standardisation of classiﬁcation.
Methods: EQAs were provided for classiﬁcation of single
nucleotide variants (SNVs), copy number variants (CNVs) in pre-
natal and postnatal settings, and somatic variants. Variant details
were provided and laboratories were expected to classify them
according to the clinical scenarios. Assessment was based on
correct classiﬁcation, evidence provided and, where appropriate,
the actionability of the variant.
Results: Nine germline SNV EQAs have been delivered since
2013, during which time the ACMG classiﬁcation system was
introduced. Data from 26 cases will be presented highlighting
changes in practice, and the different applications of evidence. A
summary of the prenatal and postnatal CNV classiﬁcation pilots
will show consistency in approach, by either using local justiﬁca-
tion, or applying the ACMG/ClinGen guidelines. They demonstrate
how uncoupling evidence-based classiﬁcation from potential
implications for an individual can assist in standardisation of var-
iant classiﬁcation. Two solid tumours variant classiﬁcation pilot
EQAs have also been delivered. Laboratories used AMP/ACO/CAP
tiering guidelines (actionability) and ACMG guidelines1 (patho-
genicity). Both showed variability reﬂecting differences in guide-
line application.
Conclusion: Accuracy of variant classiﬁcation is essential to
ensure the patient receives the correct result and clinical man-
agement. The EQAs demonstrated variability in the use and
application of the guidelines, and the continued need for EQAs to
educate and promote standardisation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Zandra Deans NHS Lothian, Dave Cregeen
NHS Lothian, Jennifer Fairley NHS Lothian, Farrah Khawaja NHS
Lothian, Mark Sales NHS Lothian, Melody Tabiner Oxford Uni-
versity Hospital NHS Trust, Rebecca Treacy NHS Lothian, Ros
Hastings Oxford University Hospital NHS Trust.
P17.004.B Increasing genomics diagnostic success for
Indigenous families in Canada with rare diseases
Tatiana
Maroilley1;2;3,
Arezoo
Mohajeri3;4,
Jill
Mwenifumbo5,
Vladimir Avramovic1;2, Karen J. Jacob4, Sarah McIntosh4, Solenne
Correard4;6, Wyeth W. Wasserman4;6, Nadine R. Caron7;8;9, Laura
Arbour4, Anna Lehman4, Maja Tarailo-Graovac1;2
1Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Departments of
Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Medical Genetics, Calgary,
Canada; 2Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Canada; 3contributed equally,., Canada; 4University
of British Columbia, Department of Medical Genetics, Vancouver,
Canada;
5BC
Children’s
Hospital
and
BC
Women’s
Hospital
Vancouver, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Vancouver, Canada;
6BC Children’s Hospital Research Institute,
Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Vancouver, Canada;
7Canada’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences
Centre at British
Columbia Cancer, Vancouver, Canada; 8University of British Colum-
bia, Centre for Excellence in Indigenous Health, Vancouver, Canada;
9University of British Columbia, First Nations Health Authority Chair
in Cancer and Wellness, Vancouver, Canada.
Background/Objectives: Genomics has the potential to transform
health care by facilitating precision medicine. However, individuals
who identify as Indigenous (First Nations, Inuit, and Métis) have
limited access to genomics. Background genetic variation for
Indigenous Peoples is largely unknown, reducing the chance of
accurate interpretation of variants and diagnosis of genetic con-
ditions. The Silent Genomes Project (SGP) aims to increase access
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
589
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
to genomics for Indigenous Peoples in Canada, in a culturally
safe way.
Methods: We analysed rare disease (RD) patients’ genomes
with two independent pipelines. The automated diagnosis pipe-
line (Level1) implements state-of-the-art methods aligned with
clinical standards. The research-based pipeline (Level2) re-analyses
genomes with no/uncertain/partial ﬁndings. It implements differ-
ent tools and newly developed approaches to explore complex
diagnostic scenarios such as non-coding variations and complex
genomic rearrangements (CGR), later experimentally validated
(PCR, transcriptomics).
Results: Level1 has analysed 33 probands with suspected
undiagnosed RD and reported clinically conﬁrmed pathogenic/
likely pathogenic variants for 12 of them (36%). Level1 has also
reported 17 variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS). In total, 20
probands are eligible for Level2. Level2 analysis of seven probands
has detected four new ﬁndings including novel gene, CGR and
translocation.
Conclusion: To facilitate VUS interpretation, the SGP plans to
build the ﬁrst Indigenous Background Variant Library (IBVL) by
enrolling Indigenous participants with no RD. With the IBVL and
two analytical pipelines, the SGP has the potential to increase
diagnostic success in Indigenous patients with RD and reduce
disparities in health care. This effort could become a model for
other underrepresented populations, addressing gaps in genomic
medicine.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Tatiana Maroilley: None declared, Arezoo
Mohajeri: None declared, Jill Mwenifumbo: None declared, Vladi-
mir Avramovic: None declared, Karen J. Jacob: None declared,
Sarah McIntosh: None declared, Solenne Correard: None declared,
Wyeth W. Wasserman: None declared, Nadine R. Caron Co-Direc-
tor, UBC Centre for Excellence in Indigenous Health, First Nations
Health Authority Chair in Cancer and Wellness at UBC, Special
Advisor on Indigenous Health; UBC Health and Faculty of Medi-
cine, Laura Arbour: None declared, Anna Lehman: None declared,
Maja Tarailo-Graovac: None declared.
P17.005.C Delivery of a multi-distribution external quality
assessment for severe combined immunodeﬁciency newborn
screening
David Cregeen1, Becky Treacy2, Stuart Adams3, Zandra Deans2
1GenQA, Edinburgh, United Kingdom; 1GenQA, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom; 3Great Ormond Street Hospital, Haematology, London,
United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Newborn screening for severe com-
bined immunodeﬁciency (SCID) by measurement of T-cell recep-
tor excision circles (TRECs) continues to be evaluated and
implemented globally. This requires concomitant implementation
of
external
quality
assessment
(EQA)
distributed
regularly
throughout the year. GenQA has developed and delivered a 2-year
pilot EQA consisting of multiple sample distributions.
Methods: Newborn blood spot cards were prepared using
blood samples with either normal or absent TRECs and validated
to conﬁrm the levels of TRECs using commercially available TREC
assays prior to the global distributions. Assessment was carried
out by independent expert advisors against peer ratiﬁed criteria.
Pilot year 1 provided eight samples across two distributions. Pilot
year 2 delivered 12 samples across six distributions.
Results: Participants were split evenly between the two
commercially available TREC assays with some variation in cut-
off levels and the units used to describe results. Over the course
of the pilot the quality of result submission improved with
ultimately only a few participating laboratories omitting essen-
tial information such as assay units, cut-off levels and reference
gene results. Older blood spots prepared from normal blood
could give results in the affected range despite reference gene
results appearing acceptable; therefore, samples for subsequent
EQAs were sourced, validated, and distributed within as short a
time as possible.
Conclusion: The development of a comprehensive newborn
screening EQA is challenging when samples need to be sourced
from patients. An EQA format consisting of regular distributions
throughout the year of samples suitable for SCID newborn
screening analysis has been successfully implemented.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.006.D Deep phenotyping – symptom annotation made
simple with SAMS
Robin
Steinhaus1;2,
Sebastian
Proft1;2,
Evelyn
Seelow3,
Tobias
Schalau1, Peter N. Robinson4;5, Dominik Seelow1;2
1Berliner Institut für Gesundheitsforschung, Exploratory Diagnostic
Sciences, Berlin, Germany;
2Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Institut
für
medizinische
Genetik
und
Humangenetik,
Berlin,
Germany; 3Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Medizinische Klinik
mit Schwerpunkt Nephrologie und Internistische Intensivmedizin,
Berlin, Germany; 4The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine,
Farmington, United States; 5University of Connecticut, Institute for
Systems Genomics, Farmington, United States.
Background/Objectives: Precision medicine needs precise phe-
notypes. The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) structures clinical
signs and symptoms and has become the standard annotation for
patient phenotypes when describing single gene disorders.
However, use of the HPO in other ﬁelds than human genetics is
not widespread.
Methods: SAMS (Symptom Annotation Made Simple) brings
deep phenotyping to routine clinical care, hospital patients, and
outpatients. Our web-based application provides three widely
used annotation systems: HPO, OMIM, and Orphanet. It also offers
a guided differential diagnosis towards a disease when clinical
signs (as HPO terms) are entered.
Results: Whilst data can be stored in our database, phenotypes
can also be imported and exported as GA4GH Phenopackets
without using the database. The web interface can easily be
integrated into local databases, e.g., clinical information systems.
SAMS offers users the ability to share their data with others,
empowering patients to record their own signs and symptoms (or
those of their children) and thus provide their doctors with
additional information.
Conclusion: We think that our approach will lead to better
characterised patients which is not only helpful for ﬁnding disease
mutations but also to better understand the pathophysiology of
diseases and to recruit patients for studies and clinical trials.
SAMS is available at https://www.genecascade.org/SAMS/.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.007.A Implementation of genomic medicine in Stockholm
healthcare region – update on ﬁrst 10,000 samples
gmck-RD consortia1;2;3, Anna Lindstrand1;3, Henrik Stranneheim2;3,
Kristina Lagerstedt-Robinson3, Nicole Lesko3, Daniel Nilsson2;3, Soﬁe
Vonlanthen3, Jesper Eisfeldt2;3, Malin Kvarnung1;3, Martin Engvall3,
Helena Malmgren3, Britt-Marie Anderlid3, Chiara Rasi2, Anders
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
590
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Jemt2;3, Per Marits3, Maria Johansson Soller3, Ann Nordgren1;3,
Valtteri Wirta2;3, Anna Wedell1;2;3
1Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; 2SciLifeLab, Solna, Sweden;
3Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: In healthcare clinical genetics is transi-
tioning to clinical genomics and especially rare disease diagnostics
is increasingly done through panel, exome and genome sequen-
cing. At Karolinska we have formed Genomic Medicine Center
Karolinska Rare Diseases (GMCK-RD),
a joint unit between
healthcare and academia, enabling large-scale genome sequen-
cing of patients. GMCK-RD brings together experts from various
medical disciplines with clinical geneticists, bioinformaticians and
researchers.
Methods: To facilitate clinical implementation of genome
sequencing, we have developed a number of bioinformatic tools
and processes covering steps such as variant calling, workﬂow
management, variant prioritization and interpretation, multiomics
support, data sharing and quality assurance.
Results: Over 10,000 individuals across a broad spectrum of
rare diseases have been analyzed, enabling a diagnosis as well as
personalized prediction, prognosis, and treatment in thousands of
patients.
Conclusion: Challenges include big data processing, ethical
and legal issues as well as rigorous quality control while at the
same time enabling continuous development of analysis pipelines
and tools. The rapid increase in genomic testing also brings along
a high need for scaling up interpretation, including recruitment
and training of highly specialized “genomicists” and development
of new support solutions. We also need integrated units where
highly specialized clinicians work closely together with laboratory
experts, enabling patient selection, correct interpretation and
rapid translation to individualized treatment. These interactions
have also enabled a large number of new disease gene dis-
coveries. By overcoming these issues, we at GMCK-RD have moved
healthcare in our region towards precision diagnostics and pre-
cision medicine.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.008.B Generic genome sequencing: one lab ﬂow for all
Gaby
Schobers1;2,
Ronny
Derks1,
Ermanno
Bosgoed1,
Debby
Hellebrekers3, Nicole de Leeuw1, Alexander Stegmann3, Erik-Jan
Kamsteeg1, Aimee D.C. Paulussen3, Marjolijn Ligtenberg1, Arthur van
den Wijngaard3, Christian Gilissen1;4, Rien Blok3, Han Brunner1;2;3,
Helger Yntema1;2, Marcel Nelen1, Lisenka Vissers*1;2
1Radboud university medical center, Human Genetics, Nijmegen,
Netherlands; 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Nijmegen,
Netherlands;
3Maastricht
University
Medical
Center,
Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands; 4Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Genetic laboratories maintain numerous
workﬂows to diagnose the full spectrum of hereditary and con-
genital diseases, including traditional approaches and advanced
technologies. A single generic workﬂow would increase efﬁciency
quite dramatically. We therefore assessed whether genome
sequencing (GS) can replace all existing workﬂows supporting
germline genetic diagnoses.
Methods: We performed GS (NovaSeq6000TM; 37x mean
coverage) on 1,000 cases with 1,271 clinically relevant variants,
selected from one year’s diagnostic yield in a tertiary referral
center, identiﬁed through 15 different workﬂows. Variants were
binned by size and type: small variants (SNVs/indels <50 bp),
large variants (CNVs and repeat expansions) and other variants
(SVs and aneuploidies). VCFs were queried per variant and
assessed in Trusight Software Suite (DRAGEN Germline Pipeline,
TSS, Illumina).
Results: Overall, 93.9% (1,194/1,271) of variants were detected
with GS. Detection rates differed per type, with small variants
detected in 95.2% (825/867), large variants in 91.9% (328/357),
and other variants in 87.2% (41/47). Importantly, variants were
identiﬁable through routine clinical interpretation strategies,
including disease-based clinical ﬁlters or gene-speciﬁc searches in
TSS. Variants that remained undetected were mosaic or located in
homologous/repetitive regions.
Conclusion: GS is an efﬁcient generic workﬂow to capture
clinically relevant germline variants in a ‘one-test-ﬁts-all-strategy’.
Besides those already known for short-read sequencing, no new
challenges in variant detection were identiﬁed. GS can therefore
not only replace exome sequencing, but also >99% of Sanger
sequencing, allele speciﬁc PCRs, smMIP, MLPA, array, and cyto-
genetic analyses including karyotyping and FISH. These results
provide perspective on how genetic laboratories will evolve in the
near future.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.009.C How can entire CFTR genotyping contribute in
genetically unsolved Cystic Fibrosis cases?
Simone Ahting1, Lutz Nährlich2, Julia Hentschel1
1University Hospital Leipzig, Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig,
Germany; 2Universitätsklinikum Giessen-Marburg GmbH, Zentrum für
Kinderheilkunde und Jugendmedizin, Abteilung Allgemeine Pädiatrie
und Neonatologie, Giessen, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Genotyping Cystic Fibrosis (CF) patients
is crucial for diagnosis conﬁrmation and treatment options. Recent
modulator therapies allow for correction of malfunctioning CFTR,
but depend on the underlying genotype. Still 5.4% of patients [1]
remain undiagnosed after conventional genetic testing and can
therefore beneﬁt from entire CFTR-genotyping.
Methods: 731 patients with clinically conﬁrmed CF-diagnosis,
but ambiguous genotype were assembled using the German CF
Registry. Variants were identiﬁed and re-classiﬁed, if required
using ClinVar, HGMD and CFTR1/2 and corrected in the registry
database. Genetic testing was offered to all patients whose var-
iants were inconclusive and further patients lacking genetic CF-
conﬁrmation were called for testing. Patient samples were ana-
lysed using a Next-Generation-Sequencing-custom-design-panel
covering all 27 exons including intronic and regulatory regions.
Results: Identiﬁcation of inconclusive variants led to the dis-
covery of 48 variants not formerly reported in the context of CF.
20 samples with previously unknown or incomplete CFTR geno-
type were sequenced via NGS with an overall success rate of 70%.
All results were uploaded to ClinVar and previously unknown
variants were reported to CFTR1/2 for database completion.
Conclusion: Entire CFTR-genotyping can greatly increase the
genetic diagnostic rate of CF-patients and should therefore be
considered as a replacement for the current strategies in routine
diagnostics. Still unclear cases might further beneﬁt from tran-
scriptome sequencing on nasal epithelial cells to analyse the
CFTR-mRNA and better assess intronic variants.
References: [1] German CF Registry annual report 2020
(https://www.muko.info/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/angebote/
qualitaetsmanagement/register/berichtsbaende/
Berichtsband_2020.pdf).
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
591
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Grants: Vertex Pharmaceuticals funded this project through
the ‘Charitable Grant Vertex’.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.010.D Periodic automated reanalysis and reevaluation of
exome data to improve its clinical utility
Cyrielle Kint1, Sara Haers1, Linde Proost1, Alexandra Obregon-Tito1,
Jeanne Leisk1
1Invitae, Leuven, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: As more genetic data become available,
gene-disease associations and phenotypes are clariﬁed. From
June-November 2021 alone, our internal gene-disorder database
grew by 184 new rare disorders associated with genetic variation.
Additionally, phenotypic associations with genes increased by
28.478 Human Phenotype Ontology terms. Therefore, patients for
whom no diagnosis is available today, might be diagnosable next
year, next month or even sooner. Similarly, the phenotype of an
individual may change over time resulting in the need to adjust
analysis to include newly available clinical information. However,
leveraging the clinical beneﬁt of this new genetic and phenotypic
information is largely contingent on computational tools that can
evaluate and integrate it.
Methods: Despite the clinical potential of integrating con-
tinuously expanding genetic and clinical information, reanalysis
and reevaluation efforts for unsolved whole exome sequencing
(WES) tests remain largely manual. This restricts access to the most
recent gene-phenotype knowledge, and limits the utility of a WES
test to the evaluation of phenotypes present in an individual at
the time of testing. To address these deﬁcits, we present an
automated reanalysis pipeline utilizing the Moon software that
runs every six months, integrating both the most up-to-date gene-
phenotype associations and the evolving clinical phenotype of a
patient when available.
Results: Automating regular reanalysis of cases has increased
the diagnostic utility of our WES tests and provides patients better
answers at no additional cost.
Conclusion: This pipeline has been validated and can be used
as part of a larger system, as presented here, or as a stand-alone
tool (Invitae’s Moon).
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Cyrielle Kint Invitae, Invitae, Sara Haers
Invitae, Invitae, Linde Proost Invitae, Invitae, Alexandra Obregon-
Tito Invitae, Invitae, Jeanne Leisk Invitae, Invitae.
P17.011.A Low-coverage genome sequencing is an efﬁcient
approach for the detection of clinically relevant copy-number
variants and mtDNA variants
Sander Pajusalu1;2, Kaisa Teele Oja1;2, Ustina Šamarina2, Mikk
Tooming1;2, Tiina Kahre1;2, Katrin Ounap1;2
1Tartu University, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Department of
Clinical Genetics, Tartu, Estonia; 2Tartu University Hospital, United
Laboratories, Department of Clinical Genetics, Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: Compared to exome sequencing, high-
coverage genome sequencing is widely appreciated for its
superior ability to detect a wide range of genetic variations
including
copy-number
variants
(CNVs)
and
mitochondrial
(mtDNA) variants. However, the high cost is still limiting the use of
genome sequencing. We aimed to assess whether low-coverage
genome sequencing, a considerably cheaper approach, would
detect clinically relevant CNVs and mtDNA variants and would
thus be a cost-efﬁcient approach to supplement exome sequen-
cing in rare disease diagnostics.
Methods: To assess the level of sequencing depth needed for
variant detection, ﬁrst, 30x mean coverage genome sequencing
data were subsampled to 0.5x, 1x, 2x, and 4x coverage ﬁles in
silico. CNVs were detected using Control-FREEC and the mtDNA
variants were detected using the GATK4 mitochondrial pipeline.
Five disease-causing deletions (sized 3.4kb, 4.6kb, 7.2kb, 16kb, and
90kb) and one possibly pathogenic heteroplasmic (14.7%) mtDNA
variant was used to assess sensitivity.
Results: For CNV calling, 2x coverage was sufﬁcient to detect
all heterozygous CNVs greater than 10kb in size, for smaller CNVs
even 4x coverage data did not sufﬁce for CNV detection.
Regarding mtDNA variants, 2x coverage resulted in >99% theo-
retical sensitivity for heteroplasmy levels >10%. The possibly
pathogenic heteroplasmic variant was detected without sig-
niﬁcant change in heteroplasmy estimation in all low-coverage
data (0.5x to 4x coverage).
Conclusion: Low-coverage genome sequencing may be used
to complement exome sequencing for simultaneous mtDNA var-
iant and CNV detection.
References:.
Grants: Estonian Research Council grants PRG471, MOBTP175,
PSG774.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.012.B MorbidGenes panel: a monthly updated list of
diagnostically relevant genes derived from diverse sources
Robin-Tobias Jauss1, Bernt Popp1, Konrad Platzer1, Rami Abou
Jamra1
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany.
Background/Objectives: Identifying clinically relevant genetic
variants is crucial for a fast and reliable genetic diagnosis. With
exome sequencing now standard, diagnostic labs are in need of a,
in principle, to-the-day-accurate list of genes associated with rare
diseases. Manual curation efforts are slow and often disease spe-
ciﬁc, while efforts relying on single sources are too inaccurate and
may result in false-positive genes.
Methods: We established the MorbidGenes panel based on a
list of publicly available databases: OMIM, PanelApp, SysNDD,
ClinVar, HGMD and GenCC. A simple logic allows inclusion of
genes with sufﬁcient evidence based on a voting algorithm. By
providing an API endpoint, users can directly access the list and
metadata for all relevant information on their genes of interest.
Results: The panel currently includes 4,677 genes (v.2022-02.1,
as of February 2022) with minimally sufﬁcient evidence on disease
causality to classify them as diagnostically relevant. Reproducible
ﬁltering and versioning allow the integration into diagnostic
pipelines. In-house implementation successfully removed false
positive genes and reduced time requirements in routine exome
diagnostics. The panel is updated monthly, and we will integrate
novel sources on a regular basis. The panel is freely available at
https://morbidgenes.org/.
Conclusion: The MorbidGenes panel is a comprehensive and
open overview of clinically relevant genes based on a growing list
of sources. It supports genetic diagnostics labs by providing
diagnostically relevant genes in a QM conform format on a
monthly basis with more frequent updates planned. Once gen-
omes are standard, diagnostically relevant non-coding regions will
also be included.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
592
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P17.013.C Who am I? Donor DNA in Patients after Stem Cell
Transplantation
Mareike Mertens1, Mona Sadlo1, Julia Hentschel1
1Philipp-Rosenthal-Straße, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leipzig, Germany.
Background/Objectives: In Germany, 3,500 persons per year
receive a stem cell transplantation resulting in a chimerism.
Therefore, germline testing of blood samples is not feasible. The
presence of donor DNA in various tissues recipients has previously
been documented (Thiede et al. 2000; Imanishi et al. 2007). Yet,
the literature lacks a statistical sound assessment of quantitative
extend of donor DNA in various tissues.
Methods: We performed a pilot trial with six patients who
received an allogeneic stem cell transplant. We analyzed DNA
from buccal swabs, nails and reference material (collected before
transplantation) with two different approaches: a short tandem
repeat (STR) assay containing 28 STR markers (custom-made) to
detect donor derived DNA and a NGS-RC-PCR-based SNP-Assay
including 34 Loci (Nimagen).
Results: Our study showed that DNA of the stem cell donor
could be detected in both buccal swabs and nail samples after
transplantation. The detected donor proportion varies between 11
% and 44 % in the buccal swabs and nail samples.
Conclusion: The study conﬁrms the presence of donor DNA in
buccal swabs and documents a donor DNA percentage in nail
samples of the recipient after allogenic stem cell transplantation.
Currently, we extent the study to additional patients, additional
tissue types and adress the question how donor DNA proportion
varies over time after transplantation to derive more robust con-
clusions, to provide guidance for germline testing after stem cell
transplantation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Mareike Mertens Universitätsklinikum
Leipzig, Mona Sadlo Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Julia Hentschel
Universitätsklinikum Leipzig.
P17.014.D Challenges and lessons learned for automated
variant interpretation pipelines in clinical whole genome
sequencing
Kevin Savage1, Susan Walker1, Katherine Smith1, Antonio Rueda1,
Javier Lopez1, Liam Abrahams1, Emma Baple2, Smedley Damien3,
Ellen Thomas1, Matt Brown1, Richard Scott1, Augusto Rendon1,
Rachael Mein2, Zandra Deans2, Sue Hill2, Mark Caulﬁeld1, Dalia
Kasperaviciute1
1Genomics England, London, United Kingdom;
2NHS England,
London, United Kingdom;
3Queen Mary University of London,
London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: During the 100,000 Genomes Project,
Genomics England developed an automated variant interpretation
framework called Tiering. Tiering prioritises variants most likely to
be clinically relevant for individual patients based on known gene-
disease association, predicted variant consequence type, popula-
tion frequency and variant segregation with the phenotype in the
family. Here, we investigate the performance of tiering.
Methods: We analysed 938 small variants that were classiﬁed
as pathogenic or likely pathogenic, and considered diagnostic by
NHS Genome Medicine Centres, but not prioritised by Tiering at
the time of the ﬁrst interpretation. We identiﬁed the reasons these
variants were not prioritised.
Results: The most frequent reasons diagnostic variants were
not prioritised were:
No gene/disease association data known at time of analy-
sis (43%).
Observed variant segregation with phenotypes in a family did
not match mendelian patterns associated with the disease (21%).
.
Complexities, such as skewed X inactivation, mosaicism,
assumed complete variant penetrance or phenocopies, may
account for some segregation errors. Sensitivity can be improved
by discarding all information from family members (recovered 63
out of 191 variants) or allowing reduced penetrance, assuming
family members may have the diagnostic variant but not be
affected (recovered 54 out of 191 variants). Such gains are at the
cost of speciﬁcity, but given the impact on diagnostic yield this
needs to be explored further.
Conclusion: Known gene-disease association data poses the
largest challenge for automated variant prioritisation. We show
that accommodating complex inheritance patterns with auto-
mated variant prioritisation pipelines is particularly challenging.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Kevin Savage Employed by Genomics
England, Susan Walker Employed by Genomics England, Katherine
Smith Employed by Genomics England, Antonio Rueda Employed
by Genomics England, Javier Lopez Employed by Genomics Eng-
land, Liam Abrahams Employed by Genomics England, Emma
Baple: None declared, Smedley Damien: None declared, Ellen
Thomas Employed by Genomics England, Matt Brown Employed
by Genomics England, Richard Scott Employed by Genomics
England, Augusto Rendon Employed by Genomics England,
Rachael Mein: None declared, Zandra Deans: None declared, Sue
Hill: None declared, Mark Caulﬁeld Employed by Genomics Eng-
land, Dalia Kasperaviciute Employed by Genomics England.
P17.015.A Prostate-enriched circulating cells from semen as a
source for prostate cancer liquid biopsy: setting and
challenges
Ilaria
De
Simone1,
Marinella
Corbetta1,
Chiara
Chiereghin2,
Piergiuseppe Colombo1;2, Federico Colombo2, Vittorio Fasulo1;2,
Cesare Saitta2, Alessio Benetti2, Rodolfo Hurle2, Alberto Saita2, Nicolò
Maria Bufﬁ1;2, Giovanni Lughezzani1;2, Paolo Casale2, Giorgio
Guazzoni1;2, Rosanna Asselta1;2, Massimo Lazzeri2, Giulia Solda’1;2
1Humanitas Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humani-
tas University, Milan, Italy; 2IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital,
Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Prostate cancer (PCa) diagnosis relies on
prostate-speciﬁc antigen and invasive trans-rectal/perineal biopsy,
with a signiﬁcant rate of false negatives and complications. Hence,
there is a growing interest in the development of novel approa-
ches for non-invasive PCa detection. We implemented a protocol
to enrich prostate-derived cells from seminal ﬂuid (SF) and urine,
to test the hypothesis that liquid biopsy (LB) of SF can be used for
PCa diagnosis/prognosis.
Methods: The study cohort included 86 PCa patients scheduled
for radical prostatectomy. The day before surgery, we collected a
sample of SF, post-ejaculation urine, and peripheral blood from
each patient. For 43 patients, PCa specimen was also obtained. After
centrifugation, prostate-derived cells were enriched from SF and
urine by FACS with the following markers: 7AAD+ (cell viability),
Syto-16+ (nuclear staining), CD45- (leucocyte antigen), PSMA+
(prostate-speciﬁc antigen), EpCAM+ (epithelial marker).
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
593
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: We obtained on average ≈67,000 and ≈23,000
prostate-enriched cells from semen and urine, respectively. No
correlation between the number of collected cells and Gleason
Score was observed. Although a critical point of implementation
concerns the quantity/quality of nucleic acids (RNA, DNA)
obtainable from these cells, we were able to conﬁrm the pre-
sence of PCa-speciﬁc lesions (TMPRSS2-ERG fusion and a somatic
mutation in the SPOP gene) in CTCs from SF and urine,
respectively.
Conclusion: The number of prostate-enriched cells in semen/
urine alone cannot be used for non-invasive PCa grading. A
molecular analysis of the obtained cells could be implemented to
identify tumor markers for PCa diagnosis.
References:.
Grants:
Ricerca
Finalizzata,
grant
RF-2018-12367080,
is
acknowledged.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.016.B A tailored stepwise strategy for improving
diagnostic yield in intellectual disability and developmental
disorders
Nuno Maia1;2, Arjan PM de Brouwer3, Paula Jorge1;2
1Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto de Magalhães (CGM), Centro
Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUPorto), Porto, Portugal; 2Unit
for Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedicine (UMIB), Institute of
Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS), and ITR - Laboratory for
Integrative and Translational Research in Population Health,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;
3Department of Human
Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Intellectual disability (ID) / develop-
mental disorders (DD) describe a clinical and genetic hetero-
geneous group of conditions. Herein, a molecular diagnostic
strategy for ID/DD will be illustrated using a singular cohort of
patients.
Methods: Exome (ES) and target sequencing were applied in
the investigation of a diverse cohort of ID/DD patients with
putative autosomal recessive inheritance and a previous normal
genetic investigation, namely Fragile-X, conventional karyotype,
and chromosomal microarray analysis.
Results: The investigational odyssey of our cohort suggests
that (i) targeted sequencing is effective in clinically recognizable
forms of ID, e.g. X-linked Optiz G/BBB syndrome; (ii) ES con-
tributes to disclose genetic contribution of complex phenotypes,
e.g. in a patient with Usher syndrome and muscle complaints
iii) deep phenotyping is important, e.g. in the synergic con-
tribution of heterozygous variants in genes linked to DNA
repair, (iv) CNVs and genomic rearrangements can be unnoticed
by ES, which we will explain by a genomic rearrangement
in SNX14, and (v) interlaboratory collaborations are key for
the identiﬁcation of new ID/DD gene(s) by using MAN2C1 as an
example.
Conclusion: According to some authors ES should be used as
ﬁrst-tier test in ID/DD. Despite this trend, the deﬁnition of a
diagnostic strategy is still difﬁcult even in case with a clear
inheritance pattern. To deﬁne the best strategy for each patient,
communication between medical and laboratory communities is
fundamental. In the absence of well-deﬁned guidelines, we pro-
pose a stepwise tailored approach for molecular diagnosis, which
should be periodically reviewed.
References:.
Grants: UIDB/00215/2020, UIDP/00215/2020) and LA/P/0064/
2020.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.017.C Analytical validation of gene coverages for
Newborns Whole Genome Sequencing Pilot programme
Dasha Deen1, Susan Walker1, Gabriel Adams1, Alex Stuckey1, Javier
Lopez1, Alice Tuff-Lacy1, Matt Brown1, Richard Scott1, Augusto
Rendon1,
David
Bick1,
Dalia
Kasperavici1,
Genomics
England
Research Consortium1
1Genomics England, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: The Newborn Whole Genome Sequen-
cing (WGS) programme is an NHS-embedded research pilot in the
UK that aims (1) to evaluate the feasibility, utility and impact on
the NHS of screening for childhood-onset rare actionable genetic
conditions; (2) understand how, with consent, genomic and
healthcare data could be used to enable research to develop new
diagnostics and treatments; and (3) explore the implications of
storing an individual’s genome for use over their lifetime. Here we
present an approach for analytical validation of the coverages of
genes for childhood-onset rare actionable conditions in short-read
WGS data.
Methods: Statistical modelling was used to deﬁne the required
coverage. Then the empirical distributions of the coverage for
coding regions of 689 genes for rare treatable conditions1 for SNP
and CNV variant calling were assessed in 1,000 test WGS samples
sequenced at average depth of 50X.
Results: We deﬁned low coverage positions as the positions
that are expected to be covered with less than 16 reads in more
than 5% of the samples. We classiﬁed the regions of systematic
low coverage into three categories: (1) inherently prone to
undersequencing; (2) low coverage due to reads with poor base
quality and (3) low coverage due to the presence of homology
regions.
Conclusion: Our work provides a basis to inform decisions
about technology, pipeline and gene selection for Newborn WGS
screening. It will also support monitoring of performance and
tailoring of approaches to enhance ﬁdelity in error-prone regions
by bespoke solutions, reference masking or blacklisting.
References: Bick et al. Am.J.Med.Genet.C.Semin.Med.Genet
187(1):48-54(2021).
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Dasha Deen Full time employee of
Genomics England, Susan Walker Full time employee of Genomics
England, Gabriel Adams Full time employee of Genomics England,
Alex Stuckey Full time employee of Genomics England, Javier
Lopez Full time employee of Genomics England, Alice Tuff-Lacy
Part-time employee of Genomics England, Matt Brown Full time
employee of Genomics England, Richard Scott Full time employee
of Genomics England, Augusto Rendon Full time employee of
Genomics England, David Bick Full time employee of Genomics
England, Dalia Kasperavici Part-time employee of Genomics Eng-
land, Genomics England Research Consortium Full time employ-
ees of Genomics England.
P17.018.D Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation
(MLPA) is a powerful tool for screening of different CNVs and
loci methylation status of various genetic conditions: 7 years’
experience
Ola Eid1
1National Research Centre, Egypt, Human Cytogenetic, Cairo, Egypt.
Background/Objectives:
Multiplex
ligation-dependent
probe
ampliﬁcation is a rapid, reliable, robust and cost-efﬁcient techni-
ques to screen the clinically relevant aberrations in routine diag-
nostics. It is a multiplex polymerase chain reaction-based method
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
594
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
that can detect changes in the gene copy number status, DNA
methylation, and point mutations simultaneously. MLPA is an
efﬁcient tool to analyze genomic copy number aberrations at 55-
60 different genomic loci. MLPA allows the proﬁling of prognostic
and predictive markers.
Methods: Here, we are going to explore the MLPA results of
more than 1500 sample form various genetic conditions such as
intellectual disabilities/multiple congenital anomalies (ID/MGA),
autism spectrum disorders (ASD), short stature (SS), breast can-
cer, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), retinoblastoma (RB),
imprinting diseases and prenatal screening for aneuploidies.
Results: MLPA positive results were detected in 3 (22.9%) out
of 144 ID/MGA patients, in 7 (17.5%) out of 40 ASD patients, in 11
(22%) out of 50 SS children, in 12 out of 72 RB patients (16.67%).
Moreover, MLPA detected 14 foetuses having trisomy out of 48
amniotic ﬂuid samples in addition of their sex determination.
Furthermore, MLPA detected 26 genomic abnormalities in 30 CLL
patients. There are other interesting results.
Conclusion: Our conclusion about this technology that it has
considerable advantages in that it is highly versatile in its appli-
cations, malleable in its target loci, highly automated, appropriate
for high-throughput testing, competent, and cost effective.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.019.A Efﬁciency and clinical utility of trio-based whole
exome sequencing in patients with suspected rare mendelian
disorders
Sandra Von Hardenberg1, Gunnar Schmidt1, Manuela Richter2,
Hannah Wallaschek1, Brigitte Schlegelberger1, Christoph Jacobi3,
Alexander von Gise4, Bernd Auber1
1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany; 2Department of Neonatology, Children’s and
Youth Hospital Auf der Bult, Hannover, Germany; 3Department of
Pediatric
Pulmonology
and
Neonatology,
Hannover
Medical
School, Hannover, Germany; 4Department of Pediatric Cardiology
and Intensive Care Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.
Background/Objectives: Rare genetic diseases are a major cause
for severe illnesses in children. Whole exome sequencing (WES) is
a powerful tool for identifying the underlying genetic cause. A
simultaneous examination of the patient and his/her parents
(tWES) has been proven to be a time saving method. To shorten
the process of identifying the correct genetic diagnosis is of
utmost
importance
for
precise,
evidence-based
treatment
decisions.
Methods: We assessed diagnostic rate and clinical utility of
tWES in 224 children with a suspected genetic condition in the
German in- and out-patient public healthcare system.
Results: tWES provided a diagnosis in 63 (28%) of all analysed
children and in 18 (35%) children treated in intensive care units
(ICUs). Due to vigorous improvements in sample processing and
data analysis the evaluation time of tWES data has been reduced
signiﬁcantly during the last three years from 41 days in 2019,
34 days in 2020 to 23 days in 2021. Several genes could be
identiﬁed to be causative, three of them (GAD1, TMEM222 and
ZNFX1) were previously not associated with a clinical condition. It
is worth emphasizing that 15% of children with a genetic diag-
nosis had larger copy number variations (CNV) that were detected
via WES.
Conclusion: tWES has been proven to have a high diagnostic
yield in critically ill children. It has a high impact for classiﬁcation
of de novo or compound heterozygous variants and therefore on
management and family counselling. We recommend initiating
tWES as early as possible, especially or children on ICU.
References: /.
Grants: /.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.020.B DeepVariant as a variant caller to diagnose rare
diseases
Ramprasad Neethiraj1, Anders Jemt2;3, Valtteri Wirta1;2;3, Henrik
Stranneheim2;3;4
1Science for Life Laboratory, School of Engineering Sciences in
Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health, KTH Royal Institute of
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden; 2Genomic Medicine Center Kar-
olinska, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; 3Science
for Life Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Tumour and Cell
Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden;
4Centre for
Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stock-
holm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: GATK best practices workﬂow is widely
used to identify variants to diagnose rare diseases, but studies
have shown that DeepVariant (DV) can generate more accurate
variant calls. DV also generates biologically relevant genotype
quality (GQ) scores, a parameter used to evaluate the quality of
the variants. The primary goal of this study was to assess DV’s
performance against that of GATK in a clinical diagnostics pipeline.
Additionally, we have also attempted to understand the rela-
tionship between genotype quality (GQ) scores from the two
variant callers.
Methods: In this study, we used 2 cases; one is a trio of Ash-
kenazi Jewish ancestry from NIST reference sample collection that
was used to evaluate precision and sensitivity metrics of the
pipeline, and one is a synthetic dataset spiked with data from 503
known disease-causative SNVs which we used to assess recall rate
on clinical samples and understand the effect of changing the
variant caller on GQ scores.
Results: We observed that DV outperformed GATK in terms of
both precision (99.92% vs. 98.88%) and sensitivity (99.84% vs.
99.41%) for variants in the high-conﬁdence regions. All 503 SNVs
were correctly recalled, and approximately 90% of the SNPs called
by GATK had a GQ score of >90, whereas SNVs from DV had a
relatively better spread with 90% of the variants between 30 and 60.
Conclusion: Our results show that switching from GATK to DV
for variant calling can improve the overall quality of variant calls.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.021.C Development of an amplicon-based NGS test for
evaluating MLH1 promoter methylation
Sara Iolanda Oliveira da Silva1, Tabata Domingos1, Bruna Catin
Kupper1, Samuel Aguiar Junior1, Dirce Carraro1, Giovana Torrezan1
1A.C.Camargo Cancer Center, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Background/Objectives: Detecting loss of expression of DNA
mismatch repair (MMR) proteins is highly relevant to identify
Lynch syndrome patients. However, MLH1 inactivation due to
promoter hypermethylation occurs in 15% of sporadic colorectal
cancers (CRCs), and it is correlated with BRAF somatic mutations.
Here, we aimed to develop a diagnostic test for assessing MLH1
promoter methylation based in next generation sequencing (NGS),
and to evaluate the concordance of MLH1 methylation and BRAF-
V600 mutation status in CRC.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
595
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: For MLH1 methylation analysis DNA from FFPE
tumors and saliva was treated with bisulﬁte, ampliﬁed by PCR and
evaluated by amplicon sequencing on Ion Proton platform.
Sequences were analyzed in CLC Genomics Workbench to evalu-
ate the frequencies of cytosine/thymine bases of four CpGs.
Results: The average percentage of MLH1 methylation was
2.49% in 20 saliva samples, 2.1% in 6 tumors with MSH2/MSH6 loss
and 29.6% (ranging from 1.0% to 91.3%) in 20 tumors with MLH1/
PMS2 loss. We conﬁrmed the reproducibility and accuracy of MLH1
promoter analysis performing a serial dilution experiment with
completely methylated and unmethylated control DNAs. For
MLH1/PMS2 deﬁcient tumors, the MLH1 methylation status was
concordant with the BRAF mutation status in 90% (18/20) of
the cases.
Conclusion: Our amplicon based NGS test showed a great
sensitivity and speciﬁcity for detecting MLH1 methylation in CRC
samples, with a high agreement with the evaluation of BRAF
mutation. This simple and affordable test could be used as a reﬂex
test to identify patients with sporadic causes of MLH1/PMS2
deﬁciency in CRC and endometrial cancer.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P17.022.D Automated decision support for the clinical
interpretation of copy number variants
Tomáš Sládeček1;2, Michaela Gažiová1;3, Marcel Kucharik1;2, Zuzana
Pös1;4;5, Ondrej Pos1;2;4, Werner Krampl1;2;4, Rastislav Hekel1;4;6, Ján
Radvánszky1;4;5, Jaroslav Budiš1;2;6, Tomas Szemes1;2;4
1Geneton Ltd, Bratislava, Slovakia;
2Comenius University Science
Park, Bratislava, Slovakia;
3Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and
Informatics, Comenius University, Department of Computer Science,
Bratislava, Slovakia; 4Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius Uni-
versity, Bratislava, Department of Molecular Biology, Bratislava,
Slovakia; 5Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences,
Institute of Clinical and Translational Research, Bratislava, Slovakia;
6Slovak Centre of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava,
Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: Clinical interpretation of copy number
variants (CNVs) is a complex process that often leads to different
decisions between diagnostic centers. In order to alleviate this
obstacle, technical standards for the interpretation and reporting
of variants have been developed, called ACMG guidelines. Several
semiautomatic computational methods have been proposed to
recommend
appropriate
choices.
Alternately,
the
emerging
machine learning based tools showed promising ways of even
fully automated predictions.
Methods: We evaluated state-of-the-art computational pre-
diction tools on CNV records collected from the ClinVar database.
We compared their accuracy and showed the superior accuracy of
their combination. We also tweaked the key parameters and
underlying data sources to demonstrate their impact on the
overall prediction.
Results: We demonstrate that the choice of underlying data
sources signiﬁcantly affects the prediction of CNV pathogenicity.
We also show how automated prediction tools, especially their
combination, further improve the evaluation of ACMG guidelines
and thus lead to more reliable clinical decision support for
clinicians.
Conclusion: Modern clinical decision support tools for the
clinical interpretation of CNVs are able to provide valuable gui-
dance to clinicians, relieving them of a great share of tedious
annotation and interpretation processes.
References.
Gažiová, M., et al. “Automated prediction of the clinical impact
of structural copy number variations.” Scientiﬁc reports 12.1
(2022): 1-14.
Grants: This work was supported by the PANGAIA project
H2020-MSCA-RISE-2019 (Grant agreement ID: 872539) funded
under H2020-EU.1.3.3. Programme; by the Slovak Research and
Development Agency (grant ID APVV-18-0319; GenoMicrosat); and
by the ALPACA project H2020-MSCA-ITN-2020 (Grant agreement
ID: 956229) funded under H2020-EU.1.3.1. Programme.
Conﬂict of Interest: Tomáš Sládeček Geneton Ltd, Michaela
Gažiová Geneton Ltd, Marcel Kucharik Geneton Ltd, Zuzana Pös
Geneton Ltd, Ondrej Pos Geneton Ltd, Werner Krampl Geneton
Ltd, Rastislav Hekel Geneton Ltd, Ján Radvánszky Geneton Ltd,
Jaroslav Budiš Geneton Ltd, grant ID APVV-18-0319; GenoMicrosat,
Tomas Szemes Geneton Ltd, ALPACA project H2020-MSCA-ITN-
202 (Grant agreement ID: 872539), PANGAIA project H2020-MSCA-
RISE-2019 (Grant agreement ID: 956229).
P17.023.A Completing MANE Select, A Joint NCBI and EMBL-
EBI Transcript Set for Clinical Genomics and Research
Adam Frankish1, Joannella Morales1, Shashikant Pujar2, Jane
Loveland1, Alex Astashyn2, Ruth Bennett1, Andrew Berry1, Eric Cox2,
Claire Davidson1, Olga Ermolaeva2, Catherine Farrell2, Reham
Fatima1, Laurent Gil1, Tamara Goldfarb2, Jose M Gonzalez1, Diana
Haddad2, Matt Hardy1, Toby Hunt1, John Jackson2, Vinita Joardar2,
Michael Kay1, Vamsi Kodali2, Kelly McGarvey2, Aoife McMahon1,
Jonathan
Mudge1,
Michael
Murphy2,
Bhanu
Rajput2,
Sanjida
Rangwala2, Lillian Riddick2, Francoise Thibaud-Nissen2, Anjana
Vatsan2, Craig Wallin2, David Webb2, Fiona Cunningham1, Terence
Murphy2
1European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics
Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 2National Center for Biotech-
nology Information, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, United States.
Background/Objectives: Understanding the impact of clinically
relevant variants requires comprehensive gene annotation. How-
ever, the historic lack of a standard for clinical reporting compli-
cates the process of consistent interpretation and reporting.
Methods: Ensembl/GENCODE and RefSeq launched the Mat-
ched Annotation from NCBI and EMBL-EBI (MANE) collaboration to
converge on human gene and transcript annotation and jointly
deﬁne a high-value set of transcripts and corresponding proteins
for use as a universal standard for variant reporting. Each MANE
transcript
represents
an
exact
match
between
the
exonic
sequence of an Ensembl/GENCODE transcript and its counterpart
in RefSeq, such that the identiﬁers can be used synonymously. The
MANE Select set identiﬁes a representative transcript for each
human protein-coding gene. The MANE Plus Clinical set provides
additional transcripts at loci where the Select alone is not sufﬁ-
cient to report all currently known clinical variants.
Results: With MANE release 1.0 we have now released MANE
Select transcripts for 99.7% of human protein-coding genes,
including all ACMG SF v3.03 genes.
Conclusion: MANE transcripts are accessible from major gen-
ome browsers and key resources. Widespread adoption will
increase consistency of reporting, facilitate exchange of data
regardless of annotation source, and help streamline clinical
interpretation.
References:.
Grants: This work is supported by: Wellcome Trust-WT200990/
Z/16/Z;
EMBL-Core-Funds;
NIH-U41HG007234
and
Intramural
Research Program of the National Library of Medicine, National
Institutes of Health.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
596
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P17.024.B Detection of Turner Syndrome in newborn
screening: validation of a fragment-analysis based approach
Ruth Luschka1, Ivonne Bedei1, Johannes Becker-Follmann2, Axel
Weber3, Zeynep Agirman2, Tarrin Khairi-Taraki2, Ramon Enriquez
Schaefer2, Roland Axt-Fliedner1
1Justus-Liebig University Gießen, Department of Prenatal Medicine
and Fetal Therapy, Giessen, Germany;
2Eluthia GmbH, Giessen,
Germany;
3Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Institute of Human
Genetics, Gießen, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Turner syndrome (TS) affects one in
1,900 newborn girls. Late diagnosis impairs a timely treatment and
limits improvement of the outcome. Various experts have been
advocating for including TS in newborn screening (NBS) programs
(1). Existing methods are not suitable for use in NBS, partly
because they fail to work with material from dried blood spots
(DBS), fail to detect mosaics or because of elevated costs. Our
objective was to overcome these constraints and develop a
screening method suitable for public NBS programs.
Methods: We deﬁned 6 STR and 3 SD (segmented duplication)
markers, all mapping to the X chromosome, the latter additionally
mapping to chromosomes Y, 3 and 16, respectively. The dis-
tribution of the STR markers along the X chromosome allows to
detect aneuploidies of both chromosomal arms separately. The SD
markers allow to compare the copy number of the X chromosome
with that of the Y chromosome and the autosomes. Fragments
were ampliﬁed by multiplex-PCR and separated by capillary
electrophoresis. 20 TS patients, conﬁrmed by karyotyping were
analyzed and compared against 60 controls. The capability to
distinguish 46,XX from discrepant karyotypes was evaluated
applying statistics.
Results: All 60 controls and 20 TS cases were correctly identiﬁed
from DBS, gDNA from whole blood and buccal smears, respectively.
Conclusion: Our SD-STR-QF-Multiplex-PCR system allows to
screen for TS, including mosaics and is in line with requirements
for NBS programs concerning tissue, ease of use, costs, turn-
around-time and scalability.
References:
(1)
Gravholt,
CH,
et
al:
Eur
J
Endocrinol
2017;177:G1-G70.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ruth Luschka: None declared, Ivonne
Bedei: None declared, Johannes Becker-Follmann Employee of
Eluthia, Axel Weber: None declared, Zeynep Agirman Employee of
Eluthia, Tarrin Khairi-Taraki Employee of Eluthia, Owns stocks in
Eluthia, Ramon Enriquez Schaefer Employee of Eluthia, Owns stock
in Eluthia, Roland Axt-Fliedner: None declared.
P17.026.D Sequencing and Commercial Intelligent Ratio
based Real-Time PCR Outperform Multiplex Ligation-
Dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation in Prenatal Diagnosis for
Spinal Muscular Atrophy
Gulten Tuncel1, Aysegul Bostanci2, Burcin Sanlidag3, Eray Dirik3,
SEHIME TEMEL4, Mahmut Ergoren1;5
1Near East University, DESAM Research Institute, Nicosia, Cyprus;
2Near East University, Department of Medical Microbiology and
Clinical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus; 3Near East
University, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Nicosia,
Cyprus; 4Bursa Uludag University, Department of Medical Genetics,
Faculty of Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus; 5Near East University, Depart-
ment of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Background/Objectives: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a rare,
recessively inherited neurodegenerative disorder arising from
deterioration of motor neurons in the anterior horn of the spinal
cord that in turn results in muscle weakness and atrophy. SMA is
mostly caused by deletion or point mutations in the SMN1 gene.
As current therapies are only applicable to patients below two
years of age and are expensive, screening tests are of high
importance for prevention and early detection of cases. Currently,
multiple ligation probe analysis (MLPA) is often considered as the
gold standard method for diagnosis, providing an easy and high
throughput system for analysing the critical regions in affected
patients and carriers.
Methods: Here we report the case of an SMA type I patient
with a novel SMN1 mutation that was misdiagnosed in prenatal
screening. She was admitted to the hospital with symptoms of
muscle weakness recognised from birth on. The diminished
movements were mostly recognised on her hands and arms.
Further genetic analysis was performed with next generation
sequencing and by SNP Biotechnology SMA Real-Time PCR
Detection Kit.
Results:
NGS
revealed
the
novel
heterozygous
SMN1
c.835_5_835delTCCTTinsTG(IVS7-5_IVS7-9delTCCTTinsTG)
muta-
tion in combination with heterozygous SMN1 exon 7-8 deletion.
The novel mutation could also be detected by SNP Biotechnology
SMA Real-Time PCR Detection Kit.
Conclusion: In this context we conclude that the use of MLPA
analysis may not be the gold standard in SMA screening as less
frequent mutations or mutations in the ligand binding regions can
be missed.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18 BIOINFORMATICS, MACHINE LEARNING AND STATISTICAL
METHODS
P18.001.A GestaltMatcher 2.0: Open access database and
open source software toolkit for facial phenotype descriptors
Alexander Hustinx1, Behnam Javanmardi1, Peter Krawitz1, Tzung-
Chien Hsieh1
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University
Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives:
Many
next-generation
phenotyping
approaches, such as GestaltMatcher and DeepGestalt, have shown
that they can assist in ﬁnding a diagnosis for individuals with rare
genetic disorders. However, most of these tools are based on deep
convolutional neural networks that were developed for a broad
range of object identiﬁcation. We aimed to improve the perfor-
mance by using recent network architectures for facial images,
more data augmentation, and ensemble models. Besides, we
introduce GestaltMatcher Database (GMDB) to the research com-
munity which can be used to train and compare further deep
learning models.
Methods: We utilized 4750 frontal face photos of 350 different
disorders in GMDB for training and benchmarking. We ﬁrst
replaced the old architecture with a recent one that performs
better on face recognition. Afterward, we improved the base
model’s performance for transfer learning and addressed the data
scarcity when training the new GestaltMatcher model. Lastly, we
applied test time augmentation and model ensembles to max-
imize the robustness and accuracy of our model.
Results: We ﬁrst benchmarked each proposed change and
showed that they improve the diagnostic performance on the
frequent and rare subsets of GMDB. Moreover, we compared the
performance between the old model, the new model, and
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
597
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
an ensemble of models. The modernized models signiﬁcantly
improved the performance on both subsets compared to the old
model’s performance on GMDB by up to 45%.
Conclusion: In Conclusion GestaltMatcher 2.0 is not only a
signiﬁcant update with respect to performance, but it is the ﬁrst
open source effort for next-generation phenotyping and FAIR
data use.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Alexander Hustinx: None declared, Beh-
nam Javanmardi: None declared, Peter Krawitz Modest; FDNA,
Tzung-Chien Hsieh: None declared.
P18.002.B Scalable integration of multiomic single-cell data
using generative adversarial networks
Valentina Giansanti1;2, Marco Antoniotti1;3, Davide Cittaro2
1Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Department of Informatics,
Systems and Communication, Milan, Italy;
2IRCCS San Raffaele
Institute, Center for Omics Sciences, Milan, Italy; 3Università degli
Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Bicocca Bioinformatics Biostatistics and
Bioimaging Centre – B4, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: The amount of single-cell datasets, their
size and the diverse modalities they describe is continuously
increasing, prompting the need to develop robust methods to
integrate multiomic datasets, whether paired from the same cells
or, most challenging, from unpaired separate experiments. Most
methods allow the integration of a limited number of omics and
make assumptions about the relationships between them. We
introduce a deep-learning model to integrate multimodal data
supporting high number of modalities and agnostic about their
relationships.
Methods: We prototyped our approach on public data for
which paired and unpaired experiments exist. Each modality is
embedded into feature spaces with same dimensionality across all
modalities. The embeddings are used to train a Wasserstein
generative adversarial network to understand the couplings
between multiple modalities. The output is integrated with the
original data and can be used to bridge information across omics.
Results: We introduce “informative training” so that mini-
batches include locally similar cells. This paradigm increases the
performances in coupling while keeping global structure invariant.
Performance of label transfer between unpaired data using
learned couplings is comparable to performance achieved when
paired data are used. We tested our approach including up to ﬁve
modalities.
Conclusion: We propose an approach for coupling unpaired
multimodal data, ready for the large diversity of single cell tech-
nologies available. Our method doesn’t make assumptions on
crosstalk among modalities nor needs anchors to match them.
Moreover, it can be easily extended to an unlimited number
of omics.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Valentina Giansanti: None declared, Marco
Antoniotti Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca Milan, Italy, CRUK
Accelerator Award #22790, Single Cell Cancer Evolution in the Clinic,
coPI. Fondo Ateneo Quota Competitiva, Università degli Studi di
Milano-Bicocca., Davide Cittaro Ospedale San Raffaele (employer).
P18.003.C Converting single nucleotide variants between
genome builds: from cautionary tale to solution
Cathal Ormond1, Niamh Ryan1, Aiden Corvin1, Elizabeth Heron1
1Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
Background/Objectives: Next-generation sequencing studies are
dependent on a high-quality reference genome for single
nucleotide variant (SNV) calling. Position information is not
directly comparable between builds, so tools such as liftOver and
CrossMap are used to convert data from one build to another.
However, the positions of converted SNVs do not always match
SNVs derived from aligned data, and in some instances, SNVs are
known to change chromosome when converted.
Methods: We describe a novel algorithm to identify positions
that are unstable when converting between human genome
reference builds GRCh37 and GRCh38. We also examine the
overlap between these unstable positions and various annotation
sets in the genome to explain the source of the instability. Finally,
we apply this method to sequencing data to benchmark the
accuracy of the converted data with aligned data.
Results: We identiﬁed 11.3Mbp of unstable positions on
GRCh37 and 20Mbp on GRCh38, all of which are determined by
the chain ﬁle and independent of the conversion tool. The
majority of these positions overlap segmental duplications and/or
assembly updates between builds. Pre-excluding SNVs at these
positions prior to conversion results in SNVs that are stable to
conversion. SNVs at unstable positions had worse accuracy metrics
than SNVs at stable positions.
Conclusion: We have identiﬁed all positions which are
unstable to conversion between GRCh37 and GRCh38 and pro-
vided a simple framework to remove these instabilities. This work
highlights the care that must be taken when converting SNVs
between genome builds.
References: Ormond et al., Brief Bioinform, 2021.
Grants: NIH [5U01MH-109499-04] and SFI [16/SPP/3324].
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.004.D Distribution analysis of missense variants in the
human genome reveals widespread gene-speciﬁc clustering
patterns and improves prediction of pathogenicity
Quinodoz Mathieu1;2;3, Virginie Peter1;2;3;4, Katarina Cisarova5, Béryl
Royer-Bertrand5, Peter D. Stenson6, David N. Cooper6, Sheila Unger5,
Andrea Superti-Furga5, Carlo Rivolta1;2;3
1Institute of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel, Basel,
Switzerland; 2University of Basel, Department of Ophthalmology, Basel,
Switzerland; 3University of Leicester, Department of Genetics and
Genome Biology, Leicester, United Kingdom; 4Lausanne University
Hospital (CHUV), Institute of Experimental Pathology, Lausanne,
Switzerland; 5University of Lausanne and Lausanne University Hospital
(CHUV), Division of Genetic Medicine, Lausanne, Switzerland; 6Cardiff
University, Institute of Medical Genetics, CArdiff, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Identifying variants that underlie Men-
delian phenotypes and cancer represents a major challenge in
genetic medicine. However, current criteria still leave many rare
missense variants classiﬁed as “variants of uncertain signiﬁcance”
(VUS). Many in silico tools have been developed to help with this
problem. However, existing tools did not take into account that
mutations appear to cluster within speciﬁc regions.
Methods: In this work, we address the question of within-gene
distribution of pathogenic and benign missense variants, discover
signiﬁcant clustering across the whole coding genome, and use
this information to build a positional score. We used a machine
learning approach to analyze the within-gene distribution of
missense variants observed in hereditary conditions and cancer.
Results: When applied to 840 genes from the ClinVar database,
this approach detected a signiﬁcant non-random distribution of
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
598
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
pathogenic and benign variants in 387 (46%) and 172 (20%) of
them, respectively, revealing that variant clustering is widespread.
We then developed a pathogenicity predictor, MutScore, that
integrates qualitative features of DNA substitutions with the new
additional information derived from this positional clustering.
Using a random forest approach, MutScore was able to identify
pathogenic missense mutations with very high accuracy, out-
performing existing predictive tools.
Conclusion: Within-gene clustering of pathogenic and benign
DNA changes is an important and previously underappreciated
feature of the human exome, which can be harnessed to improve
the prediction of pathogenicity and disambiguation of VUS.
Website: https://iob-genetic.shinyapps.io/mutscore/.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the Swiss National Science
Foundation (grants #176097 and #204285 to C.R.).
Conﬂict of Interest: Quinodoz Mathieu: None declared, Virgi-
nie Peter: None declared, Katarina Cisarova: None declared, Béryl
Royer-Bertrand: None declared, Peter D. Stenson Research per-
formed by D.N.C. was partly supported by QIAGEN Inc., David N.
Cooper Research performed by P:D.S. was partly supported by
QIAGEN Inc., Sheila Unger: None declared, Andrea Superti-Furga:
None declared, Carlo Rivolta: None declared.
P18.005.A Component-wise L2-boosting for polygenic risk
scores based on large cohort data
Hannah Klinkhammer1;2, Christian Staerk2, Carlo Maj1;3, Peter
Krawitz1, Andreas Mayr2
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University
Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany;
2Institute of Medical Biometry,
Informatics and Epidemiology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn,
Germany;
3Center for Human Genetics, Philipps University of
Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Polygenic risk scores (PRS) evaluate the
individual genetic liability to a certain trait and play an increas-
ingly important role in the ﬁeld of risk stratiﬁcation. Most often,
PRS models are based on summary statistics of univariate effects
derived from genome-wide association studies. To improve the
prediction performance of PRS, it is desirable to ﬁt multivariable
models directly on the genotypic data. Due to the large and high-
dimensional data, efﬁcient algorithms have to be developed to
overcome the computational burden.
Methods: We implemented a component-wise L2-boosting
algorithm to ﬁt genotyped data from large cohort studies to
continuous outcomes using the genotypic variants as linear base-
learners. Similar to the snpnet approach for the lasso we iteratively
work on smaller batches of variants.
Results: By restricting the set of possible base-learners in a
data-driven way in each boosting step, we can increase the
computational efﬁciency without losing prediction accuracy. Fur-
thermore, we show both in a simulation study and via different
traits from the UK biobank data, that our method yields compe-
titive results in comparison to other methods such as the lasso.
Conclusion: We introduced a L2-boosting algorithm to effec-
tively derive sparse PRS directly from genotypic data. Due to the
modular structure of boosting, the method can be extended to
construct PRS for different outcomes such as binary or time-to-
event data.
References: Qian J et al. (2020) A fast and scalable framework
for large-scale and ultrahigh-dimensional sparse regression with
application to the UK Biobank. PLoS 16(10): e1009141. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1009141.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.007.C Investigating microRNA-associated variation in
Multiple Sclerosis
Ifeolutembi Fashina1;2, Ngoc Thanh Nguyen3, Simon J. Furney4,
Claire McCoy2
1SFI Centre for Research Training in Genomic Data Science (NUIG),
Galway, Ireland; 2Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Department
of Molecular Cellular Therapeutics, Dublin, Ireland; 3Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, Department of Physiology Medical Physics,
Dublin, Ireland;
4Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Genomic
Oncology Research Group, Department of Physiology Medical
Physics, Dublin, Ireland.
Background/Objectives:
Genome-wide
association
studies
(GWAS) have highlighted over 200 autosomal variants asso-
ciated with Multiple Sclerosis (MS). However, variants in non-
coding
regions
such
as
those
encoding
microRNAs
have
not been explored adequately, despite strong evidence of
microRNA dysregulation in MS patients and model organisms.
This work explores microRNA associated variants within MS
GWAS studies.
Methods: SNPs within the coordinates of microRNA mature,
precursor and ﬂanking sequences and within 3’UTR microRNA-
binding sites were collated from six open-access catalogues. These
microRNA-associated SNPs were intersected with the 200 sus-
ceptibility SNPs and summary statistics from the most recent
MS GWAS.
TargetScan7.0, a target-prediction algorithm was used to cal-
culate potential miRNA loss and gain for each candidate SNP.
Results: No MS susceptibility SNPs were identiﬁed in microRNA
precursor or mature regions directly. However, we identiﬁed ﬁve
susceptibility SNPs among the 34,705 collated 3’UTR binding-site
SNPs. Two of the ﬁve variants were predicted to change miRNA-
binding activity. One variant, rs6742 was associated with the gain
of 6 miRNAs and loss of 3 miRNAs. This SNP is an eQTL for
SLC2A4RG. Functional validation will be carried out to study the
effect of rs6742 on candidate miRNA-interaction, while other MS
associated miRNA-SNPs will be assessed by statistical and func-
tional ﬁnemapping.
Conclusion: Altogether, we have shown the utility of exploring
miRNA variation within MS GWAS data and are generating a novel
bioinformatics pipeline for investigating microRNA-associated
variants through MS GWAS summary statistics. This pipeline
could be useful for interrogating miRNA SNPs in other disease
indications.
References: Patsopoulos et al, Science, 365(6460). https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.aav7188.
Grants: SFI CRT: 18/CRT/6214.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.008.D Using GCPBayes to explore pleiotropy at gene-level
between breast and ovarian cancers based on GWAS summary
statistics data
Yazdan Asgari1, Pierre-Emmanuel Sugier1, Taban Baghfalaki1,
Mojgan Karimi1, Elise Lucotte1, Amélie Ngo1, Gianluca Severi1, Benoit
Liquet2;3, Thérèse Truong1
1CESP (Center for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health),
INSERM,
Paris-Saclay
Universi-ty,
Paris-Sud
University,
Gustave
Roussy, Villejuif, France, Paris, France; 2Laboratoire de Mathéma-
tiques et de leurs Applications de Pau, Université de Pau et des Pays
de l’Adour, UMR CNRS 5142, E2S-UPPA, France, Paris, France; 3School
of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Macquarie University,
Sydney, Australia, Sydney, Australia.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
599
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Cross-phenotype association at gene- or
pathway-level can help to detect pleiotropic genes, i.e. the fact
that one gene can affect multiple traits, and inform about com-
mon mechanisms between diseases. However, the lack of proper
pipelines to apply gene-set analysis in this context using GWAS
data in a reasonable running time could prevent researchers to
apply such methods.
Methods: We designed a user-friendly pipeline to perform
cross phenotype association using GCPBayes method [1], a cross-
phenotype gene-based method developed by our team. We illu-
strated the application on publicly available GWAS summary sta-
tistics on breast cancer (BC) and ovarian cancer (OC) from BCAC
and OCAC consortia and compared the results with previous
studies used SNP-level analysis or transcriptome data.
Results: Previous studies suggested 40 pleiotropic genes but
only one (RCCD1) was replicated by two studies. Our method
retrieved seven of these genes: TERT, BABAM1, CPNE1, RGS19,
SMC2, CLIC6, and RCCD1. Besides, we also detected additional 140
new genes with potential pleiotropic signals for BC and OC.
However, we are working on a suitable way to narrow our large list
of candidate genes for further experimental analyses.
Conclusion: Our method replicated some genes previously
found associated to both BC and OC using gene-set rather than
SNP-level approach. User-friendly tutorials are available on our
group’s GitHub page.
References: 1. Baghfalaki et al. 2021, Stat. Med., 40, 1498–1518.
Grants: This work was supported by ‘Ligue contre le Cancer’,
INSERM Cancer, INSERM Cross-Cutting Project GOLD.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.009.A GenOtoScope: Towards automated ACMG
classiﬁcation of genetic variants associated with congenital
hearing loss
Christian Landgraf1, Damianos Melidis2, Gunnar Schmidt1, Anja
Schöner-Heinisch1, Sandra Von Hardenberg1, Alisa Förster1, Anna-Lena
Katzke1, Anke Lesinski-Schiedat3, Wolfgang Nejdl2;4, Bernd Auber1
1Hannover Medical School (MHH), Department of Human Genetics,
Hannover, Germany;
2Leibniz University Hannover, L3S Research
Center, Hannover, Germany;
3Hannover Medical School (MHH),
Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hannover, Germany; 4Leibniz
University Hannover, Knowledge-based Systems Laboratory, Hann-
over, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Consistent interpretation of a large num-
ber of genomic variants is a key challenge of today’s clinical genetics.
This is particularly relevant for hearing loss (HL). HL is the most
common sensory disorder with a vast genetic heterogeneity. Variant
assessment can be highly standardized using the “Expert Speciﬁ-
cation of ACMG/AMP Variant Interpretation Guidelines for Genetic
Hearing Loss”. However, manual analyses remain time-consuming
and prone to inconsistent interpretation and could, therefore, mas-
sively beneﬁt from automated variant (pre-)assessment.
Methods: GenOtoScope is an open-source bioinformatics tool
written in Python programming language. Two types of interfaces
are provided: a freely accessible website to classify single variants,
and a command line application capable of processing large
variant sets (e.g. full WES data sets).
GenOtoScope automates all 12 ACMG/AMP criteria that can be
assessed without further individual patient information or human
curator investigations. We benchmarked the performance against
two other variant classiﬁcation tools using two manually curated
HL data sets: ClinGen expert clinical validity curation of 164
hearing loss gene-disease pairs (158 variants in 9 genes) and a
local data set from Hannover Medical School’s Department of
Human Genetics (118 variants in 36 genes).
Results: GenOtoScope achieved the best average accuracy and
precision for both data sets: Compared to the second best tool,
GenOtoScope improved accuracy metrics by 25.75% and 4.57%
and precision metrics of 52.11% and 12.13% on the two data sets,
respectively.
Conclusion: GenOtoScope has proven capable of standardiz-
ing the process and signiﬁcantly reducing the time of variant
assessment and interpretation for HL.
References:.
Grants: Funded by Volkswagen Foundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: Christian Landgraf Volkswagen Founda-
tion (Understanding Cochlear Implant Outcome Variability using
Big Data and Machine Learning Approaches), Damianos Melidis
Volkswagen Foundation (Understanding Cochlear Implant Out-
come Variability using Big Data and Machine Learning Approa-
ches), Gunnar Schmidt: None declared, Anja Schöner-Heinisch:
None declared, Sandra Von Hardenberg: None declared, Alisa
Förster: None declared, Anna-Lena Katzke: None declared, Anke
Lesinski-Schiedat: None declared, Wolfgang Nejdl: None declared,
Bernd Auber: None declared.
P18.010.B Using the central dogma to quantify the precision
and recall of colocalisation methods
Ralf Tambets1, Anastassia Kolde1, Kaur Alasoo1
1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives:
Colocalisation
is
a
fundamental
approach for identifying candidate genes that causally mediate
complex trait associations. However, benchmarking different
colocalisation methods is challenging due to potentially unrealistic
assumptions in simulated data and a lack of ground truth about
causal associations in real data. We overcame this problem by
using cis gene expression and protein quantitative trait locus
(QTL) data, assuming that the most likely causal gene for each cis-
pQTL is the gene coding for the protein.
Methods: We compared three Bayesian colocalisation meth-
ods: coloc v3 and coloc v5 operating at the locus level; and
CAVIAR’s colocalisation posterior probability (CLPP) deﬁned at the
variant level. We used cis-eQTL data from the eQTL Catalogue (103
datasets) and blood plasma cis-pQTLs from the INTERVAL study.
Results: Using the same threshold (PP4 > 0.8), v5 detected 157
additional colocalisations (36% more) relative to v3 and missed
only 29 colocalisations (7%) that v3 detected. Of the 851 proteins
analysed, v5 found 441 to colocalise with the corresponding
coding gene (52% recall), compared to 315 found by v3 (37%
recall). However, v5 also detected colocalisations with additional
genes, giving it slightly lower precision (32% vs 40%). Both ver-
sions of coloc detected more true positive signals than CLPP at its
standard threshold (>0.1, 24% recall, 57% precision).
Conclusion: Our results indicate that using ﬁne-mapping-
based coloc v5 can signiﬁcantly improve the yield of colocalisation
analysis, but false positives introduced by co-regulation of
neighboring genes should be carefully considered.
References:.
Grants: PSG415 “Inferring gene regulatory networks from
large-scale gene expression and genotype datasets” (01.01.2020-
31.12.2023).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.011.C A phenotype-gene based graph for symptoms
description harmonization and clinically-driven genomic
analysis
Kevin Yauy1;2, Nicolas Duforet-Frebourg2, Quentin Testard1, Sacha
Beaumeunier2, Yannis Duffourd3, Jerome Audoux2, Nicolas Chatron4,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
600
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Sophie Nambot3, Cédric Le Maréchal5, Jean-Francois Taly6, Wilfrid
Carre7, Gaetan Lesca4, Claire Bardel4, Frederic Tran Mau Them3, Marc
Planes5, Marie-Pierre Audrezet5, Laure Raymond6, Charles Coutton8,
Véronique Satre8, Pauline Le Tanno8, Mouna Barat-Houari9, Marjo-
laine Willems9, Thomas Guignard9, Dimitri Larue2, Denis Bertrand2,
Virginie
Bernard8,
Marie
De
Tayrac7,
Sylvie
Odent7,
Laurent
Mesnard10, Damien Sanlaville4, Laurence Faivre3, David Geneviève9,
Nicolas Philippe2, Julien Thevenon1;8
1Institute of Advanced Biosciences, Université Grenoble Alpes, La
Tronche, France; 2SeqOne Genomics, Montpellier, France; 3CHU Dijon,
Dijon, France; 4Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France; 5CHU Brest, Brest,
France; 6Euroﬁns Biomnis, Lyon, France; 7CHU Rennes, Rennes, France;
8CHU Grenoble Alpes, La Tronche, France; 9CHU Montpellier, Mon-
tpellier, France; 10Assistance Publique - Hopitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives:
Identical
symptoms
observed
in
patients may heterogeneously be described by physicians, even
though relying on the same Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO).
Several tools explore the accuracy of generating diagnostic
hypotheses based on HPO terms associations and vicinity in the
ontology, although bearing common methodological limitations.
Methods: We build a phenotype-gene graph weighted by
consensus of associations identiﬁed on both structured and free-
text databases extracted by ElasticSearch. To manage the diversity
of physicians’ descriptions, dimensionality reduction of HPO terms
was obtained through Non-Negative Matrix Factorization. Based
on this graph, we developed a phenotype-gene matching algo-
rithm called PhenoGenius. We evaluated our approach on a
multicentric cohort of 316 patients recruited from a French con-
sortium and 444 patients from literature.
Results: The graph presents more than 2 million phenotype-
gene associations, covering 4,974 genes and 9,687 symptoms,
whereas the Monarch database contains nearly 640,000 associa-
tions. PhenoGenius performances allow a median diagnostic gene
rank of 68 (whereas others algorithms range from 144-355).
Reducing 9,687 symptoms into 650 groups leads to the reduction
of the diagnostic rank dispersion (reducing the standard deviation
of
48%)
without
compromising
the
ranking
performances.
Focusing on 650 groups achieve complete coverage of the med-
ical observations and expanded matchings to every medical
observation, gaining 24 diagnostics.
Conclusion: This work explored a weighted phenotype-gene
association graph, dissociated from the HPO developmental-based
hierarchy used to describe patients’ phenotypes. PhenoGenius
presents an original method that harmonizes and maximizes the
usage of clinical symptoms in bioinformatic processes, out-
performing currently published approaches.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Kevin Yauy SeqOne Genomics (part time),
Nicolas Duforet-Frebourg SeqOne Genomics (full time), Quentin
Testard: None declared, Sacha Beaumeunier SeqOne Genomics
(full time), Yannis Duffourd: None declared, Jerome Audoux
SeqOne Genomics (full time), Nicolas Chatron: None declared,
Sophie Nambot: None declared, Cédric Le Maréchal: None
declared, Jean-Francois Taly: None declared, Wilfrid Carre: None
declared, Gaetan Lesca: None declared, Claire Bardel: None
declared, Frederic Tran Mau Them: None declared, Marc Planes:
None declared, Marie-Pierre Audrezet: None declared, Laure Ray-
mond: None declared, Charles Coutton: None declared, Véronique
Satre: None declared, Pauline Le Tanno: None declared, Mouna
Barat-Houari: None declared, Marjolaine Willems: None declared,
Thomas Guignard: None declared, Dimitri Larue SeqOne Genomics
(full time), Denis Bertrand SeqOne Genomics (full time), Virginie
Bernard: None declared, Marie De Tayrac: None declared, Sylvie
Odent: None declared, Laurent Mesnard: None declared, Damien
Sanlaville: None declared, Laurence Faivre: None declared, David
Geneviève: None declared, Nicolas Philippe SeqOne Genomics (full
time), Julien Thevenon: None declared.
P18.012.D Community data-driven approach for generating
cross-ethnic population carrier screening panel
Yaron Einhorn1, Moshe Einhorn1, yuval yaron2, dror steinberg1, Noa
Henig2, adi mory2, lily bazak3, erez tsur4, Karin Weiss5, Tamar
Paperna5, julia grinshpun-cohen6, Amihood Singer6, lina basel-
salmon3, Hagit Baris Feldman2
1Genoox, Tel-Aviv, Israel; 2The Genetics Institute and Genomic Center,
Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical center, Israel, Tel-Aviv, Israel; 3Recanati
Genetics Institute, Beilinson Hospital, Rabin Medical Center, Petach
Tikva, Israel; 4Maccabi Health care Services, Tel-Aviv, Israel; 5The
Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel;
6Community Genetic Services, Ministry of Health, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
Background/Objectives: The ACMG has recently published tier-
based recommendations for carrier screening. While many pan-
ethnic conditions are well established, some genes carry patho-
genic founder variants (PFVs) prevalent only in speciﬁc ethnic
groups, and may therefore not be assigned into the correct tier or
not represented at all. Using an interconnected, data-driven
repository including a cohort of cases from the Israeli population
we created a workﬂow for assistance in generating a cross-ethnic
carrier screening panel.
Methods: The dataset included de-identiﬁed WES data from a
cohort of 2792 Israeli patients. Frequencies of pathogenic/likely
pathogenic variants were calculated for each subpopulation and
compared them with existing carrier screening panels used in
Israel. Manual curation was done for suspected variants using
evidence from Franklin community members.
Results: We detected a number of relevant PFVs not included
in existing carrier screening panels. These included two variants
that should be included in Tier 2 (carrier frequency >1:100) and
nine variants for Tier 3 (1:100-1:200). We detected two PFVs of
autosomal recessive traits, a PFV in PTPN23, associated with a
severe neurodevelopmental disorder (carrier frequency 1:53) as
well as a PFV in WFS1 associated with Wolfram syndrome (carrier
frequency 1:68).
Conclusion: Community data-driven and sharing approaches
may detect PFVs missing from currently available panels. More-
over, with the increasing use of next generation sequencing for
carrier screening, it is expected to result in a deluge of variants
falsely classiﬁed as P/LP. Such data-sharing approaches will facil-
itate proper classiﬁcation of frequent variants that have no clinical
implications, thereby reducing unnecessary workload and patient
anxiety.
Conﬂict of Interest: Yaron Einhorn Genoox, Moshe Einhorn
Genoox, yuval yaron Genoox, dror steinberg: None declared, Noa
Henig: None declared, adi mory: None declared, lily bazak: None
declared, erez tsur: None declared, Karin Weiss: None declared,
Tamar Paperna: None declared, julia grinshpun-cohen: None
declared, Amihood Singer: None declared, lina basel-salmon: None
declared, Hagit Baris Feldman: None declared.
P18.013.A Benchmarking of long-read structural variant
callers using in-house generated Oxford Nanopore data
Griet De Clercq1, Bram Van Gaever1;2, Lies Vantomme1, Annelies
Dheedene1, Björn Menten1
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent University
Hospital, Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium;
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
601
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
2Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent University
Hospital, Department of Pathology, Ghent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: As long-read sequencing (LRS) technol-
ogies mature, several bioinformatics tools designed to identify
structural variants (SVs) have been developed. To allow validation
of these tools, Zook et al.1 published a highly curated SV truth set
of Genome in a Bottle sample NA24385, consisting of deletions
and insertions. We performed a benchmarking analysis with ﬁve
LRS SV callers against this set utilising in-house generated Oxford
Nanopore reads.
Methods: SVs are called with cuteSV, SVIM, snifﬂes, pbsv, and
nanovar. The callers are assessed in terms of resource usage,
reproducibility, and calling performance. The latter is evaluated
with Truvari giving recall and precision statistics on SV detection.
We further investigate the inﬂuence of read support, sequencing
coverage, SV type and length, and integration of call sets with
Jasmine.
Results: CuteSV achieves overall best performance, while
nanovar lags behind in both resource usage and calling statistics.
A coverage greater than 20x offers no additional advantage for
reliable SV detection, while the recommended read support of
one third of the coverage proves to be too stringent. Integration
of call sets with Jasmine should include three callers to compete
with stand-alone call sets.
Conclusion: We propose a minimum coverage of at least 15x
for optimal sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Read support should be set
at one ﬁfth of the coverage to obtain optimised calling perfor-
mance. CuteSV performs best in both sensitivity and speciﬁcity,
and resource usage. Further work is however needed to assess
results for different SV types and more complex regions.
References: 1. Zook et al. Nat Biotechnol 38, (2020).
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.014.B DIVAs, a jump forward in the phenotype-driven
digenic variants interpretation: a case study of skeletal
dysplasia
Federica De Paoli1, Giovanna Nicora1, Edoardo Errichiello2;3, Mauro
Lecca2, Ivan Limongelli1, Susanna Zucca1
1enGenome, Pavia, Italy;
2University of Pavia, Department of
Molecular Medicine, Pavia, Italy; 3IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia,
Italy.
Background/Objectives: An evolving view of inheritance pattern
is rapidly gaining ground in the ﬁeld of rare genetic diseases, since
the paradigm “one gene, one disease” has shown limited diag-
nostic power. Here, we propose a method (DIVAs) to assess the
pathogenicity
of
digenic
variant
combinations,
considering
patient’s phenotypes.
Methods: DIVAs is a machine-learning (ML) model exploiting
different features to describe each mutated digenic combination
capturing gene-gene interaction, single variant impact, a priori
genes properties and genes association to HPO-based pheno-
types. Family analysis can also be included. The ML model was
trained on almost 400 pathogenic digenic combinations and on a
benign set of gene pairs, exploiting both public resources and an
internal curated database.
Results: On an independent dataset, DIVAs showed promising
performances (sensitivity 92%, speciﬁcity 99%). Among the large
cohort of samples tested with DIVAs, here we focus on two fetuses
(from independent pedigrees) with skeletal dysplasia. In both
cases DIVAs unveiled a digenic inheritance model. In particular,
the algorithm prioritized DYNC2H1 as ﬁrst gene, combined with
IFT140 and TCTN1 in the ﬁrst fetus, whereas with IFT172 in the
second one. In the ﬁrst case, familial segregation analysis allowed
reﬁning the digenic combination between DYNC2H1 and TCTN1,
thus discarding IFT140. For DYNC2H1-IFT172 combination segre-
gation analysis is ongoing.
Conclusion: Our algorithm proved to be reliable to deﬁne a
likely digenic inheritance in a large cohort of unsolved clinical WES
cases with heterogeneous phenotypes, such as skeletal dysplasia,
here adopted as paradigm of a typical monogenic condition.
References: PMID:26481352. PMID:26432245.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Federica De Paoli enGenome, Giovanna
Nicora enGenome, Edoardo Errichiello: None declared, Mauro
Lecca: None declared, Ivan Limongelli enGenome, He has shares
of enGenome, an italian bioinformatics company, spin-off of the
university of Pavia., Susanna Zucca enGenome, She has shares of
enGenome, an italian bioinformatics company, spin-off of the
University of Pavia.
P18.015.C Ulisse: beyond the pathway boundaries towards
cross-talk and cell-cell communication
Alice Chiodi1, Valentina Nale1, Ali Ehsani2, Matteo Bersanelli3,
Matteo Della Porta3;4;5, Paride Pelucchi1, Ettore Mosca1
1Italian national research council, Institute for biomedical technolo-
gies, Segrate (Milan), Italy;
2University of Milan, Department of
Biosciences, Milan, Italy;
3Humanitas University, Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Milan, Italy;
4Humanitas Research Hospital,
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientiﬁco (IRCCS), Milan, Italy;
5Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Laboratory of
Geriatric Neuropsychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Functional analysis is typically based
on testing the enrichment of a series of pathways, each deﬁned
as a gene set. However, at the molecular level, information ﬂows
by means of a complex net of biochemical processes in
which pathways do not have clear boundaries, and are highly
interconnected, within cells and between cells. We present
Ulisse[1], a tool for the analysis of relations between intracellular
pathways
(pathway
cross-talk,
PCT)
as
well
as
cell-cell
communication (CCC).
Methods:
Statistical
signiﬁcance
is
assessed
using
a
permutation-based approach. Molecular interactions: various sour-
ces (i.e.: STRING, iRefIndex). Gene-pathway associations: MSigDB.
Mutational data source: primary tumors from The Cancer Genome
Atlas. Ligand-receptor interactions (LRI): Omnipath. Single cell
expression data: Single Cell Expression Atlas[2], Single cell Portal[3].
Results: We used Ulisse to study the PCTs affected by the most
frequently mutated genes in 10 major cancer types and found
cancer-speciﬁc and recurring PCTs. We classiﬁed the genes
involved in these PCTs considering their functional relevance, that
is, the number of different PCTs in which a gene is involved in
relation to its interactors. We used Ulisse to calculate the CCC
using LRI and LR expression between cell types in each tumor
sample considered.
Conclusion: Ulisse complements the typical pathway analysis
assessing whether the studied genes take part in interactions
between pathways. Ulisse can be applied to any gene list emer-
ging from studies in genomics as well as other gene-centered
“omics”. It can also be applied to quantify cell-cell communication
in single cell data.
References:
[1]
https://doi.org/10.7490/
f1000research.1118917.1. [2] https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/sc/home.
[3] https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/single_cell.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
602
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P18.016.D Improved detection of functionally relevant
aberrant splicing with FRASER2
Ines Scheller1;2, Karoline Lutz1, Christian Mertes1;3;4, Vicente Yépez1,
Julien Gagneur1;2;3
1Technical University of Munich, Department of Informatics, Garch-
ing, Germany; 2Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Computa-
tional Biology, Neuherberg, Germany;
3Technical University of
Munich, Munich Data Science Institute, Garching, Germany; 4Tech-
nical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Human
Genetics, Munich, Germany.
Background/Objectives: As aberrant splicing is a major cause of
rare diseases, detection of aberrantly spliced genes from RNA-seq
data is an active research topic. We have recently developed FRA-
SER1, a denoising autoencoder-based method that outperformed
alternative approaches for detection of aberrant splicing on
precision-recall analyses. When systematically investigating FRASER
results on more than 300 rare disease RNA-seq samples2 and GTEx
v8 samples, we noticed however that many of the detected events
captured aberrant weak and cryptic splice site usage that did not
result in substantial major isoform usage variation.
Methods: We introduced a new intron excision metric that
integrates alternative donor, alternative acceptor and intron
retention signal and, therefore, reﬂects variations in major isoform
usage more closely. As with FRASER, we modelled this ratio using
a beta-binomial based denoising autoencoder thereby controlling
for potential confounding sources of variations.
Results: On a mitochondrial rare disease dataset2 (N = 303),
FRASER2 considerably reduced the number of splicing outliers (by
25% to 75%) for a mild loss of sensitivity (only 1 out 26 pathogenic
cases not recovered). Moreover, FRASER2 splice outliers were 5
times more enriched for rare splice affecting variants. Also, FRA-
SER2 is less sensitive to sequencing depth and beneﬁts from a
reduced multiple testing burden.
Conclusion: By introducing a new splicing metric, FRASER2 is
able to maintain the sensitivity of FRASER while providing more
functionally relevant outlier calls.
References: 1Mertes, Scheller et al., Nat Commun (2021).
2Yépez, Gusic, et al., Genome Med (2022).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.017.A Identiﬁcation of clinically relevant variants in
homologous regions in 41,755 exomes
Wouter Steyaert1;2, Marloes Steehouwer1, Lonneke Haer-Wigman1,
Rolph Pfundt1, Sander Stegmann3, Elke de Boer1;4, Helger Yntema1,
Han Brunner1, Alexander Hoischen1;2;5, Christian Gilissen1;2
1Radboud
University
Medical
Center,
Department
of
Human
Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 2Radboud Institute for Molecular
Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 3Maastricht University Medical
Center+, Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands;
4Radboud University, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
5Radboud University Medical
Center, Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for
Infectious Diseases (RCI), Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Altogether, homologous regions com-
prise 3.5% of the exome but are difﬁcult to analyse.
Methods: We devised a new method (Chameleolyser) that
identiﬁes single nucleotide variants (SNVs), copy number variants
(CNVs) and gene conversion events in homologous regions based
on exome sequencing data.
Results: Application to a cohort of 41,755 whole exome
sequencing samples yielded 2,191,707 SNVs, 20,432 homozygous
deletions and 22,600 homozygous gene conversions with ≤10%
frequency in the cohort. Validation with PacBio high-ﬁdelity gen-
omes of variants identiﬁed in 20 samples conﬁrmed 678/769 SNVs
(88.2%), 8/8 gene conversions (100%) and 11/15 homozygous
deletions (73%).
We then focused on variation that could potentially be disease-
causing. Within the known OMIM disease genes we identiﬁed
1,182 homozygous deletions, 2,010 heterozygous loss-of-function
(LoF) variants and 54 homozygous LoF variants of which 52 due to
gene conversions. We used these variants to conduct a statistical
comparison between speciﬁc patient groups and control samples.
In the 3 top-ranked genes, STRC, OTOA and SMN1, we identiﬁed 33
homozygous truncating mutations due to gene conversions as
well as 49 homozygous deletions. All of these events were
exclusively found in patients with hearing impairment (STRC and
OTOA) and spinal muscular atrophy (SMN1) and are causative for
disease.
Conclusion: In conclusion, we developed a novel method that
can accurately identify clinically relevant copy number and single
nucleotide variations in homologous coding regions from diag-
nostic exome sequencing data.
References:.
Grants: Solve-RD (Horizon 2020 grant agreement No. 779257).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.018.B Meta-analysis of human retinal transcriptome data:
a powerful tool to gain insight into the genomic organization
of inherited retinal disease genes
Karla Alejandra Ruiz Ceja1, Dalia Capasso1;2, Diego Di Bernardo1,
Sandro Banﬁ1;3
1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy; 2School
for Advanced Studies, “Federico II”, Genomics and Experimental
Medicine, Napoli, Italy; 3University of Campania, “Luigi Vanvitelli”,
Precision Medicine, Napoli, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Eye diseases are among the most
common inherited human retinal disorders (IRDs). Around 279
genes have been associated with the genetic diversity of IRDs.
Over 30% of patients do not harbour mutations in coding regions
of IRD genes. We aimed to gain insight into the genomic orga-
nization and transcript composition of IRDs genes using human
retina RNA-Seq datasets.
Methods: We retrieved 177 bulk RNA-Seq human retina data
from non-visually impaired post-mortem donors. RNA-Seq align-
ments were assembled at a single-sample level and merged to
generate a set of assembled transcripts. Transcript expression was
quantiﬁed by scaling TPM abundance estimates and ﬁltered out
transcripts with less than one median TPM. A subset of newly
identiﬁed candidate transcripts was validated RT-PCR.
Results: We focused our analysis on 219 IRD genes and iden-
tiﬁed 3367 putative novel transcripts. The latter were the results of
a) partial intron retentions, b) exon skipping and extension, c)
novel exon and d) connections with other transcriptional units. RT-
PCR analysis revealed an overall 50% rate of experimental
validation.
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, this is the most
comprehensive and extended meta-analysis of IRD genes carried
out on RNA-Seq data. Our work yielded a reliable expression
quantiﬁcation of IRD transcripts in the human retina, including the
identiﬁcation of novel ones, and paves the way towards a better
understanding of the organization of their transcriptional unit and,
possibly, of the molecular mechanisms underlying inherited ret-
inal diseases.
References: Pinelli et al., PMID:27235414.
Ratnapriya et al., PMID:30742112.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
603
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Grants: European Union, ITN Grant StarT (No. 813490).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.019.C Alignment-free method for gene copy number
estimation from raw next generation sequencing data
Fanny-Dhelia Pajuste1;2, Maido Remm2
1University of Tartu, Institute of Genomics, Tartu, Estonia; 2University
of Tartu, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Department of
Bioinformatics, Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: Copy variable genes in human genome
are often associated with phenotypic traits and susceptibility to
diseases. Methods for exact copy number estimation from
sequencing data require mapping reads to the reference genome
which is time-consuming and often prone to mistakes especially in
complex repetitive regions. K-mers (small substrings of DNA with
length k) have been successfully used for efﬁciently handling huge
amounts of genomic data and could be used for fast alignment-
free copy number estimation.
Methods: For an accurate copy number estimation, a list of k-
mers is carefully composed for the gene of interest as well as a
ﬂanking single-copy reference region. K-mers are selected based
on region speciﬁcity, uniqueness in the genome and GC content
value. The frequencies of these k-mers are obtained from raw
sequencing data and used for copy number estimation.
Results: The copy numbers have been estimated for amylase
genes AMY1, AMY2A and AMY2B for 40 individuals from Estonian
Biobank. The results showed high correlation (R = 0.9932) with the
copy numbers measured experimentally using Droplet Digital PCR
and the proportion of concordant results was 93.33%, these
numbers were slightly lower when using a read-depth based
approach (R = 0.9925 and 87.6%). The similar parity of AMY1 and
AMY2A copy numbers (95%) corresponds to previous studies.
Conclusion: A k-mer based method is not only fast, but
accurate approach for gene copy number estimation.
References:.
Grants: EU ERDF grant No. 2014-2020.4.01.15-0012, the cost of
the sequencing was partly covered by the Broad Institute
(MA, USA).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.020.D Performance of ACMG/AMP guidelines to tackle
digenic variants interpretation: do we need a digenic
interpreter?
Giovanna Nicora1, Federica De Paoli1, Susanna Zucca1, Ivan
Limongelli1, Paolo Magni2
1enGenome Srl, Pavia, Italy; 2University of Pavia, Department of
Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering, Pavia, Italy.
Background/Objectives: As monogenic hypothesis is sometimes
insufﬁcient
to
diagnose
rare
diseases,
digenic
models
are
increasingly evaluated. Yet, digenic variant interpretation (DVI)
guidelines are still missing. We explore whether the monogenic
ACMG/AMP standard guidelines can support interpretation of
digenic pairs types (True Digenic (TD), Composite (CO), Dual
Molecular Diagnosis (DMD)), highlighting potential utility and
drawbacks.
Methods: 121 TDs, 85 COs and 78 DMDs, along with 10.000
benign pairs were collected and interpreted according to the
ACMG/AMP guidelines using the eVai software. The eVai score,
proportional to the number of triggered ACMG/AMP criteria,
was used to develop a digenic classiﬁer (ACMG-based DVI):
if
both
variants’
scores
exceed
a
threshold,
the
pair
is
predicted pathogenic. We compared ACMG-based DVI against a
machine
learning
(ML)
approach
tailored
for
DVI
(DIVAs,
enGenome).
Results: 58% of DMD are classiﬁed as Pathogenic/Likely-
Pathogenic according to ACMG/AMP guidelines, 42% of CO are
Pathogenic/Likely Pathogenic, 34% of TD are Pathogenic/Likely
Pathogenic, and up to 15% of variants (in case of TD) are Benign/
Likely Benign. The Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve (PRC) of
the ACMG-based DVI is 30% for TD, 46% for CO and 78% for DMD.
On the other hand, DIVAs shows 93% mean PRC on TD, 96% on
CO and 95% on DMD.
Conclusion: ACMG/AMP guidelines show acceptable perfor-
mance only for DMD classiﬁcation. ML-based DVI outperforms the
ACMG-based DVI in all categories. New approaches are required to
expand variant interpretation towards more complex inheritance
patterns, such as digenicity.
References: PMID28911095.
PMID30298955.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Giovanna Nicora enGenome Srl, Federica
De Paoli enGenome Srl, Susanna Zucca enGenome Srl, enGenome
Srl, Ivan Limongelli enGenome Srl, enGenome Srl, Paolo Magni
enGenome Srl, enGenome Srl.
P18.021.A Bioinformatic approach to the detection of genetic
variants through next generation sequencing in genes and
their pseudogene counterparts
Jairo Rodríguez1, Nacho Coca1
1qGenomics, R&D department, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Current short-read NGS methods hin-
der the precise calling of clinically relevant variants in genes that
have pseudogene counterparts. We aim at developing a bioin-
formatic method that, using Illumina short reads, allows to
precisely map variants of interest in the gene CYP21A2 and its
pseudogene, which is of great relevance in the diagnostic of
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). We aim at designing a
method broadly applicable to other gene/pseudogenes with
minimal customization.
Methods: We develop proprietary bioinformatic methods that
are capable of phasing long haplotypes from short-read Illumina
data. The automated, basic steps of the method are: (i) identify all
variant positions that discriminate a gene and its pseudogene/s;
(ii) identify all possible haplotypes within the reads in a genomic
window; (iii) merge overlapping reads with compatible haplo-
types; (iv) compute copy number status for all haplotypes; (v)
provide graphical/tabular results for interpretation.
Results: Although our method can identify variants across
CYP21A2 here we focus on the clinically relevant, hard to map
variant c.C955T, p.Q319X. We have produced results for 49 sam-
ples for which we have performed Sanger sequencing. For
10 samples we were not able to reach a clear conclusion of con-
cordance (20%, 10/49). For the rest (n = 39), our software was in
agreement with Sanger sequencing in 37 samples (94%) and for
two samples (5%) we obtained discordant results.
Conclusion: Our haplotype phasing strategy using Illumina
short reads has proven capable of precisely identifying when the
clinically relevant variant c.C955T, p.Q319X (NM_000500) is pre-
sent in the CYP21A2 gene or its pseudogene.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jairo Rodríguez qGenomics, Nacho Coca
qGenomics.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
604
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P18.022.B IdeﬁcSV – towards a clinician-friendly tool for the
identiﬁcation and clinical annotation of structural variants in
whole-exome sequencing data
Anja Hess1, Henrike Sczakiel2;3, Felix Boschann2;3, Uwe Kornak4,
Björn Fischer-Zirnsak2;3, Dominik Seelow2;5
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Department of Genome
Regulation, Berlin, Germany;
2Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany;
3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development &
Disease, Berlin, Germany; 4Universitätsmedizin Göttingen, Institute of
Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany; 5Berlin Institute of Health,
Bioinformatics and Translational Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Structural variants (SVs) constitute a
core cause for genetic variation and may lead to genetic disease
or cancer. It is generally assumed that SVs are detectable only by
Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS), leading to re-sequencing
efforts of ‘failed’ Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) projects.
However, WES can detect SVs at base-pair resolution if a break-
point lies in the enriched region. Despite its extensive application
in clinical practice there is currently no public software with user-
friendly graphical interfaces for detection, clinical annotation, and
prioritization of SVs in WES data. To make SV analysis accessible
for non-bioinformaticians, we have developed IdeﬁcSV, a fast,
user-friendly tool for the identiﬁcation of Structural Variants in
WES and optionally WGS data.
Methods: IdeﬁcSV provides an intuitive interface for Windows
and Linux for high-throughput screening of BAM ﬁles. It detects
breakpoints using split-read, paired-end, and read-depth infor-
mation without requiring reference genome downloads. A 10GB
BAM-ﬁle is analyzed in ~20 minutes on a typical PC. Results can be
exported in popular BED format but we also provide a human-
friendly web interface offering candidate SVs prioritization based
on clinical phenotypes. IdeﬁcSV also renders IGV screenshots for
visual inspection of SVs.
Results: We tested the software on more than 300 NGS data-
sets and conﬁrmed detected SVs by PCR and Sanger sequencing.
We generated a consensus black list of alignment artifacts by
annotating frequently present SVs in our cohort. Users can easily
provide their own blacklist.
Conclusion: We hope that our tool will foster the recognition
of clinically relevant SVs in WES data.
References: -.
Grants: -.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.023.C Gene-environment interaction effects of early-life
stress (ELS) program neurocognitive development in children
hee-hwan wang1, seo-yoon moon1, kakyeong kim1, hyun-jin kim1,
woo-young ahn1, jiook cha1, Yoonjung Joo2
1Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Rep. of South;
2Korea
University, Seoul, Korea, Rep. of South.
Background/Objectives: Early-life stress (ELS) has well-known
associations with low cognitive outcomes and brain functional
and structural representations, yet it remains unclear how exactly
ELS affects cognitive capacity in humans. Moreover, it is unknown
how ELS interacts with genetic inﬂuences on development of the
brain and cognition in children. We hypothesized that ELS is likely
to interact with genetic inﬂuences that impact brain development
as well as cognitive development in preadolescents.
Methods: We leveraged multimodal data consisting of DNA
genotypes, brain imaging (MRI), and neuropsychological assessments
(NIH Toolbox) from 4,276 children (ages 9 to 10, European ancestry)
from the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development study. Regression
and mediation analyses were used to systematically examine the
underlying causal relationships among genome-wide polygenic
scores of cognitive capacity, brain structure, and ELS in their inﬂuence
on child neurodevelopment.
Results: Our analyses revealed signiﬁcant causal interaction of
ELS and genetic factors in modulating child neurodevelopment. In
particular, we found genetic inﬂuences on cognitive development
to be mediated by brain structure development (partial mediation
effect = 0.016, PFWE<0.001), and this gene-to-brain pathway to be
signiﬁcantly moderated by ELS (abuse) (Index of Moderated Med-
iation = -0.007; 95% CI = -0.012 ~ -0.002; PFWE<0.05).
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings indicate ELS to be a negative mod-
ulator of genetic inﬂuence on brain structural development,
thereby leading to disadvantageous neurocognitive development
in prepubertal children.
References: Wang, Hee-Hwan, et al. “The Impact of Early Life
Stress on the Genetic Inﬂuence on Brain and Cognitive Develop-
ment in Children.” medRxiv (2021).
Grants: Funded by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of
South Korea (2021R1I1A1A01054995).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.025.A MANCOR, a powerful test based on correlation to
detect predictors of the gut microbiome variability
Christophe Boetto1, Violeta Basten Romero1, Etienne Patin2, Marius
Bredon3, Darragh Duffy4, Lluis Quintana-murci2, Harry Sokol3;5;6;7,
Hugues Aschard1;8
1Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Department of Computational
Biology, Paris, France; 2Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Depart-
ment of Genomes and Genetics, Paris, France; 3INSERM, Centre de
Recherche Saint-Antoine, CRSA, AP-HP, Sorbonne Université, Saint
Antoine
Hospital,
Gastroenterology
Department,
Paris,
France;
4Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Department of Immunology,
Paris, France; 5Paris Center for Microbiome Medicine, Fédération
Hospitalo-Universitaire, Paris, France; 6Carenity, Paris, France; 7INRAE,
UMR1319 Micalis & AgroParisTech, Jouy en Josas, France; 8Harvard
TH Chan School of Public Health, Department of Epidemiology,
Boston, United States.
Background/Objectives:
Multivariate
analysis
are
becoming
central in studies investigating features associated with host-gut
microbiome relationship. However, statistical methods to assess
predictors associated with gut microbiome composition and other
meta-parameters are severely lacking. Here we present MANCOR
(Multivariate Analysis of Correlation), an innovative and ﬂexible
method that addresses this challenge, allowing to test the effect
of any predictor on the joint distribution of a multivariate out-
come, as measured by its correlation matrix.
Methods: We ﬁrst compared the performance of MANCOR
against existing correlation-based (BoxM, Mantel, etc) methods
using simulated data. We then conducted a screening of a hun-
dred predictors (diet, medical history, etc) on 16S-derived gut
microbiome data in 1,000 healthy participants from the Milieu
Interieur cohort, and compared the results of MANCOR against
both standard univariate and multivariate (MANOVA) tests, and
diversity-based (alpha) approaches.
Results: In all simulations mimicking microbiome data, existing
correlation-based methods display severe type I error rate inﬂa-
tion, and only MANCOR showed both valid calibration and high
statistical power. In the Milieu Interieur our test strongly out-
performed univariate and multivariate tests, conﬁrming associa-
tions with age and sex but with higher power (up to 200% power
increase), while detecting additional signals with smoking and diet
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
605
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
variables. Diversity-based test were only able to detect variability
with age. Host-genetics screening is ongoing.
Conclusion: Our approach will provide the community a robust
and efﬁcient tool to study the role of host-factors (genetics, envir-
onment) on a range of microbiome meta-parameters including taxa
composition, metagenomic and metatranscriptomic proﬁles.
References:.
Grants: Research supported by Agence Nationale pour la
Recherche (ANR-20-CE15-0012-01).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.028.D Variant effect prediction based on custom long-
read transcriptomes
Renee Salz1, Caspar van der Made2, Mark Quinton-Tulloch3, Sarah
Hunt3, Alexander Hoischen2, Peter-Bram ’t Hoen1
1Radboud University Medical Center, Centre for Molecular and
Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences,
Nijmegen,
Netherlands;
2Radboud
University
Medical
Center, Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical
Center for Infectious Diseases (RCI), Department of Internal Medicine,
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, and Radboud Expertise
Center for Immunodeﬁciency and Autoinﬂammation, Nijmegen,
Netherlands; 3EMBL’s European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI),
Hinxton, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Our knowledge of transcript annota-
tions is still incomplete and may result in a failure to detect
disease-causing variants. For example, in patients with primary
immunodeﬁciencies it could be valuable to annotate transcripts
that are only expressed under certain conditions such as host-
pathogen interactions. Current variant annotation software uses
only precomputed pathogenicity prediction scores based on
reference transcripts. The pipeline presented here is designed to
annotate variants with custom transcript annotations for down-
stream prioritization.
Methods: The input of the pipeline is a sample-speciﬁc/non-
reference long-read transcriptome in fasta format, variant ﬁle(s)
derived from unsolved exome data of patients with suspected inborn
errors of immunity (IEI) in VCF format, and a reference genome build.
The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor is used in conjunction with
Polyphen-2 to provide custom variant annotations. Our pipeline is
available at https://github.com/cmbi/VEP_custom_annotations.
Results: The input long-read transcriptome contained 37,434
novel transcripts detected through PacBio IsoSeq on peripheral
blood cells exposed to various immune stimuli. The re-annotation
pipeline was tested on 148 undiagnosed IEI patient’s exomes. Out
of a total of 802,352 variants, 6.2% had a more severe effect in the
novel transcript annotation than in the reference.
Conclusion: Genetic variant annotation may beneﬁt from long-
read sequencing approaches that discover novel transcripts. This
beneﬁt can be reaped without extensive bioinformatic knowledge
using this pipeline. Our pipeline outputs crucial information for
further prioritization of potentially disease-causing variants, and
will become increasingly useful due to the rising number of long-
read RNAseq datasets.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.029.A A multi-omics integration framework applied to
major depressive disorders
amazigh MOKHTARI1, david cohen1, arnaud gloaguen2, margot
derouin1, el-cherif ibrahim3, Raoul belzeaux3, bruno etain4, cynthia
marie-claire4, pierre-eric lutz5;6, andree delahaye-duriez1;7
1Inserm, U1141 - Neurodiderot, Paris, France; 2Institut François Jacob,
CNRGH - CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, Évry-Courcouronnes, France;
3Institute of Neuroscience of la Timone, Université Aix-Marseille,
CNRS, Marseille, France;
4Inserm, UMR-S1144 - Université Paris
Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; 5Douglas Mental Health
University Institute, McGill University, Montréal, Canada;
6INCI:
Institut des Neurosciences Cellulaires et Intégratives, UPR 3212,
CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France;
7Université
Sorbonne Paris Nord, UFR Santé Médecine Biologie Humaine,
Bobigny, France.
Background/Objectives: Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a
leading cause of disability worldwide that associate with
reduced life expectancy. Its clinical heterogeneity and the
implication of multiple environmental risk factors contribute to
the difﬁculty in identifying reliable biomarkers for diagnostic
and therapeutic purposes. Recently, the emergence of advanced
approaches that take into account the biological complexity of
multifactorial diseases has broadened treatment strategies in
other medical ﬁelds, such as cancer. Applied to MDD, this may
grant new insight on pathophysiology, and enable patient
stratiﬁcation.
Methods:
We
recently
analyzed
transcriptomic
(RNA-
Sequencing) and epigenomic (microRNA-Sequencing and DNA
methylation arrays) processes in blood samples from a well-
characterized cohort of individuals with MDD (n = 65), and
healthy controls (n = 81). We then built an integrative frame-
work in 3 steps: ﬁrst, we applied gene co-expression network
and ontology enrichment analyses; second, we used supervised
machine learning methods for matrix reduction; third, we
prioritized a subset of features (individual protein-coding genes,
micro-RNAs, and methylation probes) that maximize the clus-
tering of MDD patient and healthy controls, evaluated with
adjusted rand indices (ARI).
Results: We identiﬁed gene subnetworks that signiﬁcantly
associate with MDD and also show evidence of enrichment for
differentially expressed genes, differential DNA methylation, and
regulation by differentially expressed micro-RNAs. Importantly,
machine learning identiﬁed features that achieve good clustering
of cases and controls (best ARI = 0.82).
Conclusion: These results provide support for the hypothesis
that, compared to single omics, integration of multi-omic datasets
have the potential to signiﬁcantly improve patient clustering, with
implication for the development of MDD biomarkers.
References:.
Grants: French National Research Agency: ANR-18-CE37-0002-02.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.030.B ILIAD: the ERN-ITHACA federated registry of rare
diseases with intellectual disability and anomalies of
development
Klea Vyshka1;2, Morris Swertz3, Fernanda De Andrade3, Joeri Van
Der Velde3, Lennart Johansson3, Dieuwke Prins3, Dorica Dan4, Soﬁa
Douzgou HOUGE5, Andreas Dufke6, Agnies van Eeghen7, Laurence
Faivre8, Tiziana Franchin9, Andrew Green10, Raoul Hennekam11, Anne
Hugon1, Sylvia Huisman11, Marianne Le Dref1, Tjitske Kleefstra12,
David Koolen12, Andrea Manunta13, Jukka Moilanen14, Giovanni
Mosiello15, Mahsa Shabani16, Ammi Sundqvist17, Nicholas Szeto1,
Marco Tartaglia18, Zeynep TÜMER19, Birute Tumiene20, Lisenka
Vissers*12, Helger Yntema21, Dagmar Wieczorek22, Giuseppe Zam-
pino23, Alessandra Renieri24, Alain Verloes1;25, Ernithaca consortium26
1Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux
de Paris - Université de Paris,
Department of Genetics, Paris, France; 2CERCRID, UMR 5137, “Centre
de Recherches Critiques en Droit”, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France;
3University Medical Center Groningen, Dept. of Genetics, Genomics
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
606
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Coordination Center, Groningen, Netherlands; 4Romanian National
Alliance for Rare Diseases RONARD, Zalau, Romania; 5Avdeling for
medisinsk genetikk, Haukeland universitetssjukehus, Bergen, Norway;
6Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of
Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany; 7Emma Children’s Hospital, Uni-
versity of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 8Dept of Genetics
and Centres of Reference for Development disorders and intellec-
tualdisabilities, FHU TRANSLAD and GIMI Institute, University Hospital
Dijon, Dijon, France; 9Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS,
Rome, Italy;
10Department of Clinical Genetics, Temple Street
Children’s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland;
11Department of
Pediatrics, AcademicMedical Centre, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam,
Netherlands; 12Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 13Department of Urology,
University of Rennes, Rennes, France;
14Department of Clinical
Genetics, Oulu University Hospital, Medical Research Center Oulu,
Oulu, Finland; 15Department of Surgery, Urology and Neuro-Urology,
Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy; 16Faculty of Law and
Criminology,Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; 17RBU International
SBH, Solna, Sweden; 18Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division,
OspedalePediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy; 19Department
of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen,
Denmark;
20Vilnius
University
Hospital
Santaros
Klinikos, Santariskiu, Vilnius, Lithuania; 21Dept of Human Genetics,
Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 22Institute of Human Genetics
and Anthropology, Heinrich Heine UniversityDüsseldorf, Düsseldorf,
Germany; 23Department of Woman and Child Health, Center for Rare
Diseases
and
Birth
Defects,
Institute
ofPediatrics,
Fondazione
Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCCS, Università Cattolica
del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy; 24Medical Genetics, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy; 25INSERM UMR 1141 “NeuroDiderot”, Hôpital R DEBRE,
Paris, France; 26ERN ITHACA, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: European Reference Network ITHACA is
developing a “meta-registry” called ILIAD, connecting 71 HCPs,
databases, and biobanks across the EU for patients with dys-
morphic/MCA syndromes and/or intellectual disability. Through
the ERN-ITHACA’s expert and patient participation network, ILIAD
is able to provide an infrastructure for diagnosis, highly specialised
multidisciplinary healthcare, evidence-based management, and
collection of secure patient data.
Methods: The registry is built on MOLGENIS open-source
software, providing ﬂexible rich data structures, user friendly data
import and querying, and FAIR interfaces for programmatic data
exchange. ILIAD consists of 2 components: a central, web-based
registry and a network of linked satellite/client registries forming
the ERN-ITHACA registry federation. To date, two client installa-
tions have been successful and more are to follow. Data is mod-
elled adhering to international interoperability standards from JRC
and EJP-RD.
Results: In addition to the core registry, ILIAD includes the-
matic sub-registries of patients with biologically proven mono-
genic
or
genomic
(chromosomal)
diagnoses,
under
the
supervision of ERN-based curation teams. ILIAD has adopted a
data access policy, for requesting access to the data, Governance
of the Registry and ensures compliance with applicable legal and
regulatory requirements on the use of Personal Data.
Conclusion: We are well underway to share ERN-ITHACA
patient data, yielding high-quality epidemiological insights and
expert consensus statements, informing policy decisions that
impact rare disease patients in general and care for ERN-ITHACA
patients in particular.
References: van der Velde KJ et al. MOLGENIS research:
advanced bioinformatics data software for non-bioinformaticians.
Bioinformatics.
2019
Mar
15;35(6):1076-1078.
https://doi.org/
10.1093/bioinformatics/bty742. PMID: 30165396.
Grants: 3rd EU Health Programme Grant nr. 947617.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.031.C Predicting chromatin loop status from local DNA
sequence alone
Lyam Baudry1, Cyril Mathey-Doret2, Axel Cournac2, Romain Koszul2,
Alexandre Reymond1
1University of Lausanne, Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne,
Switzerland; 2Institut Pasteur, Genomes and Genetics, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: The recent ﬂurry of omics technologies
and cutting-edge protocols has brought about an increased
understanding on the fundamental structure of chromatin. How-
ever, speciﬁc mechanisms behind the formation of structures of
interest such as loops and domains remain elusive and only par-
tially elucidated. While a complex and multifactorial mechanistic
nature of loop formation is being unveiled, it is still unclear
whether and to which extent the basic DNA sequence contributes
to loop formation.
Methods: We use a variety of machine learning models (SVM,
neural network) to predict loop status from short 5000 bp frag-
ments. We build these predictions through a new and extensive
positioning
of
loops
on
the
recently-released
telomere-to-
telomere human genome sequence, combined with a speciﬁc
embedding inspired from natural language processing models
(dna2vec).
Results: Loop status can be correctly predicted with up to 80%
accuracy. In contrast with other, highly-performing models (e.g.
basenji, akita), our predictions are established independently of
the context of the assessed sequence, i.e. locus position or
extraneous data like ChiP-seq andRNA-seq.
Conclusion: As recent ﬁndings further conﬁrm that chromatin
loops are multi-faceted in nature and origin (e.g. cohesin vs non-
cohesin mediated), shedding light on the information provided by
biological latent variables of interest may prove crucial to inves-
tigate regulation mechanisms. Our method paves the way to a
generalized use of language-based frameworks to predict DNA
structure from its sole sequence.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.032.D Enhanced molecular consequence prediction and
variant annotation with the Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor
Diana Lemos1, Nuno Saraiva-Agostinho1, Ola Austine Orimoloye1,
Andrey Azov1, Diego Marques-Coelho1, S. Nakib Hossain1, Helen
Schuilenburg1, Jamie Allen1, Stephen Trevanion1, Sarah Hunt1, Paul
Flicek1, Fiona Cunningham1
1European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics
Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
Background/Objectives:
The
comprehensive
annotation
of
genomic variation is key to interpreting potential impact on
molecular function, thus important in understanding disease
aetiology and diagnosis.
Methods: The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (VEP) is a
powerful toolset for the annotation and prioritisation of genomic
variants. We have extended its functionality to incorporate addi-
tional protein annotations and variant pathogenicity predictions.
Results: The effect of genetic variation on a protein function
depends on the location of the variant in the protein structure.
The protein domains a variant falls within are reported alongside
matching UniProt protein isoforms. VEP now optionally reports
when a variant falls in a molecular interaction site, as described in
the IntAct database. To further aid interpretation, the Ensembl VEP
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
607
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
web interface displays variant locations on interactive three-
dimensional protein structures.
Further, we have extended the wide range of variant patho-
genicity scores available in Ensembl VEP. Recent additions to
command line VEP include: ClinPred, an ensemble method for
predicting missense variant pathogenicity; CAPICE, a computa-
tional method for predicting the pathogenicity of variants of dif-
ferent molecular consequences and allele frequency; PrimateAI, a
deep residual neural network for classifying the pathogenicity of
missense mutations that incorporates information about protein
structure; and EVE, which employs an evolutionary model of var-
iant effect.
Conclusion: These enhancements increase the amount of
information available to aid understanding of potential con-
sequences and to predict the impact of sequence variation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.033.A Implementing RNA-fusion detection in routine
cancer diagnostics
Annick Renevey1, Martin Proks2, Maxime Garcia3, Rickard Hamma-
rén4, Praveen Raj3, Philip Ewels5, Anders Jemt1, Valtteri Wirta1
1Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Department of
Microbiology, Tumour and Cell Biology, Solna, Sweden; 2University of
Copenhagen, Center for Stem Cell Research and Developmental
Biology, København N., Denmark; 3Karolinska Institute, Department
of Oncology-Pathology, Stockholm, Sweden;
4Uppsala University,
Department of Organismal Biology, Human Evolution, Uppsala,
Sweden; 5Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm University, Depart-
ment of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Solna, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Healthcare is increasingly relying on
massively parallel sequencing in clinical genomics diagnostics. In
particular, cancer diagnostics and therapy selection can be assis-
ted by the detection of gene fusions, as an increased number of
fusions are observed in common cancer types. However, to
operate in a clinical setting, a robust, scalable and portable data
analysis pipeline is necessary.
Methods: We have developed the rnafusion pipeline designed
to examine gene fusions in RNA sequencing. The pipeline is built
within nf-core, a community-based framework to build and
maintain bioinformatics analysis pipelines. The rnafusion pipeline
uses multiple callers (e.g. STARfusion, fusioncatcher) to generate a
combined comprehensive report of all fusion events, which aids
interpretating results.
Results:
rnafusion
has
an
easily
maintainable
codebase
assembled into a continuous integration environment. Contain-
erisation ensures reproducibility and portability of the analyses.
Combining results from different sources grants conﬁdence in
fusion events repeatedly identiﬁed by different tools and increases
the chances of identifying novel fusions.
Conclusion: Maintaining analysis pipelines to the state-of-the-
art in terms of software and databases is challenging. As com-
puting capacities and technical achievements advance, a high
turnover in data and methods is to be expected, highlighting the
need for a fast, reliable and continuous maintenance of analysis
pipelines, as well as regular validation procedures. Achieving this
gold standard is facilitated within the nf-core framework, enabling
a multitude of analyses to be accessible for patient care.
References: Ewels, P.A. et al. The nf-core framework for
community-curated bioinformatics pipelines. Nat Biotechnol 38,
276–278 (2020).
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.034.B Evaluating validation approaches for whole exome
sequencing based CNV calling in a diagnostic setting
Lisa Lüer1, Sònia Font Tellado1, Jenny Schiller2, Sebastian Eck1,
Daniel Becker1
1MVZ Martinsried, Bioinformatics R&D, Planegg, Germany;
2MVZ
Martinsried, Cytogenetics, Planegg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: The detection of genomic rearrange-
ments such as copy-number variants (CNV) from Next-generation
sequencing (NGS) data is an attractive alternative to the time
consuming and costly MLPA and aCGH. Many different tools for
CNV detection from NGS data have been developed over the last
years. However, the validation of the NGS based CNV calls in a
clinical setting is a major challenge, due to the high portion of
false-positive calls and the lack of reference material.
Methods: We set up a patient cohort based on 23 samples and
used ﬁlter settings as well as parameter modiﬁcation for CNV calls
to achieve an accessible number of calls. Here, we aim to evaluate
CNV calling performance by comparing NGS based data to various
orthogonal methods.
Results: The optimal validation methods differ, depending on
the validation parameter of interest. The GIAB dataset is suitable
as a truth set for precision calculation while the multitude of dif-
ferent methods used in generating the data makes it difﬁcult to
include it in sensitivity calculation based on short-read data. On
the other hand, aCGH data is too imprecise to generate viable
sensitivity values and MLPA cohorts are usually too small.
Conclusion: We show that the combination of a wide variety of
validation methods as a reference system made it possible to
compensate for the weaknesses of the individual technologies.
References: Zook, J.M., Hansen, N.F., Olson, N.D. et al. A robust
benchmark for detection of germline large deletions and inser-
tions. Nat Biotechnol 38, 1347–1355 (2020). https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41587-020-0538-8.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.036.D Evaluation of in silico pathogenicity predictor tools
for the classiﬁcation of small inframe indels
Stuart Cannon1, Minnie Williams1, Adam Gunning1, Caroline
Wright1
1University of Exeter, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science,
Exeter, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: The use of in silico pathogenicity pre-
dictions as evidence when interpreting genetic variants is widely
accepted as part of standard reporting guidelines. Although
numerous algorithms have been developed and evaluated for
classifying missense variants, inframe insertions/deletions (indels)
have been much less well studied.
Methods: We created a dataset of 3964 small (<100bp) indels
predicted to result in inframe amino acid insertions or deletions
using data from gnomAD v3.1 (minor allele frequency of 1-5%),
ClinVar and the Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD)
study. We used this dataset to test ten pathogenicity predictor
tools (CADD, CAPICE, EXOMISER, FATHMM-indel, MutPredIndel,
MutationTaster2 Provean, SIFT-INDEL, VEST and VVP).
Results: Our dataset consisted of 2224 benign/likely benign
and 1740 pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants from gnomAD
(n = 809), ClinVar (n = 2882) and, DDD (n = 273). We were able to
generate scores across all tools for 95% of the variants, with areas
under the ROC curve (AUC) of 0.81-0.96 based on the published
thresholds. To avoid biases caused by inclusion of our dataset in
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
608
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
the tools’ training data, we also evaluated just DDD variants not
present in either gnomAD or ClinVar (70 pathogenic and 81
benign). Using this subset, the AUC of all tools decreased sub-
stantially. Overall, VEST performed best, with AUCs of 0.93 (full
dataset) and 0.87 (DDD subset).
Conclusion: Diagnostic laboratories and genomic scientists
should note that numerous tools now exist for predicting the
pathogenicity of inframe indels, which perform on a par with
similar tools designed for classifying missense variants, though
ease of use varies substantially.
References:.
Grants: MR/T00200X/1.
Conﬂict of Interest: Stuart Cannon University of Exeter, Minnie
Williams: None declared, Adam Gunning: None declared, Caroline
Wright University of Exeter.
P18.038.B Phenotyping Hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia using UK primary care Electronic Health
Records
Orlando Buendia1
1Mendelian, Clinical Operations, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
(HHT) is a rare multisystemic disease. Underdiagnosis is common
due to the disease’s complexity and low physician awareness.
Methods: A cohort of HHT patients was identiﬁed in the Opti-
mum Patient Care Research Database (OPCRD), a database of 11
million patients’ primary care electronic health records (EHR). Cases
were identiﬁed by the presence of the SNOMED-CT code for HHT.
HHT
clinical
features
were
mapped
to
the
appropriate
SNOMED-CT codes. Clinical features were examined in advance of
their diagnostic date for HHT. Descriptive statistics was performed
including patient count and time before diagnosis summarized by
median of months.
Results: EHR with HHT diagnostic code: 1119
Clinical features
# EHR
Months before diagnostic code
(Median)
Epistaxis
190
-38
Microcytic anaemia
90
-37
Migraine
81
-72
Telangiectasia of
the skin
54
-5
Arteriovenous
malformation
28
-8
Seizure
23
-74
Spontaneous
hematomas
20
-37
Cavernous
haemangioma
20
-23
Intestinal polyposis
17
-24
Haematuria
17
-56
Stroke
12
-41
Gastrointestinal
haemorrhage
12
-5
Haemoptysis
11
-11
Visceral angiomatosis
8
-33
Clinical features
# EHR
Months before diagnostic code
(Median)
Pulmonary arterial
hypertension
3
-24
Cerebral haemorrhage
1
0
Conclusion: Clinical features of HHT can be identiﬁed in
patients’ primary care EHR in advance of diagnosis. These may be
used to develop phenotypical prediction tools to help identify
patients at risk of HHT. Further work is needed to validate these
results in other data-sets and control comparisons.
References: McDonald, J., & Stevenson, D. A. (2000). Hereditary
Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia. In M. P. Adam (Eds.) et. al., GeneRe-
views®. University of Washington, Seattle.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Orlando Buendia Mendelian.
P18.040.D On the way to individualized infection medicine:
Metagenomics in Cystic Fibrosis patients as example for the
interplay between human genetics and bacterial colonization
to predict the course of the disease
Lutz Wiehlmann1, Ilona Rosenboom2, Marie-Madlen Pust2, Marie
Dorda1, Burkhard Tümmler2
1Medical School Hannover, RCU Genomics, Hannover, Germany;
2Medical School Hannover, Pediatric Pneumology, Allergology and
Neonatology, Hannover, Germany.
Background/Objectives: The monogenetic disease Cystic Fibrosis
leads to mucus obstruction and compromises airway clearance.
Dysbiosis in CF lung disease is a result of compromised airway
clearance and insufﬁcient host defense. Speciﬁc pathogens have
been associated with pronounced disease progression. Nowadays
scientists can only describe the interplay between CFTR dysfunc-
tion and microbial dysbiosis, but are not able to predict the further
clinical course.
Methods: We have developed methods for standardized, low-
contamination sequencing of airway metagenomes, including
published programs and in-house developed in-depth analysis
pipelines. This approach allows insight into bacterial growth rate,
elimination of false positives and integrates information about
viruses and fungi. (1,2,3,4,5).
Results: We have shown that microbial dysbiosis in CF
depends on the degree of CFTR dysfunction, is closely related to
disease severity and develops after the ﬁrst four years of life.
Airway metagenomes of >100 healthy volunteers (0-60 years) and
several hundred patients with various airway diseases were used
as a reference database.
Conclusion: The analysis of the CF metagenome is a very
suitable example application to show strengths of individualized
infection medicine. Both the underlying disease and the respec-
tive genetic background of the patient are combined for the
prognosis of the course of the disease.
References:
1.
Pust
MM,
et
al.
2020.
NPJ
Bioﬁlms
Microbiomes 6:61.
2. Pust MM, Tümmler B. 2022. Comput Struct Biotechnol J
20:175-186.
3. Pienkowska K, Wiehlmann L, Tümmler B. 2019. J Cyst Fibros
18:653-656.
4. Pienkowska K, et al. 2018. Microbes Infect 20:536-542.
5. Wiehlmann L, et al. 2017. J Biotechnol 250:51-55.
Grants: VW Stiftung – NWK ZN3432.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
609
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P18.041.A Synthesized dysmorphic portraits can protect
privacy while maintaining the beneﬁts of data sharing
Tzung-Chien Hsieh1, Alexander Hustinx1, Behnam Javanmardi1,
Peter Krawitz1
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University
Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives: The performance of next-generation
phenotyping (NGP) approaches depends highly on the size and
diversity of the training dataset. Because collecting a large number
of images from individuals with rare disorders at a single institu-
tion is not feasible, data sharing between different sites is crucial,
and this is usually done through publication. However, since we
are re-identiﬁable by our faces, only about one out of ten patients
gives consent. Therefore, we propose synthesizing portraits of rare
disorders based on real data that can remain local to overcome
this barrier.
Methods: We trained generative adversarial networks on 4,538
frontal images with 139 disorders from GestaltMatcher Database
to synthesize faces with rare disorders. We then trained deep
convolutional neural networks on the real and synthetic images
separately to classify 139 disorders and benchmarked these two
models on 360 test images.
Results: We ﬁrst showed that the model trained on synthetic
images achieved comparable performance as that trained on the
real images. The saliency map was further utilized to visualize
feature importance contributing to the classiﬁcation, and dys-
morphologists conﬁrmed that the key dysmorphic features were
preserved in the synthetic images. Lastly, face veriﬁcation showed
that the synthetic images cannot re-identify the underlying
individuals.
Conclusion: We conclude that algorithms can beneﬁt from
synthetic facial images, representing an alternative to classical
means of data sharing. Moreover, facial portraits are still the best
teaching material for clinicians in medical genetics. Therefore,
beyond the deep learning purpose, it is also of interest to educate
the next generation of physicians.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Tzung-Chien Hsieh: None declared, Alex-
ander
Hustinx:
None
declared,
Behnam
Javanmardi:
None
declared, Peter Krawitz Modest.
P18.042.B New RD-Connect GPAP features implemented in
collaboration with Solve-RD, EJP-RD and ELIXIR enable the
diagnosis of rare disease patients with previously negative
WES/WGS
Leslie Matalonga1, Davide Piscia1, Alberto Corvo1, Anastasios
Papakonstantinou1, Carles Hernandez-Ferrer1, Steven Laurie1, Carles
Garcia1, Luca Zalatnai1, Raul Tonda1, Ida Paramonov1, Daniel Pico-
Amador1,
Marcos
Fernandez-Callejo1,
Dylan
Spalding2,
Coline
Thomas3, Thomas Keane3, Hanns Lochmuller4, Rita Horvath5, Holm
Graessner6, Alexander Hoischen7, Ivo Gut1, Sergi Beltran1
1CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona,
Spain; 2CSC Finland, Espoo, Finland; 3European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton,
United Kingdom; 4Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research
Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada; 5Department of
Clinical Neurosciences, School of Clinical Medicine, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, United
Kingdom; 6Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics,
University of Tübingen, Tubingen, Germany;
7Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
Netherlands.
Background/Objectives:
The
RD-Connect
Genome-Phenome
Analysis Platform (GPAP, https://platform.rd-connect.eu/) is an
IRDiRC recognised resource for diagnosis and gene discovery in
Rare Diseases (RD). The interface allows clinical scientists to col-
laboratively analyse integrated genome-phenome data under
controlled access. The GPAP is a key resource for Solve-RD (http://
solve-rd.eu/), EJP-RD (https://www.ejprarediseases.org/) and the
ELIXIR RD Community (https://elixir-europe.org/communities/rare-
diseases).
Methods: New features have been implemented in the RD-
Connect GPAP which processes and indexes pseudonymised
genome-phenome data from over 26,000 individuals.
Results: Recent developments facilitate data submission and
integration, as well as the analysis and visualisation of the data.
These developments include an innovative web interface that
improves user experience and analysis capabilities, a module to
collate and export phenotypic information using broadly used
standards (e.g. HPO, ORDO, OMIM, GA4GH Phenopackets) and a
user-friendly tool to create in-silico patient cohorts based on
phenotypic and experimental information, a programmatic mod-
ule to automate genomic analysis and the ability to remotely
visualise sequence alignments archived at the European Genome-
Phenome Archive (EGA). Some of these developments have con-
tributed to diagnose the ﬁrst 437 patients through the reanalysis
of previously inconclusive WES/WGS data within the Solve-RD
project.
Conclusion: New developments in the GPAP have contributed
to the identiﬁcation of hundreds of disease-causing variants in
patients with RD and conﬁrm diagnosis hypotheses through
patient matchmaking approaches.
References:.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34075210/,
https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34075208/,
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
29487416/.
Grants:
EU
projects
(FP7-305444,H2020-779257,H2020-
825575), ISCIII (PT13/0001/0044,PT17/0009/0019), INB and ELIXIR.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.044.D BAMdelbee: novel software enabling detection of
midsize homozygous deletions through unsequenced NGS
data analysis
Noam Hadar1, Baruch Yerushalmi2, Galina Ling2, Ismael Alshafee1;3,
Amit Nahum4, Ohad Shmuel Birk1;3
1Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, NIBN and Faculty of
Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva,
Israel; 2Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit, Soroka University Medical
Center and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel; 3Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Center,
Beer Sheva, Israel;
4Pediatrics Department A, Soroka University
Medical Center, and The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology,
Immunology, and Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
Background/Objectives:
Microdeletions
between
70bp
and
20,000bp can be disease causing, yet are often too small for
detection through chromosomal microarrays (CMA) analysis and
too large for standard NGS such as whole-exome-sequencing
(WES)
and
whole-genome-sequencing
(WGS)
data
analyses.
Therefore, specialized methods are needed for investigating this
troublesome range.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
610
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: We created BAMdelbee, a novel tool for discovery of
homozygous deletions in WES and WGS data, that is effective also
in this troublesome range. WES or WGS samples generated by the
same method produce BAM ﬁles with similar alignment coverage
across the genome. BAMdelbee locates homozygous deletions by
pinpointing regions sequenced in all samples but the ones in
question.
Results: We demonstrate how our application can spot
homozygous deletions not identiﬁed in WES and WGS variant
analysis for being too vast, yet undetectable by CMA for being
too small.
Conclusion: BAMdelbee is unique, being freely available on our
website and capable of running on a regular laptop (https://
fohs.bgu.ac.il/BirkLab/BAMdelbee). Furthermore, the high speciﬁ-
city of BAMdelbee results in scarcity of false positives, a common
pitfall in such analyses in existing software. Therefore, it can be
easily and effectively integrated into WES and WGS interpretation
pipelines for recessive diseases.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.045.A AION: an artiﬁcial intelligence platform for
automated variant interpretation
Kristina Ibáñez Garikano1, Andrea Bertana1, Carla Glassl1, David
Alberto Neville1, Rocio Acuna Hidalgo1
1Nostos Genomics, Berlin, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Variant interpretation is critical to the
success of diagnostic tests such as Whole Exome Sequencing
(WES) and Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS), as it identiﬁes
genetic variant(s) causing a patient’s clinical features. However,
variant
interpretation
remains
time-consuming
and
costly,
requiring ~12 hours per case and causing long turnaround times.
Furthermore, manual interpretation is prone to variability in
results, potentially impacting diagnostic yield.
Methods: We developed AION, a variant interpretation soft-
ware platform for diagnostic WES and WGS. AION consists of a
pipeline for variant annotation, classiﬁcation, and prioritization
using a white-box machine learning approach. AION performs
exhaustive variant interpretation providing a classiﬁcation and
conﬁdence score for each variant in coding regions, and combi-
nations of molecular and clinical diagnoses ranked according to
the genetic and clinical data provided per patient.
Results: The performance of AION’s classiﬁcation algorithm
was tested in a prospective study of 122,208 variants classiﬁed in
ClinVar, showing 96% accuracy, 92% sensitivity, and 96% speciﬁ-
city. AION was subsequently tested on 5,062 exomes from simu-
lated patients with different monogenic diseases (including
intellectual disability, hereditary cancer, heart disorders…). AION
correctly identiﬁed the disease-causing variant in 96% of cases
(4,845/5,062), outperforming automated ACMG guidelines which
identiﬁed the pathogenic variant(s) in 61% of cases (3,108/5,062).
Conclusion: AION provides fast, accurate, and interpretable
variant interpretation. AION identiﬁed pathogenic variants in
>95% of cases, increasing diagnostic yield by more than 50%
compared to ACMG rule-based classiﬁcation. Exomes were ana-
lysed in 2 minutes, leading to quick turnaround times and the
opportunity to increase throughput.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Kristina Ibáñez Garikano Nostos Genomics,
Andrea Bertana Nostos Genomics, Carla Glassl Nostos Genomics,
David Alberto Neville Nostos Genomics, Rocio Acuna Hidalgo
Nostos Genomics, Nostos Genomics.
P18.046.B Search for complex alleles leading to disruption of
mRNA splicing
Mikhail Skoblov1, Mikhail Gatupov2, Ivan Reveguk3, Igor Bychkov4,
Ksenia Davydenko1, Peter Sparber1, Andrey Marakhonov5, Alexandra
Filatova1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Laboratory of Functional
Genomics, Moscow, Russian Federation;
2Moscow Institute of
Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudnyy, Moscow Region, Russian
Federation;
3École
Polytechnique,
Laboratoire
de
Biologie
Structurale de la Cellule, Paris, France;
4Research Centre for
Medical Genetics, Laboratory of hereditary metabolic diseases,
Moscow,
Russian
Federation;
5Research
Centre
for
Medical
Genetics, Laboratory of Genetic Epidemiology, Moscow, Russian
Federation.
Background/Objectives: It is well known that single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human genome are mostly neutral.
However, if a mutation appears near to a frequent SNP their co-
operative impact on splicing regulatory sequences can be very
signiﬁcant. At the same time, the effect of mutation could be
different depending on the allelic states of SNP.
Methods: Bioinformatics analysis was performed using Max-
EntScan and SpliceAI. The functional effect of the complex alleles
on pre-mRNA splicing using a minigene assay.
Results: We attempted a genome-wide search for such “com-
plex alleles”. For this, we created an “alternative” version of the
human genome (hg19 assembly) where every frequent SNP con-
tains its alternative allele. We also generated a dataset repre-
senting results of an in silico mutagenesis of the human genome
sequence within the 10 nucleotides window ﬂanking each SNP.
Using the modiﬁed SpliceAI algorithm applied on both reference
and “alternative” genome versions, we predicted those mutations
which could change the splicing pattern in one version of the
genome but not in another. As a result, we found about 41
thousand mutations. A detailed analysis of these mutations has
shown various mechanisms of disruption of normal splicing pat-
terns. Using the minigene system, we carried out experimental
validation of some cases which could be relevant to medical
genetics.
Conclusion: This work demonstrates that pathogenic complex
alleles are common in the population and can lead to the
appearance of hereditary diseases.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.047.C Comparison of Polygenic Risk Scores for Coronary
Artery Disease in an Italian prospective cohort: the EPICOR
study
Alessandro De Gregorio1, Carla Debernardi1, Elisabetta Casalone1,
Giovanni Cugliari1, Alessandra Allione1, Licia Iacoviello2;3, Rosario
Tumino4, Vittorio Krogh5, Paolo Vineis6, Salvatore Panico7, Carlotta
Sacerdote8, Giuseppe Matullo1;9
1University of Turin, Department of Medical Sciences, Turin, Italy;
2University of Insubria, Department of Medicine and Surgery, Varese,
Italy; 3IRCCS Neuromed, Department of Epidemiology and Preven-
tion, Isernia, Italy; 4Azienda Ospedaliera “Civile-M.P. Arezzo”, Cancer
Registry and Histopathology Unit, Ragusa, Italy; 5Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori,
Department of Predictive and
Preventive Medicine, Milan, Italy; 6Imperial College London, MRC-
PHE Centre for Environment and Health, London, United Kingdom;
7University Federico II, Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, Naples, Italy; 8Piedmont Reference Centre for Epidemiology
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
611
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
and Cancer Prevention, Turin, Italy; 9AOU Città della Salute e della
Scienza, Medical Genetics Unit, Turin, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a
metabolic disorder that causes the most serious cardiovascular
death events in Western countries1. The identiﬁcation of indivi-
duals at high risk to develop coronary heart disease is a major
clinical need for timely intervention and prevention. We aimed at
investigating the predictive potential of Polygenic Risk Scores in
an Italian cohort.
Methods: We evaluated the prediction value of PRS in 286 pre-
diagnostic CAD and 290 disease-free individuals belonging to Eur-
opean Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)
cohort (EPICOR study)2. Three PRSs were selected from PGS Catalog
based on the ancestry of the GWAS study, number variants included
in the PRS and developing method to calculate the scores.
Results: Distributions between pre-clinical CAD patients and
controls were signiﬁcantly different for all PRSs evaluated (p-
value < 0.0001). Patients whose scores fall above the 90th per-
centile have a signiﬁcantly higher risk (OR = 3.24 p-value <
0.0002). In order to test the accuracy of the PRSs, CAD risk factors,
age and sex were included in multivariate regression models.
Areas under the ROC curve always increases by adding PRS (p-
value = 0.016), showing an increase of the prediction potential
for CAD.
Conclusion: This data suggest that European CAD PRSs work
also in the Italian population and could be used in clinical practice
to identify high-risk individuals for CAD development that can
beneﬁt from early intervention in terms of life-style changes and
as preventive therapeutic approach.
References:
1-Hajar
R.2017;18(3):109-114.,
2-Palli
D
et al.Tumori.2003 PMID:14870823.
Grants: Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca
“Dipartimenti di Eccellenza 2018–2022”.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.048.D The reanalysis of large exome sequencing datasets
by mobile element insertion detection tools identiﬁed causal
pathogenic variants
Robin Wijngaard1;2, German Demidov3, Steven Laurie4, burcu
yaldiz2, Wouter Steyaert2, Jordi Corominas Galbany2, Luke O’Gor-
man2, Christian Gilissen2
1Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics, Biomedical Diagnostic Center (CDB), Barcelona,
Spain; 2Radboud University Medical Center, Department of Human
Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 3Universitätsklinikum Tübingen –
Institut für Medizinische Genetik und angewandte Genomik, Tübin-
gen, Germany;
4Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG),
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science
and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Mobile element insertions (MEIs) com-
pose a small proportion of pathogenic causal variants. Most
existing MEI detection tools have been developed for analysis of
whole genome sequencing (WGS) data but not speciﬁcally for
exome sequencing (ES) data.
Methods: Six MEI calling tools (ERVcaller, MELT, Mobster,
Scramble, TEMP2, xTea) were evaluated for non-reference MEI
calling on ES from 100 trios. We generated a gold standard dataset
by visual inspection of 2,942 MEI calls and subsequently evaluated
all tools for sensitivity and precision. For comparison all tools were
also applied to two WGS samples from the Genome in a bottle
consortium (HG0002, NA12878). The best performing tools for ES
data were then applied to a further set of 11,157 ES samples
(Solve-RD).
Results: We found striking differences in performance between
tools when comparing WGS and ES results. MELT and Scramble
performed best on ES data with a sensitivity (0.72;0.63) and pre-
cision (0.84;0.76), respectively. Application of both methods to the
Solve-RD cohort identiﬁed a total of 375,082 MEIs, of which 1,647
(0.4%) were found in 2 or less individuals, absent in the dbRIP
database and affecting OMIM genes. Patient phenotype matching
has so far resulted in the identiﬁcation of 3 causal pathogenic MEIs
(0.03%), but interpretation is ongoing.
Conclusion: MELT and Scramble are the most suitable tools for
MEI identiﬁcation in ES data. Analysis of the Solve-RD dataset has
so far yielded three MEIs diagnoses. Analysis of an additional
cohort of ~50,000 WES is ongoing.
References:.
Grants: Solve-RD (Horizon 2020 grant agreement No. 779257).
Conﬂict of Interest: Robin Wijngaard full, German Demidov
full, Steven Laurie full, burcu yaldiz full, Wouter Steyaert full, Jordi
Corominas Galbany full, Luke O’Gorman full, Christian Gilissen full,
Solve-RD (Horizon 2020 grant agreement No. 779257).
P18.049.A Phivea: a novel platform for real-time detection of
chromosomal aberrations using long-read sequencing and
artiﬁcial intelligence
Carmen
Garrido
Navas1;2;3,
David
Galevski4;5,
Anne
Kristine
Schack6;7, Gjorgji Madjarov4, Aleksandar Nikov5, Lukasz Krych6, Chris
Kyriakidis7, Zoran Velkoski7
1GENYO Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research, Liquid
Biopsy and Cancer Interception Group, Granada, Spain; 2University of
Granada, Faculty of Sciences, Genetics, Granada, Spain; 3ConGen,
Genetic Counselling Services, Granada, Spain; 4University Ss Cyril &
Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia;
5Netcetera, Zurich, Switzerland;
6University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg, Denmark;
7gMendel,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
Background:.
Genetic diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities is done through
karyotyping/FISH or chromosomal microarrays (CMA) (1). Resolution,
although sufﬁcient for large anomalies, is limited for small chro-
mosomal rearrangements and mosaicism. Recently, Optical Genome
Mapping (OGM) showed 100% concordance with karyotype and
CMA (2)(3) and was able to detect mosaicism (3); however compu-
tational analysis is challenging and cost-effectiveness needs to be
demonstrated (4). Also, analysis methodology based on CMA, cannot
efﬁciently detect triploidies (5). Oxford Nanopore Technology (ONT)
uses long-read fragments facilitating identiﬁcation of aneuploidies
and mosaicism (6)(7) in a rapid and inexpensive way although
bioinformatics analysis is under development.
Methods: We developed an end-to-end solution for mass, real-
time, and cost effective screening of chromosomal aberrations
based on ONT. As proof-of-concept, we evaluated diagnostic
ability for Klinefelter syndrome (KS) patients (N = 2), healthy
donors (N = 2) and other chromosomal abnormalities (N = 10).
DNA libraries were prepared and loaded on the GridIONx5. Ana-
lysis and diagnosis was performed on Phivea®, a proprietary
software solution enabling real-time detection of chromosomal
aberrations using state-of-the-art data-driven modelling.
Results: We simultaneously analyzed 48 to 192 replicate sam-
ples, reducing costs and increasing throughput. We achieved
98.3% and 97.0% diagnostic speciﬁcity and sensitivity respectively
for KS, with a LoD below 30%.
Conclusion: Our solution demonstrated a novel approach for
detecting chromosomal abnormalities that can reduce costs,
increasing throughput and facilitating analysis. Our technology
was validated on KS, but results can be directly extrapolated for
screening of any other chromosomal aberration.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
612
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
References:
(1)
https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201896.
(2)
https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12030398.
(3)
https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.05.012.
(4)
https://doi.org/10.1081/E-ECHP-
140000148.
(5)
https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12121958.
(6)
https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.115.182311.
(7)
https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2018.06.014.
Conﬂict of Interest: Carmen Garrido Navas I am member of
the advisory board as Clinical Specialist at gMendel, David
Galevski
Consultant,
Data
Scientist,
Anne
Kristine
Schack
Employment, Full-time, Gjorgji Madjarov Advisory Board, AI/ML
Advisor, Aleksandar Nikov Consultant, AI/ML, Lukasz Krych Advi-
sory Board, Genomics Advisor, Chris Kyriakidis Employment, Full-
time, Zoran Velkoski Employment, Full-time.
P18.050.B Structurally informed epistatic features improve
variant effect assessment in clinically actionable genes
Federica Luppino1;2, Ivan A. Adzhubey3, Christopher Cassa4;5, Agnes
Toth-Petroczy1;2
1Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics,
Dresden, Germany; 2Center for Systems Biology, Dresden, Germany;
3Harvard Medical School, Biomedical Informatics, Boston, United
States; 4Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States; 5Brigham
and Womenʼs Hospital Division of Genetics, Boston, United States.
Background/Objectives: As genetic testing becomes more rele-
vant to support clinical diagnoses, the interpretation of rare single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) remains a major challenge for genetics
research. Variant effect predictors (VEPs) are used to inform variant
effect assessment. Yet their thresholds to classify a variant as
pathogenic are often set for high sensitivity, that results in the
misclassiﬁcation of benign variants. Here, we developed DeMAG
(Deciphering Mutations in Actionable Genes), a supervised clas-
siﬁer for interpreting missense variants in actionable genes.
Methods: DeMAG predictor uses conservation-based features
and structural features derived from AlphaFold2 3D models. In
addition, we designed the “partners feature” that captures epis-
tasis both in sequence and 3D space of the protein. It is a prob-
abilistic
score
that
predicts
pathogenicity
based
on
the
phenotypic effect of co-evolving residues and spatially close
residues of the protein.
Results: DeMAG reached high performance for almost all
genes considered and high sensitivity and speciﬁcity overall.
DeMAG yielded the top performance across clinical and common
population validation sets among different VEP tools. The novel
partners feature assigns a score to more than 60% of residue
positions that lack a clear clinical interpretation. We provide
classiﬁcation of all 1.3 million missense mutations for 59 action-
able genes available at demag.org.
Conclusion: DeMAG expands the traditional conservation
paradigm to epistatic and structural features to predict variants’
effect. DeMAG’s high speciﬁcity will reduce the number of mis-
diagnoses due to false positives and it might be better suited to
prioritize variants for association studies.
References:.
Grants: NIH grant (R01-HG010372), Max Planck Society MPRGL
funding.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.051.C Hybrid de novo genome assembly of a Kazakh
individual
Daniyar Karabayev1, Asset Daniyarov1, Askhat Molkenov1, Saule
Rakhimova1,
Diana
Samatkyzy1,
Aidana
Gabdulkayum1,
Ulan
Kozhamkulov1, Ainur Akilzhanova1, Ulykbek Kairov1
1National Laboratory Astana, Nazarbayev University, Center for Life
Sciences, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan.
Background/Objectives: State-of-the-art whole-genome sequen-
cing methods cannot read the entire genome at once, therefore
genome assembly is required to connect billions of genome
fragments. De novo genome assembly with next-generation
sequencing data possesses limitations due to the presence of
repeated sequences in a genome, which cannot be assembled
with short reads. This obstacle can be overcome by using long-
read genome sequencing. Here we present a hybrid de novo
genome assembly of a Kazakh individual from short and long-read
whole-genome sequencing data.
Methods: Long-read genome sequencing of Kazakh male indi-
vidual was performed on a PromethION nanopore sequencing
machine with 76.3 Gb of total reads length. Short-read sequencing
was performed on DNBSEQ platform with 99.21 Gb of total reads
length. To assemble long reads, Flye and Shasta assembly tools were
used independently. Both primary assemblies were polished with
short read sequencing data using Racon, and then with Medaka.
Results: Final assembly with Flye and polishing steps resulted
in 2,307 contigs with N50 of 21.5 Mb and 2.86 Gb of total length of
assemblies. Assembly with Shasta and polished steps resulted in
3,816 contigs with N50 of 19.7 Mb and 2.86 Gb of total length of
assemblies.
Conclusion: Hybrid de novo genome assemblies are expected
to be used in construction of the ﬁrst Kazakh reference genome in
order to identify and verify structural variants speciﬁc for the
Kazakh population.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by grant of the Science
Committee of the Ministry of Education and Science of the
Republic
of
Kazakhstan,
#AP09058660,
and
NU
CRP
grant
021220CRP2222.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.052.D Use of different soft-clustering approaches to
discover genetic subtypes of chronic kidney disease
Andrea Eoli1, Susanne Ibing2;3, Henrike Heyne2;3, Nadkarni Girish3,
Erwin P. Böttinger2;3
1Digital Health Center, Hasso Plattner Institute, University of
Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany; 1Digital Health Center, Hasso Plattner
Institute, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany; 3Hasso Plattner
Institute for Digital Health at Mount Sinai, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, United States.
Background/Objectives:.
Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) is a condition that causes a
gradual loss of kidney function and affects approximately 9.1% of
the global population. The disease is highly complex, and its
genetic disease-causing mechanisms are not entirely understood.
In this work, we use different soft-clustering approaches to
deconstruct CKD heterogeneity.
Methods: First, we applied two soft-clustering methods to
identify overlapping clusters of 493 independent CKD variants and
935 associated traits, identiﬁed from published genome-wide
association studies (GWAS). Second, we tested whether the novel
clusters have any broad clinical consequence by performing a
cluster-speciﬁc Phenome-Wide Association Study (PheWAS) on
31.701 BioMe biobank participants. We then explored the rela-
tionship between these clusters and disease outcomes, calculating
Cluster-speciﬁc polygenic Risk Scores (CRS) and comparing them
to the CKD prevalence (cases = 2871, controls = 2737). Eventually,
to further investigate each cluster’s mechanistic biology, we
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
613
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
performed a pathway analysis extracting the genes mapped to the
top variants.
Results: The two clustering methods identiﬁed six comparable
clusters whose diversity reﬂects different aspects of CKD: protec-
tive traits, type-2 diabetes, slow eGFR decline, anemia, hyperten-
sion, and hemolytic-uremic syndrome. The PheWAS conﬁrmed the
top-weighted traits in most of the clusters. Although the clustering
results were comparable, Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF)
performed better in yielding signiﬁcant PheWAS results. Further-
more, despite having used only CKD risk-increasing alleles, the
clusters showed different correlations between an increasing CRS
and the prevalence of CKD.
Conclusion: Besides improving the understanding of disease
biology, these results support using genetics to reduce CKD
complexity by identifying disease subtypes.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.054.B Venus: Elucidating the impact of amino acid
variants on protein function beyond structure destabilisation
Matteo Ferla1, Alistair Pagnamenta1, Jenny Taylor1, Brian Marsden2
1University of Oxford, Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Nufﬁeld
Department of Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom; 2University of
Oxford, Centre for Medicines Discovery, Nufﬁeld Department of
Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Exploring functional effects of a missense
variant at the protein level requires multiple pieces of information to
be interpreted appropriately. This is particularly important when
studying a potentially pathogenic variant linked to a rare or
monogenic disease. Whereas accurate stability predictions alone are
generally informative, other effects, such as disruption of post-
translational modiﬁcations or weakened ligand binding, may also
contribute to the disease phenotype. Furthermore, consideration of
nearby variants that are found in the healthy population may
strengthen or refute a given mechanistic hypothesis. Whilst there
are several bioinformatics tools available that score the deleter-
iousness of a variant, these do not assemble multiple effects of a
variant on the encoded protein, beyond structural stability, and
present them on the structure for inspection.
Methods:.
Results: Venus (https://venus.cmd.ox.ac.uk) is a webapp which,
given a protein substitution, rapidly estimates the predicted effect
on protein stability of the variant, ﬂags if the variant affects a post-
translational modiﬁcation site, a predicted linear motif or known
annotation, and determines the effect on protein stability of var-
iants which affect nearby residues and have been identiﬁed in
healthy populations.
Venus is built onto Michelaɴɢʟo and the results can be
exported to it, allowing them to be annotated and shared with
other researchers.
Conclusion: By presenting interactively multiple sources of
information on a protein structure (stability, human population
variants, post-translational modiﬁcations etc.), Venus empowers
the investigation into the effects a variant of interest may have on
a protein function.
References:.
Grants: NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre Programme.
Wellcome Trust Core Award [203141/Z/16/Z].
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.055.C A community developed pipeline for rare disease
diagnostics
Anders Jemt1;2, Ramprasad Neethiraj3, Mei Wu3, Lauri Mesilaakso4,
Annick Renevey1, Gwenna Breton5, Subazini Thankaswamy Kosalai6,
Sima Rahimi5, Emil Bertilsson2, Viktor Henmyr7, Valtteri Wirta1;2;3,
Henrik Stranneheim1;2;8
1Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institute, Department of
Microbiology, Tumour and Cell Biology, Solna, Sweden; 2Karolinska
University Hospital, Genomic Medicine Center Karolinska, Solna,
Sweden;
3Science for Life Laboratory, KTH Royal Institute of
Technology, School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnol-
ogy and Health, Stockholm, Sweden; 4Linköping University Hospital,
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Linköping, Sweden; 5Gothen-
burg University, Clinical Genomics Gothenburg, Sambio core facilities,
Gothenburg, Sweden; 6Örebro University Hospital, Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Örebo, Sweden; 7Skåne University Hospital,
Lund, Sweden; 8Karolinska University Hospital, Centre for Inherited
Metabolic Diseases, Solna, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Genome sequencing has become a
mainstay in rare disease (RD) diagnostics, enabling medical pro-
fessionals to diagnose challenging cases. However, computational
pipelines are getting increasingly complex, resource demanding
and are often tightly tied to local computational infrastructure.
The community driven nf-core initiative aims to develop and
maintain a curated set of open-source best practice bioinformatic
pipelines1. Herein we describe the development of the nf-core
raredisease pipeline.
Methods: The pipeline aligns fastq ﬁles, calls and annotates
SNV/indels and structural variants. Furthermore, it calls uniparental
disomy, runs of homozygosity, repeat expansions and SMN1/
SMN2 copy numbers. Variants are ranked according to their pre-
dicted pathogenicity using a weighted sum rank model.
Results: The pipeline is an extension of the workﬂow used in
the Stockholm healthcare region to analyze >10,000 samples, with
a diagnostic yield of 40% in a ﬁrst cohort of 3219 patients2. The
development is a collaborative effort within Genomic Medicine
Sweden, aiming to establish this as the national pipeline for RD
diagnostics.
Conclusion: Pipelines developed within the nf-core commu-
nity adhere to strict guidelines ensuring that they will install, run
and perform on most computing infrastructure, including cloud.
The nf-core raredisease pipeline enables a broad utilization across
the diagnostic RD community.
References:
1Ewels PA et al. The nf-core framework for
community-curated
bioinformatics
pipelines.
Nat
Biotechnol.
2020;38(3):276-278.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0439-x.
2Stranneheim, H et al. Integration of whole genome sequencing
into a healthcare setting: high diagnostic rates across multiple
clinical entities in 3219 rare disease patients. Genome Med.
2021;13(1):40. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-021-00855-5.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.056.D Automated prioritization of copy number variants
with ACMG/ClinGen standards
Jiri
Ruzicka1,
Kevin
Yauy1,
Nicolas
Duforet-Frebourg1,
Laure
Raymond2, Mélanie Broutin1, Jerome Audoux1, Sacha Beaumeunier1,
Nicolas Philippe1, Denis Bertrand1
1SeqOne, Montpellier, France;
2Euroﬁns Biomnis, Ivry-sur-Seine,
France.
Background/Objectives: With the rising adoption of long-read
sequencing technologies, previously undetected and numerous
CNVs (copy-number variants) are accessible and their prioritization
becomes necessary for the clinical evaluation. ACMG and ClinGen
published guidelines for clinical interpretation of such variations,
which allow more consistent prioritization of CNVs.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
614
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: We present an original implementation of the
recommendations of the ACMG/ClinGen framework, adapted to
both small and large CNVs. Classiﬁcations were processed using
dosage map sensitivity, general population frequency, phenotype
matching and disease inheritance patterns. The performance of
the model was compared with the published ACMG/ClinGen
dataset consisting of 114 CNVs evaluated by two independent
experts.
Results: Our classiﬁcation tool achieved 96.7% speciﬁcity for
pathogenic variant identiﬁcation, identifying correctly 15 of 23
CNV assessed as pathogenic by the two evaluators. 2 additional
CNV could be classiﬁed as pathogenic when phenotypes were
available. In 84.2% of CNVs, the prediction was the same as the
prediction of at least one evaluator. For the 15.8% of predictions in
disagreement, no variants classiﬁed as benign were predicted
pathogenic and vice-versa.
Conclusion: This implementation of ACMG/ClinGen standards
provides an automated and conﬁdent classiﬁcation of CNVs which
accelerates the clinical interpretation of structural variants.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.057.A dmﬁnd: a network medicine tool for the analysis of
genomics data
Valentina Nale1, Alice Chiodi1, Matteo Bersanelli2, Ettore Mosca1
1Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council,
Milan, Italy;
2Humanitas University, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: The network medicine approach helps
explain how gene alterations affect the whole system. Network
analysis of genomics data is therefore important to explain the
genetic architecture of complex diseases. We present dmﬁnd –
disease module ﬁnder – a network medicine tool for the analysis
of genomics data.
Methods: Mutational data: genomic data commons through
the package “TCGAbiolinks”. Gene-gene interactions: STRING,
iRefIndex. dmﬁnd is implemented in R. Graphs are handled
by means of the package “igraph”. Input gene scores are
processed using network diffusion. Gene relevance is quantiﬁed
by the network smoothing index. Genes are classiﬁed by parti-
cipation coefﬁcient and within-module degree. Computationally
intensive
analysis
are
run
in
parallel
using
the
package
“BioCParallel”.
Results: We substantially improved the initial release of
dmﬁnd[1], introducing a series of novel analyses, and re-
implementing the code and its documentation according to
the Bioconductor guidelines. The main novelties are: coverage
analysis of the interactome over the input ranked gene scores;
performance assessment for free parameter tuning; network
selection based on network enrichment analysis in top gene
scores; gene classiﬁcation by topological role within and
between network communities; network visualization; gene
network comparison to ﬁnd shared and speciﬁc regions. We
show the functioning of dmﬁnd analyzing the most frequently
mutated genes in a few types of cancer and using different
interactomes.
Conclusion: The R package dmﬁnd offers a documented pipe-
line to ﬁnd gene networks that are signiﬁcantly enriched in the most
altered genes of an “omic” screening. It classiﬁes the genes, sug-
gesting possible key players of the disease under investigation.
References: [1] https://doi.org/10.1038/srep34841.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.058.B Bone2Gene: deep learning-based diagnosis of rare
skeletal disorders
Sebastian Rassmann1, Alexander Hustinx1, Kyra Skaf2, Miguel Ibarra-
Arellano3, Tzung-Chien Hsieh1, Alexandra Keller4, Ruth Gausche5,
Klaus Mohnike2, Peter Krawitz1, Behnam Javanmardi1
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Bonn, Germany;
2Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Medizinische Fakultät,
Magdeburg, Germany; 3Heidelberg University, Institute for Computa-
tional Biomedicine, Heidelberg, Germany;
4Children’s Center am
Johannisplatz, Leipzig, Germany; 5Leipzig University, Medizinische
Fakultät, Leipzig, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Rare skeletal disorders are an important
group of genetic disorders that are highly heterogeneous, making
their accurate diagnosis a very challenging process. In this project,
we have (so far) collected more than 700 hand X-Ray images from
patients diagnosed with 6 different skeletal disorders which we
are using to build a diagnostic tool based on Deep Learning (DL).
Methods: DL usually requires massive amounts of training
data. However, data for rare genetic disorders is inherently sparse
which is further exacerbated by difﬁculties collecting and digitiz-
ing the X-Ray imagery. We address this issue by employing
transfer learning from a public bone age dataset. Furthermore,
varying data sources e.g. using differing imprinted labels or ima-
ges showing digitization artifacts potentially induces biases. To
eradicate these, we trained DL models to extract only the hands
concealing the origin of the X-Ray.
Results: Our bone age DL models trained on the bone age dataset
reach a competitive accuracy with a mean age difference (MAD) of
~4.5 months (compared to 5-7 months from human experts). Fur-
thermore, our models achieve a MAD of ~7.5 months (w.r.t. a single
human rater) on our skeletal disorder dataset which demonstrates
generalizability to (1) unseen datasets and (2) disordered patients.
Upon ﬁne-tuning our models on disorder classiﬁcation, we build a
preliminary classiﬁer. However, prediction accuracies widely depend
on the class frequency in our dataset (0-95%).
Conclusion: By growing our database we aim to increase the
performance and, consequently, deploy Bone2Gene as a clinical
assistance tool.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.060.D Analyzing clinical RNAseq data with machine
learning models greatly improves the genetic diagnosis in
pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Michelle Tang1;2, Zeljko Antic1, Stefan Pietzsch1, Jana Lentes1,
Winfried Hofmann1, Gunnar Cario3, Gabriele Escherich4, Udo zur
Stadt4, Brigitte Schlegelberger1, Martin Horstmann4;5, Martin Sta-
nulla6, Anke Katharina Bergmann1
1Hannover Medical School, Department of Human Genetics, Hann-
over, Germany; 2L3S Research Center, Hannover, Germany; 3Uni-
versity Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Department of Pediatrics, Kiel,
Germany; 4University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Clinic of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hamburg, Germany; 5Research
Institute Children’s Cancer Center Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany;
6Hannover Medical School, Department of Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, Hannover, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Since tumour genetics greatly inﬂuence
the risk stratiﬁcation and treatment of acute lymphoblastic leu-
kemia (ALL), Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies
have been incorporated into routine diagnostics with the cost-
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
615
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
effective targeted RNA sequencing being particularly appealing.
However, the analysis and integration of large amounts of NGS
data in diagnostic settings remains challenging since a systematic
tool is lacking.
Methods: We performed targeted RNAseq on ~1500 pediatric
ALL patients from the German pediatric ALL study groups. The
megSAP pipeline was applied to analyze the gene expression and
fusions. We then combined UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approx-
imation and Projection) and supervised machine learning algo-
rithms to build an interactive tool for visualization and prediction
of patients‘ diagnostic subgroups.
Results: Our tool provides a user-friendly interface for analyzing
large cohorts as well as individual cases. New patient‘ data is
uploaded weekly. The UMAP visualization and subgroup prediction
are generated immediately (~1 minutes) and accurately (F1~95%).
Using this tool, we are able to: (1) identify patients with DUX4 fusion,
when fusion calling and conventional cytogenetic methods failed;
(2) stratify patients without aberrant fusion or aneudiploidy, e.g. Ph-
like; (3) pinpoint individual outlier cases that need special attention
or are usually difﬁcult to distinguish, e.g. masked-hypodiploidy; (4)
validate the results from conventional diagnostic methods.
Conclusion: We present a systematic AI tool that easily inte-
grates into the routine diagnostics. Its application helps to
improve risk stratiﬁcation and brings novel insights to research.
Our workﬂow has the power to replace some traditional methods
and pave the way for personalized oncology.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.061.A Recent updates in the VarFish platform for
collaborative variant data analysis
Manuel Holtgrewe1, Oliver Stolpe1, Henrike Sczakiel2, Björn Fischer-
Zirnsak2, Felix Boschann2, Nadja Ehmke2, Dieter Beule1
1Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany; 2Charité – Universitäts-
medizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
Background/Objectives: VarFish is a web-based for the colla-
borative analysis of DNA variant data. Varﬁsh is freely available
under a permissive open source license.
Methods: We have continuously developed the application
further together with our clinical partners and extended it in terms
of features and usability.
Results: We present recent advancements in VarFish features
including support for easily exporting annotated variants for
submission to Clinvar, the analysis of strutural variants, and the
support for large cohorts.
Conclusion: VarFish continues to be a versatile and powerful
tool for variant analysis in our research and diagnostics applications.
References: Holtgrewe M, Stolpe O, Nieminen M, Mundlos S,
Knaus A, Kornak U, Seelow D, Segebrecht L, Spielmann M, Fischer-
Zirnsak B, Boschann F, Scholl U, Ehmke N, Beule D. VarFish:
comprehensive DNA variant analysis for diagnostics and research.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Jul 2;48(W1):W162-W169. https://doi.org/
10.1093/nar/gkaa241. PMID: 32338743; PMCID: PMC7319464.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.062.B Identiﬁcation of unknown environmental factors
that mediate eQTLs using principal interaction component
analysis
Martijn Vochteloo1, Patrick Deelen1;2, Britt Vink1;3, Bios Consortium4,
Sergio Andreu-Sánchez1, Jingyuan Fu1;5, Alexandra Zhernakova1,
Ellen A. Tsai6, Heiko Runz6, Harm-Jan Westra1, Lude Franke1;2
1University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands; 2Oncode Institute,
Utrecht, Netherlands; 3Hanze University of Applied Sciences, Institute
for Life Science & Technology, Groningen, Netherlands;
4BIOS
Consortium, Utrecht, Netherlands; 5University Medical Center Gronin-
gen, University of Groningen, Department of Pediatrics, Groningen,
Netherlands; 6Biogen Inc., Translational Biology, Research & Devel-
opment, Cambridge, MA, United States.
Background/Objectives: Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL)
help explain the regulatory mechanisms of trait associated var-
iants. eQTL effect sizes are often dependent on observed and
unobserved biological contexts, such as cell type composition and
environmental factors. Here, we introduce PICALO (Principal
Interaction Component Analysis through Likelihood Optimization)
which is an unbiased method to identify known and hidden
contexts that inﬂuence eQTLs.
Methods: PICALO uses expectation maximization to identify
latent components, referred to as Principal Interaction Compo-
nents (PICs), which maximally affect eQTL effect-sizes. Here we
applied PICALO to bulk RNA-seq eQTL datasets in both blood
(n = 2,932) and brain (n = 2,439).
Results: We identiﬁed 33 PICs in blood. These PICs interact
with 4,533 (35%) unique eQTLs. We identiﬁed 21 PICs in brain,
which interact with 3,996 (39%) unique eQTLs (FDR<0.05). These
PICs capture both RNA quality, cell type composition, and envir-
onmental inﬂuences.
For instance, a PIC interacting with 375 blood eQTLs is corre-
lated to the presence of prior Cytomegalovirus infection (r = 0.31,
p-value = 5x10-17). Several of these eQTLs overlap asthma GWAS
risk variants, corroborating a previously reported role of Cytome-
galovirus in asthma.
We observed that PICALO is robust to heterogeneous datasets,
yielding biologically highly informative and reproducible interac-
tion components.
Conclusion: PICALO is a novel method that allows for the
identiﬁcation of context dependent eQTLs without any prior
knowledge, and which outperforms methods that use cell counts
or expression-based principal components. PICALO therefore has
the potential to aid in better understanding the environmental
components that play a role in common diseases.
References:.
Grants: ERC Starting Grant 637640.
Conﬂict of Interest: Martijn Vochteloo: None declared, Patrick
Deelen: None declared, Britt Vink: None declared, Bios Consortium:
None declared, Sergio Andreu-Sánchez: None declared, Jingyuan
Fu: None declared, Alexandra Zhernakova: None declared, Ellen A.
Tsai Biogen Inc., Biogen Inc., Heiko Runz Biogen Inc., Biogen Inc.,
Harm-Jan Westra: None declared, Lude Franke: None declared.
P18.063.C Using CADA – a phenotype-driven gene
prioritization tool for custom panel deﬁnition in diagnostics
of rare disorders using exome sequencing – a retrospective
analysis of 380 patients
Gaber Bergant1, Aleš Maver1, Klemen Žiberna2, Borut Peterlin1
1University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Clinical Institute of Genomic
Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia; 2Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ljubljana,
Institute
for
Biostatistics
and
Medical
Informatics,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: Phenotype-driven gene target deﬁnition
using gene panels and known phenotype-gene associations
represent an established practice in next-generation sequencing
data analysis. In patients with complex phenotypes target selec-
tion can be difﬁcult, often resulting in the analysis of multiple
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
616
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
genes not associated with the observed phenotype pattern. We
propose using CADA, a phenotype-driven gene prioritization tool
for custom panel deﬁnition and report on the results of a retro-
spective analysis in 380 patients.
Methods: Phenotype of 380 patients examined, sequenced
and diagnosed at our institution was described in human phe-
notype ontology (HPO) terms and served as CADA input. We
performed a statistical analysis of the results and report on CADA
rankings and score distribution for genes with diagnostic ﬁndings.
We deﬁned custom gene panels using CADA scores at different
cut-off values and provide comparison with the standard gene
panel approach using Genomics England PanelApp.
Results: Genes with diagnostic ﬁndings in our patient cohort
had an average CADA rank of 54.6 (SD = 81.8, max = 484) and a
median score of 60.5 (SD = 24.6, min = 14.7). Average number of
genes in gene panels selected by clinical geneticist was 470. Using
CADA score at 5th percentile in our cohort as cut-off value for gene
inclusion in custom gene panel would have provided us with
smaller target sizes (mean = 324 genes) compared with gene
panels selected by a clinical geneticist.
Conclusion: We conclude that using CADA for phenotype-
driven gene target deﬁnition would lead to smaller gene targets
compared to the standard approach using gene panels.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.064.D Comprehensive copy number variant analysis of
11,000 previously unsolved rare disease exome sequencing
datasets within the Solve-RD project results in diagnoses
being reached for 2% of previously unsolved cases
German Demidov1, burcu yaldiz2, Francesco Musacchia3, Lennart
Johansson4, Ida Paramonov5;6, J. Garcia-Pelaez*7;8;9, Elisa Benetti10,
Gemma Bullich Vilanova5;6, Elke de Boer2, Nika Schuermans*11, Ana
Töpf12, Liedewei van de Vondel13, Jana Vandrovcova14, Carla
Oliveira7;8;9, Lisenka Vissers*2, Stephan Ossowski15;15, Steven Laurie5;6
1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tübingen,
Germany;
2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 3Center for Human Technol-
ogies, Italian Institute of Technology (IIT), Genova, Italy; 4University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands; 5CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic
Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain;
6The Barcelona Institute of
Science
and
Technology,
Barcelona,
Spain;
7i3S,
Instituto
de
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal; 8Ipatimup, Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunol-
ogy of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; 9Faculty of Medicine,
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;
10Med Biotech Hub and
Competence Center, Department of Medical Biotechnologies, Uni-
versity of Siena, Siena, Italy; 11Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent
University
Hospital,
Ghent,
Belgium;
12John
Walton
Muscular
Dystrophy Research Centre, Translational and Clinical Research
Institute,
Newcastle
University
and
Newcastle
Hospitals
NHS
Foundation
Trust,
Newcastle,
United
Kingdom;
13Translational
Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University
of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium;
14Department of Neuromuscular
Diseases, Institute of Neurology University College London, Queen
Square, London, United Kingdom; 15Institute of Medical Genetics and
Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
Background/Objectives: A key objective of the H2020 Solve-RD
project is the exhaustive reanalysis of 19,000 exome sequencing
(ES) datasets to reach diagnoses that have previously proven
elusive. For some of these datasets only limited, if any, copy-
number variant (CNV) analyses may have been previously
undertaken. The Solve-RD CNV working group is reanalysing all
submitted data using a variety of algorithms in order to identify
candidate disease-causing CNVs. Here we report on reanalysis of
the success of the ﬁrst 11,000 experiments representing 6,000
families.
Methods: Raw ES reads were realigned to the hs37d5 refer-
ence genome and four CNV calling algorithms applied to the new
alignments to maximise sensitivity: ClinCNV, Conifer, ExomeDepth,
and VarGenius-HZD. Putative CNVs in candidate gene lists pro-
vided by four European Reference Networks submitting to Solve-
RD, and all CNVs over 500kb in length, were prioritised for further
investigation. QC measures were applied to reduce the number of
false positive events identiﬁed, and IGV track screenshots gener-
ated for all candidate CNVs, to facilitate visual inspection and
interpretation by clinical researchers.
Results: Analyses to date have already resulted in the identi-
ﬁcation of CNVs that are fully, or partially explanatory for the
disease phenotype in >2% of cases, some of which have remained
undiagnosed for more than a decade, and this number is expec-
ted to grow further as further events are conﬁrmed.
Conclusion: Disease causing CNVs were identiﬁed in an
important proportion of patients likely because thorough CNV
analysis of exome data remains challenging and thus has not been
routinely performed in the past.
References:.
Grants: EU H2020-779257.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.066.B Fast and powerful statistical method for context-
speciﬁc QTL mapping in multi-context genomic studies
Andrew Lu1, Mike Thompson1, Gracie Gordon2, Andy Dahl3, Chun
Jimmie Ye2, Noah Zaitlen1, Brunilda Balliu1
1University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, United States;
2University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, United States;
3University of Chicago, Chicago, United States.
Background/Objectives: Recent studies suggest that context-
speciﬁc eQTLs underlie genetic risk factors for complex diseases.
However, methods for identifying them are still nascent, limiting
their comprehensive characterization and downstream inter-
pretation of disease-associated variants.
Methods: Here, we introduce FastGxC, a novel statistical
method that leverages the correlation structure of multi-context
studies to efﬁciently and powerfully map context-shared and
context-speciﬁc eQTLs. We prove through analytical derivation
and empirical examination that FastGxC shared and context-
speciﬁc eQTL effect size estimates are a re-parametrization of the
standard eQTL effect size estimates in each context and the eQTL-
by-context interaction effect size estimates from a linear mixed
model with a genotype-by-context effect.
Results: We show via simulations that FastGxC is orders of
magnitude more powerful and computationally efﬁcient than
previous approaches. We apply FastGxC to bulk multi-tissue RNA-
Seq data from the GTEx Consortium and PBMC single-cell RNA-Seq
data from CLUES to produce the most comprehensive tissue- and
cell-type-speciﬁc eQTL maps to date. We validate these maps by
establishing that context-speciﬁc eQTL variants are enriched in
corresponding
functional
genomic
annotations.
Finally,
we
examine the relationship between context-speciﬁc eQTLs and
human disease and show that FastGxC context-speciﬁc eQTLs
provide a three-fold increase in precision to identify relevant tis-
sues and cell types for GWAS variants and a two-fold improve-
ment in their rank than standard eQTLs.
Conclusion: In summary, FastGxC enables the construction of
context-speciﬁc eQTL maps that can be used to understand the
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
617
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
context-speciﬁc gene regulatory mechanisms underlying complex
human diseases.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict
of
Interest:
Andrew
Lu:
None
declared,
Mike
Thompson: None declared, Gracie Gordon: None declared, Andy
Dahl: None declared, Chun Jimmie Ye C.J.Y. has received research
support from Chan Zuckerberg Initiative,437Chan Zuckerberg
Biohub, and Genentech, C.J.Y. is a Scientiﬁc Advisory Board
member for and hold equity in435Related Sciences and ImmunAI,
a consultant for and hold equity in Maze Therapeutics, and
a436consultant for TReX Bio., Noah Zaitlen: None declared, Bru-
nilda Balliu: None declared.
P18.067.C DGH-GO: Dissecting the Genetic Heterogeneity of
complex diseases using Gene Ontology, an interactive and
user-friendly web application
Muhammad Asif1;2, Hugo Martiniano3, Francisco Couto1
1LASIGE, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa,
Portugal, Lisbon, Portugal; 2CENTURI Multi Engineering Platform, Aix
Marseille University France, Marseille, France; 3Instituto Nacional de
Sau´de Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Avenida Padre Cruz, Lisboa, Portuga,
Lisbon, Portugal.
Background/Objectives: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs)
are phenotypically heterogeneous and difﬁcult to diagnose at early-
age. The genetic heterogeneity of NDDs matches to their clinical-
variability. The different NDDs share biological mechanisms that
further complex the patient’s stratiﬁcation, thus, limiting the appli-
cations of personalized medicine for NDDs. Existing studies have
employed biological networks and machine-learning methods to
dissect the genetic heterogeneity. Such methods suffer from many
parameter tuning and lack biological interpretations, resulting in
the reduced generalizability of the proposed method.
Methods: Here, we presented an interactive and user-friendly
application, DGH-GO that allows biologists to dissect the genetic
heterogeneity of complex diseases by stratifying the genes, dis-
rupted by any type of genetic variants (SNV, CNVs). The applica-
tion can also be used to study the shared etiology of complex-
diseases.
Results: DGH-GO creates a functional similarity matrix of puta-
tive disease-causing genes or known-disease genes for multiple
disorders using Gene Ontology (GO). The resultant matrix can be
visualized in a 2D space using different dimension reduction
methods (T-SNE and Principal-Coordinate-Analysis). Functional
similarities from GO and projected space coordinates from dimen-
sion reduction methods can be used to identify clusters by
employing four different clustering methods (K-means, Hierarchical,
Fuzzy and PAM). The user may change the clustering parameters
and see their effect on stratiﬁcation results immediately.
Conclusion: In summary, functional-similarities, dimension-
reduction and clustering, coupled with interactive-visualization
and control over analysis allows biologists to explore and analyze
their datasets, without knowing the execution of complex meth-
ods. The proposed application and its application to NDDs is
available at https://github.com/Muh-Asif/DGH-GO.
References: Asif et al. 2018, 2019, 2020.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.068.D Whole-Genome Sequencing: The Long and the
Short of It
Sylvan Caspar1, Patricia Stoll1, Siro Fritzmann1, Gilles Gut1, Daniel
Salerno1, Janine Meienberg1, Gabor Matyas1;2
1Foundation for People with Rare Diseases, Center for Cardiovascular
Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Schlieren, Switzerland; 2Zurich Center
for Integrative Human Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Whole-exome sequencing (WES), short-
read whole-genome sequencing (SR-WGS) and long-read WGS
(LR-WGS) enable the detection of sequence variants at unprece-
dented scale, leading to new challenges in variant calling. Indeed,
the calling of all clinically-relevant ClinVar/HGMD variants is
challenging due to the limitations of sequencing and data analysis
platforms. Here, we provide new insights into the performance of
the most recent sequencing, alignment, and variant-calling pipe-
lines in the detection of ClinVar/HGMD variants.
Methods: We used raw data of SR-WGS (PE150, ~60×) of >50
in-house samples as well as SR-WGS (PE150, ~60×) and LR-WGS
(PacBio HiFi, ~30×) of 4 publicly available samples (HG001-HG004).
We implemented 12 state-of-the-art analysis pipelines for SR-WGS,
LR-WGS, or the combination of both as well as developed a
workﬂow to assess the pipelines’ performance in the detection of
ClinVar/HGMD variants.
Results: For a ~60× genome, accelerated pipelines decreased
the runtime of BWA/GATK from ~2.5 d to ~2-5 h, enabling the
analysis of multiple samples. LR-WGS outperformed SR-WGS,
particularly in regions with mappability <1, while WES failed to
detect variants in non-exonic or GC-rich regions. However, no
pipeline alone detected all ClinVar/HGMD variants. By analyzing
read depth, strand bias, variant allele fraction, and population-
based allele frequency, we identiﬁed a substantial number of
false-positive calls and ClinVar/HGMD entries.
Conclusion: Sequencing, alignment, and variant-calling pipe-
lines can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the detection of all ClinVar/HGMD
variants, leading to both false-negative and false-positive results.
Owing to its inherent advantages in variant detection/calling, LR-
WGS should be implemented in clinical practice as soon as it is
affordable.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.069.A Hybrid semi-automated approach for neonatal
screening using whole exome sequencing
JEKATERINA SHUBINA1, Ekaterina Lozier1, Vladislav Tkachuk2, Igor
Sadelov1, Dmitry Troﬁmov1
1FSBI «National medical research center for obstetrics, gynecology
and perinatology named after academician V.I.Kulakov» ministry of
healthcare of the Russian federation, Moscow, Russian Federation;
2DNA-technology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives:
The
advances
in
high-throughput
sequencing technologies have provided powerful tools for the
analysis of genomic variants and allowed for newborn screening
that included a huge amount of rare hereditary disorders that
would not be detected using conventional screening methods.
However the step of variant interpretation remains time and labor
consuming and requires a highly qualiﬁed specialist. Therefore, a
manual analysis of every sample is impossible for routine
screening. At the same time, a fully automated approach is not the
best decision due to the huge amount of variant data with
ambiguous clinical relevance. Therefore, we decided to apply a
combined approach that allows for automated analysis of samples
with no “suspicious” variants followed by manual analysis of those
samples that carry variants of interest.
Methods: The variants were called using GATK best practices
pipeline. The automated variant prioritization was performed for
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
618
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
more than 2000 genes associated with severe childhood-onset
diseases considering the inheritance type, variant signiﬁcance
information from ClinVar, HGMD, and local databases, variant
frequency in gnomAD and local databases. For autosomal reces-
sive disorders we only reported potential homozygotes and
compound heterozygotes.
Results: Automated variant prioritization resulted in 45% of
cases that carried no variants for manual interpretation. The
remaining cases carried “suspicious” variants in 1-3 different
genes, that signiﬁcantly reduced the time needed for analysis.
Conclusion: A combination of automated and manual variant
analysis allowed us to speed up data analysis for neonatal
screening without sacriﬁcing the sensitivity.
References:.
Grants: The study was carried out within the framework of
State Assignment 121092400060-5.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.070.B Clinically-driven, multi-layered, and interpretable
machine learning model for assisted variant interpretation
Jiri Ruzicka1, Nicolas Duforet-Frebourg1, Laure Raymond2, Jerome
Audoux1, Sacha Beaumeunier1, Denis Bertrand1, Laurent Mesnard3,
Nicolas Philippe1, Julien Thevenon4, Kevin Yauy1
1SeqOne,
Montpellier,
France;
2Biomnis-euroﬁns,
Lyon,
France;
3Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France;
4CHU
Grenoble, Grenoble, France.
Background/Objectives: With the great expansion of sequen-
cing technologies and artiﬁcial intelligence tools, the demand
for interpretable classiﬁcation of variants rises rapidly and
highlights the need for a personalized approach based on the
clinical
context.
Unfortunately,
the
low
interpretability
of
machine learning black-box models limits their adoption in the
community.
Methods: We created a multi-layered machine learning model
called ClassifyML which scores the pathogenicity of genomic
variants and prioritizes their importance for the clinical context.
ClassifyML gathers multi-level annotations based on ACMG-AMP
evidence criteria, disease heritability patterns, and phenotype
matching. The model was trained ﬁrstly on the ClinVar variant
classiﬁcation dataset, followed by a second training on a cohort
of 316 deep-phenotyped patients recruited from a French
consortium.
Results: The model proposes an interpretable output in the
form of a continuous importance scale for each criterion, which
assists the clinical interpretation of variants. We evaluated our
method with a multi-centric cohort consisting of 310 patients. The
causing variant was classiﬁed as having pathogenic evidence in
291 of 310 cases by the model, with an improvement of the
median rank of 39 fold compared to Exomiser (3 against 118).
Conclusion: ClassifyML is an interpretable machine learning
model for pathogenicity prediction and variant prioritization. It
allows variant classiﬁcation prediction, patient context integration,
and yields human-explainable classiﬁcations.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.071.C Gene prioritization for rare diseases integrating
genotype, RNA-seq and phenotype - lessons from a CAGI 6
challenger team
Vicente Yépez1, Christian Mertes1, Nicholas H. Smith1, Ines Scheller1,
Julien Gagneur1
1Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
Background/Objectives:.
RNA sequencing emerges as a complementary tool to DNA
sequencing for rare disease diagnostics. However, gene prior-
itization methods integrating genotype, RNA-seq and phenotypes
have been lacking. To address this need, the SickKids Genome
Clinic released a CAGI 6 diagnostics challenge with nearly 80
genomes and RNA-seq samples1.
Methods: We developed a gene prioritization model inte-
grating
variant
annotations,
mono-allelic
expression,
gene
expression2 and splicing outliers3 (through our workﬂow DROP4),
together with HPO-encoded phenotypes. The model is a gradient
tree boosting machine (XGboost) trained on a cohort of 209
mitochondrial disease patients5 from which half are diagnosed.
Results: On the mitochondrial disease dataset, our model
prioritizes the causal gene ﬁrst for almost half of the diagnosed
cases, and among the top 5 in more than 70% of them. Applica-
tion to the CAGI6 SickKids cohort revealed a known splice-
disrupting pathogenic variant and reported several promising
candidates (CAGI6 evaluation pending as of now).
Conclusion: Our approach and publicly available software6 can
help ﬁnd and prioritize candidates found by DNA and RNA
sequencing and can be especially useful to reduce the burden of
manual inspection in cohorts of hundreds of samples.
References:
1.
http://genomeinterpretation.org/cagi6-
sickkids.html.
2. Brechtmann et al, AJHG (2018).
3. Mertes et al, Nat Commun (2021).
4. Yépez et al, Nat Protoc (2021).
5. Yépez, Gusic et al, Genome Med (2021).
6. https://github.com/gagneurlab/cagi6_sickkids.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Vicente Yépez Technical University of
Munich, Christian Mertes Technical University of Munich, Nicholas
H. Smith Technical University of Munich, Ines Scheller Technical
University of Munich, Julien Gagneur Technical University of
Munich.
P18.073.A Whole genome sequencing for copy number
variation and structural variant analyses
Nicolas Chatron1, Virginie Bernard2, Céline Richard3, Gaelle Salaun3,
Laetitia Gouas3, Laurence Michel-Calemard1, Quentin Charret2,
Valentin Klein2, Laura Fancello2, Laury Nicolas2, Alain Viari4;5,
Anthony Ferrari4;5, Jean Yves Blay5, Marianne Till1, Renaud Touraine6,
Francis Ramond6, Ines Harzallah6, Radu Harbuz7, Véronique Satre7,
Caroline Schluth-Bolard1;8, Philippe Vago3, Charles Coutton7, Chris-
tine Vinciguerra5;9, Damien Sanlaville1;5, Julien Thevenon2;7
1Service Genetic - Hcl, Bron, France; 2auragen, Grenoble, France; 3Chu
Clermont-Fd Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France; 4Léon Bérard Center,
Lyon, France;
5auragen, Lyon, France;
6Chu Nord Saint-Étienne,
Saint-Priest-en-Jarez, France;
7Chu Grenoble Alpes - Service de
Génétique, La Tronche, France; 8Chu Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France;
9ISPB - Faculté de Pharmacie de Lyon, Lyon, France.
Background/Objectives: WGS is widely spreading as a ﬁrst line
diagnostic test, both for detecting small variants (SNVs/indels),
Copy-Number
Variants
and
Structural
Variants
(CNVs/SVs).
Through the Auragen program, we have validated a routine for
CNVs/SVs calling, annotation, and prioritizations devoted to rare
mendelian disorders diagnostics. Literature data and reference
samples are missing gold standards for such variants, hence we
developed an internal analytical validity assessment.
Methods: A reference dataset was constituted through 82
CNVs (52 losses, 30 gains) identiﬁed by array-CGH from various
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
619
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
designs (median size of 104kb) and 11 SVs from local projects.
GIAB samples were explored for CNVs smaller than 10kb. Mul-
tiple
softwares
were
compared
to
assess
precision/recall.
Annotation was performed using the VEP software with custom
parameters, notably with dbVar. Prioritization was done using in-
house scripts.
Results: A combination of two softwares was highlighted,
CNVnator and Manta. Dedicated quality control metrics were used
for large CNVs calls. Compared to array-CGH, WGS recalled 96%
losses (50/52), 87% gains (26/30) and 91% SVs (10/11). Diverging
calls were discussed with expert cytogeneticists for pipeline ﬁne-
tuning. For 1282 cases involved in Auragen diagnostic routine, in
average, 5 losses 2 gains and 4 SVs are delivered for interpretation.
Within 517 consecucutive cases, 32 CNVs/SVs were deemed
clinically relevant, including two mosaic CNVs.
Conclusion: Our analytical validity assessment developed on
Auragen samples suggests the non-inferiority of WGS compared
to array-CGH for CNVs discovery in a diagnostic routine.
References: Chaisson et al., 2019 Nat Comm, Delage et al.,
2020 BMC Genomics, Zook et al., 2020 Nat Biotechnol.
Grants: PFMG2025 (https://pfmg2025.aviesan.fr/).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.074.B Increasing the usability of PEDIA approach by
integrating open-source GestaltMatcher and CADA into
variant prioritization pipeline
Jing-Mei Li1, Meghna Bhasin1, Alexej Knaus1, Peter Krawitz1, Tzung-
Chien Hsieh1
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University
Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives: The Prioritization of Exome Data by
Image Analysis (PEDIA) supports ﬁnding the correct diagnosis in
patients with rare disorders by including phenotype information
into the variant interpretation. However, the current facial analysis
approach, DeepGestalt, is not an open-source software and
requires data transfer to Face2Gene. This increases the difﬁculty in
integrating PEDIA into the clinics because some patients do not
consent to the data transfer to another site. Moreover, the feature-
based approaches in PEDIA required updates since advanced
algorithms were published in the meantime. Therefore, we pro-
pose a version of PEDIA that works with open-source tools only
facilitating on-premise usage.
Methods: 679 individuals with 105 monogenic disorders were
recruited for benchmarking. We ﬁrst replaced DeepGestalt with
GestaltMatcher for facial image analysis and used CADA and
LIRICAL instead of Phenomizer, BOQA, and FeatureMatch for fea-
ture analysis. For the exome data, the highest CADD score was
used for each gene. We then trained the support vector machine
on GestaltMatcher, CADA, LIRICAL, and CADD scores. In the end,
the top-10 accuracy was reported.
Results: The new PEDIA approach achieved comparable top-10
accuracy (97%) compared to the previous version. We further
deployed the new PEDIA approach together with VarFish to
demonstrate how to integrate PEDIA into the existing pipeline in
the clinic without transferring data to other sites.
Conclusion: By replacing the non-open-source components,
the new PEDIA approach becomes easier to be implemented into
the variants prioritization pipeline in the clinic without losing
performance.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jing-Mei Li: None declared, Meghna
Bhasin: None declared, Alexej Knaus: None declared, Peter Krawitz
modest; FDNA, Tzung-Chien Hsieh: None declared.
P18.075.C OpenCB: an Open Source BigData clinical genetics
platform that scales for large health and research system
organizations
Will Spooner1, Pablo Marin2, Jacobo Coll2, Pedro Furio2, Philip
Hamid1, Junfe Sanahuja2, Joaquin Tarrega2, Laura Lopez1, Marta
Bleda1, Jose Miguel Juanes2, Rodiel Martinez2, Ignacio Medina1;3
1Zetta Genomics Ltd, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 2Zetta Genomics
Ltd, Valencia, Spain;
3University of Cambridge, Computational
Biology Lab, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Current large-scale clinical genomics
studies consisting of thousands of whole-genome sequences
require a platform with the ability to analyze billions of variants
over Terabytes of data. This platform should take into account
performance, scalability, ﬂexibility, robustness, accuracy and
security under a SAS model based on BIG data. Here we present
the latest version of OpenCB, an Open Source project that
implements a full-stack solution for genomic data management,
analysis and visualization for both population genomics and
clinical interpretation of rare diseases and cancer.
Methods: OpenCB is based on three main projects: (1) Cell-
Base, a MongoDB database used for querying genomic annota-
tions, (2) OpenCGA, a variant and clinical data store based on
MongoDB and HBASE with Solr indexing and (3) IVA, a web-based
analysis client of OpenCGA.
Deployment is based on Docker and Kubernetes under CI/CD.
Results: OpenCB is an open-source suite of interoperable
software components that enable genomic data management and
analysis
at
an
unprecedented
scale.
Functionality
includes
population-scale and clinical interpretation analysis for rare dis-
eases and cancer under a strict data access authorization model,
and data visualization modules.
Conclusion: OpenCB provides a scalable and ﬂexible solution
for biomedical researchers, clinical scientists, and geneticists. Both
genomic and clinical data is stored in one single platform and
allow real-time query and analysis. OpenCB is a successful clinical
Open Source project that works well from small research genomic
centres to big genomic and pharmaceutical companies, and
national health and research systems.
Public repository: https://github.com/opencb.
Conﬂict of Interest: Will Spooner Zetta Genomics, Zetta
Genomics, Pablo Marin Zetta Genomics, Jacobo Coll Zetta Geno-
mics, Zetta Genomics, Pedro Furio Zetta Genomics, Philip Hamid
Zetta Genomics, Junfe Sanahuja Zetta Genomics, Joaquin Tarrega
Zetta Genomics, Laura Lopez Zetta Genomics, Marta Bleda Zetta
Genomics, Jose Miguel Juanes Zetta Genomics, Rodiel Martinez
Zetta Genomics, Ignacio Medina Zetta Genomics, University of
Cambridge, Zetta Genomics.
P18.076.A Identiﬁcation of a non-canonical transcription
factor binding site using deep learning
Sebastian Proft1;2, Janna Leiz3;4, Robert Opitz5, Minie Jung1, Udo
Heinemann6, Dominik Seelow1;2, Kai Schmidt-Ott3;4, Maria Rutkiewicz6;7
1Berlin
Institute
of
Health, Exploratory
Data
Sciences,
Berlin,
Germany; 2Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member
of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany; 3Charité
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität
Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of Nephrol-
ogy and Intensive Care Medicine, Berlin, Germany; 4Max-Delbrück-
Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC),
Molecular and Translational Kidney Research, Berlin, Germany;
5Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
620
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institute of
Experimental Pediatric Endocrinology, Berlin, Germany; 6Max Del-
brück Center for Molecular Medicine, Macromolecular Structure and
Interaction, Berlin, Germany; 7Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the
Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Most approaches for the detection of
transcription factor binding sites are based on position-weight
matrices (PWM). These require that one or more common
sequence motifs be present in the DNA. Here we show that
artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) do not only improve prediction,
but also allow the identiﬁcation of motifs that were hitherto
unknown.
Methods: We trained a convolutional-recurrent neural network
on SELEX data for GRHL1 binding. The classiﬁer was then applied
to 7,857 sequences containing GRHL1 binding sites obtained from
ChIP-Seq experiments (length > 197 bp).
Results: The neural network identiﬁed 46 potential binding
sites for which the PWM-based approach did not suggest any
binding at all. Using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), we
could validate binding between a non-canonical DNA sequence
motif predicted by our network and the GRHL1 protein. We could
conﬁrm correlation between predicted binding scores and real
binding afﬁnity by introducing variants into the binding sites and
measuring binding strength by ITC.
Conclusion: Our results show that neural networks do not only
outperform PWMs but can also be used to discover unknown TF
binding motifs. We will apply our approach to a wider array of
transcription factors to identify novel binding sites with a special
focus on known disease mutations in promoter regions.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P18.077.A Leveraging functional annotations in genetic
discovery for human complex diseases
Xuexia Wang1, Samantha Gonzales1, long tran1, Timothy Haynes1
1University of North Texas, Mathematics, Denton, United States.
Background/Objectives: Although GWAS have identiﬁed many
genetic variants underlying complex disease, a large fraction of
heritability remains unexplained. To investigate this missing her-
itability, gene-based association tests using GWAS summary data
have been proposed, and many disease-associated genes have
been identiﬁed. However, accuracy in genetic risk prediction
remains moderate for most diseases, largely due to challenges in
identifying real functionally relevant variants and accurately esti-
mating their effect sizes in the presence of linkage disequilibrium
(LD). To identify genes with functionally relevant variants, we
propose an optimally weighted score test (OWST).
Methods: OWST uses GWAS summary statistics and models
various functional annotations, while allowing for LD estimated
from reference genotype data. OWST leverages diverse types of
genomic and epigenomic annotations in genetic association study
for complex disease. Six traditional tests, including the burden
test, the weighted sum of squared score test (SSU), and the
weighted sum statistic (WSS) are its special cases.
Results: Simulation results demonstrate that OWST is not only
valid but also outperforms comparison methods. We further apply
OWST and comparison methods to two schizophrenia (SCZ) data-
sets from the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC) (SCZ1 [13,833
cases and 18,310 controls], SCZ2 [36,989 cases and 113,075 con-
trols]) and a UK Biobank Type 2 diabetes dataset [19,119 cases and
423,698 controls]. Results from the three datasets suggest that
OWST
identiﬁed
more
meaningful
genes
than
comparable
methods. Existing literature suggests that these ﬁndings are biolo-
gically relevant to the etiology of the corresponding diseases.
Conclusion:
OWST
is
a
powerful
and
effective
genetic
association test.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19 PERSONALIZED MEDICINE AND PHARMACOGENOMICS
P19.001.D Polygenic risk prediction, how far can it go?
Léo Henches1, Jihye Kim2, Clara Albiñana3, Florian Privé3, Bjarni
Vilhjalmsson3, Hugues Aschard1;2
1Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Department of Computational
Biology, Paris, France; 2Harvard School of Public Health, Department
of Epidemiology, Boston, France; 3National Centre for Register-Based
Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
Background/Objectives: Polygenic risk scores (PRS) based on
thousands of genetic variants have become a central tool for
genetic prediction in multifactorial diseases, and the prospect of
using these PRS in clinical care has received increasing attention.
The accuracy of PRS will likely continue to increase with increasing
sample size of genome-wide association (GWAS) and the devel-
opment of new powerful methods. However, questions remain on
how much prediction can be achieved in the future and how
performances depend on the many parameters involved. Here, we
used real data and theoretical models to provide a global per-
spective on PRS performances.
Methods: We used GWASs from multiple common diseases
and published since 2010 to derived PRSs using a harmonized
pipeline. The PRSs were then applied to independent datasets to
assess performances as a function of sample size, genetic effect
size distribution, genomic coverage, and heterogeneity in disease
deﬁnition and population ancestry. We then use state-of-the-art
methodologies to investigate future improvement and expected
maximum prediction conditional on multiple parameters.
Results: Among outcomes displaying a clear increase with
sample size, some showed a convergence toward the expected
maximum, while others suggest important future gain with
increasing sample size. For several outcomes, diagnosis hetero-
geneity (age at onset, self-reported vs doctor diagnosed, etc)
induces substantial variability in prediction accuracy. Future
improvements appear to be highly dependent on the inclusion of
denser variants data with smaller frequencies.
Conclusion: Our harmonized and thorough analyses provide a
unique perspective on the potential utility of current and future PRS.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.002.A Pharmacogenetic association of diabetes
associated genetic risk score with rapid progression of
coronary artery calciﬁcation following treatment with HMG-
CoA-reductase inhibitors — results of the Heinz Nixdorf Recall
Study
Dominik Jung1, Sonali Pechlivanis1;2, Susanne Moebus3;4, Nils
Lehmann3, Amir A. Mahabdi5, Per Hoffmann6;7, Raimund Erbel3,
Markus M Nöthen7;8, Hagen Sjard Bachmann1
1Witten/Herdecke University, Centre for Biomedical Education and
Research,
Institute
of
Pharmacology
and
Toxicology,
Witten,
Germany; 2Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research Center
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
621
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
for Environmental Health, Institute of Epidemiology, Neuherberg,
Germany; 3University Hospital Essen, Institute for Medical Informatics,
Biometry and Epidemiology, Essen, Germany; 4University Hospital
Essen, Centre for Urban Epidemiology, Essen, Germany; 5University
Hospital Essen, West German Heart and Vascular Center, Department
of Cardiology and Vascular Medicine, Essen, Germany; 6University of
Basel, Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Biomedicine,
Basel, Switzerland; 7University of Bonn, Department of Genomics, Life
& Brain GmbH, Bonn, Germany; 8University of Bonn, Institute of
Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives: HMG-CoA-reductase inhibitors (HMGRIs)
are currently the most widely used group of drugs in patients with
coronary artery disease and are given pre-emptively to patients
with high levels of cholesterol, including those with diabetes
mellitus (DM). However, HMGRIs also increase the progression of
coronary artery calciﬁcation (CAC) and the risk of developing DM.
This study aimed to investigate whether HMGRI-intake interacts
with the diabetes-associated genetic risk score (GRS) to affect CAC
progression using data from the population-based Heinz Nixdorf
Recall (HNR) study.
Methods: CAC was measured in 3157 participants using
electron-beam computed tomography twice, at baseline (CACb)
and ﬁve years later (CAC5y). CAC progression was classiﬁed as
slow, expected or rapid based on predicted values. Weighted
DM GRS was constructed using 100 diabetes-mellitus associated
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We used log-linear
regression to evaluate the interaction of HMGRI-intake with
diabetes-associated GRS and individual SNPs on CAC progres-
sion (rapid vs. expected/slow), adjusting for age, sex and log(-
CACb+1).
Results: The prevalence of rapid CAC progression in the HNR
study was 19.6%. We did not observe any association of the
weighted diabetes-mellitus GRS with the rapid progression of CAC
(relative risk [95% conﬁdence interval]: 1.01[0.94;1.10]). Further-
more, no indication of an interaction between GRS and HMGRI-
intake was observed (1.08[0.83;1.41]).
Conclusion: Our analyses showed no indication that the
impact of HMGRIs on CAC progression is signiﬁcantly more severe
in patients with a high genetic risk of developing DM than in those
with a low GRS.
References:.
Grants: This study was supported by the German Heart
Foundation/German Foundation of Heart Research.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.003.B Nagencol project: personalised medicine in familial
hypercholesterolemia
Maria Apellaniz-Ruiz1, Monica Arasanz Armengol1, Luna Delgado de
Mora2, Anne Sagardia Fernandez1, Alberto Maillo3, Maria Miranda
Perez1, Iranzu González Borja1, Steven Laurie4, Oscar Teijido Hermida1,
Edurne Urrutia Lafuente1, Gonzalo Etayo Nagore5, Sergi Beltran4,
David Gomez Cabrero3;6, Juan Jose Beloqui Lizaso7, Angel Alonso
Sanchez1;8, Juan Pablo Martinez de Esteban9, Ander Ernaga Lorea9
1Navarrabiomed - IdiSNA - HUN, Genomics Medicine Unit, Pamplona,
Spain;
2INGEMM - Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain;
3Navarrabiomed - idiSNA, Translational Bioinformatics Unit, Pam-
plona, Spain; 4Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Bioinformatics
Unit, Barcelona, Spain;
5NASERTIC - Navarra De Servicios Y
Tecnologías S A - Servicios Generales, Data processing center &
distributed systems area, Pamplona, Spain; 6King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology, Biological and Environmental Science
and Engineering Division, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia; 7Hospital Universi-
tario De Navarra (HUN), Pharmacy Department, Pamplona, Spain;
8Hospital Universitario De Navarra (HUN), Genetics Department,
Pamplona,
Spain;
9Hospital
Universitario
De
Navarra
(HUN),
Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Pamplona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is
one of the most common inherited disorders worldwide. Char-
acterised by elevated LDL cholesterol levels since birth, FH confers
an increased risk of premature cardiovascular disease (CVD).
Therefore, an early diagnosis and adequate treatment is essential.
Mutations in LDLR, APOB and PCSK9 are known to cause auto-
somal dominant FH, but variants in other genes and polygenic
inheritance have also been described. The objective of this study
is to personalise the management of FH to prevent CVD, by using
genomic and clinical data.
Methods: 507 individuals with LDL>190 mg/dl and <65 years
old were recruited, and genome sequencing was performed. We
analysed genetic variants in 43 genes linked to FH and dyslipi-
demia, LDL polygenic risk scores (PRS), and pharmacogenetic
markers of statins, among others.
Results: A preliminary analysis of 300 genomes revealed: 35%
of cases carried pathogenic variants in LDLR, APOB, APOE or
ABCG8 (monogenic cause), 24% had high LDL-PRS (polygenic
cause) and 6% presented with both monogenic FH and elevated
LDL-PRS. Some individuals had VUS in typical genes or pathogenic
variants in novel genes, requiring further characterisation. Phar-
macogenomic ﬁndings showed 27% of individuals carried variants
in LpA and 32% in SLCO1B1.
Conclusion: A genetic cause of severe hypercholesterolemia
was detected in 65% of cases, as well as variants associated with
statin treatment. These data are helping us tailor patient care. The
role of non-coding and structural variants, novel FH genes and
cardiovascular risk alleles will be evaluated.
References:.
Grants: Navarra Government R&D project call 2019-2021
(0011-1411-2019-000049),
“laCaixa”
fellowship
(LCF/BQ/PI21/
11830009) and H2020-MSCA-COFUND-2018 (No847648).
Conﬂict of Interest: Maria Apellaniz-Ruiz MAR received the
support of a fellowship from ”la Caixa” Foundation (ID 100010434)
and from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and inno-
vation programme under the Marie Skłodowska Curie grant
agreement No 847648. The fellowship code is LCF/BQ/PI21/
11830009., Monica Arasanz Armengol: None declared, Luna Del-
gado de Mora: None declared, Anne Sagardia Fernandez: None
declared, Alberto Maillo: None declared, Maria Miranda Perez:
None declared, Iranzu González Borja: None declared, Steven
Laurie: None declared, Oscar Teijido Hermida: None declared,
Edurne Urrutia Lafuente: None declared, Gonzalo Etayo Nagore:
None declared, Sergi Beltran: None declared, David Gomez Cab-
rero: None declared, Juan Jose Beloqui Lizaso: None declared,
Angel Alonso Sanchez: None declared, Juan Pablo Martinez de
Esteban Modest contributions from AstraZeneca, Lilly, MSD and
Mylan., Ander Ernaga Lorea: None declared.
P19.004.C UGT1A1 mutations may related to furosemide
resistance in heart failure patients
Gizem KOPRULULU KUCUK1;2, a.ilter guney3, murat sunbul4, tugba
guctekin4, deniz kirac1
1Yeditepe University, Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey; 2T. C. Istanbul
Sisli Vocational School, Radiotherapy, Istanbul, Turkey; 3Marmara
University, Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey; 4Marmara University
Research And Education Hospital, Cardiology, Istanbul, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Heart failure (HF) can be deﬁned as the
heart’s inability to pump the amount of blood needed by tissues
or to pump some blood only under high ﬁlling pressure. Fur-
osemide is used for the treatment of HF however in some patients
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
622
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
furosemide resistance may occur. UGT1A1 enzyme play role in
furosemide metabolism therefore in this study it was aimed to
investigate the effects of UGT1A1 mutations to furosemide resis-
tance in HF patients.
Methods: Thirty healthy individuals and 50 HF patients who
used furosemide during their treatment were enrolled into the
study as control and patients groups, respectively. Patient group
was also divided into 2 subgroups as responders (n = 25) and non-
responders (n = 25) according to the presence of furosemide
resistance. After DNA was isolated from peripheral blood, UGT1A1
mutations were investigated by direct sequencing. For under-
standing the effects of the mutations to three dimentional protein
structure, homology modelling and docking studies were applied.
Results: Totally ten mutations were detected at which eight of
them are novel and nine of them cause amino acid change. Three
mutations were found deleterious and ﬁve mutations were
detected as probably damaging of protein functions. The binding
angles of furosemide with wild type and mutant types were
determined. Changes of binding sites and bond structures were
detected in ﬁve of the mutant types.
Conclusion: UGT1A1 mutations may cause furosemide resis-
tance. Therefore it may possible to prevent the harmful effects of
furosemide resistance by using personalized diagnosis and treat-
ment strategies.
References: -.
Grants: -.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.005.D Polygenic risk score comparator (PRScomp): tested
population vs. worldwide populations
Joan Fibla1, Leandre Palau2, Jose Nunes3, Oscar Lao4, Ricard López5,
Marina Laplana6
1Universitat de Lleida - IRBLleida, Complex Genetic Diseases, Lleida,
Spain; 2Grup Globalia, Lleida, Spain; 2Grup Globalia, Lleida, Spain;
4Institut de Biologia Evolutiva -UPF-CSIC, Population Genetics,
Barcelona, Spain; 5Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, Unitat
de Citogenètica i Genètica Mèdica, Lleida, Spain; 6Universitat de
Lleida, Ciència Animal, Lleida, Spain.
Background/Objectives: We developed a Polygenic risk score
comparator (PRScomp), which allows users to evaluate polygenic
risk score of a tested population and compare it with worldwide
populations.
Methods: A disease/trait database is constructed from GWAS
catalog(1) summary statistics data of genetic risk of disease and
traits. Genotype data of the tested population is uploaded to the
platform and merged with genotype data of reference data set, in
order to obtain a merged ﬁle including common disease asso-
ciated SNPs of both datasets. Reference data set comprise geno-
type data of a total of 138198 disease/trait associated SNPs of
3269 individuals from 1000 Genome Project (1Kg)(2) and Human
Genome Diversity Project (HGDP)(3), belonging to 8 worldwide
superpopulations and 75 subpopulations.
User can select a desired disease/trait from database, to be
assessed on tested population. A curated set of risk markers is
obtained and used to calculate summatory polygenic risk score
(PRS) by plink software(4). Values obtained are normalized along
all populations by z-score.
Results: Distribution of z-scored PRS values of user and
1Kg-HGDP populations are plotted by boxplot, bobble plot
on the worldwide map (mean values) and barplot (percentile
distribution).
Conclusion: PRScomp offers the opportunity to evaluate
population associated risk to disease and traits that could be of
great interest in planning and monitoring public health strategies.
References: (1) Buniello A, et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 J8;47
(D1):D1005-D1012.
(2) 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, Nature. 2015 Oct
1;526(7571):68-74.
(3) Bergström A, et al. Science. 2020 Mar 20;367.
(4) Purcell S, et al. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Sep;81(3):559-75.
Grants: Grant Diputació de Lleida.
Conﬂict of Interest: Joan Fibla: None declared, Leandre Palau
Employee at Grupo Globalia, Jose Nunes Employee at Grupo
Globalia, Oscar Lao: None declared, Ricard López: None declared,
Marina Laplana: None declared.
P19.006.A Predictive polygenic score for outcome from ﬁrst-
line oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy in colorectal cancer
patients using supervised principal component analysis
Hanla Park1;2, Dominic Edelmann3, Federico Canzian4, Tabitha
Harrison5, Xinwei Hua6;7, Qian Shi8, Allison Silverman9, Martin
Schneider10, Richard Goldberg11, Steven Alberts12, Michael Hoffme-
ister13, Hermann Brenner13;14;15, Andrew Chan16;17;18, Ulrike Peters5;19,
Polly Newcomb5;19, Jenny Chang-Claude1;20
1German
Cancer
Research
Center
(DKFZ),
Division
of
Cancer
Epidemiology, Heidelberg, Germany; 2University of Heidelberg, Medical
Faculty, Heidelberg, Germany;
3German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Division of Biostatistics, Heidelebrg, Germany; 4German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Genomic Epidemiology Group, Heidelberg,
Germany; 5Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Public Health
Sciences Division, Seattle, United States;
6Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Department of Gastroenterol-
ogy, Boston, United States; 7Massachusetts General Hospital, Clinical
and Translational Epidemiology Unit, Boston, United States; 8Mayo
Clinic, Department of Quantitative Science, Rochester, United States;
9Fred Hutchinson Research Cancer, Epidemiology Program, Seattle,
United States; 10University of Heidelberg, Department of General,
Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, Heidelberg, Germany; 11West
Virginia University Cancer Institute, Morgantown, United States;
12Mayo Clinic, Medical Oncology, Rochester, United States; 13German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Division of Clinical Epidemiology and
Aging Research, Heidelberg, United States; 14National Center for Tumor
Diseases (NCT) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Division of
Preventive Oncology, Heidelberg, Germany; 15German Cancer Con-
sortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany; 16Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Channing Division of
Network Medicine, Department of Medicine, Boston, United States;
17Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Department of
Epidemiology, Boston, United States; 18Massachusetts General Hospi-
tal, Department of Medicine, Boston, United States; 19University of
Washington, School of Public Health, Seattle, United States; 20Uni-
versity Cancer Center Hamburg, University Medical Center Hamburg-
Eppendorf, Cancer Epidemiology Group, Hamburg, United States.
Background/Objectives: Associations between candidate germ-
line genetic variants and treatment outcome of oxaliplatin, a drug
commonly used for colorectal cancer patients, have been reported
but not robustly established. This study aimed to construct a
polygenic hazard score (PHS) as a predictive marker for oxaliplatin
treatment outcome by using a supervised principal component
approach.
Methods: Genome-wide association analysis of interaction
terms (SNP*type of treatment) was conducted using two phase III
trials, 3,098 resected stage III colon cancer patients of NCCTG
N0147, and 506 metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients of
NCCTG N9741, separately. SNPs showing interaction with genome-
wide signiﬁcance (P < 5 × 10-8) were selected for principal com-
ponent analyses to derive a PHS. We performed replication in an
independent, population-based cohort, DACHS.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
623
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: The PHSs based on the ﬁrst two principal components
of signiﬁcant NPs (15 SNPs in resected stage III colon cancer and
13 SNPs in mCRC) in the discovery cohorts showed signiﬁcant
interaction with treatment type in models adjusted for clinical
covariables. However, clinical models including PHS interaction
terms were not replicated in DACHS. The prediction error of the
3-year survival remained unchanged when comparing clinical
models to clinical models including interaction terms as 0.04 in
resected stage III colon patients and 0.18 in mCRC patients.
Conclusion: Integration of the PHS with clinical factors did not
provide a statistically signiﬁcant improvement in the prediction of
patient beneﬁt from the oxaliplatin-containing regime. Our
negative results highlight the challenges in providing evidence for
a potential polygenic score for oxaliplatin efﬁcacy.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Hanla Park: None declared, Dominic Edel-
mann: None declared, Federico Canzian: None declared, Tabitha
Harrison: None declared, Xinwei Hua: None declared, Qian Shi Cel-
gene/BMS, Roche/Genentech, Janssen, Novartis., Chugai Pharma-
ceutical Co., Ltd, Johnson & Johnson, Amgen, and Merck & CO.,
Yiviva Inc, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Hoosier Cancer Research Network., Allison
Silverman: None declared, Martin Schneider: None declared, Richard
Goldberg: None declared, Steven Alberts: None declared, Michael
Hoffmeister: None declared, Hermann Brenner: None declared,
Andrew Chan: None declared, Ulrike Peters: None declared, Polly
Newcomb: None declared, Jenny Chang-Claude: None declared.
P19.007.B Whole genome germline genetic testing: a pilot of
its role as an additional tool to general health screening in
General Practice, the ﬁrst in the UK
Ann-Britt Jones1;2, Michael Sandberg3, Gabriella Pichert4, Lucy Side4,
Tessa Homfray4, Sophie Hicks4, Matthew Dixon5, Vincenzo Cirigliano5,
Bibiana Palao5, Luis Izquierdo5, Elizabeth Bancroft2, rosalind eeles1;2;4
1Institute of Cancer Research, Oncogenetics, London, United King-
dom;
2Royal Marsden Hospital, Oncogenetics, London, United
Kingdom;
390 Sloane Street General Practice, London, United
Kingdom;
490 Sloane Street General Practice, London, United
Kingdom; 5Veritas Intercontinental, Madrid, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) is
now possible due to improvements in next generation sequencing
technology. This allows opportunity to incorporate genetic data
into primary care health screening. This study aimed to set up a
model pathway to undertake WGS for actionable ﬁndings and
assess its role in enhancing health screening.
Methods: We have undertaken WGS in 100 individuals as part
of a medical screen. To date, 20 have been analysed. Individuals
were recruited from a private general practice. We reviewed past
medical and family history from electronic health records (EHR).
Germline genetic testing consisted of 84 cancer and 77 cardiac
genes and WGS, including higher penetrance monogenic muta-
tions, recessive carrier alterations and pharmacogenomics. A
multidisciplinary clinical team reviewed integrated results through
an iterative process.
Results: Twenty-ﬁve percent (5 out of 20) individuals had an
actionable genetic variant in either cancer or thromboembolic
genes. No cardiovascular risk associated variants were found.
Eighty percent of the participants had an autosomal recessive
carrier variant. Pharmacogenomics results yielded signiﬁcant var-
iants in seven individuals (DYPD; CYP2C19). Forty percent of
patients had a signiﬁcant change in management.
Conclusion: WGS in this pilot study altered risk-reducing
measures in 25% of individuals and altered the screening
programme in 40% of individuals. We identiﬁed clinically sig-
niﬁcant actionable variants in unaffected participants and showed
integrating genetic screening into primary care is clinically
valuable.
References:.
Grants: The Oppenheimer Foundation; anonymous donors to
Prof Eeles’ Research Fund, 90 Sloane Street Ltd, The Biomedical
Research Centres at The Institute of Cancer Research and Royal
Marsden NHS Foundation Trust.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.008.C Selection of biomarkers for determining the degree
of aggression of bladder tumors - strategy and a ﬂexible
workﬂow
Olga Antonova1, Zora Hammoudeh2, Boris Mladenov3, Zornitsa
Yordanova4
1Medical University of Soﬁa, Department of Medical Genetics, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria; 2Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 3UMBALSM “N.
I. Pirogov”, Department of Urology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 4University of
National and World Economy, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: Bladder cancer is a heterogeneous
group with several subgroups with different clinicopathological
features:
Low‑grade
non‑inﬁltrating
progressive
and
non-
progressive cancers, High‑grade muscle‑invasive cancer with
relatively good prognosis and those with poor prognosis.
This required improving the current knowledge that underlies
this variation in tumour behavior. The aim of our study was to
select potential bladder cancer biomarkers and to test the meth-
odology for biomarkers development.
Methods: A total of 87 bladder cancer samples staged pTa to
pT4 and 4 negative controls were collected. Pool gene expression
analysis of 168 genes involved in pathways for Cancer drug
resistance and metabolism (PAHS-004) as well as for Cancer drug
targets (PAHS-507), Qiagene was performed on 40 samples staged
pTa, pT1 and pT2. Conformational analyses were performed on 12
individual samples (4 per stage). The subsequent analyzes selected
genes for tumor invasion. Further validation on the selected genes
was performed in a cohort of additional 40 bladder cancer sam-
ples from all tumor stages pTa to pT4.
Results: The four genes: AP1S1, FIGF, HDAC11 and CDK9
were selected for gene-expression analysis based on differences
in the expression levels between invasive and non-invasive
bladder carcinoma. The results revealed 4-12 fold change dif-
ference in the expression level between pT2 and pTa/pT1 non-
invasive tumors for FIGF, HDAC11 and CDK9 genes. AP1S1 failed
to show signiﬁcant difference in expression levels between
tumor stages.
Conclusion: FIGF, CDK9 and HDAC11 can be considered as
potential biomarkers for the characterization of invasive tumor
phenotype.
References: No.
Grants: BG NSF No KP-06-OPR01/3-2018.
Conﬂict of Interest: Olga Antonova BG NSF No KP-06-OPR01/
3-2018, Zora Hammoudeh BG NSF No KP-06-OPR01/3-2018, Boris
Mladenov BG NSF No KP-06-OPR01/3-2018, Zornitsa Yordanova
BG NSF No KP-06-OPR01/3-2018.
P19.009.D Utilising drug switches as a proxy for angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitor-induced cough discovers novel
genetic signals
Kayesha Coley1, David Shepherd1, Catherine John1, Richard Packer1,
Robert Free2;3, Edward Hollox4, Louise Wain1;2, Martin D Tobin1;2,
Chiara Batini1
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
624
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1University of Leicester, Department of Health Sciences, Leicester,
United Kingdom; 2University of Leicester, NIHR Leicester Biomedical
Research Centre, Leicester, United Kingdom; 3University of Leicester,
Department of Respiratory Sciences, Leicester, United Kingdom;
4University of Leicester, Department of Genetics and Genome Biology,
Leicester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Switching drugs from one class to
another is often indicated in response to adverse reactions.
Approximately 15% of patients taking angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) experience persistent dry cough,
resulting in switches from ACEIs to angiotensin-II receptor
blockers (ARBs). Drawing on previously validated electronic
health record-based phenotypes, we used such drug switches
as
a
proxy
to
study
genetic
determinants
of
ACEI-
induced cough.
Methods: Using EXCEED Study and UK Biobank primary care
data, cases switched from ACEIs to ARBs within 12 months of
initiating ACEIs, and controls were continuous users of ACEIs. In a
two-stage meta-analysis, stage 1 included all cohort and ancestry-
speciﬁc genome-wide association analyses. Variants reaching
suggestive signiﬁcance (p-value <5 × 10−6) were meta-analysed
with publicly-available summary statistics of ACEI-induced cough
in stage 2.
Results: A total of 39,871 individuals (5,435 cases; 34,436
controls) from 4 ancestral groups (African, Asian, Chinese and
European) were included in the stage 1 meta-analysis of ~17M
variants. In stage 2, we identiﬁed nine genome-wide signiﬁcant (p-
value <5 × 10−8) risk loci for which positional and gene expression
analyses implicated 35 protein-coding genes, one of which
(KCNIP4) has been previously associated with ACEI-induced cough.
Novel genes included KCNA2, supporting the importance of
potassium ion channels in cough reﬂex modulation, and NTSR1,
highlighting the role of neuropeptides in neurogenic inﬂamma-
tion and cough hypersensitivity.
Conclusion: In this muti-ancestry meta-analysis we have identi-
ﬁed associated genes for which functional follow-up has given insight
to the currently unclear mechanism of ACEI-induced cough, and will
help identify candidates for predictive pharmacogenetic biomarkers.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Kayesha Coley: None declared, David
Shepherd: None declared, Catherine John: None declared, Richard
Packer: None declared, Robert Free: None declared, Edward Hollox:
None declared, Louise Wain Research grants from GlaxoSmithKline
(as principal investigator) and Orion Pharma (as co-principal inves-
tigator), Consultancy/advisory board for Galapagos, Martin D Tobin
Research collaborations with Orion Pharma and GlaxoSmithKline
unrelated to the current work., Chiara Batini: None declared.
P19.010.A Results of a two-year program of whole genome
sequencing at a medical check-up unit
Luis Izquierdo1, Oscar Beloqui2, Ana Patiño3, Bibiana Palao1, Maria
Moreno1, Miriam Leon1, Mafalda Almeida1, Vincenzo Cirigliano1,
Paula Penedo1, Miguel Sogbe2
1Veritas Intercontinental, Madrid, Spain;
2Clinica Universitaria de
Navarra, Internal Medicine, Pamplona, Spain; 3Clinica Universitaria
de Navarra, Genomic Medicine, Pamplona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) of
individuals without a medical indication is known as elective WGS.
Elective genome is feasible to identify both primary (related to the
patients or family history) and secondary (clinically relevant still
not yet evident) ﬁndings.
We hypothesize that the unbiased selection of these indivi-
duals in an experienced medical check-up unit would add value to
standard check-up ﬁndings.
Methods: 361 patients attended to the Medical Check Up Unit of
the Clínica Universidad de Navarra and underwent a “genomic check-
up” consisting in a complete medical interview, biochemistry, low-
intensity whole body scan and selected genome analysis, curated
with a proprietary platform (myGenome, Veritas Intercontinental).
Results: seventy-one clinically relevant genetic variants were
identiﬁed in 64 of 361 patients (17.7%), including 7 patients with 2
variants. The detected variants were related to hemochromatosis
(8.3%), hereditary cancer predisposition (6.9%), hereditary cardio-
vascular disease (2.2%), and other diseases (2.2%). Clinical
phenotype-genotype associations were made based on the
available clinical data. In addition, 66.2% patients were carriers of
one or more recessive conditions, 88.6% presented risk alleles for
multifactorial diseases and relevant pharmacogenomics associa-
tions were detected in all patients.
Conclusion: the inclusion of elective genomic sequencing in a
structured medical consultation optimizes the identiﬁcation of
primary and secondary genetic ﬁndings and enables a better
correlation of the genetic ﬁndings with the real clinical scenario of
patients and their follow up.
References: Senol-Cosar O, et al. Genet Med 21:2765-2773
(2019); Hou YC, et al. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 117(6):3053-3062 (2020).
Grants: None signiﬁcant to the purpose of this research.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.011.B Homozygous CYP2C9*14 allele resulting in
profound warfarin sensitivity
Mark Cleghorn1, Lesley McGregor2, Anna Le Fevre1, Rowenne
Smith3, Gemma Crighton3, Jacob Mathew3, Mohamad Kaddour3,
Sebastian Lunke1;4;5, Zornitza Stark1;4;5
1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, Australia; 2Women’s
and Children’s Hospital, Paediatric and Reproductive Genetics Unit,
North Adelaide, Australia; 3The Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne,
Parkville, Australia; 4Australian Genomics, Parkville, Australia; 5Uni-
versity of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
Background/Objectives: Rapid genomic testing facilitates early
genetic diagnosis, while the data generated also provides
opportunity for additional analyses in future, as clinical features
evolve. We describe a neonate who initially presented with cleft
lip/palate and congenital heart disease and underwent exome
sequencing (ES) in 2018 without a diagnosis being made. Re-
analysis of the ES data was performed after the clinical pre-
sentation evolved to severe dilated cardiomyopathy. Clinical
management was complicated by profound sensitivity to warfarin
and signiﬁcant bleeding.
Methods: Clinical rapid trio ES was performed in 2018 on DNA
extracted from peripheral blood using Agilent Sureselect QXT CREv1
kit, following by sequencing on Illumina NextSeq500. Re-analysis
using updated clinical information and updated phenotype-driven
virtual gene panels was performed in 2021.
Results: A homozygous pathogenic variant in PPP1R13L
(c.1068dupC; p.(Ser357Leufs*49)) was identiﬁed as causing the
primary clinical features (dilated cardiomyopathy and cleft lip/
palate), this gene-disease association having been described in
2020 in ﬁve unrelated families. In addition, homozygosity for the
well-established
CYP2C9*14
(p.Arg125His)
warfarin
sensitivity
allele was identiﬁed, explaining the extreme warfarin hypersensi-
tivity. Alternate anticoagulation with intravenous bivalirudin and
low molecular weight heparin successfully preventing throm-
boembolic complications.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
625
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: Heterozygosity for the CYP2C9*14 allele has been
described in individuals with increased sensitivity to the antic-
oagulant effects of warfarin. This is the ﬁrst case report of an
individual homozygous for the CYP2C9*14 allele with profound
warfarin sensitivity. In addition to expanding the phenotypic
spectrum associated with the CYP2C9*14 allele, this case report
highlights the value of genomic data as a healthcare resource.
References:.
Grants: Australian Government GHFM76747.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.012.C Genetic and environmental determinants of drug
adherence
Mattia Cordioli1, Andrea Corbetta1, Sakari Jukarainen1, Tuomo
Kiiskinen1, Samuli Ripatti1;2;3, Andrea Ganna1;4;5
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland; 2Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, United States; 3Department
of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; 4Analytic
and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, United States; 5Program in Medical and Population Genetics,
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, United States.
Background/Objectives: One of the major factors behind the
efﬁcacy of pharmacological treatments is patients adherence to
the prescribed therapy regimen. While demographic and socio-
economic factors play a role in determining adherence, there have
been few investigations on the potential effects of genetic varia-
tion on drug adherence. By using genetic data from the FinnGen
study (N = 356,077), data from Finnish nation-wide health regis-
tries and the drug purchase registry (68,826,654 total purchases),
we provide a systematic investigation of adherence determinants
across multiple medications.
Methods: We looked at adherence (ratio between the total pur-
chased quantity and total days of purchasing) and early dis-
continuation (stopping after one purchase) for six different class of
medications: statins, blood pressure (BP) medications, breast cancer
medications, antiplatelets, anticoagulants and glaucoma medications.
For each, we run a GWAS of adherence and early stopping vs
good adherence. We estimated genetic correlation (rg) between
these and 29 publicly available traits.
Results: Adherence to BP medications or statins positively asso-
ciated with psychological or behavioural traits such as educational
attainment, participation to follow-up questionnaires, subjective
well-being and with predisposition to type2 diabetes, higher BMI,
higher systolic BP. Negative associations were observed between
adherence and risk tolerance, loneliness and schizophrenia. Similar
association patterns were observed for early discontinuation of BP
medications.
Conclusion: Overall, results suggest adherence is related to
behavioural aspects and perception of underlying risk factors or disease
severity rather than to biologic determinants, allowing for a better
identiﬁcation of patients at high risk of non-adherence in drug taking.
References: -.
Grants: -.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.013.D Polygenic scores for cardiovascular disease - how
could they be implemented?
Tanya Brigden1, Saskia Sanderson2, Joanna Janus1, Chantal Babb
de Villiers1, Sowmiya Moorthie1, Mark Kroese1, Alison Hall1
1PHG Foundation, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom; 2Our Future Health, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: With the increased interest in the possi-
ble use of polygenic score analysis for clinical care, we explored the
implications arising from the possible implementation and delivery
of polygenic score analysis for cardiovascular disease in practice,
speciﬁcally in the context of the NHS Health Check programme.
Underpinning our analysis is the assumption that a robust polygenic
score model has been developed, suitable for implementation.
Methods: We adopted a mixed methods research approach,
including a literature review of peer-reviewed publications and
grey literature and semi-structured interviews with domain spe-
ciﬁc experts.
Results: Our analysis suggests that polygenic score analysis
could be incorporated into NHS Health Checks with only modest
changes relating to the interface between healthcare profes-
sionals and patients. However, such implementation will be con-
tingent on a robust testing infrastructure being in place.
Looking further forward, incorporating polygenic scores may
generate opportunities for developing personalised risk assess-
ments targeted at individuals or sub-groups.
Conclusion: More evidence is needed on the impact of poly-
genic score analysis on healthcare provider behaviour, particularly
the impact of a high polygenic score on the likelihood of a health
professional offering a prescription or recommending lifestyle
change. If health systems choose to adopt personalised risk
assessment incorporating polygenic score analysis, a key priority
will be to address any inequalities and inequities that might arise.
References: T Brigden, S Sanderson, J Janus, C Babb de Villiers,
S Moorthie, M Kroese, A Hall, Implementing polygenic scores for
cardiovascular disease into NHS Health Checks, PHGF 2021.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.014.A High throughput genetic characterization of Italian
patients affected by multi-drug resistant rheumatoid and
psoriatic arthritis
Paola Tesolin1, Francesca Bertinetto2;3, Arianna Sonaglia4, Maria
Pina Concas5, Anna Morgan5, Giuseppe Giovanni Nardone5, Alen
Zabotti4, Paolo Gasparini1;5, Antonio Amoroso2;3, Luca Quartuccio4,
Giorgia Girotto1;5
1University of Trieste, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health
Sciences, Trieste, Italy; 2University of Turin, Department of Medical
Sciences, Turin, Italy;
3Immunogenetics Service AOU “Città della
Salute e della Scienza di Torino”, Turin, Italy; 4University of Udine,
Clinic of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine (DAME), ASUFC,
Udine, Italy; 5Institute for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS, Burlo
Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Rheumatoid and Psoriatic arthritis (RA
and PsA) are multifactorial autoimmune diseases for which very few
susceptibility genes have been described so far. We genetically
characterised a highly selected cohort of non-responder patients.
Methods: The accurate clinical examination of eleven patients
affected by refractory RA/PsA was followed by several high-
throughput genetic testing:
1. Targeted resequencing focused on HLA genes.
2. WES to detect rare and pathogenic variants. T-test was
employed to compare variants burden of RA/PsA group with
a WGS control cohort.
3. SNP-arrays to identify CNV.
Results: As regards 1) the 11 patients carry at least one
HLA allele that might predispose to those diseases (i.e. HLA-
DRB1*04; *DRB1*10:01 and DRB1*01). Two subjects also carry
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
626
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
a
particular
ancestral
haplotype
(i.e.
HLA-A*33:01;B*14:02;C
*08:02;DRB1*01:02;DQB1*05:01). For analysis 2), 27 rare variants
(MAF<0.01) within 22 candidate RA/PsA genes have been detec-
ted and checked in the WGS control cohort. For example, two
patients carry different pathogenic variants (i.e. heterozygous
missense and homozygous truncating) within UGT2B17, a gene
involved in hormones and drug metabolisms. Other two carry
pathogenic heterozygous missense variants within SERPING1 and
VPS13D, having a role in complement-cascade and IL6-signaling,
respectively. Further, we identiﬁed four heterozygous missense
variants within HACE1, IRF2BP2 and DVL1, which might modulate
TNFα signalling. In analysis 3) we identiﬁed CNVs within genes
involved in crucial mechanisms of RA/PsA (e.g. MSR1).
Conclusion: This multistep approach allowed the discovery of
novel RA/PsA candidate genes and the deﬁnition of genotype-
phenotype correlations. Thus, we highlighted new molecular tar-
gets to help clinicians deﬁne the best therapeutic approach.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.015.B Transferability of genetic loci and polygenic scores
for cardiometabolic traits in British Pakistanis and
Bangladeshis from a real-world healthcare cohort
Qinqin Huang1, Neneh Sallah2, Diana Dunca2, Bhavi Trivedi3, Karen
Hunt3, Sam Hodgson4, Samuel Lambert5, Elena Arciero1, John
Wright6, Chris Grifﬁths3, Richard Trembath7, Harry Hemingway2,
Michael Inouye5, Sarah Finer3, David van Heel3, Thomas Lumbers2,
Hilary Martin1, Karoline Kuchenbäcker2
1Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 2University
College London, London, United Kingdom; 3Queen Mary University of
London, London, United Kingdom;
4University of Southampton,
Southampton, United Kingdom; 5University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom; 6Bradford Institute for Health Research, Bradford,
United Kingdom; 7King’s College London, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Individuals with South Asian ancestry
have a higher risk of heart disease than other groups in Western
countries. However, most genetic research has focused on
European-ancestry individuals and it is largely unknown whether
the ﬁndings are applicable to other groups.
Methods: Using data from 22,000 British Pakistanis and Ban-
gladeshis with linked electronic health records from the Genes &
Health cohort (G&H), we conducted genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) of coronary artery disease (CAD) and its key risk
factors, body mass index (BMI), lipid biomarkers and blood pres-
sure. We estimated power-adjusted transferability (PAT) ratios, a
new technique to assess the extent to which loci are transferable.
We tested how well polygenic scores (PGS) developed in Eur-
opean ancestry studies performed in G&H.
Results: We observed high transferability for cardiometabolic
loci from European GWAS that were sufﬁciently powered to
replicate in G&H: the PAT ratios were all ≥1 for the risk factor traits,
but only 0.62 for CAD (binomial p = 0.05). The relative accuracy of
PGS compared to European ancestry was ≥0.95 for HDL-C, trigly-
cerides, and blood pressure, but lower for BMI (0.78) and CAD
(0.42). We observed additional predictive power of PGS beyond
clinical risk factors (QRISK3) for CAD, with a signiﬁcant net
reclassiﬁcation index (NRI) =3.9% (95% CI 0.9 – 7.0).
Conclusion: Transferability of GWAS loci and PGS was high for
lipid and blood pressure traits but lower for BMI and CAD. Our ana-
lyses indicate clinical validity for adding PGS to existing clinical risk
prediction tools in primary prevention settings for this population.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Qinqin Huang: None declared, Neneh Sallah
NS is now employed by GlaxoSmithKline., Diana Dunca: None declared,
Bhavi Trivedi: None declared, Karen Hunt: None declared, Sam Hodg-
son: None declared, Samuel Lambert: None declared, Elena Arciero:
None declared, John Wright: None declared, Chris Grifﬁths: None
declared, Richard Trembath: None declared, Harry Hemingway: None
declared, Michael Inouye: None declared, Sarah Finer: None declared,
David van Heel: None declared, Thomas Lumbers: None declared,
Hilary Martin: None declared, Karoline Kuchenbäcker: None declared.
P19.016.C “Actionable” host genetic markers for repurposing
“add-on therapy” in COVID-19
Chiara Fallerini1;2, Francesca Fava1;2;3, Margherita Baldassarri2;3,
Sabino Scolletta4, Federico Franchi4, Seraﬁna Valente5, Bruno
Frediani6, Elena Bargagli7, Andrea Antinori8, Simone Lanini9, Andrea
Isidori10, Mario Umberto Mondelli11;12, STEFANIA MANTOVANI11,
Massimo Vaghi13, Gülsah Gabriel14;15;16, Francesca Mari2;3;17, Gen-
Covid Multicenter Study17, Alessandra Renieri2;3;17
1University of Siena, Department of Medical Biotechnologies, Siena,
Italy; 2Med Biotech Hub and Competence Center, Department of
Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, 53100, Italy,
Department of Medical Biotechnologies, Siena, Italy; 3Genetica Medica,
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Senese, Siena, 53100, Italy, Siena,
Italy; 4Department of Emergency and Urgency, Medicine, Surgery and
Neurosciences, Unit of Intensive Care Medicine, University of Siena,
Siena, 53100, Italy, Siena, Italy;
5Department of Cardiovascular
Diseases, University of Siena, Siena, 53100, Italy, Siena, Italy;
6Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neuros-
ciences, University of Siena, Policlinico Le Scotte, Siena, 53100, Italy,
Siena, Italy; 7Unit of Respiratory Diseases and Lung Transplantation,
Department of Internal and Specialist Medicine, University of Siena,
Siena, 53100, Italy, Siena, Italy;
8HIV/AIDS Department, National
Institute for Infectious Diseases, IRCCS, Lazzaro Spallanzani, 00149,
Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy; 9National Institute for the Infectious Diseases
“L. Spallanzani”, IRCCS, 00149, Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy; 10Department
of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 00185, Rome,
Italy, Rome, Italy;
11Division of Clinical Immunology - Infectious
Diseases, Department of Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San
Matteo, 27100, Pavia, Italy, Pavia, Italy; 12Department of Internal
Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Pavia, 27100, Pavia, Italy,
Pavia, Italy;
13Chirurgia Vascolare, Ospedale Maggiore di Crema,
26013, Crema, Italy, Crema, Italy; 14Department for Viral Zoonoses-One
Health, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany,
Hamburg, Germany; 15Institute for Virology, University for Veterinary
Medicine Hannover, Hannover, Germany, Hannover, Germany; 16Ger-
man Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Braunschweig, Germany;
17Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, 53100, Italy, Siena, Italy.
Background/Objectives:
COVID-19
still
represents
a
life-
threatening disease in individuals with a speciﬁc genetic back-
ground. We successfully applied a new Machine Learning method
on WES data to extract a set of coding variants relevant for COVID-
19 severity. We aim to identify personalized add-on therapy.
Methods: A subset of identiﬁed variants, "actionable" by
repurposed drugs, were functionally tested by in vitro and in vivo
experiments.
Results: Males with either rare loss of function variants in the
TLR7 gene or L412F polymorphism in the TLR3 gene beneﬁt from
IFN-γ, which is speciﬁcally defective in activated PBMCs, restoring
innate immunity. Females heterozygous for rare variants in the
ADAMTS13 gene and males with D603N homozygous poly-
morphism in the SELP gene beneﬁt from Caplacizumab, which
reduces vWF aggregation and thrombus formation. Males with
either the low-frequency gain of function variant T201M in
CYP19A1 gene or with poly-Q repeats ≥23 in the AR gene beneﬁt
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
627
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
from Letrozole, an aromatase inhibitor, which restores normal
testosterone levels, reducing inﬂammation and which rescues
male golden hamsters from severe COVID-19.
Conclusion: By adding these commonly used drugs to stan-
dard of care of selected patients, the rate of intubation is expected
to decrease consistently, especially in patients with high pene-
trance rare genetic markers, mitigating the effect of the pandemic
with a signiﬁcant impact on the healthcare system.
References: Fallerini C et al. Common, low-frequency, rare, and
ultra-rare coding variants contribute to COVID-19 severity. Hum
Genet. 141(1):147-173 (2022).
Grants: FISR 2020 / Tuscany Region COVID-19 / INTERVENE - GA
No. 101016775 / Soka Gakkai PAT-COVID.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.017.D Input of PRS313 for breast cancer risk stratiﬁcation
in patients with atypical breast lesion
Manon Réda1;2, Aurélie Bertaut3, Juliette Sauge4, Laura Guyard4,
Sandy Chevrier5, Romain Boidot5, Emilie Courcet6, Laurent Arnould4,
Juliette Albuisson2;7
1Centre G.F Leclerc, Oncologie médicale, Dijon, France; 2Centre G.F
Leclerc, Plateforme de Transfert en Biologie Cancérologique, Dijon,
France; 3Centre G.F Leclerc, Unité de Méthodologie et de biostatis-
tiques, Dijon, France; 4Centre G.F Leclerc, Département de Biologie et
de Pathologie des tumeurs, Dijon, France; 5Centre G.F Leclerc, Unité de
Biologie moléculaire, Dijon, France; 6Cypath Dijon, Dijon, France;
7Centre G.f Leclerc, Laboratoire de biologie moléculaire, Dijon, France.
Background/Objectives: The genetic architecture of breast cancer
(BC) susceptibility implies Mendelian inheritance related to “high-risk”
genes like BRCA1/2, and polygenic inheritance estimated through
GWAS. Polygenic risk scores (PRS) derived from GWAS help assessing
such polygenic inheritance. PRS contribution to BC risk estimation
was demonstrated in several Caucasian female populations, including
women
with
high/moderate
risk
due
to
BRCA
and
CHEK2
mutations1-3. Atypical breast Lesions (AL) confer moderate to high risk
of BC to carriers, but no routine prognostic markers are deﬁned.
In this single-center study, we retrospectively evaluated the per-
formancesofPRS313toreﬁneBCriskwithinacohortofpatientswithAL.
Methods: PRS313 was determined in non-tumor breast samples in
150 cases and 150 controls, deﬁned respectively by history of AL and
BC within 5 years, and history of AL without BC. Fluidigm© Micro-
ﬂuidic genotyping was performed. We assessed (1) the reproducibility
of genotyping on FFPE compared to frozen tissues (2) the perfor-
mances of PRS to detect high-risk women within this population,
through sensitivity, speciﬁcity and area under the curve (AUC), and (3)
evaluated odds-ratios between ﬁrst and last decile of patients.
Results: Performance’s parameters are currently under eva-
luation; results in our population will be discussed compared to
patients with BC risk factors from literature.
Conclusion: PRS313 is a promising tool to better reﬁne BC risk
in speciﬁc female populations with moderate to high risk and may
help clinical decisions.
References: 1- Mavaddat &al, Am J Hum Genet 2019.
2- Lakeman &al, Genet Med 2021.
3- Muranen &al, Genet Med 2017.
Grants: AOR-BFC-Plateforme-2020. AOI-Biocollection-2020.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.018.A A simple tool to enhance polygenic risk prediction
in coronary heart disease and type 2 diabetes
Max Tamlander1, Nina Mars1, Matti Pirinen1;2;3, FinnGen Project4,
Elisabeth Widén1, Samuli Ripatti1;2;5
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, FIMM, HiLIFE, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; 2Clinicum, Department of Public Health,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; 3Department of Mathematics
and Statistics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland;
4FinnGen
Project, Helsinki, Finland;
5Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, United States.
Background/Objectives:
Large-scale
biobank
initiatives
and
commercial repositories store genomic data collected from mil-
lions of individuals, and tools to augment easily derived polygenic
risk scores with simple questionnaire-based clinical risk factors are
needed for disease prevention.
Methods: Here, we describe the derivation and validation of
simple genomics-enhanced risk tools for two common cardio-
metabolic diseases, coronary heart disease (CHD) and type 2
diabetes (T2D). Data used for our analyses include the FinnGen
(N = 309,154) and the UK Biobank (N = 343,672) studies. The risk
tools integrate contemporary genome-wide polygenic risk scores
with simple questionnaire-based risk factors, including demo-
graphic, lifestyle, medication, and comorbidity data, enabling risk
calculation across resources where genome data is available.
Results: Compared to routinely used clinical risk scores for
prediction of incident CHD and T2D (PCE/QRISK3 for CHD and
QDiabetes/FINDRISC for T2D), the new risk tools show at least
equivalent risk discrimination, improved risk reclassiﬁcation (net
reclassiﬁcation improvements ranging from 3.7 to 6.2), and
effective 10-year risk stratiﬁcation. The predictive performance
was best in women, younger (age < 55), and non-obese (BMI < 30)
individuals, groups in which clinical risk scores often show limited
utility. The performance can be further improved with routine lipid
and blood pressure measurements.
Conclusion: Without the need for blood tests or evaluation by
a health professional, the risk tools provide a powerful yet simple
method for preliminary cardiometabolic risk assessment for indi-
viduals with genome data available.
References:.
Grants: Academy of Finland (312062; 285380; 312076; 288509;
331671); Tekes Finland (2273/31/2017);EU Horizon 2020 (10101
6775);Sigrid Jusélius Foundation;Univ. Helsinki HiLIFE Fellow grant.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.020.C Automated identiﬁcation of a cancer patient
treatment: from sequencing to treatment prioritisation
Nicolas Soirat1;2;3, Denis Bertrand1, Sacha Beaumeunier1, Nicolas
Philippe1, Dominique Vaur3, Sophie krieger2;3, Anne-Laure Bougé1,
Laurent Castera3
1SeqOne, Montpellier, France;
2Caen-Normandy University, Caen,
France; 3Centre Franois Baclesse, Inserm U1245, Caen, France.
Background/Objectives: The emergence of sequencing allowed
the scientiﬁc community to gather a tremendous amount of
cancer genomic data, characterising biomarkers responsible for
tumorigenesis that might indicate potential treatments. The use of
short-read sequencing to identify cancer patient treatment is
becoming a more common practice in hospitals. To standardise
the treatment identiﬁcation some prediction frameworks have
been developed, but they mostly focus on a single alteration type
and very few have been implemented.
Methods: We design a targeted DNA and RNA panel covering
639 cancer genes and 57 fusion genes to obtain a comprehensive
patient genomic landscape. We developed a decisional algorithm
which prioritises all known variant-therapy associations. Several rules
give a score for each association based on more than 20 variant
features indicating the variant impact in cancer, the patient indication
and similarity of patient variant with variant in therapeutic databases.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
628
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: We generated a thousand simulated tumours, each
containing passenger mutations and a targetable mutation from
the Civic database. Our method correctly classiﬁes the targetable
mutation in its top predictions (average rank 2.19). Furthermore, on
a cohort of 12 patients, we obtain similar results as 2 clinical routine
approaches using our fully automated protocol. Currently, we are
expanding our validation to a pan-cancer cohort of 500 patients.
Conclusion: We design a complete framework for multiple
variant drug association identiﬁcation in order to make easier
therapeutic choices for a clinician. We succeed to integrate it into
our variant calling workﬂow and show good performance of our
method to prioritise targetable variants.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.021.D Quantifying the causal impact of modiﬁable risk
factors and biomarkers on total healthcare burden via
Mendelian randomization
Jiwoo Lee1, Sakari Jukarainen2, Pradeep Natarajan1, Andrea Ganna2
1Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, United States;
2Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland.
Background/Objectives: Public health aims to reduce the burden
of modiﬁable risk factors to improve population health and
decrease healthcare burden. Previous studies have attempted to
quantify the total healthcare burden (e.g. total healthcare expen-
diture) associated with certain modiﬁable risk factors such as body
mass index (BMI), systolic blood pressure (SBP), or cholesterol.
However, such studies are based on observational data or single
disease clinical trials. Thus, they are likely to suffer from confound-
ing or ignore the impact of modiﬁable risk factors on broader
healthcare burden, which is mediated by multiple diseases.
Methods: Here, we address these limitations by using genetic
instruments to assess the causal impact of modiﬁable risk factors on
healthcare burden and expenditure. We leveraged primary care,
hospital visit, and medication costs for 236,101 FinnGen participants
to quantify the total healthcare burden of each participant since
2011. We performed Mendelian randomization using genetic
instruments for 15 modiﬁable risk factors and biomarkers.
Results: We found that a SD increase in SBP, body mass index
BMI, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) was causally
associated with an increase in observed healthcare costs of 27.6%
[95%
CI:
20.5%–35.2%],
17.1%
[11.7%–22.8%],
and
5.2%
[2.2%–8.2%], respectively, while high-density lipoprotein choles-
terol (HDL-C) was associated with a decrease in observed
healthcare costs by 5.2% [1.8%–8.5%].
Conclusion: Taken together, we quantiﬁed the causal impact of
modiﬁable risk factors and biomarkers on total healthcare burden.
References: None.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.022.A Genome-wide association studies of advanced
cancer patients identiﬁed loci associated with opioid-induced
nausea-vomiting
Francesca Minnai1, Morena Shkodra2;3, Sara Noci4, Cinzia Brunelli2,
Alessandra Pigni2, Frank Skorpen5;6, Pål Klepstad5;7, Stein Kaasa3;7,
Oscar Corli8, Maria Caterina Pallotti9, Marco Cesare Maltoni9,
Augusto Caraceni2;10, Francesca Colombo1
1Institute for Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council,
Segrate, Italy; 2Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Palliative
care, Pain therapy and Rehabilitation Unit, Milan, Italy; 3University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway; 4Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori,
Genetic Epidemiology and Pharmacogenomics Unit, Milan, Italy;
5Norwegian University of Science and Technology, European Palliative
Care Research Center, Trondheim, Norway; 6Norwegian University of
Science and Technology, Department of Clinical and Molecular
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Trondheim,
Norway; 7Oslo University Hospital, Department of Oncology, Oslo,
Norway; 8IRCCS Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milan,
Italy;, Pain and Palliative Care Research Unit, Milan, Italy; 9IRCCS
Istituto Romagnolo per lo Studio dei Tumori “Dino Amadori” - IRST,
Meldola (FC), Italy; 10Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of
Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Advanced cancer patients usually receive
opioids to treat cancer pain; unfortunately, 10-20% do not beneﬁt
from treatment and even higher percentages experience side
effects such as nausea and vomiting. Previous studies suggested a
possible role of genetics in determining individual variability in the
response to opioids. The aim of this genome-wide association study
is to identify new genetic markers of opioid toxicity.
Methods: The study included 1,038 European cancer patients
receiving morphine, oxycodone, buprenorphine or fentanyl. The
patients were included in one cross-sectional and two longitudinal
studies. Nausea and vomiting was measured by the European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Core Quality
of Life Questionnaire (EORTC-QLQ-C30). A composite nausea-
vomiting score (NVS), ranging from 0 to 100, was calculated.
Patients were genotyped using Axiom PMRA arrays. Genome-wide
linear regressions between NVS and the genotypes of 432,087
variants were performed using PLINK software.
Results: NVS signiﬁcantly associated (P < 5.0x10-8) with the
genotype of 12 variants (six, ﬁve, and one on chromosome 2, 6
and 15, respectively). The top-signiﬁcant variants at each locus
were rs6723108 (beta = 7.26, P = 7.47x10-11), rs2596503 (beta =
10.0, P = 2.96 x10-11), and rs1129138 (beta = -5.81, P = 1.65 x10-9),
respectively. The gene nearest to rs6723108 is TMEM163, encoding
a transmembrane protein transporting zinc ions, whereas variants
on chromosomes 6 mapped in the HLA locus.
Conclusion: These results indicate that opioid induced nausea
and vomiting are regulated by germline variants. However, further
studies are needed to validate these results and to identify the
molecular mechanisms underlying the observed associations.
References: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-57358-y.
Grants: AIRC MFAG 2019 - ID. 22950 project.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.024.C Typing CYP2D6 star alleles from fully phased
variants using PacBio HiFi reads
John Harting1, Zev Kronenberg2, Nina Gonzaludo3, Jenny Ekholm4,
Geoff Henno5, Edd Lee6
1Paciﬁc Biosciences (PacBio), Computational Research, Menlo Park,
United States; 2Paciﬁc Biosciences (PacBio), Bioinformatic Engineer-
ing, Menlo Park, United States; 3Paciﬁc Biosciences (PacBio), Market
Development,
Menlo
Park,
United
States;
4Paciﬁc
Biosciences
(PacBio), Segment Marketing, Menlo Park, United States; 5Paciﬁc
Biosciences (PacBio), Precision Health Segment Marketing, Menlo
Park, United States; 6Paciﬁc Biosciences (PacBio), Human Genomics
Segment Marketing, Menlo Park, United States.
Background/Objectives: The CYP2D6 locus is well known for its
importance to pharmacogenetics as well as for its high diversity and
complex genomic setting. Resolving individual alleles at this locus
using short-read sequencing technologies requires inference-based
methods due to ambiguous mapping in the presence of highly
homologous pseudogenes. In contrast, long-range sequencing with
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
629
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
PacBio HiFi reads directly resolves and phases a wide range of com-
plicated and difﬁcult genetic loci without inference. We present a
novel bioinformatics workﬂow using PacBio HiFi reads which enables
rapid and precise diplotyping and star(*)-allele classiﬁcation of CYP2D6.
Methods: In this work we designed a set of primers to amplify
full CYP2D6 genes and ﬂanking sequence. A multi-primer approach
was used to separately amplify primary CYP2D6 genes, duplicate
genes, hybrid genes, and fully deleted *5 alleles. We applied this
targeted strategy to 22 samples from Coriell and sequenced the
amplicons on a PacBio Sequel II System. To generate resolved
CYP2D6 *-allele diplotypes we describe a two-step process: 1)
Cluster and consensus of PacBio HiFi reads, 2) Direct comparison of
phased variant sets from consensus sequences to star-alleles
described in PharmVar. Additional information regarding fusion
alleles is also provided to further identify hybrid categories.
Results: Direct CYP2D6 *-allele typing generated by this
workﬂow resulted in concordant results compared to orthogonal
technologies. Differences between previous technologies’ results
and PacBio HiFi sequencing were due to higher resolution and
improved calls via our method, including better CNV calls, *5
deletion calling, and high resolution subtyping for all alleles.
Conclusion:.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: John Harting Paciﬁc Biosciences, Stock/
options, Zev Kronenberg Paciﬁc Biosciences, stock/options, Nina
Gonzaludo Paciﬁc Biosciences, stock/options, Jenny Ekholm Paciﬁc
Biosciences, stock/options, Geoff Henno Paciﬁc Biosciences, stock/
options, Edd Lee Paciﬁc Biosciences, stock/options.
P19.025.D Clinicians’ perceptions towards precision medicine
tools for cardiovascular disease risk stratiﬁcation in South Africa
Michelle Kamp1;2, Oliver Pain3;4, Cathryn Lewis3;4, Michele Ramsay1;2
1Sydney Brenner Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa; 2Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory
Service and School of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, The
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa; 3Social
Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, United
Kingdom;
4NIHR Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre, South
London and Maudsley NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk stratiﬁ-
cation in African populations could improve with the inclusion of
genetic risk to develop a clinically relevant precision medicine (PM)
approach. African genetic data are scarce and current stratiﬁcation
approaches remain unvalidated. Successful PM implementation
requires medical fraternity support. This study assessed clinicians’
knowledge,perceptions,andconﬁdencetowardsimplementingaPM
toolforCVDriskstratiﬁcationintheSouthAfricanpublichealthsetting.
Methods: Electronic self-administered questionnaire was pro-
vided to clinicians in public hospitals in Johannesburg. Knowledge,
perception, and conﬁdence towards PM-based CVD risk stratiﬁcation
and perceived barriers were evaluated. Bivariate analysis assessed the
effect of clinical speciality, practice level, research involvement,
postgraduate study, clinical experience, exposure to genetics training
and traditional CVD risk stratiﬁcation on mean scores.
Results: Of the 94 respondents, 23.4% currently use clinical
genetic testing, and 14.1% have formal genetics education and
training. 79.5% had a low mean knowledge score, with higher
scores associated with genetic training (p < 0.005) and research
involvement (p < 0.05). 56.3% felt conﬁdent in applying the PM-
based CVD risk stratiﬁcation, with signiﬁcantly higher scores
amongst those involved in research (p < 0.005) or already
undertaking CVD risk stratiﬁcation (p < 0.005). Despite limited
knowledge, 83.3% of respondents perceive PM approaches posi-
tively, with screening approaches tailored to African populations
being the most valued beneﬁt. Cost and limited access to genetic
services were considered the greatest barriers to implementation.
Conclusion: Addressing the gap in genetic training is neces-
sary to increase conﬁdence in utilising and effectively imple-
menting PM in South Africa.
References:.
Grants: National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI)
grant U54HG006938.
Conﬂict of Interest: Michelle Kamp: None declared, Oliver
Pain: None declared, Cathryn Lewis Advisory board member,
Myriad Neuroscience, Michele Ramsay: None declared.
P19.026.A Modelling the patient journey of osteoarthritis in
the context of obesity, using longitudinal health care data and
genetics
Rikke Linnemann Nielsen1, Thomas Monfeuga1, Zahra McVey1, Luis
G. Leal1, Line E. Lund1, August Thomas Hjortshøj Schreyer2, Carol
Sun1, Marianne Helenius2, Robert Kitchen1, Ramneek Gupta1
1Novo Nordisk Research Centre Oxford, Computational Biology,
Oxford, United Kingdom; 2Technical University of Denmark, Kgs.
Lyngby, Denmark.
Background/Objectives: Osteoarthritis (OA) is a chronic degen-
erative joint disease, causing decreased quality of life and a high
economic health-care burden. The utility of known OA risk factors
for predicting OA progression is insufﬁciently understood [1,2]. We
developed predictive risk models of OA progression, across patient
subgroups, to improve understanding of the heterogenous OA
aetiology and contribute to early diagnosis and treatment.
Methods: UK biobank data was explored using machine
learning (ML) models to predict onset and progression of OA
(N~100,000). The ML models integrated longitudinal information
across primary and secondary health care data, as well as basic
anthropometrics, lifestyle and nutrition, socioeconomic status, and
genetic data. Several approaches were explored for incorporating
genetic features. These included focusing on known common risk
variants either associated with OA [3] or located within function-
ally relevant OA genes, and genetic risk scores.
Results: A subgroup of people with obesity had increased risk
of OA compared to a normal weight population (OR: 2.95). In this
subgroup, XGBoost predicted people with a risk of rapid pro-
gression to OA following obesity (1-6yrs) with ROC-AUC:0.66 with
age, walking pace, BMI and health rating as the most predictive
features. People with slower progression to OA following obesity
(6-10yrs) were predicted with similar performance (ROC-AUC:0.65).
Genetic risk scores of selected OA-associated genes were impor-
tant for prediction of slow progression.
Conclusion: Predictive models of OA progression identify
people who would most beneﬁt from early intervention and
enable the discovery of drug target candidates.
References: [1] PMID:26904959.
[2] PMID:30523334.
[3] PMID:34450027.
Grants: Danish Diabetes Academy NNF17SA0031406 and the
Innovation Fund Denmark.
Conﬂict of Interest: Rikke Linnemann Nielsen Novo Nordisk,
full-time employment, Thomas Monfeuga Novo Nordisk, full-time
employment, Zahra McVey Novo Nordisk, full-time employment,
Luis G. Leal Novo Nordisk, full-time employment, Line E. Lund
Novo Nordisk, full-time employment, August Thomas Hjortshøj
Schreyer: None declared, Carol Sun Novo Nordisk, full-time
employment, Marianne Helenius: None declared, Robert Kitchen
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
630
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Novo Nordisk, full-time employment, Ramneek Gupta Novo Nor-
disk, full-time employment.
P19.027.B Pharmacogenetic analysis of a protein-protein
interaction network in cyclosporine pathway in Greek patients
with psoriasis under cyclosporine treatment
Charalabos Antonatos1, Eleana Staurou F.1;2, Evangelos Evange-
lou3;4, Andreas Liaropoulos1, Danai Digka1, Efterpi Zaﬁriou5, Angeliki
Roussaki-Schulze5, Aikaterini Patsatsi6, Dimitris Sotiriadis6, Soﬁa
Georgiou7, Nicholas Moschonas2;8, Ioannis Vasilopoulos1
1University Of Patras, Biology, Panepistimioupoli Patron, Greece;
2University Of Patras, Medicine, Panepistimioupoli Patron, Greece;
3University of Ioannina, Hygiene and Epidemiology, Ioannina, Greece;
4Imperial College London, Epidemiology & Biostatistics, London,
United Kingdom; 5University of Thessaly, Dermatology, Volos, Greece;
6Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Dermatology, Thessaloniki,
Greece;
7University
Of
Patras,
Dermatology,
Panepistimioupoli
Patron, Greece; 8Foundation of Research & Technology, Institute of
Chemical Engineering Science, Panepistimioupoli Patron, Greece.
Background/Objectives: Psoriasis is a chronic, inﬂammatory skin
disease that affects 2-3% of the population worldwide. Although
cyclosporine is a well-established systemic therapy for moderate
to severe psoriasis, patients show important heterogeneity (~70%)
in their response to treatment. The aim of our study was the
pharmacogenetic analysis of Greek patients with psoriasis based
on the construction of the cyclosporine-pathway Protein-Protein
Interaction (PPI) network.
Methods: The cyclosporine related protein interactome was
constructed through the PICKLE meta-database (www.pickle.gr).
Based on this, we selected 30 single nucleotide polymorphisms
mapped on 22 of the key molecular nodes in the cyclosporine
signaling cascade, ﬁltered through their functional signiﬁcance and/
or MAF≥5%. Forward, reverse and the appropriate iPLEX extension
PCR primers were designed using the ADS software. SNP geno-
typing of the 200 patients included in our study was performed
through the iPLEX®GOLD panel of the MassARRAY®System (Agena
Biosciences). In addition to single-SNP analysis carried out in Stata
13.1, haplotypes were constructed with the Hapstat 3.0 software.
Results: Preliminary single-SNP analyses showed statistically
signiﬁcant associations between PPP3R1 rs1868402 (P = 0.02) and
MALT1
rs2874116
(P = 0.03)
polymorphisms
with
positive
response to cyclosporine therapy, but also a trend for association
for 9 more genetic biomarkers. Haplotype analysis further
enhanced the predictive value of rs1868402 as a pharmacogenetic
biomarker for cyclosporine therapy (P = 0.0197).
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings have the potential not only to improve
our prognosis of cyclosporine therapy in psoriasis patients but more
importantly to be applied as a methodological approach in the
pharmacogenetics of biological therapies in complex diseases.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.029.D Whole-exome sequencing re-analysis of families
with suspected Gastric Cancer tumour risk syndromes
strengthens the role of PALB2 in diffuse gastric cancer and
lobular breast cancer predisposition
J. Garcia-Pelaez*1;2;3, Iris te Paske4, Anna Sommer5, Steven Laurie6,
german demidov7, Rita Matos1;2, Celina São José1;2;3, Marta Ferreira1;2,
francisco almeida1;2, Leslie Matalonga6, Luzia Garrido8, Sérgio Castedo8,
david huntsman9, Verena Steinke-Lange10;11;12, Andreas Laner10, Elke
Holinski-Feder10;11;12, Stefan Aretz5;12;13, Richarda De Voer4;12, marc
tischkowitz14, Nicoline Hoogerbrugge4;12, Carla Oliveira1;2;3;12
1i3S, Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Porto, Portugal;
2Ipatimup, Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; 3University of Porto, Faculty of
Medicine, Porto, Portugal; 4Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center,
Nijmegen, Netherlands; 5Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; 6The Barcelona Institute of Science
and Technology, CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Barcelona, Spain; 7Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics,
Tübingen, Germany; 8Centro Hospitalar Universitário São João (CHUSJ),
Porto, Portugal;
9University of British Columbia, Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Vancouver, Canada; 10MGZ -
Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany; 11Campus Innen-
stadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich, Germany; 12European
Reference Network on Genetic Tumour Risk Syndromes (ERN GENTURIS)
– Project ID No 739547, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 13University of Bonn,
Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, Bonn, Germany; 14University of
Cambridge, Medical Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives:
Hereditary
diffuse
gastric
cancer
(HDGC), is the major gastric cancer tumour risk syndrome (GC-TRS)
and is caused by loss-of-function germline variants in CDH1 or
CTNNA1, which predisposes for diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) and/or
lobular breast cancer (LBC). Overall, >50% of all clinically-
diagnosed HDGC remain unsolved. We hypothesise that other
tumour risk syndrome (TRS) genes explain unsolved GC-TRS cases.
Methods: We systematically searched the literature for indivi-
duals/families with cancer-history ﬁtting clinical criteria for GC-TRS
and bearing Pathogenic/Likely pathogenic variants (PVs) in TRS
genes. Within the SOLVE-RD project, we re-analysed germline WES
from 61 unsolved GC-TRS suspected families from the Netherlands,
the United Kingdom and Canada. A cohort of 23 unsolved Portu-
guese GC-TRS cases was used to validate actionable candidate
single nucleotide variants (SNVs) or copy number variants (CNVs).
Results: The literature search returned 28 PVs affecting 16 TRS-
genes in 27 GC-TRS families, with PALB2 pathogenic SNVs occur-
ring in 7/27 (26%) families dominated by DGC and LBC. SOLVE-RD
re-analysis identiﬁed 1/61 (1.6%) GC-TRS family bearing a PALB2
pathogenic CNV, and a further case with LBC (1/23;4.3%) was
identiﬁed in the validation cohort, bearing a PALB2-PV, and no
other candidate variants.
Conclusion: GC-TRS families may be explained by non-classical
genes, with PALB2 as the most frequently mutated gene found
here (2.4%) in families fulﬁlling HDGC criteria and unsolved by
CDH1 or CTNNA1. This study supports the role of PALB2 SNVs and
CNVs in the predisposition for DGC and/or LBC, and widening of
genetic testing for GC-TRS suspected-families.
References:.
Grants: EU H2020-779257 & PTDC/BTM-TEC/6706/2020.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.030.A Functional characterization of RUNX1 germline
variants enhances translation of genetic data into
personalized care
Melanie Decker1, Alena Wittstock1, Alisa Förster1, Anupriya Agarwal2,
Andreas Benneche3, Jane Churpek4, Nicolas Duployez5, Adam S.
DuVall6, Miriam Erlacher7, Martijn P. T. Ernst8, Andreas Flaum1, Alina
Fester9, Hildegunn Høberg Vetti3;10, Inga Hofmann11, Tim Lammens12,
Michelle Nash13, Charlotte Niemeyer7, Raaijmakers Marc8, Doris
Steinemann1, Tor H. A. Tvedt14, Adrianna Vlachos13, Ayami Yoshimi7,
Brigitte Schlegelberger1, Thomas Illig1;15, Tim Ripperger1
1Hannover Medical School, Department of Human Genetics, Hannover,
Germany; 2Oregon Health & Science University Knight Cancer Institute,
Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Portland, United States;
3Haukeland University Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
631
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Bergen, Norway; 4The University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of
Medicine, Section of Hematology, Oncology, and Palliative Care,
Madison, United States; 5University Lille, Department of Hematology,
CHU Lille, Lille, France; 6University of Chicago, Division of Medicine,
Section of Hematology/Oncology, Chicago, United States; 7University of
Freiburg, Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Department of
Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg, Germany; 8Erasmus MC
Cancer Institute, Department of Hematology, Rotterdam, Netherlands;
9Queen Fabiola Children’s University Hospital, Hematology-Oncology,
Brussels, Belgium;
10Afﬁliated Partner of the European Reference
Network on Genetic Tumour Risk Syndromes (ERN GENTURIS), Project
ID No 739547, coordinating ofﬁce, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 11University
of Wisconsin, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematol-
ogy/Oncology and BMT, Madison, United States; 12Ghent University
Hospital, Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Ghent, Belgium; 13Cohen Children’s Medical Center,
Northwell Health, Division of Hematology/Oncology and Cellular
Therapy, New York, United States; 14Haukeland University Hospital,
Department of Medicine, Bergen, Norway; 15Hannover Medical School,
Hannover Uniﬁed Biobank, Hannover, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Familial platelet disorder with predis-
position to hematologic malignancies (RUNX1-FPD) is caused by
heterozygous pathogenic RUNX1 germline variants. Following
current variant classiﬁcation guidelines, RUNX1 missense variants
must frequently be classiﬁed as variants of uncertain signiﬁcance
(VUS) allowing no clinical conclusions. To support variant classiﬁ-
cation, we have established, validated and clinically applied a set
of functional assays addressing various aspects of RUNX1.
Methods: We analyzed RUNX1’s heterodimerization with CBFB
using FRET, its phosphorylation by western blotting, and its ability
to activate transcription in transactivation assays in HEK293T and
HEL cells. Individual assay results were combined in a functional
score and integrated into variant classiﬁcation.
Results: To date, we investigated 11 (likely) pathogenic controls,
one benign control, and 19 RUNX1 variants of interest. We showed
that the majority of RUNX1 variants detected in RUNX1-FPD can be
evaluated by our functional assays and demonstrated that trans-
activation assays are suitable ﬁrst-line screening tools. Integrating
functional data led to reclassiﬁcation of ﬁve RUNX1 VUS to likely
pathogenic, two RUNX1 VUS to likely benign and supported the
(likely) pathogenic classiﬁcation of four additional variants.
Conclusion: Functional assays support RUNX1 variant classiﬁ-
cation and can be key to obtain a genetic diagnosis. These assays
facilitate translation of genetic data into personalized medical care
for patients and relatives at risk. Currently, we analyze additional
missense VUS (n = 16) and aim to establish functional high-
throughput assays as well as test tools for N-terminal RUNX1
variants to further enhance RUNX1 variant classiﬁcation.
References:.
Grants: EHA John Goldman Clinical Research Grant 2017; BMBF
MyPred (01GM1911B).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.031.B Costs and diagnostic yield of whole genome
sequencing in neurodevelopmental disorders
Maria Soller1;2, Hannes Runheim3, Ann Nordgren2, Maria Petters-
son1, Anna Hammarsjö1, Martin Henriksson3, Lars-Åke Levin3, Anna
Lindstrand1;2
1Karolinska University Hospital, Clinical Genetics, Stockholm, Sweden;
2Karolinska Institutet, MMK, Stockholm, Sweden; 3Linköping University,
Department of Health, Medicine and Caring Sciences, Linköping, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) has
the potential to be a comprehensive genetic test, especially relevant
for individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders, syndromes and
congenital malformations. However, the cost consequences of
using WGS as a ﬁrst-line genetic test for these individuals are not
well understood. The study objective was to compare the health-
care costs and diagnostic yield when WGS is performed as the ﬁrst-
line test instead of chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA).
Methods: Two cohorts were analyzed retrospectively using
register data, cohort CMA (418 patients referred for CMA at the
department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital,
during 2015) and cohort WGS (89 patients included in a WGS-ﬁrst
prospective study in 2017). The analysis compared healthcare
consumption over a two-year period after referral for genetic testing
and diagnostic yield over a two- and three-year period after referral.
Results: The mean healthcare cost per patient in cohort WGS
was $2,339 lower compared to cohort CMA ($-2,339, 95%CI,
-12,238-7,561; P = 0.64) including higher costs for genetic inves-
tigations ($1,065, 95%CI, 834-1,295; P < 0.001) and lower costs for
outpatient care ($-2,330, 95%CI, -3,992-(-669); P = 0.006). The
diagnostic yield was 23% higher for cohort WGS (cohort CMA
20.1%, cohort WGS 24.7%) (0.046, 95%CI, -0.053-0.145; P = 0.36).
Conclusion: WGS as a ﬁrst-line diagnostic test for individuals
with neurodevelopmental disorders is associated with statistically
non-signiﬁcant lower costs and higher diagnostic yield compared
with CMA. This indicates that prioritizing WGS over CMA in health
care decision making will yield positive expected outcomes as well
as showing a need for further research.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.032.C Polygenic risk scores for disease progression in
clinically related events
Julian Wanner1;2, Nina Mars2, Bradley Jermy2, FinnGen Consortium2,
Intervene Intervene2, Andrea Ganna2, Samuli Ripatti2, Henrike Heyne1;2;3
1Hasso Plattner Institute, Digital Health Center, Potsdam, Germany;
2Finnish Institute for Molecular Medicine (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland;
3Hasso Plattner Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York,
United States.
Background/Objectives: Predicting who is at elevated risk of
developing a severe disease remains an important task in many
clinical disciplines to optimize screening and prevention.
Methods: Here, we test the utility of polygenic risk scores
(PRSs) in a potentially actionable clinical setting where a patient
presents with an unspeciﬁed symptom using electronic health
records of 356,077 Finns. Examples for such scenarios are indivi-
duals with an unclear possible seizure at risk to develop epilepsy
or individuals with unclear stomach complaints (irritable bowel
syndrome) at risk to develop an autoimmune inﬂammatory bowel
disease (IBD).
Results: In 7,083 individuals with irritable bowel syndrome, we
found that individuals with the top 10% of IBD-PRS showed an
increased risk (HR 2.24, 95% CI 1.60-3.15) of developing IBD after 10
years compared to individuals with lower IBD-PRS. In young adults
(age < 40) the effect of IBD-PRS was larger: the top 10% of IBD-PRS
had a risk of developing IBD of ca. 14%. Individuals in the bottom
25% of IBD-PGS were consistently at low risk (<5%) to develop IBD.
Disease-speciﬁc PRS had a more modest beneﬁt in scenarios of high
genetic correlation between two endpoints such as predicting
myocardial infarction in individuals with angina pectoris or onset of
type 2 diabetes in women with gestational diabetes. Analyses are
replicated in a biobank network (n = 1.2 Million).
Conclusion: We are thus presenting scenarios and methods to
improve the utility of PRSs for predicting disease progression.
References:.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
632
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Grants: Horizon 2020(101016775).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.033.D SwissGenVar: A genetic data-sharing platform and
knowledge-database for harmonization and up-scaling of
clinical grade interpretation of genetic variants to foster
personalized health care in Switzerland
Dennis Kraemer1, Dilenn Terumalai2, Livia Famiglietti3, Stephanie
Meier4, Javier Sanz5, Samuel Koller6, Pascal Joset4, Fabienne Maurer7,
Thierry Nouspikel8, André Schaller5, Isabel Filges4, Andrea Superti-
Furga7, Marc Abramowicz8, Wolfgang Berger6, Sven Cichon4, Valérie
Barbié2, Anita Rauch1
1Institute of Medical Genetics (IMG), University of Zurich, Schlieren-
Zürich, Switzerland; 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Geneva,
Switzerland; 3Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Geneva, Switzer-
land; 4Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University Hospital
Basel, Medical Genetics, Basel, Switzerland;
5Division of Human
Genetics, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland;
6Institute of Medical Molecular Genetics (IMMG), University of Zurich,
Schlieren-Zürich, Switzerland; 7Medical Genetics Service/Division of
Genetic Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne,
Switzerland; 8Medical Genetics Service/Center for Genetic Medicine,
Geneva University Hospitals (HUG), Geneva, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Representing an effort of all Swiss aca-
demic centers for Medical Genetics under the umbrella of the Swiss
Personalized Health Network (SPHN), SwissGenVar aims to create
the infrastructure for a scalable and user-friendly Swiss-wide
depository and sharing platform of genetic variant data generated
during routine diagnostic procedures and research projects.
SwissGenVar intends to provide an environment for expert
knowledge-sharing to harmonize and up-scale the signiﬁcance
interpretation of genetic variants at clinical-grade. Broader visibility
will be gained by interfacing with international databases, thus
supporting global initiatives in personalized health care.
Methods: For the operationalisation of the genomic and
related
phenomic
data,
SwissGenVar
cross-expert
working
groups deﬁned a set of variant (type)-related genetic and
clinical data by utilizing an interchangeable data format for
direct platform implementability. Furthermore, the database
structures and functionalities required for fulﬁlling the objectives
of SwissGenVar were elaborated by dedicated operational
teams.
Results: Based on this, SwissGenVar database covering var-
iant- and patient-centered query interfaces was designed. Its
ontology refers to established external and custom data catalogs
reﬂecting the different variant annotations as well as the
demographical
and
phenotypical
features
consented
by
the individual variant carriers. After a preliminary testing phase,
the database was fed by research vcf-ﬁles using an established
encrypted data transfer tool and secure access management
system. Further exploration of the platform functionality and
required adjustments are ongoing.
Conclusion: SwissGenVar will be a necessary ﬁrst step to scale-
up clinical-grade genetic testing in Switzerland and will foster
personalized health research involving genetic risk stratiﬁcation
and disease classiﬁcations.
References: https://pages.sib.swiss/project/swissgenvar/Project.
Grants: SPHN Infrastructure development project.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.034.A MicroRNAs as biomarkers for radiotherapy toxicity
in breast and prostate cancer patients
Ester Aguado-Flor1, Petra Seibold2, Miguel E. Aguado-Barrera3;4,
Manuel Altabas5, Ananya Choudhury6;7, Orland Diez1;8, Noelia
Docampo Azuaga5, Sandrine Ducornet9, David Gibon9, Alexandra
Giraldo5, Renan Gomes1, Antonio Gomez-Caamaño4;10, Maarten
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
633
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Lambrecht11, Sarah Libert12, Susana Magriña5, Giovanna Mug-
giolu12, Tiziana Rancati13, Tim Rattay14, Victoria Reyes5, Sylvie
Sauvaigo12, Paloma Sosa-Fajardo4;10, Christopher Talbot14, Ana
Vega3;4;15, Liv Veldeman16, Paolo Zunino17, Jordi Giralt5;18, Jenny
Chang-Claude2;19, Sara Gutiérrez-Enríquez1
1Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of
Oncology
(VHIO),
Vall
d’Hebron
Barcelona
Hospital
Campus,
Barcelona, Spain; 2Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; 3Fundación Pública
Galega Medicina Xenómica (FPGMX), SERGAS, Santiago de Compos-
tela, Spain; 4Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de
Compostela (IDIS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain;
5Radiation
Oncology Department, Vall d’Hebron Hospital Universitari, Vall
d’Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain; 6Transla-
tional Radiobiology Group, Division of Cancer Sciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; 7Academic Health Science
Centre,
Christie
NHS
Foundation
Trust
Hospital,
Manchester,
Germany; 8Area of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Vall d’Hebron
Hospital Universitari, Vall d’Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus,
Barcelona, Spain; 9AQUILAB, 250 rue Salvador Allende, Loos, France;
10Department of Radiation Oncology, Complexo Hospitalario Uni-
versitario de Santiago, SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain;
11Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals Leuven/
KU, Leuven, Belgium; 12LXRepair, Biopolis, 5 avenue du Grand Sablon,
La Tronche, France; 13Prostate Cancer Program, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy;
14Leicester Cancer
Research Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom;
15Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
Santiago de Compostela, Spain; 16Department of Radiation Oncol-
ogy, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 17Modelling and
Scientiﬁc Computing Laboratory, Math Department, Politecnico di
Milano, Milan, Italy;
18Radiation Oncology Group, Vall d’Hebron
Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Vall d’Hebron Barcelona Hospital
Campus, Barcelona, Spain; 19Cancer Epidemiology Group, University
Cancer
Center
Hamburg
(UCCH),
Medical
Center
Hamburg-
Eppendorf (UKE), Hamburg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Late adverse effects caused by radio-
therapy (RT) are a common cause of morbidity amongst cancer
survivors and are determined in part by genetic susceptibility. The
international RADprecise project aims to personalize RT for cancer
patients. One of its objectives is to identify differentially expressed
microRNAs as novel biomarkers for radiosensitivity in whole blood
of prostate (PC) and breast cancer (BC) patients.
Methods: We used data and RNA samples from a large
established cohort of BC and PC patients from the REQUITE Eur-
opean project (www.requite.eu). Patients with moderate/severe
toxicity were matched to patients without, two years after RT: 62
and 61 patients for BC, and 76 and 52 for PC, respectively.
MicroRNA libraries were prepared with whole blood RNA using
NEBNext® Small RNA Library for Illumina sequencing in a HiSeq.
sRNAtoolbox (https://arn.ugr.es/srnatoolbox/) was used to perform
the bioinformatics analysis.
Results: The ﬁrst results show that in BC patients there are 75
microRNAs under- and 68 over-differentially expressed (FDR <=
0.05) between toxicity and non-toxicity groups. For PC patients no
differentially expressed microRNAs were found. However, sig-
niﬁcant differences were observed between the two centers
where the PC patients were treated. A multivariate analysis
including clinical data, treatment and location will be performed.
Conclusion: MicroRNAs may be a good indicator of RT-induced
late toxicity in BC patients. The most differentially expressed
microRNAs according to RT toxicity in this discovery analysis will
be validated in another 400 RADprecise patients using NanoString
technology.
References:.
Grants: ERAPERMED2018-244 (ERAPerMed JTC2018), SLT011/
18/00005 and FP7 #601826.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.035.B Genetic Longevity Scores for the Croatian
population aged 85+
Maja
Šetinc1,
Željka
Celinšćak1,
Luka
Bočkor1,
Matea
Zajc
Petranović1, Nina Smolej Narančić1, Tatjana Škarić-Jurić1
1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia.
Background/Objectives: Ages of 90.0 and 95.0 are widely con-
sidered as thresholds for longevity and extreme longevity,
respectively. The goal of this study was to construct unweighted
and weighted Genetic Longevity Scores (uGLS, wGLS) and to test
their ability to predict a chance of survival beyond these ages.
Methods: DNA samples of 314 unrelated elderly individuals
(85.0+ years) were genotyped for 42 putative longevity SNPs in 27
genes, and all SNPs that had a p < 0.20 in univariate analyses were
selected for testing in the multivariate logistic regression models.
SNPs from the best model for each cut-off age at death were
chosen for GLS calculation, with unweighted score representing a
sum of longevity-related alleles, and weighted score a sum of each
SNP’s value multiplied by its respective beta coefﬁcient from the
multivariate model.
Results: GLS included nine SNPs (rs7412, rs50871, rs12206094,
rs2267723,
rs9536314,
rs16847897,
rs1800629,
rs1042522,
rs17202060) for the survival age of 90.0, and ﬁve SNPs (rs429358,
rs12203592, rs4837525, rs6067484, rs1042522) for the age of 95.0.
There was no signiﬁcant sex difference in mean values of any GLS.
All four GLSs (uGLS90.0, wGLS90.0, uGLS95.0, wGLS95.0) were
positively correlated with age at death (p < 0.01). ROC curve
analysis showed all four scores are predictive for reaching the
longevity milestones. With area-under-curve of 0.690, weighted
GLS90 was shown to be the most predictive.
Conclusion: GLS based on nine longevity SNPs is predictive of
survival to 90.0 years, and ﬁve SNP-based GLS is predictive of
reaching 95.0 years in the elderly Croatian population.
References: /.
Grants: CSF IP-01-2018-2497 (HECUBA).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.036.C A multi-omics approach to visualize early neuronal
differentiation in 4D
Athina Samara1;2, Mari Spildrejorde3;4;5, Ankush Sharma6;7;8, Martin
Falck5;8,
Magnus
Leithaug3,
Stefania
Modafferi3,
Pål
Marius
Bjørnstad3, Ganesh Acharya9;10, Kristina Gervin5;11;12, Robert Lyle3;5;13,
Ragnhild Eskeland5;7
1Karolinska Institutet, Division of Clinical Paediatrics, Department of
Women’s and Children’s Health, Stockholm, Sweden;
2Karolinska
University Hospital, Astrid Lindgren Children′s Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden; 3Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, Department
of Medical Genetics, Oslo, Norway; 4University of Oslo, Institute of
Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Oslo, Norway; 5University of
Oslo, PharmaTox Strategic Research Initiative, Faculty of Mathematics
and Natural Sciences, Oslo, Norway; 6University of Oslo, Department of
Informatics, Oslo, Norway; 7University of Oslo, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Oslo, Norway; 8University of Oslo, Department of Biosciences,
Oslo, Norway;
9Karolinska Institutet, Division of Obstetrics and
Gynecology,
Department
of
Clinical
Science,
Intervention
and
Technology (CLINTEC), Stockholm, Sweden; 10Karolinska University
Hospital Huddinge, Center for Fetal Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden;
11University of Oslo, Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety Research
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
634
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Group, Department of Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Oslo, Norway;
12Oslo University Hospital, Division of Clinical Neuroscience, Depart-
ment of Research and Innovation, Oslo, Norway; 13Norwegian Institute
of Public Health, Centre for Fertility and Health, Oslo, Norway.
Background/Objectives: Neuronal differentiation of pluripotent
stem cells is an established method to study physiology, disease
and medication safety. However, the sequence of events in human
neuronal differentiation and the ability of in vitro models to
recapitulate early brain development are poorly understood.
Moreover, the role of epigenetic regulation on the establishment
and maintenance of cellular identity during early neuronal dif-
ferentiation processes is not delineated.
Methods: We developed a protocol optimized for the study of
early
human brain
development
and neuropharmacological
applications. We performed RNA-seq, global DNA methylation,
single-cell RNA-seq and ATAC-seq data integration across time-
points (4D analysis), to correlate the expression of transcription
factors with time- and population-speciﬁc chromatin states in
hESCs, and during differentiation.
Results: Gene expression and epigenetic proﬁles were com-
prehensively characterized at four timepoints, as the cells differ-
entiate from embryonic stem cells towards a heterogenous
population of progenitors, immature and mature neurons bearing
telencephalic signatures. A multi-omics roadmap of neuronal dif-
ferentiation, combined with searchable interactive gene analysis
tools, allows for extensive exploration of early neuronal develop-
ment and the effect of medications.
Conclusion: In this study, we describe the generation of a
novel neuronal differentiation protocol where we used the
unparalleled power of multi-omics to understand early events of
anterior neuroectodermal fate speciﬁcation. We assessed the
functional regulation of transcription factors and developmentally
regulated genes, from loss of pluripotency towards neuronal
differentiation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.037.D Genetic variants of serotonergic pathway affect the
development of visual hallucinations due to dopaminergic
treatment in Parkinson’s disease
Sara Redenšek1, Tanja Blagus1, Maja Trošt2, Vita Dolzan1
1Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Pharmacogenetics Laboratory,
Ljubljana, Slovenia; 2University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Department
of Neurology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: Serotonergic system plays an important
role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease (PD) as it takes over
dopamine production after dopaminergic neurons are degener-
ated to a great extent. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
effect of genetic variability of key serotonergic pathway genes on
the occurrence of visual hallucinations (VH) as adverse events (AE)
of dopaminergic treatment in PD.
Methods: We recruited 231 PD patients and collected their
demographic and clinical data. We evaluated the presence or
absence of VH due to dopaminergic treatment. We genotyped
patients for the following SNPs: HTR1A rs6295, HTR1B rs13212041,
TPH2
rs1843809,
rs7305115,
rs4290270,
rs4570625,
SLC6A4
5-HTTLPR, and SLC6A4 rs25531. Logistic regression was used for
analysis. Results were adjusted for age at diagnosis.
Results: Carriers of the HTR1A rs6295 GC genotype (OR = 2.58;
95%CI = 1.15−5.78; p = 0.021), TPH2 rs4290270 AA genotype
(OR = 2.78; 95%CI = 1.08−7.03; p = 0.034), and at least one TPH2
rs4570625 T allele (OR = 1.86; 95%CI = 1.00−3.44; p = 0.047) had
increased risk for VH. Additionally, carriers of at least one SLC6A4
5-HTTPLR rs25531 S (OR = 0.52; 95%CI = 0.28-0.96; p = 0.037) or at
least one LG allele (OR = 0.37; 95%CI = 0.14−0.97; p = 0.044) had
decreased odds for VH. Carriers of the TPH2 TAAT haplotype had
increased risk for VH (OR = 1.94; 95%CI = 1.06-3.55; p = 0.032)
compared to the TPH2 TGTG carriers. Gene-gene interactions did
not show any associations with VH.
Conclusion: The genetic variants in serotonergic system
should be further investigated as predictive biomarkers of VH as
they could contribute to better and more personalized care of PD
patients.
References:.
Grants: ARRS, grants P1-0170 and J7-2600.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.038.A Genetic variability in vitamin D receptor gene may
inﬂuence the kidney graft function
Tanja
Blagus1,
Katja
Goricar1,
Dimitar
Stefanovski2,
Emilija
Reshkova2, Gjoko Risteski2, Miha Arnol2;3, Gregor Mlinšek3, Vita
Dolzan1
1University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry
and Molecular Genetics, Pharmacogenetics laboratory, Ljubljana,
Slovenia; 2University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana,
Slovenia;
3University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Department of
Nephrology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: Vitamin D is crucial for the functioning
of several organ systems. Vitamin D deﬁciency has also been
associated with an increased risk of chronic kidney disease and
worse outcomes in kidney transplantation. Since vitamin D elicits
its actions by binding to vitamin D receptor (VDR), polymorphisms
within VDR gene may also result in impaired regulation of genes
involved in immune response and kidney graft function. Our aim
was to evaluate the association of VDR polymorphisms with kid-
ney graft function in the ﬁrst year after transplantation.
Methods: We performed a retrospective study in 143 Slovenian
patients with functional kidney graft. All patients were genotyped
for common VDR polymorphisms: rs11568820 (Cdx2), rs4516035
(GATA), rs2228570 (FokI), rs1544410 (BsmI), rs731236 (TaqI) and
rs739837 (BglI). Nonparametric tests and logistic regression were
used for statistical analysis.
Results: VDR rs4516035 polymorphism was associated with
increased serum creatinine and decreased eGFR at the end of the
ﬁrst year after transplantation in the additive (P = 0.001 and
P = 0.008, respectively) and dominant (P < 0.001 and P = 0.003,
respectively) genetic models. VDR rs2228570 was associated with
occurrence of BK polyomavirus and cytomegalovirus infections in
the ﬁrst year after transplantation, with carriers of two poly-
morphic rs2228570 alleles having a lower infection rate (OR =
0.31, 95% CI = 0.10-0.99, P = 0.047) than carriers of two normal
alleles. None of the investigated VDR polymorphisms was asso-
ciated with overall rejection in the ﬁrst year after transplantation.
Conclusion: VDR polymorphisms may be associated with
worse kidney graft function and lower risk of graft viral infection.
References:.
Grants: ARRS, grants P1-0170 and P3-0323.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.039.B Association of genetic polymorphisms in
glucocorticoid pathway with dexamethasone treatment in
COVID-19 patients
Patricija Štampar1, Tanja Blagus1, Katja Goricar1, Petra Bogovic2,
Gabriele Turel2, Franc Strle2, Vita Dolzan1
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
635
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia;
2University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: Corticosteroids are widely used for the
treatment of coronavirus disease (COVID)-19 caused by SARS-CoV-
2 as they attenuate the immune response with their anti-
inﬂammatory properties. Genetic polymorphisms of glucocorti-
coid receptor, metabolizing enzymes or transporters may affect
treatment response to dexamethasone. The aim of this study was
to evaluate the association of polymorphisms in glucocorticoid
pathway with disease severity and duration of dexamethasone
treatment in COVID-19 patients.
Methods: Our study included 107 hospitalized COVID-19
patients treated with dexamethasone. We isolated DNA from
peripheral blood and genotyped all samples for polymorphisms in
NR3C1
(rs6198,
rs33388),
CYP3A4
(rs35599367),
CYP3A5
(rs776746), GSTP1 (rs1695, rs1138272), GSTM1/GSTT1 deletions
and ABCB1 (1045642, rs1128503, rs2032582 Fisher’s and Mann-
Whitney tests were used in statistical analysis.
Results: The median (min-max) age of the included patients
was 62 (26-85) years, 69.2 % were male and 30.8 % female and
they had moderate (1.9 %), severe (83 %) or critical (15.1 %) dis-
ease. NR3C1 rs6198 polymorphism was associated with more
severe disease in additive genetic model (P = 0.022). NR3C1
rs6198, ABCB1 rs1045642 and ABCB1 rs1128503 polymorphisms
were associated with a shorter duration of dexamethasone treat-
ment in additive (P = 0.048, P = 0.047 and P = 0.024, respectively)
and dominant genetic models (P = 0.015, P = 0.048 and P = 0.020,
respectively),
while
carriers
of
the
polymorphic
CYP3A4
rs35599367 allele required longer treatment with dexamethasone
(P = 0.033). Other polymorphisms were not associated with dis-
ease severity or dexamethasone treatment duration.
Conclusion: Genetic variability of glucocorticoid pathway
genes was associated with the duration of dexamethasone treat-
ment of COVID-19 patients.
References:.
Grants: ARRS P1-0170 and P3-0296.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.040.C The NUDT15 and TPMT genes variants in Polish IBD
patients treated with thiopurines
Joanna Żuraszek1, Maryam Dangana2, Oliwia Zakerska-Banaszak1,
Aleksandra Zielińska1, Michał Walczak1, Marlena Szalata2, Ryszard
Słomski1, Marzena Skrzypczak-Zielinska1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Depart-
ment of Nucleic Acid Function, Poznan, Poland; 2Poznań University of
Life Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology,
Poznan, Poland.
Background/Objectives:
For
years,
thiopurines
have
been
essential immunomodulatory agents in maintaining inﬂammatory
bowel disease (IBD) remission. However, nearly one-third of
patients had modiﬁed or discontinued medication due to
numerous side effects. Genetic polymorphism of the TPMT and
NUDT15 genes is related to enzyme activity, patients’ reaction to
thiopurines therapy, and drug dosing. We aimed to determine the
NUDT15 and TMPT gene variants in a Polish cohort in the context
of personalized medicine.
Methods: A group of 88 Polish IBD patients treated with
thiopurine agents was enrolled. The coding region of the NUDT15
gene was analyzed using Sanger sequencing, and four common
loci c.238G>C, c.292G>T, c.460G>A, and c.719A>G of the TPMT
gene using pyrosequencing were genotyped.
Results: Obtained results found four variants of the NUDT15
gene; two in the ﬁrst exon: c.36A>G (p.Pro12Pro, rs61746486) and
c.123A>C (p.Gly41Gly, rs138959770) with minor allele frequency
(MAF) of 0.57%, one in the ﬁrst intron: c.IVS1-91G>A (rs41284205)
with MAF of 1.7% and one in the 3′ untranslated region: c.*7G>A
(rs61973267) with MAF of 2.84%. For the TPMT gene, two poly-
morphisms: c.460G>A (p.Ala154Thr) in exon 6 and c.719A>G
(p.Tyr240Cys) in exon 9, as compound heterozygous were detec-
ted, which corresponds to the presence of the TPMT*3A allele with
a frequency of 3.41%.
Conclusion: This study conﬁrmed the importance of the TMPT
gene in the pharmacogenetics of Polish IBD patients treated with
thiopurines. However, it did not demonstrate thiopurine-related
toxicity variants in the NUDT15 gene.
References:.
Grants: Polish National Science Centre, grant no. 2016/23/D/
NZ2/01620.
Conﬂict of Interest: Joanna Żuraszek Institute of Human
Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, Maryam
Dangana Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Poz-
nań University of Life Sciences, Poland, Oliwia Zakerska-Banaszak
Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poz-
nan, Poland, Aleksandra Zielińska Institute of Human Genetics,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, Michał Walczak
Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poz-
nan, Poland, Marlena Szalata Department of Biochemistry and
Biotechnology, Poznań University of Life Sciences, Poland, Rys-
zard Słomski Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of
Sciences,
Poznan,
Poland,
Marzena
Skrzypczak-Zielinska
Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poz-
nan, Poland, Polish National Science Centre, grant no. 2016/23/
D/NZ2/01620.
P19.041.D INTERVENE: exploring the generalizability of
polygenic risk scores on disease
Bradley Jermy1, Kristi Läll2, Brooke Wolford3, Tuomo Hartonen1, Zhiyu
Yang1, Remo Monti4, Stravroula Kanoni5, Ying Wang6;7;8, Kristina
Zguro9, Henrike Heyne1;4;10, Julian Wanner1;4, Omar Youssef11;12,
FinnGen Consortium1, Alicia Martin6;7;8, David van Heel13, Kristian
Hveem3, Reedik Mägi2, Aarno Palotie1;14, Nina Mars1, Andrea
Ganna1;14, Samuli Ripatti1;14
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, FIMM, HiLIFE, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; 2Estonian Genome Centre, Institute of
Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia; 3K. G. Jebsen Center for
Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Nursing,
Faculty of Medicine and Health, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim, Norway; 4Hasso Plattner Institute, Digital
Health Center, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany; 5William
Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London School of Medicine
and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, United
Kingdom; 6Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts
General
Hospital,
Boston,
United
States;
7Stanley
Center
for
Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
United States; 8Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, United States; 9Med Biotech
Hub and Competence Center, Department of Medical Biotechnolo-
gies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy; 10Hasso Plattner Institute, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, United States; 11Helsinki Biobank,
Joint Authority of Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa (HUS),
Helsinki, Finland; 12Pathology Department, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland; 13Blizard Institute, Barts and the London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London,
United Kingdom;
14Massachusetts General Hospital and Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, United States.
Background/Objectives: The INTERVENE project is a collaboration
between 7 biobank projects, harmonizing data on 1.3 million
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
636
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
participants. We aimed to estimate absolute risk by disease spe-
ciﬁc PRS strata and to understand the incremental beneﬁt in
prediction by phenotypic risk factors.
Methods: 38 diseases were selected to have high heritability,
powerful GWAS data and contribution to global burden of disease.
This includes diseases such as type 1 diabetes (T1D), rheumatoid
arthritis (RA), and diseases less explored in the PRS literature such
as melanoma and glaucoma. Analytical consistency is reached
through comprehensive endpoint harmonization and systematic
PRS deployment through Docker software.
Results: 32 disease speciﬁc PRS were tested for association in
at least one of either FinnGen, Estonian Biobank or UK Biobank.
Association strength varied by disease, however, two notably
strong associations were prostate cancer (meta-analysis: OR per
SD = 1.95, 95%CI = 1.92-1.98) and T1D (meta-analysis: OR per
SD = 2.25, 95%CI = 2.17-2.32).
While estimates for most diseases showed agreement across the
biobanks, some showed high variability, such as gout, inﬂammatory
bowel disease and RA. Indeed, RA differed in association across all
three biobank projects (Estonian Biobank: OR = 1.41, 95%CI = 1.33-
1.49; FinnGen: OR = 1.64, 95%CI = 1.60-1.68; UK Biobank: OR = 1.98,
95%CI = 1.82-2.16). These analyses are now being replicated in
other ancestries and across more biobanks.
Conclusion: Through our multi-biobank collaboration, we have
developed an efﬁcient replication machinery for studies on poly-
genic risk. Through this, we show variation in PRS association
exists for speciﬁc diseases. Understanding such variation will be a
vital step towards PRS’s clinical implementation.
References:.
Grants: Horizon 2020 (101016775).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.042.A Rethink of EGFR signaling in triple negative breast
cancer, with its interconnection with MAPK and PI3K/AKT
signaling using bioinformatic approaches
Cornelia Braicu1, Ancuta Jurj1, Oana Zanoaga1, Raduly Lajos1,
Ioana Berindan-Neagoe1
1Research
Center
for
Functional
Genomics,
Biomedicine
and
Translational Medicine, “Iuliu Hațieganu” University of Medicine
and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Background/Objectives: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has
the worse survival rate reported to other breast cancer subtypes.
Resistance mechanisms are based on the interplay between
numerous factors and signaling pathways, which crosstalk and
feedback.
Methods: To understand the interplay between the signaling
pathways was downloaded the NCBI gene list related to pathway
in cancer, mitogen-activated protein kinase(MAPK) and phospha-
tidylinositol 3-kinase(PI3K)/protein kinase B(AKT) signaling. The
next step was to overlap the genes list using Venn diagram, then
was evaluated the overall survival using online tools, based on a
patient cohort of 176 TNBC patients from TCGA.
Results: The Venn diagram among the selected gene list
emphasis a common signature of 52 genes; among this, 23 were
correlated with overall survival rate, these genes being related to
the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance, as KEEG gene
ontology classiﬁcation shows.
Although epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is over-
expressed and correlated with overall survival rate in TNBC, most
of the clinical trials with EGFR inhibitors in TNBC have heretofore
been unsuccessful. To develop effective EGFR-targeted therapy for
TNBC, the speciﬁc mechanisms of EGFR signaling and the inter-
connection with MAPK and PI3K/AKT signaling mediated immune
response in TNBC need to be elucidated. Additional key immune
response regulators (IL1A,IL4,IL6,IGF2,VEGFA/B/C,EGFR,FGR2) were
proved to be connected with overall survival rate in TNBC.
Conclusion: Our work provides the important role of the
crosstalk among the MAPK and PI3K/AKT signaling; this signature
paving the way to precision TNBC care.
References:.
Grants: This project was ﬁnanced by PN-III-P4-ID-PCE-2020-
1625-ORIENT.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.043.B Towards global contribution to precision medicine:
high-quality genome assemblies from Central African trios
Jonathan LoTempio1;2;3;4, Kizito Mosema5, D’Andre Spencer1, Kevin
Karume5;6, Adam Wang7, Miguel Almalvez1, Yulong Fu1, Celeste
Musasa1;5, Johanna Nsibu5, Matthew Bramble1;2, Erick Kamangu6,
Désiré Tshala Katumbay5;8, Dieudonné Mumba5, Eric Vilain1;2;3
1Children’s National Hospital, Washington, United States; 2The George
Washington University, Washington, United States; 3CNRS International
Research Laboratory: Epigenetics, Data, and Politics, Washington, DC,
United States; 4Institute for Advanced Studies, Wien, Austria; 5Institut
National de Recherche Biomédicale, Kinshasa, Congo, D.R.; 6Université
de Kinshasa, Kinshasa, Congo, D.R.;
7The George Washington
University, Computational Biology Institute, Washington, United States;
8Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, United States.
Background/Objectives: Precision medicine cannot be achieved
without global participation. While the cost of generating a
telomere-to-telomere genome assembly is out of reach for most
laboratories, it is feasible to generate human assemblies which
approach reference quality. To this end, our team has collaborated
to recruit and consent participants from genetically diverse trios
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo for high quality
genome sequencing.
Methods: Our ethics proposal was based on the 1000 Gen-
omes protocol1. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were
isolated from whole blood from participants. Each member of the
trio was sequenced with Illumina to a depth of 30x. DNA was
extracted from PBMCs and was sequenced on four PacBio HiFi
ﬂowcells for each proband, representing approximately 300x
coverage. Assemblies were trio binned with yak, assembled with
HiFiASM2, and scaffolded with Bionano optical maps.
Results: Trios were recruited in Kinshasa through our network
of physician scientists who prioritized geographic and ethno-
linguistic diversity. We chose four trios for sequencing by selecting
those thought to be historically distant from one another. With
these assemblies, we show that unmapped reads from experi-
ments on novel genomes from Congo, aligned to GRCh38p13, can
indeed be placed. We further show that African Pangenomic
Contigs3 can be placed on these genomes, resolving outstanding
issues in missing data.
Conclusion: HiFiASM assemblies, scaffolded with Bionano,
represent a strong advancement for placement of known,
unmapped genomic data, thus representing a step forward in
precision medicine.
References:
1:
https://www.internationalgenome.org/sites/
1000genomes.org/ﬁles/docs/Informed%20Consent%20Form%
20Template.pdf.
2: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-020-01056-5.
3: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41588-018-0273-y.
Grants: Clark Distinguished Professor funds at Children’s
National Hospital, Washington, DC.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jonathan LoTempio: None declared, Kizito
Mosema: None declared, D’Andre Spencer: None declared, Kevin
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
637
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Karume: None declared, Adam Wang: None declared, Miguel
Almalvez: None declared, Yulong Fu: None declared, Celeste
Musasa: None declared, Johanna Nsibu: None declared, Matthew
Bramble: None declared, Erick Kamangu: None declared, Désiré
Tshala Katumbay: None declared, Dieudonné Mumba: None
declared, Eric Vilain Bionano Genomics Inc, stock options, Bionano
Genomics Inc Scientiﬁc Consulting.
P19.044.C Gene editing in human iPSC models derived from
patients affected by inherited retinal dystrophies
Laura Siles1;2, Arnau Navinés-Ferrer1;2, Sheila Ruiz-Nogales1;2, Esther
Pomares1;2
1Fundació de Recerca de l’Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular, Barcelona,
Spain; 2Departament de Genètica, Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular,
IMO Grupo Miranza, Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRD) are
caused by mutations in more than 300 genes. Previous work in our
lab reported the generation of several human induced pluripotent
stem cell (iPSC) lines from patients carrying mutations in different
IRD-associated genes. These genes comprise ABCA4, BEST1, PDE6A,
PDE6C, RHO and USH2A. The aim of this study is to correct the
identiﬁed mutations through gene editing and to revert the
phenotype observed in the unedited cells as a source of cells for
potential iPSC-mediated therapy.
Methods: We used CRISPR/Cas9 and transcription activator-like
effector nuclease (TALEN) in patient derived human iPSCs to
correct the variants from each subject. For that we designed
speciﬁc sgRNAs and TAL mRNA pairs to target the mutation.
Results: We have found differences in DNA cleavage efﬁciency in
the different iPSC lines used depending on the type of the mutation
and the gene. We also observed differences in editing efﬁciency
between CRISPR and TALEN approaches among iPSC lines.
Conclusion: There is an unmet need to develop therapies to
treat IRD. Genome editing allows correcting the disease mutations
directly in patient’s DNA. By using CRISPR/Cas9 or TALEN-
mediated genome editing we are able to speciﬁcally cut the
DNA at the desired location and to revert the mutation with a
corrected DNA template.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.045.D Early-onset prostate cancer: Association of
polygenic background in combination with family history and
rare pathogenic variants
Emadeldin Hassanin1, Patrick May2, Dheeraj Bobbili2, Rana Aldisi1,
Peter Krawitz1, Carlo Maj1
1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University Hospital
Bonn, Bonn, Germany; 2Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine,
University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
Background/Objectives: We aimed to comprehensively assess
the role of polygenic risk score (PRS) on the early-onset prostate
cancer (PC) vs late-onset, in the absence or presence of a family
history of PC (FH) or rare pathogenic variants (PV, across 5 PC
susceptibility genes - HOXB13, BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, BRCA1).
Methods: We identiﬁed 9,824 PC cases from 192,779 men
(data from UK Biobank). A PRS for PC was calculated and used to
stratify individuals into low, intermediate, and high-risk groups.
We then assess the impact of PRS stratiﬁcation on the age of
onset (i.e., early-onset considered before 55 years old vs late-
onset) in the absence or presence of a FH or PV (i.e., non-carriers
vs carriers).
Results: The odds ratio (OR) of PC per standard deviation of
PRS were higher for early-onset cancer (OR = 2.1) than late-onset
cancer (OR = 1.5).
Depending on the PRS, OR for individuals without FH ranges
between 0.4-2.4 for early-onset, compared to 0.5-1.8 for late-onset;
while OR for individuals with FH ranged between 1.5-8.3, and 1.0-
3.2, respectively. OR for non-carriers ranges between 0.4-2.5 for
early-onset, compared to 0.5-1.9 for late-onset; while OR for car-
riers ranged between 0.9-7.8 and 1.5-5.3, respectively.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings show that the modifying role of
PRS on prostate cancer risk is stronger for early-onset than for late-
onset. This tendency is pronounced in combination with family
history and carrier of rare pathogenic variants.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.046.A Genotype-ﬁrst breast cancer prevention:
transferring monogenic ﬁndings from a population biobank
to clinical setting
Hannes Jürgens1;2, Laura Roht2;3, Liis Leitsalu4, Margit Nõukas4,
Marili Palover4, Tiit Nikopensius4, Anu Reigo4, Mart Kals4, Kersti
Kallak1, Riina Kütner5, Vahur Valvere5, Piret Laidre3, Kadri Toome3,
Kadri Rekker3, Mikk Tooming2;3, Ülle Murumets3, Tiina Kahre2;3, Krista
Kruuv-Käo4, Katrin Ounap2;3, Peeter Padrik1;2;6, Andres Metspalu4;7,
Tõnu Esko4, Neeme Tonisson3;4
1Hematology-Oncology
Clinic, Tartu
University Hospital,
Tartu,
Estonia; 2Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia; 3Dept. Of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia; 4Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia; 5Oncology-Hematology Clinic, North Estonian Medical
Centre, Tallinn, Estonia; 6Antegenes OÜ, Tartu, Estonia; 7Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: Although hereditary breast cancer (BC)
screening and management is well established in clinical settings,
it only captures a fraction of genetic predisposition at the popu-
lation level. We have addressed this gap by returning data on BC
predisposing monogenic variants to female participants of the
Estonian Biobank (EstBB).
Methods: We describe our experience from a national pilot
study (2018–2021) in collaboration with two Estonian regional
hospitals. We screened the EstBB cohort (n = 154,201 of whom
66.1% were female) to identify carriers (22-79y) with monogenic
variants conferring high or moderate BC risk in any of 11 genes
listed in clinical guidelines (BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, STK11, PTEN,
CDH1, ATM, PALB2, CHEK2, NBN, NF1). 180 female carriers were re-
contacted and 109 (61%) consented for further clinical manage-
ment by clinical geneticists and oncologist. That included con-
ﬁrmation of genetic variant, cascade screening, imaging studies,
laboratory testing, preventive surgery etc.
Results: Our results show that only one-third of participants
were eligible for BC screening according to the current clinical
criteria. 16 participants had previous cancer history. Only 10%
were aware of their genetic ﬁnding. BC was diagnosed in six
participants. Majority of the participants considered receiving the
genetic risk information as valuable.
Conclusion: Our results support population-based genomic
screening for hereditary BC prevention.
References:.
Grants: This research was funded by the Estonian Research
Council–RITA programme, by the European Regional Develop-
ment Fund in accordance with Directive no. 1.1-2/17/15 and by
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
638
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
the European Union through the European Regional Development
Fund (Project No. 2014-2020.4.01.15-0012) GenTransMed and
Estonian Research Council grant PRG555.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P19.047.B Pharmacogenetic markers of treatment response to
latanoprost in patients with primary open-angle glaucoma
and ocular hypertension
Makedonka Atanasovska Velkovska1, Tanja Blagus2, Katja Goricar2,
Barbara Cvenkel1;3, Vita Dolzan2
1University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Department of Ophthalmology,
Ljubljana, Slovenia; 2University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine,
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Pharmacogenetics
Laboratory, Ljubljana, Slovenia; 3University of Ljubljana, Faculty of
Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Background/Objectives: The only proven effective treatment of
primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is to reduce the intraocular
pressure (IOP). Treatment with prostaglandin analogues (PGAs) such
as latanoprost eye drops leads to highest IOP reduction. However, in
some patients sufﬁcient IOP reduction may not be achieved or the
disease may progress despite low IOP. The aim of our study was to
search for pharmacogenetic markers of treatment response to
latanoprost in patients with POAG and ocular hypertension.
Methods: Our pilot study included 52 treatment naive patients
with POAG or ocular hypertension. Response to latanoprost was
evaluated as IOP reduction in the most affected eye after 6 weeks
of treatment. Patients were genotyped for polymorphisms in
genes of latanoprost activation (CES1P1 rs3785161), transport
(SLCO2A1 rs34550074 and rs4241366), and receptor (PTGFR
rs3753380) and in antioxidative (GSTM1*0, GSTT1*0, GSTP1 rs1695
and rs1138272, SOD2 rs4880, CAT rs1001179, GPX1 rs1050450) and
inﬂammatory (TNF rs1800629, IL1B rs16944 and rs1143623, IL6
rs1800795) pathways.
Results: SOD2 rs4880 CT (Padd = 0.036), CAT rs1001179 TT
(Padd = 0.012) and TNF rs1800629 GG (Pdom = 0.012) genotypes
were signiﬁcantly associated with a decrease in absolute IOP after
latanoprost treatment in the additive model, while carriers of at
least one GSTT1 gene copy achieved higher percentage of IOP
reduction in the dominant model (P = 0.024). The other investi-
gated polymorphisms were not statistically signiﬁcantly associated
with response to latanoprost treatment.
Conclusion:
Pharmacogenetic
biomarkers
associated
with
treatment response to latanoprost may contribute to more effective
and personalized treatment of POAG and ocular hypertension.
References:.
Grants: ARRS grants P1-0170 and P3-0333.
Conﬂict of Interest: Makedonka Atanasovska Velkovska: None
declared, Tanja Blagus: None declared, Katja Goricar: None declared,
Barbara Cvenkel: None declared, Vita Dolzan ARRS grant P1-0170.
P19.048.B NAGENpediatrics: Rapid Whole Genome
Sequencing in Neonatal/Pediatric Intensive Care in Navarra,
Spain
Monica Arasanz Armengol1, sara ciria abad1, Leslie Matalonga2,
Gemma
Bullich
Vilanova2,
Ida
Paramonov2,
Edurne
Urrutia
Lafuente1, Oscar Teijido Hermida1, Alberto Maillo3, Maria Miranda
Perez1, Iranzu González Borja1, Gonzalo Etayo Nagore4, Mercè
Artigas López5, Juan Jose Beloqui Lizaso6, Angel Alonso Sanchez1;5,
Nerea Gorria-Redondo1;7, Josune Hualde Olascoaga1;7
1Navarrabiomed, Hospital Universitario de Navarra (HUN), Universi-
dad Pública de Navarra (UPNA), IdiSNA, Genomic Medicine Unit,
Pamplona, Spain; 2National Centre for Genomic Analysis - Centre for
Genomic
Regulation
(CNAG-CRG),
Barcelona,
Spain;
3Navarra-
biomed, Hospital Universitario de Navarra (HUN), Universidad
Pública de Navarra (UPNA), IdiSNA, Translacional Bioinformatics
Unit, Pamplona, Spain; 4Navarra Services and Technologies (NASER-
TIC), Pamplona, Spain; 5Hospital Universitario de Navarra (HUN),
Genetics
Service,
Pamplona,
Spain;
6Hospital
Universitario
de
Navarra (HUN), Pharmacy Service, Pamplona, Spain;
7Hospital
Universitario de Navarra (HUN), Paediatrics Service, Pamplona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) is a
rapid and cost-effective technique that signiﬁcantly impacts the
clinical setting, particularly in the paediatric context. Approxi-
mately 2-3% of newborns have a congenital anomaly, and at
least 50% of these have a genetic cause. According to the lit-
erature, rapid genomic testing (2-3 weeks) allows the diagnosis
of around 21-26% of critically ill children, inﬂuencing clinical
outcomes. This pioneering study at regional level aims to eval-
uate the diagnostic and therapeutic utility of rapid WGS in
acutely unwell children.
Methods: This ongoing study involved the participation of a
multidisciplinary team and the recruitment of 34 trios over one
year. A specialized paediatric clinical team initially assessed their
eligibility and each family received a detailed genetic counselling
consultation, provided by a registered genetic counsellor. WGS
was performed on germline DNA, and variants were ﬁltered and
reported by extensive bioinformatic analysis.
Results: We identiﬁed pathogenic variants in genes in line with
the clinical manifestations in 14 families, reaching a diagnostic
yield of 41%. Genetic results, delivered in an average time of 2-3
weeks, signiﬁcantly reduced the diagnostic odyssey and inﬂu-
enced clinical decisions.
Conclusion: We demonstrate the implementation of precision
medicine through rapid WGS in the paediatric context in the
region of Navarra, Spain, with potential extensive beneﬁts for
patients, clinicians and the Regional Health System. We describe
new genetic variants associated with rare diseases, not identiﬁable
by other diagnostic methods in rapid turnaround times.
References: Stark, Z et al., 2022.
Grants:
Proyecto
estratégico
I+DS3
2020-2022.
GEMAIV
Gobierno de Navarra.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20 POPULATION GENETICS AND EVOLUTIONARY GENETICS
P20.001.C Genome-wide polygenic risk score and lifestyle risk
factors for hypertension among 11,252 Japanese individuals
Ryosuke Fujii1;2;3, Asahi Hishida4, Masahiro Nakatochi5, Yoshiki
Tsuboi2, Koji Suzuki2, Takaaki Kondo3, Kenji Takeuchi4;6;7, Kenji
Wakai4
1Eurac Research (afﬁliated to the University of Lübeck), Institute for
Biomedicine, Bolzano, Italy;
2Fujita Health University School of
Medical
Sciences,
Department
of
Preventive
Medical
Science,
Toyoake, Japan; 3Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Division of interactive Medical and Healthcare Systems, Nagoya,
Japan; 4Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Department
of Preventive Medicine, Nagoya, Japan; 5Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Public Health Informatics Unit, Nagoya, Japan;
6Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry, Department of
International and Community Oral Health, Sendai, Japan; 7Tohoku
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Division of Regional
Community Development, Liaison Center for Innovative Dentistry,
Sendai, Japan.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
639
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Among non-European populations, it is
an urgent task to construct a PRS (polygenic risk score) and to
assess its utility with a combination of traditional risk factors. We
aimed to examine the associations between genome-wide PRS
and hypertension prevalence and interaction with conventional
risk factors in a general Japanese population.
Methods: This cross-sectional study included 11,252 Japanese
individuals who participated in the J-MICC Study (ten nationwide
study sites). By leveraging publicly available GWAS results from
the BioBank Japan, we developed PRS in the Target dataset using
PRSice-2 and evaluated its performance in the Test dataset.
Hypertension was deﬁned as systolic blood pressure (SBP) > 130
mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP) > 85 mmHg, or taking an
antihypertensive drug.
Results: Compared with the middle PRS quintile, the OR (95% CI)
of hypertension at the bottom and top PRS quintiles were 0.74
(0.57–0.97) and 1.73 (1.32–2.27), respectively. For continuous out-
comes, differences (95% CI) between the middle and the top
quintile were 4.55 (2.26–6.85) mmHg for SBP and 2.53 (1.80–3.26)
mmHg for DBP. The OR (95% CI) of non-drinkers in the top PRS
quintile (1.70, 1.11–2.61) were lower than drinkers in the top quintile
(2.53, 1.70–3.79), although interaction term was not signiﬁcant.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings highlighted that a combination of
PRS and traditional risk factors could be useful for risk stratiﬁcation
of hypertension in a Japanese population.
References:.
Grants: Grants-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research for Priority Areas
of Cancer [No: 17015018], Innovative Areas [No: 221S0001], and
JSPS KAKENHI [Nos: 16H06277, 15H02524, and 20K18943].
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.002.D Inherited and de novo variation in Lithuanian
genomes: introduction to the analysis of the generational
shift
Alina
Urnikyte1,
Laura
Pranckeniene1,
Ingrida
Domarkienė1,
Svetlana Dauengauer-Kirlienė1, Alma Molyte1, Aušra Matulevičienė1,
Ingrida Pilypienė2, Vaidutis Kučinskas1
1Biomedical Science Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University,
Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania;
2Institute of Clinical Medicine of the Faculty of Medicine of Vilnius
University, Clinic of Obstetrics, and Gynaecology, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Background/Objectives: Most genetic variants are rare and spe-
ciﬁc to the population, highlighting the importance of characteriz-
ing local population genetic diversity. Many countries have initiated
population
based
whole-genome
sequencing
(WGS)
studies.
Lithuanian genomes are underrepresented in the public databases.
Methods: Here we report initial ﬁndings of a high-coverage (an
average of 36.27x) whole genome sequencing study for 25 trios of
the Lithuanian population to infer the distribution of single
nucleotide variations (SNVs) throughout the genome and biolo-
gical aspects of novel variations from one generation to another.
Results: Each genome on average carried approximately
4,701,473 (±28,255) variants, where 80.6% (3,787,626) were SNPs,
and the rest 19.4% were indels. An average of 12.45% were novel
according to dbSNP (build 150). The WGS structural variation (SV)
analysis identiﬁed on average 9,133 (±85.10) SVs, of which 95.85%
were novel. De novo single nucleotide variation (SNV) analysis
identiﬁed 4,417 variants, where 1.1% de novo SNVs were exonic,
43.9% intronic, 51.9% intergenic, and the rest 3.13% in other sites
of genome like UTR or downstream sequence. Three possible
pathogenic de novo variants in the ZSWIM8, CDC42EP1 and RELA
genes were identiﬁed.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings provide useful information of local
human population genomic variation, especially for de novo var-
iants and will be a valuable resource for further genetic studies.
References:.
Grants: This study is a part of the ANELGEMIA project, which
has received funding from the Research Council of Lithuania
(LMTLT), agreement No. S-MIP-20-34.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.003.A Pursuing public health beneﬁt within national
genomic initiatives: learning from different policies
Suzanne Onstwedder1;2, Marleen Jansen1;2, Teresa Leonardo Alves1,
Martina Cornel2, Tessel Rigter1;2
1National Institute for Public Health and Environment, Centre for
Health Protection, Bilthoven, Netherlands; 2Amsterdam UMC, locatie
VUmc, Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Substantial public health beneﬁts are
expected of population-based genomic endeavours, such as
national genomics initiatives. To date, little is known about the
actual public health beneﬁt that is yielded. We explore to what
extent and how public health beneﬁt is pursued in national
genomics initiatives.
Methods: A mixed-method study was conducted, comprising a
literature-based comparison of 11 purposively sampled national
genomics initiatives (Belgium, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Ger-
many, Iceland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Taiwan, United Kingdom (UK),
and United States of America (USA), and ﬁve semi-structured
interviews with experts (Denmark, Estonia, Finland, UK, USA). The
results were analysed using an adapted public health policy cycle:
agenda setting, governance, (research) strategy towards health
beneﬁt, implementation, evaluation.
Results: Public health beneﬁt within national genomics initia-
tives was pursued in all initiatives and in all phases of the public
health policy cycle. The operationalization of public health beneﬁt
seemed dependent on the outcomes of agenda setting, as well as
design of governance. Some initiatives focus on a research-based
strategy to contribute to public health, while others focus on
research translation into healthcare, or a combination of both.
Both quantitative and qualitative methods were reported to
evaluate public health beneﬁts. However, the created health
beneﬁt for the general public, both short- and long-term, appears
difﬁcult to determine.
Conclusion: Genomics initiatives hold the potential to deliver
health promises of population-based genomics. To ensure effec-
tive research translation, implementation, and ultimately improve
public health, development of evaluation tools and clarity in roles
and responsibilities of stakeholders is crucial.
References:.
Grants: No grants were received.
Conﬂict of Interest: Suzanne Onstwedder Part-time employed
at National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (the
Netherlands), part-time employed at Amsterdam UMC, Marleen
Jansen Part-time employed at National Institute for Public Health
and the Environment (the Netherlands), part-time employed at
Amsterdam UMC, Teresa Leonardo Alves Fulltime employed at
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (the
Netherlands), Fulﬁlls a position in the Advisory Board of a not-for-
proﬁt organization called Mieux Prescrire, but receives no ﬁnancial
payment., Martina Cornel Fulltime employed at Amsterdam UMC,
the Netherlands, Tessel Rigter Part-time employed at National
Institute for Public Health and the Environment (the Netherlands),
part-time employed at Amsterdam UMC.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
640
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P20.004.B The contribution of rare whole genome sequencing
variants to plasma protein levels and to the missing
heritability
Marcin Kierczak1, Nima Rafati1, Julia Höglund2, Hadrien Gourlé2,
Valeria Lo Faro2, Daniel Schmitz2, Weronica Ek2, Ulf Gyllensten2,
Stefan Enroth2, Diana Ekman3, Björn Nystedt1, Torgny Karlsson2, Åsa
Johansson1;2
1Uppsala university, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden;
2Uppsala university, Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala,
Sweden; 3Stockholm University, Science for Life Laboratory, Stock-
holm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Despite the success of genome-wide
association studies, much of the genetic contribution to complex
traits remains unexplained. Here, we analysed high coverage
whole-genome sequencing data, to evaluate the contribution of
rare genetic variants plasma protein concentrations and to the
heritability.
Methods: Whole-genome sequencing was performed using
Illumina short read technology (X-ten) and protein levels for 460
putative biomarkers was measured using the Olink Proseek Mul-
tiplex panels (CVD II, CVD III, INF I, ONC II and NEU I) and the
protein extension assay. Association analyses were performed
using SKAT with different weights and minor allele frequency cut-
offs.
Results: The frequency distribution of genetic variants was
skewed towards the rare spectrum, and damaging variants were
more often rare. We estimated that less than 4.3% of the narrow-
sense heritability is expected to be explained by rare variants in
our cohort. Using a gene-based approach and SKAT, we identiﬁed
Cis-associations for 237 of the proteins, which is slightly more
compared to a GWAS (N = 213), and we identiﬁed 34 loci in Trans.
Several associations were driven by rare variants, and rare variants
had on average larger phenotypic effects.
Conclusion: We conclude therefore that rare variants could be
of importance for precision medicine applications, but have a
more limited contribution to the missing heritability of complex
diseases.
References:.
Grants: This work was funded by the SciLifeLab, the Swedish
Medical Research Council (2019-01497) and the Swedish Heart-
Lung foundation (nr. 20200687).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.005.C The effect of LPA p.Thr1399Pro on lipoprotein(a)
concentrations and coronary artery disease is modiﬁed by an
interaction with the LPA splice site variant KIV-2 4925G>A
Rebecca Grüneis1, Claudia Lamina1, Silvia Di Maio1, Sebastian
Schoenherr1, Peter Zöscher1, Lukas Forer1, Annette Peters2;3, Christian
Gieger2;3, Anna Köttgen4;5, Florian Kronenberg1, Stefan Coassin1
1Medical University of Innsbruck, Institute of Genetic Epidemiology,
Innsbruck, Austria; 2German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD),
München-Neuherberg, Germany;
3Helmholtz Zentrum München -
German Research Center for Environmental Health, Institute of
Epidemiology, Neuherberg, Germany; 4University of Freiburg, Institute
of Genetic Epidemiology, Freiburg, Germany;
5German Chronic
Kidney Disease study, Erlangen, Germany.
Background/Objectives: High Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] concentra-
tions are a major genetic risk factor for coronary artery disease
(CAD) in the general population[1]. Lp(a) variance is determined
by the complex LPA gene, with a coding CNV (“KIV-2 repeat”)
encompassing up to 70% of the coding region and determining
30-70% of Lp(a) variance[1]. Additionally, many LPA variants fur-
ther contribute to Lp(a) variance[1].
Methods: The effect of the interaction between the largely
investigated
but
ambiguous
coding
SNP
rs41272110
(p.Thr1399Pro) and the splice variant 4925G>A located in the KIV-
2 repeat was investigated by quantile regression in 10,405 indi-
viduals from three German studies (GCKD, KORA F3 and KORA F4).
Survival analysis was used to assess the impact of both variants on
CAD risk in UKBiobank (n = 186,088 exomes).
Results: We observed a highly signiﬁcant SNP interaction
(p < 3.03e-04). Rs41272110 alone showed no impact on Lp(a) (β = -
0.06 [-0.79;0.68], p = 0.879) and CAD risk (HR = 1.01 [0.97;1.04],
p = 0.731), but in a model containing both variants, rs41272110 was
associated with markedly increased Lp(a) (β = +9.40 mg/dL,
[6.45;12.34], p = 4.07E-10) and higher CAD risk (HR = 1.10, [1.04;1.16],
p = 6.9e-04). The effect of rs41272110 is seen only in carriers of
rs41272110 not carrying 4925G>A (i.e. sizeable 4% of the population),
but at population level it is masked by partial association (R2 = 0.836-
0.872, D’ = 0.984-0.985) and interaction with KIV-2 4925G>A.
Conclusion: We identify a SNP interaction and a novel CAD risk
variant in the LPA gene. Our work emphasizes that missed SNP
interactions in the genome may lead to inaccurate determination
of phenotypic effects.
References:.
[1]Coassin S et al, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/
ehx174.
Grants: Austrian Science Fund (FWF) P31458-B34.
Conﬂict of Interest: Rebecca Grüneis: None declared, Claudia
Lamina: None declared, Silvia Di Maio: None declared, Sebastian
Schoenherr: None declared, Peter Zöscher: None declared, Lukas
Forer: None declared, Annette Peters: None declared, Christian
Gieger: None declared, Anna Köttgen: None declared, Florian
Kronenberg served on the advisory boards and has received lec-
ture fees from Novartis and Amgen., Stefan Coassin: None
declared.
P20.006.D Functional differences between the modern human
and Neandertal aryl hydrocarbon receptor
Nelly Helmbrecht1, Martin Lackner1, Svante Pääbo1;2
1Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany;
2Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, Onna-son, Japan.
Background/Objectives: The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a
ligand-activated transcription factor important in the response to
toxicants. AHR in modern humans differs from the AHR of Nean-
dertals, Denisovans or other primates by having an alanine to
valine substitution at position 381. Previous studies where these
variants were overexpressed have yielded contradictory results.
Here, we investigate the activity of the two versions of AHR by
genome editing.
Methods: We introduced the codon for the Neandertal-like
amino acid in human cells using CRISPR/Cas genome editing,
exposed the edited and non-edited cells to AHR ligands and
measured the expression of the AHR target genes cytochromes
P450 1A1 and P450 1B1 with real-time quantitative PCR and
additional target genes by RNA-Sequencing.
Results: We show that the induction of the transcription of the
AHR target genes does not differ in cells expressing the ances-
tralized and modern versions of AHR when they are exposed to
the microbiome-derived metabolite indirubin. In contrast, the
ancestral AHR variant induces a transcriptional response at >1000-
fold
lower
concentrations
than
the
modern
human
AHR
variant when cells are exposed to the environmental pollutant
benzo(a)pyrene and the endogenous tryptophan metabolite
kynurenic acid.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
641
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Furthermore, the ancestralized cells are similar to comparable
chimpanzee cells in that they express higher levels of AHR target
genes when no ligands are added.
Conclusion: Compared to the ancestral variant seen in archaic
hominins, modern human AHR activates its target genes to a
lesser extent when exposed to kynurenic acid and benzo(a)pyr-
ene. This may be advantageous in that less DNA adducts might be
formed.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.007.A Phenome-wide association studies of genetic
variants in microRNAs
Rima Mustafa1, Mohsen Ghanbari2, Marina Evangelou3, Abbas
Dehghan1;4;5
1Imperial
College
London,
Department
of
Epidemiology
and
Biostatistics, London, United Kingdom; 2Erasmus MC, Department
of Epidemiology, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 3Imperial College London,
Department of Mathematics, London, United Kingdom; 4Imperial
College London, Dementia Research Institute, London, United
Kingdom; 5Imperial College London, MRC Centre for Environment
and Health, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Genetic variants in microRNAs (miRNAs)
can affect their biogenesis or functionality. Previous research
showed these variants could be associated with disease, but their
implication on a wide range of phenotypes remains unknown.
Here we aim to study the effects of those variants on human
phenome.
Methods: We utilized genotype and hospital episode statistics
data to investigate associations between genetic variants in miR-
NAs and clinical diagnoses in 423,419 participants in the UK Bio-
bank. We extracted 346 genetic variants in seed, mature, or
precursor genes of miRNAs. We included 905 diagnoses with at
least 200 cases. Phenome-wide association studies were con-
ducted for each genetic variant separately, adjusting for age, sex,
genotyping array, and the ﬁrst ﬁve principal components.
Results: At FDR<0.05, we identiﬁed 122 associations between
42 genetic variants (6 in seed, 9 in mature, and 27 in precursor
genes of miRNAs, respectively) and 63 diagnoses across 14 disease
groups. Of those, 47 associations (38.5%) were genome-wide
signiﬁcant. The strongest associations were reported between
genetic variants in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
region, including rs4285314 in the precursor gene of miR-3135b
and celiac disease (P = 1.80e-162) and other immune-related
disorders. Excluding MHC region, rs368791729 and rs370955537 in
mature miR-3939 remain the most signiﬁcant ﬁndings associated
with hypothyroidism (P = 8.06e-11 and P = 4.17e-10, respectively).
Conclusion: Our study shows that genetic variants in miRNAs
could have clinical implications and offers an opportunity to
investigate their clinical importance. Further studies are needed to
validate the ﬁndings, assess their causality, and explore the
underlying mechanism.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.008.B Genetics and material culture support repeated
expansions into paleolithic Eurasia from a population hub out
of Africa
Leonardo Vallini1, Giulia Marciani2;3, Serena Aneli1;4, Eugenio
Bortolini2, Stefano Benazzi2;5, Telmo Pievani1, Luca Pagani1;6
1University of Padova, Department of Biology, Padova, Italy; 2University
of Bologna, Department of Cultural Heritage, Ravenna, Italy; 3University
of Siena, Department of Physical Sciences, Earth and Environment,
Siena, Italy; 4University of Torino, Department of Public Health Sciences
and Pediatrics, Torino, Italy; 5Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, Department of Human Evolution, Leipzig, Germany;
6University of Tartu, Institute of Genomics, Tartu, Estonia.
Background/Objectives: The population dynamics that followed
the Out of Africa expansion of Homo sapiens and the whereabouts
of the early migrants before the differentiation that ultimately led
to the formation of Oceanian, West and East Eurasian macro
populations have long been debated. Shedding light on these
events may, in turn, provide clues to better understand cultural
evolution in Eurasia 50.000-35.000 years ago.
Methods: Here we analyze the available Eurasian Paleolithic
aDNA to provide a comprehensive population model (primarily
using admixturegraphs) and validate it in light of available
material culture.
Results: We show that the genetic modeling of Paleolithic
genomes largely matches the material culture evidence and
suggests multiple waves of colonization of Eurasia.
The only representative of the ﬁrst expansion has been
recovered in Europe and might be linked with the so called
“transitional cultures” documented there 48.000-43.000 years ago.
A second, major, population wave is broadly associated with Initial
Upper Paleolithic lithics and populated West and East Eurasia
around 45.000 years ago, before getting largely extinct in Europe.
Another expansion, started before 38.000 years ago, is broadly
associated with Upper Paleolithic industries and repopulated
Europe with sporadic admixtures with the previous wave and
more systematic ones while moving through Siberia.
Conclusion: Leveraging on our integrated approach we pro-
pose that, starting from a Eurasian population Hub, the broader
colonization of the continent occurred through multiple events of
expansion and local extinctions; with each expansion character-
ized by distinct chronologies, genetics and lithic technologies.
References:.
Grants:
UniPd
PRID
2019,
EU
Horizon
2020
(N.724046–SUCCESS).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.009.C Heterogeneity of lung function signals and genetic
risk score in predicting Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease in a multi-ancestry study of 580,869 individuals
Jing Chen1, Nick Shrine1, Abril Izquierdo1, Anna Guyatt1, Richard
Packer1, Chiara Batini1, Xiaowei Hu2, Ain W Manichaikul2, Brian
Hobbs3,
Michael
Cho3,
Tamar
Sofer4,
Karsten
Suhre5,
Alfred
Pozarickij6, Robin G Walters6;7, Stephanie London8, Andrew Morris9,
Louise Wain1;10, Ian P. Hall11, Martin D Tobin1;10
1Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, United
Kingdom; 2Center for Public Health Genomics, School of Medicine,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, United States; 3Channing Division
of Network Medicine and Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, United States;
4Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Harvard
University, Massachusetts, United States; 59Bioinformatics Core, Weill
Cornell Medicine-Qatar, Education City, Doha, Qatar;
6Nufﬁeld
Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom; 7MRC Population Health Research Unit, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom; 8Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC, United
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
642
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
States; 9Centre for Genetics and Genomics Versus Arthritis, Centre for
Musculoskeletal Research, The university of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom; 10National Institute for Health Research Biomedical
Research Centre – Respiratory theme, Glenﬁeld Hospital, Leicester,
United Kingdom;
11Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives:
Eurocentric
biases in genome-wide
association studies have risked exacerbating health disparities.
We aimed to: (i) investigate genetic ancestry-related hetero-
geneity in effect sizes of lung function associated loci; (ii) develop
and assess a multi-ancestry genetic risk score (GRS) for lung
function (the ratio of forced expiratory volume in 1 second to
forced vital capacity, FEV1/FVC); and (iii) evaluate the performance
of the multi-ancestry GRS in prediction of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
Methods: We assessed the heterogeneity of lung function
genetic signals using MR-MEGA. We constructed two GRS both
including 442 SNPs associated with lung function in 580,869
individuals across ﬁve ancestry groups: (i) using ancestry-speciﬁc
weights estimated from a ﬁxed-effects meta-analyses across
cohorts (discovery dataset) within the same ancestry group; (ii)
using weights estimated from a multi-ancestry meta-regression
(MR-MEGA) across all cohorts. We evaluated GRS performance
over ancestry-matched groups in UK Biobank (independent test-
ing datasets).
Results: We observed 109 (11.4%) signals with nominal evi-
dence
of
ancestry-correlated
heterogeneity
(binominal
test
p = 5.17x10-15). In UK Biobank, the multi-ancestry GRS consistently
outperformed ancestry-speciﬁc GRS in association with FEV1/FVC
and COPD. The variance of FEV1/FVC explained in European
ancestry individuals by multi-ancestry GRS has increased from
5.02% to 7.77% compared to our previously published GRS
derived in European samples; from 0.74% to 2.35% for African
ancestry and from 2.02% to 3.84% for East Asian ancestry.
Conclusion: 11% of lung function loci exhibit ancestry-related
heterogeneous effects. Multi-ancestry GRS for FEV1/FVC better
predicts COPD compared to a GRS based on same-ancestry GRS.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jing Chen full-time, Nick Shrine full time,
Abril Izquierdo full, Anna Guyatt full, Richard Packer full, Chiara
Batini full, Xiaowei Hu full, Ain W Manichaikul full, Brian Hobbs full,
Michael Cho full, Tamar Sofer full, Karsten Suhre full, Alfred
Pozarickij full, Robin G Walters full, Stephanie London full, Andrew
Morris full, Louise Wain full, Ian P. Hall full, Martin D Tobin full.
P20.010.D Estimating diagnostic noise in panel-based
genomic analysis
Robin Beaumont1, Caroline Wright1
1University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Gene panels with strict variant ﬁltering
rules are often used for clinical analysis of exomes and genomes.
Panels sizes vary, depending upon the genetic heterogeneity of
the clinical presentation, affecting the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of
the test. We investigated diagnostic variant ﬁltering in a popula-
tion setting using gene panels developed to diagnose a range of
heterogeneous monogenic diseases.
Methods: We used the Genotype-2-Phenotype database with
the Variant Effect Predictor plugin (VEP-G2P) to identify rare non-
synonymous variants in exome sequence data from 200,643
individuals in UK Biobank. We evaluated ﬁve clinically curated
gene panels: developmental disorders (DD; 1716 genes), heritable
eye disease (536 genes), skin disorders (293 genes), cancer
syndromes (91 genes) and cardiac conditions (49 genes). We used
phenotypic data to evaluate potential clinical overlap between
individuals in UK Biobank and gene-disease panels.
Results: As expected, bigger gene panels resulted in more
prioritised variants, from ~0.3 per person in the smallest panel
(cardiac) to ~3.5 using the largest panel (DD) with more in indi-
viduals of non-European ancestry. The number of prioritized var-
iants increased with gene length, with some notable outliers. Most
prioritized variants were missense, but the number can be
reduced by applying REVEL score thresholds or ClinVar patho-
genicity assertions, or phasing heterozygotes in biallelic genes.
Conclusion: Although large gene panels may be the best
strategy to maximize diagnostic yield in genetically hetero-
geneous diseases, they will frequently generate false positives.
Extreme caution should therefore be applied when interpreting
candidate diagnostic variants found incidentally.
References:.
Grants: MR/T00200X/1.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.011.A Reidentifying canonical metabolic networks using
observational data
Adriaan van der Graaf1, Kaido Lepik1, Zoltan Kutalik1
1Université de Lausanne, Department of Computational biology,
Ecublens, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Molecular traits are interesting candi-
dates for causal inference as they can be biomarkers for disease.
Mendelian randomization (MR) identiﬁes causal relationships
between complex traits. Unfortunately, application of MR to
molecular traits is difﬁcult due to lack of instruments and the fact
that these networks are only partially observed leading to con-
founding or pleiotropy.
Methods: We assessed multivariable MR (MVMR) performance
in complex network scenarios through simulations of the caffeine
metabolism network (KEGG ID hsa000232). In order to test how
well KEGG metabolite networks can be recovered in general, we
applied MVMR to metabolite QTLs (mQTL) obtained from two
studies comprising up to 30,724 individuals. For this, we ﬁrst
identiﬁed 76 metabolites (with 190 reactions between them) in
KEGG for which we have mQTLs and then tested how well MVMR
can distinguish conﬁrmed reactions from unsupported links.
Results: In various simulation settings, MVMR with Steiger-ﬁlter
re-identiﬁed the caffeine metabolic network edges with well-
controled false positive rates (mean: 0.050, min: 0.030, max: 0.080)
and high power (mean: 0.695, min: 0.652). MVMR based on mQTLs
successfully reidentiﬁed the caffeine network (AUC 0.77), even
when mQTLs for many (9/19) metabolites are unavailable. When
extending the network to all 76 matching KEGG metabolites, we
found slightly attenuated discriminative ability (AUC: 0.69).
Conclusion: We show that metabolic networks can serve as
ground truth for causal inference. MVMR demonstrated dis-
criminative ability for these networks. Our results can also be used
to understand why often MVMR fails when applied to molecular
traits.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.012.B Characterization of Danube Swabian samples on a
high-resolution genome-wide basis
Zsolt Bánfai1;2, Erzsébet Kövesdi2;3, Katalin Sümegi1;2, Valerián
Ádám1, Ferenc Pálos1, Attila Miseta4, Miklós Kásler5, Bela Melegh1;2
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
643
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1University of Pécs, Clinical Centre, Department of Medical Genetics,
Pécs, Hungary; 2University of Pécs, Szentágothai Research Centre,
Pécs, Hungary;
3University of Pécs, Medical School, Institute of
Physiology, Pécs, Hungary;
4University of Pécs, Medical School,
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pécs, Hungary;
5National
Institute of Oncology, Budapest, Hungary.
Background/Objectives: German-derived ethnicities are one of
the largest ethnic groups in Hungary, which date back to the 11th
century. Germans came to Hungary in multiple waves throughout
history. The biggest immigration wave took place following the
collapse of the Ottoman Empire in East-Central Europe. To date,
there are no studies available regarding the investigation of their
genetic makeup. Here we intended to assess Danube Swabian
samples using standard methods in order to determine their
suitability for more comprehensive investigations.
Methods: We analysed 47 Danube Swabian samples collected
from elderly individuals living in Southwest Hungary. Based on
self-declaration, they did not admix with other ethnicities for 3-6
succeeding generations. Using Illumina 720K genotype data, we
conducted allele frequency- and haplotype-based genome-wide
marker data analyses like maximum likelihood ancestry estimation
methods, formal tests of admixture, identical by descent and
homozygous by descent DNA segment analyses.
Results: Haplotype-based analyses like identity by descent and
homozygous by descent segment analyses show that the inves-
tigated Danube Swabians remained isolated from other ethnic
groups. This was also supported by D-statistics results. The
investigated Danube Swabians are unadmixed, and our results
suggest that their main source of ancestry can be traced back to
Germany.
Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst genome-wide analysis of Danube
Swabians and according to the results, our analysed Swabian
samples remained remarkably isolated. This makes our data
exceptional and give us a great advantage in the reconstruction of
their origin and the identiﬁcation of their major archaic genomic
patterns.
References:.
Grants: Supported by NKFIH 138669 and AHT 386706 grants.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.013.C Population genetic proﬁling of hereditary
transthyretin amyloidosis in Bulgaria and possible non-coding
genetic modiﬁers
Zornitsa Pavlova1;2;3, Tihomir Todorov1;3, Teodora Chamova4,
Mariana Gospodinova5, Vanyo Mitev2, Ivaylo Tournev4, Albena
Todorova1;2;3
1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Soﬁa, Bulgaria;
2Medical University Soﬁa, Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria;
3Independent
Medico-Diagnostic
Laboratory
Genome
Center “Bulgaria”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 4UMBAL Aleksandrovska, Medical
University Soﬁa, Department of Neurology, Clinic of Nervous
Diseases, Soﬁa, Bulgaria; 5University Hospital “St. Ivan Rilski”, Soﬁa,
Bulgaria.
Background/Objectives: In Bulgaria there is high prevalence of
vATTR and founder effect for Glu89Gln TTR variant. Haplotype
analysis of the other known TTR mutations, located in exons 2 and
3 and screening of exons 1 and 4 in suspected patients is
important for exploration of the vATTR diversity. The search of
genetic modiﬁers with possible effect on the manifestation of
vATTR could have impact on the disease heterogeneity research.
Methods: Haplotype analysis was performed with micro-
satellite markers on chromosome 18. DNA samples from vATTR
patients and their healthy relatives were analysed. TTR screening
in exons 1 and 4 of other suspected patients, DBS screening of
Roma newborns for Gly47Glu and regulatory SNP detection in
Glu89Gln cohort were performed via Sanger sequencing. All
samples were selected from our DNA bank.
Results: Founder effect was proved for the variants Val30Met
and Ser77Phe. The results from the DBS screening of newborns for
Gly47Glu were negative. We didn’t ﬁnd any TTR pathogenic var-
iants in exons 1 and 4 in the tested patients. Two of the selected
regulatory SNPs in the Glu89Gln cohort are linked in haplotype
and hypothetically could correlate to the late disease onset with
cardiac manifestation.
Conclusion: Bulgaria has several endemic loci with founder
effect for vATTR with distinct genetic background. The presence of
Gly47Glu is sporadic event. TTR exons 2 and 3 are proven hot-spot
for vATTR in Bulgaria. More studies should be done in order to
reach statistical signiﬁcance for the hypothesis of the effect of
regulatory SNPs.
References:.
Grants: WI241542 2018 GLOBAL ASPIRE TTR Amyloidosis.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.014.D Validation of low-pass sequencing approach for
HGDP populations
Christian Daviaud1, Zuzana Gerber1, Claire dandine-roulland1,
stéphane meslage1, delphine bacq-daian1, Vincent Meyer1, Edith Le
Floch1, Anne Boland1, Robert Olaso1, Jean-François Deleuze1;2
1CEA, Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine, EVRY,
France; 2Centre d’Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH) Fonda-
tion Jean Dausset, PARIS, France.
Background/Objectives: Low-pass sequencing is whole genome
sequencing to an average depth 1× combined with genotype
imputation. It has been proposed as a cost-effective alternative to
genotyping arrays to identify genetic variants [1]. Most genotyp-
ing arrays best capture variation common in populations of Eur-
opean
ancestry,
while
low-pass
sequencing
mitigates
this
ascertainment bias and can therefore be applied in under-
represented populations. Furthermore, unlike genotyping arrays, it
allows effective identiﬁcation of novel variation. In this study, we
applied low-pass sequencing to over 1000 individuals from 52
world populations from the HGDP panel [2], to evaluate the per-
formance compared to standard 30× whole genome sequencing.
Methods: Libraries from 1062 HGDP individuals (CEPH, Fon-
dation-Jean-Dausset) have been prepared with a miniaturized
assay (adapted from Illumina), optimized and fully automated in
our laboratory. Libraries (N = 720) were pooled to obtain low
coverage (target 1×) and sequenced on a NovaSeq S4 ﬂowcell
(Illumina). Coverage metrics were assessed using our custom
pipeline. Haplotype imputation was performed on a subset of
libraries with a dedicated pipeline (Gencove).
Results: We obtained homogeneous results for all libraries,
with mean depth of coverage 1.0× (interquartile range: IQR = 0.2)
and mean breadth of coverage 55.4% (IQR = 7.0%). Coverage was
relatively homogeneous across all chromosomes.
Conclusion: This is a proof-of-principle study to evaluate low-
pass sequencing approach and test its beneﬁts and limits by
analyzing genomes of individuals from
populations under-
represented in genome reference panels.
References: [1] Li et al. 2021. Genome Res 31(4):529-537.
[2] Bergström et al. 2020. Science 370(6516):557-564.
Grants: LabEx GenMed (grant number ANR-10-LABX-0013).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
644
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P20.017.C Using non-linear and stratiﬁed Mendelian
randomisation to explore relationships between body mass
index and the plasma proteome
Lucy Goudswaard1, David Hughes1, Adam Butterworth2, Nicole
Soranzo3, Ingeborg Hers1, Nicholas Timpson1
1University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom; 2University of Cam-
bridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 3Wellcome Sanger Institute,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Elevated body mass index (BMI) raises the
risk of diseases such as Type 2 Diabetes (T2D). The circulating pro-
teome has been explored as an intermediate between adiposity and
disease, where alterations in growth hormone receptor (GHR) and
insulin-like growth factor binding proteins (IGFBP1/2) likely mediate
some risk. These associations are often modelled using linear
methods but recent studies have indicated that such relationships
may be non-linear. This is important when measuring the effect of
BMI on protein levels as it may have implications for understanding
how weight loss interventions inﬂuence disease risk reduction.
Methods: We estimated linear and non-linear associations
between BMI and protein (SomaLogic, N>3600) levels using
observational and Mendelian randomisation (MR) frameworks in
INTERVAL, a UK blood donor cohort (N = 2737). To estimate non-
linear associations, an R package was developed (“glsmr” - gen-
eralized additive model (GAM) and linear stratiﬁed MR). Non-linear
effects were identiﬁed by comparing the observational linear
model and non-linear GAM models using an F-test. In addition,
BMI stratiﬁed (BMI = 18.5-25kg/m2, 25-30kg/m2 and 30-40kg/m2)
linear observational and MR analyses were performed to estimate
BMI-protein associations in each stratum.
Results: We observed attenuated estimates for BMI on levels of
proteins including leptin, GHR and IGFBPs when comparing the
obesity stratum with normal-weight and overweight strata.
Conclusion: These analyses suggest weight loss interventions
may be less effective at higher BMIs where plateauing associations
between BMI and protein level is observed. This could have
implications for weight loss interventions and disease risk
reduction.
References:.
Grants: University of Bristol alumni, BHF, EPSRC Prostanoid
programme, Wellcome Trust.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.018.D Simulated European Genome-phenome Dataset of
1,000,000 Individuals for 1+ Million Genomes Initiative
Tero Hiekkalinna1, Vilho Heikkinen1, Markus Perola1, Joseph
Terwilliger1;2;3
1Finnish
Institute
for
Health
and
Welfare,
Helsinki,
Finland;
2Columbia University, Department of Psychiatry, Department of
Genetics and Development, Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, New York,
United States;
3New York State Psychiatric Institute, Division of
Medical Genetics, New York, United States.
Background/Objectives: We are in the process of simulating
1,000,000
individual
genomes
accompanied
with
simulated
quantitative and qualitative phenotypes for the 1+MG initiative.
We will use a mosaic of publicly available sequence data sets from
European populations. This data is needed to set a founding
population (original chromosomes) and parameters for the simu-
lation of million genomes.
Methods: Our method of choice is the chromosome-based
simulation method (Terwilliger, 1993) which allows rapid simula-
tion of populations. In this simulation we drop chromosomes
through a population for a few hundred generations of drift, while
keeping track of recombination events in every meiosis, so that at
the end of the simulation we will have a set of families whose
genomes will be highly recombined mosaics of the original
chromosomes. The dataset will have all the characteristics and
data issues that any “true” genome set would.
Phenotypes will be simulated based on epidemiological mod-
els, comprised of parameters such as heritability, contribution of
environmental factors, prevalence, and others which must be
hypothesized (number of genes, allelic complexity, relative effect
size). Based on such parameters, a genotype →phenotype rela-
tionship is simulated.
Results: Simulated data can be used to benchmark the
national service implementations, technical standard compatibility
and best practices in sensitive human data management. Purpose
is to create a truly anonymised dataset of million genomes in
different formats that can be used and shared without fear for
data security issues.
Conclusion: We are already simulating hundreds of thousands
individuals and we utilize supercomputer resources of Finnish CSC
IT Center for Science.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.020.B Variation at ADH1B-ADH1C is associated with
alcohol and drug dependence in Ukrainians and has
pleiotropic effects on metabolic traits
Vitalina Bashynska1;2, Oksana Zahorodnia3;4, Yuliia Borysovych3;5,
Yaroslav Zaplatnikov6;7, Valeriia Vasylieva6, Ihor Areﬁev6, Darina
Osichanskaya8, Anna Pastyria9, Dmytro Krasnienkov10, Oksana
Zabuga10, Kateryna Murlanova11, Alexander Koliada11, Artur Kar-
apetov8, Oleksandra Melnychuk12, Olena Boiko12, Gennady Zilber-
blat12,
Nataliia
Slobodianyuk1,
Larysa
Bal-Prylypko1,
Inga
Prokopenko13, Marika Kaakinen13;14
1National University of Life and Environmental Sciences of Ukraine,
Faculty food technologies and quality management of agricultural
products, Kyiv, Ukraine; 2LightGene LLC, R&D, Kyiv, Ukraine; 3Taras
Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, Institute of High Technolo-
gies, Kyiv, Ukraine;
4Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg,
Institute of Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences (FNW), Magdeburg,
Germany; 5Heidelberg University, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany; 6Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv,
EDUCATIONAL AND SCIENTIFIC CENTER “Institute of Biology and
Medicine”, Kyiv, Ukraine; 7University of Bonn, Institute of Molecular
Physiology and Biotechnology of Plants (IMBIO), Bonn, Germany;
8MedLux Rehabilitation Center, Kyiv, Ukraine; 9BioLabTech LTD, Kyiv,
Ukraine; 10Chebotariov Institute of Gerontology, National Academy
of Medical Sciences, Laboratory of Epigenetics, Kyiv, Ukraine;
11Diagen Genetic Laboratory, Kyiv, Ukraine; 12Kyiv City Psychoneur-
ological Hospital №3, Psychiatric department for the treatment of
patients with alcohol dependence, Glevakha, Ukraine; 13University of
Surrey, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Guildford,
United
Kingdom;
14Imperial
College
London,
Department
of
Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Substance use disorders (SUDs), includ-
ing drug (DD), alcohol (AD) and nicotine (ND) dependence, are
global public health threats. SUDs are highly co-morbid with each
other and there is evidence for co-morbidity with other health-
related traits, including psychiatric and metabolic traits. This
suggests underlying shared genetic effects. We investigated var-
iation at the mainly alcohol-associated region ADH1B-ADH1C for a
range of SUDs in Ukrainians and the potential pleiotropic effects
on other traits.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
645
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: We genotyped rs1789891 at ADH1B-ADH1C in 507
individuals with and without SUDs from Ukraine (mean age
32.6±9.6 years). The individuals’ case/control statuses were
deﬁned for each phenotype depending on their ICD-10 diagnosis
and the standard questionnaire measures. We performed logistic
regression for DD (in general and for opiate (OD)/stimulators
(AmphD) dependence), AD, and ND, adjusting for sex and other
SUDs phenotypes. We further conducted a phenome-wide asso-
ciation study of rs1789891 in UK Biobank (UKBB) data using
GeneATLAS.
Results: rs1789891 in Ukrainians was associated with AD
(P = 0.0087)
and
DD
(P = 0.0321),
speciﬁcally
with
AmphD
(P = 0.0261), with the direction of effect corresponding to the
established results, but not with OD, ND, or alcohol consumption.
rs1789891 showed an association in the UKBB with alcohol intake
frequency (P = 2.45x10-24) and suggestive evidence for associa-
tions with F10 AD (P = 3.27x10-8), Waist/Hip circumference ratio
(P = 3.02x10-6),
and
Non-insulin-dependent
diabetes
mellitus
(P = 3.03x10-6).
Conclusion: Our results suggest variation at ADH1B-ADH1C
may have pleiotropic effects on multiple SUDs as well as meta-
bolic phenotypes.
References:.
Grants: University of Surrey Faculty Research Support Fund,
US-Ukraine Biotech Initiative Small Research Grant, Crowd.Science,
Diagen genetic laboratory.
Conﬂict of Interest: Vitalina Bashynska Lightgene LLC, part-
time employment (modest contribution) - scientiﬁc consultant in
molecular biology, PI and co-I in several research grants (those
relevant to the research are declared in the ‘Grants’ section,
Have received in-kind support (availability of equipment) from
Diagen genetic laboratory (2018-2020) and Institute of Ger-
ontology NAMS Ukraine (2021-2022), Oksana Zahorodnia: None
declared, Yuliia Borysovych: None declared, Yaroslav Zaplatni-
kov: None declared, Valeriia Vasylieva: None declared, Ihor Are-
ﬁev: None declared, Darina Osichanskaya: None declared, Anna
Pastyria: None declared, Dmytro Krasnienkov: None declared,
Oksana Zabuga: None declared, Kateryna Murlanova: None
declared, Alexander Koliada: None declared, Artur Karapetov:
None declared, Oleksandra Melnychuk: None declared, Olena
Boiko: None declared, Gennady Zilberblat: None declared,
Nataliia Slobodianyuk: None declared, Larysa Bal-Prylypko: None
declared, Inga Prokopenko PI and co-I in several research grants
(those relevant to the research are declared in the ‘Grants’
section, Marika Kaakinen PI and co-I in several research grants
(those relevant to the research are declared in the ‘Grants’
section.
P20.021.C Haplotype graph assembly using Swedish
individuals
Kristine Bilgrav Saether1, Anna Lindstrand1;2, Jesper Eisfeldt1;2;3
1Karolinska Institute, Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Stockholm,
Sweden; 2Karolinska University Hospital, Clinical Genetics, Karolinska
University Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden; 3SciLifeLab, Stockholm,
Sweden.
Background/Objectives:
Next
generation
sequencing
(NGS)
methods such as short-read whole genome sequencing (SR-WGS)
has transformed clinical analysis, solving complex genomic rear-
rangements. Regardless, capturing the complexity of the genome
and relating phenotype-genotype is challening using SR-WGS,
resulting in patients remaining without a molecular diagnosis.
Using long-read data to create a Swedish haplotype graph will
allow association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with
haplotypes,
easing
prediction
of
disease
susceptibility
and
phenotype-genotype interactions in Swedish patients.
Methods: To enable phasing of SNPs we built a haplotype
graph using 62 Swedish individuals sequenced with linked-read
sequencing. A custom de Bruijn graph-algorithm was applied to
assemble the graph. Using 1000 additional Swedish genomes
from the SweGen1 dataset sequenced with mostly short-, but also
long-read WGS, we identiﬁed common haplotypes in the Swedish
population. The haplotypes were compared to phased genomes
from the 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP)2 and haplotype reference
consortium (HRC)3.
Results: The de Bruijn graph with a kmer length of 2 SNPs is
represented by nodes and edges, where traversal will result in a
de Bruijn sequence representing a haplotype. We identiﬁed >1000
haplotypes, covering 90% of the genome. Using haplotype panels
from the 1KGP and HRC, we distinguished population-speciﬁc
haplotypes and inheritance patterns.
Conclusion: We built a population-speciﬁc haplotype graph of
Swedish individuals, capturing local genetic diversity. The graph
enables accurate phasing and genomic imputation in clinical
analysis, as well as GWAS and linkage analysis studies of
complex SNPs.
References: 1) Ameur, A., et al., https://doi.org/10.1038/
ejhg.2017.130.
2)
1000
Genomes
Consortium,
https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature15393.
3) Haplotype Reference Consortium, https://doi.org/10.1038/
ng.3643.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.022.D Lessons learned from the ﬁrst national population-
based carrier-screening program for Duchenne Muscular
Dystrophy
Lena Sagi-Dain1, Amihood Singer2, julia grinshpun-cohen2
1Carmel Medical Center, Genetics Institute, Haifa, Israel;
2Israel
Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel.
Background/Objectives: The Israeli Ministry of Health genetic
screening program for reproductive purposes is mainly aimed at
severe incurable diseases with high rates of infant and childhood
morbidity and/or mortality, a carrier frequency of at least 1:60 and/
or a disease frequency of 1 in 15 000 live births. Recently, Duch-
enne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) testing was included in pan-
ethnic screening tests, and our objective was to summarize the
results of ﬁrst year implementation of this test.
Methods: Data acquisition for this study was performed by
retrospective search of Ministry of Health database, encompassing
the reports of all national laboratories performing genetic
screening tests. Deletion and duplication testing of the 79 DMD
exons was performed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
ampliﬁcation
technology.
In
case
of
single
exon
deletion,
sequencing of the speciﬁc exon was performed to rule out
underlying single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP).
Results: Of overall 35,830 DMD tests, 49 female carriers
were noted (0.14%, 1:731). Of these, 41 constituted in-frame
deletions and duplications, and only 8 (0.02%, 1:4479) were out-
of-frame variants. Additional 201 single exon deletions were
subsequently deﬁned as false-positives due to underlying SNP
(0.56%, 1:178), the majority of these are exon 8 deletion in North
African Jewish population, and exon 48 deletion in Arab Muslim
population.
Conclusion: Interpretation of population-based DMD carrier-
screening
might
be
highly
complex,
occasionally
requiring
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
646
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
additional genetic testing methods and ethical considerations.
Multicenter data registry, including ethnic origin and familial
segregation in selected cases, is crucial for optimal deﬁnition of
the results and informed decisions regarding prenatal testing.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.024.B a genome-wide screening of plasma circulating
microRNAs associated with obesity, body fat distribution and
fat mass: the Rotterdam Study
Yasir J. Abozaid1, Xiaofang Zhang1, Michelle Mens2, Fariba
Ahmadizar3, Marlou Limpens1, Arfan Ikram1, Fernando Rivadeneira4,
Trudy Voortman1, Maryam Kavousi1, Mohsen Ghanbari1
1Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Epidemiology, Rotterdam,
Netherlands; 2Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Epidemiol-
ogy, Boston, United States;
3University Utrecht Medical Center,
Utrecht, Netherlands;
4Erasmus MC University Medical Center,
Internal Medicine, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: MicroRNAs represent a class of small
non-coding
RNAs
that
regulate
gene
expression
post-
transcriptionally and are implicated in the pathogenesis of dif-
ferent diseases. However, limited studies have investigated the
relationship between circulating miRNAs and obesity-related traits
in large-scale using population-based data.
Methods: We conducted a genome-wide proﬁle of circulating
miRNAs in plasma, collected between 2002 and 2005, in 1208
participants from the Rotterdam Study. Obesity was measured by
body mass index (BMI) and waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) and body
composition including fat mass index (FMI) and android-fat to
gynoid-fat ratio (AGR) were measured using Dual X-ray Absorp-
tiometry. Multivariable linear regression models were used to
assess the association of 591 miRNAs well-expressed in plasma
with BMI, WHR, FMI and AGR adjusted for potential covariates. We
further sought for the association of identiﬁed miRNAs with car-
diovascular and metabolic diseases in previous studies.
Results: Plasma levels of 12 miRNAs were associated and
overlapped
between all
four
traits
(at
Bonferroni-corrected
P < 8.46 × 10-5). The most signiﬁcant association was with miR-
193a-5p, which was also associated with type 2 diabetes and
hepatic steatosis in the Rotterdam Study. Besides, 4 miRNAs were
particularly associated with fat mass and body fat distribution;
among them, three miRNAs were associated with FMI, and miR-
378i only with AGR. Five of the obesity-related miRNAs and two of
the fat distribution-associated miRNAs have been linked pre-
viously to cardiovascular disease.
Conclusion: This study indicates that plasma levels of several
miRNAs are associated with obesity traits and body fat distribution
that may serve as potential biomarkers for obesity-related
diseases.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.026.D Multiple occurring copy number variants that
matter
Michaela Hyblova1;2, Marcel Kucharik3, Martina Sekelska1;2, Gabriel
Minarik1;2
1Medirex Group Academy n.p.o., Nitra, Slovakia; 2Trisomy test Ltd.,
Nitra, Slovakia; 3Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: NIPT has proven its efﬁcacy, reliability,
and high positive predictive value (PPV) in common aneuploidy
screening, sex chromosomal aneuploidy, or even copy number
variants. Simultaneously, they may be a precious source of infor-
mation on maternal genome variation. Large CNVs are usually not
an issue to interpret, however, many small and frequent CNV
remain ambiguous. We reviewed our NIPT data on such CNV and
determine which are the most common, compare them with
frequencies in Gnomad. We deﬁned them as multiple occurring
variants (movs).
Methods: Paired end whole genome sequencing with low
coverage on NextSeq was performed on pregnant plasma samples
with at least 5 million reads. CNV detection algorithm was applied
to more than 6000 unique analyses.
Results: We identiﬁed 20 movs not surprisingly most of them
are duplications (16) and 4 deletions. Few of them have conﬂicting
interpretations, and almost none of them is a clear benign variant.
The frequencies varied from 0.2-1.9%. In 4 cases there was no
match, in 3 cases partial overlay and 13 cases with almost com-
plete different or comparable frequency compared to Gnomad,
respectively.
Conclusion: We attempted to assess CNVs marked as movs in
the context of genomic content and allele frequency.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the OPII programme as
the project - Center for biomedical research - BIOMEDIRES II.
phase, ITMS 313011W428, co-ﬁnanced by the ERDF.
Conﬂict of Interest: Michaela Hyblova a part-time employee
of Medirex Group Academy n.p.o. and Trisomy test Ltd., colla-
borator on several running grants, Marcel Kucharik full time job
in Geneton Ltd., Collaborator on several running grants., Martina
Sekelska a part-time employee in Medirex Group Academy n.p.o.
and Trisomy test Ltd., Collaborator on several running grants.,
Gabriel Minarik a part-time employee in Medirex Group Acad-
emy n.p.o. and Trisomy test Ltd., principal investigator on run-
ning grants.
P20.027.A Genetic ancestry supports cultural history of
northwestern Himalayan Muslims
Abhishek Singh1, mukesh thakur2, vivek sahajpal3, satish kumar1
1National Forensic Sciences University, Forensic Biotechnology,
Gandhinagar, India; 2Zoological Survey of India, molecular systema-
tics division, New Alipore, India; 3State Forensic Science Laboratory,
Directorate of forensic Services, Shimla, India.
Background/Objectives: The Himalayas, a linguistic and cultural
metacenter inhabiting diverse human populations has also been a
focal point of invasions from both the west and south-eastern
regions. With the varied and complex pattern of human settle-
ments, the northwestern Himalaya has majorly evolved under the
inﬂuence of Afghan-Iranian cultures from the west blending with
the Tibetan culture from the north and Indic culture from the
south. Despite the social amalgamation, the Muslim populations
are believed to retain their distinct genetic signature due to
restricted gene ﬂow.
Methods: To establish the inﬂuence of social amalgamation
on the genetic makeup, we investigated population structure
based on 20 highly polymorphic autosomal STR markers in 187
individuals
comprising three
Muslim populations
(Kashmir,
Ladakh, and Himachal Pradesh) inhabiting northwestern Hima-
laya, India. Further, we evaluated the previous theories about
the social structure and subsistence of cultures and identiﬁed
the genetic afﬁnities with 16 different Muslim populations
comprising 3610 individuals.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
647
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: Overall, the phylogenetic analysis demonstrated
Kashmiri Muslims in close afﬁnity with other Muslim populations
of the neighbouring countries, while the Muslims of Ladakh and
Himachal Pradesh showed two different lineages. The Bayesian
and Non-Bayesian clustering analysis revealed diverse population
genetic structures between the three Muslim populations of
western Himalaya, India.
Conclusion: These genetic patterns suggest that the genetic
signature of all three populations corroborate with the historic
patterns of human settlements and the Muslim populations still
retain their genetic signature despite social amalgamation over
the centuries.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.028.B Homozygosity predominantly affects hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy minor genes in an Egyptian clinical cohort
Mona Allouba1, Roddy Walsh2, Alaa Aﬁfy1, Sarah Halawa1, Aya
Galal1, Mohammed Hosny3;4, Mariam Fathy1, Pantazis Theotokis5,
Amany Ellithy1, Rachel Buchan5;6, Risha Govind7;8, Nicola Whifﬁn9,
Shehab
Anwer10,
Ahmed
El
Guindy3,
James
Ware5;6;11,
Paul
Barton5;6;11, Yasmine Aguib1;5, Magdi H. Yacoub5;12;13
1Aswan Heart Centre - Magdi Yacoub Heart Foundation, Life
Sciences, Aswan, Egypt;
2Amsterdam University Medical Center,
Department of Experimental Cardiology, Amsterdam, Netherlands;
3Aswan Heart Centre, Magdi Yacoub Heart Foundation, Department
of Cardiology, Aswan, Egypt; 4Kasr Al Aini Medical School, Cairo
University, Department of Cardiology, Cairo, Egypt; 5National Heart
and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United
Kingdom; 6Royal Brompton and Hareﬁeld Hospitals, London, United
Kingdom;
7Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience,
King’s College London, London, United Kingdom; 8National Institute
for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre, South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College
London, London, United Kingdom; 9Wellcome Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; 10Aswan
Heart Centre, Magdi Yacoub Heart Foundation, Aswan, Egypt; 11MRC
London Institute of Medical Sciences, Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom; 10Aswan Heart Centre, Magdi Yacoub
Heart Foundation, Aswan, Egypt; 13Hareﬁeld Heart Science Centre,
United Kingdom, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Consanguinity is prevalent in Egypt
(35%) resulting in a high incidence of homozygosity. The inﬂuence
of homozygosity on the genetics of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(HCM) has not been adequately studied. The aim of this study is to
deﬁne the genetic architecture of HCM in Egypt using ethnically-
matched case and control cohorts.
Methods: Prospective Egyptian patients (n = 514) and controls
(n = 400) were recruited to Aswan Heart Centre for clinical phe-
notyping and genetic testing for 174 genes implicated in inherited
cardiac conditions (Illumina). Rare variation (gnomAD ﬁltering
allele frequency <=4x10-5) in 13 validated HCM genes were
classiﬁed according to the American College of Medical Genetics
(ACMG) guidelines and compared with a prospective HCM cohort
of predominantly European ancestry (n = 684).
Results: Signiﬁcantly fewer rare variants detected in Egyptian
patients could be classiﬁed as (likely) pathogenic compared to
Europeans (40.8% vs. 61.6%, p-value = 1.6x10-5). Incorporating
analysis from these Egyptian case-control cohorts into the ACMG
guidelines increased this yield to 53.8%. Homozygous variants
were more frequently observed in Egyptian patients (4.1% vs
0.1%, p-value = 2x10-7), with variants in the minor HCM genes
MYL2, MYL3 and CSRP3 more likely to present in homozygosity
than the major genes (MYH7, MYBPC3 and troponins), suggesting
such variants are less penetrant in the heterozygous state.
Conclusion: The integration of Egyptian-speciﬁc genetic and
phenotypic data signiﬁcantly improves variant interpretation in
HCM and consequently the precision of genetic testing. The
observed prevalence of homozygosity and rare variation in minor
HCM genes in Egyptian patients provides important insights into
its disease-mechanisms and genetics.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P20.030.D Deamination of adenine to guanine is a signature
of oxidative damage in mitochondrial DNA
Alina Mikhailova1;2, Alina Mikhailova3, Evgenii Tretiakov4, Victor
Shamanskiy2,
Dmitrii
Iliushchenko2,
Valerian
Yurov2,
Vsevolod
Makeev1, Dmitry Knorre5, Alexandre Reymond6, Konstantin Khrapko7,
Konstantin Gunbin2, Konstantin Popadin2;6;8
1Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation;
2Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Kaliningrad, Russian
Federation;
3University of Münster, Munster, Germany;
4Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 5Moskow State University, The
A.N. Belozersky Institute Of Physico-Chemical Biology, Moscow,
Russian Federation; 6University of Lausanne, Center for Integrative
Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland; 7Northeastern University, Boston,
United States; 8Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Since mitochondria maintain the oxi-
dative metabolism, it has been traditionally assumed the mito-
chondrial DNA is affected by the oxidative damage. However, the
classical signature of the oxidative damage, G>T, is extremely rare
in mtDNA, suggesting that either there is no oxidative damage in
mitochondria or it has another - mitochondria speciﬁc and yet
unknown signature.
Methods: Since oxidative damage is a normal byproduct of
oxidative metabolism, which in turn is associated with different
life-history traits, we performed a large-scale comparative-spe-
cies study associating mtDNA mutational spectrum with life-
history traits. We reconstructed mtDNA mutational spectra for
thousands of vertebrate species analyzing all available intras-
pecies mitochondrial polymorphisms at fourfold degenerate
synonymous sites.
Results: First, within mammals, we correlated mtDNA muta-
tional spectrum of hundreds species with their life-history traits
and observed that the fraction of Ah>Gh transitions (heavy chain
notation) is higher in species with longer generation length
(https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.12.03.460832). Second, focusing on
cold-blooded ﬁshes (Actinopterygii) we observed that the fre-
quency of the same transition Ah>Gh positively correlates with
the
ambient
temperature
(https://doi.org/10.1101/
2020.07.25.221184). Finally, analyzing somatic mtDNA mutations
in different human tissues we observed that Ah>Gh is more
common in normoxic tissues, enriched in molecular oxygen.
(https://doi.org/10.1101/589168).
Conclusion: Aging in mammals, high ambient temperature in
ﬁshes and normoxia in human tissues can be similar in terms of
the increased oxidative damage. Thus we propose that Ah>Gh is a
mitochondria speciﬁc mutational signature of the oxidative
damage.
References:.
Grants: Supported by RSF №21-75-20143.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
648
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P21 FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS AND EPIGENOMICS
P21.001.A Gene regulation in T-cells from PsA patients differs
between peripheral blood and the inﬂamed joints:
implications for the interpretation of GWAS signals
chenfu shi1, Danyun Zhao1, James Ding1, Carlo Ferrazzano1,
Charlotte Wynn1, Antonios Frantzeskos1, John Bowes1, Pauline Ho2,
Anne Barton1;3;4, Magnus Rattray3;5, Gisela Orozco1;3;4
1The University of Manchester, Centre for Genetics and Genomics
Versus Arthritis, Manchester, United Kingdom; 2Manchester University
NHS Foundation Trust, The Kellgren Centre for Rheumatology,
Manchester Royal Inﬁrmary, Manchester, United Kingdom; 3Manche-
ster University NHS Foundation Trust, NIHR Manchester Biomedical
Research Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom; 4The University of
Manchester, Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inﬂammation,
Manchester, United Kingdom; 5The University of Manchester, Division
of Informatics, Imaging and Data Sciences, Manchester, United
Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: GWAS studies have identiﬁed the
variants associated with complex diseases. Most of these affect
regulatory elements which are cell type and state speciﬁc,
and can affect distally located genes via chromatin interaction
mechanisms.
We and others have used functional genomics techniques in
cell lines to provide putative mechanisms for many loci with
previously unknown function. It is known that signiﬁcant differ-
ences exist between cell lines and primary cells. However, differ-
ences between between samples from healthy volunteers and
patients, in particular from the affected tissue, have not been
exhaustively investigated. Here we assess the impact of using
primary cells derived from PsA patients in functional genomics
studies.
Methods: RNA-seq and ATAC-seq were performed on CD4+
and CD8+ T cells isolated from blood from 10 controls and 48 PsA
patients and from 6 synovial ﬂuid samples.
Results: We ﬁnd subtle differences between PsA patients and
healthy controls in cells isolated from blood. In contrast, T cells
isolated from synovial ﬂuid showed substantially more differences
compared to those isolated from patient’s blood. Interestingly, we
ﬁnd that CD4+ T cells display more DE genes compared to CD8+
T cells. These genes also enriched more strongly for immune
pathways compared to synovial CD8+ T cells.
Conclusion: This study indicates the importance of not only
studying GWAS loci in relevant primary cells from patients, but
also that attention needs to be given to cells isolated from the
affected site.
References:.
Grants: Funded by the Wellcome Trust (207491/Z/17/Z, 215207/
Z/19/Z), Versus Arthritis (21754), NIHR Manchester Biomedical
Research Centre, Medical Research Council (MR/N00017X/1).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.002.B Knockout of AGBL5 in human retinal pigment
epithelium cells disrupts ciliogenesis and provides insight into
transcriptomic changes
Suly Saray Villa Vasquez1, Lama Al-Abdi2, Rob Ewing3, Fowzan
Alkuraya2, Reuben Pengelly1, David Ian Wilson1, Diana Baralle1,
Gabrielle Wheway1
1University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton,
United Kingdom;
2King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Centre, Center for Genomics Medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia;
3University of Southampton, Faculty of Environmental and Life
Sciences, Southampton, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: AGBL5 encodes a deglutamylase that
regulates functional tubulin glutamylation levels in cilia. Mutations
are associated with Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP). However, disease
mechanisms associated with AGBL5 variants require further
investigation. This study investigated the effect of patient AGBL5
mutations in AGBL5 knockout ARPE19 cells to identify the poten-
tial molecular function of AGBL5 and mechanisms causing retinal
dysfunction.
Methods: Immunoﬂuorescence confocal imaging, western
blotting, transfection with an AGBL5-eGFP expression construct
and site-directed mutagenesis were used to investigate cilium
structure modiﬁcations and protein expression in wild-type (WT)
ARPE19 cells and CRISPR knockout cells AGBL5-/-, and to char-
acterise the effect of variants in patients with RP. RNA-seq data
was used to investigate transcriptomic changes.
Results: AGBL5-/- cells have reduced levels of AGBL5 expres-
sion, hyperglutamylation, signiﬁcantly shorter cilia, and lower
percentage of ciliated cells than WT cells (p < 0.001). WT AGBL5-
eGFP expression in mutant cells rescues the ciliary phenotype,
whilst mutated versions affect ciliogenesis at variable levels, ran-
ging from increased ciliogenesis to loss of cilia. Gene ontology
(GO) analysis of genes overexpressed in AGBL5-/- cells shows
enrichment of genes with GO terms glutamate receptor signalling,
nervous system development and negative regulation of neuron
apoptotic process.
Conclusion: This work reports a clear phenotype of AGBL5
deﬁcient human cells consisting of hyperglutamylation, short cilia
and reduced ciliogenesis, provides functional and transcriptomic
data that could be used as a basis for investigating targets for
treatment of retinal degeneration and supports the use of mutant
cells models to obtain functional data of patient mutations.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.003.C DNA methylation signature for JARID2-
neurodevelopmental syndrome
Liselot van der Laan1, Eline Verberne1, Sadegheh Haghshenas2,
Kathleen Rooney2, Michael Levy2, Marielle Alders1, Saskia M. Maas1,
Sandra Jansen1, Agne Lieden3, Britt M. Anderlid3, Louise Rafael-
Croes4, Philippe M. Campeau5, Ayeshah Chaudhry6, David Koolen7,
Rolph Pfunt7, Anna C.E. Hurst8, Frédéric Tran Mau-Them9, Laetitia
Lamber10, Ange-Line Bruel11, Bertrand Isidor12, Marcel Mannens1,
Bekim Sadikovic2, Peter Henneman1, Mieke van Haelst1
1Amsterdam UMC, Human Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 2Wes-
tern University, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
London, Canada;
3Karolinska University Hospital, Department of
Clinical Genetics, Stockholm, Sweden; 4Dr. Horacio E. Oduber Hospital,
Department of Pediatrics, Oranjestad, Aruba; 5University of Montreal,
Department of Pediatrics, Montreal, Canada; 6Trillium Health Partners,
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Genetics, Mississauga,
Canada; 7Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences and Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud university
medical center, Department of Hum Genet, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
8University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Genetics,
Birmingham, United States; 9CHU Dijon-Bourgogne, Équipe Génétique
des Anomalies du Développement (GAD, Dijon, France; 10CHRU Nanc,
Service de Génétique Clinique, Nancy, France;
11Université de
Bourgogne, Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translation-
nelle et Anomalies du Développement (TRANSLAD), Dijon, France;
12CHU de Nante, Service de génétique médicale, Nantes, France.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
649
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: JARID2 pathogenic variants cause a
neurodevelopmental syndrome, that is characterized by devel-
opmental
delay,
cognitive
impairment,
hypotonia,
autistic
features,
behavior
abnormalities
and
dysmorphic
facial
features. JARID2 encodes a transcriptional repressor protein that
regulates the activity of various histone methyltransferase
complexes (1).
Methods: DNA methylation (DNAm) proﬁles were generated.
Raw data was qc processed and analyzed in R. A Linear model
(limma) was applied to obtain differential methylated positions
between patients and controls. An unsupervised model was
applied in order to assess the robustness of the JND classifying
probes, wherein we followed an eight round cross-validation.
Subsequently we applied a support vector machine to construct
the ﬁnal JND DNAm signature.
Results: Genome-wide DNAm analysis indicated a clear and
robust separation between patients with pathogenic variants and
controls. Cross-validation analysis conﬁrmed the ﬁndings of a
distinct and reproducible episignature. Patients carrying a Varia-
tion
of
Uncertain
Signiﬁcation
(VUS)
clustered
with
the
control group.
Conclusion: We identiﬁed a highly speciﬁc genome-wide
DNAm signature for patients with JARID2-neurodevelopmental
syndrome. The signature can be used to assess and reclassify
JARID2 genomic variants. In addition, the JARID2 signature can be
added to the growing list of syndromes that can be conﬁrmed by
EpiSign analysis (LHSC Epigenetics), thus further conforming the
value of EpiSign as a diagnostic tool in patients with suspected
genetic disorders.
References: 1. Verberne EA, Goh S, England J, van Ginkel M,
Rafael-Croes L, et al. JARID2 Haploinsufﬁciency is associated with a
clinically distinct neurodevelopmental syndrome. Genet Med.
2021;23(2):374-83.
Grants: No Grants.
Conﬂict of Interest: Liselot van der Laan part time, Eline Ver-
berne full, Sadegheh Haghshenas full, Kathleen Rooney (full or
part-time), Michael Levy (full or part-time), Marielle Alders full,
Saskia M. Maas (full or part-time), Sandra Jansen (full or part-time),
Agne Lieden (full or part-time), Britt M. Anderlid (full or part-time),
Louise Rafael-Croes (full or part-time), Philippe M. Campeau (full or
part-time), Ayeshah Chaudhry (full or part-time), David Koolen (full
or part-time), Rolph Pfunt (full or part-time), Anna C.E. Hurst (full or
part-time), Frédéric Tran Mau-Them (full or part-time), Laetitia
Lamber (full or part-time), Ange-Line Bruel (full or part-time),
Bertrand Isidor (full or part-time), Marcel Mannens full, Bekim
Sadikovic full, Peter Henneman full, Mieke van Haelst full.
P21.004.D The effect of polymorphic inversions on DNA
methylation and its modulation by the early-life exposome
Natalia Carreras Gallo1, Alejandro Cáceres1;2;3, Laura Balagué1,
Carlos Ruiz Arenas4, Sandra Andrusaityte5, Angel Carracedo6;7,
Maribel Casas1;2;8, Leda Chatzi9, Regina Grazuleviciene5, Kristine
Gutzkow10, Johanna Lepeule11, Lea Maitre1;2;8, Mark Nieuwenhuij-
sen1;2;8, Remy Slama11, Nikos Stratakis1, Cathrine Thomsen10, Jose
Urquiza1;2;8, John Wright12, Tiffany Yang12, Geòrgia Escaramís2;13;14,
Mariona Bustamante1;2;8, Martine Vrijheid1;2;8, Luis Pérez-Jurado6;8;15,
Juan Ramón González1;2;16
1ISGlobal, Barcelona, Spain; 2CIBERESP - Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red en Epidemiología y Salud Pública, Madrid, Spain;
3Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya - UPC, 3 Department of
Mathematics, Barcelona, Spain;
4Municipal Institute of Medical
Research, Barcelona, Spain; 5Vytauto Didziojo universitetas, Depart-
ment of Environmental Science, Kaunas, Lithuania;
6CIBERER -,
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Raras,
Santiago de compostela, Spain;
7Health Research Institute of
Santiago de Compostela (IDIS), Santiago de Compostela, Spain;
8Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain;
9Keck School of
Medicine of USC, Department of Preventive Medicine, Los Angeles,
United States; 10Folkehelseinstituttet, Department of Environmental
Health, Oslo, Norway; 11Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Team of
Environmental Epidemiology applied to Reproduction and Respira-
tory Health, La Tronche, France; 12Bradford Teaching Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Bradford, United Kingdom; 13Facultat de Medicina
- Universitat de Barcelona, Department of Biomedical Science,
Barcelona, Spain; 14University of Girona - UdG, Research Group on
Statistics, Econometrics and Health (GRECS), Girona, Spain; 15Hospi-
tal del Mar Research Institute (IMIM), Genetics Service, Barcelona,
Spain; 16Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Polymorphic genomic inversions are
chromosomal variants that play important roles in chromosome
evolution,
environmental
adaptation,
and
complex
traits.
Although their effect on local gene expression is demonstrated, it
is less known the extent to which inversions inﬂuence DNA
methylation and how this inﬂuence depends on environmental
exposures.
Methods: We analysed data of 1,009 children from the Human
Early Life Exposome (HELIX) project and 39 prenatal heart tissue
samples. We investigated the DNA methylation patterns in blood
of three common human inversions, at 8p23.1, 16p11.2, and
17q21.3, and the modulation of these patterns by 64 early-life
exposures.
Results: We found inversion-state speciﬁc methylation patterns
that extended across the three inversion regions in both datasets.
Additionally, at CpG level, we identiﬁed several inversion-exposure
interactions on methylation levels for the early-life exposome.
Within those interactions, we observed, for instance, that children
homozygous for inv-8p23.1 and exposed to higher meat intake
hypermethylated the TDH gene; while those exposed to higher
manganese hypomethylated GATA4; and those exposed to par-
ental smoking hypomethylated TRMT9B. These genes have been
associated with obesity, heart development, and respiratory dis-
ease, respectively.
Conclusion:
Although
numerous
signiﬁcant
inversion-
exposure interactions in important genes deserve further scru-
tiny, our data suggest that the effect of numerous environmental
exposures in childhood depends on the individual genetic back-
ground given by the inversions via allele-speciﬁc methylation
patterns.
References: Puig et al, Brief. Funct. Genom. (2015).
Ruiz-Arenas et al, PLoS Genet. (2019).
González et al, AJHG. (2020).
Grants: FP7/2007-206/308333 (HELIX); H2020-EU.3.1.2./874583
(ATHLETE); ISCIII (PI17/01225 and PI17/01935); PERIS-GenCat/
SLT017/20/000061 (Carreras-Gallo fellowship).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.005.A Ago-RIP sequencing identiﬁes new microRNA-449a-
5p target genes increasing sorafenib efﬁcacy in hepatocellular
carcinoma
Thea Reinkens1, Amelie Stalke2, Nicole Huge2, Beate Vajen2, Marlies
Eilers2, Vera Schäffer2, Oliver Dittrich-Breiholz2, Brigitte Schlegelber-
ger2, Thomas Illig2, Britta Skawran2
1Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany; 2Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitor sorafenib
has been used as standard treatment in advanced hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) for the last fourteen years. Unfortunately, drug
resistance develops in many cases. Therefore, we aimed to
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
650
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
mitigate drug resistance and to improve sorafenib efﬁcacy in HCC.
MicroRNAs play a signiﬁcant role in targeting genes involved in
tumor control suggesting microRNA/sorafenib combination ther-
apy as a promising treatment option in advanced HCC.
Methods: MiR-449a-5p target genes were identiﬁed by Ago-
RIP-sequencing and validated by luciferase reporter assays and
expression analyses. Target gene expression and survival data
were analyzed in public HCC datasets. Tumor-relevant functional
effects of miR-449a-5p and its target genes as well as their impact
on the effects of sorafenib were analyzed using in vitro assays. A
transwell co-culture system was used to survey anti-angiogenic
effects of miR-449a-5p.
Results: PEA15, PPP1CA and TUFT1 were identiﬁed as direct
target genes of miR-449a-5p. Overexpression of these genes cor-
related with a poor outcome of HCC patients. Transfection with
miR-449a-5p and repression of miR-449a-5p target genes inhib-
ited cell proliferation and angiogenesis, induced apoptosis and
reduced AKT and ERK signaling in HLE cells. Importantly, miR-
449a-5p potentiated the efﬁcacy of sorafenib in HCC cells via
downregulation of PEA15, PPP1CA and TUFT1.
Conclusion: This study provides detailed insights into the
targetome and regulatory network of miR-449a-5p. Our results
demonstrate that targeting PEA15, PPP1CA and TUFT1 via miR-
449a overexpression could have signiﬁcant implications in coun-
teracting sorafenib resistance suggesting miR-449a-5p as a pro-
mising candidate for a microRNA/sorafenib combination therapy.
References:.
Grants: Deutsche Krebshilfe: 70113683.
Conﬂict of Interest: Thea Reinkens: None declared, Amelie
Stalke: None declared, Nicole Huge: None declared, Beate Vajen
Deutsche Krebshilfe: 70113683, Marlies Eilers: None declared, Vera
Schäffer: None declared, Oliver Dittrich-Breiholz: None declared,
Brigitte
Schlegelberger:
None
declared,
Thomas
Illig:
None
declared, Britta Skawran Deutsche Krebshilfe: 70113683.
P21.006.B Differential gene expression by sex in skeletal
muscle cell types
Dan Ciotlos1;2, Sarah Hanks1;2, Juhyun Kim1;2, Arushi Varshney3,
Nandini Manickam3, Michael Erdos4, Anne Jackson1;2, Heather
Stringham1;2,
Michael
Boehnke1;2,
Heikki
Koistinen5;6;7,
Francis
Collins4, Stephen Parker3;8, Laura Scott1;2
1University of Michigan, Department of Biostatistics, Ann Arbor, United
States; 2University of Michigan, Center for Statistical Genetics, Ann
Arbor, United States;
3University of Michigan, Department
of
Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, Ann Arbor, United States;
4National Institutes of Health, National Human Genome Research
Institute, Bethesda, United States; 5Finnish Institute for Health and
Welfare, Department of Public Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland;
6University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Department of
Medicine, Helsinki, Finland; 7Minerva Foundation Institute for Medical
Research, Helsinki, Finland; 8University of Michigan, Department of
Human Genetics, Ann Arbor, United States.
Background/Objectives: Skeletal muscle differs in size and ﬁber-
type composition by sex. Identifying sex differences in cell-type
gene expression will point to mechanisms underlying these
differences.
Methods: We performed bulk tissue and single nucleus RNA-
sequencing from skeletal muscle biopsies from live Finnish
FUSION Tissue Biopsy Study donors (n = 258, 41.5% female). We
clustered nuclei into 13 cell types. We tested for differential gene
expression by sex in bulk tissue and cell types using linear
regression, adjusting for age and technical covariates. We identi-
ﬁed gene sets with higher expression levels in one sex using gene
set enrichment analysis (FGSEA).
Results: Across cell types, type 1, 2A, and 2X muscle ﬁbers had
the highest proportion of genes differentially expressed by sex
(9.4-16.4%), with smaller proportions in satellite cells (muscle
progenitor cells) (2.0%). In bulk tissue, 32.6% of genes were dif-
ferentially expressed by sex (FDR<0.05), likely reﬂecting greater
power. Gene sets differentially expressed by sex were found in
ﬁber types (2.4-4.3% of tested gene sets), satellite cells (0.03%),
and bulk tissue (16.0%). The majority of gene sets showed con-
sistent enrichment by sex across cell types and in bulk tissue;
however, a small subset showed enrichment in opposite direc-
tions. In satellite cells, cell-cell adhesion genes were enriched for
higher expression in males (ES = 0.34,p = 8.7x10−5), but enriched
for higher expression in females in ﬁber types (min p = 0.003,FDR
> 0.05) and bulk tissue (ES = -0.37, p = 4.2 x 10−12).
Conclusion: We identiﬁed gene sets with similarities and dif-
ferences in expression by sex between muscle ﬁbers and satellite
cells, which may point to cell-type regulatory differences by sex.
References:.
Grants: DK062370, T32 HG000040.
Conﬂict of Interest: Dan Ciotlos: None declared, Sarah Hanks
University of Michigan, F31 HG011186, Juhyun Kim University of
Michigan, Arushi Varshney University of Michigan, Nandini Man-
ickam University of Michigan, Michael Erdos National Institutes of
Health, Intramural research support ZIA HG000024-28, Anne
Jackson University of Michigan, Heather Stringham University of
Michigan, Michael Boehnke University of Michigan, DK062370,
Heikki Koistinen Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare; University
of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Francis Collins
National Institutes of Health, Intramural research support ZIA
HG000024-28, Stephen Parker University of Michigan, Laura Scott
University of Michigan, DK062370, Training Grant T32 HG000040.
P21.007.C Proﬁling genome-wide DNA methylation patterns
in human aortic and mitral valves
Sarah Halawa1;2, najma latif3;4, Yuan-Tsan Tseng3;4, Ayman M.
Ibrahim1;5, Adrian H. Chester3;4, Ahmed Moustafa2;6, Yasmine
Aguib1;4, Magdi H. Yacoub1;3;4
1Magdi Yacoub Aswan Heart Centre, Cairo, Egypt; 2Biotechnology
Graduate Program, American University in Cairo, New Cairo, Egypt;
3Magdi Yacoub Institute, Heart Science Centre, Hareﬁeld, United
Kingdom; 4NHLI, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom;
5Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt;
6Department of Biology, American University in Cairo, New Cairo, Egypt.
Background/Objectives: Cardiac valves exhibit highly complex
structures and specialized functions. Valvular gene expression is
tightly regulated by a variety of mechanisms including epigenetic
factors such as DNA methylation. To date, methylation ﬁngerprints
of non-diseased human aortic and mitral valves have not been
adequately studied.
Methods: Twelve non-diseased valves free from calciﬁcation (6
aortic, 6 mitral valves, 10 males:2 females, age range 42–64 years)
were de-endothelialised and subjected to reduced representation
bisulphite sequencing (RRBS) on Illumina HiSeq2500. Upon
FastQC, reads were trimmed via TrimGalore and mapped to hg19
using Bismark. Extracted methylation levels were analyzed using
methylKit. Genes with differentially methylated (DM) promoters
were categorized using PANTHER and used for network con-
struction using NetworkAnalyst.
Results: Analysis of methylation detected at 1601 promoters
genome-wide revealed 584 DM promoters, of which 13 were
reported in endothelial mesenchymal trans-differentiation (EMT),
37 in aortic and mitral valve disease and 7 in ECM remodeling.
Genes associated with the DM promoters were enriched for WNT-,
Cadherin-, Endothelin-, PDGF- and VEGF- signaling implicated in
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
651
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
valvular physiology and pathophysiology and for TGFB-, NOTCH-
and Integrin- signaling involved in EMT and ECM remodeling.
Conclusion: This data provides the ﬁrst insight into differential
regulation of human aortic and mitral valve tissue and identiﬁes
candidate genes linked to DM promoters. This study will contribute
to the understanding of valve biology, valve tissue engineering
approaches and to the identiﬁcation of relevant drug targets.
References:.
Grants: This research was funded by Magdi Yacoub Institute
(MYI) and Magdi Yacoub Foundation (MYF). S.H. was partially
supported by Al AlﬁFoundation.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.008.D Sex differences in DNA methylation underlay sex
differences in children’s gene expression
Carlos
Ruiz
Arenas1;2,
Alejandro
Cáceres2;3,
Mariona
Busta-
mante2;3;4, Martine Vrijheid2;3;4, Luis Pérez-Jurado1;2;5, The HELIX
Consortium3
1Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain; 2Universitat Pompeu Fabra - DCEXS,
Barcelona, Spain; 3ISGlobal, Barcelona, Spain; 4CIBER Epidemiología y
Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain;
5Hospital del Mar,
Genetics Service, Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Sex differences in gene expression in
childhood, which could explain differences in prepubertal devel-
opment, behaviour and health risks between boys and girls,
remain largely unknown.
Here, we aim to (i) identify genes with sex-speciﬁc gene
expression in children and to (ii) determine whether these dif-
ferences in gene expression can be explained by sex-speciﬁc DNA
methylation patterns.
Methods: Using data from the HELIX project (823 6-9-year-old
children from 6 European cohorts), we have performed tran-
scriptome and epigenome-wide association studies of 23,054
autosomic coding genes and 386,518 autosomic CpGs on sex. The
model was adjusted for cohort, age and 6 blood cell types.
Results: A total of 2,051 autosomic coding genes (8.9%) and
120,952 autosomic CpGs (31.3%) were signiﬁcantly associated
with sex (FDR < 0.05). 980 genes (47.8%) and 44,081 CpGs (36.4%)
showed higher expression or methylation in boys. Of the 2,051
genes with sex differences, 1,339 (65.3%) could be explained by
sex differences in DNA methylation. These 1,339 genes were
enriched in 114 GO terms (FDR < 0.05), 48 of them directly asso-
ciated with immune response.
Conclusion: Girls and boys present genome-wide differences
in gene expression in autosomal chromosomes. These tran-
scriptomic differences can be partly explained by sex differences
in DNA methylation and can lead to differences in immune
response and associated phenotypes.
References:.
Grants: FP7/2007-206/308333 (HELIX project); H2020-EU.3.1.2./
874583 (ATHLETE project); & FIS PI21/00050.
Conﬂict of Interest: Carlos Ruiz Arenas: None declared, Ale-
jandro Cáceres: None declared, Mariona Bustamante: None
declared, Martine Vrijheid: None declared, Luis Pérez-Jurado Stock
options in QGenomics, Advisory Board in QGenomics, The HELIX
Consortium: None declared.
P21.009.A Characterisation of new key cis-regulatory
elements of the CFTR gene
Clara Blotas1;2;3, Mégane COLLOBERT1;2;3, Ozvan Bocher1;2;3, Anaïs
LE NABEC1;2;3, Emanuelle Génin1;2;3, Claude Férec1;2;3;4, Stéphanie
Moisan1;2;3;4
1INSERM UMR1078, GGB, Brest, France;
2University of Bretagne
Occidentale, BREST, France; 3French Blood Institute, BREST, France;
4CHRU Brest, Laboratory of Molecular Genetic and Histocompat-
ibility, BREST, France.
Background/Objectives: Chromatin is a dynamic structure that
determine gene expression. Long-range interactions between
promoter
and
cis-regulatory
elements
(CREs)
regulate
this
expression. Dysregulation of these interactions can lead to dis-
eases, called “enhanceropathies”. Some patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis or CFTR-related disorders (CFTR-RD) have incomplete
genotypes or present extreme phenotypes. This project aims to
explain these unresolved cases by ﬁrst identifying CREs in CFTR
locus and in a second part by highlighting dysfunctions in the
latter.
Methods: In order to study the regulation of the CFTR gene,
reporter gene activity and chromatin immunoprecipitation tests
in intestinal cells (Caco-2) allowed us to characterize new CREs.
To validate the purpose, invalidation assays with CRISPR/
dCas9 are developed. Then, the chromatin interactions (DNA
loops) have to be conﬁrmed by using chromatin study techni-
ques (4C). A second part is dedicated to the detection of variants
within CREs by NGS sequencing of the CFTR locus in CFTR-RD
patients.
Results: CREs at introns 24 and 26 were newly identiﬁed with
cooperative enhancer activity, in addition to the CREs identiﬁed in
introns 1 and 12. This has allowed us to propose a three-
dimensional model of CFTR gene regulation within the locus.
Furthermore, an enrichment of transcription factors HNF1a, p300,
FOXA1/2, and CDX2 was shown. By sequencing CBAVD patients,
eight variants within CREs were identiﬁed and conﬁrmed by
functional tests.
Conclusion: Thus, this work allows a better understanding of
the three-dimensional organization of the CFTR locus in order to
improve the care of patients.
References:.
Grants: Vaincre la mucoviscidose, Association Gaetan Saleun.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.010.B Functional characterization of a JAG1 5’UTR variant
in a patient with clinically observed Alagille Syndrome
Nicole Buhl1;2, Eva-Doreen Pﬁster1, Jens Bohne3, Ulrich Baumann1,
Björn Hartleben4, Brigitte Schlegelberger2, Thomas Illig5, Britta
Skawran2, Amelie Stalke1;2
1Hannover Medical School, Pediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatol-
ogy, Hannover, Germany; 2Hannover Medical School, Department of
Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany; 3Hannover Medical School,
Institute of Virology, Hannover, Germany; 4Hannover Medical School,
Institute of Pathology, Hannover, Germany;
5Hannover Medical
School, Hannover Uniﬁed Bank (HUB), Hannover, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Alagille Syndrome (ALGS) is an auto-
somal dominant multisystemic disease predominantly affecting
liver, heart, kidney, vertebrae and eyes. Two NOTCH-Signaling
pathway members -JAG1 and NOTCH2- are known to be asso-
ciated with ALGS. Pathogenic variants exclusively affecting the
JAG1 5’UTR have not been described so far. We report on a female
patient with clinically distinct ALGS carrying a 5’UTR JAG1 variant.
We performed segregation and functional analyses to assess the
variant’s pathogenicity.
Methods: We compared the activity of the 5’UTR variant with
the wild type 5’UTR via luciferase assay after transfecting HEK293T
or Huh7 cells. RNA was analyzed by northern blot. Segregation
analysis was done by Sanger sequencing and short tandem repeat
(STR) analysis.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
652
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: The patient developed neonatal cholestasis at 4 weeks
of age. With cardiac defects, butterﬂy vertebrae and histological
ductopenia, the girl was clinically diagnosed with ALGS. We
identiﬁed the heterozygous JAG1 5’UTR variant NM_000214.3: c.-
100C>T, not detected in population database gnomAD. Luciferase
assays showed, compared to the wildtype, a signiﬁcantly reduced
luciferase activity in both cell lines. The mutation slightly
decreased total luciferase RNA levels. Sanger sequencing and STR
analysis revealed the patient’s variant to be de novo allowing a
classiﬁcation as likely pathogenic.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst description of a
disease-associated JAG1 variant located in the 5’UTR in a pediatric
patient with a clinically diagnosed ALGS. Going forward, genetic
testing of JAG1 or NOTCH2 in patients with suspected ALGS should
include detailed 5’UTR characterization of JAG1 or NOTCH2.
References:.
Grants: DFG:#433387263.
Conﬂict of Interest: Nicole Buhl: None declared, Eva-Doreen
Pﬁster Albireo, Mirum, Alexion, Orphalan, Univar, Albireo, Mirum,
Alexion (Modest), Orphalan, Univar, Albireo, Mirum, Alexion
(Modest), Jens Bohne: None declared, Ulrich Baumann Albireo,
Mirum, Alexion, Orphalan, Albireo, Mirum, Alexion, Nestle, Vivet,
Astellas (Modest), Orphalan, Albireo, Mirum, Alexion, Nestle, Vivet,
Astellas (Modest), Björn Hartleben: None declared, Brigitte Schle-
gelberger: None declared, Thomas Illig: None declared, Britta
Skawran: None declared, Amelie Stalke: None declared.
P21.012.D Methylome-wide association studies of major
depressive disorder, bipolar disorder and schizophrenia
spectrum disorders in the German FOR2107 cohort
Friederike David1, Fabian Streit2, Josef Frank2, Lea Sirignano2, Lea
Zillich2, Stefan Herms1;3, Per Hoffmann1;3, Till Andlauer4, Tilo
Kircher5;6, Udo Dannlowski7, Stephanie Witt2;8, Marcella Rietschel2,
Markus M Nöthen1, Andreas Forstner1;9
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine
& University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany; 2Department of Genetic
Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim,
Germany; 3Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland; 4Department of Neurology, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
School of Medicine, Technical
University of Munich, Munich,
Germany; 5Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University
of Marburg, Marburg, Germany;
6Center for Mind, Brain and
Behavior, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany; 7Institute for
Translational Psychiatry, University of Münster, Münster, Germany;
8Center for Innovative Psychiatry and Psychotherapy Research,
Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim /
Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany;
9Institute of Neu-
roscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Jülich, Jülich,
Germany.
Background/Objectives: Epigenetic modiﬁcations such as DNA
methylation (DNAm) are important regulators of gene expres-
sion, inﬂuenced by both genetic and environmental factors. In
major psychiatric disorders, previous studies have suggested
that alterations in DNAm proﬁles may contribute to pathogen-
esis
and
represent
potential
biomarkers.
Thus,
we
here
examined
differential
methylation
in
patients
with
major
depressive disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder (BD), and schizo-
phrenia spectrum disorders (SSD) in comparison to healthy
controls (HC) that were matched to the diagnostic groups in
regard to sex and age.
Methods: Methylation proﬁling was conducted with the Inﬁ-
nium MethylationEPIC array using DNA from peripheral blood of
886 individuals (MDD: 345, BD: 100, SSD: 101, HC: 340) of the
German FOR2107 cohort (https://for2107.de/). After quality control
and preprocessing of the methylation data set using the minﬁR
package, methylome-wide association studies (MWAS) of case-
control status were performed for each diagnostic group.
Results: During quality control, a total of 7 individuals were
excluded. In the preliminary MWAS for MDD, no differentially
methylated CpG sites could be detected that remained signiﬁcant
after Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Final results for all
diagnostic groups will be presented at the conference.
Conclusion: The investigation of DNAm proﬁles is a promising
approach for understanding molecular changes in major psy-
chiatric disorders. As the differential methylation signals typically
have small effect sizes, larger sample sizes are needed to increase
statistical power and any identiﬁed MWAS results should be
replicated in meta-analyses of large international consortia.
References:.
Grants: NO246/10-2.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.013.A Tissue- and ethnicity- independent hypervariable
DNA methylation states show evidence of establishment in
the early human embryo
Maria Derakhshan1, Noah Kessler2, Miho Ishida3, Charalambos
Demetrious3, Nicolas Brucato4, Gudrun Moore3, Caroline Fall5, Giriraj
Chandak6, Francois-Xavier Ricaut4, Andrew Prentice7, Garrett Hel-
lenthal8, Matt Silver1;7
1London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United
Kingdom; 2University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 3UCL
Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom;
4Université de Toulouse Midi-Pyrénées, Toulouse, France; 5MRC Life-
course Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton,
United Kingdom;
6Genomic Research on Complex Diseases (GRC
Group), CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad,
India; 7Medical Research Council Unit The Gambia at the London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Fajara, Gambia; 8UCL Genetics
Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Interindividual variation in DNA methy-
lation (DNAm) has been linked to both environmental exposures
and phenotypic variation. However, methylation states are gen-
erally tissue-speciﬁc, making the identiﬁcation of environmentally
sensitive variable DNAm states in disease-relevant tissues a
challenge.
Here, we search for hypervariable CpGs (“hvCpGs”) on the
widely-used Illumina450K array that show high interindividual
methylation variation across multiple tissues and ethnicities and
test the hypothesis that hvCpGs may have been established in
early development before tissue specialisation, thus showing
DNAm correlation across tissues within an individual.
Methods: We leverage 30 large-scale datasets that include 19
tissues and 8 ethnicities to identify hvCpGs falling into the top 5%
of interindividual methylation variation in >65% of datasets. We
explore hvCpG properties, including cross-tissue DNAm correla-
tion, using unpublished multi-tissue fetal methylation data and
other resources. We also analyse genetic effects on DNAm at
hvCpGs using data from a large meta-analysis of methylation
quantitative trait loci (mQTL).
Results: We identify 4143 hvCpGs and show that DNAm at
hvCpGs is not driven by genetic variation, probe reliability, sex or
cell heterogeneity effects. Instead, hvCpGs show cross-tissue cor-
relation and are strongly enriched for CpGs previously implicated
in methylation establishment in the early embryo, including loci
sensitive to periconceptional environment.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings position hvCpGs as strong candidates
for using DNAm from any tissue to study how stochastic and/or
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
653
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
environmental effects on DNAm in the early embryo can inﬂuence
life-long health and disease.
References:.
Grants:
BB/M009513/1;MR/M01424X/1;MC_PC_MR/RO20183/
1;MR/N006208/1;ANR/OCEOADAPTO;ANR/PAPUAEVOL;BT/IN/DBT-
MRC/DFID/24/GRC/2015–16.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.014.B Novel diagnostic DNA methylation episignatures
expand and reﬁne the epigenetic landscapes of Mendelian
disorders
Michael Levy1, Haley McConkey1, Jennifer Kerkhof1, Aidin Foroutan2,
Sadegheh Haghshenas2,
Jack
Reilly2,
Raissa
Relator1,
Kathleen
Rooney1;2, Dimitar Azmanov3, Tugce Balci2, Siddharth Banka4, Jozef
Gecz5, Peter Henneman6, Jennifer Lee7, Marcel Mannens6, Tony
Roscioli8, Victoria Siu2, David Amor9, Gareth Baynam10, Nicola
Brunetti-Pierri11, Eric Bend12, Kym Boycott13, Philippe M. Campeau14,
John Christodoulou9, David Dyment13, Natacha Esber15, Jill Fahrner16,
Mark Fleming17, David Geneviève18, Barb DuPont7, Kristin Kristin D.
Kerrnohan13, Alisdair McNeill19, Leonie Menke6, Laurence Faivre20,
Giuseppe Merla11, Paolo Prontera21, Cheryl Rockman22, Charles
Schwartz7, Steven Skinner7, Roger Stevenson7, Antonio Vitobello20,
Marco Tartaglia23, Marielle Alders6, Matthew Tedder7, Bekim Sadikovic1
1London Health Sciences Centre, Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre,
London, Canada; 2Western University, London, Canada; 3PathWest
Laboratory Medicine,QEII Medical Centre, Perth, Australia;
4The
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; 5University
of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia; 6Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 7Greenwood Genetic Center,
Greenwood, United States; 8University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia;
9University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia;
10King
Edward Memorial Hospital, Perth, Australia; 11Federico II University of
Naples, Naples, Italy; 12PreventionGenetics, Marshﬁeld, United States;
13University of Ottawa, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research
Institute, Ottawa, Canada; 14University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada;
15KAT6A Foundation, West Nyack, United States; 16Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, United States;
17Boston Children’s Hospital,
Boston, United States; 18Montpellier University, Montpellier, France;
19University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom;
20CHU Dijon
Bourgogne, Dijon, France; 21University of Perugia Hospital SM della
Misericordia, Perugia, Italy;
22University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Canada; 23Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Overlapping clinical phenotypes and an
expanding breadth and complexity of genomic associations are a
growing challenge in the diagnosis and clinical management of
Mendelian disorders. The functional consequences and clinical
impacts of genomic variation may involve unique, disorder-spe-
ciﬁc, genomic DNA methylation episignatures.
Methods: In this study, we describe 19 novel episignature
disorders and compare the ﬁndings alongside 38 previously
established episignatures for a total of 57 episignatures associated
with 65 genetic syndromes. New episignatures were established
through bioinformatic assessment of genome-wide methylation
data of patient cohorts with a molecular diagnosis for a given
disorder against unaffected controls to generate a speciﬁc and
sensitive classiﬁer.
Results: We demonstrate increasing resolution and speciﬁcity
ranging from protein complex, gene, sub-gene, protein domain,
and even single nucleotide-level Mendelian episignatures. We
show the power of multiclass modelling to develop highly accu-
rate and disease-speciﬁc diagnostic classiﬁers.
Conclusion: This study signiﬁcantly expands the number and
spectrum of disorders with detectable DNA methylation epi-
signatures, improves the clinical diagnostic capabilities through
the resolution of unsolved cases and the reclassiﬁcation of variants
of unknown clinical signiﬁcance, and provides further insight into
the molecular etiology of Mendelian conditions.
References: Levy, Michael A et al. “Novel diagnostic DNA
methylation episignatures expand and reﬁne the epigenetic
landscapes of Mendelian disorders.” HGG advances vol. 3,1
100075. 3 Dec. 2021, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2021.100075.
Grants: This work was funded by the government of Canada
through Genome Canada and the Ontario Genomics Institute
(OGI-188).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.015.C DNA methylation episignature testing improves
molecular diagnosis of Mendelian chromatinopathies
Jennifer Kerkhof1, Gabriella Maria Squeo2, Haley McConkey1,
Michael Levy1, Maria Rosaria Piemontese3, Marco Castori3, Maria
Accadia4, Elisa Biamino5, Matteo Della Monica6, Marilena Carmela Di
Giacomo7,
Cristina
Gervasini8,
Maitz
Silvia9,
Daniela
Melis10,
Donatella Milani11, Maria Piccione12, Paolo Prontera13, Angelo
Selicorni14, Giuseppe Merla2;15, Bekim Sadikovic1;16
1London Health Sciences Centre, Molecular Diagnostics, Verspeeten
Clinical Genome Centre, London, Canada; 2Fondazione IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, Laboratory of Regulatory and Functional
Genomics, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; 3Fondazione IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, Division of Medical Genetics, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy;
4Hospital Cardinale G. Panico, Medical Genetics
Service, Tricase, Lecce, Italy; 5University of Turin, Department of
Pediatrics, Turin, Italy; 6Cardarelli Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit,
Napoli, Italy; 7AOR San Carlo Hospital, UOC Anatomia Patologica,
Potenza, Italy; 8Universita degli Studi di Milano, Division of Medical
Genetics, Department of Health Sciences, Milan, Italy; 9Hospital San
Gerardo, Clinical Pediatric Genetics Unit, Pediatrics Clinics, MBBM
Foundation, Monza, Italy; 10Universita degli Studi di Salerno, Medical,
Surgical and Dental Department, Salerno, Italy; 11Mangiagalli Clinic
IRCCS Cà Granda Foundation Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano,
Italy; 12University of Palermo - Scuola Politecnica, Medical Genetics
Unit Department of Health Promotion, Mother and Child Care,
Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, Palermo, Italy; 13University
of Perugia, Hospital SM della Misericordia, Medical Genetics Unit,
Perugia, Italy; 14ASST Lariana, Sant’Anna General Hospital, Pediatric
Department,
Como,
Italy;
15University
of
Naples
Federico
II,
Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology,
Naples, Italy; 16Western University, Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, London, Canada.
Background/Objectives:
Mendelian
chromatinopathies
result
from disruption of genes involved in chromatin structure and
function. To date, over 50 chromatinopathies have been described
and many exhibit unique genome-wide DNA methylation proﬁles
known as episignatures. In this study, we evaluated the DNA
methylation proﬁle of 129 individuals with either a conﬁrmed or
suspected chromatinopathy for detection of an episignature.
Methods: DNA methylation proﬁles were generated with the
Illumina Inﬁnium MethylationEPIC kit on DNA specimens extracted
from peripheral blood and analyzed with the EpiSign classiﬁer for
42 episignatures.
Results: Samples were grouped into discovery, validation,
uncertain and negative cohorts based on their genotype and phe-
notypic description. Both the discovery and validation cohorts
consisted of patients carrying a pathogenic or likely pathogenic
variant with a matching (discovery) or unknown (validation) phe-
notype. The DNA methylation proﬁles of all discovery and validation
cases matched the expected episignature. The uncertain cohort
consisted of individuals with an identiﬁed VUS by sequence analysis
and 10.7% (3/28) matched a deﬁned episignature, resulting in
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
654
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
variant reclassiﬁcation to likely pathogenic. EpiSign analysis in the
negative cohort directed a clinical diagnosis in 3/33 (9.1%) cases
where molecular investigations were previously negative.
Conclusion: EpiSign analysis provides utility in the diagnosis of
chromatinopathies and should be considered as part of the clin-
ical testing cascade.
References: Kerkhof J, Squeo GM, McConkey H, et al. DNA
methylation episignature testing improves molecular diagnosis of
Mendelian chromatinopathies. Genet Med. 2022;24(1):51-60.
Grants: Telethon – Italy (GGP13231), LHSC Molecular Devel-
opment Fund, Genome Canada Genomic Applications Partnership
Program.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.016.D Investigation of SCN1A poison exons in epilepsy
Peter Sparber1, Igor Bychkov1, Denis Pyankov2, Mikhail Skoblov1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation;
2Genomed Ltd., Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives: Loss of function pathogenic variants in
the SCN1A gene are associated with Dravet syndrome (DS) - a
devastating childhood-onset epileptic syndrome. Recent works
describe several potential “poison exons” (PE) in SCN1A– an
alternatively spliced in frame exons containing premature stop
codon. Such PE when included to SCN1A mRNA leads to hap-
loinsufﬁciency. However, a valid functional approach for SCN1A PE
is not routinely available.
Methods: Bioinformatic analysis was performed using Max-
EntScan and SpliceAI. All 3 PE in the SCN1A gene were cloned to
pSpl3-Flu2 splicing vector. Investigated variants were introduced
using site directed mutagenesis. Splicing analysis was performed
using RT-PCR after transfection to HEK293T cells. Knockdown of
SRSF1 and hnRNP A1 was performed using siRNA.
Results: We created a minigene systems for investigation of
SCN1A PE inclusion. Wild-type constrictions showed no inclusion
for PE2 and PE3 and only 8.9% inclusion for PE1. We demonstrated
the pathogenic effect of PE by introduction previously reported
and artiﬁcial variants into minigenes resulting in signiﬁcant
inclusion of PE. Analysis of 2000 WGS data revealed a potential
causative variant in PE2. To investigate the regulation of PE
inclusion we performed knockdown of SRSF1 and hnRNP A1 with
siRNA. U7 snRNA oligonucleotides were used to correct the spli-
cing pattern of PE in mutant constrictions.
Conclusion: We created and validated a minigene-based
functional assay for investigation of inclusion and regulation of
PE in SCN1A. U7 snRNA oligonucleotides can be used as a pro-
mising approach for future therapy in SCN1A-based epilepsy.
References:.
Grants: The reported study was funded by RFBR. Project
number 20-315-90042.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.017.A Identifying genetic mechanisms that uncouple
leanness from a favorable body fat distribution
Jonathan Belanich1, Tuomas Kilpeläinen1, Mario Urena1
1Copenhagen University, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for
Basic Metabolic Research, København, Denmark.
Background/Objectives: Leanness is associated with a favorable
body fat distribution, indicated by lower waist-hip ratio (WHR).
However, many genetic variants show the opposite pattern ‒ they
are associated with lower body mass index (BMI) but higher
WHR. The variants also show association with an adverse
cardiometabolic risk proﬁle. The underlying biological mechan-
isms remain incompletely understood. We aimed to elucidate the
cellular mechanisms of action of genetic variants associated with
lower BMI but higher WHR, and increased risk of cardiometabolic
disease.
Methods: We took forward all genome-wide signiﬁcant SNPs
associated with BMI, WHR or WHR adjusted for BMI in the largest
GWAS published to date, and identiﬁed SNPs that are associated
with lower BMI (P < 0.05) but higher WHR (P < 0.05). We prioritized
candidate causal genes in the corresponding genetic regions, and
assessed the genes’ roles in differentiation and maturation of
mouse and human preadipocytes by microscopy and quantitative
methods.
Results: Altogether 252 independent loci showed an asso-
ciation with lower BMI but higher WHR. We prioritized six can-
didate causal genes for initial perturbation studies using siRNA.
The studies showed an inhibition of adipogenesis for four of the
six tested genes: ADAMTS9, ABHD15, EMILIN2 and COL18A1. In
further experiments, we will determine the effects on lipid
metabolism and insulin signalling through downregulation and
dCas9 overexpression, and will examine the resulting expression
proﬁle data.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings implicate four novel gene candidates
linked to a leaner phenotype but an unfavorable body fat dis-
tribution, playing a role in adipogenesis.
References:.
Grants:
Novo
Nordisk
Foundation
(NNF18CC0034900,
NNF20OC0063707).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.019.C Rare variant in CCN1 leads to a lean-to-fat switch in
body composition by controlling cell differentiation
Sophia Metz1, Katja Thorøe Michler1, Jonathan Belanich1, Trisha
Jean Grevengoed1, Matthew Gillum1, Tuomas Kilpeläinen1
1The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research,
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
København, Denmark.
Background/Objectives: Obesity is a major contributor to the
global burden of chronic disease. Unravelling the complex aetiology
of obesity is key for developing effective therapies. Genome-wide
association studies provide unique opportunities for identifying
novel therapeutic targets. We examined the adipose tissue
mechanisms that underlie the association of Ser316Cys missense
variant (MAF = 0.8%) in CCN1 with body fat percentage.
Methods: We
assessed the
role of CCN1-Cys316
by
a
phenome-wide association study (PheWAS), receptor-binding
assays, in vitro gene knockdown experiments, and in vivo adi-
pose tissue-speciﬁc gene overexpression studies.
Results:
The
CCN1-Cys316
allele
reduced
the
binding
of CCN1 to its integrin-avb3 membrane receptor by 50%
(p = 0.0003). The PheWAS suggested an association with lean
mass and fat mass, in opposing directions, but showed no sig-
niﬁcant association with other disease risk traits. Gene knock-
down in MSCs reduced proliferation by 30% (p = 0.0007),
whereas treatment with CCN1 reduced adipocyte differentiation
signiﬁcantly. In mice, adipose tissue-speciﬁc overexpression of
CCN1 led to a higher BF% (p = 0.0002) after a high fat diet, but
did not affect bodyweight, indicating a lean-to-fat switch in
body
composition.
The
mean
area
of
mouse
adipocytes
increased (p = 0.009), suggesting an effect of CCN1 on adipocyte
hypertrophy.
Conclusion: Our data indicates a key role of CCN1 during
adipocyte commitment from stem cells and an effect on adipocyte
number, size, and body composition. Our ongoing experiments
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
655
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
using RNAseq after CCN1 modiﬁcation will further elucidate the
signalling capacities of CCN1. The ﬁndings may open new avenues
for treating obesity by lowering fat mass while retaining
lean mass.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.020.D Coregulation within Epigenomic Systems
Oliver Chukwuma Orji1, Rupert Fray2, Helen Knight1
1Division of Cells, Organisms and Molecular Genetics, School of Life
Sciences, Nottingham, United Kingdom;
2School of Biosciences,
University of Nottingham, Loughborough, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives:
Post-transcriptional
and
post-
translational
regulation
by
N-6-methyladenosine
(m6A)
and
5-methylcytosine (m5C) modiﬁcation of ribonucleotides is essen-
tial for biological function. Dysregulation of m6A and m5C RNA
methylation processes and changes in ‘writer’, ‘reader’ and ‘eraser’
effector protein abundance, is proposed to be important for the
development of cancers and neurological conditions.
Methods: Here we analysed human brain tissues’ m6A and
m5C sequence datasets, as well as studied protein co-regulation
of m6A and m5C effector proteins using a newly developed mass
spectrometry protein database, ProteomeHD, which clusters
proteins showing co-regulated abundance after cellular pertur-
bations. Using a correlation cut-off ≥0.8, coregulated proteins for
each set of m6A and m5C effector proteins was retrieved and
examined by gene ontology (GO) analysis.
Results: We found co-regulation patterns between the two
RNA methylation systems. For example, the m6A mRNA writer
METT14, was found to be coregulated with the m5C rRNA writers,
NSUN4 [percentile score, (PS) = 0.94] and NSUN5 (PS = 0.92).
Furthermore, the m5C readers, ALYREF and YBX1 showed co-
regulation with m6A writer, reader and eraser proteins (PS > 0.9)
suggesting that they are central hub proteins in such RNA reg-
ulatory systems. GO analysis indicated that speciﬁc biological
functions
were
signiﬁcantly
enriched
between
co-regulated
methylation proteins, e.g. the class of writer proteins and mito-
chondrial function.
Conclusion: The ﬁndings of the current study provide evidence
of the existence of a co-regulatory cross talk between RNA mod-
iﬁcation systems and suggest that biological function may be
context-speciﬁc to localised cellular domains.
References: Shown in poster.
Grants: Nonapplicable.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.021.A Genome wide methylation proﬁling in diagnostics;
the results of 3 years Episign testing
Marielle Alders1, Jennifer Kerkhof2;3, Peter Henneman1, Michael
Levy2;3, Andrea Venema1, Raissa Relator2;3, Egbert Redeker1, Bekim
Sadikovic2;3, Marcel Mannens1
1Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Human Genetics,
Amsterdam, Netherlands;
2Verspeeten Clinical
Genome Centre,
London Health Sciences Centre, London, Canada; 3Western Uni-
versity, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, London,
Canada.
Background/Objectives: A growing number of neurodevelop-
mental syndromes are shown to have unique genomic DNA
methylation proﬁles, episignatures, which can be used as a
diagnostic tool.
Methods: We have implemented genome wide methylation
proﬁling as a diagnostic test, named EpiSign, in our laboratory in
June 2019. The ﬁrst version of this test, was able to recognize 22
conditions, which expanded to 45 conditions in v2 (2020) and to
64 conditions in v3 (2021). This latest version consist of 54 epi-
signatures, 9 imprinting disorders and Fragile X syndrome.
Results: Between July 2019 and February 2022, 537 diag-
nostic EpiSign test have been requested at AUMC. In 318 cases
the test was requested because the patient carried a VUS in one
of the genes in the EpiSign panel. In 110 of these (35%), the
methylation proﬁle matched that of the associated syndrome,
supporting pathogenicity of the variant. EpiSign was requested
for 217 patients with neurodevelopmental disorder without a
known cause. In 17 (8%) of these cases a positive epigenetic
signature was found. These were imprinting disorders in 4 cases,
FraX in one case and positive episignatures in 12 cases. In at
least 6 of these episignature positive patients the causal muta-
tion was identiﬁed after targeted and detailed (re)analysis of the
associated genes.
Conclusion: These results shows that EpiSign is a powerful
diagnostic tool, in particular for patients for whom conventional
genetic testing was inconclusive. The number of conditions with
an identiﬁed speciﬁc episignature is growing rapidly, increasing
the diagnostic capabilities of this test.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.022.B From patient to function: modeling CRIM1 in
xenopus tropicalis
OZLEM AKGUN DOGAN1;2;3, Stephen Viviano3, Ozden Hatırnaz
Ng2;4;5, Nihat Bugra Agaoglu6, Weizhen Ji3, Lauren Jeffries3, Ugur
Ozbek2;4;5, Saquib Lakhani3, Mustafa Khokha3;7, Engin Deniz8,
Yasemin Alanay1;2;5
1Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University School of Medicine,
Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey; 2Acibadem Mehmet Ali
Aydinlar University, Rare Diseases and Orphan Drugs Application and
Research Center (ACURARE), Istanbul, Turkey; 3Yale University School
of Medicine, Pediatric Genomics Discovery Program, Department of
Pediatrics, NEW HAVEN, United States;
4Acibadem Mehmet Ali
Aydinlar University School of Medicine, Department of Medical
Biology, Istanbul, Turkey; 5Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University
School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul,
Turkey;
6University of Health Sciences Umraniye Training and
Research Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey;
7Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Genetics, NEW
HAVEN, United States; 3Yale University School of Medicine, Pediatric
Genomics Discovery Program, Department of Pediatrics, NEW
HAVEN, United States.
Background/Objectives: CRIM1 is a transmembrane protein that
plays a role in organogenesis, angiogenesis, and kidney disease,
yet the function of CRIM1 has not been fully elucidated especially
in the context of human disease. Here,we report a patient with
compound heterozygous missense variants in CRIM1 presenting
with holoprosencephaly, facial asymmetry, coloboma, cleft palate,
and extremity defects. We sought to establish an animal model for
these phenotypes, test whether the CRIM1 variants are detrimental
to function, and provide additional support for disease causality.
Methods: We used whole-exome sequencing and identiﬁed
CRIM1 as a candidate gene. To model, we utilized loss-of-function
assays using CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome-editing in the
Xenopus model system. We designed two non-overlapping
CRISPRs, generated G0 tadpoles, and veriﬁed genomic edits
using CRISPR edits analysis inference. Embryos then were raised to
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
656
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
be evaluated for neural tube defects (NTDs), craniofacial, and eye
abnormalities
using
brightﬁeld/ﬂuorescence
microscopy
and
optical coherence tomography. To test the function of the var-
iants, we used a gain-of-function assay with overexpression.
Results: Crim1-G0 mutant Xenopus embryos recapitulated
patient
phenotype
closely
and
showed
severe/moderate
NTDs(50%), unilateral microphthalmia/coloboma(30%), and facial
dysmorphism (20%). Cleft palate was present in 23% of the
embryos with facial dysmorphism. The overexpression of wild-
type human mRNA resulted in more frequent NTDs than the
overexpression with the patient variants indicating that the var-
iants are detrimental to protein function.
Conclusion: We present the ﬁrst evidence that homozygous
variants in CRIM1 are associated with congenital abnormalities in
humans and Xenopus tropicalis.
References:.
Grants: This study was conducted as a part of the “Fulbright
Visiting Scholar Program”.
Conﬂict of Interest: OZLEM AKGUN DOGAN Ozlem Akgun-
Dogan is a Fulbright scholar in the “Fulbright Visiting Scholar
Program”, Stephen Viviano: None declared, Ozden Hatırnaz Ng:
None declared, Nihat Bugra Agaoglu: None declared, Weizhen Ji:
None declared, Lauren Jeffries: None declared, Ugur Ozbek: None
declared, Saquib Lakhani: None declared, Mustafa Khokha: None
declared, Engin Deniz: None declared, Yasemin Alanay: None
declared.
P21.023.C Epigenomic translocation of H3K4me3 broad
domains over oncogenes following hijacking of
super‑enhancers
Aneta Mikulasova1, Dan Kent1;2, Marco Trevisan-Herraz1, Nefeli
Karataraki2, Kent F.M. Fung2, Cody Ashby3, Agata Cieslak4, Shmuel
Yaccoby5, Frits van Rhee5, Maurizio Zangari5, Sharmilan Thanen-
drarajan5, Carolina Schinke5, Gareth J. Morgan6, Vahid Asnaﬁ4,
Salvatore Spicuglia7, Chris A. Brackley8, Anne E. Corcoran9, Sophie
Hambleton2;10, Brian A. Walker11, Daniel Rico1, Lisa J. Russell2
1Newcastle University, Biosciences Institute, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom; 2Newcastle University, Translational and Clinical
Research Institute, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; 3University
of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Department of Biomedical
Informatics, Little Rock, AR, United States;
4Université de Paris
(Descartes), Institut Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France; 5Univer-
sity of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Myeloma Center, Little Rock,
AR, United States; 6NYU Langone Health, NYU Langone Medical
Center, Perlmutter Cancer Center, New York City, NY, United States;
7Aix-Marseille
University,
Inserm,
Theories
and
Approaches
of
Genomic Complexity, Marseille, France;
8University of Edinburgh,
School of Physics and Astronomy, Edinburgh, United Kingdom;
9Babraham Institute, Lymphocyte Signalling and Development
Programme, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 10Newcastle upon Tyne
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Great North Children’s Hospital,
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; 11Indiana University, Melvin
and
Bren
Simon
Comprehensive
Cancer
Center,
Division
of
Hematology Oncology, Indianapolis, IN, United States.
Background/Objectives:
Chromosomal
translocations
are
important drivers of haematological malignancies whereby proto-
oncogenes are activated by juxtaposition with enhancers, often
called enhancer hijacking. H3K4me3 is a histone mark character-
istic of active promoters, but broad domains (H3K4me3-BDs) can
cover entire genes, providing consistent expression. We present a
new model of “epigenomic translocation”, where enhancer
hijacking results in the relocation of a wild-type H3K4me3-BD into
the target oncogene.
Methods: We investigated 118 samples including B-cells (15
healthy, 32 malignant), T-cells (17 healthy, 4 malignant) and
myeloid cells (50 healthy). Chromatin states were determined
using ChromHMM (H3K4me1, H3K4me3, H3K9me3, H3K27me3,
H3K27ac, H3K36me3), chromosomal translocations by targeted/
genome sequencing and gene expression by RNA-seq.
Results: We studied the epigenomic consequences of IGH-CCND1
rearrangements. We detected an H3K4me3-BD within the IGH locus
of healthy B-cells that was absent in samples with IGH-CCND1. Relo-
cation of super-enhancer from IGH to CCND1 locus associated with
the appearance of H3K4me3-BD over CCND1, resulted in over-
expression and extensive chromatin accessibility. We observed similar
cancer-speciﬁc H3K4me3-BDs associated with hijacking of super-
enhancers of other oncogenes in B-cell (MAF, MYC, FGFR3/NSD2) and
T-cell malignancies (LMO2, TLX3, TAL1). Co-occurrence of H3K4me3-
BD and super-enhancer was identiﬁed genome-wide in healthy cells
and associated with cell identity genes. Additionally, we predicted the
3D genome structure of the interactions between H3K4me3-BDs and
super-enhancers using in-silico simulation models.
Conclusion: Our analysis suggests that H3K4me3-BDs can be
created by super-enhancers and supports the new concept of
epigenomic translocation, where the relocation of H3K4me3-BDs
from wild-type location to oncogenes accompanies the translo-
cation of super-enhancers.
References: PMID:34933939, bioRxiv:2021.03.12.434963.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.024.D Functional correlation of genome-wide DNA
methylation proﬁles in genetic neurodevelopmental disorders
Michael Levy1, Raissa Relator1, Haley McConkey1;2, Erinija Pranck-
eviciene1, Jennifer Kerkhof1, Aidin Foroutan2, Sadegheh Haghshe-
nas2, Jack Reilly2, Kathleen Rooney1;2, Dimitar Azmanov3, Tugce
Balci4, Siddharth Banka5, Jozef Gecz6, Peter Henneman7, Jennifer
Lee8, Marcel Mannens7, Tony Roscioli9, Victoria Siu4, David Amor10,
Gareth Baynam11, Eric Bend12, Kym Boycott13, Nicola Brunetti-
Pierri14,
Philippe
M.
Campeau15,
John
Christodoulou10,
David
Dyment13, Natacha Esber16, Jill Fahrner17, Mark Fleming18, David
Geneviève19, Kristin Kristin D. Kerrnohan13, Alisdair McNeill20, Leonie
Menke7, Laurence Faivre21, Giuseppe Merla22, Paolo Prontera23,
Cheryl Rockman24,
Charles Schwartz8,
Steven Skinner8, Roger
Stevenson8, Barb DuPont8, Antonio Vitobello21, Marco Tartaglia25,
Marielle Alders7, Matthew Tedder8, Bekim Sadikovic1
1London Health Sciences Centre, Verspeeten Clinical Genome Centre,
London, Canada; 2Western University, London, Canada; 3PathWest
Laboratory Medicine,QEII Medical Centre, Perth, Australia; 4London
Health Sciences Centre, London, Canada; 5University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom;
6University of Adelaide, Adelaide,
Australia; 7Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
Netherlands; 8Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, United States;
9University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia; 10University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia; 11King Edward Memorial Hospital,
Perth, Australia;
12PreventionGenetics, Marshﬁeld, United States;
13University of Ottawa, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario
Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada;
14Federico II University of
Naples, Naples, Italy; 15University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada;
16KAT6A Foundation, West Nyack, United States; 17Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, United States; 18Boston Children’s Hospital,
Boston, United States; 19Montpellier University, Montpellier, France;
20University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom; 21CHU Dijon
Bourgogne, Dijon, France; 22University of Naples Federico II, Naples,
Italy; 23University of Perugia Hospital SM della Misericordia, Perugia,
Italy;
24University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada;
25Ospedale
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
657
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: An expanding range of genetic syn-
dromes are characterized by genome-wide disruptions in DNA
methylation proﬁles referred to as episignatures. Episignatures are
distinct, highly sensitive and speciﬁc biomarkers that have
recently been applied in clinical diagnosis of genetic syndromes.
Episignatures are contained within the broader disorder-speciﬁc
genome-wide DNA methylation changes which can share sig-
niﬁcant overlap amongst different conditions.
Methods: In this study we performed functional genomic
assessment and comparison of disorder-speciﬁc and overlapping
genome-wide DNA methylation changes related to 65 genetic
syndromes with previously described episignatures.
Results: We demonstrate evidence of disorder-speciﬁc and
recurring genome-wide differentially methylated probes (DMPs)
and regions (DMRs). The overall distribution of DMPs and DMRs
across the majority of the neurodevelopmental genetic syndromes
analyzed showed substantial enrichment in gene promoters and
CpG islands, and under-representation of the more variable
intergenic regions. Overrepresentation analysis showed signiﬁcant
enrichment of the recurring DMPs and DMRs in gene pathways
and networks related to neurodevelopment, including neuronal
generation and differentiation and axon guidance.
Conclusion: This study expands beyond the diagnostic utility
of DNA methylation episignatures by demonstrating correlation
between the function of the mutated genes and the consequent
genomic DNA methylation proﬁles as a key functional element in
the molecular etiology of genetic neurodevelopmental disorders.
References: Levy, Michael A et al. “Novel diagnostic DNA
methylation episignatures expand and reﬁne the epigenetic
landscapes of Mendelian disorders.” HGG advances vol. 3,1
100075. 3 Dec. 2021, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2021.100075.
Grants: This work was funded by the government of Canada
through Genome Canada and the Ontario Genomics Institute
(OGI-188).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.025.A Modelling the earliest stages of gliomagenesis
using iNPCs in a three-dimensional alginate-based matrix
Burcu Ekinci1, Tutku Yaraş1, Yavuz Oktay2;3
1Izmir International Biomedicine and Genome Institute, Dokuz Eylul
University, izmir, Turkey; 2Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center, Dokuz
Eylul University Health Campus, izmir, Turkey; 3Dokuz Eylul University,
School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, izmir, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: The development of gliomas is believed
to be triggered by isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH1/2) mutations,
which confer a new enzymatic activity that leads to production of
the oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG). However, current
cellular models of early gliomagenesis frequently use transformed
cells, or normal stem cells with driver mutations. In the present
study we aimed to develop an induced neural progenitor cell
(iNPC) model to study the earliest stages of gliomagenesis in 3D.
Methods: Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) were
differentiated into NPCs. 2-HG was applied to NPCs embedded in
a alginate-based 3D matrix for 2, 7, and 14 days. RNA was isolated
from NPCs after day 2, 7, 14 and key genes previously reported to
be altered in IDH1-mutant gliomas were assessed by qPCR. The
time distribution of changes in the expression of key genes
(L1CAM, MEOX2, etc.) were determined to identify the time-
dependency of 2-HG effects in this particular model. RNA-seq
analysis at selected time point were performed and compared to
data from other models to identify model-speciﬁc transcriptomic
changes. 4C-seq analysis is under way to characterize the altera-
tions in promoter interactions of select genes.
Results: Optimal culturing conditions were identiﬁed and
expression of key genes were monitored over different time
points. RNA-seq analysis identiﬁed genes that are altered in
response to 2-HG in a model-dependent manner.
Conclusion: Our model for the ﬁrst time characterizes tran-
scriptomic and epigenomic changes caused by IDH1/2 mutations
at the earliest stages of gliomagenesis.
References:.
Grants: This study was carried out with the support of TÜBİ-
TAK-ARDEB 117Z981 project.
Conﬂict of Interest: Burcu Ekinci: None declared, Tutku Yaraş:
None declared, Yavuz Oktay TUBITAK-ARDEB 117Z981 project.
P21.026.B Optimization of assay for transposase-accessible
chromatin using sequencing of neutrophils
Janine Klima1, Arif B Ekici1, Steffen Uebe1, Christian Schmidl2, Ulrike
Hüffmeier1
1University Hospital Erlangen, FAU, Institute of Human Genetics,
Erlangen, Germany; 2University Hospital Regensburg, RCI Regensburg
Centre for Interventional Immunology, Regensburg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Psoriasis is a chronic, inﬂammatory skin
disease. Palmoplantar pustular psoriasis (PPP) is one rarer subtype
of this clinically and genetically heterogeneous condition. It is
characterized by hyperkeratosis, and clusters of sterile, neutrophil-
ﬁlled pustules of the palms and soles. In contrast to other forms of
psoriasis, there is not a single validated genetic risk factor for PPP.
In our group, we aim to identify genetic risk factors for PPP.
Therefore, among other things, we employ the assay for
transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq)
on neutrophils, a cell type playing a crucial role in PPP. In order to
do so, we developed an optimized ATAC-seq protocol.
Methods: For efﬁcient ATAC-seq on neutrophils we combined
the classic protocol1 with a dead cell removal step and a cell
ﬁxation step2.
Results: Using our modiﬁed ATAC protocol we were able to
obtain all the desired DNA fractions including the nucleosome-
free fraction.
Conclusion: Instead of using a standard procedure, one should
always run proper quality controls throughout the whole ATAC-
seq protocol and if necessary, optimize the workﬂow.
References: 1 Buenrostro JD, Wu B, Chang HY, Greenleaf WJ.
ATAC-seq:
A
Method
for
Assaying
Chromatin
Accessibility
Genome-Wide. Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2015;109:21.29.1-21.29.9.
Published
2015
Jan
5.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
0471142727.mb2129s109. 2 Chen X, Shen Y, Draper W, et al.
ATAC-see reveals the accessible genome by transposase-mediated
imaging and sequencing. Nat Methods. 2016;13(12):1013-1020.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4031.
Grants: DFG CRC1181 A05, DFG HU2163/3-1.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.027.C Epigenomic and transcriptomic analysis of the
intrinsic and extrinsic molecular mechanisms at the earliest
stages of gliomagenesis in precancerous cell models
Tutku Yaraş1, Burcu Ekinci1, ebru diler2, Yavuz Oktay2;3
1Izmir International Biomedicine and Genome Institute, Dokuz Eylul
University, izmir, Turkey; 2Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center,
Dokuz Eylul University Health Campus, izmir, Turkey; 3Dokuz Eylul
University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, izmir,
Turkey.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
658
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Gliomas are the most common tumours
of the brain. Point mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 genes are believed
to be the earliest genetic defects in gliomagenesis and result in
the production of oncometabolite 2-HG, which alters cellular
metabolism as well as the epigenome. Our aim in this study is to
elucidate the mechanisms underlying the genetic predisposition
associated with SNP- rs55705857 in the 8q24.21 locus, both cell-
intrinsic and extrinsically.
Methods: Doxycycline-inducible, immortalized human astro-
cyte cells (IHA) with IDH1-R132H expression were used to mimic
the earliest stages of gliomagenesis. To determine which loci in
the genome rs55705857 physically interacts, we used the chro-
mosome conformation capture technique (4C-seq). Media col-
lected from these cells at different time points were applied to
primary monocytes differentiating to macrophages, and tran-
scriptomic changes were assessed by RNA-seq and qPCR.
Results: While 4C-Seq analyses showed that the rs55705857
locus interacts with a proximal MYC enhancer that binds TRIM28,
RNA-seq showed that differentially expressed genes were sig-
niﬁcantly enriched in the list of genes that were altered as a result
of loss of TRIM28. RNA-seq of differentiated macrophages showed
that the complement system was negatively regulated in the
presence of 2-HG-containing medium.
Conclusion: For the ﬁrst time, a mechanistic relationship was
established between the 8q24.21 associated glioma risk locus and
the control of MYC expression. Also, mutant but untransformed
astrocytes have effects on monocyte differentiation, primarily via
complement system and the mevalonate pathway.
References:.
Grants: This study was carried out with the support of TÜBİ-
TAK-ARDEB 214S097 and 117Z981 projects.
Conﬂict of Interest: Tutku Yaraş: None declared, Burcu Ekinci:
None declared, ebru diler: None declared, Yavuz Oktay TÜBİTAK-
ARDEB 214S097 and 117Z981 project.
P21.028.D Epigenetic adaptations of the masticatory mucosa
to periodontal inﬂammation
Gesa Richter1, Jochen Kruppa2, Gencay Keceli3, Emel Tuğba
Ataman-Duruel3, Christian Graetz4, Nicole Pischon5, Gunar Wagner6,
Carsten Rendenbach7, Yvonne Jockel-Schneider8, Orlando Martins9,
Corinna Bruckmann10, Ingmar Staufenbiel11, Andre Franke12, Rahime
Nohutcu3, Søren Jepsen13, Henrik Dommisch1, Arne Schäfer1
1Charité Center of Dento-Maxillo-Facial Medicine, Dept. of Period-
ontology, Oral Medicine and Oral Surgery, Berlin, Germany; 2Institute of
Medical Informatics, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany; 3Faculty of Dentistry, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey;
4Clinic of Conservative Dentistry and Periodontology, University Medical
Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany; 5Private Practice, Schönefeld,
Germany; 6University Medical Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany; 7Charité
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; 8Clinic of Preventive
Dentistry and Periodontology, University Medical Center of the Julius-
Maximilians-University, Würzburg, Germany; 9Institute of Medicine and
Oral Surgery, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; 10Medical
University Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 11Hannover Medical School, Han-
over, Germany; 12Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel, Germany;
13University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives: In mucosal barrier interfaces, ﬂexible
responses of gene expression to long-term environmental chan-
ges allow adaptation and ﬁne-tuning for the balance of host
defense and uncontrolled not-resolving inﬂammation. Epigenetic
modiﬁcations confer plasticity to the genetic information and give
insight into how tissues use genetic information to adapt to
environmental factors. The oral mucosa is particularly exposed to
environmental stressors such as a variable microbiota. Likewise,
persistent oral inﬂammation is the most important intrinsic risk
factor for the oral inﬂammatory disease periodontitis and has
strong potential to alter DNA-methylation patterns. The aim of
the current study was to identify epigenetic changes of the
masticatory mucosa in response to long-term inﬂammation that
resulted in periodontitis.
Methods: In an Epigenome-Wide Association Study, CpG
methylation of both inﬂamed and clinically uninﬂamed solid gingival
tissue biopsies of 60 periodontitis cases was analyzed using the
Inﬁnium MethylationEPIC BeadChip, applying the EpiDish algorithm
for cell-type deconvolution of inﬁltrated immune cells, and adjust-
ment of effect sizes of differentially methylated positions using our
recently developed “intercept method”.
Results: Various genes showed signiﬁcantly different methyla-
tion between periodontitis-inﬂamed and uninﬂamed oral mucosa in
periodontitis patients. The strongest differences were observed for
genes with roles in wound healing (ROBO2, PTP4A3), cell adhesion
(LPXN) and innate immune response (CCL26, DNAJC1, BPI).
Conclusion: Our results imply speciﬁc adaptations of the oral
mucosa to a persistent inﬂammatory environment that involve
wound repair, barrier integrity, and innate immune defense.
References:.
Grants: This study was funded by a research grant from the
DFG (RI 2827/1-1), the BMBF (01DL15002), and the DG PARO/CP
GABA-Forschungsförderung.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.029.A Exploring the connections between prenatal
environmental stressors and DNA methylation levels in
placenta and peripheral tissues of mothers and neonates by
applying Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
Andrea Stoccoro1, Vanessa Nicolì1, Fabio Coppedè1, Enzo Grossi2,
Simonetta
Menotta3,
Giorgio
Fedrizzi3,
Ernesto
Burgio4,
Lucia
Migliore1
1University of Pisa, Department of Translational Research and of New
Surgical and Medical Technologies, Pisa, Italy; 2Villa Santa Maria
Foundation, Tavernerio, Italy; 3Istituto Zooproﬁlattico Sperimentale
della Lombardia e dell’Emilia-Romagna “Bruno Ubertini”, Bologna,
Italy;
4Euro Mediterranean Scientiﬁc Biomedical Institute-ISBEM
Research Centre, Mesagne, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Exposure to environmental stressors
during pregnancy plays a powerful role in inﬂuencing later sus-
ceptibility to certain chronic diseases of the new-born through
modulation of epigenetic mechanisms, including DNA methyla-
tion [1]. Our aim was to explore the connections among envir-
onmental exposures during gestation with placenta, maternal and
neonatal buccal cell DNA methylation by applying artiﬁcial neural
networks (ANNs).
Methods: 28 mother-infants couples have been enrolled.
Information on lifestyle and environmental exposure during
gestation were obtained by the administration of a questionnaire.
Concentrations of heavy metals and dioxins in placenta were
analyzed by means of mass spectrometry. Global and gene spe-
ciﬁc DNA methylation were performed.
Results: ANNs analysis revealed that low birth weight asso-
ciated with placental H19 methylation, maternal stress during
pregnancy with placental NR3C1 and maternal BDNF methylation,
and exposure to air pollutants with maternal MGMT methylation.
Associations among placenta concentrations of lead, chromium,
cadmium and mercury with placental OXTR, maternal and neo-
natal HSD11B2, neonatal MECP2 and maternal MTHFR methyla-
tion, respectively, as well as among concentrations of dioxins and
placental RELN, neonatal HSD11B2 and maternal H19 methylation
were also observed.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
659
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: Current results show that methylation levels of
genes involved in different pathways important for the embryonic
development are sensitive to various environmental stressors
during pregnancy and are altered in placenta, potentially affecting
foetal development, and in peripheral tissues of mothers and
neonates, potentially providing peripheral biomarkers of envir-
onmental exposure.
References: Gluckman et al., N Engl J Med. 359(1):61-73, 2008.
Grants: CCM Program 2017 - CUP E72F17000390001.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.030.B A highly structured diet in Greek individuals reveals
molecular signatures linked to growth hormone signalling
Anargyros Skoulakis1, Dimitris Zisis1, Vasiliki Zarkou1, Maria
Anezaki1, Konstantinos Rouskas2, Antigone Dimas1
1Institute for Bioinnovation, Biomedical Sciences Research Center
Alexander Fleming, Athens, Greece; 2Institute of Applied Biosciences,
Center for Research and Technology Hellas, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Background/Objectives: Dietary restriction extends healthspan in
multiple species and likely has beneﬁcial effects for human health.
To address the molecular impact of a structured diet in humans,
we established the FastBio project. FastBio comprises 199 indivi-
duals following a structured diet speciﬁed by the Orthodox
Christian Church (temporal abstinence from meat, dairy products
and eggs for 200 days annually) and 212 individuals following a
general-population, unstructured diet. FastBio explores multiple
omics levels at fasting and nonfasting timepoints to capture acute
and long-term effects of diet.
Methods: gDNA was genotyped and PCA on genotypes was
performed to map FastBio relative to 1KG individuals. Whole blood
RNA was sequenced and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and
eQTLs were detected using DESeq2 and FastQTL respectively.
Results: FastBio individuals map closest to TSI, with a gradient
mapping away from 1KG populations implying additional ances-
try. Most DEGs (N = 386) were detected across dietary groups
during the fasting timepoint. We report enrichment of pathways
linked to: a) growth hormone receptor signalling, a pathway
modulated by diet, whose downregulation has beneﬁcial effects
on health, b) action of beta-blockers, c) immune and metabolic
processes. We also report ~8,500 eGenes for each dietary group
and timepoint.
Conclusion: We reveal key signatures driven by a highly
structured diet in humans. Integration of incoming data on: 250
plasma metabolites, 1,536 plasma proteins, the gut microbiome,
DNA methylation, as well as experiments in cell culture, will help
us understand the molecular mechanisms through which diet
shapes human health.
References:.
Grants: ERC Starting Grant to Dr Dimas.
Conﬂict of Interest: Anargyros Skoulakis ERC Starting Grant to
Dr Antigone Dimas, Dimitris Zisis ERC Starting Grant to Dr Anti-
gone Dimas, Vasiliki Zarkou ERC Starting Grant to Dr Antigone
Dimas, Maria Anezaki ERC Starting Grant to Dr Antigone Dimas,
Konstantinos Rouskas ERC Starting Grant to Dr Antigone Dimas,
Antigone Dimas ERC Starting Grant to Dr Antigone Dimas.
P21.031.C Transcriptome proﬁling with direct-RNA long-read
sequencing uncovers functional variation affecting isoform
production
Aline
Réal1;2,
Christelle
Borel1,
Nikolaos
Lykoskouﬁs1,
Gisella
PugaYung2, Joerg Seebach2, Ana Viñuela3, Anna Ramisch4, Emma-
nouil Dermitzakis1
1University of Geneva Medical School, Department of Genetic
Medicine and Development, Geneva, Switzerland;
2University of
Geneva Medical School, Department of Medicine/Department of
Pathology and Immunology, Geneva, Switzerland;
3International
Centre for Life, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle, United Kingdom; 4University of Geneva Medical School,
Department of Basic Neuroscience, Geneva, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: RNA-seq technologies increased our
knowledge of gene expression and transcript isoform signatures.
However, current short-read RNA-seq methods have limitations in
identifying complex transcript isoforms as full-length transcripts
and base modiﬁcations are lost.
Methods: In this study, we use long-read native poly(A) RNA-
seq using the Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) platform,
which measures the full length of mRNA molecules. We inde-
pendently sequenced 60 unrelated lymphoblastoid cell lines from
the 1000 Genomes/Geuvadis dataset, to investigate the effect of
genetic variation on expression, splicing and structure within a
population.
Results: Sequenced samples had on average 1.7 million reads
with a median read length of 823 bp. We detected 11,123 protein-
coding genes expressed in at least 50% of the samples. For these,
we observed a good correlation of 0.61-0.79 with gene expression
from the same samples sequenced with Illumina(~50M reads/
sample). However, using the pi1 computed on genes with sig-
niﬁcant eQTLs in Illumina (317 samples), the estimate of Illumina-
eQTLs detectable with ONT technology was only 10,7%. Isoform
analysis using the FLAIR pipeline [1] identiﬁed 250,987 isoforms, of
which 98,056 were not associated to any annotated gene. Overall,
over 77% of isoforms associated to a gene were not previously
annotated. Genetic variation analysis on isoform usage on 17,046
annotated isoforms expressed in 50% of our samples identiﬁed 70
cis-isoform-QTLs (FDR 5%), among these, nine were not previously
observed cis-eQTLs.
Conclusion: Furthermore, to understand the effect of common
and rare genetic variants on speciﬁc transcript alterations, we are
currently evaluating allele-speciﬁc expression analysis and identi-
fying direct-RNA modiﬁcations.
References: Tang, Nature Communications, 2020.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Aline Réal: None declared, Christelle Borel:
None declared, Nikolaos Lykoskouﬁs: None declared, Gisella Pug-
aYung: None declared, Joerg Seebach: None declared, Ana
Viñuela: None declared, Anna Ramisch: None declared, Emmanouil
Dermitzakis Employed by GSK.
P21.032.D Adenosine-to-inosine miR-200b-3p editing as a
novel oncogenic process in high-grade serous ovarian cancer
Magdalena Niemira1, Anna Skwarska2, Karolina Chwialkowska3,
Agnieszka Bielska1, Gabriela Sokołowska1, Anna Szałkowska1, Anna
Erol1, Iwona Sidorkiewicz1, Justyna Raczkowska1, Miroslaw Kwas-
niewski3, Mariusz Kuzmicki4, Jacek Szamatowicz4, Michal Ryn5, Pawel
Knapp5, Joanna Reszec6, Marcin Moniuszko7, Adam Kretowski1;8
1Medical University of Bialystok, Clinical Research Centre, Bialystok,
Poland;
2The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Centre,
Department of Leukemia, Houston, United States; 3Medical University
of Bialystok, Centre for Bioinformatics and Data Analysis, Bialystok,
Poland; 4Medical University of Bialystok, Department of Gynecology
and Gynecological Oncology, Bialystok, Poland; 5Medical University
of Bialystok, University of Oncology Centre, Bialystok, Poland;
6Medical University of Bialystok, Department of Medical Pathomor-
phology, Bialystok, Poland; 7Medical University of Bialystok, Depart-
ment of Regenerative Medicine and Immune Regulation, Bialystok,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
660
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Poland; 8Medical University of Bialystok, Department of Endocrinol-
ogy, Diabetology and Internal Medicine, Bialystok, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Deamination of adenosine to inosine in
double-stranded microRNAs (miRNAs) affects their function as
oncosupressors or oncogenes. Consequently, edition of miRNAs
may play a key regulatory role in multiple signalling pathways
altering cancer cell growth and survival. Therefore, edited miRNAs
represent a novel and promising therapeutic strategy, especially
for traditionally undruggable cancer’s targets.
Methods: Here, we investigated a proﬁle of miRNA editing
through small RNA sequencing followed by miRge 2.0 analysis of
36 high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) samples paired with
34 normal ovarian tissues. For functional studies, human ovarian
cancer OVCAR3 and CAOV3 cell lines were treated with siADAR1
and 8-azaadenosine to inhibit miRNA editing or transfected with
wild-type/edited miRNAs mimics and subjected to RNA-seq and
proteomics analysis to identify altered biological pathways and
the critical targets of edited miRNAs.
Results: We found that the tumour suppressor miR-200b-3p
was overedited in HGSOC samples compared to the normal ovary
tissue. Mechanistically, edited miR-200b-3p promoted cell pro-
liferation, colony formation, migration and formation of 3D
spheroids in ovarian cancer cell lines. RNAseq and GSEA analysis
revealed that whereas wild-type miR-200b-3p, consistent with its
tumour suppressor function, induced apoptotic signalling path-
ways
(NES = 2.4;
FDR = 0),
edited
miR-200b-3p
signiﬁcantly
inhibited G1 to S cell cycle control (NES = -1.89; FDR = 0.01) and
cell cycle checkpoint (NES = -0.89; FDR = 0.002) pathways.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that edited miR-200b-3p can
be a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of HGSOC.
References: Not included.
Grants: The study was supported by the funds of the Ministry
of Education and Science within the project “Excellence Initiative -
Research University”.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.033.A Epigenetic study: an aid in the diagnostic impasse
of Kabuki syndrome
Mouna
Barat-Houari1,
Nathalie
PALLARES-RUIZ1,
Aref-Eshghi
Erfan2, Bekim Sadikovic2, Olivier Ardouin1, David BAUX1, Thomas
Guignard1, Kevin Yauy3, Marine Legendre4, Stanislas Lyonnet5, jean-
luc alessandri6, Marion Gerard7, Francis Ramond8, Damien Haye9,
Anne-Marie Guerrot10, Cyril Mignot11, Berenice Doray12, Varoona
Bizaoui7, Guilaine Boursier1, David Geneviève1
1CHU de Montpellier, Genetic, Montpellier, France; 2London Health
Sciences Centre, Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Molecular Diagnos-
tics Division, London, Canada; 3Inserm U 1209, CNRS UMR 5309,
Institute of Advanced Biosciences, Centre de recherche UGA,
Grenoble, France; 4CHU de Bordeaux, Genetic, Bordeaux, France;
5Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Genetic, Paris, France; 6CHD Félix-
Guyon, Pediatric, Saint-Denis, France;
7CHU de Caen - Hôpital
Clémenceau, Genetic, Caen, France; 8CHU de Saint Etienne - Hôpital
Nord, Genetic, Saint-Etienne, France; 9CHU Nice - Hôpital l’Archet2,
Genetic, Nice, France; 10CHU Rouen - Hôpital Charles Nicolle, Genetic,
Rouen, France; 11AP-HP - Hôpital La Pitié-Salpêtrière, Genetic, Paris,
France; 12CHRU de Strasbourg, Genetic, Strasbourg, France.
Background/Objectives: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare genetic
disorder with a prevalence of 1/32,000 births. Clinical KS diagnosis
is difﬁcult in the ﬁrst year of life or with atypical facial features.
Currently, only molecular conﬁrmation by identiﬁcation of de
novo pathogenic variants in KMT2D and KDM6A allow to conﬁrm
KS. Our laboratory offers a NGS targeted analysis of genes
involved in DNA methylation pathway, including KS genes. We
conﬁrmed KS diagnosis in 29/41 cases (70.7%). However, the
absence of molecular diagnosis in 12 / 41 (29.3%) individuals
raises the question of a possible non-detected variant.
Methods: After a careful clinical data review, we classiﬁed
these patients into two groups: a “typical KS” (n = 3) and “atypical
KS” (n = 8). We obtained DNA methylation proﬁles for 11 “nega-
tive” by a collaboration with Dr B.Sadikovik, (EpiSign-CAN).
Results: Unlike “atypical KS” patients, “typical KS” displayed KS
epi-signature as previously established for KMT2D or KDM6A
patients. Thanks to a more efﬁcient bioinformatic analysis, we
identiﬁed KMT2D variants and conﬁrmed molecular diagnosis for
two “typical SK” with KS epi-signature: a 20 nucleotides deletion
and a deletion of exon 35. An extended molecular analysis of the
deep intronic and regulatory regions would help to identify the
causal variant in the third patient.
Conclusion: It would be interesting to replicate this result in a
larger sample. Such approach would provide a valuable and
complementary aid to NGS, and would allow the exit from diag-
nostic impasse for KS patients and probably for patients with
other chromatinopathies.
References: Aref-Eshghi, 2020, https://github.com/mobidic/
MobiDL.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.034.B Artiﬁcial intelligence reveal connections among
sex, gene methylation, maternal risk factors and disease
severity in Autism Spectrum Disorder
Andrea
Stoccoro1,
Roberta
Gallo1,
Sara
Calderoni2,
Romina
Cagiano2, Filippo Muratori2, Lucia Migliore1, Enzo Grossi3, Fabio
Coppedè1
1University of Pisa, Translational Research and of New Surgical and
Medical Technologies, Pisa, Italy; 2IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation,
Calambrone (PI), Italy; 3Villa Santa Maria Foundation, Tavernerio,
Italy.
Background/Objectives: Increasing evidence points to a con-
tribution of environmental and epigenetic factors in autism
spectrum disorder (ASD), but their connections are still largely
unexplored [1-3]. In the present study we used machine learning
tools to unravel connections among ASD-related gene methyla-
tion levels, maternal ASD risk factors and ASD severity.
Methods: The methylation levels of MECP2, OXTR, RELN, BDNF,
EN2, BCL2 and HTR1A genes have been assessed in blood DNA
samples of 58 ASD children (23 males and 35 females). We then
used machine learning approaches (Auto-CM) to connect gene
methylation levels with maternal ASD risk factors and with disease
severity (ADOS-2 score).
Results: Sex differences were observed in DNA methylation
levels of the studied genes, with MECP2, HTR1A, and OXTR
methylation connected to females, and EN2, BCL2, and RELN
methylation connected to males. BDNF methylation was not
linked to sex, but rather to maternal risk factors. Maternal pre-
pregnancy BMI, gestational weight gain and living context were
among factors linked to disease severity.
Conclusion: The present study highlights the power of artiﬁcial
intelligence tools to unravel connections among different vari-
ables in complex disorders, revealing links among maternal risk
factors and disease severity or gene methylation levels, as well as
sex differences in gene methylation levels that warrant further
investigation in ASD.
References: [1] Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik B, et al. J. Appl. Genet.
60(1), 37–47 (2019).
[2] Coppedè F. Epigenomics 13(20), 1587–1590 (2021).
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
661
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
[3] Gallo R, et al. Epigenomics 2022. https://doi.org/10.2217/epi-
2021-0494.
Grants: University of Pisa Grant (PRA 2017-61).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.035.C A CRISPR and FACS-based assay to assess allele-
speciﬁc gene regulation by transcription factors
Laura Duran-Lozano1, Jenny Mattsson1;2, Caterina Cafaro1, Mar-
oulio Pertesi1, Ram Ajore1, Ludvig Ekdahl1, Aitzkoa Lopez de
Lapuente Portilla1, Björn Nilsson1;3
1Lund University, Lund, Sweden; 2BioInvent International AB, Lund,
Sweden; 3Broad Institute, Cambridge, United States.
Background/Objectives:
GWAS-identiﬁed
variants
are
often
found in large intergenic or noncoding regions. Understanding
the regulatory effects of such variants is key to understanding
their functional role in a given phenotype. Allele-speciﬁc tran-
scription factor (TF) binding could explain the association of a
noncoding variant with a given phenotype as a result of differ-
ences in gene expression.
Methods: We elaborated an extensive and curated list of 1719
TF and produced a lentiviral transcription factor knock out (TF KO).
We used ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to examine
which TF were key for the expression of our gene of interest.
We did that by staining cells transfected with the TF KO library
with a speciﬁc antibody against the protein of interest and then
sorted the 5% lowest expressing cells. We then sequenced the
sorted cells to ﬁnd which TF KO caused loss of expression of the
gene of interest.
Examining cell lines with opposite genotype provides insight TFs
that affect gene expression differentially according to genotype.
Results: We applied our library to two different phenotype
models: a) key transcription factors for a known gene in Multiple
myeloma, ELL21; and b) regulators in a hematopoietic stem cell
model by studying the transcriptional regulators of recently dis-
covered ITGA92.
Conclusion: We provide with a CRISPR-based library that is
easy to use in in vitro cellular models and can be used to study key
transcription regulators of cell surface proteins as well as intra-
cellular and nuclear proteins.
References: 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms8213.
2. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2021013220.
Grants:
●
EU-MSCA-COFUND754299.
●
KnutochAlice Wallenberg Foundation.
●
Swedish Cancer Society.
Conﬂict of Interest: Laura Duran-Lozano: None declared,
Jenny Mattsson employed by BioInvent International AB, Caterina
Cafaro: None declared, Maroulio Pertesi: None declared, Ram
Ajore: None declared, Ludvig Ekdahl: None declared, Aitzkoa
Lopez de Lapuente Portilla: None declared, Björn Nilsson: None
declared.
P21.036.D Epigenome-wide association study of gestational
age at birth using DNA methylation data measured on the
Illumina MethylationEPIC BeadChip microarray
Kristine Løkås Haftorn1, William Denault1;2, Yunsung Lee1, Christian
Page1;3, Julia Romanowska1;4, Per Magnus1, Siri Håberg1, Jon
Bohlin1;5, Astanand Jugessur1;4
1Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Centre for Fertility and Health,
Oslo, Norway;
2University of Chicago, Department of Human
Genetics, Chicago, United States; 3University of Oslo, Department
of Mathematics, Oslo, Norway; 4University of Bergen, Department of
Global Public Health and Primary Care, Bergen, Norway; 5Norwegian
Institute of Public Health, Department of Method Development and
Analytics, Oslo, Norway.
Background/Objectives: Although shorter gestational age (GA) has
been linked to increased risk of disease early and later in life, the
mechanistic underpinnings are not well understood. Previous stu-
dies have shown a strong association between DNA methylation
(DNAm) and GA. However, these studies analyzed DNAm measured
on the Illumina HumanMethylation 450K array. The more recent
850K (‘EPIC’) array covers almost twice as many CpGs as the 450K
array and includes more CpGs in regulatory regions that may be
more relevant to GA. We therefore wanted to investigate the rela-
tionship between GA and CpGs on the EPIC array.
Methods: We conducted an epigenome-wide association
study (EWAS) of GA using EPIC-derived DNAm data from cord
blood of 953 randomly selected newborns from a sub-study of the
population based Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort
(MoBa) study. Adjustments for child sex, maternal age and
smoking, cell type proportions and batch effects were included in
the analysis.
Results: 13,660 CpGs were associated with GA at Bonferroni
signiﬁcance, 7639 of which were speciﬁc for the EPIC array.
Functional enrichment analysis further revealed that these CpGs
were located near genes playing a role in development and reg-
ulation of the cytoskeleton.
Conclusion: We identiﬁed numerous differentially methylated
CpGs that were associated with GA and speciﬁc for the EPIC array.
References:.
Grants: Research Council of Norway (grant 262700) and
National Institutes of Health (NIH) (grant R01 1HL134840-0).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.037.A The impact of functional characterization of
variants in calcium sensing receptor gene (CASR) on the
clinical diagnosis
Andreea Apetrei1, Richard Nicolas1, Stéphane Allouche2, Groso
Anthony3, Fontaine Paul1, Resbeut Antoine1, nicolas gruchy1, Arnaud
Molin1
1Normandy University, UNICAEN, Caen University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Genetics, Reference Center of Rare Diseases of Calcium and
Phosphorus
Metabolism,
EA
7450
BioTARGen,
Caen,
France;
2Normandy University, UNICAEN, Caen University Hospital, Depart-
ment of Biochemistry, Caen, France; 3Normandy University, UNICAEN,
EA 7450 BioTARGen, Caen, France.
Background/Objectives: The human calcium-sensing receptor
(CaSR) is a G-protein-coupled receptor that signals via intracellular
calcium mobilization and MAPK pathway to regulate extracellular
calcium homeostasis. Loss- or gain-of-function heterozygous CASR
variants lead to familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia type 1 (FHH1)
or autosomal-dominant hypocalcemia (ADH), respectively.
Methods: We analysed the CASR gene in ten unrelated families
presenting abnormalities of the calcium and phosphate metabo-
lism. The missense variants of unknown signiﬁcance were induced
by
site-directed
mutagenesis
into
a
wild-type
(WT)
CaSR-
expressing plasmidic vector. HEK293 cells were transfected with
either the WT, the variant or cotransfected with both CaSR-
containg vectors. We conducted two luciferase reporter gene
assays using NFAT and SRE response elements to measure the
function of CaSR on the two major CaSR-associated pathways.
Results: Eleven heterozygous CASR genetic variants were
identiﬁed in eight different FHH1 families, one ADH family and
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
662
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
one patient presenting nephrolithiasis and hypercalciuria. In two
families we identiﬁed two different variants in cis (complex allele)
and in trans (compound heterozygote), respectively. The func-
tional assays allowed to classify the eleven variants as gain of
function (1/11), loss of function (8/11) and without impact (2/11)
and to do a genotype-phenotype association.
Conclusion: We report and characterize eleven CASR variants
in ten families with various clinical presentations. We were able to
resolve two complex cases, with two variants presented in cis and
in trans respectively and hypothesize on their implication in the
observed phenotype. Our work enlarged the spectrum of patho-
genic variants of CASR gene.
References:.
Grants: This research received a grant from Normandy region
(RIN Normandy Genomic Medicine).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.038.B Analysis of the effect of thiopurine drugs on the
DNA methylation proﬁle in IBD patients
Marlena Szalata1, Katarzyna Bzdęga2;3, Oliwia Zakerska-Banaszak3,
Joanna Zuraszek3, Marcin Gabryel4, Aleksandra Zielińska3, Liliana
Łykowska-Szuber4,
Agnieszka
Dobrowolska1,
Ryszard
Słomski3,
Marzena Skrzypczak-Zielinska3
1Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Life
Sciences, Poznan, Poland; 2Chair and Department of Genetics and
Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland; 3Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Poznan, Poland; 4Department of Gastroenterology, Diete-
tics and Internal Medicine, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Poznan, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Thiopurines, used in immunosuppressive
treatment i.a. of inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD), are purine ana-
logs that via incorporation into the DNA strands, inhibit replication.
It is hypothesized that thiopurines may cause epigenetic effects. Our
aim was to analyze the impact of azathioprine (AZA) on the DNA
methylation using the in vitro model of T lymphocytes and NK cells
obtained from peripheral blood samples from 15 IBD patients and
subjected to 6-day culture with 10 μM AZA addition. The control
group consisted of 12 healthy individuals.
Methods: DNA methylation proﬁle analyzes were carried out
including 1) CpG islands by using bisulﬁte conversion and pyr-
osequencing of mitochondrial D loop sequence and ALU repeti-
tive sequence, 2) global methylation analysis by detection of
5-methylcytosines using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA).
Results: Pyrosequencing results show no statistically signiﬁcant
differences in the methylation level of the D-loop mitochondrial
DNA fragment and ALU sequence between in vitro cell cultures
with and without 10 μM AZA supplementation, and also between
patients and controls. However, for both loci, there were differ-
ences in the methylation level of the individual CpG positions
(p < 0.0001). ELISA results showed that the average 5-mC level was
at 4.35% for the cultured cells of patients without AZA supplement
and 4.15% for those with AZA, and it did not differ signiﬁcantly,
even compared to the results for the control group (3.95% and
4.23% respectively).
Conclusion: The presence of 10 μM AZA addition in 6-day T
lymphocytes and NK cells culture does not inﬂuence DNA
methylation.
References: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crohns.2012.06.020.
Grants: Polish National Science Centre, grant-no. 2016/23/D/
NZ2/01620.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P21.039.C DNA methylation in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome
and risk to develop schizophrenia
Chuan JIAO1, Fanny Demars1, Qin He1, Oussama Kebir1;2, Anushree
Tripathi1, Hugo Turbé3, Caroline Demily3, Marie-Odile Krebs1;2,
Thérèse Jay1, Boris Chaumette1;2;4
1Université de Paris, Institute of Psychiatry and Neuroscience of Paris
(IPNP), INSERM U1266, Paris, France;
2GHU Paris Psychiatrie et
Neurosciences, Paris, France; 3GénoPsy Centre Hospitalier Le Vinatier,
Lyon, France; 4McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
Background/Objectives: Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric
disorder resulting from the interaction of genetic and environ-
mental factors. One of the highest genetic risks is 22q11.2 dele-
tion. 25% of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) carriers will
develop schizophrenia in their lifetime. We hypothesized that
environmental factors such as stress increase the risk of schizo-
phrenia for 22q11.2DS carriers through epigenetics.
Methods: We explored the DNA methylation difference in nine
22q11.2DS carriers affected by schizophrenia and ﬁve carriers
without schizophrenia. One pair of discordant monozygotic twins
was included. Besides, 30 mice were separated into four groups:
wildtype (WT), Df(h22q11)/+ (G), WT_stress (E), and Df(h22q11)/
+_stress (GxE). Blood samples from humans and prefrontal cortex
samples from mice were sequenced by RRBS. Differentially
methylated probes (DMPs) and regions (DMRs) were detected
(FDR<0.05 & Δm>25%).
Results: A total of 3,895 DMPs and 1,562 DMRs were sig-
niﬁcant, corresponding to 3,773 unique genes. They were highly
expressed in the brain and signiﬁcantly enriched in schizophrenia
GWAS hits. The most signiﬁcant pathways were neuroactive
ligand-receptor interaction, calcium, and focal adhesion. Mean-
while, 10,076 DMPs and 167 DMRs (Δm>50%) were identiﬁed in
twins, 3,030 genes were colocalized. For mice, more genes were
detected in stress inﬂuence on Df(h22q11)/+ than WT. Same
groups of pathways were enriched. In total, 42 overlapped genes
were highly expressed in neurons and astrocytes.
Conclusion: Stress matters in the emergence of schizophrenia
for 22q11.2DS carriers. These target genes can help us to study the
mechanism and therapy further.
References: J.R. Zinkstok et al., 2019, The Lancet Psychiatry.
Grants: ANR EPI-YOUNG, and Fondation Bettencourt Schueller.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P2NEW TREATMENTS FOR GENETIC DISORDERS
P22.001.D Papillon-Lefevre syndrome: Alveolar bone
regeneration using customized 3D printed poly-l-lactic acid
scaffold and autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells
ahmad abd Elazeem1, hatem mattar2, mohamed elmasry3, mohsena
abderazik4, Nermeen Ahmed1
1Human Genetics and Gnome Research Institute, National Research
Centre, oro-dental genetics, Giza, Egypt; 2New Cairo Hospital, Oral
and Maxillofacial unit, Cairo, Egypt; 3Ganzouri Specialized Hospital,
Cairo, Egypt;
4Faculty of Dental Medicine for Girls, Al-Azhar
University, Orthdontic Department, Cairo, Egypt.
Background/Objectives: Papillion LeFevre syndrome (PLS) is an
autosomal recessive disorder that is characterized by early-onset
severe periodontitis and consequently premature loss of teeth.
Early teeth loss is followed by progressive bone resorption,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
663
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
atrophied ridges, and reduced vertical dimension of occlusion that
will hinder the construction of a suitable prosthesis. Tissue engi-
neering is a ﬁeld of medicine that uses a combination of; cells,
engineered biomaterials, and suitable biochemical factors to
replace biological tissues. Bone monocular cells (BMMNCs) have
been used for bone regeneration as they contain a fraction of
stem cells. Recent technologies, such as 3D printing, have revo-
lutionized the ﬁeld of tissue engineering and provided the ability
to design and fabricate patient-speciﬁc complex 3D scaffolds.
Here, an innovative regenerative approach is proposed to provide
a step forward towards regenerative therapy.
Methods: This study included 3 patients diagnosed with PLS.
Autologous BMMNCs were seeded on a patient-speciﬁc 3D prin-
ted poly-l-lactic acid (PLLA) scaffold. A combination of; autologous
platelet-rich ﬁbrin (PRF) and nano-hydroxyapatite was used for
bone regeneration. Clinical and radiographic assessment was be
performed at 6 and 12 months postoperatively.
Results: All patients healed probably without any complica-
tions. During the 12-month follow-up, no donor site morbidities
have been reported. Cone beam radiographs showed successful
bone regeneration in all cases.
Conclusion: This proposed approach may help to improve the
lifestyle and health of patients with PLS.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the Science and Tech-
nology Development Funding Authority (STDF), young Researcher
Grant (STDF - YRG– Call 10, Grant number 33438, 2019).
Conﬂict of Interest: ahmad abd Elazeem Science and Tech-
nology
Development
Funding
Authority
(STDF),
young
Researcher Grant (STDF - YRG– Call 10, Grant number 33438,
2019)., hatem mattar Science and Technology Development
Funding Authority (STDF), young Researcher Grant (STDF - YRG–
Call 10, Grant number 33438, 2019)., mohamed elmasry Science
and Technology Development Funding Authority (STDF), young
Researcher Grant (STDF - YRG– Call 10, Grant number 33438,
2019)., mohsena abderazik Science and Technology Develop-
ment Funding Authority (STDF), young Researcher Grant (STDF -
YRG– Call 10, Grant number 33438, 2019)., Nermeen Ahmed
Science and Technology Development Funding Authority (STDF),
young Researcher Grant (STDF - YRG– Call 10, Grant number
33438, 2019).
P22.002.A Periodontal management for patients suffering
from Papillon–Lefevre syndrome
yasmin khalil1, Nermeen Ahmed1, Phoebe M. Abdelmassih1, Heba
Mustafa1, mohsena abderazik2
1National Research Center, Department of Oro-Dental Genetics,
Human Genetics and Genome Research institute, cairo, Egypt; 2Azhar
university for girls, orthodontic department, faculty of dental
medicine, cairo, Egypt.
Background/Objectives: Papillon–Lefevre syndrome (PLS) is an
autosomal recessive disorder caused by Cathepsin C gene
mutation. Patients suffer from palmoplantar keratosis, period-
ontitis, and early loss of teeth. Few periodontists have attempted
to preserve natural dentition and avoid total clearance of both
primary and permanent teeth which causes severe psychological
trauma, indigestion problems and sabotages future attempts for
prosthetic intervention. As a continuation of a previous study,
this study aims to assess the best intervention to preserve nat-
ural dentition and delay bone loss in patients with PLS.
Methods: 5 patients aged 8 to 14 years diagnosed with PLS by
molecular and biochemical analysis. All patients received 1 year
treatment divided into 2 successive phases as in the following table
Treatment
1st
phase
(6month)
2nd
phase
(6month)
Scaling and root planning
Every 3 month
Every 3 month
Diode laser pocket
disinfection
Twice
per month
Once per month
Local chlorohexidine gel
application
non
Once per month
Periodontal condition was assessed clinically and by cone
beam x-ray at the beginning and the end of each phase.
Results: Gingival indices showed marked stability during both
phases. No teeth were lost or showed increased mobility. Bone
level and density were more stable only during the second phase.
Conclusion: Oral hygiene measures aided by diode laser can
stabilize the clinical dental condition in PLS patients. Adding
chlorohexidine gel was more effective in controlling bone loss.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the Science and Tech-
nology Development Funding Authority, young researcher grant
CALL 10 Grant number 33438,2019.
Conﬂict of Interest: yasmin khalil This work was supported by
the Science and Technology Development Funding Authority
(STDF), young researcher grant (STDF-YRG-CALL 10 Grant number
33438,2019), Nermeen Ahmed This work was supported by the
Science and Technology Development Funding Authority (STDF),
young
researcher
grant
(STDF-YRG-CALL
10
Grant
number
33438,2019), Phoebe M. Abdelmassih This work was supported by
the Science and Technology Development Funding Authority
(STDF), young researcher grant (STDF-YRG-CALL 10 Grant number
33438,2019), Heba Mustafa This work was supported by the Science
and Technology Development Funding Authority (STDF), young
researcher grant (STDF-YRG-CALL 10 Grant number 33438,2019),
mohsena abderazik This work was supported by the Science and
Technology
Development
Funding
Authority
(STDF),
young
researcher grant (STDF-YRG-CALL 10 Grant number 33438,2019).
P22.003.B L-Serine treatment is associated with
improvements in behavior, EEG and seizure frequency in
individuals with GRIN-related disorders due to null variants
Ilona Krey1, Sarah von Spiczak2;3, Katrine Marie Johannesen4, Rikke
Steensbjerre Moeller4, Christiane Hikel5, Gerhard Kurlemann6, Hiltrud
Muhle3, Diane Beysen7, Tobias Dietel8, Johannes Lemke9, Steffen
Syrbe10
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center,
Leipzig, Germany, Leipzig, Germany; 2DRK-Northern German Epilepsy
Center for Children and Adolescents, Schwentinental, Germany,
Schwentinental, Germany; 3Department of Neuropediatrics, Univer-
sity Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany,
Kiel, Germany; 4Department of Epilepsy Genetics and Personalized
Medicine,
The
Danish
Epilepsy
Centre,
Dianalund,
Denmark,
Dianalund, Denmark;
5Department of Children and Adolescents,
GFO Kliniken Niederrhein, Dinslaken, Germany, Dinslaken, Germany;
6Hospital for Children, Bonifatius Hospital Lingen, Germany, Lingen,
Germany; 7Department of Paediatric Neurology, Antwerp University
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, Antwerp, Belgium; 8Epilepsy Center Kork,
Medical Faculty of the University of Freiburg, Kehl, Germany, Kehl,
Germany; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical
Center, Leipzig, Germany, Leipzig, Germany; 10Division of Paediatric
Epileptology, Centre
for Paediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine,
University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, Heidelberg,
Germany.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
664
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Pathogenic missense variants in GRIN2A
and GRIN2B may result in gain or loss of function (GoF/LoF) of the
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR). This observation gave
rise to the hypothesis of successfully treating GRIN-related dis-
orders due to LoF variants with co-agonists of the NMDAR.
Methods: In this respect, we describe a retrospectively col-
lected series of ten individuals with GRIN2A- or GRIN2B-related
disorders who were treated with L-serine, each within an inde-
pendent n-of-1 trial.
Results: Our cohort comprises one individual with a LoF mis-
sense variant with clinical improvements conﬁrming the above
hypothesis and replicating a previous n-of-1 trial. A second indi-
vidual with a GoF missense variant was erroneously treated with
L-serine and experienced immediate temporary behavioral dete-
rioration further supporting the supposed functional patho-
mechanism. Eight additional individuals with null variants (that
had been interpreted as loss-of-function variants despite not
being missense) again showed clinical improvements. Among all
nine individuals with LoF missense or null variants, L-serine
treatment was associated with improvements in behavior in eight
(89 %), in development in four (44 %) and/or in EEG or seizure
frequency in four (44 %). None of these nine individuals experi-
enced side effects or adverse ﬁndings in the context of L-serine
treatment.
Conclusion: In summary, we describe ﬁrst evidence that
L-serine treatment may not only be associated with clinical
improvements in GRIN-related disorders due to LoF missense but
particularly also null variants.
References:.
Grants: Steffen Syrbe received funding from the Dietmar-
Hopp-Stiftung (Grant 1DH1813319).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P22.004.C Development of a method for permanent skipping
of exons 11 and 12 in the DMD gene for the treatment of
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy
Irina Panchuk1, Olga Levchenko1, Milyausha Zaynitdinova1, Yana
Slesarenko1, Sabina Nagieva1, Konstantin Kochergin-Nikitsky1, Vya-
cheslav Tabakov1, Alexander Lavrov1, Svetlana Smirnikhina1
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is
X-linked recessive disease with mutations in DMD gene, coding
dystrophin. Skipping one or more exons is a widely used approach
for frame restoration in the DMD gene. Mutations in exons 11 and
12 of DMD are typical for 1% of patients. Purpose of the work: to
evaluate the possibility of 11-12 exon skipping in the DMD using
CRISPR-Cas9.
Methods: Eight sgRNAs (4 for SpCas9 and 4 for SaCas9) for
introns 10 and 12 of DMD were cloned into plasmids with eSp-
Cas9(1.1) (Addgene #71814) or SaCas9 (Addgene #61591). Plas-
mids were individually or pairwise transfected into HEK293T
(lipofection) and immortalized healthy myoblasts (electropora-
tion), DNA and RNA were isolated 72 hours after transfection, and
PCR was performed to detect editing products. Ampliﬁed frag-
ments were sequenced according to Sanger and analyzed by TIDE
method.
Results: Experiments on HEK293T made it possible to identify
two of the most active sgRNAs for SaCas9 (with efﬁciency 20% and
8%) and SpCas9 (with efﬁciency 30% and 25%). This pairs of
sgRNAs were capable to create a target deletion in HEK293T and
myoblasts, which conﬁrmed by MLPA and Sanger sequencing. In
addition, the formation of an inversion of exons 11-12 and a cir-
cular DNA consisting of deleted product were conﬁrmed in both
cell lines. At the RNA level, only 2 products were detected: a
normal transcript and a transcript with a deletion.
Conclusion: The study shows the possibility of skipping exons
11 and 12 of the gene DMD in several cell lines.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P22.005.D The Dutch Center for RNA Therapeutics: a center to
develop antisense oligonucleotide therapies for patients with
nano-rare mutations
Marlen C. Lauffer1, Annemieke Aartsma-Rus1, Rob W.J. Collin2, Ype
Elgersma3, Willeke van Roon-Mom1
1Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics,
Leiden, Netherlands; 2Radboud University Medical Center, Depart-
ment of Human Genetics and the Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behavior, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 3Erasmus University
Medical Center Rotterdam, Department of Clinical Genetics and The
ENCORE Expertise Center for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Rotter-
dam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Antisense oligonucleotides (AONs) offer
the potential to treat patients with genetic diseases. Notably, for
tissues allowing local injection, such as the brain and eye where
high local exposure can be achieved with 3-4 infusions of low
amounts of AONs annually. Proof-of-concept has been shown for
example in spinal muscular atrophy and Leber congenital
amaurosis. This approach can also beneﬁt patients with private
mutations, as was recently evidenced by the development of the
custom-made AON milasen for a patient with Batten’s disease.
This underlines the potential of AONs as personalized medicines,
speciﬁcally for patients with private mutations that are associated
with brain or eye phenotypes. However, pharmaceutical compa-
nies are usually not interested in the development of such
approaches, due to the extreme rarity of these variants.
The Dutch Center of RNA Therapeutics (DCRT) is a colla-
boration of Dutch academic centers with a track record in AON
development that aims to develop therapies for patients with
nano-rare variants and to offer these therapies in a not-for-proﬁt
manner. The DCRT works in alignment with the N-of-1 colla-
borative (global) and the 1 mutation 1 medicine (1M1M, Eur-
opean) initiatives. In the ﬁrst two years, we have identiﬁed
several patients with mutations that are suitable for splice
modulation by AONs. Here, we outline the pre-clinical devel-
opment of AON-based splice correction for a cryptic splicing
mutation underlying Stargardt disease affecting the eye, and
Beta-propeller Protein-Associated Neurodegeneration (BPAN)
affecting the brain. We describe the Dutch roadmap towards
clinical implementation, highlighting also the efforts to align
developments internationally.
Methods:.
Results:.
Conclusion:.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P22.006.A The Abcc6a Knockout Zebraﬁsh Model as a Novel
Tool for Drug Screening for Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum
Matthias Van Gils1, Andy Willaert1, Paul Coucke1, Olivier Vanakker1
1Ghent University Hospital, Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent,
Belgium.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
665
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a
currently intractable ectopic mineralization (EM) disorder due to
bi-allelic ABCC6 mutations. PXE patients have multisystemic EM,
while heterozygous carriers present mainly cardiovascular EM.
Rapid, cost-effective discovery of therapeutic drugs can be done
by compound screening in zebraﬁsh, but this approach is unva-
lidated in PXE. We validated a stable CRISPR/Cas9 abcc6a knockout
zebraﬁsh model – which has spinal column hypermineralization as
primary phenotypic feature – as a model system for compound
screening in EM.
Methods: We evaluated the anti-mineralization potential of
ﬁve compounds, which has (anecdotal) positive effects reported in
Abcc6-/- mice or PXE patients. Abcc6a-/- zebraﬁsh larvae were
treated from 3 to 10 days post-fertilization with vitamin K1,
sodium thiosulfate (STS), etidronate, alendronate or magnesium
citrate and compared to untreated ﬁsh. Following alizarin red
staining,
alterations
in
spinal
hypermineralization
were
semiquantiﬁed.
Results: Vitamin K1 (80μM), etidronate (100μM) and alendronate
(100μM) reduce hypermineralization by 42%, 33% and 39%
respectively compared to untreated ﬁsh (P < 0.05). We show for the
ﬁrst time in a PXE model that 20μM STS reduces mineralization by
55%, but higher doses paradoxically result in EM. Magnesium citrate
(10mM) reduces mineralization by 45% and, as only compound, also
has an anti-mineralizing effect in heterozygous zebraﬁsh (hyper-
mineralization reduction of 77%). Physiological bone mineralization
was not affected by any of the compound screens.
Conclusion: We demonstrate that the use of our abcc6a-/-
zebraﬁsh model is a promising strategy for drug discovery
against EM.
References: N/A.
Grants: GOA019-21 grant – Ghent University.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P22.007.B Towards a home management solution for
phenylketonuria patients
Giuseppe Bonapace1;2, Ennio Tasciotti2;3, Antonio Valentini2, Joseph
Toaff2, Mauro Nasini2, Vittorio Rossetti2, Chiara Settanni2, Stefano
Alessandro Vismara2, Azzurra Matarazzo2, Nicole Vignaroli2, Emiliano
Binotti2, Antonio Maiolo2, Luca De Angelis2, Maria Teresa Moricca1,
Giovanna Scozzafava4, Onorina Marasco4, Maria Pittelli4, Teresa Greto4,
Nicola Perrotti4;5, Daniela Concolino1, Marco Flavio Michele Vismara2
1Magna Græcia University, Pediatrics, Catanzaro, Italy; 2lightScience
srl, R&D Department, Lomazzo, Italy; 3IRCCS San Raffaele Rome,
Human Longevity Program, Roma, Italy;
4Azienda Ospedaliero
Universitaria Mater Domini, Neonatal screening, Catanzaro, Italy;
5Magna Græcia University, Health Sciences, Catanzaro, Italy.
Background/Objectives: We aim to measure Phenylalanine using
a machine-learning-based chemometric calibration model to
process Near-Infra-Red (NIR) spectra from a Dried-Blood-Spot
(DBS) card [1, 2]. Here we present the results obtained with our
new prototype.
Methods: All data were obtained using a Texas-Instruments
NIRScan-Nano-EVM, bound in a custom-built 3d printed case run
by a proprietary software built to manage the spectra. We used
DBS-calibrators to obtain samples matched with values provided
by an independent third party and established a spectral pre-
analytical data treatment. A dataset of 101 samples was populated
with at least 6 scans from each sample. After scrubbing, 75 spectra
were used to train a machine-learning-based chemometric model
and 26 as a Test-set. The model was tested on a New-set of
30 samples.
Results: For this application, the optimal optical calibration is
990-1368 nm, with Digital resolution of 150 and auto-correction
gain of 64. The pre-analytical data treatment pipeline was opti-
mized to: Kubelka-Munk function, SNV, Smoothing_Detrend, and
2nd_derivative.
Tested against the new set, the accuracy of our model is +/-
1,34 mg/dL with a Non-Error-Rate of 70%.
Training-set (n = 75)
Test-set (n = 26)
R
0,96
0,96
R2
0,93
0,92
SPD
3,75
3,43
RMSEC
1,48
1,46
SEC
1,49
1,47
Conclusion: An RPD of 3,43 in the Test-set means a good
rating for real-world applications.
An RMSE of 1,46 explains the lack of measurement accuracy
found when analyzing the new set, and gives room for
improvement.
These ﬁndings support the feasibility of a NIR-based home
Phenylalanine measurement system.
References: ESHG2019, Poster-ID 14.090.A.
ESHG2020, Poster-ID P16.57.C.
Grants: -.
Conﬂict of Interest: Giuseppe Bonapace lightScience srl -
Modest, lightScience srl - Modest, Ennio Tasciotti lightScience srl -
Modest, Antonio Valentini lightScience srl - modest, lightScience
srl - modest, lightScience srl - modest, Joseph Toaff lightScience srl
- modest, Mauro Nasini lightScience srl - modest, lightScience srl -
modest, Vittorio Rossetti lightScience srl - modest, lightScience srl
- modest, lightScience srl - modest, Chiara Settanni lightScience srl
- Modest, Stefano Alessandro Vismara lightScience srl - Modest,
Azzurra Matarazzo modest, lightScience srl, Nicole Vignaroli
lightScience, modest, Emiliano Binotti lightScience srl - Modest,
Antonio Maiolo lightScience srl - Modest, Luca De Angelis light-
Science s.r.l., modest, Maria Teresa Moricca: None declared, Gio-
vanna
Scozzafava:
None
declared,
Onorina
Marasco:
None
declared, Maria Pittelli: None declared, Teresa Greto: None
declared, Nicola Perrotti: None declared, Daniela Concolino: None
declared, Marco Flavio Michele Vismara lightScience s.r.l. - Modest,
lightScience s.r.l. - Modest, lightScience s.r.l. – Modest.
P22.008.C Genome editing for beta-haemoglobinopathies
without double-strand DNA cleavage
Nikoletta Papaioannou1, Petros Patsali1, Panayiota Papasavva1,
Carsten W. Lederer1, Marina Kleanthous1
1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Molecular Genetics
and Thalassaemia Department, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Background/Objectives: Beta-thalassaemia, is marked by low
adult haemoglobin (α2β2), owing to defective β-globin (HBB)
expression. Increased foetal haemoglobin (α2γ2/HbF) can amelio-
rate the severity of the disorder and may be achieved by erythroid
reduction of γ-globin repressor. This can be achieved by catalysing
base editors (BEs), which are safer and likely more efﬁcient than
DSB-dependent CRISPR/Cas technology. The project aims to adopt
the newest generation of genome editors for application to tar-
gets of relevance for β-haemoglobinopathies. Moreover, multiple
editing targets are evaluated for induction of higher γ-globin
levels.
Methods: The current project performed in silico design of
guide RNAs to apply BE technology by nucleofection in erythroid
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
666
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
cells, to modify targets of relevance for β-haemoglobinopathies.
Editing efﬁciency and functional studies at the DNA, RNA and
protein level were carried out.
Results: Initial plasmid-based delivery of BEs resulted in high
toxicity and poor performance, prompting us to establish in vitro
mRNA synthesis for mRNA/gRNA-based delivery of BEs instead.
Resulting precision editing with up to 86% bulk efﬁciency indi-
cated differential same-target efﬁciency of different BEs for the
clinically relevant BCL11A target. Finally, DSB-independence
prompted us to evaluate duplex base editing of both, trans-
acting
factors
and
corresponding
cis-regulatory
elements,
which resulted in elevated γ-globin induction compared to
single edits and to DSB-based disruption that is currently in clinical
trials.
Conclusion: The present study demonstrates, superior editing
outcomes based on BEs compared to DSB-based editing for a
clinically relevant target, and superior, therapeutically relevant γ-
globin induction by duplex compared to simplex BE application.
References:.
Grants: RPF - Excellence /1216/0092.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P22.009.D MEK-inhibitor successful treatment on a patient
with NRAS-related cutaneous skeletal hypophosphatemia
syndrome
Diana Carli1;2, Daniele Tessaris1, Emilia Parodi1, Simona Cardaropoli1,
Paola Coppo3, Jessica Munarin1, Roberta La Selva3, Gianpaolo Di
Rosa4, Verdiana Pullano5, Martina Palumbo6, Alfredo Brusco5;7, Ugo
Ramenghi1, Enzo Medico6;8, Luisa De Sanctis1, Giovanni Battista
Ferrero9, Alessandro Mussa1
1University of Torino, Department of Public Health and Pediatrics,
Torino, Italy; 2Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Pediatric
Onco-Hematology, Regina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Torino,
Italy;
3Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Pediatric
Dermatology, Regina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy;
4Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Pediatric Radiology Unit,
Regina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy; 5University of
Torino, Department of Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy; 6Candiolo
Cancer Institute, FPO-IRCCS, Laboratory of Oncogenomics, Candiolo,
Italy; 7Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Unit of Medical
Genetics,
Torino,
Italy;
8University
of
Torino,
Department
of
Oncology, Torino, Italy; 9University of Torino, Department of Clinical
and Biological Sciences, Orbassano, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Cutaneous Skeletal Hypophosphatemia
Syndrome (CSHS) is a RASopathy caused by postzygotic somatic
activating variants in HRAS, NRAS, or KRAS genes. We treated a
patient with NRAS-associated CSHS with the MEK inhibitor
trametinib.
Methods: A 5-year-old boy with lipomatous nevus of the head,
eye choristoma, multiple hamartomas, epidermal nevus, hypo-
trophy of the left hemisphere, pleural lymphangioma and relap-
sing
chylothorax,
developed
in
the
last
year
severe
hypophosphatemic rickets unresponsive to phosphate and calci-
triol treatment. DNA testing from nevus biopsy showed a somatic
c.182A>G, p.(Gln61Arg) variant in NRAS. We administered trame-
tinib, a RAS/MAPK pathway inhibitor, for six months. Tran-
scriptome analysis from patient’s PBMCs was performed at time 0,
week 1, 4 and 12 from treatment start.
Results: Trametinib administration led to a prompt normal-
ization of phosphatemia and phosphaturia. During the follow-up,
we
noted
a
growth
improvement,
the
regression
of
the
lymphangioma and chylothorax, and increase in bone mineral
density with enhanced bone architecture; we also observed
reduction of the epidermal nevus and hamartomas. The sole
adverse events were a mild and asymptomatic increase in serum
potassium
and
CPK.
RNA-seq
analysis
indicated
a
down-
modulation of the upregulated RASopathy-speciﬁc transcriptional
signatures.
Conclusion: Our CSHS case is the ﬁrst effectively treated with a
MEK inhibitor allowing an almost complete recovery of the
metabolic bone disease with practically no complication. Tran-
scriptome data provide evidence that the altered RAS/MAPK
pathway of the disease is reversed under the MEK-inhibitor
treatment.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P22.010.A maxillofacial regeneration using customized 3D
printed patient speciﬁc poly-l-lactic acid scaffold and
autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells
ahmad abdelazeem1, hatem mattar2, mohsena abderazik3, Inas
Sayed1, Nermeen Ahmed1
1national research center, cairo, Egypt; 2newcairo hospital oral and
maxillofacial unit, cairo, Egypt; 3azhar university for girls, cairo, Egypt.
Background/Objectives: We report using patient speciﬁc 3D
printed scaffolds for two applications in two cases of craniofacial
disorders: clef lip and palate patient with persistant alveolar ﬁstula
and 1 case of ectodermal dysplasisa with progressive bone
resorption, atrophied ridges, and reduced vertical dimension of
occlusion. Using a combination of; cells, engineered biomaterials,
and suitable biochemical factors to replace biological tissues
combined with recent technologies, such as 3D printing revolu-
tionized the ﬁeld of tissue engineering and provided the ability to
design and fabricate patient-speciﬁc complex 3D scaffolds.
Methods: This study report 2 patients with two craniofacial
deformity,First a case diagnosed ectodermal dysplasia, and the
other with unilateral cleft lip and palate with persistant alveolar
deformity causing oronasal ﬁstula.. Autologous BMMNCs were
seeded on a patient-speciﬁc 3D printed poly-l-lactic acid (PLLA)
scaffold. A combination of; autologous platelet-rich ﬁbrin (PRF)
and nano-hydroxyapatite was used for bone regeneration. Clinical
and radiographic assessment was be performed at 6 and
12 months postoperatively.
Results: Both patients healed probably without any compli-
cations. During the 12-month follow-up, no donor site morbidities
have been reported. Cone beam radiographs showed successful
bone regeneration in those cases.
Conclusion: This proposed approach may help to improve the
complex maxillofacial repair for patients with Maxillofacial anomalies.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the Science and Tech-
nology Development Funding Authority (STDF), young Researcher
Grant (STDF - YRG– Call 10, Grant number 33494, 2019).
Conﬂict of Interest: ahmad abdelazeem This work was sup-
ported by the Science and Technology Development Funding
Authority (STDF), young Researcher Grant (STDF - YRG– Call 10,
Grant number 33494, 2019)., hatem mattar This work was sup-
ported by the Science and Technology Development Funding
Authority (STDF), young Researcher Grant (STDF - YRG– Call 10,
Grant number 33494, 2019)., mohsena abderazik This work was
supported by the Science and Technology Development Funding
Authority (STDF), young Researcher Grant (STDF - YRG– Call 10,
Grant number 33494, 2019)., Inas Sayed This work was supported
by the Science and Technology Development Funding Authority
(STDF), young Researcher Grant (STDF - YRG– Call 10, Grant
number 33494, 2019)., Nermeen Ahmed This work was supported
by the Science and Technology Development Funding Authority
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
667
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
(STDF), young Researcher Grant (STDF - YRG– Call 10, Grant
number 33494, 2019).
P22.011.B New CDKL5 KI-humanized mouse model and gene
editing
Giada Beligni1, Miriam Lucia Carriero1, Vito Antonio Baldassarro2,
Luca Lorenzini2, Antonia Gurgone3, Katia Capitani1;4, Flavia Di Re1;4,
Angel Raya5, Maria Antonietta Mencarelli6, Silvo Conticello4;7, Neil
Humphreys8, Cornelius Gross9, Maurizio Giustetto3, Laura Calzà2;10,
Alessandra Renieri6;11;12, ilaria meloni11;12
1University of Siena, Medical biotechnologies, Siena, Italy; 2University of
Bologna, Department of Veterinary Medical Science, Bologna, Italy;
3University of Turin, Department of Neuroscience “Rita Levi Mon-
talcini”, Turin, Italy; 4Core Research Laboratory, ISPRO, Florence, Italy;
5Bellvitge Institute for Biomedical Research, Catalan Institution for
Research and Advanced Studies, Barcelona, Spain; 6Azienda Ospeda-
liera Universitaria Senese, Genetica Medica, Siena, Italy; 7Institute of
Clinical Physiology, National Research Counci, Pisa, Italy; 8Gene Editing
& Embryology Facility, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Rome,
Italy; 9Epigenetics & Neurobiology Unit, European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Rome, Italy;
10University of Bologna, Tecnopolo di
Bologna, Ozzano Emilia, Italy; 11Med Biotech Hub and Competence
Center, Department of Medical Biotechnologies, Siena, Italy; 12Uni-
versity of Siena, Medical Genetic Unit, siena, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Mutations in CDKL5 cause an incurable
neurodevelopmental disorder (CDD,OMIM#300203). CRISPR/Cas9
allows genetic manipulation to either insert or correct a mutation.
We here aim to generate a new CDKL5 mouse model and
demonstrate the feasibility of correction by gene editing.
Methods: The mouse model was generated by CRISPR/Cas9-
based Homologous Recombination. Behavioral characterization of
the mouse model was performed by standard tests. The CRISPR/
Cas9-based correction tool in human cells was built as described
(1). An isogenic cell line was generated from iPSCs derived from
patient’s ﬁbroblasts.
Results: A knock-in mouse model harboring a 40 bp huma-
nized region surrounding the c.1090G>T (p.Glu364*)) mutation
was generated. Motor and behavioral anomalies compatible with
CDD were found. Brain transcriptome proﬁle revealed a lower
expression of GABRA5, suggesting an impairment of GABA circuits,
in line with the reduced GAD1 expression in patient-derived
neurons. In parallel, correction of the mutation was achieved in
both patient-derived ﬁbroblasts and iPSCs: neurons from mutant
iPSCs conﬁrmed the absence of CDKL5 protein, which was
restored following correction. A reduced expression of GAD1 was
also observed.
Conclusion: We have generated a new Cdkl5 mouse model
available for the scientiﬁc community. We achieved correction and
biological rescue using CRISPR/Cas9 in vitro. Experiments are
ongoing for the in vivo correction.
References: 1-Croci S et al, High Rate of HDR in gene editing
of p.(Thr158Met) MECP2 mutational hotspot Eur J Hum Genet
2020.
Grants: CDKL5–associazione di volontariato onlus.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23 GENETIC COUNSELLING/SERVICES/EDUCATION
P23.002.D Spectrum of medical care for pediatric patients
with neurogenetic disorders – early experiences of a
syndrome ambulance within a social pediatric center
Marta Somorai1, Volker Mall1;2
1kbo-Kinderzentrum, Social Pediatric Center, Munich, Germany; 2TUM
School of Medicine, Chair of Social Pediatrics, Munich, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Our social pediatric center provides
medical services for ca. 9.000 children pro year, mainly patients
with neurodevelopmental disorders. We perform genetic analysis
for around 250 patients/year, incl. >200 trio-WES-analysis/year,
making us one of the largest neurogenetic diagnostic centers in
the state of Bavaria, Germany.
Establishing a state-of-the-art care for our patients with classi-
cal syndromic disorders as well as rare and ultra-rare neurogenetic
diseases we started our interdisciplinary syndrome ambulance 3,5
years ago. The rapid development of this ambulance caring for
over 200 patients 3 years after its foundation mirrors the recent
large development in the human genetics.
We present our experience in three distinctive areas:.
1. The different interdisciplinary structures for appropriate
patient care depending on the age of the patient as well as the
type and severity of the underlying neurogenetic condition.
2. The set-up of genetic counselling in straight-forward diag-
nostic cases through qualiﬁed pediatricians in collaboration with
geneticist.
3. The search for approved, on-trial and novel therapeutic
approaches
through
scheduled
literature
researches
for
all
patients, and subsequently offering support to receive approved
treatment or to be admitted in a clinical-trial as well as initiating
compassionate-use drug-repurposing.
The goal of our presentation is to facilitate the communication
and
collaboration
between
pediatricians,
geneticists
and
researchers on the ﬁeld of neurogenetics.
In case of an invitation to an oral presentation we would also
present
unpublished
cases
of
compassionate-use
drug-
repurposing.
Methods:.
Results:.
Conclusion:.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.003.A Telemedicine versus traditional consultations in
clinical genetics: comparison of patient satisfaction rates
Uri Hamiel1;2, Audelia Eshel Fuhrer1;2, Nitsan Landau2, Hagit Baris
Feldman1;2, Daphna Marom1;2
1Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Genetics Institute and Genomics
Center, Tel Aviv, Israel;
2Tel Aviv University, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Background/Objectives: Telemedicine is a service delivery model
in which credentialed specialists provide care remotely to clients.
Data regarding patient satisfaction with telemedicine consulta-
tions in the ﬁeld of clinical genetics, and speciﬁcally paediatric
genetics is lacking. We aimed to compare patient satisfaction rates
from telemedicine versus traditional, face-to-face genetics con-
sultations during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Methods: A cross-sectional survey, sent to 1672 parents of
minors (patients<18years), or adult patients, who received coun-
selling through the Tel-Aviv Souraski Medical Center Genetics
Institute between 1/1/2020-1/6/2020. Data were collected through
REDCap
and
converted
to
Microsoft
EXCEL
Database
Pro-
gram(v16.0) and STATA(v14.1).
Results: Full responses were collected from 457 patients
(27.3%). Of them, 330 patients (72.2%) had face-to-face consulta-
tions, 80 (17.5%) were counselled through telemedicine, and 47
had both (10.3%). Satisfaction or high satisfaction were reported in
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
668
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
82.1% in the face-to-face consultation group, while 6.3% were
unsatisﬁed or unsatisﬁed at all, compared with 82.5% and 11.2% in
the telemedicine group, respectively. Differences were insignif-
icant statistically between the two groups. Data were further
stratiﬁed according to subspecialties. Of total consults, 58 (12.7%)
were in paediatric genetics. None of the patients who received
paediatric genetics counselling solely through telemedicine were
unsatisﬁed. Seventy-six percent of all patients who were coun-
selled through telemedicine would want to use telemedicine
services in the future, while 18.7% are undecided, and 5% do not.
Conclusion: Telemedicine consultations in the genetics clinic
during the COVID-19 pandemic, and speciﬁcally in paediatric
genetics, were associated with high satisfaction rates, non-inferior
to traditional consultations satisfaction rates.
References: N/A.
Grants: N/A.
Conﬂict of Interest: Uri Hamiel: None declared, Audelia Eshel
Fuhrer: None declared, Nitsan Landau: None declared, Hagit
Baris Feldman HBF has received honoraria for scientiﬁc talks,
grants, and consults from: Sanoﬁ-Genzyme, Protalix, Pﬁzer, and
Takeda-Shire. She serves on scientiﬁc advisory boards of Sanoﬁ-
Genzyme and Igentify and in the past also in Shire and Regen-
eron., HBF has received honoraria for scientiﬁc talks, grants, and
consults from: Sanoﬁ-Genzyme, Protalix, Pﬁzer, and Takeda-
Shire. She serves on scientiﬁc advisory boards of Sanoﬁ-
Genzyme and Igentify and in the past also in Shire and Regen-
eron., HBF has received honoraria for scientiﬁc talks, grants, and
consults from: Sanoﬁ-Genzyme, Protalix, Pﬁzer, and Takeda-
Shire. She serves on scientiﬁc advisory boards of Sanoﬁ-
Genzyme and Igentify and in the past also in Shire and Regen-
eron., Daphna Marom: None declared.
P23.004.B First German Language Master of Science in
Genetic and Genomic Counselling
Gunda Schwaninger1, Sabine Rudnik1, Johannes Zschocke1
1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria.
Background/Objectives: While Genetic Counsellors (GCs) are
well-established around the globe, they have met resistance in the
German language countries due to a perceived conﬂict of com-
petencies with medical geneticists (Schwaninger et al. 2021, PMID:
33797821). In 2019, the Medical University of Innsbruck, Austria
introduced the ﬁrst MSc programme in Genetic and Genomic
Counselling for the German-speaking countries.
Methods: Here we report the experiences from the ﬁrst cohort
graduating in spring 2022.
Results: The Innsbruck MSc programme follows the European
standards and is EBMG accredited. This allows graduates with an
additional two year training to apply for registration as a European
Certiﬁed Genetic Counsellor, granting international reciprocity and
freedom to move workplace within Europe and abroad. The ﬁve-
semester part-time programme is currently graduating the ﬁrst
cohort and has started a second year group with twelve students
from Germany, Austria and Switzerland.
The implementation of the master programme has com-
menced a lively discussion about the future of genetic counselling
in all German-speaking countries. The programme team, in con-
junction with the ﬁrst graduates, works to establish an evidence
based implementation of the occupational proﬁle for the region.
Research projects on the professional scope of practice, the
separation of the professional role of genetic counsellors and the
service of genetic counselling, issues around the job title,
remuneration concepts and the integration of GCs into genetic
services are undertaken.
Conclusion: Most crucial will be a close integration of GCs into
teams together with medical geneticists, building trust in their
education and skills from genetics knowledge to psychological
attending.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.005.C Reasons for forgoing carrier testing among
relatives of pathogenic variant carriers of Hereditary Breast
and Ovarian Cancer and Lynch Syndrome
Mahesh Sarki1, günther ﬁnk2, Souria Aissaoui3;4, Nicole Bürki5,
Rossella Graffeo-Galbiati6, Ursina Zürrer-Härdi7, Manuela Rabaglio8,
Karl Heinimann9;10, Pierre O. Chappuis11;12, Maria Katapodi1
1University of Basel, Department of Clinical Research, Basel, Switzer-
land; 2Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland;
3Cantonal Hospital Fribourg, Breast Center, Fribourg, Switzerland;
4Hirslanden Clinique de Grangettes, Geneva, Switzerland; 5University
Hospital Basel, Women’s Clinic, Basel, Switzerland;
6Oncology
Institute of Southern Switzerland, Breast Unit of Southern Switzer-
land, Bellinzona, Switzerland; 7Cantonal Hospital Winterthur, Depart-
ment of Medical Oncology, Winterthur, Switzerland; 8Bern University
Hospital, Department of Medical Oncology, Inselspital, Bern, Switzer-
land; 1University of Basel, Department of Clinical Research, Basel,
Switzerland; 10University Hospital Basel, Institute for Medical Genetics
and Pathology, Basel, Switzerland; 11University Hospitals of Geneva,
Unit of Oncogenetics, Service of Oncology, Geneva, Switzerland;
12University Hospitals of Geneva, Service of Genetic Medicine,
Geneva, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Cascade screening of Hereditary Breast
and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) and Lynch Syndrome (LS) is important
for prevention and clinical management of hereditary cancer
syndromes. The study aims to ﬁnd out reasons for forgoing carrier
testing among relatives of known carriers of HBOC- or LS-
associated pathogenic variants, and compare factors at the per-
sonal, family, and healthcare system levels between relatives who
did not have genetic testing (GT(-)) and those who had genetic
testing (GT(+)).
Methods: Data are part of the Swiss CASCADE cohort and were
collected with self-administered surveys collected between Sep-
tember 2017 and December 2021.
Results: In total 115 relatives submitted baseline data and 38%
did not have carrier testing. Compared to the GT(+) group, the
GT(-) group included a higher proportion of males, who were
signiﬁcantly less likely to have a personal cancer diagnosis, fewer
number of relatives tested in the family, less care from specialist
and more likely to receive care by multiple (≥3) healthcare pro-
viders. Being female (OR:2.77, 95%CI:1.10 – 7.10), having had
personal history of cancer (OR:4.47, 95%CI:1.03-19.42) and higher
number of family members tested (OR:1.42, 95%CI:1.09-1.83) had
higher odds of getting carrier testing.
Conclusion: Carrier testing promotion among individuals with
cancer, and men and family focused interventions may help
increase carrier testing.
References:.
Grants: The Swiss Cancer Research Foundation KFS-5293-02-
2021, the Swiss Cancer League – KLS-4294-08-2017 and by the
University of Basel, Ofﬁce of the Vice Rector of Research (2016),
and the Department of Clinical Research (2021).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
669
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P23.006.D Differences in intention to inform relatives and
rates of cascade testing in families concerned with hereditary
breast and ovarian cancer and Lynch syndrome: The Swiss
CASCADE cohort
Mahesh Sarki1, chang ming1, Souria Aissaoui2;3, Nicole Bürki4, Maria
Caiata-Zufferey5, Tobias E. Erlanger6, Rossella Graffeo-Galbiati7, Karl
Heinimann8;9, Viola Heinzelmann4, Christian Monnerat10, Nicole
Probst-Hensch11, Manuela Rabaglio12, Ursina Zürrer-Härdi13, Pierre
O. Chappuis14;15, Maria Katapodi1
1University of Basel, Department of Clinical Research, Basel, Switzer-
land; 2Cantonal Hospital Fribourg, Breast Center, Fribourg, Switzer-
land;
3Hirslanden Clinique de Grangettes, Geneva, Switzerland;
4University Hospital Basel, Women’s Clinic, Basel, Switzerland;
5University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern Switzerland,
Department of Business Economics, Health and Social Care, Lugano,
Switzerland; 6University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; 7Oncology
Institute of Southern Switzerland, Breast Unit of Southern Switzer-
land, Bellinzona, Switzerland; 8University Hospital Basel, Institute for
Medical Genetics and Pathology, Basel, Switzerland; 9University of
Basel, Department of Biomedicine, Basel, Switzerland; 10Hospital of
Jura, Department of Medical Oncology, Delemont, Switzerland;
11Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland;
12Inselspital,
Bern
University Hospital,
Department of
Medical
Oncology,
Bern,
Switzerland;
13Cantonal
Hospital
Winterthur,
Department of Medical Oncology, Winterthur, Switzerland; 14Uni-
versity Hospitals of Geneva, Unit of Oncogenetics, Service of
Oncology, Geneva, Switzerland; 15University Hospitals of Geneva,
Service of Genetic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Cascade testing and identiﬁcation of
individuals carrying pathogenic variants in causative genes asso-
ciated with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) and
Lynch syndrome (LS) are signiﬁcant public health interventions.
However, cascade rates of LS are much lower than HBOC, while a
pronounced gender disparity exists for HBOC. We describe cas-
cade testing in relatives from HBOC and LS families, and compare
predictors of intention to invite relatives to a family-based cohort.
Methods: The Swiss CASCADE is a family-based, open-ended
cohort, including carriers of HBOC- and LS-associated pathogenic
variants and their relatives. Participating index cases are asked to
invite their relatives.
Results: Currently 304 index cases and 115 relatives provided
baseline information. We identiﬁed on average 10 relatives per
index case potentially eligible for cascade testing. The family
pathogenic variant was excluded in 14.7% of relatives (true
negatives), while 13.9% are untested. Approximately 65% of
respondents intend to invite relatives. Intention is higher for ﬁrst-
compared to second- and third-degree relatives, but is not dif-
ferent between syndromes or based on relative gender. The family
environment predict intention to invite relatives for both syn-
dromes, while additional predictors were identiﬁed for HBOC.
Conclusion: Information can help optimize delivery of genetic
services.
References:.
Grants: Swiss Cancer Research Foundation KFS-5293-02-2021,
the Swiss Cancer League – KLS-4294-08-2017 and by the Uni-
versity of Basel, Ofﬁce of the Vice Rector of Research (2016), and
the Department of Clinical Research (2021).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.007.A APOGeE (A Practical Online Genetics e-Education): a
European medical genetics e-textbook by ERN-ITHACA
Nicholas
Szeto1,
jonathan
berg2,
Maurizio
Genuardi3,
Martin
Krahn4;5, Ute Moog6, Edward S. Tobias7, Peter Turnpenny8, Johannes
Zschocke9, Mutaz Amin10, Jill Clayton-Smith11;12, Dorica Dan13, Soﬁa
Douzgou HOUGE14, Marianne Le Dref1, Laurence Faivre15;16, Raoul
Hennekam17, Anne Hugon1, Jean-Marie Jouannic18, Tjitske Kleef-
stra19, David Koolen20, Giovanni Mosiello21, Alessandra Renieri22;23,
Marco Tartaglia24, Zeynep Tümer25, Birute Tumiene26, Agnies van
Eeghen17, Lisenka Vissers*20;27, Klea Vyshka1;28, Dagmar Wieczorek29,
Giuseppe Zampino30, Christiane Zweier31, Ithaca Consortium1, Alain
Verloes1
1Hôpital Robert Debré, Department of Genetics, Paris, France; 2School
of Medicine - University of Dundee, Department of Clinical Genetics,
Dundee, United Kingdom; 3Agostino Gemelli University Policlinic,
UOC Genetica Medica, Roma, Italy;
4Hôpital Timone Enfants,
Département
de
Génétique
Médicale,
Marseille,
France;
5Aix-
Marseille University, Inserm, U1251-MMG, Marseille, France; 6Heidel-
berg University, Clinical Genetic Department, Heidelberg, Germany;
7Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Academic Unit of Medical
Genetics and Clinical Pathology, Glasgow, United Kingdom; 8Royal
Devon and Exeter Hospital, Clinical Genetics Department, Exeter,
United Kingdom; 9Medizinische Universität Innsbruck, Institute of
Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria; 10Inserm US14 Orphanet, Paris,
France;
11The University of Manchester, Manchester centre for
Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom;
12Manchester
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester centre for
Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom;
13Prader Willi
Patient
Organisation,
Zalau,
Romania;
14Haukeland
University
Hospital / Health Bergen, Avdeling for medisinsk genetikk, Hauke-
land, Norway;
15FHU TRANSLAD and GIMI Institute, University
Hospital Dijon, Dept of Genetics and Centres of Reference for
Development disorders and intellectual disabilities, Dijon, France;
16UFR Des Sciences de Santé FHU-TRANSLAD, INSERM-Université de
Bourgogne
UMR
1231
GAD
«
Génétique
des
Anomalies
du
Développement
»,
Dijon,
France;
17Academic
Medical
Centre
Amsterdam UMC, Department of Pediatrics, Amsterdam, Nether-
lands;
18Hôpital Armand-Trousseau Ap-Hp, Service de Médecine
fœtale, Paris, France; 19Radboud University Nijmegen, Department of
Pediatrics, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
20Radboud University Medical
Center, Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
21Bambino Gesù ospedale pediatrico, Department of Surgery,
Urology and Neuro-Urology, Roma, Italy; 22Med Biotech Hub and
Competence Center, Università di Siena, Dept of Medical Biotechnol-
ogies, Siena, Italy; 23Università di Siena, Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy;
24Bambino Gesù ospedale pediatrico, Genetics and Rare Diseases
Research Division, Roma, Italy; 25Copenhagen University Hospital,
Rigshospitalet, Department of Clinical Genetics, København, Den-
mark; 26Vilnius university hospital Santaros klinikos, Vilnius, Lithua-
nia; 27Radboud University Medical Center, Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 28Université de
Lyon CERCRID, UMR 5137 “Centre de Recherches Critiques en Droit”,
Lyon, France;
29Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Institute of
Human Genetics and Anthropology, Düsseldorf, Germany; 30Uni-
versità Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Department of Woman and Child
Health, Center for Rare Diseases and Birth Defects, Institute of
Pediatrics, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli
IRCCS, Roma, Italy;
31Inselspital, Das Tumorzentrum University
Cancer Center, Bern, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: APOGeE (A Practical Online Genetics e-
Education) will be launched in 2022 as a free online interactive
medical genetics textbook built with Moodle, written by various
authors from the ITHACA network and other ERNs. APOGeE will
cover topics about biological genetics, formal genetics, a clinical
and physiological approach to genetic diseases, precision medi-
cine, and treatment of genetic diseases.
Methods: Whilst original content is being written by authors
from various European countries and is produced by a renowned
international editorial committee, the book will be further
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
670
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
enriched with existing up-to-date documents and courses in the
network.
Results: As a companion for the European Certiﬁcate in Med-
ical Genetics and Genomics (ECMGG) examination organised by
the European Union of Medical Specialists (UEMS), the main
content will be supplemented by almost 200 medical vignettes of
diseases as pedagogical references, all linked to their relevant
chapters. Moreover, the Moodle platform will include links to
external reference materials such as articles and guidelines for
further reading.
Conclusion: By contributing to a structured postgraduate edu-
cation programme in the ﬁeld of human genetics and rare diseases,
the project aims to provide a free and open source of interactive and
asynchronous medical genetics learning materials: doctors and
researchers from Europe and beyond, from all socioeconomic
backgrounds, will be able to access the online platform with differ-
ent learning modules, self-evaluation tools and discussion forums.
References:.
Grants: The project is co-funded by the CEF, Connecting Eur-
ope Facility of the European Union, under the action number
2020-FR-IA-0128.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.009.C Genetic ﬁrst results: Lessons learned from pediatric
secondary ﬁndings
Colleen Jodarski1, Alexander Katz2, Rajarshi Ghosh1, Leila Jamal3,
Jia Yan1, Bryce Seifert1, Michael Kamen1, Michael Setzer1, Kathleen
Jevtich1, Yunting Yu1, Steven Holland1, Magdalena Walkiewicz1,
Morgan Similuk1
1National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Division of
Intramural Research, Bethesda, United States;
2National Human
Genome
Research
Institute
(NHGRI),
Bethesda,
United
States;
3National Institutes of Health, Department of Bioethics/National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, United States.
Background/Objectives: As clinical genomic testing becomes
more common, so will receiving “genetic-ﬁrst” results, deﬁned as
pathogenic/likely pathogenic variant(s) in a gene that is unrelated
to the primary indication for testing, including a secondary ﬁnding
(SF) recommended by the American College of Medical Genetics.
A SF management framework has been articulated for adults;
however, there is little, and often conﬂicting, guidance for how SFs
should be managed in minors.
Our tertiary care sequencing program returns SF from exome
and genome sequencing in minors by default. Here we synthesize
our ﬁndings and present cases emphasizing the nuances of such
results.
Methods: A total of 864 minors received exome or genome
sequencing from 2017-2021.
Results: Seventeen SFs were returned in 16 minor participants
(1.9%). Most SFs (13/17, 76.5%) were associated with potential
childhood-onset of disease.
SF Risk Category
Frequency
Genes
High or near complete
penetrance
4/
17, 23.5%
FBN1, RET
Low or moderate penetrance
8/
17, 47.1%
BRCA2, DSC2, MHY7,
PKP2
Low intensity interventions
4/
17, 23.5%
LDLR
Typical childhood onset
1/17, 5.9%
OTC
Illustrative cases emphasize the following themes:
1. SFs do not necessarily lead to clinical diagnosis or active
disease mitigation. Follow-up is uncertain and at clinician
discretion.
2. Considerations for results disclosure: family understanding
and adaptation.
3. Age-related penetrance and cascade testing opportunity for
at-risk relatives.
Conclusion: These ﬁndings highlight opportunities and chal-
lenges of genetic ﬁrst results. As genomic approaches become
better integrated into clinical practice, thoughtful evaluation and
tailored follow-up will be essential in translating such ﬁndings into
meaningful recognition and mitigation of disease.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.010.D Role of the genetic counsellors in oncology
settings, an European survey
Christophe Cordier1, Marie Met Domestici2, Amel Tsalamlal3, Heidi
Carmen Howard4, Kelly Ormond5;6, Nicolas Taris7
1SYNLAB Suisse SA, Department of genetics, Lausanne, Switzerland;
2CHUV Lausanne, Department of genetics, Lausanne, Switzerland;
3Centre
Léon
Bérard,
Unité
Clinique
d’Oncologie
Génétique,
Lyon, France; 4Lund University, Researcher Medical Ethics, Lund,
Sweden;
5ETH-Zurich,
Health
Ethics
&
Policy
Lab,
Dept
of
Health Sciences and Technology, Zurich, Switzerland; 6Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States; 7Institut
de Cancérologie Strasbourg Europe, Department of genetics,
Strasbourg, France.
Background/Objectives: For several decades now, the inclusion
of non-physician genetic counsellors (GC) has been shown to be
an effective way to deliver genetic counselling services in many
countries including USA, Canada, UK and France. The need for
appropriately
trained
GC
to
support
genetic
healthcare
is
acknowledged all around Europe and Master Degrees specialized
in genetic counselling are available across Europe (eg: UK, Spain,
France). Although the profession is gaining recognition globally,
associations and institutions are still needed to achieve true
recognition of the practice itself (billing for consultation, recog-
nized professional title, ability to work autonomously). This is
especially true in the ﬁeld of oncology genetics, where the prac-
tice of the profession is often regulated by national and interna-
tional guidelines.
Methods: Based on review of the academic and grey literature,
we discuss the barriers, challenges and facilitators to the inte-
gration of GC in oncogenetics as well as priorities for further
action.
Results: While GC provide a valuable service within an oncol-
ogy practice, playing a pivotal role in bringing the beneﬁts of
oncogenetics and precision medicine, a concerted global effort is
required to transform GCs’ policy and practice.
Conclusion: This discussion is critical to inform professionals in
genetics of the work still needed to ensure that GC are appro-
priately involved in the offer of oncogenetics for the best care of
patients. This work will also form the basis for further empirical
studies and we hope to obtain input from 2022 ESHG conference
attendees in real-time through mentimeter questions.
References:.
Grants: No grants.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
671
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P23.011.A De Novo Experience of Individuals with Li-Fraumeni
Syndrome: “Sometimes the people in your family are never
going to be the ones who understand best”
Ashley S. Thompson1, Camella J. Rising1, Patrick Boyd1, Catherine
Wilsnack2, Alix G. Sleight3, Rowan Forbes Shepherd1, Payal P.
Khincha1, Allison Werner-Llin4
1National Cancer Institute, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, Clinical Genetics Branch, Rockville, United States; 2Uni-
versity of Texas at Austin, Steve Hicks School of Social Work, Austin,
United States; 3Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Department of Physical
Medicine & Rehabilitation, Los Angeles, United States; 4University of
Pennsylvania, School of Social Policy and Practice, Philadelphia,
United States.
Background/Objectives: Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare
hereditary cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by high
lifetime risks for multiple primary malignancies. Although most
individuals with LFS inherit a pathogenic TP53 variant from a
parent, approximately 20% have de novo variants with no sug-
gestive family cancer history. This may result in an LFS experience
distinct from individuals with affected relatives. This multi-case
study report examines the unique psychosocial experiences of
three young adults with de novo TP53 variants.
Methods:
The
National
Cancer
Institute’s
LFS
study
(NCT01443468) recruited adolescents and young adults (AYAs;
aged 15-39 years) with LFS for qualitative interviews. Three par-
ticipants had a de novo TP53 variant and a personal cancer history.
An interprofessional team analyzed interview data using extended
case study and narrative methods.
Results: De novo participants lacked familiarity with LFS to
situate a cancer diagnosis, interpret genetic test results, or adjust
to chronic cancer risk. Communicating with and receiving support
from family was challenged by their lack of common experience.
De novo participants experienced socioemotional isolation, which
was ampliﬁed during the COVID-19 pandemic. To cope, they
sought support in online rare disease communities or through
mental health providers.
Conclusion: Individuals with de novo variants may lack familial
guides and familiar providers to address disease management and
uncertainty. Specialty health and mental health providers may
support de novo patients across hereditary cancer syndromes by
validating their uncertainties and connecting them with disease-
speciﬁc patient advocacy groups that support adjustment to
chronic cancer risk.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.012.B Blood chimerism – more common than you would
think: Practical implications in genetic counseling
tehila klopstock1, Orit Lobel1, Miriam Patt1, Omri Weiss1, Rachel
Beeri1, lihi amit1, doris goldschmidt1, Reeval Segel1;2
1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Medical Genetics Institute, Jerusalem,
Israel; 2The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Faculty of Medicine,
jerusalem, Israel.
Background/Objectives: Blood chimerism (BC) result from blood
transfusion between dizygotic twins through a shared placenta.
Such chimerism is usually limited to blood cells, and doesn’t
involve other cell types or organs. In the past, chimerism was
estimated to be extremely rare, but nowadays it’s believed that BC
exists in approximately 8% of dizygotic-monochorionic twins. We
referred a 27-years old female for oncogenetic gene panel due to
breast cancer diagnosis. Two blood samples were sent to the lab
consecutively, yielding no results. Existence of different blood cells
in the samples was offered as an explanation. In combination with
the fact that the patient has a twin brother, the suspicion of
chimerism arose.
Methods: QF-PCR (using Aneufast quantitative ﬂouresent PCR
kit) was performed on DNA from the patient’s blood, buccal cells
and ﬁbroblasts, and compared to her male twin and parents’
blood samples.
Results: We found 70% chimerism (XY markers) in the patient’s
blood, 30% in her buccal cells and no chimerism in ﬁbroblasts. Her
twin’s blood sample had 50% chimerism (XX markers).
Conclusion: These results support the hypothesis of chimer-
ism, conﬁned to blood cells, most likely due to placental blood
transfusion. The diagnosis of blood-conﬁned chimerism enabled
completing the genetic testing by using DNA from ﬁbroblasts (no
known pathogenic variants were detected). In addition, her
ﬁbroblast sample may be used in future genetic testing, such as
prenatal carrier screening. Since chimerism can have medical,
social, forensic, and legal implications, raising awareness to the
issue is highly important.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.013.C Additive diagnostic yield of homozygosity regions
identiﬁed during chromosomal microarray testing in children
with developmental delay, dysmorphic features or congenital
anomalies
Mohamed Ali1, Abdelrahman Madian2
1Ain Shams university, Biochemistry department, Cairo, Egypt;
2National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt.
Background/Objectives: Chromosomal microarray (CMA) has
emerged as a robust tool for identifying microdeletions and
microduplications, termed copy number variants (CNVs). Never-
theless, data regarding its utility in different patient populations
with developmental delay (DD), dysmorphic features (DF) and
congenital anomalies (CA), is a matter of dense debate. Although
regions of homozygosity (ROH) are not diagnostic of a speciﬁc
condition, they may have pathogenic implications. Certain CNVs
and ROH have ethnically speciﬁc occurrences and frequencies. We
aimed to determine whether CMA testing offers additional diag-
nostic information over classical cytogenetics for identifying geno-
mic imbalances in a pediatric cohort with idiopathic DD, DF, or CA.
Methods: 169 patients were offered cytogenetics and CMA
simultaneously for etiological diagnosis of DD (n = 67), DF (n = 52)
and CA (n = 50).
Results: CMA detected 61 CNVs [21 (34.4%) pathogenic, 37
(60.7%) variants of uncertain clinical signiﬁcance and 3 (4.9%)
benign] in 44 patients. CMA identiﬁed one or more ROH in 116/
169 (68.6%) patients. When considering pathogenic CNVs and
aneuploidies as positive ﬁndings, 9/169 (5.3%) received a genetic
diagnosis from cytogenetics, while 25/169 (14.8%) could have a
genetic diagnosis from CMA. The identiﬁcation of ROH was clini-
cally signiﬁcant in two cases (2/169), thereby, adding 1.2% to the
diagnostic yield of CMA (16% vs. 5.3%, p < 0.001).
Conclusion: CMA uncovers additional genetic diagnoses over
classical cytogenetics. Our ﬁndings convincingly demonstrate the
additive diagnostic value of clinically signiﬁcant ROH identiﬁed
during CMA testing, highlighting the need for careful clinical
interpretation of these ROH.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
672
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P23.014.D Patient Journey Common Needs: Rare congenital
malformations syndromes with intellectual and other
neurodevelopmental disorders affect one child in a million
Anne Hugon1;2, Dorica Dan2;3, Ammi Andersson4, Ioel Detton5,
Marianne Le Dref1, Gabor Pogany6, Sue Routledge4, Nicholas Szeto1,
Klea Vyshka1, Lenja Wiehe2, Ernithaca consortium7, Alain Verloes1
1Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris - Université de Paris, Dept. of
Genetics, Paris, France; 2Eurordis rare disease europe, Paris, France;
3Patient organisation, Prader Willi, Zalau, Romania; 4Patient organisa-
tion, Pitt Hopkins Syndrome, UK, United Kingdom; 5Patient organisa-
tion, Noonan Syndrome, Paris, France; 6Patient organisation, Williams
Syndrome, HU, Hungary; 7Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris -
Université de Paris, Dept. of Genetics ERN ITHACA, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: The heterogeneous nature of clinical
presentation and huge variation in the onset of the ﬁrst symptoms
can, as early as the neonatal period, lead to misdiagnosis, thus to
the absence of early treatment. With over 5000 rare and complex
syndromes, how can ERN ITHACA meet their diverse needs? In
response, patient representatives (ePAGs) have described the
individual needs of their children in a syndrome-speciﬁc “patient
pathway”, which serves as a personal testimonial and describes
the natural history of each of these rare syndromes Rett, Williams,
Prader Willi, Spina Biﬁda and Pitt-Hopkins.
Methods: Patient representatives presented their syndrome-
speciﬁc ‘patient journeys’ (Bolz-Johnson et al. 2019) in a workshop
and identiﬁed the characteristics and needs that were common. A
position paper describing relevant elements for all syndromes was
presented to the Board in Düsseldorf, 2019.
Results: Genetics is the key for many ITHACA syndromes.
However, it is only one aspect of child’s situation and ERN ITHACA
needs to go beyond genetic diagnosis and think about the holistic
needs of patient communities.
Conclusion: An agreement with experts on introducing common
needs in all the work packages of ERN ITHACA have been achieved,
as well as developing a standard of care in a Clinical Pathway.
New patient journeys will be developed in the future.
References: Bolz-Johnson, M., Meek, J., & Hoogerbrugge, N.
(2020). “Patient Journeys”: improving care by patient involvement.
European Journal of Human Genetics, 28(2), 141-143.
Grants: ERN-ITHACA [EU Framework Partnership Agreement ID:
3HP-HP-FPA ERN-01-2016/739516].
Conﬂict of Interest: Anne Hugon APHP Paris Nord Université
Robert DEBRE, Dorica Dan: None declared, Ammi Andersson: None
declared, Ioel Detton: None declared, Marianne Le Dref APHP Paris
Nord Université Robert DEBRE, Gabor Pogany: None declared, Sue
Routledge: None declared, Nicholas Szeto APHP Paris Nord Uni-
versité Robert DEBRE, Klea Vyshka APHP Paris Nord Université
Robert DEBRE, Lenja Wiehe: None declared, Ernithaca consortium:
None declared, Alain Verloes: None declared.
P23.015.A Views and experiences of clinical geneticists
concerning unsolicited ﬁndings in next-generation
sequencing: “a great technology creating new dilemmas”
Vyne van der Schoot1, Carlijn Damste2, Helger Yntema3, Han
Brunner3, Anke Oerlemans2
1Erasmus MC, Clinical genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2Radboud
Institute For Health Sciences, IQ healthcare, Nijmegen, Netherlands;
3Radboud University Medical Center, Human genetics, Nijmegen,
Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Unsolicited ﬁndings (UFs) from diag-
nostic genetic testing are subject of debate. There is emerging
consensus that UFs from genetic testing should be disclosed, but
recommendations on UF disclosure generally leave room for
practice variation. This study aimed to explore the views and
experiences of clinical geneticists concerning counseling UFs pre-
test and UF disclosure.
Methods: We interviewed 20 medical specialists certiﬁed in
clinical genetics and residents in clinical genetics working in seven
national genetic centers.
Results: Participants expressed that discussing the prob-
ability of detecting UFs is an integral part of pre-test counseling.
However, they had doubts about to what extent and about what
to inform patients. They argued that the contents of their
counseling ought to depend on the individual patient’s capacity
to understand information. While ‘medical actionability’ is
broadly accepted as an important criterion for UFs to be dis-
closed, participants experienced substantial uncertainty regard-
ing the concept.
Conclusion: These results direct towards tailored pre-test
counseling in order to optimize genetic consultations. This study
underscores the need for further demarcation of what exactly
constitutes medical actionability. Installation of an expert panel to
help to decide which variants to disclose, will support genetic
counselors to face the dilemmas UFs present.
References:.
Grants: Not applicable.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.016.B The role of the Genetic Counsellor in the
multidisciplinary team: the perception of geneticists in Europe
francesca catapano1, mohamed el hachmi1, Natacha Ketterer-
Heng2, Francesca Mari1, Alessandra Renieri1, Michael Morris3,
Christophe Cordier3
1University of Siena, Department of Medical Biotechnology, Siena,
Italy;
2SYNLAB Suisse SA, Department of Genetics, Lausanne,
Switzerland; 3SYNLAB Suisse SA, Department of Genetics, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Genetics is becoming fundamental in
the understanding and management of pathologies; thus, it is
necessary to understand what is the most effective way of taking
care of people affected by or at risk of genetic pathologies.
Indeed, the team dealing with such patients has evolved espe-
cially with the emergence of the Genetic Counsellor ﬁgure. This
profession is still much debated and not yet recognized in all
European countries. Thus, the aim of this research is to investigate
both how a team should be composed in the care of patients
affected by or at risk of genetic pathologies and what the role of
the Genetic Counsellor should be – his ﬁeld of action and
competences.
Methods: A research at European level was carried out, sub-
mitting an online questionnaire, over a period of six months, to
geneticists who, expressing their opinion, can identify strengths
and potential areas for improvement in genetic care.
Results: 147 responses were collected from all over Europe,
highlighting the importance of the counsellor’s presence in the
multidisciplinary team and what the counsellor’s skills and quali-
ﬁcations should be. It was also possible to study differences
between different parts of Europe.
Conclusion: Although this new profession has difﬁculties in
recognition in some countries, it seems clear that these highly
competent professionals are essential in-patient care. To the
authors’ knowledge this is one of the few – if not the only – study
on the subject and we hope that it can paves the way to the
recognition of the Genetic Counsellor profession.
References:.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
673
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.017.C Mainstreaming genomic testing for children with
undiagnosed inborn errors of immunity
Tatiane Yanes1;2, Anna Sullivan1, Pasquale Barbaro3;4, Kristian
Brion5, Jane Peake1;6, Peter McNaughton1;6
1Children’s Health Queensland Hospital And Health Service, Queens-
land Paediatric Immunology and Allergy Service, South Brisbane,
Australia; 2The University of Queensland, The University of Queens-
land Diamantina Institute, Brisbane, Australia; 3Children’s Health
Queensland Hospital And Health Service, Queensland Paediatric
Haematology Service, South Brisbane, Australia; 4Pathology Queens-
land, Queensland Children’s Hospital Laboratory, South Brisbane,
Australia; 5Pathology Queensland, Department of Molecular Genet-
ics, Brisbane, Australia; 6The University of Queensland, Department of
paediatrics and child health, Brisbane, Australia.
Background/Objectives:
Genetic
diagnosis
of
paediatric
of
inborn errors of immunity (IEI) inﬂuences management decisions,
and can alter clinical outcomes through hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT).1,2 Historically, children with undiagnosed
IEI in Queensland, Australia were referred to a state-wide clinical
genetic service, delaying access to genomic testing and increasing
the burden on the genetic clinic. To address this issue, we
developed and evaluated a mainstreamed model of care for
genomic testing for paediatric IEI.
Methods: This state-wide program included a genetic coun-
sellor embedded within the paediatric immunology service, fort-
nightly multidisciplinary team meetings (MDT), and variant
prioritisation meetings. Informed by the literature, 21 different
virtual gene lists were developed for whole-exome sequencing.
Additionally, parents completed pre-and post-testing survey
assessing understanding of, and impact of genomic testing.
Recruitment occurred between Nov 2020-Sep 2021.
Results: Of the 34 children with results, nine received a genetic
diagnosis, and four accessed HSCT. Five children were also refer-
red for further investigations of suspicious VUS. On average, 14
healthcare providers attended the state-wide MDT, including adult
and paediatric immunologists, genomic pathologists, genetic
healthcare professionals, and other non-genetic-healthcare pro-
viders. Parents demonstrated understanding of the implications of
testing and reported minimal decisional regret.
Conclusion: Genomic testing can be mainstreamed for pae-
diatric IEI. Our program improved access to genomic testing,
facilitated treatment decision-making, and was acceptable to
parents and clinicians alike.
References: 1.Tangye SG, et al. J Clin Immunol. 2020;40(1):24-
64; 2.Bousﬁha A, et al. J Clin Immunol. 2020;40(1):66-81.
Grants: Queensland Genomic Health Alliance; TY is funded by
NHMRC EL1 Grant (APP2009136).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.018.D Models of communication for polygenic scores and
associated behavioural and psychological outcomes: a
systematic review
Courtney Wallingford1, Hannah Kovilpillai2, Chris Jacobs2, Erin
Turbitt2, Clare Primiero3, Deanna Brockman4, Hans Peter Soyer3,
Aideen McInerney-Leo3, Tatiane Yanes3
1The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Dermatology
Research Center, Woolloongabba, Australia;
2The University of
Technology Sydney, Graduate School of Health, Sydney, Australia;
1The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Dermatology
Research
Center,
Woolloongabba,
Australia;
4Color
Genomics,
Burlingame, United States.
Background/Objectives: Polygenic scores (PGS) are rapidly moving
into clinical care (1). However, no guidelines exist for communicating
PGS effectively, and psycho-behavioural outcomes are debated (1).
We aimed to systematically review current models for commu-
nicating PGS and psycho-behavioural outcomes of receiving PGS.
Methods: Original research, communicating PGS and reporting
on psycho-behavioural outcomes, was included. Search terms
were applied to ﬁve databases and limited by date (2009-2021).
Results: Of 3215 articles, 28 articles, representing 17 unique
studies were identiﬁed. Studies provided PGS in various settings
(cancer, cardiac, and others) to inform screening and intervention.
There was limited consistency in PGS communication, evaluation
of psycho-behavioural outcomes, and outcomes reported. Most
studies (n = 13) presented both numeric and visual representa-
tions of risk, and only three provided personalised lifestyle advice
or additional resources. No studies used behaviour change the-
ories to inform PGS delivery. Eight studies found no evidence of
long-term negative psychological impacts, up to 12 months post-
result. Of 16 studies reporting on behaviour, 10 found at least one
preventative health behaviour change associated with receipt of
PGS including screening (n = 2), lifestyle changes (n = 8), and
medication use (n = 2), especially for high PGS. Low PGS was not
associated with uptake of harmful health behaviours.
Conclusion: PGS has potential to personalise health interven-
tions. High variability among studies emphasises the need for
developing standardised guidelines for communicating PGS and
evaluating outcomes. Our ﬁndings call for the development of
best communication practices and high-quality interventions for
PGS, informed by behaviour change theories.
References:
(1)
Yanes
T,
et
al.
Hum
Mol
Genet.
2020;29(R2):R165-R176.
Grants: TY funded by NHMRC(APP1194646).
Conﬂict of Interest: Courtney Wallingford: None declared,
Hannah Kovilpillai: None declared, Chris Jacobs: None declared,
Erin Turbitt: None declared, Clare Primiero: None declared, Deanna
Brockman Full time employment at Color - a company in the
United States that is returning PRS information to clients, Hans
Peter Soyer HPS is a Medical Consultant for Canﬁeld Scientiﬁc Inc,
MoleMap Australia Pty Ltd, Blaze Bioscience Inc, Revenio Research
Oy and a Medical Advisor for First Derm., HPS is a shareholder of
MoleMap NZ Limited and e-derm consult GmbH, and undertakes
regular teledermatological reporting for both companies., Aideen
McInerney-Leo: None declared, Tatiane Yanes: None declared.
P23.019.A What does a genetic counsellor do in the university
hospital of Liege?
Léna Kukor1, Sabrina Bertoli1, Julie Crèvecoeur1, Vincent Bours1,
Saskia Bulk1
1University Hospital of Liège, Human Genetics, Liège, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Lately, the University Hospital of Liège
has faced a growing demand for genetic consultations. In addition
to increasing the number of clinical geneticists, the University
Hospital opened a ﬁrst position of Genetic Counsellor (GC) in 2013,
followed by a second one in 2017 and a third one in 2020. The GC
profession, although recognized in many countries around the
world, is not ofﬁcial yet in Belgium. Since 2015, a national working
group has been set up and a procedure is underway to create an
MSc in genetic counselling. The aim of this study was to char-
acterize and evaluate the activities of GCs in our hospital.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
674
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: We performed a retrospective observational study of
the patients from the University Hospital of Liège who had con-
sulted with a GC between 2016 and 2021. We also analyzed the
other interventions/tasks of the GCs. We performed a descriptive
statistical analysis.
Results: The main task of the GCs is to receive patients in
consultation either in pair with a geneticist or in “genetic coun-
seling” consultation under the supervision of a geneticist. Other
tasks are mainly administrative. The number of consultations has
increased by 707.5% between 2016 and 2021 and the number of
administrative interventions has also increased by 5740% between
2013 and 2020.
Conclusion: The number of speciﬁc “genetic counseling”
consultations and the administrative interventions have increased
signiﬁcantly between 2016 and 2021. The tasks of the GCs are
varied and essential for the overall care of the patient, in colla-
boration with the rest of the (para)medical team.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.020.B Awareness of prostate cancer risk associated with
deleterious mutations in DNA damage repair genes: a
“reverse” gender gap?
Monica Zuradelli1;2, Carla Barbara Ripamonti2, Monica Barile2, Ilaria
De Simone1;2, Vittorio Fasulo1;2, Giuseppe Chiarelli2, Rodolfo Hurle2,
Alberto Saita2, Giovanni Lughezzani1;2, Nicolò Maria Bufﬁ1;2, Giorgio
Guazzoni1;2, Paolo Casale2, Armando Santoro1;2, Rosanna Asselta1;2,
Massimo Lazzeri2, Giulia Solda’1;2
1Humanitas University, Milan, Italy;
2IRCCS Humanitas Research
Hospital, Milan, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Germline pathogenic mutations in
DNA damage repair genes (DDRG) are found in 5% of localized
and up to 16% of metastatic Prostate Cancer (PCa) patients.
BRCA1/BRCA2 are the most frequently mutated and associate
with aggressive disease and poorer outcome. Despite available
European guidelines for BRCA/DDRG testing, marked country-to-
country differences exist in implementation in clinical practice,
potentially excluding a not negligible number of PCa patients
from genetic analysis. Here we investigate existing gaps in early
diagnosis for PCa patients with familial history of DDRG
mutations.
Methods: BRCA1/2+ families were selected from women with
breast/ovarian cancer who attended our Genetic Counselling
Clinic from January 2016 to May 2021. All healthy men, aged 35-
75, were proposed genetic counselling and testing, and sub-
sequent dedicated “enhanced” screening based on digital rectal
examination, PSA/Prostate Health Index (PHI) blood test, and
multiparametric MRI plus biopsy in suspected cases.
Results: In more than half of 139 families (of >1000 retro-
spectively analyzed) positive for DDRG mutations, the male
member(s) rejected to be tested. In 28 families (20%) at least one
male relative was interested in DDRG screening. Overall, 86 men
performed genetic analysis, of which 35 tested positive and star-
ted the annual “enhanced” screening, together with additional 20
DDRG carriers recruited from other hospitals. About one third (16/
55) had a PHI ≥20 and underwent MRI; one patient required
biopsy (negative) based on imaging results.
Conclusion: Surprisingly, awareness in the male population
about the risk for PCa in DDRG mutation carriers, and possible
implications for early diagnosis/therapy, seems low.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.021.C GeNotes: A pan-specialty, pan-profession “just in
time” genomic education tool for clinicians
Amy Frost1, Aine Kelly1, Michelle Bishop1;2, Kate Tatton-Brown1;3
1Health Education England, Genomic Education Programme, Lon-
don, United Kingdom;
2Wellcome Genome Campus, Wellcome
Connecting Science, Cambridge, United Kingdom;
3St George’s
University
Hospitals
NHS
Foundation
Trust,
Medical
Genetics,
London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Genomic medicine is at the vanguard of
healthcare but many healthcare professionals lack the knowledge
and skills to integrate genomic data into their clinical practice. It is
therefore imperative that we upskill this workforce at scale
and pace.
Methods: Health Education England’s Genomic Education
Programme (GEP) has developed a ﬂagship, two-tier “just in time”
online educational tool to meet the genomic educational needs of
the healthcare workforce. Tier 1 (‘In the Clinic’, requesting tests
and receiving results) resources are specialty-speciﬁc, succinct,
written to a strict template and aligned to England’s Genomic Test
Directory. ‘In the Clinic’ links to tier 2 (‘Knowledge Hub’). The pan-
specialty ‘Knowledge Hub’ offers extended genomic learning
opportunities from ‘In the Clinic’ and comprises numerous indi-
vidual resources (each representing 15-20 minutes of learning)
that can be accessed standalone or assembled to create bespoke
learning journeys (which can be aligned to curricula/training
needs).
Following discovery and alpha phase testing, GeNotes has
recently completed a private beta phase qualitative (n = 11) and
quantitative (n = 21) evaluation.
Results: GeNotes received excellent feedback across the four
tested domains: expected use, ease of access, navigation, and
resource content. It scored 90/100 in system usability scale (SUS)
testing (compared with an average score for digital services of
68)1.
Conclusion: GeNotes fulﬁls a previously unmet genomic edu-
cational need and will launch for oncology (as public beta) in the
ﬁrst quarter of 2022. It will be available for paediatrics soon after
and for all working group specialties by summer 2022.
References:
1Lewis et al, International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction, 2018.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Amy Frost: None declared, Aine Kelly:
None declared, Michelle Bishop: None declared, Kate Tatton-
Brown KTB is a principal investigator of a research study to
investigate new mechanisms of the overgrowth-intellectual dis-
ability syndromes. She is in receipt of two grants, KTB has many
times been asked to speak at conferences and received honoraria
for these. This is not applicable for this conference.
P23.022.D Assessing risk in genetics services: developing and
piloting a clinical genetics-speciﬁc risk assessment tool
Deborah Lambert1, Alana J Ward1, Deborah Behan2, Dearbhla
Butterly1, sally ann Lynch1;3
1University College Dublin, School of Medicine, Dublin, Ireland;
2Children’s Health Ireland, Quality, Safety and Risk Management,
Dublin, Ireland; 3Children’s Health Ireland - Crumlin, Department of
Clinical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland.
Background/Objectives:
Whilst
using
the
national
hospital
assessment process to evaluate risks arising from long waiting lists
in Clinical Genetics, it became apparent that adaptation was
required for out-patient clinical genetic use.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
675
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: The ISO3001-based Irish Health Service Executive’s
risk assessment matrix1 was reviewed and the domains of risk
impact adapted. Genetics context-speciﬁc criteria were estab-
lished for impact severity scores of negligible(1) to extreme(5)
across domains. The new matrix was piloted to chronicle con-
sequences to 20 women who became pregnant while awaiting
appointments to discuss diagnosis/recurrence risk because of
family history or previous affected child.
Results: 10 domains of risk impact were identiﬁed: Harm to the
patient and family; Harm to staff; Service user experience, Com-
pliance with professional guidance and SOPs; National strategic
objectives, Service disruption; Adverse publicity; Financial cost to
hospital; Financial cost to patient; Environmental impact. Clinic
waiting times in pilot charts (n = 20) ranged from 2-35 months; 4/
20 had a recurrence of the condition in subsequent child while on
the waiting list. All charts showed risks in multiple domains (range
1-10), with 17/20 rated moderate (3) to extreme (5) in patient/
pregnancy harm.
Conclusion: The risk tool was usable by both clinical genetics
and non-genetic personnel. Domains of impact for patient harm,
service disruption, and ﬁnancial cost to hospital varied indepen-
dently between situations. Use of the new tool standardises risk
assessment and clariﬁes areas where control measures could be
implemented to improve care.
References: 1. Health Service Executive Integrated Risk Man-
agement Policy 2017 https://bit.ly/3J4mNoh.
Grants: Adelaide Health Foundation R22808.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.023.A An online genetic counselling narrative group as a
tool for supporting patients with hereditary ataxias in
Portugal
Milena Paneque1;2;3, Mariana Policarpo1;4, Maria Barbosa1;5, Marina
Lemos5;6, Álvaro Mendes1;2
1IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, i3S - Instituto de
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, CGPP -
Centre for Predictive and Preventive Genetics, Porto, Portugal; 2i3S -
Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto,
UnIGENe – Unit for Genetics and Epidemiological Research on
Neurological Diseases, Porto, Portugal; 3ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências
Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Porto, Portugal;
4ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal; 5FPCEUP - Faculty of Psychology and Educational
Sciences, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal; 6CPUP
- Centre of Psychology, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Background/Objectives: Genetic counselling interventions aimed
to provide psychosocial support to individuals at-risk or with
hereditary ataxias are very scarce. No interventions of this kind
have been reported in Portugal so far. We aimed at implementing
a service improvement intervention offering a group intervention
of a structured narrative exercise (already implemented with
people who tested gene-positive for Huntington disease).
Methods: Tree of life intervention was delivered remotely. In
parallel, it was conducted a study to explore, respectively, i) the
experiences of participants in the narrative intervention, and ii) to
assess the impact of the intervention in their psychological well-
being.
Data
collection
involved
observations
and
a
post-
intervention focus group.
Results:
The
Portuguese
Hereditary
Ataxias
Association
advertised the narrative group and 13 individuals stated their
interest in participating. Of these, 9 people took part in pre-
liminary session aimed to present the goals and nature of the
intervention. Six of those participants (mean age 48; 39-53, 3 men)
attended the narrative session (2,5 hours), with different types of
ataxia (mostly Machado-Joseph Disease). A focus group took place
2 weeks after the narrative session aiming to collect the partici-
pants’ views and experiences with the intervention. Participants
reported high levels of satisfaction as they had the opportunity to
build new social relations that brought them different perspec-
tives, and gained new insights to understand their biopsychoso-
cial circumstances.
Conclusion: This intervention has potential to be extended
and adapted for other types of genetic conditions and popula-
tions, and may be used as follow-up support in genetic counsel-
ling protocols.
References:.
Grants: AM holds FCT-CEECIND/02615/2017 grant.
Conﬂict of Interest: Milena Paneque: None declared, Mariana
Policarpo: None declared, Maria Barbosa: None declared, Marina
Lemos: None declared, Álvaro Mendes FCT-CEECIND/02615/2017.
P23.024.B “I got this letter” At-risk individuals experience of
healthcare-assisted disclosure on hereditary cancer
Anna Öfverholm1, Per Karlsson1, Anna Rosén2
1Inst
of
Clinical
sciences,
Sahlgrenska
Academy,
Gothenburg
University, Gothenburg, Sweden; 2Inst of Oncology, Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: When a patient has hereditary cancer
he/she is recommended to disclose information to healthy at-risk
relatives (ARRs), who can then themselves ask for assessment,
eventually access surveillance and even risk-reducing surgery. The
Swedish multicenter randomized controlled trial DIRECT evaluates
weather information letters directly from healthcare may increase
the proportion of ARRs contacting an oncogenetic unit. This study
explores how healthy ARRs perceive receiving such a healthcare-
mediated letter.
Methods: Patients with hereditary cancer included in the
DIRECT study identiﬁed ARRs to whom we sent letters with an
invitation to genetic counselling. ARRs who contacted an onco-
genetic unit was invited to qualitative in-depths interviews. The
interviews (n = 13) were recorded, transcribed, coded, categorized
and analyzed inductively.
Results: The ARRs receiving a letter thought of it as tolerable,
however when contacting the oncogenetic clinic, they wanted
prompt
accessibility
and
familiarity
with
the
matter.
They
expressed ambivalence around their right to know, empowerment
regarding one’s own health, versus the right not to know and true
beneﬁts of surveillance. They wanted a shared responsibility
between the healthcare system and patients; neither an author-
itarian praxis of disclosure nor that an individual could keep the
information solely to himself.
Conclusion: Healthcare -assisted disclosure of hereditary risk
for cancer by sending a letter to ARRs is a tolerable method.
However, the corresponding clinic has to be highly accessible for
re-contact and the ARRs expressed ambivalence regarding bene-
ﬁts and disadvantages from being contacted.
References:.
Grants: Swedish Research Council for Health, Work life and
Welfare grant 2018-00964.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.025.C The emerging role of the European Society of
Human Genetics-Young Committee
Elena Avram1;2, Juliana Xavier de Miranda Cerqueira2;3;4, Can
Ding2;5, Mridul Johari2;6;7, Ana Raquel Gouveia Freitas da Silva2;8,
Ileana Delia Sabau2;9, Nuru Noor2;10, European Society of Human
Genetics - Young Committee2
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
676
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Medlife Clinics, Ophthalmology, Bucharest, Romania;
2European
Society of Human Genetics, Vienna, Austria; 3Faculty of Medicine and
Health Technology, Tampere University, Coeliac Disease Research
Center, Tampere, Finland; 4University of Porto, Faculty of Nutrition
and Food Science, Porto, Portugal;
5Universitätsmedizin Mainz,
Institute of Human Genetics, Mainz, Germany; 6Folkhälsan Research
Center, Helsinki, Finland;
7University of Helsinki, Department of
Medical and Clinical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland; 8Hospital de Santa
Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Serviço de
Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Lisbon, Portugal;
9Personal Genetics, Bucharest, Romania;
10Cambridge University
Hospitals, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: The purpose of the European Society of
Human Genetics - Young Committee (ESHG-Y) is to support the
next generation of geneticists. Under the guidance of the ESHG,
our committee aims to develop strategies and programs for a
better education of human genetics and the creation of a strong
network of geneticists in all European countries. We are focused
on: organizing scientiﬁc events, achieving equal access to edu-
cational opportunities and promoting collaboration and leader-
ship. We present all the projects that the ESHG-Y has been
involved in since its conception in 2019.
Methods: We assessed all the ESHG-Y projects between 2019
and 2022. The role of the ESHG-Y was categorized as decisive,
coordinating or supportive.
Results: Since 2020 ESHG-Y has created its own educational
sessions at the ESHG Annual Conference. The ESHG-Y social media
platforms have regularly promoted relevant activities like a virtual
session in collaboration with the European Board of Medical
Genetics (EBMG). A scientiﬁc event in which we had a coordinating
role is the European Dysmorphology Meetings. In the last 4 years
our representatives have had a supportive role in the ESHG Board,
the ESHG Scientiﬁc Programme Committee, the ESHG Education
Committee and the EBMG. We have also supported organizations
like: ERN-Ithaca, Unique, Orphanet, EuroGEMS and MOOC BIG.
Conclusion: In the short span of almost 4 years the ESHG-Y has
successfully implemented projects that have engaged young
geneticists across Europe. For the near future, we will be seeking
to build on and develop further activities such as the “ESHG
Observership for Young Geneticists”.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.026.D Good enough embryo: Prioritization of
Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) embryos in the era of
genomic medicine
Shachar
Zuckerman1,
Orit
Freireich1,
rahel
beeri1,
Pinhas
Renbaum1, elinor Hakam1, shira Shaviv1, elina farhi1, anat yadin1,
meirav ben shlomo1, tali azar1, gheona Altarescu1
1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Medical Genetics Institute, Jerusalem,
Israel.
Background/Objectives: New technologies of expanded carrier
screening (ECS), chromosomal microarrays (CMA) and whole-
exome sequencing (WES) produce extensive information regard-
ing variants’ carrier status, complicating the decisions of couples
and professionals for testing and prioritizing embryos in PGT.
Methods: We describe the challenges of transferring embryos
for multiple conditions:.
Results: A woman carrier of two X-linked disorders; her spouse
carries AD PAX9-hypodontia; both carry AR deletion. Couple
decided to transfer an embryo with PAX9-hypodontia and freeze
female embryos carriers of the X-linked disorders.
●
Couple carriers of Canavan and each parent a different VUS
microduplication, detected by CMA in amniocentesis. They
opted of transferring only non-carrier embryo for the three
conditions.
●
Woman carrier of GREB1L mutation, detected after WES done
for a fetus with Potter, was found out to be a carrier of ACAN
mutation causing short stature. Couple decided to transfer WT
GREB1L but ACAN mutant embryo.
●
Woman with Laing myopathy caused by AD MYH7 mutation;
both partners detected by ECS as carriers of congenital
adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). Linkage for paternal allele was
impossible since both his parents were carriers. The couple
opted to transfer WT of MYH7 and carrier of maternal CAH
mutation without knowing the status of paternal allele.
.
Conclusion: These cases demonstrate the challenges couples
and professionals are faced with multiple genetic variants when
unaffected embryos for all the tested genetic diseases are una-
vailable. Appropriate genetic counseling discussing medical and
bioethical consideration and guidelines for PGT prioritization is
crucial before decisions are being made regarding tests and
embryos’ selection.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.027.A Rare disease families’ experience of accessing
genetic testing and clinical genetics services in the Republic of
Ireland
Alana
J
Ward1,
Deborah
Lambert2,
Vicky
McGrath3,
James
O’Byrne2;4;5, Dearbhla Butterly2, sally ann Lynch1;6
1School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland;
1School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; 3Rare
Diseases Ireland, Carmichael House, Dublin 7, Ireland;
4Mater
Misericordiae University Hospital, National Centre for Inherited
Metabolic Disorders, Dublin 7, Ireland; 5School of Medicine, Trinity
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; 6Children’s Health Ireland, Crumlin,
Dublin 12, Ireland.
Background/Objectives:
National
waiting
times
for
Clinical
Genetics approach three years. We aimed to identify con-
sequences to families accessing services.
Methods: An online survey was distributed via Rare Diseases
Ireland patient organisation alliance social media.
Results: Of 144 respondents 90% (129/144) were people with a
rare disease and 10% (15/144) relatives. 95% (128/135) had
genetic testing, 70% (88/125) leading to a diagnosis. Those where
a diagnosis was made by the Clinical Genetics appointment
reported higher levels of satisfaction (z = 3.94; p < 0.01).
77% (99/128) of participants had their genetic test arranged by
a non-Genetic healthcare professional. The 24% (31/111) who had
their genetic test result explained by a different physician/team
than the one who arranged the test were more likely to report
dissatisfaction (z = 3.07; p < 0.01). 55% (70/127) of respondents
waited >3 months for genetic test results.
81% (80/99) of respondents accessed public appointments and
18% (18/99) private. 82% (93/114) of respondents indicated that
being on the waiting list impacted their personal life and plans.
32% (37/114) of respondents said waiting for a Clinical Genetics
appointment placed tension on relationships with partner/family
members/friends. 23% (26/114) indicated wider impact on rela-
tives’ family planning/relationships/education/employment plans.
25% (28/114) delayed future pregnancies and 15% (17/114)
expressed impact on decisions around education/employment/
mortgage.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
677
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conclusion: Longer waiting times to access genetic services
have signiﬁcant impact on patients’ and carers’ personal lives and
plans. This highlights that current national waiting times increase
the disadvantage already experienced by families with rare
diseases.
References:.
Grants: Adelaide Health Foundation R22808.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.028.B Experiences and preferences of Healthcare
Professionals using telegenetics in a UK Clinical Genetics
centre during the COVID-19 pandemic
Beatriz Bustillo1;2, stephanie oates1, kathryn lubasch1, charlotte
tomlinson1, vishakha tripathi1, sarah rose1
1Guy’s Hospital, Clinical Genetics, London, United Kingdom; 2School
of Biological Sciences University of Manchester, Faculty of Biology,
Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives:
The
changes
and
restrictions
pre-
cipitated by the COVID-19 pandemic have led to innovation in
Clinical Genetics service delivery worldwide. At the Guy’s and St
Thomas’ (GSTT) Clinical Genetics Service, telegenetics was imple-
mented at the beginning of the pandemic using the AttendAny-
where videoconferencing platform. We subsequently designed a
qualitative study to capture experiences and preferences of
Healthcare Professional’s (HCP) using this service delivery model.
Methods: We conducted semi-structured interviews with seven
HCPs working at the GSTT Clinical Genetics Service, including
Genetic Counsellors, Clinical Geneticists and a Clinical Psychologist.
Interview content was analysed using a thematic analysis approach.
Results:
We
present
HCPs’
experiences
of
transitioning
between virtual and in-person appointments and their appraisal of
the technical and practical aspects of telegenetics. We also pre-
sent themes that emerged about how HCPs’ clinical practice has
changed to adapt to telegenetics, as well as differences in both
patients’ and HCPs’ attitudes towards virtual appointments when
compared to in-person encounters. Future considerations will be
shared regarding the suitability of telegenetics for Clinical
Genetics appointments.
Conclusion: Based on their experience at GSTT, HCPs inter-
viewed would welcome the addition of telegenetics to the Clinical
Genetics toolkit beyond the COVID-19 pandemic, and we will
provide considerations for future guidelines.
References:.
Grants: This work was conducted as part of the UK NHS Sci-
entist Training Programme.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.029.C Implementation of newborn screening for spinal
muscular atrophy in Poland – one year experience
Monika Gos1, Magdalena Frączyk1, Joanna Wasiluk2, Aleksandra
Landowska1, Mariola Jurzyk2, Katarzyna Durda3, Natalia Szczerba3,
Wioletta Wawer2, Paulina Kubiszyn2, Maria Jędrzejowska4, Mariusz
Ołtarzewski2
1Institute of Mother and Child, Department of Medical Genetics,
Warsaw, Poland; 2Institute of Mother and Child, Department of
Screening
Tests
and
Metabolic
Diagnostics,
Warsaw,
Poland;
3Pomeranian Medical University, Independent Public Clinical Hospital
nr 1, Szczecin, Poland; 4Warsaw Medical University, Department of
Neurology, Warsaw, Poland.
Background/Objectives: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a
severe
genetic
condition
that
leads
to
signiﬁcant
motor
impairment and respiratory problems, or even death. A persona-
lized treatment with Nusinersen, ZolgenSMA or Risdiplam is
available for patients. Herein, we present a schema and our ﬁrst
experience with the newborn screening for SMA (NBS-SMA).
Methods: The SMA was added to the National Newborn
Screening Programme in April 2021. Standard dried blood spots are
used for DNA extraction for a genetic test that allows to identify
homozygous deletion of exon 7 of the SMN1 gene. The SALSA
MC002 SMA Newborn Screen test is used as a screening method. All
legal guardians has to sign an agreement for genetic testing.
Results: Since April 2021, the SMA-NBS was implemented sub-
sequently in 13 districts in Poland. All likely positive samples were
checked with alternative method (PCR-RFLP or MLPA) and infor-
mation about conﬁrmed cases was sent to the hospital responsible
for SMA treatment. During the visit, clinical examination was per-
formed and a blood was collected for a MLPA veriﬁcation test. If the
result of the veriﬁcation test was positive, the personalized treat-
ment was applied. Till now, about 140.000 newborns were screened
and SMA was diagnosed in 21 (prevalence: 1/6700). The median
time since birth till ﬁrst positive result and veriﬁcation result were 9
and 14.5 days, respectively.
Conclusion: The PCR-HRM method is useful in NBS-SMA and
allows successfully to identify positive patients that can be treated
with available therapies.
References:.
Grants: The project was partially supported from Institute of
Mother and Child intramural grant 510-18-17.
Conﬂict of Interest: Monika Gos Modest, Magdalena Frączyk:
None declared, Joanna Wasiluk: None declared, Aleksandra
Landowska: None declared, Mariola Jurzyk: None declared, Katar-
zyna Durda: None declared, Natalia Szczerba: None declared,
Wioletta Wawer: None declared, Paulina Kubiszyn: None declared,
Maria Jędrzejowska Modest, Mariusz Ołtarzewski: None declared.
P23.030.D Clinical description of families with Li-Fraumeni
syndrome in a third level hospital in Barcelona
Lorena Moreno Calle1, Belen Pastor Piñera1, Elia Grau Garces1,
Aurora Sánchez Díaz2, Miriam Potrony2, Josep Oriola2, Maria Isabel
Alvarez2, Celia Badenas2, Lydia Gaba3, Adela Rodriguez3, Barbara
Adamo3, Aleix Prat3, Francesc Balaguer1
1Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Gastroenterology, Barcelona, Spain;
2Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics
Department, Barcelona, Spain; 3Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Medical
Oncology Department, Barcelona, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a rare
cancer predisposition syndrome that increases multiple cancers
risk. Recent studies suggest an overestimation in LFS penetrance
due to identiﬁcation of patients with TP53 pathogenic variants
without fulﬁlling clinical criteria. It is imperative to understand risk-
modifying factors, genotype-phenotype correlation and clinical
effect of variant type to offer a correct follow-up and genetic
counselling.
The study objective is to describe clinical and genetic LFS
families’ characteristics and assess clinical criteria compliance.
Methods: It is a descriptive, observational and retrospective
study of genetically diagnosed LFS families between 2014-2021.
Clinical manifestations, variant type and accomplishment of clin-
ical criteria are described.
Results:
Case
Cancer(s)
pro-
band, diagnosis
age
Study–
clini-
cal criteria
Genetic
diagnosis
age
Pathogenic
variant
Variant
type
1
Osteosarcoma,9
LFS–classic
9
c.637C>T
LF
2
Stomach,34
HDGC
35
c.6365_366delTG
LF
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
678
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results:
Case
Cancer(s)
pro-
band, diagnosis
age
Study–
clini-
cal criteria
Genetic
diagnosis
age
Pathogenic
variant
Variant
type
3
Breast,34
HBOCS
45
c.754_762delCTCACCAT
LF/ND
4
Breast,32
LFS–Chompret
33
c.733G>A
LF/ND
5
Breast,30 & 50
Sarcoma,44 & 50
LFS–like
51
Gene deletion
LF
6
Breast,47
HBOCS
49
c.472C>T
LF/ND
NG: negative dominance, LF: loss of function.
Conclusion: Our results agree with latest research that recon-
siders LFS penetrance and expressivity. It is not always possible to
identify the variant type and, therefore, to use this data to per-
sonalize follow-up. Although our data is limited, it reveals the high
phenotypic variability and the need to manage LFS families within
a multidisciplinary team, as well as to rethink the LFS study criteria
and the follow-up offered. It would be interesting to carry out
multicenter studies to obtain more robust conclusions.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.031.A Observational study on lifestyle behaviors and
nutritions in individuals undergoing genetic counselling for
breast or colorectal cancer risk
Lea Godino1;2, Donatella Fabbro2, Benedetta Bertonazzi2, Daniela
Turchetti1;2
1Centro di Ricerca sui Tumori Ereditari, Università di Bologna IRCCS
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria
di Bologna, Dipartimento di
Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche:, Bologna, Italy;
2UOC Genetica
Medica, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, Italy,
Bologna, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Healthy lifestyles are associated with
cancer risk reduction. We aimed at exploring modiﬁable lifestyle
behaviours among individuals at increased risk of breast/color-
ectal cancer.
Methods: We carried out a cross-sectional study of patients
undergoing breast or colorectal cancer risk assessment.
A questionnaire was administered, including: Italian validated
MEDI-Lite and International Physical Activity questionnaires, items
on socio-demographic and physical features and questions on risk
perception and smoke and alcohol habits.
Results: Fourty-two women and 8 men (age: 19-80 years) were
recruited; 19 were affected by breast cancer, 4 by colorectal
cancer, 27 were unaffected but had a family history of breast (23)
or colorectal (4) cancer.
Fourty-four respondents (88%) perceived their general lifestyle
as very or enough healthy. However, 16 (32%) were smokers
(current or former), 37 (74%) drank alcohol and 18 (36%) were
overweight or obese; 21 (42%) showed low adherence to medi-
terranean diet and 7 (14%) reported low exercise. Low adherence
to mediterranean diet was signiﬁcantly more frequent in partici-
pants of low education level (67%) compared to those with high
education level (17%; p = 0.044). Participants with higher cancer
risk were signiﬁcantly more likely to smoke: 63% of those at high
risk, 40% of those at intermediate risk and 14% of those at stan-
dard risk were current or former smokers (p <0.05).
Conclusion: The results of this pilot study support a need for
raising awareness on the role of the lifestyle in cancer risk mod-
ulation among counselees, possibly tailoring information accord-
ing to their literacy.
References:.
Grants: None.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.032.B Non-genetic health professionals’ knowledge,
attitudes, and behaviors towards medical genetics in Croatia
Tea Mladenić1, Marina Mavrinac2, Sanja Dević Pavlić1, Anna
Malnar1, Matea MAtić1, Sara Mikić1, Saša Ostojić1, Nina Pereza1
1Faculty of Medicine, University of Rijeka, Centre for Genetic
Education, Rijeka, Croatia; 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Rijeka,
Medical Informatics, Rijeka, Croatia.
Background/Objectives: The main objective of this study was to
examine the knowledge, behavior, and attitudes toward medical
genetics among physicians who encounter the largest number of
patients with speciﬁc genetic disorders, in their daily practice.
Methods: The cross-sectional study involved 175 residents and
specialists in the Republic of Croatia, who completed the online
questionnaire anonymously and voluntarily. The validated ques-
tionnaire consisted of ﬁve groups of questions: general informa-
tion, knowledge, behavior in practice, attitude toward genetic
testing, and additional education in medical genetics.
Results: The median score of total knowledge in medical
genetics was 70.2% among obstetrician-gynecologists, 80.5%
among pediatricians, and 76.7% among neurologists. A statistically
signiﬁcant difference was found between the groups, with
obstetrician-gynecologists having higher total knowledge than the
other physicians (P < 0.001). Many patients with genetic disorders
remain undiagnosed in respondent’s daily practice and not recog-
nizing such patients is the main reason why patients are not referred
for genetic testing often enough. In addition, the respondents
showed a positive attitude toward genetic testing, but they do not
feel educated enough to interpret the results of genetic testing.
Conclusion: The results obtained highlight the need for further
education of non-genetic health professionals in medical genetics,
which would lead to greater conﬁdence and ability of physicians
to recognize patients with genetic disorder, choose the right
genetic testing method and to clearly convey information.
References:.
Čargonja et al. The impact of needs-based education on the
change of knowledge and attitudes towards medical genetics in
medical students. Eur J Hum Genet. 2021;29(5):726-735.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.033.C Art & genomics: teaching next generation scientists
how to connect science and society by using art & design
Diewertje Houtman1, Mirte de Wit2, Sam Riedijk1, Bertrand Burgers3,
Boy Vijlbrief1
1Erasmus Medical Center, Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands;
2Mirte de Wit, Inclusive design and design research, Den Haag,
Netherlands; 3Bertrand Burgers, Social designer and science commu-
nicator, Utrecht, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: The potential large societal impact of
developments in the ﬁeld of genomics asks for a new generation
of scientists who are not afraid to step out of their ivory tower and
into society. For most scientists (in training) this is a step out of
their comfort zone, requiring new skills and tools. The course Art &
Genomics (A&G) was developed by two PhD students and two
designers. It aims to provide students with the skills and tools that
help them connect (with) a broad public, in dialogue about the
societal impact of genomic science, on an emotional and
experiential level.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
679
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: Students go through the non-linear process of
design thinking. Although this process asks for continuous itera-
tion, the following successive steps can be distinguished: empa-
thetic understanding, deﬁning the problem, coming up with
creative ideas, developing prototypes, and testing. At the end of
this process, students showcase their dialogue-provoking art/
design piece at an exhibition.
Results: Six students from the minor Genetics in Society parti-
cipated in a pilot. They indicated that A&G required them to get
out of their comfort zone at ﬁrst, but then gave them the tools
they needed to spark broad public dialogue about the societal
impact of scientiﬁc research. Exhibited art/design pieces included
a new fashion clothing line with your personal DNA printed on it,
and a game revealing who has your genetic data.
Conclusion: Using art/design methods can build academic stu-
dents’ competency and conﬁdence to connect science and society.
References:.
Grants: Impact at the Core.
Conﬂict of Interest: Diewertje Houtman Part-time employ-
ment at Erasmus MC, Educational support and educational
materials by Impact at the Core, a program of the Erasmus Uni-
versity stimulating impact-driven education., Mirte de Wit Educa-
tional and ﬁnancial support and educational materials from
impact at the core, a program of the Erasmus University stimu-
lating impact-driven education., Sam Riedijk Fulltime employment
at Erasmus MC, PI in prenatal genetics and social genomics, Ber-
trand Burgers Educational and ﬁnancial support and educational
materials from impact at the core, a program of the Erasmus
University stimulating impact-driven education., Boy Vijlbrief
Fulltime employment at Erasmus MC, Educational support and
educational materials by Impact at the Core, a program of the
Erasmus University stimulating impact-driven education.
P23.034.D Worldwide use of EuroGEMS.org, the ESHG’s guide
to online educational resources, and its new full Spanish
translation
Adam P. Tobias1, Irene Esteban2, Anna Esteve Garcia3, Elena Avram4,
Ana Raquel Gouveia Freitas da Silva5, Juliana Xavier de Miranda
Cerqueira6;7, Edward S. Tobias2;8
1Medical School, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United King-
dom;
2West of Scotland Centre for Genomic Medicine, Queen
Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom; 3Clinical
Genetics, Bellvitge University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain;
4Medlife
Clinics, Bucharest, Romania; 5Serviço de Genética Médica, Departa-
mento de Pediatria, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar
Universitário
Lisboa
Norte,
Lisbon,
Portugal;
6Coeliac
Disease
Research Center, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology,
Tampere University, Tampere, Finland; 7Faculty of Nutrition and
Food Science, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; 8Medical Genetics
and Genomics, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Access for individuals at all educational
levels to reliable online educational genomics-related resources
has
been
increasingly
required,
worldwide.
A
website
(www.EuroGEMS.org) (1) was therefore created for the European
Society of Human Genetics (ESHG), providing a user-friendly
English-language guide to 110 high-quality online worldwide
resources for genetics specialists, non-genetics-professionals, stu-
dents and the public (2). Subsequently, its translation into other
languages has been suggested by the ESHG. As Spanish is the ﬁrst
language of approximately 480 million people worldwide, Spanish
translation was initiated (3).
Methods: EuroGEMS.org was fully translated (and carefully
cross-checked) by two bilingual genetics professionals. The
resulting Spanish web-pages were launched in June 2021.
Results: The www.EuroGEMS.org website has been visited
from 128 countries. It has been endorsed by the ESHG Board
and, in 2022, by the Human Genome Organisation (HUGO-
International). The new Spanish-language pages have been
accessed
from
28
countries
(including
12
in
South
and
Central America) with a marked (6.3-fold) increase in the number
of Spanish speakers using EuroGEMS (from January 2021 to
January 2022).
Conclusion: EuroGEMS.org is used worldwide and has been
endorsed by two major international societies (the ESHG and
HUGO-International). Its new Spanish-language pages have greatly
increased its accessibility and readership, particularly in Spain and
South America but also elsewhere (including the USA). A Portu-
guese translation, now underway, should further increase genetics
and genomics knowledge acquisition, internationally.
References: 1. https://www.eurogems.org/index.html.
2. Tobias AP and Tobias ES (December 2020). Human Mutation
41: 2021-2027. PMID: 32906220.
3. Tobias ES et al. (September 2021) Frontiers in Genetics 12:
693952. PMID: 34539735.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.035.A Community-driven co-creation of an educational
genetics app
Ang Davies1, Naz Khan2, Alan Davies1, Norina Gasteiger3, Amy
Vercell4, Dawn Dowding3
1The University of Manchester, Division of Informatics, Imaging &
Data Sciences,
School of Health Sciences,
The University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, Manchester, United
Kingdom; 2Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester
Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom; 3The
University of Manchester, Division of Nursing, Midwifery and Social
Work,
School
of
Health
Sciences,
University
of
Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom, Manchester, United Kingdom; 4The
Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Previous studies have found lack of
access to culturally sensitive genetic information creates an unmet
genetics-education need within Pakistani communities in the UK,
where incidence of consanguineous marriage is high, increasing
risk of rare genetic diseases. Mobile apps may help to raise genetic
literacy and signposting to clinical services in a sensitive, engaging
and accessible manner.
Methods: A mixed methods study was undertaken to co-create
a genetics app with the South Asian Pakistani community
(Blackburn with Darwen, UK). Including: semi-structured interviews
with
community
members
(7),
exploring
understanding
of
genetics; systematic review of current genetics apps using the
Mobile App Rating Scale (MARS); and systematic literature review
of genetics apps.
Results: During the interview phase participants indicated
use of the potential app either alone or with family members to
educate themselves/others and make informed choices. Other
preferences included: privacy, lack of connection to genetics in
the app logo and requirement for high quality/trusted branding
(e.g. NHS logo). Participants indicated a strong preference for
video content of both patients and genetics health-professionals
from the same ethnicity as themselves. During the app review
phase, 22 apps met eligibility criteria, all intended to inform/
educate users, 32% analysed genetic data and 18% helped
to
diagnose genetic conditions, though readability scores
were poor.
Conclusion: Community-driven co-creation allowed the col-
lection of users’ requirements and prioritisation of features,
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
680
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
creating a prototype genetics app. The community were integral
to the design process, working together with researchers, app
developers and health-professionals.
References:.
Grants: Funding from Blackburn with Darwen Council.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ang Davies University of Manchester,
principal investigator, Naz Khan full-time, collaborator, Alan Davies
full-time, collaborator, Norina Gasteiger collaborator, Amy Vercell
full-time, collaborator, Dawn Dowding full-time, collaborator.
P23.036.B Development of the CME training course in clinical
laboratory genetics in Georgia
Eka Kvaratskhelia1, Maia Zarandia1, Tinatin Tkemaladze1, Elene
Abzianidze1
1Tbilisi State Medical University, Department of Molecular and
Medical Genetics, Tbilisi, Georgia.
Background/Objectives:
A
number
of
genetic
diagnostic
laboratories have been established in Georgia in recent years,
offering different types of genetic tests including diagnostic
testing for monogenic and common complex diseases, predis-
position testing for cancer causing genes, and reproductive
genetic testing [1]. The growing availability of genetic tests in
Georgia raises the question regarding a shortage of laboratory
geneticists and technicians. The ﬁrst CME course in Laboratory
Genetics has been developed at the Tbilisi State Medical Uni-
versity for healthcare professionals.
Methods: The aim of this postgraduate-level course entitled
“Molecular genetic testing in a clinical practice” is to provide
laboratory training in the ﬁeld of molecular genetics for MDs. The
course has been approved by the Ministry of Education and Sci-
ence of Georgia for 15 CME category I credits.
Results: The course format is hands-on laboratory exercises
including, but not limited to, molecular diagnostic techniques
with standard and real-time quantitative PCR and application of
these techniques in various areas of molecular genetic testing. A
typical class module begins with a lecture on a speciﬁc labora-
tory topic (e.g. DNA chemistry, gene expression, PCR metho-
dology, 1 hour), followed by lab exercises to demonstrate
principles discussed in the lecture (2 hours). The course ends
with a written multiple choice exam and post-course evaluation
survey.
Conclusion: We believe that this course will help healthcare
professionals to understand genetic technologies, and their
application to clinical practice.
References: 1. Kvaratskhelia, E., Chokoshvili, D., Kvintradze, M.
et al. Public attitudes towards the genetic testing in Georgia. J
Community Genet 12, 407–414 (2021).
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.037.C The impact of psychiatric disorders on caregivers:
An integrative predictive model of burden, stigma and well-
being
Madalina Radu1, Andra Ciuca1, Sebastian Pintea1, Roxana Sipos2,
Elena Predescu2, Catalina-Angela Crisan2, Adriana Baban1, Ramona
Moldovan1;3;4
1Babeș-Bolyai University, Department of Psychology, Cluj-Napoca,
Romania; 2Iuliu Haţieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Department of Neurosciences, Cluj-Napoca, Romania; 3School of
Biological Science, University of Manchester, Division of Evolution
and Genomic Sciences, Manchester, United Kingdom;
4St Mary’s
Hospital, Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester Centre for
Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Looking after a family member diag-
nosed with a psychiatric condition, especially for those who
become main caregivers, is a complex task as it involves providing
dedicated and often challenging assistance and support. Care-
givers are exposed to high levels of stress and many report feel-
ings of social isolation, stigma, grief, shame, guilt, anger and
helplessness. This study explores the main predictors of care-
givers’ experienced burden, stigma and well-being, when looking
after family members diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder.
Methods: We ascertained participants who were the main
caregivers of an adult or young person diagnosed with a psychiatric
condition. This cross-sectional study included 168 caregivers, 98 of
which were caregivers of adult patients and 70 of which were
caregivers of children and adolescents with psychiatric disorders.
Perceived burden, stigma, well-being, knowledge, illness percep-
tion, socio-demographic and medical variables were assessed.
Results: A number of correlates of burden, stigma and well-
being have been identiﬁed and are being discussed. The inte-
grative predictive model has shown that the caregiver’s emotional
representation of illness is the best predictor of burden, (β = 0.38,
p < 0.001), stigma (β = 0.53, p < 0.001) and well-being (β = -0.36,
p < 0.001).
Conclusion: Psychiatric conditions can impact both patients
and their caregivers. Our ﬁndings show that the emotional
representation of the psychiatric condition is the strongest pre-
dictor of caregivers’ burden. Our results can enable health pro-
fessionals to better tailor psychosocial interventions addressed to
family members of individuals living with a psychiatric condition.
References: -.
Grants: -.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P23.040.B The communication chain: a qualitative analysis of
patient-provider and patient-family communication in
hereditary cancers
Carla Pedrazzani1, Monica Aceti1, Reka Schweighoffer1, Burki
Nicole2, Rossella Graffeo-Galbiati3, Olivia Pagani3, Maria Katapodi1,
Maria Caiata-Zufferey4
1University of Basel, Clinical Research, Basel, Switzerland; 2University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; 3Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland, Bellinzona, Switzerland; 4University of Applied Sciences
and Arts of Southern Switzerland, Manno, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives:
In
hereditary
cancers,
family-
communication on genetics is crucial for family members’ deci-
sion making about genetic risk assessment. Healthcare-providers
have an important role in supporting family-communication but
this is still limited and unclear. The study aims to explore how
healthcare-providers address family-communication with muta-
tion carriers and how this may affect mutation carriers’ decision to
communicate about genetic risk to family members.
Methods: In this qualitative study, data were collected with
focus groups and interviews with 12 unaffected and 8 affected
female carriers of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC)-
associated mutations. Data were collected in Italian, German and
French in three linguistic areas of Switzerland.
Results: Data show an inconsistent management of family-
communication before, during and after genetic counselling with
the perception of an overall negligence of the health-system, a
low level of healthcare-providers’ involvement and the lack of
continuity.
Dynamic,
contradictory,
implicit
logics
such
as
responsibility, self-preservation, protection and respect of the
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
681
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
other, drive mutations carriers’ decision to (and how) commu-
nicate or not, genetic risk to family members. Many individual and
family factors inﬂuencing communication such as gender, geo-
graphical and affective distance, illness experience, interact sys-
tematically with the different logics.
Conclusion:
The
study
innovatively
frames
family-
communication proceeding along a communication chain from
health-care providers to at-risk relatives. It highlights the need for
supporting family-communication on genetic risk and potential
providers’ new roles.
References: Schwiter R. et al. (2018) How can we reach at risk
relatives? Efforts to enhance communication and cascade testing
uptake: a mini-review. Current Genetic Medicine Reports. 6:21-27.
Grants: Suisse Cancer League - KLS-4294-08-2017.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24 ETHICAL, LEGAL AND PSYCHOSOCIAL ASPECTS IN
GENETICS
P24.001.C Systematic reanalysis for genome diagnostic
laboratories? ELSI/ethical, economical, legal and (psycho)
social implications: Scoping review
Marije A. van der Geest1, Marielle E. van Gijn1, Els Maeckelberghe2,
Anneke Lucassen3;4, Morris Swertz1, Mirjam Plantinga1, Irene van
Langen1
1University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Genetics,
Groningen, Netherlands;
2University Medical Center Groningen,
Institute for Medical Education, Groningen, Netherlands; 3University
of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Ethics and Law,
Southampton, United Kingdom; 4University of Oxford, Centre for
Personalised Medicine, Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Nufﬁeld
Department of Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: With the introduction of NGS techni-
ques increasing numbers of disease-associated variants are being
identiﬁed. This ongoing progress might lead to diagnoses in for-
merly undiagnosed patients and novel insights in already solved
cases. Therefore, many studies suggest introducing systematic
reanalysis of NGS data in routine diagnostics. Introduction will,
however, also have ELSI implications that Genetic Health Profes-
sionals (GHPs) from laboratories should consider before possible
implementation of systematic reanalysis.
Methods: To get a ﬁrst impression we performed a scoping
literature review. After searching PubMed for relevant literature
between 2008 and 2021, we included 54 publications.
Results: Our ﬁndings show that for the vast majority of inclu-
ded articles ELSI aspects were not the main focus. However, some
aspects were raised implicitly. In total, we identiﬁed nine ELSI
aspects, such as (perceived) responsibilities, implications for con-
sent and cost-effectiveness.
Conclusion: The identiﬁed ELSI aspects brought forward
necessary trade-offs for GHPs to consciously take into account
when considering implementation of systematic reanalysis of NGS
data in routine diagnostics, balancing the various strains on their
laboratories and personnel while creating optimal results for
patients. Some important aspects are not well explored yet. For
example, our study shows GHPs see the values of systematic
reanalysis but also experience barriers, often mentioned as being
practical and/or ﬁnancial only, but in fact (also) being ethical and/
or psychosocial. These results are in line with our previous study
on recontacting (Otten et al., 2015). Engagement of these GHPs in
further research on ELSI aspects is important for sustainable
implementation.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.002.D The effect of Down syndrome on parents’ daily life
Leïla Dardour1, Amira M’hamed1, Amel Tej2, Asma Ben cheikh3,
Hassen Kamoun4, Mediha Trabelsi5, Ramzi Zemni1
1Faculty of Medicine of Sousse, Department of Medical Genetics,
Sousse, Tunisia; 2Farhat Hached University Hospital, Department of
Pediatrics, Sousse, Tunisia; 3Faculty of Medicine of Sousse, Depart-
ment of Community Medicine, Sousse, Tunisia;
4Hedi Chaker
University Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Sfax, Tunisia;
5Charles Nicolle University Hospital, Department of congenital and
hereditary diseases, Tunis, Tunisia.
Background/Objectives: Down syndrome (DS) is the most com-
mon genetic cause of intellectual disability. Having a child with DS
can be an unexpected event that challenges parents’ ability to
adapt. In Tunisia, there is no available data on the impact of DS on
parents’ daily life. The objective of this study is to evaluate the
quality of life of these parents and determine the associated factors.
Methods: This is a cross-sectional analytical multicentric study
(Medical Genetics Services of University hospitals of Tunis and Sfax,
“Awladouna” Association, Tunisian Union of Assistance to Persons
with Intellectual Disabilities in Sousse, and Pediatrics department of
Farhat Hached hospital, Sousse, carried out between November 1
and December 31, 2018. The measurement instrument was a
questionnaire: the Distress thermometer for parents.
Results: Of 131 participants, 74.8% were women. DS was
diagnosed postnatally in 92% of cases, which shows the need to
raise
awareness
among
general
population
about
prenatal
screening methods. The feeling of distress was present in 57.3% of
parents. Practical problems (especially professional and ﬁnancial
problems), emotional difﬁculties (depression, anxiety, and ner-
vousness), and physical problems (fatigue, pain, and sleep dis-
turbance) were all statistically associated with the overall distress
score. There were few social problems since most of parents
expressed their satisfaction with their family and friends support.
Conclusion: Almost all different aspects of daily life were
associated with parents’ distress, particularly the emotional and
practical domains. Adapted and structured psychosocial care of
these parents would allow improving their quality of life and thus
that of their children with DS.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.003.A Ethical Issues in Prenatal Genetic Diagnosis: new
guidance of the British Society for Genetic Medicine
Ruth Horn1, Alison Hall2, Anneke Lucassen3
1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; 2PHG Foundation,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; 3University of Oxford, Wellcome Centre
for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: New British Society for Genetic Medi-
cine (BSGM) guidance considers the ethical issues that can arise
in prenatal genetic testing. Building on the Joint Committee for
Genomic Medicine’s Consent and Conﬁdentiality document of
2019, it focusses on key steps of the prenatal testing pathway:
and in particular in the interpretation and communication of
results and subsequent clinical implications. By incorporating
relevant legal principles, professional guidelines, and practical
sources for support, it aims to facilitate the decision-making
processes for both professionals and patients.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
682
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Methods: Based on a workshop with a multidisciplinary
working group in 2019 and ongoing collaboration virtually during
the pandemic, the three authors produced this report which
incorporates illustrative case studies. The guidance was con-
sidered and approved by the BSGM Executive Committee in 2022.
Results: This guidance focusses on potential ethical issues
related to 5 key-aspects in prenatal genetic testing: 1. Consent to
investigations during pregnancy; 2. Communication and decision-
making; 3. Implications of prenatal genetic testing for others; 4.
Broader aspects of patient care including equal access and justice;
5. Ongoing management and post-pregnancy follow-up. The
report offers case-based practical approaches and key-messages.
Conclusion: It is hoped that these clinically focused ethical
guidelines are an accessible resource for any healthcare profes-
sional who utilises genetic and genomic tests.
References: N/A.
Grants: UK Economic and Social Research Council Grant (ES/
T00908X/1).
Conﬂict of Interest: Ruth Horn UK Economic and Social
Research Council (ES/T00908X/1), Alison Hall: None declared,
Anneke Lucassen: None declared.
P24.004.B Trust in different offers of expanded carrier
screening: a qualitative study among Dutch potential users
Mirjam Plantinga1, Bonita Bazuin1, Donald van Tol2, Reinder
Broekstra1, Erwin Birnie1, Irene van Langen1
1UMCG, genetics, groningen, Netherlands; 2University of Groningen,
sociology, groningen, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Expanded carrier screening (ECS) is aimed
at detecting carrier states for many, mainly autosomal recessive (AR)
conditions in couples from the general population planning a
pregnancy. Different ECS offers exist worldwide, amongst others in
the Netherlands, Belgium and Australia. Acceptance of using new
technologies requires high levels of trust. Investigating which
characteristics of different ECS offers contribute to high trust levels
is therefore important for implementation.
Methods: A heterogeneous sample of Dutch potential users was
interviewed about trust in different ECS offers (n = 9). Subsequently
they rated their level of trust in different ECS offers and ranked
different aspects in terms of fostering trustworthiness (survey, n = 8).
Results: Table 1 displays which ECS aspects are associated with
high and low trust.
Table 1: Trust in different ECS aspects
ECS
aspect
(ranking)
High trust
Low trust
Test performance (1)
High sensitivity/high
speciﬁcity
Low sensitivity/
low speciﬁcity
Pre-test
counselling (2)
Health care professional
Commercial
company
Analysis of ECS
test (3)
Scientiﬁc institute,
hospital
Commercial
company
Test panel (4)
(number of AR con-
ditions tested)
Limited number that
can be overseen
Large (> 100)
Test with blood/
saliva (5)
Blood
Saliva
Price (6)
Expensive
Cheap
ECS
aspect
(ranking)
High trust
Low trust
Result (individual/
couple) (7)
No differences
No differences
Trust was further found to be inﬂuenced by misunderstandings
(e.g. that larger test panels have lower test performance).
Conclusion: A highly reliable ECS test-offer screening for a
limited set of severe disorders with pre-test counselling conducted
by a professional, scores high on trust. Reliable and neutral
information is needed to avoid misunderstanding and build trust.
References:.
Grants: 250 words.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.005.C Ambivalence in the practice of advanced genetic
healthcare
Janneke M.L. Kuiper1, Ine Van Hoyweghen1
1KU Leuven, Centre for Sociological Research, Leuven, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: The clinical implementation of next-
generation sequencing (NGS) has heightened the chance of ﬁnd-
ing a genetic diagnostic answer. However, NGS results are also often
more complex and uncertain and call for multidisciplinary and
multifaceted decision-making. Conﬂicting expectations, interests,
and demands in healthcare practice can fuel tension and ambiva-
lence on both an individual and structural level. This paper uses the
concept of ‘ambivalence’ as a lens to characterise the tensions
found in dealing with NGS techniques in clinical practice (1).
Methods: We conducted extensive multi-sited qualitative
research at two large European human genetics centres. Tran-
scripts from clinical genetic consultations and semi-structured
interviews with patients and healthcare professionals and ﬁeld-
notes from observations in multidisciplinary team meetings were
inductively coded using Nvivo.
Results: Our analysis makes visible the tension, negotiation, and
compromise involved in navigating the different modes of ‘doing
good care’ at play in genetic healthcare practice (2). We show how
research and clinical practice informed interests, demands, and
concerns are intertwined in everyday practice and structure. We
demonstrate how the experience of ambivalence creates tension in
what care is offered and how care is experienced by patients.
Conclusion: Providing insight into how practices and struc-
tures are shaped by ‘the dynamics of ambivalence’ (1) can help to
more consciously give direction to the future of genetic care.
References: 1. N. J. Smelser, American Sociological Review. 63,
1 (1998).
2. J. Pols, Sociology of Health & Illness. 25, 320–347 (2003).
Grants: KU Leuven C1 funding.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.006.D Conversational agents in genetic healthcare: an
overview of ethical aspects
Marlies van Lingen1, Noor Giesbertz1, Annelien Bredenoord2, Lieke
van den Heuvel1, Peter van Tintelen1, Karin Jongsma3
1University Medical Center Utrecht, Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands;
2Erasmus University Rotterdam, School of Philosophy, Rotterdam,
Netherlands;
3University Medical Center Utrecht, Julius Center,
Utrecht, Netherlands.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
683
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Background/Objectives: Conversational Agents (CAs) are a form of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) technology and mimic human interaction
using text, speech and/or virtual embodied expressions. In the
medical ﬁeld, CAs are attracting increasing interest because of their
efﬁciency, scalability, and ﬂexibility. Considering the central role of
conversation in genetic care, genetic counselling is a particularly
suited ﬁeld for implementation. However, little is known about the
ethical aspects of the introduction of CAs in genetic care. The
urgency to address this issue is underlined by the recent develop-
ment of several chatbot-like CAs for genetic counselling practice.
Methods: We conducted a narrative review on ethical literature
related to CAs and medical AI in healthcare. Key ethical aspects
were categorized by genetic counselling phase.
Results: Different phases of genetic counselling attribute dif-
ferent roles and responsibilities for CAs. CAs could play a role in (1)
information provision, (2) guiding informed consent, (3) provide
test results or (4) emotional support, and (5) support with clinical
assessment of a clinician. For each phase, key ethical aspects are
identiﬁed at the crossroads of ethical debates in data science and
healthcare.
Conclusion: Introduction of CAs in genetic care comes with
promises and challenges. CAs impact existing care relations and
introduce new dimensions of interaction and governance. Careful
evaluation of the impact in each counselling phase is crucial to
promote a morally sound and meaningful implementation in the
clinical context.
References: -.
Grants: This project is ﬁnancially supported by ZonMW/IMDI
and the Dutch Heart Foundation. Grant number 104021006
(ZonMW) 2019B012 (Dutch Heart Foundation).
Conﬂict of Interest: Marlies van Lingen: None declared, Noor
Giesbertz: None declared, Annelien Bredenoord: None declared,
Lieke van den Heuvel: None declared, Peter van Tintelen UMC
Utrecht Fulltime, Netherlands Heart Foundation/ PLN Foundation/
Leducq Foundation, Cardiac Tissue Bank, Netherlands Heart Institute,
Utrecht, the Netherlands (unpaid), Karin Jongsma: None declared.
P24.007.A Parents’ views about newborn bloodspot screening
(non-)participation and expansion
Jasmijn Klapwijk1, Sylvia Van der Pal2, Sophie Wins2, Tessa Van
Dijk1, Adriana Kater-Kuipers1, Catharina P. B. Van der Ploeg2, Suze
Jans2, Stephan Kemp3, Rendelien K. Verschoof-Puite4, Lion J. M. Van
den Bosch5, Lidewij Henneman1
1Amsterdam UMC, locatie VUmc, Department of Human Genetics and
Amsterdam Reproduction & Development research institute, Amster-
dam, Netherlands; 2TNO, Child Health, Leiden, Netherlands; 3Amster-
dam UMC, locatie AMC, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases,
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amster-
dam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, Amsterdam, Neth-
erlands;
4National Institute for Public Health and Environment,
Department of Vaccine Supply and Prevention Programmes, Bilthoven,
Netherlands; 5National Institute for Public Health and Environment,
Centre for Population Screening, Bilthoven, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Neonatal bloodspot screening (NBS)
aims at early detection of treatable disorders to offer early inter-
vention. The number of conditions being screened for is
expanding worldwide, which may affect public acceptance of NBS.
This
study
explored
views
of
NBS
participants
and
non-
participants on (expanding) NBS in the Netherlands.
Methods: Cross-sectional survey data was collected from 804
(6051 invited; 13%) parents whose newborns participated in NBS
in the Netherlands in the last two weeks of December 2019, and
48 (1162 invited; 4%) NBS non-participants in 2019 and 2020.
Results: For NBS participants, the most important reason to
participate was preventing health problems. For NBS non-partici-
pants, the most important reasons to decline were belief that the
heel prick would be painful for the child and parents’ viewpoint on
life (more actively religious, considered alternative medicine/life-
style more important, less inclined to vaccinate their child). NBS
participants made an informed decision more often than NBS non-
participants (83% vs 44%), with NBS participants showing more
knowledge regarding NBS than NBS non-participants (86% vs
62%). Ninety-ﬁve percent of NBS participants were positive about
NBS expansion, agreeing to include conditions that were inci-
dentally found in the mother instead of the child (86), late-onset
(84%), or untreatable (61%).
Conclusion: Most parents made an informed decision about
NBS participation and were positive about NBS and its expansion.
Insights into parents’ views on (non-)participation and expansion
of NBS can help to ensure a program that suits population needs
while safeguarding ethical principles for screening.
References:.
Grants: ZonMW Netherlands (no. 543002006).
Conﬂict of Interest: Jasmijn Klapwijk Employed part-time on
Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development
(ZonMw) grant no. 543002006)., Sylvia Van der Pal Partly sup-
ported by Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and
Development (ZonMw) grant no. 543002006)., Netherlands Orga-
nisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMw) grant no.
543002006); collaborator., Sophie Wins Partly supported by
Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development
(ZonMw) grant no. 543002006)., Tessa Van Dijk Partly supported
by Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Develop-
ment (ZonMw) grant no. 543002006)., Adriana Kater-Kuipers Partly
supported by Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and
Development (ZonMw) grant no. 543002006)., Catharina P. B. Van
der Ploeg: None declared, Suze Jans: None declared, Stephan
Kemp:
None
declared,
Rendelien
K.
Verschoof-Puite:
None
declared, Lion J. M. Van den Bosch: None declared, Lidewij Hen-
neman Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Devel-
opment (ZonMw) grant no. 543002006); Principal Investigator.
P24.008.B Ethical issues raised by prenatal genetic testing in
England, France and Germany: ﬁndings from a comparative
study
Adeline Perrot1, Ruth Horn1
1Ethox Centre, Nufﬁeld Department of Population Health, Oxford,
United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Recently, a number of countries such as
England, France and Germany, have started offering NIPT as a
publicly funded second tier test for common chromosomal aneu-
ploidies (trisomy 21, 18 and/or 13). Despite the beneﬁts, the imple-
mentation of NIPT in healthcare systems raises a number of ethical
issues. These issues are discussed differently across countries,
echoing different political particularities and value-systems. Our
study aims to shed new light on different meanings of reproductive
autonomy within various socio-cultural contexts and how this
impacts on the use and regulations around prenatal genetic testing.
Methods: As part of a wider research project, which is invol-
ving semi-structured interviews with women, health professionals
and policy-makers, we conducted a comprehensive literature
review to compare arguments about, and regulations governing
NIPT in the three countries. Between December 2020 and April
2021, we reviewed approximately 250 sources in legal and reg-
ulatory texts; public reports; parliamentary debates; medical press;
academic literature, bioethics, social sciences; and daily press.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
684
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: Although reproductive autonomy is valued in each
country, it is understood and implemented differently depending
on the socio-cultural context and on what other principles (e.g.
disability rights, human dignity, or professional duties to promote
health and reduce technology-related risks) are evoked, and how
they are deﬁned and weighed against each other.
Conclusion: To further unpack these values and principles,
further qualitative research is required to investigate various sta-
keholders’ positions and motivations. Such an in-depth under-
standing will contribute to both the ethical and societal debates
on NIPT and other new prenatal genetic technologies.
References:.
Grants: ES/T00908X/1.
Conﬂict of Interest: Adeline Perrot Full time, Ruth Horn Full time,
PI - ES/T00908X/1 (Economic and social research council): Non-
invasive prenatal genetics and genomics in England, France and
Germany - Exploring practical ethical issues ‘on the ground’, Ruth
Horn is a member of Oxford Tropical Research Ethics Committee, the
French CNRS Ethics Committee, and of the scientiﬁc advisory board
of the German Human Genome-Phenome Archive. She is President
of the European Association of Centre of Medical Ethics (EACME).
P24.009.C Awareness, expectations, and concerns regarding
whole-genome sequencing studies: a survey of cancer
patients, families and the public in Japan
Izen Ri1, Junichi Kawata1, Akiko Nagai1, Kaori Muto1
1The
Institute
of
Medical
Sciences,
The
University
of Tokyo,
Department of Public Policy, Tokyo, Japan.
Background/Objectives:
Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) is
being increasingly used in research and clinical settings in cancer
genomics. Studies show that cancer patients generally have positive
attitudes toward genomic tumor proﬁling tests (Shirdarreh et al. 2021);
however, few works have revealed patients’ attitudes toward WGS.
This study clariﬁes cancer patients’, families’, and public awareness,
expectations, and concerns regarding WGS studies in Japan.
Methods: Cross-sectional anonymous online surveys were
distributed to Japanese subjects, aged 20–69 years in March 2021,
that registered in the survey company panel.
Results: The 10,077 respondents (response rate: 26.5%) were
divided into those with a history of cancer (CPs, n = 1,204), those with
family history (FMs, n = 5,968), and general adults (GAs, n = 2,915);
56.6% of CPs, 61.2% of FMs, and 70.6% of GAs had never heard of the
WGS study. CPs had the highest expectations among the three
groups; over 70% evaluated that it would lead to diagnosis, cure, or
development of medicine by building a large-scale database. FMs
had a higher level of concern than CPs; half were concerned about
the accuracy or utility and the possibility of being treated unfavorably
if germline ﬁndings were detected. About 60% of both CPs and FMs
were concerned about the privacy of their genetic information.
Conclusion: Despite low awareness toward WGS studies, CPs
had high expectations from it. Since a national project to
sequence 80,000 cancer patients started in Japan, measures to
prevent issues arising from misuse of genetic information and to
protect genetic privacy are urgently needed.
References:.
Grants: AMED JP21cm0106001, MHLW JPMH20AD0101, JSPS
KAKENHI JP18K09940.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.010.D The Australian moratorium on genetics and life
insurance fails to meet Parliamentary recommendations
against genetic discrimination
Jane Tiller1, Paul Lacaze1, Margaret Otlowski2
1Monash University, Melbourne, Australia; 2University of Tasmania,
Hobart, Australia.
Background/Objectives: Genetic discrimination is an issue of
international concern to clinicians, researchers, and policy-makers. In
Australia, genetic discrimination in life insurance is legal. In 2018,
following a Parliamentary Joint Committee Inquiry into the Life
Insurance industry, the Committee recommended an urgent ban on
the use of genetic test results in Australian life insurance under-
writing, in a form similar to the UK Code on genetic testing and life
insurance. The Australian government has not responded to the
recommendations. In 2019, the Australian life insurance industry
implemented a self-regulated moratorium that applies only to poli-
cies up to certain ﬁnancial limits until 2024. The moratorium will be
reviewed by the industry in 2022, but has no government oversight.
Methods: We analysed the Australian moratorium from a
policy perspective to measure its adherence to the Parliamentary
recommendations.
Results: The Australian moratorium has failed to follow a
number of Parliamentary recommendations. Importantly, it differs
from the UK Code in a number of key areas (Table 1), including the
ﬁnancial limits, the tests included, the involvement of govern-
ment, the end date, and the inclusion of research results. On each
of these points of difference, the Australian moratorium offers less
protection to consumers than the UK Code.
Conclusion: While the FSC moratorium is a step forward for
Australia, it fails to meet the expectations of the Parliamentary
recommendations. This analysis is instructive for Australian stake-
holders, as well as stakeholders in other jurisdictions who are inter-
ested in the impact of genetic discrimination and the mechanisms for
regulation that are being implemented internationally.
References:.
Grants:
UK Code on genec 
tesng and insurance
FSC moratorium on insurance 
and genecs 
Consistent? 
Financial limits 
The only limits on the 
moratorium are for life 
cover applicaons over 
£500,000 (approx 
$935,000)
The moratorium only applies 
up to the monetary limits on 
life cover and total/permanent 
disability cover ($500,000), 
income protecon 
($4000/month or $48,000pa), 
and trauma/crical illness 
cover ($200,000)
Tests included
Only Hunngton disease 
predicve results must 
be disclosed above the 
monetary limits for life 
cover. Currently, no 
genec test results must 
be disclosed for any 
other type of policy 
All genec test results must be 
disclosed once the monetary 
limit is reached for all types of 
life insurance policies 
Regulaon/ government 
involvement
A formal agreement 
between the UK 
government and the 
Associaon of Brish 
Insurers.    
Industry-led and self-
regulated, without any 
agreement or involvement 
with the Australian 
government
End date
No end date (athough it 
is reviewed periodically)
Currently due to end in 2024 
(may be extended following 
review in 2022)
Ability to choose to disclose 
negave genec test results
s
e
Y
s
e
Y
Research results excluded 
from disclosure
Yes
No, unless the applicant does 
not receive the result
Table 1: Comparison of UK code and Australian moratorium
.
Conﬂict of Interest: Jane Tiller JT is project manager of a
project supported by a grant from the Australian Government’s
Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF), ref 76 721, monitoring the
effectiveness of the Australian life insurance and genetics mor-
atorium, Paul Lacaze PL is CIA of a project supported by a grant
from the Australian Government’s Medical Research Future Fund
(MRFF), ref 76 721, monitoring the effectiveness of the Australian
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
685
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
life insurance and genetics moratorium, Margaret Otlowski MO is
an investigator of a project supported by a grant from the Aus-
tralian Government’s Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF), ref 76
721, monitoring the effectiveness of the Australian life insurance
and genetics moratorium.
P24.011.A To share or not to share: public perspectives on
genomic data sharing
Danya Vears1;2;3, Fiona Lynch1, Stephanie Best4;5, Yan Meng5;6;7, Ilias
Goranitis5;6;7, Christopher Gyngell1;8
1Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Biomedical Ethics Research
Group, Parkville, Australia; 2University of Melbourne, Melbourne Law
School, Carlton, Australia; 3K.U.Leuven, Centre for Biomedical Ethics
and Law, Leuven, Belgium; 4Australian Institute of Health Innovation,
Macquarie University, North Ryde, Australia; 5Australian Genomics,
Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, Australia;
6Mel-
bourne School of Population and Global Health, University of
Melbourne, Health Economics Unit, Centre for Health Policy, Carlton,
Australia; 7Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, Australia;
8University of Melbourne, Department of Paediatrics, Parkville,
Australia.
Background/Objectives: Storage and sharing of genomic data
following diagnostic sequencing is critical to the future of geno-
mic medicine. Data sharing increases the chance of ﬁnding a
diagnosis for both current and future patients and can beneﬁt
clinical and pharmaceutical research. Yet, few studies have
explored public perspectives on how and where data should be
stored, with whom it should be shared, and how to obtain
meaningful consent to do so.
Methods: To address this issue, we conducted 7 online focus
group with 39 members of the Australian public. Focus groups
were recorded, transcribed, and analysed using inductive content
analysis.
Results: Participants (mean age = 37 years; range 18-67)
were overall in favour of storing genomic data, although they
raised several concerns, particularly relating to data security and
ensuring adequate regulation and standardised application
processes to gain access to the data. Sharing data with clinicians
and researchers was generally supported because it could pro-
vide clear medical beneﬁt. Yet, views on sharing with pharma-
ceutical companies varied; some participants felt this would
lead to better treatments whereas others saw companies as
untrustworthy and predatory. Participants generally viewed
sharing with insurance companies as inappropriate. Consent was
seen as key, with many participants favouring a dynamic con-
sent model which bolstered choice regarding the uses of
the data.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings have helped elucidate the complex-
ities associated with developing a one-size-ﬁts-all approach to
data sharing and storage through the eyes of the Australian
public. These results can be used to help guide policy develop-
ment on these issues.
References:.
Grants: Australian Government GFMH#76749.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.012.B Are couples making informed choices when opting
for reproductive genetic carrier screening?
Eva Van Steijvoort1, Hilde Peeters2, Hilde Vandecruys3, Jasper
Verguts3, Karen Peeraer4, Gert Matthijs2, Pascal Borry1
1KU Leuven, Public Health and Primary Care, Leuven, Belgium; 2UZ
Leuven, Human Genetics, 3000, Belgium; 3Jessa Ziekenhuis, Hasselt,
Belgium;
4UZ Leuven, Development and Regeneration, Leuven,
Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Reproductive genetic carrier screening
(RGCS) allows to identify couples who have an increased risk of
conceiving a child with a particular genetic condition. Professional
organizations have emphasized that the success of RGCS should
not solely be measured by the uptake of screening. An assessment
of whether or not individuals are making informed choices with
regard to RGCS free from coercion from others is considered to be
as important.
Methods: Women visiting a gynaecologist practice were asked
to consider participation in a research study where RGCS was
offered for free to them and their male partner. A modiﬁed Mul-
tidimensional Measure of Informed Choice was used to determine
whether couples who opted for RGCS made an informed choice.
In addition, we assessed risk perception, feelings towards RGCS,
anxiety and decisional conﬂict.
Results: A minority of participants perceived their risk to
conceive a child with a hereditary condition (1.2%) to be (very)
high. In total, 82% of participants (n = 77) made an informed
choice with regard to RGCS according to the modiﬁed MMIC.
Thirteen participants (16.9%) made an uninformed choice due to
insufﬁcient knowledge and one participant (1.3%) due to insufﬁ-
cient knowledge and value-inconsistency. Anxiety scores were
elevated for three participants (3.8%, n = 80). Two participants
(2.4%, n = 81) presented with decisional conﬂict.
Conclusion: Our study results show high rates of informed
choice among couples who were offered RGCS in a research study
where participants received up to 30 minutes of pre-test
counseling.
References:.
Grants: Research Fund Flanders (FWO) - grant number
G094518N.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.013.C Mental health of adolescents and young adults with
Li-Fraumeni syndrome: Results from a mixed method study
Rowan Forbes Shepherd1, Camella J. Rising1, Patrick Boyd1, Alix G.
Sleight2, Catherine Wilsnack3, Ashley S. Thompson1, Payal P.
Khincha1, Allison Werner-Llin4
1National Cancer Institute, Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer
Epidemiology and Genetics, Rockville, United States; 2Cedars-Sinai
Medical Centre, Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Los
Angeles, United States; 3University of Texas at Austin, Steve Hicks School
of Social Work, Austin, United States; 4University of Pennsylvania,
School of Social Policy and Practice, Philadelphia, United States.
Background/Objectives:
Li-Fraumeni
syndrome
(LFS)
is
an
inherited cancer syndrome with whole body cancer risks from
birth. Adolescents and young adults (AYAs) with LFS may experi-
ence signiﬁcant physical and psychosocial burdens during critical
periods of development early in life, increasing vulnerability to
poor mental health. This study examined AYAs’ reported mental
health and the intersection of LFS- and lifespan-related factors
affecting ongoing mental health outcomes.
Methods: Eligible AYAs (aged 15-39 years) recruited from the
National Cancer Institute’s LFS study (NCT01443468) completed an
online survey, with validated mental health measures, and/or
qualitative interviews. Descriptive statistics and correlation coef-
ﬁcients were calculated using SPSS. An interprofessional team
thematically analyzed interview data using Dedoose.
Results: Thirty-seven AYAs completed surveys (78% female)
and 38 AYAs completed interviews (71% female) (11 completed
both). AYAs self-reported past emotional problems (n = 26, 70%),
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
686
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
depression or anxiety diagnoses (n = 25, 68%), and suicidal idea-
tion (n = 16, 43%). Past suicidal ideation was signiﬁcantly corre-
lated with younger age at awareness of LFS (r = -.391, p < .05).
Participants described LFS-related cancer diagnoses, cancer worry,
grief, and loss (e.g., family deaths, identity, occupations) that
challenged their mental health. Although most (n = 29, 78%)
reported previously receiving mental health counseling, fewer
(n = 11, 30%) reported receiving counseling currently.
Conclusion: AYAs with LFS, especially those who learn of LFS
at younger ages, may be at risk of poor mental health. These
experiences may align with acute periods of LFS-related or
developmental change leading to uncertainty and loss in multiple
domains of life. Future studies could investigate the effect of an
LFS- and youth-speciﬁc mental health support intervention.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.014.D Genomic research on indigenous peoples in Asia: A
comparative study on Japan and Taiwan
Momoko Sato1, Yusuke Inoue2, Kaori Muto2
1The University of Tokyo, Graduate School of Interdisciplinary
Information Studies, Tokyo, Japan; 2The Institute of Medical Science,
The University of Tokyo, Department of Public Policy, Tokyo, Japan.
Background/Objectives: In 2021, the ESHG announced its
opposition to the misuse of biobanks against vulnerable mino-
rities (Forzano 2021). Many Asian jurisdictions have established
biobanks emphasising the uniqueness of their genomes on
the
basis
that
genomic
research
has
been
West-biased.
However, this premise can lead to the disregard of indigenous
populations. The purpose of this paper is to understand the
ethical considerations for genomic research on indigenous
populations in Asia by focusing on major biobanks in Japan and
Taiwan.
Methods: The authors conducted a literature review on the
laws and guidelines regulating genomic research on indigenous
populations, policies of biobanks and articles on ethical issues.
Results: The Taiwan Biobank collected nationwide biological
samples, including indigenous populations. Although the group
consent rule was introduced under the Free, Prior and Informed
Consent (FPIC) of indigenous populations (United Nations 1997),
concerns about stigmatisation remain. Biobank Japan has not
mentioned the inclusion of the Ainu people, who are legally
approved as the only indigenous population in Japan. Three
academic societies and the Ainu Association on Hokkaido are
preparing ethical guidelines on Ainu research. The Okinawa Bio-
Information Bank states that Okinawans are ‘genetically different
from mainlanders’, although Okinawans are not legally indigen-
ous. In both jurisdictions, there were few examples or discussions
on beneﬁt sharing.
Conclusion: The legal statuses of indigenous populations in
Japan and Taiwan are reﬂected in their positions in genomic
research and in the number of ethical considerations. Further
discussion of beneﬁt sharing is required.
References:.
Grants: This research received no speciﬁc grant from any
funding agency.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.015.A Building a better mobile app marketplace: an
ethical and legal toolkit for app mediated genomics research
Kyle McKibbin1, Mahsa Shabani1
1Ghent University, Faculty of Law and Criminology, Ghent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Genomics mobile apps are set to
become
an
important
data
collection
tool
for
biomedical
researchers. However, app-mediated research raises questions
regarding the responsibilities of researchers, app developers, and
platforms in protecting the rights of research participants. Here,
we explore the speciﬁc roles and responsibilities of the two major
mobile platform providers, IOS and Android, in mediating geno-
mics research on their platforms.
Methods: We reviewed current literature and regulatory gui-
dance addressing the status of platform providers under the GDPR
and examined two new regulatory proposals, the Digital Services
Act and Digital Markets Act. We analysed the impact of each on
app-mediated genomics research. We then looked at the con-
tractual obligations that mobile platforms impose on developers
in the context of health and genomics research.
Results: Mobile platforms play a signiﬁcant role in the ethical
governance and design of app-mediated research studies, but
they have few clear obligations to do so under the GDPR. As a
result, research on these platforms can lead to concerns regarding
privacy, transparency, conﬂicts of interest, and diffusion of
responsibilities. New regulatory proposals are set to introduce new
obligations for mobile platforms and present opportunities for
promoting ethical research on platforms.
Conclusion: Taking advantage of proposed obligations for
platform providers to enforce their developer policies diligently,
address systemic risks, implement notice and removal procedures
for illegal content, and separate various platform services, we offer
a toolkit for stakeholders interested in building a better app
marketplace for genomics research.
References:.
Grants: FWO Flanders-Quebec grant.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.016.B Development of a digital risk prediction tool based
on family history for the general population: ethical and legal
challenges
Tetske Dijkstra1, Irene van Langen1, Boudien Sieperda2, Jacoliene
Zaal2, Corrette Ploem3, Imke Christiaans1
1University Medical Centre Groningen / University of Groningen,
Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands; 2University Medical Centre Gronin-
gen, Legal Affairs, Groningen, Netherlands;
3Amsterdam UMC
(location AMC) / University of Amsterdam, Ethics, Law and Medical
Humanities, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Both inherited and familial cardiovas-
cular diseases pose a risk of early and preventable cardiovascular
events to relatives. Implementing a risk prediction tool to facilitate
individuals from the general population to evaluate their potential
cardiovascular risk based on their family history could serve as a
responsible solution. However, the development and use of such a
risk prediction tool gives rise to legal and ethical challenges.
Methods:.
Results: At the start of our project experts mapped its legal and
ethical framework. Especially EU-regulations provided potential
obstacles for development and broader availability/use of the tool.
To illustrate, according to the General Data Protection Regulation,
collecting health data of relatives of a tool’s user -from the general
population, so outside a health care environment- is only allowed
after relatives’ consent or anonymously. This requirement has
substantial consequences for the usefulness of the tool and raises
the ethical dilemma “who is the owner of family data”. A second
example: it follows from the Medical Device Regulation that
software that generates a health risk or advice requires a CE-mark
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
687
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
from a ‘notiﬁed body’ at development, and yearly check-ups,
which are expensive. In our presentation we will illustrate main
bottlenecks and discuss possible solutions.
Conclusion: Besides national law, European law heavily
impacts on the development of digital tools collecting family data
to provide information on health risk. Direct involvement of
experts in law and ethics before and during development of a tool
is advised to anticipate and tackle legal and ethical challenges.
References:.
Grants: Dutch Heart Foundation 2019T111.
Conﬂict of Interest: Tetske Dijkstra: None declared, Irene van
Langen: None declared, Boudien Sieperda: None declared, Jaco-
liene Zaal: None declared, Corrette Ploem: None declared, Imke
Christiaans Dutch Heart Foundation (2019T111).
Netherlands Cardiovascular Research Initiative, an initiative
with support of the Dutch Heart Foundation (2015-12 eDETECT).
P24.017.C ePAGs' (European Patient Advocacy Groups) role in
the European Reference Network ITHACA on Intellectual
disability, TeleHealth, Autism and Congenital Anomalies: How
patients’ voices improve care
Anne Hugon1, Dorica Dan2;3, Ammi Andersson4, Ioel Detton5,
Marianne Le Dref1, Jill Clayton-Smith6, Soﬁa Douzgou HOUGE7,
Laurence Faivre8;9, Raoul Hennekam10, Jean-Marie Jouannic11, Tjitske
Kleefstra12, David Koolen13, Giovanni Mosiello14, Gabor Pogany15,
Alessandra Renieri16;17, Sue Routledge4, Nicholas Szeto1, Marco
Tartaglia18, Zeynep Tümer19, Birute Tumiene20, Agnies van Eeghen10,
Lisenka Vissers*21;22, Klea Vyshka1, Dagmar Wieczorek23, Lenja
Wiehe24, Giuseppe Zampino25, Christiane Zweier26, Ernithaca con-
sortium27, Alain Verloes1;28
1Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris - Université de Paris, Dept.
of Genetics, Paris, France; 2Patient organisation, Prader Willi, Zalau,
Romania;
3Eurordis rare disease europe, Paris, France; 4Patient
organisation, Pitt Hopkins Syndrome, UK, United Kingdom; 5Patient
organisation, Association Noonan, Paris, France;
6Manchester
Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom; 7Avdeling for
medisinsk genetikk, Haukeland universitetssjukehus, Haukeland,
Norway;
8UFR Des Sciences de Santé, INSERM-Université de
Bourgogne UMR 1231 GAD « Génétique des Anomalies du
Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France; 9Dept of Genetics
and Centres of Reference for Development disorders and intellec-
tual disabilities, FHU TRANSLAD and GIMI Institute, University
Hospital, Dijon, France;
10Department of Pediatrics, Academic
Medical
Centre,
Amsterdam
UMC,
Amsterdam,
Netherlands;
11Service de Médecine fœtale, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris - Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France; 12Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
France;
13Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 14Department of Surgery,
Urology and Neuro-Urology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital,
Rome, Italy;
15Patient organisation, Williams Syndrome, HU,
Hungary;
16Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria
Senese, Siena, Italy; 17Med Biotech Hub and Competence Center,
Dept of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy;
18Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pedia-
trico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy; 19Department of Clinical
Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Den-
mark; 20Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Santariskiu 2,
LT-08661, Vilnius, Lithuania; 21Donders Institute for Brain, Cogni-
tion and Behaviour, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 22Dept
of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 23Insti-
tute
of
Human
Genetics
and
Anthropology,
Heinrich
Heine
University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany; 24Eurordis rare disease
europe, Paris, France; 25Department of Woman and Child Health,
Center for Rare Diseases and Birth Defects, Institute of Pediatrics,
Fondazione
Policlinico
Universitario
Agostino
Gemelli
IRCCS,
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy;
26University
Cancer Center Inselspital UCI – Das Tumorzentrum Bern, Bern,
Switzerland; 27Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris - Université de
Paris, ERN ITHACA, Dept. of Genetics, Paris, France; 28INSERM UMR
1141 NeuroDiderot, Hôpital R Debre, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: The importance of patients’ voices is
essential. However, this is the challenge for the ERN ITHACA, a
patient-centred network, which aims to develop closer coop-
eration with ePAGs and member patient organisations. Our
Patient Council is empowered through formal roles in the gov-
ernance and participate through deep interaction in each or
across Work Groups. All activities of ITHACA include patients,
their families, and patients’ organisations as equal partners.
ITHACA covers more than 5000 rare and complex genetic dis-
orders and its name is a reference to the diagnostic Odyssey on
which families embark with their children affected by rare
developmental diseases.
Methods: Our approach is based on patient involvement in
several projects in collaboration with the EURORDIS network, in
particular on the impact of patient engagement on ERNs, to
highlight the value of patient-clinician partnership (Rare Dis
Orphan Drugs J 2021;1:2).
Results: The expected results are, through these tools and
reﬂections to improve the partnership involvement, a common
understanding of ePAGs in the daily activities of ERN ITHACA.
Conclusion: The UN has formally adopted, on 16 December
2021 with the consensus of all 193 UN Member States, the
Resolution on Addressing the Challenges of Persons Living with a
Rare Disease and their Families. This recognition of the voices of
patients with rare diseases requiring complex care pathways in
health care systems is increasingly understood at the EU level and
by patient organisations across ERNs.
References: Rare Dis Orphan Drugs J 2021;1:2.
Grants: ERN-ITHACA [EU Framework Partnership Agreement ID:
3HP-HP-FPA ERN-01-2016/739516].
Conﬂict of Interest: Anne Hugon APHP Paris Nord Université
Robert DEBRE - ERN ITHACA, Dorica Dan: None declared,
Ammi Andersson: None declared, Ioel Detton: None declared,
Marianne Le Dref APHP Paris Nord Université Robert DEBRE, Jill
Clayton-Smith: None declared, Soﬁa Douzgou HOUGE: None
declared, Laurence Faivre CHU DIJON, Raoul Hennekam: None
declared, Jean-Marie Jouannic APHP Paris, Tjitske Kleefstra:
None declared, David Koolen: None declared, Giovanni Mosiello:
None declared, Gabor Pogany: None declared, Alessandra
Renieri: None declared, Sue Routledge: None declared, Nicholas
Szeto
APHP
Paris
Nord
Université
Robert
DEBRE,
Marco
Tartaglia: None declared, Zeynep Tümer: None declared, Birute
Tumiene: None declared, Agnies van Eeghen: None declared,
Lisenka Vissers*: None declared, Klea Vyshka APHP Paris Nord
Université Robert DEBRE, Dagmar Wieczorek: None declared,
Lenja Wiehe: None declared, Giuseppe Zampino: None declared,
Christiane Zweier: None declared, Ernithaca consortium: None
declared, Alain Verloes APHP Paris Nord Université Robert
DEBRE.
P24.019.A Psychological adjustment, cancer worry and
personality traits: a preliminary survey in a group of women
undergoing genetic test for cancer susceptibility
Lucia Lombardi1, Liborio Stuppia2;3, Ivana Antonucci2;3, Carmen
Trumello2, Alessandra Babore2
1University
“G.
d’Annunzio”
of
Chieti-Pescara,
Department
of
Psychological, Health and Territorial Sciences, Chieti, Italy; 1University
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
688
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
“G. d’Annunzio” of Chieti-Pescara, Department of Psychological,
Health and Territorial Sciences, Chieti, Italy; 3University “G. d’Annun-
zio” of Chieti-Pescara, Center for Advanced Studies and Technology-
CAST, Chieti, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Individuals who undergo genetic test
may have to deal with psychological consequences such as high
levels of stress, anxiety, depression (Lombardi et al., 2019) and
worries about becoming ill. Personality traits may have an inﬂu-
ence on psychological adjustment to risk condition (Mellon et al.,
2008). This study aimed to analyze if worries about cancer were
associated with psychological adjustment and age. Furthermore,
we investigated if personality characteristics could predict cancer
worries. Finally, we evaluated differences in cancer worry and
psychological adjustment between cancer affected and healthy
females.
Methods: A total of 70 females (mean age = 47,19 years;
s.d.=10,82; 63%, n = 44, cancer affected; 37%, n = 26, familiarity
with mutation), after genetic testing, completed a set of ques-
tionnaires about psychological adjustment, personality traits and
cancer worry.
Results: We found that cancer worry was positively associated
with levels of anxiety (r = 0.548, p = 0.000), depression (r = 0.503,
p = 0.000),
stress
(r = 0.371,
p = 0.002),
but
not
with
age
(r = 0.160, p = 186). Regarding personality traits, vulnerability
predicted higher levels of cancer worries (Adjusted R2 = 0.118;
F = 10,258; P < 0.001). No differences were found between affec-
ted and healthy females.
Conclusion: This preliminary study highlighted the importance
of considering anxiety, depressive symptoms and stress during
genetic counseling regardless of age and the importance of vul-
nerability trait in worries about cancer.
References: Lombardi L et al. 2019. Psychological aspects, risk
and protective factors related to BRCA genetic testing: a review of
the literature. Supportive Care in Cancer.
Mellon S et al. 2008. Risk perception and cancer worries in
families at increased risk of familial breast/ovarian cancer. Psycho-
Oncology.
Grants: No.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.020.B To do or not to do: Population survey on forensic
familial DNA searching in the Low Countries
Soﬁe Claerhout1;2;3
1KU Leuven, Forensic Genetics, Leuven, Belgium; 2KU Leuven KULAK,
Interdisciplinary Research Facility, Kortrijk, Belgium;
3KU Leuven,
Centre of Sociological Research, Leuven, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Forensic familial DNA searching is a
powerful tool to provide a last resort opportunity to solve criminal
(cold) cases. Although the beneﬁts are strong, strict regulations
are required to address the doubts expressed by opponents
concerning privacy and ethical issues. Therefore, we aimed to
investigate the public opinion.
Methods: Through an online survey distributed through social
media, population information of 578 participants living in the
Low Countries was analysed. The survey was divided into three
parts: (1) personal information to check data reliability (2) general
DNA knowledge questions and (3) personal opinions on ‘forensic
DNA analysis’.
Results: Our population graduated cum laude with an average
score of 71%. A signiﬁcantly higher score was observed for highly
educated participants. Surprisingly, 95% of the participants is
willing to cooperate in a forensic familial search. Important factors
for participation are painless sampling and privacy security.
Moreover, we saw that people with a failed DNA score were sig-
niﬁcantly more afraid to cooperate in forensic DNA analysis.
Nevertheless, almost all participants (96%) agreed to use online
DNA databases to resolve crimes with violence, but half of them
stated that member informed consents should be obtained prior
to the search.
Conclusion: To conclude, the ‘fear of the unknown’ combined
with strong feelings towards privacy are two major inﬂuencing
factors to not cooperate in a forensic familial DNA search. Yet, the
highly positive attitude towards forensic DNA analysis was a
pleasant surprise and point towards people’s high empathy and
willingness to help justice.
References:.
Grants: FWO (1265622N).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.021.C Rapid decisions: A qualitative analysis of health
professionals’ experiences using ultra-rapid genomic
sequencing in critically ill children
Katie Arkell1, Christopher Gyngell1;2;3, Zornitza Stark1;4;5, Danya
Vears2;3
1The University of Melbourne, Department of Paediatrics, Parkville,
Australia; 2Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Biomedical Ethics
Research Group, Parkville, Australia; 3The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne Law School, Parkville, Australia;
4Murdoch Children’s
Research Institute, Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville,
Australia; 5Australian Genomics, Parkville, Australia.
Background/Objectives:
Although
ultra-rapid
genomic
sequencing (urGS) can provide life-saving results for patients in
neonatal and paediatric intensive care units, it can create unique
ethical challenges for healthcare professionals (HPs), particularly
when the diagnosis raises the possibility of redirection of care
towards palliation. Few studies have explored experiences of
HPs to understand the impact of urGS on decision-making in this
setting.
Methods: We conducted four focus groups and two interviews
online with HPs who use urGS in critically ill paediatric patients.
We explored the challenges they experience when making deci-
sions about treatment or redirection of care towards palliation
following urGS. Data was analysed using inductive content
analysis.
Results: Nineteen HPs participated (8 Clinical Geneticists/Pae-
diatric Specialists with Genetic Training; 9 Genetic Counsellors; 2
Intensivists). Participants noted the increasing prioritisation of
urGS over other tests to guide patient management. They
expressed concern that the timing of urGS may affect parent-child
bonding in this setting. Participants described the need for more
complex pre-test counselling with families, to prepare for a poor
prognosis. HPs found that instances where parents chose to pal-
liate, despite a treatment being available, were particularly
distressing.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest that urGS is changing clinical
practice and that HPs are gradually adapting their practices to
accommodate this shift. These results will assist training of the
intensive care workforce to prepare for wider implementation
of urGS.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the Australian Govern-
ment through the Medical Research Future Fund, as part of the
Genomics Health Futures Mission (Grant number 76749).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
689
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P24.022.D Ethical aspects of population scale reproductive
genetic carrier screening: Insights from the Mackenzie’s
Mission project
Ainsley Newson1, Lisa Dive1
1University of Sydney, Sydney Health Ethics, Sydney, Australia.
Background/Objectives: Genetic carrier screening to inform
reproductive decisions has existed for over half a century but is now
being scaled up for broader implementation. Australia is trialling a
large-scale population offer of reproductive genetic carrier screen-
ing (RGCS). ‘Mackenzie’s Mission’ is offering RGCS to up to 8,500
Australian couples. However, the move to large-scale population
offers of RGCS generates numerous ethical considerations.
Methods: We analyse the overarching ethical issues in
population-scale RGCS, drawing on bioethics literature and criti-
cally assessing concepts and arguments. We identify insights for
policy-makers and funders to consider when delivering an ethi-
cally robust RGCS programs.
Results: A range of ethical issues arise when carrier screening
moves from the clinic to the population, including: the selection of
genes to screen for (e.g., how to deal with variable expressivity),
the relevance of public health rather than clinical ethics approa-
ches, and ensuring RCS programs reﬂect and support wider
community values. An essential consideration is scalability –
approaches in clinical or targeted screening are not always sui-
table for populations. It is also vital to maintain a constant dialo-
gue between program-level design and how its implementation is
experienced by participants.
Conclusion: Ethical population offers of RGCS require a broad
public health pluralistic approach. This provides the best balance
of individual and societal considerations.
References: Dive L, Newson AJ. Ethics of Reproductive Genetic
Carrier Screening: From the Clinic to the Population. Public Health
Ethics 2021; 14: 202–217.
Grants: Mackenzie’s Mission is funded by the Australian Med-
ical Research Future Fund, grant GHFM73390.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ainsley Newson Professor, University of
Sydney, Prof. Newson is a current recipient of grant funds from
government
funders
in
Australia:
the
Australian
Research
Council, the National Health and Medical Research Council and
the Medical Research Futures Fund., Prof. Newson received a
small honoraria for a talk at a bioethics department in Hong
Kong in 2021., Prof. Newson sits on a range of committees.
All are government or professional societies; none are com-
mercial., Lisa Dive Research Fellow, University of Sydney (grant-
funded).
P24.024.B Dynamic informed consent system, citizen science
data management, quality control and integration for Latvian
Genome Database
Normunds Kante1, Anastasija Nikiforova1;2, Katrina Kaleja1, Alise
Svandere1, Signe Mežinska3, Raitis Pečulis1, Vita Rovite1
1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia;
2University of Latvia, Faculty of Computing, Riga, Latvia; 3University
of Latvia, Institute of Clinical and Preventive Medicine, Riga, Latvia.
Background/Objectives: Dynamic informed consent is used to
ensure that an individual participating in biobank can modify his
decision about the research that is conducted with his sample and
data and actively follow research results that could be of impor-
tance to him or his immediate relatives.
Our aim is to develop a dynamic consenting and survey system
prototype to integrate academic research conducted in Latvian
Genome Database with citizen science initiatives maintaining data
credibility via hierarchical metadata harmonization and assessing
ELSA aspects.
Methods: Working groups of experts in ﬁelds of ethics, data
science, biobanking and interested stakeholders from patients’
organizations and the pharma industry are involved in the fol-
lowing tasks: (1) create “information-wise” data management
algorithms for dynamic informed consent and survey system; (2)
develop ELSA guidelines for implementation of “ethics by design”
in the ICT system; (3) create an IT system prototype for biobank
activities and citizen science initiative integration.
Results: The prototype IT design have been created that con-
sist of registration, consent, survey, result reporting and quality
control models employing different access levels of several user
types – biobank donors, citizen science enthusiasts, doctors/nur-
ses and researchers. The “ethics by design” guidelines have been
generated to ensure the best ELSA compliance of ICT system
prototype.
Conclusion: Integrative approach is to develop a user-centred
ICT system for biobank and citizen science data integration that
will enhance data utilization in various health-related areas and
serve as basis for communication with participants of Latvian
Genome Database.
References:.
Grants: Research was supported by the European Regional
Development (Project no. 1.1.1.1/20/A/047).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P24.025.C Exploring Ethical Futures of NIPT: Stakeholder
Perspectives from Belgium
Zoë Claesen1, Lidewij Henneman2, Joris Vermeesch1, Pascal Borry1
1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 2Amsterdam UMC, VUmc, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) is
currently primarily aimed at trisomy 21, 18, and 13. Expanded
NIPT could signiﬁcantly increase the number of conditions and
non-medical traits the fetus can be tested for. This expansion
reinforces ethical concerns about what can be considered the
justiﬁable scope of prenatal screening. In Belgium, NIPT is
available to all prospective parents, genome-wide NIPT is stan-
dard, fetal sex is reported, and women only co-pay €8,68. In a
context where NIPT is reimbursed by public health care, the
question about the scope is especially pertinent. The general
aim of this research project is to identify and review: (1) the
arguments and ethical principles used to determine the scope of
NIPT; and (2) the ethical challenges connected to the widening
scope of NIPT.
Methods: We will address the research objectives by per-
forming a literature review and qualitative semi-structured inter-
view studies in Belgium with several stakeholder groups such as
healthcare professionals and (expectant) parents.
Results: Expanded NIPT is a clear example of the way tech-
nological developments challenge existing norms. There is likely
great diversity among and across stakeholder groups about the
desirable scope of NIPT. Implementing expanded NIPT needs to
be carefully deliberated and multiple stakeholder views need to
be considered.
Conclusion: The current climate of rapid technological devel-
opments in prenatal screening challenge the existing framework
regarding the scope of NIPT as well as the current models of
consent and prompt the need to rethink them.
References: -.
Grants: -.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
690
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P24.026.D Exploring policy approaches to cases of
nondisclosure of genetic risk
Amicia Phillips1, Pascal Borry1, Ine Van Hoyweghen2, Danya Vears1
1KU Leuven, Public Health and Primary Care, Leuven, Belgium; 2KU
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Genetic risk information is relevant not
just to patients but also their relatives. Disclosing genetic risk
information to relatives can play an essential role in initiating
genetic testing to determine their risk, thus enabling them to seek
treatment and access reproductive screening technologies. When
a patient does not inform their relatives, the interests and rights of
patients and family members can come into conﬂict. While this
ethical issue cannot easily be resolved, several countries have
guidelines or legislation addressing nondisclosure. There are three
main policy approaches to the disclosure: it is the obligation of the
patients or clinicians, or it is within the clinician’s purview to
decide. More commonly, countries have no speciﬁc guideline or
law, meaning it is unclear what duties patients and clinicians have
towards relatives.
Methods: Using Belgium as an example, we analyzed existing
national and European legislation and compared it with interna-
tional precedent. We then explored ethical arguments for and
against various policy approaches. This ethical analysis is supported
by data from our empirical research in which Belgian clinicians were
asked their opinions regarding potential national policies.
Results: There is strong ethical, legal, and empirical support for a
policy that obliges patients to inform their at-risk relatives, however,
there are concerns regarding the legal enforcement of such a policy.
Conclusion: Clear policy is required to address the issue of
nondisclosure, although further research is required to determine
which policy approach is best in a given context.
References: N/A.
Grants: N/A.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25 GWAS
P25.001.A A polygenic risk score to predict sudden cardiac
arrest in patients with cardiovascular disease
Eleonora Porcu1, Christian Thorball1, Alessandra Pia Porretta2,
Etienne Pruvot2;3, Kim Wiskott4, Federica Gilardi4, Aurelien Thomas4,
Claire Redin1, Zoltan Kutalik5;6;7, Tony Fracasso4, Olivier Muller2,
Jacques Fellay1;5;8
1Precision Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital and University
of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; 2Cardiovascular Department,
Division of Cardiology, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Lau-
sanne, Switzerland; 3Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; 4University Center of Legal Medicine,
Geneva and Lausanne University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland;
5Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland; 6University
Center for Primary Care and Public Health, Lausanne, Switzerland;
7Department of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland; 8School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a lead-
ing health problem representing the main cause of death globally.
Even when causative factors are known, we often do not under-
stand why a cardiovascular condition causes premature death in a
victim while others can live longer with the same condition.
Methods: Here we propose a combined polygenic risk score
(metaPRS) based on myocardial infarction (MI), coronary artery
disease (CAD) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) to predict the risk
of sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) in patients affected by severe car-
diovascular conditions. For this, we collected 2,114 patients with
reported history of myocardial infarction from the Centre hospi-
talier universitaire vaudois (CHUV) Genomic Biobank (BGC) and
extracted data from the UK Biobank (UKB) on 13,696 participants
with similar medical history. Among those, 303 and 932 are
affected by SCA or ventricular tachycardia/ﬁbrillation, respectively.
Results: We found that metaPRS is signiﬁcantly associated with
SCA
in
both
cohorts
(OR_BGC = 1.18,
P_BGC = 0.006
and
OR_UKB = 1.14, P_UKB = 1.1 x 10-04). Furthermore, using the
diagnosis based on the International Classiﬁcation of Diseases
(ICD-10) codes available in the UKB, we found that our metaPRS
exhibits a strong association with the presence of aortocoronary
bypass graft (OR_UKB = 1.20, P_UKB = 1.04 x 10-16) and coronary
angioplasty implant (OR_UKB = 1.11, P_UKB = 1.05 x 10-08).
Conclusion: These results show that genetic risk score for CVD
and associated risk factors has the potential to predict the
occurrence of SCA in patients with CVD, hence to identify patients
who could beneﬁt from further preventive measures.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.002.B Genome-wide association studies of childhood
steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome in Japanese and South
Korean populations
Katsushi Tokunaga1, Xiaoyuan Jia1, Yosuke Kawai1, Tomoko
Horinouchi2, Kandai Nozu2, Seulgi Jung3, Kyuyong Song3, Hae Il
Cheong4, Kazumoto Iijima2
1National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Genome Medical
Science Project, Tokyo, Japan; 2Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, Pediatrics, Kobe, Japan; 3University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul, Korea, Rep. of
South;
4Seoul National University Children’s Hospital, Pediatrics,
Seoul, Korea, Rep. of South.
Background/Objectives: Idiopathic nephrotic syndrome is the
most common glomerular disease in children. To understand the
genetics of steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome, we conducted
genome-wide association studies (GWASs) in Japanese and Kor-
ean populations.
Methods: In total, 1,018 children with SSNS and 3,331 healthy
adults with Japanese ancestry, 249 children with SSNS and 4,041
adult controls with Korean ancestry were recruited. Japanese
samples were genotyped using Affymetrix Japonica Array. Whole-
genome imputation was performed using a phased reference
panel of 2,036 healthy Japanese individuals. Korean patients and
healthy controls were genotyped using Axiom Genome-Wide ASI
array and HumanOmni1-Quad BeadChip, separately. Whole-
genome imputation was performed using 1000 Genome project
phase 3 as reference panel.
Results: After quality control steps, Japanese GWAS was per-
formed in 987 childhood SSNS patients and 3,206 controls
(6,834,340 variants). HLA-DR/DQ (rs6901541, P = 2.80E–33, odds
ratio
[OR] = 2.49),
NPHS1-KIRREL2
(rs56117924,
P = 4.94E-20,
OR = 1.90)
and
TNFSF15(rs6478109,
P = 2.54E-8,
OR = 0.72)
regions achieved genome-wide signiﬁcance. Korean GWAS was
conducted in 243 SSNS patients and 4,041 controls after QC
processes (2,912,342 variants). HLA-DR/DQ region (rs9272518,
P = 1.04E-14, OR = 2.63) and NPHS1-KIRREL2 (rs412175, P = 4.65E-
08, OR = 1.83) achieved genome-wide signiﬁcance. Meta-analysis
was conducted under ﬁxed effects by “METAL”. Four loci showed
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
691
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
genome-wide signiﬁcance including HLA-DR/DQ (rs114685974, P-
meta = 5.26E-39, OR = 3.67), NPHS1-KIRREL2 (rs412175, P-meta =
1.32E-24, OR = 1.90), TNFSF15 (rs7848647, P-meta = 5.20E-12,
OR = 1.43)
regions
and
a
novel
locus
within
CD28-CTLA4
(rs1181388, P-meta = 3.84E-10, OR = 1.37).
Conclusion: GWASs in Japanese and Korean datasets reveal
novel loci associated with childhood SSNS.
References: Jia, X. et al. Common risk variants in NPHS1 and
TNFSF15 are associated with childhood steroid-sensitive nephrotic
syndrome. Kidney Int 98, 1308-1322, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.kint.2020.05.029 (2020).
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.003.C Analysis of exome-wide copy number variation for
association with asthma in UK Biobank
Katherine Fawcett1, German Demidov2, Nick Shrine1, Megan
Paynton1, Stephan Ossowski2, Ian Sayers3, Louise Wain1;4, Edward
Hollox5
1Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester,
United
Kingdom;
2Institute
of
Medical
Genetics
and
Applied
Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany;
3Transla-
tional Medical Sciences, NIHR Respiratory Biomedical Research
Centre, School of Medicine, Biodiscovery Institute, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom; 4National Institute for
Health Research, Leicester Respiratory Biomedical Research Centre,
Glenﬁeld Hospital, Leicester, United Kingdom;
5Department of
Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester,
United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: The role of copy number variants (CNVs)
in asthma susceptibility is not well understood. This study aimed
to analyse exome-wide CNVs for association with asthma in UK
Biobank.
Methods: We called common CNVs from UK Biobank whole-
exome sequencing and tested them for association with asthma in
a stage 1 cohort of 7,098 cases and 36,578 controls. Nominally-
associated CNVs were meta-analysed in the stage 1 cohort and an
additional 17,280 cases and 115,562 controls.
Results: Five of 189 high-quality CNVs were associated with
asthma at a Bonferroni-corrected P-value threshold, including a
deletion overlapping the HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 genes, a
duplication of CHROMR/PRKRA, deletions within MUC22 and TAP2,
and a duplication in FBRSL1. In silico analyses indicated that the
deletion overlapping HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1 is an artefact
arising from under-mapping of reads from non-reference HLA
haplotypes, and that the CHROMR/PRKRA and FBRSL1 duplications
represent presence/absence of pseudogenes within the human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) region. Bayesian ﬁne-mapping of the HLA
region suggested that there are two independent asthma asso-
ciation signals, and that single-nucleotide missense changes in the
HLA-DQB1, HLA-DQA1 and/or HLA-DRB1 genes are likely to
account for these. No CNVs were present in the credible sets.
Conclusion: These results suggest that CNVs in the HLA region
are associated with asthma, but that the association is driven by
amino acid changes. Identiﬁcation of artefactual CNVs in the HLA
region
provides
a
cautionary
tale
for
future
analyses
of
sequencing data.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by KF’s Asthma UK Fellow-
ship (AUK-CDA-2019-414).
Conﬂict of Interest: Katherine Fawcett University of Leicester,
Asthma UK fellowship (AUK-CDA-2019-414), German Demidov:
None declared, Nick Shrine: None declared, Megan Paynton: None
declared, Stephan Ossowski: None declared, Ian Sayers: None
declared, Louise Wain GSK/British Lung Foundation Chair in
Respiratory Research (C17-1) and funding from GSK and Orion
Pharma, Galapagos, Edward Hollox: None declared.
P25.004.B Germline variants associated with immunotherapy-
related adverse events
Stefan Groha1, Sarah Abou Alaiwi1, Wenxin Xu1, Vivek Naranbhai1,
Amin Nassar1, Ziad Bakouny1, Elio Adib1, Pier Nuzzo1, Andrew
Schmidt1, Chris Labaki1, Talal El Zarif1, Biagio Ricciuti1, Joao Victor
Alessi1, David Braun1, Sachet Shukla1, Tanya Keenan1, Eliezer Van
Allen1, Mark Awad1, Michael Manos1, Osama Rahma1, Leyre Zubiri2,
Alexandra-Chloe Villani2, Christian Hammer3, Zia Khan3, Kerry
Reynolds2, Yevgeniy Semenov2, Deborah Schrag1, Kenneth Kehl1,
Matthew Freedman1, Toni Choueiri1, Alexander Gusev1
1Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, United States; 2Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, United States;
3Genentech, South San
Francisco, United States.
Background/Objectives: Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs)
have yielded remarkable responses in patients across multiple
cancer types, but often lead to immune related adverse events
(irAEs). Although a germline cause for irAEs has been hypothe-
sized, no individual variants have been identiﬁed, which is the
focus of our study.
Methods: We carried out a Genome-Wide Association Study
(GWAS) of 1,751 patients on ICIs across 12 cancer types, with repli-
cation in an independent cohort of 196 patients and independent
clinical trial data from 2275 patients. We investigated two irAE
phenotypes: (i) high-grade (3-5) events deﬁned through manual
curation and (ii) all detectable events deﬁned through electronic
health record (EHR) diagnosis followed by manual conﬁrmation.
Results: We identiﬁed three genome-wide signiﬁcant associa-
tions (p < 5 x 10-8) in the discovery cohort associated with all-
grade irAEs: rs16906115 near IL7 (combined p = 1.6x10-11; hazard
ratio (HR) = 2.1), rs75824728 near IL22RA1 (combined p = 6.6 x 10-
9; HR = 1.9), and rs113861051 on 4p15 (combined p = 1.3 x 10-8,
HR = 2.0); with rs16906115 replicating in two independent studies.
The association near IL7 colocalized with the gain of a novel
cryptic exon for IL7, a critical regulator of lymphocyte homeostasis.
Patients carrying the IL7 germline variant exhibited signiﬁcantly
increased lymphocyte stability after ICI initiation than non-carriers,
and this stability was predictive of downstream irAEs and
improved survival.
Conclusion: We carried out a GWAS of irAEs and identiﬁed a
genome wide association replicating in two independent cohorts.
We hypothesize a functional relationship with irAEs through a
change in IL7, which is predictive of patient outcome.
References:.
Grants: NIH R01CA227237.
NIH R01CA244569.
NIH R21HG010748.
Conﬂict of Interest: Stefan Groha: None declared, Sarah Abou
Alaiwi: None declared, Wenxin Xu: None declared, Vivek Nar-
anbhai: None declared, Amin Nassar: None declared, Ziad
Bakouny: None declared, Elio Adib: None declared, Pier Nuzzo:
None declared, Andrew Schmidt: None declared, Chris Labaki:
None declared, Talal El Zarif: None declared, Biagio Ricciuti: None
declared, Joao Victor Alessi: None declared, David Braun LM
Education/Exchange Services, Bristol Myers Squibb, MDedge,
Exelixis, Octane Global, Deﬁned Health, Dedham Group, Adept
Field Solutions, Slingshot Insights, Blueprint Partnerships, Charles
River Associates, Trinity Group, and Insight Strategy, Sachet Shukla
Agenus Inc., Agios Pharmaceuticals, Breakbio Corp., Bristol-Myers
Squibb and Lumos Pharma, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Tanya Keenan:
None declared, Eliezer Van Allen: None declared, Mark Awad
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
692
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Genentech, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck, AstraZeneca, Lilly, per-
sonal fees from Genentech, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck, Astra-
Zeneca, Maverick, Blueprint Medicine, Syndax, Ariad, Nektar,
Gritstone, ArcherDX, Mirati, NextCure, Novartis, EMD Serono,
Panvaxal/NovaRx outside the submitted work, Michael Manos:
None declared, Osama Rahma Merck, BMS, Merck, Merck, Celgene,
Five Prime, GSK, Bayer, Roche/Genentech, Puretech, Imvax, Sobi,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Patent “Methods of using pembrolizumab
and trebananib” pending, Leyre Zubiri: None declared, Alexandra-
Chloe Villani: None declared, Christian Hammer: None declared,
Zia Khan imCORE Network on behalf of Genentech, Inc. and
Bristol-Myers Squibb, UpToDate, Kerry Reynolds: None declared,
Yevgeniy Semenov:
None
declared,
Deborah
Schrag:
None
declared, Kenneth Kehl IBM and Roche, Matthew Freedman: None
declared, Toni Choueiri Dana- Farber/Harvard Cancer Center Kid-
ney SPORE and Program, the Kohlberg Chair at Harvard Medical
School and the Trust Family, Michael Brigham, and Loker Pinard
Funds for Kidney Cancer Research at DFCI, Pionyr, Tempest,
AstraZeneca, Aveo, Bayer, Bristol Myers-Squibb, Eisai, EMD Serono,
Exelixis, GlaxoSmithKline, IQVA, Ipsen, Kanaph, Lilly, Merck, Nikang,
Novartis, Pﬁzer, Roche, Sanoﬁ/Aventis, Takeda, Tempest, Up-to-
Date royalties, CME-related events (e.g.: OncLIve, PVI, MJH Life
Sciences) honorarium, Alexander Gusev: None declared.
P25.006.B Shared genetic aetiology of osteoarthritis and type
2 diabetes
Ana Arruda1;2;3, April Hartley4, Konstantinos Hatzikotoulas3, William
Rayner3, Andrei Barysenka3, Georgia Katsoula1;3, George Davey
Smith4, Andrew Morris3;5, Eleftheria Zeggini1;3
1TUM school of medicine, Technical University Munich and Klinikum
Rechts der Isar, Munich, Germany; 2Munich School for Data Science,
Helmholtz Association Munich, Neuherberg, Germany; 3Institute of
Translational Genomics, Helmholtz Association Munich, Neuherberg,
Germany; 4MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol,
Bristol, United Kingdom; 5Centre for Genetics and Genomics Versus
Arthritis, Centre for Musculoskeletal Research, The University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Osteoarthritis (OA) and type 2 diabetes
(T2D) are two of the most prevalent chronic health disorders
worldwide. Observational studies report a positive epidemiologi-
cal association between the diseases beyond their common risk
factors, such as obesity and increasing age. Taking into con-
sideration that the world’s obesity rates, and average age are
rising, this comorbidity pair can be considered an increasing
global health challenge. Thus, in this research project, we aim to
disentangle the genetic correlation between OA and T2D.
Methods: Using summary statistics of large-scale GWAS from
T2D (n = 898,130) and knee or hip related OA phenotypes
(n = 490,345), we investigate the genetic intersection between the
traits by performing statistical colocalization analysis of estab-
lished association signals. For colocalizing regions, we derive a set
of high conﬁdence likely effector genes based on biological lines
of evidence, including colocalization with molecular QTLs from
disease-relevant tissues. Additionally, for each of those genes, we
perform Mendelian randomization analyses between expression
QTLs and each disease.
Results: 18 genome regions show robust evidence of coloca-
lization between T2D and at least one OA phenotype. 27 genes
were deﬁned as high conﬁdence likely effector genes, including
TCF7L2 and the obesity-related FTO gene. TCF7L2 is among the
leading signals for T2D risk but had not been identiﬁed as asso-
ciated with OA at genome-wide signiﬁcance levels yet. Genetic
variants associated with expression levels of TCF7L2 in pancreatic
islets are causal for T2D and protective for knee-related OA
phenotypes.
Conclusion: Our shared common effector genes support the
epidemiologically known link between BMI and the investigated
comorbidity.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.008.D Genome wide association study of long-term
toxicity 2 years following radiotherapy for breast cancer–
results from the REQUITE cohort study
Harkeran Jandu1, Colin D Veal1, David Azria2, Jenny Chang-
Claude3, Ananya Choudhury4, Alison M Dunning5, Dirk R. de
Ruysscher6, Laura Fachal5, Sara Gutiérrez-Enríquez7, Philippe Lam-
bin8, Tiziana Rancati9, Barry S Rosenstein10, Maria C de Santis9, Petra
Seibold3, Elena Sperk11, R Paul Symonds1, Ana Vega12, Liv Velde-
man13, Adam Webb1, Catharine West4, Christopher J Talbot1, Tim
Rattay1
1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom; 2ICM Institut du
Cancer Montpellier, Montpellier, France; 3German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg, Germany; 4University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom;
5University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom;
6University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium;
7Vall
d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain; 8MAASTRO Clinic,
Maastricht, Netherlands; 9Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori, Milan, Italy; 10Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York,
United States;
11Universitätsmedizin Mannheim, Medical Faculty
Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany; 12Fundacion
Publica Galega Medicina Xenomica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain;
13Universiteit Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.
Background/Objectives: Up to a quarter of breast cancer patients
treated by surgery and radiotherapy experience clinically sig-
niﬁcant toxicity. This study was designed to identify common
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with toxicity 2
years following whole breast radiotherapy.
Methods: A genome-wide association study (GWAS) was per-
formed in 1,635 breast cancer patients with complete SNP, clinical,
treatment and toxicity data, recruited across 27 centres in Europe
and the US into the prospective REQUITE study (www.requite.eu).
All patients were genotyped using Illumina OncoArrays with
~600,000 SNPs. Datasets were imputed according to OncoArray
Network methods. A total of 7,097,340 SNPs with minor allele
frequency >0.05 and imputation score >0.3 were tested for asso-
ciation with the residuals of toxicity endpoints at 2 years.
Results: Quantile-quantile plots for association with toxicity
showed more associations above the p < 5 x 10-4 level than
expected by chance. Five SNPs reached genome-wide sig-
niﬁcance. Nipple retraction (10.0%≥G1) was associated with the
rs188287402 intron variant on the X chromosome (p = 2.80 x10-8);
breast oedema (11.1% ≥G1) with the Chr5 rs12657177 (p = 1.12 x
10-10) and the Chr13
rs61966613 variants(p = 1.06 x
10-9);
induration (6.5% ≥G2) with Chr1 rs77311050 (p = 2.54x10-8); and
arm lymphoedema (3.4% ≥G1) with the Chr1 rs643644 variant
(p = 3.54 x 10-8). Heritability estimates across different endpoints
ranged from 13% to 39%. Several previously signiﬁcant SNP
associations with late breast toxicity were validated at the nominal
0.05 signiﬁcance level.
Conclusion: This largest GWAS to date for long-term breast
radiation toxicity provides evidence for genome-wide signiﬁcant
association of common SNPs with distinct toxicity endpoints.
References:.
Grants:.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
693
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conﬂict of Interest: Harkeran Jandu: None declared, Colin D
Veal: None declared, David Azria: None declared, Jenny Chang-
Claude: None declared, Ananya Choudhury: None declared, Alison
M Dunning: None declared, Dirk R. de Ruysscher: None declared,
Laura Fachal: None declared, Sara Gutiérrez-Enríquez: None
declared, Philippe Lambin: None declared, Tiziana Rancati: None
declared, Barry S Rosenstein: None declared, Maria C de Santis:
None declared, Petra Seibold: None declared, Elena Sperk Dr Elena
Sperk: none related to the current manuscript. Outside the current
manuscript: General speakers bureau Zeiss Meditec, travel support
Zeiss Meditec., R Paul Symonds: None declared, Ana Vega: None
declared, Liv Veldeman: None declared, Adam Webb: None
declared, Catharine West: None declared, Christopher J Talbot:
None declared, Tim Rattay: None declared.
P25.009.A Gene-based burden scores to improve polygenic
models for blood and urine biomarkers
Rana Aldisi1, Emadeldin Hassanin1, Hannah Klinkhammer2, Andreas
Mayr2, Holger Fröhlich3;4, Sugirthan Sivalingam5, Andreas Buness5,
Peter Krawitz1, Carlo Maj6
1University Hospital of Bonn, IGSB, Bonn, Germany; 2University Hospital
of Bonn, Institut für Medizinische Biometrie, Informatik und Epidemio-
logie (IMBIE), Bonn, Germany;
3University of Bonn, Bonn-Aachen
International Center for Information Technology (B-IT), Bonn, Ger-
many; 4Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and Scientiﬁc Computing,
Sankt Augustin, Germany; 5University Hospital of Bonn, Core Unit for
Bioinformatics Data Analysis (CUBA), Bonn, Germany; 6University of
Marburg, Centre for Human Genetics, Marburg, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Integration of common and rare func-
tional variants for a more comprehensive genetic risk modelling in
complex phenotypes.
Methods: We analyzed the genetic component of 32 blood
and urine biomarkers in 200,000 samples with exomes and gen-
otyping data from UKBioBank. We computed: 1. polygenic risk
score (PRS) based on the effect of common variants as previously
obtained using multivariate snpnet multivariate framework; 2.
gene-based risk scores (GBRS) for each biomarker obtained by
weighting each gene-based burden score in a training dataset
according to the association signal obtained in a test dataset. The
GBRS and PRS were then used to generate prediction models,
both individually and in combination.
Results: PRS are generally more associated with the phenotype
than GBRS corroborating a predominant role for common variants
in the genetic liability for complex traits as metabolic biomarkers
levels. However, GBRS are also strongly associated with blood and
urine biomarkers suggesting that the burden of rare deleterious
variants in coding regions can also substantially inﬂuence the
biomarkers levels and interestingly the combination of PRS and
GBRS improved the prediction performance as measured by the R2
for 25 out of 32 biomarkers.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest the analysis of exome data
and the computation of gene-based risk scores assessing the
burden of rare deleterious variants can improve the current PRS
model predictions.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.010.B Novel loci and Loss-of-Function genes associated
with prediabetes provide insights into biological mechanisms
leading to diabetes
Jessica Van Setten1, Chris Finan1;2;3, Katarzyna Dziopa4, Abdulrah-
man Alasiri1;5, Marion van Vugt1, Folkert Asselbergs1;2;4, Amand
Schmidt1;2;3
1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Cardiology,
Utrecht,
Netherlands;
2University
College
London,
Institute
of
Cardiovascular Science, London, United Kingdom; 3UCL BHF Research
Accelerator Centre, London, United Kingdom;
4University College
London, Institute of Health Informatics, London, United Kingdom;
5King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, King Saud Bin
Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Ministry of National Guard
Health Affairs, Medical Genomics Research Department, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
Background/Objectives: Prediabetes is a precursor of type 2
diabetes (T2D), and while still reversible, up to 70% of patients
eventually develop diabetes. People with prediabetes have ele-
vated glycated haemoglobin (HbA1C) and plasma glucose con-
centrations, and are often overweight and hypertensive. In this
study we explored genetic and biological mechanisms responsible
for prediabetes.
Methods: We included up to 7,748 prediabetics, 23,626 dia-
betics, and 286,132 controls from UK Biobank. Prediabetes and
diabetes patients were identiﬁed using HbA1C values and a pre-
viously published algorithm. We tested prediabetes (vs diabetes
and vs healthy controls) in a GWAS setting including >38 million
variants, and examined ~8600 Loss-of-Function genes using the
Loss-of-Function toolkit (LoFTK).
Results: The GWAS analyses using healthy controls identiﬁed
thirty prediabetes loci. Of these, 26 had been previously asso-
ciated with diabetes. Out of the 4 loci speciﬁc to prediabetes we
found support from previous GWAS on HbA1c for three, and one
novel locus near GLI3. We identiﬁed eleven loci associated with
prediabetes vs diabetes, including ten known diabetes loci and a
novel locus in LPCAT1. Loss-of-Function analyses highlighted SHPK,
a novel gene associated with both prediabetes vs controls and vs
diabetes.
Conclusion: We identiﬁed novel genes associated with pre-
diabetes, which may lead to new insights into the biological
mechanisms involved in prediabetes and diabetes.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.011.C Dissecting the genetic bases of Color Vision Defects
(CVDs) through Genome-Wide Association Study (GWAS) in
Silk Road populations
Giuseppe Giovanni Nardone1, Maria Pina Concas1, Domenico
Loperﬁdo2,
Anna
Morgan1,
Maurizio
Battaglia
Parodi3,
Paolo
Gasparini1;4, Giorgia Girotto1;4
1Institute for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS, Burlo Garofolo,
Trieste, Italy;
2University of Trieste, Department of Life Sciences,
Trieste, Italy; 3Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Ophthalmology
Department, Milano, Italy;
4University of Trieste, Department of
Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, Trieste, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Color perception relies on the brain’s
response to the stimuli produced by light-activated cone photo-
receptors. To date, apart from three major genes (OPN1L-
W,OPN1MW,OPN1SW) involved in Mendelian CVDs, nothing is
known for multifactorial CVDs forms.
Methods: 520 individuals from Silk Road populations were
genotyped and phenotypically characterized for CVDs using the
Farnsworth D-15 color test and results interpretation was per-
formed by a certiﬁed ophthalmologist. CVDs analysed traits were
the following: Deutan-Protan (DP) and Tritan. GWAS for both traits
was performed; results were ﬁltered for MAF≥5%. Gene expression
of ﬁnal candidates was deﬁned using a published human eye
dataset.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
694
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: GWAS analysis revealed several interesting hits within
genes involved in eye physiology and pathologies that show high
expression levels in several eye tissues. As regards DP, LRRC8D
gene resulted signiﬁcantly associated (p-value = 3,41*10-8) whose
protein is expressed in Müller cells of the retina. Concerning Tritan,
three
genes
(MYL3,
p-value = 1,77*10-8;
PDE3A,
p-value =
6,64*10-9; MC5R, p-value = 6,17*10-10) were associated. MYL3 is a
gene modulated by MERTK, whose mutations have been asso-
ciated with retinitis pigmentosa; PDE3A encodes phosphodies-
terase 3A, a protein involved with hypertension and MC5R
encodes melanocortin receptor type 5, a receptor involved in
ocular immunity regulation. Interestingly, drugs targeting phos-
phodiesterases and melanocortin receptors are known to cause
temporary alterations in color vision.
Conclusion: We described, for the ﬁrst time worldwide, a
GWAS on multifactorial CVDs identifying four genes potentially
playing a crucial role in CVDs pathogenesis. Next step will include
external replication in independent populations and functional
in vitro/in vivo studies to deﬁne the mechanisms underlying these
clinical traits.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.012.D Genome Wide Association Studies of severe mental
disorders reveal shared and disorder speciﬁc risk loci
Vivek Appadurai1, Morten Krebs1;2, Jesper Gådin1, Kajsa-Lotta
Georgii Hellberg1, John Shorter1, Joeri Meijsen1, iPSYCH Consor-
tium1;2;3;4;5, Thomas Werge1;2, Andrew Schork1;6
1Research Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark;
2Copenhagen University, København, Denmark; 3Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark; 4Gentofte Hospital, Hellerup, Denmark; 5Statens
Serum Institut, København, Denmark;
6Translational Genomics
Research Institute, Flagstaff, United States.
Background/Objectives: Mental disorders (MD) are pleiotropic,
sharing genetic origin1–3, likely expressed in early brain develop-
ment. Descriptions of this genetic overlap are not consistent
across studies. Several genetic loci associated with MDs have been
identiﬁed through genome wide association studies (GWAS)4–6,
but loci delineating individual disorders from shared liability are
not well described. We aim to understand the genetics underlying
the similarity as well as the differences among MDs.
Methods: We use the iPSYCH2012 and 2015i cohorts, inde-
pendent samples from the population of Denmark born between
1980 and 2007 with follow up until 2015. Cases are ascertained for
diagnosis of at least one of six severe MDs. Genetic correlations
(rG) and heritabilities are calculated using phenotype correlation
genotype correlation. GWAS are performed using mixed linear
models (MLM) and genomic structural equation modeling (GSEM).
Results: rG between MDs estimated within iPSYCH are con-
sistently higher than external estimates. GWAS identify novel loci
associated with the shared and individual risk of MDs. GSEM
reveals structure of rG between MDs, replicates ﬁndings from
MLMs, and estimates heterogeneity in associations between the
shared and disorder speciﬁc risk.
Conclusion: Higher rG between iPSYCH cohorts for MDs sug-
gest diagnoses obtained from national registers are meaningfully
different from those in meta-analyses pooling data from diverse,
non-uniformly ascertained studies. Biological follow up of loci
delineating disorder speciﬁc and shared risk factors can reveal
genetic causes for differences among MDs.
References: 1. Schork 2019.
2. Gandal 2018.
3. Brainstorm 2018.
4. Demontis 2019.
5. Grove 2019.
6. Howard 2019.
Grants:.
iPSYCH.
Lundbeck foundation fellowship R335-2019-2318.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.013.A Genome-wide meta-analysis identiﬁes novel loci for
positive thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin antibodies
tatijana zemunik1, Nikolina Pleić1, mirjana babić leko1, Ivana
Gunjača1, vesela torlak2, ante punda2, ozren polašek3, thibaud
boutin4, caroline hayward4
1University of Split, School of Medicine, Department of Medical
Biology, Split, Croatia;
2University Hospital Split, Department of
Nuclear Medicine, Split, Croatia;
3University of Split, School of
Medicine, Department of Public Health, Split, Croatia; 4University of
Edinburgh, Institute of Genetics and Cancer, MRC Human Genetics
Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: The presence of antibodies to thyroid
peroxidase (TPOAb) and thyroglobulin (TgAb) is an early indi-
cator of autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD). However, thyroid
antibodies are not only frequently detected in patients with
AITD but also in patients without diagnosed thyroid dysfunction.
This study aimed to replicate the signiﬁcant ﬁndings from our
discovery
genome-wide
association
study
(GWAS)
and
to
increase statistical power to detect novel genetic variants
associated with plasma antibody positivity by including over
1,500 new individuals.
Methods: Participants with elevated plasma TPOAb and/or TgAb
were deﬁned as cases (N = 341) and those with TPOAb and TgAb
within reference values were deﬁned as controls (N = 1253). We
performed individual-level genome-wide association mapping using
a linear mixed model (LMM) of 7,609,054 variants, imputed using the
Haplotype Reference Consortium (HRC) panel, in 1,594 European-
ancestry participants of the Croatian Biobank. In the meta-analysis, we
combined these data with our discovery GWAS from three inde-
pendent cohorts consisting of 2,613 individuals. In these 4,207 indi-
viduals, analysis was performed using the random-effects method.
Results: Meta-analysis identiﬁed ERBIN gene intron variant
rs34540954 (p = 5.3 x 10-8) as the top association signal, including
another 122 variants passing the suggestive genome-wide sig-
niﬁcance threshold of 5 x 10-6.
Conclusion: This study adds to the knowledge of genetic
background of thyroid antibodies and will lead to better under-
standing of biological pathways and clinically relevant disorders
related to their function.
References:.
Grants: This work has been supported by the Croatian Science
Foundation grant No. 2593.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.014.B Rare variant associations and novel loci for
eosinophil count - a UK Biobank whole-exome sequencing
study
Julia
Höglund1,
Fatemeh
Hadizadeh1,
Weronica
Ek1,
Torgny
Karlsson1, Åsa Johansson1
1Uppsala University, Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala,
Sweden.
Background/Objectives: Eosinophils play important roles in the
release of cytokine mediators in response to inﬂammation. Many
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
695
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
associations between common genetic variants and eosinophils
have already been reported, using SNP array data. However, there
is a need to further investigate the role of rare variants altering
eosinophil count as this might have considerable implications in
the pathogenesis of inﬂammatory diseases.
Methods: Here, we have utilized 200 000 whole exome
sequences (WES) from the UK Biobank cohort to perform gene-
based analyses of eosinophil count. We deﬁned ﬁve different
variant weighting schemes to incorporate information on both
deleteriousness and frequency.
Results: A total of 220 genes in 55 loci, were found to be
associated with eosinophil count, of which seven genes (ALOX15,
CSF2RB, IL17RA, IL33, JAK2, S1PR4, and SH2B3) are driven by rare
variants, independent of common variants identiﬁed in genome-
wide association studies. Two additional genes, NPAT and RMI1,
have never been associated with eosinophil count before and are
considered novel eosinophil loci.
Conclusion: The genes driven by rare variants can be of
importance for further studies identifying therapeutic targets or
biomarkers for eosinophil related traits. Additionally, rare variants
with larger effects may have a large impact at an individual level.
These results increase our knowledge about the effect of rare
variants on eosinophil count.
References:.
Grants: This research was funded by the Swedish Research
Council (2019-01497), the Swedish Heart and Lung Foundation
(20200687) and the Åke Wiberg, Marcus Borgström, A and M
Rudbergs, Hedströms K and O F Foundations.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.016.D Benchmarking of univariate pleiotropy detection
methods, with an application to epilepsy phenotypes
Oluyomi Adesoji1, Michael Nothnagel1;2
1Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany; 2University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Complex traits have been found to
share genetic relationship in separate GWAS studies and the joint
identiﬁcation of these loci or variants via pleiotropy analysis
improves gene discovery. Pleiotropy is the phenomenon of a
hereditary unit affecting more than one trait. Joint analysis of sub-
phenotypes improve power to discover association however, due
to separate individual data collection for each trait, application of
multivariate approaches is often not feasible. Therefore, to identify
these switch-like or shared loci in more than one trait, we applied
univariate pleiotropy detection approaches to epilepsy sub-
phenotypes.
Methods: Firstly, we benchmarked ﬁve pleiotropy detection
classical meta-analysis, cFDR, ASSET, CPBayes and PLACO, via
simulation to identify the most powerful approach while keeping
type 1 error low.
Results: ASSET method which gave a good trade-off between
power and false -positive rate (FPR) is then applied to summary
statistics of focal and genetic generalized epilepsies provided by
the ILAE Consortium on complex epilepsies, thereby identifying a
new putative pleiotropic locus at 17q21.32 and conﬁrmed locus
2q24.3 which had already been identiﬁed via mega-analysis.
Classical meta-analysis performed poorly in terms of FPR.
Conclusion: ASSET method yielded good power while keeping
FPR low but, classic meta-analysis is not recommended.
References: International League Against Epilepsy Consortium
on Complex Epilepsies (2018). Genome-wide mega-analysis iden-
tiﬁes 16 loci and highlights diverse biological mechanisms in the
common epilepsies. Nat Commun 9, 5269. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-018-07524-z.
Grants: This study received support from the Research Unit
FOR-2715 of the German Research Foundation and the 710 Fonds
National de la Recherche.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.018.B Genetic overlap study between idiopathic
pulmonary ﬁbrosis and COVID−19
Beatriz Guillen-Guio1, Richard Allen1, Emma Croot2, Luke M
Kraven1, Samuel Moss3, Iain Stewart3, Gisli Jenkins3, Louise Wain1;4
1University of Leicester, Department of Health Sciences, Leicester,
United Kingdom; 2University of Leicester, Department of Genetics and
Genome Biology, Leicester, United Kingdom; 3National Heart and
Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom;
4National
Institute
for
Health
Research,
Leicester
Respiratory
Biomedical Research Centre, Glenﬁeld Hospital, Leicester, United
Kingdom.
Background/Objectives:
Genetic
factors
inﬂuence COVID-19
susceptibility and outcomes, including the development of pul-
monary ﬁbrosis (i.e. lung scarring). Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis
(IPF) is a progressive lung disease and the most common cause of
pulmonary ﬁbrosis in the general population. Genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) of COVID-19 and IPF revealed genes
associated with both diseases, suggesting these share genetic risk
factors. Here we performed a genetic overlap study between
COVID-19 and IPF.
Methods: Summary statistics from an IPF 5-way meta-GWAS
and from the COVID-19 Host Genetics initiative GWAS meta-
analysis (v6) were used. We performed genetic correlation ana-
lyses and assessed individual genetic signals to identify those
variants shared between both traits. We conducted colocalisation
analyses to determine whether the same causal variant was
driving both traits. Finally, the association of overlapping variants
with gene expression was assessed and a phenome-wide asso-
ciation study was performed.
Results: There was a positive genetic correlation between
severe COVID-19 and IPF. We found four genetic loci with likely
shared causal variants between both traits, including one novel
risk locus at 7q22.1 that colocalised with decreased ZKSCAN1 and
TRIM4 expression in blood. The other three loci colocalised with
MUC5B, ATP11A and DPP9 expression. The locus associated with
increased ATP11A expression was also associated with higher
Hb1AC levels, a biomarker used in diabetes.
Conclusion: Results suggest there are shared biological pro-
cesses driving IPF and severe COVID-19 phenotypes.
References:.
Grants:
Action
for
Pulmonary
Fibrosis,
Wellcome
Trust
(221680/Z/20/Z), GSK/British Lung Foundation (C17-1), NIHR Lei-
cester Biomedical Research Centre.
Conﬂict of Interest: Beatriz Guillen-Guio B Guillen-Guio is
supported by Wellcome Trust grant 221680/Z/20/Z, Richard Allen
R Allen is an Action for Pulmonary Fibrosis Mike Bray Research
Fellow, Emma Croot: None declared, Luke M Kraven: None
declared, Samuel Moss: None declared, Iain Stewart: None
declared, Gisli Jenkins G Jenkins is a trustee of Action for Pul-
monary Fibrosis and reports personal fees from Astra Zeneca,
Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Chiesi, Dae-
woong, Galapagos, Galecto, GlaxoSmithKline, Heptares, NuMedii,
PatientMPower, Pliant, Promedior, Redx, Resolution Therapeutics,
Roche, Veracyte and Vicore., Louise Wain L Wain holds a GSK/
British Lung Foundation Chair in Respiratory Research (C17-1), L
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
696
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Wain reports research funding from GSK and Orion and con-
sultancy for Galapagos, outside of the submitted work.
P25.019.C Value of individual population studies to
characterize loci associated with complex traits
Dariush Ghasemi-Semeskandeh1;2, David Emmert1, Eva König1,
Luisa Foco1, Martin Gögele1, Laura Barin1, Ryosuke Fujii1, Christian
Fuchsberger1, Dorien Peters2, Peter Pramstaller1, Cristian Pattaro1
1Institute for Biomedicine, Eurac Research, Bolzano, Italy; 2Depart-
ment of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC),
Leiden, Netherlands.
Background/Objectives: Genome-wide association study (GWAS)
meta-analyses of complex traits have identiﬁed thousands of loci,
whose biological characterization is underway. In meta-analyses,
variant effect sizes vary across contributing studies due to envir-
onmental or genetic differences. However, how much study-
speciﬁc features can be exploited to elucidate the underlying
mechanisms is unclear. As a case study, we compared a GWAS of
estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR) in a population-based
study from the Alps, where thyroid disease is common, versus a
meta-analysis on >1 million individuals that previously identiﬁed
147 kidney function relevant loci.
Methods: We performed a GWAS of age- and sex-adjusted
ln(eGFR) on 10,146 participants in the Cooperative Health
Research in South Tyrol (CHRIS) study, accounting for genomic
kinship (genomic inﬂation λ = 1.02). We assessed direction-
consistent replication at any variant strongly correlated with the
locus lead variant (r2≥0.8), accounting for multiple testing. Repli-
cated variants underwent phenome-wide mediation analysis
across 72 health biomarkers.
Results: We replicated 10 loci. The variants’ effect magnitudes
were 1.3-to-5.8 times larger than in the meta-analysis, at similar
minor allele frequencies (MAF). Free triiodothyronine and thyrox-
ine, measured in individuals with low or high thyroid stimulating
hormone levels, resulted as potential mediators for most loci. We
observed
potential
interactions
with
hyperthyroidism
at
SHROOM3
(p = 0.03)
and
with
hypothyroidism
at
PIP5K1B
(p = 0.03) and GAB2 (p = 0.04).
Conclusion: Similar MAF, same ancestry and loci independency
suggest the larger effects on eGFR in the CHRIS study being
probably of environmental origin. The potential modiﬁer role of
thyroid disease warrants independent replication.
References:.
Grants: H2020-MSCA-ITN-2019 ID:860977 (TrainCKDis).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.021.A Genome-wide association analysis and genomic
prediction of thyroglobulin plasma levels
Nikolina Pleić1, mirjana babić leko1, Ivana Gunjača1, thibaud
boutin2, vesela torlak3, antonela matana1, ante punda3, ozren
polašek4, caroline hayward2, tatijana zemunik1
1University of Split, School of Medicine, Department of Medical
Biology, Split, Croatia; 2University of Edinburgh, Institute of Genetics
and Cancer, MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom;
3University Hospital Split, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Split,
Croatia; 4University of Split, School of Medicine, Department of Public
Health, Split, Croatia.
Background/Objectives: Thyroglobulin (Tg) is a 660 kDa iodo-
glycoprotein produced by thyroid follicular cells. Together with
iodide and peroxide, it acts as an essential substrate for thyroid
hormone synthesis. So far, only one genome-wide association
study (GWAS) of plasma Tg levels was performed by our
research group.
Methods: Utilizing recent advancements in computation and
modelling, in the current study, we apply a Bayesian approach to
the probabilistic inference of genetic architecture of Tg. We ﬁtted
a Bayesian sparse linear mixed model (BSLMM) and a frequentist
LMM of 7,289,083 variants, imputed using the Haplotype Refer-
ence Consortium (HRC) panel, in 1096 healthy European-ancestry
participants of the Croatian Biobank. Additionally, we estimated
the heritability of Tg and constructed a polygenic score (PGS). We
meta-analysed these results with our previous results from two
independent cohorts of 605 and 489 individuals, resulting in a
total of 2,109 individuals.
Results: Meta-analysis identiﬁed 83 signiﬁcantly associated
variants within the ST6GAL1 gene and replicated the discovery
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Multi-SNP BSLMM ana-
lysis revealed additional association signals on chromosomes 1, 8,
10, and 14. We found that all available variants explain 17% of the
variance in Tg levels and that 52% of this variation is due to a
small number of 16 variants that have a major effect on Tg levels.
Conclusion: These results suggest that the genetic architecture
of plasma Tg is not purely polygenic, but rather sparse, i.e. inﬂu-
enced by a few genes with major effects.
References:.
Grants: This work has been supported by the Croatian Science
Foundation grant No. 2593.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.022.B Trait selection strategy for improving SNPs
discoverability in multi-trait GWAS with JASS
Hanna Julienne1, Hervé Ménager1, Cyril Nerin1, Rachel Torchet1,
Pierre Lechat1, Lucie Troubat1, Hugues Aschard1
1Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Department of Computational
Biology, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives:.
As a profusion of GWAS summary statistics became publicly
available, investigators explored this data with various multi-trait
GWAS methods (TATES, MTag, MostTest, JASS(1), …). Yet, the joint
analyses of GWASs comports many challenges: data harmonisa-
tion, computational cost, and missing values. While the combi-
natorial possibilities are overwhelming, there is no established
strategy to astutely select sets of traits to analyse.
Methods: To solve these challenges, we implemented JASS(1)
with a speciﬁc attention to computational efﬁciency (on 62
traits, JASS runs in 17 minutes). Leveraging a database of 178
curated summary statistics spanning several ancestries (https://
jass.pasteur.fr/index.html), we conducted multi-trait GWASs on
1219 sets of 2 to 63 traits with varying characteristics.
Results: While JASS expectedly detected more associations as
set traits were more heritable, we found more exclusive associa-
tions (i.e. not signiﬁcant in univariate tests) when the set of traits
has a low mean heritability (h2 < 0.1). This gain of exclusive asso-
ciations was also signiﬁcantly improved by adding more traits to
the set. Sets based on clinically related or highly genetically cor-
related traits yield only few new associations.
Conclusion: To differentiate from univariate GWAS ﬁndings,
we advise investigators to include numerous complementary traits
in their joint analysis to discover up to ~30% unprecedented
associations.
References: (1)Julienne, Hanna, et al. “JASS: command line and
web interface for the joint analysis of GWAS results.” NAR genomics
and bioinformatics 2.1 (2020): lqaa003.
Grants: This research was supported by the Agence National
pour la Recherche (ANR-20-CE36-0009-02).
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
697
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.023.C A novel multi-components mixed model based
bacterial-GWAS method and its application to Listeria
monocytogenes
Frouin Arthur1, Fabien Laporte1, Hafner Lukas2, Maury Mylène2,
Marc Lecuit2, Chikhi Rayan1, Hugues Aschard1
1Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Department of Computational
Biology, Paris, France; 2Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris, Depart-
ment of Cell Biology & Infection, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives:
Genome-wide
Association
Studies
(GWAS) have been central to study the genetics of complex
human phenotypes, and there is now tremendous interest for
implementing GWAS-like approaches to study pathogenic bac-
teria. However bacterial genomes harbour complex structures
making such analyses extremely challenging. Diverse and het-
erogeneous strategies have been proposed to deﬁne genetic
variants (kmers, snp,…) and account for population structure
(phylogeny, mixed model,…), but their relative performances have
not been studied, and fundamental genetic modelling aspects
have been surprisingly seldom discussed.
Methods: We used real bacterial sequence data and simulated
phenotypes to conduct a formal comparison of alternative
methods for modelling genetic structure, estimating heritability,
and testing association. We leverage those results to develop a
robust and powerful approach which we applied to the MON-
ALISA cohort, a national prospective repository that systematically
collects Listeria Monocytogenes strains in France, currently includ-
ing whole genome sequencing of 3718 strains.
Results: We demonstrate that the classic human heritability
model, commonly assumed in existing bacterial GWAS methods,
is strongly unadapted to study highly structured organisms such
as Listeria. The most efﬁcient approach consists in a multi-
component linear mixed model applied to unitigs, where com-
ponents are inferred from a hierarchical clustering of the genetic
relatedness
matrix.
Our
analyse
of
virulence
biomarkers
in
hypervirulent
strains
from
MONALISA
was
able
to
identify promising targets, along clone-speciﬁc estimates of
heritability.
Conclusion: We demonstrate that our reﬁned genetic structure
modelling
can
greatly
improve
power
and
robustness
of
bacterial GWAS.
References:.
Grants: We thank the Inception program (Investissement
d’Avenir grant ANR- 16-CONV-0005) for funding this work.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.024.D The genetics of Parkinson’s Disease and the loss of
dopaminergic neurons
Ann-Kathrin Schalkamp1, Cynthia Sandor2
1UK Dementia Research Institute at Cardiff University, Division of
Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neuroscience, Cardiff, United
Kingdom; 1UK Dementia Research Institute at Cardiff University,
Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neuroscience, Cardiff,
United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Polygenic risk scores (PRS) for Parkin-
son’s
Disease
(PD)
based
on
case/control
genome-wide-
association study (GWAS) statistics show a low predictive value,
possibly due to the high heterogeneity within PD or misdiagnoses.
As quantitative traits achieve better reproducibility in genetic
studies and better capture the phenotypic heterogeneity within a
disorder, exploring the genetics of a biomarker could improve our
understanding of the genetics of disease mechanisms. Striatal
binding ratio (SBR) as measured through DaTscan could be such a
marker. SBR is a good diagnostic biomarker and is a proxy for the
loss dopaminergic neurons, a neuropathological hallmark of PD.
We explore to what extend SBR is related to the genetics of PD
and what the genetic basis of SBR is.
Methods: We calculate PD PRS and cell speciﬁc PD PRS,
compare their performances, and correlate them with SBR. We
investigate differences in SBR progression and severity between
PD mutation carriers. We perform a GWAS for SBR and evaluate
the predictive performance of SBR PRS in an independent cohort.
Results: SBR and PD PRS are correlated regardless of the
applied p-threshold for PRS computation. The dopaminergic
neuron speciﬁc PRS for PD is signiﬁcantly associated with SBR and
has the highest predictive performance. SNCA carriers have lower
SBR at diagnosis. Some loci are associated with SBR and the
predictive performance of SBR PRS on the independent cohort
looks promising.
Conclusion: SBR is not only a good diagnostic biomarker for
PD, but it also allows us to study the genetic basis of dopami-
nergic neuron loss across disorders.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ann-Kathrin Schalkamp PhD studentship
funded by Health and Cares Research Wales, Cynthia Sandor UK
Dementia Research Institute which receives its funding from DRI
Ltd, funded by the UK Medical Research Council, Alzheimer’s
Society and Alzheimer’s Research UK.
Ser Cymru II programme which is part-funded by Cardiff Uni-
versity and the European Regional Development Fund through
the Welsh Government.
P25.025.A The genetic architecture of skull shape
Nishal Mewasingh1, Maria Knol1;2, Sander Lamballais1, Edith
Hofer3;4, Reinhold Schmidt5, Marieke van Dooren6, Mikolaj Pawlak6;7,
Hieab Adams6;8;9, Tavia Evans6;8
1Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Department of Clinical
Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2Erasmus MC University Medical
Center,
Department
of
Epidemiology,
Rotterdam,
Netherlands;
3Medical University Graz, Department of Neurology, Clinical Division
of Neurogeriatrics, Graz, Austria; 4Medical University Graz, Institute of
Medical Informatics, Statistics and Documentation, Graz, Austria;
3Medical University Graz, Department of Neurology, Clinical Division
of Neurogeriatrics, Graz, Austria; 1Erasmus MC University Medical
Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands;
7Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Department of Neurology
and Cerebrovascular Disorders, Poznań, Poland;
8Erasmus MC
University Medical Center, Department of Radiology and Nuclear
Medicine, Rotterdam, Netherlands;
9Latin American Brain Health
(BrainLat), Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile.
Background/Objectives: The human skull forms an essential layer
of protection for craniofacial areas, yet the genetic basis of skull
shape remains largely unknown. Here, we perform the ﬁrst
genome-wide association study (GWAS) seeking to ﬁnd genetic
determinants underlying different skull shape dimensions.
Methods: We deﬁned 19 MRI-derived linear and ratio skull
shape measures including cranial length and width and a variety
of novel (geometrically derived) measures. We estimated family-
based heritability (ASPS-Family, N = 368) and single-nucleotide
polymorphisms-based heritability (UK Biobank, N = 38,029), and
performed a GWAS (UK Biobank, N = 38,029) controlling for batch
effects (study center and genotyping array) and covariates (age,
sex, height, intracranial volume, and 20 principal components).
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
698
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Results: Skull shape measures were heritable to varying
extents, ranging from 3% to 26% (standard error = 1-2%) for SNP-
based heritability, and 10% to 81% (standard error = 12-13%) for
family-based heritability. We identiﬁed 59 genome-wide sig-
niﬁcant loci for 15 skull shape measures including loci nearby
genes involved in embryonic development (e.g., BMP3, FGF8) and
craniofacial abnormalities (e.g., craniosynostosis, JAG1, KANSL1;
Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome, ARID1B).
Conclusion: Individual skull shape measures contain genetic
information that could aid the understanding of the complex
mechanisms underlying craniofacial development.
References:.
Grants: Table 1 Number of loci and heritability estimates per
skull shape measure
.
SE, standard error. aLoci overlap between measures.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.026.B Inclusion of sequencing GWAS (seqGWAS) in GWAS
Catalog, data format and future challenges
Maria Cerezo1, Ala Abid1, Annalisa Buniello1;2, Peggy Hall3, James
Hayhurst1;2, Arwa Ibrahim1, Sajo John1, Elizabeth Lewis1, Aoife
McMahon1, Abayomi Mosaku1, Santhi Ramachandran1, Elliot Sollis1,
Fiona Cunningham1, Paul Flicek1, Lucia Hindorff3, Laura Harris1,
Helen Parkinson1
1European Molecular Biology Laboratory - European Bioinformatic
Institute (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, United Kingdom;
2Open Targets,
Hinxton, United Kingdom;
3National Human Genome Research
Institute (NHGRI) National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda,
United States.
Background/Objectives: Since its inception in 2008 as a resource
collating top associations from genome-wide array based studies
(GWAS), the GWAS Catalog has adapted to the changing geno-
mics landscape by expanding scope to incorporate targeted
arrays, summary statistics and pre-published datasets.
As of February 2022, the Catalog contains 33,162 GWA studies,
including 22,675 with full p-value summary statistics and more
than 325,000 curated top associations from 5,595 publications.
Pre-published datasets are also available and regularly updated as
they acquire published status. All data is freely available and fre-
quently updated, based on clear principles of open access and
data sharing.
Methods:.
Results: The next expansion in our scope has been the inclu-
sion of sequencing based studies, as the decreasing cost and
advances in analytical methods have made them feasible alter-
natives to traditional array-based GWAS. In 2021 we began to
routinely triage the literature for seqGWAS publications and make
these available for author submission of summary statistics. Since
the beginning of this year, we are also curating and extracting top
associations from the single variant analyses.
Conclusion: Gene-based analyses are of high interest to the
community but present additional challenges in standardisation.
One of the challenges is the lack of a standard format following
FAIR principles. In consultation with stakeholders we have devel-
oped a new standard format with additional mandatory ﬁelds,
suitable for single variant array and sequencing GWAS. Greater
availability of summary statistics for gene based analyses will
enable the development of an appropriate standard format for
sharing & interoperability of this data type.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.027.C Liabilideep: a ﬂexible, deep neural network
approach for constructing genetic liabilities and conditioning
on covariates without the need for prevalence or heritability
estimates
Mike Thompson1;2, Jamie Matthews1, Andrew Schork3;4, Sriram
Sankararaman2;5;6, Noah Zaitlen1;5;7
1University of California, Los Angeles, Bioinformatics, Los Angeles,
United States; 2University of California, Los Angeles, Computer Science,
Los Angeles, United States;
3Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for
Integrative Psychiatric Research (iPSYCH), Aarhus, Denmark; 4Institute
of Biological Psychiatry, MHC Sct. Hans, Mental Health Services,
Copenhagen, Denmark; 5University of California, Los Angeles, Compu-
tational Medicine, Los Angeles, United States; 6University of California,
Los Angeles, Human Genetics, Los Angeles, United States; 7University of
California, Los Angeles, Neurology, Los Angeles, United States.
Background/Objectives: Recent GWAS methods use family his-
tory and population-level estimates of prevalence and heritability
to improve power[1]. While there have been extensions to include
covariates such as sex, age, and age-of-onset, these approaches
require explicit changes to the generative model and additional
prevalence information per covariate[2].
Methods: We develop a neural network—Liabilideep—with a
ﬂexible input layer that takes any set of covariates (including
family history, related diseases, age, sex, etc.) and outputs a
genetic liability that considers all covariates at the step of liability
generation. The method optimizes a loss function that uses known
GWAS SNPs and does not require estimates of heritability or
prevalence.
Results: In simulations, Liabilideep reached over a median
3.5% increase in causal GWAS association statistics. On real data,
using only age, sex and BMI, we observe an increase in chi-square
statistics as high as 10% in GWAS of UKBB traits. Further, in
simulations, we show that Liabilideep can optimally condition on
covariates in ascertained data, leading to a 9.5% increase over
previous approaches. Notably, aside from age and sex, current
approaches cannot condition on covariates at the liability gen-
eration step, and therefore lose power in ascertained data when
the covariate is causal and included in the association framework.
Conclusion: We present a ﬂexible framework to generate
genetic liabilities while leveraging covariates. Our approach is fast
and can handle any number of covariates. Studies with ascertained
data and GWAS with more extensive family history available may
beneﬁt from Liabilideep without needing to adjust models.
References:.
[1] https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-020-0613-6.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
699
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
[2] https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.20.440585.
Grants: NIH T32HG002536.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.029.A Multi-tissue TWAS identiﬁes 137 novel gene
associations with ageing outcomes in humans
Georgina Navoly1, Olga Giannakopoulou1, Stefanie Mueller1, Linda
Partridge2, Nazif Alic2, Karoline Kuchenbäcker1
1UCL, Genetics Institute, London, United Kingdom; 2UCL, Institute of
Healthy Ageing, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Previous genome-wide association stu-
dies (GWAS) have identiﬁed multiple genetic variants associated
with human lifespan, however, only a few genome-wide sig-
niﬁcant (P ≤5 × 10−8) loci, affecting lifespan have been pin-
pointed. An alternative approach to study human lifespan is
through a gene-based association analysis called transcriptome-
wide association study (TWAS), which integrates GWAS with gene
expression data (eQTL), to boost statistical power and help narrow
down GWAS loci, to identify causal gene candidates.
Methods: In this study, we performed a multi-tissue TWAS on
human lifespan, using > 1 million parental lifespans from the UK
Biobank and the LifeGen Consortium as our discovery study, and
two replication TWASes on human longevity and healthspan
(morbidity-free lifespan) traits, using S-MultiXcan software.
Results: Here we show the successful application of the TWAS
approach to validate previous GWAS ﬁndings, and to identify
several novel genes associated with ageing: 137 novel replicating
genes (replication threshold p < 0.05) associated with either
longevity or healthspan and 9 novel genes, including HTR3B,
VARS, VWA7 and COASY associated with all the three ageing
outcomes. We identiﬁed 109 unique gene clusters, of which 16
gene clusters were successfully ﬁne-mapped (using FOGS), iden-
tifying the putative causal gene in the region.
Conclusion: Our results support the role of TWAS in uncover-
ing novel trait-associated genes, and through our prioritised,
putatively causal gene set, we provide novel insights into the
mechanisms of human ageing.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) [grant number BB/
M009513/1.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.030.B Polygenic scores for multiple deﬁnitions of
depression explain independent variance in iPSYCH MDD
Aleksander Ring1, Vivek Appadurai2, Kajsa-Lotta Georgii Hellberg2,
Morten Krebs2, Thomas Werge2, Cai Na3, Andrew Schork2
1Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark; 1Institute of
Biological Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark; 3Helmholtz Pioneer Cam-
pus, München, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Major Depressive disorder (MDD) is a
complex, heterogeneous mental disorder with contributions from
multiple genetic and environmental factors. Gene-mapping efforts
have accelerated thanks to the rapid expansion of sample sizes
enabled by including lightly phenotyped cases. This approach has
implications for both gene-mapping and trait prediction, and
debates about the best approaches for each goal are on-going.
Methods: We collected published GWAS for multiple deﬁni-
tions of MDD. We then computed polygenic scores (PGS) using
each MDD GWAS in N = ~60,000 individuals genotyped as a part
of the iPSYCH case-cohort study. We applied two PGS algorithms,
pruning and thresholding (P+T) and SBayesR. We then used
logistic regression to predict MDD in two iPSYCH cohorts, ranking
the performance of each MDD GWAS + algorithm combination.
Finally, we jointly ﬁt all PGS in one multivariate logistic model to
predict iPSYCH MDD.
Results: Consistent with previous reports, we saw clinical
deﬁnitions of MDD predict less well out of sample, perhaps
owing to their reduced sample sizes. Broad, shallow phenotyp-
ing and augmented phenotyping out-performed clinical MDD
GWAS, perhaps because of expanded sample sizes. Importantly,
when ﬁt jointly, multiple PGS explain signiﬁcant independent
variance.
Conclusion: Multiple MDD PGS may capture independent
components of etiology and can be combined to improve pre-
dictions. When performing gene-mapping it is important to
identify deﬁnitions of MDD that are not ‘too sticky’ - they separate
populations on core disease etiology. Strict predictions, however,
can relax this requirement and should consider multiple, inte-
grated predictors.
References:.
Grants: Lundbeck fellowship R335-2019-2318.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.032.D Non-coding rare variant trait associations in
127,724 UK Biobank genomes
Diogo Ribeiro1;2, Rick Wertenbroek1;2;3, Robin J. Hofmeister1;2, Olivier
Delaneau1;2
1University of Lausanne, Department of Computational Biology,
Lausanne, Switzerland; 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne,
Switzerland;
3University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland
(HES-SO), Delémont, Switzerland.
Background/Objectives: The recent growth of available whole
genome sequences (WGS) offers an unprecedented opportunity
to assess the contribution of rare genetic variation to a multitude
of human traits and diseases. Although rare variation in exonic
regions has been associated with hundreds of traits, the study of
rare variation in non-coding regions – where most GWAS hits are
found – is lagging behind. Indeed, as non-coding regions repre-
sent ~98% of the genome, the identiﬁcation of genomic regions
to focus on is crucial. In this respect, recent studies identiﬁed
regulatory domains (e.g. groups of enhancers) orchestrating the
expression of nearby genes, which could be key in aggregating
the signal across multiple pertinent genomic regions.
Methods/Results: Here, we develop new approaches to per-
form rare variant association tests on non-coding regions of
127,724 genomes from the UK Biobank. In practice, we perform
rare variant (MAF<0.1%) collapsing analyses on a plethora of
regulatory element annotations on a per gene basis, matching
cell-type-speciﬁc annotations with the relevant traits, such as
blood cell-types with blood biomarkers. To further reﬁne our
search for relevant regulatory regions per gene, we use public
multimodal single cell data (scRNA-seq + scATAC-seq in the same
cells) to identify >5000 groups of regulatory elements that syn-
chronously regulate gene expression.
Conclusion: By utilising functionally-relevant genomic anno-
tations we are able to scan the non-coding human genome and
pinpoint context-speciﬁc genetic variation that contributes to
human traits and disease and aid the development of pertinent
therapeutic agents.
References: Delaneau et al. 2019 Science.
Grants: Marie Sklodowska-Curie nº885998, SNF PP00P3_176977.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
700
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P25.034.B Identiﬁcation of shared molecular signatures of
ageing and metabolic diseases using multi-omic data
Theodora Dafni Michalettou1, Mun-Gwan Hong2, Juan Fernandez3,
Sapna Sharma4, Caroline Anna Brorsson5, Robert Koivula3;6, Jerzy
Adamski4, Søren Brunak5, Emmanouil Dermitzakis7, Paul Franks6,
Mark McCarthy3, Ewan Pearson8, Jochen Schwenk2, Mark Walker1,
Diabetes Research on Patient Stratiﬁcation (DIRECT) Consortium8,
Andrew Brown8, Ana Viñuela1
1Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom;
2SciLifeLab, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden; 3WTCHG, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom; 4Institut of Experimental Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany;
5Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark,
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark;
6Department of Clinical Science, Lund
University,
Lund,
Sweden;
7Genetic
Medicine
&
Development,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; 8Population Health and
Genomics, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Many of the well-deﬁned hallmarks of
ageing are often observed in age-related diseases such as Type 2
Diabetes (T2D). By utilising multi-omic data from human tissues
and clinical datasets we can identify molecular phenotypes asso-
ciated with ageing towards better understanding the link between
ageing and disease.
Methods: We utilised data from the DIRECT consortium
including genotypes (N~9.2e+106), transcriptomic (16,209 genes),
targeted proteomic (373 proteins) and metabolomic (116 targeted
metabolites) data from whole blood and plasma (3,029 partici-
pants). We evaluated the inﬂuence of age, T2D status, sex and BMI
on each of the molecular phenotypes along with shared effects.
Results: We found 11,938 genes (73.7%) and 287 proteins
(60.6%) differentially expressed with age (Qvalue < 5%). Of
those, 163 transcripts and their corresponding proteins were
associated with age, of which 78 pairs (~50%) demonstrated an
opposite direction of effect of age. For example, REG4 expression
signiﬁcantly decreases with age (Pval = 3.85e-50) while increas-
ing in its protein abundance (Pval = 4.49e-14). However, the
molecular phenotypes most affected by age were metabolites
(81% of targeted metabolites). We additionally evaluated that
sex had the greatest inﬂuence in gene expression (13,669
associated genes), while BMI greatly inﬂuenced protein abun-
dance (304 proteins). Signiﬁcantly associated proteins such as
IGFBP1 and FABP4 were also independently associated with age,
sex and T2D.
Conclusion: Most measured phenotypes are associated with
age and sex in an independent manner. We are currently evalu-
ating the changes of molecular phenotypes over time with long-
itudinal measurements spanning up to 48 months.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.035.C Estimation of efﬁciency low-pass whole genome
sequencing on Indian population
Ankita Srivastava1, Yuk Yee Leung2, Gerald Schellenberg2, Jinkook
Lee3, Samuel Jones1, Andrea Ganna1
1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland;
2University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine, Penn Neurodegeneration Genomics Center,
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Pennsylvania,
United States; 3University of Southern California, Los Angeles, United
States.
Background/Objectives: Several studies have suggested that
low coverage whole genome sequencing (lcWGS) represents a
powerful alternative to genotype arrays (GA) in traditionally
under-studied populations. Moreover, methods to impute lcWGS
using existing reference panels became recently available. Our
aim is to compare lcWGS vs GA in their ability to capture com-
mon and population-speciﬁc variants in the Indian population.
To do so we leveraged data from 2,768 individuals from the
LASI-DAD study.
Methods: We consider 372 individuals for which 30X WGS (our
gold standard) and GA (Illumina GSA) was available. We down-
sampled the 30X WGS data to simulate 0.5X,1X,2X, and 4X cov-
erage using GATK. GLIMPSE was used for genotype reﬁnement
and imputation of lcWGS using 1) 1000genome reference panel
and 2) ad-hoc reference panel built from 30x WGS of the
remaining 2396 LASI-DAD individuals. GA were imputed using
1000genomes, TOPMed and the ad-hoc reference panel.
Results: lcWGS data imputed using 1000 genome as reference
panel outperformed GA for all tested coverages (0.5X,1X,2X and
4X) both in terms of mean imputation quality and non-reference
concordance with the gold standard (30X WGS). 11.14% more
common and 15.55% more rare (AF < 1%) variants were dis-
covered at 4x lcWGS compared to GA. We are current performing
analysis using ad-hoc Indian-speciﬁc reference panel.
Conclusion: Our results so far demonstrate that low-coverage
WGS is a cost-effective and viable alternative to genotyping arrays
in non-European populations.
References: Martin et al., 2021.
LASI Wave 1, 2017-18, India Report, IIPS, Mumbai.
Rubinacci et al., 2021.
Grants: U01 AG064948, R01 AG05112.
Conﬂict of Interest: Ankita Srivastava Institute for Molecular
Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,
Yuk Yee Leung Penn Neurodegeneration Genomics Center,
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Gerald Schellenberg
Penn
Neurodegeneration
Genomics
Center,
Department
of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Jinkook Lee University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, Samuel Jones Institute for
Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland, Andrea Ganna Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland
(FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
P25.036.D A Genome Wide Association Study to investigate
genetic risk modiﬁers of leg ulcers in adults with sickle cell
disease
Jordan Connors1, Candace Middlebrooks1, Ashley Buscetta2, Cater-
ina Minniti3, Anthony Musolf1, Joan Bailey-Wilson1, Vence Bonham2
1National Human Genome Research Institute, Computational and
Statistical Genomics Branch, Baltimore, MD, United States; 2National
Human Genome Research Institute, Social and Behavioral Research
Branch, Bethesda, MD, United States; 3Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY, United States.
Background/Objectives: Sickle cell disease (SCD) is an inherited
recessive disorder that leads to abnormal sickle-shaped red blood
cells. There are a range of clinical manifestations that result from this
disease, including the leg ulcers sub-phenotype, which negatively
impacts the quality of life of SCD patients. There may be genetic
variants that modify the risk of developing SCD associated leg
ulcers. SCD patients develop leg ulcers at a higher rate than those in
the general population. However, not every patient with SCD will
develop leg ulcers. The INSIGHTS study seeks to understand what
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
701
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
environmental or genetic factors are contributing to the increased
risk of developing this sub-phenotype. The current project aims to
detect modiﬁer loci that may affect the risk of developing leg ulcers
in a dataset of 264 SCD patients from the INSIGHTS study.
Methods: Whole genome sequencing was completed at NHGRI
using the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform. Variant calling using GATK
and association testing using PLINK has been completed on the ﬁrst
121 samples (N = 53 with leg ulcers, N = 68 without leg ulcers).
Results: The strongest interim associations were on chromo-
some 21 near the TIAM1 gene (P-val = 1.01E-4) and on chromo-
some 20 near the ZFP64 gene (P-val = 1.08E-4).
Conclusion: Results from processing an additional 143 samples
with this same pipeline will be reported in order to gain further
insight into genetic variants that may modify the risk of devel-
oping leg ulcers in patients with SCD.
References:.
Grants: This work was supported by the Intramural Research
Program of NIH/NHGRI.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.037.A An innovative approach to link genomic data with
electronic administrative health databases, focused on the
investigation of shared genetics among autoimmune diseases
Alessandro Pizzino1, Ilenia Eboli2, Paolo Emilio Alboini3, Nadia
Barizzone1, Roberta Picariello4, Carmen Marciano5, Paola Cavalla6,
m. f. Grasso7, Paola Richiardi8, Antonio Bertolotto9, Domizia
Vecchio10, Maurizio Leone3, Roberto Gnavi2, sandra d'alfonso1
1University of Eastern Piedmont, Laboratory of human genetics,
Health sciences, Novara, Italy; 2ASL TO3, Servizio Sovrazonale di
Epidemiologia, Regione Piemonte, Turin, Italy; 3IRCCS Casa Sollievo
della Sofferenza, Neurology Unit, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; 2ASL
TO3, Servizio Sovrazonale di Epidemiologia, Regione Piemonte, Turin,
Italy; 5San Giovanni Rotondo, Clinical Trial Ofﬁce, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy; 6Turin, S.C. Neurologia I e Centro Sclerosi Multipla,
Dipartimento di Neuroscienze e di Salute Mentale, AOU Città della
Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Turin, Italy; 7Cuneo, UO Neurologia,
Ospedale Santa Croce e Carle, Cuneo, Italy; 8Turin, UO Neurologia,
ASL Città di Torino, Ospedale San Giovanni Bosco, Turin, Italy;
9Orbassano, Neurologia-CRESM (Centro Riferimento Regionale Scler-
osi Multipla), AOU San Luigi Gonzaga, Orbassano, Italy; 10University
Hospital “Maggiore della Carità”, Neurology, Novara, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a complex
inﬂammatory-degenerative disease. GWASes identiﬁed >200 sus-
ceptibility loci, but they have poorly contributed to understand
how genetics inﬂuences the phenotype as the reported comor-
bidity with other autoimmune diseases (ADs). Several AD loci were
reported.
Aims:.
a) explore an innovative approach of linkage of genomic data
with a large array of electronic administrative health databases
(EAHDs) to test if genotype/phenotype associations can be suc-
cessfully analyzed using EAHDs as well as in traditional studies.
b) test the hypothesis that MS patients share a common
genetic susceptibility with other ADs, leading to the presence of
comorbidity with several of them.
Methods: We constructed several algorithms to identify MS or
other ADs patients from EAHDs. To explore the common genetic
susceptibility among ADs we are comparing a battery of weighted
genetic risk scores (wGRSs) constructed using known genetic
susceptibility variants for several ADs in MS patients with or
without autoimmune comorbidity.
Results: We created: 1)an algorithm capable of ascertain pre-
valent MS cases, validated by matching with a clinical cohort of
685 genome-wide genotyped MS patients with conﬁrmed diag-
nosis (95.9% sensitivity, 99.97% speciﬁcity); 2) algorithms to
identify other 14 ADs and evaluated their co-morbidity with MS.
We identiﬁed 8850 MS cases, 16.2% show a comorbidity with at
least one AD: eight of these are signiﬁcantly associated with MS
(P < 0.05). Linkage with genotypic data and the AD wGRs con-
struction is ongoing.
Conclusion: EAHDs can be successfully used to test associa-
tions in complex diseases. MS patients show comorbidity with
other ADs.
References:.
Grants: Italian Ministry of Health (RF-2016-02361294 grant).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.038.B Deconstructing the genetic component of reported
trauma with genomic structural equation modelling
Abigail
ter
Kuile1;2,
Rosa
Cheesman3,
jonathan
coleman1;2,
Christopher Hübel1;2;4, alicia peel1, daniel levey5;6, murray stein7, joel
gelernter5;6, christopher rayner1, Thalia Eley1;2, Gerome Breen1;2
1King’s College London, London, United Kingdom; 2National Institute
for Health Research (NIHR) Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre at
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, United
Kingdom; 3PROMENTA Research Center, Department of Psychology,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; 4National Centre for Register-based
Research, Aarhus Business and Social Sciences, Aarhus University,
Aarhus, Denmark;
5Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, United States; 6Veterans Affairs Connecticut
Healthcare System, West Haven, United States;
7Department of
Psychiatry and School of Public Health, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, United States.
Background/Objectives: Self-reports of trauma are partly heri-
table. Heritable behaviours also inﬂuence reports of or exposure to
environmental factors. Identifying heritable behavioural factors of
self-reported trauma could improve our understanding of the
interpretation of life events.
Methods: We calculated genetic correlations of childhood
maltreatment (reporting of emotional, sexual, and physical abuse,
and emotional, and physical neglect) and >700 traits to identify
phenotypes that might explain the heritability of reported child-
hood maltreatment. We retained traits with |rg|>0.25. We used
genomic structural equation modelling to detect residual genetic
variance in childhood maltreatment once genetically correlated
traits were accounted for.
Results: More than half of the genetic component of childhood
maltreatment could be accounted for by genetic correlations with
twelve health traits (59%) and nine psychiatric disorders (57%).
General risk tolerance, subjective well-being and autism spectrum
disorder were the only traits independently associated with the
genetic component of childhood maltreatment. These three traits
alone
explained
50%
of
the
SNP-heritability
of
childhood
maltreatment.
Conclusion: Our ﬁndings offer an explanation of the herit-
ability of childhood maltreatment. The key contribution of three
independently associated traits to the SNP-based heritability of
reported trauma suggests that aspects of these phenotypes may
be involved in gene-environment correlations or the retrospective
reporting of trauma. Elucidating how these are linked with vul-
nerability or the subjective experience of trauma has the potential
to improve trauma prevention and posttraumatic intervention
strategies.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
702
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P25.039.C Understanding the genetics of autoimmune
hypothyroidism
Melissa Bujnis1, Rosalie Sterenborg2;3, Bjørn Olav Åsvold4;5, Ana
Barić6, Luka Brčić7, Jan Freudenberg8, Lars Fritsche9;10, Masahiro
Kanai11;12;13, Graham Leese14, Eirini Marouli15, Andres Metspalu16,
Marta
Riise
Moksnes16,
Bhramar
Mukherjee9;10;17,
Yukinori
Okada11;18;19, Colin Palmer20, Areti Papadopoulou15, Vesna Boraska
Perica7, ante punda6, Moneeza Siddiqui21, Enrique Soto-Pedre22,
Sundararajan Srinivasan22, Maris Teder-Laving16, Marco Medici2;3,
Alexander Teumer23, Lynn Jorde1
1University of Utah, Department of Human Genetics, Salt Lake City,
United States;
2Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
Netherlands; 3Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether-
lands;
4NTNU, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Trondheim, Norway; 5Trondheim University Hospital, Department of
Endocrinology, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway; 6University
Hospital of Split, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Split, Croatia;
7University of Split, Department of Medical Biology, School of
Medicine, Split, Croatia;
8Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Tarrytown, United States;
9University of
Michigan, Department of Biostatistics, Ann Arbor, United States;
10University of Michigan, Center for Statistical Genetics, Ann Arbor,
United States;
11RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences,
Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Yokohama, Japan; 12Massachu-
setts General Hospital, Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit,
Boston, United States; 13Harvard Medical School, Department of
Biomedical Informatics, Boston, United States; 14University of Dundee
- Ninewells Hospital & Medical School, Dundee, United Kingdom;
15William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom;
16Institute of
Genomics University of Tartu, Estonian Genome Centre, Tartu,
Estonia;
17University of Michigan, Department of Epidemiology,
Ann Arbor, United States; 18Osaka University Immunology Frontier
Research Center (WPI-IFReC), Laboratory of Statistical Immunology,
Osaka, Japan;
19Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Department of Statistical Genetics, Suita, Japan;
20University of
Dundee- Ninewells Hospital & Medical School, Department of
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Dundee, United Kingdom; 21University
of Dundee - Ninewells Hospital & Medical School, Division of
Population Health & Genomics, Dundee, United Kingdom; 22Nine-
wells Hospital and Medical School University of Dundee, Division of
Molecular and Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, Dundee, United
Kingdom; 23Institute for Community Medicine, University Medicine
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
Background/Objectives: Autoimmune hypothyroidism is com-
mon, with a prevalence of 3-5% in the general population1.
Hypothyroidism is associated with an increased risk of various
diseases and mortality1. Despite its estimated high heritability,
little is known about the genetic basis of autoimmune hypothyr-
oidism1. For this reason, we have performed the largest GWAS
meta-analysis of autoimmune hypothyroidism to date.
Methods: We obtained GWAS summary statistics from nine
cohorts, where cases and controls were deﬁned using ICD9/10
codes. Reference genomes were used to impute missing genotype
data2,3. We adjusted for covariates including age, sex, population
structure, and related individuals. METAL was used to perform the
meta-analysis3.
Results: We performed the largest GWAS meta-analysis to date
on autoimmune hypothyroidism, including 64,545 cases and
~500,000 controls. We identiﬁed more than 350 independent
SNPs passing the GWAS signiﬁcance threshold (p = 5x10E-8).
Pathway
analyses
suggest
involvement
of
known
immune
pathways as well as enrichment of associations in chromatin
structure regulation.
Conclusion: Identiﬁcation of novel genetic determinants is a
key step in advancing the understanding of this common disease.
These data will be a rich resource for future projects focusing on
disease prediction, and personalized management, and treatment
of autoimmune hypothyroidism.
References: 1. Chaker L, et al. Lancet. 390, 1550-1562 (2017).
2. Auton, A. et al. Nature. 526, 68-74 (2015).
3. McCarthy, S. et al. Nat. Genet. 48, 1279–1283 (2016).
4. Willer, C., et al. Bioinformatics 26, 2190–2191 (2010).
Grants: T32- Training Program in Computational Approaches
to Diabetes and Metabolism Research.
R35 - Human Genetic Variation and Diseases.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P25.041.A The joint phenotypic and molecular genetic
architecture of major depressive disorder and anxiety
disorders
Johan Zvrskovec1;2, Abigail ter Kuile1;2, Christopher Hübel1;2,
jonathan coleman1;2, Thalia Eley1, Gerome Breen1;2
1Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College
London, Social, Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre, London,
United Kingdom; 2National Institute For Health Research, Biomedical
Research Centre for Mental Health, South London and Maudsley
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
Background/Objectives: Anxiety and mood disorders occur
comorbid and are main contributors to the burden of disability
worldwide. By using factor analytical methods, we characterise
latent
genetic
constructs
underpinning
anxiety
and
mood
disorders.
Methods: We performed genomic structural equation model-
ling (gSEM) on European ancestry genome-wide association study
(GWAS) summary statistics of 20 behavioural traits. To retain
genetic signal we 1.) generated expanded linkage disequilibrium
(LD) scores from the European subset of 1000 Genomes Phase 3
(excluding Finnish ancestry) genetic reference panel, and 2.)
imputed missing genetic effect estimates based on LD structure in
summary statistics. We obtained GWAS with each latent genetic
factor by regressing individual variant effects on factors in a
synthetic GWAS using gSEM, including 3,935,493 individuals and
more than 7.7M genetic variants per putative factor trait. We
annotated genes and performed pathway analysis, using MAGMA
and FUMA.
Results: We identiﬁed six correlated latent genetic factors
(AIC = 3591, SRMR = 0.053), explaining 59% of the variance. We
identiﬁed 1,296 novel genetic variant associations and 281 gene
associations not previously detected in univariate GWASs. Factor
neuroticism and factor depression were both enriched in genes
expressed in brain tissue: frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex,
hypothalamus, putamen, nucleus accumbens, hippocampus, cau-
date nucleus, cortex, and amygdala. Factor neuroticism was
additionally enriched in genes expressed in substantia nigra.
Conclusion: Our work uncovers speciﬁc biological processes,
such as chromatin organisation, gene regulation, synaptic signal-
ling,
neuronal
development
and
neurogenesis,
potentially
involved in anxiety and affective aetiology.
References:.
Grants:.
https://www.guysandstthomasbrc.nihr.ac.uk/researchers/
funding-acknowledgement-policy/.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
703
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
P26 COVID-19
P26.002.C Germline rare variants of lectin pathway genes
predispose to asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection in elderly
individuals
Giuseppe D'Alterio1, Vito Alessandro Lasorsa2, Ferdinando Bonﬁ-
glio3,
Sueva
Cantalupo3,
Barbara
Eleni
Rosato2,
Immacolata
Andolfo3, Roberta Russo3, Umberto Esposito2, Giulia Frisso3, Pasquale
Abete4, Gian Marco Cassese4, Giuseppe Servillo5, ivan gentile6,
Carmelo Piscopo7, Matteo Della Monica7, Giuseppe Fiorentino8,
Angelo Boccia2, Giovanni Paolella3, Veronica Ferrucci3, Pasqualino
De Antonellis2, Roberto Siciliano2, Fathem Asadzadeh1, Cirino
Pellegrino9, Carlo Buonerba9, Biancamaria Pierri10, Massimo Zollo3,
Achille Iolascon3, Mario Capasso3
1University of Milan, Milan, Italy; 2CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate,
Naples, Italy;
3University of Naples Federico II, Department of
Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Naples, Italy; 4COVID
Hospital, P.O.S. Anna e SS. Madonna della Neve di Boscotrecase,
Ospedali Riuniti Area Vesuviana, Naples, Italy; 5University of Naples
Federico II, Department of Neurosciences and Reproductive and
Odontostomatologic Sciences, Naples, Italy; 6University of Naples
Federico II, Department of Medicine and Surgery, Naples, Italy;
7Medical and Laboratory Genetics Unit, A.O.R.N. ‘Antonio Cardarelli’,
Naples, Italy; 8AORN dei Colli Presidio Ospedaliero Cotugno, Naples,
Italy; 9Istituto Zooproﬁlattico Sperimentale del Mezzogiorno, Naples,
Italy; 10University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Emerging evidence suggests that com-
plement system infection-dependent hyperactivation may worsen
COVID-19 outcome. We investigated the role of predicted high
impact variants - referred as Qualifying Variants (QVs) - of com-
plement system genes in predisposing asymptomatic COVID-19 in
elderly individuals, known to be more susceptible to severe
disease.
Methods: Exploiting Whole-Exome Sequencing (WES) data and
56 complement system genes, we performed a gene-based col-
lapsing test between 164 asymptomatic subjects (age ≥60 y.o.)
and 56,885 European individuals from the gnomAD database. We
replicated this test comparing the same asymptomatic individuals
with 147 hospitalized COVID-19 patients.
Results: We found an enrichment of QVs in three genes (MASP1,
COLEC10 and COLEC11), which belong to the lectin pathway, in the
asymptomatic cohort. Moreover, individuals with QVs showed lower
serum levels of Masp1 and of prothrombin activity compared to
controls while no differences were observed for CH50 and AH50
levels that measure the activity of classical and alternative com-
plement pathways, respectively. Finally, integrative analyses of
genome-wide association study and expression quantitative loci
traits data showed a correlation between polymorphisms asso-
ciated with asymptomatic COVID-19 and decreased expression of
MASP1, COLEC11 and COLEC10 genes in lung tissue.
Conclusion: This study suggests that rare genetic variants can
protect from severe COVID-19 by mitigating the activation of
lectin pathway and prothrombin activity.
References:.
Grants: This research was funded by the project “CEINGE TASK-
FORCE COVID19”, grant number D64I200003800, by Regione Cam-
pania for the ﬁght against Covid-19 (DGR n. 140 del 17 Marzo 2020).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.003.D SARS-CoV-2 sequencing: A comparison of high-
throughput methods
Zuzana Gerber1, Christian Daviaud1, Damien Delafoy1, Florian
Sandron1, Enagnon Alidjinou2, Jonathan Mercier1, Sylvain Gerber3,
Vincent Meyer1, Anne Boland1, Laurence Bocket2, Robert Olaso1,
Jean-François Deleuze1
1CEA, Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine, Evry,
France;
2Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Lille, Laboratoire de
Virologie, Lille, France; 3Muséum national d’Histoire naturelle, Institut
de Systématique, Evolution, Biodiversité, Paris, France.
Background/Objectives: The COVID-19 pandemic continues to
threaten public health and burden healthcare systems worldwide.
Whole SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing has become essential for
epidemiological monitoring and identiﬁcation of new variants,
which could represent a risk of increased transmissibility, viru-
lence, or resistance to vaccines or treatment. In this study, we
assess the performance of various target enrichment methods for
whole SARS-CoV-2 sequencing.
Methods: We applied three target enrichment methods – two
multiplex ampliﬁcation methods and one hybridization capture –
to the same set of nasopharyngeal patient samples (N = 93) in
high-throughput mode. SARS-CoV-2 genome was obtained using
short-read next-generation sequencing.
Results: All three methods provided excellent breadth of
coverage of SARS-CoV-2 genome (above 99%), albeit with vastly
different sequencing depth (5-fold difference) and uniformity of
coverage (20% difference in coefﬁcient of variation). Poor local
coverage has negative impact on variant calling in the concerned
region, leading to an occasional allele drop-out (1.2% SNPs
affected for one method).
Conclusion: We discuss the performance of each target
enrichment method and their potential for scaling up, in order to
promote prospective programs of large-scale genomic surveil-
lance of SARS-CoV-2 worldwide. Genomic surveillance will be
crucial to overcoming the ongoing pandemic of COVID-19, despite
its successive waves and continually emerging variants.
References:.
Grants: LabEx GENMED (grant number ANR-10-LABX-0013).
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.005.B Design of a cost-effective diagnosis tool for SARS-
Cov-2 variant detection through a next generation
sequencing (NGS) based strategy
Mª Mercedes Montero-Vale1;2, Pau Rodriguez-Sodupe1, Marina
Alguacil-Guillén3,
Mateu
Espasa-Soley3,
LLuís
Armengol1,
Juan
Ramón González2, Jairo Rodríguez1
1Quantitative Genomics Medicine Laboratories (qGenomics), Esplu-
gues de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain; 2Barcelona Institute for Global
Health (ISGlobal), Bioinformatic Research Group in Epidemiology,
Barcelona, Spain; 3Hospital Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain.
Background/Objectives: Current pandemic situation, together
with the continuous emergence of new SARS-CoV-2 variants
reveal the need to develop a more versatile tool than PCR-based
methods that allows both high throughput COVID-19 diagnostic
and speciﬁc variant detection at reduced cost and fast turnaround
times. Thus, with the aim of overcoming current test limitations
and providing a strategy with these characteristics arises our novel
next generation sequencing based approach.
Methods: The developed strategy works with RNA samples
obtained from nasopharyngeal swabs. RNA samples are processed
with our custom laboratory protocol and can be sequenced with
any Illumina platform to generate results within a 24h timeframe.
A tailored bioinformatic pipeline analyzes the data and generates
a clinical-level report.
Results: Clinical validation results have shown that the
designed solution, sensitively and speciﬁcally identiﬁes negative
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
704
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
and positive samples that display a broad range in viral loads and
readily identiﬁes the following major SARS-CoV-2 variants of
concern (VoC): Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta, Lambda and Omicron
(BA.1 and BA.2).
Conclusion: The versatility of our solution allows the capability
of identifying the presence of other common respiratory viruses as
well as identifying patients at risk through the identiﬁcation of
susceptibility human variants in the host. This, together with the
possibility of easily adding new VoC as they emerge, will make
VoC monitoring in entire populations feasible, providing a new
perspective on the application of NGS methods in the ﬁeld of
clinical microbiology.
References:.
Grants: This project is supported by the Generalitat de Cataluña
through an Industrial PhD grant.
Conﬂict of Interest: Mª Mercedes Montero-Vale Pre-doc stu-
dent, full-time, qGenomics, Pau Rodriguez-Sodupe Pre-doc stu-
dent,
full-time,
qGenomics,
Marina
Alguacil-Guillén:
None
declared, Mateu Espasa-Soley: None declared, LLuís Armengol
CSO, full-time, qGenomics, Juan Ramón González: None declared,
Jairo Rodríguez R&D director, full-time, qGenomics.
P26.006.C A survival genome-wide association study to
identify variants associated with COVID-19 risk of death
Francesca Minnai1, Filippo Biscarini2, Tommaso A. Dragani3, Chiara
Fallerini4, Kristina Zguro4, Simone Furini4, Gen-Covid Multicenter
Study4, Alessandra Renieri4, Francesca Colombo1
1Institute for Biomedical Technologies - National Research Council,
Segrate (MI), Italy; 2Institute of Agricultural Biology and Biotechnol-
ogy - National Research Council, Milan, Italy; 3Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy; 4University of Siena, Siena,
Italy.
Background/Objectives: SARS-CoV-2 infection clinical manifes-
tations hugely vary among patients, ranging from no symptoms,
to life-threatening conditions. This variability is also due to host
genetics: COVID-19 Host Genetics Initiative identiﬁed six loci
associated with COVID-19 severity in a previous case-control
genome-wide association study. A different approach to investi-
gate the genetics of COVID-19 severity is looking for variants
associated with mortality, e.g. by analyzing the association
between genotypes and time-to-event data.
Methods: Here we perform a case-only genome-wide survival
analysis, of 1,777 COVID-19 patients from the GEN-COVID cohort,
60 days after infection/hospitalization. Case-only studies has the
advantage of eliminating selection biases and confounding rela-
ted to control subjects. Patients were genotyped using Illumina
Inﬁnium Global Screening Arrays. PLINK software was used for
data quality check and principal component analysis. GeneAbel R
package was used for survival analysis and age, sex and the ﬁrst
four principal components were used as covariates in the Cox
proportional hazard model.
Results: We found four variants associated with COVID-19
patient survival at a nominal P < 1.0 x 10-6. Their minor alleles were
associated with a higher mortality risk (i.e. hazard ratios (HR)>1). In
detail, we observed: HR = 1.03 for rs28416079 on chromosome 19
(P = 1.34 x 10-7), HR = 1.15 for rs72815354 on chromosome 10
(P = 1.66 x 10-7), HR = 2.12 for rs2785631 on chromosome 1
(P = 5.14 x 10-7), and HR = 2.27 for rs2785631 on chromosome 5
(P = 6.65 x 10-7).
Conclusion: The present results suggest that germline variants
are COVID-19 prognostic factors. Replication in the remaining HGI
COVID-19 patient cohort (EGAS00001005304) is ongoing at the
time of abstract submission.
References:.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03767-x.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-020-00793-7.
Grants: “PATCOVID” - 2020-2016_Ric_3 - Istituto Buddista Ita-
liano Soka Gakkai.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.007.D Transcriptomic analysis in patients with SARS-CoV-
2 virus infection. Identiﬁcation of the association of risk/
protective proﬁles against the disease
Israel David Duarte Herrera1, Elías Cuesta Llavona1;2, Guillermo
Muñiz Albaiceta1;2, Marta García Clemente1, Eliecer Coto1;2, Juan
Gómez1;2
1Central University Hospital of Asturias, Oviedo, Spain;
2Health
Research Institute of Asturias (ISPA), Oviedo, Spain.
Background/Objectives: SARS-CoV2 causes the COVID-19 dis-
ease, capable of producing a severe acute respiratory syndrome.
Several clinical variables and genetic variants have been related to
a worse prognosis. The aim of this study is to measure if difference
in the gene expression are associated with COVID-19 severity.
Methods: We performed RNA-seq Transcriptome in RNA
extracted from lymphoblastoid cell line in 20 patients who require
hospitalization (10 from the intensive care unit) in a GeneStudio
S5 Plus Sequencer (Ion Torrent Technology). FASTQ ﬁles were
obtained and trimmed using BBtools, BBduk for cutting, ﬁltering
and masking the data, and Dedupe for the elimination of
duplicates.
Mapping and counting matrix was done in bash using the
Salmon program. Differential expression analysis and subsequent
functional enrichment was performed using Rstudio (DESeq2,
ClusterProﬁler, GO and KEGG).
Results: We observed that 2042 differentially expressed genes
(1996 overexpressed, LFC>0 and 406 underexpressed, LFC<0)
were obtained between patients who require hospitalization ver-
sus those in the intensive care unit. We found some genes pre-
viously SARS-CoV-2 associated (PGLYRP1, HDAC9 and FUT4).
Furthermore, genes involved in the activity of the immune system
and in inﬂammatory processes showed signiﬁcant differences
between
cohorts
(ABCF1
(LFC = -25.14,
padj = 1.05e-13),
ABHD16A (LFC = 25.00, padj = 1.05e-13) and IER3 (LFC = -24.45,
padj = 2.43e-13)).
Conclusion: We described differential expression in genes of
the immune system and inﬂammatory processes that might be
have a role in the risk of develop severe symptoms of COVID-19,
including admission in the intensive care unit. This results should
be validated by additional functional studies.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.008.A A prospective study to evaluate the role of
cholesterol metabolism related genes expression in predicting
clinical outcome of patients with severe COVID-19
Katerina Basharova1, Tatiana Usenko1;2, Anastasia Bezrukova1,
Daria Bogdanova1, Michael Nikolaev2;3, Artem Izumchenko1, Elena
Gavrilova2, Irina Shlyk2, Yuri Polushin2, Petr Slominsky4, Sofya
Pchelina1;2
1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute Named by B.P. Konstantinov of
National Research Center “Kurchatov Institute”, Gatchina, Russian
Federation; 2Pavlov First Saint-Petersburg State Medical University,
Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation; 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics
Institute Named by B.P. Konstantinov of National Research Center
“Kurchatov Institute”, Gatchina, Russian Federation;
4Institute of
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
705
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Molecular Genetics of National Research Center “Kurchatov Institute”,
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives: Latest studies have stressed the rele-
vance of cholesterol metabolism with susceptibility to COVID-19
and its severity. We have previously shown downregulation of
low-density lipoprotein particle receptor pathway in severe
COVID-19 patient surviving compared to non-surviving(1). We
aimed to assess the over-time expression changes of its relevant
genes in severe COVID-19 patients with different outcomes (sur-
vivors/non-survivors).
Methods: Blood samples were taken from 39 severe COVID-
19 patients without chronic diseases twice: on the day of
admission to the intensive care (T1) and in one week (T2).
Within 30-day follow-up 18 patients recovered and 21 patients
died. 20 individuals never previously infected with COVID-19
were also enrolled. Expression levels of studied genes in per-
ipheral blood lymphocytes were analyzed by real-time PCR with
TaqMan assay.
Results: Increased expression of STAB1 at T2, PPARγ at T1 and
CD36 at T1 and T2 were revealed in COVID-19 patients regardless of
the outcome compared to controls (p < 0.05). Interesting, that in
respective groups of COVID-19 patients increased STAB1, decreased
PPARγ and in survivors decreased LRP6 expression were revealed at
T2 compared to T1 (p < 0.01). Also, STAB1 expression was decreased
in survivors compared to non-survivors at T2 (p = 0.017).
Conclusion: Our study revealed, that patients with severe COVID-
19 are characterized by increased expression of cholesterol meta-
bolism related genes, with more pronounced decrease of expression
of these genes over time for survivors. Increased STAB1 expression
may be considered as a predictor of poor COVID-19 prognosis.
References: 1. Vlasov,I. et al. Transcriptomic Proﬁles Reveal
Downregulation of Low-Density Lipoprotein Particle Receptor
Pathway Activity in Patients Surviving Severe COVID-19. Cells
10,3495 (2021).
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.009.B Persistent chemosensory dysfunction in COVID-19
patients: a deep dive into the psychophysical and genetic
characterisation of an Italian cohort
Beatrice Spedicati1, Giuseppe Giovanni Nardone2, Aurora Santin1,
Anna Morgan2, Maria Pina Concas2, Giancarlo Tirelli1, Paolo
Gasparini1;2, Paolo Boscolo-Rizzo1, Giorgia Girotto1;2
1University of Trieste, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health
Sciences, Trieste, Italy; 2Institute for Maternal and Child Health –
I.R.C.C.S. Burlo Garofolo, Medical Genetics, Trieste, Italy.
Background/Objectives: Chemosensory dysfunction is a hallmark
of SARS-CoV-2 infection; nevertheless, the genetic factors predis-
posing to long-term smell and taste loss are still unknown.
This study aims to identify candidate genes possibly involved in
persistent smell/taste loss through Whole Genome Sequencing
(WGS) analysis of a large cohort of 130 fully characterised Italian
individuals, previously diagnosed with COVID-19.
Methods: DNA of all analysed patients was used to perform
WGS analysis, and a detailed personal anamnesis was collected.
Moreover, orthonasal function was assessed through the exten-
ded Snifﬁn’ Sticks test, retronasal function was tested with 20
powdered tasteless aromas, and taste was determined with vali-
dated Taste Strips. Self-reported smell and taste alterations were
assessed via Visual Analog Scales plus questionnaires.
Results: The clinical evaluation allowed to classify the patients
in two groups: 88 cases affected by persistent smell dysfunction
(median age, 49) and 42 controls (median age, 51). Among cases,
26.1% (n = 23) were functionally anosmic and 73.9% (n = 65) were
hyposmic. Within cases, 77 underwent the taste strip test: 53.2%
(n = 41) presented hypogeusia and 46.8% (n = 36) were normo-
geusic. Preliminary WGS results on a ﬁrst subset of 76 samples
conﬁrmed the important role of UGT2A1 gene, previously descri-
bed as involved in smell loss. Interestingly, we identiﬁed a non-
sense variant (rs111696697, MAF 0.046) signiﬁcantly associated
with anosmia in males (p-value: 0.0183).
Conclusion: Here, for the ﬁrst time a large cohort of patients,
fully characterised through a comprehensive psychophysical
evaluation of smell and taste, have been analysed to better deﬁne
the genetic bases of COVID-19-related persistent chemosensory
dysfunction.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.010.C Mid-density Gene Expression proﬁling of SARS-
COV-2 infected samples using Applied Biosystems™TaqMan™
Flexible Array Panels
rui yang1, Kelly Li1, allan chen1, phillip kilgas1, katherine kirchmeier1,
Archana Gupta1
1Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, south san francisco, United States.
Background/Objectives: The broad spectrum of clinical mani-
festations from SARS-COV-2 infection and observed risk factors for
severe disease highlight the importance of understanding mole-
cular mechanisms underlying SARS-CoV-2 associated disease
pathogenesis. Research studies have identiﬁed a large number of
host proteins that play roles in viral entry, innate immune
response, or immune signalling during infection. The ability to
interrogate subsets of these genes simultaneously within SARS-
COV-2 infected samples is critical to understanding how their
expression contribute to phenotypic variability of the disease
caused by the pathogen.
Methods: 30 Nasopharyngeal swab were obtained and inclu-
ded SARS-CoV-2 infected and control samples. RNA was extracted,
reverse transcribed and loaded onto ﬂexible TaqMan array panels
designed speciﬁcally for targeting the most cited genes related to
SARS-COV-2 entry and restriction factors as well as cytokines,
chemokines, and growth factors involved in the pathogenesis.
Results: Our data indicated that not only were the levels of
several of these host factors differentially modulated between the
two study groups, but also that SARS-CoV-2 infected subjects
presented with greater frequency of several important inﬂam-
matory cytokines and chemokines such as CCL2, CCL3, IFNG, entry
receptors such as ACE2, TMRPS11A, and host restriction factors
including LY6E and ZBP1.
Conclusion:
TaqMan
array
plates
provide
a
fast,
mid-
throughput solution to determine the levels of several virus and
host-associated factors in various cell types and add to our
understanding of how the pathogenesis may vary depending on
gender, age, infection site etc.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: rui yang Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Kelly Li
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, allan chen Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,
phillip kilgas Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, katherine kirchmeier
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Archana Gupta Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc.
P26.011.D Gain and loss of function CFTR alleles modulate
COVID-19 clinical outcome
Margherita Baldassarri1;2, Chiara Fallerini1;2, Francesca Fava1;2;3,
Kristina Zguro2, Nicoletta Pedemonte4, Valeria Tomati4, Cristina
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
706
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
Pastorino5, Mirella Bruttini1;2;3, Nicola Picchiotti6;7, Simone Furini2,
Gen-Covid Multicenter Study1, Chiara Gabbi8, Alessandra Renieri1;2;3
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy; 2Med Biotech Hub
and Competence Center, Department of Medical Biotechnologies,
University
of
Siena,
Siena,
Italy;
3Genetica
Medica,
Azienda
Ospedaliero-Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy; 4UOC Genetica Medica,
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy;
5Department of
Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal
and Child Health (DI-NOGMI), University of Genoa, Genova, Italy;
6Department of Mathematics, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy;
7University of Siena, DIISM-SAILAB, Siena, Italy;
8Department of
Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background/Objectives: We previously demonstrated that car-
rying a single pathogenic CFTR allele increases the risk for COVID-
19 severity and mortality rate. We now aim to clarify the role of
several uncharacterized rare alleles, including complex (cis) alleles,
and in trans combinations.
Methods: LASSO logistic regression was used for the asso-
ciation of sets of variants, stratiﬁed by MAF, with severity.
Immortalized cystic ﬁbrosis bronchial epithelial cell lines and
Fischer Rat Thyroid cells were transfected by plasmid carrying
speciﬁc CFTR mutations. YFP-based assays were used to measure
CFTR activity.
Results: Here we functionally demonstrate that the rare
(MAF = 0.007) complex G576V/R668C allele mitigates the disease by
a gain of function mechanism. Several novel CFTR ultra-rare (MAF
<0.001) alleles were proved to have a reduced function; they are
associated with disease severity either alone (single or complex
alleles) or with another hypomorphic allele in the second chromo-
some, with a global reduction of CFTR activity between 40 to 72%.
Conclusion: CFTR is a bidirectional modulator of COVID-19
outcome. At-risk subjects do not have open cystic ﬁbrosis before
viral infection and therefore are not easily recognisable in the
general population unless a genetic analysis is performed. As the
CFTR activity is partially retained, CFTR potentiator drugs could be
an option as add-on therapy for at-risk patients.
References: Baldassarri M et al. Severe COVID-19 in Hospita-
lized Carriers of Single CFTR Pathogenic Variants. JPM..11,6 558. 15
Jun. 2021.
Grants: FISR 2020/Tuscany Region COVID-19/INTERVENE - GA
No. 101016775/Soka Gakkai PAT-COVID.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.013.B COVID-19: How to analyze data from whole-exome
sequencing?
Natalia Forgacova1;2, Zuzana Holesova3, Juraj Gazdarica1;3;4,
Rastislav Hekel1;3;4, Tatiana Sedlackova1;3, Diana Rusnakova1;2;3,
Pavol Janega5, Kristina Mikus Kuracinova5, Lucia Krivosikova5, Pavel
Babal5, Zuzana Pos1;3;6, Jakub Styk1;3;5, Ondrej Pos1;3, Jaroslav
Budiš1;3;4, Jan Radvanszky1;2;6, Tomas Szemes1;2;3
1Comenius University in Bratislava Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia;
2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia; 3Geneton Ltd., Bratislava,
Slovakia; 4Science Support Section, Slovak Centre of Scientiﬁc and
Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia;
5Faculty of Medicine,
Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia; 6Institute for Clinical and
Translational Research, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy
of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Background/Objectives: COVID-19 can affect anyone with the
disease’s symptoms ranging from mild to very severe. Although
environmental, clinical, and social factors play an important role
in the disease process, host genetic factors are not negligible
either. In the present article, we attempted to elaborate on the
spectrum of risk variants and genes identiﬁed in different ways
and their possible relationship to COVID-19 severity and/or
mortality.
Methods: We present three different approaches to search
host genetic risk factors that inﬂuence the development of COVID-
19 disease. First, we analyzed the exome sequencing data
obtained from Slovak patients who died of COVID-19. Second, we
selected risk factors/genes that were associated with COVID-19.
Finally, we compared each group of found risk variants with data
from dead patients and two control groups, worldwide public data
of the Non-Finnish European population from the gnomAD
database, and genetic data from Non-invasive prenatal testing in
the Slovak population.
Results: We illustrate the utility of genomic data showed
strong association in meta-analyses conducted by the COVID-19
HGI Browser.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, the present study is the ﬁrst
population analysis of COVID-19 variants worldwide and also in
the Slovak population that provides different approaches to the
analysis of genetic variants in whole-exome sequencing data from
patients who have died of COVID-19.
References:.
Grants: This publication is the result of support from the
Operational Programme Integrated Infrastructure for the project:
Pangenomics for personalized clinical management of infected
persons based on identiﬁed viral genome and human exoma
(Code ITMS:313011ATL7), co-ﬁnanced by the European Regional
Development Fund.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.014.C Identiﬁcation of genetic determinants of COVID-19
severity by exome sequencing
Claudio Cappadona1, Valeria Rimoldi2, Sandro Bottaro2;3, Giulia
Cardamone3;4, Humanitas COVID-19 Task Force3, The Humanitas
Gavazzeni COVID-19 Task Force5, Elvezia Maria Paraboschi2;3,
Rosanna Asselta2;3
1Humanitas University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Pieve
Emanuele, Italy; 1Humanitas University, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Pieve Emanuele, Italy; 3IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital,
Rozzano, Italy; 4Goethe-University Frankfurt, Institute of Biochemistry
I Faculty of Medicine, Frankfurt, Germany; 5Humanitas Gavazzeni
Castelli, Bergamo, Italy.
Background/Objectives: The severity of the symptoms of cor-
onavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has been associated to age,
comorbidity, and male sex. Besides virus characteristics, host
genetic
factors
inﬂuence
the
infection
outcome.
Different
genome-wide association studies and meta-analyses investigated
the contribution of common variants, whereas the role of rare
variants just started to be elucidated. Our goal is to determine the
contribution of rare variants to the development of severe COVID-
19 in the Italian population.
Methods: We compared the genetic background of 215 severe
COVID-19 patients with 1764 individuals from the general popu-
lation. Rare variants (minor allele frequency <1%) from whole-
exome sequencing data were retrieved using a bioinformatics
variant discovery pipeline. We tested the impact of rare variants
(classiﬁed according to their predicted effect on the gene product)
both using a burden test design, and an iterative machine learning
(ML) approach.
Results: We identiﬁed a total of 690,000 rare variants in the
entire examined population. Among them, 250 were associated
with COVID-19 severity at a nominal P < 0.05. Gene-based burden
test revealed a gene with an excess of loss-of-function mutations
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
707
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
at P < 0.05. Finally, the ML approach, analysing all the 690,000 rare
variants, identiﬁed the best combination of variants that is able to
predict COVID-19 severity in our cohort.
Conclusion: Our work provides new insights on the genetic
signature of COVID-19 in the Italian population. The most infor-
mative rare variants could be exploited to deﬁne individuals’ risk
proﬁles to COVID-19 severity for the Italian population.
References:.
Grants: Banca Intesa Sanpaolo is acknowledged.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.016.A Plasma cytokine proﬁle in patients with severe
COVID-19
Anastasia Bezrukova1, Tatiana Usenko1;2, Katerina Basharova1,
Zoia Korobova2;3, Natalia Liubimova3, Michael Nikolaev1;2, Artem
Izumchenko1, Elena Gavrilova2, Irina Shlyk2, Yuri Polushin2, Areg
Totolian2;3, Sofya Pchelina1;2
1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute named by B.P. Konstantinov of
National Research Centre «Kurchatov Institute», Gatchina, Russian
Federation; 2Pavlov First Saint Petersburg State Medical University,
Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation;
3Saint Petersburg Pasteur
Institute, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Background/Objectives: The severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causing coronavirus disease (COVID-
19) enters the lung tissue through exocytosis, leading to the
release of a large amount of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines called
‘cytokine storm’. The aim was to provide more insight into rela-
tionship between plasma cytokines proﬁle and fatal outcome of
COVID-19.
Methods: Plasma cytokines (IL-17F,GM-CSF,IFNg,IL-10,CCL20/
MIP3a,IL-12P70,IL-13,
IL-15,IL-17A,IL-22,IL-9,IL-1b,IL-33,IL-2,IL-
21,IL-4,IL-23,IL-5,IL-6,IL-17E/IL-25,IL-27,IL-31,TNFa,TNFb,IL-28A)
were detected in 30 patients with severe COVID-19 by a Luminex
assay system with Milliplex Human Th17 Magnetic Premix 25
Plex Kit (HT17MG-14K-PX-25, Merk-Millipore, USA) according to
the instructions. Patients were followed up for 30 days since
admission to intensive care. 18 patients died and 12 patients
survived during the period of observation. The control group
comprised 10 individuals who had never been diagnosed with
COVID-19.
Results: IL-10 and CCL20/MIP3a plasma levels were elevated in
non-survivors patients with COVID-19 compared to controls
(p = 0.0027, р = 0.012, respectively). IL-15, IL-6, IL-27 plasma levels
were higher in survivors with COVID-19 compared to controls
(p = 0.049, p = 0.026, p = 0.00032, respectively). Interestingly, IL-
15, IL-27 plasma levels were increased in non-survivors with
COVID-19 compared to controls and survivors with severe COVID-
19 (IL-15: p = 0.00098, p = 0.00014, respectively; IL-27: p = 0.011,
p < 0.0001, respectively). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
analysis has been conducted for IL-15 and IL-27. Cut-off value was
estimated as 25.50 pg/ml for IL-15 and 1.51 pg/ml for IL-27.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrated a more pronounced
immune response in non-surviving patients with severe COVID-19.
IL-15, IL-27 could be considered as a sensitive biomarker of the
fatal outcome from COVID-19.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.017.B Whole genome sequencing of a German cohort to
understand host genetics in COVID-19
Axel Schmidt1;2, Eva C. Schulte2;3;4, Susanne Motameny2;5, Nicolas
Casadei2;6;7,
Fabian
Brand2;8,
Michael
Nothnagel2;5,
Elaheh
Vojgani2;5, German Demidov2;6;7, Kerstin Becker2;5, Janine Altmül-
ler2;5, André Heimbach1;2;9, Markus M Nöthen1;2;9, Peter Nürnberg2;5,
Stephan Ossowski2;6;7, Olaf Riess2;6;7, Kerstin Ludwig1;2
1University Hospital Bonn, Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn,
Germany; 2German COVID-19 OMICs Initiative (DeCOI), Host Genetics
Group, Germany, Germany;
3University Hospital, LMU Munich,
Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), Munich,
Germany; 4University Hospital Munich, Department of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Munich, Germany; 5University of Cologne, Cologne
Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany; 6University of Tuebingen,
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Competence Center Tuebingen
(NCCT), Tübingen, Germany; 7University of Tuebingen, Institute of
Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tübingen, Germany;
8University of Bonn, Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinfor-
matics, Bonn, Germany; 9University of Bonn, West German Genome
Center (WGGC), Bonn, Germany.
Background/Objectives: The disease course upon SARS-CoV-2
infection
is highly
variable and comprises a range from
asymptomatic infection to severe (and even lethal) COVID-19.
Genetic factors substantially contribute to this variability, as
evidenced
by
epidemiological
studies
and
recent
results
from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) as well as
sequencing-based approaches. The host genetics group of the
German COVID-19 OMICs Initiative (DeCOI) has been founded
with the aim to identify additional genetic variants that inﬂu-
ence COVID-19 severity through whole genome sequencing
(WGS) analyses.
Methods: Until January 2022, WGS has been performed on
approximately 1200 individuals affected by COVID-19.
Results: The most recent data freeze comprised 952 indivi-
duals. In this dataset, no carrier of a deleterious protein-altering
variant has been detected in TLR7, which is the only conclusive risk
gene for severe COVID-19. Applying a gene-based association test
of rare variants to the subcohort of European individuals (n = 752,
mean age: 56 years, females: 44%), including 199 severely affected
individuals, we did not observe any signiﬁcant association after
correction for multiple testing. Exome-wide association analysis of
common variants in this subcohort replicated the GWAS-locus on
chromosome 3.
Conclusion: With this ongoing work, we are contributing to
international efforts to elucidate the host genetics of COVID-19,
also by sharing our summary statistics for meta-analyses. Cur-
rently, we are sequencing additional severely affected individuals
and we are reﬁning analytical strategies, which will also include
the joint analysis of common and rare variants at genome-
wide scale.
References:.
Grants: Sequencing was funded by the DFG, AS was funded by
BONFOR.
Conﬂict of Interest: Axel Schmidt BONFOR research scholar-
ship from the University of Bonn for conducting COVID-19
research. Signiﬁcant., Twist bioscience stocks (modest)., Eva C.
Schulte: None declared, Susanne Motameny: None declared,
Nicolas Casadei: None declared, Fabian Brand: None declared,
Michael
Nothnagel:
None
declared,
Elaheh
Vojgani:
None
declared, German Demidov: None declared, Kerstin Becker: None
declared, Janine Altmüller: None declared, André Heimbach: None
declared, Markus M Nöthen: None declared, Peter Nürnberg: None
declared, Stephan Ossowski: None declared, Olaf Riess: None
declared, Kerstin Ludwig: None declared.
P26.018.C Strong impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on fetal
development and chromosomal abnormalities
Mahmut Ergoren1, Gulten Tuncel2
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
708
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
1Near East University, Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics, Nicosia,
Cyprus; 2Near East University, DESAM Research Institute, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Background/Objectives: To date, not many studies have been
conducted to examine the role of COVID-19 on gestation and fetal
development. During COVID-19, pregnant women had difﬁculty
accessing prenatal screening and care due to pandemics restric-
tions and lockdowns. In this retrospective study we aimed to
assess the effect of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak on fetal develop-
ment in both prenatal and postnatal outcomes pre- and pre-
COVID-19 pandemics in Northern Cyprus.
Methods: A total number of 61 aborted materials were kar-
yotyped during the pre-pandemic period (January 2017 and
March 2020) whereas 24 samples were analysed during the peri-
pandemic period (March 2020-November 2021). On the other
hand, 25 new-borns blood samples during the pre-pandemic and
44 samples during the pre-pandemic period were analysed.
Results: No statistically signiﬁcant difference found in health
and abnormal aborted material karyotypes between two periods.
On the other hand, a statistical signiﬁcance was observed in
postnatal chromosomal abnormalities (P = 0.04) after two long
pandemic lockdowns, which are known as the ﬁrst and the second
waves, dramatically indicating that no baby with Down syndrome
was between 2017-2020 whereas seven babies with Down Syn-
drome were born as consequences of without taking precaution
against lockdowns.
Conclusion: Overall, prenatal care is failed which resulting
increased postnatal chromosomal abnormality due to heavy ﬂight
restrictions, economic inﬂation instability, limited access to medical
services during COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns in Northern Cyprus.
References:.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
P26.019.D Carnosic acid as potential anti-SARS-CoV-2
therapeutics: a mechanistic insight
Havva Ozgen Kilgoz1, erol eyupoglu2, Sepideh Hassanpour Khodaei1,
Prof. Dr. Şükrü Tüzmen1;2
1Eastern Mediterranean University, Faculty of Dentistry, Famagusta,
North Cyprus, via Mersin 10, Turkey;
2Eastern Mediterranean
University, TechnoPark, GenBiomics R&D, Famagusta, North Cyprus,
via Mersin 10, Turkey.
Background/Objectives: Rosmarinus Ofﬁcinalis L.(Rosemary)
extract Carnosic acid(CA) has been investigated for its anti-
microbial and antioxidative properties(1). Only limited number
of publications reported the utilization of this extract in SARS-
CoV-2 infection. Also, the mechanistic understanding of CA
remains to be determined. Our goal was to elucidate the
potential role of CA in COVID19. To obtain mechanistic insight
of pharmacogenomic action of CA, comprehensive in silico
analyses were performed. Further in vitro experiments were
done to illustrate the cytotoxicity of CA and conﬁrm in silico
ﬁndings.
Methods: CA was extracted from Rosmarinus Ofﬁcinalis L. by
HPLC. Stimulation assays were performed using the COVID19 sam-
ples. In silico pharmacogenomic properties of CA were performed by
using SwissADME. SwissTargetPrediction tool was utilized to deﬁne
the possible targets. SARS-CoV-2-interacting proteins were eval-
uated using STRING(2). To verify in silico ﬁndings, gene expression
levels were analyzed using qPCR.
Results: Among the top 15 SwissTargetPrediction target
molecules(out of 100), Prostaglandin E synthase(PTGES) had the
highest probability for CA. Among 332 proteins identiﬁed using
the STRING, PGES2 was found to be interacting with the nsp7,
important molecule for viral replication. The stimulation assays
and gene expression analyses conﬁrmed the viral inhibitory role of
CA through PTGES pathway.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to reveal
the inhibitory role of CA in COVID19 through PTGES pathway.
Given the crucial role of PTGES in inﬂammation, it is noteworthy to
examine CA as potential anti-SARS-CoV2 therapeutics.
References: 1. Bauer et al. J Pharmacol Exp Ther.2012
Jul;342(1):169–176.
2.Gordon et al. Nature.2020 Apr;583:459-468.
Grants:.
Conﬂict of Interest: None declared.
Abstracts from the 55th European Society of Human Genetics Conference
709
European Journal of Human Genetics (2023) 31:345 – 709
