	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
S1
 
Abstracts of the AMP Europe 2023 Congress: 
The Association for Molecular Pathology 
June 18‐20, 2023 
Milan, Italy 
 
Selected Genetics Abstracts 
 
G01. Noncoding RNAs as Modulators for Drug Delivery 
and Epigenetic Changes in Immunotherapy Resistance of 
Cancer  
F. Aliazami 
Tehran Medical Sciences, Islamic Azad University, Islamic 
Republic of Iran. 
 
Introduction: Cancer is considered a multifactorial disease 
arising from an alternative function of epigenetic modulations 
and genetic factors. A wide spectrum of strong evidence from 
research has shown that noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) are 
related to the epigenetic modulation of cancer genes and their 
associated networks. A paramount consideration for 
molecular epigenetic mechanism is the expression of ncRNAs 
making a more significant contribution to the regulation of 
cancer pathogenesis and many other diseases. However, 
although cancer immunotherapy is a well-established method 
for treatment of a wide range of cancer types, the root of the 
problem lies in the different responses in patients and low-
level responses or tumor cells evading the immune functions. 
With many tumors resentenced to immunotherapy in cancer, 
ncRNAs play an unprecedented role in enhancing the 
efficiency of immunotherapy towards tumors through 
epigenetic changes. Methods: We searched Scopus, 
PubMed, Science Direct databases, and Google Scholar. 
After a systematic review of the evidence, studies were 
considered to analyze. In this review, we will look back over 
current knowledge of the functions, expressions, critical 
mechanisms, and drug delivery of ncRNAs via epigenetic 
modulations. This review will bring great benefits to novel 
ncRNA-based immune classes in cancer immunotherapy. 
Finally, the ultimate purpose of this study is to arouse 
interested researchers to conduct studies on the theory 
because of a large knowledge gap in ncRNA-based cancer 
immunotherapy for responses to treatment. Results: 
However, not only have a few epigenetic drugs been 
approved by the FDA, but also a new hope has dawned on 
RNA-based therapeutics with epigenetic effects for cancer 
treatment. They potentially are a driving force in cancer 
immunotherapy without side effects. In addition, other 
molecular mediated RNA means, combined with 
nanoparticles, CRISPR/Cas9, polymer-based, lipid-based 
nanoparticles, can enhance RNA delivery to the tumors, 
tissues, and immune cells. They can promote immune 
responses by either silencing or upregulating the immune-
relevant genes to improve the efficiency of new drug delivery 
to cross cell membranes. Conclusions: Now a more nuanced 
understanding of this research could pave the way for 
propelling new investigations. We hope that it will give 
scientists an appreciation of some of the issues involved. The 
bottom line is that future prospects of the research on 
personalized medicine would shed light on novel ncRNA-
based cancer immunotherapy with epigenetic changes. 
 
G02. Development of a Cell-Based Pan-Cancer Fusion 
FFPE RNA Reference Standard for Use in Targeted 
Oncology NGS and RT-PCR Applications  
C. McGee, M. Fernández Muñoz, M. Fernández de Ara, B. 
Freeman, A. Van Brabant Smith, E. Chin 
PerkinElmer (Horizon Discovery), Diagnostics Products R&D, 
Cambridge, UK. 
 
Introduction: RNA-based biomarker profiling using next-
generation sequencing RNA-seq, RT-qPCR and RT-ddPCR 
can overcome some of the limitations of traditional DNA-
based methods (e.g., multiple intronic breakpoints, multiple 
fusion partners) for fusion biomarker detection in tumor 
samples. However, data interpretation can be challenging due 
to variabilities in sample quality, RNA extraction and 
quantification, and platform biases, which can result in low-
confidence results or failure to detect biomarkers. To aid the 
development, validation, and routine monitoring of these RNA-
based assays, Horizon has developed the Pan-Cancer 6-
Fusion Panel, a multiplexed cell blend containing full-length 
mRNAs for six of the most prevalent kinase fusions spanning 
a range of cancer types; TPM3-NTRK1, QKI-NTRK2, ETV6-
NTRK3, EML4-ALK, CCDC6-RET, and SLC34A2-ROS1. 
Methods: Cell lines, which were either engineered by Horizon 
to express the fusions of interest or derived from cells 
expressing fusions endogenously, were single-cell diluted to 
produce clonal cell populations for each fusion variant. After 
confirmation by Sanger sequencing and fusion expression 
profiling by RT-ddPCR, the cell lines were blended at defined 
ratios to ensure consistent expression levels of each fusion. 
The multiplexed cell blends were then fixed in 10% formalin 
before being embedded in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
S2
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
(FFPE) cores and finally embedded in paraffin blocks (Fig. 1). 
Three FFPE blocks were sectioned into 15 µm sections. RNA 
was extracted from sections using the Maxwell RSC RNA 
FFPE Platform (Promega) and assessed for average RNA 
yield by Qubit RNA (Thermo Fisher Scientific); RNA integrity 
(DV200) TapeStation (Agilent); and fusion biomarker 
expression by RT-ddPCR using fusion specific probes on the 
QX200 (Bio-Rad). Results: All RNA yields (n = 90) were 
above the >100 ng minimum QC acceptance criteria, with 
average yields of 413 ng, 679 ng and 585 ng, respectively, 
from the three blocks tested (Fig. 2, A). DV200 values for all the 
sections tested (n = 90) were greater than the minimum 
acceptance criteria of 65%, with averages of 84%, 90%, and 
87%, respectively, for three blocks (Fig. 2, B). Fusion 
expression for the six fusion biomarkers was consistent 
across the three blocks (n = 90) with average copies/ng RNA 
well above the minimum acceptance criteria for each fusion 
(Fig. 2, C). TPM3-NTRK1: 411 copies/ng (≥100); QKI-NTRK2: 
605 copies/ng (≥100); EML4-ALK: 155 copies/ng (≥40); 
SLC34A2-ROS1: 175 copies/ng (≥40); ETV6-NTRK3: 40 
copies/ng (≥4); CCDC6-RET: 42 copies/ng (≥4). 
Conclusions: The Pan-Cancer 6-Fusion Panel is a highly 
characterised, renewable cell line-derived FFPE RNA 
reference material that can be used to assess the 
performance of RNA-seq, RT-PCR, RT-qPCR, or RT-ddPCR 
assays aimed at detecting TPM3-NTRK1, QKI-NTRK2, ETV6-
NTRK3, EML4-ALK, CCDC6-RET, and SLC34A2-ROS1 
fusions. This reference standard is commutable with biopsy 
samples and serves as an appropriate control for the end-to-
end validation, optimization, and implementation of molecular 
diagnostic assays that use FFPE specimens. 
 
 
Figure 1. FFPE Process Development and Validation 
Pan-Cancer 6-Fusion Panel process development and 
validation. 
 
Figure 2. Pan-Cancer 6-Fusion Panel Block Validation 
Results: Results for average section RNA yields (ng), 
RNA integrity (DV200), and fusion biomarker expression 
results for three blocks for the Pan-Cancer 6-Fusion 
Panel. 
 
 
G03. Establishment of Nepal's First Non-Invasive Prenatal 
Testing (NIPT) Service Laboratory  (Selected for Oral 
Presentation, O-02-04) 
S. Thapa, A.J. Kunwar, N. Thakur, S. Khanal, G. Joshi 
Kathmandu Center for Genomics and Research Laboratory 
(KCGRL), Molecular Genetics, Lalitpur, Nepal. 
 
Introduction: Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for fetal 
aneuploidies using cell-free DNA (cfDNA) has been widely 
adopted in clinical practice due to its improved accuracy. 
Several NIPT tests have been developed and validated. The 
core goal of cell-free-based prenatal testing is to provide 
minimally invasive, clinically accurate screening for fetal 
chromosomal aneuploidies in the early stages of pregnancy. 
Methods: The purpose of this study was to establish a 
validated NIPT workflow for cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) 
sequencing from maternal plasma for the detection of trisomy 
13, 18, and 21 on a semiconductor sequencing instrument. A 
total of 91 standard samples from healthy pregnant women 
was provided by Yourgene Health; their cfDNA library was 
prepared and loaded on the Ion 540 chip for sequencing. The 
sequencing output data were analyzed by using the 
bioinformatics pipeline of Yourgene Health. Results: Eighty-
one samples were successfully validated out of a total of 91 
samples. However, 3% of samples did not meet quality, and 
3% of sample libraries had low reads and failed validation. 
Moreover, building the validated workflow based on Ion 
Torrent Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) would allow for 
fetal aneuploidy detection. Conclusions: This research aims 
to introduce and set up Nepal's first NGS laboratory for NIPT, 
utilizing the Ion Torrent technology to provide a complete in-
house solution for pregnant women in Nepal. 
S3
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
Workflow of NIPT 
This is the outline of the workflow of NIPT. That includes 
sample collection, cffDNA, library preparation, analysis, 
and interpretation. 
 
 
Results 
This is the presentation of the results of the project. 
 
 
G04. Withdrawn  
 
G05. Combination of Next-Generation Sequencing 
Approaches for Characterization of Genetic Bases in a 
Large Brugada Syndrome Cohort  
C. Di Resta1,2, G. Peretto2,3, S. Merella4, A. Villatore2, E. 
Rossetto2, S. Bonfiglio5, S. Benedetti4, P. Carrera1,4, S. Sala3 
1IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, Genomic Unit for the 
Diagnosis of Human Pathologies, Milan, Italy; 2Vita-Salute 
San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy; 3IRCCS San Raffaele 
Hospital, Department of Cardiac Electrophysiology and 
Arrhythmology, Milan, Italy; 4IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, 
Laboratory of Clinical Molecular Biology, Milan, Italy; 5IRCCS 
San Raffaele, Center for Omics Science, Milan, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Brugada syndrome (BS) is an inherited 
arrhythmogenic disease with a risk of sudden cardiac death in 
young asymptomatic adults. SCN5A is the only known 
causative gene, though 22 genes have been associated with 
BS susceptibility; nevertheless, 70% of patients remain 
genetically undiagnosed. To identify new candidate genes, we 
performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) of 200 patients, 
both sporadic and familial cases. Methods: WES was 
performed on the NovaSeq Illumina Platform (mean coverage: 
180X, 97% target region >20X). Reads were analyzed 
exploiting the Dragen BioIT Platform, and coding and splice 
regions variants (MAF ≤0.01%) prioritized and classified 
according to ACMG guidelines with the support of eVai-
EnGenome software. In addition, the burden test with Fisher 
exact test allowed us to extrapolate genes with higher 
mutation burden, suggesting a possible pathogenic role. A 
clinical database for the enrolled patients contains all the 
clinical information with a complete follow-up for more than 10 
years. Results: WES analysis showed rare prioritized variants 
located in about 400 genes. Subsequent burden tests allowed 
us to focus on a smaller number of genes, confirming the role 
of SCN5A and highlighting possible associations of genes 
encoding proteins involved in muscle contraction, 
development, and differentiation, as also suggested by 
enrichment analysis with Panther tool. Conclusions: 
Preliminary data identified new candidate genes suggesting a 
role for structural proteins in disease pathogenesis. These 
results should be further investigated and confirmed in a 
larger cohort, also evaluating possible copy number 
variations. Genotype-phenotype correlations will be performed 
to better stratify patients, taking into account also the putative 
oligogenic inheritance of the disease and evaluating the 
possible role of multiple variants in the clinical phenotype. 
 
G06. Withdrawn 
 
G07. Carrier Frequency and Incidence Estimation of 
Aromatic L-Amino Acid Decarboxylase Deficiency by 
Genome Aggregation Database-Based Analysis: 
Focusing on East Asians  
J.E. Park1, E.H. Cho2, T. Lee3, K. Ha3, C.-S. Ki3 
1Hanyang University College of Medicine, Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, Hanyang University Guri Hospital, Guri, 
South Korea; 2Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kangbuk Samsung 
Hospital, Seoul, South Korea; 3GC Genome, Yongin, South 
Korea. 
 
Introduction: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) 
deficiency is an autosomal recessive neurotransmitter 
metabolism disorder and is clinically characterized by infancy 
hypotonia, ophthalmic crisis, and developmental delay. With 
the emergence of gene therapy for AADC deficiency, accurate 
prediction of AADC deficiency is required. This study aimed to 
analyze the carrier frequency and expected incidence of 
AADC deficiency using exome data from the Genome 
Aggregation Database (gnomAD). Methods: We analyzed 
125,748 exomes from gnomAD, including 9,197 East Asian 
exomes, for the DDC gene. All identified variants were 
classified according to 2015 American College of Medical 
Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular 
S4
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
Pathology guidelines. Results: The worldwide carrier 
frequency of AADC deficiency was 0.17%; the highest 
frequency was observed in East Asians at 0.78%, and the 
lowest was in Latinos at 0.07%. The estimated incidence of 
AADC deficiency was 1 in 1,374,129 worldwide and 1 in 
65,266 in East Asians. Conclusions: The results 
demonstrated that East Asians have a higher carrier 
frequency of AADC deficiency than other ethnic groups. The 
variant spectrum of DDC genes in East Asian populations 
differed greatly from those of other ethnic groups. Our data 
will serve as a reference for further investigation of AADC 
deficiency. 
 
G08. The Genomic Landscape of Colorectal Cancer in the 
Saudi Arabian Population  
E.A. Alsolme 
King Fahad Medical City, Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia. 
 
Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a malignant tumor 
of the large intestine (colon and rectum). CRC is the third 
most common cancer worldwide and the second highest 
cause of cancer-related deaths in most Western countries. 
CRC has a wide geographical distribution with high incident 
rates in North America, Northern and Western Europe, and 
Australia. On a global scale, CRC accounts for 9.4% of all 
cancers in men and 10.1% in women. In Saudi Arabia (SA), 
CRC cases were last reported as 10.1% in men and 9.3% in 
women. At present, CRC screening involves detection of 
early-stage CRCs and pre-cancerous lesions in asymptomatic 
people, before they become too advanced and unsuitable for 
treatment. In SA, despite its increasing incidence rates of 
CRC, there are no national screening policies in place for 
CRC. Protocols that aid rapid detection and diagnosis of CRC 
in SA are therefore urgently required. Comprehensive 
genomic panel can detect specific mutations that can provide 
treatment opportunities for CRC patients. We analyzed the 
mutation frequencies of common actionable genes and their 
association with clinicopathological characteristics and 
oncologic outcomes using targeted next-generation 
sequencing in 107 CRC Saudi Arabian patients. Methods: A 
total of 107 CRC samples were collected from KFMC. DNA 
and RNA were extracted from each formalin-fixed, paraffin-
embedded clinical research sample using Invitrogen 
extraction kit for all samples. Oncomine Comprehensive 
Assay v3 sequencing was run using Ion AmpliSeq Kit for Chef 
DL8. The data were entered and analyzed using SPSS 
statistical package version 23. All survival analyses were 
completed in statistical software R V4.0.5 (supplementary 
methods). Two patients were omitted from the survival 
analysis because they were lost to follow-up and their survival 
outcomes were unknown. Results: In total, 98% (105) of 
patients had genetic alterations. Frequent mutations were 
observed in BRCA2 (79%), CHEK1 (78%), ATM (76%), PMS2 
(76%), ATR (74%), and MYCL (73%). A Cox proportional 
hazards model showed a positive association between poor 
differentiation of tumors and survival (p <0.05). Although no 
univariate associations between specific mutations or overall 
mutation rate and overall survival proved significant, our 
preliminary analysis of the molecular markers for CRC in a 
predominantly SA population can provide insights into the 
molecular pathways that play a significant role in the 
underlying disease progression. Conclusions: In conclusion, 
we present a mutational landscape of actionable genes in 
CRC for the SA population in patients without a familial history 
of CRC. Additionally, we address the clinical relevance of low 
variant allele frequency variants. A comprehensive analysis of 
population-specific molecular markers for CRC can provide 
insights into the disease progression, with an aim of 
optimizing individualized therapeutic options and treatment 
regimens in the management of CRC in the SA population. 
 
G09. Upregulation of IL-33 Expression in Heart Promotes 
Cardiac Fibrosis and Left Ventricle Dilatation in Diet-
Induced Obesity Mice through PPARα and PPARγ 
Signaling  
E. Vianello1, M. Kalousová2, E. Dozio1, L. Tacchini1, G. 
Tedeschi3, P. Roccabianca4, T. Zima2, M. M. Corsi 
Romanelli1,5 
1University of Milan, Department of Biomedical Sciences for 
Health, Milan, Italy; 2Charles University and General 
University Hospital in Prague, Institute of Medical 
Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostic, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic; 3University of Milan, CRC 
“Innovation for Well-Being and Environment” (I-WE), Milan, 
Italy; 4University of Milan, Department of Veterinary Medicine 
and Animal Science, Milan, Italy; 5UOC SMEL-1 Clinical 
Pathology, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Milan, Italy. 
 
Introduction: IL-33 is a cardiac alarmin expressed by 
endothelial cells and cardiac fibroblasts, and it is released in 
extracellular space to counteract detrimental stress volume 
overload in those tissues. Interestingly, IL-33 can also be 
considered a master regulator of obesity, since it controls 
cholesterol metabolism in fat and cardiac tissues. Due to the 
dual role of IL-33 in cardiac protection and lipid intake, the aim 
of this study is to analyze 1) the genomic expression of IL-33 
in whole normal and fatty heart from diet-induced obesity 
(DIO) mice; and 2) the whole proteome of DIO mouse model 
to highlight the potential network sustained by IL-33 in the 
promotion of cardiac remodeling through fat metabolism in 
obese model. Methods: Fourteen 6-week-old male C57BL/6N 
S5
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
mice (Charles River Laboratories, Calco, Italy) were divided 
into two groups and fed for 20 weeks as follows: 1) normal 
chow diet (10% fat, control lean group) and 2) high-fat diet 
(60% fat group). At the age of 26 weeks, the mice were 
sacrificed through exposure to atmosphere saturation of 
carbon dioxide for 15 min. Kidneys were collected, 
immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80° 
until genomic and proteomic investigations. The Italian 
Ministry of Health approved all animal procedures (Number 
5AD83.N.G1Q). The bioinformatic analyses on whole heart 
proteome were carried out using Cluego and Panther 
software, and the enriched networks were analyzed by String 
software and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Results: 
Genomic results showed that IL-33 is downregulated in fatty 
rather than control lean group. Cardiac proteome evaluation of 
DIO mice was carried out using IPA and demonstrated that 
the proteins differentially expressed in high-fat diet than 
normal group are related to fatty acid metabolism and lipid 
transport through PPARα and PPARγ mediators. In particular, 
functional network analysis suggested the presence of fibrosis 
and left ventricular dilatation and upregulated processes in 
metabolism (fatty acid metabolism and lipid transport, PPARα 
and PPARγ). Interestingly, the IPA network highlights the 
involvement of IL-33 as an upstream regulator of them as 
inhibitors of ACAT1, ApoE, EPHX2, IGHM, ITIH1, MYLK, 
MARKS, and UCP1 proteins, which are collectively involved in 
energy and cholesterol metabolism, inflammation, and cardiac 
matrix remodeling. Conclusions: Proteome network analysis 
demonstrated that IL-33 drove heart remodeling through 
deregulation of cardiac lipid metabolism through the 
upregulation of PPARα and PPARγ. 
 
G10. Host and Microbial Regulation of Tryptophan 
Metabolism: From Preclinical Models to Human Diseases  
G. Renga, F. D'Onofrio, M. Pariano, C. Stincardini, M. M. 
Bellet, C. Costantini, V. Oikonomou, L. Romani 
University of Perugia, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
PG, Italy. 
 
Introduction: The intricate role of host and microbial 
metabolism on the coordination of immune system activity has 
recently gained more attention. In this context, tryptophan 
(Trp) metabolism is associated with several physiological 
functions. Trp, an essential amino acid supplied by the diet, is 
uptaken and metabolized by commensal microbes and host 
cells in the intestinal tract, where it is converted into different 
metabolites. Microbes recycle free Trp to build proteins and 
generate microbial metabolites such as indoles, while host 
cells metabolize Trp into kynurenine (Kyn) and serotonin (5-
HT). Among the Trp metabolites, 5-HT is emerging as a key 
player in intestinal immune homeostasis and host-microbiota 
cross-talk. A serotonergic dysfunction has been reported in 
several genetic diseases, such as cystic fibrosis (CF) and 
celiac disease (CD), in which anxiety and depression are 
common complaints. CF and CD are two important inherited 
disorders characterized by an altered Trp metabolism. 
Whereas much is known about Kyn and indole pathways, the 
role of 5-HT in CF and CD is yet to be elucidated. Based on 
these premises, we have evaluated the contribution of 5-HT in 
CF and CD, and the effect of exogenous Trp metabolite 
administration in pulmonary and intestinal pathologies. 
Methods: To define the potential role of 5-HT in pulmonary 
and intestinal pathologies, we resorted to murine models of 
CF and CD. Specifically, CftrF508del mice were infected 
intranasally with Aspergillus fumigatus, one of the most 
common fungal pathogen colonising CF subjects, and 
evaluated for the expression of 5-HT-related genes and 
production. 5-HT levels were also observed in the sputa of CF 
patients. In the CD model, wild-type mice inbred for 3 
generations on a gluten-free diet were challenged with gliadin 
for 4 weeks and evaluated for gene expression and 5-HT 
production. Additionally, we tested the effects of 5-HT 
exogenous administration in CftrF508del mice. Results: In both 
CF and CD, we found a defective activation of the 
serotonergic pathway that leads to reduced levels of 5-HT in 
the lung and gut. In CftrF508del mice, we observed an increased 
expression of Aanat and Asmt genes encoding for 5-HT-
degrading enzymes in association with a significant increase 
of 5-OH-IAA, indicating active 5-HT catabolism. The reduction 
of 5-HT levels was also observed in the sputa of CF patients. 
5-HT repletion by exogenous administration of 5-HTP 
improved pulmonary pathology and balanced Trp metabolic 
pathway. While contrasting results are reported in terms of 5-
HT levels in human CD, we found a decisive decreased 
expression and production of 5-HT in our murine model of CD. 
Conclusions: Our results highlight the relevant, somewhat 
untold, contribution of the Tph1/5-HT pathway in the mucosal 
immune and microbial homeostasis in human inflammatory 
diseases such as CF and CD. 
 
S6
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
G11. A Genetic Deficiency in HMGA1, a Trans-Acting 
Regulatory Element of the MAPT Gene Promoter, 
Increases the Risk of Tauopathy  
M. Mirabelli1, E. Chiefari1, B. Arcidiacono1, A. Salatino1, F. S. 
Brunetti1, K.Y. Chin2, S. Credendino3, M. Fedele3, M. Morelli4, 
M. Greco1, D. P. Foti5, U. Aguglia4, A. Brunetti1 
1University “Magna Graecia” of Catanzaro, Department of 
Health Sciences, Catanzaro, Italy; 2Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia, Department of Pharmacology, Bangi Selangor, 
Malaysia; 3CNR, Institute of Experimental Endocrinology and 
Oncology, Naples, Italy; 4University “Magna Graecia” of 
Catanzaro, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, 
Catanzaro, Italy; 5University “Magna Graecia” of Catanzaro, 
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, 
Catanzaro, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Tauopathies are a group of neurodegenerative 
disorders caused by the abnormal accumulation of 
aggregates of the Tau protein in neuronal cells. Tau is 
encoded by the microtubule-associated protein Tau gene 
(MAPT), and mutations in the regulatory region of this gene 
have been shown to produce a dysfunctional Tau protein that 
is more prone to forming aggregates, causing 
neurodegeneration. However, it is unclear whether 
abnormalities in the trans-acting factors interacting with the 
MAPT gene promoter, which could affect Tau protein 
expression, are also involved in the development of 
tauopathies. The high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) has 
important trans-acting effects on genes related to both insulin 
resistance and type 2 diabetes, two conditions that are often 
associated with neurodegeneration. The role of HMGA1 on 
Tau gene transcription and the risk for neurodegeneration is 
not yet understood. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the role of HMGA1 and its genetic variant, rs146052672 in the 
development of tauopathy. Methods: To determine if HMGA1 
may affect Tau expression, experiments have been conducted 
both in vitro, in differentiated human SHSY-5Y neuroblastoma 
cells, and in primary embryonic mouse neurons, and in vivo, 
in hmga1-knockout mice. In addition, a case-control clinical 
study was conducted to examine the potential association of a 
genetic deficiency in HMGA1 (as caused by the HMGA1 
rs146052672 variant) with tauopathy. Results: Tau protein 
and mRNA levels were found to be inversely related to the 
HMGA1 levels in both cultured human neuronal cells and 
primary mouse embryonic neurons. This inverse relationship 
was confirmed in the cerebral cortex of hmga1-knockout mice, 
in which Tau was overexpressed, compared to wild-type mice. 
The role of HMGA1 in the regulation of Tau expression was 
substantiated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and 
luciferase assay, showing that HMGA1 can bind the MAPT 
promoter and repress Tau gene transcription. Furthermore, 
the HMGA1 rs146052672 variant was considerably more 
common in patients with tauopathy than in control individuals. 
The association of this HMGA1 variant with tauopathy was 
strong (OR = 4.86, 95% CI, 1.88 to 12.61, p = 0.001), even 
when adjusting for potential confounding factors, such as 
insulin resistance. Conclusions: This study provides the first 
translational evidence that tauopathies may rise from 
abnormalities in trans-acting regulatory elements of the MAPT 
gene promoter. A genetic deficit in HMGA1 may cause 
derepression of the Tau gene, leading to an increase in Tau 
protein expression in neuronal cells, thereby conferring higher 
risk for human neurodegenerative disorders. 
 
G12. Circulating miRNA Signatures in the Early Onset of 
Type 2 Diabetes  
M. Greco1, M. Mirabelli1, A. Salatino1, F. Accattato1, E. 
Chiefari1, S.A. Pullano1, A.S. Fiorillo1, D.P. Foti2, A. Brunetti1 
1University “Magna Graecia” of Catanzaro, Department of 
Health Sciences, Catanzaro, Italy; 2University “Magna 
Graecia” of Catanzaro, Department of Experimental and 
Clinical Medicine, Catanzaro, Italy. 
 
Introduction: There is growing evidence that circulating 
miRNAs may be used as biomarkers for type 2 diabetes (T2D) 
and its complications. T2D often develops from impaired 
fasting glucose (IFG), which represents an early feature of a 
pre-diabetic, insulin-resistant state that can eventually lead to 
T2D over time. Several miRNAs have been found to be 
dysregulated in the serum of T2D patients, and some of them 
may be linked to the onset of the disease. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the expression of circulating miRNAs 
in the early onset of T2D by comparing serum miRNA profiles 
of healthy controls with those of age- and sex-matched 
patients with IFG and new-onset T2D. Methods: The study 
population (aged 45 to 60 yr) was divided into three groups (n 
= 10 each): 1) healthy controls; 2) patients with IFG; and 3) 
patients with new-onset T2D (<5 yr since diagnosis) without 
complications (American Diabetes Association criteria). 
Patients with inflammatory states, liver and kidney failure, 
poor glycemic control, or severe obesity were excluded from 
the study. Circulating miRNAs were extracted from patients’ 
sera using a commercial column-based system (miRNeasy). 
After quantification, equal amounts (100 ng) of the extracted 
RNA were pooled together for each patient group and reverse 
transcribed using the miScript II RT Kit. MiRNA profiling was 
performed by a high-throughput real-time PCR assay on a 
384-well array containing spotted forward primers for 372 
miRNAs. Data analysis was done with the GeneGlobe 
software. Results: A first exploratory analysis of 372 miRNAs 
found that 33 were differentially expressed between healthy 
controls and patients with IFG and new-onset T2D. Two 
miRNAs were found to be downregulated and 31 upregulated. 
S7
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
A second analysis of these same miRNAs using more 
stringent conditions found that 8 miRNAs (miR-1260a, miR-
3200-5p, miR-4651, miR-3135b, miR-1281, miR-4301, miR-
195-5p, let-7a-5p) had a significant (>2-fold) change in 
expression in new-onset T2D patients versus IFG patients, 
suggesting that they may be useful early markers of 
progression from pre-diabetes to T2D. Regarding the other 
miRNAs, it was found that miR-146a-5p was downregulated 
and miR-1225-3p upregulated only in new-onset T2D patients, 
whereas no change in their expression could be detected in 
IFG patients versus controls. MiR-146a-5p has a well-known 
role in glucose metabolism, insulin resistance, and T2D 
complications, while no association between miR-1225-3p 
and T2D has been reported so far. Conclusions: This study 
has highlighted differences in serum miRNA profiles in 
patients with IFG and new-onset T2D compared to healthy 
controls. Variations in miR-1260a, miR-3200-5p, miR-4651, 
miR-3135b, miR-1281, miR-4301, miR-195-5p, and let-7a-5p 
emerge as circulating miRNA signatures in the early onset of 
T2D. More research is needed to determine the functional role 
of these miRNAs in the development and treatment of T2D. 
 
G13. Evaluation of Hi-C Sequencing as a Novel Diagnostic 
Technology for Detecting Genomic and Chromosomal 
Structural Variants in Constitutional Disorders  (Selected 
for Oral Presentation, O-03-01) 
Y. Liu1, H. Fang1, S. Eacker2, Y. Wu1, W. Neufeld-Kaiser1 
1University of Washington, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine and Pathology, Seattle, WA; 2Phase Genomics, 
Seattle, WA. 
 
Introduction: Precise characterization of genomic structural 
variants (GSVs), such as chromosomal rearrangements (CRs) 
and copy number variants (CNVs), is essential for the 
diagnosis, prognosis, and management of genetic 
conditions. Methods such as karyotyping, fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH), and chromosomal microarray analysis 
(CMA) all have limitations preventing a comprehensive 
understanding of GSVs and are often ordered reflexively in 
the clinical setting. In contrast, proximity ligation sequencing 
(Hi-C) is a novel method that detects a wide range of GSVs 
with a single assay. Hi-C captures chromatin contacts within 
the nucleus by proximity ligation followed by next-generation 
sequencing. Our study was to determine analytic validity and 
clinical utility of Hi-C and comparing it with the performance of 
optical genome mapping (OGM). Methods: We performed Hi-
C on 114 clinical samples previously characterized by 
karyotyping, FISH, and/or CMA, including 33 normal samples 
as controls. The 81 abnormal samples represented various 
sample types (blood, amniotic fluid, chorionic villi, FFPE 
tissues) and various GSVs (translocations, inversions, 
insertions, deletions, duplications, and regions of 
homozygosity). We also performed OGM and Hi-C in parallel 
on 16 samples representing various GSVs. Results: We 
established Hi-C data of normal control cohorts for different 
sample types. All CRs and CNVs detected by conventional 
methods were detected by Hi-C with 100% concordance, 
including 18 unique CRs (reciprocal and Robertsonian 
translocations, insertions, and inversions) and 55 unique 
CNVs (>500kb) including aneuploidy with a sequencing depth 
of >30 million reads per sample. Of 86 smaller CNVs detected 
by CMA, 79 were detected by Hi-C, giving a sensitivity of 91% 
and a specificity of 100%. The 7 CNVs <1kb were missed by 
Hi-C. The sensitivity of detecting smaller CNVs by Hi-C 
increases with increasing sequencing depth. At deeper 
sequencing (i.e., >125M reads), Hi-C also detected long 
regions of homozygosity (including copy neutral loss of 
heterozygosity) and low-level mosaicisms (>7%). Our study 
showed that Hi-C had additional advantages over current test 
methods. Hi-C detected several novel findings (insertions and 
inversions) and provided sequence information near 
breakpoints. Unlike CMA, Hi-C was able to distinguish tandem 
duplications from insertional translocations. Hi-C and OGM 
showed complete concordance in 12 of 16 samples analyzed 
in parallel. OGM analysis failed in 2 samples of cultured 
amniocytes and failed to detect a Robertsonian translocation 
in 2 samples. Conclusions: Our study proves that Hi-C is a 
promising new diagnostic test method that allows for a 
comprehensive characterization of GSVs with a single assay. 
Unlike OGM and other long-read sequencing methods, Hi-C 
analysis does not require ultra-long DNA molecules and 
tolerates a variety of sample types, including FFPE samples. 
The requirements of sequence depth and sample types, cost 
comparison, and turnaround-time will be discussed. 
Figure 1. Examples of chromosome rearrangements 
detected by karyotyping, OGM, and Hi-C. 
Complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCRs) were 
characterized by karyotype analysis (A), OGM with track 
view showing the rearrangements around the 
translocation break points (C), and Hi-C with genome view 
(D) and chromosome view (E) of contact heatmap 
showing translocations and insertions between 
chromosome 1, chromosome 4, chromosome 7, and 
S8
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
chromosome 11. Detailed data interpretation will be 
presented. 
 
 
Figure 2. Detection of duplication, deletion, and copy 
neutral loss of heterozygosity by Hi-C. 
Examples of duplication, deletion and copy neutral loss of 
heterozygosity (cnLOH) of chromosomal segments 
detected by Hi-C were shown. The plots of log(R) ratio 
(upper panel) and B allele frequency (lower panel) were 
shown for (A) regions of duplication on chr 3 (blue), 
deletion on chr 7 (pink) and cnLOH on chr 9 (purple) and 
(B) regions of duplication (blue) and deletion (pink) on 
chromosome 2. 
 
G14. Molecular Epidemiology of Beta Thalassemia and 
Screening Variants of Beta Globin Gene (HBB) by Sanger 
Sequencing in Pakistan 
K. Tariq, S. Ghani, Z. Ansar, A. Nasir  
Aga Khan University Hospital, Molecular Pathology, Karachi, 
Pakistan. 
 
Introduction: Hemoglobin disorders are one of the most 
common single-gene disorders and present a significant 
health burden. Beta globin (HBB) is a structural gene found on 
chromosome 11(11p 15.15) and forms the Beta chain of the 
adult hemoglobin. In Pakistan, many studies have shown that 
6 mutations (HBB:c.27_28insG, HBB:c.92+5G >C, 
HBB:c.126_129delCTTT, 
NG_000007.3:g.71609_72227del619, HBB:c.47G >A, and 
HBB:c.92+1G >T) account for more than 90% of all 
thalassemia genotypes. For our project we have used Sanger 
screening methods to screen the novel variants in B-Globin 
genes. Methods: DNA from the HBB gene samples was 
amplified in 2 fragments per sample using 2 different PCR 
reactions to conduct a gap PCR. This required designing of 
forward and reverse primers accordingly. PCR I had 1 forward 
primer and 2 reverse primers, out of which 1 reverse primer 
was situated in the region deleted in 619bp deletion mutation. 
PCR II only had 1 forward and 1 reverse primer. In individuals 
not affected by 619bp deletion in HBB gene, PCR I would 
yield a 1,457 bp fragment and PCR II would yield a 1,212 bp 
fragment. However, in a patient suffering from 619bp deletion, 
fragment I from PCR I would yield a longer, 1,671 bp product 
and fragment II would yield a truncated product of 593 bps. 
This was followed by cycle sequencing (modification of 
Sanger sequencing). Samples were sequenced on 
a 3500/Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) and 
sequences were analyzed using Mutation surveyor. Results: 
Molecular analysis was carried out for 165 patients with beta-
thalassemia minor and major. The most common mutations 
were IVS1-5G>C (15%), c.27dupG (12%), 126_129del (6%), 
c.364 G>C(HbD) (6%), c.92+1G>C(4%), c.619bp (4%) 
,C.17-_18delCT (3%). Other mutations identified during this 
study included: c.138 C>T (-88), C.92 A>T (HbS), C.25-26 del 
AA(CD 8), C.315+1 G>A (IVSII-I), C.316-238 C>T. A unique 
mutation was observed in a thalassemia patient with 
compound homozygous c.51del C codon 16 (-C) with c.33 
c>a codon 10 (C>A), and in another case we observed a 
patient with 3 heterozygous mutations: c.92+5 G>C, c.33CTA 
(codon 10), and c.51del C (codon 16). Conclusions: The 
PCR and the sequencing results are indicative of a compound 
heterozygous mutation consisting of HBB: 
g.71609_72227del619 (Fig. 1) and HBB: c.92+5G>C (Fig. 2). 
According to the Hbvar Database of Beta haemoglobin 
variants, both mutations lead to severe Beta thalassemia, with 
the patient being unable to produce functioning proteins; 
hence, molecular diagnosis shows the patient is suffering with 
Beta thalassemia major. In the results, the most common 
mutations were IVS1-5G>C (15%), c.27dupG (12%), 
126_129del (6%), c.364 G>C(HbD) (6%), c.92+1G>C (4%), 
c.619bp (4%), and C.17-_18delCT (3%). Two unique 
mutations included a compound homozygous c.51del C codon 
16 (-C) with c.33 c>a codon 10 (C>A), and in another case we 
observed a patient with 3 heterozygous mutations: c.92+5 
G>C, c.33CTA (codon 10), and c.51del C (codon 16). 
G15. Clinical Significance of Balance Translocation in 
Patients with Recurrent Miscarriage  
A. Zehra, S. Hussain, U. Shakil, Z. Ansar Ahmed, T. Moatter 
Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan. 
 
Introduction: Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is an obstetric 
complication that affects couples in their reproductive age. It 
can be associated with many factors, including advanced 
maternal and paternal age, infectious diseases, environmental 
toxins, and genetic abnormalities. Chromosomal 
abnormalities, mainly balanced rearrangements, could 
commonly be present in couples with RPL. Determining the 
presence of such a rearrangement is useful because it 
provides an explanation for the miscarriages; information 
about the risk for a live-born child with potentially serious 
anomalies, as well as the risk for future 
miscarriages; availability of prenatal diagnosis in a future 
pregnancy; and information for members of the extended 
family who may be at risk and may wish to undergo 
S9
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
chromosome testing. Appropriate evaluation of RPL should 
include parental karyotyping. Methods: Metaphase 
chromosome preparations from the peripheral blood cultures 
were made according to the standard cytogenetic protocols. 
Peripheral blood was put for 72-h culturing where peripheral 
blood lymphocytes were induced with phytohemagglutinin. 
Cytogenetic analysis was performed by GTG-banding at 
approximately 550-band level. A cytogenetic study was 
performed on 993 specimens received in cytogenetic 
laboratory, Aga Khan University Hospital During 2017 to 2022. 
For Nomenclature ISCN was followed. Results: Metaphase 
chromosome preparations from the peripheral blood cultures 
were made according to the standard cytogenetic protocols. 
Peripheral blood was put for 72-h culturing where peripheral 
blood lymphocytes were induced with phytohemagglutinin. 
Cytogenetic analysis was performed by GTG-banding at 
approximately 550-band level. A cytogenetic study was 
performed on 993 specimens received in cytogenetic 
laboratory, Aga Khan University Hospital, during 2017 to 
2022. For nomenclature, ISCN was followed. Conclusions: 
The couples struggling with RPL, genetic testing is 
recommended as part of the diagnostic workup. Parental 
karyotyping should be advised to all the couples undergoing 
evaluation for RPL. The carriers of a balanced translocation 
should be informed regarding the risk of congenital anomalies 
in their offspring. Hence, genetic counseling is indicated in all 
cases of RPL associated with parental chromosomal 
abnormalities. 
 
G16. The Clinical Significance of Prenatal Screening in 
the Diagnosis of Chromosomal Abnormalities  
U. Shakil, S. Hussain, A. Zehra, Z. Ansar Ahmed 
Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan. 
 
Introduction: In the age of modern medicine, the prenatal 
diagnosis of genetic diseases has become a routine part of 
obstetric care. Congenital anomalies in the fetal 
developmental stage can be identified by many approaches, 
such as maternal age, positive serum screening, a history of a 
previous affected child, a parental chromosome 
rearrangement, or an ultrasound-identified anomaly. Invasive 
diagnostic testing can be performed in the first trimester by 
chorionic villus sampling or in the second trimester by 
amniocentesis. Both procedures are safe, with an equivalent 
0.5% risk of procedure-induced pregnancy loss. This study 
aims to evaluate the number and type of chromosomal 
abnormalities that have been reported in the chorionic villus 
biopsy and amniotic fluid samples received in the past 2 years 
at the molecular pathology section, Clinical Laboratories, Aga 
Khan University Hospital. Methods: All samples of amniotic 
fluid and chorionic villus biopsies were received from Feto-
Maternal unit of The Aga Khan University Hospital Karachi 
and Gynecology and Obstetrics unit of The South City 
Hospital Karachi. Amniotic fluid and chorionic villus biopsy 
specimens collected in sterile containers and transported at 2° 
to 8°C on the same day were accepted and processed for 
chromosomal analysis. Results: Our study revealed 12.5% 
numerical and 1.7% structural chromosomal abnormalities in 
amniotic fluid samples, and 15.7% numerical chromosomal 
abnormalities in chorionic villi samples (CVS). The abnormal 
numerical karyotypes reported in amniotic fluid samples 
included Down syndrome (4.4%), Patau syndrome (1.8%), 
Edward syndrome (1.8%), Turner syndrome (2.7%), and 
ploidy (1.8%), whereas in CVS specimens the numerical 
abnormalities found were Down syndrome (2.6%), Edward 
syndrome (5.2%), ploidy, and others (7.8%). The structural 
chromosomal abnormalities were only reported in amniotic 
fluid samples which included variant Turner syndrome (0.8%) 
and balanced translocations (0.8%). Conclusions: 
Karyotyping is an established tool for an initial examination of 
chromosomal morphology; more advanced technologies such 
as microarray or next-generation sequencing (targeted) might 
provide an answer for samples that showed normal 
karyotypes. Furthermore, couples with advanced maternal 
and paternal ages and those with consanguineous marriages 
are commonly at risk of having an abnormal pregnancy. Such 
couples should be provided genetic counseling and access to 
cytogenetic analysis for making a pre-informed decision 
regarding their pregnancies. 
 
G17. Validation of epiHERA, a Minimally Invasive PCR 
Screening Tool for Hypermethylated CDO1/CELF4 Genes 
Associated with Endometrial Cancer (Selected for Oral 
Presentation, O-03-02) 
B. Vinod1, A. Ahmed1, C. Boey1, T.S. Lau2, K.W. Choy2, J. 
Lee2, C.P. Chang1 
1INEX Innovate, R&D, Singapore, Singapore; 2The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Department of OBGYN, Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong. 
 
Introduction: Endometrial cancer is the second most 
common of diagnosed gynaecologic cancers, with abnormal 
uterine bleeding as a critical risk factor. During their lifetime, 
30% of women experience abnormal uterine bleeding. 
Although abnormal uterine bleeding is a common risk factor 
for other endometrial pathologies such as polyps and 
adenomyosis, there is a current lack of a test for endometrial 
cancer screening. The current gold standard of endometrial 
cancer diagnosis is the extraction of biopsy samples through 
dilation and curettage or pipelle biopsy. In endometrial cancer, 
hypermethylation of CDO1/CELF4 were detected using a 
S10
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
methylomics database. Thus, to overcome the invasive and 
painful procedure arising from current diagnostic methods 
which limit their uptake as screening tools, we introduce an 
outpatient molecular screening method combining endometrial 
swab, hypermethylated CDO1/CELF4 and real-time PCR. Our 
preliminary data using endometrial cell lines and endometrial 
cancer cell lines showed a sensitivity, specificity, negative 
predictive value, and positive predictive value of 100%. Here, 
we show our current retrospective and prospective clinical 
data. Methods: For the retrospective study, 50 endometrial 
cancer positive formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) 
samples were acquired from biobanks with varying histology 
types. For the ongoing prospective study, a total of 689 
female patients over 18 years old with high endometrial risk 
factors, such as abnormal uterine bleeding, who visited the 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology clinic in The Chinese University 
of Hong Kong from January 2023 will be selected. To date, 
Thinprep exfoliated cells were acquired from 86 patients and 
used in this study. Concurrently, results were compared 
against the histology report attained from dilation and 
curettage. Genomic DNA was extracted from FFPE samples 
using ReliaPrep FFPE gDNA Miniprep System (Promega) and 
endometrial swabs using DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kits 
(Qiagen). Bisulfite treatment was performed to convert 
methylated cytosine to thymidine before real-time PCR. 
Samples were deidentified and histology results were blinded. 
The results were analysed based on the presence of a 
sigmoidal curve, internal control, and △Ct of the test genes. 
The sensitivity and specificity of CDO1 and/or CELF4 
methylation detection were statistically analysed for the 
detection of endometrial cancer. Results: Our results showed 
that detection of methylated CDO1 and/or CELF4 in 
retrospective FFPE samples showed a sensitivity of 85.7% 
(95%CI: 75.1%, 96.3%) and an accuracy of 85.7%. Finally, 
our current ongoing prospective study using Thinprep 
samples shows that the sensitivity and specificity for the 
detection of methylated CDO1 and/or CELF4 were 87.5% 
(95%CI: 75.9%, 94.8%) and 90.8% (95%CI: 82.7%, 95.9%), 
respectively. Conclusions: The replacement of biopsy 
sample acquisition through dilation and curettage with the 
minimally invasive endometrial swabs using Thinprep, and the 
high diagnostic accuracy, poise epiHERA as a promising 
molecular tool for the screening of endometrial cancer. 
 
G18. Effects of Xmn1 Polymorphism on Blood 
Transfusion and Its Relation to B-Thalassemia Phenotype 
and Genotype 
K. Tariq, S. Ghani, A. Yunus, S. Riaz, Z. Ansar, A. Nasir 
Aga Khan University Hospital, Molecular Pathology, Karachi, 
Pakistan. 
 
Introduction: Xmn1 polymorphism inducing fetal 
haemoglobin expression is a prominent mediator ameliorating 
β-thalassemia phenotype. Due to impaired globin chain 
synthesis, β-thalassemia syndromes are the most common 
form of chronic hemolytic anemia. Xmn1 polymorphism is 
characterized by C>T transition at 158 bp upstream of the 
gamma-globin gene, and responsible for increased HbF 
concentration and reduced thalassemic burden. In the current 
study, we attempted to screen a cohort of β-thalassemia 
patients for the presence of Xmn1 trait and to evaluate its 
overall impact on the severity of disease. Methods: HBB 
gene mutations and Xmn1 polymorphism were determined by 
amplification-refractory mutation system PCR method. The 
PCR products were digested with the Xmn1 Restriction 
Enzyme. Digestion products were electrophoresed on a 3% 
Agarose gel. Amplification with the primers produced a 650 bp 
fragment in the wild genotype; the heterozygous genotype 
gives 2 bands at 400 bp and 250 bp. Results: The study 
participants consisted of 71 patients and included males and 
females. Overall, Xmn1 polymorphism was observed. 
Homozygous (TT) and heterozygous (CT) genotypes of the 
polymorphism represented with frequencies of 5 (26%) and 12 
(7%), respectively. HbF level was significantly higher in 
patients with at least one Xmn1 allele (67.9 ± 17.9%) than 
those without the polymorphism (19.5 ± 20.3%, P <0.0001). 
Also, patients with the TT genotype demonstrated significantly 
higher HbF compared to CT cases (respective percentages of 
85 ± 6.8 and 54.7 ± 10.5, p <0.0001). Conclusions: Our 
results highlighted the role of Xmn1 polymorphism as the 
main phenotypic modifier. Hence, genetic screening at this 
level can make the diagnosis precise for thalassemia patients. 
 
G19. Real-World Evidence of Germline Alterations in 
Women with Breast and Ovarian Cancer beyond BRCA1 
and BRCA2 from a South Asian Population  
S. V. Rangan, T.D. Gupta, N. Parveen, S. Jayaraman, V. 
Javle, N. Jaiswal, H. Joshi, S.R. Peddagangannagari, K.D. 
Rishi, H.M. Goswami, R. Malhotra, V.H. Veldore 
4basecare Onco solutions Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru, India. 
 
Introduction: BRCA1/2 predominates the risk of hereditary 
breast-ovarian cancer in young women. However, analysis 
using broader gene panels may reveal non-BRCA1/2 
mutations that may predispose to cancer. Here, we provide 
the results of our germline profiling method using a larger 
S11
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
gene panel (Germline+ [213 genes], 4basecare) in breast and 
ovarian cancer patients from the South Asian population. 
Methods: The study includes 233 patients with a diagnosis of 
breast/ovarian cancer, where we identified clinically relevant 
alterations (Pathogenic/Likely Pathogenic/Variants of 
Uncertain Significance with support) and classified as per 
ACMG guidelines. Germline+ panel sequencing was 
performed using Illumina sequencing at ~100X depth to 
identify novel biomarkers in breast and ovarian cancer 
patients. Results: In all, 47% (n = 109) of these patients 
carried either BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. In the non-BRCA 
group, nearly 53% (n = 123) (Fig. 1) of the patients carried 
mutations in the DNA repair pathway (ATM, RAD54L, BRIP1, 
FANCM, PALB2, CHEK2) (Fig. 2). We also found pathogenic 
variants in relatively uncommon genes like AXIN2, PPM1D, 
and RET. Variants were also reported in receptor tyrosine 
kinase (CBL, PDGFRA, MET), cellular metabolism (SDHA, 
SDHB), chromatin remodeling (MRE11, ARID1A, NSD1) and 
Wnt/beta-catenin (APC, CTNNA1) pathway-based genes. 
Conclusions: Key findings from this study demonstrate 
nearly 53% of the individuals with the clinical phenotype of 
hereditary breast and ovarian cancers are BRCA negative. 
However, they possess genetic alterations other than 
BRCA1/2 genes, which are associated with cancer risk 
predisposition. This study summarizes the findings of >200 
cases of several intriguing familial presentation with non-
syndromic genetic alterations in pathways such as DNA 
repair, receptor tyrosine kinase, cellular metabolism, 
chromatin remodeling, and Wnt/beta-catenin. Based on our 
observations, limited panel testing of the BRCA1/2 
significantly reduces the diagnostic yield. Hence, we 
emphasize screening for rare genetic alterations in families 
with high risk of developing HBOC or other cancers. Though 
there are no standard guidelines/recommendations for 
germline panel testing, implementation of broader gene 
panels would aid in risk assessment, selection of appropriate 
treatment option, and better stratification of cancer patients in 
precision oncology practice. 
Figure 1: Distribution of BRCA and non-BRCA mutation in 
the cohort 
 
 
Figure 2: Recurrent non-BRCA genes and their 
classification 
 
 
 
Selected Hematopathology Abstracts 
 
H01. Comparison of Mutation Profiles Using Whole Bone 
Marrow Cells and CD138-Sorted Cells in Multiple Myeloma  
Y.J. Hong, D. Chu, M. Kim, S.-H. Hwang, S. Jang, E.-J. Seo, 
C.-J. Park, Y.-U. Cho 
Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. 
 
Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) is a neoplasm 
characterized by the accumulation of multiple genomic 
abnormalities in plasma cells (PCs). Emerging data suggest 
that MM risk stratification can be improved by integrating 
recurrent mutations and cytogenetic lesions with the current 
International Staging System. However, myeloma mutation 
analysis faces technical limitations with low PC recovery and 
PC enrichment issues. We investigated mutation detection 
yield using next-generation sequencing (NGS) of whole bone 
marrow (BM) cells and enriched PCs. Methods: BM samples 
were obtained from 32 patients with MM between January 
2022 and December 2022. PCs were enriched using anti-
CD138-positive beads from BM aspirates of 14 cases. The 
NGS panel included 652 genes for hematologic diseases. We 
analyzed mutation data from whole BM and the corresponding 
enriched PCs to evaluate the utility of BM pre-processing by 
CD138-sorting. The 23 myeloma-associated genes were 
selected from recent large clinical studies, whereas the clonal 
hematopoiesis (CH) driver mutations were identified from the 
bluebook of the 5th edition of the WHO classification of 
hematologic malignancies. Results: The median PC 
infiltration was 27.9% (3.2% to 92.0%), and the median PC 
purity was 90.4% (66.8% to 96.9%). The myeloma-associated 
gene mutations (Mutmm) were detected in 21/32 (65.6%) of 
patients, with a higher frequency when using enriched PCs 
(12/14, 85.7%) than when whole BM alone was used (9/18, 
50.0%). The median number of Mutmm in enriched PCs was 
3.5, whereas that of whole BM was 1.0 (P = 0.005). The 
median variant allele frequency (VAF) of Mutmm was 
S12
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
significantly higher in enriched PCs (13.95%, range 0 to 89.3) 
than in whole BM samples (0.0%, range 0 to 31.7; P <0.001; 
Fig. 1). PC enrichment increased the mutation VAF by an 
average of 17.3% (2.0% to 61.9%). In 4 cases, the Mutmm 
were detected in enriched PCs alone, including NRAS, KRAS, 
IRF4, DIS3, FAM46C, CYLD, TP53, and HIST1H1E 
mutations. Overall, CH driver mutations (MutCH) were detected 
in 14/32 (43.8%) of cases, including DNMT3A, TET2, SF3B1, 
PTPN11, CUX1, PPM1D, STAG2, ETV6, WT1, and GNB1 
mutations. The VAF of MutCH was marginally increased by PC 
enrichment (Fig. 2). Conclusions: Mutation detection yield is 
enhanced owing to PC enrichment. Therefore, CD138-sorted 
PCs should be used as a DNA source for mutation analysis in 
patients with MM. Furthermore, more accurate 
characterization of gene mutations can be expected through 
parallel analysis of mutation profiles derived from enriched 
PCs and whole BM cells. 
Figure 1. Myeloma-associated and clonal hematopoiesis 
gene mutation in patients. 
Variant allele frequency of myeloma-associated 
mutations. 
 
Figure 2. A representative case showing typical patterns 
of mutational change. 
The size of TP53 and TRAF3 mutations significantly 
increased with PC enrichment, whereas the size of TET2 
mutation did not change. 
 
H02. Molecular-Pathological Correlation of a CALR and 
MPL-Double Mutated Post-Essential Thrombocythemia 
Myelofibrosis  
M. Shi, J. Yuan, P.L. Ollila, D.S. Viswanatha, R. He 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN. 
 
Introduction: Most BCR-ABL1-negative myeloproliferative 
neoplasms (MPNs) harbor a JAK2, MPL, or CALR mutation. 
JAK2 V617F is found in >95% polycythemia vera and 50% to 
60% essential thrombocythemia (ET) and primary 
myelofibrosis (PMF). CALR mutations occur in 20% to 30% of 
ET and PMF, whereas MPL mutations occur in 5% to 10% ET 
and PMF. They converge on the JAK-STAT pathway and 
have been reported as mutually exclusive. In the era of cost-
effective, value-based medicine, professional MPN guidelines 
recommended reflexive testing for JAK2-V617F, CALR, and 
MPL sequentially until a mutation is detected. Here, we report 
a post-ET myelofibrosis (MF) patient harboring both CALR 
and MPL mutations, with the latter missed by the reflex test, 
highlighting the potential pitfall of the approach. Methods: 
DNA was extracted from the bone marrow (BM) aspirate using 
the Qiagen EZ1 DNA extraction kit (Germantown, US). JAK2-
V617F analysis was performed by quantitative allele-specific 
real-time PCR. CALR exon 9 was done using fragment 
analysis and MPL exon 10 was analyzed by Sanger 
sequencing. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was 
performed using a targeted, 42-gene panel with capture-
based chemistry on an Illumina Novaseq sequencer (San 
Diego, US). Results: A 79-year-old patient had persistent 
thrombocytosis since 2005, and the BM was slightly 
hypercellular with mildly increased megakaryopoiesis without 
distinct clustering or MF. A diagnosis of ET was rendered. 
She remained asymptomatic with stable CBCs until 2018, 
when she developed mild anemia. A repeat BM revealed 
moderate hypercellularity with markedly increased 
megakaryopoiesis with clustering and grade 1 of 3 MF. JAK2-
V617F was negative. In 2022, due to deteriorating anemia 
and thrombocytopenia, a third BM examination was performed 
which showed normocellularity with decreased erythropoiesis 
and granulopoiesis and moderately increased 
megakaryopoiesis with clustering and grade 3 of 3 MF. An 
MPN reflex test was negative for JAK2-V617F. The test 
proceeded to CALR and detected a pathogenic 52-bp 
deletion. MPL testing was not performed following the reflex 
algorithm. However, NGS revealed 2 pathogenic mutations: 
CALR: c.1099_1150del; p.Leu367Thrfs*46 (69%) and 
MPL:c.1543T>A; p.Trp515Arg (32%). Detailed information is 
listed in Table 1. Conclusions: JAK2, CALR and MPL 
mutations are not mutually exclusive in all MPN cases. 
Besides presenting in a clonal/subclonal combination pattern, 
S13
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
they may both present at clonal levels, indicating clonal 
heterogeneity and clonal evolution in MPNs. The widely 
adopted MPN reflex testing algorithm may have limitations in 
detecting the full spectrum of driver mutations in some cases. 
NGS with a broader breadth of target coverage offers a 
superior depiction of the mutational landscape of MPNs, 
which may be particularly helpful in disease progression. 
Further studies should be performed on collective patients to 
understand the pathogenesis and clinicopathologic features of 
JAK2/CALR/MPL double-mutated MPNs. 
Table 1. Laboratory and pathologic features of the patient 
with ET progression to post-ET MF. 
 
 
H03. Genetic Mutational Landscape of Diffuse Large B-
Cell Lymphomas Using a Next-Generation Sequencing 
Lymphoid Panel: A Singapore General Hospital Study   
(Selected for Oral Presentation, Oth02 ) 
F.P.S. Liaw1, T. K.H. Lim2,3, C.K. Ong4, J.Q. Lim4, G.S. Tan3, 
L.S. Tay3, A. S.T. Lim1, S.L. Tien1,5, N.F. Grigoropoulos5  
1Singapore General Hospital, Department of Molecular 
Pathology/Cytogenetics Laboratory, Singapore, Singapore; 
2Singapore General Hospital, Department of Anatomical 
Pathology, Singapore, Singapore; 3Singapore General 
Hospital, Department of Molecular Pathology/Translational 
Pathology Centre, Singapore, Singapore; 4National Cancer 
Centre Singapore, Lymphoma Translational Research 
Laboratory, Singapore, Singapore; 5Singapore General 
Hospital, Department of Haematology, Singapore, Singapore.   
 
Introduction: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a 
genetically heterogeneous disease comprising many subtypes 
and significantly different treatment outcomes. Poor outcomes 
among some subtypes, especially the low-risk subgroups, 
highlight the need for better risk stratification. Cell-of-origin 
helps predict outcomes; however, germinal centre B-cell 
(GCB) and non-GCB, such as the activated B-cell subtypes, 
remain heterogeneous prognostically and in treatment 
response. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis of 
DLBCL has facilitated the global identification of numerous 
and diverse genetic abnormalities in these neoplasms. In this 
study, we investigated the genetic mutational landscape of 
DLBCL using NGS on patients who did not achieve complete 
remission (CR) after initial treatment, relapsed after initial CR, 
and progressed after therapy. Methods: Seventy-seven 
deidentified formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumour 
samples from adult Asian patients with de novo DLBCL were 
sequenced using a 29-gene lymphopanel (Ion Torrent). 
Fisher's Exact test and Kaplan-Meier (log-rank) were used to 
determine p-values, where the statistical significance was 
<0.05. In addition, comparisons of single-gene mutation 
recurrence between response groups were performed using 
odds ratios. Results: Patients with initial CR response (n = 
56) achieved significantly longer overall survival (OS) 
compared to those who did not (p <0.05). CR failure includes 
partial remission (PR, n = 9), stable disease (SD, n = 2) and 
progressive disease (PD, n = 10). Patients who relapsed after 
initial CR (n = 4) also showed significantly worsened OS 
compared to those without evidence of remission (n = 42) at 
the last response. However, patients with disease progression 
(PR to SD or PD, n = 4) did not show significantly worsened 
OS after treatment. Patients who did not achieve initial CR 
showed an increased likelihood of mutations in MYC, ID3, 
PRDM1, TNFAIP3, CD79B, BCL6, EP300, TNFRSF11A, 
CARD11, CREBBP, and MEF2B in decreasing order with odd 
ratios (3.2 to 1.1) compared to those who did. In patients who 
relapsed after initial CR, the odds of mutations in CARD11, 
FAS, B2M, MTOR, TRAF3, BCL6, TNFAIP3, TP53, MYD88, 
and PRDM1 are 13.7 to 1.1 in decreasing order of likelihood. 
Patients with disease progression, mainly those with PR after 
initial treatment (n = 4), showed an odds ratio of 3.0 likelihood 
of CREBBP and KMT2D mutations. There was no significant 
difference in GCB and non-GCB subtypes among the groups. 
Conclusions: NGS may offer more comprehensive 
mutational profiling of high-risk patients who may not achieve 
initial CR and those who may relapse after initial CR. We have 
identified mutations in a Singapore cohort of patients with 
primary DLBCL that may be associated with poor treatment 
outcomes, affecting disease progression, thus laying the 
foundation for more predictive molecular testing-based 
prognostic models with potentially more relevance to therapy 
choice. 
 
S14
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
H04. Assessment of Chimerism by Next-Generation 
Sequencing: A Comparison to STR-PCR Method  
D. Brow, J. Kendrick, D. Viswanatha, M. Kharfan Dabaja, M. 
Elrefaei 
Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL. 
 
Introduction: Chimerism analysis enables the assessment of 
engraftment and minimal measurable residual disease (MRD) 
for early detection of relapse in patients post-hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation (HSCT). The objective of this study is 
to demonstrate the utility and sensitivity of novel multiplex 
next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based chimerism assay 
compared to the gold standard Short Tandem Repeat-PCR 
(STR-PCR) method. Methods: Five patients were evaluated 
for chimerism and MRD at various times post-HSCT. DNA 
was extracted from peripheral blood samples, and chimerism 
testing was performed by a multiplex NGS-based chimerism 
assay and compared to STR-PCR method. Limit of detection 
for complete chimerism by NGS and STR-PCR methods was 
0.1% and 5%, respectively. Results: NGS-based chimerism 
assay identified 9 informative markers that were used to 
detect and quantify MRD less than 5%. In addition, NGS-
based chimerism assay detected a wide range (0.1% to 92%) 
of recipient mixed chimerism (Table 1). In contrast, the STR-
PCR method detected at least 95% donor DNA, yet was 
unable to quantify MRD below 5%. Conclusions: The 
multiplex NGS-based chimerism assay is more sensitive and 
may allow for better quantitative monitoring of engraftment 
and MRD post-HSCT compared to the STR-PCR method. 
 
Table 1 
 
 
H05. Chimerism Analysis Post-Hematopoietic Stem Cell 
Transplantation by Next-Generation Sequencing: A Case 
Report  
D. Brow, J. Kendrick, D. Viswanatha, M. Kharfan Dabaja, M. 
Elrefaei 
Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL. 
 
Introduction: Chimerism analysis in hematopoietic stem cell 
transplant (HSCT) patients is usually performed using the gold 
standard Short Tandem Repeats-PCR (STR-PCR) method. 
However, the use of highly sensitive methods such as next-
generation sequencing (NGS) for chimerism analysis in HSCT 
may be more clinically beneficial. The objective of this case 
report is to demonstrate the utility and sensitivity of NGS-
based chimerism assay. Methods: Chimerism analysis in 
HSCT patients is usually performed using the gold standard 
STR-PCR method. However, the use of highly sensitive 
methods such as NGS for chimerism analysis in HSCT may 
be more clinically beneficial. The objective of this case report 
is to demonstrate the utility and sensitivity of NGS-based 
chimerism assay. Results: Complete chimerism was reported 
by both NGS and STR-PCR methods at 5 weeks post-HSCT. 
However, 4.8% recipient mixed chimerism was detected by 
NGS-based chimerism assay but not STR-PCR method at 7 
weeks post-HSCT (Table 1). The patient was clinically 
asymptomatic with no reports of engraftment dysfunction. A 
bone marrow biopsy was performed on week 13 and 
demonstrated mixed chimerism and disease relapse. 
Conclusions: NGS-based chimerism assay demonstrated a 
higher sensitivity and earlier detection of patient DNA in 
peripheral blood cells that may predict clinical relapse earlier 
compared to the gold standard STR-PCR method. 
 
Figure 1 
 
 
H06. Quantitative WT1 Gene Expression Assay Is a 
Validated Method for Follow-up: A Subset of Acute 
Myeloid Leukemia  
H. Huang1, A. Momeni Boroujeni1, L. Dong1, P. Salazar1, K. 
Mullaney1, P. Sukhadia1, M. Zaidinski1, J.O. Jeon1, N. 
Chaves1, S. DiNapoli1, I. Rijo1, U.D. Chunduri1, K. Nafa1, A. 
Maria1 
1Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, New York, NY; 2Alverno 
Laboratories, Central Lab, Hammond, IN. 
 
Introduction: WT1 expression has been proposed as a highly 
promising marker of disease in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) 
and myelodysplastic syndrome, which may be longitudinally 
monitored and even represent a target for treatment. Despite 
its potential value, expression assessment is not part of the 
routine evaluation in clinical laboratories. Here, we describe 
our clinical laboratory validation of a WT1 assay for this 
purpose. Methods: Diagnostic samples of AML submitted for 
routine molecular testing were selected. Initial screening was 
performed using the MSK-Fusion Heme panel, a customized 
version of the FusionPlex Pan-Heme panel (Integrated DNA 
Technologies, Inc.), which concurrently targets WT1 for 
S15
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
expression. The commercially available reverse-transcription 
PCR-based assay (Qiagen/Ipsogen WT1 ProfileQuant Kit) 
was utilized for further quantification and clinical validation. 
Accuracy, reproducibility, and sensitivity studies were 
performed. Levels of WT1 expression were normalized to an 
internal control (ABL transcript) and expressed as copy 
number per 10,000 copies of ABL. Normalized levels of >250 
at baseline were considered high based on published 
literature for this assay. Results: In total, 61 clinical samples 
were selected based on RNA availability, including 6 bone 
marrow samples without disease, and 55 with variable levels 
of AML involvement. Log2 normalized RNA expression of 
WT1 by the MSK fusion assay ranged from -3.51 to 11.65. 
Quantitation by qPCR ranged from 4.23 to 31,908.75 WT1 
copies per 10K copies of ABL; 50 samples had copies above 
250, which were all AML cases. Normalized WT1 transcripts 
were significantly higher among AML cases (mean 6,140.07; 
range 4.23 to 31,908.75) compared to samples without 
disease (mean 41.65; range 14.35 to 120.64). However, there 
was high variability in expression among AML samples and 
overall poor correlation with corresponding blast counts (R² = 
0.0693). WT1 expression levels detected by MSK-Fusion 
panel correlated well with qPCR in diagnostic samples (R² = 
0.8174). Based on preliminary data, a WT1 level of 3.5 log2 
normalized RNA expression may be established as defining 
criteria for amplification, consistently corresponding to a 
normalized WT1 level of >250 by qPCR. Sensitivity studies 
are pending for the fusion assay. Highly concordant WT1 
levels by qPCR were obtained between the clinical laboratory 
and independent laboratory (R² = 0.99) with excellent intra- 
and inter-assay reproducibility. WT1 transcripts were 
detectable down to the 10-5 dilution (0.001%). Conclusions: 
The WT1 qPCR assay performs robustly for detection of WT1 
expression with excellent intra- and inter-assay reproducibility. 
WT1 transcripts can be detected down to 10-5 dilutions, 
offering opportunities for initial baseline expression 
determination and disease monitoring. Previously established 
cutoffs of high expression correlate well with high expression 
by the MSK-Fusion assay, which could be used for cursory 
screening. Further studies are needed to establish distinct 
cutoffs. 
 
H07. Novel NUTM1 Fusions in Relapsed/Refractory Acute 
Myeloid Leukemia with Monocytic Differentiation 
(Selected for Oral Presentation, O-03-04) 
L. Chang1, J. Arias Stella1, A. Salhotra2, K. Gaal3, J. Song3, L. 
Soma3, M. Telatar1, H. Yew1, T. Dyer1, M. Gust1, P. Tizro3, A. 
Munteanu3, A. Stein2, G. Marcucci2, M. Afkhami1 
1City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Pathology, 
Molecular Pathology and Therapy Biomarkers Division, 
Duarte, CA; 2City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Hematology and Transplant, Leukemia Division, Duarte, CA; 
3City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Pathology, 
Hematopathology, Duarte, CA. 
 
Introduction: We are reporting two novel fusions in the 
NUTM1 gene in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). NUTM1 (NUT 
Midline Carcinoma Family Member 1) rearrangements are 
very uncommon in AML. They have been more commonly 
reported in NUTM1 midline carcinomas, thoracic, and head 
and neck regions. However, rearrangements of NUTM1 have 
been reported in hematologic malignancies primarily in 
pediatric B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A 
novel AVEN::NUTM1 fusion has been reported in one AML 
case in the literature. Here we report two AML patients with 
monocytic features that presented with relapsed/refractory 
(R/R) disease with no response either to transplant or 
navitoclax/venetoclax plus decitabine therapy. Methods: 
Bone marrow aspirates were tested with City of Hope’s flow 
cytometry analysis and HopeSeq Heme Comprehensive 
panel. DNA sequencing of 523 genes and RNA sequencing of 
233 genes were completed. Conventional cytogenetics was 
performed for confirmation of the results. Results: The first 
case is a 65-year-old male with persistent AML since 2020. 
Flow cytometry analysis (FCA) revealed CD34 negative 
immature "monocytic" population expressing CD4, CD11c, 
CD13, CD15, CD33, CD38, CD123, and HLA-DR. A 
LARP1::NUTM1 fusion was detected by RNAseq, and DNA 
sequencing revealed ASXL2, BCOR, DNMT3A, and 
IDH2 pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) alterations. 
Cytogenetic analysis through karyotyping detected t(5;15) in 
2022 consistent with the LARP1::NUTM1 fusion. (Fig. 1) The 
second case is a 67-year-old male with persistent AML since 
March 2022. FCA demonstrated blasts expressing CD4, CD9, 
CD11b, CD11c, CD13, CD14, CD15, CD16, CD33, CD38, 
CD45 (bright, monocytic gate), CD56, CD64, CD123, and 
HLA-DR. The population is negative for CD34 and MPO. RNA 
sequencing detected a novel ARHGAP15::NUTM1 fusion. 
Additionally, ASXL1, RUNX1, and TET2 P/LP mutations 
has been detected. Cytogenetic analysis reported t(2;15) 
consistent with the ARHGAP15::NUTM1 fusion (Fig. 2). 
Conclusions: The first case has been transplanted; however, 
it relapsed 120 days post-transplant with a chimerism of 20%. 
S16
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
The second case has shown R/R AML since the initial 
diagnosis. Additionally, the novel AVEN::NUTM1 fusion case 
reported in the literature, relapsed post-chemotherapy and 
was minimal residual disease positive 3 months after 
transplant with DNA sequencing detecting IDH1 and RUNX1 
mutations. Although all three cases have mutations 
associated with poor prognosis including BCOR and RUNX1 
based on recent ELN and WHO recommendations, the short 
relapse post-transplant and persistent disease might be due 
to having additional NUTM1 fusions. Both cases 
demonstrated AML with monocytic features, as well as the 
one reported AVEN::NUTM1 novel fusion case in the 
literature. Further study is under progress for evaluation of 
acute myelomonocytic biorepository samples retrospectively 
to evaluate prevalence for NUTM1 fusions. Both initial AMLs 
had normal karyotype; therefore, these fusions might 
represent clonal evolution or post-therapy development. 
 
Figure 1. Case 1 timeline 
 
 
Figure 2. Case 2 timeline 
 
 
H08. STAT5B-RARa Fusion Positive Variant Acute 
Promyelocytic Leukemia: Role of Next-Generation 
Sequencing in Detection of a Rare Malignancy  
I. Dey1, S. Vinarkar2, M. Parihar3, R. Demde1, A. Mandloi4, K. 
Saha1, A. Nag5, D.K. Mishra2 
1Tata Medical Center, Department of Molecular Pathology, 
Kolkata, India; 2Tata Medical Center, Department of Molecular 
Pathology & Laboratory Haematology, Kolkata, India; 3Tata 
Medical Center, Department of Molecular Pathology, 
Cytogenetics & Laboratory Haematology, Kolkata, India; 4Tata 
Medical Center, Department of Laboratory Haematology, 
Kolkata, India; 5Tata Medical Center, Department of Clinical 
Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplant, Kolkata, India. 
 
Introduction: Variant acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) 
due to STAT5B-RARa fusion t(17;17) is a rare retinoic acid-
unresponsive APL. The RARa fusion partner plays a critical 
role in the therapy and prognosis of APL and needs to be 
distinguished from the classic retinoic acid responsive PML-
RARa APL and other RARa partners (i.e., PLZF, NuMA, etc.). 
Methods: We present a rare case of STAT5B-RARa 
translocation positive APL and highlight the role of next-
generation sequencing (NGS) as an important diagnostic 
modality in its definitive diagnosis. Results: A 42-year-old 
male presented with complaints of severe weakness, 
decreased appetite, loss of weight, fever, visual disturbances 
and slurred speech for 3 months. Mild splenomegaly was 
noted upon examination. Complete blood count (CBC) 
showed leukocytosis with white blood cell count of 42,200/μl 
along with thrombocytopenia and anemia. Peripheral blood 
smear (PBS) examination revealed 76% blast/abnormal 
promyelocyte/atypical monocytoid cells with many of them 
showing salmon-pink cytoplasmic granules and strong 
cytochemical myeloperoxidase staining. No Auer rods were 
seen. Flow cytometric immunophenotyping on peripheral 
blood revealed 60% blasts/abnormal promyelocytes with high 
side scatter, dim CD45, showing expression of CD117, CD13, 
CD33, CD56, cMPO, and negativity of CD34, HLA DR. The 
PBS morphology and immunophenotyping were suggestive of 
possibility of APL. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 
for PML-RARa using dual-color dual-fusion probe 
(MetaSystem, Germany) was negative. RT-PCR for PML-
RARA (BCR1, BCR2, and BCR3 fusion transcripts) was 
negative. FISH utilizing RARa break-apart probe (Kreatek, 
Leica, Amsterdam) revealed an atypical RARa rearrangement 
(1F1G signal pattern). Bone marrow aspirate revealed a 
cellular marrow with 30% MPO positive blasts/abnormal 
promyelocytes, with many of them showing prominent Auer 
rods and occasional faggot cells. NGS-based Oncomine 
Myeloid Research Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was 
performed. RNA sequencing revealed STAT5B-RARa fusion 
positivity (6,094 read-counts). A missense variant in GATA2 
S17
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
gene NM_032638.5:c.1084C>G;p.(Arg362Gly) was detected 
on DNA sequencing. The patient received ATO, steroid, and 
azacytidine; however, within 7 days he developed respiratory 
distress followed by cardiac arrest which proved fatal. 
Conclusions: STAT5B-RARa t(17;17) is a rare variant of 
APML. It exhibits diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic 
difference with the common PML-RARa positive APL and, 
hence, the need for its prompt identification. Our case 
demonstrates the valuable role of NGS in reaching a definite 
diagnosis of such challenging and rare malignancy. 
 
H09. Distinguishing between Primary Mediastinal Large 
B-Cell Lymphoma and Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma 
Using the Lymph3Cx Gene Expression Profiling Assay  
R. S. Robetorye1,2, C.A. Ramsower2, C.L. McKinney2, L.M. 
Rimsza1,2 
1Mayo Clinic, Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Phoenix, AZ; 2Molecular Diagnostics Arizona-
Laboratory (MDAZL), Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Scottsdale, AZ. 
 
Introduction: Primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma 
(PMBL) is a distinct lymphoid neoplasm arising in the 
mediastinum that is morphologically similar to diffuse large B-
cell lymphoma (DLBCL) but has distinct clinical, 
immunophenotypic, genotypic, and molecular features. 
Although the differentiation of PMBL from DLBCL can be 
important for guiding subsequent therapy, the interpretation of 
morphologic findings and the associated 
immunohistochemistry in small, and often crushed mediastinal 
biopsies can be difficult. Therefore, we developed and fully 
validated a clinical gene expression profiling assay in the 
Molecular Diagnostics Arizona Laboratory (MDAZL) that 
utilized the Lymph3Cx gene expression signature to 
distinguish between these lymphomas using formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded tissue specimens. This assay includes and 
builds upon the Lymph2Cx expression signature and can 
categorize DLBCL into germinal center B-cell (GCB)-type, 
activated B-cell (ABC)-type, and unclassifiable (UNC) 
categories as well as accurately and robustly differentiate 
PMBL from DLBCL. Methods: First, a hematopathologist 
identifies a large B-cell lymphoma based on histologic and 
immunophenotypic assessment of the specimen, and then 
requests Lymph3Cx testing from MDAZL to aid in further 
classification. Tumor content is assessed using a hematoxylin 
and eosin (H&E)-stained slide, and then additional unstained 
slides are used to isolate total RNA from the specimen. The 
RNA is hybridized overnight on a thermal cycler to 
fluorescently labeled probes in the Lymph3Cx assay panel. 
The probe/RNA complexes are then quantitated on a 
NanoString nCounter Digital Analyzer and subsequently 
subjected to an algorithmic analysis for further classification 
and subtyping. Results: So far, 62 clinical specimens have 
been subjected to Lymph3Cx testing in the MDAZL with the 
following results: PMBL: 36 (58%); DLBCL: 16 (26%); 
Unclear: 8 (13%); Failed QC: 2 (3%). Of the 16 cases with 
gene expression signatures consistent with DLBCL, 
subsequent cell-of-origin determination showed the following 
results: GCB: 9 (56%); ABC: 5 (31%); UNC: 2 (13%). Average 
in-laboratory turnaround time for these cases was 1.8 days, 
with an average of 3.3 days from sample receipt to final 
report. Conclusions: MDAZL has performed a full clinical 
validation of the performance characteristics of the Lymph3Cx 
assay and is the first molecular diagnostics laboratory to offer 
the Lymph3Cx assay as a clinical molecular diagnostic test for 
distinguishing PMBL from DLBCL and molecular cell-of-origin 
subtyping of DLBCL. With a relatively rapid turnaround time, 
the Lymph3Cx assay is suitable for use in routine 
hematopathology practice for distinguishing PMBL and 
DLBCL. Real-world case examples can also clearly illustrate 
the clinical utility of the Lymph3Cx assay, especially in cases 
of small biopsies with prominent crush artifact, cases with 
non-specific immunohistochemistry, or cases with atypical 
anatomic site presentations, such as mediastinal DLBCL or 
non-mediastinal PMBL. 
 
H10. Diagnostic Challenges of Chromosomal 3q26.2 
Aberrations/MECOM Rearrangement: An Extended Study 
from a Single Institute  
Z. Tang1, G. Tang1, G.A. Toruner1, S. Hu1, S. Yang1, J.D. 
Khoury1,2, L.J. Medeiros1 
1The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX; 2Department of Pathology and Microbiology, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE. 
 
Introduction: Rearrangements of MECOM locus at 3q26.2 
are associated with rapid disease progression and a poor 
prognosis in myeloid malignancies. The 3q26.2 
aberrations/MECOM-R are considered a defining genetic 
abnormality for acute myeloid leukemia (AML) under the 5th 
WHO (regardless of blast count) and the ICC (if >10% blasts) 
guidelines. We previously reported 129 MECOM-R cases with 
a wide spectrum of 3q26.2 aberrations. This study is currently 
extended to a cohort of 295 cases. Many newly identified 
3q26.2 aberrations are subtle or cryptic for karyotyping. They 
presented huge diagnostic challenges. Methods: 
Karyotyping, interphase-, metaphase-, and/or map-back 
MECOM Breakapart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 
were performed on bone marrow cultures in all cases and 
optical genome mapping (OGM) in 2 cases. Results: This 
cohort included 295 patients (M/F = 173/122) with MECOM-R. 
Their median age was 65 years (range 17 to 92 years). Their 
S18
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
diagnoses following the WHO 2017 were 166 AML, 94 
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), 27 chronic myelogenous 
leukemia, 4 chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), and 5 
mixed phenotype acute leukemia. All the MDS and CMML 
cases can be re-categorized as AML by following the 5th 
WHO; and 70 MDS and all CMML cases can be re-
categorized as AML by following the ICC guidelines, 
respectively. During a follow-up of 0 to 122 months (average 9 
months), 218 (73.9%) patients died with disease, 56 (19%) 
had persistent disease or achieved partial remission, and 21 
(7.1%) achieved complete remission. Less than 50% of cases 
presented classic inv(3)(q21q26.2) (n = 122) or 
t(3;3)(q21;q26.2) (n = 19), whereas the rest showed a wide 
spectrum of non-classic 3q26.2 aberrations, including 
pericentric inv(3)s (n = 17); non-classic paracentric inv(3) (n = 
5); other translocations (n = 98) including t(1;3), t(2;3), t(3;4), 
t(3;6), t(3;8), t(3;10), t(3;12), t(3;13), t(3;17), t(3;21), and 
t(3;22); insertions (n = 8); and unknown mechanisms (n = 27). 
About 54.6% cases exhibited a complex karyotype, and 
12.9% had an isolated 3q26.2 aberration; 37.3% cases had -
7/7q- but their frequency was much higher in cases with 
pericentric inv(3)s (70.6%), non-classic paracentric inv(3)s 
(80%) and t(3;3) (47.4%) but much lower in cases with t(2;3) 
(23.8%), t(3;6) (14.3%), t(3;8) (27.3%), and t(3;12) (26.7%) 
than the average level. No statistical significances for 
frequencies of complex karyotype and -7/7q- and overall 
survivals were observed between cases with classic 
inv(3)/t(3;3) and those with non-classic 3q26.2 aberrations. 
Conclusions: The status of 3q26.2 aberrations/MECOM-R is 
vital for diagnosis, prognosis, and clinical management of 
patients with myeloid malignancies, but the MECOM-R 
associated 3q26.2 aberrations are complicated. Due to the 
complicated nature of 3q26.2 aberration/MECOM-R, some are 
cryptic/subtle for karyotyping, a highly sensitive and specific 
testing such as MECOM Breakapart FISH, OGM, and/or 
whole-genome sequencing are warranted for all cases with 
myeloid neoplasms at their initial workup. 
 
H11. Distribution of Molecular Markers of Chronic 
Myeloproliferative Neoplasm among Pakistani Population  
Z. Ansar Ahmed, S. Naz, A. Ujala, T. Moatter 
Aga Khan University, Pathology and Lab Medicine Molecular 
Pathology Section, Karachi, Pakistan. 
 
Introduction: Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are 
clonal hematopoietic stem cell malignancies, characterized by 
excessive production of blood cells. The World Health 
Organization (WHO) provides diagnostic criteria for the 
following MPN subtypes: chronic myelogenous leukemia; 
BCR-ABL1–positive; polycythemia vera (PV); essential 
thrombocythemia (ET); primary myelofibrosis (PMF); chronic 
neutrophilic leukemia; chronic eosinophilic leukemia, not 
otherwise specified; mastocytosis; and MPN-unclassifiable 
(MPN-U). Common molecular events in MPNs are the V617F 
mutation in the JAK2 gene, mutations of exon 10 of the MPL 
gene (mainly involving codon W515), and JAK2 mutations on 
exon 12, which are included as one of the diagnostic criteria. 
Recently, novel frameshift mutations in exon 9 of the 
Calreticulin (CALR) gene were found using next-generation 
sequencing in patients with JAK2 or MPL nonmutated PMF 
and ET. In this study, we investigated the mutation profiles of 
BCRABL1, CALR, JAK2, and MPL mutations in 4 different 
MPN subtypes in Pakistani patients with PMF, ET, PV, and 
MPN-U in a single tertiary health care center. Methods: This 
retrospective observational study was conducted at the 
Section of Molecular Pathology, Aga Khan University Hospital, 
Karachi, Pakistan, over a period of 6 months (from November 
2021 to April 2022) that included patients with MPNs 
diagnosed as per the World Health Organization (WHO) 
criteria. Laboratory-integrated system was then used to 
retrieve the data including age, gender, and MPN mutations. 
Results: Out of the tested 916 patients, males comprised 
73% of the total, whereas females were 27% included in the 
full analysis. The median age was 46 years (range, 16 to 87 
years). A total of 56 patients were reported to have the BCR-
ABL1 transcript (b2a2, b3a2, and e1a2) . A total of 166 
patients were reported with non-BCR-ABL MPN mutations in 
JAK2 exon 14, 157 (65%); CALR fs46/CALR fs47, 7 (27%); 
MPL, 1 (4%); CKIT, 1 (4%), and no mutation detected in JAK2 
exon 12 during the study period. Conclusions: The 
prevalence and incidence of MPNs in Pakistan were derived 
using the number of patients visiting hospital. Thus, the 
prevalence reported here is not directly comparable with the 
entire country. Currently, there are no data in percentage of 
PV, ET, PMF, and JAK2(V617F) exon 14 mutation found 
significantly in Philadelphia -ve (non-BCR-ABL) 
myeloproliferative neoplasms. 
 
H12. Additional Chromosomal Abnormalities in 
Philadelphia Positive Chronic Myeloid Leukemia in the 
Era of Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor Therapy of Pakistani 
Patients  
Z. Ansar Ahmed, S. Hussain, H. Hayat, T. Moatter, A. Zehra 
Aga Khan University, Pathology and Lab Medicine Molecular 
Pathology Section, Karachi, Pakistan. 
 
Introduction: Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a 
myeloproliferative disorder characterized by the presence of 
the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome resulting from the 
reciprocal translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11). It has been reported 
that in 5% to 10% of newly diagnosed CML cases, 1 or more 
S19
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
additional chromosomes are added to 9 and 22 and are 
involved in the translocation, and this is termed variant 
translocation. In certain cases chromosome changes are 
submicroscopic, so the translocation can be masked and 
revealed only by fluorescence in situ hybridization or by BCR-
ABL PCR analysis. In the pre-imatinib era, some studies 
reported a strong association of variant translocations with the 
presence of der(9) deletions, which indicate that the poor 
prognosis may be due to the increased frequency of the latter 
change. To the best of our knowledge, in Pakistani patients, 
no systematic studies of early chronic phase patients in large 
prospective clinical trials with imatinib have been reported. 
Methods: Analysis was performed on pretreatment bone 
marrow samples using conventional G-banding techniques. 
Bone marrow samples were cultured using standard culture 
techniques followed by harvesting (incubation, centrifugation, 
and addition of hypotonic solution). After addition of fixative 
(3:1 methanol to glacial acetic acid) and trypsin treatment, 
Giemsa staining was performed. Slides were examined under 
microscope and at least 20 mitosis were analyzed whenever 
possible. In all cases, the diagnosis of CML was confirmed by 
morphology on peripheral blood and bone marrow aspirate 
and H&C on trephine where possible using standard 
methodologies. Results: A total of 1,021 patients were 
diagnosed with CML during the study period from January 
2017 to June 2019. There were 627 males and 394 females 
(M:F = 1.6:1. A normal karyotype was identified in 180 
(17.6%) patients and abnormal karyotype in 825 (80%) 
patients (Table 1). The most prevalent chromosomal 
abnormality was t (9;22) (q34; q11.2), which was present in 
699 (68.5%) of 1,021 patients. CML with 3-way translocation 
including t(9;22) occurred in 44 (4.3%) and CML with 
additional translocation including with t (9;22) was present in 
23 (2.2%) patients. Numerical cytogenetic abnormalities 
including trisomy 8 (80%), -Y:63% and monosomy 7 (21%) 
were identified in 49 (4.8%) patients (Table 1). Ten patients 
(1%) had CML with Double Ph t (9;22). Conclusions: In 
conclusion, we report the additional abnormalities in 
Philadelphia positive CML include 3- way and numerical 
cytogenetic abnormalities; however, for further strengthening 
our finding we need larger studies to understand the evolving 
mechanism and occurrence. Therefore, our data suggest that 
patients with variant translocations do not constitute a 
“warning” category in the imatinib era 
 
H13. AML Relapse after Stem Cell Transplant from a 
Presumed Carrier of MyD88 Deficiency  
C. Karakas1, M. Buldo2, K. P. Loh3, O. Aljitawi3, Z. Oltvai2, V. 
L. Casler4, A. N. Jajosky2 
1University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine/Anatomic Pathology, 
Rochester, MN; 2University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Molecular Pathology and Laboratory Medicine/Molecular 
Diagnostics Laboratory, Rochester, MN; 3University of 
Rochester Medical Center, Department of 
Medicine/Hematology and Oncology, Rochester, MN; 
4University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine/Molecular Pathology, 
Rochester, MN; 5University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine/Bioinformatics, Rochester, MN. 
 
Introduction: A 64-year-old man with a history of 
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) developed acute myeloid 
leukemia with myelodysplasia-related changes (AML-MRC). 
Given the poor prognosis, he underwent an HLA-matched 
unrelated donor (MUD) hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT). His post-transplant course was 
complicated by infections, chronic graft-versus-host-disease 
(GvHD) requiring a cornea transplant, and AML relapse. 
Targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) unexpectedly 
revealed his MUD was likely a carrier of MyD88 deficiency, a 
rare autosomal recessive immunodeficiency caused by 
inactivating MYD88 variants and characterized by 
susceptibility to life-threatening bacterial infections in infancy 
and childhood. About 24 cases of MyD88 deficiency have 
been reported to date. Methods: NGS was performed on pre- 
and post-transplant bone marrows (BMs) using a 34-gene 
Illumina Myeloid panel. Post-transplant chimerism testing was 
performed by PCR of informative short tandem repeats 
(STRs). Results: NGS of his initial BM biopsy involved by 
MDS with excess blasts-2 (MDS-EB-2) identified an 
oncogenic IDH2 p.R172K variant. Subsequent transformation 
of MDS-EB-2 to AML-MRC was accompanied by acquisition 
of an SRSF2 p.P95L mutation. Although chimerism studies 
initially showed full donor BM engraftment, rising levels of 
recipient DNA (12%) were detected 20 months after 
transplant. This prompted re-evaluation of the BM (Fig. 1), 
confirming relapsed AML with: 1) re-emergence of the IDH2 
p.R172K mutation at a variant allele frequency (VAF) of 7%, 
and 2) acquisition of a new NRAS p.G12D mutation at a VAF 
of 3%, likely reflecting tumor evolution. Surprisingly, a likely 
pathogenic MYD88 p.Q262Ter variant was also found at a 
VAF of 45%, seemingly aligned with the 88% donor DNA in 
the sample. To investigate a possible heterozygous germline 
MYD88 variant in the stem cell donor, retrospective NGS of 
the donor’s pre-transplant blood was performed and 
S20
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
confirmed MYD88 p.Q262Ter was present at a VAF of 48%. 
Conclusions: This is the first reported case of HSCT from a 
presumed carrier of MyD88 deficiency. Since the impact of 
donor immune system defects on HSCT outcomes is largely 
unexplored, we do not know why this patient ultimately 
relapsed. Studies in Myd88-deficient mouse models suggest 
the donor’s T-cells may exhibit impaired graft-versus-leukemia 
(GvL) activity that promoted AML evolution and relapse. This 
case also raises important ethical considerations: Should 
clinicians inform stem-cell donor registries about incidental 
germline findings (associated with inherited disease and/or 
hereditary predisposition to cancer), so that donors can 
receive genetic counseling and follow-up testing? Should 
carriers of severe immunodeficiencies be excluded from stem 
cell donation even if they are otherwise healthy? Careful study 
of transplant outcomes will help to answer these questions 
and clarify whether genetic screening of stem cell donors is 
warranted. 
 
 
Figure 1. Bone Marrow Biopsy & Touch Prep & 
Peripheral Smear 
Figure 1 shows clonal monotonous atypical proliferation of 
leukemic cells in the bone marrow biopsy and myeloid 
blasts on touch prep & peripheral smear, consistent 
with the "Relapsed AML" 20 months after hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation. 
 
 
H14. Retrospective Assessment of 18 Hematological 
Malignancy Genomes by Optical Genome Mapping  
T. Kelly, A. Korpetinou, P. Pollakis, V. Katsini, D. Iakovaki, G. 
Christopoulou, P. Constantoulakis 
Genotypos MSA, Athens, Greece. 
 
Introduction: For the diagnosis, prognosis, and management 
of hematological malignancies, the assessment of well-
described genomic rearrangements is of critical importance. 
Conventional methods used for the determination of these 
genomic aberrations are classical karyotyping, fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH), and molecular karyotyping (aCGH). 
Optical genome mapping (OGM) is a high-resolution 
technology rapidly gaining interest for its capacity to detect 
structural variants (SVs) and copy number variants (CNVs) 
genome-wide in 1 single assay. Studies have shown that 
OGM can simplify lab workflow by reducing turnaround time 
and reducing multiple tests into one. Our objective was to 
evaluate OGM against standard techniques used in our 
laboratory in all different kinds of samples and highlight its 
usefulness in the management of patients with hematological 
neoplasms. Methods: In total, 18 clinical cases from patients 
with different probable diagnoses were retrospectively 
assessed. Bone marrow (BM) or peripheral blood samples 
were processed with karyotype/FISH with standard 
procedures. Ultra-high molecular weight DNA was isolated 
from the same samples, labeled, and processed for analysis 
on the Bionano Genomics Saphyr platform following the 
manufacturer’s protocols (Bionano Genomics, San Diego, 
US). Genome-wide analyses for SVs and CNVs was 
performed using the Rare Variant Pipeline Analysis on 
Bionano Access (v.1.7)/Bionano Solve (v.3.7). Results from 
conventional chromosomal analyses were compared to those 
of OGM. Results: Results between OGM analysis and 
conventional techniques were concordant in 13/18 samples. 
In particular, aneuploidies, deletions or duplications of 
chromosomal regions, and translocations were accurately 
determined, whereas in 5 cases, 7 new clinically significant 
SVs were observed that were not detectable by conventional 
methods. Interestingly, in 1/18 cases with a normal karyotype, 
microdeletions in genes of clinical importance (STIL, 
CDKN2A, MTAP) were identified, due to higher OGM 
resolution. Also, 2 cases were evaluated blindly as part of 
interlaboratory comparison, resulting in complete agreement. 
Finally, in 4 cases OGM analysis failed to detect the events 
described by conventional methods, mainly due to extended 
BM culture upon stimulation. Conclusions: In this study, 
OGM showed high concordance (72.2%) with our standard-of-
care techniques. Excluding samples with culture bias, 
concordance was >90%, making the method a reliable tool for 
the detection of abnormalities in hematological malignancies. 
Furthermore, OGM provided more information in 27.7% of 
cases, showing 7 new SVs that were missed by routine 
methods and were of clinical significance, which translates to 
an increase in diagnostic yield. The increased resolution of 
OGM analysis is expected to reveal novel genomic 
aberrations, which may redefine the established prognostic 
subgroups, and/or lead to better understanding of the 
pathophysiology and molecular biology of treatment response. 
 
S21
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
H15. Automated Round Nuclei Selection Improves FISH 
Analysis in CLL  
X. Xu, J. Seheult, S.A. Smoley, K.K. Fisch, R.G. Meyer, C.A. 
Sattler, M. Shi, P. Greipp, R. Ketterling 
Mayo Clinic, Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Rochester, MN. 
 
Introduction: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 
analysis is routinely performed to detect common cytogenetic 
abnormalities that are key prognostic markers for chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Low lymphocyte fraction in a 
subset of CLL cases imposes risk of false-negative FISH 
results. Since CLL cells typically exhibit round nuclear 
morphology, scoring round nuclei during FISH analysis can 
improve the sensitivity for detecting cytogenetic abnormalities. 
In this study, we evaluated the feasibility of automated round 
nuclei selection using morphology metrics and its impact on 
FISH scoring analysis. Methods: Sixteen clinical cases with 
24 abnormal CLL FISH sites including deletions 13q, 11q, 
17p, trisomy 12, and IGH::CCND1 were selected. Manual 
scoring of 300 consecutive nuclei regardless of nuclear 
morphology was performed by technologists to determine the 
FISH abnormality percentage representative of the abnormal 
CLL cell fraction in each case. In addition, each nucleus was 
classified as either round or irregular by technologists. 
Features of nuclear morphology, including aspect ratio (AR) 
and irregularity, were obtained from the analysis software for 
each scanned cell image (Metafer, MetaSystems Inc.) and 
used to calculate 2 additional parameters: irregularity inverse 
(II = 1-Irregularity), and a composite of AR and irregularity 
(IAR  = [1-Irregularity]*Aspect Ratio)^2). Empirical cutpoint 
estimation (Youden method) was used to establish the optimal 
cut-off of AR, II, and IAR to discriminate between round and 
irregular nuclei. Sensitivity and specificity for automated round 
cell selection at the optimal cutpoint for AR, II, and IAR were 
calculated using the manual nucleus shape classification as 
ground truth. The percentage of abnormal nuclei in 
automatically selected round nuclei was compared to that 
obtained from manual consecutive scoring of all cells. 
Results: Optimal cutpoints, and the corresponding sensitivity 
and specificity of AR, II, and IAR, as well as the average 
difference in percentage increase for each FISH site by 
applying each metric’s cutpoint, are summarized in Table 1. 
The percentage of nuclei with an abnormal FISH pattern was 
significantly higher with automated round nuclei selection 
compared to manual consecutive scoring of all cells.  
 
 
 
 
Table 1. 
 
 
Conclusions: This pilot study demonstrates the feasibility of 
applying nuclear morphology metrics from a commercially 
available digital FISH platform to automate round nucleus 
selection for CLL FISH scoring. This approach results in a 
higher percentage of abnormal cells and can be used in 
conjunction with routine analysis in cases with low lymphocyte 
fraction or concern for false-negative FISH results. 
 
H16. Severe Systemic Auto-Inflammation in an Elderly 
Woman with Clonal Hematopoiesis  
G. George1, J.L. Liesveld2, P. McMullen1, S.El Hussein1, A. 
Jajosky1 
1University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rochester, MN; 
2University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of 
Hematology and Oncology, Rochester, MN. 
 
Introduction: An 89-year-old woman developed cutaneous 
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) (Fig. 1) in association with 
other severe auto-inflammatory manifestations, including 
temporal arteritis (Fig. 2), polymyalgia rheumatica, chronic 
demyelinating polyneuropathy, and malakoplakia. Molecular 
characterization of her LCH revealed low-level oncogenic 
MAP2K1, IDH2, and SRSF2 mutations. Interestingly, the 
same IDH2 and SRSF2 mutations were highly enriched in her 
blood, suggesting a common clonal hematopoietic origin and 
identifying these somatic variants as potential mediators of 
systemic auto-inflammation. Methods: Targeted DNA-based 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on her 
cutaneous LCH using the 35-gene Oncomine Focus Assay 
and 45-gene Oncomine Myeloid Assay GX, designed for solid 
tumors and myeloid malignancies, respectively. Targeted 
DNA-based NGS was also performed on the peripheral blood 
using the 34-gene Illumina TruSight Myeloid Panel. Results: 
NGS of her LCH revealed oncogenic MAP2K1 p.C121S (VAF 
= 4%), IDH2 p.R140Q (VAF = 8%), and SRSF2 p.P95L (VAF 
= 6%) mutations. Since IDH2 mutations have not been 
reported in LCH but are well described in hematologic 
malignancies, myeloid NGS was performed on her blood 
despite relatively normal blood counts. Both the IDH2 
p.R140Q (VAF = 46%) and SRSF2 p.P95L (VAF = 51%) 
mutations were highly enriched in her blood, consistent with 
clonal hematopoiesis. The MAP2K1 mutation was not 
detected in the blood, suggesting that it is a specific acquired 
S22
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
driver of LCH. Conclusions: The discovery of clonal 
hematopoiesis in this elderly woman with a wide spectrum of 
severe auto-inflammatory conditions supports a potentially 
intriguing link between somatic blood mutations and her adult-
onset rheumatologic disorders. Mechanistically, disrupted 
SRSF2-mediated splicing may be driving aberrant antigen 
presentation by bone marrow-derived dendritic cells in her 
skin and other organs. Causal relationships between somatic 
blood mutations and autoimmune/auto-inflammatory 
conditions have been established in patients with hematologic 
malignancies and conditions like VEXAS syndrome. Although 
this patient does not meet diagnostic criteria for a hematologic 
malignancy, she will be closely monitored given her 
mutational profile and dysregulated hematopoiesis that may 
manifest as a myeloid malignancy. Of note, this is the first 
reported case of IDH2-mutated LCH, raising the potential 
therapeutic utility of IDH2 inhibitors in this entity. Fortunately, 
she is responding to treatment with steroids and the anti-IL6R 
biologic, toclizumab. 
 
 
Figure 1. (A) Microscopic examination of the skin showing 
a proliferation of Langerhans cells in the epidermis and 
dermis, surrounded by a dense lymphocytic infiltrate. The 
Langerhans cells were positive for (B) S100, (C) CD1a, 
and (D) langerin, supporting a diagnosis of Langerhans 
cell histiocytosis (LCH). 
 
 
Figure 2. (A) Microscopic examination of the temporary 
artery showing luminal occlusion, thickening of the intima, 
and transmural inflammation with a conspicuous giant cell. 
(B) Higher-power magnification of the transmural 
inflammation and giant cell. (C) Elastin stain highlighting 
the discontinuity of the internal elastic lamina.  
 
H17. Genomic Evolution of Philadelphia Negative 
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms with Double Driver 
Mutations  
R. Sardana1, L. Boiocchi1, J. Yao1, D. Lee2, R. K. Rampal3, M. 
Arcila1, M. Ewalt1 
1Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, New York, NY; 
2NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell, Department of 
Medicine, New York, NY; 3Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, Leukemia Service, New York, NY. 
 
Introduction: Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are a 
group of hematopoietic cancers classified as Philadelphia 
positive (chronic myeloid leukemia) and Philadelphia negative, 
of which the most common entities are polycythemia vera, 
essential thrombocytosis, and primary myelofibrosis. Whereas 
mutations in driver genes (CALR, MPL, and JAK2) in these 
disorders were initially described as mutually exclusive, recent 
studies have shown rare cases which harbor mutations in 2 or 
more of these genes, so-called Double Driver Mutant (DDM) 
MPNs. To date, the effect of these multiple mutations on 
disease evolution has not been well studied, and we here 
present a series of patients with DDM MPN and sequential 
follow-up. Methods: Following approval from our institutional 
review board, patient data was retrieved from clinical records. 
A total of 1,189 patients were identified who had undergone 
comprehensive genomic profiling by next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) and harbored at least 1 mutation in CALR, 
JAK2, and/or MPL. In 52 patients, 2 or more alterations were 
found in these genes. In all, 19 of these patients had 3 or 
more NGS evaluations over their follow-up. The pathogenicity 
of the mutations in CALR, JAK2, and MPL was assessed 
according to the Clinical Genome Resource, Cancer 
Genomics Consortium, and Variant Interpretation for Cancer 
Consortium guidelines. In 11 patients, both mutations were 
classified as Pathogenic (P) or Likely Pathogenic (LP) and 
thus represented DDMs for inclusion in this study. The clonal 
evolution was graphically represented using the fish plot 
package for R by Miller et al. Results: Clinical features are 
described in Table 1. From the point of identification of the 
DDMs, 2 patterns were noted in this cohort: 1) persistence of 
DDMs and baseline mutations with minimal change in variant 
allele fraction (VAF), n = 7/11; and 2) acquisition of additional 
mutations and changing clonal dynamics with change in VAF, 
n = 4/11. In the former group with stable clonal dynamics, the 
patients’ clinical status remained relatively stable with only 
increasing myelofibrosis but stable peripheral blood 
parameters and bone marrow blast counts. In the latter group, 
clonal evolution was accompanied by clinical progression 
characterized by morphologic dysplasia and in 1 patient, 
transformation to acute myeloid leukemia. Representative 
S23
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
examples of these patterns are shown in Figure 1. 
Conclusions: The stable clinical course of the DDM MPN 
patients in our cohort with stable clonal dynamics is in line 
with the findings of The FIM study (2017) in that the presence 
of DDM in itself does not necessarily alter the course of 
disease. Rather, the correlation of disease progression with 
additional clonal evolution in our cohort suggests that clinical 
progression is driven by additional genetic hits outside of 
CALR, JAK2, and MPL in the neoplastic clone and that no 
additional negative prognostic effect should be assumed in 
patients with DDM in the absence of such additional 
alterations. 
 
 
Figure 1 
Fish plots showing clonal evolution of various subclones in 
case 1 (A), 2 (B), and 7 (C), although the order of events 
depicted can be deduced from the single-clone analysis 
(the origin of the clones is predicted from the VAF of 
individual mutation here). D shows an oncoprint of the 
cases in this cohort at the timepoint with the greatest 
number of mutations.  
 
 
Table: 1 Clinical Features 
Clinical characteristics of patients. PV – polycythemia 
vera, ET – essential thrombocytosis, PMF – primary 
myelofibrosis, MPN-U – myeloproliferative neoplasm 
unclassifiable, MDS – myelodysplastic syndrome, AML – 
acute myeloid leukemia, MF – myelofibrosis, MDS/MPN – 
myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasm. 
 
 
H18. MYC Status along with BCL2, BCL6 Rearrangements 
in High-Grade B-Cell Lymphoma  
Z. Ansar Ahmed, M. Sharif, S. Siddiqui, F. Faisal, R. Zaki 
Aga Khan University, Pathology and Lab Medicine Molecular 
Pathology section, Karachi, Pakistan. 
 
Introduction: Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is the eighth 
most diagnosed cancer in men and the11th in women. Diffuse 
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) includes a heterogeneous 
group of non-Hodgkin lymphoma with different prognoses and 
molecular and clinical characteristics. MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 
are most commonly involved in B-cell lymphomas. 
Translocations of these oncogenes are associated with an 
aggressive clinical course. This study aimed to find the 
distribution of MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 rearrangements in high-
grade B cell lymphoma. Methods: A total of 110 formalin-
fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks were included in our study. 
The fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay was 
performed for t(8;14) by probes from Abbott Molecular (US) 
on 63 Burkitt lymphoma cases, comprising 55 males and 8 
females. Moreover, 47 samples, including 24 males and 23 
females diagnosed as DLBCL, were evaluated for MYC, 
BCL2, and BCL6 gene status by break-apart FISH probes. 
Results: Out of 63 samples analyzed, 21 samples of Burkitt 
lymphoma showed 63% positivity for translocation (8;14), 
whereas 31% of 42 samples of DLBCL exhibited t(8;14). 
Furthermore, out of 47 specimens examined for double- and 
triple-hit lymphoma, 12 cases belonged to double expressor 
and 35 patients to triple expressor groups. In all, 18% of the 
total showed positivity for BCL2 gene rearrangement, 34% 
showed positivity for BCL6 gene rearrangement, and 14% 
showed positivity for MYC gene rearrangement. In 
comparison, 1 sample was positive for triple-hit lymphoma, 
and 1 was positive for double-hit lymphoma based on FISH 
studies. Conclusions: These data showed the complex 
nature of molecular events in DLBCL and Burkitt lymphomas. 
Limited concordance between immunohistochemistry and 
FISH results reflects these lymphomas' morphologic and 
clinical heterogeneity 
 
S24
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
H19. Unraveling the Somatic Mutational Landscape in 
Myelodysplastic Syndrome: A Single-Center Experience  
I. Dey1, S. Vinarkar2, M. Parihar3, K. Patel1, R. Demde1, K. 
Saha1, S. Banerjee1, D. Nathi1, A. Nag4, J. Kumar4, R. Nair4, 
M. Chandy4, D. K. Mishra2 
1Tata Medical Center, Kolkata, India, Department of Molecular 
Genetics, Kolkata, India; 2Tata Medical Center, Kolkata, India, 
Department of Molecular Genetics and Laboratory 
Haematology, Kolkata, India; 3Tata Medical Center, Kolkata, 
India, Department of Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and 
Laboratory Haematology, Kolkata, India; 4Tata Medical 
Center, Kolkata, India, Department of Clinical Hematology and 
Bone Marrow Transplant, Kolkata, India. 
 
Introduction: Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are clonal 
hematological disorders characterized by cytopenia, 
hematopoietic cell dysplasia, and a predisposition to transform 
into leukemia. Tremendous interest in the complex genetics of 
MDS is made evident by the emerging diagnostic, prognostic, 
therapeutic genetic biomarkers and as highlighted by the 
recent integration of mutation profile into the prognostic 
scoring of MDS (IPSS-M). High-throughput next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) has been instrumental in unraveling this 
complex genetic landscape of MDS. The aims and objectives 
were to study the genomic profile of patients with 
Myelodysplastic syndrome using Next generation sequencing 
at our center. Methods: Routine workflow in assessment of 
MDS at our center involved peripheral blood, bone marrow 
examination, cytogenetic study, and comprehensive myeloid 
panel (NGS). We studied the mutational profile of 46 cases of 
de-novo MDS diagnosed between March 2019 and May 2022. 
DNA and RNA were extracted from bone marrow samples, 
followed by library preparation using the Ion Torrent 
Oncomine Myeloid Research Assay. DNA and RNA 
sequencing was performed on Ion PGM System. Sequencing 
reads were aligned using Torrent suite (5.12.1), followed by 
annotation of .BAM files with Ion Reporter (v 5.18.4.0). 
Results: Over a 3-year period, 46 cases were diagnosed as 
MDS based on the clinical, morphological, and cytogenetic 
findings, out of which 56% (n = 26/46) patients were ≥60 
years of age, M:F ratio was 1.8:1, and 78% (n = 32/46) had 
good cytogenetic risk (IPSS-R). In all, 61% (n = 28/46) of 
cases had ≥1 pathogenic variant, and 36% (n = 10/28) of 
mutated cases had a single gene variant, whereas the rest 
had multiple (2 to 4) mutations. MDS-MLD (46%, n = 21/46) 
was the most common morphological classification and most 
frequent mutated subgroup, followed by MDS-EB (30%, n = 
14/46). According to functional genetic categories, the 
majority of the mutated genes belonged to DNA methylation 
(50%, n = 14/28), followed by RNA splicing regulators (46%, n 
= 13/28), and transcription regulating genes (39%, n = 11/28). 
The most frequently mutated gene was TET2 (39%, n = 
11/28), followed by RUNX1 (21%, n = 6/28), and most 
commonly co-mutated genes were TET2 and SRSF2 (29%, n 
= 5/17). Three patients transformed to acute myeloid 
leukemia, out of which 1 had TP53 gene variant. Five patients 
(11%) succumbed to disease/therapy-related complications, 
out of which 2 harbored mutations in TP53 gene. 
Conclusions: We studied the genetic profile of 46 MDS 
cases using NGS. The mutation frequency of MDS at our 
center was 61%, which was concordant with published 
literature. TET2 and RUNX1 genes were the most frequently 
mutated genes, and TP53 gene-mutated patients showed 
progression and poor outcomes. We could hence conclude 
that targeted NGS panels can help in detecting recurrent 
mutations associated with this rare disorder. 
 
H20. Acquired GATA2 Mutations in CSF3R-Negative 
Chronic Neutrophilic Leukemia  
M. Jin, J. Gomez-Gelvez, B. Shaw, O. Kis, Y. Shen 
Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI. 
 
Introduction: Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) is a 
BCR::ABL1-negative myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) 
characterized by sustained neutrophilia with ≥80% segmented 
neutrophils and bands, bone marrow (BM) granulocytic 
proliferation, activating CFS3R mutations, and absence of 
dysplasia or monocytosis. Acquired GATA2 mutations have 
previously been found in myeloid neoplasms. In acute myeloid 
leukemia, somatic GATA2 gain-of-function mutations have 
correlated with poor outcome. GATA2 mutations are rarely 
found in CNL. Here, we describe a patient with CSF3R-
negative CNL and acquired GATA2 mutations. Methods: 
Peripheral blood and BM samples were collected from the 
patient after obtaining informed consent. Flow cytometric 
analysis, chromosome analysis, and fluorescent in situ 
hybridization (FISH) were performed on BM aspirates. Next-
generation sequencing (NGS) analysis was performed on 
DNA extracted from the patient’s BM on Illumina NextSeq Dx 
550. Results: The 95-year-old female patient presented with 
slight leukocytosis. The white blood cell count at diagnosis 
was 25.2 × k/uL, 82% neutrophils, and <10% granulocytic 
precursors on manual differential, with anemia (8.1 g/dL) and 
thrombocytopenia (64 × k/uL). BM biopsy showed 
hypercellular marrow (80% to 90%) with marked granulocytic 
hyperplasia, high M:E ratio (13:1), 4% myeloid blasts, and no 
overt dysplasia in all lineages. Flow cytometry showed 
abnormal myeloblasts with aberrant CD5 expression, and 
polytypic plasma cells. Chromosome analysis showed a 
normal female karyotype, and MDS/MPN FISH showed 
normal results for all loci studied. Of note, FISH was negative 
for BCR::ABL1 t(9;22) translocation. Myeloid NGS panel 
S25
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
analysis demonstrated multiple pathogenic/likely pathogenic 
mutations including ASXL1 E635Rfs*15 with variant allele 
frequency of 40.7%, U2AF1 R156H (47.9%), GATA2 
L138Hfs*81 (36.5%), and GATA2 G292Rfs*93 (5.4%). The 2 
acquired GATA2 mutations in this patient are predicted to be 
in trans and thus will lead to loss of GATA2 protein function 
due to the loss of functional zinc finger domains. Morphologic 
features associated with GATA2 deficiency, namely 
monocytopenia and atypical megakaryocytes with separated 
lobes, were identified in this patient. Following diagnosis in 
July 2022, the patient progressed with marked 
monocytopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia, requiring 
frequent supportive transfusions. She passed away 5 months 
after CNL diagnosis. Conclusions: CSF3R-negative CNL is a 
challenging diagnosis, as it does not carry the mutation that 
classically defines the entity. Whereas CSF3R mutations may 
be most common in CNL, this case showed that it might not 
always be the central factor in development of this disorder. 
This case also demonstrated morphological features of 
GATA2 deficiencies found previously, monocytopenia, and 
atypical megakaryocytes with separated lobes. Acquired 
GATA2 mutations in CNL, an entity which rarely carries them, 
increase the complexity of disease presentation and may 
have prognostic value. 
 
H21. Co-existence of CALR and JAK2 or MPL Mutations in 
Myeloid Disorders: A Reference Laboratory Experience  
X. Zhang, J. Yuan, M. Shi, K. Bessonen, D. Viswanatha, R. 
He  
Mayo Clinic, Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Rochester, MN.  
 
Introduction: JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutations are the most 
frequent driver events in BCR-ABL1-negative 
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). These mutations are 
generally considered mutually exclusive, due to their 
convergent roles in the activation of the JAK/STAT signaling 
pathway. Although co-mutated cases are occasionally 
encountered clinically, the incidence and clinical significance 
of the co-occurrence of these mutations have not been 
thoroughly explored in a large cohort. We aimed to investigate 
molecular features of co-existing MPN-associated mutations 
in our reference lab based on next-generation sequencing 
(NGS) data. Methods: Peripheral blood or bone marrow 
specimens submitted for myeloid NGS analysis in our institute 
were collected. A myeloid neoplasm-targeting, 35- or 42-gene 
panel with capture-based chemistry on an Illumina HiSeq or 
Novaseq sequencer (San Diego, US) was used. Molecular 
data of cases with co-existing CALR and JAK2 mutations, or 
CALR and MPL mutations were selected and analyzed. 
Results: Out of 25,191 specimens submitted for NGS 
evaluation of known or suspected myeloid neoplasms, 410 
(1.6%) harbored a pathogenic CALR mutation with a variant 
allele frequency (VAF) ranging from 3% to 69%. Thirteen out 
of 410 (3%) CALR-mutated cases had a co-existing 
pathogenic JAK2 or MPL mutation: 5 (5/13, 38%) with a JAK2 
V617F mutation (VAF range 6% to 22%), and 8 (8/13, 62%) 
with an MPL mutation (W515R/L, S505N, Y591D, VAF range 
5% to 39%). Co-existence of JAK2, CALR, and MPL 
mutations were not identified. Seven (7/13, 54%) cases 
showed clonal VAF of greater than 10%. The VAF differences 
of the 2 driver mutations ranged from 2% to 45%, with 8 and 5 
cases showing higher and lower CALR VAFs, respectively. In 
8 cases, the VAF difference was greater than 10%, 
suggesting that 1 mutation likely occurred in a founder clone 
and the other mutation occurred during clonal evolution. The 
other 5 cases with similar VAFs of the co-existing mutations 
may reflect co-existence of similarly sized, distinct clones or 
mutational co-existence in the same clone. Detailed 
information of the 13 cases is listed in Table 1. Conclusions: 
Although JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutations are considered 
mutually exclusive, double mutations occurred in 3% of 
CALR-mutated cases in our large NGS study cohort. Our 
findings accentuate the clonal complexity, heterogeneity, and 
evolution in myeloid disorders. The stepwise approach for 
sequential testing of JAK2, CALR, and MPL, until a mutation 
is identified in MPN, may not identify all the 3 drivers in some 
cases. The biological mechanism and clinical significance of 
co-existing MPN-associated driver mutations deserve further 
studies. 
 
Table 1. Summary of cases with co-existing MPN-
associated driver mutations. 
  
 
S26
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
H22. Discovery of a Germline EZH2 Variant, and 
Underlying Weaver Syndrome, during Sequencing of an 
Adult B-Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia  
C. R. Syposs1, K. H. Seymour2,3, M. Buldo1, K. O’Dwyer2, A. 
N. Jajosky1 
1University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rochester, MN; 
2University of Rochester Medical Center, Department of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN; 3University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Department of Pediatrics, Rochester, MN. 
 
Introduction: A 44-year-old woman with intellectual disability 
and a history of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 
presented with fatigue, night sweats, and easy bruising. She 
was found to have leukocytosis with 93% circulating B-
lymphoblasts. Given her remote history of chemotherapy and 
radiation treatment for childhood ALL, she was diagnosed with 
therapy-related B-cell ALL (B-ALL). Methods: Targeted DNA-
based next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed at 
both diagnosis and remission using the Illumina TruSight 
Myeloid Panel designed to detect substitutions and small 
insertions/deletions within the mutational hot spots of 34 
genes recurrently altered in hematologic malignancies. 
Results: At diagnosis, NGS of a peripheral blood sample 
containing 93% leukemic blasts identified 2 pathogenic 
variants: 1) TET2 p.R1516Ter at 53% variant allele frequency 
(VAF), and 2) EZH2 p.E745K at 45% VAF. To investigate the 
suspected germline origin of the EZH2 variant, NGS 
performed during complete remission confirmed the EZH2 
p.E745K mutation was still present at 48% VAF. 
Conclusions: Identification of an EZH2 p.E745K mutation 
about 50% VAF during tumor-only sequencing prompted 
careful review of the medical literature. Somatic EZH2 
mutations are not well described in B-ALL, although germline 
EZH2 variants have been reported in Weaver syndrome, a 
rare autosomal dominant overgrowth disorder documented in 
50 individuals to date. Close review of her medical record 
confirmed she had many clinical features of Weaver 
syndrome: tall stature (5'11''), a distinctive facial appearance, 
intellectual disability, a history of developmental delay, and 
signs of pre- and postnatal overgrowth (99th percentile for 
childhood growth). She was referred to a genetic counselor, 
and we are awaiting results of definitive germline testing of 
skin fibroblasts. Hematologic malignancies developing in 
infancy and childhood, including ALL, have been described in 
2 patients with Weaver syndrome; however, heightened 
cancer surveillance is not currently recommended. This 
unusual case of ALL arising in both childhood and adulthood 
supports a potential link between Weaver syndrome and 
susceptibility to hematologic cancers. Since we could not 
obtain her childhood ALL specimen, it is unknown whether the 
adult B-ALL is a late relapse of her childhood leukemia or a 
clonally unrelated disease. The working diagnosis of 
underlying Weaver syndrome (clinically unrecognized for 
more than 40 years) likely explains her intellectual disability, 
which appears to have been misattributed to “cerebral palsy” 
in childhood. By explaining her constellation of seemingly 
unrelated clinical findings, a genetic diagnosis can provide 
answers and emotional relief to patients and their families. 
Adult therapy-related B-ALL 
Figure 1. Circulating leukemic blasts at initial presentation 
(A: 10X magnification, B: 50X magnification). C: 
Immunophenotyping of circulating blasts by flow cytometry 
establishes a diagnosis of B-ALL. Flow cytometry 
identified 93% lymphoblasts expressing CD34 (partial, 
75%), CD10, CD19, CD22, CD38, CD123, CD200, HLA-
DR, and cytoplasmic 79a; TdT was indeterminate. 
 
Persistence of EZH2 p.E745K during complete 
remission 
Figure 2. During complete remission of her B-ALL, NGS 
of her bone marrow showed persistence of EZH2 p.E745K 
at 48% VAF, supporting a germline origin. 
 
 
S27
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
H23. Validation of a New Next-Generation Sequencing 
Library Prep Kit for the Detection of Mutations in 
Hematological Neoplasms 
M. S. Basqueira, P. H.S. Rodrigues, R.C. Petroni, S. E.A. da 
Rosa, R.S. Reis, K.O. Pelegrino, M.C. Cervato, R. A.F. 
Santana, R. Sitnik, N.H. Muto, P.V. Campregher 
Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil. 
 
Introduction: Myeloid malignancies are clonal diseases 
affecting hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells driven by 
genomic abnormalities. Detection of mutations responsible for 
these diseases has an impact on diagnosis, prognosis, and 
therapy. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology can 
achieve this goal because it allows detection of a 
comprehensive mutation repertory using massively parallel 
sequencing. However, NGS technology has challenges on 
detecting highly important genes, such as CEBPA, due to high 
GC content. NGS kit manufacturers have developed different 
library preparation and analysis strategies to address these 
challenges. The Archer VariantPlex Myeloid Panel could be a 
promising kit, since it utilizes Anchored Multiplex PCR (AMP) 
that enables deep strand-specific amplification of molecular 
barcoded DNA fragments for sequencing and allows DNA 
copy number variation, DNA SNP/indel, and DNA structural 
variation detection. Methods: For performance evaluation of 
VariantPlex Myeloid Panel (Archer), we selected 21 samples 
with previous results obtained with TruSightMyeloid 
Sequencing Panel (Illumina). The 21 samples were intended 
for an accuracy test, and 5 of them were also used for 
reproducibility assay, 2 samples for duplicate intra-assay, and 
3 samples for triplicate inter-assays. For test sensitivity, a pool 
was prepared with 4 equimolar positive samples to obtain a 
total of 23 variants with allele frequency ranges from 1.03% to 
15.78% and tested 16 times to establish the assay limit of 
detection (LOD). The Illumina panel includes 54 genes and 
does not have molecular barcodes, whereas Archer panel 
targeted 75 genes and has molecular barcodes in 
methodology. For the Ilumina panel, amplification of the TP53 
and CEBPA genes was also performed in parallel to 
complement the test. Library sequencing was performed on 
Nextseq 550 platform (Illumina). Data and variant analysis 
were performed on an online platform from the manufacturer. 
Results: The overall sequencing metrics of both 
methodologies were satisfactory, with a better coverage 
uniformity in Archer panel. In accuracy, 21 of 21 (100%) 
samples presented concordance with the previous results, 
and 76/76 (100%) variants reported were identified with an 
allele frequency coefficient of variation of 0.0003 to 0.5521. 
Intra- and inter-assay reproducibility showed 100% correlation 
between replicates. The test LOD was established in 5% 
based on the lowest allelic frequency detected in 100% of the 
replicates. Conclusions: The Archer panel presented high 
performance and good coverage in GC-rich regions as 
CEBPA gene being a promising test in accuracy of somatic 
analysis and was validated in our laboratory. 
 
H24. Validation of an Ultra-Sensitive Genomic NGS Assay 
for Hematological Malignancies (Selected for Oral 
Presentation, O-04-01) 
S.E. DiNapoli1, E. Gedvilaite1, A. Bowman1, F. Xu1, A.D. 
Parikh1, M. Diosdado1, J. Cassanova-Murphy1, S. Rana1, M.H. 
Haque1, C. Hale3, Y-T. Lin1, Y. Hu1, G.A. Salles2, M.F. 
Berger1,3, B. Loomis1,3, M.D. Ewalt1, M. Arcila1, A.R. Brannon1 
1Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Department of 
Pathology, New York, NY; 2Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, Department of Medicine, New York, NY; 3Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Center for Molecular 
Oncology, New York, NY. 
 
Introduction: In recent years, analysis of cell-free DNA 
(cfDNA) by next-generation sequencing has shown clinical 
utility in non-invasive assessment and monitoring of solid 
cancer mutations. Preliminary data in lymphoma patients 
suggest that patients with hematologic malignancies could 
also benefit from the more sensitive approach that had been 
developed for cfDNA sequencing. Therefore, we developed 
and validated MSK-ACCESS Heme (Memorial Sloan 
Kettering-Analysis of Circulating cfDNA to Examine Somatic 
Status), a unique molecular indexing (UMI) ultra-deep 
sequencing assay that examines select exons of 117 genes 
recurrently mutated in hematological cancer. The assay was 
designed based upon the New York State Department of 
Health-approved MSK-IMPACT HEME and MSK-ACCESS 
SOLID assays, but with the flexibility to interrogate either 
plasma from lymphoma patients or whole blood samples from 
leukemia patients. Moreover, the assay was designed to be 
performed either fully matched or as an unmatched hotspot 
analysis to enable flexibility around sample collection and 
turnaround time needs. Herein we present the results of the 
assay’s validation. Methods: UMI tagged and dual-barcoded 
libraries were constructed from 92 plasma or whole blood 
samples, captured with IDT baits targeting 420kb across 
select exons of 117 genes, then sequenced on an Illumina 
NovaSeq 6000. Additionally, 75 healthy donor samples were 
collected to aid in removing recurrent artifacts and to assess 
and control for noise at each base of the targeted region. De 
novo variant calling was performed using Vardict, MuTect, 
Mutect2, and SomaticIndelDetector, and known alterations 
were genotyped using an internally developed tool, gbcms, to 
mimic a tumor-informed approach. Results were compared 
against the same samples sequenced with the already 
validated and NYS-approved MSK-ACCESS solid assay. 
Results: The average deduplicated consensus sequencing of 
S28
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
the 92 validation samples was 1,509X, with a mean of 1,471X 
for the plasma samples and 1,673X for the whole blood 
samples. Background error rate patterns for plasma versus 
whole blood were notably different, which underscored the 
need for healthy donor controls to be collected for both 
plasma and whole blood extraction. A genotyping accuracy of 
97% and de novo accuracy of 87% were achieved for the 326 
mutations identified in the orthogonal assay. The limit of 
detection analysis using a commercial standard demonstrated 
the ability to reliably call mutations de novo down to 0.5%. 
Conclusions: The analytical validation results demonstrate 
that MSK-ACCESS Heme is a robust and reliable tool that 
sensitively and accurately detects clinically relevant 
alterations in hematological malignancies. Further work will 
focus on confirming the clinical utility of this assay.  
 
Selected Infectious Diseases Abstracts 
 
ID01. The Long Pentraxin PTX3 Is an Early Prognostic 
Biomarker of Bacterial or Fungal Co-infections in COVID-
19 Patients  
F. Scavello1, E. Nappi1, I.D. García Martín1, M. Sironi1, R. 
Leone1, S. Mapelli1, P. Morelli2, F.M. Tordato2, B. Bottazzi1, A. 
Mantovani1,4, C. Garlanda1,3 
1IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Italy; 
2IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Infectious Diseases 
Unit, Hospital Health Direction, Rozzano, Italy; 3Humanitas 
University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Pieve 
Emanuele, Italy; 4Queen Mary University of London, London, 
United Kingdom. 
 
Introduction: Clinical records show that broad-spectrum 
antimicrobial prescriptions in COVID-19 dramatically 
outnumbered the estimated rate of bacterial co-infections in 
these patients. Distinguishing COVID-19 with and without 
secondary co-infections is a clinical issue, because the 
massive use of broad-spectrum agents can result in 
detrimental emergence of antimicrobial resistance. Currently, 
procalcitonin (PCT) and C-reactive protein (CRP) are 
considered the most suitable biomarkers of COVID-19-
associated co-infections, but both of them have limitations. 
Pentraxin 3 (PTX3) is a soluble pattern recognition molecule 
(PRM), and its plasma concentration rapidly increases in 
infectious and inflammatory diseases earlier than CRP. In 
COVID-19 patients, increased plasma concentrations of PTX3 
were observed compared to healthy individuals and they were 
a strong independent predictor of mortality. In this study, we 
assessed whether PTX3 could be of help in early identification 
of co-infections in COVID-19 patients. Methods: We 
analyzed, by ELISA tests, the circulating levels of PTX3 and 
several inflammatory markers in 37 patients with a COVID-19 
laboratory-confirmed diagnosis and a concomitant 
bloodstream infection (BSI) with a fungal or bacterial 
pathogen. We next enlarged our study to a cohort of 119 
COVID-19 co-infected patients, with pneumonia or urinary 
tract infection, stratified in Community and Hospital-Acquired 
Infections (CAI or HAI). The presence and relevance of co-
infections was supported by laboratory and clinical data. All 
these patients were compared with a control group of COVID-
19 patients with no evidence of a concomitant secondary 
infection. Results: In BSI patients PTX3 plasma levels at 
diagnosis of co-infection were significantly higher compared to 
COVID-19 patients without evidence of co-infection. PTX3 
concentration correlated with other serum biomarkers of 
infection (PCT, CRP, ferritin, D-dimer, and interleukin-6) at the 
co-infection time point, and was positively associated with 
mortality. Also, in our second cohort, PTX3 plasma levels at 
diagnosis of CAI or HAI were significantly higher compared to 
COVID-19 patients without secondary infections, and the 
increase of PTX3 plasma levels preceded that of PCT and 
CRP. In COVID-19 patients with HAIs, PTX3 increased at 
admission and co-infection time points, decreasing in the 
other phases of the hospitalization. Furthermore, PTX3 levels 
remained elevated throughout the hospitalization in deceased 
patients with HAIs. PTX3 levels at hospital discharge 
positively correlated with mortality and inflammatory status at 
the confection time point. Conclusions: Our study 
demonstrates that PTX3 is a promising biomarker for the early 
identification and risk stratification of COVID-19 patients with 
bacterial or fungal co-infections. 
 
ID02. Extensive Validation of a Saliva-Based PCR 
Diagnostic Test Designed to Reduce Costs and Increase 
Access to Testing  
A. Wyllie 
SalivaDirect, New Haven, CT. 
 
Introduction: The COVID-19 pandemic presented an 
unprecedented demand for diagnostic testing. Testing was 
essential for identifying infected individuals and preventing 
further virus spread, but was significantly strained by high 
costs, inadequate infrastructure, and supply chain disruptions. 
To overcome these challenges and increase testing equity, 
we developed a low-cost solution: An open-source, saliva-
based PCR test for SARS-CoV-2. Over the course of the 
pandemic, we have further validated this approach for the 
detection of additional infectious diseases. Methods: 
Identifying the potential of saliva early in the pandemic, we 
simplified testing by: 1) demonstrating the sensitivity of saliva 
for SARS-CoV-2 detection; 2) developing clear self-collection 
instructions; 3) negating the need for healthcare worker-
assisted collection; 4) eliminating collection tubes with 
S29
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
propriety buffers and/or preservatives; 5) replacing nucleic 
acid extraction with a simple heat and/or enzymatic step; 6) 
validating each protocol step with reagents and instruments 
from multiple suppliers; and 7) establishing a novel 
emergency use authorization (EUA) regulatory model. More 
recently, we also validated this approach (SalivaDirect) for the 
detection of influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, and mpox. 
Results: We observed stable detection of virus RNA in raw 
unsupplemented saliva for prolonged periods at elevated 
temperatures. The lower limit of detection ranges from 1.5 to 
12 virus RNA copies/μl of saliva, workstream-depending, 
comparable to many sensitive PCR tests. Since August 2020, 
>8 million SalivaDirect tests have been performed by 201 
designated labs in 42 US states. SalivaDirect has also been 
independently validated in at least 13 countries. The flexible 
protocol allows labs to utilize existing infrastructure and 
vendor relationships for greater supply chain resilience and 
lower costs. The streamlined PCR process reduces test 
turnaround time and increases lab throughput. Expansion of 
the protocol (e.g., unsupervised self-collection, at-home 
collection kits, pooled testing) extends its utility to numerous 
patient profiles and clinical scenarios. Conclusions: 
Advances in testing during the pandemic created new 
possibilities for respiratory pathogen detection. Since, we 
have found that saliva can be used as a sensitive, reliable 
option for PCR testing for not only SARS-CoV-2 detection, but 
also other viruses. Compared to other sample types, saliva 
supports more equitable diagnostic and surveillance testing 
programs, particularly in low-resource and remote 
environments. Our innovative regulatory framework and 
resulting laboratory network produced a low-cost, high-quality 
public health model capable of national impact.  
 
ID03. SARS-CoV-2 Infection Is Associated with Age- and 
Gender-Specific Changes of the Nasopharyngeal 
Microbiome  
C. Costantini, S. Bozza, E. Nunzi, A. Frías Mazuecos, A. 
Mencacci, V.N. Talesa, L. Romani, C. Antognelli, P. Puccetti 
University of Perugia, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
Perugia, Italy. 
 
Introduction: The recent COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 
2019) pandemic was caused by the severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), an airborne pathogen 
that exploits air transmission to infect potential hosts and 
cause significant morbidity and mortality in susceptible 
populations. The initial steps in COVID-19 pathogenesis 
involve the binding of SARS-CoV-2 with angiotensin-
converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) followed by virus release inside 
susceptible cells. The ensuing host-pathogen interaction 
drives the evolution of the clinical picture, which may range 
from asymptomatic to potentially fatal multi-organ failure. It is 
increasingly being recognized that the early interactions 
between the host and the virus in the upper respiratory tract 
are critical in disease evolution. Indeed, the nose shows the 
highest expression of ACE2 along the respiratory tract, and 
the nasopharyngeal (NP) microbiome plays a major role in the 
regulation of both local and systemic immunity. Therefore, the 
identification of NP microbial signatures of SARS-CoV-2 
infectivity would be critical in a diagnostic/prognostic 
perspective with the potential to identify personalized 
therapeutic approaches. Methods: An observational study 
with a cross-sectional and monocentric design was carried 
out. NP swabs from individual adults referring to the Hospital 
of Perugia for SARS-CoV-2 molecular testing were collected 
from January 2021 to March 2021. The swabs were 
processed for SARS-CoV-2 testing according to standard 
procedures/CDC guidelines. The residual sample was used 
for DNA extraction and 16S rRNA sequencing. A total of 540 
NP swabs were collected and stratified into 18 groups based 
on age (18 to 40, 40 to 60, >60 years), gender (male, female), 
and viral load according to cycle threshold value (Ct) 
(negative, >35 Ct; low viral load, 25 to 35 Ct; high viral load, 
<25 Ct). Results: The taxonomic composition of the NP 
microbiome revealed that Firmicutes, Bacteroidota, 
Proteobacteria, Actinobacteriota, and Fusobacteriota were the 
most abundant phyla, while Prevotella, Streptococcus, and 
Veillonella dominated at the genus level, in line with previous 
studies. Age, gender, and viral load had distinct effects on 
both richness and evenness of genera, and influenced the 
compositional structure of the NP microbiome. Upon applying 
the Adonis test when a multifactorial model of age, gender, 
and viral load was used, all the variables were found to 
interact with each other. Conclusions: The results indicate 
the age, gender, and viral load variably affect NP microbial 
composition, indicating that the effect of viral infection on the 
microbiome must be considered in the context of the 
individual variability set by demographic factors. Unraveling 
the microbial signatures resulting from the interactions 
between infection and demographic factors will be 
instrumental for personalized diagnosis and prognosis. This 
study was supported by Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio di 
Perugia. 
 
S30
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
ID04. Development of a Syndromic Molecular Diagnostic 
Assay for Tickborne Pathogens Using Barcoded Magnetic 
Bead Technology  
S. Mir, E. Kahang, S. Rowan 
Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA. 
 
Introduction: The infectious disease diagnostics often 
depends on costly serological testing with poor sensitivity, low 
specificity, and long turnaround time. Here in this manuscript, 
we demonstrate the proof of the principle for simultaneous 
detection of 2 tickborne pathogens from a single test sample 
using barcoded magnetic bead technology on the BioCode 
2500 system. Methods: Specific primer sets complementary 
to the conserved genes of Anaplasma phagocytophilum and 
Borrelia burgdorferi were used in PCR amplification of the 
target, followed by the hybridization of the resulting 
biotinylated PCR products with specific probes tethered to the 
barcoded magnetic beads for simultaneous detection, using a 
fluorophore with high quantum yield. The assay has extremely 
high signal-to-background ratio and detects up to 2 copies of 
the target in a test reaction with high sensitivity and specificity. 
Results: The assay demonstrated 100% positive and 
negative agreements on performance evaluation using patient 
specimens and blood samples spiked with tittered pathogens. 
No cross-reactivity was observed with other related tickborne 
pathogens and genomic DNA of human, cattle, and canine 
origin. Conclusions: The assay can be upgraded to a 
sensitive and cost-effective multiplex diagnostic approach that 
can simultaneously detect multiple clinically important 
tickborne pathogens in a single sample with a short 
turnaround time. 
 
ID05. Plasmatic 8-OH-dG Levels and O-GlcNAcase 
Activity as Additional Tools in the Oxidative Stress 
Evaluation in COVID-19 Infection  
L. Massaccesi1, E. Galliera1,2, M.M. Corsi Romanelli1,3 
1Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Scienze 
Biomediche per la Salute, Milano, Italy; 2IRCCS Orthopedic 
Institute Galeazzi, Milan, Italy, Milano, Italy; 3U.O.C SMEL-1 
Patologia Clinica IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato, 
Milan, Italy, San Donato, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Oxidative stress (OS) plays an important role 
within the COVID-19 infection. Recently the degree of proteins 
O-GlcNAcylation has been showed as able to influence the 
stress response pathway; cellular levels of O-GlcNAc, 
regulated by O-GlcNActransferase and O-GlcNAcase (OGA), 
are thought to be OS sensors and are implicated in the 
aetiology of various diseases. OGA is a ubiquitous enzyme 
also present in the cytosol and plasma; alteration in its activity 
has been observed in several pathologies related to strong 
OS, such as Down syndrome or erectile dysfunction. For 
these reasons its use as a new marker of cellular OS has 
been suggested. In recent years, several OS markers have 
gained increasing attention. Among them, a new method for 
the evaluation of total plasma antioxidant defenses, known as 
lag-time, proved to be a valid marker of OS in different 
diseases including COVID-19. It is well known that OS is 
closely related to levels of advanced glycation end products 
(AGEs). AGEs interact with their receptors, receptor for 
advanced glycation end products (RAGE), which can be 
bound to the membrane or in soluble form (sRAGE). 
Interaction of AGEs with membrane-bound RAGE leads to 
massive inflammatory cytokine and ROS production. sRAGE 
acts as a decoy receptor performing a protective action 
against the harmful effects resulting from the activation of the 
AGEs-RAGE axis. Several studies proposed soluble RAGE as 
an OS circulating biomarker in several diseases, including 
COVID-19. Oxidized guanine nucleoside, 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-
2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OH-dG) is a metabolite derived from 
oxidative damage to DNA. The plasmatic evaluation of 8-OH-
dG is used to investigate the effects of OS on nucleic acids in 
several pathologies. Therefore, we analysed a panel of OS 
parameters to better characterize the OS in COVID-19. 
Methods: In 13 COVID-19 (58.6 ± 18.8 years), 52 non-
COVID-19 patients presenting COVID-19-like symptoms (60.8 
± 20.6 years) at hospital emergency admission, and 30 age-
matched non-infected controls (56.9 ± 14.3 years), plasmatic 
sRAGE and 8-OH-dG levels (by ELISA assay), total 
antioxidant defenses, and OGA activity (by fluorimetric 
method) were evaluated. Results: 8-OH-dG were significantly 
increased in COVID-19 patients compared to the other 
subjects (P <0.05). sRAGE was significantly lower in all 
patients compared to controls (P <0.001). OGA was 
significantly lower in COVID-19 patients compared to non-
COVID-19 patients (P <0.05). In COVID-19 patients 8-OH-dG 
showed a significant (P <0.05) negative linear correlation with 
lag-time (r2 = -0.614) and OGA activity (P <0.05) (r2 = -0.674). 
Conclusions: Our results give a deeper picture of the role of 
OS in COVID-19 and emphasize the importance of a global 
redox characterization as a potential tool to monitor conditions 
of COVID-19 patients under therapies aimed to regain a 
correct redox balance and to counter the harmful systemic 
effects of this pathology. 
 
S31
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
ID06. Diagnostic Potential of the Long Pentraxin 3 in Hip 
and Knee Periprosthetic Joint Infections  
M. Loppini1,2, M. Di Maio1, R. Avigni1, R. Leone1, A. 
Inforzato1,2, G. Grappiolo1,3, A. Mantovani1,2, B. Bottazzi1 
1IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano (MI), Italy; 
2Humanitas University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, 
Pieve Emanuele (MI), Italy; 3Università degli Studi di Genova, 
Fondazione Livio Sciutto Onlus, Campus Savona, Savona, 
Italy; 4Queen Mary University of London, Harvey Research 
Institute, London, United Kingdom. 
 
Introduction: Preoperative diagnosis of periprosthetic joint 
infections (PJIs) poses an unmet clinical challenge. The long 
pentraxin PTX3 is a member of the innate immune system 
produced by stromal and immune cells in response to 
inflammatory and infectious stimuli and is a candidate 
biomarker of inflammation and infections. The aim of this 
study was to evaluate the potential of synovial and plasmatic 
PTX3 in the diagnosis of hip and knee PJIs. Methods: The 
study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of 
IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital. Plasma, synovial fluid, 
and intra-operative periprothesic tissue samples were 
collected prospectively before surgery from consecutive 
revisions of total hip and knee arthroplasty (THA/TKA). Each 
revision was classified as septic or aseptic according to the 
European Bone and Joint Infection Society (EBJIS) and 
Musculoskeletal Infection Society (MSIS) criteria. PTX3 levels 
were measured in collected plasma and synovial fluid 
samples by a sandwich ELISA based on reagents (i.e., 
antibodies and recombinant protein) developed in-house. The 
assay was not reacting with CRP and had a sensitivity of 75 
pg/ml. CRP, D-dimer, ESR, and synovial fluid leukocyte count 
were measured by standard procedures in use in the 
Institutional Clinical Laboratory. Presence and identity of 
aerobic and anaerobic microorganisms were assessed 
following culture in appropriate selective media. The area 
under the curve (AUC), threshold value, sensitivity, specificity, 
and positive and negative likelihood ratios were calculated 
using the ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve 
method. Results: The study population included 128 patients 
(94 THAs; 34 TKAs) enrolled at Humanitas Research 
Hospital. Patients with a confirmed infection were between 
41% (according to EBJIS criteria) and 27% (according to 
MSIS criteria) of the enrolled patients. The most frequent 
pathogens isolated in infected patients were coagulase-
negative Staphylococci, Staphylococcus aureus, and 
Streptococci. Synovial PTX3 and plasmatic CRP were 
significantly higher in the infected patients compared to the 
non-infected ones when either EBJIS or MSIS criteria was 
considered for diagnosis of PJI (p <0.0001). Plasmatic PTX3, 
ESR, and D-dimer did not discriminate infected from non-
infected patients. When patients were stratified based on the 
explanted implant (THA or TKA), the synovial levels of PTX3 
remained significantly higher in the infected individuals 
compared to the ones who had aseptic revision, regardless of 
the criteria used for diagnosis of PJI. The AUC of the synovial 
PTX3 based on EBJIS criteria was 0.85 (p <0.0001), with a 
sensitivity of 81.13% and a specificity of 93.33%. The AUC 
based on MSIS criteria was 0.95 (p < 0.001), with a sensitivity 
of 91.43% and a specificity of 89.25%. Conclusions: 
Synovial PTX3 demonstrated an excellent diagnostic potential 
in hip and knee PJIs, with a very high specificity irrespective 
of the diagnostic criteria for PJI. 
 
ID07. Innate Immunity and Bone Infections: Emerging 
Roles of the Long Pentraxin PTX3 in Staphylococcus 
aureus-Dependent Osteomyelitis  
A. Inforzato1,2, R. Parente2, V. Possetti1,2, V. Granata2,3, F. 
Davi2, M.L. Schiavone3,2, D. Strina3,2, M. Filipović4,5, D. 
Grčević4,5, B. Bottazzi2, A. Mantovani2,6, C. Sobacchi3,2 
1Humanitas University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, 
Pieve Emanuele, Italy; 2IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital, 
Rozzano, Italy; 3National Research Council-Institute for 
Genetic and Biomedical Research (CNR-IRGB), Rozzano, 
Italy; 4University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Department of 
Physiology and Immunology, Zagreb, Croatia; 5University of 
Zagreb School of Medicine, Croatian Institute for Brain 
Research, Zagreb, Croatia; 6Queen Mary University of 
London, Harvey Research Institute, London, United Kingdom. 
 
Introduction: Osteomyelitis (OM) is a debilitating infection of 
the bone primarily caused by the opportunistic pathogen 
Staphylococcus aureus (SA). SA exploits several strategies to 
evade the immune response, acquire antibiotic resistance, 
and chronically colonize the musculoskeletal tissue, yet the 
underlying molecular and cellular processes are largely 
unclear. This study aimed to characterize the pathogenetic 
mechanisms of SA-OM with a focus on the long pentraxin 3 
(PTX3), a soluble pattern recognition molecule and bone 
tissue component that is emerging as a new player in 
osteoimmunology and a diagnostic marker of periprosthetic 
joint infections (PJIs), a common form of OM. Methods: A 
murine model of OM based on intra-femur injection of SA was 
developed that closely mimicked surgery-/trauma-related OM 
in humans and allowed addressing the role of PTX3 in gene-
modified (Ptx3-/-) animals. Local and systemic infection and 
inflammation were assessed via microbiology, flow cytometry, 
histochemistry, and microCT techniques. Results: SA-
injected mice developed chronic infection with measurable 
levels of viable bone-resident bacteria up until 30 days from 
microbial challenge. The infection was confined to the treated 
limbs only and accompanied by extensive tissue remodeling. 
The bacterial load was higher in wild-type (WT) than Ptx3-/- 
S32
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
animals at 6 and 14 days from SA injection. Accordingly, WT 
mice had enhanced systemic inflammation with expanded 
innate immune compartment in the spleen and increased 
serum levels of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. 
PTX3 levels were higher in SA- than vehicle (PBS)-injected 
WT animals, both in the serum and bone tissue. Furthermore, 
administration of a PTX3-targeting antibody reduced the 
bacterial burden in the bones of SA-injected WT mice. 
Conclusions: In a mouse model of SA-OM, genetic 
deficiency of PTX3 protected from infection and inflammation, 
pointing to this pentraxin as a crucial player in OM 
pathogenesis and a novel therapeutic target in bone 
infections. 
 
ID08. The Two Faces of IFN-g in the Immune Challenge 
against Fungi  
V. Oikonomou, G. Renga, M. Pariano, C. Stincardini, F. 
Donofrio, C. Costantini, M.M. Bellet, L. Romani 
University of Perugia, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
Pathology Section, Perugia, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Fungi can cause diseases in humans, from 
mucocutaneous (Candida spp.) to life-threatening systemic 
infections (Aspergillus spp.). Interferon-gamma (IFN-g) has 
emerged as an extremely versatile cytokine mediating 
protection against a wide array of pathogens. Undoubtedly, 
such an important immune mediator is under stringent 
regulatory control. However, IFN-g is a double-edged sword: It 
can have therapeutic as well as aberrant effects depending on 
the type of disease. Two clear examples are: 1) chronic 
granulomatous disease (CGD), a genetic disorder of the 
NADPH oxidase characterized by increased susceptibility to 
Aspergillus infections and hyperinflammation associated with 
defective autophagy and increased inflammasome activation; 
and 2) autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–
ectodermal dystrophy (APECED), an autoimmune disease of 
impaired central immune tolerance characterized by selective 
susceptibility to mucosal but not systemic fungal infection. 
Methods: First, we monitored DAPK1 expression and its 
modulation by IFN-g in vivo p47phox−/− in infected mice and in 
vitro in both p47phox−/− lung macrophages and monocytes from 
CGD patients. Second, we broadly investigated oral mucosal 
immune responses both in a model of oropharyngeal 
candidiasis in Aire−/− mice and in a large cohort of APECED 
patients. Results: In mouse models and patients with CGD, 
we have described an IFN-g/DAPK1 signaling that mediates 
LC3-associated phagocytosis (LAP), critical for dampening 
Aspergillus-triggered immunopathology. Of interest, DAPK1 
activity was defective in murine and human CGD, a finding 
suggesting that the LAP/DAPK1 axis may represent a 
druggable pathway in CGD. Indeed, IFN-g, the only FDA-
approved treatment option in CGD, restored reduced DAPK1 
activity and dampened fungal growth. Activated by IFN-g, 
DAPK1 not only mediated A. fumigatus–LAP but also 
concomitantly inhibited NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) 
activation, thus restraining pathogenic inflammation. In 
contrast, in AIRE deficiency, we have shown that excessive 
IFN-g–dependent responses at the mucosal level lead to 
susceptibility to oral mucosal infection by Candida albicans. 
Concordantly, genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of IFN-g 
or JAK-STAT signaling ameliorated mucosal fungal disease 
and multi-organ autoimmunity. Thus, aberrant T-cell-
dependent, type 1 mucosal inflammation is a critical tissue-
specific pathogenic mechanism that promotes mucosal fungal 
infection susceptibility. Conclusions: Together, our data 
suggest that the bright side of IFN-g in CGD in which it is 
beneficial is counteracted by the exaggerated IFN-g/STAT1 
response leading to tissue-specific autoimmune 
manifestations in APECED. Thus, IFN-g-mediated host-
pathogen interactions are critical for both understanding 
disease pathogenesis and IFN-g optimization by disease-
oriented therapy. 
 
ID09. Innate Immune Responses to Malaria Parasites: 
Role of the Malaria Pigment Hemozoin in Macrophage 
Polarization  
F. Perego1, S. Parapini2, E. Calvo Alvarez3, M. Dolci1, P. 
Rebuffini3, K. Maina1, R. Ticozzi1, S. Delbue1, P. Misiano3, D. 
Taramelli3, N. Basilico1, S. D'Alessandro3 
1University of Milan, Department of Biomedical, Surgical and 
Dental Sciences, Milan, Italy; 2University of Milan, Department 
of Biomedical Sciences for Health, Milan, Italy; 3University of 
Milan, Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular 
Sciences, Milan, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Malaria is a parasitic, vector-borne disease 
causing millions of cases every year. The importance of 
innate immunity to malaria infection is well recognized. 
Hemozoin (HZ), or malaria pigment, is the detoxification 
product of heme, produced by parasites during their intra-
erythrocytic stages following hemoglobin digestion in the so-
called food vacuole. HZ is released into the circulation during 
asexual replication of parasites, when merozoites are 
released from red blood cells to infect new erythrocytes. HZ 
has been found in postmortem samples of malaria patients, 
especially in the spleen, liver, bone marrow, lungs, brain, and 
placenta. Once phagocytized by host cells, especially 
macrophages, HZ may induce different, often opposite 
responses such as the production of pro-inflammatory or anti-
inflammatory cytokines. The aim of this work was to 
investigate whether HZ can affect M1/M2 macrophage 
polarization induced by known stimuli. Methods: THP-1 
S33
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
monocytes were differentiated into macrophages by 48 h 
incubation with 10 nM PMA. M1 and M2 macrophage 
polarization was obtained by 24 h treatment with IFN-γ and 
LPS or IL-4 and IL-13, respectively. HZ at the physiologically 
relevant concentrations of 1.5 or 10 μM was co-incubated with 
the M1/M2 stimuli. The activation of macrophages was 
evaluated by measuring the production of IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-10 
in cell supernatants by ELISA, and by measuring the 
expression of the corresponding genes by RT-PCR. Two 
markers of M2 phenotype were examined: PPARγ expression 
by RT-PCR and STAT6 activation by Western blot 
(phosphorylated STAT6 normalised on total STAT6 protein 
levels). Results: Both naïve (M0, unstimulated) and M1 or M2 
polarized macrophages avidly phagocytosed HZ. HZ mainly 
induced pro-inflammatory cytokines, namely IL-1β and TNF-α, 
by unstimulated macrophages. However, in the presence of 
M1 stimuli, HZ reduced the expression and production of IL-
1β and TNF-α. HZ had no effect on cytokine production in M2 
polarized macrophages, whereas it decreased STAT6 
phosphorylation. The same trend has been observed for 
PPARγ expression. Conclusions: This work represents one 
of the first investigations about the effect of HZ on 
macrophage polarization. The differential response of M1 
versus M2 macrophages to HZ may help reconcile the 
controversial and often opposite responses obtained in vitro 
with HZ and different macrophage population. Further work is 
necessary to better characterize the effective in vivo role of 
HZ during the different phases of innate immunity in malaria. 
Acknowledgement: PR and KM were supported by a young 
scientist fellowship from the GSA-IDEA project 
(PSRL621CBAND_01) funded by University of Milan. 
 
ID10. Human Papillomavirus Typing in Liquid-Based Pap 
Tests in Israel  
S. Aviel-Ronen1,2, R. Yacobi1, H. Tabibian-Keissar1, I. 
Barshack1,3 
1Sheba Medical Center, Pathology, Ramat Gan, Israel; 2Ariel 
University, Adelson School of Medicine, Ariel, Israel; 3Tel Aviv 
University, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel. 
 
Introduction: The types of human papillomavirus 
(HPV) related to the development of uterine cervix dysplasia, 
carcinoma, and genital warts are well characterized. We 
aimed to study the distribution of HPV types in Israel and 
compare it to the prevalence reported in the literature. 
Methods: HPV typing was performed in 977 cervical 
ThinPrep samples at the Sheba Medical Center, Israel, from 
2019 to 2021. The Pap tests were taken for several medical 
indications, including screening, post-coital bleeding, and 
various degrees of epithelial dysplasia. HPV typing was done 
using Master Diagnostics HPV Direct Flow CHIP on the 
eBRID automated system. This PCR amplification and 
reverse dot blot hybridization-based method identifies 36 
types of HPV (18 high-risk, 18 low-risk) and the presence of 
unspecified HPV genotype (using a universal HPV probe 
detecting L1 consensus region). Results: The median patient 
age in our cohort was 43 years (range 17 to 80 years, 
average 43.3 years). HPV typing failed in 31 (3.2%) samples 
(15 due to insufficient material and 16 for other pre-analytical 
reasons). Of the 421 (44.5%) samples positive for HPV, high-
risk HPV alone was found in 160 patients (16.9%), both high- 
and low-risk HPV were detected in 119 patients (12.6%), only 
low-risk HPV was present in 108 patients (11.4%), unspecified 
HPV was found in 34 patients (3.6%), and 525 (55.5%) were 
negative for HPV. The relative prevalence we found for each 
of the 36 types is presented and shows differences from the 
traditionally accepted distribution (e.g., high prevalence of 
types 53, 66, and 31). Conclusions: The relative prevalence 
of the HPV types we found in our cohort of patients deviates 
from the recognized distribution in the literature. The type of 
epithelial abnormality (low-grade intra-epithelial lesions [LSIL] 
and high-grade intra-epithelial lesions [HSIL] vs. atypical 
squamous cells-undetermined significance [ASC-US]), 
method of HPV detection, geography, and HPV vaccination 
may all contribute to these differences. 
 
ID11. Single-Cell Transcriptome and Epigenomic 
Alterations in Enterovirus and Parechovirus Systemic 
Illness in Infants 
R. Selvarangan, D. Louiselle, A. Sasidharan, J. Johnston, W. 
Cheung, B. Yoo, M. Gibson, A. Walter, T. Bradley, E. 
Grundberg, T. Pastinen 
Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, MO. 
 
Introduction: Enterovirus (EV) and parechovirus (PeV) are 
leading viral causes of systemic illness in infants, manifesting 
as aseptic meningitis and sepsis-like illness. Although clinical 
symptoms for EV and PeV systemic illness overlap, the 
plasma cytokine/chemokine profile during PeV infections is 
more robust than EV. The basis for the difference in host 
response to EV and PeV is not well understood. We describe 
the single cell transcriptome and epigenome alterations in EV 
and PeV infected infants in comparison to control infants with 
similar clinical presentation testing negative for both viruses. 
Methods: EV and PeV real-time RT-PCR testing was 
performed on cerebrospinal fluid samples submitted from 
infants suspected of central nervous system infections. We 
enrolled EV-positive (n = 3), PeV-positive (n = 6), and 
EV/PeV-negative (control) infants (n = 6), and collected whole 
blood for peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) isolation 
and buccal swab for genotyping using the Illumina Global 
Screening Array (GSAMD-24v1-0). PBMC samples were 
S34
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
pooled in 2 groups, and approximately 21,000 cells were 
loaded into a 10x Genomics Single Cell A Chip and tested by 
kit v2 for scRNA-seq. Approximately 15,300 nuclei were 
loaded into 1 well of a Chromium Chip E (10x Genomics Cat 
No. 1000155), and scATAC-seq was performed using the 
scATAC Library & Gel Bead Kit (10x Genomics Cat No. 
1000110). Differentially expressed genes were determined 
within each cell cluster and pathogen classification using 
Seurat v3.1.4’s default Wilcoxon Rank Sum test, followed by 
Bonferroni correction of resulting p-values. Results: The 
clinical presentation and laboratory findings of enrolled 
children are presented in Table 1. In unsupervised annotation 
analyses we found overall high predominance of CD4+/CD8+ 
T-lymphocyte cells, but also characterized B-cells, NK cells, 
monocytes, and dendritic cells. Following cell deconvolution to 
PeV, EV, and negative groups, respectively, we noted very 
distinct patterns across the groups. Specifically, we identified 
complete polarization (i.e., >10-fold difference in relative cell 
abundance between infected infants and negative controls) of 
cells in T-cell clusters that together defined systemic response 
to PeV and EV compared to control group infants requiring 
hospitalization. Differential expression analysis of marker 
genes across the clusters revealed PeV eliciting increased 
overexpression of a wide variety of interferon 
pathway/antiviral genes in T-cells as compared to EV 
infection, and this difference was primarily manifested in CD4 
and CD8 T-cells. Conclusions: We demonstrate distinct gene 
expression changes in immune cell populations in infants with 
systemic viral infection, with remarkably distinct immune cell 
profiles noted for EV and PeV infection, with canonical 
interferon pathway activation and shutdown of protein 
translation. 
Table 1: Demographics and laboratory findings of 
hospitalized EV, PeV, and control infants 
 
 
ID12. Choice of Candida auris DNA Extraction Method Is 
Crucial to PCR Assay Performance  
N.A.L. Supandi, X.L.K. Chan, L.E.L. Oon, K.S. Chan 
Singapore General Hospital, Molecular Pathology, Singapore, 
Singapore. 
 
Introduction: Candida auris (CAU) is a multi-drug-resistant 
yeast causing healthcare-associated infection with high 
mortality worldwide. Rapid identification of colonization status 
through early patient screening is recommended to control its 
spread. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can yield results 
within a day compared to 7 days for culture. The presence of 
a complex, tough, chitinous cell wall that is resistant to 
chemical lysis used by conventional extraction methods 
impairs effective DNA extraction. This study aims to compare 
the performances of 4 commercially available extraction 
methods on CAU: one with bead-beating step followed by 
chemical lysis (QIAGEN DNeasy PowerSoil Pro [PSP] on 
QIAcube/QIAcube Connect), and three using purely chemical 
lysis (bioMérieux NucliSens easyMAG/eMAG, Promega 
Maxwell RSC Viral Total Nucleic Acid Purification Kit and 
QIAGEN EZ1&2 Virus Mini Kit v2.0). Methods: A clinical 
isolate of CAU was cultured and suspended in 1x phosphate 
buffered saline to 0.5 McFarland turbidity before serial dilution 
to 96 CFU/mL and 960 CFU/mL using combined nose, axilla, 
and groin swab media (ESwab, Copan Diagnostic Inc.) matrix 
(previously tested negative) followed by DNA extraction and 
PCR testing. Plate counts were done to establish the 
inoculum. Five replicates were performed for each dilution per 
extraction method. All extractions were performed based on 
manufacturer’s instructions, using maximum recommended 
input volumes and minimum elution volumes for highest DNA 
extract concentrations. PCR was performed using primers and 
probes, described by Leach et al. (2018) on Bio-Rad CFX96 
instrument. Results were analysed using Bio-Rad Manager 
3.1, and cycle threshold (Ct) values were determined using 
regression. One-way ANOVA by IBM SPSS 25.0 software 
package was used to compare the results. A P-value of <0.05 
was considered statistically significant. Results: There was a 
significant difference in the Ct values (P <0.05) at 960 
CFU/mL between the different extraction methods. The 95% 
confidence interval of Ct values attained on PSP was 22.75 to 
25.57; on easyMAGä/eMAG it was 28.89 to 29.94; on 
Promega it was 37.49 to 40.51; and on EZ1&2 it was 32.83 to 
35.09. Extraction using PSP had the highest DNA yield, 
followed by easyMAG/eMAG, EZ1&2, and Promega. Of note, 
only with PSP extraction was the PCR assay able to pick up 
CAU DNA at 96 CFU /mL (all 5 replicates detected). 
Conclusions: Extraction with PSP on QIAcube/QIAcube 
Connect, which included bead-beating, resulted in a CAU 
S35
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
PCR assay with a much higher analytical sensitivity compared 
to the other 3 extraction methods. This was despite PSP 
extraction method requiring the lowest input volume. Our 
findings highlight the importance of including a bead-beating 
component in CAU extraction. Highly sensitive screening 
assay with rapid turnaround time is the cornerstone for early 
detection of CAU colonization, facilitating infection control 
efforts to stamp out nosocomial spread. 
 
ID13. HIV-1 Exploits CD32-Driven Autoantibody-Enhanced 
Trogocytosis to Facilitate Infection of Resting CD4 T-Cells  
M. Albanese1,2, H.-R. Chen1, M. Gapp1, M. Muenchhoff1, D. 
Peterhoff3, K. Hoffmann4, H. Hengel4, R. Wagner3, O.T. 
Fackler5, A. Lanzavecchia2, O.T. Keppler1 
1Ludwig Maximilian University (LMU) of Munich, Max von 
Pettenkofer Institute and Gene Center - Faculty of Medicine - 
Virology, München, Germany; 2National Institute of Molecular 
Genetics (INGM), Human Immunology, Milan, Italy; 
3University of Regensburg, Institute of Medical Microbiology 
and Hygiene, Molecular Microbiology (Virology), Regensburg, 
Germany; 4University Medical Center, Albert-Ludwigs-
University Freiburg, Institute of Virology, Freiburg, Germany; 
5University Hospital Heidelberg, Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Integrative Virology, Heidelberg, Germany. 
 
Introduction: The replication-competent HIV-1 reservoir 
persists despite antiretroviral therapy, but knowledge gaps on 
the mechanisms regulating its size limit rational approaches to 
HIV cure. The identification of biomarkers expressed 
selectively on the surface of resting CD4 T-cell subsets 
harboring replication-competent HIV-1 would facilitate the 
targeting and elimination of the latent viral reservoir in infected 
individuals. The Fcγ receptor CD32 has been reported to 
serve as such a biomarker for resting CD4 T-cells, but its role 
has remained controversial. Methods: We established a 
CRISPR/Cas9 model system using ex vivo co-cultures of 
primary human macrophages together with autologous resting 
CD4 T-cells, as well as a cell line-based donor-target model 
system. We combined microscopy, flow cytometry, and other 
state-of-the-art techniques including the Amnis ImageStream 
technology to characterize CD32 exposed on CD4 T-cells. 
The transient expression of different CD32 isoforms, 
chimeras, and mutants, together with other surface receptors 
expressed as well as the addition of modulating antibodies 
provided unprecedented mechanistic insight into a process 
called “trogocytosis," in which T-cells acquire receptors from 
the macrophages’ cell surface. Finally, HIV-1 binding, fusion, 
and infection assays were used to study the infection in CD4 
T-cells which acquired CD32 patches from macrophages. 
Results: Thanks to this co-culture system, we identified the 
Fcγ receptor CD32 as driver and cargo of a cell contact-
dependent, unidirectional trogocytotic transfer of distinct 
plasma membrane patches from macrophages to resting CD4 
T-cells that render these non-permissive reservoir cells 
transiently susceptible to HIV-1 infection. T-cell-reactive 
autoantibodies in plasma from a subset of chronic HIV-1 
patients, forming a “bridge” between donor and recipient T-
cells, enhanced the trogocytotic transfer of membrane 
patches via highly dynamic, filamentous nanoprotrusions. 
Surprisingly, we identified a long list of other receptors that 
are transferred from macrophages to T-cells via trogocytosis. 
Conclusions: On CD4 T-cells, trogocytosed CD32 membrane 
patches recruited the CD4 receptor, creating hot spots of 
preferential binding and fusion for HIV-1 particles, resulting in 
increased infection. Additional trogocytosed receptors 
conferred new migration and adhesion functions, potentially 
creating a more infection-prone environment. Thus, Fcγ 
receptor-mediated trogocytosis expands the proteomic and 
functional plasticity of immune cells and is exploited by HIV-1 
to persist. In HIV patients, this process can enhance HIV-1 
susceptibility of resting CD4 T-cells and may thus contribute 
to expanding the latent HIV-1 reservoir in vivo. 
 
 ID14. Evaluation of a Meta-Genomics Next-Generation 
Sequencing (mNGS) Assay with Novel Host Depletion 
Method for Pathogen Identification in Sepsis Patients 
(Selected for Oral Presentation, O-02-02) 
Y-C. Chen2,3, D.H-T. Yen4, M. Chan1, H. Hung1, K. Chao1, M. 
Wu1 
1Micronbrane Medical, Taoyuan, Taiwan; 2Taipei Veterans 
General Hospital, Emergency Department, Taipei, Taiwan; 
3School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Emergency Department, Taipei, Taiwan; 4Chang 
Bing Show-Chwan Memorial Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan. 
 
Introduction: Sepsis is a life-threatening condition arising 
from the human immune response to the bloodstream 
infection. It can progress into septic shock, organ failure, and 
death if diagnosis and correct treatment are not timely made. 
The traditional diagnosis of sepsis by microbial blood culture 
(BC) suffers from 1) long culture cycle leading to delay of 
results, and 2) low diagnostic yields. Metagenomic next-
generation sequencing (mNGS) methods have the potential to 
overcome these issues. In this study, an mNGS workflow 
utilizing a novel filter to specifically capture white blood cells 
and deplete host DNA background was evaluated against BC 
results, as well as mNGS without the filter, for pathogen 
identification from blood samples. Methods: Patients admitted 
to Taipei Veterans General Hospital with suspected sepsis 
were recruited to the study approved by the IRB. Blood 
sample was taken for BC (designated as first BC) before any 
antibiotic exposure. Upon patient enrollment, blood was taken 
again and divided into 3 portions, with one used for the 
second BC. The other two were used for mNGS with one 
processed with the filter and the other without filtering, to 
assess the effectiveness of host depletion by the filter. 
Results: A total of 50 patients were recruited, among which 
39 had results for all 4 tests. The mNGS with filter had the 
highest positive rate of 64.1%, followed by first BC (51.3%) 
and mNGS without filter (46.2%), whereas the second BC had 
the lowest positive rate of 25.6%. It strongly suggested that 
S36
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
mNGS was less sensitive to antibiotics exposure as compared 
to BC. The overall correlation between samples with versus 
without filtration (R2 = 0.99) confirmed that filtration does not 
affect microbial composition in a sample. For the BC positive 
samples, the effect of host depletion by filtration increased 
microbial target reads/million QC reads from 41 reads to 209 
reads on average. Microbial reads enrichment by the filter 
appeared to be more effective for the samples with lower 
microbial concentration, thus increasing the test sensitivity 
over mNGS without filter. Using the second BC results as a 
reference, mNGS with filter and mNGS without filter exhibited 
sensitivities of 90.0% and 50.0%, and specificities of 41.4% 
and 55.2%, respectively. Conclusions: The mNGS with filter 
was able to recover most of the pathogens identified by 
clinical BC and achieved the highest diagnostic yield. With the 
clinical implementation to complete the workflow within 24 
hours, it has the potential to overcome slow turnaround and 
low diagnostic yield issues of traditional BC. 
 
ID15. A New High-Throughput Viral Integration 
Sequencing Method Coupled to a New Bioinformatic 
Pipeline Revealed That Mitochondrial DNA Can Be 
Targeted by Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) Integration in Tumour 
and Non-Tumour Liver Cells Showing Active HBV 
Replication (Selected for Oral Presentation, O-02-01) 
D. Giosa1, D. Lombardo1, C. Musolino1, V. Chines1, F. 
Casuscelli di Tocco1, D. Daliberti1, G. Caminiti1, C. Saitta1, A. 
Alibrandi3, R. Aiese Cigliano4, O. Romeo5, G. Navarra2, G. 
Raimondo1, T. Pollicino1 
1University of Messina, Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
Messina, Italy; 2University Hospital of Messina, Human 
Pathology, Messina, Italy; 3University of Messina, Economics, 
Messina, Italy; 4Sequentia Biotech Sl, Barcelona, Spain; 
5University of Messina, ChiBioFarAm, Messina, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Although research on hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
DNA integration has made relevant progress, important 
aspects remain unclear. Development of new integration 
detection methods may help in improving knowledge in the 
field and in better understanding HBV-related tumorigenesis. 
Our aim was to conduct a high-throughput integration 
detection on tumour (T) and non-tumour tissues (NT) from 
HBsAg-positive patients using a highly sensitive method for 
assaying HBV integration. Methods: We studied T from 7 
patients with HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
and paired NT from 6 of the 7 cases. HBV integration sites 
were recovered by semi-nested ligation-mediated PCR from 
host DNA (fragmented by sonication and ligated to 
asymmetric DNA linkers) and the use of forward or reverse 
HBV-specific primers. Targeted sequences were further 
enriched by nested-PCR with forward or reverse MiSeq HBV 
primers and forward or reverse MiSeq plinkers. PCR products 
were subjected to paired-end sequencing, and reads were 
aligned to a hybrid genome including human genome 
(GRCh38.p10) and HBV genome (NC_003977). Results: A 
total of 3,339 unique HBV integration sites were detected in 
the 7 patients: 2,913 integrations in T and 426 in NT. The 
average numbers of integration sites in T and NT were 416 
and 71, respectively. All patients had HBV integrations, with 
an average of 256.8 integrations per individual patient. The 
detected integration sites were randomly distributed across 
the whole genome and no hotspot was detected. Compared to 
individual chromosomes, a significant enrichment of virus 
integration sites was observed in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 
both in T (P <0.0001) and NT (P <0.0001), after normalization 
of the number of integrations to chromosome length. We 
found a total of 20 unique HBV integrations in mtDNA from the 
tissue samples obtained from 4/7 patients (17 breakpoints in T 
from 4/4 patients and 3 breakpoints in NT from 2/4 patients). 
HBV integration in mtDNA was associated with HBV DNA (P = 
0.01) and pregenomic RNA amounts (P = 0.02). In mtDNA, 
the integration breakpoints were preferentially located in 
mitochondrial genes in T (17/17 vs. 0/3; P <0.0001) and in the 
D-loop region in NT (2/17 vs. 3/3; P = 0.001). RNR2, ATP6, 
ND4, and ND5 mitochondrial genes were identified as 
recurrent sites of integration in T. Moreover, in T of individual 
patients, HBV integrations were detected in CYTB, COX1, 
ND1, and ND2 genes. Furthermore, we found that HBV RNAs 
are imported into mitochondria. Conclusions: The new HBV 
integration sequencing method importantly increased the 
detection efficiency of HBV integration breakpoints. We 
detected an enrichment of virus integrations in mtDNA from 
both T and NT. HBV integrations in mtDNA preferentially 
involved OXPHOS mitochondrial genes in T, suggesting that 
there is selection for mitochondria harboring HBV integration 
in these genes or for cells containing these mitochondria 
during hepatocarcinogenesis. Our data suggest a novel 
mechanism by which HBV insertion might contribute to HCC 
development. 
 
ID16. Postbiotics as Mediators of the Host-Microbiota 
Front Line  
M. Pariano1, M. Puccetti2, G. Renga1, F. D'Onofrio1, S. 
Giovagnoli2, M. Ricci2, L. Romani1 
1University of Perugia, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
Perugia, Italy; 2University of Perugia, Department of 
Pharmaceutical Science, Perugia, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Alterations of the microbiome occur in a 
number of immune-mediated diseases, a finding consistent 
with the role of the microbiome in the maintenance of the 
immune system homeostasis. In this regard, L-tryptophan 
S37
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
metabolites of microbial origin, referred to as postbiotics, are 
crucial regulators of the host-microbial symbiosis by acting as 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ligands. A number of studies 
have highlighted the capacity of AhR to respond to indoles 
postbiotics, thus positioning AhR as a candidate indole 
receptor. The intestinal and respiratory barriers are very 
sensitive to AhR activity, suggesting that AhR modulation 
could be a therapeutic option to maintain the microbial and 
immune homeostasis at the epithelial barrier, which has 
substantial implications for health even beyond the mucosal 
site. However, the context- and ligand-dependent activity of 
AhR requires one to resort to suitable biopharmaceutical 
formulations to enable site-specific drug delivery in order to 
achieve therapeutic effectiveness, decrease unwanted 
toxicities, and prevent off-target effects. Methods: We 
resorted to biopharmaceutical technologies to deliver the 
microbial-derived indole-3-aldehyde (3-IAld), known to act as 
guardian of epithelial barrier integrity via the AhR/Il-22 
pathway, directly into the lung via dry powder inhalation, or 
into the gut via dry powder encapsulation, in preclinical 
models of lung or gut inflammation. Results: We found that 
site-specific delivery of 3-IAld is an efficient strategy to 
mitigate lung and gut inflammatory pathology, by restoring 
immune and microbial homeostasis at mucosal surfaces. 
Specifically, 3-IAld dry powder prevented lung inflammatory 
pathology in murine cystic fibrosis; restrained epithelial injury 
and the consequent microbial dysbiosis, immune, and 
metabolic dysregulation in intestinal and liver inflammatory 
diseases; and protected from immune check-point inhibitor 
adverse events without affecting the antitumoral activity. No 
systemic effects were observed upon each targeted delivery. 
Conclusions: These studies provide proof-of-concept 
demonstration of how pharmaceutical technology helps 
translating the new frontiers of microbial drug discovery into 
human therapeutics. 
 
ID17. Role of Leishmania infantum Infection and Hypoxia 
in Modulating the Crucial Fate of Arginine in 
Macrophages  
F. Perego1, S. D'Alessandro2, S. Parapini3, M. Dolci1, L. 
Signorini1, S. Delbue1, D. Taramelli2, N. Basilico1 
1Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Scienze 
Biomediche, Chirurgiche e Odontoiatriche, Milano, Italy; 
2Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Scienze 
Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari, Milano, Italy; 3Università 
degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche per 
la Salute, Milano, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Leishmaniasis is a neglected tropical disease 
caused by infection with Leishmania parasites and transmitted 
by the bite of a phlebotomine sand fly. Infected tissues are 
characterized by a hypoxic inflammatory environment where 
macrophages are the final hosts of the intracellular parasite 
Leishmania. In macrophages, arginine is the common 
substrate of the inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and of 
the 2 arginase isoforms, arginase 1 (Arg1) and arginase 2 
(Arg2). The balance among these enzymes is critical for the 
outcome of the disease; indeed, a major consumption of 
arginine by NOS leads to a higher amount of the microbiocidal 
nitric oxide (NO), whereas a predominant activity of arginases 
induces intracellular survival of Leishmania through 
polyamines production. Since their regulation by Leishmania 
infection and hypoxia is still not fully understood, the aim is to 
evaluate how the metabolism of arginine is orchestrated in an 
in vitro model of Leishmania-infected macrophages in 
normoxia or hypoxia. Methods: Mouse bone marrow-derived 
macrophages (BMDMs) were activated to a pro-inflammatory 
phenotype with mIFNγ and LPS, and infected with Leishmania 
infantum (L. infantum) MHOM/TN/80/IPT1 promastigotes 
(MOI 1:10). After 6 hours of incubation in normoxia (20% O2) 
or hypoxia (1% O2) Nitric Oxide Synthase 2 (NOS2), Arginase 
1 (ARG1), and Arginase 2 (ARG2) gene expression was 
evaluated by RT-PCR. After 24 hours of incubation, NO and 
urea levels were evaluated in cell supernatants as a measure 
of the activity of NOS or arginases, respectively. Results: In 
normoxia, L. infantum infection reduced NOS2 expression and 
NO secretion induced by BMDM activation, whereas it 
induced ARG1 expression and the activity of arginases, 
despite a reduction of ARG2 expression. Although hypoxia 
strongly induced NOS2 in uninfected macrophages, NO 
production was completely abrogated. Concomitantly, the 
activity of arginases was increased in the hypoxic 
environment. L. infantum infection reduced the expression of 
both NOS2 and ARG1 induced by hypoxia, although with no 
significant effects on the final products, NO and urea. 
Conclusions: Our data suggest that in normoxia the infection 
of macrophages with L. infantum parasites preserves their 
own survival by promoting the arginase-mediated pathway to 
the detriment of arginine metabolism by inducible NOS. Even 
a hypoxic environment, typical of an inflammatory state, 
seems to modulate arginine metabolism in favor of arginases. 
A clearer comprehension of the interplay between hypoxia 
and Leishmania infection in the main macrophage defense 
mechanism is essential not only for a better knowledge of 
leishmaniosis pathogenesis, but also in the perspective of 
new possible tools for leishmaniosis treatment. 
 
S38
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
ID18. Extracellular Vesicle Biomarker Detection for 
COVID-19 Diagnostics Using MALDI-Based Screening  
D. Stefanizzi, F. Caponnetto, R. Del Sal, E. Sozio, C. Tascini, 
F. Curcio, A.P. Beltrami 
Università degli studi di Udine, Department of Medical Area, 
Udine, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Multi-omic approaches have been implemented 
under COVID-19 pressure for the identification of biomarkers 
of patient outcome. In this setting, matrix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) is being 
studied to identify specific proteomic and lipidomic fingerprints 
of biological samples that could be associated with disease 
outcome. Exosomes are small, cell-derived bioactive 
nanovesicles (50 to 200 nm) increasingly recognized as a 
promising source of circulating biomarkers for non-invasive 
diagnostics from body fluids. For this reason, the aim of this 
work is to create a fingerprint of circulating extracellular 
vesicles (EVs) associated with COVID-19 outcome. Methods: 
Platelet-poor plasma of 20 COVID-19 patients was 
dichotomized based on disease severity and collected at 
hospital admission. Patients who were either 
paucisymptomatic or affected by a mild to moderate form of 
the disease were referred to as “non-severe,” whereas 
patients who were either affected by severe to critical COVID-
19 at disease onset or who had moderate disease and 
worsened requiring admission to the ICU were referred to as 
“severe." The same mutational variant of concern was 
maintained for reproducibility of data. Biological samples 
underwent exosomal enrichment using SelectEV kit 
(Exosomics) to obtain an exosomal pellet, which was 
processed for protein isolation using 2-D Clean-up kit (Bio-
Rad). Proteins, together with intact EVs, were desalted and 
concentrated using C18-ZipTips and spotted directly on the 
MALDI plate in duplicate. We performed analysis using the 
MALDI-7090. Results: Protein extracts were analyzed by 
MALDI-TOF in the range of m/z 2,000 to 20,000, and using 
mMass software for peak picking we could identify 82 peaks 
in non-severe patients’ protein extracts and 90 peaks in 
severe patients’ protein extracts. Analyzing intact vesicles, we 
detected 67 peaks in non-severe patients’ and 77 peaks in 
severe patients. As expected, we found that 38 peaks were 
shared among all the spectra, while 26 were shared only in 
extracted vesicles and 17 were present only in the intact 
vesicles. Lastly, once we compared the peaks obtained, 
correlating them with disease severity, 23 peaks were 
exclusive of severe patients’ protein extracts and 16 peaks 
exclusive of non-severe patients’, whereas considering intact 
vesicles, 14 peaks were detected in severe patients’ intact 
vesicles and only 4 peaks were found in non-severe patients. 
Conclusions: This work shows the great potential of MALDI-
based technology for the identification of a specific proteic 
exosomal fingerprint to identify potential clinical biomarkers. 
The presence of the peaks, as well as their intensities, were 
found to vary greatly depending on the type of sample 
analyzed. More generally, MALDI could be promising to 
establish a high-throughput screening platform for clinical 
purposes in several pathologies. 
 
ID19. Determination of a Ct Cut-off Value for Optimization 
of SARS-CoV-2 Detection via CDC Protocol  
M.T. Tada, E.M. Silva, N.C. Melo, D.A. Nociti, J.S.L. Silva, 
A.S. Lima, C.F.A. Cavalcanti, R.A. Coudry 
UnitedHealth Group, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, São 
Paulo, Brazil. 
 
Introduction: The World Health Organization (WHO) on 
March 11, 2020, declared the novel coronavirus outbreak a 
global pandemic. The Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) has released in February 2020 a SARS-
CoV-2 detection protocol, which detects 2 viral targets 
(N1/N2) and RNaseP (endogenous control). However, some 
RT-PCR results can be classified as inconclusive due to the 
detection of only 1 viral target. These results may confound 
the laboratory result of SARS-CoV-2 viral infection. Despite 
this, few studies have explored the obtaining of Ct cut-off to 
determine positive results in a large cohort. Thus, the aim of 
this study was to evaluate the outcome of inconclusive results 
using the CDC method for detecting SARS-CoV-2 using the 
multiplex technique that evaluates 3 viral targets. Methods: 
We selected 1,487 nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swab 
samples with an undetermined result (detection of only 1 
target) by CDC protocol (RT-PCR TaqMan SARS-CoV-2 – 
CDC) between July and December of 2020. All patients 
signed an informed consent form. Samples were reprocessed 
with the same amount of RNA input into a multiplex detection 
kit (TaqPath COVID-19 CE-IVD RT-PCR Kit, Thermo Fisher) 
to confirm the result. This kit consists of 3 SARS-CoV-2 
targets: S, N, and ORF1ab genes, and an exogenous control 
(MS2 bacteriophage). The results were compared using 
receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curves and Youden 
index to determine the better cut-off considering its sensitivity 
and specificity. SARS-CoV-2 detection procedures were 
performed according to the manufacturers' recommendations. 
Statistical analysis was made using SPSS software. Results: 
Reprocessed samples using the multiplex kit with 
undetermined results by the CDC showed 98.12% negative (n 
= 1,459) and 1.88% (28) positive results. All tested samples 
had RNaseP identification, showing that the RNA extraction 
step was efficient. In positive samples, the mean Ct was 36.3 
± 3.04 for N1/N2 and 26.9 ± 2.09 for RNaseP for 
S39
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
undetermined samples by CDC protocol, whereas positive 
samples with multiplex kit showed a mean Ct of 30.1 ± 5.20, 
30.2 ± 5.30, and 33.0 ± 5.30 in S, N, and ORF1ab targets, 
respectively. The Youden index determined the best cut-off 
point for Ct of 35.15, corresponding to 75.0% of sensitivity and 
85.2% of specificity. ROC curve analysis showed a 
statistically significant curve (AUC = 0.845; SE = 0.039; p 
<0.01; 95% CI = 0.769 to 0.921). Conclusions: Using a large 
number of samples with an undetermined result in the CDC 
protocol and comparing with the multiplex detection kit by 
analyzing the ROC curve and the Youden index demonstrated 
that the best cut-off point for Ct for undetermined results from 
the CDC protocol is 35.15, considering 75.0% of sensitivity 
and 85.2% of specificity. 
 
ID20. Validation of SARS-CoV-2 Detection in Saliva 
Samples by Real-Time PCR (RT-PCR)  
N.C. Melo, E.M. Silva, M.T. Tada, J.S.L. Silva, D.A. Nociti, 
A.S. Lima, C.F.A. Cavalcanti, R.A. Coudry 
UnitedHealth Group, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, São 
Paulo, Brazil. 
 
Introduction: The detection of viral RNA in respiratory 
specimens such as nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swabs 
(NP/OP) by real-time PCR (RT-PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 
infection is recommended by the World Health Organization. 
However, the need to increase the capacity for SARS-CoV-2 
testing in different realities associated with the availability of 
collection supplies has motivated the search for alternative 
specimen types. In this context, the objective of the current 
study was to validate the detection of SARS-CoV-2 in saliva 
samples in comparison with NP/OP specimens using RT-
PCR. Methods: This multicenter retrospective study included 
3 medium-sized hospitals and collected samples from 253 
patients from April 2021 to May 2021. All patients signed an 
informed consent form. The MagMAX Viral/Pathogen Nucleic 
Acid Isolation kit (Thermo Fisher) and the saliva lysis protocol 
were used to obtain RNA from swab and saliva samples, 
respectively. For swab viral detection we used multiplex 
detection kit (TaqPath COVID-19 CE-IVD RT-PCR, Thermo 
Fisher), which targets ORF1ab, N, and S viral regions, 
whereas the saliva RT-PCR kit TaqMan SARS-CoV-2-CDC 
targets 2 regions of the N gene (N1/N2) and RNaseP. SARS-
CoV-2 detection procedures were performed according to the 
manufacturers' recommendations. Statistical analysis was 
performed using SPSS software. Results: The incidence of 
SARS-CoV-2 was 38% (70/253) by 2 tests (saliva and NP/OP 
swab by RT-PCR). The population consisted of 61.26% 
(155/253) females with a mean age of 39 ± 12.27 years. The 
limit of detection observed was of 100 copies/μL in saliva 
samples performed in 20 replicates by detection curve and 
reproducibility. In saliva samples, the mean Ct values of N1 
and N2 genes were 27.8 and 28.0, respectively, whereas in 
swab samples, the mean Ct values of S, N, and ORF1ab 
targets were 20.2, 20.2, and 20.0, respectively. We verified a 
strong positive correlation for both CDC and for the multiplex 
targets, suggesting homogeneity in the analysis. The 
detection of SARS-CoV-2 using saliva samples showed 
sensitivity of 95.7% and specificity of 98.4% when compared 
to the gold standard method. The accuracy obtained was 
97.63%, with a Cohen's kappa coefficient of 0.941 (p <0.001) 
and classified as "almost perfect." All tested samples had 
RNaseP identified, showing that the saliva lysis step was 
efficient. Conclusions: The RT-PCR test on a saliva sample 
showed high sensitivity and specificity for the detection of 
SARS-CoV-2. These findings provide supporting evidence for 
recommending saliva as an alternative modality that is safer, 
comfortable, and convenient to collect, and sufficiently 
accurate for making a clinical diagnosis. Thus, the direct 
saliva sample showed good applicability in the laboratory 
routine by reducing costs with extraction methods and 
practicality in collection. 
 
ID21. Evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 Genomic Mutations 
Potentially Conferring Resistance to Antiviral Drugs in 
Viral Populations Isolated from Untreated SARS-CoV-2-
Infected Subjects (Selected for Oral Presentation, O-04-
04) 
D. Lombardo, G. Caminiti, C. Musolino, V. Chines, C. 
Palermo, G. Raffa, T. Pollicino 
University Hospital "G. Martino" of Messina, Clinical and 
Experimental Medicine, Messina, Italy. 
 
Introduction: The development of safe and effective antiviral 
drugs has been a crucial issue since the outbreak of the 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-
CoV-2) global pandemic. Currently, only three antiviral drugs 
are approved for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2-infected 
patients. Remdesivir and molnupiravir are two nucleoside 
analogs that target non-structural protein 12 (nsp12), the 
catalytic subunit of the RdRp complex. Paxlovid (a nirmatrelvir 
and ritonavir combination) blocks the activity of SARS-CoV-2 
Nsp5/Main Protease/3C-like protease. Given the adaptive 
potential of SARS-Cov-2 and the ongoing selection of viral 
variants, it is conceivable that natural selection of mutant 
viruses might jeopardize the efficacy of new developed 
antiviral agents. The aim of this study was to analyze the 
SARS-CoV-2 genetic variability of the RdRp complex subunits 
and Nsp5 in SARS-Cov-2 populations isolated from a large 
series of subjects naïve to antiviral therapy. Methods: Viral 
RNA from 4,155 nasopharyngeal swabs from subjects from 
Southern Italy, collected from April 2021 to October 2022, was 
S40
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
extracted using an automated nucleic acid purification 
platform. Viral genomes were amplified with a SARS-CoV-2-
specific primers pool. The amplicons were used to prepare the 
libraries that were sequenced on Illumina MiSeq platform, 
producing 151 bp paired-end reads. The SARS-CoV-2 
complete genomes were reconstructed using the pipeline 
SARS-CoV-2 RECoVERY (REconstruction of COronaVirus 
gEnomes & Rapid analYsis). Phylogenetic relationship 
between viral isolates was obtained using the Molecular 
Evolutionary Genetics Analysis X (MEGAX) software. 
Results: Analysis of nsp12 SARS-CoV-2 sequences 
identified 84 aa substitutions. Among these, the P323L 
substitution was detected in 3,777/4,155 (91%) of the samples 
and the G671S substitution was detected in 2,906/4,155 
(69.9%) of the isolates, 2,904/2,906 (99.9%) belonging to 
Delta variant and 2/2,906 (0.1%) belonging to Omicron BA.5 
subvariant. In addition, 457/4,155 (11%) of the samples 
showed the L838I substitution, which is associated with 
remdesivir resistance. Sequencing analysis of the nsp7 and 
nsp8 SARS-CoV-2 genomic regions identified 14 and 24 
different aa substitutions, respectively, which have not been 
characterized to date. The analysis of nsp5 identified 28 
different aa substitutions. Among these, the A191V 
substitution, flanking the active site cavity of nsp5, has been 
detected in 3/4,155 (0.07%) of the cases. Phylogenetic 
analysis showed that, compared to nsp12 and nsp5 genomic 
regions, nsp7 and nsp8 have a lower genetic variability. 
Conclusions: This study demonstrates that both nsp12 and 
nsp5, targeted by currently available antiviral therapies, may 
accumulate several naturally selected aa substitutions, which 
may potentially affect antiviral drug efficiency, and suggests 
that nsp7 and nsp8 might be considered as new potential 
targets for the development of new antiviral drugs because of 
their low genetic variability and essential role in SARS-CoV-2 
replication. 
 
ID22. Evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 Positivity by RT-PCR in a 
Clinical Laboratory in São Paulo during 2022  
E.M. Silva, M.T. Tada, N.C. Melo, J.S.L. Silva, D.A. Nociti, 
C.R.M. Pereira, C.F.A. Cavalcanti, R.A. Coudry 
UnitedHealth Group, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, São 
Paulo, Brazil. 
 
Introduction: In Brazil, in March 2020, the Ministry of Health 
characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. After the first case 
had been verified a dynamic of positivity involved several 
factors, including socio-demographic aspects, vaccination, 
and the presence of different variants of SARS-CoV-2. 
Knowledge of the extent of infection is critical to developing an 
effective public health response to COVID containment. In this 
context, the objective of the current study was to evaluate 
positivity of SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR in a clinical laboratory in 
São Paulo during 2022. Methods: This was a multicenter 
retrospective study that included 17 hospitals, involving 
patients who received at least 1 interpretable SARS-CoV-2 
RT-PCR result from January 1 to December 31 of the year of 
2022. For the detection of SARS-CoV-2, samples of 
nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swabs (NP/OP) or saliva were 
analyzed by real-time PCR (RT-PCR). In NP/OP swabs, we 
used MagMAX Viral/Pathogen Nucleic Acid Isolation kit for 
RNA isolation and TaqPath COVID-19 CE-IVD RT-PCR 
(Thermo Fisher) kit for multiplex SARS-CoV-2 viral detection, 
whereas for saliva, we used TaqMan SARS-CoV-2 Fast PCR 
Combo Kit 2.0 for direct multiplex SARS-CoV-2 detection. A 
descriptive analysis of the variables (genus and age) was 
made by absolute and relative frequencies. Statistical 
analyses were performed using SPSS and GraphPad Prism 
software. Results: During the study period, 75,226 cases 
were analyzed; 27.74% (n = 20,865) were positive for SARS-
CoV-2 in 2022. In Brazil, we had 2 peaks of infections, one in 
January and another in June, presenting a positive rate of 
51.1% and 40.0%, respectively. Positive cases were 
characterized by presenting 64.85% (n = 13.532) of female 
patients and 19.91% (n = 4.155) of vulnerable patients (764 
children ≤5 years old [mean age 2.1 ± 1.4] and 3,391 people 
aged ≥60 years old [mean age 73.6 ± 9.8]). Positivity 
decreased during the year as expected, with a significant 
difference between the first and second semesters p <0.05, 
3,096.0 ± 3,390.0 and 381.0 ± 396.9, respectively. Positivity 
in vulnerable patients represented 19.1% (4,155/20,865) of 
positive attendances in 2022. The average positivity in 
vulnerable patients was 346.3 ± 398.0 per month, with 
minimum values from 13 (September) to 1,407 (January), 
showing no differences between the first and second 
semesters (p >0.05). Conclusions: The mean positivity found 
in our study was high both in the general population (27.74%) 
and in vulnerable patients (19.91%). The peaks of positive 
cases in January and June were consistent with the positivity 
curve in Brazil in the year 2022. As expected, there was a 
reduction in the number of cases over the course of the year, 
probably due to the vaccination adherence of the population 
analyzed in this study. 
 
 
 
S41
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
ID23. Hantavirus Detection in a Private Hospital in São 
Paulo, Brazil, Using a Metagenomic RNA Diagnostic Test 
R. Petroni, R. Santana, N. Muto, D. Amgarten, E. Dorlass, B. 
Oliveira, A.P. Salles, A. Santos, A. Takara, M. Menezes, R. 
Sitnik, J.R. Pinho, A. Doi 
Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil. 
 
Introduction: Hantaviruses (family Hantaviridae, genus 
Orthohantavirus) are enveloped zoonotic RNA viruses hosted 
by rodents that can cause diverse potentially fatal syndromic 
diseases. In the Americas, they are responsible for hantavirus 
pulmonary syndrome (HPS). In Europe and Asia, they cause 
hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome. Laboratory diagnosis 
is often conducted by detection of IgG- and IgM-specific 
antibodies in blood; in addition, immunohistochemistry can be 
used to detect viral antigens, and viral RNA can be detected 
through RT-PCR. However, all of these laboratory techniques 
are rarely available in clinical laboratories. We report a case of 
hantavirus detection in a private hospital in São Paulo, Brazil, 
using a metagenomic RNA diagnostic test. Methods: We 
developed and validated a new routine metagenomic test for 
RNA viruses, a virome enrichment technique using 
metagenomic next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology. 
Briefly, total RNA was extracted from plasma and human 
rRNA was depleted. Reverse transcription of RNA was 
performed with a 2-step cDNA random synthesis, followed by 
PCR amplification, a protocol adapted from Greninger et al. 
The generated data were used as input for an in-house 
bioinformatics pipeline. Results: After the bioinformatics 
analysis, it was possible to recover 99 reads of Andes 
orthohantavirus. NGS average coverage was 32X with an 
abundance of 62,6%. No other potentially clinical pathogen 
was detected in our metagenomic test. Considering the 
consistency between clinical history and metagenomic genetic 
finding, we reported the result as positive. Conclusions: 
Andes orthohantavirus is a type of hantavirus found in rodents 
in South America which leads to a severe and potentially fatal 
respiratory illness called HPS. These can develop quickly and 
therefore a rapid medical intervention is necessary. There is 
no specific treatment, cure, or vaccine for HPS. However, 
patients can receive supportive care in the hospital to help 
with symptoms. Through the technique used in this study, it 
was possible to recover the partial genome of the Andes 
orthohantavirus. This case demonstrated the importance of 
using metagenomics in the clinical laboratory for the detection 
of rare pathogens, which normally do not have specific tests in 
the laboratory menu. Moreover, a non-targeted test can also 
help in potentially new emerging infectious disease.  
 
ID24. Direct from Specimen Species Identification: 
Urinary Tract Microbiota Assay  
C. Ledesma, J. Garcia 
Marquis Labs, Oklahoma City, OK. 
 
Introduction: Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are very 
common, especially in women, and consist of an infection of 
the urinary system, including the bladder, urethra, and/or 
kidneys. If treated promptly, no serious condition arises, but if 
not treated or treated with the wrong medicines, more serious 
conditions like kidney infection may occur. Although widely 
used, culture-based methods for the detection of pathogens 
involved in urinary tract infections lack sensitivity, are 
subjective, have longer turnaround times, and have been 
shown to miss a significant percentage of positive cases. 
Molecular solutions for UTI analysis can take as little as 5 
hours from DNA extraction to results reporting, with increased 
accuracy in reporting of detected organisms. Methods: The 
purpose of this validation is to demonstrate the acceptable 
analytical and clinical performance of the Thermo Scientific 
Custom Urinary Tract Microbiota (UTM) Assay on a 
QuantStudio 12k Flex (QS12k). Results: The method 
validation is composed of the following studies: precision, 
accuracy, limits of detection, analytical sensitivity, stability, 
and interference studies. Precision data for all targets and all 
replicates were 95% to 100% concordant. Accuracy: All 
targets for all specimens were 100% concordant. Limits of 
detection (LOD): The experimental data consistently showed 
successful PCR for all targets contained in the Custom UTM 
Amplification Control at all tested concentrations except 100 
and 500 copies/µL. The LOD for this validation is considered 
to be a concentration of 1,000 copies/µL (103). Analytical 
sensitivity: All targets on this assay produced a specificity 
value of 100% Interference; no significant PCR interference 
was detected for blood, rash cream, zinc, or benzalkonium 
chloride. Conclusions: Molecular solutions can expedite the 
process of organism identification. The validation of this assay 
could be beneficial to antibiotic stewardship, as it promotes 
the earlier detection of organisms. 
 
Selected Informatics Abstracts 
I01. Predicting Immunotherapy Response by Inferring 
Tumor Neoantigen Load (Selected for Oral Presentation, 
O-01-03) 
R. Burns, C.C. Palsuledesai, N. Friedman, M.C. Liu, M. 
Rabinowitz, A. Aleshin, H.A. Costa 
Natera, Inc., Austin, TX. 
 
Introduction: Tumor mutational burden (TMB), which reflects 
the number of cancer mutations, has emerged as a predictive 
biomarker of immunotherapy (IO) response. Although high 
TMB status leads to increased neoantigen presentation and 
S42
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
enables T-cell recognition, not all mutations produce 
neoantigens or elicit an immune response. TMB is therefore 
an imperfect biomarker. In this study, we sought to analyze 
whether neoantigen load and immune diversity inferred from 
tumor whole-exome sequencing (WES) and/or RNA 
sequencing (RNAseq) data could improve the prediction of 
patient response to IO when compared with TMB alone. 
Methods: In this study, we built an immune response 
prediction model by analyzing publicly available WES and 
RNAseq data from 257 patients with high-risk muscle-invasive 
bladder cancer (MIBC) who received adjuvant IO. Protein 
coding somatic mutations identified using WES from each 
patient were processed by several open-source neoepitope 
and neoantigen classifiers working as an ensemble for 
maximum predictive power. Tumor bulk RNAseq data were 
used to deconvolute proportions of immune cells present 
within the tumor, assemble B- and T-cell receptors, and 
calculate the receptor alpha diversity within each patient. The 
model was then trained using the above dataset, pre-IO 
circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) results (Signatera), and clinical 
characteristics (age, cancer stage, previous therapies, and 
metastases). The training was conducted using 80% of the 
patients, whereas testing was conducted using 20% of the 
patients. Results: We analyzed the performance of our model 
by predicting response to IO. Predicted responders had 
significantly better disease-free survival (DFS) (HR: 0.15; 95% 
CI: 0.06 to 0.39; p = 0.001; area under the curve = 0.79) 
compared to predicted non-responders. TMB (high/low) alone 
was observed to be less predictive of DFS (HR: 0.60; 95% CI: 
0.40 to 0.88; p = 0.007) than the immune response prediction 
model. The presence of neoantigens (inferred by PRIME and 
DeepImmuno) was predictive of IO response, whereas a 
higher number of nodal metastases, ECOG score, and pre-IO 
ctDNA-positivity status were predictive of non-response to IO. 
Additionally, higher immune diversity was found to be 
predictive, wherein monocytes C and pDCs were associated 
with higher risk of recurrence. Interestingly, TMB status was 
not found to be a predictive factor by the model. 
Conclusions: Our results indicate that the incorporation of 
neoantigen load, immune diversity, and other clinical variables 
significantly improved the prediction of IO response in patients 
with MIBC, compared to TMB status alone. For patients 
undergoing tumor-informed ctDNA monitoring and/or 
comprehensive tumor profiling, neoantigen load and immune 
diversity information can be inferred without the need for any 
additional tests. Further studies in other cancer types are 
warranted to establish the clinical utility of the immune 
response prediction model. 
 
I02. Identification of Potential Gut Microbiota Biomarkers 
of Predisposition to Inflammatory Bowel Disease in 
Healthy Subjects from Northern Italy  
G. Taurino1,2, L. Mancabelli1,2, M.G. Bianchi1,2, G. Longhi3, M. 
Chiu1, F. Turroni2,3, R. Cecchi2,4, M. Ventura2,3, O. Bussolati1,2 
1University of Parma, Laboratory of General Pathology, 
Department of Medicine and Surgery, Parma, Italy; 2University 
of Parma, Microbiome Research Hub, Parma, Italy; 
3University of Parma, Laboratory of Probiogenomics, 
Department of Chemistry, Life Sciences, and Environmental 
Sustainability, Parma, Italy; 4University of Parma, Laboratory 
of Forensic Medicine, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
Parma, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is an 
heterogeneous group of chronic pathologies of the 
gastrointestinal tract, including Crohn disease (CD) and 
ulcerative colitis (UC). The main biomarkers used to diagnose 
and monitor IBD are faecal calprotectin (FC) and serum C-
reactive protein. FC is released by recruited neutrophils and, 
in smaller quantity, monocytes, thus reflecting local 
inflammatory status, and can reach very high levels in IBD 
patients (CD ~3,200 µg/g, UC ~1,900 µg/g). It is known that 
gut microbiota composition of IBD patients is characterized by 
an enhancement and/or depletion of specific microbial groups 
such as Fusobacterium and Faecalibacterium, respectively. 
Hence, the gut microbiota can also be a potential IBD 
biomarker, although profiling data available so far do not 
consider possible confounding host “extrinsic” (diet, 
geographical location, drug therapy) and “intrinsic” (stress, 
immunity status, psychopathologies) factors. In this study, we 
have evaluated the presence of potential microbial biomarkers 
in healthy subjects of a specific area of northern Italy as part 
of a larger project (i.e., the Parma Microbiota study), 
correlating taxa composition with FC levels and considering a 
number of extrinsic/intrinsic factors. Methods: Healthy 
subjects (n = 500, age 18 to 70 yrs) resident in the Parma 
area (Emilia-Romagna, Italy) were enrolled, and their 
extrinsic/intrinsic factors were obtained through 
questionnaires. Faecal samples were collected and 15 mg of 
each sample were picked up with specific devices to quantify 
FC levels through ELISA analysis. At the same time, bacterial 
DNA was extracted and purified from faecal samples to 
perform next-generation metagenomics analysis (deep 
shotgun metagenomics attempts). Results: Median FC in the 
500 healthy subjects was 23.4 µg/g of faeces (Q1 11.8 µg/g 
to Q3 46.9 µg/g). More than 70% of donors show FC levels 
below the normal cut-off (50 µg/g), whereas about 10% of 
subjects present FC levels higher than 100 µg/g, showing an 
elevated inflammatory, IBD-related status. Studies of the 
correlation between FC levels and age or gender of donors 
such as the analysis of the different microbiome taxa are 
S43
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
ongoing. Conclusions: The results of FC levels show that at 
least 10% of the adult healthy population in northern Italy 
display laboratory indexes indicative of an intestinal 
inflammatory condition, suggesting a possible predisposition 
of this “IBD-cluster” to develop the intestinal pathology. These 
data will be correlated with host extrinsic/intrinsic factors and 
with gut microbiota composition to identify putative 
microbiome biomarkers associated to a higher risk of IBD. 
 
I03. Predicting the HER2 Receptor Amplification and Its 
Implementation in Routine Clinical Diagnostics of Breast 
Cancer Using Machine Learning and RNA-seq Data  
S.P. Kuntia, N.A. Tanwar, R. Malhotra, S. Reddy P, K.D. 
Rishi, H. Goswami, V.H. Veldore 
4baseCare Onco Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, India. 
 
Introduction: About ~15% to 20% of breast malignancies 
have an overexpression/amplification of HER2, which is often 
referred to as HER2-positive and makes these cancers more 
aggressive. This also serves as a biomarker for targeted anti-
HER2 therapies. In clinical practice, assays such as 
immunohistochemistry (IHC), fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH), and DNA-seq-based analyses are used 
to determine a patient's HER2 amplification status by 
evaluating different aspects of the HER2 receptor. Here, we 
are presenting a new method for predicting HER2 status using 
machine learning (ML) algorithms applied to RNA-seq data. 
The aim of the study is to compare the performance of this 
ML-based approach to traditional DNA and protein-based 
methods, and develop a more efficient and accurate way of 
predicting HER2 status, which could potentially improve 
patient outcomes. Methods: We have used the TCGA-BRCA 
dataset (n = 1,098) to train an ML pipeline using the SVM 
algorithm. The training set consisted of 736 samples, and the 
HER2 status was trained based on concordant IHC and FISH 
results, which served as the dependent variables. The 
remaining TCGA data, which comprised about 33% of the 
total dataset, were used to evaluate the performance of the 
algorithm. The robustness of the algorithm was further 
validated using tumor profiling data from 150 cancer patients, 
which included RNA-seq, DNA-seq (amplification), and IHC 
results from 4baseCare. To ensure accurate predictions, the 
raw data were normalized for library sizes using the TMM 
approach and was batch corrected to avoid any biases. 
Results: The ML pipeline used in the study was able to 
accurately predict the HER2 receptor status with 89.2% 
accuracy using data from the TCGA dataset and 88.8% 
accuracy using data from the 4baseCare dataset. The results 
showed a high concordance among the results of IHC, RNA-
seq, and DNA-seq data. Conclusions: The ML approach has 
helped in better stratification of patients with HER2 
amplification, as it provided a clear binary distribution, unlike 
the difficulties experienced with patients who have IHC3+ 
results and ambiguous HER2 results from FISH testing. To 
summarize, incorporating AI/ML techniques into the routine 
clinical testing workflow adds tremendous value in the 
selection of patients who would be potential responders to 
targeted therapies. 
Machine learning pipeline for prediction of HER2 
status. 
 
 
I04. The Development of a Genomic Variant “Truth Set” to 
Aid Next-Generation Sequencing-Based Cancer 
Diagnostics (Selected for Oral Presentation, O-01-04) 
G. C.J. Mackenzie1,2, P. Roxburgh1, G. Hamilton1, L. Lo-
Cascio2, A.P. Sanzone3, F. Lescai4 
1University of Glasgow, Institute of Cancer Science, Glasgow, 
United Kingdom; 2Medicines and Healthcare Products 
Regulatory Agency, Division of Diagnostics, Genomics Team, 
South Mimms, United Kingdom; 3Formerly Medicines and 
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, Division of 
Diagnostics, Genomics Team, South Mimms, United 
Kingdom; 4University of Pavia, Laboratory of Computational 
Genomics, Pavia, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Exhaustive characterisation of cancer patient 
genomes can only be achieved by accurate detection of 
somatic variants and quantification of their variant allele 
frequencies (VAFs). Overcoming the difficulties in 
distinguishing low VAFs from sequencing and analysis errors 
is essential to the successful implementation of precision 
medicine in healthcare. The lack of appropriate standards and 
calibrated methods is a critical gap. In 2018, NIBSC created 
the first WHO international standard (IS) panel for somatic 
variants in cancer, containing 5 highly characterised variants 
across 3 cell lines: HCT15, MOLT4, and ATDB102. Project 
aims were to expand upon the original standard by 
characterising structural variants (SVs) present in original cell 
lines’ genome, study potential biases introduced by PCR 
during library preparation, and ensure reproducibility of the 
results. Methods: Whole-genome sequencing was performed 
by BGI Sequencing, using both PCR and PCR-free library 
preparations, allowing biases from PCR to be detected by 
comparing each pair of cell line datasets. Since the cell lines 
S44
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
lack matched normal samples, a Panel of Normals (PON) was 
generated using publicly available sequencing data from the 
Sequence Read Archive. We wrote a custom Nextflow 
workflow as currently, nf-core/Sarek does not support PON 
generation. Variant calling was performed using the nf-
core/Sarek somatic and joint germline workflows. nf-
core/Sarek was chosen as it follows the widely adopted GATK 
best practices, being written in Nextflow makes it easily 
portable, and is available on the nf-core repository for easy 
installation. Analysis was run on the Google Cloud Platform 
(GCP). Results: To start, modules necessary for GATK best 
practices not on nf-core were written and submitted to nf-core 
These helped create the joint germline workflow introduced in 
the 3.0 release of nf-core/Sarek and to write the PON 
workflow. Sequencing data selected for PON generation was 
the closest technical match in terms of sequencing conditions 
publicly available. This was limited by the sequencing 
platform, but an appropriate match was found. Using the GCP 
to run nf-core/Sarek allowed for flexible storage of large 
quantities of data and access to the processing power that 
would otherwise be unavailable. For each cell line, annotated 
variants were generated covering the whole genome, for both 
PCR and PCR-free library preps. Joint germline variants were 
also generated using all cell line sequencing data. Newly 
discovered variants will be validated by digital PCR. 
Conclusions: We expanded the analysis of the original WHO 
IS to cover the whole genome, focusing on SVs. Since the 
original cell lines are available from NIBSC and each step of 
the bioinformatic analysis uses publicly available, easy-to-run 
workflows, the results generated can be reproduced and the 
methods used can be applied as a standard workflow for data 
analysis and future standards generation. 
 
Selected Solid Tumors Abstracts 
ST01. Mutational-Copy Number Variation Profile and 
Immunotherapy Drivers in Neuroendocrine Lung 
Carcinomas: PD-L1, Microsatellite Instability, DNA 
Mismatch Repair Genes Expression and Tumor 
Mutational Burden in a Series of 30 Cases  
N. Rodon1, C. Pubill1, Y. No1, E. Garcia2, E. Saigi2, X. Puig1,3 
1BIOPAT. Biopatologia Molecular SL. Grup Assistència., 
Barcelona, Spain; 2Servicio de Oncologia, SCIAS-Hospital de 
Barcelona, Grup Assistència., Barcelona, Spain; 3Histopat 
Laboratoris SL, Barcelona, Spain. 
 
Introduction: Immunotherapy, with treatments aimed at 
inhibiting immune checkpoints, has meant a paradigm shift in 
the therapeutic approach to solid neoplasms. The biomarkers 
postulated to indicate this type of treatment have been the 
PD-L1 expression, the presence of microsatellite instability (H-
MSI), loss of DNA mismatch repair gene (dMMR) expression, 
and tumor mutational burden (TMB), interpreted as the 
number of mutations detected per megabase of DNA 
analyzed (mut/Mb). In the current study, these 4 biomarkers 
as well as the mutational profile and copy number variation 
(CNV) status have been analyzed in a series of lung 
neuroendocrine carcinomas. Methods: A retrospective study 
was designed. Lung neuroendocrine neoplasms analyzed in 
our center between 2019 and June 2022 were included. The 
morphological and MMR expression diagnosis included the 
immunohistochemical study of TTF-1 (Novocastra), 
chromogranin (Cell Marque), synaptophysin (Cell Marque), 
INSM1 (Santa Cruz), PANK (Biolegend), PD-L1 (Roche), and 
MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 (BD Pharmingen). The 
molecular study was performed with 2 NGS panels: one for 
the analysis of alterations in 52 genes at DNA and RNA level 
(FOCUS, Thermo Fisher); and a second NGS panel for TMB 
analysis (Oncomine TML, Thermo Fisher). Mutations, CNV, 
and gene fusions were recorded. The microsatellite instability 
study was performed by PCR and fragment analysis of 13 
markers (TrueMark MSI Assay, Thermo Fisher). Results: 
Thirty lung neuroendocrine tumors were included (7.5% of all 
lung neoplasms studied in the indicated period): 27 small cell 
tumors and 3 large cell tumors. None were negative for 
synaptophysin and chromogranin simultaneously. Only 3 
tumors showed PD-L1 expression (20%, 20%, and 5%); all of 
them presented a combined pattern of squamous cell 
carcinoma and TMB values of 11, 4, and 7 mut/Mb, 
respectively. In 2 of these cases neither mutation nor CNV 
was detected. The third one showed a TP53 mutation and 
MYCL amplification. In the global series, non-informative NGS 
panel results were obtained in 1 case due to the presence of 
deamination in the DNA extracted. Mutations in TP53, RB1, 
HNF1A, NOTCH1, PTEN, ARID1A, and STK11 genes were 
detected in 72.4%, 17.2%, 10.3%, 10.3%, 6.9%, 6.9%, and 
6.9% of patients, respectively. Mutations in 13 more genes 
were detected with a frequency of less than 4%. Ten patients 
(34,5%) showed a CNV involving MYC, RICTOR, TERT, 
PIK3CA, PDGFRA, KIT, and MYCL genes. No alteration was 
detected at RNA level. None of the analyzed tumors 
presented H-MSI or dMMR. The range of TMB values was 
from 0 to 18.8 mut/Mb with a mean of 7.8 mut/Mb. Eleven 
cases (37.9%) presented a TMB ≥ 10 mut/Mb. Conclusions: 
In this series of lung neuroendocrine carcinomas, TP53 and 
RB1 mutations were the most prevalent. No tumors showed 
H-MSI or dMMR. Only 3 expressed PD-L1. TMB can predict a 
potential response to immunotherapy in 38% of the cases 
analyzed.  
 
S45
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
ST02. Next-Generation Sequencing-Guided Therapy for 
BRAF V600E Mutant Glioblastoma Results in Stable 
Disease  
S. Bannykh, J. Hu, C. Patil, E. Vail 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA. 
 
Introduction: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an 
aggressive infiltrative brain tumor with poor outcome and only 
a 14-month overall survival. The molecular makeup varies for 
individual tumors. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) offers a 
multiplex analysis of mutations in hundreds of genes, yet the 
clinical applicability of these findings is limited. Here we report 
a case of a GBM with sarcomatoid morphology and a 
presence of BRAF V600E mutation. The tumor was treated 
with BRAF-targeted therapy, resulting in a stable disease. 
Methods: Tissue diagnosis was obtained using WHO (2021) 
criteria using routine histology of formalin-fixed, paraffin-
embedded (FFPE) tissue supplemented by 
immunohistochemical studies. Genomic DNA and RNA were 
extracted from macro-dissected areas on FFPE tissue 
sections. Concurrent DNA and RNA libraries were constructed 
using Oncomine Comprehensive Plus Assay library 
preparation kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, US) and 
the library pools were sequenced using the Ion GeneStudio 
S5 Prime system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sequencing 
data were analyzed by Ion Reporter Software v5.18 and in-
house-developed bioinformatic pipelines. The assay detects 
single nucleotide variants, small insertion-deletions, copy 
number variants, and select fusions from more than 500 
genes and accurately assesses tumor mutation burden and 
microsatellite instability. Results: The patient presented with 
worsening headaches, confusion, altered mental status, and 
ataxia on June 12, 2021. Imaging revealed centrally necrotic 
enhancing 6.4 cm right frontal mass. Near complete resection 
was obtained. Pathology revealed an isocitrate 
dehydrogenase 1/2-wild-type GBM. NGS revealed SMARCB1 
p.R40 (75.9%), TERT promoter mutation (44.4%), and BRAF 
p.V600E (28.6%). Tumor mutation burden was 5 muts/Mb 
(intermediate), and there was no PD-L1 expression by 
immunohistochemistry. O6-methylguanine-
DNA methyltransferase promoter showed presence of 
methylation. The patient underwent a standard post-operative 
treatment with radiation and 12 cycles of temozolomide. 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain from October 
6, 2022, showed increased enhancement along cerebellum 
(presumed recurrence). Given the presence of BRAF V600E 
mutation, the patient was started on dabrafenib 150mg BID 
and trametinib 2mg (10/07/2022). Follow-up MRIs from 
November 3, 2022, and January 5, 2023, showed no evidence 
of progression and slight decrease in tumor’s size. 
Conclusions: NGS can provide useful data for successful 
targeted therapy of patients with GBM. 
 
ST03. Diagnosis of Metastatic SHH-Activated 
Medulloblastoma in Adult via Bone Biopsy and Next-
Generation Sequencing  
S. Bannykh, B. Balzer, X. Fan, E. Vail, J. Hu 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA. 
 
Introduction: Establishing a primary site for a bony 
metastasis of tumor of unknown origin relies on multiple 
modalities, including demographics, PET scan, histology, and 
immunohistochemistry. Commonly, advanced clinical stage 
dictates the need for targeted therapy. Here we report a case 
of SHH-activated medulloblastoma metastatic to bone, 
diagnosed through next-generation sequencing (NGS). 
Methods: Tissue diagnosis was rendered based on WHO 
(2021) criteria using routine histology of formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue supplemented by 
immunohistochemical studies. Genomic DNA and RNA were 
extracted from macro-dissected areas on FFPE tissue 
sections. Concurrent DNA and RNA libraries were constructed 
using Oncomine Comprehensive Plus Assay library 
preparation kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, US) and 
the library pools were sequenced using the Ion GeneStudio 
S5 Prime system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sequencing 
data were analyzed by Ion Reporter Software v5.18 and in-
house-developed bioinformatic pipelines. The assay detects 
single nucleotide variants, small insertion-deletions, copy 
number variants, and select fusions from more than 500 
genes. Results: Fifty-one-year-old woman presented with 
headaches in October 2022. Brain MRI revealed a 3.8 x 3.2 
cm dural-based lesion along the paramedian transverse sinus 
with remodeling of the occipital bone. Subsequent MRI of the 
spine and whole-body PET CT from December 2022 showed 
more than 10 hypermetabolic lytic axial bony metastases. The 
differential diagnosis included metastatic carcinoma, 
melanoma, lymphoma, or histiocytosis. Stereotactic iliac 
biopsy on December 27, 2022, disclosed histologically and 
immunophenotypically poorly differentiated primitive small 
round cell malignant neoplasm, negative for histiocytic 
markers, and also of a carcinoma, lymphoma, or melanoma. 
Neuroendocrine marker: Insulinoma Associated Protein 1, 
was strongly positive and Ki-67 was 45%. NGS demonstrated 
mutation pattern of SHH activated, TP53-wild-type 
medulloblastoma. The mutations included: PTCH1 splice site 
alteration chr9:g.98268688C>A NM_000264.3:c.394+1G>T 
(allele frequency (AF) of 84%), PIK3CA p.E545K (AF 40%), 
MYCN p.P44L (AF 42%), KDM6A p.L981Nfs*17 (AF 40%), 
S46
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
and TERT promoter site alteration (AF 36%). The findings 
were therefore consistent with metastatic medulloblastoma. 
Clinically, there was no evidence of Gorlin syndrome. 
Mutations in Patched (PTCH) with loss of protein function 
release tonic inhibition of Smoothened (SMO), which in turn 
result in abnormal activation of the Hedgehog pathway. Potent 
inhibitor of SMO can suppress proliferation of cells of 
medulloblastoma, driven by SHH pathway activation. 
Vismodegib, an inhibitor of SMO, was therefore administered 
in combination with temozolomide. Conclusions: NGS can 
play a pivotal role in providing a definitive diagnosis and guide 
therapeutic efforts in central nervous system tumors. 
 
ST04. Using Chromosome Microarray to Resolve Difficult 
ERBB2 FISH Results: Example Cases  
J. Dong 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Pathology, Galveston, 
TX. 
 
Introduction: Erb-b2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (ERBB2) 
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) assay is routinely used 
to measure ERBB2 DNA copy numbers in 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) equivocal (2+) tumor samples. 
ERBB2 IHC and FISH results have prognostic and predictive 
values for breast, gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma (GEA), 
and other cancers. FISH results can be complicated by 
equivocal ERBB2 status and by intra- and inter-tumor genetic 
heterogeneity. This study examined the use of whole-genome 
chromosome microarray (CMA) to help resolve difficult 
ERBB2 results. Methods: FISH assay was conducted by 
using PathVysion HER-2 DNA Probe Kit (Abbott Laboratories) 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. ERBB2 and 
chromosome enumeration probe 17 (CEP17) signals were 
observed under a fluorescent microscope (CytoVision, Leica 
Biosystems Inc). ERBB2 status was evaluated by the most 
updated ASCO/CAP guidelines for breast and GEA cancers. 
Cases with challenging ERBB2 FISH results were examined 
by CMA using OncoScan CNV Assay Kit (Affymetrix). A copy 
number variant profile was generated and analyzed using 
Chromosomal Analysis Suite (ChAS, Affymetrix). Results: 
CMA detected cases with false ERBB2 FISH signal due to 
larger size of FISH probe covering amplified flanking 
sequences of ERBB2 and clonal differences of primary and 
metastatic samples from the same patients with different 
ERBB2 results. Conclusions: CMA can help us understand 
and resolve challenging ERBB2 results. Further studies are 
warranted to examine the utility of CMA in facilitating ERBB2 
testing, especially in cases with unusual results. 
 
ST05. Validation and Clinical Implementation of a Pan-
Cancer Circulating Tumor DNA-based Next-Generation 
Sequencing Assay (Selected for Oral Presentation, O-01-
01)  
G. Zheng, A. Schneider, M. Campion 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN. 
 
Introduction: Cell-free tumor DNA (ctDNA) enables non-
invasive diagnostic assays for precision medicine, and it could 
provide similar comprehensive molecular mutation profile 
information as tumor tissue biopsies. In this study, we 
validated and clinically implemented a 33-gene Pan-Cancer 
ctDNA next-generation sequencing (NGS) assay (PGDx Elio 
Plasma resolve [EPR] assay). Methods: In the validation 
study, 40 clinical plasma samples, 10 healthy donor plasma 
samples, 20 contrived samples using DNA derived from 
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor tissue, and 3 
commercial reference materials were used. CfDNA was 
extracted from whole blood using KingFisher Presto Nimbus 
automated platform. Ten to 40 ng of cfDNA was used to 
prepare genomic libraries using the EPR kit. The sequencing 
was performed on the Illumina Nextseq. PGDx EPR software 
performs alignment, variant calling, and filtering. The 
alterations detected included single nucleotide variants, small 
insertions and deletions (indels), amplifications, microsatellite 
instability (MSI) status, and translocations. Detected DNA 
variants were compared to orthogonal NGS testing results if 
available, and digital droplet PCR for amplifications or 2-Step 
PCR for SNVs and indels were used as confirmation tests. 
Clinical experience after test implementation was 
summarized, focusing on clinical actionability. Results: Both 
within-run and between-run reproducibility studies showed 
>99% concordance across different types of alterations. The 
assay showed a limit of detection of at least 0.5% variant 
allele frequency (VAF) for hotspot SNVs, and 1% for non-
hotspot SNVs; 2.5% for indels, 1.2- to 1.6-fold change for 
gene amplification depending on specific genes and the 
number of single nucleotide polymorphisms available to 
assess allelic imbalance, 2% for MSI status detection, and 2 
supporting reads for fusion detection. Hotspot mutation 
reportable range can be as low as 0.1% with positive 
prediction value of 100% between 0.1% to 0.5% VAF. In 
accuracy study, sensitivity for SNVs and indels was 97% 
(97/100) and specificity was 100% (123/123), and overall 
concordance was 99% (220/223). Concordance for gene 
amplification was 95% (20/21), fusions 100% (17/17), and 
MSI status 88% (30/34). Clinically the assay shows an 
average turnaround time of 7 to 8 days and 100% success 
rate. A total of 52.5% of clinical samples were from patients 
with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer, 62% of which had 
S47
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
tier 1 variants detected, and 18% with tier 2. Overall, 57.5% of 
cases showed either tier 1 or tier 2 variants detected (Fig. 1). 
Conclusions: This 33-gene ctDNA NGS assay shows high 
reproducibility, accuracy, and sensitivity, which enable the 
assay to be applied clinically in cancer mutation profiling to aid 
clinical decision making for oncology patients. In addition, our 
clinical experience strongly supports clinical feasibility and 
utility of ctDNA panels for advanced cancer patients. 
 
Figure 1. Summary of clinical actionability 
Summary of clinical actionability of the MCLBP (Mayo 
Complete Liquid Biopsy Panel) with real-world data. 
 
ST06. Multiple Alterations of TP53 Predict Worse Clinical 
Outcome for Oral Cavity Squamous Cell Carcinoma  
M. Afkhami1, N. Haghighi1, H. Ma1, A. Guerrero2, M. Telatar1, 
M. Gust1, T. Dyer1, H. Yew1, L. Chang1, T. Gernon3, R. 
Bakkar4, E. Massarelli2, E. Maghami3, D. Bell4, V. Villaflor2 
1City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Pathology, 
Molecular Pathology and Therapy Biomarker Division, Duarte, 
CA; 2City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical 
Oncology, Head and Neck Division, Duarte, CA; 3City of Hope 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Surgical Oncology, Head and 
Neck Division, Duarte, CA; 4City of Hope Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Pathology, Anatomic Pathology Division, 
Duarte, CA. 
 
Introduction: This study evaluated the prognostic 
significance of TP53 mutations and shedded light on the 
prognostic value of TERT promoter mutations and other 
genes exclusively in oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma 
(OCSCC). Methods: Retrospective review of 388 head and 
neck SCC from December 2017 to 2022 was performed. After 
exclusion of oropharynx and nasopharynx cases, 63 cases of 
OCSCC with available samples were identified. Tumor 
primary sites were 2 groups of tongue/floor of mouth versus 
other, which includes buccal mucosa, gingiva, and retromolar 
trigone. Thirty-three, 29, and 3 cases were sequenced, 
respectively, with Oncomine V3, TSO500, and whole-exome 
sequencing. PD-L1 22C3- CPS score by immunostains was 
evaluated in 61 cases. Biostatistical analysis was performed 
using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, US). Overall survival (OS) 
and disease-free survival (DFS) stratified by each factor of 
interest were examined using Kaplan-Meier curves and log-
rank test in the univariate analysis (2-sided at a significance 
level of 0.05). Hazard ratio for mortality risk and its 95% 
confidence interval (95% CI) were estimated using univariate 
Cox proportional hazards regression models. Results: Thirty-
six females and 27 males ranged from 19 to 83 years of age, 
with 55 patients at least 40; the median age of diagnosis was 
63. In all, 43/63 patients were still alive by the end of follow-
up. All cases were negative for human papillomavirus (HPV) 
either by p16 or HPV high-risk immunohistochemistry. Our 
univariate analysis showed that higher pN, ever smoking, and 
double/triple TP53 mutations were associated with worse OS 
(all LR test p <0.04); higher PD-L1 expression was associated 
with better OS (LR p = 0.039). All-cause mortality risk (ACMR) 
was approximately 11 times (HR = 10.58, 95% CI = 2.14 to 
52.17) for pN = 3 vs. pN ≤1, 3 times for ever smoking vs. 
never smoking (HR = 3.35, 95% CI = 1.35 to 8.31), and 
double/triple TP53 mutations (HR = 2.87, 95% CI = 1.02 to 
8.07). Patients with at least 20% of PD-L1 expression had 
68% (HR = 0.32, 95% CI = 0.11 to 1.00) lower ACMR than 
those with <20% PD-L1 expression. No statistically significant 
association with ACMR was observed for other factors 
examined. Our data also showed that tongue/floor of mouth 
demonstrated better DFS- than other group (LR test p = 
0.002). The most common alterations were TP53, TERT PM, 
CDKN2A, HRAS, PIK3CA, NOTCH1, and CASP8 mutations. 
The most common amplifications found were FGF19, FGF3, 
CCND1, EGFR, and IGF1R. TERT PM was positive in 68.3% 
(43/63), with equal -124 and -146 distribution. TP53 was 
positive in 84.1% (53/63) mainly in exon 4 to 8 (Fig. 1), with 
12/53 having double or triple mutations. Conclusions: Other 
than TP53 double or triple mutations, other gene 
alterations did not show any clinically significant ACMR or 
DFS including TERT PM. Limitations of this study include 
small size of the cohort and relatively short duration of follow-
up. The predictive roles of more than 1 TP53 are under further 
investigation for a larger cohort with multivariant analysis and 
functional studies. 
 
 
Figure 1. TP53 mutation distribution. 
 
S48
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
ST07. SARS-CoV-2 Humoral Immunity in a Cohort of 
Patients with Head and Neck Carcinoma  
L.G. Marutescu1,2, A.G. Enea5,4, E. Dragu1,2, M. Popa2, D.A. 
Costea1, M. Neculae1, C.M. Chifiriuc1,2, E. Codrici6, S.G.-V. 
Bertesteanu5,4, V. Ristoiu2,3, V. Lazar1,3, R. Grigore5,4, P. 
Ancuta7,8,  
1University of Bucharest, Department of Botanics and 
Microbiology - Faculty of Biology, Bucharest, Romania; 
2University of Bucharest, Department of Anatomy, Animal 
Physiology and Biophysics - Faculty of Biology, Bucharest, 
Romania; 3University of Bucharest, Institute of Research, 
Bucharest, Romania; 4Coltea Clinical Hospital, Ent 
Department, Bucharest, Romania; 5Carol Davila University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Coltea Clinical Hospital - Ent 
Department, Bucharest, Romania; 6Victor Babes, National 
institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania; 7Université de 
Montréal, Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier de 
l’Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada; 8Université de 
Montréal, Montréal, Département de microbiologie, 
infectiologie et immunologie, Faculté de médecine, Montreal, 
Canada. 
 
Introduction: The COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-
CoV-2 infection was associated with increased mortality in 
relationship with aging and comorbidities. The duration of 
natural and vaccine-induced immunity was largely studied in 
the general population, but investigations in cancer patients 
remain scarce. Here, we aimed to monitor the humoral 
immunity upon SARS-CoV-2 infection or vaccination in 
patients with head and neck cancer (HNC) recruited at Colțea 
Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. Methods: Peripheral blood 
was collected from HNC participants (n = 50; 44 males, 6 
females; median age: 65 years; body mass index [BMI]: 25 
kg/m2), convalescent (n = 17; mild/moderate symptoms) or 
vaccinated (n = 34; Pfizer/Moderna RNA or 
AstraZeneca/Johnson&Johnson adenoviral vector vaccine), 
and non-cancer controls (n = 14; 5 males, 9 females) between 
August 2021 and January 2022. The anti-Spike (S1, S2), anti-
receptor binding (RBD) and anti-nucleocapsid (NC) IgG 
antibodies (Abs) were detected in the plasma using 
MILLIPLEX (EMD Millipore) technology; the results were 
expressed by the average fluorescence intensity parameter. 
Total and memory (CD27+) CD19+ B-cells producing SARS-
CoV-2-specific Abs of IgM, IgG, or IgA isotype were identified 
by polychromatic flow cytometry analysis of peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells ex vivo, using the SARS-CoV-2 RBD B-
cells kit (Miltenyi Biotec). Finally, a panel of 25 cytokines was 
quantified using the MILLIPLEX technology. The Mann-
Whitney test and the Spearman correlation model were used 
for statistical analysis. Results: Based on vaccination status, 
SARS-CoV-2 PCR, and plasma NC Abs, participants were 
classified in vaccinated, hybrid immunity, and convalescent 
groups similar in age, BMI, and time since immunization. The 
S1, S2, and RBD Abs were detected in the majority of 
participants up to 300 days post-immunization, whereas NC 
Abs were only detected in convalescent/hybrid immunity 
groups. SARS-CoV-2 Abs levels were significantly higher in 
convalescent/hybrid versus vaccinated HNC, but did not differ 
between HNC and controls, and did not correlate with the time 
since infection, age, or BMI. RBD-specific B-cells exhibited 
similar frequencies in HNC versus controls and 
vaccinated versus convalescent/hybrid immunity HNC, but 
positively correlated with plasma SARS-CoV-2 Abs levels and 
time since infection. RBD-specific B-cells were enriched in 
cells with a memory CD27+ phenotype and IgG/IgA isotype, 
with no differences between 
vaccinated versus convalescent/hybrid immunity HNC. Finally, 
the frequency of RBD-specific B-cells negatively correlated 
with plasma levels of IL-6, a marker of systemic inflammation. 
Conclusions: Our results reveal that HNC patients mount 
efficient humoral memory responses upon SARS-CoV-2 
vaccination or natural infection. These results also point to the 
deleterious effects of systemic inflammation on the quality of 
antiviral responses. Subsequent longitudinal studies will 
inform on the duration/quality of SARS-CoV-2 humoral 
immunity in HNC patients. 
 
ST08. Secretogranin II Could Be a Biological Indicator and 
Potential Target for Bladder Cancer  
Q.-X. Yu1, D.-X. Li2, L.-X. Ye1, H.-H. Zheng1 
1Taizhou Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Department 
of Pathology, Taizhou, China; 2West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Department of Urology, Chengdu, China. 
 
Introduction: Secretogranin II (SCG2) is involved in the 
development of many cancers. However, the function of 
SCG2 in bladder cancer (BC) remains unclear. This study 
aimed to clarify the role of SCG2 in BC through bioinformatics 
analysis and immunohistochemical analysis. Methods: The 
data of bioinformatics analysis were downloaded from online 
database and analyzed by R version 3.6.3 and relative 
packages. Immunohistochemical staining (IHC) was 
performed in the samples from our institution with the 
approval of the Institutional Ethics Committee (K20220830). 
Results: The expression of SCG2 in BC tissues was 
significantly higher than that in adjacent tissues according to 
the results of TCGA dataset and IHC data. Patients in the 
high-SCG2 expression group were statistically associated with 
poor overall survival in TCGA dataset, GSE31684 dataset, 
and IHC data. Furthermore, SCG2 had independently 
prognostic value for patients with BC in TCGA dataset and 
IHC data. The function analysis identified that SCG2 was 
involved in immune-related and metabolism-related pathways. 
There was a significant positive correlation between SCG2 
S49
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
expression and some immune checkpoints, such as CD274, 
PDCD1, and CTLA4. Referring to the results of the 
CIBERSORT algorithm, the low-SCG2 expression group 
contained a higher proportion of B-plasma cell, CD4+T naïve 
cell, and T follicular helper cell infiltration. Meanwhile, SCG2 
expression was positively correlated with tumor mutation 
burden score and stemness index, suggesting that patients 
with low-SCG2 expression were more likely to benefit from 
immunotherapy. In the TIDE algorithm, compared with the 
high-SCG2 expression group, the low-SCG2 expression 
group had a significantly lower TIDE score. Meanwhile, 
responders to immunotherapy had statistically lower SCG2 
expression than no-responders. Patients in the high SCG2 
expression group were sensitive to docetaxel 
and gemcitabine, according to the results of the “pRRophetic” 
algorithm. Conclusions: According to the results of 
bioinformatics and IHC analyses, SCG2 can predict the 
prognosis, immunotherapy, and chemotherapy response of 
BC patients, indicating that SCG2 is a biomarker and target of 
BC. 
 
ST09. Allele-Specific CDKN2A/B Loss Worsens Overall 
Survival in IDH-Mutant Astrocytomas  
R.A. Hickman1,2, E. Gedvilaite1, R. Ptashkin3, R. Cimera1, C. 
Vanderbilt1, J. Benhamida1, T. Fahy4, R. Young4, A. Miller5, I. 
Mellinghoff5, M. Rosenblum1, M. Ladanyi1, M. Arcila1, R. 
Brannon1, Y. Zhang1, T. Bale1 
1Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Pathology, New 
York, NY; 2Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the 
Advancement of Military Medicine, Surgery and Pathology, 
Bethesda, MD; 3C2i Genomics, New York, NY; 4Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Radiology, New York, NY; 
5Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Neurology, NY. 
 
Introduction: IDH-mutant gliomas represent the most 
common glioma subtype in patients younger than 50 years of 
age. The World Health Organization Classification for central 
nervous system tumors recommends that IDH-mutant 
astrocytomas with homozygous deletion (HOMDEL) of 
CDKN2A/B be designated as grade 4 irrespective of histologic 
appearance; however, there is no recommended testing 
method for determining HOMDEL, and current guidelines do 
not include other mechanisms of CDKN2A/B inactivation. 
Using an FDA-authorized next-generation sequencing 
pipeline, we examined whether mutations and somatic copy 
number alterations (SCNA) of CDKN2A/B could influence 
overall survival (OS) and whether allele-specific copy number 
alterations (ASCNA) of CDKN2A/B might better stratify OS. 
Methods: Matched tumor-normal targeted sequencing of all 
exons and select introns of 341 to 505 genes was performed 
using MSK-IMPACT of 382 IDH-mutant astrocytomas. Point 
mutations and indels were detected using MuTect, Vardict 
and SomaticIndelDetector. SCNA were determined using 
loess normalized sequence coverage of targeted regions in 
each tumor sample compared with a standard diploid 
nontumor sample (SCNA analysis). We used the FACETS 
algorithm (Fraction and Allele-Specific Copy Number 
Estimates from Tumor Sequencing), which uses a single 
nucleotide polymorphism-based approach for allele 
discrimination, to perform ASCNA across genomic targets. 
Results: Somatic copy loss of CDKN2A/B was the most 
frequent SCNA in IDH-mutant astrocytomas and conferred 
shorter OS than copy neutral samples (13.6% [n = 52], 
median OS: 1.9 versus 12.6 years, P <0.01). In samples 
considered CDKN2A/B copy neutral by SCNA analysis, 24% 
(n = 78) had a CDKN2A/B ASCNA by FACETS, which 
conferred worse OS than otherwise (median OS: 7.0 vs. 15.4 
years, P = 0.01). FACETS assessment of CDKN2A/B 
revealed intermediate OS between heterozygous loss 
(HETLOSS, median survival: 6.9 years, n = 89), 
HOMDEL/copy neutral loss of heterozygosity (median 
survival: 2.3 years, P = 0.02, n = 37), and neutral states 
(median survival: 15.4 years, P <0.01, n = 256). In samples 
with CDKN2A/B HETLOSS, additional gains in the related RB 
pathway genes, CCND2 and/or CDK4, conferred worse OS 
than otherwise (median OS: 1.4 years, P = 0.01). Finally, 12 
samples, all of which considered neutral by SCNA analysis, 
harbored a CDKN2A/B somatic mutation, which was 
associated with shorter OS than wild-type samples (1.6 vs. 
11.8 years, P <0.01). No mutation was recurrent; however, 
most were considered oncogenic or likely oncogenic by 
OncoKB (n = 7) and included single nucleotide variants, 
truncating variants, and in-frame deletions. Five of these 
samples were CDKN2A/B HETLOSS and 2 had copy neutral 
loss of heterozygosity. Conclusions: Other CDKN2A/B 
genetic alterations beyond HOMDEL associate with shortened 
OS. Comprehensive analysis of CDKN2A/B genetic 
alterations and relevant RB pathway genes using tumor-
matched normal sequencing data allows for further 
prognostication of IDH-mutant astrocytomas beyond current 
guidelines. 
 
 
 
S50
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
ST10. Adhesion-Regulating Molecule 1 (ADRM1) Can Be a 
Potential Biomarker and Target for Bladder Cancer  
Q.-X. Yu1, D.-X. Li2, Y.-Q. Guo1, H.-H. Zheng1 
1Taizhou Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Department 
of Pathology, Taizhou, China; 2West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Department of Urology, Institute of Urology, 
Chengdu, China. 
 
Introduction: Adhesion-regulating molecule 1 (ADRM1) can 
regulate tumor development. However, the function of ADRM1 
in bladder cancer (BC) remains unclear. We wanted to identify 
the role of ADRM1 in BC by bioinformatic analysis and 
immunohistochemical analysis (IHC). Methods: R version 
3.6.3 and relative packages were used to analyze the data 
from the online database and IHC data with the approval of 
the Institutional Ethics Committee (K20220830). Results: In 
paired and unpaired comparisons, the expression of ADRM1 
in BC tissues was significantly higher than that in adjacent 
tissues. Patients with high ADRM1 expression had statistically 
worse overall survival than those with low ADRM1 expression. 
Functional analysis enriched immune-related pathways. There 
was a significant positive correlation between 
ADRM1 expression and some important immune checkpoints. 
Samples with high ADRM1 expression contained a 
significantly higher proportion of CD8+ T-cells and 
macrophage infiltration, and had significantly higher tumor 
mutation burden scores and stemness indices. Patients with 
low ADRM1 expression were sensitive to cisplatin, docetaxel, 
vinblastine, mitomycin C, and methotrexate. Conclusions: 
Based on the results of bioinformation and IHC 
analyses, ADRM1 had prognostic value in BC patients and 
could predict immunotherapy and chemotherapy responses, 
indicating that it is a biomarker and target of BC. 
 
ST11. Role of GREM1 in Bladder Cancer: A Biological 
Indicator and Potential Target  
Q.-X. Yu1, D.-X. Li2, L.-X. Ye1, H.-H. Zheng1 
1Taizhou Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Department 
of Pathology, Taizhou, China; 2West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Department of Urology, Institute of Urology, 
Chengdu, China. 
 
Introduction: Gremlin 1 (GREM1), a secreted protein, can 
regulate the development of many cancers. However, no 
studies have revealed the role of GREM1 in bladder cancer 
(BC). We aimed to identify the function of GREM1 in BC. 
Methods: R version 3.6.3 and relative packages were used to 
analyze the data. Samples from our institution were assessed 
by immunohistochemical staining (IHC) with the approval of 
the Institutional Ethics Committee (K20220830). Results: 
GREM1 was highly expressed in BC tissues according to the 
TCGA and IHC data. GREM1 had significant prognostic value 
for patients with BC in the TCGA, GSE32584, GSE31684, and 
GSE32894 datasets. Our IHC data also indicated that GREM1 
could predict the prognosis of BC patients. GREM1 was 
involved in immune-related and metabolism-related pathways 
according to the results of functional analysis. In immune-
related analysis, compared with the low-GREM1 group, many 
immune checkpoints, including CD274, PDCD1, and CTLA4, 
were differentially expressed in the low- and high-GREM1 
groups. The low-GREM1 group had significantly higher T 
follicular helper cell and monocyte cell infiltration than the 
high-GREM1 group. Meanwhile, GREM1 expression was 
negatively associated with the stemness index. In the TIDE 
algorithm, 61.0% (119/195) of patients in the low-GREM1 
group were effective for immunotherapy, higher than 13.3% 
(26/195) in the high-GREM1 group. Patients in the high-
GREM1 group were sensitive to cisplatin, 
docetaxel, gemcitabine, and vinblastine. Conclusions: 
GREM1 can predict the prognosis, immunotherapy, and 
chemotherapy responses of BC patients, indicating that it may 
be a biomarker and target of BC. 
 
ST12. Identification of a Cross-Talk between the 
MEK5/ERK5 and the Hedgehog/GLI Pathways in 
Melanoma  
I. Tusa1, A. Tubita1, A. Menconi1, S. Gagliardi2, M. Lulli1, B. 
Stecca2, E. Rovida1 
1University of Florence, Department of Experimental and 
Clinical Biomedical Sciences, Florence, Italy; 2ISPRO, Core 
Research Laboratory - Institute for Cancer Research and 
Prevention (ISPRO), Florence, Italy, Florence, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Malignant melanoma is among the most 
aggressive cancers, and its incidence is increasing worldwide. 
Available treatments for melanoma, especially in its 
intermediate or advanced stages, are unsatisfactory. We have 
recently reported that the MAPK ERK5 is required for the 
Hedgehog/GLI (HH/GLI)-dependent melanoma cell 
proliferation and that GLI1, the major downstream effector of 
HH/GLI signaling, positively regulates ERK5 expression by 
binding to a functional non-canonical GLI consensus 
sequence at the ERK5 promoter. We have also observed that 
activation of the HH/GLI pathway induces a marked increase 
of the upstream kinase MEK5, pointing to an additional 
HH/GLI-dependent mechanism that could contribute to the 
activation of the ERK5 pathway in melanoma. Additionally, 
since the HH/GLI pathway may be activated in a non-
canonical way by the MAPK ERK1/2, we also explored 
whether ERK5 positively regulates the HH/GLI signaling. 
Methods: Melanoma cell lines used: SSM2c (wild-type B-
RAF) and A375 (BRAF V600E). Activation of the HH/GLI 
pathway was obtained by silencing the negative regulator 
S51
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
PATCH1 using lentiviral vectors expressing a specific short 
hairpin RNA (shRNA), whereas genetic inhibition of GLI1 or 
ERK5 was achieved using lentiviral vectors expressing GLI1- 
or ERK5-targeting shRNA. Luciferase assay using the GLI-
binding site luciferase reporter was performed to evaluate 
GLI1 transcriptional activity. A constitutively active form of 
MEK5 (MEK5DD) was used to induce ERK5 activation. 
Results: Activation of the HH/GLI pathway by genetic 
inhibition of PTCH1 increased the expression and 
phosphorylation of MEK5. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
experiments performed in SSM2c, in which the HH/GLI 
pathway is constitutively active, showed that GLI1 silencing 
determined a reduction of RNA Polymerase Type II 
recruitment at and of GLI1 binding to a functional non-
canonical GLI consensus sequence at MAP2K5 promoter, the 
gene encoding for MEK5 protein. In further support of a 
positive regulation of MAP2K5 by GLI1 transcription factor, 
GLI1 silencing resulted in the reduction of MAP2K5 mRNA. To 
test whether ERK5 regulates the expression of components of 
the HH/GLI pathway, we evaluated the mRNA and protein 
expression levels of GLI transcription factors in melanoma 
cells following genetic inhibition of ERK5. ERK5 knockdown 
reduced the amount of GLI1 and GLI2 mRNA and protein. 
Moreover, MEK5DD overexpression further increased 
transcriptional activity of the HH-GLI signaling, whereas ERK5 
silencing reversed this effect. These results confirmed that 
ERK5 positively regulates the HH/GLI signaling. Consistently, 
MEK5DD overexpression increased GLI1 protein level. 
Conclusions: These findings highlight the existence of a 
consistent bidirectional cross-talk between the ERK5/MEK5 
and the HH/GLI pathways. Regarding a possible translational 
impact of this study, combined inhibition of the 2 pathways 
may prevent resistance mechanisms frequently observed 
upon monotherapy in melanoma. 
 
ST13. Withdrawn 
 
ST14. A Multisite Study of Molecular Profiles of Brain 
Metastasis in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer  
M. Kokabee1, Y.-R. Wuu4, M. Vojnic2, R.S.D’Amico3, A.G. 
Wernicke4, M. Harshan1 
1Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at 
Hofstra/Northwell, Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine at Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, NY; 2Donald and 
Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, 
Department of Medical Oncology, Northwell Health Cancer 
Institute at MEETH, New York, NY; 3Donald and Barbara 
Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Department 
of Neurosurgery at Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, NY; 
4Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at 
Hofstra/Northwell, Department of Radiation Medicine at Lenox 
Hill Hospital, New York, NY. 
 
Introduction: Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer death 
globally. Despite advances in therapies, up to 50% of brain 
metastases (BrM) will originate from lung cancer. Advances in 
sequencing have improved outcomes for non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC), with targetable alterations identified in 
genes such as EGFR, BRAF, MET, RET, ROS1, NTRK, and 
ALK. Programmed death-ligand receptor 1 (PD-L1) tumor 
proportion score (TPS) ≥50 allows for chemotherapy-free 
options in the first-line setting, with several immune 
checkpoint inhibitors approved. High tumor mutation burden 
(TMB) (>10 mutations/Mb) predicts improved response to 
immunotherapy. Despite these advances, there are limited 
data on molecular profiles of BrM from NSCLC. This report 
presents molecular findings from our database and provides a 
foundation for future studies aimed at improving treatment and 
outcomes for these patients. Methods: Northwell Health’s 
pathology and clinical systems were queried for NSCLC 
patients with BrM who underwent neurosurgical resection 
between 2011 and 2022. Tumor molecular profiles were 
reviewed. PD-L1 expression testing for BrM NSCLC began in 
2015, and detailed lung cancer panel testing in 2020. Data 
were entered in cBioPortal, which uses a one-sided Fisher's 
Exact Test to assess if observed events are random or due to 
biological phenomena. cBioPortal also uses the Log2 Odds 
Ratio to assess the direction of association. Results: A total 
of 149 cases of NSCLC with BrM were identified across 5 
hospitals. Of these, 124 (83%) were adenocarcinomas, 17 
(11.5%) were squamous cell carcinomas (SCC), 7 (4.7%) 
were NSCLC NOS or poorly differentiated, and 1 (0.7%) was 
sarcomatoid carcinoma (Fig. 2). Median age at diagnosis of 
BrM was 65.2 years for females (53%) and 66.3 years for 
males (47%). Among patients with SCC, 5 were females 
(29%) and 12 were males (71%) with mean age at diagnosis 
S52
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
of BrM 70 years and 62.5 years, respectively. PD-L1 
expression was tested in 69% of cases, of which 59% were 
positive (TPS ≥1). Of these, 30% had high PD-L1 expression 
(TPS ≥50). TP53 mutations were identified in 81% of 63 
tested samples, KRAS in 52% of 80 tested, EGFR in 21% of 
85 tested, and ALK rearrangements in 2.6% of 76 tested. No 
RET, NTRK, or ROS1 fusions were found. In the SCC 
subgroup, TP53 mutations were found in 100% of 3 tested, 
EGFR in 67% of 3 tested, ALK rearrangements in 34% of 3 
tested, and no RET, NTRK, or ROS1 fusions were found. The 
most frequent KRAS alteration was G12C (20/80), followed by 
G12V (6/80). In EGFR mutated tumors, E746-A750del was 
present in 5/85 tested tumors. Mutual expression of genes 
was calculated, and EGFR and KRAS were mutually 
exclusive (p-Value <0.001 and Log 2 Odds ≤3). 
Conclusions: Identification of actionable tumor drivers is 
important both for prognosis and treatment of patients with 
BrM. Our molecular profile database may serve as a major 
step in identification of BrM-specific drivers, which may lead to 
better understanding of BrM biology and consequently 
improvement in therapeutic strategies. 
Figure 1. Oncoprint 
Detailed Oncoprint of cases with molecular alteration. 
 
Figure 2. PD-L1 and TMB 
Detailed PD-L1 expression and correlation with TMB. 
 
 
ST15. Clinical Significance of IDH Mutations and MGMT 
Promoter Methylation among WHO Classified CNS 
Tumors in Major Tertiary Care Unit of Pakistan  
Z. Ansar Ahmed, S. Naz, A. Ujala, T. Moatter 
Aga Khan University, Pathology and Lab Medicine Molecular 
Pathology section, Karachi, Pakistan. 
 
Introduction: In the revised World Health Organization 
(WHO) classification of tumors of the central nervous system 
(CNS), molecular genetic alterations have been incorporated 
into the classic histology of primary brain tumors (PBT), 
including isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1 and IDH2) 
mutations and methylation of the O-6-methylguanine-DNA 
methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter. Glioblastoma, the most 
common malignant PBT, is characterised by aggressive 
behaviour and poor survival. Combined assessment of IDH1 
mutations and MGMT methylation status is suggested to 
predict survival in glioblastoma better than either IDH1 or 
MGMT alone. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification 
(MLPA) can detect the methylation status of the MGMT gene 
and identify the 4 most predominant IDH1 (R132H and 
R132C) and IDH2 (R172K and R172M) point mutations in 
glioma. Assessment of IDH mutation status in central nervous 
system tumors may assist in tumor classification and provide 
prognostically relevant information for subgroups of patients 
with diffuse gliomas. Methods: The Methylation Specific 
MLPA (MS-MLPA) assay has been used to detect IDH type 
1/type 2-point mutations and MGMT methylation. In the MS-
MLPA assay the sequence targeted by specific probes 
contains a restriction site for the HhaI endonuclease, able to 
recognize the unmethylated GCGC sequence on formalin-
fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections. Results: This study 
investigated 30 patients with primary brain tumors enrolled 
January 2021 to February 2022 at the Aga Khan University 
Hospital. The male-to-female ratio was 2:1. Mean age was 38 
years, and patients’ ages ranged from 19 to 70 years. 
Fourteen cases (47%) were positive for isocitrate 
dehydrogenase mutation. Among IDH Positive patients, 12 
cases exhibited IDH1 (P. R132H/P. R132C) point mutation 
and 2 cases exhibited IDH2 (R172K) point mutation. Sixteen 
(53%) of the cases had no mutation detected, whereas 
methylation of MGMT was detectable in 18 out of the 30 
patients examined (60%). According to the WHO classification 
of tumors of the CNS: Six patients had glioblastoma and 
MGMTp methylation (20%); 4 patients had glioblastoma but 
no MGMTp methylation (13.3%); 3 patients had glioma and 
MGMTp methylation (10%); 1 patient had glioma but no 
MGMTp methylation (3.3%); 9 patients had oligodendroglioma 
and MGMTp methylation (30%); 3 patients had 
oligodendroglioma but no MGMTp methylation (10%). 
S53
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
Conclusions: Practical implementation of routine molecular 
work-up of CNS tumors is compromised by impractically long 
turnaround times and economic restraints. Based on our 
results, we advocate a stepwise approach, providing fast-track 
results obtained by MLPA for first-line therapy decisions within 
a week after surgery. 
 
ST16. Diagnostic and Prognostic Value of Circulating 
Tumor Cells in Indian Women with Suspected Ovarian 
Cancer  
S. Singh 
Netaji Subhas Medical College and Hospital, Biochemistry, 
Patna, India. 
 
Introduction: “Liquid biopsy," where body fluids are screened 
for biomarkers, is gathering substantial research. We aimed to 
examine women with suspected ovarian cancer for the 
presence of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and study their role 
in prediction of chemoresistance and survival. Methods: 
Magnetic powder labeled monoclonal antibodies for epithelial 
cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM), Mucin 1 cell surface 
associated (MUC1), mucin 16, cell surface associated 
MUC16, or CA-125 were prepared according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol. Expression of 3 ovarian cancer-
related genes were detected in CTCs using multiplex reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (Multiplex RT-PCR). 
CTCs and serum CA-125 were measured in 100 patients with 
suspected ovarian cancer. Correlations with 
clinicopathological parameters and treatment were analyzed. 
Results: CTCs were detected in 18/70 (25.7%) of women 
with malignancy compared to 0/30 (0.0%) in those with benign 
gynecologic diseases (p = 0.001). The sensitivity and 
specificity of the CTC test for predicting a malignant histology 
in pelvic masses was 27.7% (95% CI:16.3%, 37.7%) and 
100% (95% CI: 85.8%, 100%), respectively. The number of 
CTCs correlated with stage of ovarian cancer (p = 0.030). The 
presence of EpCAM+CTC at primary diagnosis in ovarian 
cancer was found to be an independent predictor of a poor 
progression-free survival (HR,3.3; 95% CI, 1.3 to 8.4; p = 
0.010), overall survival (HR, 2.6; 95% CI,1.1 to 5.6; p = 
0.019), and resistance to chemotherapy (OR 8.6; 95% CI, 1.8 
to 43.7; p = 0.009). Conclusions: Expression of EpCAM+CTC 
in ovarian cancer predicts platinum resistance and poor 
prognosis. This information could be further utilized in 
investigating anti-EpCAM targeted therapies in ovarian 
cancer. 
 
ST17. A European Newcomer’s Experience with NGS-
Based Proficiency Testing Offered by the College of 
American Pathologists  
S. Laßmann1,2, S. Kral1, M. Kunz1, X. Ungefug1, M. Werner1,2 
1Institut für Klinische Pathologie, Universitätsklinikum 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; 2Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. 
 
Introduction: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) molecular 
pathology testing requires continuous quality assurance for 
the entire work process from pre-analytics, sample processing 
for NGS, and diagnostic bioinformatics to reporting. So far, 
few external quality assurance programs covering these 
aspects are offered in Europe. Here we report on our 
experiences with the College of American Pathologists (CAP, 
US) NGS-based proficiency testing (PT) programs in 2022. 
Methods: Enrollment was for 5 PT programs, including 3/5 
starting from a given DNA sample (“NGS-exome," “tumor 
mutation burden [TMB]," “copy number variant [CNV]”) and 
2/5 starting from own modified or provided fastq-files for 
diagnostic bioinformatics (“NGS-BV” exome, “NGSB” panel). 
PT programs were for certification (1/5 “NGS-exome”) or for 
educational challenge (4/5). For each PT program, testing 
was performed in 2 phases (spring and autumn 2022). The 
laboratory processes included hybrid-capture NGS panel 
(TSO500, Illumina) and/or whole-exome sequencing 
(SureSelect All Human Exon V8; Agilent). Diagnostic 
bioinformatics included commercial pipelines (TSO500 local 
app, Illumina; CLC Genomic Workbench, Qiagen) and/or 
custom in-house pipelines (for whole-exome sequencing 
[WES]). Results: Registration and enrollment for CAP PT, 
shipment schedules, and e-Lab Solution Suite (ELSS) 
results/interaction were professionally organized and readily 
usable. Initial delays of shipment due to unforeseen airport 
customs/tax issues were resolved. Subsequent to laboratory 
processing and/or diagnostic bioinformatics, all results were 
entered manually into ELSS. For the users' benefit, interim 
result evaluations and program statistics were provided after 
the first phase for potential laboratory adjustments and 
overview of the NGS community’s procedures: For the PT 
“NGS-exome” correct results were obtained in 92.5% and a 
specificity of 98.9%, resulting in a good overall assessment. 
For the “TMB” challenge (DNA provided: Seven mut/Mb) our 
results (9.5 and 9.6 mut/Mb by TSO500 and WES) and those 
of the NGS community (n = 50 participants: 8.39+/- 3.2 
mut/Mb) were higher. For the “CNV” challenge, 10/14 
alterations were correctly called (TSO500). For the “NGSB” 
challenge, all 16/16 alterations were correctly called 
(TSO500). For the “NGS-BV” challenge, interim results are 
currently awaited. Challenges experienced were 1) manual 
entering of detected variants into ELSS, 2) lack of hg19 and 
S54
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
hg38 flexibility for all PTs and 3) in part provision of old-type 
fastq-files. Opportunities experienced were 1) availability of 
several comprehensive NGS PT programs, 2) twice a year 
PTs with few samples, and 3) comprehensive results 
requested and evaluated (such as correct variant description). 
Conclusions: NGS-based proficiency testing by the CAP is a 
highly valuable quality assurance resource for European 
molecular pathology diagnostic laboratories for ensuring 
technical, bioinformatical, and interpretational validity, 
worthwhile for investing in CAP PT costs and own laboratory 
capacities. 
 
ST18. PIK3CA-Mutant Breast Cancer Metastatic Patient-
Derived Organoid Approach to Evaluate Alpelisib 
Treatment for Multiple Secondary Lesions  
M. Cioce1, S. Donzelli2, A. Sacconi3, F. Zanconato4, T. 
Daralioti5, G. Orlandi8, S. Di Martino7, V.M. Fazio1,14, G. 
Alessandrini9, S. Telera10, M. Carosi5, G. Ciliberto11, F. 
Goeman6, C. Botti12, S. Strano6, S. Piccolo4,13, G. Blandino2 
1Campus Biomedico University, Laboratory of Molecular 
Medicine and Biotechnology General and Clinical Pathology, 
Rome, Italy; 2IRCCS Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, 
Translational Oncology Research Unit, Rome, Italy; 3IRCCS 
Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Clinical Trial Center, 
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Unit, Rome, Italy; 4University 
of Padua, Department of Molecular Medicine, Padua, Italy; 
5IRCCS Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Department 
of Pathology, Rome, Italy; 6IRCCS Regina Elena National 
Cancer Institute, SAFU Unit, Rome, Italy; 7IRCCS Regina 
Elena National Cancer Institute, Department of Pathology, 
Biobank, Rome, Italy; 8IRCCS San Gallicano Dermatological 
Institute, Scientific Direction, Rome, Italy; 9IRCCS Regina 
Elena National Cancer Institute, Thoracic Surgery, Rome, 
Italy; 10IRCCS Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, 
Neurosurgery, Rome, Italy; 11IRCCS Regina Elena National 
Cancer Institute, Scientific Direction, Rome, Italy; 12IRCCS 
Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Breast Surgery, 
Rome, Italy; 13IFOM, the FIRC Institute of Molecular 
Oncology, Milan, Italy; 14National Research Council of Italy 
(CNR), Institute of Translational Pharmacology, Rome, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Breast cancer (BC) is a powerful example of 
the intra- and inter-patient heterogeneity of tumours; thus, 
there remain several grey areas in BC treatment approaches. 
This is especially true for advanced/metastatic disease 
(mBC). Organoid cultures are suitable models for studying the 
histological complexity and genetic heterogeneity of parental 
tumours and can be used to assess treatment strategies for 
challenging diseases such as mBC. Methods: BC-patient-
derived tumor-organoid setup; RNAseq, and drug treatment 
have been performed. Results: Based on the relevant impact 
of PIK3CA gene mutations on breast cancer progression and 
resistance to therapy, we assessed the efficacy of alpelisib, a 
specific PI3K-a inhibitor, on organoid cultures derived from 
multisite mBC samples carrying specific PIK3CA gene 
mutations. In this test case, metastasis-derived patient-
derived tumor organoids (PDTOs) were challenged with 
alpelisib to assess differential response in PIK3CAwt versus 
PIK3CAmut PDTOs. Conclusions: Here, we report a proof-
of-concept test case using organoid cultures from metastatic 
BC specimens to rapidly test drug sensitivity and molecular 
lesion-driven treatments. Furthermore, establishing specific 
conditions for the propagation of metastatic material is 
unprecedented. 
 
ST19. Withdrawn 
 
ST20. Development and Application of Absolute Digital 
PCR to Detect TERT Promoter Mutations in 180 Solid 
Tumor Samples  
S.Y. Kang, K.-M. Kim 
Samsung Medical Center, Department of Pathology and 
Translational Genomics, Seoul, South Korea. 
 
Introduction: Telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) 
promoter is mutated at high frequencies in multiple cancer 
types, most commonly at positions -124 and -146 (designated 
C228T and C250T, respectively). Detection of these 
mutations has been challenging because of the high GC 
content of this region (approximately 80%). High GC contents 
can result in formation of stable secondary structures, non-
specific binding of primers, and reduced amplification 
efficiency. We developed novel probe-based Absolute Q 
Digital PCR assays that specifically detect and quantify these 
2 hotspot mutations, and applied this technology in formalin-
fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor samples from 
advanced solid cancer patients. The QuantStudio Absolute Q 
Digital PCR platform partitions a sample into thousands of tiny 
droplets, each containing a single PCR reaction. This allows 
individual quantification of target DNA molecules and reduces 
the effects of PCR inhibition and bias in traditional PCR. 
Methods: Assay designs and running conditions were 
optimized with genomic DNAs obtained from cancer cell lines 
harboring C228T or C250T mutations. To develop a highly 
sensitive and specific assay, each hotspot mutation was 
independently optimized with many primer/probe designs, 
various amplification cycles, and diverse PCR modifiers. To 
validate the novel Absolute Digital PCR technique, 180 FFPE 
tumor samples with known mutation status by next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) were used. Results: Absolute Digital PCR 
and NGS-based deep sequencing showed a 100% 
concordance in detecting TERT mutations in 180 FFPE tumor 
samples. There were no false positives in FFPE samples. 
Absolute Digital PCR provided a highly sensitive and specific 
method for the detection and quantification of TERT promoter 
S55
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
mutations in FFPE tissues. Specifically, a melanoma sample 
with low tumor volume (<30%) and low (11.4%) variant allele 
frequency was effectively amplified and confirmed to harbor 
C250T mutation. Conclusions: Absolute Digital PCR is 
considered a gold standard method for the detection and 
absolute quantification of rare mutated alleles because of its 
high sensitivity, specificity, and robust quantitative 
performance characteristics. Because Absolute Digital PCR 
assays typically require only 1.5 hours of running time and 
little manipulation of the sample, development of a novel 
Absolute Digital PCR assay can be easily applied in the clinic. 
Despite the high GC content, this novel Absolute Digital PCR 
assay demonstrated a high specificity and sensitivity using 
DNA extracted from cancer cell lines and FFPE tissue 
samples from various solid tumor samples, even from 
advanced cancer patients with metastatic settings. In 
conclusion, we describe a novel Absolute Digital PCR assay 
that specifically detected C228T and C250T promoter 
mutations in the TERT gene. Our results raise the potential to 
become valuable assets in diagnosing and monitoring patients 
with advanced cancer possessing TERT promoter mutations. 
Detection of C250T TERT promoter mutation. 
Left panel: 2-dimensional Absolute Digital PCR plots 
showing the C250T TERT promoter assay. Right panel: 
Demonstration of specificity using cell line with TERT 
promoter mutations (C250T) and formalin-fixed, paraffin-
embedded (FFPE) samples. Cell line (C250T) and tumor 
FFPE samples were analyzed with real-time PCR to identify 
their TERT promoter region. Blue arrows indicate the 
homozygous cell line C250T mutation and melanoma 
sample with low tumor volume (<30%) and low (11.4%) 
variant allele frequency. 
 
 
ST21. Recurring FGF/FGFR and PAM Pathway Alterations 
as Potential Therapeutic Targets in Primary 
Neuroendocrine Carcinoma of the Breast  
N.E. Albayrak, B.L. Liu 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of 
Pathology, Molecular and Cell-Based Medicine, New York, 
NY. 
 
Introduction: Primary neuroendocrine breast carcinoma 
(NEBC) is an under-diagnosed subtype of breast cancer, 
which includes small-cell neuroendocrine carcinomas 
(SCNECs) and large-cell neuroendocrine carcinomas. Given 
their low prevalence, NEBCs remain a challenge to accurately 
diagnose. Specifically, they may be misclassified as poorly 
differentiated invasive breast carcinoma of no special type 
(IBC-NST), poorly differentiated invasive ductal carcinoma 
(IDC), or a metastatic neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC), 
which most commonly arises in the bronchopulmonary or 
gastroenteropancreatic tracts. However, in contrast to lung 
and enteropancreatic NECs, the genomics of breast NECs 
has not been well characterized. Methods: Search of a 
pathology database from 2010 to 2022 revealed 10 patients 
with histologically confirmed diagnosis of NEBCs. This 
represented 0.11% of all registered breast cancer cases (n = 
9,068) during 2010 to 2022. Four of them were initially 
misdiagnosed with either IDC or IBC-NST. FoundationOne 
(F1) testing was performed on consecutive histological 
samples and/or on blood samples collected from 10 patients 
diagnosed with NEBCs. Results: The most frequent somatic 
mutations were in TP53 (60%) and RB1 (30%), which were 
co-altered in 75% (3/4) of SCNECs. Targetable mutations 
involving the phosphoinositide 3 kinase 
(PI3K)/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) (PAM) 
pathway (i.e., activating PIK3CA and AKT1 mutations) were 
identified in 40% (4/10) NEBCs. FGFR1, which is commonly 
amplified in estrogen receptor-positive carcinomas, was 
amplified in 20% (2/10) NEBCs. Conclusions: The findings 
provide insight into the pathogenesis of primary breast NECs, 
underscore their classification as a distinct tumor type, and 
highlight genetic similarities to extramammary NECs, 
including highly prevalent p53/RB pathway aberrations in 
SCNEC. 
 
 
 
S56
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
ST22. Closing the Gap: Successes and Obstacles in 
Achieving Rapid and Comprehensive Profiling of Lung 
Cancer  
D. Jones 
The Ohio State University, The James Cancer Hospital and 
Solove Research Institute, Columbus, OH. 
 
Introduction: A worthy goal of cancer molecular diagnostics 
is to provide the fastest turnaround time (TAT) and most 
comprehensively actionable genomic profiling of tumor for 
quick therapy initiation. This is especially critical for non-small-
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) where many patients (pts) present 
with high stage and early mortality is high. Methods: To 
achieve best TAT and completion rate for often limited 
NSCLC samples, we utilized amplicon-based 50-gene hotspot 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) supplemented with ALK, 
RET, ROS1, and MET fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(PULMOL). For pts with <20-pack year smoking history and 
driver variant identified, this was followed by 542-gene 
probe/bait comprehensive genomic panel (CTP) with GOAL-
designed/xGEN IDT probes that covered NSCLC actionable 
gene fusions, copy number variant, microsatellite instability, 
and mutation burden. RNAseq panels were utilized to confirm 
novel exon skip variants. PULMOL NGS was initially 
performed on LifeTech S5 or Genexus with CTP on Illumina 
NextSeq. Target reporting from tissue receipt was 10 days 
with PULMOL within 3 to 5 days and CTP within 7 days 
(inclusive of weekends). Results: In all 1,378 pts with newly 
diagnosed NSCLC were profiled from January 1, 2020, to 
January 20, 2023, including 171 (12%) biopsied at outside 
hospitals/referred to our center and 202 (15%) being treated 
at community hospitals/clinics. Lab TAT target was met in 
97% for initial work-up and 79% for reflexed CTP (259 cases, 
20%). Failure rate was 1% (15 cases) due to insufficient or 
poor quality material. However, 34 other cases had no 
pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) variant identified after 
PULMOL/CTP likely due to low tumor for an overall clinical 
sensitivity rate of 96.4%. The collection-to-answer time was 
significantly different based on setting, 14 days (median) for 
material collected at our center, 23 days for community cases, 
and 40 days for referred patients (P <0.0001), with many more 
outliers in the last 2 categories. The differences were mostly 
due to delays in patient referral and material receipt. 
Additional driver variants seen with CTP included most 
commonly novel MET exon 14 skip variants (12 cases) and 
NF1 (14) and STK11 (12) P/LP variants not covered by the 
rapid panel. P/LP variants in SMARC/SWI-SNF (16), 
KEAP1/NFE2L2 (16) and RAS/MAPK (30, less common 
variants) pathways were potentially targetable. Conclusions: 
A reflex strategy for NSCLC profiling, incorporating smoking 
history, is cost-effective and easy to implement. The few 
detection failures can likely be improved by rapid panel design 
changes underway (adding UMIs and revised gene content). 
The high cumulative incidence of less common P/LP variants 
in potentially targetable pathways in reflexed cases highlights 
a workable model for targeted trial design that could 
encompass many more patients. For referred or community-
treated patients, significant improvements in completion will 
require resampling at referral or lab assistance with processes 
outside the lab to improve ordering/insurance approvals and 
minimizing time for tissue retrieval to have further impact on 
decreasing delays in treatment initiation in NSCLC. 
 
NSCLC: Days from collection to final signout. 
Figure 1 
 
Additional likely driver variants on CTP reflex, by pathway. 
Figure 2 
 
 
 
 
S57
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
ST23. Targeted SLIMamp NGS Technology as a Solution 
for Localized NGS Testing with Challenging Clinical 
Samples  
S. Zou1, L. Fink2,3, N. Stone2, L. Anderson3,5, P. Leo3,5, M. 
Marshall3,5, K. O'Byrne3,4, B. Jaradi2 
1Pillar Biosciences, Natick, USA; 2XING Genomic Services, 
Sinnamon Park, Australia; 3ATCG Queensland University of 
Technology, Woolloongabba, Australia; 4The University of 
Queensland, Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine, 
Woolloongabba, Australia; 5Princess Alexandra Hospital, 
Wooloongabba, Australia. 
 
Introduction: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a 
powerful tool that can be used clinically to identify actionable 
cancer biomarkers for targeted therapy. However, high failure 
rates and long turnaround time (TAT) restrict it from being 
widely adopted. Studies show ~23% to 31% of tumor samples 
fail comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP), mostly due to 
insufficient quantity and/or poor sample quality. Additionally, 
the complex and costly workflow of hybrid capture based NGS 
testing can only be performed in large reference labs, taking 
>2 to 3 weeks, whereas most therapy decisions are made 
within 7 days. SLIMamp is a technology developed by Pillar 
Biosciences that enables efficient, single-tube, ultra-multiplex 
PCR reactions by reducing the generation of unwanted, short 
overlapping regions between amplicons. NGS libraries 
prepared with SLIMamp result in higher NGS uniformity and 
reduced background noise, with a preferential amplification of 
genomic regions of interest. In this study, 48 clinical samples 
that failed pre-analytic QC of genomic profiling NGS 
testing were collected and sequenced by Pillar’s oncoReveal 
Solid Tumor Panel (STP). Our results show SLIMamp reduces 
the requirements for sample quantity and quality, 
simplifies the NGS workflow, and shortens TAT, making it an 
ideal NGS solution for any local clinical lab with a sequencing 
platform. Methods: Forty-eight clinical samples from various 
solid tumors that failed pre-analytical QC criteria (quantity, 
DNA integrity, and avg. DNA fragment size) of CGP from an 
ISO15189-accredited lab were collected and tested with 
oncoReveal STP from Pillar. Data were analysed using Pillar’s 
PiVAT secondary analysis pipeline, and bioinformatics 
analysis and clinical interpretation were performed in an 
ISO15189-accredited lab. Post-sequencing QC metric used to 
predict sample reportability was generated from statistical 
analysis of variant allele frequency (VAF) of the sequencing 
results. Results: All 48 samples were successfully sequenced 
with the oncoReveal STP with ≥3,000X coverage, including 
40 samples that failed >1 pre-analytical QC metric. Clinical 
reports were successfully generated for >80% of the testing 
cohort. Among the 39 samples with a clinical report, 36 
(>92%) contained actionable or significant variants to help 
direct therapy selection. Further analysis of the 9 unreportable 
samples showed that NGS data of these samples were 
dominated by artefacts that are not correlated with the pre-
analytical QC criteria. On the other hand, we found that these 
unreportable data can be reliably predicted by applying a 
novel, post-sequencing QC metric based on the VAF kernel 
density. Conclusions: This study demonstrates the 
advantages of NGS Library Preparation kit using Pillar’s 
SLIMamp technology on clinical samples of low 
quality/quantity. In combination with the post-sequencing QC 
metric, which we developed during this study, SLIMamp kits 
can be used for clinical testing on a large proportion of the 
most challenging clinical samples, which otherwise would go 
untested. 
 
ST24. Evaluating Gene Fusions in Solid Tumors by Next-
Generation Sequencing: A Tertiary Centre Experience  
P. Gogte1, S. Epari1, M. Gurav1, T. Pai1, N. Karnik1, G. 
Deshpande1, J. Saha1, P. Shah1, R. Iyer1, P. Joshi1, K. Vyas1, 
S. Dhanavade1, S. Chavan1, V. Noronha2, V. Ostwal2, O. 
Shetty1, S. Desai1 
1Tata Memorial Centre, Department of Pathology, Division of 
Molecular Pathology, Mumbai, India; 2Tata Memorial Centre, 
Department of Medical Oncology, Mumbai, India. 
 
Introduction: Gene fusions have been identified as 
oncogenic drivers in and across a wide spectrum of solid 
tumor types. Traditional methods for detecting oncogenic 
fusion transcripts include fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) and immunohistochemistry (IHC). However, these 
methods are limited in scalability and pose significant 
technical and interpretational challenges. Next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) is a high-throughput method for detection 
of gene fusions and provides diagnostic, prognostic, and 
theranostic information for cancer patients. In this study, we 
reviewed the frequency of fusion positive cases observed 
among the solid tumor cases subjected to NGS testing. 
Methods: The current study is a retrospective audit of RNA 
fusions in 1,570 solid tumor samples subjected to multigene 
testing during 2021 to 2022 as part of routine diagnostic work-
up. Targeted NGS was performed using SOPHiA Solid Tumor 
Plus Solution (SOPHiA GENETICS, Lausanne, Switzerland), 
an NGS panel targeting 42 genes using DNA panel, RNA 
panel comprising 137 fusion genes, microsatellite instability 
and 24 copy number variations. Sequencing was performed 
on the MiSeq System (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) and 
results were analyzed using the SOPHiA DDM platform 
version 5.10.30. The clinical and histological details of all the 
cases were retrieved from the hospital electronic medical 
records system. Results: On analyzing sequencing data of 
1,570 cases among different solid tumor types, 26 cases were 
S58
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
excluded from the cohort due to low read counts (<10,000 
reads). Of the remaining 1,544 cases, RNA fusions were 
detected in 98 cases (6.3%). Recurrent gene fusions were 
primarily identified in lung adenocarcinomas (n = 86) involving 
ALK (n = 51), ROS1 (n = 21), RET (n = 7), and MET (exon 14 
skipping) genes (n = 7). Additionally, NGS identified EGFRvIII 
mutation (deletion of exons 2 to 7) in glioblastoma (n = 2), 
NTRK fusions in secretory breast cancer (n = 2, ETV6-
NTRK3; n = 1, DCTN1-NTRK1) and colorectal cancer (n = 1, 
LMNA-NTRK1). Six other rare fusions including SDC4-FGFR1 
(n = 2), AGK-BRAF, SND1-BRAF, GOLGB1-TACC3, and 
FGFR3-TACC3 were detected in thyroid and colorectal 
cancers. RNA fusion testing by NGS provided a more 
definitive diagnosis in 12 cases where IHC result for ALK was 
equivocal and ROS1 was positive. These cases were also 
orthogonally confirmed by FISH. Moreover, NGS testing led to 
a change in the therapeutic management of 31/98 patients 
(31.6%) providing them clinical benefit. Conclusions: Gene 
fusions represent crucial targets in the context of precision 
medicine. NGS testing for fusion detection not only allows 
analysis of multiple targets but also saves time and material. 
The identification of novel fusions in this study also highlights 
the potential for future therapeutic targets. 
 
ST25. Application of Next-Generation Sequencing Tests 
for Cancer Treatment to Guide Oncologists in Pakistan  
A. Yunus, S. Ghani, N. Islam, A. Nasir, T. Moatter, Z. Ansar 
Ahmed 
Aga Khan University, Pathology and Lab Medicine Molecular 
Pathology section, Karachi, Pakistan. 
 
Introduction: Genomic tests designed to facilitate decisions 
about treatment management include those that identify 
alterations in single genes and multimarker tumor panels. 
Multimarker panels include targeted gene expression profiling 
tests that are used to estimate prognosis and/or the likelihood 
of recurrence. Multimarker panels also include DNA and RNA 
analysis through next-generation sequencing (NGS) 
technologies, including custom panels that profile multiple 
actionable driver genes and tumor characteristics that may 
guide the selection of targeted therapies. Currently, there are 
no nationally representative data describing oncologists’ 
awareness, knowledge, and use of NGS testing to inform 
patient care, especially in community practice settings. 
Methods: This study was performed retrospectively on 73 
biopsy specimens received for histopathological work-up at 
the Aga Khan University Hospital. The specimens were 
obtained between January 2021 and December 2022. Briefly, 
DNA from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues was 
extracted and tested through TruSight Tumor 15 (TST15) 
targeted cancer gene panel Illumina, MiSeq Instrument. 
Results: The histopathological diagnosis was inclusive of 7 
cancer origins (lung, melanoma, breast, colon, ovarian, 
gastric, and prostate). The distribution of cancer types 
observed was metastatic carcinoma and adenocarcinoma 
(infiltrating, mucinous, moderately differentiated) in 26 cases 
of colorectal sigmoid region; invasive ductal grade II and III in 
6 cases of breast cancer; infiltrating adenocarcinoma in 3 
cases of lung cancer; squamous cell and papillary carcinoma 
in 2 cases of prostate cancer; gastrointestinal stromal tumor in 
2 cases of gastric cancer. One case of melanoma was 
observed. Out of 73 patients tested, 28 (38.3%) were females 
and 45 (61.6%) were males with a median age of 52 years, 
and patients’ ages ranged from 20 years to 84 years. Out of 
the all the samples tested there was no mutation in 14 
(19.17%) patients, whereas 59 (80.8%) tested positive with 
mutations in 7 of the 15 targeted genes. Out of the 15 genes 
tested, the highest frequency of mutation was observed in 
TP53 gene (54.7%), KRAS (27%), EGFR (12%), PIK3CA 
(10.9%), ERBB2 or HER2 (5.5%), NRAS (4%), and lowest 
frequency was observed in MET (1%) and BRAF (1%). To 
further analyze colorectal sigmoid cancer, data involving 
microsatellite instability (MSI) were also gathered. Eighteen 
patients also got tested for MSI alongside NGS, out of which 
16 patients (88.8%) were stable for all 5 markers of MSI, and 
2 of the patients (11.1%) were instable (MSI-high). 
Conclusions: Our current study consists of small data with 
limited targeting of prognostic and actionable markers in solid 
tumors to predict the targeted therapy and characterize 
tumors. NGS testing is changing the paradigm for molecular 
testing in these patients; with time, it should be possible to 
apply NGS to routine diagnostics. More research is needed to 
establish the clinical usefulness of these tests and develop 
evidence-based clinical guidelines for their use in practice. 
 
Targeted gene variants 
 
 
ST26. EQA for Classifying Somatic Solid Tumour 
Sequence Variants: Helping to Harmonise and Improve 
Patient Results 
J.A. Fairley, Z.C. Deans 
GenQA, Edinburgh, UK. 
 
Introduction: The introduction of large next-generation 
sequencing panels for the analysis of solid tumours has led to 
more variants being identified that have potential clinical 
impact. Classification systems are required to attempt to 
S59
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
stratify these variants into those with clinical potential and 
those without. A number of different systems have been 
proposed that address pathogenicity/oncogenicity and 
actionability to assist with choice of targeted therapies, 
prognosis, and diagnosis. Methods: GenQA have provided 3 
pilot external quality assessments (EQAs) since 2020 to 
assess classification of somatic sequence variants by clinical 
laboratories. Participating laboratories enrolled in the EQA via 
the GenQA website. They were provided with 3 variants for 
each round of EQA along with a clinical case scenario and 
were asked to classify the variant according to their usual 
processes with the results being submitted to the GenQA 
website via a proforma. The results were assessed by at least 
2 independent experts and benchmarked against the 
classification provided by the cohort of laboratories. Results: 
Nine individual cases have been offered since 2020. The 
criteria used for each case varied depending on the type of 
variant and the gene. The majority of laboratories used 
AMP/ASCO/CAP guidelines to classify the actionability of the 
variants, and ACMG guidelines to classify the pathogenicity of 
the variant. Benign single nucleotide variants were reported 
consistently by all laboratories; however, other variants 
showed considerable differences in the classification provided 
by laboratories demonstrating variation in application of 
guidelines. The differences in classification were such that 
they could potentially impact patient management. 
Conclusions: It is important to provide accurate variant 
classification is to ensure the patient receives the correct 
result and clinical management, particularly with respect to 
targeted therapies in solid tumours. This EQA has 
demonstrated variability in the use and application of the 
guidelines and has highlighted the continued need for EQAs 
to educate and promote standardisation. 
 
ST27. Identification of a Rare Case of Intracranial Adult 
DICER1 Mutant Sarcoma by Using Epigenomic Profiling 
M. Cuomo1,2, D. Costabile2, R. Della Monica2, M. Buonaiuto1, 
F. Trio2, T. Di Risi2, R. Vinciguerra2, S. Ferraro2, R. Visconti3, 
L. Chiariotti1,2 
1University of Naples Federico II, Molecular Medicine and 
Medical Biotechnology, Naples, Italy; 2CEINGE Biotecnologie 
Avanzate, Naples, Italy; 3CNR, Naples, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Brain tumors are still characterized by a very 
poor prognosis, with often misleading diagnoses. Brain tumor 
molecular classification, based on genetic and epigenetic 
modifications, has substantially surpassed pathological 
classification, as highlighted in the new WHO 2021 edition. 
Indeed, epigenetic signatures based on DNA methylation and 
chromatin organization allow characterizing with extreme 
precision different types of tumors. To date, the epigenetic 
profile of brain tumors represents an identity card and, 
notably, the tumor will retain some specific “signatures” of the 
cell of origin and acquire the typical “signatures” that define 
the tumor specificity. In this context, primary malignant 
mesenchymal brain tumors are most of all a diagnostic 
challenge for pathologists, because they are rare and 
heterogeneous. We presented the fifth case so far described 
of an adult, intracranial, primary SCS-RMSlike-DICER1 tumor, 
genetically and epigenetically characterizing the tumor. 
Methods: DNA methylome was performed by using Epic 
array 850. Raw data were analysed by a sophisticated 
algorithm published previously by DKFZ 
(www.molecularneuropathology.com) and the prediction score 
associated to the tumor was calculated. The presence of 
DICER1 mutation, predicted by Methylome analysis, was 
identified by DNA sequencing of all the 25 exons of DICER 
gene. Bioinformatic analyses were performed by using R-
based RnBeads scripts to obtain beta value at single CpG 
level for both tumors. Only the CpG sites with a difference of 
at least 25% in DNA methylation between high-grade glioma 
and DICER1 mutant sarcoma were retained. Results: We 
identified 20,022 CpGs with a lower degree of DNA 
methylation in DICER1 mutant sarcoma, whereas 8,254 CpG 
sites were found more methylated in DICER1 mutant sarcoma 
compared with high-grade glioma. We then associated the 
differentially methylated CpG sites with the respective genes 
by using R-based library “GenomicRanges." Only genes with 
at least 5 differentially methylated CpG sites were considered 
for the other analyses. By this way, we identified 2,262 
hypomethylated genes and 1,190 hypermethylated genes, 
comparing DICER1 mutant sarcoma and high-grade glioma. 
We then performed KEGG analysis to identify the enriched 
pathways for the differentially methylated genes. Particularly, 
we found that 48 demethylated genes were significantly 
assigned to MAPK signalling pathway, generally activated in 
DICER1 mutant tumors and associated with high tumor 
aggressiveness and high proliferative cellular rate. 
Conclusions: The methylome profiling of DICER1 mutant 
tumor allows the clear identification of this tumor entity with 
respect to other brain tumors, unambiguously discriminating it 
from morphologically similar primary brain tumors. However, 
the rarity of DICER1 mutant sarcoma renders still challenging 
the identification of significant and targeted epigenetic 
markers that may help to better characterize the molecular 
mechanisms harbouring this so aggressive class of sarcoma. 
 
ST28. Withdrawn 
S60
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
ST29. Targeted Inhibition of the Lysine Methyltransferase 
SETD8 Restrains Glioblastoma Multiforme Growth in Vitro 
in Association with Wee1 Kinase Inhibitor  
R. Della Monica, M. Buonaiuto, D. Costabile, S.F. Cicala, T. 
Federica, T. Di Risi, R. Vinciguerra, S. Ferraro, R. Visconti, L. 
Chiariotti, M. Cuomo 
CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most 
aggressive form of brain tumor. GBM standard therapy is 
based on temozolomide + radiotherapy, and it is largely 
adopted, but the prognosis remains poor and many patients 
still present relapses and/or resistance to treatments in a short 
time. Several preclinical and clinical studies have been 
developed but the results are not very encouraging due to the 
high heterogeneity of the tumor. For this reason, the 
identification of new biomarkers is required to develop target 
therapies. Methods: To perform our experiments we used 
different glioblastoma cell lines (LN-18, T98, U251, and 
SW1088). To inhibit SETD8 activity we used a specific 
chemical inhibitor (UNC0379). We validated the data using an 
siRNA targeting SETD8. To demonstrate cell cycle arrest and 
DNA damage we performed MTT assay, FACs analyses, 
Western blots, and immunofluorescence. To validate mitotic 
catastrophe we used Caspase assay and time lapse 
experiments. In vivo experiments were performed on 
xenograft model inoculated with Luc+U251 tumor cells. After 
tumor implantations we monitored tumor growth in presence 
or absence of specific treatments. Results: In our laboratory, 
we demonstrated that SETD8, a methyltransferase, is 
overexpressed in GBM, with an oncogenic role. SETD8 is 
able to catalyze the mono-methylation of various proteins 
including the onco-suppressor p53 (leading to its 
degradation). In this regard, we evaluated the consequences 
of SETD8 inhibition in GBM using a chemical inhibitor 
(UNC0379) and genetic silencing. We found that the inhibition 
of SETD8 activity led to a huge number of γ-H2AX foci by 
immunofluorescence, demonstrating the induction of DNA 
damage, which causes cell-cycle arrest in glioblastoma cell 
lines and primary cells. Based on these considerations, we 
forced arrested cells to entry into mitosis by inhibiting the 
kinase Wee1, causing a mitotic-catastrophe death. By 
combining UNC0379 with adavosertib (Wee1 chemical 
inhibitor), we found a very low viability in double-treated cells, 
compared to the single treatment, and a strong caspase 
activation, with consequent apoptosis induction. We obtained 
a strong delay in tumor growth also in xenograft models using 
the combination of the 2 drugs. Conclusions: Thus, our 
preliminary data indicate the association UNC0379+AZD1775 
as a successful strategy for glioblastoma treatment, especially 
for those overexpressing SETD8. 
ST30. LTBP1/TGFbeta Axis Reduces Cell Proliferation and 
Invasion in Melanoma Cells upon ERK5 Inhibition  
A. Tubita1, I. Tusa1, A. Menconi1, Z. Lombardi1, D. Papini1, 
A.E. Ogando2, A.P. Alonso2, B. Stecca3, E. Rovida1 
1University of Florence, Department of Experimental and 
Clinical Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio", Florence, Italy; 
2Universidad de Salamanca, Centro de Investigación del 
Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain; 3Institute for Cancer Research 
and Prevention (ISPRO), CORE RESEARCH LABORATORY, 
Florence, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Malignant melanoma is the deadliest skin 
cancer, with a poor prognosis in advanced stages. Available 
treatments have improved the survival for this disease, 
although their long-term benefits are still unsatisfactory. We 
recently showed that the mitogen-activated protein kinase 
ERK5 plays a relevant role in melanoma growth, and that 
ERK5-knockdown (KD) determines cellular senescence and 
the production of soluble mediators typically involved in the 
senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). 
Methods: A375 and SK-Mel-5 BRAF V600E-mutated 
melanoma cells have been used. Conditioned media (CM) 
from ERK5-KD cells were harvested 14 days post-
transduction with lentiviral vectors expressing control or 
ERK5-targeting shRNA. Invasion assay was performed using 
a Boyden chamber. Control isotype IgG or neutralizing 
antibodies were added to CM prior to administration to cells. 
Results: We recently identified CXCL1, CXCL8, and CCL20 
as the prominent SASP-related proteins secreted by ERK5-
KD melanoma cells. Because TGF-β is secreted as one of the 
SASP factors and can regulate proliferation and invasion in 
cancer, we analysed the upstream components of TGF-β 
signalling pathway by transcriptomic analysis and found that 
LTBP1 mRNA was upregulated in both A375 and SK-Mel-5 
ERK5-KD cells. LTBP1 is a key regulator of TGF-β, and by 
using publicly available datasets we found a positive 
association between high levels of LTBP1 or TGF-β mRNA 
and a better overall survival as well as disease-free survival in 
melanoma patients treated with anti-PD1 therapy. 
Furthermore, we found an increased protein level of TGF-β in 
whole-cell lysates and in CM of ERK5-KD cells. Moreover, CM 
recovered from ERK5-KD melanoma cells reduced melanoma 
cell proliferation. Interestingly, treatment with a neutralizing 
antibody for TGF-β resulted in the partial restoration of cancer 
cell proliferation in a concentration-dependent manner. 
Importantly, performing TGF-β staining on archival xenografts 
of A375, after systemic administration of ERK5-i, we observed 
a marked increase of LTBP1 or TGF-β expression. Finally, 
treatment with the CM recovered from ERK5-KD cells was 
able to significantly reduce A375 and SK-Mel-5 invasiveness, 
and neutralizing antibodies for TGF-β were able to restore 
S61
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
their invasion ability, whereas control IgG were not. 
Conclusions: Our results extended the knowledge of the 
mechanisms by which ERK5 regulates melanoma growth and 
invasiveness, improving the comprehension necessary to 
develop new treatments for melanoma. 
 
ST31. Modulation of Invadopodia-Dependent Invasion of 
Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma by ABL2/TGFβ1/LOX 
Cross-Talk: Role of Tumor Grade and Matrix Stiffness  
S. De Marco1, I. Morabito1, B. Torsello1, N. Zucchini2, G. 
Strada3, C. Bianchi1 
1University of Milano-Bicocca, School of Medicine and 
Surgery, Monza, Italy; 2ASST Monza, San Gerardo Hospital, 
Anatomo-Pathology Unit, Monza, Italy; 3ASST North Milan, 
Bassini Hospital, Urology Unit, Cinisello Balsamo, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the 
most common and metastatic variant of renal carcinomas. In 
fact, up to 30% of newly diagnosed and 40% of previously 
treated ccRCC patients show metastatic disease. The 
dissemination and metastasizing of solid tumor cells exploit F-
actin-rich cell protrusions with matrix-degradative activity 
known as invadopodia. Invadopodia maturation in different 
cancer cells is induced by Abl2 kinase through 
phosphorylation of specific invadopodia components and 
cytoskeleton rearrangements. Invadopodia maturation in 
cancer cells is induced also by TGFβ signaling, which 
specifically enhances ccRCC invasion. Even the extracellular 
matrix modifying enzyme Lysyl oxidase (LOX), which is 
overexpressed in ccRCC, has a role in cytoskeleton 
rearrangement and in modulation of matrix stiffness, inducing 
cellular migration and invasion. Notably, TGFβ1 treatment of 
renal tubular cells significantly upregulated Lox production. 
Here, we studied the role of Abl2 in the modulation of the 
TGFβ-induced and invadopodia-dependent matrix 
degradation in an in vitro model of primary cell cultures of 
ccRCC with different Furhman grade. The effect of matrix 
stiffness and the role of Lox in the stiffness modulation has 
been also evaluated. Methods: We performed 
immunofluorescence analysis of invadopodia F-actin spots 
and degradation assay of matrixes with different stiffness 
using primary cell cultures from human ccRCC tissues of 
different Fuhrman grade, treated or not with TGFβ1, TGFβ-
receptor (SB431542), and Abl2 (imatinib and GNF5) 
inhibitors. Real-Time PCR and ELISA evaluated Lox 
expression. We quantified the stiffness of matrixes treated 
with ccRCC conditioned media by atomic force microscopy. 
Results: Invadopodia F-actin spots and matrix degradation 
activity of ccRCC cells were increased by TGFβ1 treatment. 
This effect was reduced when imatinib or GNF5 inhibited 
Abl2. High-grade (G3-G4) ccRCC cultures showed more 
invadopodia than low-grade (G1-G2) cultures in all 
experimental conditions analysed. Moreover, ccRCC cells 
showed more invadopodia when cultured on stiffer matrix, 
regardless of grade. Lox transcript and active protein secreted 
in culture media were more abundant in low-grade ccRCC 
samples than in high-grade cultures. Furthermore, TGFβ1 
treatment of ccRCC cells increased Lox secretion and 
SB431542 prevented this increment. The evaluation of the 
effect of different grade ccRCC culture conditioned media, in 
presence or absence of TGFβ1 treatment, on matrix stiffness 
is ongoing. Conclusions: Our studies show that: 1) Abl2 is 
necessary for TGFβ1-induced invadopodia maturation of 
ccRCC cells, regardless of grade; 2) TGFβ1-induced Lox 
secretion by ccRCC cells could modulate their invasion 
through the putative induction of matrix stiffness. The cross-
talk among Abl2, TGFβ1, and Lox could suggest new 
therapeutic targets in ccRCC metastatic disease. 
 
ST32. Molecular Landscape of Small-Cell and Large-Cell 
Neuroendocrine Carcinomas of the 
Gastroenteropancreatic System (Selected for Oral 
Presentation, O-01-02) 
N.E. Albayrak, B.L. Liu, S.C. Ward 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of 
Pathology, Molecular and Cell-Based Medicine, New York, 
NY. 
 
Introduction: The World Health Organization subdivides 
high-grade (G3) gastroenteropancreatic (GEP) 
neuroendocrine neoplasms into well-differentiated 
neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) and poorly differentiated 
neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs). NECs are highly 
aggressive neoplasms with a median overall survival (OS) of 
11.9 months (vs. OS = 55.6 months in G3 NETs). Yet 
molecular data for GEP-NECs are limited, and treatment 
strategies are extrapolated from small-cell lung cancer 
(SCLC). Methods: A search of a pathology database (2010 to 
2022) revealed 48 cases of GEP-NECs, including esophageal 
(5), gastric (4), small intestinal (3), pancreatic (9), biliary (6), 
and colorectal (21) primary tumors. FoundationOne testing 
was performed on consecutive histological samples and/or on 
blood samples collected from 48 patients diagnosed with 
GEP-NECs. Based on the sequencing of 324 cancer-related 
genes, we assessed mutations and copy number alterations 
(CNAs). Results: Molecular alterations in TP53 (85%) proved 
to be the most commonly observed, regardless of the primary 
site. Other consistently found molecular alterations included 
BRAF (21%) and RB1 (19%), which were mutually exclusive, 
followed by KRAS (17%) and APC (17%). Nineteen percent of 
GEP-NECs harbored cell cycle progression pathway-related 
gene mutations other than RB1, including aberrations in 
S62
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
CCNE1, CDKN2A, CCND1, and CDK4. Frequent 
amplifications/gains were found in MYC (19%) and ERBB2 
(10%). Targetable mutations involving the phosphoinositide 3 
kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) 
(PAM) pathway (i.e., activating PIK3CA and AKT1 mutations 
or PTEN loss) were identified in 15% of GEP-NECs. 
Mutations and CNAs varied according to primary tumor site, 
with BRAF mutations mainly seen in colon (50%), and APC 
mutations mainly seen in rectal cancers (43%). Conclusions: 
The findings provide insight into the pathogenesis of GEP-
NECs and highlight limited similarities to SCLC. Despite the 
paucity of data about the molecular drivers associated with 
GEP-NECs, a high fraction of targetable alterations (46% in 
our cohort) indicates a high potential for better-personalized 
treatments. 
 
ST33. Utility of ctDNA for Molecular Profiling in NSCLC 
Patients in Resource-Limited Clinical Setting  
P. Joshi1, A. Nair1, N. Pawar2, D. Dhanawade1, P. Gogte1, M. 
Gurav1, T. Pai2, R. Kumar2, N. Karnik2, G. Wagh2, J. Saha1, P. 
Shah1, O. Shetty1, S. Desai2 
1Tata Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha National 
institute,Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Mumbai, India; 2Tata 
Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha National institute, 
Department of Pathology, Mumbai, India. 
 
Introduction: In the era of precision medicine, liquid biopsy 
has become a promising approach for disease monitoring and 
molecular diagnosis of patients who do not have access to a 
tissue specimen or an adequate biopsy. Circulating tumor 
DNA (ctDNA) is a fragmented cell-free DNA (cfDNA) making 
up as low as 0.01% of the entire cfDNA released from tumor 
cells. The International Association for the Study of Lung 
Cancer (IASLC) statement provides the guidelines for the 
incorporation of ctDNA testing in a clinical setting. The current 
study summarizes the utility of ctDNA-based molecular 
diagnosis of lung cancer patients using real-time PCR and 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) platforms. Methods: 
ctDNA molecular profiling data of the non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) patients (n = 299) diagnosed with variable 
histology previously and having an inadequate biopsy or are 
undergoing targeted inhibitor therapy at Tata Memorial 
Hospital were compiled (2020 to 2022). ctDNA was extracted 
from the plasma samples of NSCLC patients using the 
COBAS cfDNA extraction kit (Roche Diagnostics). EGFR 
mutation detection using conventional ARMS-RTPCR (cobas 
EGFR mutation test V2) was performed for 268 samples. 
NGS using SOPHiA SOLID TUMOR PLUS SOLUTION 
targeted panel was used to assess the remaining 31 samples. 
Results: Of the 268 cases tested by real-time PCR 170 
(63.4%), cases were reported as wild-type for EGFR mutation. 
Targetable mutations were reported in 96 (35.8%) cases 
having histology of advanced metastatic adenocarcinoma (n = 
78) and squamous cell carcinoma (n = 4). Actionable EGFR 
mutations were reported on the basis of ctDNA from 14 cases 
in which histological findings were unavailable due to various 
clinical reasons. Tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy-resistant 
mutations (exon 18 and exon 20) were reported in 10 
advanced metastatic adenocarcinomas. Due to suboptimal 
DNA quality, 5 cases were reported as uninterpretable. Of the 
cases subjected to NGS testing 5 out of 31 cases had 
targetable alterations with variant allelic frequency ranging 
from 0.2 to 5.8. In 3 cases that were EGFR exon 19 deletion 
positive on biopsy, ctDNA of the same patient during the 
longitudinal monitoring did not show any alterations. 
Conclusions: ctDNA analysis is a critical challenge that often 
leads to false negative results due to biological variables such 
as stage of the disease, tumor volume, low DNA-shedding, 
and preanalytical variables. The current study demonstrates 
the utility of ctDNA as a non-invasive promising tool to detect 
targetable alterations in situations where tissue biopsy is 
inaccessible or tumor tissue is depleted. Real-time PCR-
based platform is the most preferred option for molecular 
analysis of ctDNA in clinical settings over NGS, considering 
factors like cost, turnaround time, and availability of 
resources. 
 
ST34. Identification of a Functional Relationship between 
MEK5-ERK5 Pathway and Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1α  
A. Menconi1, I. Tusa1, A. Gentilini2, F. Marra2, E. Rovida1 
1University of Florence, Department of Experimental and 
Clinical Biomedical Sciences “Mario Serio," Florence, Italy; 
2University of Florence, Department of Experimental and 
Clinical Medicine, Florence, Italy. 
Introduction: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is the second most 
common liver cancer after hepatocellular carcinoma, and 
constitutes a heterogeneous group of malignancies that arise 
from the epithelium of the biliary tree. Each subtype of CCA 
has a distinct genetic profile that is reflected in a different 
pathogenesis and prognosis in patients. Genetic 
heterogeneity opens many opportunities for new personalized 
and targeted therapies. Currently, in fact, many selective 
inhibitors are under study. Recently, our group reported the 
importance of the mitogen-activated protein kinase 
extracellular-signal regulated kinase 5 (ERK5) in supporting 
the survival and proliferation of CCA both in vitro and in vivo. 
In the attempt to identify additional Achilles' heels to be 
targeted in CCA, we investigated on the existence of a 
functional relationship between ERK5 and hypoxia inducible 
factor 1α (HIF-1α), the main regulator of the response to 
hypoxia, a condition that is typical of the tumour 
microenvironment. Methods: Two intrahepatic CCA cell lines 
S63
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
(CCLP-1 and HUCCT-1) were grown at different timepoints 
under normoxia and hypoxia (0.1 % O2) conditions. Protein 
expression analysis was performed by Western blot. Effects 
on cell viability of KC7F2 (HIFi) and XMD8-92 or JWG-071 
(ERK5i) were evaluated using MTT assay. Results: We found 
that ERK5 phosphorylation and HIF-1α expression are 
increased in hypoxia. The increased activity of the latter in 
hypoxia was confirmed by the consistent increase of its target 
genes, Carbonic Anhydrase 9 (CAIX) and Glucose transporter 
1 (GLUT1). We then performed a combined treatment of 
ERK5 and HIF inhibitors and found a greater effect of the 
combination than the single treatments in hypoxic conditions. 
Conclusions: These findings led to the identification of a 
relationship between ERK5 and HIF-1α in the regulation of 
CCA homeostasis, and put light on the combined ERK5/HIF-
targeting among the new possible therapeutic options for 
CCA. 
 
ST35. Integrated Molecular Analysis of Diffuse Adult-Type 
Gliomas: Proposal of Next-Generation Sequencing and 
FISH Approaches for a Clinically Applicable Molecular 
Classification  
S. Coluccelli1, T. Maloberti1, A. De Leo1, V. Sanza2, S. Asioli3, 
E. Franceschi4, A. Altimari2, E. Gruppioni2, D. de Biase5, G. 
Tallini2 
1University of Bologna, Department of Medicine (Dipartimento 
di Medicina Specialistica, Diagnostica e Sperimentale), 
Bologna, Italy; 2IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di 
Bologna, Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Bologna, Italy; 
3Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche, Bologna IRCCS-ISNB, 
Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences 
(DIBINEM)-Surgical Pathology Section-Alma Mater 
Studiorum-University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; 4IRCCS 
Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Nervous 
System Medical Oncology Department, Bologna, Italy; 
5University of Bologna, Department of Pharmacy and 
Biotechnology (FaBiT), Bologna, Italy. 
 
Introduction: The fifth edition of the WHO Classification of 
tumors of the central nervous system (CNS), updated in May 
2021, renewed the incorporation of both histological features 
and molecular alterations into the diagnostic framework, 
classifying, and grading of brain tumors. The guidelines 
emphasized the importance of an integrated histomolecular 
diagnosis for treatment and follow-up of CNS tumor. 
According to these recommendations and the diagnostic 
algorithm proposed for the adult-type diffuse gliomas 
integrated classification, this study aimed at applying a set of 
molecular techniques to assess the incidence of adult-type 
diffuse gliomas in a cohort of consecutive patients, and to 
evaluate the impact of the update on the adult-type diffuse 
gliomas diagnosis. Methods: A total of 117 patients 
diagnosed with an adult-type diffuse glioma from January 
2022 to January 2023 were characterized by next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) to determine their isocitrate 
dehydrogenase (IDH1/IDH2) status, as well as other adult-
type diffuse gliomas molecular signature markers, among 
TP53, TERT mutations, and MGMT promoter methylation. 
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed on all 
the cohort. A 1p/19q-single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
panel was used to support puzzling FISH diagnoses of 1p/19q 
co-deletion. Results: A total of 41 (35%) diffuse gliomas with 
IDH-wild-type were found, out of which 12 (29.7%) had EGFR 
gene amplification and 8 (19.5%) had +7/-10 chromosome 
copy number changes. Among the 76 (65%) astrocytomas 
IDH-mutant screened for the CDKN2A/B homozygous 
deletion, 11 (14.5%) were positive and designated as 
astrocytomas IDH-mutant CNS WHO grade IV. Ten (13.2%) 
out of 30 are oligodendrogliomas IDH-mutant and co-deleted 
1p/19q on FISH. Twenty (66.7%) out of all the IDH-mutant 
diffuse gliomas were further investigated using the 1p/19q-
SNP panel, out of which 5 (25%) were designated 1p/19q co-
deleted, according to both molecular approaches. Two cases 
(10%) of this group showed discrepant results after 1p/19q 
FISH and SNP analysis: In detail, 1 case showed 
chromosome imbalance according to the SNP panel, 
inconsistent with 1p/19q co-deletion. In this case, the 
diagnosis was consistent with astrocytoma IDH-mutant, CNS 
WHO grade III. Another case, CNS WHO grade IV, diagnosed 
as Chr19q13 deleted by FISH, showed only a partial loss of 
heterozygosity of the Chr19q13.2-19qter by NGS. 
Conclusions: This molecular algorithm seems to be useful in 
the classification of adult type- diffuse gliomas analyzed, 
allowing sufficient integrated histopathologic and molecular 
diagnosis. The combination of NGS and FISH analysis was 
consistent to molecular characterization of adult-type diffuse 
glioma by ancillary markers. NGS analysis was revealed to be 
essential to support FISH results for equivocal cases, 
especially in high-grade adult-type diffuse gliomas for 1p/19q 
co-deletion. 
 
ST36. Impairment of ERK5 Nuclear Localization Restores 
Sensitivity to ERK5 Kinase Inhibitors  
Z. Lombardi1, L. Gardini2, A. Menconi1, I. Tusa1, M. Lulli1, E. 
Rovida1 
1University of Florence, Department of Experimental and 
Clinical Biomedical Sciences, Filorence, Italy; 2University of 
Florence, LENS - European Laboratory for Non-Linear 
Spectroscopy, Sesto Fiorentino, Italy. 
 
Introduction: The extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 
(ERK5) is emerging as a possible target for melanoma 
treatment. ERK5 pro-proliferative activities are linked to its 
presence in the nucleus, but the mechanisms involved in 
S64
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
ERK5 nuclear translocation are poorly characterized. We 
focused on the elucidation of this process using single 
molecule tracking and searching for compounds able to 
prevent ERK5 nuclear shuttling, to design new strategies for 
cancer treatment. Methods: To achieve single ERK5 tracking 
in living cells, we used super-resolution microscopy. HeLa 
cells were transfected with an expression vector for ERK5, 
linked to HaloTag, alone or with a vector for a constitutively 
active form of the ERK5 activator MEK5 (MEK5DD). The cell-
permeable photoactivatable chromophore JaneliaFluor646 
was used as a detection technique for super-resolution 
imaging. As a complementary approach, HEK293 T-cells, 
transfected with ERK5 and MEK5DD, and A375 melanoma 
cells were treated with the alpha/beta1 importin-mediated 
transport inhibitor ivermectin (IVM) or transfected with 2 
siRNA targeting importin-β1. MTT, 2D-colony forming assays, 
and apoptosis evaluation were performed in A375 or HeLa 
cells treated with IVM in combination with the ERK5-i AX-
15836. A375 and HeLa spheroids were used to evaluate the 
effect of IVM and AX-15836 on a 3D model of in vitro tumor 
growth. Results: The HaloTag technology provided the 
selective binding of JaneliaFluor646 to ERK5, and Highly 
Inclined and Laminated Optical sheet microscopy allowed us 
to collect the signal of single molecule ERK5 instances. Data 
showed that in ERK5-transfected cells, as expected, the 
protein is mainly localized in the cytoplasm, whereas it moves 
in the nucleus with the activator MEK5DD, and this effect is 
partially reversed in cells treated with IVM. Moreover, ERK5 
amount in the nuclear fraction of lysates from IVM-treated 
cells and from KPNB1 KD cells is lower compared to control, 
suggesting a role of importin α/β1 in ERK5 nuclear transport. 
Finally, we found that ERK5i AX-15836, which was reported to 
induce ERK5 nuclear translocation in a paradoxical way, 
reduced melanoma cell proliferation only in combination with 
IVM in 2D and 3D growth models. Conclusions: The current 
study demonstrated the involvement of importin α/β1 in ERK5 
nuclear translocation. The described super-resolution 
technique will also help future studies to investigate the 
mechanism of action of ERK5 in the nucleus. Furthermore, 
our data showed that impairment of ERK5 nuclear localization 
restores sensitivity to AX-15836, suggesting that the actors 
involved in ERK5 nuclear shuttling could be identified as novel 
targets for ERK5 inhibition, and therefore for a possible 
anticancer therapy. 
 
ST37. Detecting Gene Fusions with 3D Genomics from 
FFPE Solid Tumors: Clinical Concordance, Validation, 
and Actionable Insights from Tumors with Unknown 
Drivers  (Selected for Oral Presentation, O-04-03) 
A. Schmitt1, K. Galbraith2, K. Sikkink1, Y. Yang2, H. 
Mohamed2, L. Van Meter1, M. Movahed-Ezazi2, I. Tran2, B. 
Zeck2, L. Chiriboga2, A. Tsirigos2, S. Chiang3, G. Jour2, M. 
Snuderl2 
1Arima Genomics, Carlsbad, CA; 2NYU Langone Health, 
Department of Pathology, New York, NY; 3Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, New York, NY. 
 
Introduction: Identifying gene fusions in tumor biopsies is 
critical for understanding disease etiology; however, clinical 
next-generation sequencing panels often fail to yield clear 
genetic drivers. A key challenge is that RNAseq does not 
perform well in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) 
tissue blocks due to RNA degradation and/or RNA panel 
design, and cannot detect breakpoints outside of the gene 
body, which are established clinical biomarkers with 
mechanistic significance and clinical utility in solid 
hematological cancers. Methods: We developed a novel 
DNA-based partner-agnostic approach for identifying fusions 
from FFPE tumors using 3D genomics. We profiled 184 FFPE 
tumors across various tumor types. This cohort includes 33 
tumors with known gene fusions detected by RNA panels for 
clinical concordance analyses. It also includes 151 FFPE 
tumors, including 62 central nervous system tumors, 59 
gynecological sarcomas, and 22 solid heme tumors, with no 
detectable genetic drivers from prior DNA and RNA panel 
CLIA assays (“unknown driver cohort”). Samples were 
processed using the Arima-HiC+ FFPE kit, and in some cases 
a capture panel was applied to enrich for specific genes of 
interest. Libraries were sequenced using Illumina platforms. 
Data were analyzed using the Arima-SV pipeline, or the Arima 
Oncology Pipeline, depending on whether the data were 
genome-wide or targeted, respectively. Overexpression of 
putative driver genes associated with fusions was confirmed 
by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Results: For clinical 
concordance, Arima-HiC technology detected 33/33 fusions 
previously detected by RNA panels. For clinical validation and 
utility studies in our unknown driver cohort, Arima-HiC 
detected 1 or more fusions in 72% (109/151) of tumors. To 
attribute clinical significance according to NCCN guidelines, 
WHO classification criteria, and OncoKB, 33.8% (51/151) of 
tumors had fusions implicating FDA-approved therapeutic 
level biomarkers, 4.0% (6/151) had fusions implicating 
biomarkers that are the target of ongoing clinical trial 
therapies, and 14.6% (22/151) had fusions implicating 
diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers, indicating an overall yield 
S65
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
of clinically actionable biomarkers of 52.3% in unknown driver 
cases. Several cases with clinically actionable fusions 
underwent confirmatory IHC testing for oncoprotein 
expression, and 91.6% (11/12) showed diffuse or focally 
positive staining. To highlight examples from prospectively 
analyzed cases from this cohort, we identified a novel PD-L1 
rearrangement in a pediatric glioma tumor that was not 
detected by DNA or RNA panels, which we confirmed by PD-
L1 IHC, and the patient was administered pembrolizumab 
after tumor recurrence and has since exhibited stable disease. 
We also identified a MYBL1 fusion in a glioma that spared the 
patient unnecessary chemotherapy post-resection. 
Conclusions: Our findings provide evidence of clinical 
concordance, validation, and utility, and underscores the need 
for 3D genome profiling to increase diagnostic yield by finding 
clinically actionable fusions in FFPE solid tumors. 
 
ST38. Utilization of Liquid Biopsies of Different Origin for 
NGS Studies in the Mexican Population 
C. Peñaloza Coronas1,2, V. Izúcar Ramales1, L.A. Mendoza 
Torres1, M. Wences Carretero3, S.M. Montilla Fonseca1 
1Labopat Diagnostics, NGS laboratory, Puebla, Mexico; 
2Universidad Nacional de Quilmes, Science and Technology 
Department, Buenos Aires, Argentina; 3Instituto Tecnológico y 
de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, Science School, 
Puebla, Mexico. 
 
Introduction: For the past decade, liquid biopsies have 
become increasingly relevant in the management of cancer 
patients due to their minimally invasive sample collection 
process. Liquid biopsy refers to a laboratory test performed on 
bodily fluids, such as whole blood, cerebrospinal fluid, pleural 
fluid, ascites fluid, and others to detect circulating tumor 
nucleic acids (ctNAs). However, there are numerous 
challenges in the analysis of ctNA, including its short half-life 
(less than 1.5 hours) and low amounts of nucleic acids in the 
sample, which are directly linked to the quality of the collection 
tube. Liquid biopsy is mainly used to analyze tumor 
heterogeneity, especially when solid biopsy samples are 
unavailable, as well as for prognostication and evaluation of 
treatment strategies, therapy resistance, new therapeutic 
targets, residual disease, and early cancer stage diagnosis. 
Methods: In 2022, our laboratory received 8 liquid biopsies of 
different sources, including 4 peripheral blood, 1 ascites fluid, 
and 3 cerebrospinal fluids. The samples were collected in 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic (EDTA) tubes, with a volume of 5 
to 10 mL. The samples were processed within 1 hour of 
collection or were frozen (-20°C) until processing. Cell-free 
nucleic acids were isolated using MagMAX Cell-free Total 
Nucleic Acids, evaluating final yield of extraction. After that, an 
amplicon-based next-generation sequencing was performed 
by the Oncomine precision assay using the Genexus 
Integrated Sequencer. The data were analyzed using the 
Genexus software (Fig. 1). Results: All samples had an 
adequate yield of extraction for the subsequent technique 
(minimum of 0.33 ng/uL; median yield: 6.501 ng/uL). Single 
nucleotide variants were detected in TP53 (25% of the cases) 
(FA: 87.9% to 76.6%), KRAS (FA: 50.1%), GNAS (FA: 
14.1%), MAP2K1 (FA: 46.3%), MTOR (FA: 6.3%), PIK3CA 
(FA: 38.4%) y EGFR (FA: 39.4%), each one in 12.5% of the 
cases. Additionally, copy number variations in CDKN2A were 
detected in 25% of the cases and EGFR (amplification) in 
12.5%. Two samples (25%) did not show any alterations. 
Conclusions: These results indicate that the isolation 
methods for circulating tumor nucleic acids were successful in 
all samples considered in this study, with few variations to the 
extraction protocols based on sample origin. The use of EDTA 
tubes did not affect the viability of the sample when processed 
on the same day of collection. This represents a significant 
milestone, as access to specialized consumables is limited in 
México. 
 
 
Figure 1. 
NGS workflow for liquid biopsies. 1) Sample collection. 2) 
Different sample sources for ctNA detection. 3) NGS 
processing and data analysis.  
 
ST39. Clinical Application of Liquid Biopsy across Pan-
Cancer: 4baseCare's Experience Using TarGT Indiegene-
Liquid Biopsy NGS Panel  
A. Ravi, N.A. Tanwar, A. Prakash, K. Verma, S. Jayaraman, 
L. Varghese, S.R. Peddagangannagari, K.D. Rishi, H. 
Goswami, R. Malhotra, V.H. Veldore 
4baseCare Onco Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, India. 
 
Introduction: Precision oncology is a branch of medicine that 
focuses on using personalized and targeted approaches to 
treat cancer, based on the specific genetic mutations present 
in a patient's tumor. The use of liquid biopsy, which analyzes 
cell-free DNA in the blood, has become a popular tool in 
precision oncology to monitor cancer progression and 
response to treatment without invasive tissue biopsy. The 
TarGT Indiegene Liquid Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) 
panel, developed and validated by 4baseCare, is a 
comprehensive gene panel that covers 1,212 genes, and 
derived from in-house research on 1,500 pan-cancer patients 
S66
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
tumor tissue profiling on whole exome and transcriptome. 
Methods: A total of 100 patients with 20 different advanced 
stage cancers were analyzed using the TarGT Indiegene 
Liquid Biopsy Panel (Fig. 1). Beyond analytical validation, we 
have analyzed liquid biopsy patients samples from diverse 
cancer types using the standard Illumina library preparation 
protocol. Data analysis was performed using DRAGEN BioIT 
platform. Results: Performance matrix of TarGT Indigene 
Liquid (1,212 genes) biopsy NGS panel along with the 
diagnostic yield from clinical samples is summarised in Figure 
2. Seventy-six patients were observed to harbour oncogenic 
alterations, out of which 43% variants were implicated in 
therapy and 40% more were correlated with prognostic and 
therapeutic implications. Further, ERBB2 and CCND1 
amplification, FGF3/4 co-amplifications and FGFR2::BICC1 
gene fusions were identified in the patient cohort, and minimal 
residual disease (MRD) estimation was evident in a patient as 
well. Almost 70% of patients had TP53 alterations. In a patient 
with carcinoma of unknown primary, we found actionable 
mutation in PIK3CA (p.Glu545Asp) and IDH2 (p.Arg172Trp) 
that provided a scope for targeted therapy with repurposing 
option. The MRD estimation was evident in a breast cancer 
patient with ERBB2 amplification detected while the patient 
was on maintenance trastuzumab. Conclusions: This pan-
cancer pilot study using the TarGT Indiegene Liquid Biopsy 
Panel supports the hypothesis that molecular information 
obtained from liquid biopsy can play a significant role in 
clinical decision-making, in addition to tissue mutation 
profiling. The results of this study demonstrate the potential 
clinical utility of this liquid biopsy panel in identifying 
actionable genomic alterations in patients with advanced 
stage cancer. These findings suggest that liquid biopsy has 
the potential to complement tissue biopsy and provide 
important molecular information to inform personalized 
treatment decisions for patients with cancer. 
 
Patient cohort and sample processing end-to-end 
workflow of TarGT Indiegene Liquid Biopsy NGS panel. 
 
Assay performance metrics and clinical diagnostic 
yield of TarGT Indiegene Liquid Biopsy NGS panel 
 
ST40. The Senolytic Activity of Quercetin on Doxorubicin-
Induced Senescent Fibroblasts Reduced Osteosarcoma 
Cell Growth and Invasiveness  
E. Bientinesi, S. Ristori, M. Lulli, D. Monti  
University of Florence, Department of Experimental and 
Clinical Biomedical Sciences, Florence, Italy.  
 
Introduction: Cellular senescence is a tumour-suppressive 
mechanism that prevents the proliferation of premalignant 
cells. However, several studies show that senescent cells 
(SCs), particularly senescent cancer-associated fibroblasts, 
can promote tumour progression via the senescence-
associated secretory phenotype (SASP). Therefore, potential 
strategies for mitigating the effects of SCs include senolytic 
drugs that selectively kill them and interfere with the SASP. In 
this study, we used quercetin as a senolytic agent on 
Doxorubicin-induced senescent fibroblasts (SFs), 
investigating the mechanisms through which it killed 
senescent cells. Moreover, we studied if the partial elimination 
of SFs was sufficient to reduce the pro-tumour effects on 
osteosarcoma cells. Methods: WI-38 fibroblasts were induced 
to senescence with Doxo and then treated with quercetin 40 
μM for 3 days. To assess the reduction of senescent cells, we 
evaluated cell proliferation by Trypan blue exclusion assay, 
cell cycle arrest by cytofluorimetric analysis, senescence-
associated β-galactosidase activity (SA-β-gal), senescence-
associated heterochromatin foci (SAHF) by 
immunofluorescence, and cell death by Annexin/7AAD flow 
cytometry assay. In addition, the expression of autophagy 
markers was analysed by Western blot and 
immunofluorescence. Moreover, we have investigated colony 
formation capacity and invasiveness of U2OS treated with 
fibroblast conditioned media (CM). Results: Our results 
showed that quercetin kills 30% of SFs without affecting the 
proliferating ones. These data were obtained by assessing the 
decrease of SA-β-gal activity, cell cycle arrest, and increased 
SAHF presence in quercetin-treated SCs compared to 
untreated ones. Interestingly, our data suggested that 
S67
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
quercetin could kill SCs by reducing autophagy, a safeguard 
process frequently enhanced in SCs to counteract 
endoplasmatic reticulum stress due to the production of 
SASP. Moreover, our results showed that CM from SFs 
enhanced proliferation and invasiveness of U2OS cells. On 
the contrary, CM from quercetin-treated SFs did not induce 
these aggressive behaviours. Conclusions: Our study shows 
that quercetin exerted a senolytic activity on Doxo-induced 
senescent fibroblasts, reducing autophagy without affecting 
the viability of young cells. Reducing autophagy, quercetin 
probably exposes SFs to proteotoxic stress induced by the 
high protein synthesis rate involved in the SASP, leading to 
senolysis.Moreover, our data demonstrated that even if 
quercetin killed a relatively small amount of SCs (30%), this is 
sufficient to cancel pro-tumour activity of SFs on 
osteosarcoma cells. In conclusion, using flavonol quercetin to 
eliminate chemotherapy-induced SFs could be an excellent 
strategy to reduce chemotoxicity and metastatic progression, 
the biggest cause of poor prognosis of osteosarcoma. 
 
ST41. The Profiles of E-cadherin Expression in Different 
Types of Prostate Adenocarcinoma  
R.M. Plesea1,4, M.S. Serbanescu3,6, E.I. Plesea2,5  
1Craiova University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cell and 
Molecular Biology, Craiova, Romania; 2“Carol Davila” 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Pathology, Craiova, 
Romania; 3Craiova University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Medical Informatics and Biostatistics, Craiova, Romania; 
4Craiova Emergency Clinical County Hospital, Medical 
Genetics, Craiova, Romania; 5“Bagdasar-Arseni” Emergency 
Clinical Hospital, Pathology, Bucharest, Romania; 6Filantropia 
Municipal Clinical Hospital, Pathology, Craiova, Romania. 
 
Introduction: E-cadherin (ECHAD) is one of the main cell 
adhesion molecules related to the formation and growth of 
epithelial malignancies. The aim of this study is to compare 
the expression of ECHAD in 2 morphological variants of 
prostate adenocarcinoma: the classic form (PADK) and the 
ductal form (DADK) according to the degree of differentiation 
assessed with the Gleason system. Methods: A series of 525 
prostatic tissue areas with different individual patterns of the 
Gleason system of were immunohistochemically (IHC) stained 
with ECHAD and images were evaluated through a 
proprietary computational algorithm. The group consisted of 
435 areas of PADK, and 90 were areas of DADK. The 
algorithm marked the pixels where the red channel was more 
intense than the other channels. Then the overall colour 
intensity of the previously selected mask was inverted and 
considered as the value for the intensity of the IHC staining. 
Larger values have meant more intense staining. ECHAD 
expression location was stratified as follows: E1 = Membrane 
only, E2 = Membrane + Cytoplasm, E3 = Cytoplasm only. 
Results: ECHAD expression site evolved differently in the 2 
variants of prostate adenocarcinoma. In PADK, ECHAD had a 
dominant E1 expression in well-differentiated (WD) areas and 
evolved towards a predominant E3 expression in poorly 
differentiated (PD) areas, with a chi-square test p value 
<0.0001. In DADK, in turn, ECHAD had different types of 
expression in the 4 main types of Gleason patterns (chi-
square test p value = 0.022) but with an oscillating trend of 
expression, with obviously dominant E1 expression in the 
most PD areas (Gleason pattern 5), followed by moderately 
(Gleason pattern 3) and WD areas (Gleason pattern 2), and 
predominant E3 expression only in Gleason pattern 4 areas. 
Conclusions: The degree of intercellular adhesion, 
expressed by the ECHAD presence on cell membrane 
dominantly, does not always correlate with a lower degree of 
differentiation in prostate adenocarcinomas. 
 
ST42. Efficient Lung Cancer Molecular Diagnostics by 
Combining Next-Generation Sequencing with Reflex Idylla 
GeneFusion Assay Testing  
D. Nkosi, H. Liu, M. Buldo, M. Velez, Z.N. Oltvai 
University of Rochester, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Rochester, MN. 
 
Introduction: Molecular testing for lung cancer is well 
established, but how to provide rapid, precise, and cost-
effective testing modalities for optimal patient care remains 
unresolved. Here, we show that DNA-only <50 gene next-
generation sequencing (NGS) panels combined with ultra-
rapid reflex testing for fusion transcripts (ALK, ROS1, RET, 
NTRK1-3) and MET exon 14 splice mutations using the 
Biocartis Idylla GeneFusion assay provides a rapid and cost-
effective testing pathway for most lung cancer cases. We also 
demonstrate the need for additional reflex testing capability on 
larger DNA and fusion panels for a small subset of cases. 
Methods: We performed retrospective analyses of all lung 
tumor samples submitted for NGS and fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) for ALK and ROS1 rearrangements in a 
1-year time period (July 2021 to June 2022) at our institution. 
NGS data were obtained on the DNA portion of the Oncomine 
Focus Assay (OFA) (Thermo Fisher), which tested 35 genes 
for single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small indels and 18 
genes for gene amplification. We also sent out 4 in-house 
NGS/FISH negative specimens for comprehensive mutation 
and fusion profiling to a large commercial laboratory and 
performed Idylla GeneFusion assay testing on them. Results: 
In-house OFA NGS testing identified a pathogenic or likely 
pathogenic variant in more than 75% of lung tumor 
specimens. In contrast, FISH for ALK and ROS1 
rearrangements proved positive in only 3% of cases. We did 
S68
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
not detect a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant by NGS in 
any specimens that were positive for ALK or ROS1 
rearrangement. Follow-on comprehensive mutation and fusion 
profiling of 4 NGS negative-, ALK/ROS1 FISH negative cases 
identified SNVs and fusions in genes not tested on the OFA 
NGS panel. This included a case with detected FGFR3-
TACC3 fusion transcript and a specimen with a Met exon 14 
splice junction mutation that was not detectable by the OFA 
panel but could be detected by the Idylla GeneFusion assay 
which we validated recently. Conclusions: DNA-only <50 
gene NGS panels can identify oncogenic mutations in the 
majority of lung tumor cases. In contrast, FISH testing for ALK 
and ROS1 rearrangement is overwhelmingly negative and 
does not justify their use for initial testing. Instead, NGS 
negative lung tumor specimens can be reflexed to the Idylla 
GeneFusion assay, which provides results within 4 hours. 
Rare specimens that are both NGS and Idylla GeneFusion 
negative need to be promptly assessed by comprehensive 
mutation and fusion profiling for rare driver mutations and 
fusion transcripts. Similar testing blueprints could be 
established for all solid tumor types for which extensive 
gene/fusion variant results are available both in the treatment-
naïve and post-therapy settings. 
 
ST43. Molecular Characteristics of a C11orf95-RELA 
Fusion Gliosarcoma: A Case Report 
T. Feldman1, E. Vlodavsky1, S. Sarji1, A. Yousef Abu El Hija1, 
M. Benifla2, L. Oren3, M. Ben-Arush3, Y. Zohar1 
1Rambam Health Care Campus, Department of Pathology, 
Haifa, Israel; 2Rambam Health Care Campus, Children's 
Neurosurgery Department, Haifa, Israel; 3Rambam Health 
Care Campus, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, 
Ruth Rappaport Children's Hospital, Haifa, Israel. 
 
Introduction: Gliosarcoma (GSM) is a rare variant of IDH-
wild-type glioblastoma (GBM), an aggressive astrocytic tumor 
with a poor prognosis. Ependymomas are rare glial tumors 
arising from ependymal cells which are classified according to 
molecular and anatomical features. The combination of 
ependymoma and gliosarcoma elements in the same tumor is 
extremely rare, and the molecular characteristics of these 
entities are not clear. Here we present a rare case of an 
aggressive gliosarcoma harboring C11orf95-RELA fusion and 
its mutational landscape suggesting an aberrant activation of 
the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway. Methods: A 12-year-old 
male was admitted to our institute and was diagnosed with a 
left frontoparietal brain tumor which was operated and 
resected. Following a period of 10 months, the tumor 
recurred, and the patient was re-operated. Formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded tissue samples from both operations were 
sectioned, stained with hematoxylin-eosin and subjected to a 
histopathological examination. In addition, DNA and RNA 
were extracted from the tissue of the second operation and a 
library using the Oncomine Comprehensive Assay Plus kit 
was prepared, covering more than 500 unique genes. Library 
products were sequenced using the Ion GeneStudio S5 Prime 
semiconductor sequencer, and analysis was performed using 
the Ion Torrent Suite and Ion Reporter Software. Results: 
The sections from the original operation demonstrated a 
highly cellular, biphasic tumor composed of spindle cells with 
marked atypia and 30 mitoses in 10 HPF, alongside another 
population of large atypical epithelioid cells, focally positive for 
GFAP and EMA. A final diagnosis of undifferentiated sarcoma 
was made. Molecular studies revealed the presence of 
C11orf95-RELA fusion transcript in RNA, whereas DNA 
sequencing revealed somatic mutations in HRAS, NF1, TP53, 
BCOR, and STAG2 genes. Conclusions: In this report we 
present an extremely rare case of C11orf95-RELA fusion 
supratentorial ependymoma that underwent a complete 
sarcomatous transformation. The presence of C11orf95-RELA 
fusion in this case highlights the importance of considering the 
diagnosis of ependymoma in sarcomatous brain tumors and 
of performing unbiased molecular studies in these cases. 
Importantly, this report sheds light on key biological and 
evolutionary aspects of this rare tumor, such as an aberrant 
overactivation of the RAS/RAF/MAPK signaling pathway. 
Consequently, the sensitivity of these tumors to MEK 
inhibition should be assessed in future studies. 
 
ST44. Gold Nanoparticles Obtained by Pulsed Laser 
Ablation as Inducer of Tumor Vessel Normalization  
A. Chillà1, C. Anceschi1, E. Frediani1, T. Del Rosso2, G. Fibbi1, 
M. Del Rosso1, F. Margheri1, A. Laurenzana1 
1University of Florence, Department of Experimental and 
Clinical Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio", Florence, Italy; 
2Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro, Department 
of Physics, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
 
Introduction: Tumor neovascularization is essential for the 
progression of solid tumors, supporting their demand for 
nutrients and oxygen. However, the structure and function of 
new vessels are immature and deformed because of influence 
by excessive proangiogenic factors. Abnormal tumor vessels 
have low blood perfusion and thereby decrease oxygen 
infusion into tumors, thus creating a hypoxic tumor 
microenvironment, impeding the infiltration of immune cells 
and facilitating the intravasation of tumor cells into the 
circulation and consequently metastasis. Most of the therapies 
currently used for cancer treatment have focused primarily on 
inhibiting angiogenesis in tumors by cutting off their blood 
supply. However, these antiangiogenic drugs have limited 
efficacy and drug resistance. Moreover, some antiangiogenic 
S69
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
drugs increase the production of proangiogenic factors 
promoting pathological angiogenesis due to the reduction of 
the oxygen supply, thus leading to the increased tumor 
metastasis and relapse in some cancers. New antiangiogenic 
therapies focus on tumor vascular normalization with the aim 
of remodeling and stabilizing the immature vascular structures 
through the integration of vascular mural cells. Restoring 
aberrant tumor blood vessels has been shown not only to be 
capable of reducing tumor invasion and metastasis, but also 
of improving the efficiency of chemotherapy, radiation therapy, 
and immunotherapy. Methods: To test the effect of gold 
nanoparticles (Au-NPs) obtained by pulsed laser ablation 
(PLA) on the endothelial colony forming cells' (ECFCs') ability 
to form vessel structures, we performed experiments of 
capillary morphogenesis on Matrigel. To reproduce tumor 
microenvironment, the 3D model of tumor was composed of 
M6 melanoma spheroids which were placed in the presence 
of LA-Au-NPs-loaded ECFCs. A 3D invasion assay with 
Boyden chamber and scratch assay were used to test 
invasion and migration capacity of tumor cells, instead of 
WST-8 colorimetric assay, to assess their proliferation. 
Results: In this work we have shown that Au-NPs obtained by 
PLA release CO formed in the ablation process, triggering a 
cascade of events that stimulates neo-angiogenesis by a 
particular class of EPCs known as ECFCs, which play a 
fundamental role in tumor angiogenesis. Moreover, the 
migration and the enhanced angiogenic properties of PLA-Au-
NPs-enriched ECFCs were also confirmed in 3D melanoma 
culture. In parallel, the same Au-NPs induced the inhibition of 
melanoma and breast cancer cell invasion and proliferation. 
Conclusions: These preliminary experiments showed that 
PLA-Au-NPs are a promising nanomaterial due not only to 
their inherent anti-neoplastic activity typical of Au-NPs, but for 
inducing a strong proangiogenic activity in endothelial 
progenitor cells. Based on these properties, promising 
experiments are now being conducted to test these NPs as 
tumor vessel normalization inducers. 
 
ST45. DNA Methylation Changes in HPV-Positive and 
HPV-Negative Cervical Adenocarcinoma  
S.A. Farkas1, M. Kaliff1, B. Sorbe3, L. Bohr Mordhorst3, G. 
Lillsunde-Larsson4,1 
1Örebro University, Örebro University Hospital, School of 
Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro, 
Sweden; 2Örebro University, School of Medical Sciences, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro, Sweden; 3Örebro 
University, Örebro University Hospital, Oncology, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health, Örebro, Sweden; 4Örebro University, 
School of Health Sciences, Örebro, Sweden. 
 
Introduction: Persistent human papilloma virus (HPV) 
infection is considered the main cause of cervical cancer. 
There are more than 200 different subtypes of HPV, classified 
into high risk or low risk. The cytological screenings and 
vaccines against HPV are powerful tools to combat cervical 
cancer; however, the incidence has increased in developing 
countries in the past decades. There are 2 main histological 
types of cervical cancer, squamous cell carcinoma, and 
adenocarcinoma (AC). Changes in DNA methylation patterns 
are one of the hallmarks of cancer, where certain changes 
may lead to progression and aggressiveness. The aim of the 
current work was to study DNA methylation changes in HPV-
positive and HPV-negative cervical adenocarcinoma to aid in 
the knowledge about the epigenetic changes that occur due to 
HPV infection. Methods: We have analysed DNA methylation 
profile in 15 HPV-positive AC, and 8 HPV-negative AC 
samples using the Illumina EPIC array. Samples were 
collected at the Department of Oncology, Örebro, University 
Hospital. The DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-
embedded material. The differential methylation analysis was 
performed using R package CHAMP. Results: The differential 
methylation analysis resulted in a limited number of 
differentially methylated CpG sites (see Fig. 1). A total number 
of 377 differentially methylated CpG sites were identified with 
an adjusted p-value <0,05. The vast majority of the CpG sites 
were hypermethylated in the HPV-positive adenocarcinoma. 
Top 10 hypermethylated CpG sites were located in the 
KCNK12 (cg13913015), PPP1R1C (cg21566370), FAM155A 
(cg14119999), C1orf114 (cg14119999), PDE4D 
(cg11258089), VSTM2B (cg18802754), SOX2OT 
(cg02650401), SYT9 (cg24678137), SST (cg24678137), and 
ONECUT1 (cg17500265) genes. The difference in 
methylation (∆-β value) between the 2 groups ranged 
between 0.37 and 0.49. Conclusions: HPV infection affects 
the DNA-methylation pattern in cervical adenocarcinoma, 
specifically, more hypermethylation was observed. 
S70
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
Figure 1. 
Differentially methylated CpG sites in HPV-positive and 
HPV-negative adenocarcinoma. 
 
 
Selected Other Abstracts 
 
OTH01. PD-L1 Testing of Pulmonary and Non-pulmonary 
Malignancies: A Cytology/Histology Correlation Study  
K. Ijaz, L. Layfield, M. Esebua 
University of Missouri Hospital and Clinics, Department of 
Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, Columbia, MO. 
 
Introduction: Immunotherapy and related PD-L1 testing are 
standard of care for many patients with advanced 
malignancies at a variety of body sites. Many studies have 
correlated PD-L1 testing results of cytology and histology 
specimens from pulmonary carcinomas, but fewer have been 
reported for malignancies arising at other body sites. We 
report our findings for PD-L1 testing in a series of pulmonary 
and non-pulmonary malignancies. Methods: An electronic 
search for all PD-L1 testing of cytologic specimens performed 
over a 48-month period (January 1, 2019, to June 30, 2022) 
was undertaken. Each case identified by the search was 
reviewed for corresponding biopsy or resection specimens. 
Representative histologic slides from the surgical specimens 
underwent immunohistochemical testing for PD-L1. Two 
observers independently scored the cytologic and histologic 
PD-L1 stained slides with correlation analyzed by Cohen’s 
kappa. Results: Thirty-four cytology specimens with PD-L1 
results were identified, which had subsequent surgical 
biopsies or resection specimens. Twenty-two cases were 
pulmonary carcinomas and 12 were non-pulmonary 
malignancies (8 pancreatic adenocarcinomas, 3 head and 
neck squamous carcinomas, and 1 mesothelioma). Overall, 
the observed agreement between cytologists for PD-L1 
results was 97.1% with expected agreement of 40.0% and a 
kappa of 0.95. Observed correlation of cytologic and histologic 
PD-L1 staining was 82.4%, with expected agreement of 
36.8% with a Cohen’s kappa of 0.72. Observed agreement of 
pulmonary cases for cytologic-histology correlation was 86.4% 
with a kappa of 0.78, and for non-pulmonary cases observed 
agreement was 75% with a Cohen’s kappa of 0.62 (Table 1). 
Conclusions: Correlation between observers for PD-L1 
scoring was strong, as was agreement between cytologic and 
histologic specimens for PD-L1 results. Correlation between 
cytologic and histologic specimens was higher for pulmonary 
specimens (86.4%) than for non-pulmonary malignancies 
(0.78%), but the difference was not statistically significant (p  
=  0.5). 
 
Correlation results for PD-L1 testing 
 
 
OTH02. Next-Generation Sequencing of Cytology 
Specimens: A Practical Review  
K. Ijaz, M. Esebua, L. Layfield 
University of Missouri Hospital and Clinics, Department of 
Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, Columbia, MO. 
 
Introduction: Cytologic samples often constitute the only 
available material for diagnosis and ancillary testing, 
especially in advanced stage cancers. Cellblock preparations 
represent a valid method for next-generation sequencing 
(NGS), especially for predicting response to targeted 
therapies. FoundationOne CDx Solid Tumor Panel is a 
qualitative NGS-based diagnostic test which includes 315 
genes, as well as introns of 28 genes with known 
rearrangements, and cancer biomarkers including tumor 
mutational burden (TMB) and microsatellite instability (MSI). 
We examined NGS results of cytologic material to determine 
the frequency of therapeutically useful results. Methods: 
Following Institutional Review Board approval, the NGS 
reports of 54 cytology specimens (48 fine needle aspirations 
and 6 fluids) were reviewed. Reports were analyzed for tumor 
type, tumor location, presence of actionable mutations, 
mutations without specific drug assignment, MSI, and TMB. 
Tumor sites include lymph node, lung, pancreas, liver, pleural 
fluid, peritoneal fluid, and bronchial washings (Table 1). Thirty-
seven cases were tumors of pulmonary origin (30 
S71
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
adenocarcinomas, 4 squamous cell carcinomas, 1 each small 
cell carcinoma, carcinosarcoma, and neuroendocrine 
neoplasms). Six cases were pancreatic adenocarcinomas, 
while 4 were squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck. 
Three adenocarcinomas of the breast, 1 adenocarcinoma of 
the gallbladder, 1 esophageal adenocarcinoma, along with a 
single squamous cell carcinoma of unknown origin, and a 
single urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. Thirty-eight of 54 
cases had adequate tissue for analysis. Results: Five 
specimens from adenocarcinomas of the lung contained 
targetable mutations (4 EGFR and 1 ROS1) (Table 1). No 
other specifically targetable mutations were found in this 
series. Mutations of potential utility for protocol selection were 
found in 21 specimens of lung neoplasms and a single breast 
adenocarcinoma. Nine mutations of prognostic significance 
were found in lung adenocarcinomas, and 1 each in 
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, breast, and gallbladder. 
TMB data were obtained in 27 of 54 cases, but none showed 
high mutational burdens. MSI was documented in none of the 
29 cases successfully tested. Conclusions: Adequate 
material for NGS was obtainable in 68.5% of cases. NGS 
panel provided useful information in most cases. Targetable 
mutations were found in 9% of cases, but mutations 
potentially impacting protocol selection were found in 39% of 
cases, indicating the value and applicability of NGS to 
cytology specimens. 
 
NGS Results Summarized in Cytology Cases of 
Pulmonary and Non-pulmonary Malignancies 
 
 
OTH03. Development and Validation of an AI-Based 
Tumour Cell Estimation Algorithm for Use in a Lung 
Adenocarcinoma Molecular Pathology Workflow 
(Selected for Oral Presentation, O-02-03) 
R.C. Wyatt1, D. Dorward2, D. Mulkern1, P. Caie1, C. Corless3 
1Indica Labs, Albuquerque, NM; 2NHS Lothian, Department of 
Pathology, Edinburgh, United Kingdom; 3Oregon Health & 
Science University, Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Portland, OR. 
Introduction: The development of targeted therapies has led 
to an increasing volume of molecular testing on formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded tissue samples. This has increased the 
workload for pathologists, who review haematoxylin and eosin 
(H&E) stained slides, mark a tumour-dense region suitable for 
macrodissection, and estimate the percentage of tumour cells 
within the area. These estimates also suffer from subjectivity 
and inter-observer variability; pathologists typically 
overestimate the proportion of tumour. Accurate knowledge of 
the tumour fraction is critical for interpreting molecular results 
and avoiding false negatives. Computational assessment of 
cell counts can standardise tumour fraction measurements, 
bringing efficiency and quality gains to the molecular 
pathology workflow. More accurate results and faster 
turnaround times will reduce workloads and benefit patients. 
Here, we present an AI-based algorithm for the clinical scoring 
of pulmonary oncology samples to support pathologists and 
increase consistency. Methods: HALO Lung Macrodissect AI 
was developed and validated on routine, H&E-stained lung 
adenocarcinoma (ADC) diagnostic cases, including cytology, 
core biopsy, and resection specimens from primary and 
metastatic lesions. Across 91 images from 2 institutes 
(institute 1: n = 47 [52%]; institute 2 n = 44 [48%]), 173,374 
annotations were split into training (n = 146,852 [84.7%]) and 
validation (n = 26,522 [15.3%]) pools. These were used to 
train a ResNet 18-based network to classify all cells within a 
whole slide image (20x magnification) as either "tumour" or 
"other." The resultant algorithm was validated at the cell level 
using 28,733 annotations (tumour: n = 15,523 [54%]; other: n 
= 13,210 [46%]) from 30 unseen images (institute 1: n = 17, 
57%; institute 2: n = 13, 43%). All annotations were verified by 
expert pathologists. The algorithm was then run on 25 unseen 
images within regions marked for macrodissection by 
pathologists during their routine clinical workflow. The 
percentage of cells identified as tumour by the classifier was 
compared with a pathologist’s estimate. Results: The median 
image F1-score for combined cell level validation was 0.88 
(IQR, 0.84 to 0.93). The median F1-score for tumour and 
other cells was 0.90 (IQR, 0.85 to 0.94) and 0.87 (IQR 0.82 to 
0.92), respectively. In regions marked for macrodissection, the 
median tumour cell percentage score from the pathologist was 
55% (IQR, 35% to 65%) compared with 48% (IQR, 36% to 
S72
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
57%) (p = 0.007) from the algorithm. The median difference 
between estimates was 7.9% (IQR 3.8% to 14.5%). The AI 
scores were within 10% of the pathologist’s estimate in 15 
(60%) cases. Conclusions: Tumour cell percentage scores 
from HALO Lung Macrodissect AI agree with pathologist 
estimates in routine lung ADC cases annotated for 
macrodissection. Cell level validation shows that the algorithm 
detects tumour cells with a high level of accuracy. Use of this 
classifier in a diagnostic setting can support pathologists by 
saving time, standardising results, and improving the quality of 
molecular readouts. 
Tumour cell percentage scores 
Plot to show tumour cell percentage scores measured in 
regions marked for macrodissection on 25 unseen 
images. The median score from the pathologist was 55% 
(IQR, 35% to 65%) compared with 48% (IQR, 36% to 
57%) (p = 0.007) from HALO Lung Macrodissect AI. 
 
OTH04. Technical Validation of the Idylla Microsatellite 
Instability Assay on FFPE Tissue in Colorectal Cancers  
S. Kalachian, R. Abdul Khalik, F. Abbas, R. Mahfouz 
American University of Beirut Medical Center (AUBMC), 
Pathology and Lab Medicine, Beirut, Lebanon. 
 
Introduction: Microsatellite instability (MSI) is a molecular 
hallmark for some colorectal cancers (CRCs) in which short 
tandem repeats are prone to mutations along with DNA 
sequences. Microsatellites are strands of DNA with a 
repetitive sequence of 1 to 10 nucleotides duplicated from 5 
to 50 times that are wildly distributed throughout the human 
genome. These tandem repeats are particularly unstable and 
susceptible to mutations with rates of 103 to 105 per cell 
generation. The mutations that escape from the DNA 
mismatch repair (MMR) system form new alleles at the 
microsatellite loci and are inherited by the next cell 
generation. MMR proteins (MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6) are a 
major system of DNA repair that specifically repairs DNA 
base-base mismatch pairs introduced into microsatellites 
during DNA synthesis to maintain genomic stability. MMR 
system deficiency (MMR-D) particularly affects microsatellites 
and results in alterations in their repeat length, named MSI, 
and in loss of expression of MMR proteins in tumor tissue. 
Therefore, MSI status detected by MSI testing actually reflects 
MMR proficiency. MSI testing is used to classify CRC tumors 
as MSI-high (MSI-H), MSI-low, and microsatellite stable 
tumors. This classification also aids in making treatment 
management decisions. In fact, MSI-H or MMR deficient 
tumors have shown the best prognosis among all CRCs, so 
MSI testing is considered as a good prognostic marker. 
Methods: MSI status was determined on 12 archived 
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections with Idylla 
technology. The Idylla MSI Test performs a qualitative 
detection of 7 monomorphic homopolymer biomarkers 
(ACVR2A, BTBD7, DIDO1, MRE11, RYR3, SEC31A, SULF2) 
for identification of colorectal cancer with MSI. The Idylla MSI 
results were compared with previously obtained findings by 
routine testing methods. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) looks at 
MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 staining on tumor samples 
to identify the loss of protein expression that characterizes 
MMR-D as a surrogate for MSI. Results: Ten out of 12 
samples showed concordance between the results obtained 
with the Idylla MSI Test and the IHC staining profile. The 2 
discordant samples were non-colorectal tumors. Indeed, 
recent studies have shown a higher rate of discordance 
between microsatellite status and MMR immunophenotype in 
non-CRC. Moreover, different types of MMR-D 
immunostaining from the classical MLH1/PMS2 or 
MSH2/MSH6 loss have also been described. Consequently, 
the rising amount of MMR testing, particularly in non-CRC, 
has led to an increase in the number of unusual MMR-D 
cases. The origin and functional consequences of these 
unusual MMR-D profiles are not documented; nor was their 
clinical impact evaluated. Conclusions: The Idylla MSI Test 
was successfully technically validated as an adequate tool for 
the evaluation of the MSI status in CRC. 
 
 
 
S73
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
OTH05. Yin/Yang Effectiveness of Gold Nanoparticles: 
Tumor Progression Control or Promotion of 
Vascularization of Defective Angiogenesis Diseases  
C. Anceschi1, E. Frediani1, A. Chillà1, F. Scavone1, F. 
Margheri1, P. Armanetti3, L. Menichetti3, F. Ratto2, T. Del 
Rosso4, G. Fibbi1, M. Del Rosso1, A. Laurenzana1 
1University of Florence, Experimental and Clinical Biomedical 
Sciences, Florence, Italy; 2National Research Council, 
Institute of Applied Physics “N. Carrara” Sesto Fiorentino, 
Italy; 3National Research Council, Institute of Clinical 
Physiology (IFC), Pisa, Italy; 4Pontifical Catholic University of 
Rio de Janeiro, Department of Physics, Rio de Janeiro-RJ, 
Brazil. 
 
Introduction: The application of nanomaterials in the fields of 
medicine and biotechnology is of enormous interest, 
particularly in the areas where traditional solutions have failed. 
Nanoparticles can offer clear advantages compared to 
traditional therapies: 1) fewer side effects of delivered drugs; 
2) increased versatility in formulation; and 3) display of optical 
or magnetic properties that can be tuned to detect early 
disease (diagnosis) or to cause damage to cancer cells 
(therapy). Certainly, the biological activity of nanoparticles 
(NPs) depends on chemical and physical factors such as size 
and shape, surface area, agglomeration state, chemical 
composition, surface chemistry (charge and hydrophilicity), 
surface activity, solubility, dose, and so on. In particular, gold 
NPs, due to the chemically inert nature of gold and the relative 
ease of surface chemistry manipulation for downstream 
applications, have received much attention. Methods: The 
current work describes the effects and biological interaction of 
two different types of gold NPs on progenitor endothelial cells 
(EPCs). Capillary morphogenesis, matrigel plug assay, real-
time PCR, and Western blot analysis were used to evaluate 
the angiogenic properties and phenotype of EPCs. Inductively 
coupled plasma mass spectrometry and transmission electron 
microscopy were employed to assess cellular gold uptake and 
retention. Confocal microscopy and photoacoustic imaging 
(PAI) were used to evaluate the distribution of AuNPs inside 
3D tumor models and to detect the optical imaging of NIR 
AuNP-doped EPCs. Results: We surprisingly identified pro-
angiogenic properties of gold nanoparticles (Au-carbenoids), 
having a peak of absorbance at 510nm, that are heavily taken 
by EPCs. We demonstrated that EPCs, loaded with these 
particular gold nanoparticles, show an improved angiogenic 
phenotype in vitro and in vivo. We also demonstrated that the 
same cell line can be heavily loaded with near infrared (NIR) 
AuNPs and be used as theranostic vector. Indeed, NIR AuNP-
loaded EPCs enhanced AuNP optical properties and exhibited 
excellent thermotransductive property when exposed to NIR 
light. Moreover, EPC loaded with NIR AuNPs are able to 
reach hypoxic areas of a 3D tumor model and could possibly 
re-sensitize tumors to radiotherapy. Conclusions: Au-
carbenoids might represent a differential therapeutic option for 
patients with diseases associated with progressive loss of 
microvasculature. Nonetheless, NIR AuNP-doped EPCs 
represent a powerful theranostic tool for tailored early disease 
detection and innovative medical treatment. 
 
OTH06. Measurable Residual Disease Detection in Mantle 
Cell Lymphoma (MCL) Subjects Using NGS B-Cell MRD 
Assay  
P. Shah1, Y. Huang1, O. Diaz II1, A. Jacobson1, N. Hill1, A. M. 
Herrera2, A. Zlotnicki1 
1Invivoscribe, Product Development, San Diego, CA; 
2Universitario de Salamanca, Hospital Clínico, San Vicente, 
Spain. 
 
Introduction: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive, 
rare form of non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma. Measurable 
residual disease (MRD) assessment can provide useful 
information when assessing and tracking response to therapy, 
refining treatment, and predicting clinical outcome for subjects 
with B-cell lymphoproliferative diseases. One method of MRD 
detection is to identify and track specific clonal 
immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) gene rearrangement 
sequences on a next-generation sequencing platform. Here, 
we present the NGS-based B-cell MRD Assay with 10-6 
sensitivity for detecting MRD in malignancies in MCL. 
Methods: Residual DNA samples from different specimen 
types (44 bone marrow [BM] and 77 peripheral blood [PB]) at 
different post-treatment time points were obtained from 
anonymized 47 MCL subjects that had been enrolled in a 
study approved by the Spanish Group of Lymphoma and 
Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation (clinical trial: 
NCT02682641, publication reference: 
10.1200/JCO.21.02321). A total of 121 of these follow-up 
samples were tested by the B-cell MRD Assay by tracking the 
clonal sequences detected in corresponding baseline 
samples. Among them, 90 follow-up samples were paired PB 
and BM samples. The B-cell MRD Assay workflow consists of 
DNA extraction and PCR-based library preparation with 
proprietary multiplex master mixes targeting either IGH 
Framework 1 (FR1) or 3 (FR3) regions, which both track the 
patient- and tumor-specific CDR3 sequence. Purified libraries 
are then equimolar pooled and sequenced on Illumina’s 
NextSeq Dx platform. The FASTQ output files from 
sequencing are analyzed using Invivoscribe’s B-Cell MRD 
Software-NextSeqDx. Results from Invivoscribe were 
compared to the results from the Salamanca lab that were 
generated by qPCR. Results: Based on the results from the 
B-cell MRD Assay, 115/121 (95%) samples were valid, 42/115 
(37%) valid samples had, “MRD Detected," and 73/115 (63%) 
S74
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
samples had, “MRD Not Detected," with a “MRD Detection” 
rate of 28% in PB and 50% in BM specimen types. When 
comparing MRD detectable status between paired PB and BM 
samples from 36 MCL subjects, 30/44 (68%) paired samples 
had the same MRD call and were concordant, whereas 14/44 
(32%) calls were discordant. More specifically, 12/14 (86%) 
discordant samples had PB specimen type with a “MRD Not 
detected” call, whereas the paired BM specimen showed a 
“MRD Detected” call. Overall, in comparison with the MRD 
results (n = 84) provided by the Salamanca lab using the 
qPCR method, the B-cell MRD Assay demonstrated 
concordance of 80%, positive percent agreement of 79%, and 
negative percent agreement of 80% for MRD detection in 
MCL samples. Conclusions: Good concordance was 
observed between Salamanca and the B-cell MRD Assay. It is 
important to note that the BM specimen type was determined 
to be more sensitive in detecting MRD when compared to BM 
in assessment of paired PB and BM samples. These results 
demonstrate that the B-cell MRD Assay can be utilized for 
MRD detection in follow-up sample types for MCL subjects. 
 
OTH07. Evaluation of EGFR and GeneFusion Assay Using 
Biocartis Idylla Technology in Lung Adenocarcinoma  
R. N. Abdel Khalek, S. Kalachian, F. Abbas, R. Mahfouz 
American University of Beirut Medical Center, Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Beirut, Lebanon. 
 
Introduction: Lung cancer is the second most common 
cause of cancer death in the world. Thus, the tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor (TKI) therapy is established for cancer driven by an 
oncogenic kinase. The detection of actionable mutations such 
as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), anaplastic 
lymphoma kinase (ALK), c-ros oncogene 1 (ROS1), ret proto-
oncogene (RET) or neurotropic tyrosine receptor kinase 
(NTRK) is very crucial in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. 
Patients carrying EGFR mutations or gene fusion variants 
may be candidates for a targeted therapy, whereas those 
developing resistance to first-generation TKI expressed the 
T790M EGFR mutation. This study aims to evaluate the 
clinical performance of the Idylla EGFR and Idylla 
GeneFusion on the Idylla Biocartis System. Methods: In this 
evaluation, 10 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) 
tumor tissue sections previously tested with Cobas EGFR 
gene mutation assay were retested by real-time PCR 
amplification using Idylla EGFR Mutation assay. The Idylla 
EGFR detects a total of 51 mutations on exon 18 
(G719A/S/C), 36 deletions in exon 19, exon 20 (T790M, 
S768I), and 5 insertions in exon 20 and exon 21 (L858R, 
L861Q). Eight FFPE samples from patients with 
adenocarcinoma were retested using the Idylla GeneFusion 
assay, which detects gene fusion for ALK, ROS1, RET as well 
as MET exon 14 skipping and expression imbalance for ALK, 
ROS1, RET, and NTRK1/2/3 by reverse transcription of 
mRNA followed by real-time PCR amplification. Results: A 
concordance frequency of 100% (10/10) was observed 
between the Idylla EGFR and Cobas EGFR Mutations Test 
V2. Eight of the 10 tumors were lung biopsy, one pleural fluid, 
and one iliac bone biopsy. Six out of 8 samples tested by 
Idylla GeneFusion showed concordant results for ALK, ROS1, 
and RET fusion in comparison with immunohistochemistry 
(IHC) staining. One of the discrepant samples was a pleural 
fluid and the second a vertebral biopsy. This failure may be 
due to loss and/or degradation of RNA, which might be 
countered by increasing the amount of sample input. 
Conclusions: The Idylla EGFR testing is an accurate and 
simple tool useful for the early screening of EGFR mutations. 
The Idylla GeneFusion is a potential screening panel with 
short turnaround time using a minimal amount of tissue and 
might be considered as a relevant complementary testing to 
IHC in diagnostic molecular laboratories. 
 
OTH08. Irish Healthcare Providers' Knowledge, 
Confidence, and Practice Regarding Molecular Pathology: 
Measurement and Attitudes, Including towards Clinical 
Informatics to Support Implementation of Molecular 
Pathology, amongst Diverse Health Care Providers in 
Various Specialities in a Large Irish University Teaching 
Hospital 
S. Kearney 
University College Dublin, School of Medicine, Dublin, Ireland; 
Beacon Hospital, Oncology Department, Dublin, Ireland. 
 
Introduction: The purpose of this study was to measure Irish 
healthcare providers’ (HCPs) subjective self-appraisal of their 
knowledge of molecular pathology (MP) tests and techniques, 
combined with obtaining an objective assessment of such 
knowledge. We measured HCPs' self-confidence regarding 
MP tasks, including ordering, interpreting, and explaining MP 
tests. Aside from measuring knowledge and confidence, we 
ascertained HCPs' attitudes and opinions regarding how 
clinical informatics tools and ancillary supports (such as 
genetic counsellors, molecular tumour boards, and accessing 
second opinions) might assist MP workflows. We also 
investigated general attitudes and opinions on MP clinical 
informatics issues including interoperability, artificial 
intelligence, mobile access, and preference for paper versus 
digital workflows. Finally, we enquired whether HCPs viewed 
MP as a mainly research-oriented activity or as being clinically 
essential. Methods: The survey was conducted via electronic 
means, utilising Google Forms, which was distributed to a 
wide variety of HCPs. Thirty HCPs associated with a single 
hospital replied, including nurses of various grades, doctors in 
S75
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
training in various specialities (both medical and surgical), 
general practitioners, and qualified consultants. Results: 
More than half of respondents (65.6%) thought they knew less 
than enough regarding MP to do their jobs (Fig. 1). Amongst 
all types, grades, and specialities of HCPs, there was a 
distinct subset of doctors who thought they knew enough or 
more than enough to do their jobs. However, only a minority of 
this cohort actually had relatively high levels of objective MP 
knowledge, as measured via a battery of tests (Fig. 2). 
Regarding confidence in all the steps of ordering, interpreting, 
and explaining MP tests, only a minority were fully or 
somewhat confident. The majority of HCPs were positively 
predisposed to utilising clinical informatics to assist with MP 
workflows and tasks, were in favour of genetic counsellors 
(GCs) assisting their practice, were comfortable with 
accessing second opinions, and thought that molecular 
tumour boards (MTBs) were essential to successful 
implementation. Only one HCP had a strong preference for 
paper over digital workflows, whereas the majority were 
comfortable with AI. The majority had poor access to 
healthcare data interoperability and mobile access. Finally, 
the majority (83.9%) were supportive or strongly supportive 
that MP was important to their clinical practice, rather than 
research, within their speciality. Conclusions: Despite a 
small subset of respondents having high self-appraisals of 
their MP knowledge, when objectively measured most Irish 
HCPs lack knowledge and confidence in MP, like their 
international peers. However, clinical informatics tools and 
professional supports, such as MTBs, GCs, and second 
opinions, may help to overcome such limitations in knowledge 
and confidence. This is important, given the growing 
prominence of MP in mainstream clinical practice, as reported 
by respondents. 
Figure 1: Irish HCPs' Subjective Knowledge of 
Molecular Pathology 
The percentage breakdown in Irish Health Care Providers' 
self-appraisal of their knowledge regarding molecular 
pathology. 
 
Figure 2: Irish HCP's Objective Knowledge of 
Molecular Pathology 
Graph showing the percentage breakdown in HCP’s 
knowledge of commercial third-party molecular pathology 
testing laboratories. 
 
OTH09. Exosomal PD-L1 Expression Reduction by 
uPAR/PAI-1 Blockade: A New Strategy for Cancer 
Immunotherapy?  
E. Frediani, C. Anceschi, F. Scavone, A. Chillà, G. Fibbi, M. 
Del Rosso, A. Mocali, A. Laurenzana, F. Margheri 
Università degli studi di Firenze, Dipartimento di Scienze 
Biomediche Sperimentali e Cliniche, Firenze, Italy. 
 
Introduction: Over the last few years, immunotherapy has 
revolutionized cancer therapy. Immune checkpoint inhibitors, 
such as antibodies against PD-L1 and PD-1, have shown 
effectiveness against a large number of cancer types, 
including melanoma and non-small-cell lung cancer. Emerging 
evidence suggests that improved prognosis and clinical 
outcomes in melanoma patients subjected to anti- PD-L1 
therapy are associated with high PD-L1 positivity. Recently, 
Tseng et al. showed that targeting plasminogen activator 
inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) by its inhibitor tiplaxtinin (TPX) synergizes 
with anti-PD-L1 checkpoint blockade in a model of murine 
melanoma, thus paving the way for a more effective 
melanoma treatment. The membrane-associated plasminogen 
activation system (urokinase-type plasminogen activator, uPA; 
uPA receptor, uPAR; uPA inhibitor type-1, PAI-1) is 
considered one of the main systems involved in tumor 
invasion and metastasis. Moreover, previous data have 
reported that PD-L1 on exosomes surface can inhibit 
antitumor immune responses: cancer cells package PD-L1 
into exosomes by shedding PD-L1 on their surface. Thus, PD-
L1-positive exosomes promote immunosuppression. On this 
basis, we propose to inhibit PD-L1 endocytosis targeting LRP-
1/uPAR and or/PAI-1 complex in order to reduce the 
expression of exosomal PD-L1 and maintain the receptor at 
membrane level. Methods: A375M6 (metastatic melanoma 
cells) and A549 (non-small cell lung cancer cells) were treated 
with TPX 28mM to evaluate the modulation of TPX treatment 
on exosomal PD-L1. Conditioned media collected from 
untreated and TPX-treated tumor cells were used for 
exosome isolation, through two sequential steps of 
S76
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
ultracentrifugation. PAI-1 and uPAR silencing by siRNA and 
uPAR/LRP-1 complex inhibition by specific antibodies were 
performed to block PD-L1 endocytosis and increase PD-L1 
membrane levels on A375M6 and A549 surface. In particular, 
PD-L1 membrane levels were analyzed by flow cytometry and 
confocal immunofluorescence. Results: We demonstrated 
that in A375M6 and in A549, PAI-1 and uPAR silencing by 
siRNA, or uPAR/LRP-1 complex inhibition by specific 
antibodies, is able to block the PD-L1 internalization and, 
consequently, to increase PD-L1 membrane levels on cancer 
cells. Moreover, our result evidenced that exosomes from 
TPX-treated A375M6 and A549 show a decrease of exosomal 
PD-L1 levels, compared to untreated cancer cells. 
Conclusions: Our data demonstrated that uPAR silencing or 
uPAR/LRP-1 inhibition results in a significant increase in 
surface PD-L1 levels. In parallel, our results evidenced that 
PAI-1 inhibition and, consequently, the blockade of PAI-1-
dependent PD-L1 endocytosis showed a decrease of 
exosomal PD-L1 levels. These findings open the way for new 
combined therapeutic strategies with anti-uPAR/PAI-1 and 
anti-PD-1/PD-L1, and could have significant implications for 
immunotherapeutic approaches to cancer treatment. 
 
OTH10. MPQAP EQAS Scheme for FISH HER2/neu Gene 
Amplification Assay: Excerpts from Five Rounds of 
Proficiency Testing Cycle  
R. Iyer, O. Shetty, T. Shet, P. Joshi, P. Gogte, M. Gurav, N. 
Karnik, T. Pai, G. Deshpande, S. Epari, C. Hingnekar, S. 
Desai 
Tata Memorial Hospital, Homi Bhabha National Institute, 
Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, 
Mumbai, India. 
 
Introduction: Analysing amplification status of HER2/neu 
gene is a prerequisite for providing targeted therapy to breast 
cancer patients, thereby necessitating the need for accurate 
test results. Monitoring the quality of technical procedures and 
analytical interpretation for diagnosis is the primary role of 
EQAS providers. Molecular Pathology Quality Assurance 
Program (MPQAP) is a first EQAS initiative in India for solid 
tumor diagnostics started in the year 2019 which is actively 
conducting quality assurance schemes for fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) and PCR-based tests. The current study 
presents the findings and excerpts from the summation of five 
rounds of an EQAS scheme for a FISH HER2/neu test. 
Methods: Previously tested and reported cases of breast 
cancer tissues (formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded) were 
selected as survey material. Tissue microarrays containing 5 
to 6 cores each having varied HER2 gene amplification status 
was prepared. These were circulated to registered 
participants of the test scheme (2019 to 2022). Participants 
were required to test the samples using their routine 
diagnostic protocols and report their findings. During the 
pandemic, apart from routine EQAS, an image interpretation 
module was also released to assess the post-analytical 
aspect of testing. The participants were assessed and scored 
based on accurate interpretation, data entry, and timely 
completion of the survey. The score system was as follows: 
>90 = "Very Good Performance," 70 to 80 = "Good 
Performance," and <70 = "Needs Improvement." Based on 
these scores, participant summaries were prepared. The test 
results were anonymised for the evaluator’s assessment and 
a report was issued to all participants. Results: A total of 21 
centres participated in the scheme, with 4 centres in the first 
round followed by 13 to 15 centres, each in subsequent 
cycles. From the obtained 61 datasets of test results, overall 
81% (17/21) centres showed "Very Good Performance," 7% 
(1/21) showed "Good Performance," and 12% (2/21) were 
graded as "Needs Improvement." Three centres participated 
in all 5 rounds and showed consistent "Very Good 
Performance." During the third circulation, inconsistency in 
performance of centres was observed where 57% (12/21) of 
centers scored 70 to 90 and 14% (3/21) centers scored <70. 
Based on this trend, an online session was conducted as an 
educational exercise to address the concerns of result 
discrepancies. The session focused on 1) ASCO/CAP 2018 
recommendations for FISH reporting; 2) analysing samples 
with low tumor content; 3) genomic heterogeneity; and 4) 
known control samples for internal quality assurance. Post-
session, the performance of participants rose to an average of 
96% in the fourth and fifth rounds, depicting the importance of 
monitoring the role of EQAS providers. Conclusions: 
MPQAP augmented the monitoring criteria of the quality 
testing by providing educational EQAS programs. The 
program provides continual support to participating 
laboratories by imparting recommendations for enhancing 
quality practices in solid tumor diagnostics to improve 
performance, thereby ensuring reliability of testing. 
 
OTH11. Rapid qPCR Based IDH1/IDH2 Mutation Screening 
in Solid Tumors and Hematologic Malignancies without 
Extraction (Selected for Oral Presentation, O-03-03) 
E. Dikoglu, D. Kim, R. Chan, B. S. Gray, A. Yun, P.A. Salazar, 
H.A. Patel, I. Rijo, T. Bale, M.D. Ewalt, L. Borsu, M. Hameed, 
K. Nafa, M.E. Arcila 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
Pathology/Molecular Genetic Pathology, New York, NY. 
 
Introduction: Recurrent mutations in isocitrate 
dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1 and IDH2) are important 
actionable biomarkers in hematologic malignancies and solid 
tumors. Rapid, accurate, and robust screening is important for 
S77
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
diagnosis, prognosis, and/or therapeutic management, 
depending on the disease setting. In this study, we describe 
the use of a fully automated system to enable ultra-rapid 
assessment of IDH1/2 hotspot mutation status on various 
sample types without the need for prior DNA extraction. 
Methods: Tumor samples submitted for routine clinical 
mutation assessment were selected. Rapid screening was 
performed using a newly developed, cartridge-based assay 
with flexible design for the Idylla platform. The Idylla IDH1-2 
mutation assay kit consists of an automated agnostic cartridge 
and a vial containing the specific primers and probes for 
testing. By design, the assay detects mutations involving 
specific codons in IDH1 (R132) and IDH2 (R140 and R172) 
but does not discriminate the specific amino acid substitution. 
Results were compared to concurrently performed clinical 
testing by next-generation sequencing (MSK-IMPACT, MSK-
ACCESS) and/or digital PCR as reference methods. 
Performance characteristics were assessed including 
accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility. Results: 
In all, 42 samples were assessed (32 positive, 10 negative) 
including both extracted and unextracted material: 13 
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue sections 
(5μm thick), 24 extracted DNA, and 5 unextracted blood/bone 
marrow (BL/BM) samples in EDTA. Overall, we achieved 
100% accuracy in mutation detection (34 mutations) 
compared to the reference method (14 IDH1 R132, 6 IDH2 
R140, 2 double mutant IDH1 R132 and IDH2 R140, 10 IDH2 
R172 and 10 IDH1/2 negative). Mutations were detected over 
a broad variant allele frequency (VAF) range of 2.2% to 
44.2%. Sensitivity studies showed a limit of detection between 
2% and 3%, and provided sufficient input with excellent 
reproducibility. Minimal input studies, performed on extracted 
DNA, showed >10ng were required to consistently detect a 
mutation known to be present at 5% VAF. Unextracted 
material input requirements varied according to sample type, 
quality, and quantity (>9 mm2 for tissue, 10μl BL/BM). A cycle 
of quantification of ≤36 (internal control) is needed to maintain 
detection of variants at 5% VAF. The technical hands-on time 
averaged 5 minutes, and time from set-up to instrument report 
generation was 95 minutes. Conclusions: The IDH1/IDH2 
cartridge-based assay for the Idylla system allows ultra-rapid, 
sensitive, and robust screening for recurrent mutations at 
residues R132 in IDH1 and R140 or R172 in IDH2. The 
system provides reliable analysis of both extracted and pre-
extraction tumor tissue from numerous sources beyond FFPE, 
including direct blood and bone marrow samples. It markedly 
simplifies the workflows in the lab and enables rapid treatment 
decisions. 
 
OTH12. Development and Validation of TarGT Indiegene: 
World's First Indian Population-Specific Cancer Gene 
Panel  
V. Javle, R. Malhotra, N.A. Tanwar, N. Jaiswal, B. Shreenath, 
S.P. Kuntia, A.P. Satheesh, S.R. Peddagangannagari, L. 
Varghese, K.D. Rishi, H.M. Goswami, V.H. Veldore 
4basecare Onco solutions Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru, India. 
 
Introduction: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) testing has 
emerged as a backbone in precision oncology practice in the 
last decade to improve understanding of the disease and 
provide accurate treatment decisions. Geographic diversity 
and ethnic variation among individuals contribute significantly 
to the disease onset and aggressiveness. Therefore, it is 
important to research the diversity of cancer in local 
populations to overcome challenges in treatment. We share 
here our efforts for the development and validation of India's 
first cancer gene panel, TarGT Indiegene, specifically tailored 
to the Indian population. Methods: As part of Illumina 
accelerator support, tumors from 1,500 cancer patients across 
28 different cancer types were subjected to whole-exome and 
whole-transcriptome profiling using Illumina NGS Panels 
using standard procedure. The data were analyzed using the 
proprietary DRAGENIT Platform from Illumina. Systematic 
filtration of variants was carried out for the entire 
exome/transcriptome data to eliminate non-pathogenic 
variants. The true somatic pathogenic variants were derived 
using a variant effect predictor and multiple cancer-specific 
databases such as ClinVar, CBioPortal, MyCancerGenome, 
and OncoKB, as depicted in Figure 1. Results: The TarGT 
Indiegene panel was created by collating genes with 
pathogenic alterations found in multiple cancers and through a 
literature survey. The panel consists of 1,212 genes including 
1,064 single nucleotide variations/insertions and deletions 
(SNVs/indels), 570 copy number alterations, and 299 gene 
fusions. The panel has undergone analytical and clinical 
validation, showing 100% specificity, 98% sensitivity, and 
100% reproducibility with a detection limit of 5% for SNVs and 
10% for indels. Conclusions: TarGT Indiegene is the first of 
its kind to narrate the tumor mutation spectrum in the Indian 
population, making it unique compared to other panels that 
rely solely on data from Western populations or worldwide 
cancer databases. The ab initio approach used in its 
development not only revealed insights into the existing 
mutation cohort, but also identified novel biomarkers that were 
specific to the Indian population, and rare driver mutations. 
This study could provide opportunities for new targeted 
therapies and chemotherapy options. 
S78
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
 
Development of TarGT Indiegene Panel 
 
Performance Metrics of TarGT Indiegene Pan-Cancer 
Solid Tumor Panel 
 
 
OTH13. Targeting Microglial A20/TNFAIP3 as a Novel 
Leishmania infantum Strategy to Curtail the NF-
κB/NLRP3-Mediated Neuroinflammatory Response in 
Alzheimer Disease  
E. Calvo Alvarez1, M. Saresella2, G. Pepe3, F. La Rosa2, E. 
Vegeto3, D. Taramelli1, M. Clerici4,2, N. Basilico5 
1University of Milan, Department of Pharmacological and 
Biomolecular Sciences, Milan, Italy; 2IRCCS Fondazione Don 
Carlo Gnocchi, Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and 
Biotechnology, Milan, Italy; 3University of Milan, Department of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Milan, Italy; 4University of Milan, 
Department of Physiopathology and Transplants, Milan, Italy; 
5University of Milan, Department of Biomedical, Surgical and 
Dental Sciences, Milan, Italy. 
 
Introduction: The detrimental effect of extensive 
neuroinflammation on the pathological trajectory of Alzheimer 
disease (AD) is widely recognized. Overactivated microglia 
(MG) are the main players of the neuroinflammatory cascade, 
and rewiring their immune activation state holds promise for 
novel therapeutic interventions. While the nuclear factor 
kappa B (NF-κB) is a key mediator of brain inflammation in 
AD, the negative regulator A20/TNFAIP3 terminates NF-κB 
signaling, leading to the inhibition of the NLRP3 
inflammasome-dependent neuroinflammation, and MG 
inactivation. Leishmania infantum (Li) are eukaryotic parasites 
and professional immune evaders in macrophages. We have 
previously demonstrated the parasite-dependent NLRP3 
inhibition in both macrophages and AD-like MG. Yet, the 
mechanistic insights are unknown. Here, we investigated the 
molecular tools used by these parasites to counteract the NF-
κB/NLRP3-mediated MG hyperactivation, as a potential bio-
inspired immunosuppressive approach to attenuate 
neuroinflammation in AD. Methods: Ex vivo primary MG 
isolated from postnatal mice and an MG cell line were infected 
with WT or dual bioluminescent/fluorescent Li (Ppy-tdT+Li) 
parasites (ratio 1:10 MG:parasites), and treated with canonical 
NLRP3 activators including amyloid-β peptide (Aβ), and NF-
κB pharmacological inhibitors. Phagocytosis was studied by 
live-cell fluorescent imaging and Giemsa staining. The 
expression of A20 and NLRP3-related factors was 
investigated by qPCR, Western blot, and ELISA, and reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) levels were assessed by ROS-Glo 
(Promega). NF-κB signaling, A20 subcellular localization, and 
lysosomal integrity were analyzed by immunofluorescence. 
Results: In AD, the transcriptional regulation of NLRP3 
components is mediated by NF-κB nuclear trafficking in 
response to Aβ. Our results demonstrate that Li parasites 
interfere with the NF-κB signaling in AD-like MG by preventing 
the nuclear translocation of the transcription factor 
concomitantly with a downregulation of Nlrp3 and pro-il-1β 
transcripts, thus impairing the NLRP3 priming step upstream 
of NLRP3 activation. This inhibitory effect is accompanied by 
the upregulation of A20 in infected cells, and an increased 
A20 accumulation in parasite-containing phagolysosomes, as 
evidenced by co-localization studies with lysosomal markers. 
Since the A20-lysosome association is crucial for proper 
inhibitory activity, these observations indicate an active 
parasite-mediated process to trigger an effective termination 
of the NF-κB signaling. Additionally, it is known that Aβ 
enhances the NF-κB/NLRP3 axis through lysosomal rupture 
and ROS generation. Interestingly, we also found that Li 
preserves microglial lysosomal integrity and reduces ROS 
production in the presence of Aβ. Conclusions: Overall, 
these results uncover an unexpected mechanism by Li to 
impair the NF-kB/NLRP3 axis in AD-like MG. Imposing a 
parasite-driven brake on overactivated MG might open novel 
therapeutic avenues against neuroinflammation in AD. 
 
S79
	
AMP Abstracts
The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics ■ jmdjournal.org
 
OTH14. Unifying NGS Workflows: A Modularized 
Automated Approach for Streamlining Clinical Molecular 
Diagnostics Laboratories  
F.A. San Lucas1, H. Pelicano1, J. Gascoyne1, J. Mercado1, S. 
Ninan1, J. Ozenci1, D. Duose4, R. Yang3, M. Routbort1,3, K. 
Patel1,2, S. Roy1,2, I. Wistuba4, R. Luthra1, J. Medeiros2, H. 
Alvarez1,2 
1The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, Houston, TX; 2The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department 
of Hematopathology, Houston, TX; 3The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Pathology, 
Houston, TX; 4The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, 
Houston, TX. 
 
Introduction: The Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory at The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center underwent a 
transformation aimed at streamlining complex next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) workflows and enhancing their efficiency. 
The increasing diversity and volume of NGS testing in the 
past decade resulted in a complex laboratory environment 
that was becoming increasingly difficult to manage. To 
address this issue, the laboratory implemented a modularized 
automated approach, consisting of four liquid handler robots 
and a custom laboratory information management system to 
create a single, unified workflow for the entire NGS process. 
Methods: The robots in the workflow were responsible for 
various tasks, including sample tissue deparaffinization, blood 
fractionation, simultaneous DNA and RNA extraction, cDNA 
and library preparation, and NGS hybrid capture. The 
accompanying software system facilitated connectivity, real-
time monitoring of the workflow, and streamlined 
troubleshooting by tracking sample and control movements 
and status changes throughout the process. Results: The 
results of this transformation were significant. The modular 
design of the robots and their flexibility in batch sizes 
supported a wide range of applications, including NGS 
applications for solid tumor assays such as MDA MAPP (a 
700+ gene panel), exome sequencing, and whole-genome 
sequencing, as well as liquid biopsy applications. The new 
workflow resulted in a reduction of hands-on time for 
technologists by 80% and a decrease in the number of 
required technologists and supervisors by 67% when 
implementing three assays. Moreover, the development time 
for new assays was streamlined, reducing the time required 
for technology familiarization and training. Conclusions: In 
conclusion, the Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory at MD 
Anderson Cancer Center successfully transformed their 
complex NGS workflows into a single, unified, and automated 
process, resulting in improved efficiency and reliability. This 
approach has the potential to be applied to any clinical 
laboratory performing NGS sequencing, simplifying operations 
and facilitating the rapid implementation of additional NGS 
assays. 
 
OTH15. Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor: 
Immunohistochemical, Variant Gene Characterization and 
in Silico Analysis in Canine Mammary Cancer – A 
Comparative Genomics Approach  
S. Monteiro1, A.B. Gonçalves1, A. Alves2,4, M. dos Anjos 
Clemente Pires2,4, A. Gama2,4, E. Bastos1,3 
1University of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro (UTAD), 
Department of Genetics and Biotechnology, School of Life 
and Environmental Sciences (ECVA), Vila Real, Portugal; 
2University of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro (UTAD), 
Department of Veterinary Sciences, School of Agrarian and 
Veterinary Sciences (ECAV), Vila Real, Portugal; 3University 
of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro (UTAD), Center of the 
Research and Technology of Agro-Environmental and 
Biological Sciences (CITAB), Vila Real, Portugal; 4University 
of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro (UTAD), Animal and 
Veterinary Research Centre (CECAV), Vila Real, Portugal. 
 
Introduction: Finding inhibitors of Epidermal Growth Factor 
Receptor (EGFR) protein binding is the aim of different 
studies. Using databases such as STRING and KEGG can be 
an interesting in silico approach. This strategy has been 
recently described by Ongko et al. (2022) and previously by 
Majhi et al. (2018) in humans; however, this same approach 
can be applied to other species, such as the canine species, 
based on comparative genomics. Canis familiaris is a natural 
and spontaneous model for different diseases, including 
neoplastic and inflammatory diseases, as well as periodontal 
disease. Our group published a review regarding this model 
and its advantages compared with other animal models 
(Albuquerque et al., 2012). Mammary tumours are the most 
frequent neoplasm diagnosed in intact female dogs, and 
EGFR is a transmembrane receptor involved in the regulation 
of cell proliferation, differentiation, motility, and survival. 
Although frequently studied in human breast cancer, few 
studies have been dedicated to analysing EGFR in canine 
mammary tumours, especially regarding the search for EGFR 
gene variants and using in silico strategies. The aim of the 
current study is to describe EGFR immunoexpression and the 
presence of EGFR gene variants in this animal model, based 
on the EGFR expression evaluated by immunohistochemistry 
(IHC) in 111 mammary malignant tumours, 68 lymph node 
metastases, and 12 lung metastases. Herceptest scoring 
system was used for EGFR evaluation, with 2+ and 3+ cases 
considered positive (complete membrane staining in >10% 
cells). EGFR overexpression was observed in 53.2% of 
primary tumours, 47.1% of node metastases, and 25% of lung 
metastases. EGFR expression in primary tumours and node 
S80
AMP Abstracts
jmdjournal.org ■ The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics
metastases was significantly associated (P <0.0001), with a 
concordance in 79.4% samples. The search for EGFR exon 
19 sequence variants from 30 frozen mammary tissue 
samples (20 primary carcinomas and 10 adjacent non-
neoplastic tissue) followed, using the steps of DNA extraction, 
PCR, and Sanger sequencing. Four intronic variants were 
detected in six samples, corresponding to four female dogs 
(four carcinomas vs. two paired non-neoplastic adjacent 
tissues). Although three of these carcinomas also 
overexpressed EGFR (detected by IHC), the remaining 
positive EGFR samples failed to reveal gene variants. 
Additional studies using a larger series are already being 
implemented, and in silico search is starting to be used to 
answer the following question: What is the real role of the 
EGFR gene and its variants in human and dog mammary 
tumours? The comparative genomics is our starting point for 
our contribution to this scientific question. 
Methods: TBA. Results: TBA. Conclusions: TBA. 
 
OTH16. Identification of Therapeutically Relevant 
Mutations in Circulating Tumor DNA at Baseline to Assist 
in Treatment Decision Making  
P. van der Leest1, A. Sartori2, P. Rozendal1, N. Rifaela1, A.J. 
van der Wekken3, L.C. van Kempen1, T.J.N. Hiltermann3, E. 
Schuuring1 
1University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Department of Pathology, Groningen, 
Netherlands; 2Agena Bioscience GmbH, Hamburg, Germany; 
3University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Groningen, 
Netherlands. 
 
Introduction: According to current guidelines, molecular 
tumor profiling is performed on tumor cells of lung cancer 
patients to facilitate treatment decision making. Liquid biopsy 
approaches, especially the detection of circulating tumor DNA 
(ctDNA) in the bloodstream, are emerging as sensitive and 
reliable alternatives for routine diagnostic testing relying on 
tumor tissue biopsy specimens. Here, we analyze serially 
collected baseline plasma samples of lung cancer patients to 
determine the agreement between tumor tissue-based and 
ctDNA-based molecular tumor profiling and the consequent 
clinical implications. Additionally, as molecular profiling of the 
tumor fails in 10% to 20% of the cases, we determine the 
additional value of liquid biopsy testing when tumor tissue 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) data are unavailable. 
Methods: Between July 2018 and December 2021, 180 
serially collected baseline plasma samples were included. 
Using 2mL of plasma, circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) was 
extracted and analyzed with the UltraSEEK Lung Panel v2 on 
the MassARRAY System (Agena Bioscience, San Diego, US), 
which detects 78 common (actionable) mutations in BRAF, 
EGFR, ERBB2, KRAS, and PIK3CA. CcfDNA is 
retrospectively quantified using the LiquidIQ Panel (Agena 
Bioscience) to evaluate discrepant results. Results: Tumor 
tissue NGS analysis was available for 132 non-small cell lung 
cancer patients (73%). An 82% concordance has been 
observed between mutations detected in tumor tissue and in 
plasma. More mutations were reported with tumor tissue NGS 
in 19 patients, whereas in 4 patients additional mutations have 
been found in plasma. No particular factors affect retrieval of 
tumor-derived mutations in the ccfDNA. In the absence of 
tumor tissue NGS data, five therapeutically targetable 
mutations were detected. Molecular tumor profiling based on 
tissue allocated showed 60 patients eligible for tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor (TKI) treatments, of which 15 (8%) were for 
rearrangements not covered by the UltraSEEK Lung Panel. 
Forty-one patients (23%) were eligible for TKI against 
mutations in BRAF, EGFR, and KRAS. Conclusions: 
Molecular tumor profiling using ctDNA with the UltraSEEK 
Lung Panel identified therapeutically relevant mutations at a 
rate comparable to tumor tissue NGS, and might therefore 
serve as a prescreening tool for baseline actionable variant 
identification in the absence of tumor tissue, or as a 
complementary test in addition to tumor tissue NGS.
 
