ABSTRACTS
LABORATORY INVESTIGATION
THE BASIC AND TRANSLATIONAL PATHOLOGY RESEARCH JOURNAL
LI
VIRTUAL and INTERACTIVE
MARCH 13 -18, 2021
NEVER STOP 
LEARNING
2021
NEVER STOP 
LEARNING
2021
NEVER STOP 
LEARNING
2021
NEVER STOP 
LEARNING
2021
NEVER STOP 
LEARNING
2021
NEVER STOP 
LEARNING
2021
USCAP 110TH ANNUAL MEETING
USCAP 110TH ANNUAL MEETING
USCAP 110TH ANNUAL MEETING
USCAP 110TH ANNUAL MEETING
VOLUME 101  |  SUPPLEMENT 1  |  MARCH 2021  
(238-270)
DERMATOPATHOLOGY
2021
ABSTRACTS | PLATFORM & POSTER PRESENTATIONS
To cite abstracts in this publication, please use the following format: Author A, Author B,  
Author C, et al. Abstract title (abs#). In “File Title.” Laboratory Investigation 2021; 101 (suppl 1): page#
EDUCATION COMMITTEE
ABSTRACT REVIEW BOARD
Jason L. Hornick 
Chair
Rhonda K. Yantiss, Chair 
Abstract Review Board and Assignment Committee
Kristin C. Jensen 
Chair, CME Subcommittee
Laura C. Collins 
Interactive Microscopy Subcommittee
Raja R. Seethala 
Short Course Coordinator
Ilan Weinreb 
Subcommittee for Unique Live Course Offerings
Benjamin Adam
Rouba Ali-Fehmi
Daniela Allende
Ghassan Allo
Isabel Alvarado-Cabrero
Catalina Amador
Tatjana Antic
Roberto Barrios
Rohit Bhargava
Luiz Blanco
Jennifer Boland
Alain Borczuk
Elena Brachtel
Marilyn Bui
Eric Burks
Shelley Caltharp
Wenqing (Wendy) Cao
Barbara Centeno
Joanna Chan
Jennifer Chapman
Yunn-Yi Chen
Hui Chen
Wei Chen
Sarah Chiang
Nicole Cipriani
Beth Clark
Alejandro Contreras
Claudiu Cotta
Jennifer Cotter
Sonika Dahiya
Farbod Darvishian
Jessica Davis
Heather Dawson
Elizabeth Demicco
Katie Dennis
Anand Dighe
Suzanne Dintzis
Michelle Downes
Charles Eberhart
Andrew Evans
Julie Fanburg-Smith
Michael Feely
Dennis Firchau
Gregory Fishbein
Andrew Folpe
Larissa Furtado
Billie Fyfe-Kirschner
Giovanna Giannico
Christopher Gifﬁth
Anthony Gill
Paula Ginter
Tamar Giorgadze
Purva Gopal
Abha Goyal
Rondell Graham
Alejandro Gru
Nilesh Gupta
Mamta Gupta
Gillian Hale
Suntrea Hammer
Malini Harigopal
Douglas Hartman
Kammi Henriksen
John Higgins
Mai Hoang
Aaron Huber
Doina Ivan
Wei Jiang
Vickie Jo
Dan Jones
Kirk Jones
Neerja Kambham
Dipti Karamchandani
Nora Katabi
Darcy Kerr
Francesca Khani
Joseph Khoury
Rebecca King
Veronica Klepeis
Christian Kunder
Steven Lagana
Keith Lai
Michael Lee
Cheng-Han Lee
Madelyn Lew
Faqian Li
Ying Li
Haiyan Liu
Xiuli Liu
Lesley Lomo
Tamara Lotan
Sebastian Lucas
Anthony Magliocco
Kruti Maniar
Brock Martin
Emily Mason
David McClintock
Anne Mills
Richard Mitchell
Neda Moatamed
Sara Monaco
Atis Muehlenbachs
Bita Naini
Dianna Ng
Tony Ng
Michiya Nishino
Scott Owens
Jacqueline Parai
Avani Pendse
Peter Pytel
Stephen Raab
Stanley Radio
Emad Rakha
Robyn Reed
Michelle Reid
Natasha Rekhtman
Jordan Reynolds
Andres Roma
Lisa Rooper
Avi Rosenberg
Esther (Diana) Rossi
Souzan Sanati
Gabriel Sica
Alexa Siddon
Deepika Sirohi
Kalliopi Siziopikou
Maxwell Smith
Adrian Suarez
Sara Szabo
Julie Teruya-Feldstein
Khin Thway
Rashmi Tondon
Jose Torrealba
Gary Tozbikian
Andrew Turk
Evi Vakiani
Christopher VandenBussche
Paul VanderLaan
Hannah Wen
Sara Wobker
Kristy Wolniak
Shaofeng Yan
Huihui Ye
Yunshin Yeh
Anjana Yeldandi
Gloria Young
Lei Zhao
Minghao Zhong
Yaolin Zhou
Hongfa Zhu 
David B. Kaminsky  
(Ex-Ofﬁcio)
Zubair W. Baloch
Daniel J. Brat
Sarah M. Dry
William C. Faquin
Yuri Fedoriw
Karen Fritchie
Jennifer B. Gordetsky
Melinda Lerwill
Anna Marie Mulligan
Liron Pantanowitz
David Papke,  
Pathologist-in-Training
Carlos Parra-Herran
Rajiv M. Patel
Deepa T. Patil
Charles Matthew Quick
Lynette M. Sholl
Olga K. Weinberg
Maria Westerhoff
Nicholas A. Zoumberos,  
Pathologist-in-Training
 
 
 
 
284 
238 
Reduced S-100 Expression in Melanoma Assessed by Digital Image Analysis Predicts 
Poor Overall Survival 
Ibrahim Abukhiran1, Ilham Farhat1, Andrew Bellizzi1, Sarag Boukhar1 
1University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics, Iowa City, IA 
Disclosures: Ibrahim Abukhiran: None; Ilham Farhat: None; Andrew Bellizzi: None; Sarag Boukhar: None 
Background: S-100 differential expression is believed to be pathogenetically associated with 
melanoma development and progression. Furthermore, studies have showed strong correlation between serum S-
100-B concentrations and therapy response or tumor progression, with few reports of diminished or lost S-100 
antigenicity in metastatic melanoma. SOX10 is also believed to play a critical role in melanoma cell invasion. 
However, the prognostic value of S-100 and SOX10 immunohistochemical (IHC) expression is not well-studied. 
Herein, we report digital image analysis (DIA) of S-100 and SOX10 expression in a large cohort of well-annotated 
melanomas, finding a significant relationship between S-100 expression and overall survival.  
Design: S-100 and SOX10 IHC were performed on tissue microarrays (TMAs) from 273 melanoma cases 
(ascertained between 2010 and 2017) from 248 patients (137 primaries, 136 metastases). BAP1 and BRAF V600E 
mutation-specific IHC had been previously performed. Glass slides were digitally scanned (3DHISTECH, Budapest, 
Hungary) and whole TMA cores were annotated. Optimized membranous (S-100) and nuclear (SOX10) 
3DHISTECH QuantCenter algorithms were used to count and threshold (1+, 2+, 3+) immunoreactive tumor cells 
(ITC).  A strong positivity index [(SPI) percentage of total strong positive (+3) cells to total positive cells] and 
weighted positivity index (WPI) were recorded for each stain. The WPI was calculated according to the following 
formula: WPI = [(strong ITC% X 3) + (moderate ITC% X 2) + (weak ITCx1)]/3*100. The cases were stratified into 
WPI or SPI high (>/=55%) and low (<55%) expressing categories. Survival analysis (K-M curve with Mantel-Cox 
test), t-test, and one-way ANOVA were used with p<0.05 considered significant. 
Results: Survival analysis showed a statistically significant difference (p= <0.0001) in overall survival between the 
S-100-SPI high (>/=55%), low (<55%), and S-100-negative cases. The median survival (in weeks) was 517, 98, 
and 65 for SPI high, low, and negative cases, respectively. There were also statistically significant differences in S-
100 SPI according to histologic type, location, and BAP1 status (Table 1). There was no survival difference 
between the high and low score groups for SOX10-SPI (0.8798), SOX10-WPI (p= 0.3689), or S-100-WPI (p= 
0.9727).   
Association of S100 Strong Positivity Index to Clinicopathologic Variables 
Average S100 SPI 
p 
Metastatic 
70 
0.31 
Primary 
73 
Cutaneous 
73 
0.0004 
Non-cutaneous 
61 
BAP1 
Intact 
72 
0.033 
Lost 
60 
BRAF V600E 
Negative 
71 
0.84 
Positive 
73 
 
 
 
 
285 
Figure 1 - 238 
 
Conclusions: High S-100 (but not SOX10) SPI is associated with a significant survival benefit in melanoma. SPI 
low-status correlated with BAP1 loss and non-cutaneous origin. The S-100 and SOX10 WPI failed to demonstrate 
prognostic import. 
 
239 
Imaging Mass Spectrometry Aids in the Classification of Nevi Versus Melanoma 
Rami Al-Rohil1, Ahmed Alomari2, Jason Robbins3, Jessica Moore3, Nathan Patterson4, Richard Caprioli4, 
Jeremy Norris5 
1Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, 2Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN, 3Nashville, TN, 4Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 5Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, TN 
Disclosures: Rami Al-Rohil: None; Jason Robbins: Advisory Board Member, Frontier Diagnostics; Jessica 
Moore: Employee, Frontier Diagnostics; Nathan Patterson: Employee, Frontier Diagnostics, LLC; Richard Caprioli: 
None; Jeremy Norris: Advisory Board Member, Frontier Diagnostics, LLC 
Background: Classification of melanocytic neoplasms relies on histopathologic examination, but multiple studies 
have shown poor diagnostic reproducibility, even amongst experts. The focus has now shifted to develop tools that 
objectify the classification to predict the outcomes accurately. Molecular studies have been a useful adjunct; 
however, they still carry technical and diagnostic limitations.  Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Mass 
Spectrometry (MALDI MS) is a technology with ideal characteristics for in situ molecular analysis. In MALDI 
profiling experiments, mass spectra are collected from tissues with known pathologic outcomes. These spectra are 
used to train machine learning classification models. Spectra taken from new tissues can be compared to the 
models, classified, and scored, providing a classification both on a per spectra and per sample level. 
Design: We analyzed various subclasses of unambiguous nevi and melanomas to investigate the validity of 
imaging mass spectrometry in the classification of melanocytic neoplasms. The rationale behind using 
unambiguous lesions is to prove the high-performance parameters of such a platform relative to histopathologic 
evaluation. Three independent board-certified Dermatopathologists were provided deidentified H&E slides of 
melanocytic neoplasms along with age, sex, and location and were asked to classify the samples as nevi versus 
melanoma. Spots of interest were annotated by dermatopathologists using a 50 µm spot tool, and the annotated 
slide image was registered to 6-micron thick serial section for mass spectrometry. Only triconcordant samples were 
included for training (n=241) and test set (n=92). Twelve cases were deemed challenging which 
was further classified as favor benign vs favor malignant.  Lesions were deemed correctly classified when 85% 
of the spots agreed with the concordant diagnosis. 
 
 
 
 
286 
Results: The platform detected melanoma with a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity of 100%; per spectra analysis 
showed a sensitivity of 95.1% and a specificity of 94.8% in the test set. In the challenging lesions: 50% correctly 
classified, 42% indeterminate, and 8% misclassified. 
Conclusions: These findings support the validity of Imaging Mass Spectrometry as an analytical technology in the 
diagnosis of melanocytic neoplasms and provide an additional layer of evidence to support a consensus diagnosis 
in challenging lesions while requiring minimal tissue. Further studies to include external validation cohorts of 
unambiguous and ambiguous tumors are needed to prove clinical utility. 
 
240 
Systematic Re-Evaluation of Pathologic Examination and Treatment Modalities in 
Desmoplastic Melanoma with Emphasis on Advanced Stage 
Farah Baban1, Kabeer Shah2, Ruifeng (Ray) Guo1 
1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 2St. Mary's Hospital, Madison, WI 
Disclosures: Farah Baban: None; Kabeer Shah: None; Ruifeng (Ray) Guo: None 
Background: Desmoplastic melanoma (DM) differs from conventional melanoma with distinct morphology and 
clinical behavior. Management of desmoplastic melanoma has been controversial and variable.  Only limited 
studies have been performed and one of the main challenges is in regard to adjuvant therapy offered in clinically 
advanced stages. 
Design: 75 patients with a diagnosis of DM and a clinical record from our institution were retrospectively evaluated 
and followed up over a 22 year period from 1998 to 2020. All patients had wide local excision and some of them 
went on with lymph node examination. The clinical course and treatment modalities of those with metastasis 
(advanced stage III and IV disease) were reviewed systematically and the findings were summarized. 
Results: 20 of 75 patients had metastases either at the time of diagnosis or later in the course of the disease, with 
18 of 20 having complete follow up.  Among the 18 patients with metastases, only one was limited to the regional 
draining basin, while all the rest developed distant metastases. The mean age was 67.8 years (range 33-87) with 
males being predominant 16 vurses 4 females. The majority, 13 of 20, received radiation and or conventional 
chemotherapy after the initial resection to reduce the risk of local recurrence.  7 patients with distant metastases 
received immune check inhibitors (including Ipilimumab, Pembrolizumab and Nivolumab) treatment. Among them, 5 
patients showed complete responses (defined as being clinically and radiographically in remission). The remaining 
2 patients that failed to respond had a high disease burden with other comorbidities (metastases to brain and liver). 
The remaining 11 patients did not receive immune check inhibitors. Among them, 10 of 11 succumbed to the 
metastatic disease irrespective of any other treatment modalities. The one that survived had an advanced stage III 
disease treated successfully with tumor resection only. 
Conclusions: In our study, DM is characterized by 26.6% metastasis, rarely limited to regional lymph nodes and 
majority developed distant metastases, which is a distinct feature.  In treatment, metastatic DM showed a 71.4 % 
response rate to immune check inhibitors in our patients in contrast to other modalities, shedding light on 
encouraging survival outcomes with immunotherapy in this specific melanoma subtype. Larger scale clinical 
studies are needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
287 
241 
Comprehensive Single-Cell Analysis of Peripheral Blood in Sézary Syndrome Reveals 
Novel Expression Markers and Shifting Gene Profiles Associated with Treatment 
Nick Borcherding1, Nicholas Henderson2, Luana Ortolan3, Vincent Liu2, Brian Link4, Aaron Mangold5, Ali 
Jabbari2 
1Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 2University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, 
Iowa City, IA, 3Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, 4University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 5Mayo Clinic 
Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ 
Disclosures: Nick Borcherding: None; Nicholas Henderson: None; Vincent Liu: None; Aaron Mangold: Consultant, 
Kirin; Grant or Research Support, MiRagen; Grant or Research Support, Solagenix; Grant or Research Support, 
Sun Pharma; Grant or Research Support, Elorac 
Background: Although central to the diagnosis of cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL) is the malignant clonal 
proliferation of skin-tropic T cells, the term represents a spectrum of diseases often with varied clinical courses. 
Most patients have an indolent disease course with cycling therapies, while others, especially in advanced stages 
of disease, have aggressive progression and poor median survival. Adding to the difficulty of treatment, Sézary 
syndrome (SS), a leukemic variant of CTCL, lacks highly consistent phenotypic and genetic markers that would aid 
in not only the diagnosis of the malignancy, but also response to therapies. 
Design: Using single-cell mRNA and T-cell-receptor sequencing of peripheral blood immune cells in SS, we 
extensively mapped the transcriptomic variations of nearly 50,000 T cells of both malignant and nonmalignant 
origins of five patients. The single cells were processed and clustered using R (v4.0.2) with the Seurat R package 
(v3.2.2) using uniformed manifold approximation approach. TCR sequences were organized using our scRepertoire 
R package (0.99.17) in order to create measures of clonality that could interact with the seurat object.  
Results: We identified potential diverging SS cell populations, including quiescent and proliferative populations 
shared across multiple patients. In a single patient, we were able to characterize differences in cell populations 
comparing malignant T cells at the start of histone deacetylase inhibition (HDACi) and photopheresis to a 
secondary time point after progression on treatment. New cellular clusters after progression on the therapy had 
increased expression of the transcriptional factor FOXP3. 
Conclusions: This study is the first cohort of whole-transcriptome single-cell quantification of SS patients in the 
peripheral blood. Although a clonal tumor, we demonstrate SS at the single-cell mRNA level mirrors the 
heterogeneity of findings reported in clinical and flow-based investigations. Despite this, the resolution offered by 
highthroughput single-cell techniques could allow for precision diagnostics, new avenues for applied and basic 
sciences, and even possible therapeutic monitoring.  
 
242 
PD-L1 Expression in HPV-Dependent Versus HPV-Independent Invasive Vulva Squamous 
Cell Carcinoma 
Chau Bui1, Fabiola Medeiros1, Brian Cox1, Mariza De Peralta-Venturina1, Bonnie Balzer1 
1Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 
Disclosures: Chau Bui: None; Fabiola Medeiros: None; Brian Cox: None; Mariza De Peralta-Venturina: None; 
Bonnie Balzer: None 
Background: PD-L1 has become increasingly useful to predict response to checkpoint inhibitor therapy in 
squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) of various anatomic sites. Approximately 90% of vulvar cancers are SCCs. Two 
etiological pathways have been implicated in the pathogenesis of vulvar SCC: a high-risk human papillomavirus 
(HPV)-dependent route associated with p16 positivity and an HPV–independent pathway characterized by TP53 
mutations. Some studies suggest that HPV-dependent cancers have a more favorable prognosis. To date, large-
scale data on the presence of PD-L1 or other immunotherapy targets in vulvar cancer are lacking. The aim of this 
study was to assess the association between PD-L1 expression and vulva SCC subtype in order to evaluate the 
utility of PD-L1 in prognostication and therapeutic selection based on HPV status. 
 
 
 
 
288 
Design: Fifty three biopsy and resection specimens of invasive vulvar SCC were collected from a tertiary medical 
center over a 15-year span. Staining with H&E, p16, p53, and PD-L1 IHC was performed on cut tissue sections. 
Expression of P53 was classified as wild-type (scattered or mild-epithelial) or mutant (basal expression, diffuse 
overexpression, absent, or cytoplasmic). PD-L1 status was assessed using the immune cell score(IC) defined by 
<1% and >1%; the Tumor proportion score (TPS) defined by <1%, >1%, and >50%; and the Combined positive 
score (CPS) defined by <1, >1, and >10. The primary outcome was PD-L1 expression as compared between HPV-
dependent (block positive p16 and wild-type p53) and HPV-independent (mutant p53 and negative or patchy 
positive p16) tumors based on chi-square test.   
Results: The study group consisted of 25 HPV-dependent and 28 HPV-independent VSCC from patients aged 34 
to 91 years. PD-L1 positivity was observed in the majority of cases in both groups (60-96.4%) (Table 1). There was 
a statistically significant difference between HPV-dependent and HPV-independent tumors based on TPS 
(p=0.007) (Figure 1). However, PD-L1 expression based on IC (p=0.453) and CPS (p=0.176) showed no significant 
difference between groups.  
Percent 
IC<1 
IC>1 
TPS<1 
TPS>1 
TPS>50 
CPS<1 
CPS>1 
CPS>10 
HPV-dependent  
20 
80 
40 
52 
8 
16 
68 
16 
HPV-independent 
10.7 
89.3 
7.1 
57.1 
35.7 
3.6 
50 
46.4 
Percent of PD-L1 positivity 
Figure 1 - 242 
 
Conclusions: This study demonstrates that PD-L1 expression is detectable in a substantial proportion 
of invasive vulvar SCCs, with a significantly greater association between PD-L1 and HPV-independent tumors as 
compared with HPV-dependent tumors. These findings suggest that PD-L1 testing is warranted in all PD-L1 vulvar 
SCC subtypes, although HPV-independent tumors as a whole may be more responsive to PD-L1 inhibitor therapy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
289 
243 
Characterization of the Immune Landscape of Acral Lentiginous Melanomas in Caucasian 
and Hispanic Populations 
Woo Cheal Cho1, Rossana Lazcano Segura1, Luisa Solis Soto1, Edwin Parra1, Sandro Casavilca 
Zambrano2, Miluska Castillo3, Carlos Castaneda2, Pavandeep Gill1, Priya Nagarajan1, Doina Ivan1, 
Jonathan Curry, Ignacio Wistuba1, Victor Prieto1, Carlos Torres-Cabala1, Phyu Aung1 
1The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 2Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades 
Neoplásicas, Lima, Peru, 3Lima, Peru,  
Disclosures: Woo Cheal Cho: None; Rossana Lazcano Segura: None; Luisa Solis Soto: None; Edwin Parra: 
None; Sandro Casavilca Zambrano: None; Miluska Castillo: None; Carlos Castaneda: None; Pavandeep Gill: None; 
Priya Nagarajan: None; Doina Ivan: None; Jonathan Curry: None; Ignacio Wistuba: None; Victor Prieto: None; 
Carlos Torres-Cabala: None; Phyu Aung: None 
Background: Highly immunogenic, cutaneous melanomas (CMs) are frequently associated with tumor-infiltrating 
lymphocytes (TILs), and the presence of a dense lymphocytic infiltrate correlates with improved response to 
immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) in patients with CMs. Unlike CMs arising in the non-acral sites, acral lentiginous 
melanomas (ALMs), the most common melanoma subtype in non-Caucasians, often exhibit a low density of TILs 
and express PD-L1 less frequently, making them potentially less susceptible to ICIs. It is unknown whether the 
immune landscape of ALM is associated with ethnicity. This knowledge could contribute to a better prognostication 
of ALM in specific populations and identify new therapeutic targets. 
Design: We performed 7-color multiplex immunofluorescence (mIF) assay, using a panel composed of SOX10, 
CD3, CD8, CD68, PD-1, PD-L1 and DAPI, in 36 ALMs from two different ethnic groups (18 Caucasians and 18 
Hispanics). The immune infiltrates from 5 intratumoral regions of interest were analyzed using a digital image 
analysis software to determine the cell density of each immune phenotype. IHC testing for IDO-1 and CD20 was 
also performed on selected cases. Statistical analysis was performed to compare the immune landscape between 
the two groups with respect to clinicopathologic characteristics. 
Results: ALMs in Hispanic patients showed a higher median cell density of cytotoxic T-cells (CD3+/CD8+) 
(p=0.03), antigen-experienced T-cells (CD3+/PD1+) (p=0.03) (Figure 1), and antigen-experienced cytotoxic T-cells 
(CD3+/CD8+/PD1+) (p=0.02), when compared with those in Caucasian patients (Table 1 and Figure 2). Overall, a 
lower clinical stage was associated with a higher density of macrophages expressing PD-L1 (p=0.04) (Figure 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
290 
Figure 1 - 243 
 
Figure 2 - 243 
 
Conclusions: There was a significant difference in the immune landscape of ALMs between Caucasian and 
Hispanic patients, particularly with the density of cytotoxic T-cells, antigen-experienced T-cells and antigen-
experienced cytotoxic T-cells within the tumor microenvironment, suggesting a role for ethnicity in the response to 
ICIs. These findings also suggest the importance of individualized prognostic risk stratification for patients of 
different ethnicities. Further evaluation of survival with regards to the composition, density and distribution of TILs is 
warranted to assess their prognostic values across different ethnic groups. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
291 
244 
The Utility of Telomerase Reverse Transcriptase Immunohistochemistry as a Surrogate 
Marker of TERT Gene Amplification Status in Acral Lentiginous Melanoma 
Woo Cheal Cho1, Wen Li2, Jun Gu1, Wei-Lien (Billy) Wang1, Jing Ning1, Steven Sfamenos1, Pavandeep 
Gill1, Priya Nagarajan1, Jonathan Curry1, Doina Ivan1, Alexander Lazar1, Victor Prieto1, Carlos Torres-
Cabala1, Phyu Aung1 
1The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 2McGovern Medical School at 
UTHealth, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 
Disclosures: Woo Cheal Cho: None; Wen Li: None; Jun Gu: None; Wei-Lien (Billy) Wang: None; Jing Ning: None; 
Steven Sfamenos: None; Pavandeep Gill: None; Priya Nagarajan: None; Jonathan Curry: None; Doina Ivan: None; 
Alexander Lazar: None; Victor Prieto: None; Carlos Torres-Cabala: None; Phyu Aung: None 
Background: Acral lentiginous melanomas (ALMs) exhibit a high degree of copy number (CN) alterations, often 
with amplifications of the telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) gene, which are associated with adverse 
prognosis. Despite the prognostic value of TERT amplification in ALMs, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) 
for TERT is not performed routinely in pathology laboratories. Here, we assess the utility of TERT protein 
expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) as a potential surrogate marker of TERT amplification in ALMs. 
Design: IHC for TERT was performed on a series of 35 acral and nonacral melanomas, including 18 primary and 3 
metastatic ALMs. The proportion and intensity of TERT expression were evaluated, and H-score was calculated. 
FISH was performed, using a probe binding to TERT at 5p15 and a normalization probe that hybridizes to 5q31. 
Fisher’s exact test and Spearman’s correlation were used to evaluate the associations between two categorical and 
continuous variables, respectively. Logistic regression was used to assess the relationship between binary 
variables and other predictors. The predictive ability was evaluated by using receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) curve and the area under ROC curve (AUC). 
Results: The frequency of TERT expression and TERT amplification, as well as results of statistical analysis, are 
summarized in Table 1 and Figure 1. Overall, TERT immunoreactivity was significantly associated 
with TERT amplification in our cohort (p=0.009). By logistic regression models, the intensity of TERT expression 
and H-score were associated with TERT amplification (p=0.03 and p=0.047, respectively). AUCs for the proportion 
of TERT expression, intensity of TERT expression, and H-score were 0.77, 0.83, and 0.77, respectively. Moderate 
(2+) intensity of TERT expression correlated with high TERT amplification ratio, with a correlation coefficient of 0.37 
(p=0.03). 
  
Number (%) of lesions 
  
  
PALM 
(n = 18) 
MALM 
(n =3) 
PNLAMa 
(n = 8) 
PNACM 
(n = 6) 
Overall 
(n = 35) 
TERT protein expression by IHC 
11 (61%) 
3 (100%) 
2 (25%) 
3 (50%) 
19 (54%) 
TERT gene amplification by 
FISHb 
4 (22%) 
2 (67%) 
0 (0%) 
1 (17%) 
7 (20%) 
Overall correlation between TERT protein expression and TERT gene amplification 
  
TERT protein expression by IHC 
P value 
Absent (n = 16) 
Present (n = 19) 
0.009 
TERT gene 
amplification 
status, n (%) 
Absent 
16 (100%) 
12 (63%) 
Present 
0 (0%) 
7 (37%) 
Overall prediction performance of proportion and intensity of TERT protein expressionc and H-scored on TERT gene amplification 
  
P value in logistic regression model 
Area under ROC curve 
Proportion of TERT protein expression 
0.05 
0.77 
Intensity of TERT protein expression 
0.03 
0.83 
H-score 
0.047 
0.77 
Overall correlation of proportion and intensity of TERT protein expressionc and H-scored with TERT amplification ratio 
  
Correlation coefficient 
P value 
Proportion of TERT protein expression 
0.29 
0.10 
Intensity of TERT protein expression 
0.37 
0.03 
H-score 
0.30 
0.08 
Abbreviation: PALM, primary acral lentiginous melanoma; MALM, metastatic acral lentiginous melanoma; PNLAM, primary nonlentiginous acral melanoma; PNACM, primary 
nonacral cutaneous melanoma; TERT, telomerase reverse transcriptase; IHC, immunohistochemistry; FISH, fluorescent in situ hybridization; ROC, receiver operating 
characteristic 
 
 
 
 
292 
a Nonlentiginous acral melanoma represents a rare group of acral melanomas without lentiginous growth pattern, showing features compatible with other histologic subtypes 
of cutaneous melanomas arising in nonacral sites (e.g., nodular or superficial spreading subtype). 
b TERT gene amplifications were considered positive if the ratio between TERT gene copy number and control was greater than 1.11, the cutoff value of which was 
established at our institution through probe validation and statistical analysis. 
c The proportion of melanoma cells expressing TERT (cytoplasmic) was recorded in percentage. The intensity of TERT protein expression was recorded as negative (0), 
weak (1+), moderate (2+), or strong (3+), using the keratinocytes of stratum spinosum and luminal cells of eccrine glands/ducts as reference intensities (designated as 2+ 
and 3+ intensities, respectively). H-score was calculated using the formula: [(% of positive cells) × (intensity of protein expression)] 
Figure 1 - 244 
 
Conclusions: In our study, TERT protein expression was more common in metastatic ALMs than in primary ALMs, 
suggesting a role for TERT in the progression of ALMs. TERT expression, particularly with intensity of at least 
moderate (2+), correlated well with TERT amplification in our cohort, suggesting potential utility of IHC to 
predict TERT amplification status in ALMs. Additional studies with larger cohorts are needed to further elucidate the 
value of TERT IHC as a surrogate marker of TERT amplification status in ALMs. 
 
245 
Molecular Profiling of Syringocystadenocarcinoma Papilliferum Reveals RAS-Activating 
Mutations and a UV-Signature 
Kristine Cornejo1, Lloyd Hutchinson2, Patrick O'Donnell3, Xiuling Meng4, Sara Shalin5, David Cassarino6, 
May Chan7, Timothy Quinn8, Paul Googe9, Rosalynn Nazarian10 
1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 2UMass Memorial Health Care, Worcester, MA, 3University 
of Massachusetts, Worcester, MA, 4UMass Medical School, Worcester, MA, 5University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, 6Kaiser Permanente Los Angeles, 7University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI, 8Massachusetts General Physicians Organization Dermatopathology Associates, Newton, 
MA, 9University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 10Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
Disclosures: Kristine Cornejo: None; Lloyd Hutchinson: None; Patrick O'Donnell: None; Xiuling Meng: None; Sara 
Shalin: None; David Cassarino: None; May Chan: None; Timothy Quinn: None; Paul Googe: None; Rosalynn 
Nazarian: None 
Background: Syringocystadenocarcinoma papilliferum (SCACP) is an exceedingly rare cutaneous adnexal 
carcinoma and is the malignant counterpart of syringocystadenoma papilliferum (SCAP). SCAP is commonly 
 
 
 
 
293 
located on the head and neck and may arise in association with a nevus sebaceus. RAS mutations have been 
identified in SCAP (HRAS in up to 26% of cases) and nevus sebaceus (HRAS in up to 95% of cases; KRAS in up 
to 5% of cases), but the molecular profile of SCACP has not been explored.  The aim of this study is to review the 
clinicopathologic features and molecular profile of SCACP. 
Design: We obtained a total of 11 SCACP cases from 6 institutions and reviewed the clinical characteristics and 
morphologic features. In addition, we performed molecular profiling using next generation sequencing by employing 
the Ampliseq Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 analyzing 50 cancer “hotspot” gene mutations. 
Results: The clinicopathologic and mutation profiles are summarized in Figure 1.  The cohort comprised of 6 
females and 5 males with ages ranging from 29-96 (mean: 73.6) years. The neoplasms occurred on the head and 
neck (n=8; 73%) and extremities (n=3; 27%), of which one arose in association with a nevus sebaceus on the 
scalp. Morphologically, 4 cases showed at least carcinoma in situ (adenocarcinoma: n=2; squamous cell 
carcinoma: n=2) and 7 cases were invasive with variable components of adenocarcinoma and squamous cell 
carcinoma/carcinoma with squamous differentiation. Eight of 11 (73%) cases identified hotspot mutation(s) 
consisting of HRAS (n=4), KRAS (n=1), TP53 (n=4), ATM (n=2), FLT3 (n=1), CDKN2A (n=1) and PTEN (n=1).  UV-
associated mutations defined as C>T or CC>TT at dipyrimidine sites were identified 
in TP53, CDKN2A and ATM.  Two cases were not found to harbor hotspot mutations and 1 case failed due to poor 
DNA quality/quantity. All 4 cases with HRAS mutations occurred on the head and neck, while the case with 
a KRAS mutation occurred on the lower extremity. 
Figure 1 - 245 
 
Conclusions: RAS-activating mutations were detected in 45% of cases, of which the majority (80%) 
involved HRAS and occurred on the head and neck, supporting these tumors are a result of malignant 
transformation of SCAP and is an early event.  Additional UV-associated mutations also occurred 
in TP53, CDKN2A and ATM in sun-exposed sites. These findings suggest SCACP displays a diversity of oncogenic 
drivers and the additional tumor suppressor inactivating mutations, which appear to be UV-related, play a role in 
malignant progression. 
 
246 
Ultrasensitive RNAscope In Situ Hybridization is a Cost-Effective Method for Determining 
Clonality in Cutaneous B-cell Lymphomas and Lymphoproliferative Disorders 
Ashley Craddock1, William Kane2, Alejandro A. Gru2, Sarah Gradecki2 
1University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, VA, 2University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 
Disclosures: Ashley Craddock: None; William Kane: None; Alejandro A. Gru: Primary Investigator, Innate Pharma; 
Sarah Gradecki: None 
Background: Demonstrating clonality is critical in the diagnosis of cutaneous B-cell lymphoma; however, the 
relatively lower expression levels of kappa and lambda light chains in B-cells as compared to plasma cells limits 
 
 
 
 
294 
reliable detection. Several methods are currently available to asses light chain restriction in formalin-fixed, paraffin-
embedded tissue: immunohistochemistry, conventional in situ hybridization (ISH), and ultrasensitive RNAscope in 
situ hybridization (RNAscope). Often, ISH and PCR studies for IgH heavy chain rearrangements are both 
performed to increase the likelihood of detecting clonality or to confirm clonality.  
Design: Institutional archives were searched for all cases of cutaneous B-cell lymphoma and atypical lymphoid 
infiltrates diagnosed from 2016 to 2020. Use of ISH, RNAscope, and IgH rearrangement studies was documented. 
The use of IgH rearrangement studies in ISH vs. RNAscope and equivocal vs. polyclonal vs. restricted groups was 
compared using Fishers’ exact tests. Additionally, a cost analysis comparing the cost to patient and lab when using 
ISH vs. RNAscope was performed. 
Results: 280 cases were identified, with ISH or RNAscope performed on 186 (66.4%). Conventional ISH was 
performed on 109 (58.6%) and RNAscope was performed on 77 (41.4%) (Table 1). Significantly fewer IgH 
rearrangement studies were performed on cases that were evaluated with RNAscope as compared to ISH (p=0.03). 
Subgroup analysis demonstrated that there was no significant difference in the use of IgH studies in cases that 
were equivocal (p=0.35) or polyclonal (p=0.76), but cases that were restricted by RNAscope were significantly less 
likely to have subsequent IgH studies performed (p=0.02). Factoring in the risk of IgH testing as associated IgH 
costs, the expected cost of cases using ISH was $1054.03 to the patient and $245.66 to the lab, while the expected 
cost using RNAscope was just $828.00 to the patient and $229.32 to the lab. 
Table 1: Rates of IgH gene rearrangement study use in cutaneous B-cell lymphomas and atypical lymphoid 
infiltrates with conventional in situ hybridization or RNAscope in situ hybridization 
 
Conventional ISH 
(N=109) 
RNAscope 
(N=77) 
P value 
IgH Rearrangement 
27 (24.8%) 
9 (11.7%) 
0.03 
 
Equivocal 
13 (11.9%) 
7 (9.1%) 
 
   IgH Rearrangement Performed 
5 (38.5%) 
1 (14.3%) 
0.35 
   IgH Rearrangement Not Performed 
8 (61.5%) 
6 (85.7%) 
Polyclonal 
29 (26.6%) 
24 (31.2%) 
 
   IgH Rearrangement Performed 
9 (31.0%) 
6 (25.0%) 
0.76 
   IgH Rearrangement Not Performed 
20 (69.0%) 
18 (75.0%) 
Restricted 
67 (61.5%) 
46 (59.7%) 
 
   IgH Rearrangement Performed 
13 (19.4%) 
2 (4.4%) 
0.02 
   IgH Rearrangement Not Performed 
54 (80.6%) 
44 (95.6%) 
Conclusions: The use of ultrasensitive RNAscope in situ hybridization to evaluate clonality in cutaneous B-cell 
lymphoma reduced the need for ordering subsequent IgH rearrangement studies when compared to conventional 
ISH. In particular, cases with clear light chain restriction by RNAscope did not need confirmation by PCR for IgH 
rearrangement. Despite higher costs to the lab to run RNAscope, routine use of this methodology can result in cost 
savings to both the patient and lab by decreasing use of expensive molecular methods. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
295 
247 
Identifying Signature Genes Associated with Cutaneous Melanoma Survival 
Negin Farsi1, James Cotelingam2, Ali Mahdavi Adeli3, Ashish Patil2, Diana Veillon2 
1LSU Health Shreveport, Shreveport, LA, 2Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, 
LA, 3Memphis, TN 
Disclosures: Negin Farsi: None; James Cotelingam: None; Ali Mahdavi Adeli: None; Ashish Patil: None; Diana 
Veillon: None 
Background: Cutaneous melanoma (CM) is responsible for less than 5% of all skin cancers but accounts for most 
skin cancer deaths. The incidence of CM has been increasing over the past decade and ranks second in rate of 
new cancer cases in 2019. Although staging and management of CM has been established, there has not been 
reliable germline variants for CM clinical outcome predictors. While several studies have used gene sequencing in 
CM cases to determine possible gene alterations, it is not clear how gene alterations, individually and collectively, 
impact patient survival. For example, BRAF mutations are seen in 40-60% of melanoma cases but do not 
significantly impact patient survival rates. The purpose of this study is to identify which genes are altered in CM 
cases and which alterations significantly affect survival. 
Design: We curated a list of 51,309 human genes using the consensus coding sequence gene list from the 
Ensembl Genome Browser website. We then used Cbioportal, a multi-institutional web-based platform that curates 
data on cancer genomics from prior literature as well as The Cancer Genome Atlas database, to check whether 
alterations in each individual gene are associated with CM and whether such gene alterations have an impact on 
overall survival. Cbioportal contains 12 main studies on CM including 1635 samples before October 2020, which we 
queried for each of the 51,309 genes. The type of mutation in genes, overall survival, disease specific survival, 
disease free survival, and progression free survival of patients with altered and unaltered genes are calculated from 
the retrieved results. 
Results: Out of 51,309 human genes, we identified 26,931 genes that were sequenced in the 1635 samples. We 
selected genes with highly significant difference in survival between patients with altered and unaltered genes (p-
value<10-7). We identified 12 signature genes that have a significant effect on decreased overall survival. Analysis 
of these 12 genes showed that disease specific median survival for patients is reduced to 9.07 months (P-value: 
4.91e-4, Attributable Risk: 33-45%) with alterations in these genes, whereas the median survival in unaltered cases 
is 63.35 months (Table 1). Moreover, the overall survival in cases with altered genes was significantly reduced in 
comparison to unaltered cases (Figure 1). 
Identified Genes: SLX1B, SULT1A4, SNORD32A, SNORD33, SNORD34, SNORD35A, TMEM160, RPL13AP5, INAFM1, 
GNG8, GSK3A, NAPSB 
 
Number of cases Total 
Number of Cases Deceased 
Median months overall 
Altered group 
33 
31 
9.07 
Unaltered group 
1166 
598 
63.35 
Table 1. Number of cases in altered and unaltered groups for the 12 identified signature genes 
 
 
 
 
296 
Figure 1 - 247 
 
Conclusions: The 12 signature genes identified in this study can be used to detect poor prognosis in CM cases 
and could be viable candidates for future studies and targeted gene therapy. 
 
248 
Genomic Copy Number Profiling of Benign and Malignant Cutaneous Melanocytic 
Neoplasms 
Katherine Geiersbach1, Ruifeng (Ray) Guo1, William Sukov1, Thomas Flotte1, Lori Erickson1 
1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
Disclosures: Katherine Geiersbach: None; Ruifeng (Ray) Guo: None 
Background: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array profiling with molecular inversion probes can detect 
genome wide copy number variation (CNV) and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in DNA samples extracted from 
formalin fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue specimens. Genomic profiling is increasingly employed in the 
pathologic work up of cutaneous melanocytic neoplasms of indeterminate malignant potential. However, the 
sensitivity and specificity of SNP array for accurate diagnostic classification of early melanoma is not well 
characterized, in part due to variable diagnostic thresholds across different pathology practices. 
Design: Our study included 30 benign cutaneous nevi and 34 malignant cutaneous melanomas that were 
diagnosed and clinically followed at our institution. DNA for SNP array testing was extracted from areas on FFPE 
tissue slides containing at least 40% tumor. All melanomas were confirmed to be malignant by the presence of 
metastatic disease. Reportable abnormalities on SNP array included technically acceptable calls covering 
melanoma genes, deletions 1 Mb or larger, duplications 2 Mb or larger, or LOH regions 10 Mb or larger. Known 
benign or non-pathogenic alterations on SNP array were excluded from analysis. 
Results: Benign nevi were mostly normal; only two showed any alterations on SNP array: a 41.5 Mb deletion on 3q 
in one benign nevus, and a 72.9 Mb deletion on 9q and 22.5 Mb copy gain on 17q in another benign nevus. All 
melanomas were abnormal with 3 to >100 alterations. Common CNV alterations in melanoma included regions 
 
 
 
 
297 
targeted by a clinically available FISH panel, including gain of 6p, loss of 6q, loss of 9p, gain of 8q, and gain of 11q; 
however, 5 out of 34 (14.7%) melanomas were negative for abnormalities detected by the FISH panel. In our study, 
limited to neoplasms that were clearly benign or clearly malignant, the presence of at least one reportable 
abnormality on SNP array was 100% sensitive and 93% specific for melanoma. Using a threshold of >3 
abnormalities, SNP array was 97% sensitive and 100% specific for melanoma. 
Conclusions: Genomic copy number profiling is a valuable ancillary test method for detecting genomic 
abnormalities associated with melanoma. In clinical practice, the sensitivity and specificity of SNP array can be 
affected by the individual laboratory’s handling and reporting of SNP arrays as well as the threshold for establishing 
a histopathologic diagnosis of melanoma. 
 
249 
Squamoid Eccrine Ductal Carcinoma: A Clinicopathologic and Transcriptomic Profiling 
Pavandeep Gill1, Elizabeth Keiser1, Jiexin Zhang1, J. Jack Lee1, Dzifa Duose1, Baili Zhang1, Woo Cheal 
Cho1, Phyu Aung1, Michael Tetzlaff2, Carlos Torres-Cabala1, Jonathan Curry1, Victor Prieto1, Doina Ivan1, 
Priya Nagarajan1 
1The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 2University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
Disclosures: Pavandeep Gill: None; Elizabeth Keiser: None; Jiexin Zhang: None; J. Jack Lee: None; Dzifa Duose: 
None; Baili Zhang: None; Woo Cheal Cho: None; Phyu Aung: None; Michael Tetzlaff: None; Carlos Torres-Cabala: 
None; Jonathan Curry: None; Victor Prieto: None; Doina Ivan: None; Priya Nagarajan: None 
Background: Squamoid eccrine ductal carcinoma (SEDC) is a recently described, rare cutaneous neoplasm with a 
biphasic pattern of growth with squamous and eccrine ductal differentiation. Although little is known about its 
histogenesis and molecular profile, it is typically associated with an aggressive clinical course. Here, we utilized a 
novel gene expression profiling platform to characterize the transcriptomic landscape of SEDC, as compared to 
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and eccrine porocarcinoma (EP). To our knowledge, this is the first study to 
employ this novel molecular diagnostic assay based on quantitative nuclease protection and next-generation 
sequencing in the evaluation of cutaneous neoplasms. 
Design: We identified 8 SEDC, 4 SCC, and 4 EP cases from pathology archives to comprehensively collate the 
clinicopathological and outcome parameters (Table 1) and utilize the novel immuno-oncology panel to evaluate 
gene expression profiles on unstained slides cut from formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissues. Pearson 
correlation and ward.D2 linkage rule were used for clustering analysis, while ANOVA was used to identify 
differentially expressed genes (DEG). 
Results: Cox proportional hazards model revealed a significant univariate association between ulceration and time 
to recurrence (109.4 months sooner on average, p <0.006) and lymphovascular invasion and regional metastases 
(p = 0.01) in SEDC. A clustering analysis of all 1392 and 505 highly variable genes showed that most SEDC (n=7, 
87.5%) were more similar to SCC than EP; but the distance between the branches was not significant as evident 
from the small height (Figure 1A). However, SEDC and EP notably under-expressed a majority of 31 DEGs 
compared to overexpression in SCC via ANOVA analysis  (Figure 1B), with IL1A and VEGFC transcript levels 
most differentially expressed (BH adjusted p-value < 0.05). Among SEDC tumors, the following clinical and gene 
associations were identified: lymphovascular invasion: HELLS, DTL, BORA, GSDME, GINS4, and C20orf24; 
metastases: MME; angiotropism: EPCAM, and tumor size: IL1RL1 and ITGA6; but did not reach statistical 
significance due to limited sample size. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
298 
Table 1: Clinicopathologic features of the squamoid eccrine ductal carcinoma (SEDC), squamous cell 
carcinoma (SCC), and eccrine porocarcinoma (EP). 
Parameter 
SEDC, n=8 
SCC, n=4 
EP, n=4 
Mean age (years) 
76 
80.5 
66.5 
Sex 
Female 
2 
0 
2 
 
Male 
6 
4 
2 
Anatomic site 
Head and neck 
6 
3 
1 
 
Trunk 
0 
1 
1 
Extremities 
2 
0 
2 
Epidermal connection 
Absent 
2 
0 
0 
 
Present 
6 
4 
4 
Ulceration 
Absent 
5 
1 
2 
 
Present 
3 
3 
2 
Level of Invasion 
Dermis 
2 
0 
1 
 
Subcutis 
6 
4 
3 
Histologic grade 
G1 
0 
0 
1 
 
G2 
5 
1 
2 
 
G3 
3 
3 
1 
Perineural invasion 
Absent 
1 
0 
3 
 
Present 
7 
4 
1 
Angiotropism 
Absent 
4 
2 
3 
 
Present 
4 
2 
1 
Lymphovascular invasion 
Absent 
6 
3 
3 
 
Present 
2 
1 
1 
Any Metastasis 
Absent 
4 
2 
3 
 
Present 
4 
2 
1 
Regional metastasis 
Absent 
4 
2 
3 
 
Present 
4 
2 
1 
Distant metastasis 
Absent 
7 
2 
3 
 
Present 
1 
2 
1 
Outcome 
Dead 
1 
2 
0 
 
Alive 
7 
2 
3 
Lost to follow up 
0 
0 
1 
Figure 1 - 249 
 
Conclusions: Our study shows that SEDC shares gene expression profiles with both SCC and EP, ulceration and 
lymphovascular invasion may correlate with SEDC tumor recurrence and regional metastases, respectively, and 
certain genes may correlate with clinical progression. Additional studies using larger cohorts are necessary to 
validate these findings. 
 
 
 
 
299 
250 
Characterizing the Molecular Landscape of Acral Lentiginous Melanoma: A Multi-National 
Study of 429 Patients 
Pavandeep Gill1, Kenjiro Namikawa2, Denai Milton1, Woo Cheal Cho1, Priya Nagarajan1, Doina Ivan1, 
Jonathan Curry1, Victor Prieto1, Carlos Torres-Cabala1, Phyu Aung1 
1The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 2National Cancer Center Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan 
Disclosures: Pavandeep Gill: None; Kenjiro Namikawa: Speaker, Ono Pharmaceutical; Speaker, Bristol Myers 
Squibb; Speaker, Novartis Pharma; Speaker, MSD; Denai Milton: None; Woo Cheal Cho: None; Priya Nagarajan: 
None; Doina Ivan: None; Jonathan Curry: None; Victor Prieto: None; Carlos Torres-Cabala: None; Phyu Aung: 
None 
Background: Acral lentiginous melanoma (ALM) is a rare, distinct subtype of cutaneous melanoma. It is typically 
associated with a delayed diagnosis and worse prognosis than other cutaneous melanoma subtypes. It 
also constitutes a relatively greater proportion of melanomas occurring in non-Caucasians. Risk factors for ALM 
remain unclear and the genetic alterations associated with ALM remain to be further defined. We performed a multi-
national study, including the largest cohort of ALM patients reported to date, in order to better characterize the 
molecular landscape of this disease. 
Design: We identified 429 patients with ALM who underwent mutational testing at two major cancer referral centers 
in the United States (US, n=376) and Japan (n=53) between 2000 and 2020. Platforms for mutational testing 
included next generation sequencing and polymerase chain reaction panels. We collected clinico-pathological, 
outcome, and molecular data for all patients. The frequency of mutations was calculated, and a Fisher exact test 
was used to compare the rates of BRAF, KIT, NRAS, HRAS, and KRAS mutations between the US and Japanese 
populations. 
Results: Molecular alterations were identified in 316 of the 429 (74%) patients. The overall frequencies 
of BRAF, KIT, NRAS, HRAS, and KRAS were 29%, 27%, 28%, 3%, and 2%, respectively. Significant differences 
between the frequency of HRAS mutations in the Japanese and US populations were observed (8% and 2% 
respectively, p <0.05). No other significant differences were identified. Ninety of the 316 (28%) cases included other 
mutations involving TP53, GNAQ, TERT, PTEN, NF1, CTNNB1, MET, CBL, CDKN2A, and APC genes. 
Conclusions: In the largest reported study of the mutational landscape of ALM, we confirm that BRAF, KIT, 
and NRAS mutations are the most commonly identified genetic alterations comprising 84% of all mutations 
identified in ALM. Molecular alterations were not identified in 26% of patients, suggesting that other genetic and/or 
epigenetic events may be involved. Our study enhances our knowledge of the genetic landscape of ALM and offers 
insights into potential therapeutic targets. 
 
251 
Merkel Cell Polyomavirus–Negative Merkel Cell Carcinoma is Associated with JAK-STAT 
and MEK-ERK Pathway Activation 
Takeshi Iwasaki1, Michiko Matsushita2, Kazuhiko Hayashi3, Daisuke Nonaka4, Kenichi Kohashi5, Yuichi 
Yamada6, Satoshi Kuwamoto7, Yoshihisa Umekita2, Yoshinao Oda5 
1JCHO Kyushu Hospital, Kitakyushu, Japan, 2Tottori University, Japan, 3Tottori University Medicine, 4Guy's 
and St. Thomas' Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom, 5Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 
Japan, 6Kyushu University, Japan, 7Tottori University, Yonago, Japan 
Disclosures: Takeshi Iwasaki: None; Michiko Matsushita: None; Kenichi Kohashi: None; Yuichi Yamada: None; 
Yoshinao Oda: None 
Background: Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) is monoclonally integrated into the genomes of approximately 
80% of Merkel cell carcinomas (MCCs). It affects clinicopathological features of MCC, and MCPyV large T-antigen 
(MCPyV-LT) has a pivotal role in MCC pathogenesis. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in MCC 
development after MCPyV infection are unclear. The association between MCPyV infection and the MEK-ERK and 
JAK-STAT signaling pathway activation in MCC was investigated to elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of MCC 
with regard to signal transduction. The aim was to identify new molecular targets for MCC treatment. 
 
 
 
 
300 
Design: The molecular pathological characteristics of 30 MCPyV-positive and 20 MCPyV-negative MCC were 
analyzed; MCPyV was detected through real-time polymerase chain reaction. Using next-generation sequencing, 
mutations of oncogenes in eight cases (MCPyV-positive in four cases, MCPyV-negative in four cases) were found. 
Further, immunohistochemical expression of phosphorylation status of MEK, ERK, JAK, and STAT3. Then, using 
an in vitro system of MCC cell lines, the activation status of the MEK-ERK and JAK-STAT pathways, as well as the 
effect of JAK inhibitor was analyzed. 
Results: Mutation analysis revealed variants of 21 genes, including 5 pathogenic mutations. JAK2 and JAK3 
mutations were not observed. Principal component analysis revealed that MCPyV-positive and MCPyV-negative 
MCCs are distinguished by the first and second principal components. Immunohistochemically, the expression of 
pJAK2 (p = 0.038) and pERK1/2 (p = 0.019) was higher in MCPyV-negative MCCs than in MCPyV-positive MCCs. 
Conversely, STAT3 phosphorylation status in MCPyV-positive MCCs did not differ from that in MCPyV-negative 
MCCs. Prognostic analysis revealed that male gender, older age, non-MCPyV status, and advanced cancer stage 
are unfavorable prognostic factors; however, the phosphorylation statuses of JAK2, STAT3, MEK1/2, and ERK1/2 
were not related to the prognosis. In vitro analysis showed that JAK inhibitors inhibited cell proliferation more in 
MCPyV-negative MCC cell lines (MCC13 and MCC14/2) than in a MCPyV-positive MCC cell line (MKL-1). Western 
blotting showed that the expression of pERK1/2 and pMEK was higher in MCPyV-negative MCC cell lines than in 
MCPyV-positive MCC cell lines. 
Conclusions: These results suggest that MCPyV-positive and MCPyV-negative MCCs have different tumorigenic 
pathways and that JAK-STAT and MEK-ERK signaling pathway signals are novel targets for MCC treatment. 
 
252 
Cutaneous Apocrine Carcinoma of the Scrotum: A Multi-institutional Clinicopathologic 
Analysis of 6 Cases and Comparison with Extramammary Paget Disease 
Sonia Kamanda1, Adeboye O. Osunkoya2, Jonathan Epstein3, Andres Matoso3 
1James Buchanan Brady Urological Institutions, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions, Baltimore, MD, 2Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 3Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
MD 
Disclosures: Sonia Kamanda: None; Adeboye O. Osunkoya: None; Jonathan Epstein: None; Andres Matoso: 
None 
Background: Primary cutaneous apocrine carcinoma (AC) of the scrotum is extremely rare with only 4 case 
reports published in the literature. 
Design: A retrospective multi-institutional review of the pathology and expert consultation files between 1989 and 
2020 identified 6 cases of AC of the scrotum. We compared the findings to our recently published series of 
extramammary Paget disease (EMPD) of the scrotum. 
Results: Mean age at presentation was 71 years (range: 31-91 years). Presenting clinical symptoms included an 
eczematous rash, scrotal cyst, ulcerated skin, and inguinal mass. The tumor ranged in size from 1.2 to 
5.5cm. Microscopically, the tumors show a solid growth pattern with involvement of the dermis and hypodermis and 
are composed of infiltrating cohesive cords and nests of epithelioid cells surrounded by desmoplastic stromal 
reaction. The cells have an eosinophilic cytoplasm, display nuclear pleomorphism, irregular nuclear membranes, 
and prominent nucleoli. Glandular/tubule formation and intracellular mucin were seen in 2 cases (33.3%). Focal 
squamous differentiation was evident in one case (16.6%). An intraductal component was seen in one case 
(16.6%). Pagetoid spread of tumor cells in the epidermis was seen in 1 case (16.6%). By immunohistochemistry, 
the tumor cells were most consistently positive for GCDFP15 (4/4), GATA3 (4/4), mammaglobin (2/2), AR (3/3), and 
CK7 (4/4). Other positive markers include ER (2/3), and Her2 (1/3). Treatment included wide local excision (n=4) 
and inguinal lymph node dissection (n=1). Adjuvant therapy included chemotherapy (gemcitabine, carboplatin; 
n=4), herceptin and lupron (n=1) tamoxifen/arimidex (n=1); and radiotherapy (n=1). At the time of this study, three 
patients (50%) were reported dead of disease, less than 2 years from the time of diagnosis. Four (66.6%) patients 
developed metastasis to the inguinal and retroperitoneal lymph nodes, liver, bones, and lungs. Three patients had 
significant lower extremity edema. Molecular analysis on two cases detected a Her2 mutation in one and 
microsatellite instability in the other. EMPD and AC share the same immunophenotype, suggesting origin from the 
 
 
 
 
301 
same cell type. While EMPD has an insidious presentation and is most commonly an in-situ disease, AC 
presents as a mass, is deeply invasive, and has an aggressive clinical behavior. 
Conclusions: Distinction of AC from EMPD is important for prognostication and management. Similarities with 
mammary carcinoma raises consideration for breast cancer specific therapy. 
 
253 
Malignant Melanoma in Immunocompromised Patients: a Statistical and Pathologic 
Analysis. 
Trevor Killeen1, Ryan Shanley1, Vidhyalakshmi Ramesh1, Alessio Giubellino1 
1University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 
Disclosures: Trevor Killeen: None; Ryan Shanley: None; Vidhyalakshmi Ramesh: None; Alessio Giubellino: None 
Background: Malignant melanoma is the leading cause of death from cutaneous malignancies worldwide. 
Immunocompromised patients have an increased risk of developing cutaneous malignancies, including malignant 
melanoma. After identifying immunocompromised patients who subsequently developed melanoma, we collected 
their clinical and histopathologic data to further analyze this relationship. 
Design: We manually reviewed our clinical and pathology databases from 2011 to 2019 to identify all 
immunocompromised patients who subsequently developed melanoma. Death data, when applicable, was obtained 
from the death database. In total, 97 patients with a combined 117 unique melanoma lesions were identified. 
Relevant demographic and diagnostic data, as well as available histopathologic data, were recorded. 
Results: The most common causes of immunosuppression, in order of frequency, were transplantation; 
hematologic neoplasms; and HIV/AIDS. Solid organ transplant, specifically kidney transplant, was the most 
common transplantation subcategory. Superficial spreading melanoma and lentigo maligna melanoma were the 
most represented subtypes of malignant melanoma. Median Breslow depth was 0.8 mm. The most common 
primary tumor stage was T1a. A significant portion of patients developed melanoma in situ following 
immunosuppression, instead of or in addition to malignant melanoma. Median time from onset of 
immunosuppression to melanoma diagnosis was 5 years, with 6 years for all transplants (n=54), 7 years for solid 
organ transplants (n=41), and 4.5 years for all hematologic neoplasms (n=36). 32 of 97 patients (33%) were 
deceased at the time of analysis; 6 of these patients (19%) had melanoma listed as a cause of death. Notably, 66 
of the total 97 patients (68%) were male. 
Conclusions: Our data contribute to an improved understanding of melanoma in immunocompromised patients 
and the histopathologic profile of melanoma. Transplants, particularly solid organ transplants, are a major 
contributor to immunosuppression in this patient demographic. Median time between immunosuppression onset 
and diagnosis of melanoma in our cohort varied based on the cause of immunosuppression, with solid organ 
transplants showing a higher median disease-free state after onset of immunosuppression than hematologic 
neoplasms. Further statistical analyses will compare this patient cohort to the general population to establish 
incidence and hazard ratios for development of melanoma in immunocompromised patients. 
 
254 
Different Oncogenic Mechanism Between Caucasians and African Americans for Post-
Transplant Skin Cancer 
Takeda Kotaro1, Aisha Kousar1, Kimbely Briley1, Lorita Rebellato1 
1East Carolina University, Greenville, NC 
Disclosures: Takeda Kotaro: None; Aisha Kousar: None; Kimbely Briley: None; Lorita Rebellato: None 
Background: Transplant medicine is continuously expanding. Increased occurrence of malignancy becomes one 
of the medical burdens in organ transplant recipients. Skin cancer is the most common malignancy after 
transplantation. Since different ethnicities have a different cancer risk, different oncogenic mechanism is speculated 
for skin cancer. 
 
 
 
 
302 
Design: We compared post-renal transplant skin cancer between Caucasians and African Americans. Adult 
primary renal transplants performed at our transplant center between 2009 and 2015 were included in this study. 
Skin cancer incidence through 2019 was determined through detailed medical record review. The study evaluated 
time interval until initial skin cancer diagnosis, affected location, histologic subtype, clinical stage, human 
papillomavirus infection, treatments, prognosis, immunosuppressive regimen and human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 
mismatch.  
Results: 447 kidney transplant recipients were analyzed (Caucasians 130, African Americans 317). 31 recipients 
(6.9 %) developed post-transplant skin cancer (Caucasians 24, African Americans 11) with average age of 61 years 
at diagnosis. The average time interval until cancer diagnosis was 1356 days. Caucasians were significantly more 
susceptible to skin cancer than African Americans. Skin cancer in Caucasians was developed exclusively on sun-
exposed areas such as face, neck and forearm with an evidence of solar elastosis. In contrast, African Americans 
developed cancer predominantly on genital areas including perianal area and vulva. 75 % of genital skin cancers 
showed diffuse p16 positivity, indicating human papillomavirus involvement for carcinogenesis. The most common 
histologic subtype was squamous cell carcinoma (22), followed by basal cell carcinoma (2), whereas no histologic 
diagnosis was available in 7 cases. Malignant melanoma was not observed. Most cases of skin cancer were either 
in situ or focally invasive lesions treated by local excision, but two cases showed advanced stages and one African 
American died due to perianal cancer. No difference in immunosuppression and number of HLA mismatch was 
found between the races. 
Conclusions: We found high incidence of post-transplant skin cancer with different oncogenic mechanism 
between Caucasians and African Americans. Sun exposure is the important risk factor in Caucasians, whereas 
human papillomavirus infection/reactivation is involved for African Americans. This study suggests that skin cancer 
risk stratification based on race after kidney transplantation is warranted. 
 
255 
Complete and Heterogeneous Loss of H3K27 Trimethylation Expression in Secondary and 
Sporadic Angiosarcomas 
Andrea Krajisnik1, Wonwoo Shon1 
1Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 
Disclosures: Andrea Krajisnik: None; Wonwoo Shon: None 
Background: H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) is a well-known epigenetic regulator that is associated with 
transcriptional repression.  H3K27me3 immunohistochemistry has been considered by many authors to be a 
reliable diagnostic marker for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, although some disagree.  Two recent 
studies have also explored the status of H3K27me3 protein expression in post-irradiation angiosarcomas (AS), yet 
inconsistent results were reported.  In this study, we analyzed a series of well-characterized secondary and 
sporadic AS for H3K27me3 protein expression. 
Design: Cases of AS (39 total cases; 14 post-irradiation/chronic lymphedema, 13 primary cutaneous, and 12 deep 
soft tissue/visceral) and 10 post-irradiation atypical vascular lesions were retrieved and follow-up was obtained. 
Representative hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides were re-reviewed to confirm diagnoses.  All sections were 
then stained with H3K27me3 (C36B11, 1:200, Cell Signaling Technology).  The percentage of positive tumor cells 
was semiquantitatively scored (complete loss: <5%, partial loss: 5-75%, and intact >75%). After the initial review, 
we also developed a dual-color H3K27me3 (nuclear brown) and CD31 (cytoplasmic red) immunohistochemistry 
and applied it in selected cases of angiosarcoma and atypical vascular lesion. 
Results: 19 of 27 (70%) cutaneous AS showed loss of H3K27me3 expression, including 12 of 14 (86%; complete 
loss 9 and partial loss 3) secondary AS and 7 of 13 (54%; complete loss 5 and partial loss 2) primary AS.  We also 
detected loss of H3K27me3 expression in 9 of 12 (75%; complete loss 7 and partial loss 2) deep soft tissue/visceral 
AS.  All cases of atypical vascular lesions revealed intact H3K27me3 staining.  In those selected cases, dual 
staining for CD31 and H3K27me3 together expedited visualization and allowed for easier assessment of the tumor 
foci in question. 
Conclusions: There may be some diagnostic role for H3K27me3 immunohistochemistry in the distinction of 
secondary AS from selected potential mimics, such as atypical vascular lesion.  Although it shows low sensitivity in 
 
 
 
 
303 
sporadic AS, detection of H3K27me3 loss may also aid in predicting sensitivity to epigenetic-based 
therapies.  Finally, our H3K27me3/CD31 dual-color stain provides more convenient microscopic evaluation and 
improved accuracy of H3K27me3 status by precisely delineating the neoplastic endothelial cells. 
 
256 
Immunohistochemistry for PRAME in the Differential Diagnosis of Melanocytic Lesions of 
the Nail Apparatus 
Andrea Krajisnik1, Nima Gharavi1, Mark Faries1, Matthew Martelli2, Wonwoo Shon1 
1Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, 2Rush Foundation Hospital, Meridian, MS 
Disclosures: Andrea Krajisnik: None; Nima Gharavi: None; Mark Faries: Advisory Board Member, 
Novartis; Advisory Board Member, Merck; Advisory Board Member, Array Bioscience; Advisory Board Member, 
Pulse Bioscience; Advisory Board Member, Bristol Myers Squibb; Matthew Martelli: None; Wonwoo Shon: None 
Background: Nail unit melanocytic lesions present a unique set of diagnostic challenge owing to the unfamiliarity 
with clinical assessment and the lack of experience with histologic examination.  Because the first surgical 
specimen received in the pathology laboratory is typically a small, sometimes suboptimal biopsy, the distinction 
between melanoma and its histologic mimics can be difficult.  For this reason, there has been continued interest in 
the development of ancillary markers that may assist in the differential diagnosis of nail unit melanocytic 
lesions.  Up-regulation of PRAME has been reported to be a common event in melanomas, and relatively recently, 
immunohistochemistry for PRAME has been shown to be helpful in evaluating various melanocytic neoplasms.  In 
this study, we evaluated PRAME protein expression in a series of nail unit melanocytic lesions. 
Design: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections from 23 nail unit melanomas (including small biopsy and 
amputation specimens) and 30 control cases including lentigo (13), conventional melanocytic nevus (8), 
melanocytic activation/hypermelanosis (5), melanocytic nevus/proliferation with "atypia" (3), and junctional Spitz 
nevus (1) were retrieved.  An automated immunohistochemistry system (Ventana BenchMark XT, Ventana Medical 
systems, Inc., Tucson, AZ) was used for the detection of PRAME, using a commercially available antibody (E7I1B; 
Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA). Nuclear staining was scored as negative (<5%), 1+ (5%-25%), 2+ (26%-
50%), or 3+ (>51%). Intensity of staining was scored as weak, moderate, or strong. 
Results: All melanoma cases were positive for PRAME (3+ in 19, 2+ in 2, and 1+ in 2 cases; strong in 15, 
moderate in 6, and weak in 2 cases); of note, two weakly positive cases were sections from significantly decalcified 
amputation specimen.  In specimens where the neoplastic cells are limited in number, the staining was restricted to 
the tumor cells, corresponding to the initial H&E impression. All control cases were completely negative for PRAME 
expression. 
Conclusions: PRAME expression is helpful in distinguishing between melanomas and other nail unit melanocytic 
lesions.  This antibody also proved to be diagnostic valuable in detecting melanoma cells in small biopsy 
specimens and minimal residual disease.  Future larger studies will have to determine the diagnostic value of 
PRAME expression in borderline nail unit melanocytic lesions. 
 
257 
Exploratory Transcriptomic Analyses of Tumor and Microenvironment Signatures in 
Aggressive Digital Papillary Adenocarcinoma 
Zongshan Lai1, George Jour2, Doina Ivan1, Carlos Torres-Cabala1, Priya Nagarajan1, Baili Zhang1, Dzifa 
Duose1, Jonathan Curry1, Victor Prieto1, Phyu Aung1 
1The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 2New York University, New York, NY 
Disclosures: Zongshan Lai: None; George Jour: None; Doina Ivan: None; Carlos Torres-Cabala: None; Priya 
Nagarajan: None; Baili Zhang: None; Dzifa Duose: None; Jonathan Curry: None; Victor Prieto: None; Phyu Aung: 
None 
Background: Aggressive digital papillary adenocarcinoma (ADPA) is a rare but aggressive cutaneous malignant 
sweat gland neoplasm that occurs in acral skin. Rates of local recurrence and distant metastasis are approximately 
35% and 14%, respectively. No histophenotypic parameters can be used to definitely differentiate ADPA from 
 
 
 
 
304 
histologically similar benign adnexal tumors such as hidradenoma, especially in small biopsies. Complete excision 
or digit amputation is the treatment of choice for localized ADPA and there is no standard treatment for metastatic 
disease. We used targeted transcriptomics to characterize the tumor microenvironment of ADPA to identify specific 
gene expression signatures that could potentially serve for identifying immunotherapy and targeted regimens for 
ADPA as compared to hidradenoma. 
Design: We identified 10 ADPA and 10 hidradenomas from the pathology archives and collated the 
clinicopathological and outcome parameters (Table 1). We conducted RNA analysis using PanCancer IO 360 
assay including 770 genes from 24 different immune cell types and 48 gene derived signatures measuring 
biological variables crucial to the tumor-immune interaction including cell proliferation, angiogenesis and immune 
inhibitory mechanisms. Statistical analysis was performed using the N-Solver package (P < 0.01, FDR<0.01). 
Results: Semi-supervised signature-based analysis revealed upregulated B7-H3, Endothelial cells, and TGF-beta 
signatures in ADPA compared to benign tumors (signature scores of 5.4 vs. 4.5, 5.4 vs. 4.4, and 5.1 vs. 3.9, 
respectively; p-value <0.05; Fig.1). KDR was downregulated in the benign group compared to ADPA (lg2FC =-1.14, 
P<0.0001, FDR=0.06; Fig.2A). No differences in the tumor inflammation score and the loss signatures in the JAK-
STAT pathway were noted between the groups. Both groups showed microsatellite-stable transcriptomic 
signatures. However, a hypermutated signature was seen almost exclusively in ADPA (2 vs 10/12; Fig.2B). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table1: Patients’ demographic and clinicopathological characteristics 
Parameters 
ADPA 
(n=9) 
Hidradenoma 
(n=10) 
Mean age, years (SD) 
47.1 (11.3) 
58.6 (14.9) 
Sex, n (%) 
Female 
4 (44.4) 
5 (50.0) 
 
Male 
5 (55.6) 
5 (50.0) 
Race, n (%) 
White 
8 (88.9) 
9 (90.0) 
 
Black 
0 (0) 
1 (10.0) 
 
Unknown 
1 (11.1) 
0 (0) 
Perineural invasion, n (%) 
Absent 
9 (100.0) 
10 (100.0) 
 
Present 
0 (0) 
0 (0) 
Lymphovascular invasion, n (%) 
Absent 
7 (77.8) 
10 100.0) 
Present 
2 (22.2) 
0 (0) 
Any Metastasis, n (%) 
Absent 
7 (77.8) 
10 (100.0) 
 
Present 
2 (22.2) 
0 (0) 
Regional metastasis, n (%) 
Absent 
8 (88.9) 
10 (100.0) 
 
Present 
1 (11.1) 
0 (0) 
Distant metastasis, n (%) 
Absent 
7 (77.8) 
10 (100.0) 
 
Present 
2 (22.2) 
0 (0) 
Outcome, n (%) 
Dead 
1 (11.1) 
0 (0) 
 
Alive 
8 (88.9) 
10 (100.0) 
Note: one of the ADPA cases has two specimens: one from original biopsy and the other one from recurrent lesion) 
 
 
 
 
305 
 
Figure 1 - 257 
 
Figure 2 - 257
 
 
 
Conclusions: Our preliminary result suggests that ADPA lacks a significant tumor inflammatory signature, and 
lacks microsatellite instability (MSI), which would not support the rationale for using immune checkpoint therapy. 
The hypermutated signature appears to be specific to ADPA and is independent of the MSI 
status. KDR upregulation in ADPA could serve as a potential target for drugs targeting VEGFR2 which are currently 
being investigated in clinical trials. 
 
 
 
 
 
306 
258 
Deep Dermal and Subcutaneous Anisometric Cell Lipoma (Dysplastic Lipoma): A Series of 
Eight Cases 
Maryam Masouminia1, Wonwoo Shon1 
1Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 
Disclosures: Maryam Masouminia: None; Wonwoo Shon: None 
Background: Anisometric cell lipoma, also known as dysplastic lipoma, commonly affects the posterior neck, 
shoulder, and upper trunk with a male predominance. Striking variation in size and shape of adipocytes can lead to 
diagnostic confusion, including atypical lipomatous tumor/well-differentiated liposarcoma as one consideration.  To 
the best of our knowledge, there have been no reports in the dermatology or dermatopathology literature describing 
this peculiar variant of lipoma. In this study, we present a series of eight cases of deep dermal and subcutaneous 
anisometric cell lipoma. 
Design: Eight cases of anisometric cell lipoma were retrieved from our institutional archives.  Immunohistochemical 
stains were performed in all cases included: RB1, p53, and MDM2.  Molecular evaluation for MDM2 gene 
amplification was also performed using FISH on interphase nuclei present on FFPE sections. One selected case 
was further analyzed by genomic microarray hybridization (OncoScan).  Clinical information, including follow-up 
information, was obtained from our institutional medical record system.   
Results: The tumors arose in seven men and one woman, ranging from 29 to 76 years of age (median: 56 
years). The sites involved were back (4), shoulder (2), and head and neck (1), and upper arm (1). The tumors 
ranged from 4 to 14 cm in the greatest dimension (median 8 cm).  Microscopically, all tumors were composed of 
adipocytes with significant variation in size and shape (Fig.1-A) accompanied by minimal cytologic atypia and 
Lochkern change (Fig1-B).  There were also microscopic foci of mild fat necrosis (Fig1-C).  Enlarged 
hyperchromatic stromal cells and thickened fibrous septa, as seen in atypical lipomatous tumor/well-differentiated 
liposarcoma, were absent.  Immunohistochemistry revealed a loss of RB1 nuclear staining in the adipocytic cell 
nuclei (Fig.2-A).  Occasional lesional cells were also positive for p53 protein (Fig.2-B).  One case showed some 
lesional adipocytes with MDM2 protein expression.  No MDM2 gene amplification was detected by fluorescence in 
situ hybridization in all cases (Fig.2-C). By genomic microarray hybridization, the tumor showed a loss of 1q, 7q, 
13q, and 16q in one case.  At this point, no evidence of recurrent disease or malignant transformation was noted 
after complete surgical resection.  
Figure 1 - 258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
307 
Figure 2 - 258 
 
Conclusions: Anisometric cell lipoma is a rare adipocytic tumor that exhibits distinct histopathologic, 
immunohistochemical, and genetic features.  This underrecognized diagnosis constitutes a diagnostic pitfall for 
dermatopathologists and dermatologists, and could be misdiagnosed as other benign or malignant lipomatous 
lesions. 
 
259 
Retrospective Clinicopathological Analysis of Clinically Suspicious Cases of Hansen’s 
Disease 
Priyathersini Nagarajan1, Leena Dennis Joseph1, Kaviya Bharathi Murugan1, Priya Nagarajan2 
1Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, India, 2The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 
Disclosures: Priyathersini Nagarajan: None; Leena Dennis Joseph: None; Kaviya Bharathi Murugan: None; Priya 
Nagarajan: None 
Background: Hansen’s disease caused by Mycobacterium leprae is a prevalent infectious disease among the 
Indian population with high treatment costs. The long incubation period, the wide variability in clinicopathological 
presentation poses a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge, precluding eradication of the disease. This is further 
complicated by non-adherence to the prolonged therapy, leading to unusual histologic features. Thus, there is a 
critical need to re-evaluate the histopathologic features in this context. In this study, we have retrospectively 
analyzed biopsies from patients who were clinically suspected to have Hansen’s disease in a tertiary care center in 
south India, over a period of one year from January to December 2019. 
Design: We identified 50 skin biopsies from patients with clinically suspected Hansen’s disease from the pathology 
archives and comprehensively collated the clinical and histopathological information. 
Results: The cohort included 36 men and 14 women with a median age of 47.5 years (range 15-80 years) at the 
time of biopsy. The demographic and clinical information are presented in Table 1. The most common clinical 
presentation was multiple hypopigmented patches with loss of sensation involving face and upper extremities. The 
duration of symptoms ranged from 1 month to 2 years with an average period of 6 months in most cases. 
Microscopically 26 cases were confirmed to be Hansen’s disease with lepromatous type (LL) being the most 
common type (n=11), which showed abundant dermal histiocytic infiltrate with foamy cytoplasm, followed by 
borderline tuberculoid (n=9), which showed granulomatous dermal infiltrate with perineural predilection, lacking 
foamy cytoplasm. Of these, 2 cases were from patients with relapse at 8 to 10 years after initial diagnosis and 
treatment. The modified acid-fast Wade-Fite stain was performed on all biopsies, with positivity in only 3 cases, 
suggesting low sensitivity, even among LL cases. The most common histopathologic diagnosis among those that 
were non-diagnostic for Hansen’s disease was polymorphous light eruption with superficial perivascular 
lymphocytic infiltrate. 
 
 
 
 
308 
Figure 1 - 259 
 
Conclusions: This retrospective study provides a glimpse of the varied clinical and histomorphological features of 
Hansen’s disease. While the histologic features are most helpful, the utility of ancillary studies is questionable due 
to low sensitivity of modified acid fast special stains.  
 
260 
Experiences With Convolutional Neural Network / Artificial Intelligence Algorithms in the 
Classification of Pigmented Skin Lesions: Potential Adjunct to Clinical and 
Histopathologic Assessment 
Janira Navarro Sanchez1, Christopher Lum1, Shane Spencer2, John Shepherd2, Kevin Cassel2, Mark 
Willingham2 
1University of Hawaii, John A. Burns School of Medicine, Honolulu, HI, 2University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 
Disclosures: Janira Navarro Sanchez: None; Christopher Lum: None; Shane Spencer: None; John Shepherd: 
None; Kevin Cassel: None; Mark Willingham: None 
Background: Each year in the US there are more skin cancer diagnoses than all other cancers combined. A 
significant subset of melanocytic lesions can be diagnostically challenging. In this study we looked at the 
performance of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in skin lesion classification as a complementary tool to 
clinical and histologic assessment. 
Design: A Neural Network-based classification model was trained on 13842 dermoscopic pictures of 
histopathology-confirmed pigmented skin lesions from the International Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC) Archive 
dataset. Benign and malignant cases represented 90.7% and 9.2% respectively of the total.  The optimal CNN 
model was selected based on train/validation loss plot, Monte Carlo simulations and receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC/ROC). We performed a blind study of our CNN model with 3 dermatologists on a 
 
 
 
 
309 
comparison batch of 50 images representing benign and malignant skin lesions. Our main outcome measure was 
accuracy based on AUC/ROC characteristics. 
Results: The AUC/ROC of the selected model was 0.948 in the two classification tasks examined: Benign versus 
Malignant and Melanoma versus Non-Melanoma. The dermatologists and the Artificial Intelligence (AI) comparative 
image testing showed similar results differentiating benign vs. malignant lesions. Dermatologist 1 and 2 had 70% 
correct diagnoses, dermatologist 3 had 54% and our CNN model had 68%. There were no incorrectly diagnosed 
images by the dermatologists and the AI combined. 
Conclusions: Artificial intelligence algorithms are a promising tool that can assist dermatologists with melanoma 
detection in clinical practice. AI scoring of skin pigmented lesions, may provide an objective categorization between 
low and high risk lesions. This can be useful as an adjunct to histopathological observation of diagnostically 
challenging lesions, improving the diagnostic accuracy. 
 
261 
Weakly-Supervised Deep Learning-Based Segmentation of Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer on 
Histopathological Images 
Trung Nguyen1, Yufei Zhou1, Cheng Lu1, Andrew Janowczyk1, Rainer Grobholz2, Ian Katz3, Anant 
Madabhushi1 
1Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, 2Institute of Pathology, Cantonal Hospital Aarau, 
Aarau, Switzerland, 3Southern Sun Pathology, Westmead, Australia 
Disclosures: Trung Nguyen: None; Yufei Zhou: None; Cheng Lu: None; Andrew Janowczyk: None; Rainer 
Grobholz: None; Ian Katz: None; Anant Madabhushi: Advisory Board Member, Aiforia Inc; Grant or Research 
Support, Bristol Myers-Squibb; Primary Investigator, Astrazeneca; Primary Investigator, Boehringer-Ingelheim 
Background: Non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSC) have a curative rate of > 95% if detected and treated early. A 
deep learning-based segmentation pipeline may potentially reduce the time needed by pathologists for diagnosing 
NMSC, but training of such a segmentation approach typically requires a large number of laborious pixel-level 
tumor annotations. In this study, we present a weakly-supervised segmentation approach using the U-Net 
(Ronneberger et al., 2015) and CAMEL framework (Xu et al., 2019) that uses only image-level labels to 
automatically delineate regions of Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC) and Basal Cell Carcinoma (BCC) on H&E 
stained histopathological image, obviating the need of pixel-level annotations. 
Design: We obtained from 87 patients a collection of 114 digitized H&E stained WSIs at 20x magnification, 
comprising 10 benign cases, 56 BCC, 10 in-Situ SCC, and 11 invasive-SCC. 550 Region of Interests (ROIs) 
identified by pathologists were extracted from the WSIs and categorized into 2 classes: 60 non-cancerous (NC) and 
490 cancerous (CA) ROIs (i.e. 373 BCC, 53 invasive-SCC, and 64 in-Situ SCC images). These ROIs were 
randomly split into training and testing sets (ratio of 1:1). 
As illustrated in Figure 1, all ROIs are first annotated with image-level labels. Notably, these labels are easy to 
create yet noisy because CA images contain NC regions as well. An automated Label Refinement procedure was 
adapted from CAMEL to re-label NC subregions and highlight CA subregions within ROIs labeled as CA. A U-Net 
model for NMSC tumor segmentation was then trained using the refined labels. A U-Net model using image-level 
labels as annotations without any label refinement was developed as a comparative strategy (baseline). Our model 
and the baseline were evaluated against ground truth annotations for CA and NC regions provided by 
dermatopathologists. 
Results: Qualitative results for our model and the comparative approach are illustrated in Figure 2. Compared to 
the baseline (i.e. U-Net without Label Refinement), our weakly-supervised U-Net model achieved better 
performance with an F1-score=0.72 and 80.4% accuracy, as opposed to 0.63 and 68.9% for the baseline. 
 
 
 
 
310 
Figure 1 - 261 
 
Figure 2 - 261 
 
Conclusions: These preliminary results suggest that our weakly-supervised U-Net is capable of identifying regions 
of BCC and SCC. The use of an automated machine learning model for identifying regions of disease on WSIs 
could help reduce the time for pathologist slide interpretation in rendering a cancer diagnosis. 
 
262 
Can Immunohistochemistry On Routine Formalin-Fixed, Paraffin-Embedded Skin Tissue 
Be Helpful In The Diagnosis Of Bullous Pemphigoid? 
Harim Oh, Youngjin Kang1, Yoo Jin Lee1 
1Korea University Anam Hospital, Seoul, South Korea 
Disclosures: Harim Oh: None; Youngjin Kang: None; Yoo Jin Lee: None 
Background: The gold standard for the diagnosis of bullous pemphigoid (BP) is the detection of linear deposition 
of IgG and/or C3 on the dermoepidermal junction by direct immunofluorescence (DIF). As DIF has several 
disadvantages because of use of frozen specimens, we hypothesized that immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of 
complements and IgG using FFPE tissue could help diagnose BP, thereby making immunopathologic confirmation 
of the bullous process possible without disadvantages of DIF. 
 
 
 
 
311 
Design: Eighty-eight cases of bullous lesions were included. IHC studies for C3d, C4d, and IgG were performed in 
88 cases (DIF-confirmed BP [n=43], clinicopathologically suspicious BP with negative DIF results [n=9], and other 
bullous disease [n=36]). Considering the existence of false-negative DIF results, we compared DIF and IHC 
staining findings, including those of clinicopathologically suspected BP cases with negative results on DIF. 
Results: When the diagnosis was based on C3d, C4d, or IgG positivity on IHC staining, 86% of BP cases 
diagnosed via DIF could be diagnosed using IHC staining with deposition of C3d, C4d, or IgG as the diagnostic 
criterium. The sensitivity of IHC staining in detecting BP and suspicious BP cases was similar to that of DIF (80.8% 
vs. 84.3%), and the specificity was higher (83.3% vs. 75.0%). Furthermore, five of nine (55.6%) cases with negative 
DIF results could be diagnosed as BP using IHC staining. Considering that DIF is more sensitive than IHC staining, 
we reviewed IHC-positive and DIF-negative cases and found that 66.7% of discordant cases based on IgG, 100% 
of discordant cases based on C3d, and 100% of discordant cases based on C4 were treated as BP cases. 
Table. Diagnostic value of IHC and DIF based on DIF-confirmed group and highly suspicious group 
  
Sensitivity 
Specificity 
PPV 
NPV 
  
DIF (%) 
IHC (%) 
DIF (%) 
IHC (%) 
DIF (%) 
IHC (%) 
DIF (%) 
IHC (%) 
IgG 
60.8 
63.5 
94.4 
83.3 
93.9 
84.6 
63.0 
61.2 
C3(d) 
76.5 
44.2 
75.0 
100 
81.3 
100 
69.2 
55.4 
C4(d) 
19.6 
55.8 
100 
100 
100 
100 
46.8 
61.0 
IgG and/or C3(d) 
84.3 
73.1 
75.0 
83.3 
82.7 
86.4 
77.1 
68.2 
C3(d) and/or C4(d) 
76.5 
61.5 
75.0 
100 
81.3 
100 
69.2 
64.3 
IgG and/or C4(d) 
62.7 
76.9 
94.4 
83.3 
94.1 
87.0 
64.2 
71.4 
IgG and/or C3(d) 
and/or C4(d) 
84.3 
80.8 
75.0 
83.3 
82.7 
87.5 
77.1 
75.0 
BP=bullous pemphigoid, IHC=immunohistochemical, DIF=direct immunofluorescence, PPV=positive predictive 
value, NPV=negative predictive value 
Figure 1 - 262 
 
 
 
 
 
312 
Conclusions: To the best of our knowledge, our study, which evaluated the diagnostic value of IHC staining as an 
alternative to DIF, has the second largest number of BP cases yet reported. Although DIF remains the gold 
standard, IHC staining could be another useful strategy for BP diagnosis, especially when DIF cannot be 
performed. In addition, we suggest that additional IHC staining of FFPE tissue may be helpful in cases of 
clinicopathologically suspicious BP with negative or suboptimal DIF results, instead of conducting a second biopsy. 
 
263 
PRAME Expression in Melanocytic Lesions of the Nail 
Ourania Parra1, Konstantinos Linos1, Shaofeng Yan1 
1Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH 
Disclosures: Ourania Parra: None; Konstantinos Linos: None; Shaofeng Yan: None 
Background: PRAME (Preferred Antigen for Melanoma) is an antigen first discovered on the surface of T-cells in a 
patient with melanoma. Since then, PRAME expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) has been evaluated in a 
variety of melanocytic tumors, however, data on nail melanocytic lesions are scarce. Subungual melanoma can be 
diagnostically challenging, especially in the early stages. We evaluated PRAME IHC to assess its potential for 
differentiating benign from malignant nail melanocytic proliferations. 
Design: We conducted a retrospective search of pathology archives between 2009 and 2020 and identified 40 
cases of nail melanocytic lesions (8 invasive melanomas, 10 melanomas in situ, 3 melanocytic nevi, 3 lentigos and 
16 cases of melanocytic activation). Patients’ clinical characteristics from medical records were documented. H&Es 
and PRAME IHC were reviewed by two board certified dermatopathologists independently. The extent of PRAME 
was evaluated as follows: 0 no staining, 1+ 1-25%, 2+ 26-50%, 3+ 51-75%, and 4+ >75%. Consensus had to be 
reached in 4 cases. 
Results: The difference in PRAME expression in malignant and benign lesions was statistically significant (Fisher 
exact test, p<0.01). Among the 18 malignant lesions, 11 (61.1%) showed a 4+ staining score, 3 (16.7%) showed a 
3+ score, 2 (11.1%) showed a 1+ score and 2 (11.1%) showed a 0 score. For the 22 benign lesions, 1 (0.05%) 
showed a 2+ score, 6 (27.3%) showed a 1+ score, and 15 (68.2%) showed a 0 score. When the positive cutoff 
value for malignancy was decreased from score 4+ to 3+, the sensitivity of PRAME IHC test increased from 61% to 
78% while the specificity remained the same (100%) since all the benign lesions (22/22) were considered negative 
with both cut-offs. 
Conclusions: PRAME serves as a relatively sensitive and highly specific marker in differentiating benign from 
malignant melanocytic proliferations of the nail. However, the difference in sensitivity when using different cutoff 
values is not negligible. Therefore, the correlation between morphology and PRAME expression is imperative in the 
evaluation of melanocytic lesions of the nail. 
 
264 
Novel Double Immunohistochemistry (CD34/SOX10) for the Detection of Lymphovascular 
Invasion in Cutaneous Melanoma. Clinical-pathological Evidence Emerging from a Routine 
Set 
Costantino Ricci1, Stefano Chillotti1, Francesca Ambrosi2, Angelo Corradini1, Martina Lambertini1, Emi 
Dika1, Michelangelo Fiorentino2, Barbara Melotti1, Barbara Corti1 
1S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Maggiore Hospital, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy 
Disclosures: Costantino Ricci: None; Stefano Chillotti: None; Francesca Ambrosi: None; Angelo Corradini: None; 
Martina Lambertini: None; Emi Dika: None; Michelangelo Fiorentino: None; Barbara Corti: None 
Background: Lymphovascular invasion (LVI) is an unfavorable prognostic factor in cutaneous melanoma (CM). 
Detection of LVI by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining alone is about 0%-6%, but previous studies showed that 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) targeting lymphovascular structures (D2-40, CD34, D2-40/MITF1) increase the 
detection rate of LVI up to 38%. As SOX10 proved to be the most sensitive melanocytic marker and CD34 stains 
 
 
 
 
313 
not only lymphatic but also vascular structures (“panvascular” marker), we decided to test double immunostaining 
for CD34/SOX10 in a routine set encompassing early and advanced-stage CM. 
Design: Five authors independently evaluated 42 consecutive and prospectively enrolled cases of CM. We 
compared the LVI assessment with H&E and CD34/SOX10, analyzing the association with other clinical-
pathological features (Chi-square and Fisher’s exact tests for dichotomous and categorical data; Kruskal-Wallis for 
continuous ones) and the interobserver agreement (Fleiss’s Kappa/FK and intraclass correlation coefficient/ICC). 
Results: LVI was detected in 4 (9.5%) and 13 (31%) with H&E and IHC, respectively (McNamar=0.004). LVI 
detected by H&E stain was significantly associated with higher pT stage (2 pT2a and 2 pT4b; p=0.01) and Breslow 
thickness (p=0.013); conversely, LVI detected with IHC was not significantly associated with any clinical-
pathological features. The interobserver agreement in LVI detection was higher with H&E (KF=0.561; ICC=0.869) 
compared to IHC (KF=0.490; ICC=0.833). Interestingly, no pT1a cases showed LVI with H&E whereas 5/42 
(11.9%) ones showed LVI with IHC. 
Conclusions: Our study showed that the IHC greatly increases the detection rate of LVI in a routine set of CM, but 
also how H&E-detected LVI is significantly associated with adverse clinical-pathologic features (pT stage and 
Breslow thickness) and improves the interobserver agreement. These results are particularly relevant because 
prove as the IHC applied to a routine set could probably lead to an overdiagnosis of LVI and overtreatment of the 
patients, especially for pT1a ones. Future studies are needed to investigate the correlation with survival data and to 
clarify the prognostic implications of cases with discordance between H&E and IHC. 
 
265 
Phenotypic Switch in Mycosis Fungoides: A Tertiary Cancer Center Experience 
Shira Ronen1, Jonathan Curry2, Priya Nagarajan2, Phyu Aung2, Doina Ivan2, Victor Prieto2, Carlos Torres-
Cabala2, Michael Tetzlaff3 
1Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 2The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
TX, 3University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
Disclosures: Shira Ronen: None; Jonathan Curry: None; Priya Nagarajan: None; Phyu Aung: None; Doina Ivan: 
None; Victor Prieto: None; Carlos Torres-Cabala: None; Michael Tetzlaff: None 
Background: Changes in immunophenotype in mycosis fungoides (MF) represent an uncommon phenomenon 
and may pose a significant diagnostic challenge. In the current study, we characterize this phenomenon further, 
both pathologically and clinically, by evaluating a large series of MF patients. 
Design: MF cases with phenotypic switch (PS) between 2010-2020 were identified from pathology archives. 
Clinical data and follow-up information were obtained, and histopathological features were evaluated. 
Results: Fifty-three biopsies displaying PS from 32 patients were identified (Table 1), including 13 women and 19 
men with a median (mdn) age of 67.5 (range 17-89 years [y]). Figures 1&2 show PS in a case of CD4+/CD8- MF; a 
month later, a biopsy from a different anatomic location showed a CD4-/CD8+ phenotype, with partial loss of CD3. 
Fifteen patients (46.8%) had more than one PS during their disease course. Among those, two patients had two 
different PS on biopsies performed at the same time on different anatomic locations; CD4+ to CD8+ and CD4-
/CD8- phenotypes; and CD8+ to CD4+ and CD4-/CD8- phenotypes. Time range for PS occurrence varied from 1 to 
197 months [m] (mdn of 22 m) from the initial diagnosis. In 5 cases, identical TCR clone peaks were detected in the 
immunophenotypically distinctive lesions. No definite association between therapy and PS was observed. Follow-
up ranged from 13 days to 165 m (mdn of 14.5 m). Thirteen patients died between 1.5 to 100 m (mdn of 14.2 m) 
after PS. Among the patients who died, the mdn time from MF diagnosis to the PS was 20.6 m (mdn age is 75 y), 
and among the patients that were alive, the mdn time was 44.1 m (mdn age is 66 y).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
314 
Table 1: Distribution of mycosis fungoides cases showing phenotypic switch 
Figure 1 - 265 
 
Figure 2 - 265 
 
Phenotypic switch 
Number of 
switches 
Number of patients 
who died 
Median time from 
diagnosis to phenotypic 
switch (months) 
CD4+ to CD4-/CD8- 
14 
6 (42.8%) 
41 
CD4+ to subpopulation CD4-/CD8- 
5 
2 (40%) 
12 
CD4+ to CD8+ 
13 
6 (46.1%) 
50 
CD4-/CD8- to CD4+ 
8 
2 (25%) 
43 
 
Subpopulation CD4-/CD8- to CD4+ 
4 
1 (25%) 
26 
CD8+ to CD4-/CD8- 
6 
4 (66.6%) 
28 
CD8+ to CD4+ 
5 
1 (20%) 
17 
CD4-/CD8- to CD8+ 
4 
4 (100%) 
72 
CD3- to CD3+ 
2 
0 
42 
CD3+to CD3- 
1 
0 
32 
 
 
 
 
315 
Conclusions: This represents the largest series of MF cases showing PS to date. This phenomenon may be not 
as rare as previously thought. No obvious association between PS and initiation or response to therapy was 
identified.  46.8% of cases displayed more than one PS suggesting that this phenomenon may occur temporally 
and anatomically distinctly during disease progression. Features that appeared to portend a worse clinical course 
were earlier PS in the course of the disease and specific PS from CD4-/CD8- to CD8+, and CD8+ to CD4-/CD8-. 
Awareness of this phenomenon is crucial to avoid misdiagnoses of second primary lymphomas and to alert the 
treating clinicians of potential changes in the clinical course of the disease. 
 
266 
Superficial Low-Grade Fibromyxoid Sarcoma 
Shira Ronen1, Jennifer Ko1, Brian Rubin1, Scott Kilpatrick1, Wei-Lien (Billy) Wang2, Alexander Lazar2, John 
Goldblum1, Steven Billings3 
1Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 2The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
TX, 3Cleveland Clinic, Lerner College of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 
Disclosures: Shira Ronen: None; Jennifer Ko: None; Brian Rubin: None; Scott Kilpatrick: None; Wei-Lien (Billy) 
Wang: None; Alexander Lazar: None; John Goldblum: None; Steven Billings: None 
Background: Low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma (LGFMS) is a distinctive spindle cell sarcoma that typically involves 
deep soft tissue (beneath the fascia) of the proximal extremities and trunk. Long-term follow-up has have shown a 
high rate of recurrence, metastasis, and death due to tumor. There is only one previous large series focusing on 
superficial LGFMS that suggested superficial tumors were disproportionately more common in children and may 
have a better prognosis. This study's primary goals are to confirm these findings and increase general awareness 
that LGFMS can arise in superficial soft tissue. 
Design: The electronic surgical pathology file was queried at the authors’ institutions to retrieve all cases of 
superficial LGFMS diagnosed between 2008 -2020. Superficial tumor location was confirmed for inclusion (23 
cases). Available slides were reviewed, and clinical data and follow-up information were obtained. 
Results: The clinicopathologic features are summarized in Table 1.  Patients (9M;14F) had a median age of 29 
years (range 2-65 years); 8 (34.8%) were children (<18 years), and 5 (21.7%) were young adults (18-30 years). 
The majority of the tumors were located in the lower half of the body (87%).  The tumors were primarily centered in 
the subcutis (20; 87%, Fig. 1A), with 3 centered in the dermis (13%).  They were circumscribed (95%) and had 
typical features of LGFMS with alternating fibrous and myxoid zones composed of bland, slightly hyperchromatic 
spindled cells (Fig. 1B). Necrosis was typically absent (96%), as was mitotic activity (83%). All were positive for 
MUC4 by immunohistochemistry (Fig. 1C) or FUS rearrangement by FISH. Follow-up on 11 cases ranged from 
11.3 to 133.7 months (median 30.2 months) with no evidence of recurrence. 
Table 1: Clinicopathologic Data on Superficial LGFMS 
F, female; HPF, high power field; LTF, lost to follow-up; M, male; mo, months; NED, no evidence of disease; NI, not 
identified; y, years. 
*Confirmatory test by MUC4 immunohistochemistry or FISH for FUS rearrangement. 
Case 
No. 
Age 
(y)/Sex 
Site 
Size (cm) 
Location 
of tumor 
Necrosis 
Mitotic 
figures 
Circumscribed/ 
infiltrative 
Confirmatory 
test* 
Follow-
up 
(mo) 
Outcome 
1 
52/M 
Inguinal 
region 
2.7 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
FUS FISH 
LTF 
LTF 
2 
7/F 
Thigh at 
inguinal 
crease 
2.4 
Subcutis 
NI 
1/10 
HPF 
Circumscribed 
FUS FISH 
133.7 
NED 
3 
45/M 
Abdominal 
wall 
9.2 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
FUS FISH 
94.2 
NED 
4 
4/F 
Flank 
2 
Subcutis 
NI 
1/10 
HPF 
Circumscribed 
FUS FISH 
LTF 
LTF 
5 
23/F 
Groin 
 Unknown 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
FUS FISH 
LTF 
LTF 
 
 
 
 
316 
 
Figure 1 - 266 
 
Conclusions: Superficial LGFMS affects children and young adults (56.5%) at a higher rate and may have a better 
prognosis than that for deep LGFMS. The largest limitation of our study is that many of our patients were lost to 
follow-up and that follow-up was somewhat limited. For that reason, further studies with longer follow-up would help 
support these findings. 
6 
46/M 
Perianal 
2.8 
Dermis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
and FUS FISH 
LTF 
LTF 
7 
41/F 
Leg 
1.8 
Subcutis 
NI 
1/10 
HPF 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
LTF 
LTF 
8 
57/F 
Buttock 
3 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
LTF 
LTF 
9 
19/F 
Axilla 
1 
Dermis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
LTF 
LTF 
10 
56/M 
Buttock 
4 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Cannot be 
assessed 
MUC4 IHC 
LTF 
LTF 
11 
61/F 
Gluteal 
region 
4.5 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
13.9 
NED 
12 
12/F 
Pretibial 
3.3 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
40 
NED 
  
13 
4/F 
Gluteal 
region 
2 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
11.3 
NED 
14 
7/M 
Thigh 
2.8 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Cannot assess 
MUC4  IHC 
and FUS FISH 
38.4 
NED 
15 
29/M 
Flank 
4.2 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
30.3 
NED 
16 
15/F 
Thigh 
1.6 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
LTF 
LTF 
17 
29/M 
Paraspinal 
5 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Infiltrative 
MUC4 IHC 
30.2 
NED 
18 
50/M 
Flank 
5 
Subcutis 
Focal 
NI 
Cannot be 
assessed 
MUC4 IHC 
LTF 
LTF 
19 
2/M 
Great toe 
1 
Dermis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
13.3 
NED 
20 
23/F 
Occipital 
scalp 
2 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
MUC4 IHC 
LTF 
LTF 
21 
8/F 
Occipital 
scalp 
 Unknown 
Subcutis 
NI 
1/10 
HPF 
Cannot be 
assessed 
MUC4 IHC 
LTF 
LTF 
22 
65/F 
Thigh 
5 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Cannot be 
assessed 
FUS FISH 
15.7 
Death 
unrelated 
to 
LGFMS 
23 
49/F 
Groin 
3 
Subcutis 
NI 
NI 
Circumscribed 
FUS FISH 
61.9 
NED 
 
 
 
 
317 
267 
Robust Classification of Melanocytic Lesions Using Deep Neural Networks: Flagging 
Dysplastic and Malignant Morphologies Before Pathology Review 
Wonwoo Shon1, Julianna Ianni2, Bonnie Balzer1, Saul Kohn2, Ramchandra Vikas Chamarthi2, Kameswari 
Devi Ayyagari2, Sivaramakrishnan Sankarapandian2, Rajath Soans2, Mike Bonham2 
1Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, 2Proscia Inc, Philadelphia, PA 
Disclosures: Wonwoo Shon: None; Julianna Ianni: Employee, Proscia Inc; Bonnie Balzer: None; Saul 
Kohn: Employee, Proscia, Inc.; Ramchandra Vikas Chamarthi: Employee, Proscia Inc; Kameswari Devi 
Ayyagari: Employee, Proscia Inc; Sivaramakrishnan Sankarapandian: Employee, Proscia Inc; Rajath Soans: None; 
Mike Bonham: Employee, Proscia 
Background: While melanoma accounts for roughly 1% of annual skin cancer diagnoses, it is responsible for the 
majority of skin cancer deaths, with a survival rate for patients with metastatic melanoma at 20%. Of the over 2 
million biopsies for melanoma each year in the US, approximately 15% are discordant or indeterminate, adding 
delay and uncertainty to diagnosis and complicating the treatment for these patients. In this work, we present a 
deep neural network trained to detect melanoma in unannotated whole slide images (WSIs) of Hematoxylin and 
Eosin stained histopathology specimens. 
Design: Our training dataset consisted of WSIs from 1796 melanocytic biopsy and resection specimens from two 
laboratories with different scanners.  No WSIs were excluded based on image quality or artifacts. Using a multiple-
instance learning training criterion, a neural network learned to classify specimens based on an M score of 0-1 
(<0.4 likely benign (LB), 0.4-0.9 suspect (S), >0.9 likely malignant (LM)). We evaluated the algorithm on an 
independent test set of 215 melanocytic biopsy and resection specimens: 125 melanomas (69 invasive and 56 in 
situ) 62 benign nevi, 28 dysplastic nevi (18 low-grade and 10 high-grade),  No melanoma subtypes were excluded.  
Results: Our model was able to distinguish between conventional nevi vs melanomas (AUC = 0.97) and dysplastic 
nevi vs melanomas (AUC = 0.92). 122/125 (98% sens) melanomas were flagged (90 LM and 32 S).  Among 
dysplastic nevi, 16/28 (57%) cases were flagged as LM (1 high-grade and 1 low-grade) or S (8 high-grade and 6 
low-grade).  54/62 (87%) benign nevi were LB; of note, 6 cases were flagged as S and 1 was LM. 
Conclusions: Our deep learning based model accurately classifies a wide range of melanocytic specimens into 
actionable groups prior to pathology review. It could be used to  prioritizing or triage cases within a digital workflow 
to increase laboratory efficiency.  Alternatively, the model could flag discordant specimens for additional review, 
potentially improving diagnostic quality.  
 
268 
Differential Expression of Delta-like Protein 3 in Merkel Cell Carcinoma Primary Tumors 
and Metastases: A Novel Potential Therapeutic Target 
Chauncey Syposs1, Anthony Cardillo2, Alexandra Danakas1, Tatsiana Pukhalskaya2, Bruce Smoller3, 
Tanupriya Agrawal1 
1University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 2URMC Surgical Pathology Dept, Rochester, 
NY, 3University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 
Disclosures: Chauncey Syposs: None; Anthony Cardillo: None; Alexandra Danakas: None; Tatsiana Pukhalskaya: 
None; Bruce Smoller: None; Tanupriya Agrawal: None 
Background: Merkel cell carcinomas (MCC) are rare malignancies, with an estimated incidence of 470 cases per 
year in the United States. They are cutaneous neuroendocrine carcinomas associated with high rates of 
recurrence, metastasis, and poor overall survival. Delta-like Protein 3 (DLL3) is an inhibitory Notch ligand that is 
currently being developed as a predictive biomarker and potential therapeutic target for neuroendocrine 
carcinomas. While DLL3 is extensively studied in Small Cell Carcinomas of the lung, current literature on DLL3 
expression in Merkel Cell carcinoma is sparse. In this study we analyzed the expression of DLL3 in primary 
cutaneous tumors and compared the expression to lymph nodes and distant metastases.   
Design: We queried Merkel cell carcinoma cases diagnosed from 2012 – 2020 at the University at Rochester 
Medical Center. Cases were grouped based on whether the patient had a skin primary with no nodal or metastatic 
 
 
 
 
318 
disease (18 cases), metastatic Merkel Cell carcinoma identified in a lymph node (15 cases), and distant metastatic 
disease (10 cases). Patient history and microscopic slides were reviewed for each case to confirm the diagnosis of 
Merkel cell carcinoma. Cases deemed eligible were stained for DLL3 and INSM1 (a sensitive and specific nuclear 
marker of neuroendocrine carcinomas) and graded based on the percent of cells demonstrating membranous 
staining of DLL3 (no expression, <50% expression, >50% expression). 
Results: DLL3 expression was observed in 89% (33/37) of cases. Our findings demonstrated an increased 
frequency of high expression of DLL3 in Merkel cell metastases (14 of 23; 61%) versus skin primary tumors (11 of 
28; 39%) (Table 1A). We also compared DLL3 expression in ten cases with matched primary skin tumors, lymph 
nodes, and distant metastatic tissue, which demonstrated an increase in the frequency of high DLL3 expression in 
lymph nodes and distant metastases (14 of 23; 61%) versus their original primary skin tumors (4 of 10; 40%) (Table 
1B). 
Table 1A: DLL3 expression in Primary Skin Tumors versus Metastatic Tissue  
Skin Primaries  
  
Metastatic Tissue 
  
No Expression 
Low 
High 
No Expression 
Low 
High 
3 of 28 
14 of 28 
11 of 28 
1 of 23 
8 of 23 
14 of 23 
0.11 
0.50 
0.39 
0.04 
0.35 
0.61 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Table 1B: DLL3 expression in Skin Primaries and their Metastatic Components 
Skin from  Primaries with Metastasis 
Distant Metastases and Lymph Nodes   
No Expression 
Low 
High 
No Expression 
Low 
High 
1 of 10 
5 of 10 
4 of 10 
1 of 23 
8 of 23 
14 of 23 
0.10 
0.50 
0.40 
0.04 
0.35 
0.61 
Figure 1 - 268 
 
 
 
 
 
319 
Conclusions: Our study shows the expression of DLL3 in nearly all Merkel Cell carcinoma cases studied, 
suggesting a role for novel anti-DLL3 targeted drugs as a potential therapeutic option.  Our results provide new 
insights into the differential expression of DLL3 in primary vs metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma. Further studies are 
required to explore the role of DLL3 plays in primary and metastatic Merkel cell carcinomas.  
 
269 
Molecular Profiling of Cutaneous C-Group Non-Langerhans Cell Histiocytoses 
Rebekah Wieland1, Tomas Bencomo2, Carolyn Lee1, Ryanne Brown1 
1Stanford Medicine/Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 2Stanford University, Stanford, CA 
Disclosures: Rebekah Wieland: None; Tomas Bencomo: None; Carolyn Lee: None; Ryanne Brown: None 
Background: The 2016 revised classification of the histiocytoses consolidated and simplified new insights into this 
poorly-understood category of neoplasms; however, novel molecular findings with therapeutic relevance and new 
systemic associations continue to emerge, requiring continual refinement of our understanding of the cutaneous 
histiocytoses. A subset of the L-Group histiocytoses, specifically Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) and Erdheim-
Chester disease (ECD), have been extensively characterized with the majority of cases showing abnormalities in 
the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway resulting in MAPK signaling activation.  The R-Group, consisting of Rosai-Dorfman 
disease and its variants, can also show Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway mutations, similar to the L-Group.  While L-
Group and R-Group histiocytoses have been extensively characterized, the C-Group histiocytoses have not been 
molecularly profiled outside of the setting of isolated case reports. 
Design: 13 cutaneous C-group non-Langerhans cell histiocytoses were collected retrospectively from the 
pathology archives after IRB approval. Tumor was microdissected from formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissue. 
Whole genome sequencing was performed with an average depth of 25X and somatic variants were detected using 
Mutect2. Variants were annotated using the Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor and Combined Annotation Dependent 
Depletion (CADD) deleteriousness score. 
Results: Recurrent hotspot missense and splice site mutations with high CADD scores were identified 
in KMT2B (p.E1034A) in 5/13 cases (38%), HGH1 (p.G54V) in 3/13 cases(23%), AC239859.5 (splice site) in 2/13 
cases (15%), GTPBP6 (p.G61R) 7/13 cases (54%), ZBED3 (p.L155A) in 5/13 cases (38%), MUC5AC (p.P1919L) 
in 3/13 cases (23%), and SYN2 (p.P105A) in 3/13 cases (23%). Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway mutations were 
observed in 2/13 cases (15%). 
Conclusions: This is the first and largest series to perform whole genome sequencing on cutaneous C-group non-
Langerhans cell histiocytoses. Our data support the finding of recurrent deleterious missense and splice site 
mutations in this group. We are currently examining structural variants within this cohort. 
 
270 
MicroRNA Expression Signature Differentiates Primary Lentiginous from Non-Lentiginous 
Acral Melanoma 
Richard Yang1, Shira Ronen2, Achim Bell1, Priya Nagarajan1, Jonathan Curry1, Doina Ivan1, Victor Prieto1, 
Carlos Torres-Cabala1, Phyu Aung1 
1The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 2Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 
Disclosures: Richard Yang: None; Shira Ronen: None; Priya Nagarajan: None; Jonathan Curry: None; Doina Ivan: 
None; Victor Prieto: None; Carlos Torres-Cabala: None; Phyu Aung: None 
Background: Primary acral lentiginous melanoma (PALM) is a melanoma that commonly arises on the volar skin 
of the soles, palms, digits, and nail apparatus. Unlike most subtypes of melanoma, PALM is thought not to be 
driven by chronic sun exposure. It occurs relatively more commonly in patients of African, Asian, and Latin ethnicity. 
Interestingly, somatic mutations in the RAS pathway have been described in 87% of these neoplasms, a unique 
pathogenesis uncommonly seen in non-lentiginous type melanomas from acral sites (NALMs). Due to this 
difference in pathogenesis, we sought to determine the differential miRNA expression levels between PALM and 
NALMs. 
 
 
 
 
320 
Design: Melanocytic lesions from 23 patients (Table 1) were macrodissected (10 PALM, 6 NALMs, and 8 nevi) to 
isolate lesional cells. The differentially expressed microRNAs (miRNAs) were analyzed using the Nanostring 
Human microRNA v3 panel, including 837 probes, including 827 human miRNA probes, and targeting 665 unique 
human miRNAs. Normalization and analysis, including hierarchical clustering and graphical representations, were 
performed using the Nanostring nSolver software (version 4.0) and Functional Annotation (FA) Tool using the 
online resource, DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8, NIAID/NIH. GraphPad Prism v8.4.3 was used to create 
Kaplan Meier survival curves and performed survival analysis. 
Results: Differential expression between 16 melanomas and 8 nevi yielded a set of 14 probes with False Discovery 
Rate (FDR) < 0.25: miR29A, miR21, miR4286, miR16-1, miR15B, miR150, miR222, miR1180, miR93, miR30D, 
miR1253, miR630, miR494, and miR29C (Fig. 1A). FA of this miRNA set yielded the KEGG pathway “MicroRNAs in 
cancer” with a nominal p-value of 8.1 x 10-12 and Benjamini-Hochberg correction (FDR) of 1.6 x 10-11. Differential 
expression analysis between PALM and NALM identified 17 miRNAs using p-value < 0.05 (RPL19, ACTB, RPLP0, 
miRLET7B, miR181A2, miR191, miRLET7G, miR513B, miR361, miRLET7E, miR99B, miR340, miR497, miR199B, 
miR3065, miR551B, and miR610, Fig. 1B). FA of this set identified enrichment for the “focal adhesion” Gene 
Ontology (GO) pathway with p-value: 4.6 x 10-4 and FDR:1.2 x 10-2. We also found relatively shorter metastasis 
free survival in patients with PALM compared to those with NALM in this cohort (p-value = 0.1079, Fig. 2). 
Case 
Age/Sex 
Race 
Clark 
level 
Breslow 
thickness 
(mm) 
Mitotic 
figures 
Ulceration 
Regression 
LVI 
PNI 
Microscopic 
satellitosis 
LN 
metastases 
N1 
24/M 
White 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
N2 
47/M 
White 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
N3 
34/F 
White 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
N4 
56/M 
White 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
N5 
64/M 
White 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
N6 
16/M 
White 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
N7 
32/M 
White 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
N8 
62/F 
White 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
PALM1 
78/M 
White 
5 
>4 
5-9 
Yes 
NI 
Yes 
NI 
NI 
0/3 
PALM2 
75/F 
Hispanic 
5 
>4 
5-9 
NI 
NI 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
2/17 
PALM3 
59/F 
Unknown 
5 
>4 
10-20 
NI 
Yes 
NI 
Yes 
NI 
4/4 
PALM4 
53/F 
White 
5 
>4 
1-4 
NI 
NI 
Yes 
Yes 
NI 
2/2 
PALM5 
83/F 
White 
4 
2.04-4.04 
5-9 
Yes 
NI 
NI 
NI 
NI 
1/2 
PALM6 
83/F 
Hispanic 
5 
>4 
1-4 
NI 
NI 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
2/2 
PALM7 
69/M 
White 
5 
>4 
>20 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
NI 
2/2 
PALM8 
76/M 
White 
4 
2.04-4.04 
1-4 
Yes 
NI 
NI 
Yes 
NI 
0/2 
PALM10 
79/M 
White 
4 
2.04-4.04 
1-4 
Yes 
NI 
NI 
NI 
NI 
3/3 
NALM1 
36/M 
African 
American 
5 
>4 
1-4 
NI 
NI 
Yes 
Yes 
NI 
9/14 
NALM2 
58/F 
White 
5 
0.8-1.04 
10-20 
Yes 
NI 
NI 
NI 
NI 
5/8 
NALM3 
89/F 
White 
4 
>2.04-
4.04 
1-4 
NI 
NI 
NI 
NI 
NI 
1/3 
NALM4 
2/F 
White 
5 
>2.04-
4.04 
1-4 
NI 
NI 
Yes 
NI 
NI 
1/1 
NALM5 
86/M 
White 
4 
1.04-2.04 
1-4 
NI 
NI 
NI 
NI 
NI 
NP 
NALM6 
32/M 
White 
4 
<0.8 
0 or <1 
NI 
Yes 
NI 
NI 
NI 
NP 
Table 1: Clinicopathological features; N: nevus; NALM: non-lentiginous type melanomas from acral sites; NI: not 
identified; NP: not preformed; PALM: Primary acral lentiginous melanoma 
 
 
 
 
321 
Figure 1 - 270 
 
 
Figure 2 - 270 
 
 
Conclusions: Our findings suggest that miRNA-based expression signature differs among different types of acral 
melanocytic lesions (i.e., melanoma vs. nevus, and PALM vs. NALM). The results also highlight the potential role of 
some miRNAs in cell adhesion, a finding that may help explain the histological phenotype of PALM (characteristic 
confluent single cell proliferation / pagetoid spread) and worse prognosis compared to NALM.  
