48
research highlights
Lab Animal | VOL 49 | February 2020 | 43–48 | www.nature.com/laban
cancer
An automated pipeline for metastasis detection
Pan, C. et al. Cell 179, 1661–1676 (2019)
New therapeutic strategies are needed for 
metastasis, which remains the main cause 
of death in patients with cancer. Mouse 
models have been invaluable to improve 
our understanding of the metastatic 
process, but limitations in small-animal 
imaging technologies, such as insufficient 
resolution, have hampered the development 
of new therapies. A study published in 
Cell describes a new pipeline for systemic 
analysis of micrometastases at the full 
body scale and with a resolution down to 
individual cells, which might foster the 
development of anti-metastatic therapies.
The pipeline called DeepMACT (deep 
learning-enabled metastasis analysis in 
cleared tissue) was developed to circumvent 
major limitations in metastasis imaging, 
such as the difficulty of detecting small 
fluorescent micrometastases in mice because 
of tissue-endogenous fluorescence. Human 
MDA-MB-231 mammary carcinoma cells 
expressing a fluorescent protein were 
transplanted in the mammary fat pad of 
NSG mice and tumors were allowed to 
grow and metastasize for 6–10 weeks. To 
enhance the fluorescence in cancer cells, 
the team of investigators led by Ali Ertük 
from the ITERM and LMU in Munich used 
vDISCO, a whole-body immunolabeling 
method developed in their lab to boost 
the signal of fluorescent proteins in mice 
rendered transparent by a clearing method. 
They showed that several micrometastases, 
which were not visible by traditional 
bioluminescence, could be detected in the 
same mouse by epifluorescence imaging 
after vDISCO was applied.
The investigators used light-sheet 
microscopy to image the entire transparent 
mouse and applied a deep-learning approach 
to detect and quantify metastases in the 3D 
images stacks. They determined that the 
detection performance of DeepMACT came 
very close to the level of a human annotator, 
but with a processing speed >60 times faster.
The pipeline also reliably detected 
micrometastases down to the size of 
individual cells in a variety of tumor 
models, including immunodeficient or 
immunocompetent mice, syngeneic tumors 
and xenotransplants. The investigators 
also used DeepMACT to assess the 
biodistribution and targeting efficiency 
of a fluorescently labeled therapeutic 
monoclonal antibody in the breast 
carcinoma mouse model. “It represents 
the first method that allows quantitative 
analysis of the efficiency of antibody-based 
drug targeting at the full body scale, with a 
resolution down to the level of individual 
micrometastases,” explain the investigators 
in their report. An online version of the 
DeepMACT algorithm is hosted by the 
Code Ocean initiative and can be executed 
via any web browser.
Alexandra Le Bras
Published online: 20 January 2020 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41684-020-0479-3
A82659
Open access chemical 
sciences journal from 
Nature Research.
Communications Chemistry publishes
high-quality research, reviews and 
commentary in all areas of the chemical 
sciences.
Research papers published by the journal 
represent signiﬁ cant advances for a 
specialized area of research.
Submit your research and beneﬁ t from:
 · Fast decisions, easy submission
 · Rigorous, balanced peer review
 · Nature Research editorial standards
 · Global visibility, fully open access
 · Expert in-house editors and editorial 
board
nature.com/commschem
 @CommsChem
