Journal Pre-proof
Animal models of pain: diversity and beneﬁts
Cynthia Abboud (Conceptualization) (Writing - original draft), Alexia
Duveau (Writing - original draft), Rabia Bouali-Benazzouz (Writing -
original draft), Karine Mass´e (Writing - original draft), Joseph Mattar
(Writing - original draft), Louison Brochoire (Writing - original draft)
(Writing - review and editing), Pascal Fossat (Writing - original
draft), Eric Bou´e-Grabot (Writing - original draft), Walid Hleihel
(Funding acquisition) (Supervision) (Writing - original draft), Marc
Landry (Funding acquisition) (Supervision) (Conceptualization)
(Writing - original draft) (Writing - review and editing)
PII:
S0165-0270(20)30420-9
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2020.108997
Reference:
NSM 108997
To appear in:
Journal of Neuroscience Methods
Received Date:
18 May 2020
Revised Date:
3 November 2020
Accepted Date:
8 November 2020
Please cite this article as: Abboud C, Duveau A, Bouali-Benazzouz R, Mass´e K, Mattar J,
Brochoire L, Fossat P, Bou´e-Grabot E, Hleihel W, Landry M, Animal models of pain: diversity
and beneﬁts, Journal of Neuroscience Methods (2020),
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2020.108997
This is a PDF ﬁle of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as
the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the
deﬁnitive version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and
review before it is published in its ﬁnal form, but we are providing this version to give early
visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal
pertain.
© 2020 Published by Elsevier.
1 
 
Review article 
Animal models of pain: diversity and benefits 
 
Cynthia Abboud1,2,3,4 Alexia Duveau2, Rabia Bouali-Benazzouz2, Karine Massé2, Joseph Mattar3, Louison 
Brochoire2, Pascal Fossat2, Eric Boué-Grabot2, Walid Hleihel3,4*, Marc Landry2*§ 
 
 
1: Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Interdisciplinary Institute for Neuroscience, IINS, UMR 5297, F-33000 Bordeaux, 
France 
2: Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, IMN, UMR 5293, F-33000 Bordeaux, 
France 
3: School of Medicine and Medical sciences - Holy Spirit University of Kaslik (USEK) 
4: Faculty of Arts and Sciences - Holy Spirit University of Kaslik (USEK) 
 
*: Share seniority 
§: Corresponding author, marc.landry@u-bordeaux.fr 
 
Highlights 
 
Evaluation tools to assess chronic pain and its comorbidities  
 
inventory of a large diversity of pain models including rodents, non-human primates pain 
models and simple organisms  
 
Focus on inflammatory and neuropathic pain models 
 
Limitations of the predictive validity of animal models of pain  
 
Translational successes from animal model studies to develop new analgesics 
 
Abstract 
Chronic pain is a maladaptive neurological disease that remains a major health problem. A deepening of 
our knowledge on mechanisms that cause pain is a prerequisite to developing novel treatments. A large 
variety of animal models of pain has been developed that recapitulate the diverse symptoms of different 
pain pathologies. These models reproduce different pain phenotypes and remain necessary to examine 
the multidimensional aspects of pain and understand the cellular and molecular basis underlying pain 
conditions. 
In this review, we propose an overview of animal models, from simple organisms to rodents and non-
human primates and the specific traits of pain pathologies they model. We present the main behavioral 
tests for assessing pain and investing the underpinning mechanisms of chronic pathological pain. The 
validity of animal models is analysed based on their ability to mimic human clinical diseases and to 
predict treatment outcomes. Refine characterization of pathological phenotypes also requires to 
consider pain globally using specific procedures dedicated to study emotional comorbidities of pain. We 
discuss the limitations of pain models when research findings fail to be translated from animal models to 
Journal Pre-proof
2 
 
human clinics. But we also point to some recent successes in analgesic drug development that highlight 
strategies for improving the predictive validity of animal models of pain. Finally, we emphasize the 
importance of using assortments of preclinical pain models to identify pain subtype mechanisms, and to 
foster the development of better analgesics. 
Keywords: Pain, animal models, preclinical research, pain behaviour, neuropathic pain, inflammatory 
pain 
 
Introduction 
Pain is a vital physiological function that protects organisms against potential damage. Acute nociceptive 
pain is a normal function of the nervous system that provides important sensory information about the 
environment and reacts to harmful stimuli such as noxious heat, extreme cold, chemical irritants, and 
mechanical tissue damage. These noxious stimuli activate peripheral nociceptors, triggering action 
potentials that propagate along sensory axons to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord where nociceptive 
inputs are processed and relayed to the brain. In turn, the activation of specific brain areas produces a 
broad array of sensory, emotional, autonomic, and motor responses that shape our experience and 
perception of pain (Basbaum et al., 2009; Burma et al., 2017). 
In contrast to acute pain, chronic pain is a maladaptive disease that heightens the sensitivity to sensory 
stimulation (Woolf and Salter, 2000; Costigan et al., 2009). Chronic pain results from abnormal functioning 
of the nervous system, with pain persisting far beyond the resolution of the primary injury. Pain 
hypersensitivity manifests as spontaneous pain (pain in the absence of an external stimulus), allodynia 
(pain resulting from an innocuous stimulus), and/or hyperalgesia (an exaggerated pain response to a 
noxious stimulus). Chronic pain is a major health problem that negatively impacts the quality-of-life of 
sufferers and exacts enormous socio-economic costs with a prevalence of around 8% of the general 
population (Bouhassira et al., 2008). In the European Union, it is estimated that 20% of the population 
would suffer from chronic pain during lifespan (Breivik et al., 2006; Alshami, 2014), and it is among the 
most significant risk factors for suicide. 
Chronic pain drastically diminishes quality of life and causes enormous socio-economic costs. Besides high 
costs for disease management, chronic pain is associated with major impacts on daily activities and quality 
of life (Groenewald and Palermo, 2015) and high productivity losses due to work absences (Mayer et al., 
2019) partly due to common co-morbidities such as depression (Phillips, 2006). The estimated direct and 
indirect healthcare costs for chronic pain disorders in European Member States vary between two and 
three percent of GDP across the EU (Breivik et al., 2013). For 2016, this estimate would result in up to €441 
billion. In the USA, ~100 million people suffer from pain costing ~$600 billion/year in health care and lost 
productivity (Walker et al., 2014). These costs are reported to exceed those estimated for heart disease, 
cancer and diabetes (Breivik et al., 2013). However, chronic pain is poorly managed with treatment success 
rates around 30% (Ossipov et al., 2014), mainly because chronic pain mechanisms remain poorly 
understood (Basbaum et al., 2009; Dolique et al., 2010; Cordero-Erausquin et al., 2016; Kuner and Flor, 
2016), and patients often suffer from comorbid disorders such as anxiety and depression (Attal et al., 
2011). 
It is important to recognize that there is not one overarching, singular condition called chronic pain but 
rather, there are multiple aetiologies of pain, each resulting from different pathologies and differing in the 
clinical presentation of signs and symptoms (Burma et al., 2017). Pain is usually subdivided in different 
Journal Pre-proof
3 
 
categories as a function of the mechanism of injury. Nociceptive pain represents the normal response to 
noxious insult or injury of tissues such as skin, muscles, visceral organs, joints, tendons, or bones. 
Inflammatory pain results of activation and sensitization (peripheral and/or central) of the nociceptive pain 
pathway by a variety of mediators released at a site of tissue inflammation. Neuropathic pain arises from 
damage to the nervous system itself, central or peripheral, either from disease, injury, or pinching. Other 
types of pain were characterized, e.g. cancer pain or dysfunctional pain when no biological cause is 
identified. To address differences in the presentation of pain symptoms across chronic pain conditions, an 
array of preclinical animal models has been developed to recapitulate the underlying pathology, duration, 
and comorbidities of pain phenotypes (Mogil, 2009). This variety of preclinical pain models is essential for 
understanding the molecular and cellular mechanisms that underlie distinct pain conditions. The 
development of novel and more efficacious therapies requires a thorough understanding of the 
mechanistic underpinnings of chronic pain and the design and testing of new drugs. 
Rodents are employed in an large majority of preclinical pain studies (Mogil, 2009). However, the use of 
alternate vertebrates and invertebrates, such as zebrafish, fruit flies (Drosophila sp.) and nematodes 
(Caenorhabditis elegans) can also be advantageous for screening assays and for studying the genetic and 
molecular mechanisms of acute and chronic pain (Way and Chalfie, 1989; Gonzalez-Nunez and Rodríguez, 
2009; Milinkeviciute et al., 2012). Each organism confers a distinct advantage for studying pain; the 
behavioral complexity of the rodents allows the analysis of the affective components of pain (Johansen et 
al., 2001; Panksepp and Lahvis, 2011), whereas simpler organisms, such as Drosophila, can facilitate the 
discovery of novel molecular players involved in the detection of noxious stimuli (Caldwell and Tracey, 
2010; Mogil et al., 2010).  
Another important aspect for designing animal models is to recognize that pain is a multi-dimensional 
experience. Indeed, pain is processed not only at the peripheral and spinal levels, but also in higher brain 
structures including cortical areas underlying the affective component of pain (Liu and Chen, 2014). As pain 
transitions from acute to chronic and becomes pathological, the associated negative emotional state not 
only exacerbates sensory modalities, but also worsens the comorbidities. Indeed, anxiety is a highly 
common comorbidity of pain where the interactions between pain and anxiety have been demonstrated in 
human. In addition, chronic pain and depression are complex disorders that often coexist and increase the 
risk of one another (Radat et al., 2013; Steel et al., 2014; Zhu et al., 2018a). Investigations of pain and 
psychiatric disorders are mostly conducted separately, but more knowledge of the overlap and interactions 
between affective and pain circuits is key to better treatments. Refined analysis of animal models of pain 
and depression has become mandatory to understand interactions between pain and emotional 
comorbidities (Kremer et al., 2020). 
The present review proposes an overview of rodent and alternate models of pain. A large panel of 
evaluation devices used to characterize pain-like behavior in animal models has been developed over the 
years, and a summary description of these tools is presented here. The review focuses mainly on the 
broadly studied neuropathic and inflammatory types of pain. It also highlights the necessity of specific 
procedures dedicated to studying emotional comorbidities to pain. Finally, it summarizes the main 
limitations of using animal models to mimic clinical pain in humans, but also provides examples of 
successful translational applications of using animal models. 
 
1. Assessment of pain  
Journal Pre-proof
4 
 
The classical pain evaluation devices aim to assess the sensory component of pain, usually by measuring a 
withdrawal reflex. However, more recently, specific efforts have been made to assess pain perception and 
to evaluate the emotional component of pain and comorbid affections. Unlike humans, animals are 
incapable of verbally describing pain, therefore a battery of behavioral tests has been developed in order to 
assess pain-like behavior in animals. These assays can be divided into stimulus-dependent and stimulus 
independent tests. 
 
Stimulus-dependent tests 
In the evoked tests the latency to or the frequency of paw withdrawal is usually measured after mechanical 
or thermal stimulation.  
Mechanical stimulation. 
Mechanical hypersensitivity can be of various types, namely dynamic (triggered by brushing), static 
(triggered by pressure), and punctate (triggered by touch) (Deuis et al., 2017a). Dynamic mechanical 
hypersensitivity is measured by air puffing on the face (Miraucourt et al., 2009) or light stroking (velocity is 
~ 2 cm/s) of the external lateral side of the injured hind paw with a paintbrush (Cheng et al., 2017). The 
typical response of naive rodents to the dynamic mechanical stimulation is a very fast lifting of the 
stimulated paw aside. In experimental pain models, the response changes into sustained lifting, flinching or 
even licking behavior. Static mechanical sensitivity can be assessed with a pressure algometer (Deuis et al., 
2017a). Testing punctate mechanical hypersensitivity generally consists of applying an increasing pressure 
and measuring nociception in animals. Some tests are more specific to rats (Randall-Selitto Test) and some 
are common to rats and mice (von Frey). These tests are described more in detail below.  
von Frey test. The von Frey test, originally developed by Maximillian von Frey, is used to assess mechanical 
allodynia in rodents (Piel et al., 2014; Deuis et al., 2017b). The manual von Frey test consists of applying 
pressure of different force using calibrated von Frey filaments (ranged from 0.008 to 300 g) on the plantar 
surface of the hind paw. The animal is freely moving in a cage, and can rest on a penetrable grid. Once the 
animal is standing on its 4 legs, the filament is placed perpendicularly and pressed against the paw until it 
bends.  
(i) Three main methods of using von Frey filaments are commonly used. The “up and down” method 
determines the weight of stimulus that elicits a response 50% of the times it is applied. It derives of the 
statistical formula used to determine LD50s (lethal dose: dose that is lethal for 50% of the animals in the 
group) (Dixon, 1980; Chaplan et al., 1994). The methods is based on a series of testing with filament of 
different forces. The calculation takes into account six responses around the threshold and assess the 50% 
threshold using the formula: 50% threshold (g) = 10(X+kd)/104, where X = the value (in log units) of the final 
von Frey filament, k = tabular value for the response pattern (see Appendix 1 in (Chaplan et al., 1994)) 
and d = the average increment (in log units) between von Frey filaments (Deuis et al., 2017a).  Recent 
refinements of this methods have been published and proposed easier procedures (Bonin et al., 2014; 
Christensen et al., 2020). A limitation of this method is the repetitive stimulations that is time-consuming 
and can cause sensitization. 
(ii) In the “percent” method, identical series of stimulations with von Frey filaments of increasing force are 
applied to all animals and the percentage of withdrawal responses is assessed (Chaplan et al., 1994). Here 
also the limitation relates to the high number of stimulations applied to one animal.  
Journal Pre-proof
5 
 
(iii) In the “ascending” method, filaments with increasing force are used, and nociceptive behavior is 
considered when the animal retracts the paw, licks it or even shakes it (D’Souza et al., 2011; Papon et al., 
2020). The effects of stress are very limited in this test since the animal is unrestrained and is habituated to 
the environment prior to the test. However, it relies on the experimenter eye and judgment thus a 
subjective bias has to be taken into consideration. In order to limit this subjectivity, one can use electronic 
von Frey where a single filament is pressed against the paw and the force is increased automatically until 
paw withdrawal. 
Overall, despite the popularity of the von Frey test, there is no consensus on the sensation that is triggered 
in rodents, mainly is because the distinction between noxious and innocuous stimuli relies on subjective 
human judgment and can hardly be applied to an animal. Moreover, pain is an experience that can be 
different for human and rodents. Therefore, it is assumed that the von Frey test triggers nociception and 
can be used to assess unpleasantness of the stimulation, rather than pain (Abdus-Saboor et al., 2019). 
Randall-Selitto Test or paw pressure test. This test is used to assess mechanical hypersensitivity in rats 
(Randall and Selitto, 1957). The animal is restrained and an increasing pressure is exerted on the hind paw 
or tail using a dome-shaped plastic tip. When the rat withdraws its paw or vocalizes, threshold is attained 
and the pressure is stopped (Barrot, 2012). Waiting for the animal to vocalize is not recommended since it 
is a synonym to great pain which may lead to injuring the animal (Muley et al., 2016). Another limitation is 
that rats should be habituated to being restrained in order to minimize the stress bias (Santos-Nogueira et 
al., 2012). 
Behavioral tests and readouts must be carefully chosen according to the mechanisms under investigation. 
Withdrawal reflex is usually seen as a measure of spinal reflex. In contrast, vocalizations are considered as a 
measure of integrated pain-like behavior (Kayser and Christensen, 2000). Since 22 kHz vocalizations are 
emitted in response to aversive stimuli, the use of ultrasound has been considered. However, ultrasound 
vocalization do not correlate to pain-like behavior and cannot be considered as a reliable readout of pain 
sensation in rodents (Wallace et al., 2005). 
Cold stimulation. 
Acetone evaporation test. Acetone evaporation test is used to assess cold allodynia in rodents (Choi et al., 
1994; Vissers and Meert, 2005; Colburn et al., 2007). The evaporation of acetone on the hind paw leads to a 
cold stimulation that is not considered nociceptive in naive animals. Therefore, it is used to evaluate 
allodynia in neuropathic and inflammatory pain models (Deuis et al., 2017). The test consists of a repetitive 
application of acetone on the hind paw and a measurement of the latency to withdrawal (Xing et al., 2007). 
Alternatively, cold allodynia assessment may be achieved by monitoring the duration or the number of 
nocifensive responses, or scoring the severity of the response. The test is done on one paw, leaving the 
other as control. However, the smell of acetone can trigger an olfactory stimulus that can overlap the cold 
stimulation (D’Souza et al., 2011a). 
Cold plate. The cold plate test is used to assess cold allodynia and hyperalgesia. It consists of measuring the 
latency to paw withdrawal after applying a stick of ice (wet or dry ice) on the floor of a cage just 
underneath the paw of a freely moving animal (Allchorne et al., 2005). Alternatively, the rodent can be 
standing on a plate that is cooled down to 5°C by Pelletier effect. One main disadvantage for this test is that 
the animal should stay in place until the temperature transfer (Barrot, 2012). 
Journal Pre-proof
6 
 
The cold plantar assay has been developed to apply a focal ramping cold stimulus to unrestrained, 
acclimated mice (Brenner et al., 2012). This assay has the ability to establish a detail evaluation of the 
nocifensive response as a function of the temperature and to measure both cold allodynia and cold 
anesthesia with low variability in mice. It is also highly sensitive to experimentally altered pain conditions 
including CFA-induced inflammation, and SNL-induced nerve injury, or morphine treatment.  
Hot stimulation. 
Hot plate. Hot plate test is used to assess thermal nociception in mice and rats (Woolfe and Macdonald, 
1944). The test consists of placing a freely moving animal on a hot metallic surface (with a constant 
temperature at 50-55°C) and measuring the latency for the animal to exhibit nocifensive behavior (paw 
withdrawal or jumping). For ethical reasons, it is recommended to stop the test as soon as the animal 
withdraws the paw. The latency should not be measured on the forepaws since they are more often used 
to explore and groom. Consequently, it is more reliable to observe hind paw withdrawal. In order to avoid 
tissue damage, explorers should determine a cut-off time if the animal doesn’t respond. Another variant of 
the hot plate is the dynamic hot plate test where the temperature of the metallic surface increases 
gradually until pain-like behavior (D’Souza et al., 2011; Barrot, 2012; Burma et al., 2017; Deuis et al., 2017). 
The dynamic hot plate (Ogren and Berge, 1984) differs of the classical hot plate test in the sense that the 
animal is submitted to a ramp of increasing temperatures, usually starting at 42°C until a nocifensive 
response is observed. By assessing the response temperature, the dynamic hot plate test gives an estimate 
of thermal allodynia. 
Hargreaves or plantar test: Hargreaves test is used to assess heat pain threshold in mice and rats 
(Hargreaves et al., 1988). The test consists of applying an infrared heat source on the hind paw of an 
unrestrained animal in a clear box which rests on a glass floor. The latency to withdrawal is automatically 
measured and displayed. The animal should be acclimatized to the box prior to the experiment to minimize 
movement not related to nociception. Compared to the hot plate test, the Hargreaves test offers the 
possibility to address each hind paw and thus using one as control (Hargreaves et al., 1988; Harvey and 
Dickenson, 2009). In 2013, Banik and Kabadi have developed a modified Hargreaves for rats where they fix 
the time and measure the temperature at which the paw is withdrawn (Banik and Kabadi, 2013). The 
authors apply a constant temperature for 10s, then they increase the temperature by 2.5 °C and apply it for 
another 10 seconds until paw withdrawal (with temperature starting at 35°C up to a maximum of 70°C). 
Tail Flick test : The tail flick test is used to assess heat pain threshold in mice and rats (D’amour and Smith, 
1941). The test consists of measuring the latency of the tail to flick after a heat stimulation. The tail is either 
dipped in a hot water bath with a constant water temperature between 46° and 52°C or the tail is exposed 
to a light beam. This test is easy and quick to perform if the animal is habituated to being loosely 
restrained, but there is a risk of jeopardizing animal’s thermoregulation since the tail plays an important 
role in rodents’ thermoregulation (Barrot, 2012; Deuis et al., 2017b). 
 
Stimulus-independent tests 
When in pain, animals are capable of developing a spontaneous behavior that is not a consequence of 
thermal nor mechanical stimulation. This type of behavior is believed to be more relevant clinically 
although it must be kept in mind that rodents being prey animals, they tend to hide states of discomfort. 
Throughout the years a series of methods have been developed to assess these non-evoked behaviors. In 
Journal Pre-proof
7 
 
this review the grimace scale, weight bearing, conditioned place preference and burrowing will be 
discussed (for a more thorough review on spontaneous behavior please refer to Tappe-Theodor and Küner 
(Tappe-Theodor and Küner, 2014). 
Grimace scale and unbiased behavioral analysis. 
The grimace scale test in rodents consists of observing 5 facial features: orbital tightening, nose bulge, 
cheek bulge, ear position, and whisker position (Langford et al., 2010; Sotocinal et al., 2011). These features 
are scored from 0 (normal) to 2 (severe). It is classically used to assess acute pain since animal are capable 
of adapting to long-lasting pain, and therefore no longer express facial changes (Langford et al., 2010). 
Moreover, facial expression is being used to asses emotions associated with pain (Dolensek et al., 2020). 
Beyond the grimace scale test, high-throughput, unbiased approaches that accurately measure non 
stimulus-evoked pain are currently under development. Increasing the dimensionality of pain assays has 
the potential to increase the predictive validity of translational pain therapeutics and the transfer from 
bench to bed side. The speed of rodent responses to sensory stimulations is in the range of the millisecond 
and cannot be captured only by the eye experimenter. It requires the development of automated systems 
to monitor pain-like behavior, possibly coupled with statistical modelling and machine-learning (Abdus-
Saboor et al., 2019). Automated behavioral analysis can be performed in a dedicated apparatus (Behavioral 
Spectrometer, Behavioral Instruments) or in a home cage (HomeCageScan, CleverSys; PhenoTyper, Noldus) 
and captured a broad array of various motor behaviors. It also computes distance traveled and velocity 
(Brodkin et al., 2014; Roughan et al., 2016). The challenge is to ensure that the combination of measured 
behaviors is representative of pain states since each individual behavior is not specific to pain. Comparisons 
with well-established assays, or series of individual assays, are necessary prior to generalize the use of 
automated, unbiased paradigms to assess pain conditions in rodents. 
Weight bearing. 
The test consists of measuring weigh repartition on the rodent’s hind limbs. In normal conditions the 
weight is equally distributed on both hind limbs, whereas in inflammatory or neuropathic pain models, the 
weight is shifted towards the non-painful paw. Weight bearing is assessed either statically (the animal is 
standing in inclined cage with the 2 paws relying on 2 separate pressure detectors) or dynamically (the 
animal is freely moving on pressure sensitive floor) (Muley et al., 2016; Burma et al., 2017; Deuis et al., 
2017).   
Conditioned place-preference (CPP). 
CPP test in used to assess ongoing pain in rodents (Leite-Almeida et al., 2015). The original protocol was 
developed in rats by King et al. (King et al., 2009). The test consists of 2 compartments with identical 
dimensions but with different floors and walls. One compartment is associated with pain relief and both 
compartments communicate through a middle chamber (King et al., 2009; Blanco-Gandía et al., 2018). Prior 
to the test, animals are preconditioned for 3 days where they are left moving freely between both 
compartments, the ones developing a preference to one compartment are excluded. Afterwards animals 
are conditioned for 4 days by pairing each of the two compartments with either drug or vehicle 
administration. The purpose is to associate one compartment with pain and the other one with analgesia. 
On the test day, animals are left uninjected and moving freely. The time spent in each compartment is 
recorded (King et al., 2009; Sellmeijer et al., 2018). The animals tend to spend more time in the pain-relief 
compartment (Vuralli et al., 2019). The test assesses spontaneous pain in an indirect way. To avoid biases in 
Journal Pre-proof
8 
 
the compartment choice, it is important to maintain the same environment during the whole procedure 
(Narita et al., 2006). 
Burrowing 
Burrowing is a spontaneous behavior that has been used in rodents to assess non-evoked pain conditions. 
A burrow, filled with appropriate substrate, is placed in the home cage and the amount of material 
displaced by the animal within a predefined time interval is measured by the experimenter (Deacon, 2006). 
It is a very simple, objective, test, showing a high level of reproducibility. It has been validated for various 
models of inflammatory and neuropathic pain (Deuis et al., 2017a). 
 
Assessment of pain comorbidities 
When chronic pain lasts for more than 3 months and is considered as an illness, it is often associated with 
emotional or psychiatric comorbidities. In spite of its prevalence and impact on patients quality of life, 
chronic pain and emotional disorders are still poorly managed and current therapies are often inadequate 
(Finnerup et al., 2010). Although many reports suggest that typical anti-depressants are successful in 
treating pain, their success rate remains lower than 50% (Kroenke et al., 2009). Moreover, anti-depressants 
have anti-nociceptive effects but are less convincing in preventing the affective component of pain, i.e., 
pain perception (Boyce-Rustay et al., 2010). Therefore, simply targeting either pain or emotional disorders 
is not effective and there is a need to identify new common mechanisms. An increased understanding of 
mechanisms that underlie the overlap of pain with comorbid emotional states are key factors in the 
development of new therapies (Navratilova et al., 2016). For this purpose, the identification of agents that 
are active against both pain and emotional pathologies is a priority since these agents are likely to target 
common mechanisms, engaging overlapping neuronal circuits and underlying both disorders. Such research 
at the frontier between pain studies and psychiatry requires elaborate animal models and complex analysis 
to discriminate between the various components of the global pathology. Some highlights on comorbidities 
between chronic pain and psychiatric disorders are proposed below. A thorough evaluation of pain and 
anxiety/depression models was recently proposed (Kremer et al., 2020).  
Anxiety-like behavior. 
In the following tests the time and frequency of staying in one compartment or another is measured. 
Elevated plus maze test (EPM). The EPM test is considered as the standard test for anxiety-like behavior in 
rodents (Leite-Almeida et al., 2015). It was first developed in rats by Pellow et al. in 1985 (Pellow et al., 
1985) and by Lister et al. in 1987 for mice use (Lister, 1987). The test consists of a cross-shaped maze that is 
elevated from the floor with 2 open arms that are perpendicular to 2 closed arms (Vuralli et al., 2019). The 
animal is placed in the centre and left to explore the premises for 5 minutes (Narita et al., 2006). The test 
relies on the quandary between the animal innate tendency to explore and its fear of open, lit and elevated 
places (Campos et al., 2013). Anxious animals spend less time in open arm. Indeed, inflamed animals exhibit 
anxious-like behavior just hours after pain induction and lasts for 3-4 weeks, whereas animal models of 
neuropathic pain develop this kind of behavior 3-4 weeks after the surgery and it lasts for 4 more weeks 
(Leite-Almeida et al., 2015). It is important to notice that the animal gets familiar with the cross shaped 
maze, thus introducing some bias (Tucker and McCabe, 2017). Therefore, the elevated zero maze was 
developed as it consists of a circular-shaped maze (Shepherd et al., 1994). One more pitfall is that the 
Journal Pre-proof
9 
 
presence of the experimenter interferes with the results. Consequently, animals are videotaped for 
unbiased data (Vuralli et al., 2019). 
Open field test (OF). The OF test represents the oldest test to assess anxiety-like behavior in rodents (Leite-
Almeida et al., 2015). The test consists of placing the animal in the center of a square with high walls and 
let the animal explore the area freely for 5 minutes. The concept of this test is similar to the EPM, as it 
relies on the dilemma between exploratory behavior and fear of open spaces. Anxious animals tend to stay 
next to the wall and avoid the center, in fact mouse models of inflammatory pain exhibit anxiety-like 
behavior from 2 to 28 days after induction of the inflammation whereas neuropathic pain models may 
develop this kind of behavior 2 to 8 weeks after surgery or may not. This great variability could be linked to 
the type of neuropathy or to the test protocol; this is why it is not recommended to use this test as the sole 
determinant of anxiety-like behavior in neuropathic pain models (Kremer et al., 2020). 
Light and dark box test (LDB): The LDB test was first developed by Crawley and Goodwin in the 1980’s 
(Crawley and Goodwin, 1980). The box is divided into two compartments, one small and dark and the other 
big and brightly lit (twice as big as the small dark compartment) (Bourin and Hascoët, 2003). The animal is 
placed in the light compartment and left to explore the box freely for 5 minutes (Vuralli et al., 2019). The 
LDB concept is the same as the EPM and OF, as it is based on the conflict between the animal exploratory 
behavior and its aversion to light places. Anxious animal tend to avoid the light compartment. In fact mouse 
models of inflammatory pain exhibit anxiety-like behavior from 1 to 28 days after induction of the 
inflammation whereas this kind of behavior may develop 4 to 8 weeks after surgery in neuropathic pain 
models (Kremer et al., 2020). 
Depression-like behavior. 
Forced swim test (FST). The FST is the most commonly used test to assess depression-like behavior in 
rodents. It was first developed by Porsolt in 1977 (Porsolt et al., 1977a, 1977b). The test consists of 
dropping the animal in a water filled cylinder for 5 minutes and measure the total duration of immobility 
(Leite-Almeida et al., 2015). When faced with the inability to escape (closed water cylinder), the animal 
stays immobile as a possible manifestation of depression-like behavior. Increased immobility is observed in 
mouse models of inflammatory pain between 4 to 35 days post induction and between 4 to 8 weeks post-
surgery in neuropathic pain models (Kremer et al., 2020). 
Tail suspension test (TST): TST is a depression-like behavior test applicable only in mice and is considered as 
a more sensitive variant of FST (Steru et al., 1985). It consists of suspending the mice by their tail for 6 
minutes and measuring their duration of immobility. Increased immobility is observed in inflamed mice 
between 7 days (complete Freund’s adjuvant model in mice, see §2) to 41 weeks (osteoarthritis model in 
mice, see §2) post induction and between 2 weeks to 2 months post-surgery in animal models of 
neuropathic pain (Kremer et al., 2020). 
Sucrose preference test (SPT): The SPT developed by Katz (Katz, 1982), is a depression-like behavior test 
that assesses anhedonia which refers to the inability to feel pleasure. The animal has the freedom to drink 
either water or a sweet solution. Animal models of depression have a decrease ratio of usage of sweet 
solution over water. In fact inflammatory pain mouse models have their ratio decreased between 2 days to 
4 weeks post induction and between 1 week to 10 weeks post-surgery in neuropathic pain models (Kremer 
et al., 2020). 
 
Journal Pre-proof
10 
 
2. Models of inflammatory pain 
Two important parameters to be considered in animal models of pain are the method of injury and the 
endpoint measurement. The most appropriate models, whether an injury, application of chemical agents, 
or other manipulations, should be based on 1) understanding the clinical disease presentation and 
pathology (i.e. face validity); 2) producing nociception by recapitulating the mechanisms of specific clinical 
conditions (i.e. construct validity). Measures of nociceptive behavior must not only detect pain-like 
responses but also do so in a manner consistent with the clinical experience of pain (Gregory et al., 2013). 
Measures of reflexive behaviors such as withdrawal thresholds to noxious stimuli have been used for 
decades to examine mechanisms of pain. These have clearly proven useful in advancing our understanding 
of the physiological basis of nociception, and the identification of neurotransmitters, receptors, 
intracellular messengers, genes, and circuits implicated in pain-specific mechanisms. They led to better 
understanding of existing pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic pain treatments (Woolf, 1983, 2011; 
Basbaum et al., 2009). In addition, past studies in rodent models of acute nociception and chronic pain 
indicated that the pharmacologic action (i.e. efficacy, potency, duration of action) of a broad spectrum of 
analgesics to reduce reflexive sensory responses have demonstrated relevance to human analgesia (Yaksh, 
2002; Gregory et al., 2013). 
Chronic pain can be the consequence of persistent inflammation (Burma et al., 2017). Injured peripheral 
tissue releases an inflammatory soup made of pro-inflammatory molecules comprising bradykinin, 
prostaglandin, cytokines and chemokines. This peripheral inflammation stimulates primary afferent 
neurons and causes peripheral sensitization. This can be accompanied by central sensitization due to the 
release in the spinal cord of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators such as glutamate, substance P or BD. 
This sensitization is transient in case of acute inflammation, whereas it becomes long lasting in chronic pain 
diseases (Ji et al., 2014). In the following, classical animal models of inflammatory pain will be listed first 
(Table 1) and followed by specific models for specific pathologies. As a matter of fact some animal models 
are specifically developed for well-defined pathologies. In this review, animal models of pain commonly 
used for osteoarthritis (which is the most common form of arthritis) and rheumatoid arthritis will be 
detailed. 
 
Pain model induced by capsaicin 
Capsaicin is a proto-alkaloid present in chili peppers and is considered to be the main irritant responsible 
for hot sensation (Ilie et al., 2019). Capsaicin induces a neurogenic inflammation. In fact capsaicin binds to 
transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV-1) present on free neuronal endings of primary sensory 
neurons which will leads to the peripheral release of several inflammatory mediators: calcitonin gene-
related peptide (CGRP), neurokinin A/B, somatostatin, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), and substance P 
(Muley et al., 2016; Ilie et al., 2019). These neuropeptides will thus induce the release of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines by nearby mast cells, endothelial cells, epithelial cells and immune cells. The local inflammation 
occurs with hyperalgesia. Administration of capsaicin is accompanied by 2 types of hyperalgesia, a primary 
one that is believed to be a consequence of peripheral sensitization and responds to thermal and 
mechanical stimuli, and a secondary one which is a result of central sensitization and responds to 
mechanical stimulation (Frias and Merighi, 2016; Muley et al., 2016; Ilie et al., 2019). Capsaicin effects are 
dose dependent. In fact, a high concentration or a continuous administration can lead to desensitization of 
TRPV1 resulting in an analgesic effect.  
Journal Pre-proof
11 
 
This inflammatory induced pain model, obtained after intra-plantar injection of capsaicin, is used in mice 
and rats (Carter and Francis, 1991; Lynn et al., 1992; Caterina et al., 2000; Laird et al., 2001a; Drewes et al., 
2003) to mimic skin inflammation and inflammatory bowel disease. It has also been used to assess the 
efficiency of non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (diclofenac) (NSAID), or anti-epileptic drugs (gabapentin) 
(Muley et al., 2016). 
 
Pain model induced by formalin  
The formalin test is commonly used since it was created in 1977 (Dubuisson and Dennis, 1977). It consists 
of an injection (sub-cutaneous or intra-plantar) of a diluted solution (0,05-5%) of formaldehyde (Tjølsen et 
al., 1992). This pain model is characterized by a biphasic response. A short (0-5 minutes) first phase, where 
pain is believed to be a consequence of direct activation of primary sensory neurons, is followed by a 
second prolonged phase (10-40 minutes), where pain is the result of spinal cord inflammation within the 
dorsal horn, leading to central sensitization (Hunskaar and Hole, 1987; Tjølsen et al., 1992; Raboisson and 
Dallel, 2004). Among the mechanisms involved in this model, it has been shown that formalin activates 
transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) (McNamara et al., 2007) more particularly in phase 2. 
Interleukin-33 and its receptor ST2 are also believed to be involved in inducing pain in both phases. In fact, 
Il-33/ST2 pathway activation leads to activating mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway 
cascades that are implicated in central sensitization (McNamara et al., 2007; Han et al., 2015). In phase 1, 
pain-like behavior (paw licking and lifting, vocalization) can be observed. It is inhibited by lidocaine. In 
contrast, in phase 2, pain is alleviated by NSAID, morphine and gabapentin (McNamara et al., 2007). The 
formalin induced model is used in rats (Dubuisson and Dennis, 1977; McNamara et al., 2007) and mice 
(Hunskaar and Hole, 1987; Han et al., 2013) has largely contributed to better understanding of pain 
mechanisms (central and peripheral) (Muley et al., 2016). 
 
Pain model induced by complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA) 
CFA is a suspension of heat-killed Mycobacterium tuberculosis in paraffin oil (Barrot, 2012) that is 
frequently used for inducing inflammatory pain. CFA is injected subcutaneously in the hind paw or intra-
articular. When injected in the hind paw, the inflammation occurs 24 hours after the injection and lasts for 
one to two weeks (Ren and Dubner, 1999; Bas et al., 2016). However, after after intra-articular injection, 
the inflammation takes 7 days to occur (Muley et al., 2016). The mechanisms leading to CFA-induced 
inflammatory pain are still to be deepened but it is known that the injection of CFA leads to the release of 
pro-inflammatory mediators (PGE2, TNF alpha, IL-1) that induces synovitis, bone resorption and eventual 
degeneration. Inflammatory mediators are responsible of neuronal sensitization that is responsible for joint 
pain (Muley et al., 2016). CFA-induced pain models are frequently used to assess inflammatory pain in mice 
and rats (Knight et al., 1992; McDougall et al., 1995; Keeble et al., 2005; Simjee et al., 2007; Fernandes et 
al., 2011; Uematsu et al., 2011; Nisar et al., 2015). For example, the CFA model is considered a robust 
model to study arthritis, and particularly rheumatic arthritis (RA) since it mimics the synovitis and bone 
resorption observed in human RA but does not mimic cartilage alteration (Bas et al., 2016).  
 
Pain model induced by carrageenan  
Journal Pre-proof
12 
 
This model is mainly used to study inflammatory pain, more specifically joint inflammation (Mert et al., 
2018). Carrageenan is used to induce transient joint inflammation, where hyperalgesia and allodynia are 
observed (Winter et al., 1962; Fehrenbacher et al., 2012). A carrageenan solution with a concentration 
centered between 0.5-2 percent is injected subcutaneously, the swelling is observed 3-5 hours after the 
injection and it lasts for 24 hours (Winter et al., 1962; Otterness and Moore, 1988). 
 
Pain model induced by zymosan 
This self-resolving model is used to study acute inflammation(Cash et al., 2009). Indeed, 30 minutes 
after injecting zymosan, which is an insoluble polysaccharide component of the cell walls of 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, animals develop edema and inflammation as well as thermal and mechanical 
hyperalgesia (Doherty et al., 1985; Meller and Gebhart, 1997). Thermal and mechanical hyperalgesia are 
dose dependent, and spontaneous pain is observed with greater doses (Doherty et al., 1985; Meller and 
Gebhart, 1997). 
 
Osteoarthritis pain models 
Arthritis is a medical condition in which the inflammation of the joint leads to chronic pain and movement 
limitation. In 2012, 52.5 million USA adults suffered from arthritis. This number is thought to increase and 
reach 78.4 million by year 2040 (Hootman et al., 2016). Osteoarthritis (OA) is a progressive musculoskeletal 
disease that leads to the failure of the entire joint (Teeple et al., 2013; Alshami, 2014). Novel treatment that 
tackles pain and helps increase activity is of necessity and therefore animal models of pain are needed to 
deepen the understanding of the underlying physiopathology of OA.  
Chemically induced models 
A wide range of chemicals are used to induce OA-like models, including papain, trypsin, carrageenan, 
kaolin, hyaluronidase, collagenase, sodium urate and mono-iodoacetate (MIA) (D’Souza et al., 2011a; Fang 
and Beier, 2014). Notably, MIA is the most commonly used model to assess OA pain and one of the best 
models to study symptom-modifying OA drugs (D’Souza et al., 2011b). MIA injection was first used by 
Dieter Kalbhen (Kalbhen, 1987). The mechanism of action of MIA consists of inhibiting the glyceradehyde-3-
phosphate dehydrogenase in chondrocytes; thus inhibiting the glycolytic pathway and eventually leading to 
chondrocyte apoptosis, subchondral bone necrosis and cartilage degeneration, consequently mimicking the 
morphology of end stage OA (D’Souza et al., 2011a; Fang and Beier, 2014). Subsequent to MIA injection, 
there are 2 phases. The first one consists of an early (few days after) inflammation, where pain is reversed 
by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). In the second phase, the joint is destructed and the 
expression of the nerve injury marker activating transcription factor-3 (ATF-3) is increased in the L5 dorsal 
root ganglion. The pain during this phase may be lowered by the administration of morphine/gabapentin. 
MIA injection is used mainly in rats and also in mice and guinea pigs. In rats and mice the clinical outcomes 
are characterized by mechanical hypersensitivity in hind paw, alteration of sleep, and locomotive deficit, 
whereas in guinea pig mechanical allodynia is observed with altered weight bearing (D’Souza et al., 2011a; 
Malfait et al., 2013; Fang and Beier, 2014). The intra-articular (knee) injection of the above-listed chemicals 
is a low-cost procedure that leads to rapid severe joint degeneration. Unfortunately the clinical relevance 
of this model to model OA is not as accurate as with other procedures. 
Journal Pre-proof
13 
 
Surgically induced models. 
Surgically induced models are obtained after joint surgery that is consequently unstable and altered. The 
cartilage degeneration, which is proportional to the degree of joint instability, depends on the joint 
structure. The most common procedures are performed on mice knees and leads to a fast and reproducible 
disease progression. 
Anterior cruciate ligament transection (ACLT). It has been used for decades on large animals and nowadays 
this procedure is performed on rodents (Stoop et al., 2001; Gomis et al., 2007). The post-surgery 
physiopathology evolves over time with changes in chondrocyte physiology at 4 weeks post-surgery, mild 
cartilage destruction at 8 weeks, and osteophytes formed at 12 weeks post-surgery. When ACLT is 
combined to the removal of medial meniscus, the joint destruction and osteophytes formation are 
observed only at 4 weeks post-surgery. It is important to mention that in human OA, support structures are 
not all ruptured (D’Souza et al., 2011; Teeple et al., 2013). 
Meniscectomy. The meniscectomy in rodents could be partial or total, lateral or medial, unilateral or 
bilateral (Bendele, 1987; Bove et al., 2006; Knights et al., 2012). At 4 weeks post-surgery, the cartilage 
starts to get damage and OA lesions progressively develop from 8 to 12 weeks post-surgery (Knights et al., 
2012). This procedure is questionable since there is no consistency in the amount of meniscus that is being 
removed (Teeple et al., 2013). 
Destabilisation of medial meniscus (DMM). The DMM is very common in mice (Glasson et al., 2007). 
Transection of the medial meniscotibial ligament leads to mild instability with cartilage destruction, 
subchondrial bone sclerosis and osteophyte formation. Cartilage lesions appear at 2 weeks post-surgery 
and progress for 16 weeks after this period. This procedure is the most common since it is reliable, 
reproducible and structurally similar to human OA. Furthermore, pain is reversed by standard analgesics. 
Finally, the disease progression is slower when compared to others (D’Souza et al., 2011a). 
Osteoarthritis in companion animals 
OA is a natural occurring disease in cats, dogs and horses and appears to be very similar to human disease. 
Studies in these large animals, although less used than small animal models, are often required in 
translational research (McCoy, 2015; Lascelles et al., 2018). Dogs are considered as an excellent model to 
study human OA and remain the most used, especially in preclinical trials (Aragon et al., 2007; Pelletier et 
al., 2010; McCoy, 2015). However, natural racehorse OA is the best-suited model to investigate the 
pathophysiology of post-traumatic osteoarthritis in humans, especially in athletes (McIlwraith et al., 2012; 
McCoy, 2015). In particular, the stifle joints articular cartilage, the most frequent altered tissue in OA 
suffering horses, is highly similar to the human knee cartilage. Although some pain research studies have 
been carried out in induced-OA companion animals, OA-natural companion models are, along with cancer-
natural models (see section 4), valid models for modelling human pain (Klinck et al., 2017). 
Thermal and mechanical nociception and pain tests commonly used in rodents have been adapted for 
these large animal models, such as facial expression analysis with the Grimace Scales (Holden et al., 2014; 
de Grauw and van Loon, 2016). For OA large animal models, subjective lameness scoring and kinetic gait 
analysis are also a widely method to assess OA pain (Moreau et al., 2014). Clinical metrology instruments 
(CMIs), questionnaires designed for pet owners, have improved the assessment of sensory and affective 
effects of pain in companion animals. Several OA CMIs exist for dogs, e.g. The “Canine Brief Pain Inventory” 
(CBPI) and “Liverpool Ostoearthritis” (LOAD), and cats, e.g. ‘The Owner Behavior Watch’ (OBW) and ‘The 
Journal Pre-proof
14 
 
Feline Musculoskeletal Pain Index’ (FMPI). Although these CMIs are subjective methods to assess pain, they 
are validated by comparative analysis with objective tests for diagnosis and for outcome measurements in 
clinical research (Walton et al., 2013; Stadig et al., 2019). The positive therapeutic outcome of the anti-NGF 
antibodies in OA suffering dogs and cats is a good example of the translational positive values of 
companion animal models (see § 11; (Gruen et al., 2016; Sanga et al., 2017; Lascelles et al., 2018; Kelly et 
al., 2019)). 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis models 
An average of 0.5-1% of the general population suffer from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (Bas et al., 2016). RA 
is a chronic autoimmune disorder characterized by T cells’ activation of macrophages and release of pro-
inflammatory cytokines, e.g. tumour necrosis factor α (TNFα), interleukin (IL) 1, 6 and 17. This results in 
inflammation of the synovial membrane as well as cartilage and bone erosion (Caplazi et al., 2015; Bas et 
al., 2016). Immunotherapy is the most commonly used treatment for RA but the underlying cause of T cells 
reactivation is still unknown. Therefore, animal models are still needed and should new lights on 
pathophysiological mechanisms. 
Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) 
CIA is the most frequently used models for RA since there is a good resemblance with human RA with the 
presence of rheumatoid factor and anti-citrullinated peptide antibody (Caplazi et al., 2015; Bas et al., 2016). 
The experimental procedure consists of an intra-dermal (ID) injection of a combination of CFA and collagen 
II, which constitutes the major form of articular cartilage, leading to chronic polyarthritis in periarticular 
joints (Courtenay et al., 1980; Caplazi et al., 2015; Bas et al., 2016; Fischer et al., 2017).  
Collagen antibody–induced arthritis (CAIA) 
CAIA is obtained after intravenous or intraperitoneal injection of a mixture of anti-CII antibodies, followed 
by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) injection 3 days after (Nandakumar et al., 2003; Caplazi et al., 2015; Bas et al., 
2016). Inflammation is at its maximum 8 days after the injection and lasts for a month (Lynn et al., 1992). 
This model is frequently used because of its histological similarities with human RA. In addition, bone and 
cartilage degradation as well as synovitis and pannus are observed in CAIA (Fischer et al., 2017). In this 
model, mechanical and thermal (hot and cold) hypersensitivity are observed. CAIA can be implanted in 
rodents that are unsuitable for CIA. However the inflammation observed is innate and not related to B cell 
nor T cell activation (Caplazi et al., 2015; Fischer et al., 2017). 
Streptococcal cell wall (SCW)-induced arthritis 
This model is used to mimic RA in rats.  It consists of an intra-articular injection of Streptococcus 
pyogenes cell walls. A single injection leads to an acute inflammation within one day, whereas multiple 
injections lead to chronic RA (van den Broek et al., 1988; Bessis et al., 2017). 
 
3. Models of migraine pain 
Migraine has not classically been considered an inflammatory disease probably because it is not obviously 
associated with heat, redness, and swelling. Instead, a vascular etiology was proposed and the prevailing 
theory of migraine for most of the twentieth century, held that pain results from an abnormal dilatation of 
Journal Pre-proof
15 
 
intracranial blood vessels, leading to mechanical excitation of sensory fibers. However, in recent years, 
advancements in the neurobiology of migraine headache have shifted the emphasis away from vascular 
smooth muscle toward mechanisms related to inflammation (Waeber and Moskowitz, 2005). Accumulating 
data have come, in large part, from basic science research utilizing small animal models of migraine-related 
pain (Akerman et al., 2017; Harriott et al., 2019; Vuralli et al., 2019c). Although the vascular system plays a 
crucial role in the headache associated with migraine that distinguishes it from somatic or visceral pain, a 
neuronal involvement in the aetiology of migraine has increasingly been considered (Olesen et al., 2009). 
Several lines of evidence suggest that activation of trigeminal nociceptors innervating meningeal tissues is 
central to the initiation of migraine pain. Once activated, trigeminovascular afferents release 
neuropeptides that, in turn, may mediate additional release of mast cell contents and other immune 
mediators (Harriott et al., 2019). Exposure of perivascular fibers to inflammatory agents released in the 
vicinity of sensory fibers alters their sensitivity and leads to the sensation of head pain. Animal models 
ultimately seek to reproduce the etiology of migraine with various experimental paradigms described 
below. 
 
Dural stimulation 
Peripheral stimulation of meningeal nerve terminals can be achieved electrically or chemically. The direct 
electrical stimulation of meningeal nerve terminals (Zagami et al., 1990) derived from the demonstration in 
human that it results in pain often referred to the face. Such stimulation elicits the polysynaptic activation 
of the central projection sites of these afferents in the trigeminal nucleus caudalis and ascending 
projections throughout the brain (Benjamin et al., 2004). These studies have been key in identifying major 
migraine-related pain processing in preclinical research (Akerman et al., 2013). Direct electrical stimulation 
is however a nonrecoverable procedure and other protocols are necessary to mimic chronic activation of 
the dura. 
Indeed, direct application of inflammatory soup on the exposed dura mater induces cephalic 
hypersensitivity (Melo-Carrillo and Lopez-Avila, 2013). This chemical stimulation elicits the expression of 
pronociceptive markers in the trigeminal ganglia (Lukács et al., 2015). This paradigm authorizes repeated 
applications producing a long-lasting central sensitization that mimics the pathophysiology of migraine 
(Munro et al., 2017). Less invasive refinements of this paradigm make it compatible with behavioral testing 
in conscious freely-moving animals. 
Electrophysiology is a common readout for the various procedures of dura mater direct stimulation. It is a 
powerful assay method that allowed identifying effective mechanisms such as the triptans and CGRP 
receptor antagonists, while predicting failure of neurokinin (NK)1 receptor antagonists (Akerman et al., 
2013). 
 
Trigeminal neuron stimulation 
The stereotaxic insertion of electrodes allows to directly stimulate trigeminal ganglion neurons which 
causes release of CGRP from perivascular afferent terminals to the dura mater. Short (3-5 min) and long (30 
min) stimulation paradigms have been used with the latter inducing morphological changes (Knyihár-Csillik 
et al., 1997). Notably, neurochemical and morphological changes are sensitive to triptan and 
Journal Pre-proof
16 
 
dihydroergotamine, thus making the inhibition of peripheral neuropeptide release a plausible mechanism 
of anti-nociceptive action (Buzzi et al., 1991). 
 
In vivo application of algogenic substances 
The most widely used models in preclinical migraine research rely on systemic infusion of nitric oxide 
donors, e.g. glycerol trinitrate (GTN) (Munro et al., 2017). Intraperitoneal administration is replaced in 
some studies by intravenous infusion that can directly activate the trigeminovascular system 
(Ramachandran et al., 2014). Beside acute administration, other authors have developed repeated 
intermittent intraperitoneal administration (Pradhan et al., 2014), or intradermal injection of GTN in the 
hindpaw (Ferrari et al., 2016). Both variants have clinical relevance, resulting in progressive and sustained 
basal hyperalgesia and showing sumatriptan sensitivity, repectively. Interestingly in these models, the 
effects of algogenic substances are not restricted to specific peripheral or central nervous system sites but 
are likely to act more broadly in migraine-related structures (Harriott et al., 2019). 
 
Genetic models 
Among the rare genetic models of migraine, mouse models expressing gain of function missense mutations 
of the CACNA1A faithfully recapitulate the symptoms of familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM), a rare 
monogenic migraine subtype associated with aura. Notably, CACNA1A, as well as other genes implicated in 
FHM, encode ion channel and transporter subunits that play important roles in neurotransmission. 
 
Cortical spread depression model 
The aura is associated with migraine in up to 30% of patients. The aura results from a wave of intense 
excitation across the visual cortex that has been attributed to cortical spreading depression (CSD) process. 
CSD is a slowly propagating depolarizing wave that can be induced experimentally in rodents where it is 
initiated by injection of KCl into the cortex (Munro et al., 2017). CSD triggers neuronal activation within the 
trigeminal ganglion and in higher brain regions (Cui et al., 2015). Moreover, CSD also increased activation of 
microglia that is a key mechanism relevant to central sensitization and contributing to pain sensitivity. 
 
4. Models of neuropathic pain. 
Neuropathic pain (NP) is a painful syndrome caused by central or peripheral lesion of the nervous system. It 
is highly disabling, affecting 7-8% of general population (Bouhassira et al., 2008). NP elicits sensory 
alteration including dysesthesia and paresthesia, spontaneous pain, increase pain sensation for innocuous 
stimuli (allodynia) and increase pain sensation for noxious stimuli (hyperalgesia). Animal models of NP are 
developed, mainly in rodents, to recapitulate one or several symptoms of NP aiming at deciphering the 
underlying mechanisms. Larger animals, e.g. cat, have also been used to study NP mechanisms (Koyama et 
al., 1993). NP models are distinguished according to the localization, central or peripheral, of the nerve 
injury. 
 
Models of central NP 
Journal Pre-proof
17 
 
Central pain syndrome (CPS) classified as neuropathic pain is defined as “pain initiated or caused by a 
primary lesion or dysfunction of the central nervous system” (International Association for the Study of the 
Pain, Merskey and Bogduk, 1994) or more recently as “pain arising as a direct consequence of a lesion or 
disease affecting the central somatosensory system” (Treede et al., 2008). CPS patients display 
somatosensory abnormalities (hyposensitivity to thermal and noxious stimuli), which is the universal 
feature of this syndrome, due to the spinothalamoparietal thermoalgesic pathway dysfunctions (Canavero 
and Bonicalzi, 2007). CPS patients suffer from dysesthesia and painful burning sensation whose localization 
in body regions, and intensity and duration, widely differ, depending of the syndrome etiology. CPS onset 
can be delayed several months after CNS damage but is a lifetime condition in the majority of cases (Berić, 
1998; Canavero and Bonicalzi, 2007)CPS is mostly induced by stroke (referred as central post-stroke pain), 
multiple sclerosis or brain/spinal cord injury (SCI). Diseases displaying a CPS-like component such as 
Parkinson’s disease are referred as central pain-allied conditions (CPAC). Depending of the origins of the 
lesions, patients suffer from brain central pain (brain-brainstem lesion) or cord central pain (spinal cord 
lesion). 
CPS has been mostly studied in rodents by performing SCI, either targeting individual fiber tracts, or 
extensively affecting the cord. Electrolytic lesions (one or two) of the rat spinothalamic tract afferents are 
performed using tungsten or quartz-insulated platinum or electrodes (Wang and Thompson, 2008; Masri et 
al., 2009). The electrode is targeted unilaterally to the ventrolateral spinal quadrant in the lower cervical or 
thoracic vertebral level (Wang and Thompson, 2008; Masri et al., 2009). Demyelinating lesions have also 
been carried out by the injection of lysophosphatidylcholine solution through a glass pipette inserted into 
the region of the rat spinothalamic tract (Wang and Thompson, 2008). CCP rodent models allowed to 
identify the biological bases of this syndrome (Wang and Thompson, 2008; Masri et al., 2009; Quiton et al., 
2010; Naseri et al., 2013) and to test therapeutic approaches  (Wang and Thompson, 2008; Lucas et al., 
2011). 
Other models are generated by a more extensive SCI, not only restricted to fiber tracts, e.g. spinal cord 
compression, partial or complete sections, photo-chemically induced ischemia, spinal cord crushing, 
contusion, or application of excitatory neurotoxins (Table 1). Even if paralysis is the core symptom of this 
model due to the lesion of descending motor tracts, other features of SCI impair quality of life such as pain 
(Simpson et al., 2012; Caplazi et al., 2015; Fischer et al., 2017). Extensive lesions of the spinal cord are 
associated with spontaneous and evoked pain resulting in both hyperalgesia and allodynia (Campbell and 
Meyer, 2006; Starkey et al., 2009; Schneider et al., 2017).  
Contusive SCI is usually obtained by using a weight-drop technique (Siddall et al., 1995). In this model, rats 
developed allodynia few days after SCI, that lasts up to 30 days after motor recovery (Siddall et al., 1995). 
Spinal hemi-section mimics chronic central pain after spinal cord lesion (Christensen et al., 1996). This 
model offers advantages of maintaining the injured site separate from the intact side. It is obtained by 
performing a hemi section of a thoracic segment, usually cranial to L1 dorsal root entry. Spinal hemi-section 
induces changes in withdrawal thresholds in response to both mechanical and thermal stimuli that persist 
for 5-6 months. In this model, NP develops both below and above the SCI on both sides. This model 
recapitulates the NP in Brown–Sequard Syndrome, a spinal cord hemi-section injury, where chronic pain 
also develops on both sides (Koehler and Endtz, 1986). 
Photochemical injury, developed by Watson and Colleagues (Watson et al., 1985), presents the advantage 
to reproduce a mechanical trauma of the spinal cord without surgery. It consists of intravenous injection of 
the photosensitizing dye, Rose Bengal or erythrosin B, followed by an irradiation. This reaction induces 
Journal Pre-proof
18 
 
thrombosis leading to ischemia and tissue necrosis of the spinal cord (Gaviria et al., 2002). Injury induces a 
strong allodynia in different areas innervated by the ischemic spinal segments (caudal trunk, hind limbs, 
and hind paws) and a hypersensitivity to cold but not to heat stimuli. 
 
Models of peripherally-induced NP 
Various models have been proposed to copy consequences of radiculopathies or post-operative nerve 
lesions (Table 1). Classical models are obtained by lesioning peripheral nerves, e.g. the infra-orbital nerve 
(face neuropathy) or the sciatic nerve (hindlimb neuropathy). Peripheral NP models elicit peripheral but 
also central effects, including spontaneous discharges from afferent neurons, nociceptor sensitization and 
spinal and cortical reorganization.  
Nerve transection. 
The sciatic nerve total transection is achieved by a complete axotomy of the sciatic nerve removing 
approximately 5mm of the sciatic nerve in rats or mice. This model mimics the clinical symptoms of 
“phantom limb” that occur in humans after transversal spinal lesion. The limitation of this axotomy model 
is the motor impairment, which hampers behavioral evaluation by testing withdrawal latencies, and causes 
frequent autotomy. For ethical considerations, these axotomy models are now replaced by partial nerve 
injury in which autotomy is strongly reduced or totally suppressed. 
 
Partial nerve lesion. 
Several partial nerve lesion models have been developed over the last 20 years. These models differ 
according to their procedure, their reproducibility, the inflammatory component and the duration of NP 
symptoms. Chronic constriction injury (CCI) (Bennett and Xie, 1988) consists of four loose knots around the 
sciatic nerve or the infra-orbital nerve. This model involves both neuropathic and inflammatory 
components triggered by suture thread (Costa et al., 2005). CCI elicits spontaneous pain and pain 
hypersensitivity that occurs 24 hours after surgery and persists for a duration of at least 7 weeks. Variability 
in responses occurs upon variation in the tightness of ligature and thread used. Cuffing of sciatic nerve 
(“cuff” model) allows a standardized and reproducible chronic constriction injury; it is obtained by the 
implantation of a section of polyethylene tubing placed around the common branch of the sciatic nerve of 
rats or mice (Pitcher et al., 1999; Benbouzid et al., 2008; Yalcin et al., 2014b). Animals develop heat-
hyperalgesia lasting for 3 weeks and mechanical allodynia for at least 2 months (Benbouzid et al., 2008). 
This model is of interest to study anxio-depressive comorbidities associated with NP that lasts for weeks 
after removal of hypersensitivity to pain (Yalcin et al., 2014a). Partial sciatic nerve injury (PNI), developed in 
rats by Seltzer and colleagues (Seltzer et al., 1990), consists of tight partial ligation of the dorsal third or half 
of sciatic nerve, peroneal or tibial branch or both. Pain symptoms occur within 1 week after surgery and 
continue up to 6 weeks post-injury. PNI has been adapted in mice by Malmberg and Basbaum (Malmberg 
and Basbaum, 1998) and showed pain symptoms one day after injury. The thermal allodynia resolves by 49 
days, but the mechanical allodynia persists for the duration of the study (70 days). Spinal Nerve Ligation 
(SNL) was developed in rats by Kim and Chung (Kim and Chung, 1992). It consists of a unilateral and tight 
ligation of lumbar spinal nerves L5 and L6 distal to dorsal root ganglia. Within 24 to 48 hours after surgery, 
this model develops a mechanical allodynia, thermal hyperalgesia and spontaneous pain that persist for 4 
months without any autotomy. Although the surgery is complex, it is a highly reproducible method with 
Journal Pre-proof
19 
 
little damage to surrounding tissue (Kim and Chung, 1992; Dobremez et al., 2005; LaBuda and Little, 2005; 
Fossat et al., 2010; Laffray et al., 2012). SNL model is also available in mice (Kiso et al., 2008) where 
mechanical allodynia started at day 1 and lasted for at least 2 months after surgery. Spared nerve injury 
(SNI) corresponds to the lesion of two of the three terminal branches of the sciatic nerve that is obtained by 
the ligation of common peroneal and tibial nerves leaving the remaining sural nerve intact (Decosterd and 
Woolf, 2000; Bourquin et al., 2006). Mechanical and thermal responsiveness is increased in the territory of 
spared sural nerve. SNI model displays early and persistent pain-like behaviors; it is easy to perform and 
highly reproducible. Caudal trunk resection is performed by lesioning the caudal trunk in rat or mice (Na et 
al., 1994; Sung et al., 2000). Allodynia and hyperalgesia appear within a day of nerve injury and last for 
weeks (Back et al., 2003). In rats and mice, this model offers several advantages by allowing behavioral 
tests, thermal and mechanical stimuli to be easily performed at the same spot on the tail. 
These models of peripheral neuropathy induce pain-like behavior as a direct consequence of nerve lesion 
(i.e. sciatic nerve for the hindlimb or infra-orbital nerve for the face). These models have the ability to 
recapitulate some particular neuropathic syndromes in human. For instance, CCI, SNI and PNI targeting the 
sciatic nerve are models of complex regional pain syndromes type II (CRPS) that same sensory disorders 
similar to those described in patients, e.g. touch hypersensitivity, mechanical hyperalgesia, spontaneous 
pain, and pain irradiatio. Moreover, in the case of CCI, the strong inflammatory component mimics some 
features of the chronic low back pain syndromes in human. Finally, SNL that targets dorsal roots of the 
sciatic nerve models sciatica or radiculopathy (defined as pain resulting from injury or disease of the 
cervical, thoracic, lumbar or sacral nerve roots). Although these models present interesting features, there 
is still today a large gap between the number of molecules effective in preclinical studies and their poor 
outcome in clinical trials. Several explanations can be evoked such as the genetic homogeneity of the 
models (inbred mouse/rat), the low diversity of the behavioral tests generally used (i.e. withdrawal 
reflexes), the similarities between the different preclinical models (nerve injury modelling 
mononeuropathy) and the almost exclusive use of male rodents. Future challenges will be to determine 
precisely which mechanisms is targeted by a given drug, and which patients will be relevant for treatment 
(Rice et al., 2018). For this purpose, the relevance of pain assessment in animal models, and the similarities 
between animal behavior and human symptoms are critical. 
 
Models of poly-neuropathy (PN) 
Notably, studies on animal models of mononeuropathic pain most largely report sensory gain (Rice et al., 
2018). However, traumatic nerve injury is most often characterized by a loss of sensitivity to non-painful 
stimuli, and a moderate sensory gain to painful stimuli (Gierthmühlen et al., 2012). In addition, most of 
clinical trials involve patients with polyneuropathy (Rice et al., 2019). In human clinics, polyneuropathies 
(peripheral neuropathies) are the most common type of disorder of the peripheral nervous system in 
adults, and specifically in the elderly, with an estimated prevalence of 5–8%, depending on age. A sensory 
loss profile is reported in the majority of patients with common polyneuropathies for example: 
chemotherapy-induced (Ventzel et al., 2018), diabetic (Raputova et al., 2017) and HIV-associated associated 
(Phillips et al., 2014) polyneuropathies, and spinal cord injury (Finnerup et al., 2003) or postherpetic 
neuralgia (Fields et al., 1998). Recently, relevant disease models have been developed and validated, 
especially those related to drug-induced neuropathy, diabetic and HIV-associated neuropathy and 
autoimmune neuropathy. Some examples of these models are briefly discussed in the following. 
Journal Pre-proof
20 
 
Chemotherapy-induced neuropathy 
Peripheral neuropathy is a dose-limiting side effect for a number of chemotherapeutic agents including 
platinum analogues, microtubule-directed agents (taxol, vincaalkaloids), suramin or thalidomide. Cisplatin 
neurotoxicity is very common and can be mimicked in in mice and rats by repeated injections of platinum 
for several weeks. Mechanical and thermal hyperalgesia and allodynia appear in the 2–4 weeks following 
the beginning of treatment (Authier et al., 2003). Oxaliplatin is another chemotherapeutic drug used for the 
treatment of gastrointestinal tract tumours, especially in colorectal cancer (Ibrahim et al., 2004). Oxaliplatin 
induces acute side effects in 80% of the patients, and can evolve to a long-term neuropathy in a fraction of 
the affected patients (around 15-20%). Mouse models of chemotherapy-induced neuropathy are generated 
by repeated (e.g. twice a week for 4 weeks) intravenous injection of oxaliplatin in the tail vein (Marmiroli et 
al., 2017). Chronic treatment with oxaliplatin has been reported to induce shrinkage of Dorsal Root Ganglia 
(DRG) neurons and axonopathy of myelinated fibres in animal models (Renn et al., 2011), and impairs 
sensory neuron arborisation, indicating that oxaliplatin neurotoxicity occurs mainly in sensory neurons 
(López-González et al., 2018). 
Diabetic neuropathy 
Diabetic neuropathy is a progressive disease that leads to structural changes in the nerve causing 
hyperalgesia. Various animal models, with possible different pathogenesis underlying mechanisms, exist 
and highlight the importance of establishing clear criteria for models of diabetic neuropathy in rodents. 
The most common metabolic models are the streptozotocin (STZ) diabetic rats and mice (mainly Swiss, 
C57/Bl6 or CD1) (Biessels et al., 2014). Depending on the severity of anticipated disease, diabetes is 
induced by a single intraperitoneal or intravenous dose of 40–80 mg STZ/kg (rat), or 150–200 mg STZ/kg 
(mouse) body weight, or of lower doses given to mouse over consecutive days. STZ neurotoxicity was 
reported to induce early behavioral and electro-physiological changes followed by distal nerve fiber loss, 
axonal atrophy and myelin thinning after many months of diabetes. However, STZ toxicity may be indirectly 
responsible for neuropathy (Davidson et al., 2009). 
A large variety of genetic model have been also proposed to recapitulate the pathophysiology of diabetes. 
The BB/Wor and BBZDR/Wor rats model type 1 and type 2 diabetes respectively. The BB/Wor rats lack T 
lymphocytes expressing the RT6 alloantigen, and develop auto-immune attack of the pancreas and 
spontaneous onset of type 1 diabetes in males between the ages of 70–80 days (Yang and Santamaria, 
2006). The BBZDR/Wor-rat spontaneously develops insulin resistance that is preceded by obesity and these 
animals model type 2 diabetes (Tirabassi et al., 2004). In mouse, there are two common genetic models of 
type 1 diabetes: the non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse and the Akita mouse, representing spontaneous 
auto-immune type 1 diabetes (NOD) and a mutation of the insulin-2 gene, respectively. There is currently 
relatively little consistent information on the neuropathy in these animal models (Biessels et al., 2014). 
Models of type 2 diabetes, such as db/db (leptin receptor mutation) and ob/ob (leptin mutation) mice, 
have been available for many years (Wang et al., 2014). Both models develop diabetes at 4–6 weeks of age 
with hyperinsulinemia and hyperlipidemia. Early electrophysiological changes, and later structural 
abnormalities have been reported during the progression of the disease. The main limitation of both the 
db/db and ob/ob models is that death occurs at 24–30 weeks of diabetes in the absence of insulin 
supplementation. 
A major limitation of the STZ and genetic models is that they do not replicate the evolution of the 
metabolic imbalance and the natural progression from obesity to diabetes (Preguiça et al., 2020). High fat, 
Journal Pre-proof
21 
 
or high fat and high sugar diets, alone or associated with low or moderate doses of STZ, more closely model 
the disease progression. These paradigms induce the hallmarks of diabetic neuropathy and are key in the 
progressive development of symptoms including behavioural alterations, nerve conduction velocity deficits 
and nerve structural impairments (O’Brien et al., 2014). 
In these different models of diabetic peripheral neuropathy, evoked nociception is not correlated to 
ongoing pain that remains present whatever the hypo- or hyperalgesic status and the possible loss intra-
epidermal nerve fibre endings (Agarwal et al., 2018; Gao et al;, 2019). 
Autoimmune neuropathy 
Autoimmune neuropathies comprise a diverse group of conditions resulting from an immune attack on the 
peripheral nervous system. The prototypic immune neuropathy is the heterogeneous Guillain-Barré 
syndrome (GBS), the most common acute paralytic disorder in industrialized countries. It is classically 
considered as an acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (Fricker et al., 2008). The pathological 
substrate for GBS has been well established with immune cell infiltration, demyelination with or without 
axonal damage in the peripheral nervous system (PNS), nevertheless molecular and cellular mechanisms 
require adapted animal models to be fully understood. In the classical models of experimental allergic 
neuritis (EAN), the auto-immune aetiology of GBS was reinforced using homogenate of peripheral nerve 
tissue in adjuvant (Waksman and Adams, 1956). Classical EAN is induced in susceptible rats (the Lewis rat 
strain is the most sensitive to auto-immune conditions) or mice by active immunization (complete Freund’s 
adjuvant) with peripheral myelin extract, or the whole or partial purified P2 myelin protein (Hahn, 1996). 
Adoptive transfer EAN is induced by injection into naive animals of antigen-specific T cells obtained from 
lymph nodes of EAN syngenic animals (Toyka, 1999). Although EAN has provided valuable information, it 
has been criticized for its artificial manipulation (Yang et al., 2014). Therefore, genetic models have been 
raised that develop spontaneous autoimmune peripheral polyneuropathy caused by B7-2 (Salomon et al., 
2001) or CD4 (Yang et al., 2014) depletion in mouse. 
Infectious neuropathy 
Infectious neuropathies include several diseases associated with infectious micro-organisms targeting the 
central (e.g. neurosyphilis, viral meningitis) or the peripheral (e.g. leprosy, HIV, Lyme disease, hepatitis C) 
nervous system. Here we provide examples of animal models of the two most common neuropathies 
induced by an infectious agent, leprosy and HIV-associated neuropathy. Leprosy is the most common 
sensory multiple mononeuropathy, still largely present in developing countries. Leprosy is caused by the 
non-toxic non-cytolytic Mycobacterium leprae, an obligate intracellular parasite. The proliferation of M. 
leprae in the mouse footpad (MFP) has been widely used to test bactericidal activity (Ji et al., 2006) and to 
define the role of immunity in leprosy after MFP infection in immune-deficient mice (Rambukkana et al., 
2002; Fricker et al., 2008). However, the development of more representative models of human leprosy is 
still necessary to better account for a real leprosy neuropathy. 
In HIV-associated neuropathy, peripheral sensory structures (DRG, peripheral nerves and cutaneous 
terminals) are affected. Distal sensory polyneuropathy (DSP) is the most common HIV-associated 
neuropathy and is present in one third of HIV-infected patients. Classical animal models rely on the 
postulated direct toxicity of secreted viral proteins (gp120 and Tat) on DRG and axons leading to 
degeneration and the development of DSP. Gp120 can be delivered acutely through an intradermal 
injection, or chronically, directly to the sciatic nerve, with a carrier matrix, thus inducing allodynia and 
hyperalgesia (Herzberg and Sagen, 2001). HIV infection may also heightens the vulnerability to 
Journal Pre-proof
22 
 
antiretrovirus-induced neurotoxicity. Indeed, in transgenic mice continuously releasing gp120 from 
astrocytes and Schwann cells, food supplementation with the antiretroviral agent didanosine results in 
small unmyelinated fiber degeneration and hyperalgesia (Keswani et al., 2006). Similarly, the intravenous 
injection of a common protease inhibitor, indinavir, triggers hindpaw mechanical hypersensitivity in rats 
(Huang et al., 2017). Notably, DSP in these models is responsive to analgesic compounds, e.g. gabapentin. 
 
5. Models of cancer pain 
Several mammalian and non-mammalian animal models have been developed to improve our 
understanding of cancer biology (Schachtschneider et al., 2017). However, cancer pain, which is 
experienced by human patients and animals in advanced stages of cancer, has only been addressed in some 
of these models.  
Immunocompromised and immunocompetent rodents (mouse and rat) are commonly used to study cancer 
pain. Because of its large size, rat model is better suited for manipulations and injections into bones 
compared to mouse. However, mice are more widely used compared to rats mostly due to the possibility to 
address cancer pain in transgenic mice either in knock-out or -in overexpressing gene mice (Ghilardi et al., 
2005a; Lindsay et al., 2005). Larger animals also used are dogs and less commonly cats as they develop 
spontaneous tumors such as mammary, prostate, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), 
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). In dogs, cancer is the number one cause of mortality with osteosarcoma 
(OSA) being the most common primary bone tumor, and a painful one. Dogs and cats display similar cancer 
biology when compared with humans and are therefore appropriate models for human cancer (MacEwen, 
1990; Simmons et al., 2015). Methods used to quantify cancer pain are various and dependent of the 
animal species used. In rodents, the von Frey assay remains most widely used although non-evoked pain 
tests are also applied (Table 2). Cancer pain in dogs is addressed mostly using owner-completed 
questionnaires and activity sensory function measure assays (Brown et al., 2015; Monteiro et al., 2018) 
(Table 2).  
Bone cancer leads to the most painful conditions with patients suffering from chronic pain and 
breakthrough pain. Moreover, as bone is the major site of metastasis in advanced stage cancer, e.g. 
mammary and prostate cancers, it is expected that bone cancer induced pain (CIBP) models are the first 
cancer pain models to be developed. Metastastic bone cancer pain models were developed via 
intravenous, intra-cardiac (left ventricule of the heart), or orthotopic injections of cancer cells (Arguello et 
al., 1988; Yoneda et al., 1994; Liepe et al., 2005). However, assessment of bone induced pain cancer has 
been proven difficult in these models due to the differences in size, tissue/organ localization of the 
metastases. The first primary bone cancer pain model was developed in 1998 by injection of NCTC 2472 
fibrosarcoma cells into mouse intramedullary space of long bone, i.e. femur (Schwei et al., 1999). The first 
rat model was developed a few years later by injection of MRMT1 mammary carcinoma into the 
intramedullary space of tibia (Medhurst et al., 2002). A model of breakthrough cancer pain defined as an 
intermittent episode of extreme pain has been recently developed (Tang et al., 2016). Non-bone cancer 
models were also developed using orthotopic injections (see Table 2). The differences between these 
different rodent models depend on the site of injection and the type of cancer cell injected (Table 2). 
Development of these diverse models allowed pharmacological interventions with preclinical positive 
outcome (reviewed in  (Slosky et al., 2015)). Indeed, analgesic effects of resiniferatoxin, a TRPV1 activator, 
were demonstrated on intractable osteosarcoma suffering dogs and in phase I clinical trials on patients 
Journal Pre-proof
23 
 
with intractable cancer (Brown et al., 2015). Moreover, the use of various animal models has validated the 
anti-NGF therapy for cancer pain management (Sevcik et al., 2005; Jimenez-Andrade et al., 2011). 
Tanezumab and Fulranumab, two NGF antibodies, safety and efficiency have been tested in phase I and 
phase II clinical trials (Sopata et al., 2015; Slatkin et al., 2016). A phase III trial using Tanezumab is currently 
in progress to determine whether Tanezumab is effective in the treatment of cancer pain due to bone 
metastasis in patients already taking background opioid therapy (see ClinicalTrials.gov). 
The use of these different models has provided insight into the mechanisms involved in cancer pain 
(reviewed in (Falk and Dickenson, 2014)) and brought in vivo evidence of the implication of tumor secreting 
proteins, e.g. endothelin 1, (Wacnik et al., 2001; Tang et al., 2016)), microRNAs (Bali et al., 2013; Elramah et 
al., 2017), neurotrophins, receptors (e.g. osteoprotegerin, (Honore et al., 2002)), and TRPV1 (Ghilardi et al., 
2005a; Sapio et al., 2018). In particular, the implication of the purinergic P2X receptor family and purinergic 
pathway in cancer pain has been shown using these rodent models (Gilchrist et al., 2005; Wu et al., 2012; 
Guedon et al., 2016; Falk et al., 2019). 
 
6. Models of visceral pain 
Visceral pain includes pain emanating from organs localized into the thoracic, pelvic and abdominal regions. 
This type of pain is poorly localized, often affecting two or more visceral organs. In particular, 
gastrointestinal (GI) pain is common in various disorders including irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory 
bowel diseases (IBD) (Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis), pancreatitis, kidney stones, biliary disorders or 
associated with cancer. Several factors have been identified as contributing to visceral pain, such as stress, 
early life influence, microbiota, genetic predispositions, epigenetic changes and miRNA regulation 
((Larauche et al., 2012; Zhang and Banerjee, 2015; Fuentes and Christianson, 2018; Lomax et al., 2019; 
Louwies et al., 2019; van Thiel et al., 2020). However, the mechanisms of visceral pain are complex and 
identifying its cause and the correct treatments for patient remains a challenge (Drewes et al., 2020). 
Numerous animal models, mostly rodent models, have been developed to mimic GI diseases (reviewed in 
(Larauche et al., 2012; Goyal et al., 2014; Greenwood-Van Meerveld and Johnson, 2017)). However, visceral 
pain has only been investigated in a small number of these available models (Schwartz and Gebhart, 2014). 
Some examples of naturally occurring or induced visceral pain are given in the Table 3.  
Visceral pain associated diseases naturally occur in dogs, and pancreatitis is the most frequent visceral pain 
condition (Catanzaro et al., 2016). Pain is addressed by posture, movement, behavioral, physiological 
changes and reaction to abdominal palpation (Mansfield and Beths, 2015; Catanzaro et al., 2016). 
Classically, visceral pain can be induced by hollow organ isobaric distension using latex balloon inserted into 
the esophagus or colon that is distended over a certain period of (Ness and Gebhart, 1988; Ozaki et al., 
2002; O’Mahony et al., 2012). Colonic sensitivity is then measured by behavior analysis, e.g. abdominal 
withdrawal reflex (AWR) and/or monitoring abdominal muscles contraction (visceromotor responses, 
VMR). This method is mostly used in rodents but has been adapted to bigger animals, such as dogs or 
horses (Ness, 1999). 
One widely used technique consists of inducing GI irritation, in order to copy IBD, by intra-colorectal 
injection or oral ingestion of irritant chemicals such as trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid, dextran sulfate 
sodium, dibutyltin dichloride (Vera-Portocarrero and Westlund, 2004; Lapointe et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 
2018b; Hou et al., 2019). This technique derives from the writhing test developed in 1957. In this method, 
Journal Pre-proof
24 
 
intraperitoneal injection of chemical irritant, such as acetic acid or phenylquinone, induced writhing 
responses and has been used as pharmaceutical screening tool (reviewed in (Schwartz and Gebhart, 2014)). 
However, its use needs to be reconsidered due to limitations and ethical issues. GI inflammation can also 
be induced by parasite or E.coli infection or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) injection (Quick et al., 2013; Nozu et 
al., 2018, 2019; Zhang et al., 2019).  
More disease-specific models, such as experimental autoimmune pancreatitis induced by mice 
immunization with rat prostate extracts antigen, or kidney stones obtained by the injection of dental 
cement into rat ureter, have been generated (Giamberardino et al., 1995; Liu et al., 2019). 
Animal models have also been developed to evaluate stress-induced visceral pain. They rely on inducing 
stress in adult rodents by repeated water avoidance stress, partial restraint stress or in early life of mice by 
neonatal maternal separation (Miquel et al., 2016; Nozu et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2019). 
In all of these disease models, visceral pain is then measured using abdominal withdrawal reflex, 
visceromotor responses, mustard oil test, von Frey assay or “up and down” method, or animal behavior 
analysis such as grimace face (see Table 3). 
The use of different rodent strains is a plus to address the importance of individual’s sensitivity to stress 
into the induction and maintenance of GI pain (O’Malley et al., 2014). Furthermore, these assays to induce 
visceral nociception/pain can be carried out in transgenic mice, enabling to highlight the implications of 
factors, or signaling pathways, e.g. purinergic signaling pathway in the mechanisms of visceral pain and/or 
to address the effects of analgesics and probiotics/prebiotics on visceral pain (Trimble et al., 2007; Ochoa-
Cortes et al., 2014; Pusceddu and Gareau, 2018). 
Visceral pain can also be felt in other somatic regions than the affected one, therefore it is called referred 
visceral pain(Giamberardino et al., 2010). For example left shoulder, jaw and neck pain are typically 
observed in case of a cardiac ischemia. The physiopathology underlying referred visceral pain lies in the 
presence of viscerosomatic convergence at spinal cord level. In fact the dorsal horn of the spinal cord 
receives a visceral input that converges with a somatic input leading to the sensation of pain (Gebhart and 
Bielefeldt, 2016). Referred visceral pain is first felt within the deep tissue walls but with persistent 
stimulation and secondary hyperalgesia the pain is extended to superficial layers(Sikandar and Dickenson, 
2012).  Laird et al developed an animal model for referred visceral pain in mice, it consists of an intracolonic 
capsaicin instillation (ICI). In fact 50 μl of capsaicin were injected in the colon via a cannula inserted in the 
anus. Von frey filaments were applied to the abdomen before the instillation and 20 minutes after, and the 
difference in the frequency to withdrawal was tested (Laird et al., 2001b). ICI was also adapted for rats , in 
this case 200 μl of capsaicin were injected (Sanoja et al., 2010). 
 
7. Models of musculoskeletal pain 
Similarly to cancer pain or visceral pain, muscle pain results in a diffuse, aching pain that contrasts with 
sharp and localized cutaneous pain. Models specific to studying muscle pain are scarce in the literature 
although muscle pain is a major clinical problem. Indeed, musculoskeletal pain is a chronic widespread pain 
manifestation that affect between one quarter and one third of the US population (Gaskin and Richard, 
2012). In chronic conditions like lowback pain, myositis, myofascial pain, and fibromyalgia, muscle pain is 
one of the major clinical manifestations. Therefore, animal models obtained after muscle insult more 
Journal Pre-proof
25 
 
reliably replicate many clinical pain syndromes when compared to models of cutaneous pain (Lesnak and 
Sluka, 2019). 
Models of chronic muscle pain include inflammatory and non-inflammatory components. Musculoskeletal 
hyperalgesia is classically generated by intramuscular injection of either carrageenan (inflammatory) or 
acidic saline (noninflammatory) (Sluka et al., 2001; Radhakrishnan et al., 2003). The inflammatory pain 
models mimic a wide range of painful muscular disorders with an inflammatory component such as 
myositis and tendonitis. The pain behaviors are sensitive to anti-inflammatory drugs (Kehl et al., 2000). The 
inflammatory model of musculoskeletal pain in rodents is obtained by carrageenan injection in the 
gastrocnemius muscle and produces hyperalgesia to heat stimuli (Chopade et al., 2014). This carrageenan-
induced pain model has been suggested to have greater face validity to pain of musculoskeletal origin in 
humans [4]. 
The non-inflammatory model mimics painful muscle disorders such as fibromyalgia, where inflammation is 
not present. This model is not sensitive to anti-inflammatory agents (Radhakrishnan et al., 2003). The most 
common and well-characterized models of fibromyalgia-like pain involve repeated insults to the muscle. A 
non-inflammatory pain model is induced by repeated injections of acid saline (pH 4.0) into the same 
gastrocnemius muscle. It results in widespread hyperalgesia of the skin, muscle and viscera without 
observable tissue damage or inflammation (Sluka and Clauw, 2016). 
In both inflammatory and non-inflammatory animal models, the findings nicely corroborate clinical 
observations and contributed to demonstrate that chronic widespread pain is multifactorial. Peripheral 
alterations are partly responsible of the symptoms through the involvement of the immune system or 
impaired nociceptor sensitivity, in particular in the induction of hyperalgesia. However, emerging evidence 
suggest that the central nervous system maintains the hyperalgesia. In inflammatory musculoskeletal pain, 
recent observations indicate the importance of a spinal COX-2 mechanism, and the spinal site of action of 
systemically delivered drugs that alleviate hyperalgesia (Chopade et al., 2014). Central excitatory 
mechanisms have also been implicated in the pathophysiology of fibromyalgia (Sluka and Clauw, 2016). In 
addition, the inhibitory effects of central pain modulation are decreased in human patients with 
fibromyalgia and animal model studies point to reduced serotoninergic transmission in the brain stem that 
projects to the spinal dorsal horn (Bobinski et al., 2015). 
 
8. The particular case of non-human primates 
Although rodents are mammals, their behavior and the organization of their nervous system remains 
different from humans. In contrast, studying pain in non-human primates offers the opportunity to 
investigate mechanisms, and response to analgesic treatment, that are close to what is expected in 
humans. However, using non-human primates undoubtedly poses acute ethical problems and little 
exploration of pain-related mechanisms has been done in non-human primates as compared to rodent.  
Few attempts have been made to develop NP models in non-human primates. The most classical approach 
was the ligation of the L7 spinal nerve in rhesus monkeys. At 14 days post lesion, this resulted in the 
alteration in the activity of spinothalamic tract neurons that displayed increased activity in response to 
mechanical and thermal stimuli (Palecek et al., 1992). Accordingly, the animals exhibited behavioral 
responses consistent with mechanical and thermal allodynia (Carlton et al., 1994). Recently, Macaca 
fascicularis has been used to establish a model of mild injury of the sciatic nerve. This does not involve 
Journal Pre-proof
26 
 
nerve transection, so that nerve transduction can still take place. Under these conditions, behavioral and 
physiological outcomes model the chronic and long-term nature of sciatic nerve neuropathy that is 
observed in clinics more closely than in classical rodent models (Guo and Gu, 2014). Sciatic nerve retained 
the ability of nerve signal transduction, and showed a firing rate profile consistent with injury induced-
sensitization of sensory fibres. This model may serve as a non-human primate model to study functional 
changes of traumatic injury to the sciatic nerve. In a macaque model of chemotherapy-induced neuropathic 
pain, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) reported abnormal activation of pain-related brain 
regions including insular and secondary somatosensory cortices, suggesting that fMRI measurement 
combined with behavioral outcomes in macaque models could be used to test therapeutic treatments for 
neuropathic pain and document their modes of action (Nagasaka et al., 2020). 
Interestingly, a procedure similar to the rodent CCI model failed to induce symptoms of neuropathic pain in 
non-human primates (Palecek et al., 1992), likely because of the thicker protective sheath of the primate 
spinal nerve that prevented rodent-like pathology to develop. This example highlights that specific pain-
inducing procedures must be adapted for every species studied. 
The use of large animal models is more common to study acute or chronic inflammatory pain (Henze and 
Urban, 2010). In non-human primates, the formalin test has been used as a tonic pain model with good 
objectivity, validity, reproducibility and quantification. Moreover, this model exhibits good predictive 
validity by recapitulating the analgesic effects of morphine and pethidine (Alreja et al., 1984). Similarly, 
topical application of capsaicin proved to be efficient in inducing transient hyperalgesia and can serve as a 
model to test analgesic treatments in primates (Kupers et al., 1997). Spontaneous osteoarthritis exists in 
rhesus monkeys but despite a good face validity, it has never been used to test effectiveness of analgesics, 
perhaps because it would require preliminary reliable methods to assess pain in these free-range animals 
(Henze and Urban, 2010). Another painful affection that develops spontaneously in non-human primates is 
endometriosis (Braundmeier and Fazleabas, 2009). Such spontaneous endometriosis in cynomolgus 
monkeys displays similar clinic-pathological characteristics to the human disease and was useful as an 
experimental model (Nishimoto-Kakiuchi et al., 2018). Cynomolgus monkeys have similar lesions to those in 
humans as revealed with MRI studies (Nishimoto-Kakiuchi et al., 2018). The implications of these findings 
are that well established conventional laboratory methods and parameters for assessment can be applied 
for evaluating disease progress and drug efficacy in this model. 
 
9. Pain models in simple organisms 
To reduce the use of rodents in pain studies and carry out high-throughput screening studies, new models 
have started to appear in pain research, using lower vertebrate species such as zebrafish or Xenopus and 
invertebrates such as Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans). 
The shared advantages of these models reside in their simplicity of use including low cost and easy 
maintenance, large brood and egg size and rapid external development. They are genetically similar to 
humans and genome manipulation (random or directed mutagenesis, transgenesis, Crisp/Cas9...) or gene 
expression alteration (knock-down or over-expression) can be easily and quickly carried out (St Johnston, 
2013; Sassen and Köster, 2015; Chen et al., 2016; Tandon et al., 2017). Genetic, chemical and behavioral 
screening can also be performed in multiwell-format screening (Jorgensen and Mango, 2002; Wheeler and 
Brändli, 2009; Giacomotto and Ségalat, 2010; Venken and Bellen, 2014). These diverse and efficient 
technologies together with online resources make them powerful model to human neuropathologies 
Journal Pre-proof
27 
 
(Jeibmann and Paulus, 2009; Bessa et al., 2013; Pratt and Khakhalin, 2013; Fontana et al., 2018; de Abreu et 
al., 2019; Vaz et al., 2019; Markaki and Tavernarakis, 2020). Furthermore, the lower level of ethical 
constraints for Drosophila and C. elegans and zebrafish and Xenopus embryos and larvae under European 
and USA legislation places them as a replacement approach in animal experimentation and alternative 
promising models to study nocifensive reactions, in respect of the 3R principles (Sneddon et al., 2017). 
There are numerous debates regarding the capacities of non-mammals to experience pain (Sneddon et al., 
2014; Brown, 2015; Key, 2015; Sneddon, 2018, 2019; Williams et al., 2019). Indeed these species are quite 
distant phylogenetically from humans and their nervous system is indeed not organized as in mammals 
(White et al., 1986; Rein et al., 2002; Pratt and Khakhalin, 2013; Lee-Liu et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2018; Vaz 
et al., 2019). The simplicity of nervous system and the lack of neocortex in zebrafish and somatocortex in 
Xenopus is one of the main arguments for no possible pain experience in these species. However, it has 
been established that nociceptive pathways in these four animals are similar to mammalian ones (Tobin 
and Bargmann, 2004; Kahn-Kirby and Bargmann, 2006; Smith and Lewin, 2009; Stevens, 2011, 2015; 
Khuong and Neely, 2013; Demin et al., 2018b, 2018a; Sneddon, 2018; Walters, 2018). This includes (1) 
nociceptors with morphological and functional resemblance to vertebrate ones, (2) ions channels which, 
based on their sequence and structure homology and functional assays, are orthologous to the mammalian 
TRP channels, (3) opioid system and (4) neurotransmitters of primary afferents (Table 4). These four species 
are capable of sensing mechanical, chemical and thermal noxious stimuli although only amphibians can 
sense cold stimuli (Sneddon, 2018). 
Stereotypical behavioral responses to a noxious stimulus have been well described in these simple 
organisms and helped to develop numerous assays to study thermal, mechanical and chemical nociception 
and also neuropathic and chronic pain models (Table 5). In Drosophila, the classical response of larvae to 
heat or mechanical noxious stimuli is the rolling (corkscrew-like) response (Milinkeviciute et al., 2012). 
C.elegans respond to a heat stimulus with the stereotypical escape behavior called Tav (thermal 
avoidance), which includes a stop movement followed by reversal, reposition and a forward movement to 
another new direction (Wittenburg and Baumeister, 1999). However, new heat avoidance assays rely on 
other behavior responses such as crossing a thermal barrier or distance travelled on heated assay plate 
(Glauser et al., 2011; Nkambeu et al., 2019). Xenopus nociceptive response to the application of acetic acid 
test (AAT) drops of dilute acetic drops (5%) to the hindlimb, a pain model developed by Pezalla in 1983 
(Pezalla, 1983), is called “wipping response”. In zebrafish, nociception has been assessed by changes in 
behavior, such as reduction of activity, swimming distance and space use, physiological changes (opercular 
beat rate) or more recently by abdominal constriction like response (Costa et al., 2019; Sneddon, 2019). 
Some of these assays such as the hotplate or von Frey test, successfully implemented in Drosophila larvae 
and adults, are similar to the mammalian ones (Milinkeviciute et al., 2012). These nociception like assays 
based on behavioral responses coupled to the ease of genomic manipulation allowed the discovery of new 
molecular mechanisms involved in nociception and pain. As an example, painless, a TRP channel related to 
the TRPA1 channel subfamily, was identified in the first nociception study though a forward genetic screen 
for Drosophila mutants defective in heat stimulus response (Tracey et al., 2003).  
It is now admitted that these four animals can be used as alternatives to mammalian models to study 
nocifensive behaviors. However, it remains unclear if they can be used to improve our understanding of 
pain integration. Pain models, such as neuropathic pain, have been developed in Drosophila and zebrafish 
(Malafoglia et al., 2014; Khuong et al., 2019) (Table 5). The ATT test, performed in Xenopus and zebrafish 
have been considered as a pain model, mimicking the rodent visceral pain protocol when injected 
Journal Pre-proof
28 
 
intraperitoneally (Costa et al., 2019). These animals have also been used in analgesia and anaesthesia 
research and it has been proven that negative effects of noxious stimulus are blocked by the use of 
anaesthetics (Morgan et al., 2007; Stevens, 2011; Lopez-Luna et al., 2017). To access pain events is 
complicated in these four organisms, but it has shown they display cognitive processes such as memory, 
learning, active avoidance learning, punishment learning, pain-relief learning and if trained, opioids self-
administration (Millhr et al., 1974; Ardiel and Rankin, 2010; Gerber et al., 2014; Rothman et al., 2016; Bossé 
and Peterson, 2017; Yang et al., 2018).  
The large number of Drosophila, C.elegans and zebrafish and Xenopus larvae obtained from one mating 
combined to the absence of ethical issues for these individuals made them very attractive for large genetic 
and chemical screenings. Teratogenecity assays in zebrafish and Xenopus embryos and larvae have been 
used to address toxicity of pain drugs and herbal remedies and could be powerful tests for future analgesics 
and anaesthetics development (Chae et al., 2015; Jayasinghe and Jayawardena, 2019). High-throughput 
screenings have already been implemented with the aim to identify new pain drugs (Ellis et al., 2018). 
Xenopus wild type or overexpressing human proteins related to chronic pain oocytes are frequently used to 
screen libraries of compounds and test their specificity using electrophysiology or voltage-clamp 
fluorometry (Zeng et al., 2020). In particular, inhibitors of the P2X7 purinergic receptor or an ion channel 
involved in chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy have been identified using Xenopus oocytes 
(Zeng et al., 2020). Straightjacket, member of the voltage-gated calcium channel family involved in acute 
and chronic pain in humans, and the thermoreceptor TRPA1 were identified among 580 new pain genes in 
a 10,000 knockdown adult flies screen (Neely et al., 2010, 2011). Recently, a forward behavioral genetic 
screen allowed testing more than 600,000 transgenic tgMOR C.elegans mutants and identifying a novel and 
conserved orphan-opioid system (Wang et al., 2019). The recent development of novel behavioral assays 
with large numbers of animals, automated behavioral tool (such as the Fish Behavior index (FBI)), tracking 
software (AnyMaze®) and quantitative models should become very useful tools for assessing nociceptive 
responses high-throughput screening (Curtright et al., 2015; Leung et al., 2016; Taylor et al., 2017; Deakin 
et al., 2019). Indeed, the Multi-Worm Tracker software (Swierczek et al., 2011) was used to record the 
animal movement and identify C.elegans mutants displaying behavioral changes to opioids (Wang et al., 
2019). Finally, habituation alterations have been successfully tested in these high-throughput models for 
neurodevelopmental disorders (Kepler et al., 2020). Such assay could be a promising approach to provide 
insight into nociception and pain. 
The easiness of these four organisms, the ethical issues and the development of recent automated 
methodologies have contributed to the increase of studies on nociception and pain research. Although 
these animals feel nociception and can be used to test behavioral responses to thermal, chemical and 
mechanical noxious stimuli with a great potential for pharmacological research, for molecular mechanisms 
understanding and for the 3R respect, there is some limitations to their use. One of these limitations is their 
phylogenetic distance to humans and therefore to some molecular and cellular mechanisms differences. 
For example, the P2X3 receptor involved in pain is not found in Xenopus genome (Burnstock, 2016; Bernier 
et al., 2018; Blanchard et al., 2019). The main limitation resides in the difficulty to assess pain perception, if 
any. However, the use of these models, especially in high-throughput screening, could be the first in vivo 
step before any experimentation on rodents or other mammals. 
 
10. Limitations of animal models of pain 
Journal Pre-proof
29 
 
The study of pain always relied on preclinical animal models that attempted to explore the complex 
physiological and sensory implications of the condition. Various animal models of chronic pain aim to 
emulate different types of pain and they have been instrumental in the discovery and development of 
analgesic agents. While there is no doubt about the necessity of such models in chronic pain research, 
there are several limitations to their use. This is especially true when considering their failure to facilitate 
the translation of basic science data into effective and commercially available therapies. This is supported 
by the fact that there is a high rate of translational failures associated with preclinical animal models (Le 
Bars et al., 2001; Negus et al., 2006). One well-known failure is that of the neurokinin-1 receptor 
antagonists (substance P) (Hill, 2000). Several reasons have been suggested for these failures (Mogil, 2009). 
This debate focuses partly on the utility of animal models of pain and behavioral measures for screening 
new potential analgesics. One concern is the reliance of studies on reflexive measures, and it has been 
suggested that additional measures of supraspinal integration that use non-reflexive pain-like behaviors 
should be included, such as operant learning measures, spontaneous nocifensive behaviors and quality of 
life or physical activity measures. Another concern is the use of animal models of disease that do not reflect 
the clinical condition the experimenter is trying to model, such as using inflammatory pain in animals to 
study chronic low back pain. Finally, the insufficiency of the knowledge on fundamental neuronal 
mechanisms must be also emphasized. In particular, recent studies pointed to the importance of NK1 
receptor signaling along the endocytotic pathway, and not only at the plasma membrane, in the 
transduction of nociceptive information (Jensen et al., 2017). Therefore, classical NK1 antagonists that 
target membrane NK1 may not be able to prevent atypical intracellular NK1 signaling. 
Most molecules that successfully demonstrated analgesic effects in preclinical studies fail to produce 
similar effects when tested on a clinical level. One of the reasons this might occur relies on the genetic and 
molecular neurochemical differences between humans and animals. This makes it difficult to predict the 
pharmacological effect of a molecule on the clinical level. In contrast, after clinical validation, most 
approved drugs have proven good efficiency in reverse translational studies in animals. The difficult 
translatability of pain across species and transfer to clinical settings could also be due to non-optimal 
translational research conditions and not directly related to the failure of the model to simulate human 
pain mechanisms (Le Bars et al., 2001; Henze and Urban, 2010). In fact, failure in translational approaches 
can be due to the presence of severe side effects that appear in clinics but are not detected in preclinical 
studies (Mogil, 2009). 
Another major cause is likely to be the heterogeneous nature of human chronic pain which can have a 
multitude of aetiologies. This heterogeneity clashes with the controlled environment often used in animal 
studies that might interfere with the translation of the research to a human population. In particular, a vast 
majority of animal studies utilize inbred animal. While some injury models are available, most studies only 
use sensory-evoked thresholds (e.g., von Frey filaments) in order to assess nociceptive sensitivity; whereas 
the evaluation of ongoing pain based on non-evoked stimulus (such as the grimace scale, weight bearing, 
CPP…) may be clinically more relevant (Negus et al., 2006; Deuis et al., 2017b). Other challenges 
researchers are facing include the replication of the transitional process of pain from acute to chronic in 
animal models. The complexity of pain mechanisms and differences between pain types (i.e. neuropathic 
vs. inflammatory) indicates a lack of a mechanistic delineation between conditions (Le Bars et al., 2001; 
Ferrari et al., 2015).  
In addition, several demographic factors are implicated in pain mechanisms in humans including age. Pain 
mechanisms are often considered independent from age in animals, which lead to the predominant use of 
Journal Pre-proof
30 
 
young mice in preclinical studies. This is questioned by the increasing evidence of the involvement of an 
age-dependent mechanism (Mogil, 2009). Sexual dimorphism is another demographic factor that might 
lead to the misrepresentation of chronic pain in animal models. This is apparent through the overuse of 
male subjects in studies which is a clear contrast to the high prevalence of chronic pain in females. The 
underutilization of female subjects in preclinical trials might provide an explanation to the lack of effective 
analgesic therapies for the human global population (Le Bars et al., 2001; Negus et al., 2006; Henze and 
Urban, 2010). Pain perception differs between female and male; with female perceiving more pain perhaps 
due to high levels of estrogen and progesterone, and low testosterone levels. In fact, pain perception is 
modulated by the immune system that is under the control of gonadal hormones (Mogil, 2009). This 
difference has been highlighted in a study that indicated only male mice developed acute thermal 
hypersensitivity when tested in an environment linked to a painful memory (Martin et al., 2019). 
Furthermore it has been showed that T-cell deficient female mice needed 2-3 times the morphine dose 
administered to male mice (Rosen et al., 2019). Another example pointed that the hypersensitivity induced 
by nerve injury is different between male and female mice since the spinal mechanisms differ between the 
two genders (Mapplebeck et al., 2018). 
Interstrain animal genotypic variabilities can also account for the failure of human chronic pain modelling in 
animals (Le Bars et al., 2001; Negus et al., 2006; Henze and Urban, 2010). The example of the gene 
encoding sodium channel Nav1.7 is illustrative. This gene is present on adrenal and pituitary gland of 
rodents, and its mutation is lethal. However, the situation is different in primates where this gene mutation 
leads to pain insensitivity (Mogil, 2009). Notably, recent studies pointed that Nav1.7 may not be critical for 
survival even in rodents, but appears as an key molecular component for transmitting high-threshold 
noxious stimuli (Gingras et al., 2014). There is also genetic variability among rodents that is also to blame 
for clinical failure. In fact, mice show an increase of morphine analgesia when isolated in a cage, whereas it 
decreases with rats. Furthermore chronic pain was shown to modulate 43 genes in rats versus only 10 in 
mice (Mogil, 2009).  
 
11. Translational lessons learned from animal model studies 
Translation is defined by the National center for advancing translation science as “the process of turning 
observations in the laboratory, clinic, and community into interventions that improve the health of 
individuals and populations – from diagnostics and therapeutics to medical procedures and behavioral 
interventions” (Nakao, 2019). It is worth noting that despite the aforementioned limitations, a growing 
number of examples demonstrate the potential to convert new agents into widely used analgesics 
through pre-clinical testing in animal models. The following will consider such examples for treating 
neuropathic or inflammatory pain, as well as low back pain and post-operative pain. 
 
Targeting purinergic signalling 
ATP induces acute pain when applied to human skin (Bleehen and Keele, 1977; Hamilton et al., 2000) 
where it activates ATP-gated channels (P2X receptors), mainly P2X3 receptors that are almost 
exclusively expressed in nociceptive sensory neurons. P2X3 and heteromeric P2X2/3 play a key role in 
pain sensing and in various sensory transduction such as taste and visceral afferent sensation. Several 
P2X receptors expressed in neurons and/or microglia, including P2X3 and P2X4 or P2X7, are also 
Journal Pre-proof
31 
 
involved in the chronic nociceptive behavior that follow nerve injury or inflammation indicating that P2X 
receptors represent therapeutic targets for pain syndrome (Khakh and North, 2006).  
Nerve injury mouse models recently allowed the understanding of a spinal mechanism in which the 
purinergic receptor P2X4 expressed in microglia plays a critical role specifically in neuropathic pain but 
not in acute or inflammatory pain. Using a spinal nerve ligation rat model of neuropathic pain, a 
pioneered work showed that the increase of P2X4 expression specifically in reactive microglia within the 
dorsal horn of the spinal cord is determinant in tactile allodynia (Tsuda et al., 2003). The authors also 
showed that the pharmacological blockade of P2X4 or the expression knock-down using siRNA 
dramatically reduced pain-like behavior indicating that P2X4 activation is required to maintain pain 
hypersensitivity. The key role of P2X4 was confirmed in P2X4 knockout mice (P2X4KO) in which tactile 
allodynia after peripheral nerve ligation was drastically reduced (Ulmann et al., 2008). Several studies 
established that activation of microglial P2X4 by ambient ATP increases nociceptive signaling within the 
spinal cord by reducing inhibitory currents within the spinal cord. This neuronal disinhibition results 
from a rise in the intracellular concentration of chloride ions that suppresses GABA or Glycine mediated-
inhibitory responses. This phenomenon may eventually convert inhibition into excitation in a subset of 
neurons, sufficient to induce hypersensitivity of spinal neurons and tactile allodynia (Coull et al., 2005; 
Trang et al., 2009). These changes in chloride concentration are triggered by the potassium-chloride co-
transporter (KCC2) downregulation, which is mediated by the extracellular release of BDNF and the 
activation of Trk-B receptor located at the surface of inhibitory neurons. The neuronal hyper-excitability 
mediated by microglial P2X4 signaling may account for the main symptoms of neuropathic pain 
suggesting that the blockade of P2X4 expression or function alleviates this debilitating condition in 
human. Although no commercially available P2X4-derived pain killer exists, the therapeutic potential of 
targeting this system is well recognized, and current research efforts are made for P2X4 drug 
development. TNP-ATP or 5-BDBD are P2X4 antagonists that have been commonly used to show the 
involvement of P2X4 in rodent nervous tissue but they are not very selective (Suurväli et al., 2017). New 
antagonists of rodent P2X4 (BAY-1797 or NP-1815-PX) and a highly selective human P2X4 antagonist 
(BX430) with no effect on rodent P2X4 were recently identified (Ase et al., 2015; Matsumura et al., 
2016). Kyushu University and Nippon Chemiphar Co., Ltd. initiated a phase 1 clinical trial of the NC2600 
P2X4 antagonist but no data is available since then (Bhattacharya, 2016). 
An alternative to P2X4 blockade could be the enhancement of KCC2. Actually, chloride extrusion 
enhancers have been proposed as novel therapeutics for pain alleviation (Gagnon et al., 2013). Chloride 
enhancers could also be used in synergy with other pharmacological agents. Indeed, a recent study 
pointed to the benefit of rescuing chloride homeostasis with the KCC2-enhancer CLP25728 on the 
analgesic action of the benzodiazepine site ligand L838,417. This combination produced an efficient 
analgesia even with high doses of benzodiazepine, whereas they remained otherwise ineffective when 
administered alone (Lorenzo et al., 2020). 
P2X7 is expressed in most of the immune cells and regulate the inflammation, thus representing a 
valuable therapeutic target for many diseases involving inflammation, including persistent pain 
(Burnstock and Knight, 2018). P2X7 antagonists such as AZ106006120 or nanobodies that are small 
single chain antibodies blocking or modulating P2X7 functions have been proposed as drug candidates 
for inflammatory disorders (Danquah et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2016). P2X7 knockout mice showed 
reduced behaviorral responses to inflammation or tactile allodynia (Chessell et al., 2005). These effects 
seem to be mediated by the decrease of the pro-inflammatory interleukin-1 release from microglia. 
Journal Pre-proof
32 
 
P2X7 is abundantly expressed in reactive microglia after CNS injury, and neuropathic pain is reduced by 
P2X7 antagonist such as A-740003 and A-438079. These data suggest that targeting microglial P2X7 may 
be useful for the treatment of chronic pain (Tsuda, 2017). 
Antagonist selective of P2X3 or P2X2/3 receptors have also been shown to have anti-inflammatory and 
anti-nociceptive effects in different models of neuropathy and peripheral inflammation when expressed 
in sensory neurons (Jarvis et al., 2002; Kuan and Shyu, 2016). Mechanical allodynia in animal models was 
also reduced in mouse with deletion of P2X3 gene (Cockayne et al., 2000; Souslova et al., 2000).  In 
addition, P2X3 knockout mice exhibited a marked urinary bladder hyporeflexia and it has been showed 
that ATP released by the distension of the urothelium activates P2X3 expression in afferent nerves. A 
similar link have been established for the taste buds, the wall intestine and reflexes such as cough, 
indicating that P2X3 and/or P2X2/3 receptors have a more widespread role in sensory transduction. 
Therefore, they represent attractive targets for drugs, and not only for pain. Among the numerous 
selective antagonists of P2X3 discovered, some of them have been studied in clinical trials for pain-
related disorders but also for other diseases such as overactive bladder, irritable bowel syndrome, or 
chronic cough. Gefapixant (MK-7264) significantly reduced cough frequency in patients with refractory 
chronic cough or unexplained chronic cough  (Smith et al., 2020) and is one of the most promising P2X3 
antagonists in phase 3 clinical trials for the treatment of chronic cough. 
 
Targeting 5-HT receptors 
Lumbar disc herniation is a well known aetiology of chronic lower back pain. A herniated disc induces 
pain by a mechanical deformation (in addition to a biochemical irritation) to the dorsal root ganglion and 
the nerve root. Many substances such as proinflammatory cytokines and monoamines play a role in the 
biochemical irritation of the nerve. Serotonin (5-HT) is one of the monoamine participating in pain 
modulation mainly via 5-HT2A receptors. Nowadays, scientists are using animal models to understand the 
complexity of chronic pain pathways, aiming to project these hypothesis and find a curative treatment 
for chronic pain, and especially low back pain in humans (Kato et al., 2015). 
In their paper, Hashizume H et al. evaluated the effect of a 5-HT2A receptor antagonist (sarpogrelate) on 
lumbar disc herniation pain (Hashizume et al., 2007). They performed a study on rats that underwent 
surgery to place an autologous nucleus pulposus at the 4th and 5th left lumbar nerve roots in order to 
mimic lumbar disc herniation pain. After studying pain related behaviors, researchers found that 
sarpogrelate treatment considerably reduced mechanical allodynia at 5 and 8 days after drug 
administration (Hashizume et al., 2007). In a related experiment, the same surgical model of rats was 
used to study the effect of a similar 5-HT2A receptor antagonist (saprogrelate hydrochloride) on pain 
related behavior, and on the expression of 5-HT2A receptors in dorsal root ganglia. The results confirmed 
that saprogrelate used at high doses (10 mg/kg) dramatically reduced mechanical withdrawal threshold 
evaluated by von Frey tests. In addition to decreasing nociceptive transmisison, researchers confirmed 
that this 5-HT2A antagonist down-regulates 5-HT2A receptor expression in dorsal root ganglia (Kato et al., 
2015). Furthermore, the effect of the serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) duloxetine was 
evaluated on radiculopathy in the same rat model of lumbar disc herniation pain (Handa et al., 2016). 
Rats received duloxetine at different doses (low dose 0.4 mg/kg, high dose 1.2 mg/kg). Results 
confirmed that duloxetine had a positive impact on neuropathic pain in rats probably by down 
Journal Pre-proof
33 
 
regulating the expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha and nerve growth factor and microglia 
activation (Handa et al., 2016). 
These preclinical data obtained on animal models drove clinical trials in order to demonstrate SNRI drug 
efficacy on chronic back pain in humans. A recent meta-analysis reported the results of 3 randomized 
double blind clinical studies of patients taking duloxetine or placebo for chronic low back pain (Enomoto 
et al., 2017). Duloxetine-treated patients (n=400) and placebos (n=451) were considered and the 
statistical analysis revealed that duloxetine considerably alleviated pain. Duloxetine-induced analgesic 
effect was mainly modulated by interaction with the pain pathway rather than with the anti-depressive 
effect of the drug, indicating that duloxetine primarily targeted pain-specific mechanisms and not 
comorbid disorders (Enomoto et al., 2017). The effectiveness and safety of duloxetine monotherapy was 
assessed in a Japanese population suffering from chronic low back pain. Duloxetine (60 mg daily) was 
effective in pain management. Moreover, duloxetine was well tolerated with mild side effects that may 
resolve and improve with the course of the treatment (Konno et al., 2016). These results were 
confirmed by independent studies with randomized, double-blind trials on chronic low back pain 
patients (Skljarevski et al., 2010a, 2010b). 
Taken together, these studies have led to the recommendation of duloxetine in the management of 
chronic low back pain as a second line therapy by the American college of physicians in 2017 (Qaseem et 
al., 2017). 
In addition, a novel dual antagonist of the GlyT2 glycine transporter and 5-HT2A receptor (VVZ-149) is 
being tested in healthy volunteers for future applications in the management of post-operative pain (Oh 
et al., 2018). In case of success, the therapeutic indication for this drug may be extended beyond post-
operative pain to other pain pathologies. 
 
Targeting TRPV1 receptors 
Capsaicin is a TRPV1 receptor agonist (see §2.) with anaesthetic effects that is approved as a pain killer 
and proved to be efficient in various types of pain. Although the analgesic properties of capsaicin were 
empirically known for long, animal model studies allowed to determine its mechanisms of action. Early 
evidence, back in the 1980s, indicated that capsaicin treatment causes an alteration of the synthesis and 
storage of substance P in the dorsal horn and primary afferent neurons, thus affecting nociceptive 
transmission (Gamse et al., 1980; Lembeck and Donnerer, 1981). Subsequently, capsaicin-mediated 
thermal anti-nociceptive effects were demonstrated, and the suggested mechanisms pointed to a 
possible suppression of axoplasmic impulses in sensory neurons (Yaksh et al., 1979; Buck et al., 1981; 
Gamse et al., 1982). More recent studies revealed that capsaicin alleviates pain in various animal models 
including post-surgical pain (Hamalainen et al., 2009) and bone cancer pain (Ghilardi et al., 2005b).  
Based on animal model studies, the use of topical capsaicin for the management of human chronic pain 
became increasingly popular (Wagner et al., 2013; Blair, 2018). The effect of an 8% capsaicin patch were 
assessed on peripheral neuropathic pain in comparison with oral Pregabalin (Haanpää et al., 2016). 
Capsaicin treatment contributed to remarkable pain alleviation at 8 weeks in comparison with optimal 
Pregabalin doses. Patches are associated with less systemic side effect, rapid action and greater 
treatment satisfaction (Haanpää et al., 2016). Another study also indicated the superiority of 8% 
capsaicin patches over Pregabalin on mechanical allodynia in patients suffering from peripheral 
Journal Pre-proof
34 
 
neuropathic pain (Cruccu et al., 2018). These findings were confirmed by a network meta-analysis of 25 
randomized controlled trials (van Nooten et al., 2017). Consequently, Capsaicin patch is indicated in 
treating neuropathic and skeletomuscular pain (Chang and Quick, 2020). In addition, a recent paper 
supported the use of capsaicin patches to attenuate chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy that 
may occur in cancer patients (Anand et al., 2019). 
Prolonged application of capsaicin results in the desensitization of TRPV1 channel. As a 
consequence, the nociceptive afferent becomes functionally silent (Zhang and Li Wan Po, 1994; 
Lambert, 2009). The efficacy of capsaicin-induced desensitization in treating pain pushed 
pharmaceutical companies to develop TRPV1 antagonists (Dray, 2008). Moreover, TRPV1 was shown to 
play a role in neural sensitization (Ramsey et al., 2006), and preclinical studies suggested TRPV1 
antagonists may exhibit analgesic effects in inflammatory conditions (García-Martinez et al., 2002). 
These findings paved the way for clinical research, and at least seven orally active TRPV1 antagonist 
substances were under development in 2009, with many more in preclinical development (Gunthorpe 
and Chizh, 2009). In the same period, phase II clinical trials were performed for compounds such as GRC 
6211 (Lilly/Glenmark), NDG6243 (Merck/Neurogen) and AZD1386 (AstraZeneca). However, to date, no 
TRPV1 antagonists are available for the clinician. 
The main reasons for this failure relies in the lack of precise and rigorous preclinical evidence for using 
TRPV1 antagonists in pain treatment. Hence, it is necessary to optimize preclinical pharmacology to 
define precisely pain profiles sensitive to the compounds tested. Alternatively, refinements in preclinical 
studies may avoid making overenthusiastic assumptions, and help in a timely manner not to pursue 
clinical developments, thus saving money and resources for the pharmaceutical industry (M Keppel 
Hesselink, 2016). 
 
Targeting Nerve Growth Factor 
Evidence for a contribution of locally produced nerve growth factor (NGF) to joint pathology, as well as 
pain in arthritic joints has emerged from animal model studies. A single intraarticular (IA) injection of 
NGF into normal rat knees produced a direct sensitisation of nociceptors through dose-dependent, long-
lasting increases in pain-like behavior, joint swelling and synovial macrophage infiltration (Ashraf et al., 
2014). Other work provided evidence that NGF is released by damaged cells in arthritic joints, and 
elevated NGF is detected in synovium of murine OA model (Kc et al., 2016). Elevated levels of NGF has 
been also found in synovial fluid in dogs with naturally occurring OA (Isola et al., 2011). Administration 
of an anti-NGF/TrkA signalling molecule significantly decreased pain-like behaviors in a murine model of 
OA (McNamee et al., 2010). In particular, anti-NGF monoclonal antibody (mAb) produced a robust 
analgesia that is equal to or greater than current analgesics in animal models (Xu et al., 2016; Enomoto 
et al., 2019). 
In view of experimental preclinical findings on the role of NGF in pain, clinical trials have been initiated 
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the strategy targeting the NGF system (Takasusuki and Yaksh, 2011; 
Bannwarth and Kostine, 2014, 2017). Anti-NGF mAbs are in development as treatments for several pain 
conditions and three NGF-blocking drugs have been developed: tanezumab (humanised mAb; Pfizer, in 
collaboration with Eli Lilly), fulranumab (fully human mAb; Amgen) and fasinumab (fully human mAb; 
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, in collaboration with Sanofi). The first attempts to develop clinical trials 
aimed at evaluating the efficacy of anti NGF antibodies on osteoarthritis pain (Ishikawa et al., 2015; 
Journal Pre-proof
35 
 
Miyagi et al., 2017). Tanezumab prevents NGF binding to its TrkA receptor resulting in pain alleviation. 
Although many studies emphasized Tanezumab positive effects against osteoarthritis pain, Tanezumab 
exhibits also serious adverse effects such as arthralgia, paraesthesias and osteonecrosis that question 
Tanezumab approval to treat chronic pain conditions in humans (Schnitzer et al., 2015; Walicke et al., 
2018; Webb et al., 2018). After being put on a clinical hold between 2010 and 2012, trials for the 
development of anti-NGF mAbs in human restarted in 2015, and Tanezumab received fast track 
designation by the Food and Drug Administration in 2017. Tanezumab is currently in phase III studies in 
patients with OA of the hip and knee, chronic lower back pain, and bone cancer pain trials (Enomoto et 
al., 2019). Other companies are developing TrkA antagonist (Sanofi, GZ389988; Glenmark 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., GBR 900). Comparisons with anti-NGF antibodies in animal models of 
inflammatory pain demonstrated that GBR 900’s efficacy is similar as that of anti-NGF antibodies  
Since OA naturally occurs in cats, dogs and horses (see §2), companies are developing canine and feline 
anti-NGF mAbs (NexVet, Ranevetmab and Frunevetmab, respectively). Overall, significant improvement 
has been seen in both dogs and cats following administration of anti-NGF mAbs. Assessment was made 
in dogs with OA through the subjective (owned completed questionnaire) and objective (activity) 
measures. These results suggested a positive analgesic effect possibly greater than that expected with 
NSAIDs (Webster et al., 2014). Anti-NGF mAB effectiveness was also demonstrated in dogs with pain 
artificially induced by kaolin injection (Gearing et al., 2013). 
 
Targeting calcium channels 
Conopeptides are interesting candidates to design novel drugs for alleviating chronic neuropathic pain. 
Conopeptides are extracted from the venoms of marine snails and have an effect on calcium channels in 
modulating pain (Schroeder and Craik, 2012; Patel et al., 2018). Efficiency of conopeptides were first 
assessed in animal models of pain and then transferred to human clinic (Nielsen et al., 2005). Among 
conopeptides, a peptide blocker of CAV 2.2 channels (synthetic version of W-conotoxin MVIIA, named 
Ziconotide) has attracted much attention (Patel et al., 2018). Intrathecal administration of Ziconotide for 
refractory chronic pain (e.g. neuropathic pain) has proved antiallodynic and antihyperalgesic effects 
(Wermeling and Berger, 2006; McDowell and Pope, 2016). Ziconotide however show severe drawbacks, 
and various alarming side effects have been monitored, e.g. sedation, confusion, ataxia, memory 
impairment, vertigo, gait imbalance, hallucinations, nausea and vomiting, that limit its indications 
(Wermeling and Berger, 2006). Actually Ziconotide is approved as a nonopioid analgesic but it must be 
administered intrathecally in refractory chronic pain cases, allowing patients to benefit from a potent 
long lasting analgesic effect related to malignant and non-malignant aetiologies (McGivern, 2007; Wie 
and Derian, 2020). To facilitate the use of Ziconotide, recent studies are evaluating the possibility of 
administrating the drug intranasally (Manda et al., 2016). 
 
12. Conclusion 
Animal models of pain were historically viewed as reliable tools that have served to advance research in the 
field over the past decades. They have been instrumental in constructing a global picture of how key 
proteins, signalling systems, and neural circuits contribute to pain-like behaviors. However, there are 
limitations and caveats to these models that must be acknowledged when considering the translation of 
Journal Pre-proof
36 
 
research findings from the bench to the bedside. There is not one “best model” for the study of pain. 
Instead, the use of different organisms has been instrumental for integrating a comprehensive array of 
genetic, molecular, cellular, and behavioral data on normal and pathological pain processing in the central 
and peripheral nervous systems.  
Classical rodent models usually display good face validity. However, it is still needed to improve construct 
validity by choosing refine animal models that mimic faithfully the human diseases. In particular, 
considering sex-differences, genetic variations, or comorbid interactions will contribute to describe a 
greater diversity of mechanisms that accurately account for clinical situations. In addition, defining more 
accurate behavioral measures will assist investigators in developing an appropriate set of experiments to 
better test mechanisms and potential treatments. 
In contrast, using simpler organisms provides an efficient mean to achieve high throughput screening of 
possible key players in pain processes. These approaches are based on alterations of aversive behaviors 
that are considered surrogates of aberrant pain processes. Although far from the human clinics, these 
assays are likely to inform the construct of specific rodent models, or the design of protocols dedicated to 
test the actual role of these candidates. 
The combination of distinct animal models may be the alternative to the lack of good predictive validity of 
animal models that basic research is facing so far. As long as the interpretation of the results remains 
constrained by their intrinsic limitations, integrating data obtained from different animal models is a 
powerful method to build up a comprehensive understanding of pain mechanisms and for the identification 
of potentially more relevant therapeutic targets. 
Developing clinical assessment of pain is another important path to help defining more accurate animal 
models. Quantitative sensory testing, assessment of evoked vs resting pain, are parameters that are 
needed to understand how pain develops in humans. Clinical trials may also be designed to test outcomes 
and mechanisms derived from animal studies. Finally, an open dialogue between basic research results and 
clinical challenges posed by human studies is necessary to improve the translation of findings from bench 
to the bedside and to ensure the development of better pain therapies and pain management strategies  
 
 
Author contribution: Marc Landry and Walid Hleihel: funding acquisition and supervision; Marc Landry 
and Cynthia Abboud: conceptualization; Cynthia Abboud, Alexia Duveau, Rabia Bouali-Benazzouz, 
Karine Massé, Joseph Mattar, Louison Brochoire, Pascal Fossat, Eric Boué-Grabot, Walid Hleihel and 
Marc Landry: writing – original draft; Cynthia Abboud and Karine Massé: Writing – tables; Marc Landry 
and Louison Brochoire: Writing – review and editing. 
 
Competing interest statement: The authors declare they have no competing interests. 
 
Acknowledgements: This work is supported by an ANR grant (Relax, n° 193992). CA is the recipient of a 
scholarship from the CNRSL (Lebanon). We thank Dr. Najib NAJJAR, Adjunct Instructor at Holy Spirit 
University of Kaslik – USEK, Chairperson at American University of Technology – AUT, for English language 
editing. 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof
37 
 
Bibliography 
References 
Abdus-Saboor I, Fried NT, Lay M, Burdge J, Swanson K, Fischer R, Jones J, Dong P, Cai W, Guo X, Tao Y-X, 
Bethea J, et al. 2019. Development of a Mouse Pain Scale Using Sub-second Behavioral Mapping and 
Statistical Modeling. Cell Rep 28:1623-1634.e4. 
Abreu MS de, Genario R, Giacomini ACVV, Demin KA, Lakstygal AM, Amstislavskaya TG, Fontana BD, 
Parker MO, Kalueff AV. 2019. Zebrafish as a Model of Neurodevelopmental Disorders. Neuroscience. 
Agarwal N, Helmstädter J, Rojas DR, Bali KK, Gangadharan V, Kuner R. 2018. Evoked hypoalgesia is 
accompanied by tonic pain and immune cell infiltration in the dorsal root ganglia at late stages of 
diabetic neuropathy in mice. Mol Pain 14:1744806918817975. 
Akerman S, Holland PR, Hoffmann J. 2013. Pearls and pitfalls in experimental in vivo models of migraine: 
dural trigeminovascular nociception. Cephalalgia Int J Headache 33:577–592. 
Akerman S, Romero-Reyes M, Holland PR. 2017. Current and novel insights into the neurophysiology of 
migraine and its implications for therapeutics. Pharmacol Ther 172:151–170. 
Allchorne AJ, Broom DC, Woolf CJ. 2005. Detection of cold pain, cold allodynia and cold hyperalgesia in 
freely behaving rats. Mol Pain 1:36. 
Alreja M, Mutalik P, Nayar U, Manchanda SK. 1984. The formalin test: a tonic pain model in the primate. 
Pain 20:97–105. 
Alshami AM. 2014. Knee osteoarthritis related pain: a narrative review of diagnosis and treatment. Int J 
Health Sci 8:85–104. 
Anand P, Elsafa E, Privitera R, Naidoo K, Yiangou Y, Donatien P, Gabra H, Wasan H, Kenny L, Rahemtulla 
A, Misra P. 2019. Rational treatment of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy with capsaicin 8% 
patch: from pain relief towards disease modification. J Pain Res 12:2039–2052. 
Aragon CL, Hofmeister EH, Budsberg SC. 2007. Systematic review of clinical trials of treatments for 
osteoarthritis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 230:514–521. 
Ardiel EL, Rankin CH. 2010. An elegant mind: Learning and memory in Caenorhabditis elegans. Learn 
Mem 17:191–201. 
Arguello F, Baggs RB, Frantz CN. 1988. A murine model of experimental metastasis to bone and bone 
marrow. Cancer Res 48:6876–6881. 
Ase AR, Honson NS, Zaghdane H, Pfeifer TA, Séguéla P. 2015. Identification and characterization of a 
selective allosteric antagonist of human P2X4 receptor channels. Mol Pharmacol 87:606–616. 
Ashraf S, Mapp PI, Burston J, Bennett AJ, Chapman V, Walsh DA. 2014. Augmented pain behavioural 
responses to intra-articular injection of nerve growth factor in two animal models of osteoarthritis. Ann 
Rheum Dis 73:1710–1718. 
Journal Pre-proof
38 
 
Attal N, Lanteri-Minet M, Laurent B, Fermanian J, Bouhassira D. 2011. The specific disease burden of 
neuropathic pain: results of a French nationwide survey. Pain 152:2836–2843. 
Authier N, Gillet JP, Fialip J, Eschalier A, Coudore F. 2003. An animal model of nociceptive peripheral 
neuropathy following repeated cisplatin injections. Exp Neurol 182:12–20. 
Back SK, Kim JS, Hong SK, Na HS. 2003. Ascending pathways for mechanical allodynia in a rat model of 
neuropathic pain. Neuroreport 14:1623–1626. 
Bali KK, Selvaraj D, Satagopam VP, Lu J, Schneider R, Kuner R. 2013. Genome-wide identification and 
functional analyses of microRNA signatures associated with cancer pain. EMBO Mol Med 5:1740–1758. 
Banik RK, Kabadi RA. 2013. A modified Hargreaves’ method for assessing threshold temperatures for 
heat nociception. J Neurosci Methods 219:41–51. 
Bannwarth B, Kostine M. 2014. Targeting nerve growth factor (NGF) for pain management: what does 
the future hold for NGF antagonists? Drugs 74:619–626. 
Bannwarth B, Kostine M. 2017. Nerve Growth Factor Antagonists: Is the Future of Monoclonal 
Antibodies Becoming Clearer? Drugs 77:1377–1387. 
Barrot M. 2012. Tests and models of nociception and pain in rodents. Neuroscience 211:39–50. 
Bas DB, Su J, Wigerblad G, Svensson CI. 2016. Pain in rheumatoid arthritis: models and mechanisms. Pain 
Manag 6:265–284. 
Basbaum AI, Bautista DM, Scherrer G, Julius D. 2009. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pain. Cell 
139:267–284. 
Benbouzid M, Pallage V, Rajalu M, Waltisperger E, Doridot S, Poisbeau P, Freund-Mercier MJ, Barrot M. 
2008. Sciatic nerve cuffing in mice: a model of sustained neuropathic pain. Eur J Pain Lond Engl 12:591–
599. 
Bendele AM. 1987. Progressive Chronic Osteoarthritis in Femorotibial Joints of Partial Medial 
Meniscectomized Guinea Pigs. Vet Pathol 24:444–448. 
Benjamin L, Levy MJ, Lasalandra MP, Knight YE, Akerman S, Classey JD, Goadsby PJ. 2004. Hypothalamic 
activation after stimulation of the superior sagittal sinus in the cat: a Fos study. Neurobiol Dis 16:500–
505. 
Bennett GJ, Xie YK. 1988. A peripheral mononeuropathy in rat that produces disorders of pain sensation 
like those seen in man. Pain 33:87–107. 
Berić A. 1998. Central pain and dysesthesia syndrome. Neurol Clin 16:899–918. 
Bernier L-P, Ase AR, Séguéla P. 2018. P2X receptor channels in chronic pain pathways. Br J Pharmacol 
175:2219–2230. 
Journal Pre-proof
39 
 
Bessa C, Maciel P, Rodrigues AJ. 2013. Using C. elegans to decipher the cellular and molecular 
mechanisms underlying neurodevelopmental disorders. Mol Neurobiol 48:465–489. 
Bessis N, Decker P, Assier E, Semerano L, Boissier M-C. 2017. Arthritis models: usefulness and 
interpretation. Semin Immunopathol 39:469–486. 
Bhattacharya A. 2016. Clinical optimism for antagonists targeting certain ion channels. 3:10–13. 
Biessels GJ, Bril V, Calcutt NA, Cameron NE, Cotter MA, Dobrowsky R, Feldman EL, Fernyhough P, 
Jakobsen J, Malik RA, Mizisin AP, Oates PJ, et al. 2014. Phenotyping animal models of diabetic 
neuropathy: a consensus statement of the diabetic neuropathy study group of the EASD (Neurodiab). J 
Peripher Nerv Syst JPNS 19:77–87. 
Blair HA. 2018. Capsaicin 8% Dermal Patch: A Review in Peripheral Neuropathic Pain. Drugs 78:1489–
1500. 
Blanchard C, Boué-Grabot E, Massé K. 2019. Comparative Embryonic Spatio-Temporal Expression Profile 
Map of the Xenopus P2X Receptor Family. Front Cell Neurosci 13:. 
Blanco-Gandía MC, Aguilar MA, Miñarro J, Rodríguez-Arias M. 2018. Reinstatement of Drug-seeking in 
Mice Using the Conditioned Place Preference Paradigm. J Vis Exp JoVE. 
Bleehen T, Keele CA. 1977. Observations on the algogenic actions of adenosine compounds on the 
human blister base preparation. Pain 3:367–377. 
Bobinski F, Ferreira TAA, Córdova MM, Dombrowski PA, Cunha C da, Santo CC do E, Poli A, Pires RGW, 
Martins-Silva C, Sluka KA, Santos ARS. 2015. Role of brainstem serotonin in analgesia produced by low-
intensity exercise on neuropathic pain after sciatic nerve injury in mice. Pain 156:2595–2606. 
Bonin RP, Bories C, De Koninck Y. 2014. A simplified up-down method (SUDO) for measuring mechanical 
nociception in rodents using von Frey filaments. Mol Pain 10:26. 
Bossé GD, Peterson RT. 2017. Development of an opioid self-administration assay to study drug seeking 
in zebrafish. Behav Brain Res 335:158–166. 
Bouhassira D, Lantéri-Minet M, Attal N, Laurent B, Touboul C. 2008. Prevalence of chronic pain with 
neuropathic characteristics in the general population: Pain 136:380–387. 
Bourin M, Hascoët M. 2003. The mouse light/dark box test. Eur J Pharmacol 463:55–65. 
Bourquin A-F, Süveges M, Pertin M, Gilliard N, Sardy S, Davison AC, Spahn DR, Decosterd I. 2006. 
Assessment and analysis of mechanical allodynia-like behavior induced by spared nerve injury (SNI) in 
the mouse. Pain 122:14.e1-14. 
Bove SE, Laemont KD, Brooker RM, Osborn MN, Sanchez BM, Guzman RE, Hook KE, Juneau PL, Connor 
JR, Kilgore KS. 2006. Surgically induced osteoarthritis in the rat results in the development of both 
osteoarthritis-like joint pain and secondary hyperalgesia. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 14:1041–1048. 
Journal Pre-proof
40 
 
Boyce-Rustay JM, Zhong C, Kohnken R, Baker SJ, Simler GH, Wensink EJ, Decker MW, Honore P. 2010. 
Comparison of mechanical allodynia and the affective component of inflammatory pain in rats. 
Neuropharmacology 58:537–543. 
Braundmeier AG, Fazleabas AT. 2009. The non-human primate model of endometriosis: research and 
implications for fecundity. Mol Hum Reprod 15:577–586. 
Breivik H, Collett B, Ventafridda V, Cohen R, Gallacher D. 2006. Survey of chronic pain in Europe: 
prevalence, impact on daily life, and treatment. Eur J Pain Lond Engl 10:287–333. 
Breivik H, Eisenberg E, O’Brien T, OPENMinds. 2013. The individual and societal burden of chronic pain in 
Europe: the case for strategic prioritisation and action to improve knowledge and availability of 
appropriate care. BMC Public Health 13:1229. 
Brenner DS, Golden JP, Gereau RW. 2012. A novel behavioral assay for measuring cold sensation in mice. 
PloS One 7:e39765. 
Brodkin J, Frank D, Grippo R, Hausfater M, Gulinello M, Achterholt N, Gutzen C. 2014. Validation and 
implementation of a novel high-throughput behavioral phenotyping instrument for mice. J Neurosci 
Methods 224:48–57. 
Broek MF van den, Berg WB van den, Putte LB van de, Severijnen AJ. 1988. Streptococcal cell wall-
induced arthritis and flare-up reaction in mice induced by homologous or heterologous cell walls. Am J 
Pathol 133:139–149. 
Brown C. 2015. Comparative evolutionary approach to pain perception in fishes. 7. 
Brown DC, Agnello K, Iadarola MJ. 2015. Intrathecal resiniferatoxin in a dog model: efficacy in bone 
cancer pain. Pain 156:1018–1024. 
Buck SH, Deshmukh PP, Yamamura HI, Burks TF. 1981. Thermal analgesia and substance P depletion 
induced by capsaicin in guinea-pigs. Neuroscience 6:2217–2222. 
Burma NE, Leduc-Pessah H, Fan CY, Trang T. 2017a. Animal models of chronic pain: Advances and 
challenges for clinical translation. J Neurosci Res 95:1242–1256. 
Burma NE, Leduc-Pessah H, Fan CY, Trang T. 2017b. Animal models of chronic pain: Advances and 
challenges for clinical translation. J Neurosci Res 95:1242–1256. 
Burnstock G. 2016. Purinergic Mechanisms and Pain. Adv Pharmacol San Diego Calif 75:91–137. 
Burnstock G, Knight GE. 2018. The potential of P2X7 receptors as a therapeutic target, including 
inflammation and tumour progression. Purinergic Signal 14:1–18. 
Buzzi MG, Carter WB, Shimizu T, Heath H, Moskowitz MA. 1991. Dihydroergotamine and sumatriptan 
attenuate levels of CGRP in plasma in rat superior sagittal sinus during electrical stimulation of the 
trigeminal ganglion. Neuropharmacology 30:1193–1200. 
Journal Pre-proof
41 
 
Caldwell JC, Tracey WD. 2010. Alternatives to mammalian pain models 2: using Drosophila to identify 
novel genes involved in nociception. Methods Mol Biol Clifton NJ 617:19–29. 
Campbell JN, Meyer RA. 2006. Mechanisms of Neuropathic Pain. Neuron 52:77–92. 
Campos AC, Fogaça MV, Aguiar DC, Guimarães FS. 2013. Animal models of anxiety disorders and stress. 
Rev Bras Psiquiatr Sao Paulo Braz 1999 35 Suppl 2:S101-111. 
Canavero S, Bonicalzi V. 2007. Central pain syndrome: elucidation of genesis and treatment. Expert Rev 
Neurother 7:1485–1497. 
Caplazi P, Baca M, Barck K, Carano R a. D, DeVoss J, Lee WP, Bolon B, Diehl L. 2015. Mouse Models of 
Rheumatoid Arthritis. Vet Pathol 52:819–826. 
Carlton SM, Lekan HA, Kim SH, Chung JM. 1994. Behavioral manifestations of an experimental model for 
peripheral neuropathy produced by spinal nerve ligation in the primate. Pain 56:155–166. 
Carter RB, Francis WR. 1991. Capsaicin desensitization to plasma extravasation evoked by antidromic C-
fiber stimulation is not associated with antinociception in the rat. Neurosci Lett 127:43–45. 
Cash JL, White GE, Greaves DR. 2009. Chapter 17. Zymosan-induced peritonitis as a simple experimental 
system for the study of inflammation. Methods Enzymol 461:379–396. 
Catanzaro A, Di Salvo A, Steagall PV, Zampini D, Polisca A, Della Rocca G. 2016. Preliminary study on 
attitudes, opinions and knowledge of Italian veterinarians with regard to abdominal visceral pain in 
dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg 43:361–370. 
Caterina MJ, Leffler A, Malmberg AB, Martin WJ, Trafton J, Petersen-Zeitz KR, Koltzenburg M, Basbaum 
AI, Julius D. 2000. Impaired nociception and pain sensation in mice lacking the capsaicin receptor. 
Science 288:306–313. 
Chae J-P, Park MS, Hwang Y-S, Min B-H, Kim S-H, Lee H-S, Park M-J. 2015. Evaluation of developmental 
toxicity and teratogenicity of diclofenac using Xenopus embryos. Chemosphere 120:52–58. 
Chang A, Quick J. 2020. Capsaicin. StatPearls, Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing,. 
Chaplan SR, Bach FW, Pogrel JW, Chung JM, Yaksh TL. 1994. Quantitative assessment of tactile allodynia 
in the rat paw. J Neurosci Methods 53:55–63. 
Chen X, Feng X, Guang S. 2016. Targeted genome engineering in Caenorhabditis elegans. Cell Biosci 6:60. 
Cheng L, Duan B, Huang T, Zhang Y, Chen Y, Britz O, Garcia-Campmany L, Ren X, Vong L, Lowell BB, 
Goulding M, Wang Y, et al. 2017. Identification of spinal circuits involved in touch-evoked dynamic 
mechanical pain. Nat Neurosci 20:804–814. 
Chessell IP, Hatcher JP, Bountra C, Michel AD, Hughes JP, Green P, Egerton J, Murfin M, Richardson J, 
Peck WL, Grahames CBA, Casula MA, et al. 2005. Disruption of the P2X7 purinoceptor gene abolishes 
chronic inflammatory and neuropathic pain. Pain 114:386–396. 
Journal Pre-proof
42 
 
Choi Y, Yoon YW, Na HS, Kim SH, Chung JM. 1994. Behavioral signs of ongoing pain and cold allodynia in 
a rat model of neuropathic pain. Pain 59:369–376. 
Chopade AR, Sayyad FJ, Naikwade NS. 2014. Pharmacological characterization of carrageenan induced 
heat muscle hyperalgesia in rats using non-selective, preferential and selective COX-2 inhibitors. 
Pharmacol Rep PR 66:353–362. 
Christensen MD, Everhart AW, Pickelman JT, Hulsebosch CE. 1996. Mechanical and thermal allodynia in 
chronic central pain following spinal cord injury. Pain 68:97–107. 
Christensen SL, Hansen RB, Storm MA, Olesen J, Hansen TF, Ossipov M, Izarzugaza JMG, Porreca F, 
Kristensen DM. 2020. Von Frey testing revisited: Provision of an online algorithm for improved accuracy 
of 50% thresholds. Eur J Pain Lond Engl 24:783–790. 
Cockayne DA, Hamilton SG, Zhu QM, Dunn PM, Zhong Y, Novakovic S, Malmberg AB, Cain G, Berson A, 
Kassotakis L, Hedley L, Lachnit WG, et al. 2000. Urinary bladder hyporeflexia and reduced pain-related 
behaviour in P2X3-deficient mice. Nature 407:1011–1015. 
Colburn RW, Lubin ML, Stone DJ, Wang Y, Lawrence D, D’Andrea MR, Brandt MR, Liu Y, Flores CM, Qin N. 
2007. Attenuated cold sensitivity in TRPM8 null mice. Neuron 54:379–386. 
Cordero-Erausquin M, Inquimbert P, Schlichter R, Hugel S. 2016. Neuronal networks and nociceptive 
processing in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Neuroscience 338:230–247. 
Costa B, Trovato AE, Colleoni M, Giagnoni G, Zarini E, Croci T. 2005. Effect of the cannabinoid CB1 
receptor antagonist, SR141716, on nociceptive response and nerve demyelination in rodents with 
chronic constriction injury of the sciatic nerve. Pain 116:52–61. 
Costa FV, Rosa LV, Quadros VA, Santos ARS, Kalueff AV, Rosemberg DB. 2019. Understanding 
nociception-related phenotypes in adult zebrafish: Behavioral and pharmacological characterization 
using a new acetic acid model. Behav Brain Res 359:570–578. 
Costigan M, Scholz J, Woolf CJ. 2009. Neuropathic pain: a maladaptive response of the nervous system 
to damage. Annu Rev Neurosci 32:1–32. 
Coull JAM, Beggs S, Boudreau D, Boivin D, Tsuda M, Inoue K, Gravel C, Salter MW, De Koninck Y. 2005. 
BDNF from microglia causes the shift in neuronal anion gradient underlying neuropathic pain. Nature 
438:1017–1021. 
Courtenay JS, Dallman MJ, Dayan AD, Martin A, Mosedale B. 1980. Immunisation against heterologous 
type II collagen induces arthritis in mice. Nature 283:666–668. 
Crawley J, Goodwin FK. 1980. Preliminary report of a simple animal behavior model for the anxiolytic 
effects of benzodiazepines. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 13:167–170. 
Cruccu G, Nurmikko TJ, Ernault E, Riaz FK, McBride WT, Haanpää M. 2018. Superiority of capsaicin 8% 
patch versus oral pregabalin on dynamic mechanical allodynia in patients with peripheral neuropathic 
pain. Eur J Pain Lond Engl 22:700–706. 
Journal Pre-proof
43 
 
Cui Y, Toyoda H, Sako T, Onoe K, Hayashinaka E, Wada Y, Yokoyama C, Onoe H, Kataoka Y, Watanabe Y. 
2015. A voxel-based analysis of brain activity in high-order trigeminal pathway in the rat induced by 
cortical spreading depression. NeuroImage 108:17–22. 
Curtright A, Rosser M, Goh S, Keown B, Wagner E, Sharifi J, Raible DW, Dhaka A. 2015. Modeling 
Nociception in Zebrafish: A Way Forward for Unbiased Analgesic Discovery. PLoS ONE 10:. 
D’amour FE, Smith DL. 1941. A Method for Determining Loss of Pain Sensation. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
72:74–79. 
Danquah W, Meyer-Schwesinger C, Rissiek B, Pinto C, Serracant-Prat A, Amadi M, Iacenda D, Knop J-H, 
Hammel A, Bergmann P, Schwarz N, Assunção J, et al. 2016. Nanobodies that block gating of the P2X7 
ion channel ameliorate inflammation. Sci Transl Med 8:366ra162. 
Davidson E, Coppey L, Lu B, Arballo V, Calcutt NA, Gerard C, Yorek M. 2009. The roles of streptozotocin 
neurotoxicity and neutral endopeptidase in murine experimental diabetic neuropathy. Exp Diabetes Res 
2009:431980. 
Deacon RMJ. 2006. Burrowing in rodents: a sensitive method for detecting behavioral dysfunction. Nat 
Protoc 1:118–121. 
Deakin AG, Buckley J, AlZu’bi HS, Cossins AR, Spencer JW, Al’Nuaimy W, Young IS, Thomson JS, Sneddon 
LU. 2019. Automated monitoring of behaviour in zebrafish after invasive procedures. Sci Rep 9:1–13. 
Decosterd I, Woolf CJ. 2000. Spared nerve injury: an animal model of persistent peripheral neuropathic 
pain. Pain 87:149–158. 
Demin K, Lakstygal A, Kalueff A. 2018a. Time to (finally) acknowledge that fish have emotionality and 
pain. Anim Sentience 3. 
Demin KA, Meshalkina DA, Kysil EV, Antonova KA, Volgin AD, Yakovlev OA, Alekseeva PA, Firuleva MM, 
Lakstygal AM, Abreu MS de, Barcellos LJG, Bao W, et al. 2018b. Zebrafish models relevant to studying 
central opioid and endocannabinoid systems. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 86:301–312. 
Deuis JR, Dvorakova LS, Vetter I. 2017a. Methods Used to Evaluate Pain Behaviors in Rodents. Front Mol 
Neurosci 10:284. 
Deuis JR, Dvorakova LS, Vetter I. 2017b. Methods Used to Evaluate Pain Behaviors in Rodents. Front Mol 
Neurosci 10:284. 
Dixon WJ. 1980. Efficient analysis of experimental observations. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 20:441–
462. 
Dobremez E, Bouali-Benazzouz R, Fossat P, Monteils L, Dulluc J, Nagy F, Landry M. 2005. Distribution and 
regulation of L-type calcium channels in deep dorsal horn neurons after sciatic nerve injury in rats. Eur J 
Neurosci 21:3321–3333. 
Journal Pre-proof
44 
 
Doherty NS, Poubelle P, Borgeat P, Beaver TH, Westrich GL, Schrader NL. 1985. Intraperitoneal injection 
of zymosan in mice induces pain, inflammation and the synthesis of peptidoleukotrienes and 
prostaglandin E2. Prostaglandins 30:769–789. 
Dolensek N, Gehrlach DA, Klein AS, Gogolla N. 2020. Facial expressions of emotion states and their 
neuronal correlates in mice. Science 368:89–94. 
Dolique T, Landry M, Nagy F. 2010. Spinal cord: dorsal horn. Handbook of Brain Microcircuits, Oxford 
University Press, p 237–248. 
Dray A. 2008. Neuropathic pain: emerging treatments. Br J Anaesth 101:48–58. 
Drewes AM, Olesen AE, Farmer AD, Szigethy E, Rebours V, Olesen SS. 2020. Gastrointestinal pain. Nat 
Rev Dis Primer 6:1. 
Drewes AM, Schipper KP, Dimcevski G, Petersen P, Gregersen H, Funch-Jensen P, Arendt-Nielsen L. 2003. 
Gut pain and hyperalgesia induced by capsaicin: a human experimental model. Pain 104:333–341. 
D’Souza WN, Ng GY, Youngblood BD, Tsuji W, Lehto SG. 2011a. A review of current animal models of 
osteoarthritis pain. Curr Pharm Biotechnol 12:1596–1612. 
D’Souza WN, Ng GY, Youngblood BD, Tsuji W, Lehto SG. 2011b. A review of current animal models of 
osteoarthritis pain. Curr Pharm Biotechnol 12:1596–1612. 
Dubuisson D, Dennis SG. 1977. The formalin test: a quantitative study of the analgesic effects of 
morphine, meperidine, and brain stem stimulation in rats and cats. Pain 4:161–174. 
Ellis LD, Berrue F, Morash M, Achenbach JC, Hill J, McDougall JJ. 2018. Comparison of cannabinoids with 
known analgesics using a novel high throughput zebrafish larval model of nociception. Behav Brain Res 
337:151–159. 
Elramah S, López-González MJ, Bastide M, Dixmérias F, Roca-Lapirot O, Wielanek-Bachelet A-C, Vital A, 
Leste-Lasserre T, Brochard A, Landry M, Favereaux A. 2017. Spinal miRNA-124 regulates synaptopodin 
and nociception in an animal model of bone cancer pain. Sci Rep 7:10949. 
Enomoto H, Fujikoshi S, Funai J, Sasaki N, Ossipov MH, Tsuji T, Alev L, Ushida T. 2017. Assessment of 
direct analgesic effect of duloxetine for chronic low back pain: post hoc path analysis of double-blind, 
placebo-controlled studies. J Pain Res 10:1357–1368. 
Enomoto M, Mantyh PW, Murrell J, Innes JF, Lascelles BDX. 2019. Anti-nerve growth factor monoclonal 
antibodies for the control of pain in dogs and cats. Vet Rec 184:23. 
Falk S, Appel CK, Bennedbæk HB, Al-Dihaissy T, Unger A, Dinkel K, Heegaard A-M. 2019. Chronic high 
dose P2X7 receptor inhibition exacerbates cancer-induced bone pain. Eur J Pharmacol 845:48–55. 
Falk S, Dickenson AH. 2014. Pain and nociception: mechanisms of cancer-induced bone pain. J Clin Oncol 
Off J Am Soc Clin Oncol 32:1647–1654. 
Journal Pre-proof
45 
 
Fang H, Beier F. 2014. Mouse models of osteoarthritis: modelling risk factors and assessing outcomes. 
Nat Rev Rheumatol 10:413–421. 
Fehrenbacher JC, Vasko MR, Duarte DB. 2012. Models of Inflammation: Carrageenan- or Complete 
Freund’s Adjuvant-Induced Edema and Hypersensitivity in the Rat. Curr Protoc Pharmacol Editor Board 
SJ Enna Ed--Chief Al 0 5:Unit5.4. 
Fernandes ES, Russell FA, Spina D, McDougall JJ, Graepel R, Gentry C, Staniland AA, Mountford DM, 
Keeble JE, Malcangio M, Bevan S, Brain SD. 2011. A distinct role for transient receptor potential ankyrin 
1, in addition to transient receptor potential vanilloid 1, in tumor necrosis factor α-induced 
inflammatory hyperalgesia and Freund’s complete adjuvant-induced monarthritis. Arthritis Rheum 
63:819–829. 
Ferrari LF, Bogen O, Reichling DB, Levine JD. 2015. Accounting for the delay in the transition from acute 
to chronic pain: axonal and nuclear mechanisms. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 35:495–507. 
Ferrari LF, Levine JD, Green PG. 2016. Mechanisms mediating nitroglycerin-induced delayed-onset 
hyperalgesia in the rat. Neuroscience 317:121–129. 
Fields HL, Rowbotham M, Baron R. 1998. Postherpetic neuralgia: irritable nociceptors and 
deafferentation. Neurobiol Dis 5:209–227. 
Finnerup NB, Johannesen IL, Fuglsang-Frederiksen A, Bach FW, Jensen TS. 2003. Sensory function in 
spinal cord injury patients with and without central pain. Brain J Neurol 126:57–70. 
Finnerup NB, Sindrup SH, Jensen TS. 2010. The evidence for pharmacological treatment of neuropathic 
pain. Pain 150:573–581. 
Fischer BD, Adeyemo A, O’Leary ME, Bottaro A. 2017. Animal models of rheumatoid pain: experimental 
systems and insights. Arthritis Res Ther 19:146. 
Fontana BD, Mezzomo NJ, Kalueff AV, Rosemberg DB. 2018. The developing utility of zebrafish models 
of neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders: A critical review. Exp Neurol 299:157–171. 
Fossat P, Dobremez E, Bouali-Benazzouz R, Favereaux A, Bertrand SS, Kilk K, Léger C, Cazalets J-R, Langel 
U, Landry M, Nagy F. 2010. Knockdown of L calcium channel subtypes: differential effects in neuropathic 
pain. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 30:1073–1085. 
Frias B, Merighi A. 2016. Capsaicin, Nociception and Pain. Mol Basel Switz 21:. 
Fricker B, Muller A, René F. 2008. Evaluation tools and animal models of peripheral neuropathies. 
Neurodegener Dis 5:72–108. 
Fuentes IM, Christianson JA. 2018. The Influence of Early Life Experience on Visceral Pain. Front Syst 
Neurosci 12:2. 
Gao Z, Wei H, Chen Z, Jalava N,, A. Koivisto A, Pertovaara A. 2019. Ongoing pain in streptozotocin model 
of diabetes in the rat: correltation with cutaneous chemonociception. J. Physiol. Pharm. 70, 6, 969-978. 
Journal Pre-proof
46 
 
Gagnon M, Bergeron MJ, Lavertu G, Castonguay A, Tripathy S, Bonin RP, Perez-Sanchez J, Boudreau D, 
Wang B, Dumas L, Valade I, Bachand K, et al. 2013. Chloride extrusion enhancers as novel therapeutics 
for neurological diseases. Nat Med 19:1524–1528. 
Gamse R, Holzer P, Lembeck F. 1980. Decrease of substance P in primary afferent neurones and 
impairment of neurogenic plasma extravasation by capsaicin. Br J Pharmacol 68:207–213. 
Gamse R, Petsche U, Lembeck F, Jancsò G. 1982. Capsaicin applied to peripheral nerve inhibits 
axoplasmic transport of substance P and somatostatin. Brain Res 239:447–462. 
García-Martinez C, Humet M, Planells-Cases R, Gomis A, Caprini M, Viana F, De La Pena E, Sanchez-Baeza 
F, Carbonell T, De Felipe C, Pérez-Paya E, Belmonte C, et al. 2002. Attenuation of thermal nociception 
and hyperalgesia by VR1 blockers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:2374–2379. 
Gaskin DJ, Richard P. 2012. The economic costs of pain in the United States. J Pain Off J Am Pain Soc 
13:715–724. 
Gaviria M, Haton H, Sandillon F, Privat A. 2002. A mouse model of acute ischemic spinal cord injury. J 
Neurotrauma 19:205–221. 
Gearing DP, Virtue ER, Gearing RP, Drew AC. 2013. A fully caninised anti-NGF monoclonal antibody for 
pain relief in dogs. BMC Vet Res 9:226. 
Gebhart GF, Bielefeldt K. 2016. Physiology of Visceral Pain. Compr Physiol 6:1609–1633. 
Gerber B, Yarali A, Diegelmann S, Wotjak CT, Pauli P, Fendt M. 2014. Pain-relief learning in flies, rats, and 
man: basic research and applied perspectives. Learn Mem Cold Spring Harb N 21:232–252. 
Ghilardi JR, Röhrich H, Lindsay TH, Sevcik MA, Schwei MJ, Kubota K, Halvorson KG, Poblete J, Chaplan SR, 
Dubin AE, Carruthers NI, Swanson D, et al. 2005a. Selective blockade of the capsaicin receptor TRPV1 
attenuates bone cancer pain. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 25:3126–3131. 
Ghilardi JR, Röhrich H, Lindsay TH, Sevcik MA, Schwei MJ, Kubota K, Halvorson KG, Poblete J, Chaplan SR, 
Dubin AE, Carruthers NI, Swanson D, et al. 2005b. Selective blockade of the capsaicin receptor TRPV1 
attenuates bone cancer pain. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 25:3126–3131. 
Giacomotto J, Ségalat L. 2010. High-throughput screening and small animal models, where are we? Br J 
Pharmacol 160:204–216. 
Giamberardino MA, Affaitati G, Costantini R. 2010. Visceral Referred Pain. J Musculoskelet Pain 18:403–
410. 
Giamberardino MA, Valente R, Bigontina P de, Vecchiet L. 1995. Artificial ureteral calculosis in rats: 
behavioural characterization of visceral pain episodes and their relationship with referred lumbar 
muscle hyperalgesia. Pain 61:459–469. 
Gierthmühlen J, Maier C, Baron R, Tölle T, Treede R-D, Birbaumer N, Huge V, Koroschetz J, Krumova EK, 
Lauchart M, Maihöfner C, Richter H, et al. 2012. Sensory signs in complex regional pain syndrome and 
peripheral nerve injury. Pain 153:765–774. 
Journal Pre-proof
47 
 
Gilchrist LS, Cain DM, Harding-Rose C, Kov AN, Wendelschafer-Crabb G, Kennedy WR, Simone DA. 2005. 
Re-organization of P2X3 receptor localization on epidermal nerve fibers in a murine model of cancer 
pain. Brain Res 1044:197–205. 
Gingras J, Smith S, Matson DJ, Johnson D, Nye K, Couture L, Feric E, Yin R, Moyer BD, Peterson ML, 
Rottman JB, Beiler RJ, et al. 2014. Global Nav1.7 knockout mice recapitulate the phenotype of human 
congenital indifference to pain. PloS One 9:e105895. 
Glasson SS, Blanchet TJ, Morris EA. 2007. The surgical destabilization of the medial meniscus (DMM) 
model of osteoarthritis in the 129/SvEv mouse. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 15:1061–1069. 
Glauser DA, Chen WC, Agin R, Macinnis BL, Hellman AB, Garrity PA, Tan M-W, Goodman MB. 2011. Heat 
avoidance is regulated by transient receptor potential (TRP) channels and a neuropeptide signaling 
pathway in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 188:91–103. 
Gomis A, Miralles A, Schmidt RF, Belmonte C. 2007. Nociceptive nerve activity in an experimental model 
of knee joint osteoarthritis of the guinea pig: effect of intra-articular hyaluronan application. Pain 
130:126–136. 
Gonzalez-Nunez V, Rodríguez RE. 2009. The zebrafish: a model to study the endogenous mechanisms of 
pain. ILAR J 50:373–386. 
Goyal N, Rana A, Ahlawat A, Bijjem KRV, Kumar P. 2014. Animal models of inflammatory bowel disease: 
a review. Inflammopharmacology 22:219–233. 
Grauw JC de, Loon JP a. M van. 2016. Systematic pain assessment in horses. Vet J Lond Engl 1997 
209:14–22. 
Greenwood-Van Meerveld B, Johnson AC. 2017. Stress-Induced Chronic Visceral Pain of Gastrointestinal 
Origin. Front Syst Neurosci 11:86. 
Gregory NS, Harris AL, Robinson CR, Dougherty PM, Fuchs PN, Sluka KA. 2013. An overview of animal 
models of pain: disease models and outcome measures. J Pain Off J Am Pain Soc 14:1255–1269. 
Groenewald CB, Palermo TM. 2015. The price of pain: the economics of chronic adolescent pain. Pain 
Manag 5:61–64. 
Gruen ME, Thomson AE, Griffith EH, Paradise H, Gearing DP, Lascelles BDX. 2016. A Feline-Specific Anti-
Nerve Growth Factor Antibody Improves Mobility in Cats with Degenerative Joint Disease-Associated 
Pain: A Pilot Proof of Concept Study. J Vet Intern Med 30:1138–1148. 
Guedon J-MG, Longo G, Majuta LA, Thomspon ML, Fealk MN, Mantyh PW. 2016. Dissociation between 
the relief of skeletal pain behaviors and skin hypersensitivity in a model of bone cancer pain. Pain 
157:1239–1247. 
Gunthorpe MJ, Chizh BA. 2009. Clinical development of TRPV1 antagonists: targeting a pivotal point in 
the pain pathway. Drug Discov Today 14:56–67. 
Journal Pre-proof
48 
 
Guo N, Gu X. 2014. Sciatic Nerve Neuropathy in Cynomolgus Monkey Macaca Fascicularis: Altered Leg 
Usage and Peripheral Nerve Firing. J Neurol Neurophysiol 05: 
Haanpää M, Cruccu G, Nurmikko TJ, McBride WT, Docu Axelarad A, Bosilkov A, Chambers C, Ernault E, 
Abdulahad AK. 2016. Capsaicin 8% patch versus oral pregabalin in patients with peripheral neuropathic 
pain. Eur J Pain Lond Engl 20:316–328. 
Hahn AF. 1996. Experimental allergic neuritis (EAN) as a model for the immune-mediated demyelinating 
neuropathies. Rev Neurol (Paris) 152:328–332. 
Hamalainen MM, Subieta A, Arpey C, Brennan TJ. 2009. Differential effect of capsaicin treatment on pain 
related behaviors after plantar incision. J Pain Off J Am Pain Soc 10:637–645. 
Hamilton SG, Warburton J, Bhattacharjee A, Ward J, McMahon SB. 2000. ATP in human skin elicits a 
dose-related pain response which is potentiated under conditions of hyperalgesia. Brain J Neurol 123 ( 
Pt 6):1238–1246. 
Han P, Liu S, Zhang M, Zhao J, Wang Y, Wu G, Mi W. 2015. Inhibition of Spinal Interlukin-33/ST2 Signaling 
and Downstream ERK and JNK Pathways in Electroacupuncture Analgesia in Formalin Mice. PloS One 
10:e0129576. 
Han P, Zhao J, Liu S-B, Yang C-J, Wang Y-Q, Wu G-C, Xu D-M, Mi W-L. 2013. Interleukin-33 mediates 
formalin-induced inflammatory pain in mice. Neuroscience 241:59–66. 
Handa J, Sekiguchi M, Krupkova O, Konno S-I. 2016. The effect of serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake 
inhibitor duloxetine on the intervertebral disk-related radiculopathy in rats. Eur Spine J Off Publ Eur 
Spine Soc Eur Spinal Deform Soc Eur Sect Cerv Spine Res Soc 25:877–887. 
Hargreaves K, Dubner R, Brown F, Flores C, Joris J. 1988. A new and sensitive method for measuring 
thermal nociception in cutaneous hyperalgesia. Pain 32:77–88. 
Harriott AM, Strother LC, Vila-Pueyo M, Holland PR. 2019. Animal models of migraine and experimental 
techniques used to examine trigeminal sensory processing. J Headache Pain 20:91. 
Harvey VL, Dickenson AH. 2009. Behavioural and electrophysiological characterisation of experimentally 
induced osteoarthritis and neuropathy in C57Bl/6 mice. Mol Pain 5:18. 
Hashizume H, Kawakami M, Yoshida M, Okada M, Enyo Y, Inomata Y. 2007. Sarpogrelate hydrochloride, 
a 5-HT2A receptor antagonist, attenuates neurogenic pain induced by nucleus pulposus in rats. Spine 
32:315–320. 
Henze DA, Urban MO. 2010. Large Animal Models for Pain Therapeutic Development. In: Kruger L, Light 
AR, editors. Translational Pain Research: From Mouse to Man, Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press/Taylor & 
Francis,. 
Herzberg U, Sagen J. 2001. Peripheral nerve exposure to HIV viral envelope protein gp120 induces 
neuropathic pain and spinal gliosis. J Neuroimmunol 116:29–39. 
Journal Pre-proof
49 
 
Hill R. 2000. NK1 (substance P) receptor antagonists--why are they not analgesic in humans? Trends 
Pharmacol Sci 21:244–246. 
Holden E, Calvo G, Collins M, Bell A, Reid J, Scott EM, Nolan AM. 2014. Evaluation of facial expression in 
acute pain in cats. J Small Anim Pract 55:615–621. 
Honore P, Kage K, Mikusa J, Watt AT, Johnston JF, Wyatt JR, Faltynek CR, Jarvis MF, Lynch K. 2002. 
Analgesic profile of intrathecal P2X(3) antisense oligonucleotide treatment in chronic inflammatory and 
neuropathic pain states in rats. Pain 99:11–19. 
Hootman JM, Helmick CG, Barbour KE, Theis KA, Boring MA. 2016. Updated Projected Prevalence of Self-
Reported Doctor-Diagnosed Arthritis and Arthritis-Attributable Activity Limitation Among US Adults, 
2015–2040. Arthritis Rheumatol Hoboken NJ 68:1582–1587. 
Hou T, Xiang H, Yu L, Su W, Shu Y, Li H, Zhu H, Lin L, Hu X, Liang S, Zhang H, Li M. 2019. 
Electroacupuncture inhibits visceral pain via adenosine receptors in mice with inflammatory bowel 
disease. Purinergic Signal 15:193–204. 
Huang W, Calvo M, Pheby T, Bennett DLH, Rice ASC. 2017. A rodent model of HIV protease inhibitor 
indinavir induced peripheral neuropathy. Pain 158:75–85. 
Hunskaar S, Hole K. 1987a. The formalin test in mice: dissociation between inflammatory and non-
inflammatory pain. Pain 30:103–114. 
Hunskaar S, Hole K. 1987b. The formalin test in mice: dissociation between inflammatory and non-
inflammatory pain. Pain 30:103–114. 
Ibrahim A, Hirschfeld S, Cohen MH, Griebel DJ, Williams GA, Pazdur R. 2004. FDA drug approval 
summaries: oxaliplatin. The Oncologist 9:8–12. 
Ilie MA, Caruntu C, Tampa M, Georgescu S-R, Matei C, Negrei C, Ion R-M, Constantin C, Neagu M, Boda 
D. 2019. Capsaicin: Physicochemical properties, cutaneous reactions and potential applications in painful 
and inflammatory conditions. Exp Ther Med 18:916–925. 
Ishikawa G, Koya Y, Tanaka H, Nagakura Y. 2015. Long-term analgesic effect of a single dose of anti-NGF 
antibody on pain during motion without notable suppression of joint edema and lesion in a rat model of 
osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 23:925–932. 
Isola M, Ferrari V, Miolo A, Stabile F, Bernardini D, Carnier P, Busetto R. 2011. Nerve growth factor 
concentrations in the synovial fluid from healthy dogs and dogs with secondary osteoarthritis. Vet Comp 
Orthop Traumatol VCOT 24:279–284. 
Jarvis MF, Burgard EC, McGaraughty S, Honore P, Lynch K, Brennan TJ, Subieta A, Van Biesen T, Cartmell 
J, Bianchi B, Niforatos W, Kage K, et al. 2002. A-317491, a novel potent and selective non-nucleotide 
antagonist of P2X3 and P2X2/3 receptors, reduces chronic inflammatory and neuropathic pain in the rat. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:17179–17184. 
Jayasinghe CD, Jayawardena UA. 2019. Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 
https://www.hindawi.com/journals/ecam/2019/7272808/. Accessed April 2, 2020. 
Journal Pre-proof
50 
 
Jeibmann A, Paulus W. 2009. Drosophila melanogaster as a model organism of brain diseases. Int J Mol 
Sci 10:407–440. 
Jensen DD, Lieu T, Halls ML, Veldhuis NA, Imlach WL, Mai QN, Poole DP, Quach T, Aurelio L, Conner J, 
Herenbrink CK, Barlow N, et al. 2017. Neurokinin 1 receptor signaling in endosomes mediates sustained 
nociception and is a viable therapeutic target for prolonged pain relief. Sci Transl Med 9:. 
Ji B, Chauffour A, Andries K, Jarlier V. 2006. Bactericidal activities of R207910 and other newer 
antimicrobial agents against Mycobacterium leprae in mice. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 50:1558–
1560. 
Ji R-R, Xu Z-Z, Gao Y-J. 2014. Emerging targets in neuroinflammation-driven chronic pain. Nat Rev Drug 
Discov 13:533–548. 
Jimenez-Andrade JM, Ghilardi JR, Castañeda-Corral G, Kuskowski MA, Mantyh PW. 2011. Preventive or 
late administration of anti-NGF therapy attenuates tumor-induced nerve sprouting, neuroma formation, 
and cancer pain. Pain 152:2564–2574. 
Johansen JP, Fields HL, Manning BH. 2001. The affective component of pain in rodents: Direct evidence 
for a contribution of the anterior cingulate cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci 98:8077–8082. 
Jorgensen EM, Mango SE. 2002. The art and design of genetic screens: caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Rev 
Genet 3:356–369. 
Kahn-Kirby AH, Bargmann CI. 2006. TRP channels in C. elegans. Annu Rev Physiol 68:719–736. 
Kalbhen DA. 1987. Chemical model of osteoarthritis--a pharmacological evaluation. J Rheumatol 14 Spec 
No:130–131. 
Kato K, Sekiguchi M, Kikuchi S, Konno S. 2015. The effect of a 5-HT2A receptor antagonist on pain-
related behavior, endogenous 5-hydroxytryptamine production, and the expression 5-HT2A receptors in 
dorsal root ganglia in a rat lumbar disc herniation model. Spine 40:357–362. 
Katz RJ. 1982. Animal model of depression: pharmacological sensitivity of a hedonic deficit. Pharmacol 
Biochem Behav 16:965–968. 
Kayser V, Christensen D. 2000. Antinociceptive effect of systemic gabapentin in mononeuropathic rats, 
depends on stimulus characteristics and level of test integration. Pain 88:53–60. 
Kc R, Li X, Kroin JS, Liu Z, Chen D, Xiao G, Levine B, Li J, Hamilton JL, Wijnen AJ van, Piel M, Shelly DA, et 
al. 2016. PKCδ null mutations in a mouse model of osteoarthritis alter osteoarthritic pain independently 
of joint pathology by augmenting NGF/TrkA-induced axonal outgrowth. Ann Rheum Dis 75:2133–2141. 
Keeble J, Russell F, Curtis B, Starr A, Pinter E, Brain SD. 2005. Involvement of transient receptor potential 
vanilloid 1 in the vascular and hyperalgesic components of joint inflammation. Arthritis Rheum 52:3248–
3256. 
Kehl LJ, Trempe TM, Hargreaves KM. 2000. A new animal model for assessing mechanisms and 
management of muscle hyperalgesia. Pain 85:333–343. 
Journal Pre-proof
51 
 
Kelly KM, Sanga P, Zaki N, Wang S, Haeussler J, Louie J, Thipphawong J. 2019. Safety and efficacy of 
fulranumab in osteoarthritis of the hip and knee: results from four early terminated phase III 
randomized studies. Curr Med Res Opin 35:2117–2127. 
Kepler LD, McDiarmid TA, Rankin CH. 2020. Habituation in high-throughput genetic model organisms as 
a tool to investigate the mechanisms of neurodevelopmental disorders. Neurobiol Learn Mem 
171:107208. 
Keswani SC, Jack C, Zhou C, Höke A. 2006. Establishment of a rodent model of HIV-associated sensory 
neuropathy. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 26:10299–10304. 
Key B. 2015. Fish do not feel pain and its implications for understanding phenomenal consciousness. Biol 
Philos 30:149–165. 
Khakh BS, North RA. 2006. P2X receptors as cell-surface ATP sensors in health and disease. Nature 
442:527–532. 
Khuong TM, Neely GG. 2013. Conserved systems and functional genomic assessment of nociception. 
FEBS J 280:5298–5306. 
Khuong TM, Wang Q-P, Manion J, Oyston LJ, Lau M-T, Towler H, Lin YQ, Neely GG. 2019. Nerve injury 
drives a heightened state of vigilance and neuropathic sensitization in Drosophila. Sci Adv 5:eaaw4099. 
Kim SH, Chung JM. 1992. An experimental model for peripheral neuropathy produced by segmental 
spinal nerve ligation in the rat. Pain 50:355–363. 
King T, Vera-Portocarrero L, Gutierrez T, Vanderah TW, Dussor G, Lai J, Fields HL, Porreca F. 2009. 
Unmasking the tonic-aversive state in neuropathic pain. Nat Neurosci 12:1364–1366. 
Kiso T, Watabiki T, Tsukamoto M, Okabe M, Kagami M, Nishimura K, Aoki T, Matsuoka N. 2008. 
Pharmacological characterization and gene expression profiling of an L5/L6 spinal nerve ligation model 
for neuropathic pain in mice. Neuroscience 153:492–500. 
Klinck MP, Mogil JS, Moreau M, Lascelles BDX, Flecknell PA, Poitte T, Troncy E. 2017. Translational pain 
assessment: could natural animal models be the missing link? Pain 158:1633–1646. 
Knight B, Katz DR, Isenberg DA, Ibrahim MA, Le Page S, Hutchings P, Schwartz RS, Cooke A. 1992. 
Induction of adjuvant arthritis in mice. Clin Exp Immunol 90:459–465. 
Knights CB, Gentry C, Bevan S. 2012. Partial medial meniscectomy produces osteoarthritis pain-related 
behaviour in female C57BL/6 mice. Pain 153:281–292. 
Knyihár-Csillik E, Tajti J, Samsam M, Sáry G, Slezák S, Vécsei L. 1997. Effect of a serotonin agonist 
(sumatriptan) on the peptidergic innervation of the rat cerebral dura mater and on the expression of c-
fos in the caudal trigeminal nucleus in an experimental migraine model. J Neurosci Res 48:449–464. 
Koehler PJ, Endtz LJ. 1986. The Brown-Séquard syndrome. True or false? Arch Neurol 43:921–924. 
Journal Pre-proof
52 
 
Konno S, Oda N, Ochiai T, Alev L. 2016. Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-controlled Phase III Trial of 
Duloxetine Monotherapy in Japanese Patients With Chronic Low Back Pain. Spine 41:1709–1717. 
Koyama S, Katayama Y, Maejima S, Hirayama T, Fujii M, Tsubokawa T. 1993. Thalamic neuronal 
hyperactivity following transection of the spinothalamic tract in the cat: involvement of N-methyl-D-
aspartate receptor. Brain Res 612:345–350. 
Kremer M, Becker LJ, Barrot M, Yalcin I. 2020a. How to study anxiety and depression in rodent models of 
chronic pain? Eur J Neurosci n/a: 
Kremer M, Becker LJ, Barrot M, Yalcin I. 2020b. How to study anxiety and depression in rodent models of 
chronic pain? Eur J Neurosci. 
Kroenke K, Bair MJ, Damush TM, Wu J, Hoke S, Sutherland J, Tu W. 2009. Optimized antidepressant 
therapy and pain self-management in primary care patients with depression and musculoskeletal pain: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 301:2099–2110. 
Kuan Y-H, Shyu B-C. 2016. Nociceptive transmission and modulation via P2X receptors in central pain 
syndrome. Mol Brain 9:58. 
Kuner R, Flor H. 2016. Structural plasticity and reorganisation in chronic pain. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:20–
30. 
Kupers RC, Chen CC, Bushnell MC. 1997. A model of transient hyperalgesia in the behaving monkey 
induced by topical application of capsaicin. Pain 72:269–275. 
LaBuda CJ, Little PJ. 2005. Pharmacological evaluation of the selective spinal nerve ligation model of 
neuropathic pain in the rat. J Neurosci Methods 144:175–181. 
Laffray S, Bouali-Benazzouz R, Papon M-A, Favereaux A, Jiang Y, Holm T, Spriet C, Desbarats P, Fossat P, 
Le Feuvre Y, Decossas M, Héliot L, et al. 2012. Impairment of GABAB receptor dimer by endogenous 14-
3-3ζ in chronic pain conditions. EMBO J 31:3239–3251. 
Laird J, Martinez-Caro L, Garcia-Nicas E, Cervero F. 2001a. A new model of visceral pain and referred 
hyperalgesia in the mouse. Pain 92:335–342. 
Laird JM, Martinez-Caro L, Garcia-Nicas E, Cervero F. 2001b. A new model of visceral pain and referred 
hyperalgesia in the mouse. Pain 92:335–342. 
Lambert DG. 2009. Capsaicin receptor antagonists: a promising new addition to the pain clinic. Br J 
Anaesth 102:153–155. 
Langford DJ, Bailey AL, Chanda ML, Clarke SE, Drummond TE, Echols S, Glick S, Ingrao J, Klassen-Ross T, 
Lacroix-Fralish ML, Matsumiya L, Sorge RE, et al. 2010. Coding of facial expressions of pain in the 
laboratory mouse. Nat Methods 7:447–449. 
Lapointe TK, Basso L, Iftinca MC, Flynn R, Chapman K, Dietrich G, Vergnolle N, Altier C. 2015. TRPV1 
sensitization mediates postinflammatory visceral pain following acute colitis. Am J Physiol Gastrointest 
Liver Physiol 309:G87-99. 
Journal Pre-proof
53 
 
Larauche M, Mulak A, Taché Y. 2012. Stress and visceral pain: from animal models to clinical therapies. 
Exp Neurol 233:49–67. 
Lascelles BDX, Brown DC, Maixner W, Mogil JS. 2018. Spontaneous painful disease in companion animals 
can facilitate the development of chronic pain therapies for humans. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 26:175–
183. 
Le Bars D, Gozariu M, Cadden SW. 2001. Animal models of nociception. Pharmacol Rev 53:597–652. 
Lee-Liu D, Méndez-Olivos EE, Muñoz R, Larraín J. 2017. The African clawed frog Xenopus laevis: A model 
organism to study regeneration of the central nervous system. Neurosci Lett 652:82–93. 
Leite-Almeida H, Pinto-Ribeiro F, Almeida A. 2015. Animal Models for the Study of Comorbid Pain and 
Psychiatric Disorders. Mod Trends Pharmacopsychiatry 30:1–21. 
Lembeck F, Donnerer J. 1981. Time course of capsaicin-induced functional impairments in comparison 
with changes in neuronal substance P content. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 316:240–243. 
Lesnak J, Sluka KA. 2019. Chronic non-inflammatory muscle pain: central and peripheral mediators. Curr 
Opin Physiol 11:67–74. 
Leung K, Mohammadi A, Ryu WS, Nemenman I. 2016. Stereotypical Escape Behavior in Caenorhabditis 
elegans Allows Quantification of Effective Heat Stimulus Level. PLoS Comput Biol 12:. 
Liepe K, Geidel H, Haase M, Hakenberg OW, Runge R, Kotzerke J. 2005. New model for the induction of 
osteoblastic bone metastases in rat. Anticancer Res 25:1067–1073. 
Lindsay TH, Jonas BM, Sevcik MA, Kubota K, Halvorson KG, Ghilardi JR, Kuskowski MA, Stelow EB, 
Mukherjee P, Gendler SJ, Wong GY, Mantyh PW. 2005. Pancreatic cancer pain and its correlation with 
changes in tumor vasculature, macrophage infiltration, neuronal innervation, body weight and disease 
progression. Pain 119:233–246. 
Lister RG. 1987. The use of a plus-maze to measure anxiety in the mouse. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
92:180–185. 
Liu M-G, Chen J. 2014. Preclinical research on pain comorbidity with affective disorders and cognitive 
deficits: Challenges and perspectives. Prog Neurobiol 116:13–32. 
Liu Y, Li Y, Liu Q, Wu Z, Cui J, Zhu K, Zhao H, Zhou C, Shi B. 2019. Role of GM-CSF in a mouse model of 
experimental autoimmune prostatitis. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 317:F23–F29. 
Lomax AE, Pradhananga S, Sessenwein JL, O’Malley D. 2019. Bacterial modulation of visceral sensation: 
mediators and mechanisms. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 317:G363–G372. 
López-González MJ, Soula A, Landry M, Favereaux A. 2018. Oxaliplatin treatment impairs extension of 
sensory neuron neurites in vitro through miR-204 overexpression. Neurotoxicology 68:91–100. 
Lopez-Luna J, Al-Jubouri Q, Al-Nuaimy W, Sneddon LU. 2017. Reduction in activity by noxious chemical 
stimulation is ameliorated by immersion in analgesic drugs in zebrafish. J Exp Biol 220:1451–1458. 
Journal Pre-proof
54 
 
Lorenzo L-E, Godin AG, Ferrini F, Bachand K, Plasencia-Fernandez I, Labrecque S, Girard AA, Boudreau D, 
Kianicka I, Gagnon M, Doyon N, Ribeiro-da-Silva A, et al. 2020. Enhancing neuronal chloride extrusion 
rescues α2/α3 GABAA-mediated analgesia in neuropathic pain. Nat Commun 11:869. 
Louwies T, Ligon CO, Johnson AC, Greenwood-Van Meerveld B. 2019. Targeting epigenetic mechanisms 
for chronic visceral pain: A valid approach for the development of novel therapeutics. 
Neurogastroenterol Motil Off J Eur Gastrointest Motil Soc 31:e13500. 
Lucas JM, Ji Y, Masri R. 2011. Motor cortex stimulation reduces hyperalgesia in an animal model of 
central pain. Pain 152:1398–1407. 
Lukács M, Haanes KA, Majláth Z, Tajti J, Vécsei L, Warfvinge K, Edvinsson L. 2015. Dural administration of 
inflammatory soup or Complete Freund’s Adjuvant induces activation and inflammatory response in the 
rat trigeminal ganglion. J Headache Pain 16:564. 
Lynn B, Ye W, Cotsell B. 1992. The actions of capsaicin applied topically to the skin of the rat on C-fibre 
afferents, antidromic vasodilatation and substance P levels. Br J Pharmacol 107:400–406. 
M Keppel Hesselink J. 2016. Arguments to develop TRPV1 antagonist in neuropathic pain. Lessons for 
drug development. Clin Res Trials 3:. 
MacEwen EG. 1990. Spontaneous tumors in dogs and cats: models for the study of cancer biology and 
treatment. Cancer Metastasis Rev 9:125–136. 
Malafoglia V, Colasanti M, Raffaeli W, Balciunas D, Giordano A, Bellipanni G. 2014. Extreme Thermal 
Noxious Stimuli Induce Pain Responses in Zebrafish Larvae. J Cell Physiol 229:300–308. 
Malfait AM, Little CB, McDougall JJ. 2013. A commentary on modelling osteoarthritis pain in small 
animals. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 21:1316–1326. 
Malmberg AB, Basbaum AI. 1998. Partial sciatic nerve injury in the mouse as a model of neuropathic 
pain: behavioral and neuroanatomical correlates. Pain 76:215–222. 
Manda P, Kushwaha AS, Kundu S, Shivakumar HN, Jo SB, Murthy SN. 2016. Delivery of ziconotide to 
cerebrospinal fluid via intranasal pathway for the treatment of chronic pain. J Control Release Off J 
Control Release Soc 224:69–76. 
Mansfield C, Beths T. 2015. Management of acute pancreatitis in dogs: a critical appraisal with focus on 
feeding and analgesia. J Small Anim Pract 56:27–39. 
Mapplebeck JCS, Dalgarno R, Tu Y, Moriarty O, Beggs S, Kwok CHT, Halievski K, Assi S, Mogil JS, Trang T, 
Salter MW. 2018. Microglial P2X4R-evoked pain hypersensitivity is sexually dimorphic in rats. Pain 
159:1752–1763. 
Markaki M, Tavernarakis N. 2020. Caenorhabditis elegans as a model system for human diseases. Curr 
Opin Biotechnol 63:118–125. 
Journal Pre-proof
55 
 
Marmiroli P, Riva B, Pozzi E, Ballarini E, Lim D, Chiorazzi A, Meregalli C, Distasi C, Renn CL, Semperboni S, 
Morosi L, Ruffinatti FA, et al. 2017. Susceptibility of different mouse strains to oxaliplatin peripheral 
neurotoxicity: Phenotypic and genotypic insights. PloS One 12:e0186250. 
Martin LJ, Acland EL, Cho C, Gandhi W, Chen D, Corley E, Kadoura B, Levy T, Mirali S, Tohyama S, Khan S, 
MacIntyre LC, et al. 2019. Male-Specific Conditioned Pain Hypersensitivity in Mice and Humans. Curr Biol 
CB 29:192-201.e4. 
Masri R, Quiton RL, Lucas JM, Murray PD, Thompson SM, Keller A. 2009. Zona incerta: a role in central 
pain. J Neurophysiol 102:181–191. 
Matsumura Y, Yamashita T, Sasaki A, Nakata E, Kohno K, Masuda T, Tozaki-Saitoh H, Imai T, Kuraishi Y, 
Tsuda M, Inoue K. 2016. A novel P2X4 receptor-selective antagonist produces anti-allodynic effect in a 
mouse model of herpetic pain. Sci Rep 6:32461. 
Mayer S, Spickschen J, Stein KV, Crevenna R, Dorner TE, Simon J. 2019. The societal costs of chronic pain 
and its determinants: The case of Austria. PloS One 14:e0213889. 
McCoy AM. 2015. Animal Models of Osteoarthritis: Comparisons and Key Considerations. Vet Pathol 
52:803–818. 
McDougall JJ, Karimian SM, Ferrell WR. 1995. Prolonged alteration of vasoconstrictor and vasodilator 
responses in rat knee joints by adjuvant monoarthritis. Exp Physiol 80:349–357. 
McDowell GC, Pope JE. 2016. Intrathecal Ziconotide: Dosing and Administration Strategies in Patients 
With Refractory Chronic Pain. Neuromodulation J Int Neuromodulation Soc 19:522–532. 
McGivern JG. 2007. Ziconotide: a review of its pharmacology and use in the treatment of pain. 
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 3:69–85. 
McIlwraith CW, Frisbie DD, Kawcak CE. 2012. The horse as a model of naturally occurring osteoarthritis. 
Bone Jt Res 1:297–309. 
McNamara CR, Mandel-Brehm J, Bautista DM, Siemens J, Deranian KL, Zhao M, Hayward NJ, Chong JA, 
Julius D, Moran MM, Fanger CM. 2007. TRPA1 mediates formalin-induced pain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
104:13525–13530. 
McNamee KE, Burleigh A, Gompels LL, Feldmann M, Allen SJ, Williams RO, Dawbarn D, Vincent TL, Inglis 
JJ. 2010. Treatment of murine osteoarthritis with TrkAd5 reveals a pivotal role for nerve growth factor in 
non-inflammatory joint pain. Pain 149:386–392. 
Medhurst SJ, Walker K, Bowes M, Kidd BL, Glatt M, Muller M, Hattenberger M, Vaxelaire J, O’Reilly T, 
Wotherspoon G, Winter J, Green J, et al. 2002. A rat model of bone cancer pain. Pain 96:129–140. 
Meller ST, Gebhart GF. 1997. Intraplantar zymosan as a reliable, quantifiable model of thermal and 
mechanical hyperalgesia in the rat. Eur J Pain 1:43–52. 
Journal Pre-proof
56 
 
Melo-Carrillo A, Lopez-Avila A. 2013. A chronic animal model of migraine, induced by repeated 
meningeal nociception, characterized by a behavioral and pharmacological approach. Cephalalgia Int J 
Headache 33:1096–1105. 
Mert T, Sahin E, Yaman S, Sahin M. 2018. Pain-Relieving Effectiveness of Co-Treatment with Local 
Tramadol and Systemic Minocycline in Carrageenan-Induced Inflammatory Pain Model. Inflammation 
41:1238–1249. 
Milinkeviciute G, Gentile C, Neely GG. 2012. Drosophila as a tool for studying the conserved genetics of 
pain. Clin Genet 82:359–366. 
Millhr RR, Berk AM, Springer AD. 1974. Acquisition and retention of active avoidance in Xenopus laevis. 
Bull Psychon Soc 3:139–141. 
Miquel S, Martín R, Lashermes A, Gillet M, Meleine M, Gelot A, Eschalier A, Ardid D, Bermúdez-Humarán 
LG, Sokol H, Thomas M, Theodorou V, et al. 2016. Anti-nociceptive effect of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii 
in non-inflammatory IBS-like models. Sci Rep 6:19399. 
Miraucourt LS, Moisset X, Dallel R, Voisin DL. 2009. Glycine inhibitory dysfunction induces a selectively 
dynamic, morphine-resistant, and neurokinin 1 receptor- independent mechanical allodynia. J Neurosci 
Off J Soc Neurosci 29:2519–2527. 
Mishra A, Guo Y, Zhang L, More S, Weng T, Chintagari NR, Huang C, Liang Y, Pushparaj S, Gou D, 
Breshears M, Liu L. 2016. A Critical Role for P2X7 Receptor-Induced VCAM-1 Shedding and Neutrophil 
Infiltration during Acute Lung Injury. J Immunol Baltim Md 1950 197:2828–2837. 
Miyagi M, Ishikawa T, Kamoda H, Suzuki M, Inoue G, Sakuma Y, Oikawa Y, Orita S, Uchida K, Takahashi K, 
Takaso M, Ohtori S. 2017. Efficacy of nerve growth factor antibody in a knee osteoarthritis pain model in 
mice. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 18:428. 
Mogil JS. 2009. Animal models of pain: progress and challenges. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:283–294. 
Mogil JS, Davis KD, Derbyshire SW. 2010. The necessity of animal models in pain research. Pain 151:12–
17. 
Monteiro BP, Lorimier L-P de, Moreau M, Beauchamp G, Blair J, Lussier B, Pelletier J-P, Troncy E. 2018. 
Pain characterization and response to palliative care in dogs with naturally-occurring appendicular 
osteosarcoma: An open label clinical trial. PloS One 13:e0207200. 
Moreau M, Lussier B, Ballaz L, Troncy E. 2014. Kinetic measurements of gait for osteoarthritis research in 
dogs and cats. Can Vet J Rev Veterinaire Can 55:1057–1065. 
Morgan PG, Kayser E-B, Sedensky MM. 2007. C. Elegans and Volatile Anesthetics. WormBook. 
Muley MM, Krustev E, McDougall JJ. 2016. Preclinical Assessment of Inflammatory Pain. CNS Neurosci 
Ther 22:88–101. 
Munro G, Jansen-Olesen I, Olesen J. 2017. Animal models of pain and migraine in drug discovery. Drug 
Discov Today 22:1103–1111. 
Journal Pre-proof
57 
 
Na HS, Han JS, Ko KH, Hong SK. 1994. A behavioral model for peripheral neuropathy produced in rat’s 
tail by inferior caudal trunk injury. Neurosci Lett 177:50–52. 
Nagasaka K, Takashima I, Matsuda K, Higo N. 2020. Brain activity changes in a monkey model of central 
post-stroke pain. Exp Neurol 323:113096. 
Nakao K. 2019. Translational science: Newly emerging science in biology and medicine - Lessons from 
translational research on the natriuretic peptide family and leptin. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci 
95:538–567. 
Nandakumar KS, Svensson L, Holmdahl R. 2003. Collagen Type II-Specific Monoclonal Antibody-Induced 
Arthritis in Mice. Am J Pathol 163:1827–1837. 
Narita M, Kaneko C, Miyoshi K, Nagumo Y, Kuzumaki N, Nakajima M, Nanjo K, Matsuzawa K, Yamazaki 
M, Suzuki T. 2006a. Chronic pain induces anxiety with concomitant changes in opioidergic function in 
the amygdala. Neuropsychopharmacol Off Publ Am Coll Neuropsychopharmacol 31:739–750. 
Narita M, Kaneko C, Miyoshi K, Nagumo Y, Kuzumaki N, Nakajima M, Nanjo K, Matsuzawa K, Yamazaki 
M, Suzuki T. 2006b. Chronic pain induces anxiety with concomitant changes in opioidergic function in 
the amygdala. Neuropsychopharmacol Off Publ Am Coll Neuropsychopharmacol 31:739–750. 
Naseri K, Saghaei E, Abbaszadeh F, Afhami M, Haeri A, Rahimi F, Jorjani M. 2013. Role of microglia and 
astrocyte in central pain syndrome following electrolytic lesion at the spinothalamic tract in rats. J Mol 
Neurosci MN 49:470–479. 
Navratilova E, Morimura K, Xie JY, Atcherley CW, Ossipov MH, Porreca F. 2016. Positive emotions and 
brain reward circuits in chronic pain. J Comp Neurol 524:1646–1652. 
Neely GG, Hess A, Costigan M, Keene AC, Goulas S, Langeslag M, Griffin RS, Belfer I, Dai F, Smith S, 
Diatchenko L, Gupta V, et al. 2010. A genome-wide Drosophila screen for heat nociception identifies 
α2δ3 as an evolutionary-conserved pain gene. Cell 143:628–638. 
Neely GG, Keene AC, Duchek P, Chang EC, Wang Q-P, Aksoy YA, Rosenzweig M, Costigan M, Woolf CJ, 
Garrity PA, Penninger JM. 2011. TrpA1 regulates thermal nociception in Drosophila. PloS One 6:e24343. 
Negus SS, Vanderah TW, Brandt MR, Bilsky EJ, Becerra L, Borsook D. 2006. Preclinical assessment of 
candidate analgesic drugs: recent advances and future challenges. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 319:507–514. 
Ness TJ. 1999. Models of Visceral Nociception. ILAR J 40:119–128. 
Ness TJ, Gebhart GF. 1988. Colorectal distension as a noxious visceral stimulus: physiologic and 
pharmacologic characterization of pseudaffective reflexes in the rat. Brain Res 450:153–169. 
Nielsen CK, Lewis RJ, Alewood D, Drinkwater R, Palant E, Patterson M, Yaksh TL, McCumber D, Smith MT. 
2005. Anti-allodynic efficacy of the chi-conopeptide, Xen2174, in rats with neuropathic pain. Pain 
118:112–124. 
Journal Pre-proof
58 
 
Nisar A, Akhter N, Singh G, Masood A, Malik A, Banday B, Zargar MA. 2015. Modulation of T-helper 
cytokines and inflammatory mediators by Atropa accuminata. Royle in adjuvant induced arthritic tissues. 
J Ethnopharmacol 162:215–224. 
Nishimoto-Kakiuchi A, Netsu S, Okabayashi S, Taniguchi K, Tanimura H, Kato A, Suzuki M, Sankai T, 
Konno R. 2018. Spontaneous endometriosis in cynomolgus monkeys as a clinically relevant experimental 
model. Hum Reprod Oxf Engl 33:1228–1236. 
Nkambeu B, Salem JB, Leonelli S, Marashi FA, Beaudry F. 2019. EGL-3 and EGL-21 are required to trigger 
nocifensive response of Caenorhabditis elegans to noxious heat. Neuropeptides 73:41–48. 
Nooten F van, Treur M, Pantiri K, Stoker M, Charokopou M. 2017. Capsaicin 8% Patch Versus Oral 
Neuropathic Pain Medications for the Treatment of Painful Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy: A 
Systematic Literature Review and Network Meta-analysis. Clin Ther 39:787-803.e18. 
Nozu T, Miyagishi S, Kumei S, Nozu R, Takakusaki K, Okumura T. 2018. Lovastatin inhibits visceral 
allodynia and increased colonic permeability induced by lipopolysaccharide or repeated water avoidance 
stress in rats. Eur J Pharmacol 818:228–234. 
Nozu T, Miyagishi S, Kumei S, Nozu R, Takakusaki K, Okumura T. 2019. Metformin inhibits visceral 
allodynia and increased gut permeability induced by stress in rats. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 34:186–193. 
O’Brien, P.D.; Sakowski, S.A.; Feldman, E.L. Mouse models of diabetic neuropathy. ILAR J. 2014, 54, 259–
272. 
Ochoa-Cortes F, Liñán-Rico A, Jacobson KA, Christofi FL. 2014. Potential for developing purinergic drugs 
for gastrointestinal diseases. Inflamm Bowel Dis 20:1259–1287. 
Ogren SO, Berge OG. 1984. Test-dependent variations in the antinociceptive effect of p-
chloroamphetamine-induced release of 5-hydroxytryptamine. Neuropharmacology 23:915–924. 
Oh J, Lee S, Kim A, Yoon J, Jang K, Lee DH, Cho S, Lee SR, Yu K-S, Chung J-Y. 2018. Safety, Tolerability, and 
Pharmacokinetic Characteristics of a Novel Nonopioid Analgesic, VVZ-149 Injections in Healthy 
Volunteers: A First-in-Class, First-in-Human Study. J Clin Pharmacol 58:64–73. 
Olesen J, Burstein R, Ashina M, Tfelt-Hansen P. 2009. Origin of pain in migraine: evidence for peripheral 
sensitisation. Lancet Neurol 8:679–690. 
O’Mahony SM, Tramullas M, Fitzgerald P, Cryan JF. 2012. Rodent models of colorectal distension. Curr 
Protoc Neurosci Chapter 9:Unit 9.40. 
O’Malley D, Julio-Pieper M, O’Mahony SM, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. 2014. Differential visceral pain sensitivity 
and colonic morphology in four common laboratory rat strains. Exp Physiol 99:359–367. 
Ossipov MH, Morimura K, Porreca F. 2014. Descending pain modulation and chronification of pain. Curr 
Opin Support Palliat Care 8:143–151. 
Otterness IG, Moore PF. 1988. Carrageenan foot edema test. Methods Enzymol 162:320–327. 
Journal Pre-proof
59 
 
Ozaki N, Bielefeldt K, Sengupta JN, Gebhart GF. 2002. Models of gastric hyperalgesia in the rat. Am J 
Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 283:G666-676. 
Palecek J, Dougherty PM, Kim SH, Palecková V, Lekan H, Chung JM, Carlton SM, Willis WD. 1992. 
Responses of spinothalamic tract neurons to mechanical and thermal stimuli in an experimental model 
of peripheral neuropathy in primates. J Neurophysiol 68:1951–1966. 
Panksepp JB, Lahvis GP. 2011. Rodent empathy and affective neuroscience. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
35:1864–1875. 
Patel R, Montagut-Bordas C, Dickenson AH. 2018. Calcium channel modulation as a target in chronic 
pain control. Br J Pharmacol 175:2173–2184. 
Pelletier JP, Boileau C, Altman RD, Martel-Pelletier J. 2010. Experimental models of osteoarthritis: 
Usefulness in the development of disease-modifying osteoarthritis drugs/agents. Therapy 7:621–634. 
Pellow S, Chopin P, File SE, Briley M. 1985. Validation of open:closed arm entries in an elevated plus-
maze as a measure of anxiety in the rat. J Neurosci Methods 14:149–167. 
Pezalla PD. 1983. Morphine-induced analgesia and explosive motor behavior in an amphibian. Brain Res 
273:297–305. 
Phillips CJ. 2006. Economic burden of chronic pain. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res 6:591–601. 
Phillips TJC, Brown M, Ramirez JD, Perkins J, Woldeamanuel YW, Williams AC de C, Orengo C, Bennett 
DLH, Bodi I, Cox S, Maier C, Krumova EK, et al. 2014. Sensory, psychological, and metabolic dysfunction 
in HIV-associated peripheral neuropathy: A cross-sectional deep profiling study. Pain 155:1846–1860. 
Piel MJ, Kroin JS, Wijnen AJ van, Kc R, Im H-J. 2014. Pain assessment in animal models of osteoarthritis. 
Gene 537:184–188. 
Pitcher GM, Ritchie J, Henry JL. 1999. Paw withdrawal threshold in the von Frey hair test is influenced by 
the surface on which the rat stands. J Neurosci Methods 87:185–193. 
Porsolt RD, Bertin A, Jalfre M. 1977a. Behavioral despair in mice: a primary screening test for 
antidepressants. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 229:327–336. 
Porsolt RD, Le Pichon M, Jalfre M. 1977b. Depression: a new animal model sensitive to antidepressant 
treatments. Nature 266:730–732. 
Pradhan AA, Smith ML, McGuire B, Tarash I, Evans CJ, Charles A. 2014. Characterization of a novel model 
of chronic migraine. Pain 155:269–274. 
Pratt KG, Khakhalin AS. 2013. Modeling human neurodevelopmental disorders in the Xenopus tadpole: 
from mechanisms to therapeutic targets. Dis Model Mech 6:1057–1065. 
Preguiça I, Alves A, Nunes S, Gomes P, Fernandes R, Viana SD, Reis F. Diet-Induced Rodent Models of 
Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy, Retinopathy and Nephropathy. Nutrients. 2020 Jan 18;12(1):250.  
Journal Pre-proof
60 
 
Pusceddu MM, Gareau MG. 2018. Visceral pain: gut microbiota, a new hope? J Biomed Sci 25:73. 
Qaseem A, Wilt TJ, McLean RM, Forciea MA, Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of 
Physicians. 2017. Noninvasive Treatments for Acute, Subacute, and Chronic Low Back Pain: A Clinical 
Practice Guideline From the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 166:514–530. 
Quick ML, Wong L, Mukherjee S, Done JD, Schaeffer AJ, Thumbikat P. 2013. Th1-Th17 cells contribute to 
the development of uropathogenic Escherichia coli-induced chronic pelvic pain. PloS One 8:e60987. 
Quiton RL, Masri R, Thompson SM, Keller A. 2010. Abnormal activity of primary somatosensory cortex in 
central pain syndrome. J Neurophysiol 104:1717–1725. 
Raboisson P, Dallel R. 2004. The orofacial formalin test. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 28:219–226. 
Radat F, Margot-Duclot A, Attal N. 2013. Psychiatric co-morbidities in patients with chronic peripheral 
neuropathic pain: a multicentre cohort study. Eur J Pain Lond Engl 17:1547–1557. 
Radhakrishnan R, Moore SA, Sluka KA. 2003. Unilateral carrageenan injection into muscle or joint 
induces chronic bilateral hyperalgesia in rats. Pain 104:567–577. 
Ramachandran R, Bhatt DK, Ploug KB, Hay-Schmidt A, Jansen-Olesen I, Gupta S, Olesen J. 2014. Nitric 
oxide synthase, calcitonin gene-related peptide and NK-1 receptor mechanisms are involved in GTN-
induced neuronal activation. Cephalalgia Int J Headache 34:136–147. 
Rambukkana A, Zanazzi G, Tapinos N, Salzer JL. 2002. Contact-dependent demyelination by 
Mycobacterium leprae in the absence of immune cells. Science 296:927–931. 
Ramsey IS, Delling M, Clapham DE. 2006. An introduction to TRP channels. Annu Rev Physiol 68:619–
647. 
Randall LO, Selitto JJ. 1957. A method for measurement of analgesic activity on inflamed tissue. Arch Int 
Pharmacodyn Ther 111:409–419. 
Raputova J, Srotova I, Vlckova E, Sommer C, Üçeyler N, Birklein F, Rittner HL, Rebhorn C, Adamova B, 
Kovalova I, Kralickova Nekvapilova E, Forer L, et al. 2017. Sensory phenotype and risk factors for painful 
diabetic neuropathy: a cross-sectional observational study. Pain 158:2340–2353. 
Rein K, Zöckler M, Mader MT, Grübel C, Heisenberg M. 2002. The Drosophila standard brain. Curr Biol CB 
12:227–231. 
Ren K, Dubner R. 1999. Inflammatory Models of Pain and Hyperalgesia. ILAR J 40:111–118. 
Renn CL, Carozzi VA, Rhee P, Gallop D, Dorsey SG, Cavaletti G. 2011. Multimodal assessment of painful 
peripheral neuropathy induced by chronic oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy in mice. Mol Pain 7:29. 
Rice ASC, Finnerup NB, Kemp HI, Currie GL, Baron R. 2018. Sensory profiling in animal models of 
neuropathic pain: a call for back-translation. Pain 159:819–824. 
Journal Pre-proof
61 
 
Rosen SF, Ham B, Haichin M, Walters IC, Tohyama S, Sotocinal SG, Mogil JS. 2019. Increased pain 
sensitivity and decreased opioid analgesia in T-cell-deficient mice and implications for sex differences. 
Pain 160:358–366. 
Rothman GR, Blackiston DJ, Levin M. 2016. Color and intensity discrimination in Xenopus laevis tadpoles. 
Anim Cogn 19:911–919. 
Roughan JV, Bertrand HGMJ, Isles HM. 2016. Meloxicam prevents COX-2-mediated post-surgical 
inflammation but not pain following laparotomy in mice. Eur J Pain Lond Engl 20:231–240. 
Salomon B, Rhee L, Bour-Jordan H, Hsin H, Montag A, Soliven B, Arcella J, Girvin AM, Padilla J, Miller SD, 
Bluestone JA. 2001. Development of spontaneous autoimmune peripheral polyneuropathy in B7-2-
deficient NOD mice. J Exp Med 194:677–684. 
Sanga P, Katz N, Polverejan E, Wang S, Kelly KM, Haeussler J, Thipphawong J. 2017. Long-Term Safety 
and Efficacy of Fulranumab in Patients With Moderate-to-Severe Osteoarthritis Pain: A Phase II 
Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Extension Study. Arthritis Rheumatol Hoboken NJ 
69:763–773. 
Sanoja R, Tortorici V, Fernandez C, Price TJ, Cervero F. 2010. Role of RVM neurons in capsaicin-evoked 
visceral nociception and referred hyperalgesia. Eur J Pain Lond Engl 14:120.e1-120.e9. 
Santos-Nogueira E, Redondo Castro E, Mancuso R, Navarro X. 2012. Randall-Selitto Test: A New 
Approach for the Detection of Neuropathic Pain after Spinal Cord Injury. J Neurotrauma 29:898–904. 
Sapio MR, Neubert JK, LaPaglia DM, Maric D, Keller JM, Raithel SJ, Rohrs EL, Anderson EM, Butman JA, 
Caudle RM, Brown DC, Heiss JD, et al. 2018. Pain control through selective chemo-axotomy of centrally 
projecting TRPV1+ sensory neurons. J Clin Invest 128:1657–1670. 
Sassen WA, Köster RW. 2015. Advances in Genomics and Genetics. https://www.dovepress.com/a-
molecular-toolbox-for-genetic-manipulation-of-zebrafish-peer-reviewed-article-AGG. Accessed April 2, 
2020. 
Schachtschneider KM, Schwind RM, Newson J, Kinachtchouk N, Rizko M, Mendoza-Elias N, Grippo P, 
Principe DR, Park A, Overgaard NH, Jungersen G, Garcia KD, et al. 2017. The Oncopig Cancer Model: An 
Innovative Large Animal Translational Oncology Platform. Front Oncol 7:190. 
Schneider LE, Henley KY, Turner OA, Pat B, Niedzielko TL, Floyd CL. 2017. Application of the Rat Grimace 
Scale as a Marker of Supraspinal Pain Sensation after Cervical Spinal Cord Injury. J Neurotrauma 
34:2982–2993. 
Schnitzer TJ, Ekman EF, Spierings ELH, Greenberg HS, Smith MD, Brown MT, West CR, Verburg KM. 2015. 
Efficacy and safety of tanezumab monotherapy or combined with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
in the treatment of knee or hip osteoarthritis pain. Ann Rheum Dis 74:1202–1211. 
Schroeder CI, Craik DJ. 2012. Therapeutic potential of conopeptides. Future Med Chem 4:1243–1255. 
Schwartz ES, Gebhart GF. 2014. Visceral pain. Curr Top Behav Neurosci 20:171–197. 
Journal Pre-proof
62 
 
Schwei MJ, Honore P, Rogers SD, Salak-Johnson JL, Finke MP, Ramnaraine ML, Clohisy DR, Mantyh PW. 
1999. Neurochemical and cellular reorganization of the spinal cord in a murine model of bone cancer 
pain. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 19:10886–10897. 
Sellmeijer J, Mathis V, Hugel S, Li X-H, Song Q, Chen Q-Y, Barthas F, Lutz P-E, Karatas M, Luthi A, 
Veinante P, Aertsen A, et al. 2018. Hyperactivity of Anterior Cingulate Cortex Areas 24a/24b Drives 
Chronic Pain-Induced Anxiodepressive-like Consequences. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 38:3102–3115. 
Seltzer Z, Dubner R, Shir Y. 1990. A novel behavioral model of neuropathic pain disorders produced in 
rats by partial sciatic nerve injury. Pain 43:205–218. 
Sevcik MA, Ghilardi JR, Peters CM, Lindsay TH, Halvorson KG, Jonas BM, Kubota K, Kuskowski MA, 
Boustany L, Shelton DL, Mantyh PW. 2005. Anti-NGF therapy profoundly reduces bone cancer pain and 
the accompanying increase in markers of peripheral and central sensitization. Pain 115:128–141. 
Shepherd JK, Grewal SS, Fletcher A, Bill DJ, Dourish CT. 1994. Behavioural and pharmacological 
characterisation of the elevated “zero-maze” as an animal model of anxiety. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 
116:56–64. 
Siddall P, Xu CL, Cousins M. 1995. Allodynia following traumatic spinal cord injury in the rat. Neuroreport 
6:1241–1244. 
Sikandar S, Dickenson AH. 2012. Visceral Pain – the Ins and Outs, the Ups and Downs. Curr Opin Support 
Palliat Care 6:17–26. 
Simjee SU, Jawed H, Quadri J, Saeed SA. 2007. Quantitative gait analysis as a method to assess 
mechanical hyperalgesia modulated by disease-modifying antirheumatoid drugs in the adjuvant-induced 
arthritic rat. Arthritis Res Ther 9:R91. 
Simmons JK, Hildreth BE, Supsavhad W, Elshafae SM, Hassan BB, Dirksen WP, Toribio RE, Rosol TJ. 2015. 
Animal Models of Bone Metastasis. Vet Pathol 52:827–841. 
Simpson LA, Eng JJ, Hsieh JTC, Wolfe DL, Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation Evidence Scire Research Team. 
2012. The health and life priorities of individuals with spinal cord injury: a systematic review. J 
Neurotrauma 29:1548–1555. 
Skljarevski V, Desaiah D, Liu-Seifert H, Zhang Q, Chappell AS, Detke MJ, Iyengar S, Atkinson JH, Backonja 
M. 2010a. Efficacy and safety of duloxetine in patients with chronic low back pain. Spine 35:E578-585. 
Skljarevski V, Zhang S, Desaiah D, Alaka KJ, Palacios S, Miazgowski T, Patrick K. 2010b. Duloxetine versus 
placebo in patients with chronic low back pain: a 12-week, fixed-dose, randomized, double-blind trial. J 
Pain Off J Am Pain Soc 11:1282–1290. 
Slatkin N, Zaki N, Sanga P, Wang S, Louie J, Kelly K, Thipphawong J. 2016. (382) Efficacy, safety, and 
tolerability of Fulranumab as adjunctive therapy for cancer-related pain: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, multicenter study. J Pain 17:S70–S71. 
Slosky LM, Largent-Milnes TM, Vanderah TW. 2015. Use of Animal Models in Understanding Cancer-
induced Bone Pain. Cancer Growth Metastasis 8:47–62. 
Journal Pre-proof
63 
 
Sluka KA, Clauw DJ. 2016. Neurobiology of fibromyalgia and chronic widespread pain. Neuroscience 
338:114–129. 
Sluka KA, Kalra A, Moore SA. 2001. Unilateral intramuscular injections of acidic saline produce a 
bilateral, long-lasting hyperalgesia. Muscle Nerve 24:37–46. 
Smith ESJ, Lewin GR. 2009. Nociceptors: a phylogenetic view. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural 
Behav Physiol 195:1089–1106. 
Smith JA, Kitt MM, Morice AH, Birring SS, McGarvey LP, Sher MR, Li Y-P, Wu W-C, Xu ZJ, Muccino DR, 
Ford AP, Protocol 012 Investigators. 2020. Gefapixant, a P2X3 receptor antagonist, for the treatment of 
refractory or unexplained chronic cough: a randomised, double-blind, controlled, parallel-group, phase 
2b trial. Lancet Respir Med 8:775–785. 
Sneddon LU. 2018. Comparative Physiology of Nociception and Pain. Physiol Bethesda Md 33:63–73. 
Sneddon LU. 2019. Evolution of nociception and pain: evidence from fish models. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci 374:20190290. 
Sneddon LU, Elwood RW, Adamo SA, Leach MC. 2014. Defining and assessing animal pain. Anim Behav 
97:201–212. 
Sneddon LU, Halsey LG, Bury NR. 2017. Considering aspects of the 3Rs principles within experimental 
animal biology. J Exp Biol 220:3007–3016. 
Sopata M, Katz N, Carey W, Smith MD, Keller D, Verburg KM, West CR, Wolfram G, Brown MT. 2015. 
Efficacy and safety of tanezumab in the treatment of pain from bone metastases. Pain 156:1703–1713. 
Sotocinal SG, Sorge RE, Zaloum A, Tuttle AH, Martin LJ, Wieskopf JS, Mapplebeck JCS, Wei P, Zhan S, 
Zhang S, McDougall JJ, King OD, et al. 2011. The Rat Grimace Scale: a partially automated method for 
quantifying pain in the laboratory rat via facial expressions. Mol Pain 7:55. 
Souslova V, Cesare P, Ding Y, Akopian AN, Stanfa L, Suzuki R, Carpenter K, Dickenson A, Boyce S, Hill R, 
Nebenuis-Oosthuizen D, Smith AJ, et al. 2000. Warm-coding deficits and aberrant inflammatory pain in 
mice lacking P2X3 receptors. Nature 407:1015–1017. 
St Johnston D. 2013. Using mutants, knockdowns, and transgenesis to investigate gene function in 
Drosophila. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol 2:587–613. 
Stadig S, Lascelles BDX, Nyman G, Bergh A. 2019. Evaluation and comparison of pain questionnaires for 
clinical screening of osteoarthritis in cats. Vet Rec 185:757. 
Starkey ML, Davies M, Yip PK, Carter LM, Wong DJN, McMahon SB, Bradbury EJ. 2009. Expression of the 
regeneration-associated protein SPRR1A in primary sensory neurons and spinal cord of the adult mouse 
following peripheral and central injury. J Comp Neurol 513:51–68. 
Steel Z, Marnane C, Iranpour C, Chey T, Jackson JW, Patel V, Silove D. 2014. The global prevalence of 
common mental disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis 1980–2013. Int J Epidemiol 43:476–
493. 
Journal Pre-proof
64 
 
Steru L, Chermat R, Thierry B, Simon P. 1985. The tail suspension test: a new method for screening 
antidepressants in mice. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 85:367–370. 
Stevens CW. 2011. Analgesia in amphibians: preclinical studies and clinical applications. Veterinary Clin 
North Am Exot Anim Pract 14:33–44. 
Stevens CW. 2015. Bioinformatics and evolution of vertebrate nociceptin and opioid receptors. Vitam 
Horm 97:57–94. 
Stoop R, Buma P, Kraan PM van der, Hollander AP, Billinghurst RC, Meijers TH, Poole AR, Berg WB van 
den. 2001. Type II collagen degradation in articular cartilage fibrillation after anterior cruciate ligament 
transection in rats. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 9:308–315. 
Sung B, Loh HH, Wei L. 2000. Association of kappa opioid receptor mRNA upregulation in dorsal root 
ganglia with mechanical allodynia in mice following nerve injury. Neurosci Lett 291:163–166. 
Suurväli J, Boudinot P, Kanellopoulos J, Rüütel Boudinot S. 2017. P2X4: A fast and sensitive purinergic 
receptor. Biomed J 40:245–256. 
Swierczek NA, Giles AC, Rankin CH, Kerr RA. 2011. High-throughput behavioral analysis in C. elegans. Nat 
Methods 8:592–598. 
Takasusuki T, Yaksh TL. 2011. Regulation of Spinal Substance P Release by Intrathecal Calcium Channel 
Blockade. Anesthesiology 115:153–164. 
Tandon P, Conlon F, Furlow JD, Horb ME. 2017. Expanding the genetic toolkit in Xenopus: Approaches 
and opportunities for human disease modeling. Dev Biol 426:325–335. 
Tang Y, Peng H, Liao Q, Gan L, Zhang R, Huang L, Ding Z, Yang H, Yan X, Gu Y, Zang X, Huang D, et al. 
2016. Study of breakthrough cancer pain in an animal model induced by endothelin-1. Neurosci Lett 
617:108–115. 
Tappe-Theodor A, Kuner R. 2014. Studying ongoing and spontaneous pain in rodents--challenges and 
opportunities. Eur J Neurosci 39:1881–1890. 
Taylor JC, Dewberry LS, Totsch SK, Yessick LR, DeBerry JJ, Watts SA, Sorge RE. 2017. A novel zebrafish-
based model of nociception. Physiol Behav 174:83–88. 
Teeple E, Jay GD, Elsaid KA, Fleming BC. 2013a. Animal models of osteoarthritis: challenges of model 
selection and analysis. AAPS J 15:438–446. 
Teeple E, Jay GD, Elsaid KA, Fleming BC. 2013b. Animal models of osteoarthritis: challenges of model 
selection and analysis. AAPS J 15:438–446. 
Thiel I a. M van, Botschuijver S, Jonge WJ de, Seppen J. 2020. Painful interactions: Microbial compounds 
and visceral pain. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis 1866:165534. 
Tirabassi RS, Flanagan JF, Wu T, Kislauskis EH, Birckbichler PJ, Guberski DL. 2004. The BBZDR/Wor rat 
model for investigating the complications of type 2 diabetes mellitus. ILAR J 45:292–302. 
Journal Pre-proof
65 
 
Tjølsen A, Berge O-G, Hunskaar S, Rosland JH, Hole K. 1992. The formalin test: an evaluation of the 
method. Pain 51:5–17. 
Tobin DM, Bargmann CI. 2004. Invertebrate nociception: behaviors, neurons and molecules. J Neurobiol 
61:161–174. 
Toyka KV. 1999. Eighty three years of the Guillain-Barré syndrome: clinical and immunopathologic 
aspects, current and future treatments. Rev Neurol (Paris) 155:849–856. 
Tracey WD, Wilson RI, Laurent G, Benzer S. 2003. painless, a Drosophila gene essential for nociception. 
Cell 113:261–273. 
Trang T, Beggs S, Wan X, Salter MW. 2009. P2X4-receptor-mediated synthesis and release of brain-
derived neurotrophic factor in microglia is dependent on calcium and p38-mitogen-activated protein 
kinase activation. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 29:3518–3528. 
Treede R-D, Jensen TS, Campbell JN, Cruccu G, Dostrovsky JO, Griffin JW, Hansson P, Hughes R, 
Nurmikko T, Serra J. 2008. Neuropathic pain: redefinition and a grading system for clinical and research 
purposes. Neurology 70:1630–1635. 
Trimble N, Johnson AC, Foster A, Greenwood-van Meerveld B. 2007. Corticotropin-releasing factor 
receptor 1-deficient mice show decreased anxiety and colonic sensitivity. Neurogastroenterol Motil Off J 
Eur Gastrointest Motil Soc 19:754–760. 
Tsuda M. 2017. P2 receptors, microglial cytokines and chemokines, and neuropathic pain. J Neurosci Res 
95:1319–1329. 
Tsuda M, Shigemoto-Mogami Y, Koizumi S, Mizokoshi A, Kohsaka S, Salter MW, Inoue K. 2003. P2X4 
receptors induced in spinal microglia gate tactile allodynia after nerve injury. Nature 424:778–783. 
Tucker LB, McCabe JT. 2017. Behavior of Male and Female C57BL/6J Mice Is More Consistent with 
Repeated Trials in the Elevated Zero Maze than in the Elevated Plus Maze. Front Behav Neurosci 11:13. 
Uematsu T, Sakai A, Ito H, Suzuki H. 2011. Intra-articular administration of tachykinin NK₁ receptor 
antagonists reduces hyperalgesia and cartilage destruction in the inflammatory joint in rats with 
adjuvant-induced arthritis. Eur J Pharmacol 668:163–168. 
Ulmann L, Hatcher JP, Hughes JP, Chaumont S, Green PJ, Conquet F, Buell GN, Reeve AJ, Chessell IP, 
Rassendren F. 2008. Up-regulation of P2X4 receptors in spinal microglia after peripheral nerve injury 
mediates BDNF release and neuropathic pain. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 28:11263–11268. 
Vaz R, Hofmeister W, Lindstrand A. 2019. Zebrafish Models of Neurodevelopmental Disorders: 
Limitations and Benefits of Current Tools and Techniques. Int J Mol Sci 20:. 
Venken KJT, Bellen HJ. 2014. Chemical mutagens, transposons, and transgenes to interrogate gene 
function in Drosophila melanogaster. Methods San Diego Calif 68:15–28. 
Journal Pre-proof
66 
 
Ventzel L, Madsen CS, Karlsson P, Tankisi H, Isak B, Fuglsang-Frederiksen A, Jensen AB, Jensen AR, Jensen 
TS, Finnerup NB. 2018. Chronic Pain and Neuropathy Following Adjuvant Chemotherapy. Pain Med 
19:1813–1824. 
Vera-Portocarrero LP, Westlund KN. 2004. Attenuation of nociception in a model of acute pancreatitis 
by an NK-1 antagonist. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 77:631–640. 
Vissers K, Meert T. 2005. A behavioral and pharmacological validation of the acetone spray test in gerbils 
with a chronic constriction injury. Anesth Analg 101:457–464, table of contents. 
Vuralli D, Wattiez A-S, Russo AF, Bolay H. 2019a. Behavioral and cognitive animal models in headache 
research. J Headache Pain 20:11. 
Vuralli D, Wattiez A-S, Russo AF, Bolay H. 2019b. Behavioral and cognitive animal models in headache 
research. J Headache Pain 20:11. 
Vuralli D, Wattiez A-S, Russo AF, Bolay H. 2019c. Behavioral and cognitive animal models in headache 
research. J Headache Pain 20:11. 
Wacnik PW, Eikmeier LJ, Ruggles TR, Ramnaraine ML, Walcheck BK, Beitz AJ, Wilcox GL. 2001. Functional 
interactions between tumor and peripheral nerve: morphology, algogen identification, and behavioral 
characterization of a new murine model of cancer pain. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 21:9355–9366. 
Waeber C, Moskowitz MA. 2005. Migraine as an inflammatory disorder. Neurology 64:S9-15. 
Wagner T, Poole C, Roth-Daniek A. 2013. The Capsaicin 8% Patch for Neuropathic Pain in Clinical 
Practice: A Retrospective Analysis. Pain Med Malden Mass 14:1202–1211. 
Waksman BH, Adams RD. 1956. A comparative study of experimental allergic neuritis in the rabbit, 
guinea pig, and mouse. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 15:293–334. 
Walicke PA, Hefti F, Bales R, Lu S-P, Ruckle JL, Brown MT, West CR, Shelton DL. 2018. First-in-human 
randomized clinical trials of the safety and efficacy of tanezumab for treatment of chronic knee 
osteoarthritis pain or acute bunionectomy pain. Pain Rep 3:e653. 
Walker AK, Kavelaars A, Heijnen CJ, Dantzer R. 2014. Neuroinflammation and Comorbidity of Pain and 
Depression. Pharmacol Rev 66:80–101. 
Wallace VCJ, Norbury TA, Rice ASC. 2005. Ultrasound vocalisation by rodents does not correlate with 
behavioural measures of persistent pain. Eur J Pain Lond Engl 9:445–452. 
Walters ET. 2018. Nociceptive Biology of Molluscs and Arthropods: Evolutionary Clues About Functions 
and Mechanisms Potentially Related to Pain. Front Physiol 9:. 
Walton MB, Cowderoy E, Lascelles D, Innes JF. 2013. Evaluation of construct and criterion validity for the 
“Liverpool Osteoarthritis in Dogs” (LOAD) clinical metrology instrument and comparison to two other 
instruments. PloS One 8:e58125. 
Journal Pre-proof
67 
 
Wang B, Chandrasekera PC, Pippin JJ. 2014. Leptin- and leptin receptor-deficient rodent models: 
relevance for human type 2 diabetes. Curr Diabetes Rev 10:131–145. 
Wang D, Stoveken HM, Zucca S, Dao M, Orlandi C, Song C, Masuho I, Johnston C, Opperman KJ, Giles AC, 
Gill MS, Lundquist EA, et al. 2019. Genetic behavioral screen identifies an orphan anti-opioid system. 
Science 365:1267–1273. 
Wang G, Thompson SM. 2008. Maladaptive homeostatic plasticity in a rodent model of central pain 
syndrome: thalamic hyperexcitability after spinothalamic tract lesions. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 
28:11959–11969. 
Watson BD, Dietrich WD, Busto R, Wachtel MS, Ginsberg MD. 1985. Induction of reproducible brain 
infarction by photochemically initiated thrombosis. Ann Neurol 17:497–504. 
Way JC, Chalfie M. 1989. The mec-3 gene of Caenorhabditis elegans requires its own product for 
maintained expression and is expressed in three neuronal cell types. Genes Dev 3:1823–1833. 
Webb MP, Helander EM, Menard BL, Urman RD, Kaye AD. 2018. Tanezumab: a selective humanized mAb 
for chronic lower back pain. Ther Clin Risk Manag 14:361–367. 
Webster RP, Anderson GI, Gearing DP. 2014. Canine Brief Pain Inventory scores for dogs with 
osteoarthritis before and after administration of a monoclonal antibody against nerve growth factor. Am 
J Vet Res 75:532–535. 
Wermeling DP, Berger JR. 2006. Ziconotide infusion for severe chronic pain: case series of patients with 
neuropathic pain. Pharmacotherapy 26:395–402. 
Wheeler GN, Brändli AW. 2009. Simple vertebrate models for chemical genetics and drug discovery 
screens: lessons from zebrafish and Xenopus. Dev Dyn Off Publ Am Assoc Anat 238:1287–1308. 
White JG, Southgate E, Thomson JN, Brenner S. 1986. The structure of the nervous system of the 
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 314:1–340. 
Wie CS, Derian A. 2020. Ziconotide. StatPearls, Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing,. 
Williams CJ, James LE, Bertelsen MF, Wang T. 2019. Analgesia for non-mammalian vertebrates. Curr 
Opin Physiol 11:75–84. 
Winter CA, Risley EA, Nuss GW. 1962. Carrageenin-induced edema in hind paw of the rat as an assay for 
antiiflammatory drugs. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med Soc Exp Biol Med N Y N 111:544–547. 
Wittenburg N, Baumeister R. 1999. Thermal avoidance in Caenorhabditis elegans: an approach to the 
study of nociception. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:10477–10482. 
Woolf CJ. 1983. Evidence for a central component of post-injury pain hypersensitivity. Nature 306:686–
688. 
Woolf CJ. 2011. Central sensitization: implications for the diagnosis and treatment of pain. Pain 152:S2-
15. 
Journal Pre-proof
68 
 
Woolf CJ, Salter MW. 2000. Neuronal plasticity: increasing the gain in pain. Science 288:1765–1769. 
Woolfe G, Macdonald AD. 1944. The Evaluation of the Analgesic Action of Pethidine Hydrochloride 
(demerol). J Pharmacol Exp Ther 80:300–307. 
Wu JX, Xu MY, Miao XR, Lu ZJ, Yuan XM, Li XQ, Yu WF. 2012. Functional up-regulation of P2X3 receptors 
in dorsal root ganglion in a rat model of bone cancer pain. Eur J Pain Lond Engl 16:1378–1388. 
Xing H, Chen M, Ling J, Tan W, Gu JG. 2007. TRPM8 mechanism of cold allodynia after chronic nerve 
injury. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 27:13680–13690. 
Xu L, Nwosu LN, Burston JJ, Millns PJ, Sagar DR, Mapp PI, Meesawatsom P, Li L, Bennett AJ, Walsh DA, 
Chapman V. 2016. The anti-NGF antibody muMab 911 both prevents and reverses pain behaviour and 
subchondral osteoclast numbers in a rat model of osteoarthritis pain. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 24:1587–
1595. 
Yaksh TL. 2002. Future advances in pain pharmacology: what does the present say about the future? 
Proc West Pharmacol Soc 45:211–218. 
Yaksh TL, Farb DH, Leeman SE, Jessell TM. 1979. Intrathecal capsaicin depletes substance P in the rat 
spinal cord and produces prolonged thermal analgesia. Science 206:481–483. 
Yalcin I, Barthas F, Barrot M. 2014a. Emotional consequences of neuropathic pain: insight from 
preclinical studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 47:154–164. 
Yalcin I, Barthas F, Barrot M. 2014b. Emotional consequences of neuropathic pain: insight from 
preclinical studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 47:154–164. 
Yalcin I, Megat S, Barthas F, Waltisperger E, Kremer M, Salvat E, Barrot M. 2014c. The sciatic nerve 
cuffing model of neuropathic pain in mice. J Vis Exp JoVE. 
Yang M, Rainone A, Shi XQ, Fournier S, Zhang J. 2014. A new animal model of spontaneous autoimmune 
peripheral polyneuropathy: implications for Guillain-Barré syndrome. Acta Neuropathol Commun 2:5. 
Yang P, Kajiwara R, Tonoki A, Itoh M. 2018. Successive and discrete spaced conditioning in active 
avoidance learning in young and aged zebrafish. Neurosci Res 130:1–7. 
Yang Y, Santamaria P. 2006. Lessons on autoimmune diabetes from animal models. Clin Sci Lond Engl 
1979 110:627–639. 
Yoneda T, Sasaki A, Mundy GR. 1994. Osteolytic bone metastasis in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 
Treat 32:73–84. 
Zagami AS, Goadsby PJ, Edvinsson L. 1990. Stimulation of the superior sagittal sinus in the cat causes 
release of vasoactive peptides. Neuropeptides 16:69–75. 
Zeng SL, Sudlow LC, Berezin MY. 2020. Using Xenopus oocytes in neurological disease drug discovery. 
Expert Opin Drug Discov 15:39–52. 
Journal Pre-proof
69 
 
Zhang J, Banerjee B. 2015. Role of MicroRNA in Visceral Pain. J Neurogastroenterol Motil 21:159–171. 
Zhang L, Wang R, Bai T, Xiang X, Qian W, Song J, Hou X. 2019. EphrinB2/ephB2-mediated myenteric 
synaptic plasticity: mechanisms underlying the persistent muscle hypercontractility and pain in 
postinfectious IBS. FASEB J Off Publ Fed Am Soc Exp Biol 33:13644–13659. 
Zhang WY, Li Wan Po A. 1994. The effectiveness of topically applied capsaicin. A meta-analysis. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol 46:517–522. 
Zheng Z, Lauritzen JS, Perlman E, Robinson CG, Nichols M, Milkie D, Torrens O, Price J, Fisher CB, Sharifi 
N, Calle-Schuler SA, Kmecova L, et al. 2018. A Complete Electron Microscopy Volume of the Brain of 
Adult Drosophila melanogaster. Cell 174:730-743.e22. 
Zhu C, Xu J, Lin Y, Ju P, Duan D, Luo Y, Ding W, Huang S, Chen J, Cui D. 2018a. Loss of Microglia and 
Impaired Brain-Neurotrophic Factor Signaling Pathway in a Comorbid Model of Chronic Pain and 
Depression. Front Psychiatry 9:442. 
Zhu H, Xiao X, Chai Y, Li D, Yan X, Tang H. 2019. MiRNA-29a modulates visceral hyperalgesia in irritable 
bowel syndrome by targeting HTR7. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 511:671–678. 
Zhu X, Liu Z, Qin Y, Niu W, Wang Q, Li L, Zhou J. 2018b. Analgesic effects of electroacupuncture at ST25 
and CV12 in a rat model of postinflammatory irritable bowel syndrome visceral pain. Acupunct Med J Br 
Med Acupunct Soc 36:240–246. 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof
70 
 
 
Table 1: Classical inflammatory and neuropathic pain models in rodents with notes on companion animals. 
 
Animal species 
Procedure 
Clinical relevance 
References 
Inflammatory pain models 
Pain model induced by 
capsaicin 
Mice  
Rats 
Intra-plantar injection 
of capsaicin 
Mimic skin 
inflammation and 
inflammatory 
bowel disease 
 
Kenins P., 1982  
Muley et al., 2016 
 
Pain model induced by 
formalin 
Mice  
Rats 
Injection (sub-
cutaneous, intra-
plantar...) of diluted 
formaldehyde solution 
(0.5-5%) 
Not specific to a 
clinical pathology. 
Dubuisson et al., 
1977 
Muley et al., 2016  
 
Pain model induced by 
complete freund’s 
adjuvant (CFA) 
Mice  
Rats  
Subcutaneous injection 
of CFA in the hind paw 
or intra-articular 
Assess 
inflammatory pain 
in mice and rats  
Robust pain model 
for the study RA  
Stein et al., 1988 
Muley et al., 2016  
 
Pain model induced by 
carrageenan  
Mice 
Rats  
Subcutaneously 
injection of 
carrageenan  
Joint pain 
inflammation  
Winter et al., 1962 
Pain model induced by 
zymosan 
Mice 
Injection of cell walls of 
Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae 
Acute inflammation  Doherty et al., 1985 
Osteoarthritis pain models 
Mice 
Rats  
Guinea-Pigs 
Dogs 
Cats 
 Chemical injections 
 Joint surgery and 
ligament 
manipulation 
 Streptococcus 
injection 
Musculoskeletal 
disease and joint 
inflammation 
Kalbhen, 1987 
Stoop et al., 2001 
Gomis et al.,2007 
Knights et al., 2012 
van den Broek et al., 
1988 
Mc Coy, 2015 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
models 
Mice 
 Collagen injection 
 Collagen antibody 
injection 
chronic 
autoimmune 
disorder 
Courtenay et al., 
1980 
Nandakumar et al., 
2003 
 
Journal Pre-proof
71 
 
Streptococcal cell wall 
induced arthritis (SCW)  
Rats  
Intra-articular injection 
of Streptococcus 
pyogenes 
Mimic RA  
van den Broek et al., 
1988 
Bessis et al., 2017 
Centrally induced neuropathic pain models  
Contusive  Spinal cord 
injury 
Mice  
Rats 
Weight drop on spinal 
cord  
Clinically relevant 
model, but not 
specific to a 
pathology 
Siddall et al., 1995 
 
Spinal hemi-section 
Rats 
Hemi section of a 
thoracic segment 
usually cranial to L1 
dorsal root entry 
Mimic chronic 
central pain after 
spinal cord trauma 
Koehler and Endtz, 
1986 
 
Photochemical injury 
Rats 
Ischemia & tissue 
necrosis of spinal cord 
Reproduce a 
mechanical trauma 
of the spinal cord 
without surgery 
Watson et al., 1986 
 
Peripherally induced neuropathic pain models  
Sciatic nerve total 
transection 
Mice  
 Rats 
Complete sciatic nerve 
transection 
Mimic the clinical 
symptoms of 
“phantom limb”  
Wall et al., 1979 
 
Chronic constriction injury 
Mice  
Rats 
Four loose knots 
around sciatic nerve or 
the infra-orbital nerve 
Mimic causalgia or 
complex regional 
pain syndrome 
Bennett and Xie, 
1988 
 
Cuffing of sciatic nerve 
Mice  
Rats 
Implantation of a 
polyethylene tubing 
(cuff) around the 
common branch of the 
sciatic nerve 
Study anxio-
depressive 
comorbidities 
associated with NP 
that lasts for weeks 
after loss of 
hypersensitivity to 
pain 
Mosconi et al., 1996 
Benbouzid et al., 
2008 
 
Partial sciatic nerve injury 
Mice  
Rats 
Partial ligation of 
dorsal third or half of 
sciatic nerve, peroneal 
or tibial branch or both 
Mimic human 
causalgia 
symptoms (injury 
to the peripheral 
nerve) 
Seltzer et al., 1990 
Malmberg and 
Basbaum, 1998  
 
Spinal Nerve Ligation 
Mice  
Rats 
Unilateral ligation of 
lumbar spinal nerves 
L5 and L6 distal to 
dorsal root ganglia 
Mimic human 
causalgia 
symptoms (injury 
to the peripheral 
nerve) 
Kim and Chung, 
1992. 
Kiso et al., 2008 
Journal Pre-proof
72 
 
Spared nerve injury 
Mice  
Rats 
Lesion of two of the 
three terminal 
branches of the sciatic 
nerve 
Not specific to a 
clinical pathology. 
Decosterd and 
Woolf, 2000  
 
 
Journal Pre-proof
73 
 
Table 2:  Animal Models of Cancer Pain. Canine BPI: Canine Brief Pain Inventory; ET-1: Endothelin-1 ; n.a: not 
applicable; QoL: Quality of Life; QST: quantitative sensory testing;VAL; Visual analog scale; VMR: Visceromotor 
responses  
 
 
Animal 
Species 
Procedure 
Cancer cell line 
Pain Tests 
References 
Bone Cancer 
Induced Pain 
(CIBP)  
Mice 
 
Intraosseous 
Injection Cancer 
Cells into  
Femur 
Humerus 
Calcaneus bone 
of hindpaw 
 
66.1 or 4T1-Luc2 
mammary 
adenocarcinoma 
NTCT2472 
Fibrosarcoma 
B16 melanoma 
C26 colon 
adenocarcinoma 
 
Flinching 
Guarding 
von Frey Test 
Limb use 
Tail Flick Assay 
Dynamic weight 
bearing 
Palpation (light 
touching) 
Schwei et al., 1999; Wacnik 
et al., 2001;  
Sabino et al., 2003; 
Vermeirsch et al., 2004;  
Grenald et al., 2017; Elmarah 
et al., 2017; Appel et al., 
2019 
Transgenic mice  
n.a. 
Flinching 
Guarding 
Ghilardi et al., 2005  
 
Rat 
Intraosseous 
Injection Cancer 
Cells into  
Tibia 
Femur 
 MRMT-1 murine 
mammary 
carcinoma 
Walker 256  
rat mammary 
carcinoma 
 MLL rat prostate 
adenocarcinoma 
von Frey Test 
Limb use 
Weight-bearing 
test 
  
Medhurst et al., 2002;  
Wu et al., 2012;  
Zhu et al., 2018;  
Wang et al., 2018; 
Falk et al., 2018 
Dog  
Naturally-
Occurring Bone 
Cancer 
n.a. 
Lameness  
Canine BPI 
QST 
VAL 
QoL 
Brown et al., 2015;  
Sapio et al., 2018: Monteiro 
et al., 2018 
 
Breakthrough 
Cancer pain 
(BTcP) 
Mice  
Injection of 
Cancer Cells into 
Femur +ET-1 
injection into 
tumor cells 
Lewis Lung 
carcinoma 
von Frey Test 
Limb use 
Tang et al., 2016;  
Metastasis Bone 
Cancer Pain  
Mice/rat 
 
Injection of 
Cancer Cells into:  
Tail vein 
Intracardiac 
Intraosseous 
Orthotopic 
 
ACE-1 canine 
prostate carcinoma  
R3327 Mat LyLu 
cells rat prostatic 
adenocarcinoma 
Flinching 
Guarding 
Thermal Paw 
stimulator 
Posture changes, 
movement 
limitations 
Liepe et al., 2005; Halvorson 
et al., 2005  
Breast Cancer 
Pain  
Mice  
Injection of 
cancer cells into 
mammary fat pad 
4T1 murine breast 
cancer 
von Frey Test 
Acetone drop 
 grimace  scale 
De Almeida et al., 2019 
Pancreatic 
Cancer Pain 
Mice 
Injection of 
cancer cells into 
pancreas 
 
SW1990 human 
pancreatic cancer  
Abdominal 
withdrawal 
threshold 
Hunching 
VMR 
Wang et al., 2017 
  
Transgenic mice  
n.a. 
Hunching 
Vocalization 
Lindsay et al., 2005 
Journal Pre-proof
74 
 
Peritoneal 
carcinomatosis 
Mice  
Injection of 
cancer cells into 
abdominal cavity 
60As6Luc derived 
from HSC60 human 
gastric scirrhous 
carcinoma 
von Frey test 
licking 
Abdominal 
withdrawal 
threshold 
Hunching 
 
Suzuki et al., 2012 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof
75 
 
Table 3: Visceral pain models. AWR: Abdominal Withdrawal Reflex; CRD : Colorectal distension;  EAP: Experimental 
autoimmune prostatitis; IBD: Inflammatory Bowel Disease; IBS: Irritable Bowel syndrome; IBS-D: Irritable Bowel 
syndrome - diarrhea-predominant; NMS : Neonatal Maternal Separation; PRS: Partial restraint stress; VMR: 
Visceromotor responses, WAR: Water avoidance  stress 
 
 
Animal 
Species 
Procedure 
Clinical relevance 
Pain/Nociceptive 
tests 
References 
Abdominal 
Viscera 
Mice 
Intraperitoneal 
injection of 
chemicals  
Colorectal 
distension (CRD) 
Visceral Pain 
Writhing Test 
Responses 
 
 
VMR  
 
Alonso-Castro et al., 2017 
Kamp et al., 2002 
Rat 
Colorectal 
distension 
Passive avoidance 
behavioral 
paradigm 
AWR 
Ness and Gebhart, 1988; 
Ness and Gebhart, 1991;  
 
Dog 
Colorectal 
distension 
VMR  
Lyubashina et al., 2016 
Digestive Tract 
Mice 
 
Intracolorectal 
injection of 
chemicals  
IBD 
“up and down” 
method 
von Frey Test 
Hou et al., 2019 
 
Oral ingestion of 
chemicals  
IBD 
Ulcerative colitis 
Intracolonical 
administration of 
allyl 
isithiocyanate 
(mustard oil) 
(0,5%) 
VMR 
Lapointe et al., 2015 
Rat 
Intracolorectal 
injection of 
chemicals 
IBD 
 
VMR 
AWR 
Huang et al., 2019; Parisio et 
al., 2020 
Colon-Bowel 
Mice 
Castor-oil induced 
diarrhea  
IBS-D 
Intracolonical 
administration of 
allyl 
isithiocyanate 
(mustard oil) 
Writhing Test 
Sobczak et al., 2014 
Repeated WAS  
NMS  
PRS  
IBS 
AWR 
 
VMR 
Zhu et al., 2019 
Miquel et al., 2016 
Rat 
Colorectal 
injection of 
inflamogens or 
irritants  
Intragastric 
Parasite infection 
Subcutaneous LPS 
injection 
PI-IBS Ulcerative 
colitis 
 
 AWR 
 VMR 
Zhu et al., 2018 
Zhang et al., 2019 
Nozu et al., 2019 
Repeated WAS  
IBS 
 
Nozu et al., 2019 
Stomach 
 
Hollow stomach 
distention 
Gastric  
hyperalgesia 
VMR 
Ozaki et al, 2002 
Journal Pre-proof
76 
 
Gastric 
injection/Oral 
injection of 
irritant chemical 
Passive Avoidance 
Behavior 
paradigm 
Ureter 
Rat  
Intraureteral 
injection of dental 
cement  
Ureteric calculi 
(Kidney stones) 
vocalization to 
electrical 
stimulation 
Giamberardino et al., 1995 
Mice 
oral injection of 
DBTC  
Chronic 
pancreatitis 
von Frey Test 
animal posture 
gait disturbances 
Oz, 2016 
Pancreas 
Rat 
 
High fat 
(65%)/ethanol 
(6%) diet  
(10 weeks)  
Chronic 
pancreatitis 
von Frey Test 
up-down method  
Hot plate   
McIlwrath and Westlund, 
2015 
Intraductal 
infusion of a bile 
salt + 
Intraperitoneal 
injection of aCCK 
analogue 
Intravenous 
injection of 
chemical 
Acute pancreatitis 
Exploratory 
activity  
von Frey Test 
abdominal 
withdrawal to 
heat stimulus  
 
 
Zhang et al., 2004 
Vera-Portocarrero and 
Westlund, 2004 
 
Dog  
Naturally-
Occurring 
Pancreatitis  
Glasgow 
Composite Pain 
Scale  
Mansfield and Beths, 2015 
Catanzaro et al., 2016 
Prostate 
Mice  
Infection with 
E.coli bacteria 
isolate from 
patient 
EAP 
induction 
Chronic 
prostatitis/ 
chronic pelvic  
pain  syndrome  
(CP/CPPS) 
von Frey Test 
 
Quick et al., 2013 
Liu et al., 2019 
Biliary system 
 
Mice 
Injection of 
solvents into bile 
duct  
Cholangiopathy 
Grimace face  
Parameters 
activity 
Berntsen et al., 2017 
Rat  
Bile duct 
resection 
Cholestasis  
Tail-flick latency 
Hasanein, 2010 
Referred visceral 
pain 
Mice  
Rats  
Intracolonic 
capsaicin 
instillation  
Prolonged 
referred 
hyperalgesia 
Von frey test  
Laird et al., 2001 
Sanoja et al., 2010 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof
77 
 
Table 4: The nociceptive pathways in invertebrates (C.elegans and Drosophila) and lower vertebrates (Xenopus and 
Zebrafish). Some examples of neurotransmitters or TRP channels are given; only TRPM, TRPA and TRPV channels 
are indicated for Xenopus and Zebrafish, *demonstrated in amphibian class (Rana). 
 
Nociception 
Nociceptors 
TRP-like 
channels 
Neuromodulators 
Opioid 
system 
References 
C.elegans  
Thermal, 
chemical and 
mechanical 
 
ASH pair of 
neurons DRG 
polymodal 
nociceptors  
 
Osm-9 and ocr-2 
(=TRPV)  
 
SubstanceP, calcitonin,  
Glutamate FLP18/FLP-
21/NRP-1  
-opioid 
like 
receptor 
 
Bargmann and 
Kaplan, 1998; Kahn-
Kirby and 
Bargmann, 2006; 
Venkatachalam et 
al., 2014; 
Wittenburg and 
Baumesiter, 1999; 
Nkambeu et al., 
2018; Glauser et al., 
2011; Hills et al., 
2016 
Drosophila 
Thermal, 
chemical and 
mechanical 
Multidendritic 
(Md) class IV 
and class III 
neurons 
 
Painless, TRPA1, 
pyrexia ( ≈ TRPA)  
Pkd2, NompC, 
and Trpm  
Inactive (≈ TPRV)  
 
NRP1  
Neuropeptide F 
Amnesiac  
-opioid 
like 
receptor 
 
Hwang et al., 2007; 
Walters, 2019; 
Tracey et al., 2003; 
Neely et al., 2011; 
Lee et al., 2005; 
Turner et al., 2016; 
Kwon et al., 2010; 
Hu et al., 2017; 
Aldrich et al., 2010; 
Kuong and Neely, 
2013 
Zebrafish 
Thermal, 
chemical and 
mechanical  
Polymodal 
nociceptors  
 
Un-myelinated 
C-fibre and  
Myelinated 
Afibres  
 
10 TRP channels 
(TRPV, TRPM, 
TRPA)  
 
Substance P, 
Glutamate,  
14 opioid 
( 
and 
opioid-
like) 
receptors 
Williams et al., 
2019; Sneddon, 
2019; Saito and 
Shangai, 2006; 
Demin et al., 2018;  
Stevens, 2015; 
Demin et al., 2018 
Xenopus 
Thermal, 
chemical and 
mechanical 
Polymodal 
nociceptors  
 
Un-myelinated 
C-fibre and 
myelinated 
Afibres 
 
14 TRP channels 
(TRPV, TRPM, 
TRPA)  
 
Substance P, CGRP, 
Glutamate* 
4 opioid 
( 
and 
opioid-
like) 
receptors 
 
Williams et al., 
2019; Stevens, 
2011; Saito and 
Shangai, 2006; 
Stevens et al., 2009 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof
78 
 
Table 5: Examples of assays to study nociception performed in C. elegans, Drosophila, Zebrafish and Xenopus 
 
Age 
Thermal assay 
Mechanical 
assay 
Chemical 
assay 
Chronic pain-
like assay 
Neuropathic 
pain-like assay 
References 
C. elegans 
 
Heated metal 
pen tip or laser 
diode 
Thermal barrier 
assay 
Noxious heat 
thermogradient 
assay and 
four quadrants 
assay  
Harsh touch 
assay  
Octanol 
avoidance 
assay 
Thrashing 
assay 
N.T. 
N.T. 
Mills et al., 2016; 
Cohen et al., 2014; 
Tobin and 
Bargmann, 2004; 
Wittenburg and 
Baumeister, 1999; 
Glauser et al., 2011; 
Nkambeu et al., 
2019; Wang et al., 
2019 
Drosophila 
Larvae 
 
Soldering iron 
heated to 46°C  
Heated Water 
Droplet 
Cold probe 
contact 
 
von Frey 
fibres assay 
 
HCl (quick 
exposure or 
incubation) 
N.T. 
N.T. 
Khuong et al., 2019; 
Calvo et al., 2019; 
Im and Galko, 2012; 
Milinkeviciute et al., 
2012; Lopez-Bellido 
et al., 2019; Heather 
et al., 2017 
Adult 
Water-tight 
chamber 
surrounded by 
hot water 
‘Jump’ reflex 
assay  
‘Hotplate’ assay  
The light-driven 
heat avoidance 
test 
Thermal 
challenge (warm 
water bath) 
N.T. 
Feeding 
session  
Direct contact 
with 
food/liquid 
laced with 
noxious 
compound 
‘Sunburn’ UV 
radiation  
Nerve injury 
(Middle leg 
amputation)  
Zebrafish  
Embryo/
Larvae 
Temperature 
aversion assay 
Cold and warm 
water tank 
N.T. 
Acetic Acid 
exposure  
Acetic acid 
test 
(exposure) 
Extreme 
Thermal 
exposure   
Malafoglia et al., 
2014; Curtright et 
al., 2015; Taylor et 
al., 2017; Deakin et 
al., 2019; Ellis et al, 
2018; Yang et al., 
Journal Pre-proof
79 
 
Adult 
N.T. 
Electric 
shock 
Acetic acid 
test (exposure 
or 
subcutaneous 
injection) 
Algogen 
injections 
Acetic acid 
test (exposure 
or 
subcutaneous 
injection) 
N.T. 
2018; Costa et al., 
2019; Sneddon, 
2018 
Xenopus 
Adult 
Hargreaves test  
Pinch by a 
bulldog 
clamp in the 
dactyls of 
the forelimbs 
Pull of the 
ovaries 
Electric 
shock  
Acetic acid 
test 
(exposure) 
Acetic acid 
test 
(exposure) 
N.T. 
Stevens, 2011; 
Miller et al., 1974 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof
