BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
Available online 6 May 2022
0925-4439/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. This article is made available under the Elsevier license (http://www.elsevier.com/open-access/userlicense/1.0/).
Autophagy and EMT in cancer and metastasis: Who controls whom? 
Rohit Gundamaraju a,n,*, Wenying Lu b, Manash K. Paul c,**, Niraj Kumar Jha d,o, 
Piyush Kumar Gupta e, Shreesh Ojha f, Indranil Chattopadhyay g, 
Pasupuleti Visweswara Rao h,i,p, Saeid Ghavami j,k,l,m 
a ER stress and Mucosal Immunology lab, School of Health Sciences, University of Tasmania, Launceston, Tasmania 7248, Australia 
b Respiratory Translational Research Group, Department of Laboratory Medicine, School of Health Sciences, University of Tasmania, Launceston, Tasmania 7248, 
Australia 
c Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 
d Department of Biotechnology, School of Engineering and Technology, Sharda University, Greater Noida 201310, UP, India 
e Department of Life Sciences, School of Basic Sciences and Research, Sharda University, Greater Noida 201310, Uttar Pradesh, India 
f Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain 17666, United Arab Emirates 
g Department of Life Sciences, Central University of Tamil Nadu, Thiruvarur, Tamil Nadu, India 
h Department of Biomedical Sciences and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu 88400, Sabah, Malaysia 
i Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Abdurrab University, Pekanbaru, Riau, Indonesia 
j Department of Human Anatomy and Cell Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Manitoba, Canada 
k Research Institutes of Oncology and Hematology, Cancer Care Manitoba-University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3E 0V9, Canada 
l Autophagy Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz 7134845794, Iran 
m Faculty of Medicine, Katowice School of Technology, 40-555 Katowice, Poland 
n Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA 
o Department of Biotechnology, School of Applied and Life Sciences (SALS), Uttaranchal University, Dehradun 248007, India 
p Center for international relations and collaborations, Reva University, Rukmini knowledge Park, Kattigenahalli Yelahanka, Bangalore, Karnataka 560064, India   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Autophagy 
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) 
Metastasis 
Starvation 
Tumor signalling pathways 
A B S T R A C T   
Metastasis consists of hallmark events, including Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), angiogenesis, 
initiation of inflammatory tumor microenvironment, and malfunctions in apoptosis. Autophagy is known to play 
a pivotal role in the metastatic process. Autophagy has pulled researchers towards it in recent times because of its 
dual role in the maintenance of cancer cells. Evidence states that cells undergoing EMT need autophagy in order 
to survive during migration and dissemination. Additionally, it orchestrates EMT markers in certain cancers. On 
the other side of the coin, autophagy plays an oncosuppressive role in impeding early metastasis. This review 
aims to project the interrelationship between autophagy and EMT. Targeting EMT via autophagy as a useful 
strategy is discussed in this review. Furthermore, for the first time, we have covered the possible reciprocating 
roles of EMT and autophagy and its consequences in cancer metastasis.   
Summary: Metastatic malignancies are tumors that have spread to 
surrounding tissues and other parts of the body via a complex step-wise 
mechanism, including cell intravasation, transport through circulation, 
extravasation, and homing at a secondary tissue site. Metastatic cancers 
are difficult to treat and are the leading cause of cancer-related mortality 
[1]. Considering its clinical importance, the basic molecular and genetic 
underpinnings are poorly understood. Among the biological processes, 
autophagy, which is a self-degradative process, has been recently 
reported to play an important role in cancer cell metastasis [2]. Among 
other cellular processes, Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) is a 
switch that allows cells to transition between epithelial and mesen­
chymal states and is key to the metastatic process [3]. Recent observa­
tions have shown that these two processes are intertwined in a 
complicated manner in relation to metastasis [4]. In this review, we 
attempt to dissect the molecular and functional interaction that regu­
lates the interplay of autophagy and EMT in regard to metastasis 
* Correspondence to: R. Gundamaraju, ER stress and Mucosal Immunology lab, School of Health Sciences, University of Tasmania, Launceston, Tasmania 7248, 
Australia. 
** Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: rohit.gundamaraju@utas.edu.au, g.rohit@wustl.edu (R. Gundamaraju), manashp@ucla.edu (M.K. Paul).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/bbadis 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2022.166431 
Received 17 January 2022; Received in revised form 10 March 2022; Accepted 2 May 2022   
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
2
signalling. 
1. Role of autophagy in cancer metastasis 
In order to degrade long-standing cellular proteins and organelles, 
autophagy is triggered, which is not only important in normal devel­
opment and response to changing environmental stimuli but also a chief 
component in diseases like cancer [5]. At the basal levels, autophagy 
maintains cellular homeostasis through the regular turnover of 
dysfunctional proteins and organelles. Cellular stress and nutritional 
deficiency, on the other hand, substantially enhance autophagy. Auto­
phagy improves nutrient recycling, avoids misfolded protein accumu­
lation, prevents damage-mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS), 
protects organelle function, and modulates intracellular signalling cas­
cades, all of which are critical cell survival strategies [6–8]. In cancer, 
autophagy can play neutral, tumor-suppressive, or tumor-promoting 
roles in different contexts and stages of cancer development, deter­
mined by nutrient availability, microenvironment stress, and pathogenic 
conditions [9]. 
Autophagy is principal for the quality control of the cell, such as 
removing damaged mitochondria and endorsing tumors and malig­
nancies [10–12]. When tumors reach an advanced stage, autophagy aids 
in protection, survival, maintaining mitochondrial integrity, declining 
DNA damage, protecting cancer cells against stress, helping withstand 
tumor metabolism, articulate tumor promotion, and development, 
finally induces tumorigenesis and causes resistance to chemotherapeutic 
agents [9,13,14]. While it is reported that autophagy can enhance the 
aggressiveness of cancers by supporting metastasis, the effect of auto­
phagy is dependent on factors such as tissue type, cancer microenvi­
ronment, and genetic disparities [15–17]. 
The several means of autophagy articulating cancer occur with the 
help of various underlying signalling pathways (Fig. 1). Autophagy ex­
hibits a distinct pro-survival role by modulating proteins and associated 
pathways such as p53, Bax-interacting factor-1 (Bif-1), Beclin 1 
(BECN1), ultraviolet irradiation resistance-associated gene (UVRAG), 
mTOR, protein kinase B (Akt), B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2), Ras, and Class 
I PI3K (PI3KI) [18]. mTORC1 is found to possess a critical role in 
adjusting and coordinating cells in response to stress and adapting to it. 
The PI3K signalling triggers mTORC2, which in turn phosphorylates 
AKT at two different sites, leading to AKT/mTORC1 signalling axis 
activation [19]. Intriguingly, mTORC1 orchestrates ULK1, ATG13, and 
FIP200 (which will be discussed in the subsequent section of this 
review). 
5′-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is another crucial player in 
the regulation of ULK1 and mTORC1 autophagy pathway, which is 
switched on upon energy deprivation, especially during conditions of 
glucose starvation where the ratio of AMP to ATP in eukaryotic cells 
increases [20,21]. On the contrary, when the environment is devoid of 
nutrition, mTOR phosphorylates ATG14 in the VPS34 complex and in­
hibits its lipid kinase activity, providing mTORC1-mediated autophagy 
inhibition [22]. mTORC1 restrictive phosphorylation of ULK1 disturbs 
its interaction with AMPK, thereby impeding the autophagosome for­
mation and autophagy. In congruence with this, triggered ULK1 was 
known to directly phosphorylate AMPK and inhibit its activation, thus 
providing a negative feedback loop on autophagy induction [23]. In 
addition, mTORC1 might influence autophagy through several other 
mechanisms, including the regulation of the death-associated protein 1 
(DAP1), a suppressor of autophagy, and through WD repeat domain 
phosphoinositide-interacting protein 2 (WIPI2), a mammalian ortholog 
of Atg18 (a regulator of early autophagosome formation in yeast), which 
was identified as potential mTOR effector and by ULK1-dependent p62 
phosphorylation, thereby facilitating the degradation of selective sub­
strates [24–26]. In order to metastasize, tumor cells must overcome 
challenges related to the intrinsic properties of the cancer cell that in­
fluence metastasis. These factors include the propensity to migrate, 
invade, and survive using intracellular signalling pathways, as well as 
extrinsic microenvironmental properties such as extracellular matrix 
composition, interactions with other cell types, and access to the 
vasculature, which determines nutrient and oxygen availability. Thus, a 
complex network connects autophagy and consolidates both the 
intrinsic and extrinsic factors regulating metastasis [2]. 
2. Is autophagy a friend or foe for metastasis? 
On one side, autophagy promotes tumor growth and survival by 
eradicating oxygen radicals, maintaining mitochondrial integrity, and 
helping survive under stress conditions [13]. Autophagy’s role in cancer 
metastasis is quite tricky and intriguing. In the early stages, autophagy 
inhibits metastasis by impeding tumor necrosis and cell infiltration, 
whereas in the advanced metastatic disease or condition, autophagy aids 
Fig. 1. Role of autophagy in cancer. PI3K signalling, mTOR signalling, ATG12 and ATG8 system leading to key processes like initiation, elongation, maturation, 
formation of autophagosome, and eventually bolstering in gaining a mesenchymal ability to the epithelial cells resulting in metastasis. 
R. Gundamaraju et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
3
in the cancer cell migration, escalating cell colonization of detached 
cells and inducing the metastatic cells to reach dormancy and endorse to 
survive in the new environment [27–29]. An autophagic flux is induced 
after the cells have reached the stage of colonizing the target organs to 
fight hypoxia and nutritional limitation [30,31]. Several studies have 
established a link between autophagy and metastasis in diverse cancers, 
including breast, melanoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, and glioblas­
toma, demonstrating the active involvement of autophagy in cancer 
aggressiveness [32–35]. 
Autophagy is instrumental in metastasis. It is multifactorial and 
varies with cell type and the composition of the tumor microenviron­
ment. Categorically, autophagy alters mechanisms that contribute to 
metastasis, including focal adhesion dynamics, integrin signalling, 
trafficking, and Rho GTPase-mediated cytoskeleton reorganization [2]. 
Regarding the regulation of focal adhesion dynamics and focal adhesion 
kinases by autophagy, the primary step is the formation of lamellipodia 
and filopodia. Secondly, integrins attach to the extracellular matrix and 
mature into focal adhesion complexes and trigger intercellular signal­
ling mechanisms, and finally, these integrin adhesion complexes are 
facilitated for forward movement [36,37]. Adapter proteins are 
recruited during the binding of ECM ligands to integrin heterodimers. 
Subsequently, kinases such as PTK2 and SRC are recruited, which induce 
downstream signalling mechanisms such as Rho GTPase, mitogenic 
signalling, etc. [37]. Hence, several mechanisms like integrin focal 
adhesion formation and disassembly are actively involved in migration 
and metastasis. Collectively, targeting of SRC p-Y416 and RET from 
focal adhesion sites to phagophores highlights an essential link between 
autophagy and focal adhesion signalling, and autophagic assisted 
degradation of SRC may aid in focal adhesion disassembly to promote 
migration [2]. Targeting autophagic degradation might be a therapeutic 
avenue. Focal adhesion disassembly, turnover and impeding of auto­
phagy by autophagic degradation of focal adhesion protein results in cell 
migration and metastasis mitigation. Knockdown of ATG7, ATG12, or 
ATG5 reduced migration and invasion in several cells [38,39]. Another 
tissue-specific autophagic receptor is NBRI. NBRI inhibition results in 
focal adhesion turnover and migration ability in specific tissues and 
cells, unlike breast cancer [39]. In both in vitro experiments and in 
syngeneic 4 T1 tumors, the loss of ATG7 and ATG12 causes PXN accu­
mulation. Thus, autophagy targets and disintegrates focal adhesion 
complex proteins such as PXN and SRC p-Y416. Apart from focal 
adhesion degradation, autophagy also targets ULK1-RB1CC1-PTK2 sig­
nalling [2]. 
Mounting evidence suggests that RB1CC1 mediates an inverse rela­
tionship between autophagy and PTK2-induced migration, where the 
ULK1-RB1CC1 complex sequesters and reduces PTK2 in energy-deprived 
conditions to escalate autophagy and decline migration which denotes 
that inhibition of ULK1 or RB1CC1 will increase metastasis [40]. This 
study lays a foundation to support the theory of suppression of migration 
and invasion by starvation-induced autophagy utilizing ULK1-RB1CC1 
mediated alleviation of PTK2 [2]. 
3. Autophagy tuning Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition 
EMT is a process where the cells gain invasive mesenchymal ability 
through a series of events such as loss of cell junctions, rearrangement of 
cytoskeleton, and remodeling of the extracellular matrix [41]. Among 
the many mechanisms known to govern EMT, autophagy stands as one 
of the prime mechanisms [42]. The role of autophagy in tumor devel­
opment remains debatable. For instance, in the EMT of hepatocytes, 
Atg7 knockout escalates mesenchymal markers, especially Vimentin 
(VIM) and SNAI1 [43]. In addition, the repression of BEC1 and ATG7 in 
mouse hepatocytes declines the epithelial markers such as e-Cadherin, 
OCLN and inclines the mesenchymal marker levels like FN1, VIM, 
ACTA2, MMP9, and SNAI1 [43]. Surprisingly, starvation mediates 
autophagy TGF-β1-regulated EMT. Concurrently, SNAI1 is also 
degraded via SQSTM1-dependent autophagy, thereby directly linking 
autophagy and EMT. In contrast, starvation-induced autophagy triggers 
EMT, which is vital for hepatocarcinoma cell lines in vitro [44]. 
Furthermore, knockdown of ATG7 or ATG3 inhibits EMT and suppresses 
the expression of FN1, TGF-β1 and SMAD3. The bonding of SQSTM1 
with TWIST was recently established. SQSTM1 stabilizes TWIST in order 
to induce EMT, and loss of autophagy escalates TWIST in SQSTM1 
dependent fashion, which drastically increases EMT in vivo [45]. 
SQSTM1 also has the ability to sustain TWIST and trigger TGF-β1-SMAD 
signalling, which induces EMT-associated junction remodeling, 
enumerating a strong link between autophagy loss and EMT [46]. In 
glioblastoma, starvation-induced autophagy reduces cell migration and 
invasion, downregulating SNAI1 and SNAI2 [47]. Additionally, 
silencing BECN1 or ATG7 in the same cells escalated migration and in­
vasion, suggesting that autophagy may impede EMT in glioblastoma 
under starvation conditions [47]. A similar phenomenon is observed in 
thyroid carcinoma, where CDH6 suppression results in increased EMT 
by autophagy proteins [48]. Strategic reduction of autophagy by star­
vation aids in decreased expression of mesenchymal markers [49]. ROS 
also plays an active role in regulating EMT in these cells. HMOX1 and 
ROS levels alter EMT conditions, thereby elucidating the active role of 
autophagy in the ROS-HMOX1-EMT axis [49]. This evidence clears up 
the double-edged role of autophagy in cancer, highlighting the prime 
role of starvation in autophagy-mediated anti-cancer therapy. 
4. Effects of starvation on autophagy-mediated anti-cancer 
ability 
Decrease in blood glucose levels in nutrition starvation activates 
autophagy in organs as an adaptive switch to withstand stressful con­
ditions [31,50]. This theory gained popularity, especially in chemo­
therapy, as it could potentiate effectiveness [51]. Among the different 
diet regimens, intermittent fasting was the best chosen one. Intermittent 
fasting eases DNA repair triggering mechanisms and preserves small 
intestinal (SI) stem cell viability as well SI architecture and barrier 
function after exposure to high-dose etoposide, indicating that inter­
mittent fasting may be beneficial in reducing side effects and toxicity in 
chemotherapy patients [52]. It was shown in a breast cancer murine 
model that intermittent fasting reduced glucose and IGF-1 levels [53]. In 
a later study on colon cancer, intermittent fasting impeded tumor 
growth without adverse effects such as weight loss and reduced M2 
polarization in the tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) in mice. 
Macrophages of the M2 phenotype (TAM) are abundant in tumors and 
play a critical role in tumor formation, invasion, and metastasis, among 
other functions. Further, autophagy-mediated inhibition of M2 polari­
zation was noted in cell line models in the same study by the down­
regulation of the JAK1/STAT3 axis [54]. The utilization of nutrient 
starvation in vitro was successfully proved in a recent experimental 
model for glioblastoma [55]. The flowcytometric analysis revealed that 
nutrition starvation after 5 days resulted in 64% of cells undergoing 
apoptosis in glioblastoma-like stem cells. Autophagy was detected in 
99.7% of the cells. There was a clear difference in expressions of phospo- 
Beclin 1, LC3B-1, and LC3B-2 [55]. 2-deoxy-D-glucose, an inhibitor of 
metabolism, was employed in multiple cellular models, including a 
transfected pEGFP-LC3 autophagy reporter construct in PC-3 and LNCaP 
cells to study the effects of autophagy and starvation on cancer thera­
peutics. There was an increase in LC3-II expression recorded in the cells. 
Further, the functional correlation of Beclin 1 was studied where; 
knockdown of Beclin-1 overturned the 2-deoxy-D-glucose induced 
autophagy [56]. A similar scenario regarding Beclin-1 was observed in 
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line study. Inhibition of autophagy by 3- 
methyladenine or siRNA-targeted Beclin 1 increased the nutrient 
deprivation-induced apoptosis and chemosensitivity [57]. Autophago­
somes are actively produced and promptly consumed in colorectal 
cancer cells under nutrient deprivation. Autolysosome inhibitors and 3- 
methyl adenine, which suppresses autophagosome formation, remark­
ably induce apoptosis under amino acid-deprived and glucose-deprived 
R. Gundamaraju et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
4
conditions [58]. 
Employment of mediums like Earle’s balanced salt solution is a way 
of inducing canonical autophagy in thyroid cancer cells. Alteration of 
BAG3 expression in this study resulted in a marked reduction of auto­
phagy and enhanced apoptosis of the thyroid cancer cells evoked by 
starvation [59]. A recent quantitative proteomic study investigated the 
effect of time-based starvation, where the early or acute starvation 
brought more significant changes in the cells. In the early starvation 
condition, autophagic receptors were degraded. Overall, amino acid 
deprivation obtains endocytosis of specific membrane receptors, trig­
gering macroautophagy and degradation of autophagic receptors [60]. 
Prolonged or chronic starvation is once again a tricky phenomenon. A 
study correlating p53 and autophagy in colorectal cancer cell lines 
exhibited that p53 loss leads to the accumulation of autophagosomes in 
the absence of p52 in HTC116 cells. However, long-standing starvation 
wasn’t beneficial as autophagosome recycling became ineffective under 
prolonged starvation, and the increased LC3 staining was actually 
because of the stalling of autophagy, causing aberrant accumulation of 
static autophagosomes. Furthermore, p53 aids in escalating HTC116 
survival under long-term starvation [61]. This clearly shows that some 
cancer cells utilize p53 to survive under nutrient-deficit conditions. 
Another relatively newer pharmacological interventional therapy is 
calorie restriction mimetics alongside cytotoxic agents. These agents aid 
in the activation of AMPK and repression of signalling such as mTOR 
resulting in autophagy induction (Fig. 2), depletion of energy sources 
such as ATP, and reduced employment of glucose [62]. This might yield 
successful therapeutic outcomes as autophagy dependent on the AMPK 
pathway is pivotal for survival to adapt to hypoxic stress, and suppres­
sion of autophagy under hypoxic conditions results in startling cyto­
toxicity and heightened apoptosis [63]. 
5. Autophagy scores epithelial markers in EMT 
Cell adhesion molecules play a salient role in the interaction between 
cells and extracellular matrix proteins. Possible defects in these in­
teractions lead to the initiation of metastasis [64]. Cadherins are 
transmembrane glycoproteins that act as cell-to-cell adhesion molecules 
in the presence of calcium. Cadherins are connected to the cytoskeleton 
via intermediary proteins, the catenins, which bridge the two. Under the 
circumstances of human malignancies, reduced expression of E-Cad­
herin was linked with lymphogenesis spread [65–67]. E-Cadherin 
expression negatively correlated with less mean survival time, and 
reduced expression resulted in tumor differentiation and lymphogenesis 
metastasis, making it a prime prognostic factor in non-small cell lung 
cancer [64]. E-Cadherin is a key component of autophagic machinery. E- 
Cadherin interacts with SQSTM1/p62, and silencing of SQSTM1/p62 
downregulated E-Cadherin, which paves the direction for understanding 
that SQSTM1/p62 aids in E-Cadherin delivery to autophagosomes, 
thereby correlating with poor prognosis via autophagy activation [68]. 
Autophagy may downregulate the expression of Claudin-2 (CL-2) in 
intestinal epithelial cells induced by LPS correlating autophagy with 
inflammation. Claudins, alongside protein components, form tight 
junctions in the epithelium and endothelium. The alterations in the 
levels of Claudins may lead to severe disturbances in the barrier func­
tions such as water regulation, ion and solute channeling and macro­
molecule uptake in affected areas, resulting in the specific clinical 
phenotype and inflammatory conditions such as IBD (Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease) [69]. Autophagy modulates tight junctions functioning, 
which has a major role in cancer metastasis (Fig. 3). CL-2 predominantly 
controls and influences inflammatory diseases and its levels can be 
tuned by autophagy. However, inflammation, autophagy and Cl-2 have 
a reciprocating role and may be modulated by inhibitors and inducers 
[69]. 
Desmosomes are integral like other epithelial members. They 
maintain integrity, tissue remodeling, adhesion, and development [70]. 
Downregulation of desmosomal adhesion is ideal for cell migration and 
cancer invasion [70]. Macromolecular assemblies of junctions and des­
mosomes are degraded by autophagy machinery. A mechanism that 
Fig. 2. Starvation mediated effects on autophagy. 
Fasting may counteract the Warburg effect, facilitating oxidative phosphorylation in tumor cells and escalating ROS production, and reduced levels of lactate and 
ATP. The increase in the ADP/ATP can induce the AMPK pathway, leading to autophagy induction. Furthermore, the long-standing stressful environment can result 
in cell death induction. Several tumors harbor mutations that endorse MAPK pathway activation, which empowers tumor cell growth, survival, and proliferation. 
Chemotherapies targeting this pathway and fasting may result in the downregulation of this pathway along with a reduction in AKT and mTOR activation, resulting 
in autophagy induction and apoptosis eventually. Additionally, fasting potentiates the detrimental effects of chemotherapy, such as DNA damage, thus activating the 
apoptosis axis, decontrolling pro-apoptotic, anti-apoptotic proteins, and inducing mitochondrial modulations and caspase activation, which in turn concludes in 
programmed cell death. 
R. Gundamaraju et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
5
inhibits autophagy shows the hijacking of components of autophagy 
initiation, for example, Atg16, by the connexins themselves. Upon 
nutrient starvation, connexins release Atg16, the blockade is lost, and 
autophagy proceeds. This axis shows that autophagy controls desmo­
somes in disease. Ideally, desmosomes are degraded by non-selective 
autophagy. Autophagy is also relatable to anoikis, the apoptosis initia­
tion process leading to the detachment of the cell from the substrate. 
Integrin-mediated adhesion loss results in autophagy, impedes anoikis, 
and down-regulates programmed cell death signalling. In cancer cells, 
enhanced autophagy activity succeeding detachment aids in resistance 
and promotes malignancy, making the cells adapt to stress conditions 
and increasing motility [71–73]. 
Apart from coating, lubricating, and protecting the epithelial sur­
faces, Mucins are devoted to maintaining the epithelial cell integrity 
[74]. Mucins are over-expressed in various cancers [75], and their 
aberrant expression and large size of mucins might possess a survival 
advantage under nutrient deficit conditions by undergoing autophagy. 
MUC1 has been investigated and proved to inhibit necrosis induction in 
response to the deprivation of glucose with the induction of autophagy 
[76]. MUC4 deregulates apoptosis in response to nutrient deprivation. 
Additionally, MUC4 also represses starvation-induced increase in ROS 
generation. 
Further, the expression of ATG7, a protein essential for the formation 
of autophagic vacuoles, has a vital role in MUC4-overexpression. A 
significant time-dependent increase in ATG7 expression is observed 
upon starvation of MUC4-expressing cells compared to the respective 
control cell lines. These results suggest that overexpression of MUC4 in 
human malignancies enhances autophagy and may offer a survival 
benefit during nutritional deprivation [77]. To support this, a study by 
Patel et al. stated that autophagic proteins and endosomal formation are 
vital for ROS formation. Production of ROS is crucial to orchestrate 
mucin granule accumulation in colonic goblet cells. Thus, autophagy 
proteins can alter secretory function through ROS, which is in part 
generated by LC3-positive vacuole-associated NADPH oxidases [78]. 
Zonula occludens (ZO) which act as scaffold proteins have been iden­
tified in the regulation of cell migration via modulation of ZO-1 [79]. On 
the other hand, ZO-2 suppression leads to increased migration. Claudin- 
1 is reported as a primer of migration and is controlled by ZO-1 and ZO-2 
[80]. Autophagic inhibition was the mechanism employed in ZO-1 
modulation by lycopene in COLO-16 cells [81]. Keratins under the 
class of cytokeratins are epithelial markers in EMT. Keratin-19 is 
elevated in aggressive breast cancer [82]. Autophagy dysfunction dys­
regulates keratins in mammary glands, and elevated levels of p62, ker­
atins, and ER chaperones were observed in autophagy-deficient 
mammary tissues and beclin 1+/−
immortalized mouse mammary 
epithelial cell (iMMEC)–generated tumors [83]. This evidences that 
autophagy is a key aspect of Keratin homeostasis. In the course of TGF- 
β2–induced EMT process, it was evaluated that p-KRT8 was enhanced in 
RPE cells, which was followed by an increase in autophagic flux. Be­
sides, disruption of autophagy with the aid of pharmacological in­
hibitors or specific siRNAs resulted in a reduction in cell migration and 
further synthesis of several EMT markers [84]. 
6. How far can autophagy alter mesenchymal markers? 
Vimentin, a subtype of intermediate filament, aids in the formation 
of a cytoskeletal network and a superiorly conserved protein. Vimentin 
is fundamental in processes such as cell migration, invasion, motility 
and promoting resistance to stress conditions [85]. Vimentin is phos­
phorylated by Akt1 and protects from caspase-mediated cell death [85]. 
Vimentin has been relatively active in the prostate, gastrointestinal 
tract, breast, etc. [86–88]. Vimentin further participates in metastatic 
progression via cytoskeletal reorganization and focal adhesion matura­
tion that occurs during EMT [89]. What makes Vimentin a true class of 
mesenchymal marker is its ability to increase β1-integrin and the decline 
expression of junction protein E-cadherin. Furthermore, slug expression 
is also mediated by Vimentin [89]. Vimentin has been markedly iden­
tified as a pre-metastatic marker and is related to poor prognosis and 
outcomes in solid tumors [85]. The interrelationship between auto­
phagy and Vimentin has been investigated using D-limonene, where D- 
limonene reduces the expression of Vimentin via autophagy modulation 
[90]. This is particularly helpful since LC3 lipidation by D-limonene is 
independent of mTOR inhibition, which plays a crucial role in auto­
phagy induction. Further, D-limonene stimulates ERK and ROS genera­
tion [90]. These characteristics are considered important in cancer 
therapeutics. Mesenchymal cell motility and mortality are of paramount 
importance in the EMT process. The Fsp-1 family has been indicated in 
microtubule dynamics, signal transduction processes, and cell cycle 
regulation [91]. Tubular epithelium transfected with cDNA encoding 
Fsp1 displays several properties of EMT, including a reduction in cell 
adhesion, cytokeratin, and expression of Vimentin. ATG7 modulates 
fibrosis by altering EMT in vitro [92]. In endothelial cells, loss of 
Fig. 3. Multifunctional role of autophagy over EMT markers.  
R. Gundamaraju et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
6
endothelial autophagy induced by silencing of ATG7 promoted endo­
thelial mesenchymal transition. Silencing of ATG7 was further assisted 
by marked morphological and ultra-structural changes changing cells. 
These morphological changes were also linked with the rearrangement 
of cytoskeletal proteins, a feature specific to the increased expression of 
mesenchymal markers. EMT was associated with decreased levels of 
endothelial markers, such as CD31, VE-cadherin, and Tie2, and 
increased levels of mesenchymal markers, such as FSP-1, suggesting that 
endothelial autophagy is active during the transition from one state to 
another [92]. The FSP-1 expression was clear in inflammatory mediated 
conditions such as ductular reactions, which are ideally the preliminary 
steps in most cancers [93]. The ductular cells from fibrotic livers showed 
an increased autophagy and underwent a mesenchymal transition, 
which demanded the initiation of the TGF-β/Smad2/3 signalling axis in 
an autophagy-dependent manner. Essentially, ductular cells were not 
only positive for LC3-II but also showed increased expression of TGF-β 
and fibroblast-specific protein-1 (FSP1) in cirrhotic human livers [94]. 
Autophagy orchestrates cancer cell proliferation, invasion and EMT, and 
in cancers, dysregulated circuits such as NFκB/SNAIL/YY1/RKIP/ 
PTEN—define the fate and regulation of tumor cell characteristics [95]. 
The relationship between SNAIL-induced EMT and autophagy was 
investigated where it was evaluated that the level of SNAIL increases 
post-transcriptionally and autophagy degrades SNAIL, but its inhibition 
increases SNAIL. Therefore, stimulation of autophagy inhibits EMT 
progression in this context [43]. Autophagy acts as a double-edged 
sword in the context of induction and inhibition of EMT through 
SNAIL degradation. MiR57c, for instance, impedes autophagy, cell 
infiltration, and cell migration. MiR57c is involved in the upregulation 
of the expression of the epithelial markers E-cadherin and Claudins in 
contrast, decreases the mesenchymal marker expression such as SNAIL 
and Vimentin, elucidating the blocking ability of miR517c against 
autophagy and its reflective effect on mesenchymal markers [96]. A 
clear description of SNAIL and autophagy in EMT has been reported, 
where the autophagy strives in the degradation of SNAIL and initiates a 
switch from the mesenchymal to the epithelial type, which is the prime 
characteristic in cancer metastasis [95]. The SNAIL axis and mechanisms 
basing autophagy can be extremely useful in designing therapeutics 
because starvation-mediated autophagy triggers SNAIL(SNAI1) degra­
dation and inhibits EMT and metastasis in cancer cells. Surprisingly, 
SNAI1 proteins are associated and colocalized with LC3 and SQSTM1 in 
cancer cells. In a study, ATG7 knockdown inhibited autophagy-induced 
SNAI1 degradation in the cytoplasm, which was associated with a 
decrease in SNAI1 nuclear translocation resulting in suppressed cancer 
cell invasion and migration by starvation-instigated autophagy [97]. 
The transcription factor TWIST actively regulates EMT in both the 
embryonic stage and in cancer [98]. Autophagy insufficiency stabilizes 
TWIST1 protein through SQSTM1/p62 accumulation. SQSTM1 binds 
with TWIST1 to inhibit TWIST1 degradation in both autophagosomes 
and proteasomes. This supports SQSTM1-mediated TWIST1 stabilization 
to promote EMT in vitro, tumor growth, and metastasis in mice. This 
suggests autophagy as a novel pathway to control the TWIST1 protein 
levels [98]. P62 acts as a bridge between autophagy and cancer. Auto­
phagy repression leads to p62 accumulation and the promotion of 
tumorigenesis. p62 inhibits degradation of Twist1. In murine models, 
p62 elevation escalates tumor cell growth and metastasis in a Twist1- 
dependent manner, thereby projecting Twist1 as a key downstream 
effector of p62 in the regulation of cell proliferation and migration [45]. 
Twist1 and Twist2 may also tag in conjunction with H-RASV12 to pre­
vent premature senescence of mouse embryonic fibroblasts by inhibiting 
the p53 pathway and promoting EMT by inhibiting E-cadherin expres­
sion and increasing vimentin expression [99]. In human skin squamous 
cell carcinoma and melanoma, autophagy deficiency supports EMT by 
stabilizing TWIST1 [98]. Research on breast and colon cancers affirmed 
that the death effector domain-containing DNA-binding protein (DEDD) 
negatively regulated EMT by triggering autophagy and subsequently 
inducing the autophagy-mediated lysosomal degradation of Snail and 
Twist [100]. SNAIL or SNAIL-1 is a vital player in EMT, especially in 
offering resistance to therapies in multiple cancers [101]. SLUG also 
carries a role in human oral squamous carcinoma, and silencing SLUG 
results in repression of anti-tumor drug resistance and invasion ability. 
TGF-β upregulates the expression of SNAIL and SLUG and promotes 
aggressiveness in cancers [101]. Either Slug or Snail silencing alone can 
partially mitigate malignancy potential in the presence of TGF-β, 
whereas both Slug and Snail siRNAs together can significantly suppress 
them. 
Inhibition of autophagy can be a therapeutic target in cancer. 
Autophagy inhibition in RAS-mutated cells induces EMT, which is 
related to enhanced tumor invasion. ZEB1 is a principal determinant of 
cell plasticity, furnishing cells with the ability to cope with an aberrant 
mitogenic activity, and has a profound effect on the genetic history of 
tumorigenesis, and the various limitations faced throughout tumor 
growth [102]. Suppression of ATG3 or ATG5 enhances oncogenic RAS- 
induced expression of ZEB1 [103]. In a very recent study on cancer stem 
cells (CSC), it was confirmed that autophagy supplements the stemness 
of lung CSCs by degrading ubiquitinated p53. Furthermore, Zeb1 is 
essential for TP53 regulation of CSC self-renewal. CSC utilizes the 
autophagy-p53-Zeb1 arm for renewal and oncogenesis [104]. This study 
strengthens the evidence of Zeb1 role in p53 regulation of CSC renewal. 
Autophagy modulation might act as a molecular switch from a 
mesenchymal phenotype to an epithelial-like one and vice versa in the 
GBM cellular model [47]. During the process of autophagy induced by 
nutrient deprivation or by pharmacological inhibition of the mTOR 
complexes, GBM migration and chemokine-mediated invasion are 
impaired. SNAIL and SLUG are down-regulated upon autophagy stim­
ulation and, a transcriptional and translational up-regulation of N and R- 
cadherins is further noted. Conversely, in BECLIN 1 silenced GBM cells, 
an increased migration capability and an up-regulation of SNAIL and 
SLUG are observed, with a resulting decrease in N- and R-cadherin 
mRNAs [47]. 
7. EMT modulates autophagy 
EMT plays a role in the genesis and progression of malignancies, as 
well as the chemoresistance of metastatic tumors. EMT and autophagy 
connection is complicated but critical in malignant cell invasion, 
metastasis, and generation of stem cell-like state and is an exciting topic 
in oncology research. The connection between EMT and autophagy is 
complex because recent findings suggest that autophagy may be acti­
vated or inhibited by EMT-related signalling pathways, while autophagy 
may also play an important role in the initiation and suppression of 
EMT. Understanding the molecular intricacies at the crossroads of 
autophagy and EMT, and this section intends to present the current 
know-how EMT modulates autophagy. Early in tumor development, 
adherent epithelial cells transform into highly motile mesenchymal cells 
by the process of EMT, followed by a metastatic transition. Cellular 
stresses like oxidative stress, ER-stress, are known to induce EMT, and 
EMT-inducing stimuli may activate autophagy to maintain the viability 
of the migratory cancer cells that mediate metastatic spread. Several 
signalling pathways related to EMT, including Ras, WNTs, and NF-kβ 
signalling cascades, also play a critical role in autophagy. Oncogenic 
activation of Ras mutation stimulates not only the Rac-MEK-ERK-Snail 
mediated EMT induction, but also Rac-JNK-Atg pathway mediated 
autophagy [105]. Similarly, NF-kβ modulates both EMT via SNAIL1/ 
SLUG/TWIST1/SIP1 [106] and autophagy by the suppression of Beclin- 
1 (an autophagy initiator) [105]. These associations between oncogenic 
signalling, EMT and autophagy are genetics dependent as well as tissue- 
dependent, hence intriguing. 
Several EMT-inducing signalling triggers, such as hypoxia and TGF- 
β, have been shown to potently induce autophagy in different disease 
contexts and cell types [107–109]. Kiyono et al. showed that TGF-β 
induced autophagosome formation and enhanced expression of many 
autophagy-related genes, via the Smad-JNK-dependent pathway in 
R. Gundamaraju et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
7
human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines and MDA-MB-231 mammary 
carcinoma cells [109]. Though these studies showed that EMT-inducers 
like TGF-β activate autophagy but whether EMT is upstream or down­
stream was not clear. He et al., demonstrated that TGF-β promoted 
transcription factor EB (TFEB)-driven autophagy in pancreatic cancer 
cells via the Smad pathway [110]. Liang et al., showed differential role 
of TGF-β-induced autophagy in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and 
its association with specific genetic backgrounds. TGF-β-induced auto­
phagy was associated with enhanced proliferation and reduced migra­
tion in Smad4-positive cells. Whereas in Smad4 deficient cells, TGF- 
β-induced autophagy leads to increased migration and reduced prolif­
eration along with the activation of MAPK/ERK activation and EMT 
phenotype [111]. This study elucidates the role of EMT-inducers, the 
molecular underpinning with autophagic flux generation in the context 
of genetic background, and its significance in understanding the cancer 
heterogeneity. These studies though show TGF-β-promoted EMT inhi­
bition by autophagy suppression. Recent data suggest that EMT is a non- 
binary phenomenon and encompasses dynamic intermediate cell states 
and also establishment of EMT memory are interesting aspects that are 
not phenotypically demarcated [112–114].Hence, additional research is 
required to better understand the divergence and convergence of EMT- 
inducing signalling on EMT and autophagy. Though converse relations 
where autophagy regulates EMT are also reported and discussed in the 
earlier section. 
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a key regulator of hypoxic 
stress and is a mediator of EMT in many cancer and associated metastasis 
[115]. HIF-1 is also reported to promote esophageal cancer cell growth 
in a xenograft model [109]. HIF-1 triggered autophagy via the p27-E2F1 
signalling pathway in human esophageal cancer cells [116] and also 
mediates mitochondrial autophagy [117]. Once again, the transcription 
factor E2F1 is reported to induce EMT via upregulating ZEB2 [116]. 
Hence, more evidence is essential to uncover the HIF-1 mediated regu­
lation of EMT and autophagy in the pathogenesis of cancer. EMT tran­
scription factors, on the other hand, seem to have an impact on the 
PI3K/Akt pathway, according to research. Twist has the ability to 
disrupt the Akt signalling pathway, according to current studies. This 
transcription factor enhances cancer cell phosphorylation, invasion, and 
metastasis via increasing miR-10b production [118]. Twist also seems to 
activate the PI3K/Akt signalling pathway by binding to the E-box area of 
the Akt2 promoter, according to the findings [119]. As a consequence of 
the positive feedback loop between Twist and Akt, the EMT and meta­
static spread processes are initiated. The PI3K-Akt-Ulk pathway is also 
important for autophagy. MT enhances tumor spread by increasing 
autophagy in cancer cells by enhancing the activity of transcription 
factors like Snail and Slug [120]. Slug is a Zinc finger transcriptional 
factor that promotes EMT and imparts cancer stem cell phenotype in 
breast cancer [121]. EMT-TF components regulate MITF activity during 
melanoma-genesis, which, as previously stated, promotes autophagy 
gene expression. This is an interesting finding [122]. 
Epithelial cells must utilize integrins to stay connected to the 
extracellular matrix (ECM) in order to survive. Anoikis, a kind of 
apoptotic cell death, is caused by prolonged detachment from the ECM 
[123]. Autophagy is triggered in cells when the epithelial cell-matrix is 
detached or blocked directly by integrins, and autophagy suppression 
increases the amount of epithelial cell death that happens when the 
matrix is removed. As a consequence, it is thought that autophagy is 
important for preventing anoikis and ensuring the survival of detaching 
tumor cells during metastatic dissemination [124]. The ER-stress sen­
sitive kinase, protein kinase R-like ER kinase, was shown to be activated 
in mammary tumor models in response to matrix separation or integrin 
blocking, and this was related to ROS-dependent activation of the 
autophagy induction pathway (PERK1) [125]. Using either the inhibi­
tion of PERK or autophagy itself during matrix detachment or the 
blockage of integrin signalling during detachment, a similar trend was 
seen. These findings indicate that autophagy-mediated by PERK is crit­
ical for breast tumor cell survival during matrix detachment. It is 
noteworthy that EMT enhances tumor spread by increasing autophagy 
in cancer cells. It is also a matter of investigation as to how EMT in 
different cancers might correlate with the different forms of autophagy 
namely, 
microautophagy, 
chaperone-mediated 
autophagy, 
and 
macroautophagy. 
8. Utilizing autophagy as therapeutic target 
Inhibition of EMT in cancer by regulating autophagy has caught 
great attention from researchers. Autophagy and EMT cross regulate 
each other via diverse signalling pathways. The major signalling path­
ways of autophagy regulation are PI3K/AKT/mTOR, Beclin-1, and JAK/ 
STAT pathways, which also significantly impact EMT [105]. On the 
other hand, the EMT process signalling pathways such as WNTs, TGF-β, 
and NF-κB involve in autophagy [105]. PI3K/AKT/mTOR signalling 
pathway is one of the most important pathways that regulate autophagy 
and EMT in cancer metastasis and as a therapeutic target. Pleckstrin 
homology like domain family A member 2 (PHLDA2) is one essential 
gene correlated with tumor progression by regulating PI3K/AKT/mTOR 
signalling pathway in osteosarcoma [126].Research has indicated that 
downregulation of PHLDA2 inhibited cellular proliferation, invasion, 
migration, and EMT and promoted autophagy apoptosis via PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR signalling pathway in colorectal cancer [127]. FAT tumor sup­
pressor homolog 4 (FAT4) has been found to display an inhibitory effect 
on EMT in gastric cancer cells [128]. FAT4 regulates the PI3K activity to 
promote autophagy and inhibit EMT via PI3K/AKT/mTOR and PI3K/ 
GSK-β signalling pathways in colorectal cancer [129]. In addition, some 
of the growth factors that activate the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signalling 
pathway induce EMT in cancer cells [130]. Blocking the growth factors 
can reverse the inductive effect therefore inhibiting the PI3K/Akt/ 
mTOR signalling pathway and further inhibiting metastasis. TGF-β is 
one of the prime EMT inducers, and it is involved in the induction of 
EMT by direct and indirect activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signalling 
[131]. Additional signalling pathways are involved in the cancer cell 
metastasis via inhibiting EMT by regulating autophagy (Table 1). 
Furthermore, the crosstalk between autophagy and EMT can be 
utilized for anticancer drug development. Autophagy is like a “double- 
edged sword” that can suppress and advance cancer progress. Some 
anticancer drugs are autophagy inhibitors or activators involved in 
different pathways to suppress the EMT process and reduce the anti­
cancer therapeutic resistance [13](Table 2). Alisertib promotes auto­
phagy and suppresses the EMT process by inhibiting the PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR pathway to impede the metastasis of cancer cells in pancreatic 
cancer [135] and ovarian cancer [136]. On the other hand, autophagy 
inhibitors, such as Chloroquine, 3-Methyladenine, are commonly used 
autophagy inhibitors in cancer treatment, which inhibit cancer cell 
Table 1 
Target signalling pathways for inhibiting EMT via regulation of autophagy.  
Inhibitor 
target 
Signalling 
pathways 
Promotion 
Inhibition 
Cancer 
PHLDA2 
PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR 
Apoptosis 
Cellular 
proliferation, 
invasion, 
migration, EMT 
Colorectal 
cancer [127] 
FAT4 
PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR 
PI3K/AKT/ 
GSK-3β 
Autophagy 
EMT, invasion, 
migration 
Colorectal 
cancer [129] 
CDH6 
TGF-β 
Autophagy 
EMT, metastasis 
Thyroid cancer  
[48,132] 
GSK-3β 
LKB1/ 
AMPK 
Apoptosis 
EMT, PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR 
Prostate cancer  
[133]; 
Head and neck 
squamous cell 
carcinoma  
[134]  
R. Gundamaraju et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
8
proliferation and metastasis. 
9. Conclusion and future directions 
Targeting both autophagy and EMT is an intriguing tumor-targeting 
strategy. Autophagy and EMT are intertwined processes that are critical 
in the onset and progression of cancer and pose significant challenges to 
anticancer therapy. Autophagy and EMT: Who controls whom? (Fig. 4) 
This is an interesting question. EMT and autophagy are modulated by 
both cell-intrinsic and extrinsic factors and are dynamically associated 
with tumor developmental stages. Therefore, new studies are required to 
generate a comprehensive idea about the complicated genetic and mo­
lecular network of regulatory signalling pathways and their control of 
EMT and autophagy. The EMT-autophagy interaction can play a crucial 
role in cancer development, metastasis, development of cancer stem cell 
phenotype, alteration of metabolic signature, and drug resistance, and 
much of this is an open question. The role of different oncogenic factors 
in differentially controlling EMT and autophagy in different cancers 
needs to be investigated. Paradoxically autophagy has been shown to 
impact EMT, depending on the environment of cancer cells during 
metastasis. Currently, autophagy inhibitors and activators, such as 
chloroquine and 3-methyladenine, have translational implications in 
anticancer treatment via modulating EMT. However, due to the un­
avoidable adverse effects, such as significant cytotoxicity and poor 
selectivity, there is a lack of clinical data regarding the therapeutic use of 
autophagy regulators. 
Additional studies are needed to understand the different categories 
of autophagy and their induction concerning the distinct epithelial- 
mesenchymal cell transition stages. Another exciting aspect is to study 
the metabolic shift and its correlation with EMT–autophagy interaction. 
Considering the role of several membrane proteins, like integrins and 
Cadherin’s in relation to autophagy, leads to the need to investigate 
these membrane proteins’ non-canonical roles. An additional exciting 
aspect is that the role of the tumor microenvironment in the regulation 
of EMT-autophagy in different cancers needs to be investigated in vivo. 
Table 2 
Autophagy inhibitors and activators used for anticancer drugs development.  
Autophagy activator 
Pathways/target 
Inhibition 
Cancer 
Alisertib 
PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR 
EMT, 
metastasis 
Pancreatic cancer  
[136]; ovarian 
cancer [136] 
Rapamycin 
mTOR regulating 
TGF-β 
EMT 
Gallbladder cancer  
[137]; Colorectal 
cancer [138] 
Brusatol 
PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR 
EMT 
Hepatocellular 
carcinoma [139] 
Metformin 
mTOR 
EMT 
Thyroid cancer  
[140] 
FTY720 
PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR 
Migration, 
invasion 
Glioblastoma [141] 
Autophagy inhibitor 
Pathways/target 
Inhibition 
Cancer 
Chloroquine 
Hydroxychloroquine 
Autophagosome- 
lysosome fusion; 
EMT, 
Beclin1 
Colorectal cancer, 
Renal cell carcinoma 
[142]; Bladder 
cancer [143]; Breast 
cancer [144] 
3-Methyladenine  
PI3K 
NSCLC [145] 
Afatinib 
AKT/mTOR, Erk 
EGFR 
NSCLC [146] 
Vismodegib 
ROS, GLI2 
SMO 
Lung 
adenocarcinoma  
[147] 
Bevacizumab  
VEGF 
Colorectal cancer  
[148]  
Fig. 4. Interrelationship between autophagy and EMT. 
Autophagy allows cellular material to be delivered to lysosomes for degradation resulting in a basal or stress-induced turnover of cell components that provide energy 
vital to cancer cells, promoting tumor and key processes like EMT. Autophagy holds the ability to control the regulatory switch for cancer initiation and progression/ 
inhibition. As described in the review, autophagy can widely orchestrate and modulate the EMT process and individual markers via diverse pathways and serve as a 
therapeutic target. On the other hand, EMT can control autophagy via a few pathways such as WNT, NF-kB, Smad-JNK, etc. Therefore, the hallmark of events in EMT- 
autophagy crosstalk can be extremely beneficial in cancer therapy to combat therapeutic resistance and control metastasis. 
R. Gundamaraju et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
9
It is interesting to think of a tumor-targeting strategy that targets both 
autophagy and EMT. Though preclinical data support targeting both 
EMT and autophagy processes, there is a dearth of clinical data. Further, 
there is a need for the development of suitable biomarkers defining 
different stages of EMT and different categories of autophagy. This can 
help in categorizing cancer genotypes for personalized medicine. It will 
be interesting to understand how EMT-autophagy interactions cause 
resistance to chemotherapy and immunotherapy. Recent advances in 
single-cell sequencing, single-cell proteomics, creation of data re­
positories, and machine learning algorithm-based big data analysis can 
help dissect out the interlink between autophagy, EMT, and metastasis. 
As a result, we should be able to search for more effective and precise 
ways to activate or inhibit autophagy, thus inhibiting EMT and regu­
lating cancer growth. Combination therapies can be a more promising 
anticancer strategy when coupled with EMT-autophagy inhibitors. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
References 
[1] P. Mehlen, A. Puisieux, Metastasis: a question of life or death, Nat. Rev. Cancer 6 
(2006) 449–458. 
[2] C.M. Dower, C.A. Wills, S.M. Frisch, H.G. Wang, Mechanisms and context 
underlying the role of autophagy in cancer metastasis, Autophagy 14 (2018) 
1110–1128. 
[3] S. Jonckheere, J. Adams, D. De Groote, K. Campbell, G. Berx, S. Goossens, 
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) as a therapeutic target, Cells Tissues 
Organs (2021) 1–26. 
[4] M. Gugnoni, V. Sancisi, G. Manzotti, G. Gandolfi, A. Ciarrocchi, Autophagy and 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition: an intricate interplay in cancer, Cell Death 
Dis. 7 (2016), e2520. 
[5] M.M. Hippert, P.S. O’Toole, A. Thorburn, Autophagy in cancer: good, bad, or 
both? Cancer Res. 66 (2006) 9349–9351. 
[6] L. Galluzzi, E.H. Baehrecke, A. Ballabio, P. Boya, J.M. Bravo-San Pedro, 
F. Cecconi, Molecular definitions of autophagy and related processes, Embo J. 36 
(2017) 1811–1836. 
[7] N. Mizushima, Autophagy: process and function, Genes Dev. 21 (2007) 
2861–2873. 
[8] N. Mizushima, D.J. Klionsky, Protein turnover via autophagy: implications for 
metabolism, Annu. Rev. Nutr. 27 (2007) 19–40. 
[9] X. Li, S. He, B. Ma, Autophagy and autophagy-related proteins in cancer, Mol. 
Cancer 19 (2020) 12. 
[10] K. Wang, D.J. Klionsky, Mitochondria removal by autophagy, Autophagy 7 
(2011) 297–300. 
[11] G. Ashrafi, T.L. Schwarz, The pathways of mitophagy for quality control and 
clearance of mitochondria, Cell Death Differ. 20 (2013) 31–42. 
[12] A.L. Anding, E.H. Baehrecke, Cleaning house: selective autophagy of organelles, 
Dev. Cell 41 (2017) 10–22. 
[13] E. White, Deconvoluting the context-dependent role for autophagy in cancer, Nat. 
Rev. Cancer 12 (2012) 401–410. 
[14] R.A. Barnard, D.P. Regan, R.J. Hansen, P. Maycotte, A. Thorburn, D.L. Gustafson, 
Autophagy inhibition delays early but not late-stage metastatic disease, 
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 358 (2016) 282–293. 
[15] C. Fung, R. Lock, S. Gao, E. Salas, J. Debnath, Induction of autophagy during 
extracellular matrix detachment promotes cell survival, Mol. Biol. Cell 19 (2008) 
797–806. 
[16] R.L. Macintosh, P. Timpson, J. Thorburn, K.I. Anderson, A. Thorburn, K.M. Ryan, 
Inhibition of autophagy impairs tumor cell invasion in an organotypic model, Cell 
Cycle 11 (2012) 2022–2029. 
[17] Y.F. Peng, Y.H. Shi, Z.B. Ding, A.W. Ke, C.Y. Gu, B. Hui, et al., Autophagy 
inhibition suppresses pulmonary metastasis of HCC in mice via impairing anoikis 
resistance and colonization of HCC cells, Autophagy 9 (2013) 2056–2068. 
[18] E. Morselli, L. Galluzzi, O. Kepp, J.M. Vicencio, A. Criollo, M.C. Maiuri, et al., 
Anti- and pro-tumor functions of autophagy, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1793 (2009) 
1524–1532. 
[19] W.J. Oh, C.C. Wu, S.J. Kim, V. Facchinetti, L.A. Julien, M. Finlan, mTORC2 can 
associate with ribosomes to promote cotranslational phosphorylation and 
stability of nascent Akt polypeptide, EMBO J. 29 (2010) 3939–3951. 
[20] J. Kim, M. Kundu, B. Viollet, K.L. Guan, AMPK and mTOR regulate autophagy 
through direct phosphorylation of Ulk1, Nat. Cell Biol. 13 (2011) 132–141. 
[21] L. Shang, S. Chen, F. Du, S. Li, L. Zhao, X. Wang, Nutrient starvation elicits an 
acute autophagic response mediated by Ulk1 dephosphorylation and its 
subsequent dissociation from AMPK, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108 (2011) 
4788–4793. 
[22] H.X. Yuan, R.C. Russell, K.L. Guan, Regulation of PIK3C3/VPS34 complexes by 
MTOR in nutrient stress-induced autophagy, Autophagy 9 (2013) 1983–1995. 
[23] A.S. Loffler, S. Alers, A.M. Dieterle, H. Keppeler, M. Franz-Wachtel, M. Kundu, et 
al., Ulk1-mediated phosphorylation of AMPK constitutes a negative regulatory 
feedback loop, Autophagy 7 (2011) 696–706. 
[24] I. Koren, E. Reem, A. Kimchi, DAP1, a novel substrate of mTOR, negatively 
regulates autophagy, Curr. Biol. 20 (2010) 1093–1098. 
[25] P.P. Hsu, S.A. Kang, J. Rameseder, Y. Zhang, K.A. Ottina, D. Lim, et al., The 
mTOR-regulated phosphoproteome reveals a mechanism of mTORC1-mediated 
inhibition of growth factor signaling, Science 332 (2011) 1317–1322. 
[26] J. Lim, M.L. Lachenmayer, S. Wu, W. Liu, M. Kundu, R. Wang, et al., Proteotoxic 
stress induces phosphorylation of p62/SQSTM1 by ULK1 to regulate selective 
autophagic clearance of protein aggregates, PLoS Genet. 11 (2015), e1004987. 
[27] M.S. Sosa, P. Bragado, J.A. Aguirre-Ghiso, Mechanisms of disseminated cancer 
cell dormancy: an awakening field, Nat. Rev. Cancer 14 (2014) 611–622. 
[28] Y.F. Peng, Y.H. Shi, Y.H. Shen, Z.B. Ding, A.W. Ke, J. Zhou, et al., Promoting 
colonization in metastatic HCC cells by modulation of autophagy, PLoS One 8 
(2013), e74407. 
[29] Z. Lu, R.Z. Luo, Y. Lu, X. Zhang, Q. Yu, S. Khare, et al., The tumor suppressor gene 
ARHI regulates autophagy and tumor dormancy in human ovarian cancer cells, 
J. Clin. Invest. 118 (2008) 3917–3929. 
[30] S. Valastyan, R.A. Weinberg, Tumor metastasis: molecular insights and evolving 
paradigms, Cell 147 (2011) 275–292. 
[31] G. Kroemer, G. Marino, B. Levine, Autophagy and the integrated stress response, 
Mol. Cell 40 (2010) 280–293. 
[32] R. Lazova, R.L. Camp, V. Klump, S.F. Siddiqui, R.K. Amaravadi, J.M. Pawelek, 
Punctate LC3B expression is a common feature of solid tumors and associated 
with proliferation, metastasis, and poor outcome, Clin. Cancer Res. 18 (2012) 
370–379. 
[33] H. Zhao, M. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, High expression of LC3B 
is associated with progression and poor outcome in triple-negative breast cancer, 
Med. Oncol. 30 (2013) 475. 
[34] S. Galavotti, S. Bartesaghi, D. Faccenda, M. Shaked-Rabi, S. Sanzone, A. McEvoy, 
et al., The autophagy-associated factors DRAM1 and p62 regulate cell migration 
and invasion in glioblastoma stem cells, Oncogene 32 (2013) 699–712. 
[35] H.Y. Zheng, X.Y. Zhang, X.F. Wang, B.C. Sun, Autophagy enhances the 
aggressiveness of human colorectal cancer cells and their ability to adapt to 
apoptotic stimulus, Cancer Biol. Med. 9 (2012) 105–110. 
[36] P.T. Caswell, J.C. Norman, Integrin trafficking and the control of cell migration, 
Traffic 7 (2006) 14–21. 
[37] P.T. Caswell, S. Vadrevu, J.C. Norman, Integrins: masters and slaves of endocytic 
transport, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 10 (2009) 843–853. 
[38] C.M. Kenific, S.J. Stehbens, J. Goldsmith, A.M. Leidal, N. Faure, J. Ye, et al., 
NBR1 enables autophagy-dependent focal adhesion turnover, J. Cell Biol. 212 
(2016) 577–590. 
[39] M.N. Sharifi, E.E. Mowers, L.E. Drake, C. Collier, H. Chen, M. Zamora, et al., 
Autophagy promotes focal adhesion disassembly and cell motility of metastatic 
tumor cells through the direct interaction of paxillin with LC3, Cell Rep. 15 
(2016) 1660–1672. 
[40] H. Wei, S. Wei, B. Gan, X. Peng, W. Zou, J.L. Guan, Suppression of autophagy by 
FIP200 deletion inhibits mammary tumorigenesis, Genes Dev. 25 (2011) 
1510–1527. 
[41] K. Polyak, R.A. Weinberg, Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal 
states: acquisition of malignant and stem cell traits, Nat. Rev. Cancer 9 (2009) 
265–273. 
[42] M.A. Nieto, R.Y. Huang, R.A. Jackson, J.P. Thiery, Emt: 2016, Cell 166 (2016) 
21–45. 
[43] G. Grassi, G. Di Caprio, L. Santangelo, G.M. Fimia, A.M. Cozzolino, M. Komatsu, 
et al., Autophagy regulates hepatocyte identity and epithelial-to-mesenchymal 
and mesenchymal-to-epithelial transitions promoting Snail degradation, Cell 
Death Dis. 6 (2015), e1880. 
[44] J. Li, B. Yang, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu, D. Shang, Y. Guo, et al., Autophagy promotes 
hepatocellular carcinoma cell invasion through activation of epithelial- 
mesenchymal transition, Carcinogenesis 34 (2013) 1343–1351. 
[45] L. Qiang, B. Zhao, M. Ming, N. Wang, T.C. He, S. Hwang, Regulation of cell 
proliferation and migration by p62 through stabilization of Twist1, Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111 (2014) 9241–9246. 
[46] M. Bertrand, V. Petit, A. Jain, R. Amsellem, T. Johansen, L. Larue, et al., 
SQSTM1/p62 regulates the expression of junctional proteins through epithelial- 
mesenchymal transition factors, Cell Cycle 14 (2015) 364–374. 
[47] M. Catalano, G. D’Alessandro, F. Lepore, M. Corazzari, S. Caldarola, C. Valacca, et 
al., Autophagy induction impairs migration and invasion by reversing EMT in 
glioblastoma cells, Mol. Oncol. 9 (2015) 1612–1625. 
[48] M. Gugnoni, V. Sancisi, G. Gandolfi, G. Manzotti, M. Ragazzi, D. Giordano, et al., 
Cadherin-6 promotes EMT and cancer metastasis by restraining autophagy, 
Oncogene 36 (2017) 667–677. 
[49] Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, J. Xue, X. Zhao, P. Liu, Autophagy inhibition promotes 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition through ROS/HO-1 pathway in ovarian cancer 
cells, Am. J. Cancer Res. 6 (2016) 2162–2177. 
[50] N. Mizushima, A. Yamamoto, M. Matsui, T. Yoshimori, Y. Ohsumi, In vivo 
analysis of autophagy in response to nutrient starvation using transgenic mice 
expressing a fluorescent autophagosome marker, Mol. Biol. Cell 15 (2004) 
1101–1111. 
[51] C.H. O’Flanagan, L.A. Smith, S.B. McDonell, S.D. Hursting, When less may be 
more: calorie restriction and response to cancer therapy, BMC Med. 15 (2017) 
106. 
R. Gundamaraju et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
10
[52] K.L. Tinkum, K.M. Stemler, L.S. White, A.J. Loza, S. Jeter-Jones, B.M. Michalski, 
Fasting protects mice from lethal DNA damage by promoting small intestinal 
epithelial stem cell survival, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112 (2015). E7148-54. 
[53] C. Lee, F.M. Safdie, L. Raffaghello, M. Wei, F. Madia, E. Parrella, et al., Reduced 
levels of IGF-I mediate differential protection of normal and cancer cells in 
response to fasting and improve chemotherapeutic index, Cancer Res. 70 (2010) 
1564–1572. 
[54] P. Sun, H. Wang, Z. He, X. Chen, Q. Wu, W. Chen, et al., Fasting inhibits colorectal 
cancer growth by reducing M2 polarization of tumor-associated macrophages, 
Oncotarget 8 (2017) 74649–74660. 
[55] W. Sa-Nongdej, S. Chongthammakun, C. Songthaveesin, Nutrient starvation 
induces apoptosis and autophagy in C6 glioma stem-like cells, Heliyon 7 (2021), 
e06352. 
[56] R.S. DiPaola, D. Dvorzhinski, A. Thalasila, V. Garikapaty, D. Doram, M. May, et 
al., Therapeutic starvation and autophagy in prostate cancer: a new paradigm for 
targeting metabolism in cancer therapy, Prostate 68 (2008) 1743–1752. 
[57] X.L. Guo, F. Hu, H. Wang, J.M. Fang, Z. Zhu, L. Wei, et al., Inhibition of 
autophagy in hepatocarcinoma cells promotes chemotherapeutic agent-induced 
apoptosis during nutrient deprivation, Oncol. Rep. 39 (2018) 773–783. 
[58] K. Sato, K. Tsuchihara, S. Fujii, M. Sugiyama, T. Goya, Y. Atomi, et al., Autophagy 
is activated in colorectal cancer cells and contributes to the tolerance to nutrient 
deprivation, Cancer Res. 67 (2007) 9677–9684. 
[59] S. Li, H.Y. Zhang, T. Wang, X. Meng, Z.H. Zong, D.H. Kong, et al., BAG3 promoted 
starvation-induced apoptosis of thyroid cancer cells via attenuation of autophagy, 
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 99 (2014). E2298-307. 
[60] J. Mejlvang, H. Olsvik, S. Svenning, J.A. Bruun, Y.P. Abudu, K.B. Larsen, et al., 
Starvation induces rapid degradation of selective autophagy receptors by 
endosomal microautophagy, J. Cell Biol. 217 (2018) 3640–3655. 
[61] R. Scherz-Shouval, H. Weidberg, C. Gonen, S. Wilder, Z. Elazar, M. Oren, p53- 
dependent regulation of autophagy protein LC3 supports cancer cell survival 
under prolonged starvation, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 (2010) 
18511–18516. 
[62] F. Madeo, F. Pietrocola, T. Eisenberg, G. Kroemer, Caloric restriction mimetics: 
towards a molecular definition, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 13 (2014) 727–740. 
[63] S. Owada, K. Ito, H. Endo, Y. Shida, C. Okada, T. Nezu, et al., An adaptation 
system to avoid apoptosis via autophagy under hypoxic conditions in pancreatic 
cancer cells, Anticancer Res. 37 (2017) 4927–4934. 
[64] M.A. Sulzer, M.P. Leers, J.A. van Noord, E.C. Bollen, P.H. Theunissen, Reduced E- 
cadherin expression is associated with increased lymph node metastasis and 
unfavorable prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer, Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care 
Med. 157 (1998) 1319–1323. 
[65] S.M. Siitonen, J.T. Kononen, H.J. Helin, I.S. Rantala, K.A. Holli, J.J. Isola, 
Reduced E-cadherin expression is associated with invasiveness and unfavorable 
prognosis in breast cancer, Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 105 (1996) 394–402. 
[66] T. Takayama, H. Shiozaki, M. Inoue, S. Tamura, H. Oka, T. Kadowaki, et al., 
Expression of e-cadherin and alpha-catenin molecules in human breast-cancer 
tissues and association with clinicopathological features, Int. J. Oncol. 5 (1994) 
775–780. 
[67] J.H. Schipper, U.H. Frixen, J. Behrens, A. Unger, K. Jahnke, W. Birchmeier, E- 
cadherin expression in squamous cell carcinomas of head and neck: inverse 
correlation with tumor dedifferentiation and lymph node metastasis, Cancer Res. 
51 (1991) 6328–6337. 
[68] V. Damiano, P. Spessotto, G. Vanin, T. Perin, R. Maestro, M. Santarosa, The 
autophagy machinery contributes to E-cadherin turnover in breast cancer, Front. 
Cell Dev. Biol. 8 (2020) 545. 
[69] C.A. Hu, Y. Hou, D. Yi, Y. Qiu, G. Wu, X. Kong, et al., Autophagy and tight 
junction proteins in the intestine and intestinal diseases, Anim. Nutr. 1 (2015) 
123–127. 
[70] S. McHarg, G. Hopkins, L. Lim, D. Garrod, Down-regulation of desmosomes in 
cultured cells: the roles of PKC, microtubules and lysosomal/proteasomal 
degradation, PLoS One 9 (2014), e108570. 
[71] P. Paoli, E. Giannoni, P. Chiarugi, Anoikis molecular pathways and its role in 
cancer progression, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1833 (2013) 3481–3498. 
[72] S.M. Frisch, R.A. Screaton, Anoikis mechanisms, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13 (2001) 
555–562. 
[73] S.M. Frisch, M. Schaller, B. Cieply, Mechanisms that link the oncogenic epithelial- 
mesenchymal transition to suppression of anoikis, J. Cell Sci. 126 (2013) 21–29. 
[74] S. Bafna, S. Kaur, S.K. Batra, Membrane-bound mucins: the mechanistic basis for 
alterations in the growth and survival of cancer cells, Oncogene 29 (2010) 
2893–2904. 
[75] R. Gundamaraju, W.C. Chong, Consequence of distinctive expression of MUC2 in 
colorectal cancers: how much is actually bad? Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Rev. 
Cancer 1876 (2021), 188579. 
[76] L. Yin, S. Kharbanda, D. Kufe, MUC1 oncoprotein promotes autophagy in a 
survival response to glucose deprivation, Int. J. Oncol. 34 (2009) 1691–1699. 
[77] S. Bafna, A. Singh, S. Batra, MUC4 mucin protects from nutrient deprivation- 
induced apoptosis by promoting autophagy, Cancer Res. 68 (2008) 3364. 
[78] K.K. Patel, H. Miyoshi, W.L. Beatty, R.D. Head, N.P. Malvin, K. Cadwell, et al., 
Autophagy proteins control goblet cell function by potentiating reactive oxygen 
species production, EMBO J. 32 (2013) 3130–3144. 
[79] Y. Nasu, A. Ido, S. Tanoue, S. Hashimoto, F. Sasaki, S. Kanmura, et al., Hepatocyte 
growth factor stimulates the migration of gastric epithelial cells by altering the 
subcellular localization of the tight junction protein ZO-1, J. Gastroenterol. 48 
(2013) 193–202. 
[80] K. Umeda, J. Ikenouchi, S. Katahira-Tayama, K. Furuse, H. Sasaki, M. Nakayama, 
et al., ZO-1 and ZO-2 independently determine where claudins are polymerized in 
tight-junction strand formation, Cell 126 (2006) 741–754. 
[81] S. Bi, L. Li, H. Gu, M. Li, S. Xu, W. Bu, et al., Lycopene upregulates ZO-1 and 
downregulates claudin-1 through autophagy inhibition in the human cutaneous 
squamous cell carcinoma cell line COLO-16, J. Cancer 10 (2019) 510–521. 
[82] D.A. Zajchowski, M.F. Bartholdi, Y. Gong, L. Webster, H.L. Liu, A. Munishkin, et 
al., Identification of gene expression profiles that predict the aggressive behavior 
of breast cancer cells, Cancer Res. 61 (2001) 5168–5178. 
[83] S. Kongara, O. Kravchuk, I. Teplova, F. Lozy, J. Schulte, D. Moore, et al., 
Autophagy regulates keratin 8 homeostasis in mammary epithelial cells and in 
breast tumors, Mol. Cancer Res. 8 (2010) 873–884. 
[84] Q. Miao, Y. Xu, H. Yin, H. Zhang, J. Ye, KRT8 phosphorylation regulates the 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in retinal pigment epithelial cells through 
autophagy modulation, J. Cell. Mol. Med. 24 (2020) 3217–3228. 
[85] S. Wu, Y. Du, J. Beckford, H. Alachkar, Upregulation of the EMT marker vimentin 
is associated with poor clinical outcome in acute myeloid leukemia, J. Transl. 
Med. 16 (2018) 170. 
[86] M.E. Kidd, D.K. Shumaker, K.M. Ridge, The role of vimentin intermediate 
filaments in the progression of lung cancer, Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 50 
(2014) 1–6. 
[87] A. Satelli, S. Li, Vimentin in cancer and its potential as a molecular target for 
cancer therapy, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 68 (2011) 3033–3046. 
[88] B.O. Sun, Y. Fang, Z. Li, Z. Chen, J. Xiang, Role of cellular cytoskeleton in 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition process during cancer progression, Biomed. 
Rep. 3 (2015) 603–610. 
[89] C.Y. Liu, H.H. Lin, M.J. Tang, Y.K. Wang, Vimentin contributes to epithelial- 
mesenchymal transition cancer cell mechanics by mediating cytoskeletal 
organization and focal adhesion maturation, Oncotarget 6 (2015) 15966–15983. 
[90] D. Gentile, L. Berliocchi, R. Russo, G. Bagetta, M.T. Corasaniti, Effects of the 
autophagy modulators d-limonene and chloroquine on vimentin levels in SH- 
SY5Y cells, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 533 (2020) 764–769. 
[91] H. Okada, T.M. Danoff, R. Kalluri, E.G. Neilson, Early role of Fsp1 in epithelial- 
mesenchymal transformation, Am. J. Phys. 273 (1997). F563-74. 
[92] K.K. Singh, F. Lovren, Y. Pan, A. Quan, A. Ramadan, P.N. Matkar, et al., The 
essential autophagy gene ATG7 modulates organ fibrosis via regulation of 
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition, J. Biol. Chem. 290 (2015) 2547–2559. 
[93] Y. Li, R. Liu, J. Wu, X. Li, Self-eating: friend or foe? The emerging role of 
autophagy in fibrotic diseases, Theranostics 10 (2020) 7993–8017. 
[94] T.M. Hung, Y.J. Huang, Y.C. Lin, Y.H. Chen, Y.M. Wu, P.H. Lee, A critical role of 
autophagy in regulating the mesenchymal transition of ductular cells in liver 
cirrhosis, Sci. Rep. 9 (2019) 10673. 
[95] B. Bonavida, Linking autophagy and the dysregulated NFkappaB/ SNAIL/YY1/ 
RKIP/PTEN loop in cancer: therapeutic implications, Crit. Rev. Oncog. 23 (2018) 
307–320. 
[96] L. Lu, L. Zhou, E.Z. Chen, K. Sun, P. Jiang, L. Wang, et al., A novel YY1-miR-1 
regulatory circuit in skeletal myogenesis revealed by genome-wide prediction of 
YY1-miRNA network, PLoS One 7 (2012), e27596. 
[97] S. Zada, J.S. Hwang, M. Ahmed, T.H. Lai, T.M. Pham, D.R. Kim, Control of the 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and cancer metastasis by autophagy- 
dependent SNAI1 degradation, Cells 8 (2019). 
[98] L. Qiang, Y.Y. He, Autophagy deficiency stabilizes TWIST1 to promote epithelial- 
mesenchymal transition, Autophagy 10 (2014) 1864–1865. 
[99] S. Ansieau, J. Bastid, A. Doreau, A.P. Morel, B.P. Bouchet, C. Thomas, et al., 
Induction of EMT by twist proteins as a collateral effect of tumor-promoting 
inactivation of premature senescence, Cancer Cell 14 (2008) 79–89. 
[100] Q. Lv, F. Hua, Z.W. Hu, DEDD, a novel tumor repressor, reverses epithelial- 
mesenchymal transition by activating selective autophagy, Autophagy 8 (2012) 
1675–1676. 
[101] R. Nakamura, H. Ishii, K. Endo, A. Hotta, E. Fujii, K. Miyazawa, et al., Reciprocal 
expression of Slug and snail in human oral cancer cells, PLoS One 13 (2018), 
e0199442. 
[102] J. Caramel, M. Ligier, A. Puisieux, Pleiotropic roles for ZEB1 in cancer, Cancer 
Res. 78 (2018) 30–35. 
[103] Y. Wang, H. Xiong, D. Liu, C. Hill, A. Ertay, J. Li, et al., Autophagy inhibition 
specifically promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition and invasion in RAS- 
mutated cancer cells, Autophagy 15 (2019) 886–899. 
[104] J. Wang, D. Liu, Z. Sun, T. Ye, J. Li, B. Zeng, et al., Autophagy augments the self- 
renewal of lung cancer stem cells by the degradation of ubiquitinated p53, Cell 
Death Dis. 12 (2021) 98. 
[105] H.T. Chen, H. Liu, M.J. Mao, Y. Tan, X.Q. Mo, X.J. Meng, et al., Crosstalk between 
autophagy and epithelial-mesenchymal transition and its application in cancer 
therapy, Mol. Cancer 18 (2019) 101. 
[106] B.R. Pires, A.L. Mencalha, G.M. Ferreira, W.F. de Souza, J.A. Morgado-Diaz, A. 
M. Maia, et al., NF-kappaB is involved in the regulation of EMT genes in breast 
cancer cells, PLoS One 12 (2017), e0169622. 
[107] F. Heydarpour, S. Sajadimajd, E. Mirzarazi, P. Haratipour, T. Joshi, M.H. Farzaei, 
et al., Involvement of TGF-beta and Autophagy pathways in pathogenesis of 
diabetes: a comprehensive review on biological and pharmacological insights, 
Front. Pharmacol. 11 (2020), 498758. 
[108] S. Ghavami, R.H. Cunnington, S. Gupta, B. Yeganeh, K.L. Filomeno, D.H. Freed, et 
al., Autophagy is a regulator of TGF-beta1-induced fibrogenesis in primary human 
atrial myofibroblasts, Cell Death Dis. 6 (2015), e1696. 
[109] K. Kiyono, H.I. Suzuki, H. Matsuyama, Y. Morishita, A. Komuro, M.R. Kano, et al., 
Autophagy is activated by TGF-beta and potentiates TGF-beta-mediated growth 
R. Gundamaraju et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
BBA - Molecular Basis of Disease 1868 (2022) 166431
11
inhibition in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells, Cancer Res. 69 (2009) 
8844–8852. 
[110] R. He, M. Wang, C. Zhao, M. Shen, Y. Yu, L. He, et al., TFEB-driven autophagy 
potentiates TGF-beta induced migration in pancreatic cancer cells, J. Exp. Clin. 
Cancer Res. 38 (2019) 340. 
[111] C. Liang, J. Xu, Q. Meng, B. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Hua, et al., TGFB1-induced 
autophagy affects the pattern of pancreatic cancer progression in distinct ways 
depending on SMAD4 status, Autophagy 16 (2020) 486–500. 
[112] L.G. Karacosta, B. Anchang, N. Ignatiadis, S.C. Kimmey, J.A. Benson, J.B. Shrager, 
et al., Mapping lung cancer epithelial-mesenchymal transition states and 
trajectories with single-cell resolution, Nat. Commun. 10 (2019) 5587. 
[113] R. Li, S.L. Ong, L.M. Tran, Z. Jing, B. Liu, S.J. Park, et al., Chronic IL-1beta- 
induced inflammation regulates epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition memory 
phenotypes via epigenetic modifications in non-small cell lung cancer, Sci. Rep. 
10 (2020) 377. 
[114] A. Basu M. K. Paul M. Alioscha-Perez A. Grosberg H. Sahli S. M. Dubinett , et al. 
Image Quantification Technique Reveals Novel Lung CancerCytoskeletal 
Phenotype With Partial EMT Signature. bioRxiv2021:2021.06.17.448784. 
[115] S.Y. Tam, V.W.C. Wu, H.K.W. Law, Hypoxia-induced epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition in cancers: HIF-1alpha and beyond, Front. Oncol. 10 (2020) 486. 
[116] P. Wang, M. Long, S. Zhang, Z. Cheng, X. Zhao, F. He, et al., Hypoxia inducible 
factor-1alpha regulates autophagy via the p27–E2F1 signaling pathway, Mol. 
Med. Rep. 16 (2017) 2107–2112. 
[117] H. Zhang, M. Bosch-Marce, L.A. Shimoda, Y.S. Tan, J.H. Baek, J.B. Wesley, et al., 
Mitochondrial autophagy is an HIF-1-dependent adaptive metabolic response to 
hypoxia, J. Biol. Chem. 283 (2008) 10892–10903. 
[118] G. Hujie, S.H. Zhou, H. Zhang, J. Qu, X.W. Xiong, O. Hujie, et al., MicroRNA-10b 
regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition by modulating KLF4/KLF11/Smads 
in hepatocellular carcinoma, Cancer Cell Int. 18 (2018) 10. 
[119] W. Xu, Z. Yang, N. Lu, A new role for the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway in the 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, Cell Adhes. Migr. 9 (2015) 317–324. 
[120] D. Medici, E.D. Hay, B.R. Olsen, Snail and Slug promote epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition through beta-catenin-T-cell factor-4-dependent expression of 
transforming growth factor-beta3, Mol. Biol. Cell 19 (2008) 4875–4887. 
[121] S. Phillips, C. Kuperwasser, SLUG: critical regulator of epithelial cell identity in 
breast development and cancer, Cell Adhes. Migr. 8 (2014) 578–587. 
[122] Y. Tang, S. Durand, S. Dalle, J. Caramel, EMT-inducing transcription factors, 
drivers of melanoma phenotype switching, and resistance to treatment, Cancers 
(Basel) (2020) 12. 
[123] Z. Su, Z. Yang, Y. Xu, Y. Chen, Q. Yu, Apoptosis, autophagy, necroptosis, and 
cancer metastasis, Mol. Cancer 14 (2015) 48. 
[124] J. Yang, Z. Zheng, X. Yan, X. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Ma, Integration of autophagy and 
anoikis resistance in solid tumors, Anat. Rec. (Hoboken) 296 (2013) 1501–1508. 
[125] L. Poillet-Perez, G. Despouy, R. Delage-Mourroux, M. Boyer-Guittaut, Interplay 
between ROS and autophagy in cancer cells, from tumor initiation to cancer 
therapy, Redox Biol. 4 (2015) 184–192. 
[126] G.S. Zhao, Z.R. Gao, Q. Zhang, X.F. Tang, Y.F. Lv, Z.S. Zhang, et al., TSSC3 
promotes autophagy via inactivating the src-mediated PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway 
to suppress tumorigenesis and metastasis in osteosarcoma, and predicts a 
favorable prognosis, J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 37 (2018) 188. 
[127] Z. Ma, S. Lou, Z. Jiang, PHLDA2 regulates EMT and autophagy in colorectal 
cancer via the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, Aging (Albany NY) 12 (2020) 
7985–8000. 
[128] D.F. Egan, M.G. Chun, M. Vamos, H. Zou, J. Rong, C.J. Miller, et al., Small 
molecule inhibition of the autophagy kinase ULK1 and identification of ULK1 
substrates, Mol. Cell 59 (2015) 285–297. 
[129] R. Wei, Y. Xiao, Y. Song, H. Yuan, J. Luo, W. Xu, FAT4 regulates the EMT and 
autophagy in colorectal cancer cells in part via the PI3K-AKT signaling axis, 
J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 38 (2019) 112. 
[130] S.H. Baek, J.H. Ko, J.H. Lee, C. Kim, H. Lee, D. Nam, et al., Ginkgolic acid inhibits 
invasion and migration and TGF-beta-induced EMT of lung cancer cells through 
PI3K/Akt/mTOR inactivation, J. Cell. Physiol. 232 (2017) 346–354. 
[131] M.K. Wendt, J.A. Smith, W.P. Schiemann, Transforming growth factor-beta- 
induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition facilitates epidermal growth factor- 
dependent breast cancer progression, Oncogene 29 (2010) 6485–6498. 
[132] V. Sancisi, G. Gandolfi, M. Ragazzi, D. Nicoli, I. Tamagnini, S. Piana, et al., 
Cadherin 6 is a new RUNX2 target in TGF-beta signalling pathway, PLoS One 8 
(2013), e75489. 
[133] A. Sun, C. Li, R. Chen, Y. Huang, Q. Chen, X. Cui, et al., GSK-3beta controls 
autophagy by modulating LKB1-AMPK pathway in prostate cancer cells, Prostate 
76 (2016) 172–183. 
[134] H.W. Chang, Y.S. Lee, H.Y. Nam, M.W. Han, H.J. Kim, S.Y. Moon, et al., 
Knockdown of beta-catenin controls both apoptotic and autophagic cell death 
through LKB1/AMPK signaling in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell 
lines, Cell. Signal. 25 (2013) 839–847. 
[135] F. Wang, H. Li, X.G. Yan, Z.W. Zhou, Z.G. Yi, Z.X. He, et al., Alisertib induces cell 
cycle arrest and autophagy and suppresses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
involving PI3K/Akt/mTOR and sirtuin 1-mediated signaling pathways in human 
pancreatic cancer cells, Drug Des. Devel. Ther. 9 (2015) 575–601. 
[136] Y.H. Ding, Z.W. Zhou, C.F. Ha, X.Y. Zhang, S.T. Pan, Z.X. He, et al., Alisertib, an 
Aurora kinase a inhibitor, induces apoptosis and autophagy but inhibits epithelial 
to mesenchymal transition in human epithelial ovarian cancer cells, Drug Des. 
Devel. Ther. 9 (2015) 425–464. 
[137] H. Zong, B. Yin, H. Zhou, D. Cai, B. Ma, Y. Xiang, Inhibition of mTOR pathway 
attenuates migration and invasion of gallbladder cancer via EMT inhibition, Mol. 
Biol. Rep. 41 (2014) 4507–4512. 
[138] Y. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Lu, P. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, et al., Rapamycin inhibits 
FBXW7 loss-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer stem cell-like 
characteristics in colorectal cancer cells, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 434 
(2013) 352–356. 
[139] R. Ye, N. Dai, Q. He, P. Guo, Y. Xiang, Q. Zhang, et al., Comprehensive anti-tumor 
effect of brusatol through inhibition of cell viability and promotion of apoptosis 
caused by autophagy via the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway in hepatocellular 
carcinoma, Biomed. Pharmacother. 105 (2018) 962–973. 
[140] B. Han, H. Cui, L. Kang, X. Zhang, Z. Jin, L. Lu, et al., Metformin inhibits thyroid 
cancer cell growth, migration, and EMT through the mTOR pathway, Tumour 
Biol. 36 (2015) 6295–6304. 
[141] L. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Zhu, K. Ding, J. Xu, FTY720 reduces migration and invasion 
of human glioblastoma cell lines via inhibiting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR/p70S6K 
signaling pathway, Tumour Biol. 35 (2014) 10707–10714. 
[142] M. Singla, S. Bhattacharyya, Autophagy as a potential therapeutic target during 
epithelial to mesenchymal transition in renal cell carcinoma: an in vitro study, 
Biomed. Pharmacother. 94 (2017) 332–340. 
[143] H. Tong, H. Yin, M.A. Hossain, Y. Wang, F. Wu, X. Dong, et al., Starvation-induced 
autophagy promotes the invasion and migration of human bladder cancer cells 
via TGF-beta1/Smad3-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition activation, 
J. Cell. Biochem. 120 (2019) 5118–5127. 
[144] F.A. Janser, M.P. Tschan, R. Langer, The role of autophagy in HER2-targeted 
therapy, Swiss Med. Wkly. 149 (2019), w20138. 
[145] H. Wang, Y. Zhang, Q. Wu, Y.B. Wang, W. Wang, miR-16 mimics inhibit TGF- 
beta1-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition via activation of autophagy 
in non-small cell lung carcinoma cells, Oncol. Rep. 39 (2018) 247–254. 
[146] X. Hu, S. Shi, H. Wang, X. Yu, Q. Wang, S. Jiang, et al., Blocking autophagy 
improves the anti-tumor activity of afatinib in lung adenocarcinoma with 
activating EGFR mutations in vitro and in vivo, Sci. Rep. 7 (2017) 4559. 
[147] J. Fan, X. Zhang, S. Wang, W. Chen, Y. Li, X. Zeng, et al., Regulating autophagy 
facilitated therapeutic efficacy of the sonic hedgehog pathway inhibition on lung 
adenocarcinoma through GLI2 suppression and ROS production, Cell Death Dis. 
10 (2019) 626. 
[148] Z. Zhao, G. Xia, N. Li, R. Su, X. Chen, L. Zhong, Autophagy inhibition promotes 
bevacizumab-induced apoptosis and proliferation inhibition in colorectal cancer 
cells, J. Cancer 9 (2018) 3407–3416. 
R. Gundamaraju et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
