ABSTRACTS
Abstracts
32nd Congress of the ESP and XXXIII International Congress of the IAP
Oral Free Paper Sessions
OFP-01-001
Kidney biopsy codes for pathologists-mapping to SNOMED CT
A. Dendooven*, M.J. Helbert, H. Peetermans, S. Leh
*UZ Gent, Universiteit Antwerpen, Belgium
Background & objectives: The “Kidney Biopsy Codes (KBC)” project
provides terms that allow any diagnosis and/or histomorphological pat-
tern for a non-neoplastic kidney biopsy to be coded. We explored whether
mapping to SNOMED CT is feasible, to enable aggregation and comput-
erized exchange of data.
Methods: For KBC terms for which an unambiguous match with a pre-
existing SNOMED CT concept was available, both ‘parent concept’ and
the place in the SNOMED taxonomy were established. For remaining
terms, we explored whether these could be defined by combining pre-
existing (more simple) SNOMED CT concepts. This process ('post-coor-
dination’) is well supported by SNOMED CT and allows extending its
content.
Results: Of glomerular terms, 88/195 (45%) could be matched to
SNOMED CT. %-matching was more successful for KBC terms desig-
nating disease concepts (56%) than patterns of injury (32%). For the
majority of terms that could not be mapped, we found that these could
indeed be defined as a compositional expression of pre-existing
SNOMED CT concepts (post-coordination). We suggested concepts that
are needed for this post-coordination.
Conclusion: SNOMED CT is considered the standard for documenting,
encoding and exchanging medical data in/between health information sys-
tems. This proof-of-concept shows that mapping of KBC terms to
SNOMED CT is feasible, in part directly, in part through post-coordination.
OFP-01-002
Molecular analysis of renal transplant biopsies comparing the
Edmonton Molecular Microscope with the NanoString Human
Organ Transplant Panel
J. Schmitz*, H. Stark, S. Bartels, D. Jonigk, P.F. Halloran, G. Einecke,
J.H. Bräsen
*Institute of Pathology, Nephropathology Unit, Hannover Medical
School, Germany
Background & objectives: Different molecular methods like microar-
rays or quantitative PCRs were used by several groups on renal transplant
tissues. High-resolution determination of the inflammatory infiltrate by
NanoString analysis (which was developed for formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded-derived RNA) should be a sufficient approach.
Methods: We used surveillance and indication biopsies from 63 patients
whose time-matched second biopsy core had been frozen and analysed by
microarray in the INTERCOM/INTERCOMEX study. After re-
evaluation according to recent Banff consensus, RNA isolation was per-
formed with Maxwell FFPE kits and led to sufficient RNA yields in 53
samples which were further processed for NanoString analysis (Human
Organ Transplant panel).
Results: Morphologically, of the 53 samples analysed (samples from
2011/12 and 2015), twenty-five patients showed no signs of rejection,
twelve had borderline rejection, four showed cellular rejection, seven had
humoral rejection, and five presented with combined rejection.
Preliminary analysis of gene expression by T-distributed Stochastic
Neighbour Embedding (t-SNE), Random Forest and Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) showed clear differences between samples
with rejection (humoral and cellular) and without rejection. Rejection
samples revealed high expression of chemokine ligands compared to
rejection-free tissues. Borderline rejection shared a common pattern com-
pared to samples without rejection. First results display good correlation
with the former molecular diagnosis from the INTERCOM/
INTERCOMEX study.
Conclusion: Molecular approach using the NanoString platform may
supplement morphological diagnosis of renal grafts especially in unclear
cases and thus enhance precision diagnostics with small tissue require-
ment. Morphological and molecular evaluation in the same biopsy core
from FFPE tissue enables direct histological-molecular correlation.
Additionally, this technology also improves our understanding of patho-
physiology in renal and other transplants.
Funding by: Dr. Werner Jackstädt foundation
OFP-01-003
Arteriolar C4d: a potential prognostic marker in IgA nephropathy –
a retrospective study in a Portuguese tertiary centre
P. Amoroso Canão*, B. Faria, Q. Cai, C. Henriques, A.C. Matos,
F. Poppelaars, M. Gaya da Costa, M. R. Daha, R. Pestana Silva,
M. Pestana, M. A. Seelen
*Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Portugal
Background & objectives: IgA Nephropathy (IgAN) is the most com-
mon glomerulonephritis worldwide. C4d has been recognized as a marker
associated with significantly reduced renal survival. We aimed to study
the clinical significance of arteriolar immunoexpression of C4d in a co-
hort of IgAN patients.
Methods: We selected all kidney biopsies with the diagnosis of IgAN,
between 2001 and 2017, and reviewed their clinical features; evaluated
them according to the Oxford Classification of IgAN 2016 and assessed
the presence of vascular lesions. We evaluated the arteriolar and glomer-
ular immunoexpressions of C4d and their association with the baseline
and follow-up clinico-histological data thought bivariate and regression
analysis.
Results: Arteriolar immunoexpression of C4d was present in 21 (17%)
biopsies and associated with mean arterial pressure (MAP), chronic mi-
croangiopathy and arterial intimal fibroelastosis. After adjusting to other
significant predictors, such as baseline estimated glomerular filtration
rate, MAP and the presence of crescents, this immunoexpression
remained significantly associated (P values <0.001) with progressive kid-
ney disease.
Conclusion: Arteriolar immunoexpression of C4d is a potential prognos-
tic marker in IgAN. These findings raise the possibility of including
immunohistochemistry for C4d in the evaluation of IgAN biopsies.
OFP-01 Joint Oral Free Paper Session: Uropathology /
Nephropathology
Virchows Archiv
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-020-02938-x
OFP-01-004
The impact of vitamin D3 (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3) and its role on
to the epithelial to mesenchymal transition and the development of
interstitial fibrosis in renal allografts
E.S. Ayva*, B.H. Ozdemir, E. Yılmaz Akcay, G. Ozdemir, A. Yucel
Polat, M. Haberal
*Baskent University, School of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Turkey
Background & objectives: This study aimed to understand the role and
the mechanism of action of vitamin D3 (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3) in
the development of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and in-
terstitial fibrosis (IF) in renal transplant (Tx) patients.
Methods: Out of 161 cases, 70 treated with vitamin D3 (Group D) and 91
cases did not receive vitamin D3 (Group A). Cytoskeletal proteins F-
actin, α-SMA and paxillin expression of tubules and the tubular
TGF-β, TNF-α, and E-cadherin expression evaluated. Follow-up biop-
sies analysed for the development of IF during 18 and 24 months after Tx.
Results: Group D patients showed higher degrees of tubular E-cadherin
expression than Group A (p<0.001). Tubular F-actin, α-SMA, paxillin,
TGF-β and TNF-α found significantly low in Group D compared to
Group A (p<0.001). A positive correlation found between the develop-
ment of IF with the tubular F-actin, α-SMA, paxillin, TNF-α and TGF-β
expression (p<0.001). The development of IF during in follow-up biop-
sies found lower in Group D compared to Group A (p<0.001)
Conclusion: The activation of EMT and the occurrence of IF
found higher in Group A cases who had cytoskeleton reorganiza-
tion (increased F-actin, α-SMA, paxillin expression), and E-
cadherin downregulation. E-cadherin loss during EMT suggested
to promoted by high TNF-α and TGF-β expression. Contrarily,
Group D patients had a lower incidence of IF. Treatment with D3
abolishes the EMT promoted by TNF-α and TGF-β. Therefore,
D3 therapy is beneficial in renal transplant patients with its
antifibrotic property.
OFP-01-005
Rearrangement of the endothelial cell cytoskeleton in glomerular and
peritubular capillaries following antibody-mediated rejection: its sig-
nificance on the development of transplant glomerulopathy and in-
terstitial fibrosis
E.S. Ayva*, B.H. Ozdemir, E. Yılmaz Akcay, G. Ozdemir, M. Haberal
*Baskent University, School of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Turkey
Background & objectives: This study aimed to understand the rear-
rangement of endothelial cell cytoskeleton (EC-CSK) both in glomeruli
and peritubular capillaries (PTCs) in antibody-mediated rejection (AMR)
and to investigate the influence of cytoskeleton rearrangement on the
development of transplant glomerulopathy and interstitial fibrosis
Methods: Total 116 allograft biopsies which diagnosed with AMR were
re-evaluated and the intensity of interstitial, glomerular and PTC inflam-
mation were graded. The endothelial cell (EC) expression of F-actin,
paxillin, vinculin, HIF-1α, VEGF, and eNOS were evaluated in glomer-
uli and PTCs. Follow-up biopsies analysed for the development of trans-
plant glomerulopathy (TG) and interstitial fibrosis (IF).
Results: The expression of F-actin paxillin, vinculin, HIF-1α, VEGF and
eNOS in EC increased with increasing degree of C4d expression, PTC
destruction, interstitial inflammation, glomerulitis and PTC-itis in glo-
meruli and PTCs (p<0.001). The risk of the development of TG, IF,
proteinuria, and graft loss found higher in recipients with a high degree
of F-actin, paxillin, vinculin, HIF-1α, VEGF and eNOS expression
(p<0.001).
Conclusion: We hypothesized that PTC destruction following AMR
causes chronic hypoxia that induces HIF-1α, VEGF and eNOS expres-
sion that give rise to the reorganization of EC-CSK. Upon the
reorganization of EC-CSK and the increased amount of endothelial
VEGF together induce the formation of gaps between adjacent ECs,
which in turn initiate EC permeability and influx of leukocytes and pro-
teinuria. As a consequence, the increasing amount of inflammatory cells
induces the early development of IF, TG, and consequently the premature
graft loss.
OFP-01-006
Application of artificial intelligence (AI) in assessment of renal allo-
graft biopsies: comparison with subjective Banff criteria for graft
inflammation
M. Shamassi*, E.S. Ayva, N.K. Alham, I.S. Roberts
*Department of Anatomical Pathology, Monash Medical Centre, Monash
Health, Melbourne, Australia
Background & objectives: The Banff classification is used routinely in
reporting of transplant biopsies. The variable reproducibility of Banff
criteria limits its clinical value. This study evaluated the use of AI to
quantify graft inflammation and correlated inflammatory cell density with
Banff scores.
Methods: Digital images from 119 allograft biopsies were scored by two
renal pathologists according to Banff criteria. Images were then analysed
using the Visiopharm Integrator System platform. An APP was designed
to quantify inflammation within normal and fibrotic cortex, and an aux-
iliary APP to exclude glomeruli. The model was trained through one
million iterations.
Results: The inter-observer agreement for i, ti and i-IFTA scores was
moderate to good (kappa-scores 0.615, 0.566, 0.552 respectively).
Banff scores correlated only weakly with the density of inflammatory
cells assessed using AI. i-score: only for i0 vs i3 was there a significantly
different inflammatory cell density. i-IFTA and ti scores: the density was
significantly greater for Banff categories 1-3 than 0, but there were no
significant differences between categories 1-3.
Conclusion: he density of inflammatory cells correlates weakly with
Banff scores, likely reflecting the fact that a pathologist will only recog-
nise cortex as inflamed when there is greater than a threshold level of
inflammatory cell density in a particular area. It remains to be ascertained
whether inflammatory cell density assessed by AI or subjective Banff
scores correlate better with clinical outcome and response to treatment.
OFP-01-007
Carcinogen-induced tumour mouse model reveals dynamic molecu-
lar changes during basal bladder cancer progression
J. Fontugne*, J. Wong, N. Karboul, A. Rapinat, P. Maille, R. Leclere,
A. Nicolas, D. Meseure, D. Gentien, S. Baulande, N. Servant, I. Bernard-
Pierrot, M. Sibony, F. Radvanyi, Y. Allory
*Molecular Oncology team, UMR144, Institut Curie, Paris, France
Background & objectives: The basal subgroup of bladder cancer is often
diagnosed at the muscle-invasive stage (MIBC). Identification of molec-
ular changes during progression from non-muscle-invasive (NMIBC) to
basal MIBC is challenging.
We used the N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)-nitrosamine (BBN) mouse
model to study disease progression.
Methods: To study multiple stages of progression, 40 mice bladders were
obtained at different time points following an oral BBN exposure of a
maximum of 14 weeks. To characterize molecular changes occurring
during progression from early stages to MIBC, we performed immuno-
histochemistry (IHC) - markers of basal (CK5, CK6, CK14) and luminal
subtypes (FOXA1, CK20) - and RNA-seq for all stages.
Results: Morphological analysis identified a spectrum of lesions during
BBN exposure: hyperplasia (n= 5), dysplasia (n=5), CIS (n=3), pTa
(n=14), pT1 (n= 6), MIBC (n = 7). All tumours displayed a squamous
or sarcomatoid component. IHC showed expression of basal markers
Virchows Arch
within early stages of carcinogenesis, with a decrease in FOXA1 expres-
sion during progression. Molecular classifications using RNA-seq data
highlighted an early and progressive switch to the complete basal pheno-
type. Further analysis of RNA-seq data identified clusters of genes with
expression changes during progression. Assessment of the expression
dynamics of each cluster of genes provided insights into specific biolog-
ical processes involved in basal bladder cancer progression and invasion.
Conclusion: We used the BBN-induced cancer mouse model to longitu-
dinally study carcinogenesis and progression of basal bladder cancer. Our
study sheds light on the underlying biology of progression from NMIBC
to basal MIBC and from squamous to the aggressive sarcomatoid variant.
OFP-01-008
TERT promoter mutation analysis is a valuable diagnostic adjunct to
distinguish pseudosarcomatous spindle cell proliferations from
sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder
S. Bertz*, R. Stöhr, N.T. Gaisa, B. Wullich, A. Hartmann, A. Agaimy
*Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich-
Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany
Background & objectives: Bladder pseudosarcomatous myofibroblastic
proliferations are diagnostically challenging due to occasional ALK-neg-
ativity, frequent cytokeratin expression, worrisome histology.
Sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma (sUC) may resemble inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumour (IMT). TERT promoter mutations are frequent
in urothelial cancers, but pseudosarcomatous lesions have not been
investigated.
Methods: We performed comparative histomorphological and immuno-
histochemical analysis and TERT promoter mutation testing in 17 ALK-
positive and -negative spindle cell lesions and 18 sUC. Screening for
genetic rearrangement and/or FISH analysis was performed by RNA
sequencing in the pseudosarcomatous myofibroblastic proliferations.
Results: 9/17 sUC showed at least focal IMT-like morphology. Atypical
mitoses, presence of a differentiated urothelial component and presence
of heterologous elements were the most reliable morphological features
of sUC, if present. ALK (D5F3), p53, p63, Ki67-index, smActin and
GATA3 were differentially expressed. Pancytokeratin staining was fre-
quent in both groups, but the staining pattern differed significantly (dif-
fuse in 17/17 pseudosarcomatous proliferations, focal in 6/15 sUC).
TERT promoter mutations were found in 17/18 sUC but in none of 17
pseudosarcomatous myofibroblastic proliferations. RNA sequencing and
FISH analysis revealed genetic rearrangements in 6/7 ALK positive and
1/10 ALK negative pseudosarcomatous myofibroblastic proliferations,
including a novel FN1/RET gene fusion in an ALK-negative lesion
Conclusion: TERT promoter mutations and/or ALK expression/
rearrangements in spindle cell lesions of the bladder are confirmatory for
sUC or IMT in the majority of cases, respectively. In equivocal cases
lacking TERT and ALK alterations, clinical history, classical
histomorphological and immunohistochemical features should be assessed
carefully. RNA sequencing is a sensitive method for assessment of gene
rearrangement, including involvement of novel genes other than ALK.
OFP-01-009
Grading of intraductal carcinoma has minor impact on grade group
assignment in prostate cancer biopsy and radical prostatectomy
specimens
L. Rijstenberg*, E. Hollemans, T. Hansum, C. Kweldam, G. van
Leenders
*Erasmus Medical Center, The The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Intraductal carcinoma (IDC) has an adverse
outcome in prostate cancer patients but is not incorporated in tumour
grading. Our objective was to determine the effect on global Grade group
(GG) assignment in case IDC is included in grading.
Methods: A prostate cancer biopsy (n=1,031) and unrelated radical pros-
tatectomy (n=835) cohort were reviewed for GG according to the 2014
ISUP guidelines, without IDC grade assignment. Presence and percent-
age of IDC were monitored. By accounting IDC as Gleason pattern 4 or 5
based on its morphology, the GG was recalculated.
Results: IDC was identified in 139/1,031 biopsies (13.5%). Assigning a
Gleason pattern to IDC led to a change of GG in 17 cases (1.6%): 4/486
from GG1 to GG2, 9/375 GG2 to GG3, and 4/58 GG4 to GG5. In 213/
835 (25.5%) prostatectomy specimens IDC was present. Grading of IDC
based on its underlying pattern led to a GG change in 5 cases (0.6%):
1/307 from GG1 to GG2, 1/307 GG1 to GG3, 2/420 GG2 to GG3, and
1/50 GG4 to GG5.
Conclusion: We demonstrate that grading IDC led to a change in GG in
<2% of prostate cancer biopsies and radical prostatectomies, indicating it
has overall minimal impact on prostate cancer grade assignment.
OFP-01-010
A retrospective single-centre audit of block-taking in cystectomy
specimens for malignancy
N. Herlihy*, A. Haider
*UCLH, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: There is no consensus on how many blocks
should be submitted from cystectomy specimens for bladder tumours.
Our department recommends ≤10 blocks. Our objective was to audit
block-taking and assess how frequently the diagnosis could be reached
with ≤10 blocks.
Methods: We performed a retrospective single-centre audit on
cystectomy specimens for malignancy processed from January-
December 2017. We performed a SNOMED search on Co-Path for all
cystectomy cases for malignancy and collected data on patient demo-
graphics, presence of gross tumour, number of blocks taken from the
bladder at initial cut-up and number of extra blocks (if any), and the
histological diagnosis.
Results: 45 cases were suitable for inclusion. A median of 13 bladder
blocks were taken per case (range, 4-28). Ten blocks or less from bladder
were submitted in 10/45 cases (22.2%). More than 10 blocks were taken
in a higher proportion of cases without gross tumour (16/19, 84.2%)
compared to cases with gross tumour (19/26, 73.1%). Additional blocks
were taken in 4/45 cases (8.8%). 2/10 specimens (20%) where less than
ten blocks were taken initially required additional blocks. On review of
the slides, the final histological diagnosis was achievable on the initial
blocks in all four cases where additional blocks were taken. Estimated
costs of oversampling for one year were £8,595.36.
Conclusion: The final histological diagnosis was achievable in all
cystectomy cases for malignancy where ten blocks or less were taken
from the bladder. In the majority of cases, more than ten blocks were
taken, incurring significant potentially unnecessary costs. We suggest that
no more than ten blocks should be taken from cystectomy specimens for
malignancy, and that even fewer representative blocks can be taken if a
gross lesion is identified.
OFP-01-011
Heterogeneity-analysis of molecular subtypes of muscle-invasive
bladder cancer and their precursor lesions in multiregion mapped
whole-organ bladders
V. Weyerer*, R. Stoehr, S. Bertz, S. Wach, H. Taubert, D. Sikic,
B. Wullich, A. Hartmann, M. Eckstein
*Institute of Patholoy, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich-
Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany
Background & objectives: Molecular subtypes of bladder cancer have
been described which seem to have a predictive effect for chemotherapy
regimens. Due to this clinical implication, the aim is to characterize in
Virchows Arch
which extent precursor lesions and tumours exhibit a heterogeneity of
subtypes.
Methods: 23 positions of three whole-organ mapped specimens were
histomorphologically reviewed for classifying location of normal
urothelium, precursor lesions and different areas of the tumour.
Immunohistochemical analysis of luminal (CK20, GATA3, FOXA1)
and basal markers (CD44, CK14 and CK5/6) was carried out in selected
precursor lesions and tumours to map the distribution of luminal and basal
subtypes across the different positions/lesions.
Results: Out of three analysed multiregion mapped bladder tumours, one
showed a heterogenous luminal and double-negative molecular
subtype in multiple tumour positions as well as a mixed morphol-
ogy including conventional urothelial and neuroendocrine areas.
Moreover, among the second analysed bladder tumour, all tumour
positions showed a high expression of basal markers whereas the
included Carcinoma in situ demonstrated a luminal subtype with
almost total absence of basal markers. The third analysed mapped
bladder tumour demonstrated a homogenous luminal molecular
subtype in all precursor and tumorous lesions.
Conclusion: This first analysis of three multiregion mapped bladder tu-
mours shows divergent results of subtype distribution: Heterogeneity of
subtypes can be observed, but other tumours and associated precursor
lesions show a homogenous distribution of subtypes. To further elucidate
how often subtype heterogeneity occurs in whole multiregion mapped
bladder tumours, data of further bladder specimens will be presented at
the meeting.
OFP-01-012
Combining hypermethylated RASSF1A detection using droplet dig-
ital PCR with miR-371a-3p testing: an improved and highly sensitive
panel of liquid biopsy biomarkers for testicular germ cell tumour
patients
J. Lobo*, L. MJ van Zogchel, M. G Nuru, A. JM Gillis, E. van der
Schoot, G. AM Tytgat, L. HJ Looijenga
*Portuguese Institute of Oncology - Porto, Department of Pathology,
Portugal
Background & objectives: Classical serum tumour markers used rou-
tinely in the management of testicular germ cell tumour (TGCT) patients
(AFP and HCG) are elevated in only 50-60% of the cases at time of
diagnosis. miR-371a-3p is the most recent promising biomarker for
TGCTs, but is not sufficiently informative for detecting mature teratoma,
which is therapeutically relevant. We aimed to test the feasibility to use
hypermethylated RASSF1A (RASSF1AM), detected in circulating cell-
free DNA, combined with miR-371a-3p, as non-invasive diagnostic
markers of TGCTs.
Methods: A total of 109 patient-derived serum samples and 29 sera from
healthy young-adult males were included, along with representative cell
lines and tumour tissue samples. We describe a novel droplet digital PCR
(ddPCR) method for quantitatively assessing RASSF1AM in liquid
biopsies.
Results: Promoter methylation of RASSF1A was detected in all TGCT
tissues and cell lines by EPIC array, confirmed by ddPCR. Both miR-371a-
3p (sensitivity=85.7%) and RASSF1AM (sensitivity=89.8%) outperformed
the combination of AFP and HCG (sensitivity=65.5%) for TGCT diagnosis.
RASSF1AM detected 88% of teratomas. In this representative cohort, 14
cases were negative for miR-371a-3p, all of which were detected by
RASSF1AM, resulting in a combined sensitivity of 100%.
Conclusion: Cell-free detection of RASSF1AM combined with miR-
371a-3p resulted in a 100% diagnostic sensitivity for TGCT patients.
These results need to be validated in patient follow-up and detection of
minimal residual disease.
Funding by: FCT/MCTES, project EpiMarkGermCell (PTDC/MECONC/
29043/2017). JL is recipient of a fellowship from FCT - Fundação para a
Ciência e Tecnologia—(SFRH/BD/132751/2017).
OFP-01-013
Inflammation burden in benign tissue is inversely associated with
significant cancer burden in the prostate: lessons from the
PROMIS study
V. Stavrinides*, L. Texeira Mendes, A. Freeman, N. Trahearn, A.E.S.
Bosaily, L. Brown, L. Carmona Echeverria, R. Kaplan, C. Parker, S.
Punwani, G. Attard, A. De Marzo, H. Whitaker, H. Ahmed, M. Emberton
*Division of Surgery and Interventional Science, University College
London, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Intraprostatic inflammation enables cancer
and is an attractive therapeutic target, but its burden in biopsy-naive men
is poorly defined. We analysed inflammation in 158 PROMIS partici-
pants who had MRI followed by 5-mm template mapping biopsies (TPM)
regardless of MRI findings.
Methods: 235 men enrolled at University College London Hospital
(2012-2015) and TPM outcomes were collected for 158 (77 pilots ex-
cluded). Cancer burden was recorded in 20 Barzell zones per prostate by
an experienced uropathologist (Definition 1: Gleason≥4+3 and/or maxi-
mum length ≥6mm; Definition 2: 3+4 and/or 4-5mm; insignificant: 3+3,
less than 3mm). Inflammation, PIN or ASAP were noted in cancer-free
Barzell zones.
Results: There was a negative association between the proportion of
benign Barzell zones reported as “heavily inflamed” (out of all cancer-
free zones) and TPM cancer burden (1A). The fraction of non-cancer-
ous, inflamed Barzell zones was significantly higher in men without/
insignificant cancer, compared to those with Definition 1/2 disease
(1B; Kruskal-Wallis, p<0.001; Tukey post hoc analysis; p<0.001).
This difference persisted when men without/insignificant cancer were
compared to those with significant disease of any definition (1C). The
opposite trend was true for PIN/ASAP: there was a positive associa-
tion between PIN content in benign Barzell zones and cancer burden
(2A), although not statistically significant (2B, 2C: Kruskal-Wallis
ANOVA, p=0.37; Wilcoxon test, p=0.11).
Conclusion: Heavy inflammation affects fewer benign areas in men with
significant cancer compared to those without significant tumours in their
prostate. We hypothesise that such inflammatory burden differences (1)
enable the progression of significant cancer in the first place (2) are a
consequence of tumour-related microenvironmental changes or (3) are
driven by increased inflammation in the early stages of carcinogenesis.
Whether these hypotheses are true requires further investigation.
Funding by: MRC Clinical Research Training Fellowship MR/
S005897/1
OFP-02-001
Congenital vascular anomaly in alveolar capillary dysplasia with
misalignment of pulmonary veins
L. Wang*, M. Alturkustani, Y. Lou, D. Li, J. Byers, L. Szymanski,
D. Parham, W. Shi
*Children’s Hospital of Los Angeles, University of Southern California,
USA
Background & objectives: Alveolar capillary dysplasia with “misalign-
ment of pulmonary veins” (ACDMPV) is a rare, fatal abnormal pulmo-
nary vascular developmental disease. The pathogenic mechanisms re-
main largely unknown. This study aims to characterize the microvascular
alterations in the lungs of ACDMPV patients.
Methods: Lung histologic structures were analysed from 16 autopsies
with ACDMPV. Lung endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and alveo-
lar epithelial cells were examined by immunohistochemical and
OFP-02 Joint Oral Free Paper Session: Breast
Pathology / Paediatric and Perinatal Pathology
Virchows Arch
immunofluorescent stainings with antibodies recognizing different cellu-
lar markers for ACDMPV and age-matched controls. Statistical analysis
was performed.
Results: The decreased capillary density or completely absence of
capillary in the alveolar septa was observed while new microvascu-
lar formation with abnormal tortuosity in the thickened alveolar
septa was present. Aberrant pulmonary veins were detected adjacent
to small pulmonary arteries within the same bronchovascular bundle
even though septal pulmonary veins were still seen in the ACDMPV
lungs. Glut-1 protein, a marker for endothelial immaturity, was de-
tected in the malpositioned and normalized pulmonary veins as well
as abnormal septal neovasculature. In addition, hyperplasia of type 2
alveolar epithelial cells was observed.
Conclusion: The loss of vascular integrity and the destruction of the
alveolar-capillary interface may drive abnormal growth and remodelling
of the pulmonary microvasculature, which challenges the current concept
of “misalignment of pulmonary veins”. Future studies are needed to un-
derstand the pathogenesis.
OFP-02-002
Clinical exome sequencing for the diagnosis of foetal skeletal
dysplasias
A. Nadal*, M. Pauta, B. Campos, M. Segura, G. Arca, A. Borrell
*Pathology, Hospital Clínic, UB, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain
Background & objectives: Skeletal dysplasias require genetics for def-
inite diagnosis. Single gene sequencing (SGS), next generation sequenc-
ing (NGS) methods such as gene panel sequencing (GPS), clinical exome
sequencing (CES, including all genes listed in OMIM) or whole exome
sequencing are alternative approaches.
Methods: Nineteen foetuses from pregnancies interrupted because of
skeletal dysplasia were genetically investigated either by SGS (eight) or
NGS-based GPS (six) or CES (nine –three previously SGS and one GPS
analysed-), and full autopsy including radiology.
Results: Pathogenic gene variants were found in 3/8 SGSs and in
10/12 NGS-based analysis. In six cases genetics confirmed the
pathology diagnosis (thanatophoric dysplasia -twice-, spondylo-
epiphyseal dysplasia (SEDC), osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), and
Desbuquois syndrome), that could raise to seven if two negative
SGS are included. Genetics provided previously unsuspected di-
agnosis in eight cases: de novo achondroplasia, OI, short-rib poly-
dactyly type 3 (SRP3), anauxetic dysplasia, and LADD, Roberts,
Steel, and Schwartz-Jampel syndromes. Pathology confirmed var-
iants of unknown significance as actual pathogenic variants in
seven cases (Steel, SEDC, Schwartz-Jampel, SRP3, Roberts, OI,
and Desbuquois), all among CES-analysed cases.
Conclusion: CES identifies a wide range of skeletal dysplasias and pre-
viously unreported genetic variants carrying pathogenetic significance.
CES methods would likely identify variants identified in SGS whereas
the contrary is unlikely. Multidisciplinary approach results in the highest
diagnostic yield and precision.
Funding by: Grant from Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias PI17/01153,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, and Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional
(FEDER), Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad, Spain
OFP-02-003
CD34 immunostain increases sensitivity and/or upgrades the diagno-
sis of foetal vascular malperfusion in placentas from ex-utero
intrapartum treatment
J. Stanek*
*Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Division of Pathology, USA
Background & objectives: Previously we found an increase in-
cidence of foetal vascular malperfusion (FVM) in placentas from
EXIT (ex-utero intrapartum treatment) procedures. This retrospec-
tive analysis analyses the impact the recently introduced CD34
immunostain for the FVM diagnosis in placentas from EXIT
procedures.
Methods: 105 placentas from EXIT procedures were studied. In 73
cases, the placental histological diagnosis of segmental FVM was
made on H&E stained placental sections only (Group 1). In 32
cases, the CD34 component of a double E-cadherin/CD34 immuno-
stain slides was also used to detect the segmental endothelial frag-
mentation (Group 2). 23 clinical and 47 independent placental phe-
notypes were statistically compared.
Results: The indications for EXIT procedures were: EXIT 48 to
airway, 43 EXIT to ECMO and 14 EXIT to resection). Congenital
diaphragmatic hernias were statistically significantly more common
in Group 2 (34% vs 56%, p=0.03). There was no statistical signif-
icance between the groups in rates of segmental villous avascularity
(29% vs 34%), but CD34 immunostain added and/or upgraded 12
more cases in Group 2, thus increasing the sensitivity of placental
examination for FVM by 37%. There were no other statistically
significantly differences in clinical and placental phenotypes, prov-
ing the otherwise comparability of the groups.
Conclusion: The use of CD34 immunostain increases the sensi-
tivity of placental examination for FVM which thus may improve
the neonatal management by revealing the increased likelihood of
the potentially life-threatening neonatal complications.
OFP-02-004
A report of a very rare case of 47XYY disorder of sexual develop-
ment presenting with an ambiguous genitalia and mixed gonadal
dysgenesis with persistent Mullerian structures
K. Abrham*
*St. Paul's Hospital MMC, Ethiopia
Background & objectives: Introduction – A report of a very rare case of
47XYY DSD presenting with an ambiguous genitalia and mixed gonadal
dysgenesis with persistent Mullerian structures.
Case presentation – An 11 month old infant presented with a
chief complaint of ambiguous genitalia. Physical examination of
the external genitalia revealed poorly developed bifid scrotum
with bilaterally non palpable testes, phallus length of 4cm with
distal hypospadia and chordae. Other systemic examination was
unremarkable. Hormonal analysis showed Testosterone 2.15 ng/ml
and Dihydrotestestrone <6 pg/ml.cont...
Methods: cont... . Serum electrolytes were within the normal limits.
Abdomino-pelvic ultrasound reported non visualized testicles.
Karyotype was determined from a cheek cell with a report of 47XYY.
Surgical exploration done for DSD showed Uterus with cervix, Bilateral
fallopian tubes with fimbrated ends and Left side ovary like structure. No
right side ovary , testicular structure or cord was seen.
Results: Histopathology showed Fallopian Tube histology and cryptor-
chid testis
Conclusion - 47,XYY syndrome occurs in about 1 in 1,000 new-
born boys. Most males with 47,XYY syndrome have normal pro-
duction of the male sex hormone testosterone and normal sexual
development. Although many males with this condition are taller
than average, the chromosomal change sometimes causes no un-
usual physical features. Mixed gonadal dysgenesis (MGD) is one
of the most frequent causes of male sexual ambiguity.
Conclusion: The most common karyotype is 45,X/46,XY
mosaicism
In our case the association of 47XYY DSD with ambiguous gen-
italia and mixed gonadal dysgenesis with persistent Mullerian
structures is a rare finding, and to our knowledge, very few are
reported so far
Virchows Arch
OFP-02-005
Paediatric non-Hodgkin lymphomas: a 10-year study from a terciary
centre in Coimbra
C. Faria*, M.J. Julião, J. Fraga, A. Lai, M.B. Pimentão, R. Almeida,
J. Madeira, J. Gama, M.J. Brito, R. Pina
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is a common ma-
lignancy in children and adolescents in Europe. Burkitt lymphoma re-
mains the most frequent followed by lymphoblastic lymphoma and dif-
fuse large B-cell lymphoma. The outcome has improved, and prognosis is
in general good at paediatric age.
Methods: Retrospective study of children (age<18 years old) with histo-
pathologically diagnosis of Non-Hodgkin lymphoma from 2009 to 2019.
We enrolled 43 patients in total, predominantly male (72.1%), being the
youngest case with 3 years old and the oldest one with 17 years old.
Results: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) represented 25.6% of
cases, Burkitt lymphoma 23.3%, lymphoblastic T-cell lymphoma 16.3%,
anaplastic large cell lymphoma 16.3%, lymphoblastic B-cell lymphoma
6.9%, follicular lymphoma 4.7%, primary cutaneous anaplastic lympho-
ma 2.3%, plasmablastic lymphoma 2.3% and hepatoesplenic T-cell lym-
phoma 2.3%. Three of DLBCL were post-transplant lymphoproliferative
disorders (PTLDs).
Five patients died (11.6%), two were PTLDs after cardiac transplant, one
PTLD after bone marrow transplant and the others had primary cutaneous
anaplastic lymphoma (death by suicide, 3 years off treatment) and
hepatoesplenic T-cell lymphoma with advanced disease at the time of
the diagnosis, infection and progression of the disease. B symptoms were
also a factor for worse prognosis.
Conclusion: Non-Hodgkin lymphoma remains an aggressive neoplasia;
however effective treatment has improved the overall survival and 5-year
disease free rates. In our series, we also conclude that specific types of lym-
phoma have a worse outcome, aswell asassociation with other comorbidities.
OFP-02-006
Frequency distribution of breast cancer biomarkers from a large
volume laboratory – a single institution experience
J. Carter, A. Plagge, K. Del Rosario, K. Geiersbach, T. Mounajjed,
B. Chen*
*Mayo Clinic, USA
Background & objectives: Oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone re-
ceptor (PR) and HER2 are established clinical biomarkers in breast car-
cinoma (BC). We evaluated trends in biomarker data (2007-2019), in-
cluding newly implemented decile scoring in ER/PR, and compared in-
ternal cases (IC) and external cases (EC).
Methods: ER/PR (2011-2019) and HER2 (2007-2019) data on invasive
breast carcinoma were analysed. Per ASCO/CAP guidelines, ER (clone
SP1) and PR (clone 1E2) IHC were scored as <1%, 1-10%, and > 10% (or
deciles of 10-100% from 2017). HER2 IHC/digital image analysis
(Ventana Pathway HER2 (4B5) with Aperio software was scored 0 - 3+
; 2+ cases were reflexed to FISH.
Results: Among 19,193 BC, (IC=6833, EC=12,360), year-to-year
ER positive rates (>1%) ranged narrowly (79-81%) with PR rang-
ing from 70-79%.By decile scoring (N=2300), ER was: score<1%
(range 18-21%), score 1-10% (2.7-3.2%), score>90% (67-71%),
others ≤3%. PR: score <1% (28-30%); score1-10% (7-10%);
score>90% (27-31%), others ≤10%. Year-to-year HER2 IHC (total
N=40,137) ranged: 0/1+ (67-80%); 2+(12-24%), and 3+(7.4-
10.2%). The HER2 2+/FISH+ rate fluctuated between 13% and
28%. IC and EC results were similar.
Conclusion: Over the past decade, ER/PR IHC positive rates remained
stable. The bimodal distribution of ER decile scores supports previous
studies that most breast cancers are either ER negative or diffusely pos-
itive whereas PR scores vary more widely. Variations in the HER2
IHC2+ rate reflected the equivocal nature of this category, but interest-
ingly also coincided with changes in the ASCO/CAP HER2 FISH guide-
lines. Frequency distributions for ER, PR and HER2 scores did not differ
between internal cases and external cases.
OFP-02-007
The use of PAM50 (Prosigna®) as molecular classifier in breast can-
cer - the experience of 106 consecutive cases analysed at the Royal
Surrey Hospital (RSH), Guildford
C. Spencer*, S. Di Palma, B. Ping, N. Collins, T. Irvine
*Department of Histopathology, Royal Surrey Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Hormone receptor status in breast cancer
confers vital prognostic and therapeutic implications. It is currently
defined using immunohistochemistry, a subjective test which may
not represent true genotype. We explore discrepancies between im-
munohistochemical and molecular profiles using the molecular clas-
sifier Prosigna.
Methods: Since 2019 RSH has used Prosigna clinically to evaluate
106 consecutive cases of ER/PR positive, Her2 negative early breast
cancer predicting risk of recurrence (ROR) and likely benefit of
chemotherapy. Analysis of the Prosigna genetic signature also de-
fines the “intrinsic” molecular subtype; luminal A, luminal B, Her2-
enriched and basal-like, which we compared with immunohisto-
chemical hormone receptor status.
Results: Of 106 cases, 101 cases had strong positive immunohistochem-
istry for ER (Allred score 7-8/8). PAM50 confirmed the ER positive
genetic profile in all cases by categorising 66 as luminal A and 35 as
luminal B. No cases were classified as Her2-enriched.
There were 5 cases with “weak” positive ER immunohistochemistry
(Allred score 3-6/8). Prosigna defined these as a “basal-like” molecular
profile.
Conclusion: Since eligibility for case selection was immunohisto-
chemical ER positivity, all cases were expected to be categorised
Luminal A or Luminal B as per molecular intrinsic subtype.
However, Prosigna defined 5% of our cases as “basal-like”.
Further investigation of the “basal like” cases demonstrated that
they had weak ER positivity by immunohistochemistry. This cor-
roborates recent ASCO/CAP guidelines proposing a new reporting
category “ER Low Positive” which have a gene expression profile
more similar to ER-negative cancer.
Funding by: BDIAP Fellowship
OFP-02-008
Multiplex immunohistochemistry/immunofluorescence (mIHC/if)
for PD-L1 testing in triple negative breast cancer: validation of a
translational assay with conventional IHC
J. Yeong*, T. Tan, H. Li, J. Lim, J. Lim, A.A. Thike, J. Iqbal, R. Dent,
P.H. Tan
*Singapore General Hospital, Singapore
Background & objectives: There are several immunohistochemical
(IHC) assays approved as companion diagnostics to select for treatment
with specific programmed death (PD)-1/PD-ligand-1 (L1) inhibitors.
There is no uniformity in assessing PD-L1 across trials in triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC).
Methods: Recently, we reported a comparison study (JCP 2020) demon-
strating that mIHC/IF represents a promising tool in the era of cancer
immunotherapy, as it can simultaneously detect and quantify PD-L1 la-
belling with multiple antibody clones, allowing accurate evaluation of
tumour and immune cells. Hereby we conducted a validation study with
bigger cohort, aiming to translate to routine diagnostic setting.
Results: Our cohort comprised of 37 TNBC cases, 20 non-small cell lung
carcinomas, 9 colorectal and 29 other cancers. Three in-vitro diagnostic
Virchows Arch
PD-L1 antibody clones (22C3, SP142 and SP263) were used to perform
multiplex immunohistochemistry/immunofluorescent (mIHC/IF) stain-
ing. To detect tumour, EpCAM and cytokeratin staining were applied.
This was followed by digital pathological evaluation to report the com-
bined positive score (CPS), tumour proportion score (TPS) and immune
count (IC) on a single tissue section. We compared the automated scoring
results to standard, manual PD-L1 scoring by pathologists using conven-
tional IHC staining.
Conclusion: Moderate-to-strong correlations in PD-L1 positivity were
found between results obtained through mIHC/IF and IHC. Individual
concordance rates in the study ranged from 69-98%, with Spearman’s
rank correlation coefficient values up to 0.91. Further analysis within the
context of therapeutic trials is required to develop PD-L1 testing as a
complementary diagnostic platform in TNBC and other cancers.
OFP-02-009
Assessment of the usefulness of selected methylation features in dif-
ferent tissues of breast cancer patients for preoperative risk
stratification
K. Kankava*, E. Kvaratskhelia, G. Burkadze, E. Abzianidze
*Tbilisi State Medical University, Georgia
Background & objectives: Epigenetic changes have long been believed
to reflect tumour biology. We tested some of them in different tissues of
breast cancer patients to analyse epigenetic background and the value of
these parameters in predicting clinicopathological characteristics of
tumours.
Methods: 100 Patients with breast cancer were included in the study
along with age-matched controls and patients with benign breast lesions.
Methylation of global DNA, repetitive elements (LINE-1 and Alu) and
BRCA1 gene were studied in blood, tumour tissue and normal breast
ductal epithelial cells. These parameters were analysed in comparison to
clinical, histologic and phenotypic characteristics of tumours.
Results: Alu, LINE-1 and global DNA methylation showed markedly
low levels in all tissues of cancer patients compared to healthy controls,
with extreme hypomethylation in tumour tissue. Changes in these param-
eters were not always concordant. BRCA1 promoter methylation was
detected exclusively in tumour tissues and in only two cases, both of
which had aggressive phenotype. Methylation levels detected in blood
didn't allow stratification of patients with benign and malignant breast
lesions and showed rather weak relationship with clinicopathological
characteristics of tumours.
Conclusion: Epigenetics signatures show distinct pattern in tumour tissue
and are not homogenous in different tissues of the same patient. Given the
uniform picture of DNA methylation in blood in some of investigated
groups, additional data and very careful approach are required when
considering using it as a diagnostic or predictive tool.
Funding: The research was supported by Shota Rustaveli National
Science Foundation Of Georgia (SRNSFG) [Grant Number -
PhDF2016_85].
OFP-02-010
Comparison of different pathological complete remissions in neoad-
juvant breast cancer based on different assessment systems
Y. Liu*, Y. Ma
*The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University, China
Background & objectives: Differences in pathological complete
remission (pCR) achieved after neoadjuvant therapy (NAT) of
breast cancer patients based on Miller–Payne (MP) classifica-
tion, residual cancer burden (RCB), and Pinder assessment
system.
Methods: 276 patients with breast cancer who underwent neoadjuvant
therapy after surgical diagnosis of preoperative puncture pathology from
January 2014 to January 2015 in the Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical
University were retrospectively studied. Chi-square test was used to an-
alyse the relationship. ROC curves to analyse respective diagnostic effi-
cacy. COX regression model was used to analyse the significance in
prognostic evaluation.
Results: In this study, we found that tumour size, ER expression state, PR
expression state, Ki67 index, and molecular classification of HER2 over-
expression type and three negative type breast cancer were statistically
significant in terms of achieving pathological complete response after
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (P<0.05); Chi-square test showed that there
was no statistically significant difference in pCR rate (P>0.05); ROC
curve analysis shows that RCB has higher diagnostic efficiency than
Pinder; COX survival analysis shows that the RCB index classification
is more instructive for the prognosis of breast cancer patients after neo-
adjuvant treatment.
Conclusion: Evaluation of pathological response after neoadjuvant, the
RCB index evaluation system has better performance than MP and Pinder
evaluation system.
OFP-02-011
AI-assisted interpretation of Ki-67 standard comparison cards for
different types of breast cancer
Y. Liu*, l. Li
*The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University, China
Background & objectives: Compare the difference between the refer-
ence breast cancer standard comparison card and conventional micro-
scope interpretation and explore the clinical applicability of breast cancer
standard comparison card.
Methods: 311 breast cancer surgical resection specimens from our
Hospital were selected, Ki-67 immunohistochemical staining was per-
formed by 3 senior pathologists with conventional interpretation and
comparative artificial standards. Comparison card interpretation method,
by selecting two regional interpretation methods, high value-added area
and average value. Intraclass correlation coefficients were used to assess
reproducibility between observers.
Results: The reference standard comparison card showed excellent con-
sistency between Ki-67 values in different types of breast cancer by
selecting the average value (a high value-added area and a low value-
added area, AVE) (ICC: 0.797, CI 0.753-0.834).
Conclusion: The reference standard comparison card interpretation is
expected to become a common method for breast cancer Ki-67
interpretation.
OFP-02-012
ZNF703 copy number and protein expression in breast cancer
E. Klæstad*, M. Valla, A.M. Bofin
*Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine
and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
Norway
Background & objectives: ZNF703 is associated with proliferation and
is thought to be most common in luminal breast cancer. We aimed to
study ZNF703 copy number and protein expression in breast cancer and
elucidate associations with proliferation, molecular subtype and
prognosis.
Methods: Using fluorescence in situ hybridization (n=702) and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) (n=829), we examined ZNF703 copy
number and protein expression in primary breast cancers. We
assessed associations between ZNF703 copy number and prolifer-
ation, molecular subtype and prognosis, and between protein ex-
pression and molecular subtype. In the prognostic analyses, we
estimated cumulative incidence of breast cancer death and hazard
ratios.
Virchows Arch
Results: We found that 7% of primary tumours had increased copy num-
ber (mean copy number ≥6), and 76% of primary tumours were IHC
positive (≥50% tumour cell nuclei positive). The highest proportion of
tumours with mean copy number ≥6 was found in the Luminal A and
Luminal B(HER2-) subtypes. Luminal subtypes also had the highest
proportion of IHC+ cases. We found a positive association between
ZNF703 copy number increase and proliferation. Patients with
ZNF703copy number ≥6 had poorer prognosis compared to cases without
copy number increase (HR 1.6 (95% CI 1.1 -2.5)).
Conclusion: ZNF703 copy number increase is associated with the
Luminal A and Luminal B (HER2-) subtypes. Protein expression
is associated with all luminal subtypes. There is an association
between ZNF703 copy number increase and proliferation, and a
poorer prognosis.
OFP-02-013
The association of clinicopathological parameters and the extent of
neuroendocrine differentiation with microRNA 21 and microRNA
let7f expression in primary invasive breast carcinomas with neuro-
endocrine features
G. Usul, C. Kelten Talu, I. Yilmaz, T.C. Savli*, S. Bektas, D. Can Trablus
*Health Science University, Istanbul Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: To compare primary Breast Carcinoma with
Neuroendocrine Features (BCNF) cases with Invasive Ductal Carcinoma
(IDC-NOS) cases without neuroendocrine differentiation matched for
molecular subtype and stage as regards the clinicopathological features
and the expression levels of two miRNAs.
Methods: The slides and paraffin blocks of the 29 cases with BCNF
diagnosis and the 29 cases with IDC-NOS diagnosis as reported in our
clinic between 2012 and 2017 were obtained from the archives and ret-
rospectively re-evaluated. The miR-21 and miR-let7f expression levels
were detected with the qRT-PCR method in paraffin blocks containing
invasive tumour and normal tissue in each case.
Results: The mean age in the groups with neuroendocrine differentiation
was almost 10 years higher than in the IDC-NOS group. The Ki-67
proliferation index level, nuclear grade and histological grade were higher
in the group with 10% to 50% neuroendocrine differentiation than in the
group with ≥50% neuroendocrine differentiation.
Comparison of the groups for miR-21 expression revealed that the
increased expression in the IDC-NOS group was more prominent than
in the other two groups with neuroendocrine differentiation. The de-
crease in the miR-let7f expression level in the group with 10% to 50%
neuroendocrine differentiation was less than seen in the IDC-NOS
group.
Conclusion: BCNF is seen at more advanced ages than IDC-NOC
cases. Cases with widespread neuroendocrine differentiation within
tumour tissue are associated with a lower nuclear/histological grade
and Ki-67 levels. Decreased miR-let7f expression is more prominent
in BCNFs while increased expression of miR-21 is more prominent
in IDC-NOS cases without neuroendocrine differentiation. Our re-
sults let us to consider various treatment options (miRNA based ther-
apy) for BCNF.
OFP-02-014
Germline mutations and pathological features of breast and female
genital cancers in increased-risk patients of Asian origin
M. Zaakouk*, A. Longworth, J. Hoffman, A. Sharma-Oates, C. Huber,
K. Ong, R. Hart, Y. Wallis, A. Considine, P. Dasani, R. Ganesan,
I. Tomlinson, S. Sundar, A. Shaaban
*Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham,
University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust Queen
Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Patients of Asian ancestry comprise 10.8%
of UK population in West Midlands. Breast and ovarian cancers in non-
Caucasian women tend to present at earlier age with more aggressive
disease. We aim to analyse patient genetics and pathologic features of
those cancers.
Methods: We identified 164 increased-risk patients of Asian ances-
try, out of 5618 patients genetically tested between 2006-2018 at a
large reference genetics centre. All patients were screened for muta-
tions of BRCA1/2, and a subset were also tested for (PALB2, BRIP1,
RAD51D & others) as per the clinical guidelines. Histopathological
and clinical data were collected and correlated with the genetic
results.
Results: 51 mutations in 46 patients (median age 38) were identified of
which 20/26 were BRCA1-pathogenic and 13/22 were BRCA2-VUS.
Two rare pathogenic-BRCA1 variants were found repeated. BRIP1 &
PALB2 mutations were pathogenic, and RAD51D was VUS. The 46
patients presented mostly by breast cancers. Breast cancers were predom-
inantly grade3(75%), >15mm in 57.9%(11/19) and with 43% lymph node
positivity and high proportion of the triple-negative phenotype
(TNBC)(36.4%).
The 118/164 patients (negative for germline mutations) presented at me-
dian age of 40 years. The breast cancers were mostly grade3(52.7%), of
invasive size (>15mm) in 64.6%(31/48) and node negative(55.3%;26/
47). There was a higher proportion of the luminal phenotype(63.8%)
and lower proportion of the TNBC(25.5%).
Conclusion: Increased-risk Asian patients presented with high
grade breast cancers, at young age with larger proportions of the
unfavourable triple negative molecular subtype (TNBC). Patients
with pathogenic mutations had a higher proportion of TNBC. Two
cases were negative for BRCA1/2 mutations but later tested positive
for BRIP1 (pathogenic) and RAD51D (VUS). Extended panel test-
ing is warranted and informs genetic counselling and optimal man-
agement in this patient group.
OFP-03-001
Multiplexed immunohistochemistry for immune cell phaenotyping,
quantification and spatial localisation in a rare tumour, clear cell
ovarian cancer
C. Genestie*, C. Klein, L. Laot, A.S. Lemaire, E. Vaz, S. Gouy,
A. LeFormal, A. Maulard, P. Morice, P. Pautier, M. Kfoury,
E. Colomba, E. Yanis-Galende, A. Leary
*Gustave Roussy, France
Background & objectives: Little is known about the unique immuno-
phenotypical features of clear cell ovarian cancer (CCOC).We con-
ducted multiplexed IF/IHC to 1) describe the tumour microenviron-
ment (TME) of CCOC and 2) compare CCOC to high grade serous OC
(HGSOC).
Methods: Tissue micro-arrays with triplicate tumour samples from 29
CCOC and 30 HGSOC were stained using multiplex IF/IHC panels in-
cluding: CD3, CD4, CD8, FOXP3, Granzyme B (GrzB), CD68, CD163
and CK. IC topography was described as intraepithelial if <20uM from
tumour cells (TC), or stromal (>20uM from TC). Image analysis
(Visiopharm) performed to quantify IC in number/mm2 or % surface
positive
Results: There were significantly fewer CD8+ IC in CCOC vs HGSOC
(median 15 vs. 48 cells/mm2; p=0.01) and 34% (10/29) of CCOC were
“immune-excluded” with CD8+ IC present only in the stromal compart-
ment. However, despite lower CD8+ IC, CCOC showed significantly
greater GrzB expression (marker of effector T cell cytotoxicity)
(p=0.0007), and significantly reduced FOXP3+ T cells (p=0.03) resulting
in favourable effector/suppressor ratio compared to HGSOC (median
GrzB+/FoxP3+: 10.7 vs 0.04; P<0.0001). CCOC also showed
OFP-03 Gynaecological Pathology
Virchows Arch
significantly higher levels of CD68+ macrophages (M1) (<0.0001),
resulting in a significantly more favourable M1/M2 ratio than HGSOC
(median CD68+/CD163+: 3.6 vs. 0.8; p=0.0001).
Conclusion: One third of CCOC are “immune excluded”. However,
when present, the effector to suppressor balance of both T cells
(GrzB+/FoxP3+) and macrophages (CD68+/CD163+) is in favour of
anti-tumour immune response.
OFP-03-002
Micropapillary variant of serous borderline tumour (MSBT) with
BRAF mutations, a molecularly distinctive and less aggressive pre-
cursor of low-grade serous carcinoma (LGSC)
M. Martini*, M. Bilotta, A. Santoro, M. Dall'Acquila, S. Capodimonti,
T. Cenci, G.F. Zannoni, L.M. Larocca
*Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy
Background & objectives: Despite the MSBT has been recently identi-
fied as a “synonymous” of non-invasive LGSC (niLGSC; WHO, 2014),
on the base of the clinical-prognostic reports, few molecular studies are
carried out on this pathological entity.
Methods: KRAS, NRAS and BRAF mutational analysis and HER2 and
p53 expression were assessed on 50 LGSCs, 42 MSBTs, 50 Serous
Borderline Ovarian Tumours (SBT). On these groups, we performed
the Human Cancer Pathway- and miRNA- Finder PCR array (Qiagen).
Altered miRNAs and pathways were confirmed by real-time PCR or
immunohistochemistry. Results were correlated with the clinical and
pathological features.
Results: We found a higher rate of BRAF mutation in SBT (65%) than in
MSBT (30%) and LGSC (5%). Conversely, RAS mutations rate signifi-
cantly increased from SBT (6%) to MSBT (25%) to LGSC (40%). We
did not find HER2 and p53 alterations. MSBTs with BRAF mutations
had a miRNAs and cancer pathway alterations significantly similar to
those SBT cases with BRAF mutations, but different to those MSBT
group with RAS mutations. Contrariwise, MSBT with RAS mutations
had a miRNAs and cancer pathway alterations significantly similar to
those RAS mutated LGSC cases. Finally, MSBT with RAS mutations
are significantly associated to a worse PFS respect to MSBT cases with
BRAF mutations (p=0.003).
Conclusion: Our data suggested the idea that MSBTs is a heterogeneous
group of patients that when associated to RAS mutations represent a more
aggressive malignant precursor of the LGSC. Conversely, MSBTs with
BRAF mutations are molecularly and clinically more similar to SBTs.
OFP-03-004
How much tumour do we need to submit during grossing to correctly
evaluate Silva pattern in endocervical adenocarcinomas?
M. Souto Moura*, R. Vieira, H. Pereira, L. Moço, S. Salta, C. Bartosch
*Department of Pathology, IPO-Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: Endocervical adenocarcinoma(EA) Silva
pattern stratifies tumours based on morphology and correlates with clin-
ical outcome. It’s unknown if entire tumour submission is necessary to
assign the appropriate Silva pattern. Our aim is to clarify EAs gross
submission to correctly diagnose Silva pattern.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed a cohort of 37 patients that
underwent surgery and were diagnosed with HPV-related EAs at IPOP
between 2005 and 2019. Macroscopic information and histological slides
were re-evaluated, particularly regarding tumour size and submitted sec-
tions. Silva pattern was evaluated in each tumour section. Probability
models were created using random sampling without replacement.
Results: Patients underwent hysterectomy(n=29) or conization
only(n=8). Mean tumour size was 17mm (range:2,55mm). Twenty-one
tumours were macroscopic. Twenty-seven tumours were totally submit-
ted (mean size=12mm) and 10 were partially submitted(mean
size=29mm). Mean tumour sections was 6 (range:1,13). Tumour’s final
Silva pattern included: 7 pattern-A, 7 pattern-B, 23 pattern-C.
Intratumoral comparison of Silva pattern between sections showed 15
homogeneous(8-pattern C; 7-pattern A) and 22 heterogeneous tumours.
Larger tumour size is associated with pattern C(p=0.006). In large
tumours(~2cm) this pattern composes in median 67% of sections.
Probability models showed that submission of at least half the tumour
identifies the correct Silva pattern in 88% of all cases, and in 81% of
heterogenous larger tumours.
Conclusion: Our findings support the current practice of partially includ-
ing large tumours, since they are most frequently extensively pattern C.
Total inclusion is recommend for small tumours and for larger tumours
that are heterogeneous.
OFP-03-005
Integrated histopathologic and molecular classification of endometri-
al carcinoma: identification of prognostic subgroups
A. De Leo*, D. de Biase, G. Dondi, P. De Iaco, A.M. Perrone, D. Santini,
G. Tallini, C. Ceccarelli
*University of Bologna, Italy
Background & objectives: The TCGA project discovered four distinct
prognostic endometrial carcinoma (EC) classes: POLE-mutant, mismatch
repair deficient-MMRd, p53-mutant and no specific molecular profile-
NSMP groups. Our aims were to integrate the histological and molecular
classifications, and to identify markers relevant for risk stratification.
Methods: Comprehensive clinicopathologic and follow-up data includ-
ing immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis and/or Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS) were analysed in a retrospective cohort of 110 ECs.
IHC and/or NGS were used to assign TCGA groups and to investigate
molecular alterations of multiple target genes including POLE, PTEN,
ARID1A, ß-catenin, TP53, MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6 and L1CAM.
Results: TCGA class assignment of EC cohort: 8 (7.3%) POLE, 34 (30.9%)
MMRd, 23 (20.9%) p53abn and 45 (40.9%) NSMP. Molecular subgroups
were significantly associated with different grade, tumour-infiltrating
lymphocites (TILs), mitoses, Ki-67 index, pattern of invasion, L1CAM ex-
pression. NSMP class was further subdivided based on ARID1A and on ß-
catenin alterations. ARID1A loss was associated with higher grade, increase
of TILs, necrosis, higher mitotic and Ki-67 index, specific patterns of inva-
sion. Ten of 110 (9.1%) ECs recurred: 5 NSMP with ARID1A mutation, 2
MMRd, 3 p53abn. NSMP cases with ARID1A mutation showed the worst
outcome with early recurrence (log-rank p<0.01).
Conclusion: An integrated EC classification may better define risk as-
sessment, representing a step towards precision medicine. The analysis of
ß-catenin and ARID1A alterations in NSMP class identified subsets of
ECs statistically correlated with specific histopathological parameters and
different disease recurrence.
OFP-03-006
Correlation of MMR protein deficiency with histopathologic param-
eters in endometrial carcinoma
T. Soylemez*, G. Kir, R.B. Girgin, Z.C. Olgun, A. Aydin, S.R. Dur,
M.I. Tosun, H. Ankarali, A. Karateke
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: The aim of the study was to analyse the
correlation between DNA mismatch repair (MMR) proteins status and
clinicopathological characteristics of endometrial cancers (ECs).
Methods: The relationship between clinicopathologic parameters and
MMR proteins status was investigated in 198 consecutive patients who
underwent surgery for ECs.
75 out of 198 (33%) cases showed immunohistochemical alteration of
MMR proteins: 65=(32.8%) cases lost MLH1&PMS2, 10(5.1%)cases
lost other proteins(8MSH2 & MSH6, 1MSH6, 1PMS2).On univariate
Virchows Arch
analysis, we more frequently observed high grade endometrioid carcino-
ma in cases with MLH1&PMS2 losses, low grade endometrioid carcino-
ma in cases with other losses (p=0.021).
Results: Larger tumour size and increased tumour infiltrating
lymphocytes(TILs) were more frequently observed in patients with MLH1
& PMS2 losses than other losses (p=0.004, p=0.009, respectively). On mul-
tivariate binary logistic regression analysis, loss of MLH1 & PMS2 revealed
statistically marginal significance for larger tumour size than MMR protein
intact and other losses (odds ratio [OR]=3,052, 95% confidence interval
[CI]=0.817–11.396,p=0.097,OR=0,135, 95% CI=0.014–1.263,p= 0.079,
respectively).TILs was independently correlated with MMR protein loss,
there was a marginal significance between infiltrative glands type
myoinvasion and MMR protein loss(OR=3.104, 95% CI=1.431–6.736,
p=0.011,OR=0.307, 95%CI=0.116-0.808, p=0.064, respectively).
Conclusion: The presence of infiltrative glands type myoinvasion
showed predisposition to be associated with MMR protein loss. Cases
with MLH1&PMS2 losses tend to be larger and higher-grade tumours
than cases with MMR intact status and other losses. These results have to
be proven in larger cohorts.
OFP-03-007
Correlation of PD-L1 expression with MMR protein subtype defi-
ciency in endometrial carcinomas
G. Kir*, Z.C. Olgun, T. Soylemez
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) was stud-
ied in several cancer types, however there is stil limited data about endome-
trial cancer (EC). The purpose of this study was to evaluate PD-L1 expression
of tumour cells(TC) and immune cells(IC) at different cut-off values.
Methods: By using immunohistochemical staining, in 176 resection
specimens of EC patients, PD-L1 results were correlated with mismatch
repair (MMR) protein status and several prognostic parameters including
myometrial invasion patterns.
Results: On both univariate and multivariate analysis, TC and IC PD-L1
positivity with a 5% cut-off were significantly associated with MMR
protein loss(univariate: p=0.015, and p=0.001; multivariate: p=0.027,
CI=0.003-0.583, and p=0.002, CI=1.498-5.557 respectively).
MLH1&PMS2 loss subgroup had higher rates of positivity for IC PD-
L1 expression, however other MMR loss subgroup(MSH2 and/or
MSH6,PMS2) tended to have higher rates of positivity for TC PD-L1
expression. MELF type myoinvasion were marginally significant for TC
PD-L1 expression at 5% cut-off (univariate:p=0.089; multivariate:
p=0.062, CI:0.022-10.101).
Conclusion: This study demonstrated that tumoral PD-L1 expression
was more common in patients with other MMR loss subgroup, IC PD-
L1 expression was more common in patients with MLH1&PMS2 loss
subgroup. Also, the presence of MELF type myoinvasion showed predis-
position to be associated with TC PD-L1 positivity. These results have to
be proven in larger cohorts.
This research was funded by Istanbul Medeniyet University Scientific
Research Project Fund.
OFP-03-008
Increased FOXJ1 protein expression is associated with improved
overall survival in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma: an ovarian
tumour tissue analysis consortium study
E.Y. Kang*, A.L. Weir, N.S. Meagher, P.D. Pharoah, S.J. Ramus,
M. Kӧbel
*University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Background & objectives: NanoString mRNA analyses have identified
FOXJ1 (ciliated cell transcription factor) and GMNN (DNA replication in-
hibitor) as prognostic markers in tubo-ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma
(HGSC). We aimed to evaluate FOXJ1 and GMNN expression by immuno-
histochemistry and survival associations within ovarian carcinomas.
Methods: Ovarian Tumour Tissue Analysis Consortium tissue microarrays
containing high-grade serous, low-grade serous, mucinous, endometrioid, and
clear cell carcinomas were stained for FOXJ1 (N=5,544) and GMNN
(N=3,787). Nuclear staining was scored in 5%-increments then categorized
(FOXJ1: 0%, 5%, 10-15%, 20-45%, 50-100%; GMNN: 0%, 5%, 10-15%,
20-25%, 30%, 35-100%). The log-rank test and Cox proportional hazards
regression compared expression levels and survival.
Results: FOXJ1 and GMNN expression was heterogeneous across
histotypes. Increased FOXJ1 expression was associated with improved over-
all 5-year survival in HGSC: 47.1% in patients with high (50-100%) FOXJ1
expression versus 34.7% in those with absent FOXJ1 expression (HR= 0.78,
95%CI 0.66-0.93, p<0.0001). However, GMNN expression was not signifi-
cantly associated with survival. No significant association with overall sur-
vival was observed in any other histotype, for both markers.
Conclusion: FOXJ1, but not GMNN, can be translated into an immuno-
histochemical biomarker to stratify prognosis in HGSC.
OFP-03-009
Technical and interpretation performance characteristics of P16 im-
munohistochemistry: a joint project by the British Association of
Gynaecological Pathologists (BAGP) and United Kingdom External
Quality Assessment Service (UKNEQAS)
N. Singh*, B. Gilks, J. Won, G. von Schalkwyk, R. Ganesan, S. Arif,
P. Mukonoweshuro, B. Tanchel, S. Parry
*Department of Cellular Pathology, Barts NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Immunohistochemistry for the biomarker
p16 is a surrogate for high-risk Human Papillomavirus (HPV)-mediated
anogenital precancerous and malignant lesions. The accuracy of this bio-
marker is dependent on the technical quality of the immunostaining as
well as well as correct interpretation.
Methods: BAGP members were invited to participate. Unstained sections
from a tissue microarray containing 74 cores from anogenital neoplasms, non-
invasive and invasive, as well as control cases, were sent to each of 40
laboratories. Participating laboratories were asked to submit details of their
staining protocol as well as interpretation results electronically, the latter for
each core as “Normal/reactive”, “Abnormal” or “Other/Uninterpretable”.
Results: Results were received from a total of 37 laboratories and 109
individuals (93 pathologists and 16 Biomedical Scientists). Two antibody
clones were used; BDPharmingen: G175-405 (n=4) and Ventana CINtec:
E6H4 (n=26). (No methods from 7 laboratories). IHC staining platforms
from 3 suppliers were represented: Ventana Benchmark: 70%; Leica
Bond: 27%; Dako autostainer: 3%.
Slides were returned by 35 laboratories enabling assessment of results of
74 cores from 102 individuals (n=7548). 30/35 laboratories (86%)
showed >95% concordance with the reference result for 52 assessable
cores. Excluding uninterpretable cores, there was 94% (5331/5673 core
results) absolute agreement between individual and central review results.
Conclusion: This study shows excellent technical performance of p16 im-
munohistochemistry using different antibody clones and automated staining
platforms. Interpretation accuracy for abnormal results was high overall, and
discrepant results are explained largely through technical reasons.
OFP-03-010
Indicators of the intensity of intoxication of the term placenta by
tobacco smoke
I. Novosel*, M. Rastovac, Ž. Josić, M. Kos, D. Babić
*Østfold Sykehuset Kalnes, Norway
Background & objectives: Intrauterine exposure to tobacco smoke can
cause not just metabolic, immunological and endocrine diseases but also
epigenetic changes in new-borns DNA.
Virchows Arch
Our objective was to establish an indicator of toxic changes in the form of
Placental intoxication index (PII).
Methods: 290 postpartum women were divided into four groups with
respect to smoking habits during pregnancy: NS, non-smokers; PS,
passive smokers; AS, active smokers; APS, combined smokers.
Placenta samples were analysed pathohistologically (H/E),
immunohistochemically (p53, bcl-2, Hsp-70 and Metallothionein)
and statistically.
PII was established for each placenta. It incorporates the sum of Placental
morphologic index (PMI) and Placental immunohistochemical index
(PIHI).
Results: Statistical comparison of PII for each group enabled the
distinction of placentas exposed to tobacco smoke during the intra-
uterine period from those that were not exposed; the PII of placentas
exposed to passive smoking differed statistically significantly from
PII of placentas exposed to active smoking, while there was no dif-
ference between PII of placentas exposed to active smoking and
combined forms of smoking.
PII in placentas exposed to tobacco smoke indicated intensity of intoxi-
cation since it showed a statistically significant correlation with the level
of tobacco smoke exposure regardless of the mode of exposure.
Conclusion: PII detected intoxicated placentas that would otherwise be
considered unexposed to the effect of tobacco smoke during 40 weeks of
pregnancy because neonatal and macroscopic placental parameters did
not indicate significant changes. Therefore, PII enables the early detection
of risky new-borns who require enhanced care up to adulthood because of
the harmful intrauterine effects of tobacco smoke.
OFP-03-011
Inter-observer variability in differentiated vulvar intraepithelial
neoplasia
S. Dasgupta*, E. de Jonge, L.S. Alcala, L. Makkus, S. Wilhelmus,
S. Smits, K. Schelfout, K.K. Van de Vijver, M.R. Van Bockstal,
E. Marbaix, L. Libbrecht, S. Koljenović, F.J. van Kemenade,
P.C. Ewing-Graham
*Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Differentiated vulvar intraepithelial neopla-
sia (dVIN) progresses rapidly to carcinoma but manifests a subtle histo-
logic appearance. We assessed the variability of the diagnosis of dVIN
amongst pathologists and sought to identify the most reproducible histo-
logic features.
Methods: Two pathologists selected a set of dVIN (n=30) and no-
dysplasia (n=10) slides with a range of histologic appearance and pre-
pared a check-list of histologic features of dVIN. Nine external partici-
pants independently judged these slides as ‘dVIN’ or ‘no-dysplasia’ and
noted which features they used for the diagnosis. ‘Consensus diagnosis’
was defined as 70% agreement. Inter-observer agreement (Fleiss’ Kappa)
was calculated.
Results: Consensus was reached for 23 (77%) dVIN cases and for all the
no-dysplasia cases. For the diagnosis of dVIN moderate agreement
(ĸ=0.46) was obtained; pair-wise agreement ranged from slight to sub-
stantial (mean ĸ=0.51; range: 0.14–0.71). Among all histologic features,
moderate agreement was obtained only for parakeratosis (ĸ=0.51). Fair
agreement was obtained for nuclear features such as atypia discernable
under 100X magnification (ĸ=0.39), nuclear angulation (ĸ=0.38), abnor-
mal chromatin (ĸ=0.38), and suprabasal mitoses (ĸ=0.32). Histologic
features related to disturbed maturation and architectural changes, such
as deep squamous eddies (ĸ=0.39), elongated/anastomosing rete-ridges
(ĸ=0.33), altered cellular alignment (ĸ=0.32), cobblestone appearance
(ĸ=0.29), and individual cell keratinization (ĸ=0.27), also had fair
agreement.
Conclusion: Histologic diagnosis of dVIN suffers from considerable
inter-observer variability. Moderate agreement was obtained only for
parakeratosis, and there was only fair agreement for most histologic
features. Future studies should focus on ancillary immunohistochemical
and molecular biomarkers to facilitate accurate diagnosis.
OFP-05-001
A new marker for intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator
F. Pedica*, F. Falcinelli, F. Invernizzi, N. Ahmed, F. Filipello,
C. Doglioni
*Pathology Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy
Background & objectives: Biliary tract cancer are aggressive and het-
erogeneous neoplasms and a specific marker for the biliary epithelium is
missing. We performed immunohistochemical analysis of the cystic fi-
brosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) in a series of 74
biliary and non biliary tumours.
Methods: We collected a cohort of 40 intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas
and 7 combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinomas, then compared
them with 8 perihilar adenocarcinomas, 5 hepatocellular carcinomas, 1
case of biliary adenofibroma, 1 case of colorectal liver metastasis, 5
pulmonary adenocarcinomas and 7 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas.
3-μm-thick tissue sections were incubated with monoclonal antibody
anti-CFTR (NeoBiotechnologies, mouse monoclonal antibody,
CFTR/1643, diluition 1:100).
Results: Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas were 10 “large duct type” and
30 “small duct type”. Of the "small duct type" 6 cases partially resembles
biliary adenofibroma and 6 had a cholangiolocellular carcinoma compo-
nent. CFTR was expressed in 67% of "small duct type", whilst never
expressed in the"large duct type", nor in the perihilar adenocarcinomas
(p=0.009). Moreover, CFTR was positive both in the biliary
adenofibroma and cholangiocellular components of the intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas (p=0,011) and was positive in the case of biliary
adenofibroma. In the combined cancers, CFTR was expressed in 4 of 7
cases. HCCs, colorectal liver metastasis and pulmonary adenocarcinomas
were negative; 1 of the 7 cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma was
positive.
Conclusion: CFTR is a reliable marker for intrahepatic biliary tumours
and can be useful both in routine practice and for understanding their
biology, which is fundamental to understand the results coming from
genomic studies and for the personalization of therapies.
OFP-05-002
Histological and molecular profiling of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas in patients with a history of asbestos exposure
F. Vasuri*, A.G. Corradini, M. Deserti, S. Tavolari, G. Brandi,
A. D'Errico
*Pathology Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna University, Italy
Background & objectives: There are recent evidences of a role of as-
bestos in the cancerogenesis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCC).
Here we present the preliminary results of a study on the histopathological
features and mutational status of iCC in asbestos-exposed patients.
Methods: We retrospectively selected the iCC patients from our
Institution with a proven history of asbestos exposure according to mod-
ified RENAM questionnaire. Clinical and histological features were re-
vised. Immunohistochemistry for CK7, CK19, pCEA and CD56 was
automatically performed. Next-Generation Sequencing was performed
for mutational status.
Results: Until now, 19 patients were selected; 12 cases with concomitant
risk factors for liver disease (alcohol, steatosis/steatohepatitis, HBV/HCV
infection) and 7 cases with only asbestos exposure in anamnesis.
OFP-05 Digestive Diseases Pathology - Liver / Pancreas
Virchows Arch
Six out of 7 asbestos-only exposed cases were iCC of the small-duct
subtype, 1 case was an undifferentiated peripheral iCC, without a specific
morphological subtype for small or large bile ducts.
Some gene mutations were more typical of multifactorial iCCs: BAP1 was
mutated in 6/12 (50.0%) multifactorial cases and 1/7 (14.3%) asbestos-only
cases (p=0.004, t-test); MUC genes were mutated in 6/12 (50.0%) and 1/7
(14.3%) cases respectively (p=0.004). Conversely, ATN1 was mutated in
4/12 (33.3%) and 3/7 (42.9%) cases respectively (p=0.05).
Conclusion: These preliminary results suggest an association between
asbestos exposure and small-duct subtype iCC: thus, asbestos could be
considered a “non-biliary” risk factor. Moreover, the different incidence
of some gene mutations in presence of other risk factors suggests different
carcinogenetic mechanisms.
OFP-05-003
Combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma (CHCC-CC): are the
cellular components important?
F. Yilmaz*, H. Koc, P. Savas, O.V. Unalp, D. Nart, M. Zeytunlu
*Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Primary liver carcinomas (PLC) with un-
equivocal presence of both hepatocytic and cholangiocytic differentiation
within the same tumour are classified as combined hepatocellular-
cholangiocarcinoma (cHCC-CC). In this study the clinicopathologic
characteristics and immunophenotypes of combined CC-HCC cases were
analysed.
Methods: Clinicopathologic data of 19 combined CC-HCC cases
were retrospectively analysed. Thirty tumour nodules from 19
cases were retrospectively reviewed for the morphological features
of their hepatocytic, cholangiocytic and stromal components based
primarily on routine stains.
Results: There were 12 male, 7 female patients (mean age 57, range 34-
76). Tumours were, multifocal in 3 (15.79%) cases. Histopathological
analyses showed presence of combinations of classical-Hepatocellular
carcinoma, classical-cholangiocarcinoma (cCC) and components com-
posed of intermediate cells, intermixed/transitional nests and immature
(embryonal-like) cells. Twelve cases were classical cHCC-CC, two were
combined intermediate carcinoma-CC, 3 were Intermixed/Transitional
Nests combined with cCC and two had embryonal liver-like
hepatocytic/cholangiocytic components. Classical HCC-CC was more
multifocal (25% vs 0%), smaller (mean diameter 6,38 cm vs 8.64 cm),
had more major vascular invasion, satellite nodules, intrahepatic metas-
tases and perineural inavasion (33.33% vs. 14.48%, 16.66% vs. 0%,
33.33% vs. 0%16.66% vs. 14.28 %, respectively) than other subtypes.
Conclusion: Histopathological components of cHCC-CC may have an
influence on the biological behaviour of the tumour and merits analysis in
larger series
OFP-05-004
Importance of recipients’ clinical profile in the allocation of liver
grafts with fibrosis from dyslipidemic donors
M. Riefolo*, D. Malvi, G. Germinario, M. Ravaioli, M. Cescon,
A. D'Errico, F. Vasuri
*Pathology Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna University, Italy
Background & objectives: A novel role of graft fibrosis and dyslipid-
emic profile in extended-criteria donors (ECD) in predicting early allo-
graft dysfunction (EAD) was previously demonstrated.
Aim: to validate our previous results on a prospective cohort, matching
graft histology to recipients’ characteristics.
Methods: We prospectively enrolled all ECD whose liver grafts
underwent to transplant after biopsy in 2 years.
Histological variables of the graft, donors' and recipients' clinical data,
and follow-up data were recorded, including EAD (at 7 days).
Multivariate and univariate analyses were applied. ROC curves were built
to calculate bilirubin and creatinine cut-offs.
Results: We enrolled 103 ECD and corresponding recipients. Fourteen
(13.6%) had portal fibrosis ≥2 (according to Ishak) and dyslipidemia
(dyslipidemic donors with fibrosis, DDF); 42.8% DDF recipients experi-
enced EAD versus20.9% of the other recipients (p=0.076); in
particular, DDF recipients had more episode of AST raise within
7 days (p=0.048).
At multivariate ad univariate analyses, EAD correlated with pre-OLT
bilirubin levels (p=0.030) in non-DDF recipients, and with pre-OLT cre-
atinine and INR in DDF recipients (p=0.024 and p=0.016).
In particular, DDF recipients with >0.85 mg/dL pre-OLT creatinine had
71.4% EAD episodes, compared to 14.3% in DDF recipients with <0.85
mg/dL creatinine (p=0.009).
Conclusion: Our prospective cohort confirmed the importance of DDF
model in predicting EAD. Moreover, the choice to transplant DDF grafts
likely depends on recipients’ clinical profile, in particular creatinine level,
according to our model.
OFP-05-005
Histopathologic evaluation of resected colorectal cancer liver
metastases
J. Santos*, R. Machado-Neves, T. Amaro, M. Honavar
*Unidade Local de Saúde de Matosinhos, Portugal
Background & objectives: Colorectal liver metastasis (CRLM) presents
histopathologic patterns with prognostic implications. The objective of
this study is to evaluate the influence of pathological findings on mortality
rate (MR).
Methods: Analysis of clinical and outcome data from 30 patients who
underwent CRLM resection, 25 of whom were treated with chemotherapy
before hepatic resection. Pathological review: resection margins; tumour re-
gression grade (TRG); growth pattern (GP); necrosis and mucinous pattern.
Results: Thirty patients: 12 women and 18 men. Mean age: 65 years.
Median survival following hepatic resection: 41 months. Resection mar-
gins: positive in nine specimens, associated with higher mortality rate
(MR) (56% vs 29%). TRG: fourteen showed complete/partial response
(TRG1-3) and eleven showed poor response (TRG4-5). TRG1-3 had
lower MR (21%) vs TRG4-5 (54%). GP: five pushing, twelve
desmoplastic, seven replacement and six mixed. Replacement GP
showed higher MR (57%). Oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy was associ-
ated with desmoplastic GP (56%). Necrosis: sixteen had >10% and four-
teen <10% (MR 63% vs 8%). Mucinous pattern: present in six, all four
with mucinous pattern >50% died.
Conclusion: The pathological features associated with higher MR were
positive resection margins, TRG4/5, replacement GP, >10% of tumour
necrosis and mucinous pattern >50%. Prospective studies of patients with
CRLMs are warranted to evaluate the prognostic value of histopatholog-
ical features.
OFP-05-006
Role of cellular senescence in the natural history of primary
sclerosing cholangitis
S. Sarcognato*, N. Cazzagon, G. Corrà, S. De Martin, V. Guzzardo,
A. Floreani, F.P. Russo, M. Guido
*Dept of Medicine, University of Padova, Italy
Background & objectives: Cellular senescence (CS) represents an irre-
versible cell cycle arrest to prevent replication of injured cells, whose role
in chronic liver diseases was recently suggested. We aimed to evaluate
hepatic CS-marker expression in primary sclerosing cholangitis(PSC)
and its correlation with clinical-pathological features.
Methods: Thirty-five PSC patients with at least one liver biopsy(LB)/
explant at diagnosis and/or during follow-up were enrolled. Clinical/
Virchows Arch
laboratory data(including prognostic models) at the time of LB were
collected. Endpoint was survival without liver transplantation or cirrhosis
decompensation. Grading/staging according to Nakanuma were per-
formed. Immunohistochemistry for CS-markers(p16,p21) were per-
formed and scored based on positivity extent in native bile duct(NBD)
and ductular reaction(DR).
Results: p16 and p21 expression in NBD and DR was directly correlated
with hepatitis activity, cholestasis-related histological lesions, fibrosis,
and disease stage (p<0.05 for all). By multivariate analysis, p16 expres-
sion in DR was independently associated with advanced disease stages
[p=0.002,HR 13.6 (95%CI 2.6-72.6)]. p16 and p21 expression in DR was
directly related to Mayo Risk Score (p=0.02 for both) and Amsterdam-
Oxford Model (AOM;p<0.001 and p=0.007, respectively). p16 and p21
expression in NBD was directly related to AOM (p=0.03 for both). p21
expression in DR was independently associated with adverse outcome-
free survival [p=0.005,HR 4.6 (95%CI 1.6-13.6)].
Conclusion: In PSC, CS marker expression in cholangiocytes is related
to clinical and histological severity, disease progression and patients’
prognosis, suggesting a role for CS in the natural history of the disease.
OFP-05-007
Biomarkers to predict response to immunotherapy identify
pancreatic cancer patient subgroups with prolonged progression-
free survival
M. Wartenberg*, E. Vassella, S. Eppenberger-Castori, B. Gloor,
A. Perren, E. Karamitopoulou-Diamantis
*Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Switzerland
Background & objectives: Immunotherapy alone or in combination
with chemotherapy can improve treatment response in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Therapy success has been linked to microsat-
ellite instability (MSI), inflamed tumour microenvironment (TME), high
tumour mutational burden (TMB) and PD-L1 expression.
Methods: The study cohort comprised 115 resected PDACs, TNM stage
I-III, including 25 long-term survivors (progression-free survival>60
months). TMB was assessed using the oncomine mutation load assay.
PD-L1, immune cell densities and MSI-status were assessed
immunohistochemically (PD-L1, MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6, CD3,
CD4, CD8, FOXP3, CD68) on tissue microarrays.
Results: MSI-H was present in 2.6% of all patients and more frequent
among LTSs (8%). 75% of MSI-H-cases were also TMB-H (i.e. >10),
showing T-cell-inflamed TME. TMB-H was found in 15% of PDACs;
60% also expressing PD-L1. PD-L1-positivity was found in 37% (20%
were also TMB-H). PD-L1-high (expression-score >4; 7%) was associ-
ated with an inflamed TME. Better overall (OS) and progression-free
survival (PFS) was found for TMB-H cases (p=0.01817 and p=0.00664).
Conclusion: The morphologic/microenvironmental and clinicopatholog-
ic features of MSI-H and TMB-H patients indicate a better anti-tumour
immune response. Based on concurrent biomarker expression, TMB-H
patients might further profit from checkpoint inhibition, while other strat-
egies inducing immune response might be an option for the remaining
majority of patients. Combinations of biomarkers indicating potential
immunotherapy response along with TMB can assist the selection of
target groups as part of an individualized, precision oncology approach.
OFP-05-008
Predicting morphological classifications of pancreatic ductal adeno-
carcinoma (PDAC) using deep learning
S. N Kalimuthu*
*Toronto General Hospital, Canada
Background & objectives: We recently proposed a revised, pat-
tern based morphological classification for PDAC, associated with
transcriptional subtypes and overall survival1.We aim to assess if
deep learning can automate our system to enhance reproducibility
and accessibility to pathologists for patient care.
Methods: 365 H&E slides from 58 patients (range 3-11 slides/
patient) with tx-naïve PDAC were digitized. Tiling was automated
to generate a total of 1.6 x 105 image 524 um2 patches tiles and
tumour-containing image patches extracted. Five-fold cross valida-
tion approach was used to assess the performance of our classifier
in predicting the A and B morphologic subtypes of our entire
cohort.
Results: Using unsupervised hierarchical clustering and dimen-
sionality reduction, histological features, defined by 512 deep
learning feature vectors (DLFV) generated by convoluted neural
network (CNN) developed in our department2, were used to sub-
group PDAC that mirrored our morphological subtypes. When
both stromal and epithelial components were included, 68% were
classified as Group A and 78% were classified as group B accu-
rately. However, when stromal elements, to only include epithelial
elements, it was able to classify 80% of Group A and 85% of
Group B patients accurately, with an area under the receiver op-
erator characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) of 0.83.
1. N Kalimuthu S et al 2019
2. Faust et al 2019
Conclusion: We have demonstrated a proof of concept that deep
learning, when applied to PDAC can objectively classify the mor-
phological subtypes previously described on H&E slides. This
could provide rapid survival data and act as a surrogate to tailor
targeted therapy.
OFP-05-009
Reliability of EUS-guided fine-needle biopsy specimens to assess
ATRX/DAXX and PDX1/ARX by immunohistochemistry in
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours: a proof of concept study
M.G. Mastrosimini*, S. Crino, A. Parisi, L. Bernardoni, M. De Bellis,
E. Torresani, S. Ammendola, S. Marletta, A. Gabrielli, M.C. Conti
Bellocchi, E. Manfrin
*Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona,
Italy
Background & objectives: Somatic inactivating mutations in
ATRX/DAXX genes and altered expression of transcription fac-
tors ARX and PDX1 are associated with poor outcomes in
PanNETs. We sought to assess ATRX/DAXX and PDX1/ARX
expression by immunohistochemistry in EUS-FNB and paired sur-
gical specimens of PanNETs.
Methods: EUS-FNB and corresponding surgical specimens of
twenty-six patients with PanNETs were retrieved at the
University Hospital of Verona (2017-2018). ATRX, DAXX,
ARX and PDX1 protein expression and Ki-67 proliferation index
were detected by immunohistochemistry on biopsy and paired
surgical specimens. Tumour grade was classified according to
the WHO 2019.
Results: All EUS-FNB cases provided adequate material for immu-
nohistochemistry examination. ATRX, DAXX, PDX1, and ARX
concordance between biopsy and surgical specimens was 92% (K =
0.705; p < 0.001), 96% (K = 0.866; p < 0.001), 100% (K = 1.000; p <
0.001), and 82% (K = 0.400; p = 0.050), respectively. Likewise,
tumour grade concordance was 92% (K = 0.752; p < 0.001), since
2 cases were under-staged on biopsy.
Conclusion: The assessment of ATRX/DAXX and PDX1/ARX
protein expression by immunohistochemistry can be accurately
performed on EUS-FNB. The concordance between EUS-FNB
and surgical specimens is substantial for ATRX and tumour
grade, and almost perfect for DAXX and PDX1.
Virchows Arch
OFP-05-010
Through the needle biopsy (TTNB) specimens. A new procedure in
the setting of pre-operative histological diagnosis of the cystic lesions
in the pancreas and retroperitoneum
S. Ammendola*, E. Cavallo, S. Crino, L. Bernardoni, A. Parisi,
M.G. Mastrosimini, A. Gabbrielli, M.C. Conti Bellocchi, E. Manfrin
*Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona,
Italy
Background & objectives: Endoscopic ultrasound guided through the
needle biopsy (TTNB) with microforceps procedure ecruits specimens
from the cyst wall for the histological evaluation.
Hereby, we describe our experience at the University of Verona Hospital
trust with TTNB of pancreatic and retroperitoneal cysts.
Methods: Electronic files were searched for TTNBs performed between
January 2016 and January 2020. The clinical, serological, imaging and
cyto-histological data were collected for the selected cases.
Results: 99 TTNB procedures were performed and the histologi-
cal yield was 99% (98/99 cases). The histological diagnosis was
performed in 83/99 (84.7%) cases. The aspecific histological char-
acteristics of the biopsy prevented the conclusive diagnosis in 15
cases (15.3%).
In 30 cases, the patients underwent surgery and TTNB diagnosis
was confirmed in 27/30 cases (90%). Grading of epithelial dys-
plasia between biopsy and surgical specimen was discordant in
2/30 cases (6.7%).
Conclusion: TTNB is a reliable diagnostic tool for the pre-operative
diagnosis of cystic lesions in the pancreas and retroperitoneum and it
allows to avoid unnecessary surgery. However, due to the histological
heterogeneity of the cyst wall, pathologists must be aware that TTNB
microforceps could miss epithelial dysplasia or sample non diagnostic
areas, favouring misdiagnosis. A multidisciplinary approach helps reduce
misdiagnosis.
OFP-06-001
Serrated polyposis syndrome: morphologic and molecular heteroge-
neity of dysplasia-carcinoma progression
J. Gibson*, A. Barbieri, Z. Walther
*Yale University School of Medicine, USA
Background & objectives: Serrated polyposis syndrome (SPS) predis-
poses to colorectal cancer (CRC) and is characterized by multiple serrated
polyps (SP) according to WHO criteria proposed in 2010 and revised in
2018. We aim to characterize the pathologic and molecular progression of
SPS neoplasia.
Methods: 32 SPS patients were identified using WHO criteria in 2345
consecutive patients with at least 1 SP. Clinicopathologic assessment of
advanced neoplasia (AN) in SPS patients was performed, including CRC
and/or SP with dysplasia of any grade (SSPD), intestinal (I) or serrated (S)
type. 10 AN were subjected to next generation sequencing (NGS) using a
50 gene hot spot panel.
Results: SPS incidence was 1.4% (18:14 female:male, mean age 67
years). 9 SPS patients had AN, including 7 CRC, 8 SSPD-I and 3
SSPD-S. BRAF V600E mutation was detected in 9 cases (5 SSPD-I, 1
SSPD-S, and 3 CRC) and KRAS Q61H in 1 CRC. Additional mutations
were found in CRC cases in the following genes: p53 (2 cases), FBXW7
(2), and SMAD4, PTEN, RB1, and RET (1 each).
Conclusion: In our cohort, 13% SPS patients had AN, including CRC
and SSPD. All AN had activating mutations involving the RAF-RAS -
MAPK signalling pathway, with majority with BRAF mutations and one
case with a KRAS mutation. Our study confirms that while BRAF V600E
is a common early mutation in SPS neoplasia, analysis of CRC in SPS
patients demonstrates a diverse mutational profile. Our results support the
conclusion that progression of carcinogenesis in SPS involves heteroge-
nous molecular pathways.
OFP-06-002
Computer-assisted hot-spot selection for tumour budding assessment
in colorectal cancer
J. Bokhorst*, F. Ciompi, I. Zlobec, A. Lugli, M. Vieth, R. Kirsch, J. van
der Laak, I. Nagtegaal
*Radboud University Medical Center, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Tumour budding (TB) is an established prog-
nosticator for colorectal cancer. Detection of the hot-spot to score TB is
based on visual inspection, hindering reproducibility of this important
factor. We present an algorithm that can potentially assist pathologists
in this task.
Methods: We used a previously developed algorithm for the detec-
tion of tumour buds in pan-cytokeratin stained whole slide images,
calculating the number of buds for each location using a circle with
0.785mm2 surface area. From these numbers, density heatmaps
were produced. The algorithm was applied to 270 slides from
Bern University hospital, in which hot-spots and tumour buds were
visually identified.
Results: Heat maps were created and we located the hand-selected
hotspot and noted the associated TB number. The differences and simi-
larities between computer identified and manually selected hot-spots were
visually assessed as well as via histograms. Preliminary results show that
the heatmaps are helpful, as locations with the highest TB density (the top
15%) also include the hand-selected hotspots. The full results will be
presented during the conference.
Conclusion: The presented algorithm can assist the pathologist in
selecting the hot-spot with the highest tumour bud count with more ease
at low magnification and can help to reduce the high inter-observer var-
iability among pathologists in scoring tumour budding.
This project has received funding from the Dutch Cancer Society, project
number 10602/2016-2.
OFP-06-003
Prognostic value of tumour deposits for disease-free survival in
patients with stage III colon cancer: a post hoc analysis of the idea
France phase III trial (prodige-gercor)
M. Svrcek*, J. Delattre, R. Cohen, J. Henriques, J. Emile, F. Bibeau,
J. Taieb, C. Louvet, D. Vernerey, T. Andre
*Sorbonne Université, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Department of
Pathology, France
Background & objectives: Tumour deposits (TD) seem to impact the
prognosis of patients with colon cancer (CC). In the
TNM7 CC staging, their presence is only considered in the absence of
lymph node metastases
(LNM). In the era of personalized duration of histopathological criteria-
based adjuvant therapy, this could potential lead to a loss of the prognosis
prediction accuracy.
Methods: A post hoc analysis of all pathological reports from stage III
CC patients included in the IDEA
France phase III study (NCT00958737) investigating the duration of ad-
juvant FOLFOX or CAPOX therapy (3 vs 6 months) was performed. The
primary objective was to determine the prognostic impact of TD on
disease-free survival (DFS). The effect of the addition of TD to LNM
count on pN restaging was also evaluated. A multivariable analysis was
performed to establish the association between TD and DFS.
Results: Of 1942 patients, 184 (9.5%) had TD. The pN1a/b and pN1c
populations showed similar DFS. TD-positive patients had worse prog-
nosis compared with TD-negative patients, with the 3-year DFS rate of
OFP-06 Digestive Diseases Pathology - GI
Virchows Arch
65.6% (95% CI 58.0 to 72.1) and 74.7% (95% CI 72.6 to 76.7; P=.0079).
On multivariable analysis, TD were associated with the higher risk of
recurrence or death (HR=1.36; P=.0201). Other pejorative factors includ-
ed pT4 and/or pN2 (HR=2.21; P<.001), the 3-month adjuvant treatment
(HR=1.29, P=.0029), obstruction (HR=1.28; P=.0233), and male gender
(HR=1.24; P=.0151). pN2-restaged patients (n=35, 2.3%) had similar
DFS than those initially classified as pN2
Conclusion: TD is an independent prognostic factor for DFS in stage III
CC patients. The addition of TD to LNM may help to better define the
duration of adjuvant therapy.
OFP-06-004
Deep neural networks and supervised machine learning for the
screening and classification of dysplasia in inflammatory bowel
disease
J. Kantonen*, A. Knuuttila, S. Blom, N. Sjöblom, R. Samaletdin,
M. Färkkilä, J. Arola
*University of Helsinki, HUS/Pathology, Finland
Background & objectives: Algorithms based on deep neural networks
(DNN) have been shown to outperform humans in specialized tasks in
pathology. Here we assess the performance of a pathologist-trained algo-
rithm in the search for and grading of dysplasia in inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD).
Methods: HE-slides from a cohort of 391 IBD patients were used. A
training set of 50 slides was annotated by a pathologist, subsequently
used to train a DNN using the Aiforia® cloud platform. The resulting
algorithm was applied to a validation set of 250 slides and results were
compared to pathologist performance. Discrepant results were reviewed
by an expert panel.
Results: The algorithm was consistently able to find areas suspicious for
dysplasia. The algorithm could also differentiate between the classes 'indefi-
nite for dysplasia', 'LG dysplasia', 'HG dysplasia' and 'Carcinoma budding',
with the diagnosis for carcinoma being aided by the immediate vicinity of a
class for 'reactive stroma'. Review of the discrepant diagnoses revealed the
inconsistencies of human performance on the one hand and limitations of the
trained algorithm on other hand. In a speed test with 100 random IBD slides,
the algorithm was able to outperform a pathologist using a conventional
microscope, finishing within 1/3 of the time needed by the pathologist.
Conclusion: Our algorithm outperforms pathologists in both speed and
consistency, but is limited in scope, and requires a pathologist to make the
definitive diagnosis for carcinoma. Nevertheless, with the number of
samples continuing to grow, it provides a useful tool for the screening
and classification of dysplasia in IBD. With such tools, training patholo-
gists to become 'diagnostic machines' is questionable as a vision for the
future of pathology.
Funding by: HUS (Valtion tutkimusrahoitus)
OFP-06-005
Markers of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in early colorectal
carcinoma compared to adenoma and adenoma with pseudoinvasion
B. Ranković*, E. Boštjančič, M. Žlajpah, N. Zidar
*Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Slovenia
Background & objectives: Distinguishing malignant adenoma/early co-
lorectal carcinoma (CRC) from adenoma with pseudoinvasion can be
challenging. Our aim was to investigate the expression of markers of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in malignant adenoma/early
CRC compared to adenoma and adenoma with pseudoinvasion.
Methods: Thirty-two cases of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue
were included (10 adenomas, 10 malignant adenomas/early carcinomas
and 12 adenomas with pseudoinvasion). We analysed the expression of
miR-200 family and their target genes CDKN1B, ONECUT2, PTPN13,
RND3, SOX2, TGFB2 and ZEB2 using qPCR.
Results: We found statistically significant down-regulation of miR-141,
miR-429 and PTPN13 and up-regulation of CDKN1B in malignant
adenomas/early carcinomas compared to adenomas with pseudoinvasion.
We also observed down-regulation of miR-200c and miR-429, and up-
regulation of CDKN1B and RND3 in malignant adenomas/early carcino-
mas compared to adenomas, and down-regulation of TGFB2 and up-
regulation of RND3 and CDKN1B in adenomas with pseudoinvasion
compared to adenoma.
Conclusion: Down-regulation of the miR-200 family and PTPN13, and
up-regulation of CDKN1B in malignant adenomas/early carcinomas com-
pared to adenomas and adenomas with pseudoinvasion is consistent with
the postulated role of EMT in the progression of adenoma to early CRC.
OFP-06-006
Inhibition of LPS-mediated TLR4 activation abrogates gastric
adenocarcinoma-associated peritoneal metastasis
M. Alzahrani*, C. Janeiro, L. Almarzouki, V. Stavrakos, L. Ferri
*McGill University, Saudi Arabia
Background & objectives: Curative-intent-surgery remains the most ben-
eficial treatment-option for localized gastric-adenocarcinoma(GC),the ma-
jority of patients experience cancer recurrence, with peritoneum as the most
common site. Clinically, there is an observed link between post-operative
infection and metastasis of primary(GC)to the peritoneum, however the
mechanisms behind are poorly-understood.
Methods: We aimed to show the effects and mechanisms of LPS-
induced TLR4-signaling on peritoneal metastasis of gastric adeno-
carcinoma, as a proposed mechanism for post-surgical infection
induced cancer recurrence. in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo activation
of TLR4 by LPS or heat inactivated E. coli using both murine-
and human-derived gastric cancer cell lines to human peritoneal
mesothelial cells(HPMCs) were done.
Results: Up to a six-fold significant increase was seen in the LPS and E.
coli conditions compared to control (P<0.05). Use of neutralizing TLR4
antibody and TLR4 signal cascade blockades, notably TAK1 and
MEK1/2 blockades, significantly abrogated adhesion (P<0.05). A similar
effect was seen using a novel ex vivo model of peritoneal metastasis
employing peritoneal surface harvested from both C57BL/6 wild type
and TLR4–/– knockout mice. In vivo LPS infection potentiates the de-
velopment of gross metastases in NSG mice after intraperitoneal injection
with MKN-45 human gastric cancer cells. Furthermore, murine peritoneal
carcinomatosis index (PCI) scores are highest in mice that received LPS
injection with MKN-45 cells LPS stimulation.
Conclusion: These studies have shown the relevance of TLR4 and the
TLR4 signalling cascade in potentiating metastatic adhesion and spread
to the peritoneum upon activation.
Funding by: McGill University
OFP-06-007
Integrated clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical analysis of
α-foetoprotein-producing gastric carcinoma: an exploration of
histogenesis, molecular features and prognostic markers
F. He, Y. Fu, Q. Sun, X. Fan*
*Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, China
Background & objectives: Typical a-fetoprotein–producing gastric can-
cer (AFPGC), which is characterized by histological resemblance to he-
patocellular carcinoma and a poor prognosis. The aim of this study is to
elucidate the clinicopathological, histogenesis and molecular characteris-
tics as well as prognostic markers of AFPGC.
Methods: Fifty-five patients with AFPGC were screened out by morpho-
logical features for hepatoid adenocarcinoma (HAC), gastric cancer with
enteroblastic differentiation (GCED) and common tubular/papillary ade-
nocarcinoma (COM). The immunohistochemical diagnostic markers
Virchows Arch
including AFP, GPC3 and SALL4, mucin phenotypes, molecular features
and Immunoscore were assessed. Finally, the relationships between each
factor and clinicopathologic features as well as the overall survival time
were analysed.
Results: In 55 patients, mixtures of 3 types (COM+GCED+HAC)
were most commonly observed. The transition between COM and
GCED, GCED and HAC, and sometimes transition between COM
and HAC were could frequently see. Hyaline globule and pink amor-
phous substance were often present. Of the three diagnostic indictors,
SALL4 was the most sensitive marker (90.9%). AFPGC showed rel-
atively frequent expressions of HER2 (38.2%). Besides, 38 patients
(69.1%) showed pure intestinal phenotype and the remained 17 pa-
tients were mixed gastric/intestinal phenotype. Cases with prominent
hyaline globules had a significantly poor prognosis. SALL4, HER2
and Immunoscore had an independent influence on OS. In addition,
HER2low + SALL4low+ Immunoscore high group have the best
prognosis.
Conclusion: AFPGC is a genetically heterogenous group. It might be
developed from intestinal type gastric adenocarcinoma and progress to
GCED, finally HAC. CIN/GS subtypes could be where they belong.
SALL4, HER2 and Immunoscore are independent influence on OS of
AFPGCs.
OFP-06-008
A pathological risk score based on poorly differentiated clusters,
tumour budding and number of harvested loco-regional lymph
nodes predicts prognosis in stage II colorectal cancer
S. Ammendola*, G. Burato, S. Pecori, A. Tomezzoli, C. Pedrazzani,
V. Barresi
*Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona,
Italy
Background & objectives: Use of adjuvant chemotherapy is controver-
sial in patients with stage II colorectal carcinoma (CRC), because of good
overall prognosis. This study aims to investigate the prognostic value of
several clinical-pathological variables in stage II CRC.
Methods: A cohort of 149 surgically resected stage II CRC patients who
did not receive neoadjuvant or adjuvant treatment was selected. Data on
cancer specific survival (CSS) was available in all cases. All cases were
revised to assess histological grading, tumour budding (TB) grade, poorly
differentiated clusters (PDC) count, lymphovascular/perineural invasion
and tumour border configuration.
Results: Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that high
TB grade (Bd3), presence of PDC and a number of lymph nodes
<12 were significant and independent variables for prediction of
cancer related death. A risk score, by assigning 1 point to the pres-
ence and 0 points to the absence of each of these variables was
formulated. A risk score ≥1 was significantly and independently
prognostic of shorter CSS.
Conclusion: Examination of an inadequate number of locoregional
lymph nodes, high TB grade and presence of PDC were associated with
shorter CSS and cancer-related death in patients with stage II CRC. These
features may be helpful to select high risk patients who could benefit from
adjuvant chemotherapy.
OFP-06-009
Mucinous appendiceal neoplasms: a 10 year review with reclassifica-
tion and outcomes
A. Colmenares Lozada*, M. Oliveira, C. Ivanova, P. Luís, S. Ortiz
*Hospital Distrital de Santarém, Portugal
Background & objectives: Appendiceal mucinous neoplasms (AMN)
tend to occur in adults in the sixth decade, and usually present with
features of appendicitis. In recent classifications two new concepts for
AMN were introduced: LAMN (Low-grade AMN) and HAMN (High-
grade AMN).
Methods: Retrospective study, in a 10-year period, of 29 cases of AMN.
The cases were analysed for gender, age, initial symptoms, TNM classi-
fication when applicable, surgical approach, complications, survival rate
and recurrence.
Histologic review of all cases was made, to demonstrate how many would
now fulfil the criteria for LAMN or HAMN, and how it could have
changed treatment and/or prognosis.
Results: 15 were initially diagnosed as mucinous cystadenoma [after
review 12 were reclassified as LAMN (80%), 2 as HAMN (13,3%) and
1 as sessile serrated lesion]; 5 were LAMN, 2 HAMN and 5 mucinous
adenocarcinomas [no change after review].
Global 2-year survival rate was 95% [LAMN 100%; HAMN 100%]
and 5-year survival rate was 66% [LAMN 81%; HAMN 100%];
global recurrence index was 11,1% [LAMN 6,2%; HAMN 0%] and
the global rate of disease progression was 14,8% [LAMN 5,8%;
HAMN 0%].
Conclusion: In reclassified cases there was no significant change in both
prognosis and disease-free survival (despite pT stating), however follow-
up is short.
Most LAMN and all HAMN have a 2-year to 5-year follow-up free of
disease or signs of recurrence.
Those with adenocarcinoma, as described in the literature, had worse
prognosis.
OFP-06-010
p53 and p16 combined immunohistochemistry for the prognostic
stratification of adenocarcinomas of cardias and gastroesophageal
junction: A multicentric study
D. Malvi*, M. Riefolo, F. Vasuri, E. Bonora, L. Mastracci,
H. Söderström, J. Räsänen, S. Krishnadath, M. Seri, R. Fiocca,
S. Mattioli, A. D'Errico
*Pathology Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna University, Italy
Background & objectives: Adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal
junction (AdGEJ) is rare and aggressive, and still lacks of bio-
pathological prognostic markers. Aim of the present study was to estab-
lish the usefulness of p53 and p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC) in
AdGEJ prognosis.
Methods: Eighty-three patients resected for non-treated AdGEJ were
enrolled in 5 European centres. Histological variables included: tumour
classification according to WHO and Lauren, concomitant intestinal
metaplasia, tumour stage, vascular invasion.
IHC was performed for Cytokeratin 7 and 20 and CDX2 for diagnosis
and tumour classification, as well as for p53 and p16. p53 mutational
status was confirmed by NGS.
Results: p53 was hyperexpressed in 46 (55.4%) cases, and completely
null in 5 (6.0%), for a total of 51 p53-mutated cases (p53+),
normoexpressed in the remaining cases (p53wt). p16 was hyperexpressed
in 42 (50.6%) cases (p16+), applying a cut-off of 7.5% of p16-positive
cells, calculated by ROC curve.
Patients were sorted in: p53wt/p16- (N=11), p53+/p16- (N=30),
p53wt/p16+ (N=21) and p53+/p16+ cases (N=21). Kaplan-Meier
curves of the 4 patients groups showed a significantly different
cancer-specific survival (p=0.032): in particular, 90% of patients
with p53wt/p16- AdGEJ were alive after 80 months of follow-up,
versus 20% of cancer-specific survival recorded among patients
with p53+/p16+ AdGEJ. Patients with p53+/p16- and p53wt/p16+
AdGEJ showed intermediate survivals.
Conclusion: IHC for p53 and p16 seems to be an independent prognostic
factor in patients with AdGEJ, and it could be proposed in the pathological
report.
This work was partially funded by Associazione Italiana Ricerca sul
Cancro (AIRC), grant Nr. IG1769.
Virchows Arch
OFP-07-001
Data mining on transcriptomic data unmasks AXL, TYRO3 and
MERTK receptors as new potential prognostic markers for ad-
vanced cutaneous melanoma: an ongoing project
L. Nicolè*, R. Cappellesso, F. Cappello, T. Sanavia, D. Serafin,
G. Cortese, P. Del Fiore, S. Mocellin, A.P. Dei Tos
*Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Italy
Background & objectives: TAM receptor (TAMr) tyrosine-kinase fam-
ily plays a significant role in oncogenesis and in immune-modulation, but
their role in melanoma is largely unknown. TAMr prognostic relevance
and correlation with CD8+ T-cells infiltration (Tils8) was assessed in
melanoma patients.
Methods: AXL, TYRO3 and MERTK gene expression profiles re-
garding 235 primary melanomas along with clinico-pathological and
follow-up records were downloaded from TCGA repository. Overall
and disease-free survival analyses were performed considering
clinico-pathological data, TAMr gene expression and Tils8. Tils8
was estimated by a consensus ranking obtained with TIMER and
CIBERSORT tools. P-values<0.05 were considered for statistical
significance.
Results: After stepwise selection based on Akaike Information Criterion,
low AXL and TYRO3 expressions resulted significantly correlated with
worse disease-free survival, while low AXL and high MERTK expres-
sions significantly decrease overall survival in patients with high tumour
stage. Significant positive Spearman correlation was observed between
AXL and Tils8 score (p<0.001).
Conclusion: TAMr are promising prognostic markers for advanced melano-
ma. To assess our results, we are validating AXL, TYRO3 and MERTK
expression by immunohistochemistry in a large cohort of patients with III-
IV stage melanoma. Moreover, studies reported the molecule UNC2025 as a
specific MerTK inhibitor, suggesting that MerTK receptor could also repre-
sent a potential therapeutic target for advanced melanoma.
OFP-07-002
T-cell receptor expression in cutaneous benign and malignant lym-
phoid infiltrates in comparison with T-cell receptor gene rearrange-
ment and its diagnostic utility in borderline cases
K. Kamarádová*, K. Hrochova, D. Belada
*University Hospital Hradec Kralove, The Fingerland Department of
Pathology, Czech Republic
Background & objectives: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoid infiltrates can
represent benign lesion or an infiltration with T-cell lymphoma.
Histopathological appearance can overlap and T-cell receptor gene rear-
rangement evaluation is not always accessible. Expression of different
TCR antibodies is studied in cutaneous lymphoid infiltrates.
Methods: Representative cases of reactive and malignant
lymphoproliferations were collected. Separate group of lesions with bor-
derline morphology was selected for comparison. Immunohistochemical
expression of TCR-beta-F1 (TCR-BF1), TCR-C-beta1 (TCR Jovi.1),
TCR gamma/delta (TCRg/d) and TCR delta (TCRd) was performed in
all cases. TCR gene rearrangement evaluation was performed in all cases
using PCR BIOMED-2 assay.
Results: Benign lymphoid infiltrates were all negative in TCRd and
TCRg/d, expression of TCR-BF1 in one. T-cell lymphomas were positive
for TCR-BF1 and TCRg/d in 60% and 30% of cases, respectively. TCR
gene rearrangement was confirmed in 90% of lymphoma cases. All be-
nign lesions were polyclonal. Borderline lesions showed expression of
TCR-BF1 in 6/10 cases and TCR gene rearrangement in 4/10 cases.
Conclusion: Expression of TCR-BF1 and TCR-gene rearrange-
ment was significantly associated with malignant infiltrates. Re-
evaluation of the cases and clinical correlation led to the change
of the diagnosis and confirmation of T-cell lymphoma in 4/10 of
borderline cases. TCR-BF1 positivity in borderline cutaneous
lymphoproliferations can raise or support the suspicion of malig-
nancy, nevertheless, confirmation by TCR gene rearrangement and
careful clinical correlation is still advisable.
Supported by MH CZ - DRO (UHHK, 00179906), BBMRI-CZ:
No: EF16 013/0001674, PROGRES Q40/11 and BBMRI-CZ
LM2018125.
OFP-07-003
ROCK1 and ROCK2 expression is decreased in late-stage skin
melanomas
M. Kaczorowski*, P. Biecek, P. Donizy, M. Pieniążek, R. Matkowski,
A. Hałoń
*Wroclaw Medical University, Poland
Background & objectives: Rho-associated coiled-coil kinases
(ROCK) 1 and 2 are controllers of cytoskeleton dynamics and
are implicated in several features of carcinogenesis, e.g. adhesion,
invasiveness, migration or proliferation. We aimed to determine
clinicopathological significance of ROCK1 and 2 expression in
skin melanoma.
Methods: ROCK1 and ROCK2 expression was assessed in
immunohistochemically stained sections of 129 primary skin melanomas.
Obtained results were statistically analysed together with other clinico-
pathological characteristics.
Results:We found negative correlations between melanocytic ex-
pression of either ROCK kinase and Breslow thickness, Clark lev-
el, AJCC stage as well as mitotic rate. Moreover, there was a
predilection for low ROCK1 and 2 reactivity in ulcerated tumours
and nodular melanomas. Decreased ROCK2 immunoexpression in
melanoma cells was associated with shorter melanoma-specific and
melanoma-free survival in Kaplan-Meier analysis, but did not in-
dependently predict prognosis in a multivariable model.
Conclusion: Our results indicate that ROCK signalling may be involved
in the pathogenesis of melanoma and that ROCK1 and 2 are downregu-
lated in aggressive and late-stage tumours, which is contrary to most
reports concerning other cancers. Therapeutic inhibition of ROCK ki-
nases in skin melanoma may thus be ineffective.
Funding by: statutory subsidy by the Polish Ministry of Science and
Higher Education as part of grants STM.B131.17.008,
SUB.C280.19.050 and ST.B130.18.030; National Science Centre grant
Opus 2016/21/B/ST6/02176
OFP-07-004
Clinical relevance of tumoral indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 and
PD-L1 co-expression in Merkel cell carcinomas
P. Donizy*, C. Wu, J. Kopczynski, M. Pieniazek, D.M. Miller, J. Rys,
M.P. Hoang
*Department of Pathomorphology and Oncological Cytology, Wroclaw
Medical University, Poland
Background & objectives: The prognostic role of combined tumoral
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) and PD-L1 expression in
Merkel cell carcinomas (MCCs) has not been studied in a large cohort
of patients.
Methods: IDO1 and PD-L1 immunostains were performed on tissue
microarrays constructed from paraffin-embedded tissues of 132 MCCs.
PD-L1 expression >1% was considered positive. The cytoplasmic IDO1
staining was done using the H-score. We correlated IDO1 and PD-L1
expression with clinicopathologic variables and patient outcomes.
OFP-07 Joint Oral Free Paper Session:
Dermatopathology / Soft Tissue & Bone Pathology
Virchows Arch
Results: High tumoral IDO1 expression was observed in 48,5% of
cases and PD-L1 expression >1% in 48% of cases. There was co-
expression of IDO1 and PD-L1 in 25% of cases. By Fisher’s exact
tests, combined high tumoral IDO1 expression and tumoral PD-L1
expression >1% significantly correlated with favourable survival
status (p=0.0002). By univariate analysis, combined high tumoral
IDO1 and tumoral PD-L1 >1% expression revealed a trend with
improved overall survival (p=0.057).
Conclusion: The co-expression of IDO1 and PD-L1 in MCC sug-
gests a potential therapeutic role of combined IDO1 inhibitor and
PD1/PD-L1 inhibitor. Understanding the clinical and pathologic
features associated with IDO1/PD-L1 co-expression in MCC
may provide insights into effective strategies for therapy.
OFP-07-005
Systems biomarker discovery implicates TEAD3 in cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma perineural invasion
I. Katsyv*, G. Niedt
*Columbia University, New York Presbyterian Hospital, USA
Background & objectives: Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
(cSCC) is the second most common primary skin malignancy.
Although resection/radiation is generally curative, a significant
minority of patients develop recurrence. Perineural invasion
(PNI) is a significant risk factor for recurrence, however detection
can be limited.
Methods: We apply Weighted Gene Coexpression Network Analysis
(WGCNA) to 24 human cSCC transcriptomes (GSE86544) to identify
gene clusters associated with PNI. Clusters are ranked by their correlation
with PNI, and candidate biomarkers in top clusters are identified based on
intracluster centrality, differential expression between tumours with and
without PNI, and expression in normal tissues from the Genotype-Tissue
Expression (GTEx) project.
Results: We identify 56 gene clusters ranging in size from 31 to 4166
genes. Sixteen clusters show significant correlation with PNI (p < 0.05).
These clusters are enriched for genes involved in transcriptional regula-
tion, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and extracellular matrix
(ECM) remodelling (p < 0.05). The transcription factor TEAD3 has high
network centrality in a gene cluster enriched for transcriptional regulators
(p < 0.05), is significantly upregulated in cSCC with PNI (fold change =
4.57, p < 0.05), and is preferentially expressed in skin compared to nerve,
adipose, and salivary gland tissue. TEAD3 expression significantly cor-
relates with expression of the EMT/ECM gene cluster (p < 0.05).
Conclusion: Our work suggests TEAD3 contributes to transcriptional
regulation of cSCC invasiveness, and TEAD3 expression may be useful
in identifying high-risk lesions. Further work must be done to characterize
TEAD3 protein expression in cSCC.
OFP-07-006
Secondary syphilis: three-case with different clinico-pathological
presentations
S. Lashin*, S. Elsheikh, A. Sharma
*University of Nottingham, United Kingdom; Menoufia University,
Egypt
Background & objectives: Syphilis, the old friend, continues in re-
emerging with heterogenous presentations which represents a diagnostic
dilemma to dermatologist and dermatopathologists. The UK was one of
five countries that shows more than double the number of cases over the
last 10 years.
Methods: This study aims to highlight the increasing challenge in the
diagnosis of secondary syphilis by presenting three cases with different
presentations
Results: The first case was a 56-year-old gentleman complaining of fe-
ver, chest pain and hearing loss. Followed by the eruption of extensive
papular rash over the trunk, palms and soles. Pulmonary scan showed
bilateral lung nodules. Histology showed localised granulomatous in-
flammation with plasma cells and few eosinophils.
The second case was a 43-year-old lady presented with scaly
sarcoidal-like nodular lesions on face and chest without mucous
membrane involvement. Biopsy showed non-specific perifollicular
granulomatous lympho-histiocytic infiltrate with plasma cells.
The third case was a 32-year-old homosexual man developed oral
thrush and juicy scaly nodular rash on trunk sparing palms and
soles with generalized lymphadenopathy. HIV test was negative
and histopathology was non-specific.
Conclusion: Secondary Syphilis can present with non-specific clinical
and histological features. Clinical, histological and serological correlation
is pivotal for early diagnosis.
OFP-07-007
Indolent cutaneous T-cell lymphoid proliferations of the nose region -
a novel diagnostic algorithm and molecular description
O. Kuczkiewicz-Siemion*, K.A. Seliga, K. Błachnio, Z. Bystydzieński,
A. Tysarowski, M. Prochorec-Sobieszek, G. Rymkiewicz
*Institute of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Diagnostic
Haematology Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research
Institute of Oncology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Poland
Background & objectives: Primary cutaneous CD4+ small/
medium T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder (pc-CD4+TCLPD)
and primary cutaneous acral CD8+ T-cell lymphoma (pc-acral-
CD8+TCL) are indistinguishable morphologically and could pose
a challenge on histopathological and immunohistochemical exami-
nation. The study presents a novel diagnostic approach for these
rare entities.
Methods: Two patients (p1, p2) present solitary nasal skin le-
sions. Skin punch biopsies were obtained with histopathological
and immunohistochemical evaluation, which were inconclusive.
Subsequently fine-needle biopsies (FNB) of the lesions were per-
formed and flow cytometry (FCM) analysis of immunophenotype
and T-cell clonality (IO Test Beta Mark) were done. Finally, both
lesions underwent next-generation sequencing (NGS) molecular
testing (Archer® FusionPlex Lymphoma panel).
Results: Histopathologically, both cases were characterized by a
diffuse focal-epidermotropic dermal proliferation of small to
medium-sized lymphocytes. Immunohistochemically neoplastic
cells were: CD3(+)/CD4(+)/CD8(-)/CD7(-/+)weaker/CD20(-)
(p1) and CD4(+/-)/ CD8(+)/CD7(-)/CD30(-)/granzymeB(+
)/perforin(-) (p2).
Subsequent FCM showed distinct origin of pathological lympho-
cytes. Memory CD4(+): CD45RO(+)/CD45RA(-)/CD4(+)/CD27(+
)moderate-high/ CD26(+)low/CD7(-)/CD8(-) (p1) and naive
CD8(+): CD45RO(-)/CD45RA(+)/CD8(+)/CD27(-)/CD26(+
)/CD7(-/+) /CD4(-) (p2). The monoclonal nature of the pathologic
T-lymphocyte population was confirmed by demonstrating the
lack of clonality of TCR Vbeta on their surface in both cases.
The diagnosis of pc-CD4+TCLPD (p1) and pc-acral-CD8+TCL
(p2) was made. Next-generation sequencing analysis revealed the
EIF4E3[7]-FOXP1[3] fusion in pc-acral-CD8+TCL sample.
Conclusion: FNB/FCM analysis of immunophenotype and
clonality are useful in the final diagnosis of cutaneous T-cell
lymphoid proliferations. Study presents the first molecular de-
scription of pc-CD4+TCLPD and pc-acral-CD8+TCL. We report
a novel FOXP1 fusion, which requires confirmation in a larger
study.
Virchows Arch
OFP-07-009
Use of pan-TRK immunohistochemistry for identification of NTRK
fusions in mesenchymal neoplasms – real life experience
I. Brcic*, T.M. Godschachner, M. Bergovec, J. Igrec, S. Scheipl,
K. Kashofer, A. Leithner, J. Szkandera, B. Liegl-Atzwanger
*Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of
Graz, Austria
Background & objectives: Fusions involving NTRK1-3 are oncogenic
drivers occurring in a spectrum of mesenchymal neoplasms. To get fur-
ther insights into the staining profile with the pan-TRK antibody we
performed immunohistochemistry on various soft tissue sarcomas and
correlated our results with molecular testing.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed soft tissue sarcomas diagnosed
from 1999 until 2019 at the Institute of Pathology, Medical University of
Graz retrieved from the surgical pathology files and consultation cases of
one of the authors. Tissue micro arrays from 409 cases were performed
and analysed immunohistochemically with pan-Trk rabbit monoclonal
antibody (clone EPR17341, Roche/Ventana). Positive cases underwent
next generation sequencing (NGS).
Results: Immunohistochemical staining was observed in 18 (4.4%)
cases. Five cases showed diffuse nuclear and/or cytoplasmatic staining
and each harboured an NTRK-fusion (LMNA-NTRK1, IRF2BP2 -
NTRK1, TMB3-NTRK1, ETV6-NTRK3, RBPMS - NTRK3). Thirteen
cases (3/31 (9,7%) synovial sarcomas, 2/73 (2,7%) leiomyosarcomas, 2/2
(100%) extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas, 2/116 (0,2%)
myxofibrosarcomas, 1/34 (0,3%) atypical lipomatous tumour, 1/33
(0,3%) dedifferentiated liposarcoma) showed weak cytoplasmic/
membranous staining and harboured no NTRK Fusion.
Pan-TRK (clone EPR17341, Roche/Ventana) immunohistochemistry is a
reliable, highly sensitive but less specific diagnostic marker that can be
expressed in non-NTRK-rearranged mesenchymal neoplasms.
Conclusion: Pan-TRK (clone EPR17341, Roche/Ventana) can be used
as a surrogate marker for an identification of NTRK fusion, nevertheless,
an RNA-based NGS for detection of the specific fusion should be per-
formed to confirm the rearrangement if patients are undergoing targeted
therapy.
OFP-07-010
Human sarcoma nude mice xenografts
A. Llombart-Bosch*, C. Carda, E. Mayordomo, F. Giner, R. Noguera,
S. Navarro, I. Machado
*Department of Pathology, University Valencia, Spain
Background & objectives: Biological and molecular studies of human
sarcomas require fresh tumour tissue. Nude mice xenografts offer a valu-
able method to maintain tumours, retaining the histological and genetic
characteristics. Since 1990 we have produced a tissue bank of 438
xenografted human tumours.
Methods: Tumour tissue is inoculated subcutaneously in the back of the
animal, under sterile conditions (1–2 mm3 of tumour tissue). Nude mice
are kept in germ-free conditions (complying with all ethical regulations).
The tumour is followed until it reaches 1–2 cm in diameter, and then
transferred to new animals. Material obtained is kept for histology, cell
culture, EM, and frozen.
Results: Positive grafts (Average 40%, Range 27-60%). By histology
and frequency: Osteosarcoma and Chondrosarcoma (44/100), Es/PNET
(30/80), MFH (18/48), Rhabdo-Leiomyosarcomas (18/41), Synovial sar-
comas (17/28), Liposarcomas (12/39), Fibrosarcomas (4/11), GIST
(6/22), Vascular sarcomas (5/8) and miscellaneous tumours (22/61).
Total 176 positive grafts out of 438 xenografts (40%). Several cell lines
in vitro have been established. Frozen tissue and PFETB are available in
most cases.
Conclusion: Sarcoma xenografts in nude mice provide a suitable model
for the study of tumour morphology, biology and molecular genetics.
Funding by: Grants PI040822 Instituto Carlos III de Madrid, Spain
Contract nº: 018814 (EuroBoNet) 6thFP of the EC and Instituto
Valenciano de Oncología Valencia Spain.
OFP-07-011
Primary and metastatic dedifferentiated malignant melanoma is
significantly under-recognized: analysis of 22 cases
A. Agaimy*, R. Stöhr, A. Hartmann
*Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich-
Alexander Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany
Background & objectives: Dedifferentiated melanoma (primary or met-
astatic) lacks histological and immunophenotypic melanocytic features;
hence cannot be confirmed as melanoma by these conventional tools
alone. To date, 38 cases have been reported. We describe 22 cases
expanding their phenotypic and genotypic spectrum.
Methods: Cases were identified in our pathology (n=2) and consultation
files (n=20). Histological and immunophenotypic findings were
reviewed. All cases were negative for melanocytic markers we use rou-
tinely (SOX10, S100, pan-melanoma, Melan A, HMB45) except for
minimal foci (<5%) of differentiation or immunoreactivity observed in
a few cases. Molecular testing was performed (TST15 gene panel;
Illumina® Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).
Results: Age range was 31-86 years (median, 62). Fourteen patients were
males. Twenty tumours were metastases and two were primary
(subungual, anorectal). Initial diagnosis was undifferentiated pleomor-
phic sarcoma (10), unclassified malignancy (5), other sarcomas (2), met-
astatic melanoma (2) and reactive (1). In only two cases was
dedifferentiated melanoma mentioned. History of melanoma was positive
in 13 cases. Sites of metastases were axilla, inguinal, shoulder, gastroin-
testinal, bone, neck, lung/pleura. Histology was predominantly undiffer-
entiated pleomorphic sarcoma (11). Unusual patterns include osteo-
chondroblastic, tenosynovial giant cell tumour-like and low-grade
fibromyxoid sarcoma-like. Melanoma-typical mutations were detected
in 17/21 (81%) cases (NRAS=8, BRAF=8 and KIT=1). Of 4 wild type
tumours, one showed NF1 mutation by extended testing.
Conclusion: This extended follow-up study highlights the phenotypic
plasticity of dedifferentiated malignant melanoma and indicates signifi-
cant underrecognition of this aggressive disease among general surgical
pathologists. UPS and other unclassified high-grade sarcomas occurring
at unusual sites such as the axilla, inguinal area and the lateral neck should
alert to the possibility of dedifferentiated melanoma, even in the absence
of positive clinical history. Genotyping represents a valuable adjunct to
confirm diagnosis.
OFP-07-012
Atypical pleomorphic lipomatous tumours: a clinicopathologic
analysis of 55 cases
W. Anderson*, C. Fletcher, V. Jo
*Brigham and Women's Hospital, USA
Background & objectives: Atypical pleomorphic lipomatous tumour is
a recently described adipocytic neoplasm. Diagnosis and distinction from
pleomorphic liposarcoma can be challenging due to its wide-ranging
morphology. We present the clinicopathological features of a large case
series to further characterise this emerging entity.
Methods: 55 cases were identified from the consultation files. Clinical
and follow up information were obtained from referring institutions.
Immunohistochemistry for MDM2, CDK4, CD34, Rb, S100 and desmin
was performed in cases with available material.
Results: Patients were 20 women and 35 men; median age was 59 years
(range: 20-89). Tumours arose in upper limb (33%), trunk (31%), lower
limb (29%), head and neck (7%) with size range 2.3-11.5 cm (median:
5.9). Tumours were variably composed of atypical and pleomorphic cells,
Virchows Arch
adipocytes, and lipoblasts, often showing infiltrative growth, myxoid or
collagenous stroma, and multinucleated floret cells. Mitoses were infre-
quent. Tumours expressed CD34 (65%), S100 (64%), and desmin (30%).
86% (38/44) showed Rb loss. Rare cases expressed MDM2 (2%) or
CDK4 (13%); FISH for MDM2 amplification was negative (0/11).
Follow up in 15 patients so far (median: 33 months) revealed no local
recurrences or metastases.
Conclusion: Despite its frequently infiltrative growth, nuclear pleomor-
phism, and hypercellularity which can mimic sarcoma, atypical pleomor-
phic lipomatous tumour behaves in an indolent fashion.
Immunohistochemistry for CD34, S100, desmin and Rb (demonstrating
loss) can support the diagnosis.
OFP-08-001
Diagnostic findings and clinical behaviour of non-invasive follicular
thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features (NIFTP) in a
large Iberian retrospective series
M. Bella-Cueto*, C. Zafon, E. Anda, N.M. Sanchez-Gomez, G. Carnero,
A. Póvoa, C. Blanco, I. Mancha, L. García-Pascual, A. Lázaro,
V. Alcázar, I. Capel, J. Maravall, J. Sanz-Gallur, M. Paja
*Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari, I3PT, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Sabadell, Spain
Background & objectives: Providing diagnostic and clinical data about
the challenging entity Non-invasive Follicular thyroid neoplasm with
papillary-like nuclear features (NIFTP) is of interest.
Objective: To record the diagnostic, management and follow-up data of
NIFTP in a large multi-centre Iberian retrospective series.
Methods: Surgical cases of Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma (PTC) and
tumours of Uncertain Malignant Potential (UMP) over 5 mm (years
2005 to 2015) were recorded from pathological reports of 16 institutions,
and slides reviewed if needed. Diagnostic and clinical data from cases
finally considered as NIFTP were recorded.
Results: From 3134 PTC and 14 UMP nodules, 175 (5.55%) cases were
considered to meet the original criteria of NIFTP (141F/34M, age range 18-
78, average 49). Ultrasound report was available in 142, 56 of them with
suspicious findings (39.4%). Pre-surgical fine needle (FN) cytology or
biopsy was performed in 150 cases (85.7%), being its result the first reason
for surgery in 102 (58.3%). Undetermined Bethesda categories were the
most prevalent (52.66).Total thyroidectomy was performed initially in 112
(64%), and deferred in 45 (25.7%), receiving radio-iodine therapy 132
(75.4%), with an average dose of 96.7 mCi. Follow-up disclosed 10 pa-
tients with biochemical +/- structural persistence, but no recurrences.
Conclusion: In our series of NIFTP prevailed non-suspicious ultrasonog-
raphy (60.6%), undetermined Bethesda categories (52.6%) total thyroid-
ectomy procedure (89.7%), and radioiodine therapy (75.4%). No recur-
rence was identified.
OFP-08-002
Incidence and clinicopathological features of non-invasive follicular
neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features (NIFTP) in a large
Iberian retrospective series
M. Bella-Cueto*, J.M. Cameselle-Teijeiro, A. Ugalde, P. Fernandez-
Seara, H. Quiceno, I. Gomez de la Riva, M.V. Ortega, Á. Castaño, C.
Gonzalez, S. Lopez-Agulló, M. Chao, E. Roselló, P. Meseguer, J.J.
Paricio, C. Iglesias
*Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari. I3PT, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Sabadell, Spain
Background & objectives: Incidence of Non-invasive Follicular
Neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features (NIFTP) varies between
countries. Furthermore, histological diagnostic criteria have changed
recently.
Objective: To determine the incidence and histological features of NIFTP
in Iberian countries applying the original and new diagnostic criteria.
Methods: Sixteen institutions from Spain and Portugal joined the study.
Surgical cases of Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma (PTC) and tumours of
Uncertain Malignant Potential (UMP) over 5 mm (years 2005 to 2015)
were recorded from pathological reports, and slides reviewed if needed.
Incidence and histopathological findings of cases considered finally as
NIFTP following the original and the new diagnostic criteria were
recorded.
Results: From 3134 PTC and 14 UMP lesions, 175 (5.55%) cases were
considered to meet the original criteria of NIFTP. Overall incidence
among PTC was 4.67% (range: 0-12.12% depending of the institution),
and 50% among tumours of UMP. Thirty-five cases measured between 5
and 10 mm. Average size was 21.8 mm (range 5-100 mm). In 95 cases the
whole lesion was studied, and in 97 the whole nodular margin. If new
diagnostic criteria were applied, 39 cases (22.28%) must be removed (38
with papillae, 1 BRAF V600E mutated), with a final incidence of NIFTP
of 4.32%. There were no significant differences regarding the nuclear
features when applying the different diagnostic criteria.
Conclusion: In our Iberian retrospective series, incidence of NIFTP was
low (5.55%), with moderate variability among institutions. The lesion
was studied completely in more than half of the cases. Applying the
new diagnostic criteria, 22.28% of them had to be excluded from the
series, with a final incidence of 4.32%. Although that, no differences in
nuclear features were observed.
OFP-08-003
Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma-like thyroid carcinoma –
expanding spectrum of thyroid cancer with a distinct entity
A. Bychkov*, R. Katoh, T. Amano, K. Ito
*Kameda Medical Center, Nagasaki University, Japan
Background & objectives: Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (cRCC)-
like thyroid carcinoma was first described in 2017 as a distinctive clini-
copathological entity of thyroid carcinoma. However, there have been no
additional cases reported so far.
Methods: We retrieved four cases of primary thyroid tumours with
cRCC-like appearance from the files of Ito Hospital, Tokyo, a large-
volume thyroid centre.
Results: There were 3 males and 1 female (mean age 46 years) without
history of genetic disorders. Two cases were initially diagnosed as inva-
sive HTT, one as PTC, solid variant, and one as PDTC. All tumours were
invasive and showed trabecular/alveolar pattern. IHC revealed TTF1+,
PAX8+, Tg-, CD117-, and low Ki67 index. Histochemistry showed weak
cytoplasmic colloidal iron staining. One patient developed locoregional
recurrences and probable lung metastasis (late after surgery).
Conclusion: cRCC-like thyroid carcinoma revealed to be distinc-
tive in histology and could be misdiagnosed as Hurthle cell car-
cinoma, HTT, and metastatic carcinoma in thyroid tumour pathol-
ogy. Our cases were not in association with any finding of tuber-
ous sclerosis complex. Further characterization by immunohisto-
chemistry and genetic analysis in this rare tumour is required to
define its position in the histopathological classification.
OFP-08-004
Distinct morphological and immunophenotypical features of
cribriform-morular tumour of thyroid: towards a separate entity
B. Boyraz*, V. Nose
*Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, USA
Background & objectives: Cribriform-morular variant of papillary thy-
roid carcinoma (CMv-PTC) is an extremely rare variant of PTC with
OFP-08 Joint Oral Free Paper Session: Endocrine
Pathology / Head and Neck Pathology
Virchows Arch
cribriform architecture and squamoid morules. In this study, we investi-
gated morphology, immunoprofile and genetics of these tumours to fur-
ther our understanding of this biologic entity.
Methods: We reviewed twenty-three CMv-PTC cases in this study.
Representative blocks from these cases were subjected to immunohisto-
chemical studies using antibodies against B-Catenin, BRAF, HBME1,
TTF-1, p63, CD5 and CK5. Molecular studies to identify APC variants
were performed in certain cases.
Results: All patients with CMv-PTC were female and ranged in age from
18 to 59 (n=23).
All cases showed strong nuclear and cytoplasmic staining of B-Catenin
(23/23+).
Molecular studies revealed pathogenic APC variants (12/12+).
HBME1 (15/15-) and BRAF (4/4-) showed negative staining.
TTF-1 showed positive staining in cribriform areas and negative staining
in morules (n=2).
CD5 (8/8+) and CK5 (5/5+) staining highlighted the morules, and the
cribriform areas were negative. Morules were negative for p63 (2/2-).
Conclusion: Nuclear B-Catenin positivity and APC mutations are char-
acteristic features of CMv-PTC.
Negative HBME-1 and BRAF staining, TTF-1 staining pattern suggest a
different pathogenesis than classical PTC.
The morules are positive for CK5 and CD5, and negative for p63. These
findings suggest a different biological pathway for morule formation and
can be used to aid diagnosis of this tumour.
Further immunohistochemical and genetic studies would increase our
understanding of this tumour leading to reclassification as a separate
entity as cribriform-morular tumour of thyroid.
OFP-08-005
Invasion matters also in encapsulated conventional papillary thyroid
carcinoma
E.D. Kuz*, D. Akbulut, S. Dizbay Sak, N. Kurşun
*Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: We aimed to investigate the histopathologi-
cal features and BRAF status of understudied encapsulated
(conventional) papillary thyroid carcinoma (EC-PTC).
Methods: Among 823 PTC cases diagnosed at our institution be-
tween 2015-2018, 121 tumours in 105 patients(12,75%) were
reclassified as EC-PTC. Size, localization, cystic changes, back-
ground thyroiditis, presence/amount of psammoma bodies(PB), cer-
vical lymph node metastasis(LNM), capsular/lymphovascular
invasion(CI/LVI), immunohistochemical BRAF-VE1 expression
were evaluated. 92 non-encapsulated conventional PTC cases were
chosen as control group. Pearson chi-square and Fischer’s exact
tests were performed for analyses.
Results: EC-PTC cases were predominantly women(73,3%), 47% were
microcarcinomas, 97,5% had cystic changes, and LNM was positive in
55,2%. 20.7% of the tumours showed total encapsulation, whereas, CI
was detected in 79,3%(partial:57,9%, extensive:21,5%). LVI was
rare(5,8%). Thyroiditis(48.8%) and PB (52.9%) were detected in nearly
half of cases. Relationship between LNM and CI was statistically signif-
icant (p=0.008) and was more prominent in cases with extensive
CI(p=0.011). PB positive cases showed a higher rate of LNM(p=0.009).
BRAF was positive in 81,1% of EC-PTC and 85,7% of nonencapsulated
PTC. In nonencapsulated cases, patients older than 40 showed more
BRAF positivity (p=0.016), whereas in EC-PTC, there was no difference
in terms of age and BRAF(p=0.15).
Conclusion: As in encapsulated follicular-variant PTC, invasion status is
important in EC-PTC in predicting clinical behaviour, such as LNM.
Cystic changes are very common, deserves mentioning in morphological
characteristics of EC-PTC.
BRAFV600E mutation determined by immunohistochemistry isn't differ-
ent than non-encapsulated PTC.
OFP-08-006
The enigmatic mixed medullary-follicular carcinoma of the thyroid:
a comparison of 2 cases and a review of the literature
A. Varelas*, M. Farinha, P. Lopes, M. Jácome
*Department of Pathology, IPO-Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: Mixed medullary-follicular thyroid
carcinomas(MMFTC) comprise a partially understood group, including
collision tumours, synchronous/metachronous follicular and medullary
carcinomas and “true” MMFTC.There are many theories of possible or-
igins of MMFTC, none indisputably proved.
We relate two cases followed at our institute, while reviewing the
literature.
Methods: A 65year-old female and 60year-old male patients were
followed at our institute since 2011 and 2019 for thyroid nodules.
Analytically, only calcitonin levels were increased (1949pg/mL and
428,5pg/mL, respectively). Total thyroidectomy and cervical lymph node
dissection were performed in both cases.
Results: Histology showed predominantly medullary
carcinomas(calcitonin+, neuroendocrine+).In the first case, there
was a slightly juxtaposed population of morphologically-papillary
features(thyroglobulin+); the second case had also a confirmed pap-
illary component, deeply intermingled. Both lymph node metastasis
had a mixture of papillary and medullary-like features. The final
report diagnosis was collision tumour(pT1bN1b) and “true”
MMFTC(pT2(m)N1b) respectively, both patients being alive and
without evidence of the disease.
Conclusion: While some authors defend a common origin for the com-
ponents of MMFTC using a “stem cell” or a “divergent differentiation”
theory, others suggested a “field effect“, a “collision effect” or a “hos-
tage” theory based on a dual origin. It has been recently questioned
whether C-cells are endodermal-derived rather than neural-crest-derived,
suggesting the ultimobranchial stem-cell as a possible common cell line-
age for MMFTC.
We report two cases, one of which was considered a collision tumour and
other one a “true” MMFTC. The etiopathogenesis remains uncertain.
OFP-08-007
Prognostic significance of oral dysplasia features – analysis of a
preliminary cohort
H. Mahmood*, S.A. Khurram
*Academic Unit of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry,
University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Grading of oral epithelial dysplasia (OED)
remains the gold standard for malignant change prediction. However,
little is known about the prognostic significance of individual histological
features. This study aims to determine the prognostic significance of OED
features in a preliminary cohort.
Methods: OED cases with varying grades (n=51) were identified (2005-
2013) from the local tissue archive after ethical approval. New H&E
sections were obtained, and five-year clinical follow-up data collected.
Blind histological examination was undertaken to review the original
diagnosis and identify the most prominent features from the WHO
Classification for each case. The prognostic significance of specific his-
tological features was measured.
Results: 17/51 (33%) lesions showed malignant progression; 10 (59%) of
these were originally graded as moderate dysplasia and 7 (41%) as severe
dysplasia. The most significant features predictive of malignant transfor-
mation were: loss of epithelial cohesion/acantholysis (RR 3.9, CI 1.4-
10.4, p=0.0057), hyperchromatism (RR 4.0, CI 1.6-9.6, p=0.0018), irreg-
ular and/or verruciform surface keratination (RR 0.44, CI 0.2-0.9,
p=0.0282), dyskeratosis/individual cell keratinisation (RR 4.4, CI 1.1-
17.3, p=0.0316) and presence of suprabasal mitotic figures (RR 7.8, CI
1.9-30.6, p=0.0033).
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Our preliminary findings reveal feature-specific risk
of malignant progression in OED for the first time. These find-
ings need to be explored on bigger cohorts to establish their true
significance and provide useful prognostic information to aid
management.
OFP-08-008
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma of never-smokers and
never-drinkers show frequent PD-L1 expression and association of
tumour infiltrating lymphocytes with favourable survival
F. Mulder, E. de Ruiter, T. Gielgens, F. van Voorst van Beest, R. de Bree,
M. van den Hout, B. Kremer, S. Willems, E.J. Speel*
*Maastricht UMC, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: PD-L1 expression is a predictive biomarker
for immunotherapy in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC). Our objective was to assess if PD-L1/2 expression and tumour
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in HNSCC of non-smokers and non-
drinkers (NSND) have prognostic value.
Methods: Clinical data and tumours of 114 NSND HNSCC patients were
collected retrospectively. Immunohistochemistry was performed for PD-
L1, PD-L2, and lymphocyte markers PD-1, CD45, and CD8 on Tissue
MicroArrays. Difference in 5-year survival of patients with and without
expression of these biomarkers was determined using Kaplan-Meier and
log rank analysis.
Results: The patients were on average 71.6 years old and predominantly
women (77%) with a tumour of the oral cavity (78%). PD-L1 (tumour
proportion score ≥1% and ≥50%) and PD-L2 (≥1%) expression was
detected in 70%, 18%, and 10% of the tumours, respectively. A high
number of CD45 and CD8-positive TILs (≥150/mm2) was a predictor
for a significantly better 5-year disease free (HRCD45=.50, p=.010;
HRCD8=.51, p=.013) and overall survival (HRCD45=.40, p=.001;
HRCD8=.50, p=.014). This significant difference persisted, regardless
of which cut-off value for TILs/mm2 was applied.
Conclusion: PD-L1 expression is present in a large percentage of
HNSCC in NSND. This might have implications for the application of
immunotherapy in this patient group. A high number of CD45 and CD8-
positive TILs is predictive for a better disease free and overall 5-year
survival.
OFP-08-009
A subgroup of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma with
unfavourable prognosis shows oxidative stress signatures and a
mesenchymal-like phenotype
C. Huebbers, O. Siefer, U. Drebber, M. Odenthal, B. Akgül,
M. Hufbauer, D. Beutner, J. Klussmann, E.J. Speel*
*Maastricht UMC, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: A subgroup of oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (OPSCC) with integrated HPV 16 shows oxidative stress sig-
natures and an unfavourable prognosis. The objective was to further in-
vestigate these oxidative stress signatures and their possible relation to a
mesenchymal like (EMT) phenotype.
Methods: 51 OPSCCs including 28 HPV-positive cases (FFPE and fro-
zen tissue) were available. Expression of EMT, retinoic acid and oxida-
tive stress pathway components including NRF2, AKR1C1/3,
ALDH1A2, Frizzled 10, b-Catenin, E-Cadherin, Vimentin, miR-9 and
miR-16-2 were assessed by immunohistochemistry, RT-qPCR and/or
in-situ hybridization. The impact of viral oncogenes on EMT-relevant
components was addressed in primary human keratinocytes overexpress-
ing HPV16-E6 and/or -E7.
Results: Expression analysis revealed that subgroups of OPSCC predom-
inantly related to HPV-infection exhibit an increased oxidative stress
response (NRF2, AKR1C1/3) as well as activating EMT pathway
signatures (Frizzled 10, b-Catenin, E-Cadherin, Vimentin, miR-9 and
miR-16-2), frequent metastasis, and downregulated retinoic acid synthe-
sis (ALDH1A2). Moreover, in vitro experiments showed that HPV16-E6
expression results in induction of miR-9, miR-16-2 and b-Catenin
expression.
Conclusion: Our data show, that OPSCC presenting with upregulation of
oxidative stress response signatures have a higher tendency to undergo
EMT. Frizzled 10 expression known to be regulated by retinoic acid was
highly correlated to ALDH1A2 expression and inversely correlated to
EMT and oxidative stress. Our data implicate that subgroups of tumours
might benefit from adjuvant treatment with retinoids, which should be
further studied.
OFP-08-010
Secretory carcinoma of the parotid gland a new entity: a case series
L.E. Salazar Huayna*, C. Alborch-Gil, E. Dacosta, O. Moscoso Miranda,
S. Ramón y Cajal, M. Alberola
*Vall d´Hebron University Hospital, Spain
Background & objectives: Secretory carcinoma, first described in 2010
by Skálová et al, is a low-grade salivary gland carcinoma characterized by
sharing morphological features with mammary secretory carcinoma. It
harbours a recurrent translocation t(12;15)(p13;q25) which causes
ETV6-NTRK3 fusion.
Methods: It activates RAS-PI3K-AKT pathway, promoting cell prolifer-
ation and survival. Moreover, it’s also known that first generation TRK
inhibitor can be used as a treatment.
We report three patients diagnosed with secretory carcinoma at
the Vall d´Hebron University Hospital Pathology department from
2017 to 2020.
Results: In our series, two patients were female with a median age of
43 years (range 32-62).The tumour was located in parotid gland. All
cases were treated with parotidectomy. Histologically the tumour
showed solid, tubular and microcystic structures with abundant eo-
sinophilic bubbly secretion. Neoplastic cells had eosinophilic vacuo-
lated cytoplasm, occasionally with condensed material (mucin) and
uniform, round nuclei with small nucleoli. Immunohistochemical
stains were performed, the tumour cells were positive for CK7,
mammaglobin and S100. In all the cases pan-NTRK immunohisto-
chemistry was positive. The presence of ETV6-NTRK3 translocation
was confirmed by Fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH) break-
apart for ETV6. In only one patient distant metastases and local
recurrence have been reported.
Conclusion: Secretory carcinoma is a recently described tumour with
distinctive morphology, immunohistochemistry and genetic profile. It is
the only salivary gland tumour related to ETV6-NTRK3 gene fusion.
Nowadays, its presence is useful for diagnosis and specific treatment.
OFP-08-011
Revisiting a case series of glomangiopericytomas: reassessing STAT6
value in differential diagnosis
D. Gigliano*, M. Farinha, J. Lobo, P. Lopes, C. Pinto, M.R. Teixeira,
M. Jácome
*Portuguese Institute of Oncology - Porto, Department of Pathology,
Portugal
Background & objectives: Glomangiopericytoma is a rare sinonasal
neoplasm. Despite contrary evidence in literature, we came across a
STAT6-equivocal and beta-catenin+ glomangiopericytoma. This
prompted a thorough review of all published reports and re-
evaluation of histology and immunohistochemistry in all cases from
our Institute.
Methods: Four cases were retrieved from our pathology archive. All the
histological material and corresponding clinical files were re-examined.
Virchows Arch
New STAT6, beta-catenin and CD34 immunostains were performed on
freshly cut formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections. Older stains were
also reviewed. Furthermore, one case required additional search for mu-
tations of the CTNNB1gene by Sanger sequencing. Literature review was
conducted using PubMed.
Results: Two patients were male. The age range was 40-79 years. All
cases displayed typical cytoarchitectural and immunohistochemical
features of glomangiopericytomas, except for one showing moderate
STAT6 nuclear positivity, both in tumoral and peritumoral tissues.
Being described as consistently negative in glomangiopericytomas
and positive in solitary fibrous tumour (SFT), our STAT6 yielded
differential diagnosis issues. Nevertheless, our literature review
disclosed rare STAT6-equivocal glomangiopericytomas.
Furthermore, Ghaffar et al. described non-specific STAT6 positivity
in the nasal mucosa of patients with chronic rhinitis, which our pa-
tient had. This phenomenon might lead to misdiagnosis. A mutation
in exon 3 of the CTNNB1gene was found in this last case, confirming
the diagnosis of glomangiopericytoma.
Conclusion: Glomangiopericytomas represent a diagnostic challenge.
Differential diagnosis especially includes SFT, and STAT6 immunostain-
ing plays a key role in discriminating the two entities. Cautious interpre-
tation of STAT6 in patients with chronic rhinitis is advised.
OFP-08-012
IDH2 R172 mutated sinonasal carcinoma: pathological and molecu-
lar assessment of 32 cases
S. Dogan*, S. Gloess, B. Xu, V. Vasudevaraja, A. Jungbluth, M. Snuderl,
D. Capper
*Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, USA
Background & objectives: IDH2 R172 mutations are present in >80%
sinonasal undifferentiated (SNUC) and large-cell neuroendocrine
carcinomas (LCNEC), while their presence in olfactory neuroblas-
toma (ONB) remains controversial. Here, we explored pathologi-
cal features of a sizable cohort of IDH2 mutated sinonasal carci-
nomas (SNC).
Methods: Thirty-two primary IDH2 R172 mutated SNC were studied by
light microscopy and by immunohistochemistry (IHC) including S-100,
cytokeratins, synaptophysin and chromogranin. IDH2 mutation status
was assessed by targeted exome sequencing or by IDH2 IHC (clone
11C8B1) in most cases. DNA methylation profiles were analysed by
semisupervised hierarchical clustering and IDH2 wild-type sinonasal tu-
mours were used for comparison.
Results: IDH2 variants included R172S (61%), R172T (14%), R172K
(14%), R172G (7%) and R172M (4%). All cases were high-grade with a
median 21 mitoses/10 high-power-fields, frequent necrosis (85%), apo-
ptosis (100%) and prominent nucleoli (97%). Most (94%) were SNUC or
LCNEC. Two cases showed glandular/acinar differentiation. While no
tumour had definitive features of ONB, two ethmoid carcinomas focally
labelled for S-100 (sustentacular pattern) suggesting the olfactory bulb
origin. Surface and/or minor salivary glands involvement was detected in
39% cases supporting the Schneiderian mucosal origin. All cases, irre-
spective of subtle differences as to their putative cell/tissue of origin,
formed one distinct methylation cluster and clearly separated from
IDH2 wild-type tumours.
Conclusion: IDH2 R172 mutated SNC are phenotypically, genetically
and epigenetically remarkably similar suggesting that their biology and
clinical behaviour might be primarily defined by their unique molecular
signature. A confirmation of these findings in further studies may impact
future (re)classification of the current WHO categories: SNUC, LCNEC
and ONB.
Funding by: MSKCC Support Grant of the National Institutes of Health/
National Cancer Institute - award number P30CA008748 (to SD).
OFP-09-001
Clinical significance of ephrin receptors (Ephs) type-a and -b expres-
sion in thymic epithelial tumours
C. Masaoutis*, P. Sarantis, M. Bobos, I. Theochari, N. Tsoukalas,
P. Alexandrou, D. Rontogianni, S. Theocharis
*Department of Pathology, Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens,
First Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: Ephrin receptors (EPHs) are receptor tyro-
sine kinases (RTKs) implicated in tissue development and homeostasis
and are aberrantly expressed in tumours. Here, immunohistochemical
EPHs (type-A and -B) expression in thymic epithelial tumours (TETs)
was assessed and correlated with clinicopathological parameters.
Methods: TMAs from 98 FFPE TETs excised in 2009-2019 (55 females,
43 males; aged 29-85; histologic types: 12 A, 22 AB, 49 B, 2
micronodular, 13 carcinomas) were stained for EPH-A1, -A2, -A4 -A6,
-B1, -B2, -B4, -B6. The relationship between neoplastic and lymphoid
cell immunoreactivity score (IRS), histopathological parameters
(Pearson’s test) and survival of 35 patients (Mantel-Cox model) was
explored.
Results: Epithelial-rich subtypes showed higher EPH-A6 cytoplasmic
IRS (B2, B3, carcinoma) (P<0.001) and stronger EPH-A4 IRS (B3, car-
cinoma) (P=0.011). The immature T-cells, especially in subtypes AB and
B1, had a higher EPH-B6 IRS than carcinoma-associated mature lym-
phocytes (P<.001); carcinomas had a higher lymphocytic EPH-B1 IRS
(P=0.026). High lymphocytic EPH-A6 IRS was overall rare, but more
common in B1 thymomas (P=0.015). Higher lymphocytic and lower
epithelial EPH-B6 IRS correlated with low Masaoka stages (stages ≤II)
(P=0.043, P=0.010 respectively). All cases showed variable epithelial and
lymphocytic EPH-A2 expression, but clinicopathological associations
with EPH-A2 were not reached.
Conclusion: Our study confirms the expression of EPHs type-A and -B
in TETs, which is associated with established prognostic parameters, i.e.
tumour subtype and Masaoka stage, although correlation with patient
survival was not reached. Such findings suggest involvement of these
RTKs in thymic neoplasia, as well as their potential utility as treatment
targets.
OFP-09-002
Primary mediastinal germ cell tumours with high prevalence of so-
matic malignant transformation: an experience from a single tertiary
care cancer centre
A. Beg*, A. Sahay, R. Kumar
*Tata Memorial Hospital, India
Background & objectives: Primary mediastinal germ tumours(PMGCT)
constitutes 3-4 % of all germ cell tumours(GCT).They account for approx.
16% of mediastinal tumours in adults and 19-25% in children as per western
literature. There is hardly any large series on PMGCT from India.
Methods: We have retrospective analysed clinic-pathological features of
101 PMGCT cases, diagnosed over a period 10years(2010-2019) from a
single tertiary care oncology centre. Metastatic tumours to mediastinum
were excluded.
Results: The study group(n=101) comprised predominantly of
males(n=95),with mean age=25yrs(range 3months to 57 year).Tumours were
predominantly located in anterior mediastinum(n=99).Non-seminomatous
germ cell tumours (NSGCT)(composed embryonal, yolk sac tumour(YST)
&teratoma) was the most common histological subtype(n=26), followed by
seminoma(n=25),mature teratoma(n=21),YST(n=13),immature
OFP-09 Joint Oral Free Paper Session: Pulmonary
Pathology / Thymic and Mediastinal Pathology
Virchows Arch
teratoma(n=6) , mixed tumours (n=4) and GCT;NOS(n=6).Secondary somat-
ic malignancy was seen in 11 cases and six out of them either died or had
progressive disease.
Conclusion: Interestingly, in this series, PMGCT was seen predominant-
ly in young adult males and somatic malignancies was noted in as high as
in 10% of cases. Patient with somatic malignancy have aggressive clinical
course, hence, extensive sampling and careful histopathological evalua-
tion is recommended for definitive characterization.
OFP-09-003
Clinicopathological correlations of PD-L1 expression in thymic
epithelial tumours using two immunohistochemical assays
C. Masaoutis*, D. Rontogianni, P. Sarantis, M. Bobos, E. Dana,
N. Tsoukalas, S. Theocharis
*Department of Pathology, Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens,
First Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: Thymic epithelial tumours (TETs) range
from locally aggressive to frankly malignant. In our study, PD-L1 expres-
sion in TETs was assessed by two immunohistochemical assays and
associations with clinicopathological parameters, as well as the concor-
dance of the two assays were evaluated.
Methods: TMAs from 98 FFPE TETs excised in 2009-2019 (55 females,
43 males; 29-85 years old; histologic types: 12 A, 22 AB, 49 B, 2
micronodular, 13 carcinomas) were stained using SP143 and SP263 as-
says. The relationship between epithelial PD-L1 expression at 1%, 5%,
10%, 25%, 50% cut-offs, histopathological parameters (Pearson’s test)
and survival of 35 patients (Mantel-Cox model) was explored.
Results: The percentage of PD-L1+ TETs at ≥1%, ≥5%, ≥10%, ≥25% and
≥50% cut-offs was respectively: 45%, 34%, 29%, 19% and 14% for SP143;
54%, 46%, 40%, 36% and 29% for SP263. PD-L1 expression was more
frequent in type B thymomas, especially in the epithelial-rich subtypes B2
(67-78%) and B3 (93-100%) [P<0.001 (all assays and cut-offs)]. A sugges-
tive relationship between PD-L1 ≥50% expression and shorter survival
[P=,077 (SP143); P=0,068 (SP263)] was noted. Cohen’s agreement
(SP143 vs SP263) was: substantial for 5% (k=0.662), 10% (k=0.753) and
moderate for 1% (k=0.590), 25% (k=0.575) and 50% (k=0.586) cut-offs.
Conclusion: Epithelial PD-L1 expression in TETs is frequent, variable,
significantly associated with histological subtype and less strongly with
survival, suggesting a role in TET pathobiology. About half [45%
(SP143) vs 54% (SP263)] of TETs are PD-L1 positive (≥1% epithelial
expression), therefore potentially eligible for anti-PD-L1 treatment.
Discrepant scoring (SP143 vs SP263) is noted and varies with cut-off
values. Clinical trials of anti-PDL1/PD1 agents should take into account
variability in PD-L1 expression.
OFP-09-004
Utility of methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) immunohis-
tochemistry in malignant pleural mesothelioma: correlation with
CDKN2A genomic status and inter-assay agreement
Y.Z. Zhang*, J. Hughes, A. Nastase, A. Mandal, C. Brambilla, A. Rice,
J.L. Robertus, W.O. Cookson, M.F. Moffatt, A.G. Nicholson
*National Centre for Mesothelioma Research, National Heart & Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, United Kingdom; Department of
Histopathology, Royal Brompton And Harefield NHS Foundation
Trust, London, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Deletion of CDKN2A/p16 is one of the
hallmark genomic events in the pathogenesis of malignant pleural meso-
thelioma (MPM). Methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) has
emerged as a potential cost-effective surrogate marker. Inter-assay agree-
ment and correlation with genomic status however are currently
uncertain.
Methods: This is a single-institutional validation study of MTAP IHC for
routine diagnostics using whole exome sequencing (WES) and single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping as gold standard. Twenty-
seven histologically confirmed MPM with matched frozen and FFPE
tissue were included. Inter-assay agreement was performed for two com-
mercial clones (EPR6893, Abcam & 2G4, Abnova). Inter-observer agree-
ment was performed between two scorers.
Results: CDKN2A deep deletion was detected in 56% (15/27) of cases.
Overall concordance between sequencing and MTAP IHC (EPR6893)
was 73%. Focal staining was seen in 22.2% (6/27). By treating focal
staining as positive, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive and nega-
tive predictive values were 81.8%, 66.7%, 64.3% and 83.3% respectively,
similar to previous studies. No significant difference was observed be-
tween the two clones (p=0.180). Inter-observer agreement was good
(Cohen’s kappa = 0.713).
Conclusion: MTAP IHC showed reasonable concordance with
CDKN2A genomic status. Based on available evidence, EPR6893 and
2G4 clones could be used interchangeably and inter-observer agreement
was good. Given detection of CDKN2A status is currently hampered by
inadequate assay sensitivity (p16 IHC), limited access to assay platforms
(PCR, NGS) or high cost (CDKN2A FISH), our findings support MTAP
IHC to be used as a reliable surrogate marker. Financial and logistic
considerations need to be taken into account prior to local
implementation.
Funding by: National Centre for Mesothelioma Research (NCMR),
established via a Department of Health (United Kingdom) grant awarded
to National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College London.
OFP-09-005
Atypical mesothelial proliferation (amp) of the pleura: multidisci-
plinary approach, prognostic stratification and proposal of minimal-
ly invasive malignant pleural mesothelioma
Y.Z. Zhang*, C. Brambilla, P.L. Molyneaux, A. Rice, J.L. Robertus,
S. Jordan, E. Lim, L. Lang-Lazdunski, S. Begum, M. Dusmet,
V. Anikin, S. Popat, W.O. Cookson, M.F. Moffatt, A.G. Nicholson
*National Centre for Mesothelioma Research, National Heart & Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, United Kingdom; Department of
Histopathology, Royal Brompton And Harefield NHS Foundation
Trust, London, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Atypical mesothelial proliferation (AMP),
along with cases limited by sampling, also likely includes those
exhibiting morphological features of malignant pleural mesothelioma
(MPM) yet showing insufficient invasion. We reviewed these cases with
a view to improve early diagnosis of MPM.
Methods: This is a retrospective study including 131 consecutive cases
of histologically confirmed AMP diagnosed at our institution (2005-
2019), of which 35 (26.5%) had subsequent biopsies showing definitive
MPM. Clinicopathological data were retrieved from an institutional me-
sothelioma database. Prognostic variables predictive of overall survival
(OS) were identified using univariate and multivariate Cox regression
analyses. Statistical significance was denoted as p<0.05.
Results: AMP had comparable demographic profile to invasive MPM.
Multivariate analysis showed lack of subpleural structure sampling
(p=0.010) and severe nuclear atypia (p=0.001) were independent predic-
tors of worse OS. Cases fulfilling the criteria of (i) adequate subpleural
sampling either without invasion or invasion limited to fibrous pleura, (ii)
no severe nuclear atypia, (iii) no necrosis, were associated with signifi-
cantly improved median OS compared with those without (24.4 vs 12.8
months, p<0.001).
Conclusion: AMP poses challenges to diagnosis and patient manage-
ment as it encompasses a spectrum of benign and malignant mesothelial
lesions. We propose morphology-based criteria to stratify AMP into high
and low risk groups. It is likely the former was the result of insufficient
sampling whilst the latter represented minimally invasive MPM. This
Virchows Arch
allows MPM to be diagnosed earlier in its natural history. Further refine-
ment using BAP1/MTAP immunohistochemistry as part of a multidisci-
plinary approach is currently being investigated.
Funding by: National Centre for Mesothelioma Research
(NCMR), established via a Department of Health (United
Kingdom) grant awarded to National Heart & Lung Institute,
Imperial College London.
OFP-09-006
Congenital pulmonary airway malformations with K-RAS mutations
may have malignant potential
J. Wolf*, S.M. Hermelijn, D. den Toom, R.M. Wijnen, R.J. Rottier,
J.M. Schnater, J. von der Thüsen
*Department of Pathology, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Potential malignant degeneration is often
argued as a reason to resect asymptomatic congenital pulmonary airway
malformations (CPAM). In this study, we analysed immunohistochemi-
cal expression patterns and molecular findings of adult lung tumour
markers in CPAM.
Methods: CPAM tissue samples were morphologically evaluated, clas-
sified, and subsequently analysed by immunohistochemistry using a pan-
el of lineage differentiating (TTF1/CDX2/MUC2/MUC5ac/CC10) and
tumour (p16/p53/Dicer1) markers. Intensity of immunohistochemical
staining was quantitatively assessed in normal lung tissue, CPAM and
mucinous proliferations (MP) in each sample. Next generation sequenc-
ing of adult tumour markers (KRAS/BRAF/EGFR/ERBB2) was also
performed separately for the aforementioned categories.
Results: We analysed 50 CPAM samples (Types 1 and 2; n=25 each).
Irrespective of the type of CPAM, mucinous cell clusters were detected in
11 cases all characterized by a lack of CDX2, MUC2 and to a lesser
extent TTF1 expression, whereas MUC5ac was strongly expressed.
P16, DICER1 and p53 showed no aberrant expression. All 11 samples
with mucinous proliferations harboured a K-RAS mutation. The normal,
surrounding lung tissue showed no genetic alternations.
Conclusion: Immunohistochemistry using TTF1 and MUC5ac may help
to identify small MP in the pathological assessment of CPAM. These
proliferations were found in both CPAM type 1 and 2 and harboured a
K-RAS mutation in all cases. These findings support the notion that a
subset of CPAMs may be considered potentially pre-malignant lesions.
Funding by: Educational Fellowship BDIAP
OFP-09-007
Can pulmonary sarcoidosis with severe fibrosis be considered as a
severe form of lung sarcoidosis?
E. Kogan*, S. Demura
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: 0,3 - 7,8 % of patient population with lung
sarcoidosis (SL) has "malignant course" which leads to the rapid devel-
opment of honeycomb lung. Target: to study morphological and molec-
ular biological particularities of lung sarcoidosis with severe fibrosis.
Methods: A retrospective clinical and morphological analysis of open
transthoracic (46) and transbronchial (10) lung biopsies and autopsy (2
cases) from 58 patients with diagnosed lung sarcoidosis. Serial paraffin
sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, picrofuchsin Van
Gieson. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed with the follow-
ing markers: MMPs, Dsm, Vim, SMA, Apo-Cas, IGF1, TNF-α, TGF-β,
Oсt-4, СD 117.
Results: SL with severe fibrosis - 15 cases (16%). were characterized by
multiple sarcoid granulomas with apoptosis of epithelial cells,
lymphohistiocytic infiltration, vasculitis and sclerotic changes, the de-
struction of the basement membranes in the bronchioloalveolar transition
zone (BATZ) with the replacement of alveolocytes by cells with a
myofibroblastic immunophenotype (SMA, Dsm, Oсt-4 & СD 117 posi-
tive). It differed from SL without fibrosis by increased expression of
profibrotic molecular markers in the in the epithelium of bronchioles,
myofibroblast foci: and granuloma cells (p˂0,05).
Conclusion: Pulmonary sarcoidosis with severe fibrosis can be consid-
ered as a severe form of lung sarcoidosis according to the differences of
molecular profibrogenic activity of granuloma cells.
OFP-09-008
Evaluation of pathologic response and immune microenvironment in
“Pancoast tumour” series after induction chemo-radiotherapy
F. Fortarezza*, F. Pezzuto, A. Pavan, G. Pasello, S. Frega, R. Polverosi,
L. Evangelista, A.S. Fraia, C. Giraudo, M. Mammana, F. Rea,
F. Calabrese
*University of Padova, Italy
Background & objectives: The analysis of pathologic response (PR) is
crucial for the evaluation of the response to chemo-radiotherapy treat-
ments. The histological analysis of PR is coded for other malignancies
in which it seems to play a prognostic role.
Methods: We retrospectively analysed eight consecutive samples of
Pancoast tumour surgically resected after induction chemo-radiotherapy.
The PR was evaluated according to the last IASCL recommendations
[Travis WD, 2020]. Microenvironment assessment included immuno-
staining for several tumour-infiltrating immune cells (TIICs) (CD3,
CD4, CD8, CD68) and PD-L1 expression (tumour proportion score).
Radio-metabolic responses and radiomic evaluation were also reported
and correlated with our data.
Results: Histologically the tumours were six adenocarcinomas, one squa-
mous cells carcinoma and one non-small-cell lung cancer-not otherwise
specified (NSCLC, NOS). Two cases showed a complete pathologic re-
sponse (CPR) and two other a major pathologic response (MPR); the rate
of residual tumoral cells (RTCs) was 10% (median value; from 0 to 60%).
No oncogene addiction was detected, PD-L1 was < 1% in all cases. All
TIICs had a score >2+, except for CD4+ that scored 1+ in 88%. Tumours
with a greater metabolic response showed a higher CD68+ TIICs and
lower RTCs (p=0.020 and p=0.042, respectively). No other statistically
significant differences were found.
Conclusion: Based on our data, the histological evaluation of the PR does
not correlate with the radiological, metabolic and radiomic findings,
highlighting the crucial value of morphological analyses. Data from
radiomic analyses require larger case series. A precise immune microen-
vironment assessment with focus on macrophages (CD68+) could repre-
sent a marker to include in the evaluation of PR.
OFP-09-009
Revised MET-FISH evaluation algorithm: a simplified method
R. Castiglione*, N. Duerbaum, B. Holz, M. Wittersheim, E. Binot,
S. Merkelbach-Bruse, N. Friedrichs, A. Bosse, R. Buettner, A. Schultheis
*Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Stuttgart, Germany
Background & objectives: MET is altered in ~5 % of non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) and according to the newest NCCN guideline,
evaluation of MET should be performed for every advanced-stage
NSCLC. FISH-analysis reliably identifies MET-amplified tumours.
With a steadily increasing number of cases, currently applied FISH-
criteria can be time-consuming for the evaluating pathologist.
Objectives: to propose a faster and equally reliable MET-FISH evaluation
algorithm.
Methods: In the present two-centred study, we re-evaluated the MET-
amplification status obtained by FISH of n=497 NSCLC. For each case,
after counting the first 20 cells, the possible results (negative/low-/inter-
mediate-/high-level amplification as previously defined by us) were com-
pared to the original results based on 60 cells.
Virchows Arch
Results: Of all 497 cases, 471 (94%) showed identical results when
counting 20 or 60 cells. Only 26 cases (5%) showed discrepancy: n=19
(4%) would have been upgraded in a higher diagnostic category when
counting 20 cells only and n=6 (1%) would have been downgraded. Most
importantly, all high-level amplified and negative cases remained the
same. To prevent scoring-errors, we propose the following evaluation
algorithm: After thorough examination of the tumour, 20 continuous
nuclei are counted in the area with most MET-signals. If the case is
negative or high-level amplified, it can be signed out. If it fulfils the
criteria for low- or intermediate-level amplification, another 40 cells in
two different areas must be counted to reach a total of 60 cells.
Conclusion: We propose a modified FISH-evaluation algorithm for
MET-amplification in NSCLC that provides a much faster, yet equally
reliable method.
OFP-09-010
Overexpression of p14/ARF in PD-L1 positive malignant epithelioid
pleural mesotheliomas with high nuclear grade
F. Pezzuto*, F. Lunardi, F. Fortarezza, S.E. Vuljan, M. Mammana,
A. Boscolo, L. Urso, G. Pasello, F. Rea, F. Calabrese
*University of Padova, Italy
Background & objectives: CDKN2A gene plays a central role in the
pathogenesis of malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM). It encodes for
two tumour suppressor proteins, p16/INK4A and p14/ARF. We aimed to
determine the correlation between p14, morphology and immune micro-
environment, to date still unknown.
Methods: Diagnostic biopsies from 76 chemonaive MPM (54 epi-
thelioid, 18 biphasic, 4 sarcomatoid) were evaluated. Pathological
assessment of histotype, necrosis, inflammation, grading, and mito-
sis was performed. p14/ARF positivity (nuclear and cytoplasmic),
PD-L1 (tumour proportion score), Ki-67 (percentage) were evaluat-
ed by immunohistochemistry. Inflammatory cells (CD3, CD4, CD8
T lymphocytes; CD20 B-lymphocytes; CD68 macrophages) were
quantified as percentage distinguishing intratumoral and peritumoral
areas.
Results: P14/ARF was evaluable in 68 patients that showed a sufficient
number of tumour cells. A strong nuclear and cytoplasmic positivity was
detected in 14 patients (21%) (11 epithelioid and 3 biphasic MPMs). P14/
ARF positive epithelioid MPMs showed higher nuclear grade (G3)
(p=0.002), higher peritumoral CD4 positive T-lymphocyte percentage
(p=0.04) and PD-L1>1% (p=0.04). No other statistically significant dif-
ferences with morphological findings were found.
Conclusion: p14ARF positive epithelioid MPMs seem to mark a more
aggressive histological phenotype, being related to a higher nuclear grade
and PD-L1 expression. Larger case series are mandatory to validate our
preliminary results thus carrying out more complete statistical tests also
with clinical data.
OFP-09-011
Revised usual interstitial pneumonia/idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
diagnoses after the 2018 International Guideline: a 17-year bicentric
experience
F. Lunardi*, F. Pezzuto, C. Giraudo, E. Balestro, A. Fattori, M. Ohana, A.
Labani, E. Cocconcelli, R. Polverosi, E. Faccioli, M. Chenard, R. Kessler,
S. Hirschi, F. Rea, F. Calabrese
*University of Padova, Italy
Background & objectives: Improved knowledge has highlighted the
importance of additional histological and clinico/radiological features
for the diagnosis of non-Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF)/Usual
Interstitial Pneumonia (UIP) patients. We present findings of bicentric
revised UIP/IPF cases after multidisciplinary discussions(MDDs) accord-
ing to the 2018 ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT Guideline.
Methods: Histological and radiological review were performed, cat-
egorizing cases as “UIP”, “Probable UIP”, “Indeterminate for UIP”,
“Alternative diagnosis” following the guideline. Experienced pathol-
ogists reviewed all cases considering also additional morphological
features suggestive of connective tissue diseases (CTD):germinal
centres,>4 lymphoid follicles/cm2, lymphocyte/plasma-cell ratio≥1,
lymphocytic pleuritis, vessel remodelling and of chronic hypersensi-
tivity pneumonitis (CHP): bridging fibrosis, peribronchial metapla-
sia, centrolobular fibroblastic foci, granulomas/giant-cells. Cinical
data were also reviewed.
Results: All 2002-2018 cases with diagnosis of IPF, complete clin-
ical information and available HRCT images (101 patients: 81
explanted lungs and 20 VATS) were independently evaluated by
pathologists, radiologists and clinicians; they were then re-
categorized after MDDs. In 44% of patients the final diagnosis was
IPF, in the remaining 56% it was not a “high-confidence” IPF diag-
nosis: 16% IPF likely, 10% indeterminate for IPF, 8% IPF likely/non-
IPF and 22% non-IPF. After MDDs, 62% of cases were finally cat-
egorized as IPF, 13% as CHP, 7% as CTD, 12% as other diseases and
6% remained unclassifiable. Pathological diagnosis of “UIP” showed
the best performance in term of sensitivity and specificity than radio-
logical assessment (67%-92% vs 40%-97%).
Conclusion: In conclusion, the rate of IPF diagnoses appears to
have been overestimated in the last decade. The current knowl-
edge and good practice of MDDs have significantly improved the
diagnostic accuracy. In MDDs, experienced pathologists play a
key role to establish a final diagnosis.
OFP-09-012
Association of genetic variants of glutathione S-transferase with P53
phenotype and DNA damage in non-small cell lung carcinoma
N. Husain*, A.K. Pathak, S. Kant, L. Bala, S. Shukla
*Dr Ram Manohar Lohia Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India
Background & objectives: Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs), including
GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1 are phase II metabolic enzymes which
regulate cell signalling and cell death. They may enhance occurrence of
mutations in critical tumour suppressors, such as p53 increasing risk of
Non-Small Cell Lung cancer(NSCLC).
Methods: A case series of histologically diagnosed NSCLC (n=74) were
tested for GSTM1 (Fuc./Del.),GSTTI(Fuc./Del.) and GSTP1 (Ile 105
Val) variants using polymerase chain reaction(PCR) followed by restric-
tion digestion. P53 phenotype was categorized as mutant type with >50%
2-3+ intensity in IHC. DNA damage (n=48) in lymphocytes was assessed
by comet assay. Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS version
16 (Chicago, USA).
Results: Age was 54.4±11.4; male:female ratio was 2.36; Study sample
included 91.8% adenocarcinoma, and 8.1% squamous cell carcinoma.
Mutant type P53 was seen in 62.2 % NSCLC and was significantly
associated with GSTM1 del genotype RR1.97(p=0.002) and GSTP1
Val/Val genotype RR1.98(p=0.03). GSTT1 genotype showed insignifi-
cant RR1.03(p=1.0), Lymphocyte DNA damage was significantly asso-
ciated with GSTM1 (Fuc/Del) (Mean±SD 5.50±1.62/8.74
±3.46;p=0.001) and GSTT1(Fuc/Del) genotype (Mean±SD 5.60±2.09/
8.76±3.20; p=0.001); and with GSTP1 Val/Val genotype (Mean±SD
7.24±2.81;p 0.001).
Conclusion: GSTM1 and GSTP1 genes could play a role in carci-
nogenesis in NSCLC, possibly through increased frequency of mu-
tations in p53 independently or through known mechanisms of de-
creased detoxification of carcinogens including tobacco smoke.
Mutant type GSTs genotype are associated with increased post che-
motherapy DNA damage evidenced in circulating lymphocytes pos-
sibly affecting susceptibility of tumour to chemotherapy.
Association between mutant p53 phenotype and DNA damage was
not seen.
Virchows Arch
OFP-10-001
Deep learning artificial intelligence-based image analysis algorithm
for Ki-67
T. Vesterinen*, J. Säilä, J. Arola
*HUSLAB, Department of Pathology, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital, Finland
Background & objectives: Analysing of immunohistochemical stains is
often time consuming, non-reproducible, and prone to subjectivity. The
aim of this study was to determine, how a deep learning artificial intelli-
gence (AI)-based image analysis algorithm performs in analysing Ki-67
labelled pulmonary carcinoid tumour samples.
Methods: Study material consisted of 127 pulmonary carcinoid tumours
labelled with Ki-67. AI was trained to recognize diaminobenzidine
stained Ki-67 positive cells as well as all cells negative for Ki-67. The
results retrieved from AI’s Ki-67 algorithm were compared with a con-
ventional area-based image analysis software as well as with the analysis
of the pathologist that served as the ground truth.
Results: Altogether 11 658 tumour cells positive or negative for Ki-67
were annotated to train the algorithm. After training, the specificity of the
algorithm was 96.8% and sensitivity 96.1%. F1-score was 96.4%. The
correlation between the AI model and manual analysis performed by the
pathologist was 0.94 (P=0.0001). The correlation between the AI model
and the conventional image analysis software was 0.66.
Conclusion: This study showed that AI-based image analysis algorithm
yields similar results compared with a human observer. It was superior
compared with a conventional image analysis software. Thus, AI-based
Ki-67 algorithm can assist pathologists to perform Ki-67 analysis in PC
tumours.
Funding by: Finnish Cancer Foundation and Helsinki University Hospital
Research Fund
OFP-10-002
Development of semi-automatic interactive algorithm for annotating
histological images of colon epithelial neoplasms
I. Mikhailov*, A. Khvostikov, A. Krylov, P. Malkov, N. Oleynikova,
O. Kharlova, N. Danilova
*Lomonosov Moscow State University, Russia
Background & objectives: Complete manual labelling is extremely
time-consuming process which limits possibility of developing deep
learning algorithms for histological images analysis (e.g. the prob-
lem of segmentation of mucous glands). Development of semi-
automatic interactive annotation tools helps a lot to solve this
problem.
Methods: The proposed algorithm for semi-automatic image segmenta-
tion works with scribble annotations and is based on a graph model with
2-stage label propagation. The weights of graph edges are predicted with
a CNN, that was trained on a fully labelled dataset.
Results: The developed algorithm was trained and tested on the
Warwick-QU dataset as well as PATH-DT-MSU dataset (https://
imaging.cs.msu.ru/en/research/histology/path-dt-msu) containing 80
full-size annotated images of colon epithelial neoplasms. The proposed
algorithm works in real time and allows to add new scribbles during the
annotation which makes the labelling process interactive. Despite the
high accuracy of the proposed algorithm we also offer a “classical” set
of manual annotating tools to postprocess the results of the algorithm thus
allowing annotator to finalize the annotation down to the smallest details.
The developed algorithm allows to perform interactive labelling with
scribbles and reduce the annotation time of one image from 150 minutes
to 25-30 minutes.
Conclusion: Using this semi-automatic interactive tool will significantly
increase the number of fully annotated images of colon epithelial neo-
plasms in PATH-DT-MSU which is necessary for the development of
real diagnostic algorithms. The work was supported by RFBR grant 19-
57-80014 (BRICS2019-394).
OFP-10-004
Giant cell interstitial pneumonia: value of scanning electron micros-
copy coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analysis
F. Fortarezza*, M. Della Barbera, F. Pezzuto, F. Lunardi, E. Faccioli,
F. Rea, F. Calabrese
*University of Padova, Italy
Background & objectives: Hard metal lung disease (HMLD) is an oc-
cupational disease caused by exposure to hard metal particles histologi-
cally characterized by giant cell interstitial pneumonia (GIP). We present
a case series of HMLD studied by histology and scanning electron mi-
croscopy with microanalysis.
Methods: Surgical pathology files from 2006 to 2019 were searched for
lung biopsies and explanted lungs with morphological diagnosis of GIP.
A detailed clinical history was collected in all cases. Sections from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) of two transbronchial biopsies,
one cytoblock of bronchoalveolar lavage and from native lung tissue were
analysed at Scanning Electron Microscopy and Energy Dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (SEM/EDX).
Results: All patients had clinical history of occupational exposure
(metal workers, miner, railway maintenance worker), none reported
a clear-cut hard metal exposure (tungsten carbide or cobalt). At
histology all lung samples showed features of GIP with multinu-
cleated giant cells of both alveolar macrophage and type II
pneumocytes. SEM/EDX analysis was successfully performed also
in small transbronchial biopsies and cytoblock. Only one patient
(with both biopsy and cytology) had detectable tungsten level.
Other metals and inorganic chemical compound were detected in
the remaining cases.
Conclusion: SEM coupled with microanalysis, the gold standard tool for
the detection of environmental dusts, may be performed also in FFPE
tissue of small samples or cytology. SEM/EDX is ongoing on additional
FFPE fragments of explanted lung and the final data will be presented at
the next ECP-IAP congress.
OFP-10-005
Evolution of pathology repositories – from kunstkammer to digital
pathology
J. Gulczyński*, S. Goertz, T. van de Wetering, L. Ventura,
P. Paluchowski, E. Izycka-Swieszewska
*Dept. of Pathology and Neuropathology, Medical University of Gdansk,
Pathomorphology Dept. Copernicus Hospital, Poland
Background & objectives: Description how collections of anatomy/
pathology specimens changed in time. Serving at the beginning multiple
purposes like art or medicine, slowly became didactic aid. Nowadays we
face the computer revolution on massive scale and pathology also entered
the digital world.
Methods: We analyse early anatomical drawings and models accompa-
nied by digital collections of microscopic slides of contemporary and
ancient tissue samples. Through evolution of recreating nature, we move
to collections of specimens in new dimension. We present the consecutive
steps to contemporary microscopy supported by digital equipment with
efficient and accurate representation of specimen collections from every-
day work to ancient research.
OFP-10 Joint Oral Free Paper Session: IT in Pathology /
Autopsy Pathology / Pathology in Favour of Developing
Countries / Cardiovascular Pathology / History of
Pathology / Electron Microscopy / Other Topics
Virchows Arch
Results: We present the evolution of pathology representations. From
collections of objects showing gross pathology, through the world of art
to science, with specimens as didactic help. Presented in special cabinets,
then dedicated rooms and museums. Those collections started with basic
figurative sculptures presenting anatomy and pathology, through draw-
ings to spatial models. At the beginning made of wood, bone up to wax
resembling human tissues. It was necessary when preserving real tissue
was impossible. The invention of fixatives let show real-life pathology.
Development of microscopes let observe the cellular pathology and
stained microscopic slides could also be stored. Development of collec-
tions with consecutive evolution to digital pathology and scanned image
databases.
Conclusion: Analysing the timeline we observe that the quality and
amount of information carried by the collection’s changes accordingly
to the of development of science, including all aspects of presentation.
From organized rooms and buildings, we move into digital realm not
limited by any physical boundaries. We go through macroscale to mi-
croscopy, augmented by 3D representation, even on the cellular level, but
also to virtual images of anatomopathological collections.
OFP-10-006
Encephalitis lethargica from the autopsy reports of the University of
Turin: a brief history full of doubts
L. Ferrari*
*ASL AT Asti, Italy
Background & objectives: Since the greatest virulence of
Encephalitis lethargica was during the Spanish flu pandemic, an
archive search was carried out on the old autopsy reports to in-
vestigate the relationship between Encephalitis lethargica and
Spanish flu in Turin.
Methods: The cases were selected based on the diagnosis of
“Encephalitis lethargica” which was clearly indicated on all the selected
reports. The time period considered was that of the spread of Encephalitis
lethargica, between the years1915 and 1926 according to the spread of the
pandemic.
Results: The first case of Encephalitis lethargica in Turin dates back to
20th January 1920. The autopsy was performed on a 30-years-old male
who died at St. John Hospital. No special autopsy findings were reported
except a red colour of the meninges. There were a total of 14 cases all in
the year 1920. None of them were affirmed by the pathologists of Turin.
Indeed, many question marks were written near the diagnosis.
Conclusion: The autopsy reports show the presence of the Encephalitis
lethargica in Turin at the end of the pandemic of Spanish flu. A
big doubt seems to emerge from these reports due to the scepti-
cism of the pathologists.
OFP-10-007
Comparison of antemortem clinical diagnosis and post-mortem
findings in intensive care unit patients
S. Rusu*, P. Lavis, V.S. Domingues Salgado, M. Van Craynest,
J. Creteur, I. Salmon, A. Brasseur, M. Remmelink
*Department of Pathology, Erasme Hospital, Free University of Brussels,
Belgium
Background & objectives: The autopsy is an important tool to advance
medical knowledge and an excellent assurance indicator of patient
management.
The objective is to analyse the discrepancies between premortem clinical
and post-mortem pathology findings in adult patients deceased in
Intensive Care Unit(ICU).
Methods: We retrieved the clinical and post-mortem findings of all pa-
tients who died in the ICU of Erasme University Hospital, Belgium from
January 1st 2016 to December 31st 2018 and underwent autopsy.
Afterwards the comparisons between clinical and histological findings
were classified in five classes according to the classification proposed
by Goldman et al.
Results: The 2016’ series included 141 complete autopsies. Post-mortem
examinations revealed unexpected findings in 63 cases (47%), of whom
20 (14.2%) were classified as major discrepancies. The first two major
misdiagnosis were malignancy/metastasis (9 [6.4%]) and pulmonary em-
bolism (4 [2.84]). There is no statistical difference between major-minor
discrepancies and the ICU stay and age respectively. Compared to the
study conducted by C. Maris et al. in 2007, a discrete decrease of the
frequency of major discrepancies was observed (14% vs 19%) and the
absence of statistical difference in discrepancies with regard to length of
stay in the ICU was observed (p=0.21 vs p=0.008).
Conclusion: Although the incidence of major discrepancies identified is
low and in discrete decrease compared to our previous study, autopsy
remains a valuable tool to asses the causes leading to death, to assess
the accuracy of clinical diagnosis and for training.
OFP-10-008
Cardiac amyloidosis in the elderly is not related to Alzheimer’s
disease or cerebral amyloid angiopathy
M. Martins Garcia*, J. R. Stone
*Massachusetts General Hospital, USA
Background & objectives: Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA),
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and cardiac amyloidosis due to transthyretin
are all age-related diseases characterized by amyloid deposition. In this
study, the relationship between cardiac amyloidosis and AD/CAA was
investigated in autopsies of elderly patients.
Methods: Autopsies with cardiac amyloidosis in patients 80 years old or
older were matched with control patients without cardiac amyloidosis
based on age and gender. Patients with AL amyloidosis were excluded.
The association between cardiac amyloidosis and CAA or severe AD
(Braak stage V or VI) was assessed by Fisher test. P values less than
0.05 were considered significant.
Results: Sixty-five patients with cardiac amyloidosis met the study
criteria and were matched with 65 control patients without cardiac amy-
loidosis. CAA was present in 17 (26%) of the cardiac amyloidosis cases
and in 13 (20%) of the controls (p=0.53). Severe AD was present in 11
(17%) of the cardiac amyloidosis cases and in 14 (22%) of the controls
(p=0.66). The amyloid stained positively for transthyretin by immunohis-
tochemistry or immunofluorescence.
Conclusion: Some recent studies have suggested a relationship be-
tween AD and cardiac amyloidosis in the elderly, potentially
resulting from the release of amyloidogenic peptides from the brain
into the bloodstream in AD. However, in this series of patients,
there is no significant association between cardiac amyloidosis in
the elderly and severe AD or CAA. The cardiac amyloid in these
elderly patients is derived from transthyretin.
OFP-10-009
Implementation of a cardiac proforma to autopsy practice
K. Tilley*, S. Wright
*Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: There is considerable variation in the way in
which pathologists approach heart dissection. To improve the quality of
reporting, a proforma was introduced. A subsequent audit was conducted
to see if there was improvement in the recording of heart measurements.
Methods: Training was given on how to use the cardiac proforma, spe-
cifically on how to undertake the measurements required. Following this,
the proforma was introduced. We subsequently extracted specific data
items from our departmental post-mortem reports before and after the
introduction of the cardiac proforma.
Virchows Arch
Results: Undertaking heart examination in a systematic way with repro-
ducible results helps to inform clinico-pathological correlation and the
need for genetic testing. Since introducing the proforma, septal wall thick-
ness measurement increased by 30%, left ventricular wall thickness by
12% and right ventricle wall thickness by 10%. The ventricular diameters
measurements increased by 8% and 10% more cases commented upon
the pattern of ventricular hypertrophy. Measurement of aortic valve
circumference/leaflet number rose by 53%.
Conclusion: Following the introduction of the proforma, there was an
improvement in the number of measurements recorded when examining
the heart during autopsy. User satisfaction has also increased. We recom-
mend the use of cardiac proforma in the autopsy setting.
OFP-10-010
Valid diagnostics from autopsy samples: proteomical analysis of the
post-mortem interval-dependent human tissue degradation
E. Kocsmar*, I. Kocsmár, M. Cosenza-Contreras, M. Schmid, G. Rácz,
A. Kiss, M. Werner, P. Bronsert, O. Schilling, G. Lotz
*2nd Department of Pathology, Semmelweis University, Hungary
Background & objectives: Comprehensive analyses of changes in the
composition of proteins using high resolution mass spectrometry-based
proteomics might provide insight into post-mortem decomposition pro-
cesses. Here we characterize the dynamics of protein degradation in hu-
man autopsy samples of the liver, kidney and lung.
Methods: Snap-frozen tissue samples were processed for liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry with label-free quantifica-
tion. Representation pattern of the proteins in the mass-composition were
identified by comparative analysis of co-expression networks of the
targeted tissues. Stable and unstable proteins were coupled with the
Gene Ontology (GO) database and analysed according to molecular
functions.
Results: Patients were included with predefined exact post-mortem
time intervals (6-12-18-24-48-96 hours; 78 tissue specimens of 26
patients). Dynamic changes in representation of proteins in the mass-
composition were different in the investigated organs. The kidney
tissue cytoskeletal proteins remained stable by the increasing time
intervals whereas proteins of the mitochondrial respiratory chain
complex became underrepresented. In the liver, proteins of the lipid
metabolism became underrepresented while pigment storage-related
proteins accumulated by the time. Contrary to the liver and kidney,
proportion of the lung cytoskeletal proteins decreased while proteins
involved in activation of neutrophil granulocytes and lipid metabo-
lism increased by the time in the mass-composition.
Conclusion: Protein degradation is one of the major processes in tissue
decomposition after death. Understanding the biology behind the post-
mortem interval-dependent changes of the mass-composition offers
breath-taking opportunities for diagnostic and therapeutic improvements
and paves the way for proteomic quality analyses of snap-frozen and
formalin fixed-paraffin embedded tissue specimens.
This study was supported by the Start-up Grant of Semmelweis
University (11722).
OFP-10-011
Review of water-related deaths in Oxfordshire over the last 22 years
A. Julai*, K. Collis, A. Srinivasan, I.S. Roberts
*Department of Cellular Pathology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
United Kingdom
Background & objectives: The UK National Water Safety Forum re-
ported 585 water-related deaths in 2018. Most water-related deaths are
presumed to be accidental drownings. Autopsy reports on water-related
deaths in Oxfordshire over 22 years was reviewed to identify factors
contributing to these deaths.
Methods: Water-related deaths (n=194) in Oxfordshire (1997-2019)
were identified by search of the electronic adult post-mortem database
and the Coroner’s autopsy reports were reviewed.
Results: The mean age of individuals dying in water was 57 years (range
15-96 years). 70% of the deaths occurred in men. The month of August
witnessed the most deaths. Water-related deaths were more likely to occur
in the summer for individuals under 30 years-old and in the winter for
those above 60. 71% were deaths due to drowning of which 32% were
directly contributed to by medical conditions. Toxicology results were
available for 107 autopsies; 28% of deaths due to drowning were associ-
ated with alcohol and/or drug intoxication. 22% of individuals had a
history of psychiatric illness; 10% of deaths were attributed to suicide
and occurred mostly in the spring.
Conclusion: A majority of water-related deaths occurred in men and the
most common cause of death was drowning. Alcohol/drug intoxication
and pre-existing medical conditions frequently contributed to drowning.
OFP-10-012
Implementing digital pathology in a large-scale laboratory in Brazil:
one year of experience
L. Maia*, L. Berriel, R. Salomão, V. Krauss Silva, C. Scapulatempo Neto
*DASA, Brazil
Background & objectives: The implementation of digital pathology in
Brazil is an opportunity to provide diagnostics to a larger number of
people. It has the potential to overcome some of the urgent demands of
serving a population of 210 million and 3,500 pathologists.
Methods: DCP was implemented at the main laboratory that processes
50% of the cases. Five Philips UFS scanners were installed and operate
24/7. Eighteen pathologists sign out using glass slides and 14 pathologists
report 100% digitally from distant locations.
Results: 260,000 cases were reported digitally in 2019, which represents
>65% of the case volume of the main laboratory. The cases have been
signed out by pathologists in 8 different cities from 6 different states.
Conclusion: The implementation of digital pathology in large scale is
technically challenging and costly. The adaptation of the laboratory, pa-
thologists and technical staff is a complex process. DP implementation
allowed the reference lab to greater a network of specialized pathologists.
OFP-10-013
How does it feel to be a pathologist? Results of a nation-wide survey
on job satisfaction of pathologists in Turkey and comparison with
Minnesota satisfaction questionnaire
B. Pehlivanoglu*, H. Hassoy, G. Gul, U. Aykutlu, B. Doganavsargil
*Adiyaman University, Turkey
Background & objectives: Job satisfaction has a direct impact on work-
place performance and there is limited research regarding pathologists’
job satisfaction.
Methods: We conducted a 59-item web-based survey questioning re-
spondents’ institutional background, history of training (HT), workplace
(technical and physical) conditions (WPC), professional well-being
(PWB) and job satisfaction level. Likert-type and open/close ended ques-
tions were asked and cored. The participants were also asked to complete
Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire-Short Form (MSQ).
Results: Of the 321 participants, 75% were female and median age was
41±8.82 (range 28-71 y.o.). The respondents’ experience as a pathologist
ranged between 0.12 years and 44 years (mean 11.4±9.16 years).
Academic pathologists had significantly higher scores of MSQ, HT,
WPC and PWB. Senior pathologists working at larger laboratories were
significantly more satisfied of their WPC, with higher scores of MSQ and
HT. Overall, 83% of participants were happy to have chosen pathology,
but 45% reported to experience the feeling of burnt out. Most (98.4%)
Virchows Arch
agreed that pathologists have a critical impact on patient management, but
92% thought that patients barely know pathologists’ importance.
Conclusion: Our findings suggest that pathologist’s job satisfaction in-
creases with years of experience, physical and technical quality of the
pathology laboratory/institution, and professional well-being, i.e., to
maintain work/life balance. Pathologists seem to be aware of their impor-
tant role in patient management although pathology remains to be invis-
ible to the patients.
OFP-10-015
Evaluation of two-photon fluorescence microscopy for sectioning-
free virtual H&E imaging of different tissues
M. Strauch*, J.P. Kolb, W. Draxinger, N. Merg, J. Hundt, S. Karpf,
R. Huber
*Institute for Biomedical Optics, University of Lübeck, Germany
Background & objectives: The pathology workflow relies on pre-
paring paraffin sections with a thickness of one cell layer. We de-
velop a two-photon fluorescence microscope based on optical fibre
lasers to create H&E images from bulk tissue samples without sec-
tioning in less than 1h.
Methods: A bulk tissue sample is stained with acridine orange (AO) and
sulforhodamine 101 (SR) for <10min. The two-photon fluorescence micro-
scope creates an image of the sample within ~20 min/cm2. The obtained
data is transformed to a virtual H&E image in 10min. Two-photon fluores-
cence can be used to scan a section or a 3D volume of a bulk tissue sample.
Results: We measured a set of different tissues with our self-built two-
photon fluorescence microscope to show a proof of concept for a digital
and fast sectioning-free H&E imaging technique with similar quality to
paraffin sectioning. It allows staining with AO&SR as well as H&E. By
improving the microscope scanner and data processing, we expect to
increase the speed of our two-photon fluorescence microscope to a few
minutes per square centimetre.
Conclusion: Virtual H&E imaging provides an alternative to convention-
al bright field microscopy of stained paraffin sections in a fraction of time.
We will further investigate the usage of fluorescent immunostains and
potential combination with other imaging modalities (e.g. Two-photon
fluorescence lifetime imaging) for in vivo application.
Funding by: European Union (ERC CoG no.646669), German Research
Foundation (HU1006/6,EXC 306/2), German Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF no.13GW0227B: “Neuro-OCT”),
European Regional Development Fund CELLTOM.
OFP-11-001
Primary sarcomas of the orbit: 15-year experience from the Queen
Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow
K. Kinch*, F. Roberts
*Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital,
Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: In adults, primary orbital sarcomas are rare,
limited to individual case reports and small case series in the literature.
Here we review our experience with these tumours at the Department of
Pathology, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow.
Methods: Seven cases were identified from the institutional database.
Three were classified as post-radiation sarcoma (PRS) using the follow-
ing diagnostic criteria: 1. the sarcoma arose in a previously irradiated
field; 2. it was histologically distinct from the original neoplasm; 3. it
was not present at the time of radiotherapy; and 4. there was a latency
period of at least 2 years.
Results: A variety of histological types were encountered, including ma-
lignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour (MPNST) (2); atypical lipomatous
tumour/well-differentiated liposarcoma (ALT/WDLS) (2); malignant sol-
itary fibrous tumour (SFT) (1); rhabdomyosarcoma (1); osteosarcoma (1);
and low-grade sarcoma of uncertain histogenesis (1). PRS accounted for
43% of cases, with an average age at diagnosis of 40 years and a median
latency period of 15 years (range 12-45).
Conclusion: This review represents one of the largest series to date, with
seven cases identified over a 15-year period between January 2005 and
January 2020. Primary orbital sarcomas are rare and difficult to treat.
Whereas in children embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma predominates, in
adults they comprise a variety of histological types. Irradiation is a sig-
nificant risk factor and patients who receive radical radiotherapy require
long-term follow-up.
OFP-11-002
The genetic background of conjunctival melanoma and correlation
with recurrences and metastasis
J. van Ipenburg*, N. van Poppelen, Q. van den Bosch, J. Vaarwater,
T. Brands, B. Eussen, D. Paridaens, N. Naus, E. Kilic, A. de Klein,
R. Verdijk
*Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Conjunctival melanoma have limited treat-
ment options once a lesion has metastasized. The aim of this study is to
elucidate the genetic background of conjunctival melanoma within the
spectrum of ocular melanoma, correlated with the development of recur-
rences and metastasis.
Methods: Twenty-eight conjunctival melanoma from the Rotterdam
Ocular Melanoma Study group were collected and DNA was isolated
from formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue using lysis buffer and
Chelex. DNA from fresh tumour tissue was isolated using the QIAmp
DNA-mini kit. Targeted next-generation sequencing was performed
using a panel covering GNAQ, GNA11, EIF1AX, BAP1, BRAF,
NRAS, c-KIT, PTEN, SF3B1 and TERT.
Results: Preliminary data show recurrences and metastasis in ten (36%)
and nine (32%) conjunctival melanoma cases respectively. BRAF muta-
tions were most common, but also NRAS, c-KIT, PTEN, TERT and
SF3B1 mutations were observed. No mutations in GNAQ, GNA11 and
EIF1AX were found. There was no significant association with the de-
velopment of recurrences or metastasis.
Conclusion: Conjunctival melanoma and uveal melanoma are both ocu-
lar melanomas. Yet, based on molecular characteristics our data suggest a
different pathogenesis in conjunctival melanoma compared to uveal mel-
anoma, with involvement of BRAF, NRAS, c-KIT, PTEN, SF3B1 and
TERT mutations occurring mainly in conjunctival melanoma and less
frequent in uveal melanoma, although there are overlapping gene muta-
tions. In our study no association was found between specific mutations
and recurrences or metastasis.
Funding by: Stichting Nederlands Oogheelkundig Onderzoek Stichting
Wetenschappelijk Oogheelkundig Onderzoek
OFP-11-003
Morphological study of perivascular interstitial cells in glioblastoma
L. Mitrofanova*, A. Hazratov, B. Galkovsky, A. Gorshkov, D. Gulyaev,
D. Bobkov
*The Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Russia
Background & objectives: Telocytes (Tcs) and pericytes (Pcs) are two
types of perivascular interstitial cell known to be widespread in various
organs and tissues, including the brain. Objective: morphological study of
Tc and Pc role in glioblastoma (GBM) neovascularization.
Methods: Samples from 15 GBM, 10 diffuse astrocytomas and 5
tumour-free frontal lobes (control samples) were studied. We used
OFP-11 Joint Oral Free Paper Session: Cytopathology /
Neuropathology / Ophthalmic Pathology
Virchows Arch
immunohistochemistry and double immunohistochemical staining with
antibodies to GFAP, Ki-67, CD117, NeuroD1, NG2, CD34, SMA,
connexin43; confocal laser scanning microscopy of glioma cultures and
frozen and paraffin embedded GBM sections. Electron microscopy of
GBM was performed in 4 cases.
Results: The presence of Tcs and Pcs was shown in GBM sections and
glioma cultures. The Tc immunophenotype was CD117+/CD34+/
connexin43+/NeuroD1+. The Pc immunophenotype was SMA+/NG2+/
CD13+. The number of Tcs in GBM specimens was 10 times more than
in astrocytoma. We also identified CD13/CD117 and CD34/NG2 co-
expressing cells in GBM blood vessels.
Conclusion: Four immunophenotypes were found in GBM ves-
sels, corresponding to endotheliocytes, Pcs, Tcs, and a mixed Pc/
Tc immunophenotype. Study of these cell types and their roles in
brain tumour oncogenesis will likely enable improved targeted
therapies.
OFP-11-004
Copy number alterations of chromosome 1p could be helpful to
differentiate spindle cell oncocytoma from pituicytoma
V. Barresi*, M. Simbolo, M. Gessi, S. Rossi, M. Caffo, A. Eccher,
F.F. Angileri, S. Cannavò, M. Brunelli, A. Scarpa
*Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, Section of Pathology,
University of Verona, Italy
Background & objectives: Spindle cell oncocytoma (SCO) and
pituicytoma are tumours of the posterior pituitary with overlapping mor-
phology. They are both classified as grade I, but SCO has higher local
invasiveness and more frequent recurrence rate. This study aimed to
analyse which histopathological, immunohistochemical and genetic fea-
tures may be helpful in the differential diagnosis between these two
tumours.
Methods: We reviewed the histological and immunohistochemical fea-
tures of 7 SCOs and 4 pituicytomas. In addition, we analysed the muta-
tional and copy number variation (CNV) profile of all cases using the
Oncomine Tumour Mutational Load assay, which covers 409 cancer-
related genes, and Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) for chromo-
somes 1p and 1q.
Results: All SCOs, but not pituicytomas, had lymphocytic infiltrate.
3 SCOs and 1 pituicytoma had sufficient DNA for sequencing and
had no mutations in any of 409 genes analysed. At CNV or FISH
analysis 7/7 SCOs, but none of 4 pituicytomas, had loss or gains of
chromosome 1p.
Conclusion: CNV of chromosome 1p could be potentially used in the
differential diagnosis between these SCO and pituicytoma.
This study was supported by Research and Mobility 2017 Funding of the
University of Messina to MC and VB.
OFP-11-005
Cytokeratin 18-negative somatotroph pituitary neuroendocrine tu-
mours (adenomas) are not clinically distinct tumour subset and often
express internexin-alpha
J. Soukup*, T. Cesak, M. Manethova, L. Michnova, D. Netuka,
L. Popovska, J. Cap, F. Gabalec
*The Fingerland Department of Pathology, University Hospital and
Faculty of Medicine Hradec Kralove, Charles University,
Czech Republic
Background & objectives: Low molecular weight cytokeratin (LMWK:
CAM5.2 or cytokeratin 18) expression is used for subclassification of
somatotropinomas. A small subset is LMWK immunonegative and these
have not been well studied: we decided to explore clinicopathological
features of this subgroup.
Methods: 105 somatotroph tumours with known clinical features
(tumour size, levels of IGF1, GH, prolactin, TSH) were analysed
using antibodies against cytokeratin 18, prolactin, growth hormone,
βTSH, Ki67 and p53. E-cadherin, SSTR2 and SSTR5 expression
was recorded in form of H-score. In cytokeratin-negative tumours
(<10% of immunoreactive cells), additional antibodies (AE1/3,
CK8/18, vimentin, neurofilament and internexin-alpha) were used
for further characterisation.
Results: In total, 10 tumours (9,52%) stained negatively for CK18.
Compared to the rest of tumours (n=95), we observed no differ-
ence with respect to the tumour size, biochemical or other patho-
logical features. The results were similar when compared with sub-
groups of sparsely granulated (SGT, n=39) and non-sparsely gran-
ulated (nSGT, n=46) tumours. CK18-negative tumours showed
lower E-cadherin expression compared to nSGT but not SGT
(p<0,01), while SSTR2 expression was comparable to nSGT group
and significantly higher than in SGT (p<0,01). One tumour stained
for cytokeratin 8/18 and AE1/3 and 6 tumours stained for
internexin-alpha in more than 10% of cells (mean 74% positive
cells, SD±26,1%) in morphological patterns similar to LMWK.
Conclusion: Cytokeratin 18-negative somatotroph tumours are not a
distinct clinicopathological subgroup. They may show lower E-
cadherin expression and majority of these tumours express
internexin-alpha, while vimentin and neurofilament light chain are
not expressed at all.
Supported by MH CZ NV19-01-00435.
OFP-11-006
Metastatic tumours of the central nervous system and their prognos-
tic outcomes: a clinicopathological evaluation of 221 cases
E. Gun*, F. Cakalagaoglu, A. Kahraman Akkalp, I.E. Sevin, N. Yuceer
*Izmir Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: The involvement of the central nervous
system (CNS) with metastatic tumours is seen frequently since it has
a strong neurovascular network. We aimed to evaluate the histopath-
ological characteristics and the prognostic outcomes of the patients
with metastatic tumours of the CNS.
Methods: All patients who had a diagnosis of a CNS tumour be-
tween January 2006 and January 2020 were re-evaluated with the
help of clinical, morphological, immunohistochemical, radiological
and prognostic findings. The age, gender, primary tumour, histo-
pathological diagnosis, survival time of the patients, the duration
between the metastasis and the primary tumour, the location and
number of metastases in the brain were recorded and analysed.
Results: Of all 936 patients operated with a CNS tumour,
221(23.6%) patients were diagnosed with metastasis.34.8% was fe-
male and 65.2% was male. The mean age was 58.3.The most com-
mon primary site was the lungs(55.7%) followed by breast(14%) and
colon(7.7%). There were multiple metastases in 37.6%.In 50.2%,
first diagnosis was made with the metastasis. In patients with a pre-
viously known primary tumour, the median interval between the di-
agnosis of the primary tumour and CNS metastases was 13.2 months.
Mean overall survival time was 6.9 months. There wasn't a statisti-
cally significant correlation between the primary origin of the metas-
tases and the survival time. The patients with multiple metastases had
a significantly worse prognostic outcome (p=0.002).
Conclusion: Clinical symptoms and radiological features can be
diagnostic in CNS tumours, however; as our study shows, brain
metastasis can be the first onset of previously unknown primary
tumour. Histopathological evaluation is crucial if the differential
diagnosis includes a primary tumour or unknown primary site.
Virchows Arch
OFP-11-007
Implementing diagnostic digital cytology into routine clinical
practice
A. Bychkov*, T. Hori, Y. Koyama, S. Yoshida, A. Yoshikawa,
Y. Masuzawa, J. Fukuoka
*Kameda Medical Center, Nagasaki University, Japan
Background & objectives: Adoption of digital cytology into routine
pathology workflow is challenging due to technical limitations. There
are only few reports on successful implementation available, mainly lim-
ited to remote rapid onsite evaluation. Other case uses of digital cytology
are largely unexplored.
Methods: Kameda Medical Center with approximately 22.000 cytopa-
thology cases annually served as a model institution. The routine cyto-
logic workflow included two-step screening by cytotechnologists follow-
ed by a sign out by pathologist. Available equipment suitable for digital
cytology were digital microscope with live video output (Olympus), ro-
botic microscope (Sakura), Panoptiq microscopic digital imaging plat-
form, and slide scanner with Z-stack mode (Motic).
Results: We introduced sign out of cytologic cases using live digital
microscope operated by cytotechnologist, which allowed reviewing
slides remotely by pathologist via video streaming (1800 cases in 16
months). We also provided cytologic correlation to support the virtual
slide-based sign out of histopathological specimens (2560 cases in 32
months). In addition, positive cytology cases are archived for integration
into LIS and for prospective AI studies (1300 cases in 32 months).
Conclusion: Since 2017 several case uses of digital cytology,
including remote sign out, providing cytologic correlations, and
archiving virtual slides are routinely used at our hospital and
proved to be successful for practical and educational purposes.
This unique experience may serve as a role model for other in-
stitutions.
OFP-11-008
Accuracy of pleural and peritoneal effusion cytopathology using the
newly-proposed international system for reporting serous fluid
cytopathology
J. Costa*, S. Petronilho, P. Monteiro, L. Leça, F. Schmitt, C. Lobo
*IPO-Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: Serous effusion cytology is an important tool
in the evaluation of effusions. Currently, there is no framework for
reporting serous effusion cytology. The recently proposed International
System for Reporting Serous Fluid Cytopathology (ISRSFC) aims to
standardize reporting and increase reproducibility.
Methods: Pleural and peritoneal effusion samples admitted at our insti-
tution between 2012-2016 for cytological analysis were reviewed and
reclassified according to the five categories proposed by the ISRSFC.
Accuracy of serous effusion cytology was measured against histological
analysis, imaging, surgical findings and clinical follow-up.
Results: 1496 pleural effusion samples were recategorized: 12(0.8%) non-
diagnostic(ND)|944(63.1%) negative for malignancy(NFM)|9(0.6%) atypia
of undetermined significance(AUS)|54(3.6%) suspicious of
malignancy(SFM)|477(31.9%) malignant(M). 763 peritoneal effusion sam-
ples were reclassified: 5(0.7%) ND|457(59.9%) NFM|12(1.6%)
AUS|37(4.8%) SFM|252(33%) M. Risk of malignancy was, for the aforesaid
categories, 57.1%;23.9%;50%;76.2%;100% in pleural effusions and
100%;26.3%;62.5%;91.7%;100% in peritoneal effusions. Sensitivity, speci-
ficity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value and diagnostic ac-
curacy were, respectively, 61.6%;100%;100%;73.3%;81.3% for pleural effu-
sions, and 61.2%;100%;100%;70%;79.7% for peritoneal effusions.
Conclusion: Serous effusion cytology has a confirmatory role in the
diagnosis of malignancy, corroborated by a high positive predictive value
and specificity and a modest negative predictive value and sensitivity.
The tiered classification system proposed (ISRSFC) will increase
standardization, consistency and reproducibility in reporting, with an
aim to improve communication and clinical decision-making.
OFP-11-010
Moesin (MSN) as a novel proteome-based diagnostic marker for
early detection of muscle-invasive bladder urothelial carcinoma in
liquid-based cytology
H.S. Ryu*
*Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Republic
of Korea
Background & objectives: Treatment for Bladder urothelial carcinoma
(BUC) highly depends on the invasiveness of cancer cells. A predictive
biomarker needs to be identified for invasive BUC. Here, we employed
proteomics on urine liquid-based cytology samples to demonstrate a bio-
marker for invasive BUC.
Methods: Proteomics methods were employed on 16 urine liquid-based
cytology (LBC) samples and a set of BUC cell line library to verify candidate
biomarker for invasive BUC. Furthermore, in vitro 2-dimensional (2D) and 3-
dimensional (3D) invasion study and validation of immunocytochemistry
were performed on an independent liquid-based cytology cohort.
Results: The proteomic analysis suggested moesin (MSN) as a potential
biomarker to predict the invasiveness of BUC. Moreover, an in vitro 3D
invasion study showed that inhibition of MSN significantly decreased
invasiveness in BUC cell lines. Further validation of the slide-based
moesin immunocytochemical test ultimately confirmed moesin (MSN)
as a potential biomarker to predict the invasiveness of BUC (p =
0.042). The predictive ability was more powerful in the dichotomous
comparison between BUC groups without invasion and the other group
with invasion (p-value = 0.023, moesin immunoreactive rates, 38.5% vs.
82.4%, respectively).
Conclusion: In conclusion, we suggest moesin as a potential diagnostic
marker for early detection of BUC with invasion in LBC and as a poten-
tial therapeutic target.
OFP-11-011
EUS guided FNA in diagnosing pancreatic lesions according to
Papanicolaou Society of Cytopathology for pancreaticobiliary
system, a single centre experience
I. Guvendir*, I.E. Zemheri
*Health Sciences University, Umraniye Education and Training Hospital,
Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Early diagnosis of pancreatic cancers is im-
portant for therapeutic efficacy, disease management. EUS-FNA cytolo-
gy is helpful for early diagnosis, significant for cost-effectivity. Our aim is
to present EUS-FNA cases diagnosed according to Papanicolaou Society
of Cytopathology for pancreaticobiliary system in one centre, evaluate
clinicohistopathological correlation.
Methods: This retrospective study includes 84 EUS‑guided pancreatic FNA
cases between 2015-2019 years in our hospital. Clinical data, laboratory tests,
cytopathology, histopathology and imaging reports were included in assess-
ment. Final diagnosis were given according to the findings of EUS‑FNA
cytology, cell block and/or histopathology of surgical specimens. All results
were compared with the final diagnosis to calculate the sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV).
Results: 84 EUS-FNA procedures were performed.7 cases were exclud-
ed from study. Lesions were grouped as cystic 16(21%)and solid
61(79%).Median age was 52;%37 (n=28 ) of patients were female,%63
(n=49) were male. According to Papanicolaou classification,5 cases were
category I(12%),19 were II(24%),15 were III(19 %),4 were IVB (5%),8
were category V(10%),26 were category 6(33%).Cytological evaluations
were compared with final clinical and histopathological diagnoses.
Consequently, sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of EUS-FNA
Virchows Arch
cytology to predict final clinicohistopathology were 91%,60%,80%,80%,
respectively.
Conclusion: The EUS-FNA guided cytology with Papanicolaou Society
Classification is a very helpful diagnostic tool for accurate diagnosis and inter-
pretation of pancreatic lessions with high sensitivity (91%) and PPV (80%).
OFP-11-012
Cytomorphologic and immunophenotypic characterisation of tumour-
associated circulating atypical cells in prostate adenocarcinoma
S.C. Bhakdi*, P. Suriyaphol, P. Thaicharoen, S.T.K. Grote,
B. Chaiyaprasithi, K. Charnkaew
*Department of Pathobiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand; X-ZELL, Singapore
Background & objectives: Systematic classification of tumour-
associated circulating atypical cells (tCAC) in solid-tumour patients has
been hampered by the inherent challenges of rare-cell detection. We
present a first classification of tCAC obtained from patients diagnosed
with prostate adenocarcinoma.
Methods: The study enrolled 170 patients with suspected prostate cancer
scheduled for transrectal ultrasound-guided tissue biopsy. Blood was drawn
immediately before the biopsy, thereby avoiding cross-contamination with
cells released into circulation by the procedure. Atypical cells were isolated
using hMX high-gradient magnetic cell separation and characterised by
highly-multiplexed Cryoimmunostaining on standard laboratory slides in a
seven channel widefield fluorescence microscope.
Results: Atypical circulating cells or cell clumps were observed in 49 out
of 74 patients with a positive tissue biopsy for prostate adenocarcinoma,
as well as in 22 out of 72 patients with a negative biopsy. Cells from
patients with positive biopsy showed classical structural changes such as
nuclear enlargement, indentation, irregularity, increased chromatin,
multinucleation, and high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio. The
immunophenotype of atypical cells was predominantly endothelial
(CD31, CD34) with diffuse overexpression of vimentin.
Conclusion: Papanicolau first systematized general criteria for cellular
malignancy. The Bethesda classification, among others, later refined and
elaborated such criteria. The present study demonstrates that morphol-
ogies of tCAC in prostate adenocarcinoma patients correspond well to
these general criteria, and, in addition, takes advantage of highly
multiplexed immunophenotyping. The present classification may im-
prove the clinical utility and reproducibility of cell-based liquid biopsies
in diagnosing prostate cancer and, possibly, other cancers.
The study was jointly funded by the Thailand Research Foundation and
X-Zell Biotech Pte. Ltd. (Singapore).
OFP-12-001
Genomic and histological characterisation of gallbladder cancer
identifies potentially actionable therapeutic targets in the majority
of patients
T. de Bitter*, E. de Savornin Lohman, E. Vink-Börger, S. van Vliet,
M. Hermsen, L. Kroeze, D. von Rhein, E. Jansen, I. Nagtegaal, P. de
Reuver, M. Ligtenberg, R. van der Post
*Department of Pathology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is a highly aggres-
sive malignancy with a low incidence in Western countries and a 5-year
survival rate highlighting the need for more effective therapies. We aimed
to identify potentially actionable therapeutic targets for GBC.
Methods: We collected specimens and clinicopathological data of >800
GBC patients between 2000 and 2019 using the Dutch Pathology
Registry (PALGA) and the The Netherlands Cancer Registry.
Pathology review was performed for 500 cases. A subset (N=79) was
subjected to the Illumina TruSight™Oncology (TSO)500 assay. We
assessed variants in a panel of 54 actionable genes, tumour-mutational
burden (TMB) and microsatellite instability.
Results: Histopathological subtypes comprised biliary-type (66%),
intestinal-type (20%), poorly cohesive-type including signet ring cell
(1%) and other (neuroendocrine carcinoma and (adeno)squamous carci-
noma) (14%). Most cases were of pT1/2 stage (70%), followed by pT3/4
(29%) and pTx (1%). Vascular-, lymphatic-, and perineural invasion were
observed in 47%, 53% and 37% of cases, respectively. Most tumours
(58%) carried at least one (likely) pathogenic variant in an actionable
target gene including KRAS(11%), ERBB2(10%), CDKN2A(9%) and
PIK3CA(9%) and with varying frequency in numerous other genes.
One case showed microsatellite instability. The median TMB was 5.5
mutations/Mb (range: 0 – 161.1 mutations/Mb) and 12 cases (15%) had
a TMB of >10 mutations/Mb.
Conclusion: The majority of GBC patients carry a potentially actionable
variant, increasing the potential for targeted therapy selection and
highlighting the importance of molecular testing in this population.
Funding by: Foundation ADP
OFP-12-002
Next-generation-sequencing based molecular profiling of low-
cellularity cytological specimens
P. Jermann*, I. Alborelli, B. Calgua de Leon, D. Gozuyasli, L. Quagliata,
M. Matter
*University Hospital Basel, Switzerland
Background & objectives: Cytological specimens represent up to 50%
of diagnostic cancer samples, but are seldomly used for molecular profil-
ing, as they often contain <20% tumour cells. We use a novel NGS assay
to accurately profile low-cellularity cytological specimens within a single
day.
Methods: The Oncomine Precision Assay (OPA) covers 50 genes and
uses unique molecular identifiers to maximize sensitivity. Libraries from
of 15 previously characterized cytological specimens were prepared and
sequenced on the Ion Torrent Genexus Integrated Sequencer. Sensitivity
and specificity of variant detection was assessed.
Results: To assess the limit of detection we used serial dilutions as well as
samples with a tumour cell content ranging from 5% – 20%. Clinically
relevant cancer hotspot mutations as well as copy number alterations in
HRAS; EGFR; PIK3CA and TP53 were accurately detected at <1% variant
allele frequency. Preliminary analysis shows 100% concordance with pre-
viously characterized matched laser-microdissected samples. Turnaround
time from sample to results was as short as one day. Comprehensive anal-
ysis of the complete dataset will be presented at the conference.
Conclusion: The OPA allows for sensitive and specific detection of vari-
ants in low-cellularity cytological samples, obviating the need for laser-
capture microdissection. Using the Genexus Sequencer, NGS results can
be reported to clinicians as quickly as immunohistochemical analyses.
Funding by: Thermo Fisher Scientific
OFP-12-004
Pervasive lesion segregation shapes cancer genome evolution
S. Aitken*, C. Anderson, F. Connor, L.C.E. Consortium, C. Semple,
N. López-Bigas, P. Flicek, D. Odom, M. Taylor
*Cancer Research UK - Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge;
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Cancers arise through the acquisition of on-
cogenic mutations and grow through clonal expansion. Sequencing and
OFP-12 Joint Oral Free Paper Session: Molecular
Pathology / Haematopathology
Virchows Arch
analysis of cancer genomes have identified a wealth of driver mutations
and mutation signatures, illustrating how environmental mutagens cause
genetic damage and elevate cancer risk.
Methods: We chemically induced liver tumours in fifteen-day-old male
C3H/HeOuJ inbred mice and performed whole genome sequencing and
histological analyses of of 371 independently-evolved tumours from 104
individuals.
Results: We revealed that most mutagenic DNA lesions are not
resolved as mutations within a single cell-cycle. Instead, DNA le-
sions segregate unrepaired into daughter cells for multiple cell gen-
erations, resulting in the chromosome-scale phasing of subsequent
mutations. We characterised this process in mutagen-induced mouse
liver tumours and show that DNA replication across persisting le-
sions can produce multiple alternative alleles in successive cell di-
visions, thereby generating both multi-allelic and combinatorial ge-
netic diversity.
Conclusion: The phasing of DNA lesions enables the accurate
measurement of strand biased repair processes, the quantification
of oncogenic selection, and the fine mapping of sister chromatid
exchange events. Finally, we demonstrate that lesion segregation
is a unifying property of exogenous mutagens, including UV light
and chemotherapy agents in human cells and tumours, which has
profound implications for the evolution and adaptation of cancer
genomes.
Funding by: S.J.A. received a Wellcome Trust PhD Training Fellowship
for Clinicians (WT106563/Z/14/Z) and is now funded by a National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Clinical Lectureship.
OFP-12-005
Influence on cancer cell energy metabolism by pharmacological
inhibition of the histone modifying lysine-specific-demethylase-1
M. Schmiel*, L. Wang, J. Wang, X. Yu, P. Dalvi, R. Buettner,
M. Odenthal
*Department of Pathology, University Hospital Cologne, Center for
Molecular Medicine Cologne, Germany
Background & objectives: The lysine-specific-demethylase-1 (LSD1) is
overexpressed in different cancer types. Additionally, to its effects on cell
cycle, our studies revealed LSD1 function in cancer metabolism. To
investigate the metabolic effects of LSD1 inhibition in tumours we used
the novel inhibitor HCI-2509.
Methods: RNA sequencing followed by pathway analysis and qPCR
validation was performed on non-treated versus HCI-2509 treated
cancer cell lines. The mitochondria were investigated by mitochon-
drial membrane potential staining, flow cytometry quantification of
the mitochondrial membrane potential and analysis of the respiratory
chain, using the Seahorse device. Besides, public available patient
datasets were assessed regarding differential expression of metabolic
genes.
Results: Expression profiling revealed altered regulation of many
metabolic genes upon pharmacological LSD1 inhibition.
Especially, transcription of genes related to mitochondrial metab-
olism and in particular, expression of genes encoding subunits of
the electron transport chain (ETC) complex I were repressed.
Accordingly, we proved a decrease of the mitochondrial mem-
brane potential, lower ATP production and lower maximal respi-
ration upon LSD1 inhibition in cancer cells. Interestingly, the
expression of various mitophagy effectors was increased.
Additionally, public available datasets confirmed altered expres-
sion of metabolic genes in tumours compared to non-tumour
specimens.
Conclusion: Our data emphasizes the value of LSD1 inhibition in cancer
therapy since LSD1 inhibition does not only disrupt cell cycle progres-
sion but also leads to energy depletion by ETC complex I dysregulation
and upregulation of mitophagy inducers.
OFP-12-006
The expression levels of microRNA 21 and microRNA 210 in renal
cell carcinoma subtypes and renal cell carcinoma metastases and
their relationship with prognosis
T.C. Savli*, I. Yilmaz, S. Baykal Koca, C. Kelten Talu, T. Bolme Savli,
G. Narli, H. Koseoglu, E. Tural
*Health Science University, Istanbul Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: MicroRNAs are non-coding RNA groups
consisting of approximately 20 nucleotides with single strands. They play
roles in many biological events such as cell proliferation and differentia-
tion, apoptosis, angiogenesis and also in cancer pathogenesis and
metastasis.
Methods: Cases diagnosed between 2012-2018 were re-evaluated.
35 ccRCC, 11 CRCC, 9 PRCC and 9 metastatic ccRCC were
included.
Tissues were studied using real-time PCR. Fold change, which is the
change in the expression level of the target microRNA in tumour and
metastatic tissue compared to normal tissue, was calculated with the for-
mula 2-ΔΔCT. Significance was determined by P value (p<0.05).
Results: Expression levels of microRNA-21 and microRNA-210 are
statistically significant between histological types (p<0,001). Only
the effect of microRNA-210 expression level on survival time is
statistically significant. (p=0,034). There was no statistically signif-
icant difference between microRNA-21 and microRNA-210 expres-
sion levels between primary and metastatic tumours (p=0,053;
p=0,237). microRNA-210 has a statistically significant diagnostic
accuracy for metastatic tumours (p=0.04). Both microRNA-21 and
microRNA-210 have a statistically significant diagnostic accuracy
for clear cell RCC versus choromofob RCC and papillary RCC
versus choromofob RCC (p<0,001). microRNA-210 has a statisti-
cally significant diagnostic accuracy for clear cell RCC versus pap-
illary RCC (p=0,001).
Conclusion: MicroRNAs show different ELs in kidney tumours accord-
ing to histological types. This feature can make the use of microRNA-21
and microRNA-210 significant in the subtype diagnosis process. With
treatment to be developed against microRNA-210, which can be used in
determining survival times, patients can survive longer.
OFP-12-007
Anti-arthritic effect of hesperidin loaded lecithin NPs coated with
folic acid silver nanoparticles via modulating immune mediators of
inflammation and bone damage
A. Razzak*, T. Roome, S. Aziz, T. Jabri, M. Imran, M. Raza Shah
*Section of Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, Dow
Diagnostic Reference and Research Laboratory; Cell Signalling
Pathways & Immunopathology Lab, Dow Research Institute of
Biotechnology and Biomedical Sciences; Department of Laboratory
Animal Sciences, Dow International Medical College, Dow University
of Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Activated macrophages by expressing Folate
receptor (FR) play significant role in rheumatic inflammation. Presently,
Hesperidin loaded lecithin NPs coated with folic acid silver nanoparticles
(FA-L HP-AgNPs) was investigated against CFA-induced arthritis model
targeting downstream inflammatory mediators of macrophages
signalling.
Methods: FA-L-HP-AgNPs characterized through UV–vis, zetasizer,
FT-IR and AFM. During CFA-induced arthritis rat model, oxidative
stress markers (NO & PO), M1/M2 cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-
23, IL-10 and TGF-β1), and TLRs expressions were tested in serum,
peritoneal macrophages and splenocytes, respectively. Additionally,
mRNA levels of TLR-2/-4, RANK, RANKL & ROR-γt and percentage
of Th17 cells were performed in spleen tissues.
Virchows Arch
Results: Oral administration of FA-L-HP-AgNPs (1 & 3mg/kg) exhibit-
ed potent anti-arthritic activity with minimal arthritic score, reduced de-
generative changes and lesser influx of inflammatory cells in macroscop-
ic, radiographic, and histological examination, respectively. The treat-
ment not only inhibited TLRs, RANKL, MMP-9/-2 and IL-17 levels in
synovium but also suppressed the serum NO and HO (p <0.001) produc-
tion demonstrated its immunomodulatory effects. Interestingly M1 and
M2-derived cytokines was also disrupted including TNF-α, IL-1β and
TGF-β1 (p <0.005).
Conclusion: FA-L-HP-AgNPs (1&3mg/kg) had profound therapeutic ef-
fect on arthritic rats, consistent with reductions in bone damage and Th17-
associated IL-17 and ROR-γt expressions. Moreover, FA-L-HP-AgNPs
suppressed RANK/RANKL and MMPs production, which supported its
anti-osteoclastic effects. Conclusively, FA-L-HP-AgNPs acted as antiarthrit-
ic agent in a pleiotropic manner in CFA rats by not only reducing the clinical
signs of arthritis, inflammatory cytokines and free radical production but
also attenuating the M1/M2 and RANK/RANKL signalling pathway.
OFP-12-008
Glutathione-S-transferase (GSTT1, M1 and P1 ) genetic polymor-
phisms among Sudanese acute lymphoblastic leukaemia patients
N.E. Husain*, A. Abodlaa, H. Idris, M. Masri
*Omdurman Islamic University, Sudan
Background & objectives: Glutathione S-transferase (GST) is an enzyme
involved in metabolic activation and detoxification of carcinogens. This
study examined differences in the frequencies of selected single nucleotide
polymorphisms in GST (P1, T1 and M1) genes in Sudanese ALL patients.
Methods: This case-control study included extracted DNA from 280
blood samples (150 patients attending Khartoum Oncology Hospital
and 130 healthy matched volunteered controls). PCR-RFLP assay was
used for genotyping of the GSTP1 (Ile105Val) polymorphism. A multi-
plex PCR was used to amplify both GSTM1 and GSTT1 in a single PCR
reaction together with ß-globin gene primer as an internal control.
Results: The risk of ALL in patients with GSTT1 null genotype was not
significant (OR= 1.23, 95% CI=0.74 -2.0, P-0.44). The GSTM1 null geno-
type was significantly higher in the ALL group (79, 60.3 %) compared to
controls (52, 39.78%) and increased the risk to ALL by two folds
(OR=1.72, 95% CI=1.1-2.7, p=0.03). The frequency of GSTP1 genotypes
was significantly different between the two groups (P=0.000). AG, GG and
AG+GG genotypes were found to increase the risk of ALL by more than
three times (P<0.000) compared to the AA genotype. Allele frequencies
were significantly different (P= 0.001, OR= 1.79, CI= 1.247-2.58). High
frequencies were reported in Kordofan and Khartoum states.
Conclusion: GTM1 null allele and GSTP1 mutant genotype exhibits
significant association with the risk of developing ALL among
Sudanese patients, either alone or with environmental factors related to
some Sudan states. Accompanied environmental studies are needed to
highlight possible substrate carcinogens.
OFP-12-009
Brain tumour diagnostics using a DNA methylation-based classifier
as a diagnostic support tool
W. de Leng*, L. Priesterbach-Ackley, H. Boldt, J. Petersen, D. Scheie,
B. Ulhøi, M. Gardberg, T. Brännström, S. Torp, E. Aronica, B. Küsters,
W. den Dunnen, F. Vos, P. Wesseling, B. Kristensen
*Department of Pathology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht
University, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Methylation profiling is increasingly incor-
porated in the diagnostic process of central nervous system tumours at our
centres in The The Netherlands and Scandinavia. We aimed to identify
the benefits and challenges of MP as a support tool for CNS tumour
diagnostics.
Methods: 502 CNS tumour samples were analysed using (850k) meth-
ylation profiling (MP). Profiles were matched with the DKFZ/Heidelberg
CNS Tumour Classifier. For each case the final pathological diagnosis
was compared to the diagnosis before MP.
Results: In 54.4% (273/502) of analysed cases, the suggested methyla-
tion class (calibrated score ≥0.9) corresponded with the initial patholog-
ical diagnosis. The diagnosis of 24.5% of these cases (67/273) was more
refined after incorporation of the MP result. In 9.8% of cases (49/502) the
MP result led to a new diagnosis, resulting in an altered WHO grade in
71.4% of these cases (35/49). In 1% (5/502) of cases the suggested class
based on MP was initially disregarded/interpreted as misleading, but in
retrospect the MP result predicted the right diagnosis for 3 of these cases.
33.7% of cases (169/502) had a calibrated score <0.9, including 7.8% (39/
502) without class indication (calibrated score <0.3).
Conclusion: MP is a powerful tool to confirm and fine-tune the patho-
logical diagnosis of CNS tumours, and to avoid misdiagnoses. However,
it is crucial to interpret the results in the context of clinical, radiological,
histopathological and other molecular information.
OFP-12-010
Explanation of unexpected IHC and MSI results of Lynch syndrome
diagnostics
W. de Leng*, H. Ma, I. Geurts-Giele, A. Jansen, M. Koudijs,
T. Letteboer, W. Dinjens, F. Morsink, J. Offerhaus, L. Brosens
*Department of Pathology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht
University, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: During our 10 year experience in performing
Lynch Syndrome (LS) diagnostics we have encountered 28 patients
where MMR IHC and microsatellite instability (MSI) analyses showed
unexplained contradictory results. This study is to clarify these non-
corresponding molecular observations.
Methods: Tumours of 2335 patients were tested for MMR-deficiency
and MSI between 2007 and 2017 in the UMC Utrecht. Diagnostic
MMR IHC and MSI analyses were repeated for patients with unexplained
contradictory results. Two MSI assays were used; the Bethesda markers
(mono- and di-nucleotide repeats) and the Pentaplex assay (mononucle-
otide repeats). Germline and somatic mutation analysis and protein
modelling were performed.
Results: Repeated IHC analysis resulted in a different outcome in 7
out of 17 patients. Repeated MSI analysis with only mono-
nucleotide markers resulted in a different result in 9 out of 10 pa-
tients. Somatic MMR mutations were identified in 10 patients.
Protein modelling could explain preserved protein expression in
some tumours as mutations did not cause major conformational
changes. In total, in 15 patients the unexplained results could be
clarified (e.g. bi-allelic somatic mutations, LOH, minor conforma-
tional changes), while 5 patients were partially explained.
Conclusion: Mononucleotide markers for MSI analysis were more sen-
sitive than dinucleotide markers and a combined analysis including
germline and somatic mutations proved crucial for identifying a definitive
diagnosis as somatic mutations were frequent in this study population.
OFP-12-011
Abdominal involvement of Erdheim-Chester disease: clinical, histo-
logical and molecular characteristics of 22 cases
I. Ungureanu*, F. Cohen-Aubart, F. Charlotte, S. Valmary Degano,
Z. Hélias-Rodzewicz, D. Cazals-Hatem, P. Dartigues, M. Delage-Corre,
J. Selves, P. Tas, L. Veresezan, T. Kuopio, C. Prokopiou, J. Haroche,
J. Emile
*Pathology Department, Ambroise-Paré Hospital, France
Background & objectives: Peritoneal infiltration rarely occurs in
Erdheim-Chester disease and other histiocytoses and may be
Virchows Arch
misdiagnosed when presenting as a single-organ involvement. We aimed
to analyse clinical, histological, and molecular features of peritoneal man-
ifestations of patients diagnosed with histiocytosis.
Methods: Twenty-two patients were retrieved from the file of Ambroise-
Paré Hospital. All slides were stained with H&E, and immunohistochem-
istry was performed for the following markers: CD163 (or CD68), CD1a,
S100 protein and phosphoERK. DNA was extracted from histiocyte-rich
areas and analysed using real-time PCR, Picodroplet Digital PCR and
NGS. Clinical information was obtained for each case.
Results: The final diagnosis of seventeen patients was ECD. For
twelve patients, the abdominal symptoms revealed the disease, and
nineteen underwent surgical biopsies. Four patients had a unique
abdominal mass, while the others had diffuse peritoneal infiltration.
Sixteen had subserosal histiocytic infiltration, ten of whom also had
deep infiltration of adipose tissue. Histiocytes were mainly mono-
nucleated, with multinucleated cells in seven cases. Eighteen cases
contained foamy histiocytes. Most cases with low or moderate den-
sity of histiocytes had ECD. Cytosteatonecrosis was present in one
patient with ECD. All cases were positive for CD163 or CD68 and
negative for CD1a. Twelve cases contained phosphoERK positive
histiocytes. Thirteen patients had BRAF or MAP2K1 mutations.
Conclusion: Abdominal symptoms may reveal unsuspected Erdheim-
Chester disease. In more than half of these referred cases the diagnosis
of ECD was not initially proposed. Molecular biology is a helpful diag-
nostic tool.
OFP-12-012
Prognostic value of histone modifying enzyme EZH2 and histone
mark H3K4me3 in R-CHOP-treated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
S. Petronilho*, J.P. Sequeira, S. Paulino, S. Chacim, J. Lobo,
C. Jerónimo, R. Henrique
*Pathology Department, IPO-Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: DLBCLs are aggressive, heterogeneous lym-
phomas. Under RCHOP-treatment, 30% of patients progress or ultimate-
ly relapse. Histone modifying enzymes’ alterations are frequent, but their
prognostic value is still controversial.
Aim: To ascertain the prognostic value of EZH2/H3K4me3
immunoexpression in RCHOP-treated DLBCL.
Methods: Retrospective cohort study including 127 patients with
RCHOP-treated DLBCL (2008-2017). EZH2/H3K4me3
immunoexpression was evaluated using a digital imaging system for H-
score calculation and dichotomized in high/low expression.
Clinicopathological variables (sex/age/stage/R-IPI/bone marrow status/
Hans molecular group/BCL2/CD5 positivity) were re-evaluated/
collected.
Primary outcome was event free survival (EFS); secondary outcomes
were lymphoma specific (LSS) and overall survival (OS). Subgroup anal-
ysis by molecular group was performed.
Results: EZH2 expression levels did not differ between molecular
groups (p=0.749). Exclusively in the non-Germinal Centre
(nonGC) subtype, high EZH2 expression was associated with poor
EFS, both in univariable (HR 2.29; 95%CI[1.08- 4.85]; p=0.031)
and multivariable analysis (HR 2.78; 95%CI[1.18- 6.54];
p=0.019). EZH2 expression was not significantly associated with
LSS (p=0.046*) or OS (p=0.031*). [*alpha=0.01 for secondary
outcomes]
We did not find an association between H3K4me3 expression levels and
survival.
Conclusion: High EZH2-expression was associated with worse EFS in
nonGC-DLBCL, supporting its role as prognostic biomarker in this
subgroup.
Although EZH2-mutations are almost exclusively found in GC-DLBCL,
both subgroups shared similar expression levels, suggesting EZH2-
antagonists might also be beneficial in nonGC-DLBCL.
Oral Free Paper Session: One-Day
Computational Pathology Symposium
CP-03-001
Deep learning-based tumour bud detection in pan-cytokeratin
stained colorectal cancer whole-slide images
J. Bokhorst*, I. Nagtegaal, I. Zlobec, A. Lugli, M. Vieth, R. Kirsch,
J. van der Laak, F. Ciompi
*Radboud University Medical Center, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Tumour budding (TB) is an established prog-
nosticator for colorectal cancer. Deep learning-based TB assessment has
the potential to improve diagnostic reproducibility and efficiency. We
developed an algorithm that can detect individual tumour buds in pan-
cytokeratin stained colorectal cancer slides
Methods: Tumour-bud candidates (n=1765, collected from 58 whole
slide images; WSI) were labelled by seven experts as either TB, poorly
differentiated cluster, or neither. The 58 slides were randomly split into a
training (49) and test-set (9). A deep learning (DL) model was trained
using the buds identified by the experts in the training set.
Results: The algorithm was tested on the nine remaining WSI and 270
WSI from pan-cytokeratin stained slides from Bern University hospital,
in which hot spots and TB were manually scored. An F1 score of 0.82
was found for correspondence at the bud level between experts and DL. A
correlation of 0.745 was found between the manually counted buds with-
in the hot-spots and the automated method in the 270 WSIs.
Conclusion: Assessment of tumour budding as a prognostic factor for
colorectal cancer can be automated using deep learning. At the level of
individual tumour buds, correspondence between DL and experts is high
and comparable to the inter-rater variability. However, compared to the
manual procedure, the algorithm yields higher counts for cases with rel-
atively high bud densities (>15). Follow-up studies will focus on the
assessment of TB in H&E stained slides.
Funding: This project has received funding from the Dutch Cancer
Society, project number 10602/2016-2.
CP-03-002
Optimised tumour infiltrating lymphocyte assessment for triple neg-
ative breast cancer prognostics
M. Balkenhol*, F. Ciompi, Ż. Świderska-Chadaj, R. van de Loo,
M. Intezar, I. Otte-Höller, D. Geijs, J. Lotz, N. Weiss, T. de Bel,
G. Litjens, P. Bult, J. van der Laak
*Radboudumc, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: The tumour microenvironment was shown to
harbour prognostic value for breast cancer. For instance, tumour infiltrat-
ing lymphocytes (TILs) are studied using a variety of methods. This study
aims to establish the most optimal (marker, region) and objective TIL
assessment method.
Methods: Multiplex immunohistochemistry (mIHC) was applied on 94 triple
negative breast cancer cases, using CD3, CD8 and FOXP3. Multispectral
images were co-registered with serial H&E sections, to combine deep learn-
ing based automated tissue delineation with lymphocyte detection. Densities
of positive lymphocytes were analysed in different regions (peri- and intra-
tumoral, within tumour stroma etc) and correlated to relapse free and overall
survival.
Results: We found that for all three markers of TILs, the presence of a
high density of positive cells correlated with an improved survival, with
none of the markers being superior to the others. The results of TILs
CP-03 One-Day Computational Pathology Symposium -
Selected Abstracts
Virchows Arch
assessment in the various regions did not show marked differences: TILs
assessed within the tumour stroma, in the entire tumour area or at the
tumour periphery all show similar prognostic value.
Conclusion: We showed that completely automatic assessment of TILs
in different regions of the tumour is feasible. The correlation between
TILs and survival in our cohort are in line with previous studies. Our
results provide directions for optimizing TILs assessment methodology
and will be validated in larger series.
Funding: This study was funded by a Junior Researcher grant from the
Radboud University Medical Center Institute for Health Sciences (RIHS),
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
CP-03-003
An AI system for predicting ER/PGR/HER2 status from H&E slides
in breast cancer
P. Gamble, R. Jaroensri, F. Tan, M. Moran, D.F. Steiner, C.H. Mermel,
P.C. Chen*
*Google Health, United States
Background & objectives: Existing ER/PgR/HER2 guidelines require
IHC interpretation by experts. Prior research suggests histological fea-
tures in H&E images correlate with biomarker status. Here, we develop
deep learning systems for predicting ER/PgR/HER2 status directly from
H&E slides.
Methods: Paired H&E and IHC slides were prepared using representative
tissue blocks from 260 cases from two independent institutions. Board-
certified pathologists annotated H&E images using the IHC images for
reference. Using these annotations, we developed convolutional neural
networks to predict ER/PgR/HER2 status directly from H&E slides.
Results: Each model was trained on 200 cases and evaluated on 60 held-
out cases. Rates of biomarker positivity in our sample were 0.76/0.72/
0.32 for ER/PgR/HER2, respectively. The deep learning system demon-
strated an accuracy of 0.87, 0.93, 0.79 (95% CIs: 0.85-0.89/0.91-0.94/
0.77-0.81) and an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve
(AUC) of 0.87, 0.82, 0.76 (95% CIs: 0.89-0.91/0.81-0.87/0.73-0.79) on
slide-level status of validation cases for ER/PgR/HER2, respectively.
Conclusion: Histopathological features present in H&E slides can be used
to predict ER/PgR/HER2 status as demonstrated by our deep learning sys-
tem. Recent guideline updates recommend repeated testing when biomark-
er results are discordant with the histopathological review, highlighting the
value of understanding biomarker status’ association with morphological
features. Further research into the features learned by our models may
provide novel insights into biomarker status in breast cancer.
CP-03-004
Grading nuclear pleomorphism in breast cancer using deep learning
C. Mercan*, M. Balkenhol, J. van der Laak, F. Ciompi
*Radboudumc, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Nuclear pleomorphism is defined as the var-
iability in size and shape of tumour cells as compared to normal epithelial
cells. Objective of this study is to train a deep neural network that can
achieve pathologist-level pleomorphism grading performance.
Methods: We collected 29 whole slide images (WSI) of breast cancer
resections in which we manually selected 90 regions of interest, ensuring
grade homogeneity of tumour cells within a region. Subsequently, we
cropped regions of ~0.38 mm2 at 40X magnification (0.25 um/px) and
asked six pathologists to grade each region independently.
Results: We used an epithelial cell detector network to detect the epithe-
lial cells in each region and extracted fixed-size patches from these re-
gions with high tumour density. For the task of pleomorphism grading,
we trained a densenet model on those patches with the majority voting of
the grades of the pathologists (majority grades). The variation of kappa
scores of the pathologists with the majority grade was very high, ranging
between 0.37 and 0.69 on the standalone test set consisting of 18 regions
from 7 WSI. On the same test set, our densenet model had a kappa score
of 0.47 with the majority grades.
Conclusion: We demonstrated that our network trained only on tumour
cells achieved performance on the task of pleomorphism grading of breast
cancer around the low mid-range of the inter-pathologist variability where
the inter-observer variability of pathologists was very high. Future re-
search will include scores of a larger panel of pathologists, and study
alternative deep learning strategies to improve the performance.
CP-03-005
Artificial intelligence to aid the diagnosis of head and neck precan-
cerous and cancerous lesions: a systematic review
H. Mahmood*, M. Shaban, I. Indave, A. Santos-Silva, N. Rajpoot,
S.A. Khurram
*Academic Unit of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry,
University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: This systematic review aims to evaluate the
published literature on AI/machine/deep learning applications for detec-
tion, grading and classification of head and neck precancerous and can-
cerous lesions using digitised human tissue.
Methods: Electronic database search was conducted using MEDLINE
via OVID, Scopus and Web of Science to retrieve relevant articles (2009
and 2019). A tailored search strategy using database specific search terms
and text words were used, and studies screened against an eligibility
criteria. Modified QUDAS-2 tool was used for risk of bias assessment.
Results: 11 articles met the inclusion criteria which used a combination
of heuristics, supervised and unsupervised learning methods, including
more than 10 different classification and segmentation techniques.
Automated detection was based on analysis of specific histological
markers for oral precancer (n=1), oral submucous fibrosis (n=5), oral
cancer (n=4) and oropharyngeal cancer (n=1). Most studies used small
unicentric datasets (range 40-270 images) comprising small visual fields.
Detection accuracy ranged from 79%-100%.
Conclusion: Most studies have shown a high risk of bias which is likely
to have contributed to high accuracy rates. Traditional supervised learn-
ing methods were most commonly used highlighting the need for modern
state-of-the-art deep learning techniques in future research.
CP-03-006
Validation of computer-assisted tumour-bud and T-cell detection in
pT1 colorectal cancer
L. Studer*, J. Bokhorst, I. Zlobec, A. Lugli, A. Fischer, F. Ciompi, J. van
der Laak, I. Nagtegaal, H. Dawson
*Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Switzerland
Background & objectives: Tumour budding, and T-cells are robust
prognostic biomarkers in colorectal cancer. A combined analysis is com-
plex and can be greatly expedited and automated using deep learning. The
implementation of computer-based analysis in diagnostics is challenging
and necessitates extensive validation.
Methods: Randomly selected (n=61) double-stained immunohistochemical
slides (AE1-AE3 pancytokeratin for tumour buds and CD8 for cytotoxic T-
cells) from our pT1 cohort from 3 different institutions were used to validate
the deep learning algorithms for tumour budding and CD8 T-cell detection
developed by the International Budding Consortium Computational
Pathology Group. Staining and scanning were performed in a single
laboratory.
Results: In the visually identified tumour budding hotspot (0.785 mm2),
tumour buds were manually annotated, and the output of the T-cell algo-
rithm manually corrected by a single observer. For budding, 645 out of
the 1’306 buds were correctly identified by the algorithm. Recall and
precision were 49.4% and 61.4%, respectively. For the T-cells, 89.3%
Virchows Arch
were correctly detected (from a total of 16’296). The recall was 90.3%
and the precision was 87.3%. Reasons for misclassified T-cells included
staining intensity, suboptimal tissue recognition and slide artifacts.
Conclusion: Our preliminary data demonstrates satisfactory results for T-
cell detection. Automated budding detection is more difficult, as inter-
observer variability of bud calling is high among experts. These issues
merit consideration when developing reliable deep learning algorithms
examining the tumour/host interface.
Funding: The work presented here has been supported by the Rising Tide
foundation with the grant number CCR-18-130.
CP-03-007
Characterisation of the tumour-host interface as a prognostic factor
through deep learning systems
T. Haddad*, J. Bokhorst, L. van den Dobbelsteen, F. Zimmer, F. Ciompi,
I. Zlobec, A. Lugli, J. van der Laak, I. Nagtegaal
*Radboud University Medical Center, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Interpretation of the tumour-host interface
can provide relevant prognostic information. Through H&E and IHC
double staining in combination with deep learning, we set out to find a
novel way of characterizing features of the invasive margin in colorectal
carcinoma (CRC).
Methods: Formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded human CRC tissue obtained
from the Radboudumc (Nijmegen, Netherlands) was automatically H&E
stained and digitized. A double staining procedure using anti-CD3 and pan-
cytokeratin was conducted on the same slides and scanned, generating a
2nd whole slide image (WSI) per sample. WSIs were processed using a
series of deep learning neural networks (automated lymphocyte detection,
tissue classification, tumour budding detection).
Results: Our method was successfully implemented as the tumour bud-
ding and lymphocyte detection algorithms were able to automatically
detect peritumoral budding in pan-cytokeratin and CD3+ lymphocytes
respectively in the immuno-stained WSIs. The tissue classifier segmented
the H&E-stained WSIs into 13 classifications. This technique allows us to
combine the relevant data and link the density of peritumoral budding
with immune infiltration, tumour cell ratio, mismatch repair (MMR) sta-
tus and clinical outcome. Data correlations on a cohort of 150 colorectal
cancer patients with varied MMR status will be presented at the meeting.
Conclusion: Automated classification of the invasive margin in combi-
nation with clinical outcome can lead to an improved understanding of
patient prognosis. This unbiased and transferable method could improve
diagnostic accuracy as well as broaden our understandings of tumour
budding and other poor prognostic factors.
Funded by the Dutch Cancer Society.
Oral Free Paper Sessions: One-Day Molecular
Pathology Diagnostics and Translational
Research Symposium
MD-02-001
First ESWR1-SMAD3 rearranged tumour arising in bone:
expanding the clinical and histological spectrum of this emerging
tumour type (case presentation)
S. De Noon*, R. Tirabosco, P. O'Donnell, A. Flanagan, F. Amary
*UCL Cancer Institute, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: EWSR1-SMAD3 fibroblastic tumours are an
emerging group of rare soft-tissue neoplasms, defined by characteristic
genetic alteration, similar fibroblastic morphology and predilection for
hands and feet. We describe the first case of an EWSR1-SMAD3
rearranged tumour arising in bone.
Methods: We reviewed the imaging, clinical records, histopathology and
genomic findings of a patient diagnosed at our institution with an unusual
bone tumour. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) was performed on fresh
frozen tissue as part of the 100,000 genomes project, and data was
analysed using standard bioinformatics pipelines in the Genomics
England research environment.
Results: A 44-year old male presented with a 9-month history of
a painful right knee swelling, with no significant functional de-
fects. MRI revealed a partly ossified mass involving the proximal
tibia with a large extraosseous component. The pathology showed
a biphasic tumour comprising cellular regions of atypical spindled
to oval cells and interspersed hyalinised nodular areas, in places
resembling cartilaginous differentiation. The differential diagnosis
at the time included a mesenchymal chondrosarcoma and a
dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma. Subsequently in the analysis of
WGS data, an EWSR1-SMAD3 fusion was discovered.
Conclusion: We present, to our knowledge, the first case of an EWSR1-
SMAD3 fibroblastic tumour occurring in bone. This case highlights the role
of next generation sequencing in the accurate classification of mesenchymal
tumours, particularly in difficult cases showing atypical histological features.
MD-02-002
A case report of ROS1 fusion detection by FISH - a possibility of false
positive results
J. Siemanowski*, C. Heydt, A. Schultheis, S. Merkelbach-Bruse
*University Hospital Cologne, Institute of Pathology, Germany
Background & objectives: While fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) is commonly used for the detection of drug-targetable fusion events,
false positive results can hamper profitable treatment decisions. This case
report visualizes the possibility of false positive ROS1 FISH results.
Methods: ROS1 FISH and ROS1 immunohistochemistry (IHC) were
performed using a SPEC ROS1-Dual Colour Probe (ZytoVision) and a
ROS1 antibody Clone D4D6 (Cell Signalling Technology). RNA was
extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) material.
Gene fusion detection by parallel sequencing was done using the
FusionPlex CTL panel (Archerdx) on a MiSeq (Illumina).
Results: A 44 –year-old male, diagnosed with an NSCLC adenocarcinoma
showed a ROS1 translocation with aberrant signals in 79% of nuclei in FISH
analysis. Further evaluation revealed a pattern of 78 nuclei with isolated 3’
extra green signals and 1 nucleic signal with break apart signal. Follow up
IHC showed no ROS1 protein expression. Parallel sequencing was also neg-
ative for ROS1, indicating a false positive FISH result. Analysing a larger
cohort of FISH positive cases by isolated 3’ green signals demonstrated that
48% were not confirmed by alternative methods.
Conclusion: This case report showed that isolated 3’ green signals in
ROS1 break-apart FISH should be confirmed by alternate methods. It
seems that isolated 3’ green signals could indicate a chromosomal break
albeit not generating a functional fusion product.
MD-02-003
Molecular characterisation of high grade papillary urothelial
carcinoma with divergent glandular differentiation reveals the clonal
origin of both components
I. Carretero-Barrio*, T. Caniego, E. Moreno Moreno, M.T. Martínez,
I. González, A. Saiz Gonzalez, J. Palacios-Calvo
*Hospital Universitario Ramon y Cajal, Servicio de Anatomia
Patologica, Spain
Background & objectives: Urothelial carcinoma with divergent
glandular differentiation is a recognised variant of urothelial
MD-02 Joint Session One-Day Molecular Pathology
Diagnostics and Translational Research Symposium,
Molecular Pathology & Trainees: Case Presentations
Virchows Arch
carcinoma. There is no clear evidence about the clinical signifi-
cance of this neoplasm, although some studies associate it with
worse prognosis. There are studies about the immunophenotype of
tumours with divergent differentiation, but there are no publica-
tions to date about the possible different genomic profiles of the
urothelial and the glandular components.
Methods: We present the case of a high grade papillary urothelial
carcinoma with divergent glandular differentiation, on which we
performed immunohistochemical and molecular analyses of the
two areas. For the molecular analysis, both components were se-
quenced with next generation sequencing (NGS) techniques, using
a 59 gene custom panel.
Results: The high grade papillary urothelial component was only positive
for GATA3, p63 and CK7. The glandular area was only positive for
CDX2 and CK20.
Both components shared the same mutations on FGFR2, CDH19,
KMT2C, MKI67 and PMS2. The glandular component had addi-
tional mutations on TP53, ARID1B, ARID5B, CDH19, CTNNB1
and PMS2. Immunohistochemical analysis showed p53 loss of
expression (mutated “null” pattern) only in the glandular area,
confirming the NGS result.
Conclusion: The molecular analysis, showing the same mutations on
both components and the acquisition of new mutations on the glandular
component, suggest a common clonal origin. To our knowledge, this is
the first study reporting this finding.
MD-02-004
A case of Burkitt-like lymphoma with 11q aberration arising in
Waldeyer’s ring
C. Masaoutis*, V. Pantelaion, D. Rontogianni
*Department of Pathology, Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens,
First Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: A 35-year-old female with Crohn’s disease
under azathioprine and mesalazine presented with a right rhinopharyngeal
tumour causing local symptoms over the last 4 months, without B-symp-
toms, lymphocytosis, lymphadenopathy or organomegaly. LDH levels
were normal. A tumour biopsy was performed.
Methods: H&E: Mucosal involvement by a diffuse population of large
cells with vesicular nuclei and conspicuous nucleoli and medium-sized,
relatively monomorphic cells with a “starry sky” pattern.
Immunohistochemistry: Strong, uniform co-expression of CD20,
PAX5, CD10, BCL6; c-MYC>80%, MUM1/IRF4-, BCL2-, CD5-,
CD23-, cyclin-D1-, CD30-, Ki67>99%. EBER-ISH: negative. Break-
apart FISH for MYC, BCL2, BCL6: negative. Triple-colour FISH re-
vealed 11q23.3 gains and 11q24.1-q25 losses.
Results: A Burkitt-like lymphoma with 11q aberration [BLL-11q]
diagnosis was rendered. The demonstration of 11q aberrations
without detectable MYC, BCL2 or BCL6 rearrangements helped
exclude high grade B-cell lymphoma, NOS (see mixed Burkitt-
like and DLBCL cytology) and a morphologically "atypical"
Burkitt lymphoma (BL) with a cryptic MYC translocation (see
c-MYC>80% and “BL immunophenotype”).
The patient received R-DA-EPOCH including CNS prophylaxis,
switched to R-CHOP, and is disease-free 5 months after the diagnosis.
Conclusion: BLL-11q explains some “MYC-negative BLs” or BLs with
presumed cryptic translocations. Copy number arrays are the gold stan-
dard, but no false positive cases have been reported with FISH. The
azathioprine-induced immunosuppression is noteworthy, as cytogeneti-
cally similar lymphomas arise in post-transplant patients. Transformed
follicular lymphoma may have similar 11q aberrations, but this case
lacked such evidence. 11q22-q24 and 11q12.3-q25 gains without
telomeric losses, seen in DLBCL and LBCL-IRF4 respectively,
are nonspecific.
MD-02-005
Spindle cell tumour of the liver with an ETV6-NTRK3 fusion
D. Nann*, I. Bonzheim, M. Scharpf, F. Fend
*Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology, University Hospital
Tübingen and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Tübingen, Germany
Background & objectives: A 31-month-old girl suffered from abdomi-
nal pain, sickness, and fever. Radiologically, she showed a 7.9 cm large
tumour of the liver.
Methods: Hematoxylin and eosin, and immunohistochemical staining
was done on a formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded biopsy. For mutation
and fusion analysis, the Oncomine Focus Assay (ThermoFisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was performed and for confirmation of
fusions the Archer FusionPlex solid tumour panel (ArcherDX, Boulder,
CO, USA) was used.
Results: The tumour composed of a spindle proliferation with ovoid or
elongated nuclei and medium sized cytoplasm undermixed with inflam-
matory cells. Immunohistochemically, the cells showed a weak and het-
erogenous positivity for SMA, but were negative for desmin, myogenin,
CD23, S100, ALK, pancytokeratin, CD21, lysozyme, CD1a, glypican 3,
HepPar1, and didn’t show loss of INI1. MIB1 staining indicated 10%
proliferation activity. Molecular analysis detected an ETV6-NTRK3
inframe fusion gene.
Conclusion: The tumour was diagnosed as a spindle cell tumour with
ETV6-NTRK3 fusion with differential diagnoses infantile fibrosarcoma
and ALK negative inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour (IMT). The
morphology, the interspersed inflammatory cells and the localization
are more in line with IMT.
MD-02-006
Fusion and mutation-negative inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour
in bladder: a case report
A. Vernemmen*, I.V. Samarska, V. Winnepenninckx, R.M. Sciot,
A.P. de Bruïne, S. Wouda, A.M. van Marion, A. zur Hausen
*Department of Pathology, GROW School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center,
The Netherlands
Background & objectives: A 71-year old patient underwent a radical
cystoprostatectomy due to a rapidly growing bladder tumour with bilat-
eral hydronephrosis and infiltrative growth on imaging. The bladder
contained a 7.4 cm polypoid lesion, invading the detrusor muscle and
the perivesical tissue.
Methods: The lesion was examined with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) and
immunohistochemical stainings, including ALK-1. The morphology
showed a spindle cell lesion, organised in fascicles, with an intervening
mixed inflammatory infiltrate. The ALK and ROS1 fluorescent in situ
hybridisation (FISH) assay was performed, followed by a DNA analysis
and an RNA gene fusion panel assay (Archer) using next-generation
sequencing.
Results: Using the H&E and immunohistochemical stainings, the morphol-
ogy of the tumour was consistent with an inflammatory myofibroblastic
tumour (IMT), although ALK-1 was negative. No ALK and ROS1 gene
alterations were detected in the FISH assays. The Archer gene fusion panel
assay (ALK, CAMTA1, CCNB3, CIC, EPC1, EWSR1, FOXO1, FUS, GL1,
HMGA2, JAZF1, MEAF6, MKL2, NCOA2, NTRK3, PDGFB, PLAG1,
ROS1, SS18, STAT6, TAF15, TCF12, TFE3, TFG, USP6 and YWHAE) did
not reveal any gene fusion either and the DNA mutation analysis detected no
mutations. Despite extensive molecular testing, no gene alterations or muta-
tions were encountered. External consultation by Prof. Dr. J.I. Epstein (JHH,
Baltimore, USA) was confirmative.
Conclusion: Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour is a rare tumour with
potentially aggressive biologic behaviour. Subset of IMT can be ALK-
negative and shows no molecular alteration. Additional molecular re-
search remains necessary for potential future targeted therapy.
Virchows Arch
MD-02-007
Vulvar pilomatrix carcinoma: morphological and molecular features
D. Bueno Sacristán*, M.T. Martínez, I. González, T. Caniego,
J. Palacios-Calvo, B. Pérez
*Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Department of Pathology, Spain
Background & objectives: Pilomatrix carcinoma (PC) is the rare malig-
nant counterpart of pilomatrixoma, a skin adnexal tumour originating
from hair matrix cells. Mutations in CTNNB1, the encoding gene of
beta-catenin, have been found in both entities, but other molecular alter-
ations are still unknown.
Methods: We present the morphological, immunohistochemical and mo-
lecular features of a PC of the clitoris, the third known reported case located
on the external genitalia, which developed multiple metastases in a 53-year-
old woman. Next generation sequencing (NGS) was performed with a
custom-panel including 59 genes. Sanger sequencing was also carried out.
Results: The tumour showed an atypical neoplastic proliferation with
scattered abrupt keratinization and shadow cells upon tumour areas.
Negative immunohistochemical stain for p16 and p53 excluded the diag-
nosis of squamous cell carcinoma. Neoplastic cells showed nuclear and
cytoplasmic beta-catenin overexpression, characteristic of pilomatrix car-
cinoma. Sanger sequencing identified S37F mutation in CTNNB1 and
NGS also evidenced mutations in ARID1A, PTEN and PIK3CA.
Posterior negative immunostaining for ARID1A confirmed NGS result.
Conclusion: PC is a rare neoplasm usually located in head and neck
region. Metastasis only occur in 10% of cases. In contrast, this study
presents a vulvar PC with multiple metastasis. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the first case analysed by NGS, which demonstrated not only
the common initiating mutation in CTNNB1, but also other mutations
that could have contributed to the dismal evolution in this patient.
MD-02-008
Sino-nasal Ewing family tumour – a morphomolecular case report of
a “small round blue cell tumour”
H. Morris*, G. Dowds, C. McKeeve, S. Wright
*Department of Pathology, Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of
Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: An elderly female presented with right eye
pain, epiphora and proptosis. CT and MRI showed a 7.7cm mass involv-
ing the right nasal cavity, ethmoid sinus and orbit with bilateral frontal
sinus involvement and early intracranial extension.
Methods: Biopsy showed a small round blue cell tumour. Focally, the
lesional cells formed whorls around small blood vessels. There was no
keratinization or gland formation. An extensive immunohistochemistry
(IHC) panel was performed and supplemented by FISH for EWSR1
translocation, RT-PCR for EWSR1-FLI1 and SS18 fusion products and
multiplex PCR for HPV-16 and HPV-18 genotypes.
Results: IHC demonstrated staining with antibodies to broad spectrum
cytokeratins and focal staining with squamous markers p63 and p40.
Antibodies to p16 were positive. Of note, CD99 was negative.
Neuroendocrine, neural, melanocytic, skeletal and smooth muscle, lym-
phoid and vascular markers were negative. EBV-ISH was negative. There
was no loss of INI-1 expression. There was focal cytoplasmic PAS-
positive material. Molecular testing revealed EWSR1-FLI1 fusion.
A diagnosis of Ewing family tumour (EFT) was made. Sinonasal EFTs
are very rare and have a wide differential diagnosis. EWSR1 translocation
can also be seen in anaplastic myoepithelial carcinoma but EWSR1-FLI1
fusion is specific to EFT and is present in 85% of cases.
Conclusion: This report raises awareness of sinonasal EFT, a rare entity
which has a wide differential diagnosis, and demonstrates the use of
molecular analysis as an adjunct to traditional histology, histochemistry
and IHC to reach a definitive diagnosis.
Hayley Morris is a NHS Education for Scotland funded Clinical Lecturer
in Pathology.
MD-04-001
Evaluation of 1429 lung tumour samples analysed by targeted
RNA-Seq
S. Wagener-Ryczek*, C. Heydt, R. Pappesch, J. Siemanowski,
J. Fassunke, J. Rehker, M.A. Ihle, S. Merkelbach-Bruse, R. Buettner
*University Hospital Cologne, Institute of Pathology, Germany
Background & objectives: Molecular assays for fusion detection in lung
tumours are widely used in routine diagnostics. However, conventional
methods like fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) can come with
several drawbacks. In this study, 1429 lung tumour samples were evalu-
ated with targeted RNA-Seq.
Methods: For the detection of known and novel gene fusions, the Archer
FusionPlex Lung panel (Archerdx, Boulder, CO) was used. In brief, 35 to
200 ng of tNA was target enriched by single primer extension. Prepared
cDNA libraries were sequenced on a MiSeq (Illumina). Data analysis and
fusion detection were done using Archer Analysis software versions
5.0.4, 5.1.3 and 6.2.1 (Archerdx).
Results: 1429 lung tumours were evaluated in routine diagnostics.
98% of these samples were analysable. Novel fusion partners, for
example EGFR – VSTM2A or NIPBL-NRG1 were found as well
as rare but clinically relevant lung fusions like ST7-MET and the
EGFR VIII variant were identified. Furthermore, the assay was found
to be a useful tool to verify, whether mutations and deletions in close
proximity to characterized MET exon 14 skipping mutations will
lead to a real exon skipping event. This assay is only hampered by
the fact that fusions involving genes both outside the selectively
captured region cannot be detected and false-negative results due to
poor quality samples can be encountered.
Conclusion: This method has demonstrated excellent diagnostic utility
for fusion detection in lung tumours. Novel and rare fusions partner can
be identified by targeting one gene fusion partner only. Mutations/
Deletions leading to exon skipping events can be verified.
MD-04-002
Participation in external quality assessment (EQA) for BRCA testing
in ovarian cancer: lessons learned and the need for continued quality
improvement
M. Cheetham*, V.S. Williams, J.A. Fairley, N.L. Wolstenholme,
Z.C. Deans, S.J. Patton
*EMQN, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Ovarian cancer is the eighth most common
cancer in women for which PARP inhibitors have proved effective ther-
apeutic agents in eligible patients. We present data from BRCA-based
EQA schemes over a 3-year period (2016-2018) involving over 300 lab-
oratories globally.
Methods: EMQN and GenQA sent identical clinically relevant samples
to each EQA participant to be tested for BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene var-
iants using their routine methodologies. The anonymised results were
assessed, peer reviewed and individual laboratory and overall summary
scheme reports were produced to help laboratories improve their perfor-
mance and to enable comparison (benchmarking) of results and reporting.
Results: Over the three years, there has been significant improvement in
the quality of testing, clinical reporting of results and standardisation with
respect to the nomenclature used for the reporting of sequence variants.
Improvement in the clinical interpretation is also evident but there are
areas where further work is required.
Conclusion: Although errors persist, we conclude that annual participa-
tion in these EQA schemes can improve the quality of diagnostic testing
MD-04 One Day Molecular Pathology Diagnostics
and Translational Research Symposium -
Selected Abstracts
Virchows Arch
for ovarian cancer and considerably contribute to the achievement of the
promise of accurate personalised medicine.
The EQA schemes in question were sponsored by an educational grant
from AstraZeneca.
MD-04-003
Diagnosis of microsatellite instability in routine practice in colorectal
adenocarcinoma: what we learn from the rereading of discordant
cases
P. Cervera*, O. Lascols, M. Svreck, S. Breton, R. Cohen, D. Tougeron,
T. Andre, A. Duval, J. Fléjou
*APHP Sorbonne Université INSERM, France
Background & objectives: In the era of immunotherapies in
Microsatellites Instability, efficiency of diagnostic is challenged as rou-
tine screening is not standardized. The two methods used, immunohisto-
chemistry and molecular testing, give discordances.
These discordances are studied in a retrospective series of colorectal
adenocarcinomas.
Methods: In 2128 colorectal patients, MMR and MSI status were
established between 2013 and 2018. MSI testing was carried out using
the pentaplex panel and MMR immunohistochemistry testing two MMR
proteins (MLH1, MSH2). The primary endpoint was the rate of real
discordance between MSI and MMR IHC tests. Each discordance case
was thoughtfully examined to be confirmed and explored.
Results: This cohort initially presented 28 (1.3%) discordant cases. After
rereading of 2 tests (immunohistochemistry and molecular testing) and/or
new tests, 75.0% of discordant cases (n=21/28) were reclassified as non-
discordant. After rereading and addition of MSH6/PMS2 IHC, 32,1% of
discordant cases, initially pMMR (n=9/28) were reclassified as non-dis-
cordant. Among the 19 remaining discordant cases (0,68%), 4 were MSI/
pMMR and 16 MSS/dMMR. For 9 of them, the discordance was the
result of sampling error (47% of the remaining cases). The genetic profile
of the three cases pMMR that are MSI, has to be explored. The 7 MSS/
dMMR tumours demonstrated loss of any of the four MMR protein.
Conclusion: Our study emphasises the importance of accurate and care-
ful material sampling and the advantage of combination of two comple-
mentary techniques. Discordant cases must be reviewed, since it is a
major issue to select patient for appropriate treatment.
MD-04-004
Real-world challenges of EGFR mutation testing in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer: complementary roles of next generation
sequencing and Idylla
L. Habran*, H. Piron, S. Pisvin, P. Delvenne
*CHU Liege, Anatomopathology Department, Belgium
Background & objectives: This real-world study aims to weigh up
benefits/challenges of next generation sequencing (NGS) versus the
Idylla™Epidermal growth factor receptor mutation (EGFRm) Test in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), regarding pathology lab applicabil-
ity, turnaround-time (TAT) and EGFRm test performance.
Methods: A central lab analysed 193 routine diagnostic NSCLC samples
in parallel with in-house validated NGS and Idylla™EGFR Mutation
Test (CE-IVD, Idylla™).
Results: Ease-of-use and short TAT were confirmed for Idylla, with
shortest TAT of 1 versus 13 calendar days with NGS. 19 samples
(10%) contained <5% tumour cells and were excluded from EGFRm
analysis. Extracted DNA quantity was insufficient for NGS in 17
samples (10%), but 65% of those had a valid Idylla result. 27 con-
tributive samples (16%) gave an Idylla result with reservation be-
cause Cq>26.0: 15 of those had a NGS result with reservation sug-
gesting inferior DNA quality; 6 had insufficient DNA for NGS;
another 6 had a conclusive NGS result. If sample/test quality criteria
were met, 7 concordant EGFRm (5%) were detected with NGS and
Idylla for known actionable variants.
Conclusion: This regional study reveals pre-analytical challenges of
NSCLC biopsies. NGS and Idylla demonstrate a complementary role to
improve clinically relevant molecular results. Both have distinct advan-
tages and labs will have to determine locally the appropriate EGFRm test
algorithm.
Funding: Unconditional grant provided by AstraZeneca for the pur-
chase of Idylla cartridges, Idylla demo instrument provided by
Biocartis.
Poster Sessions
PS-01-001
Comparing histological grading of breast cancer on core biopsy and
excision specimen
S. Appukutty*, M. Jimenez-Linan, B. Mahler-Araujo, A. Duckworth,
P. Wright, E. Provenzano
*Addenbrooke's Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Histological grade of breast cancer is one of
the key variables in treatment decisions following a breast cancer diag-
nosis. Concordance in breast cancer grade between core biopsy and ex-
cision specimens is reported as around 75%.
This study aims to look at the concordance rate of primary breast cancer
grading on core biopsy and excision specimens from three centres over a
period of two years reported at Addenbrooke's Hospital.
Methods: A retrospective computer search for all breast core
biopsies with a B5b classification diagnosed between April 2017
and March 2019, and subsequent surgical excision specimens
identified. Overall grade and the three individual grade compo-
nents were extracted from the paired reports. Concordance for
overall grade and each of the grade components was determined,
along with percentage of cases upgraded or downgraded.
Results: A total of 980 primary surgery and 89 post-neoadjuvant cases
were included.
The grade concordance following primary surgery was 82.8%, with 12.8
% upgraded and 4.4% downgraded. The concordance rates for tubule
formation, pleomorphism and mitoses were 84.4%, 80.5% and 76.7%
respectively.
Amongst the neoadjuvant cases overall concordance was only 45%, with
upgrading and downgrading in 1.1% and 53.9% of cases respectively.
Mitotic count reduction accounted for most downgrading (56.2%).
Conclusion: The concordance rate of primary breast cancer grading on
core biopsy and excision specimens is in line with published literature.
Reduced mitotic count following neoadjuvant chemotherapy is well de-
scribed, and has been associated with improved survival, reflecting re-
sponse to therapy.
PS-01-002
Adenomyoepitheliomas of the breast: a 15-year case series
X. Ara Mancebo*, I. Miranda-Gómez, E.M. Fuentes-Camps, C. Alborch-
Gil, S. Ramón y Cajal, V. Peg-Cámara
*Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Spain
Background & objectives: Adenomyoepitheliomas (AME) of the
breast are uncommon biphasic tumours composed of prominent
myoepithelial cells around glandular spaces. Rarely, the epithelial
or myoepithelial component, or both, becomes malignant (malignant
PS-01 Breast Pathology
Virchows Arch
AME). AME should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
several lesions.
Methods: We present a retrospective study reviewing the main
clinical-pathological findings diagnosed in our institution in the last
15 years. All AME from 2004 to 2019 were collected, recording the
relevant information from the pathology reports and medical histo-
ries. 13 cases of AME were identified, which corresponded to 24
biopsies.
Results: Patients' age ranged from 20 to 88 years (mean of 59 years).
Most presented with a single tumour on imaging, but in three cases
(23.1%) synchronous lesions were found.
In all the cases a core biopsy and a lumpectomy were performed. In
9 cases (69.2%) the first diagnosis was confirmed. 2 cases (15.4%)
were initially misdiagnosed as juvenile secretory carcinoma and
complex sclerosing lesion. 2 cases first diagnosed as AME finally
appeared to be solid papillary carcinoma and complex
fibroadenoma.
In one single case (7.7%) malignant criteria were detected, as both the
myoepithelial and the epithelial component presented cytologic atypia
and increased mitotic activity.
Conclusion: Due to its highly morphological variation, AME
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of both benign
and malignant breast lesions when a biphasic pattern with extensive
adenosis and a prominent myoepithelial component is observed,
especially in small biopsies.
PS-01-004
Molecular profiling of breast carcinoma in patients of African origin
N. Badr*, O.A. Ajayi, M. Haruna, J. Steven, A. Daramola, N. Asaad,
A. Abdou, A. Shaaban
*Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, The University of
Birmingham, United Kingdom; Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, Menoufia University, Shebin El-Kom, Egypt
Background & objectives: Breast carcinoma represents a major health
problem in Africa. Natural history and molecular profile of the disease
remain poorly understood. We aim to study the molecular profile of
African breast cancer at protein level as compared to published
European data.
Methods: One North African (Egyptian, n=84) and two West African
(Nigerian, n=176) breast cancer cohorts were assembled into tissue mi-
croarrays. Sections were immunohistochemically stained for ER, PR,
Androgen receptor (AR), CK14, ki67, GATA3 and scored by two
pathologists.
Results: 37.2% of Egyptian and 47.7% of Nigerian patients were
younger than 50 years. Grade 3 carcinomas were diagnosed in
22.8% and 31.7% of Egyptian and Nigerian cases respectively.
61% of the Egyptian cases showed luminal and 23.4% triple neg-
ative phenotype. 68.3% of Nigerian patients were triple negative
and only 24.2% of them were of luminal phenotype. AR was
positive in 53.3% and 45.5% of Egyptian and Nigerian cancers
respectively. GATA3 was positive in 79.2% of Egyptian and only
8.6% of Nigerian cases. 21.5% of Egyptian and 25.6% of
Nigerian patients were of the basal phenotype. High Ki67 expres-
sion (>10%) was seen in 46.1% of Egyptian and 12.8% Nigerian
patients.
Conclusion: Breast cancer in Nigerian was predominantly of
triple-negative phenotype compared to Caucasians. GATA3 ex-
pression was remarkably low in the Nigerian cohort. The propor-
tions of luminal and AR positive cancers were low in both co-
horts. Basal subtype was more common in African in comparison
to Caucasian patients. Unexpectedly, Ki67 showed very low ex-
pression in Nigerian patients. Our data highlight differences in the
immunohistochemical profile between the African and European
breast cancer.
PS-01-005
Immunohistochemical expression of tetraspanin 6 (TSPAN6) in
inflammatory breast carcinoma and correlation with tumour
microenvironment
N. Badr*, J. McMurray, I. Danial, N. Asaad, N. Sharma, Y. Horimoto,
F. Hoar, D. Rea, J.L. Jones, J. Steven, R. Merard, P. Lewis, K. Hunter,
F. Berditchevski, A. Shaaban
* Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, The University of
Birmingham, United Kingdom; Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, Menoufia University, Shebin El-Kom, Egypt
Background & objectives: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is an ag-
gressive form of breast cancer. Tumour immune microenvironment and
tetraspanins are thought to play role in tumorigenesis of various malig-
nancies. We aim to correlate Tspan6 expression with clinical parameters
and characteristics of IBC microenvironment.
Methods: 124 IBC core biopsies were immunohistochemically stained
for Tspan6. Multiplex immunofluorescent staining of CD4, CD8, CD68,
CD20, and FOXP3 was performed on 75 cases. Machine learning with
Inform 2.2.1 software was used to analyse images. Clinicopathological
parameters including tumour characteristics, neoadjuvant pathological
response, oestrogen receptor, HER2 status, and overall survival were
collected.
Results: Half of the cases were ER positive and 29.5% were HER2
positive. 53.3% showed high grade tumour morphology.
Pathological complete response was achieved in 20.9% of cases.
Survival ranged from one to 138 months with a median of 32.5
months. 58.9% of cases were Tspan6 positive. Positive Tspan6 ex-
pression correlated with pathological response (p=0.04) and in-
creased intratumoral CD20+ cell infiltration (p=0.02). Stromal
CD20+ cell infiltration correlated with grade I and II (p=0.04) while
high stromal CD68+ cells correlated with grade III tumour (p=0.03).
High intratumoral CD68+ density correlated with no pathological
response (p=0.02). Intratumoral co-localization of CD20+ and
CD68+ cells correlated with positive Tspan6 expression (p=0.04).
Conclusion: The expression of Tspan6 was significantly associated with
increased B-lymphocyte (CD20+) cell counts and increased response
rates. B-lymphocytes were shown to be closer to other immune subsets
in those patients with higher Tspan6 expression. We show for the first
time Tspan6 role in tumour response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
the ability of tumour cells to interact with the immune cells in different
locations of the IBC microenvironment.
PS-01-006
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer – analysis of changes
in breast cancer phenotype, hormonal and HER2 expression
N. Badr*, I. Danial, D. Rea, J. Steven, A. Shaaban
*Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, The University of
Birmingham, United Kingdom; Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, Menoufia University, Shebin El-Kom, Egypt
Background & objectives: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) is be-
ing used for primary breast carcinoma with the aim of down-staging and
facilitating conservative surgery. We assessed the effect of NACT on
pathological characteristics, hormone receptors and HER2 expression
and whether post-treatment re-testing is warranted.
Methods: Patients who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy for primary
and operable invasive breast cancer were selected from the database of a
large UK tertiary referral centre in the period between 2006 and 2019.
Comprehensive clinical, histopathological and follow up data were col-
lected. Statistical analysis of the data was performed using SPSS V.26.
Results: A total of 351 cases were identified. 68.7% patients were
Caucasians and 50.4% were younger than 50 years. No special type
carcinoma was diagnosed in 80.3% and 51.3% were grade 3 tumours.
Pathological complete response was achieved in 23.1% of cases
Virchows Arch
particularly in HER2 positive group (35.8%) (p=0.043). 39.9% of cases
with pre-treatment positive lymph nodes showed complete response.
There was a change in the histological type in 20.1% (p<0.001).
Significant down-grading was seen in 59% (p<0.001). ER status changed
in 3% of cases. PR and HER2 status showed significant changes post-
treatment in 11.2% and 5.9% of the cases respectively, (p<0.001).
Patients with luminal cancer showed better overall survival (p<0.001).
Conclusion: Significant changes in tumour morphology, grade and
marker expression occur following NACT. Pathological complete re-
sponse was achieved in more than fifth of cases especially with HER2
positive status. We recommend o repeat testing of hormone receptors and
HER2 on residual tumours. This can provide alternative treatment options
for those patients.
PS-01-007
Correlation between PD-L1 expression and clinicopathological
characteristics in triple-negative breast cancer patients
N. Basheska*, B. Ognenoska-Jankovska
*Department of Histopathology & Clinical Cytology, University Clinic
of Radiotherapy & Oncology, Ss Cyril and Methodius University Faculty
of Medicine, North Macedonia
Background & objectives: While immunotherapy is emerging as an
effective treatment option for advanced triple-negative breast carcinoma
(TNBC) patients, the clinicopathological significance of PD-L1 expres-
sion in TNBC remains unclear. Our objective was to investigate the
association between PD-L1 expression and clinicopathological character-
istics in TNBC.
Methods: The study group comprised 47 TNBC patients in which PD-L1
status was evaluated by immunohistochemistry with SP142 assay on the
Ventana BenchMark. All PDL1(+) tumour-associated immune cells (IC)
were quantified as % of the tumour area. Tumours were classified as PD-
L1(+)(≥1%) or PD-L1(-)(<1%). The statistical significance of the corre-
lation between PD-L1 status and clinicopathological characteristics was
determined by chi-square test.
Results: PD-L1(+) were 24(51.1%) of the 47 TNBC patients whose
median age at diagnosis was 59 (range, 39-79). 53.5%(23/43) of the
primary and 25%(1/4) of the metastatic TNBC cases were PD-L1(+).
21(87.5%) of the PD-L1(+) TNBC had IC1(≥1 and <5%), 2(8.3%) had
IC2(≥5 and <10%), and 1(4.2%) had IC3(≥10) score. The PD-L1(+)
status significantly associated with high histological grade (G3,
P=0.022), and higher proliferative index (Ki-67>35%, P=0.004), while
the correlation with larger tumour size (>2 cm, P=0.055) did not reach
statistical significance. No significant relationship was found between
PD-L1 status and other variables such as patients` age, postoperative
stage, tumour status, lymph nodal status, tumour type, vascular invasion,
and p53 expression.
Conclusion: Our preliminary results suggest that PD-L1 expression is
associated with several high-risk clinicopathological parameters in
TNBC patients. Further larger studies are warranted to clarify the clinical
relevance of PD-L1 expression in TNBC patients.
PS-01-008
The significance of tumour budding in breast carcinomas and its
relationship with E-cadherin, CD44 and CTLA-4 expressions
T. Bolme Savli*, H. Pasaoglu, A. Muhammedoglu, T.C. Savli
*Health Science University, Bagcilar Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Tumour budding(TB) (isolated <5 tumour
cells at invasive edge)are thought to be effective in prognosis in breast
carcinomas(BC).We aimed to investigate TB in BC using E-cadherin that
provides cell-cell interaction,CD44 as stem cell marker and CTLA-4
receptor as self-tolerance marker.
Methods: 179 BC patients (172 invasive ductal, 7 metaplastic) in-
cluded. For each case, buds were counted at x200 magnification.
90% for E-Cadherin and 10% for CD44 were regarded as positive
staining cut-offs. Staining intensity and percentage of CTLA-4 in
bud and bud microenvironment lymphocytes were evaluated.
Tumours were separated into low (<5) and high bud groups (≥5)
according to median bud number.
Results: High bud tumours were likely to have lymphovascular
(p= 0.001), perineural invasion (p<0.001), higher pT
stage(p=0.025). Tumour bud number is correlated with higher met-
astatic lymph node number (p<0.001) and tumour size (p<0.01).
No significant relation was found between number of buds and
peritumoral lymphocytic reaction, immunohistochemistry based
molecular subtyping, E-cadherin, and CD44 staining (p>0.05 for
all). E-cadherin was significantly lost in buds in regard to corre-
sponding tumour (p<0.001), while CD44 staining pattern is pre-
served (p = 0.76). In high bud tumours, CTLA-4 staining percent-
age of lymphocytes in bud microenvironment was found to be
significantly higher (p =0.026). Every increase in tumour bud num-
ber, decreases overall survival risk 1.07 times (1.01-1.12 95%CI,
p=0.013).
Conclusion: Tumour bud is a poor prognostic factor in breast
carcinomas. Increased CTLA-4 can block antitumour response,
causing an increase in the number of buds. Anti-CTLA-4 immu-
notherapies may be beneficial in patients with high bud detected
breast carcinoma.
PS-01-009
A dynamic macrophagic environment in xanthogranulomatous mas-
titis: a broader clue to xanthomatous diseases pathophysiology and
clinical evolution?
L. Campos Clemente*, M. Marques-Piubelli, M. Balancin, L. Reis,
V.L. Capelozzi
*University of São Paulo, Brazil
Background & objectives: Xanthogranulomatous mastitis is an
inflammatory condition. Usually no immunohistochemistry (IHC)
characterization is performed in routine surgical pathology. In this
study, we explored by IHC the macrophagic polarization status of
M1 and M2 subtypes.
Methods: A retrospective single-institution case retrieve was per-
formed from the archives. IHC was performed for CD68, Arginase
I, Arginase II, NOS-2, and TGF-Beta. Sequential 400x images were
acquired through a microscope coupled camera and quantified
through an optical threshold method in ImageJ for each marker.
Statistics were executed on SPSS 25 (ANOVA and Spearman's test),
p-value less than 0.05 was significant.
Results: We reviewed 11 cases. All patients were female, median
age of 56,5 years (29-72). Seven (63%) cases were radiologically
described as an irregular nodule/asymmetry, while 4 (36%) as
circumscribed nodule. The mean ratio of IHC stain was: Arginase
I (0.80), Arginase II (0.70), NOS-2 (0.85), and TGF-B (0.60). M1
polarization elements (ArgI, II and TGF-B) were correlated
(p=0.005 for ArgI-ArgII and p=0.001 for TGF-B-ArgI/II). Both
M1 and M2 surrogate markers were expressed in all cases, charac-
terizing a bipolar macrophagic activation status. No significant
expressed in all cases, characterizing a bipolar macrophagic activa-
tion status. No significant correlation was evidenced between mac-
rophage status and radiological presentation, necrosis or epithelioid
giant cells.
Conclusion: XM is an uncommon diagnosis and this is the first
attempt at classifying MC in indexed English-language literature.
The bipolar status may translate as the destructive and reparative
dynamic of lesions, evoking a slow-progressing evolution until re-
parative pole is reached.
Virchows Arch
PS-01-010
Synchronous phyllodes tumour and ductal carcinoma in situ of
breast
R. Carp*, C. Suciu, D. Anderco, D. Grujic
*Timisoara County Emergency Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: We present a case of a phyllodes tumour
coexisting with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). Rarely, those two lesions
are part of the same tumour, but in this case they represent two different
neoplasms.
Methods: A 70-year-old female patient presented in our hospital complaining
of a lump within the left breast. The lesion appeared 5 months before and it
didn’t increased in size until lumpectomy was performed. For the histological
examination we used hematoxylin&eosin stained slides and immunohisto-
chemical markers: CK5, ER, Ki67 and p-53.
Results: Histology analysis of the lumpectomy specimen showed phyl-
lodes tumour with a 20% proliferative index and approximately 10
mitoses/10 HP, p-53 positive stromal cells. Following the histopatholog-
ical result, modified radical mastectomy with lymph node dissection
(Madden technique) was effectuated. The mastectomy specimen revealed
multifocal high grade DCIS with comedo and non-comedo pattern; CK5
was expressed focally or in a continuous layer in the myoepithelial cells,
excluding an invasive component, the tumour cells being diffusely and
intensely positive for ER.
Conclusion: The coexistence of phyllodes tumour and ductal carcinoma
in situ as different lesions is a rare occurrence which complicates the
evolution and treatment. As far as we know, this is the first case of
synchronous malignant phyllodes tumour and ductal carcinoma in situ
diagnosed in our department.
PS-01-011
PD-L1 status by SP142 and sp263 immunohistochemistry in
triple-negative breast cancer
A. Cordoba*, M.D.R. Mercado, I. Amat, R. Beloqui, B. Aguiar,
Y. Rodriguez, D. Guerrero-Setas
*Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the
most immunogenic subtype with a higher proportion of tumour-
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). TNBC is very aggressive but the choice
of Immunotherapy based on PD-L1 expression seems to be a promising
therapeutic option for this subtype.
Methods: PD-L1 expression was evaluated with SP142 and SP263
antibody clones in 100 TNBCs included in tissue microarrays. We
assessed the presence of evaluable PD-L1 staining in inflammatory
cells (ICs) in the intratumoral stroma, considering positive if present
in ≥1% of the area occupied by ICs. The presence of TILs were also
evaluated.
Results: The percentage of patients with PD-L1 positive ICs was 46%
and 82% by using SP142 and SP263 antibody, respectively. SP142 is the
approved diagnostic test to identify patients who most likely would ben-
efit for the treatment with PD-L1 inhibitor (atezolizumab).The overall
percentage agreement between both systems was 55%.The SP263 PD-
L1 assay (IC ≥1%) identified a larger number of TNBC than SP142 PD-
L1 assay (IC ≥1%).
Conclusion: All SP142-positive cases were also SP263-positive.SP142
and SP263-positive cases displayed higher number of TILs.Additional
studies about PD-L1 expression with different clones and the identifica-
tion of improved biomarkers to predict clinical benefit are needed.
PS-01-012
Adenoid cystic carcinoma of the breast, 20-year experience
A. Cordoba*, I. Fernandez, M.D.R. Mercado, I. Amat, B. Aguiar,
A. Larrea, R. Beloqui, D. Guerrero
*Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is an
uncommon breast cancer (< 0.1%). ACC is typically triple negative
with good prognosis. Due to its low frequency there's no therapeutic
consensus. We report a series of ACC collected during the last 20
years.
Methods: A retrospective study of all breast ACC cases diagnosed
in Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, between 1998-2018 was per-
formed. Clinical and pathological characteristics were assessed and
compared with current literature. We identified twelve cases of
ACC, from a total of 18,241 patients. Mean age patients years
was 63.5. All of them were clinical stage I-II at diagnosis.
Results: Average tumour size of 23.84 mm. According to
Nottingham grading system, eight cases were grade 1, two grade 2
and two grade 3. When compared with Ro classification three were
grade 1, four grade 2 and five grade 3. One out of 12 cases was ER
positive, the rest of them were triple negative. One case presented a
lymph node micrometastases. None of them presented local recur-
rences (77.5 months mean follow-up), and one developed metasta-
ses 5 months after diagnosis. None of them were BRAF-V600E
immunoreactive.
Conclusion: Prognosis of breast ACC remains uncertain.Seldom
usually ACC shows an indolent course, we report one case with
an aggressive behaviour.Sentinel node biopsy can't be avoided ac-
cording to our study (one micrometastases).Despite of previous re-
ports of BRAF-V600E expression in ACC, all our cases were neg-
ative.
PS-01-013
Predictive factors of pathological complete response to neoadjuvant
therapy in triple-negative breast carcinoma
J. Costa*, N. Coimbra, P. Lopes, L. Antunes, M. Souto Moura, C. Leal
*IPO-Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: Triple-negative breast carcinoma
(TNBC) is a heterogeneous disease, both clinically, pathologically
and molecularly. There is increasing evidence that response to neo-
adjuvant therapy (NAT) may be affected by certain molecular and
morphological features.
Methods: Core-needle biopsies of TNBC patients submitted to
NAT in our institution (2016-2018) were reviewed. Clinico-
pathological features and expression of biomarkers
(Ki67|vimentin|androgen receptor (AR)|SOX-10|p63|PD-L1) were
recorded and correlated with pathological response to NAT (com-
plete response/near complete response with ≤10% residual tumour
(pCR/pNCR) group versus partial response with ≥10% residual
tumour/no evidence of response (pPR/pAOR) group). Statistical sig-
nificance was considered as p<0.05.
Results: Biopsies of 45 patients with a median age of 51 years were
reviewed. 27(60%) presented as stage I-II and 18(40%) as stage III-
IV. 20(44.4%) presented pCR and 6(13.3%) pNCR, after NAT.
35(77.8%) were diagnosed with invasive carcinoma NST,
40(88.9%) had histological grade 3. When comparing the pCR/
pNCR group versus the pPR/pAOR group, p63 was positive in
12(46.2%)vs.4(21.1%), vimentin in 19(73.1%)vs.11(57.9%), SOX-
10 in 20(76.9%)vs.10(52.6%), AR in 13(50%)vs.11(57.9%) and
PD-L1 in 17(65.4%)vs.11(57.9%). The pCR/pNCR group had a
significantly higher proportion of cases with Ki67>50% when com-
paring to the pPR/pAOR group (23(88.5%)vs.6(31.6%),p<0.001),
corresponding to almost 17 times more odds of having pCR/pNCR
in patients with Ki67>50% (OR=16.61(95%CI=[3.55;77.78])).
Conclusion: TNBC express a wide range of myoepithelial markers,
as well as variable expression of AR and PD-L1, with potential
therapeutic applications. High values of Ki67 are significantly asso-
ciated with pCR/pNCR. The size of the cohort may have impacted
our results.
Virchows Arch
PS-01-014
Breast myofibroblastoma – a benign rarity on biopsy
R. Cruz*, I. Alves
*Department of Pathology, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, Instituto
de Histologia e Biologia do Desenvolvimento, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
Background & objectives: Breast myofibroblastoma is a rare be-
nign mesenchymal tumour, with <90 cases described in the litera-
ture. We report a case of myofibroblastoma of the breast. The pur-
pose of this case report was to review the characteristics of this rare
neoplasm.
Methods: A 72-year old woman with a clinical history of HIV
infection under antiretroviral therapy and depressive syndrome,
which during her routine breast ultrasonographic screening exam
was revealed a well-circumscribed hypoechogenic breast nodule
with 8 mm, biopsied under the clinical and radiographic suspicion
of being a fibroadenoma.
Results: Histologically, the nodule was composed by a proliferation
of spindle cells arranged in haphazardly intersecting fascicles, inter-
spersed by bands of collagen. The cells had abundant eosinophilic
cytoplasm with oval nuclei, occasionally with small nucleoli; necro-
sis was absent, mitoses were rare (1/10 HPF), without atypia. With
this morphological aspects, the differential diagnosis should include
nodular fasciitis, fibromatosis, leiomyoma, spindle cell metaplastic
carcinoma and spindle cell lipoma. The neoplastic cells showed
diffuse and strong staining for CD34, BCL2 and oestrogen recep-
tors, focal staining for desmin, smooth muscle actin and h-
caldesmon, and were negative for cytokeratins, β-catenin, S100
and p63. The morphological and immunohistochemical features
were compatible with myofibroblastoma.
Conclusion: Myofibroblastoma of the breast is a benign mesenchymal
tumour composed of fibroblasts and myofibroblasts, which could have a
wide variety of morphological features, frequently similar to spindle cell
lipoma. The molecular study of this entities has revealed the same geno-
type.
PS-01-015
Comparison of the hormone receptor status, HER2 status and Ki67
index between preoperative core needle biopsy and surgical speci-
mens in invasive breast cancer
A. Dobriakov*, K. Opalenov, V. Salaeva, E. Poputchikova, N. Shvets,
M. Antonov, A. Tokmakov, Y. Cherkasova
*Moscow Bakhrushin Brothers Hospital, Russia
Background & objectives: Accurate analysis of hormone receptor sta-
tus, HER2 status and Ki67 of breast core needle biopsy (CNB) tissue is
important for determining neoadjuvant systemic therapies for invasive
breast cancer.
Methods: We aimed to evaluate the concordance rate (CR) of oestrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2, and Ki67 between
CNBs and surgical specimens. The study was conducted with invasive
breast cancer patients who underwent surgery after CNB without preop-
erative systemic therapy at Moscow Bakhrushin brothers Hospital be-
tween December 2013 and December 2019.
Results: ER, PR, HER2, and Ki67 were analysed using immunohisto-
chemistry. ER and PR were evaluated by Allred score (0-8). HER2 was
graded from 0 to +3, and all 2+ cases were tested with in situ hybridiza-
tion. The labelling index of Ki67 was counted manually. The cutoff value
for Ki67 was 20%. In total, 239 patients were evaluated. The median age
was 65 (range, 29 to 88 years).The CRs of ER, PR, HER2, and Ki67 were
97.1% (kappa, 0.805; p<.001), 89.5% (kappa, 0.589; p<.001), 97.4%
(kappa, 0.81; p<.001), and 79.1% (kappa, 0.555; p<.001), respectively.
Conclusion: CNB was reasonably accurate for determining ER, PR,
HER2 and Ki67.
PS-01-016
Clinical features and pathological findings in a series of MRI-guided
breast biopsies
A. Doyle*, A. Maguire, M. Courtney, S. O'Keefe
*St James's Hospital, Ireland
Background & objectives: Breast magnetic resonance imaging is used
for high-risk screening and in evaluation of extent of disease in newly
diagnosed breast cancer patients. We wanted to correlate the pathology
results of MRI-guided biopsies to MRI findings and patient clinical his-
tory characteristics.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed clinical history, MRI features and
pathology outcomes of MRI-guided vacuum needle biopsies performed
at our institution between September 2015 and July 2019.
Results: 45 patients were biopsied. 48% had newly diagnosed breast
cancer, the strongest predictor of malignancy (malignancy rate 56%).
46% of biopsies were from women on surveillance (malignancy rate
16.7%) and 6% in women with conventional imaging and suspicious
symptoms (malignancy rate 33%). 18 (40%) lesions were malignant: 12
invasive carcinomas; 6 DCIS. Non-mass like enhancement was the most
frequent descriptor of both malignant (8/19, 42.1%) and benign lesions
(11/26, 42.3%).
Conclusion: MRI detects malignancies undetected by other imaging mo-
dalities but also detects a wide variety of benign lesions and MRI features
of both can be similar necessitating biopsy for histological evaluation.
There should be a low threshold for proceeding to MRI-guided biopsy
particularly in women with newly diagnosed breast cancer.
PS-01-017
Two cases of intramammary metastases from cutaneous melanoma
D. Dzhenkov*, L. Petkova, N. Yanilova, P. Ghenev
*Medical University Varna, Bulgaria
Background & objectives: We present here two cases of histologically
diagnosed metastatic small cell achromatic malignant melanoma. Each of
these cases presented a challenge for the pathologist in a different way.
Methods: The first case is of a 49-year-old woman with subsequent sectoral
resections of both breasts (2017 and 2019), histologic findings interpreted as
triple negative mammary carcinoma. Later on, pulmonary lesions appeared
and transthoracic thick-needle biopsy was performed. Histology and immu-
nohistochemistry revealed small cell achromatic malignant melanoma.
Meanwhile, regressive melanoma of the skin over the sternum was suspected.
Results: So, previous biopsies were revised and the diagnosis of achro-
matic malignant melanoma, producing bilateral mammary and pulmo-
nary metastases was confirmed. Finally, BRAF V600 mutation was prov-
en in the breast metastasis. The second case is a 45-year-old woman, with
a malignant melanoma of the breast skin 13 years ago. Because of the
staging (pT1, Clark 1) treatment with Calgevax was performed only. In
2020 intramammary lesion was detected, clinically suspected for mam-
mary fibroadenoma. The lesion was surgically removed and the histology
and immunophenotyping were consistent of a small cell malignant mel-
anoma - a metastasis of the primary skin tumour.
Conclusion: Achromatic melanoma, “the great imitator” has always been
a challenge for pathologists. In the first case metastases were interpreted
as a primary tumour, and in the second – late metastases appeared.
Careful interpretation of histological findings with correlation of clinical
data is of pivotal importance.
PS-01-018
High HER2 signals and HER2/CEP17 ratio tumours achieve better
responses in breast cancer
I.J. Expósito Afonso*, T. del Pino Sedeño, I. González Villa, J.F. Loro
Ferrer, J.J. Cabrera Galván
*Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Spain
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: HER2 molecular subtype is one of those
which achieves most pCR rates in breast cancer. The objective
of this study is to evaluate the relationship between HER2 signals
and pCR and HER2/CEP17 ratio and response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.
Methods: 37 HER2-overexpressing early breast cancer patients who had
received neoadjuvant trastuzumab were included in this study. We per-
formed in situ hybridization and measured HER2 and chromosome 17
centromere (CEP17) copy numbers. HER2/CEP17 ratio was calculated.
Analysis between that and response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy
assessed by RCB were examined.
Results: In trastuzumab treated patients, 83,8% were HER2-Luminal and
16,2% HER2 hormone receptor (HR) negative. 46% of patients were
Nottingham grade 2 and 54% were grade 3. From 37 patients, 29,7%
achieved pCR. 43,5% of patients with high-level amplification
(HER2/CEP17 ratio ≥6) obtained pCR compared to 2,7% of patients
with low-level amplification (HER2/CEP17 <6 ratio) (p=0.030).
Regarding to HER2 number of signals, 27% of patients with HER2>6
signals per nuclei obtained pCR compared to 2,7% of patients with
HER2<6 signals per nuclei (p = 0.04852).
Conclusion: An HER2 copy number>6 in the pretherapeutic tumour
biopsy is associated with a significantly higher pCR rate. Also
HER2/CEP17 ratio>6 is related to pCR in HER2+ tumours treated with
neoadjuvant trastuzumab.
PS-01-019
Columnar cell lesion in breast tissue biopsies: an often underreported
diagnosis
U. Ezenkwa*, A. Rahman, A. Olusanya, R. Anyanwu, G. Ogun
*University College Hospital Ibadan, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Columnar cell lesion (CLL) of the breast
belongs to the spectrum of proliferative breast disease with premalignant
potential, although it is often underreported. This study investigated the
frequency of CCL in non-malignant breast biopsies in a single general
pathology practice.
Methods: H&E stained slides of non-malignant breast biopsies received
over a four-year period were reviewed for the presence of columnar cell
features (columnar cell change with/without atypia, columnar cell hyper-
plasia with/without atypia, and flat epithelial atypia) following
established protocol. Information on patient age at diagnosis was obtained
from the surgical pathology records. Data generated was presented as
percentages.
Results: Columnar cell lesions were present in 22 (7.7%) of 286 cases
reviewed. Of these, 18 (81.8%) were columnar cell change, whilst 2
(9.1%) each were columnar cell hyperplasia and flat epithelial atypia.
The median age was 39 years (18-64years) with modal age at 5th decade
of life. Eleven (50%) cases occurred in individuals who were aged 40
years and below. Flat epithelial atypia was seen at 4th and 5th decades.
Conclusion: This study suggests that CCL occur in about 7% of benign
proliferative breast lesions in our practice and are predominantly non-
atypical. The observed median age of occurrence suggests a frequent
occurrence in the young. This might influence the earlier occurrence of
breast cancers in our population.
PS-01-020
Interaction between the expression of mTOR and PD-L1 signalling
pathway in triple-negative breast cancer
J.P. Flores Gutierrez*, F. Lopez Lopez, S. Treviño Garza, N. Vilches
Cisneros, O. Barboza Quintana, R. Garza Guajardo, M. Molina Ayala
*Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Mexico
Background & objectives: Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) and
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) are pathways expressed on
tumour cells that interact with the immune system function. We investi-
gated the relationship between their expression in Triple-Negative Breast
Cancer (TNBC) based on clinicopathological variables.
Methods: 50 consecutive TNBC cases were collected, the histopath-
ological report and paraffin block were obtained from each case. The
expression of mTOR and PD-L1 on tumour cells was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry using their respective antibodies. The results
were correlated with the age, clinical stage, metastatic lymph nodes
and tumour size.
Results: The results from the immunohistochemistry show a positivity for
mTOR in 38 cases (76%) and for PD-L1 in 11 cases (22%), a joint expres-
sion of 21.05% was demonstrated. PD-L1 and mTOR expression did not
correlate with clinical stage, age, metastatic lymph nodes or tumour size,
however the analysis of the number of metastatic lymph nodes shows a
slight significant tendency in tumour cells when both markers were shown
positive (p=.068). The results of PD-L1 and mTOR appears to have a
correlation with the lymph nodes status based on the TNM staging system.
Conclusion: mTOR pathway has been poorly studied in TNBC and
seems to favour PD-L1 expression, the results suggest new scenarios with
drugs that inhibit both pathways. More clinical response-related TNBC
cases are needed to assess the correlation between mTOR and PD-L1.
PS-01-021
A case of tall cell carcinoma with reversed polarity of the breast with
a recent history of gastric carcinoma
M. Gündüz*, S. Önder, B. Yeni, A. Bayram, M. Tükenmez, E. Yavuz
*Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Tall cell carcinoma with reversed polarity
(TCCwRP) is a rare breast tumour. Despite the triple negative profile, it
has an indolent behaviour. However, cases with lymph node and bone
metastasis were published in literature.
Methods: The patient was a 62-year-old female who complained of multiple
lumps in both breasts and had a history of surgery and chemotherapy for
gastric carcinoma, 12 months before mastectomy. Grossly, there were two
tumours, measured 14 and 13-milimeters, which were partly and totally well-
demarcated respectively. Both had brown and white cut surfaces.
Results: Microscopically, both tumours were composed of nests
surrounded by artefactual empty space and separated by dense fibrous
stroma. Both exhibited no sign of chemotherapy-induced regression. The
tumour cells were columnar to cuboidal with abundant eosinophilic cyto-
plasm and oval, bland-looking nuclei which were located at the apical rather
than basal pole of the cells. Foci of ductal carcinoma in situ were also found.
Lymphovascular invasion and necrosis were absent. One of 22 axillary
lymph nodes showed metastasis. The neoplastic cells were positive for
GATA-3 and mammaglobin and negative for PAX-8 and TTF-1, excluding
metastasis of thyroid carcinoma. They displayed diffuse expression of
cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 5/6 and 14, and were negative
Conclusion: for oestrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and HER2.
Ki67 proliferation rates were 18% and 15%, respectively. EMA
highlighted the apical membranes of neoplastic cells and pointed out
the apical positioning of nuclei, therefore was helpful to designate the
term reversed polarity. TCCwRP is a rare breast neoplasm, may mimic
thyroid carcinoma metastasis. Hence, pathologists should keep it in mind
and be aware of its morphological and immunohistochemical features.
PS-01-022
High molecular weight cytokeratin expression in ductal carcinoma in
situ of the breast: a diagnostic pitfall
T. Heaton*, A. Elhag, R. Mihai, E. Rakha, S. Bakhiet
*Hull University Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: In breast pathology, the distinction be-
tween intraductal epithelial hyperplasia of usual type (HUT) and
Virchows Arch
neoplastic lesions is challenging and often requires immunohisto-
chemistry for confirmation. However, deviations from well-known
patterns of expression exist in routine practice making such diagno-
ses challenging.
Methods: We present two cases of mammary Paget’s disease (PD) that
underwent central excision of the nipple-areolar complex.
Histology confirmed PD with underlying intraductal epithelial
proliferations difficult to differentiate between HUT and interme-
diate grade DCIS. Basal cytokeratins (CK5/6 and CK14) and
oestrogen receptor (ER) immunohistochemical staining were per-
formed to differentiate between the two entities, as well as HER2.
Results: Immunohistochemistry showed mosaic positivity of both basal
cytokeratins akin to HUT. ER immunohistochemistry was heterogeneous
in one case and negative in the other. However, the diagnosis of DCIS
was confirmed in both cases by strong HER2 positivity and by extension
of the proliferating cells into the epidermis as PD. Further morphological
evaluation revealed nuclear hyperchromasia and occasional prominent
nucleoli, features not seen in HUT.
Conclusion: These cases demonstrate the importance of cellular
morphology in diagnosing intermediate and high-grade DCIS and
the potential diagnostic pitfall of relying on immunohistochemis-
try alone. The mosaic pattern of expression for basal CKs may
represent basal-like differentiation of the neoplastic cells and this
pattern of immunostaining should be interpreted in the appropriate
context.
PS-01-023
Comparison of the pam50 intrinsic subtypes with immunohistochem-
istry in breast cancer patients
E. Honrado*, S. Sáez Álvarez, A. López González, B.I. Távara Silva,
L. Prieto Domínguez, J. Martínez Martínez, M.A. López Flores,
A. García Palomo
*Complejo Asistencial Universitario de León, Spain
Background & objectives: PAM50 classifies breast tumours, predicts
risk of recurrence and evaluate the need of adjuvant chemotherapy.
Clinical subtyping, however, is based on immunohistochemistry (IHC)
biomarkers. We aimed to analyse the discordance between immu-
nohistochemistry based surrogate subtyping and PAM50 intrinsic
subtypes.
Methods: PAM50 intrinsic subtypes were determined according to 50
cancer genes expression in a total of 74 breast tumours, oestrogen recep-
tor positive, HER-2 negative, T<=30 mm, pN0, pN1mi or pN1. Subtype
Luminal A was defined by IHQ as Ki67 < 14% and Luminal B as Ki67
>=14%. Clinicopathological parameters were collected, including grade
and stage in all tumours.
Results: A 33% of tumours, showed discrepancy between IHC
subtype and PAM50 intrinsic subtype in our study. Out of 41
Luminal B tumours subtype performed by IHC, PAM50
reclassified 7 (17%) as Luminal A and low risk of recurrence,
indicating that no adjuvant chemotherapy was needed. On the other
hand, 7 (20.5%) Luminal A tumours classified by IHQ, changed to
high risk by PAM50, being able to benefit from chemotherapy.
The tumours reclassified by PAM 50 as low risk of recurrence
were grade 1 and stage IA (71.4% Vs 17.7%, p=0.036) while the
tumours reclassified as high risk, were grade 2 and stage IIA
(60.0% Vs.47.8% p=0.048).
Conclusion: A substantial portion of tumours showed discrepancy
between IHC subtype and PAM50 subtype in our study. Gene
expression-based classification shifted some tumours categorized
as low risk by IHQ criteria to higher-risk subtypes and vice versa.
Current IHC-based classification could mislead the treatment and
result in poor outcome in 20% of breast cancers. Subtypes from
PAM50 seem better able to predict tumours with poorer outcomes
compared with using IHC markers.
PS-01-024
A rare case of tumour-to-tumour metastasis from invasive lobular
breast carcinoma to ovarian cystadenoma
R. Ibrahim*, Z. Elalfy
*Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University,
Egypt
Background & objectives: Tumour-to-tumour metastasis is an unusual
phenomenon. The most frequently reported donor tumours are lung and
breast carcinomas, whereas meningiomas represent the most common
recipients. We hereby describe a rare case of metastasis from invasive
lobular breast carcinoma to ovarian cystadenoma.
Methods: A 60-year-old female presenting with a 9 cm ovarian mass and
a right breast lesion. Ultrasonography report of the breast lesion revealed
features suggestive of malignant mass (BIRADS 4b). Fine needle aspira-
tion of the breast tumour yielded malignant smear. Patient underwent
right modified radical mastectomy, right oophorectomy and infracolic
omentectomy.
Results: Histopathologic evaluation of the breast mass revealed invasive
lobular carcinoma, positive for oestrogen, progesterone receptors and
Her2-neu negative. The ovarian mass exhibited features of benign ovarian
cystadenoma harbouring a distinct malignant component, histologically
similar to invasive lobular carcinoma of the breast. Immunohistochemical
assessment of the aforementioned invasive component using GCDFP15
and E-cadhrin confirmed the breast origin of the tumour and the lobular
carcinoma diagnosis. Other markers were used to exclude metastasis from
different sites such as Napsin-A and CDX-2
Conclusion: This is the first reported case of invasive lobular breast
carcinoma metastasis to ovarian cystadenoma. The possibility of
tumour-to-tumour metastasis rises if any tumour exhibits dimorphic his-
tology, which is diagnostically challenging. This indicates poor outcome,
disease dissemination and aggressiveness.
PS-01-025
Audit of histopathology reports for mastectomy specimens in a
tertiary hospital, south west Nigeria
V. Iyawe*, O. Qassid, K. Adeleke, A. Agboola
*Olabisi Onabanjo University and Teaching Hospital, Sagamu, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Mastectomy remains the mainstay of the
treatment of breast cancer in Nigeria. Pathologic diagnosis and reporting
is one of the basic available resources. It is therefore critical that reports
contain key diagnostic and prognostic indicators guide the management
of patients.
Methods: Copies of histopathology reports were retrieved from the
histopathology department for all mastectomies reported between
January 2016 and December 2019. Completeness for reporting of
the mastectomies was examined for 7 key items: tumour size, tu-
mour type, histological grade, margins of excision, vessel invasion,
nodal status and TNM stage. The items were indicated as present
or absent from the report.
Results: The histological type had the highest frequency of 100%, while
the lymph node status and tumour size were reported in 92.3% and 82.1%
respectively. The least frequently reported items were the TNM staging
and the vessel invasion at 23.1% and 25.6% respectively. Only 2.6% of
reports had all the variables reported. In addition, histological grade was
reported in 76.9% while statements about margins of excision were
contained in 71.8% of the report.
Conclusion: There is currently no local guidelines to adhere to in the
reporting of mastectomy specimens, therefore having discussed the re-
sults with the local team, the royal college of pathology datasets have
been adopted for use. Synoptic reporting will allow for more consistent
and complete reports. A similar study will need to be repeated after the
synoptic reporting is introduced to evaluate its effectiveness in improving
the quality of pathology reports.
Virchows Arch
PS-01-026
Neuroendocrine neoplasms of the breast showing peculiar forms of
recurrence and/or metastasis
T. Kawasaki*, A. Sapino, M. Ishida, T. Tada, H. Matsuya, H. Nakagomi,
T. Oyama, C. Muramatsu, J. Ichikawa, M. Saitoh, T. Kondo, R. Katoh,
T. Sugai, Y. Nakamura, K. Kaira
*Saitama Medical University, Japan
Background & objectives: This is the first report of a mammary neuro-
endocrine tumour (NET) showing a relapse related to needle implantation
(Case 1). Furthermore, we describe the first case of a NET resulting in a
huge tumour embolization in the breast (Case 2).
Methods: [Case 1] A 60-year-old Japanese woman presented with skin
retraction in the right breast. Ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy
(CNB) of the irregular, hypoechoic breast mass yielded a pathological
carcinoma diagnosis. [Case 2] A 42-year-old Thai woman presented with
a palpable mass in the left breast. Ultrasonography revealed a sharply-
marginated, hypoechoic tumour, with a cranially-extending lumen-like
structure filled with solid tumour.
Results: [Case 1] A poorly-delimited tumour (12x10mm) was composed
of a trabecular growth of polygonal cells with a highly-vascular stroma.
We noted small subcutaneous scars with disseminated neoplastic cell
clusters, causally-related to the preoperative CNB. Neoplastic cells were
immuno-positive for chromogranin A and NCAM. She had become
aware of a mass at the skin puncture site for the previous CNB 47 months
after surgery. We pathologically confirmed the recurrent NET. [Case 2]
The lesion was histopathologically diagnosed as a mammary NET, mea-
suring 17x15mm, with extensive intravenous spread. She postoperatively
received adjuvant chemotherapy. However, bone metastases were identi-
fied 36 months after surgery and liver metastases were detected 47
months after surgery.
Conclusion: [Case 1] To minimize the clinical impact of tumour dis-
placement, we need to consider preventive radiation therapy for needle
pathways, their excision and/or use of vacuum-assisted biopsy devices
(Virchow Archiv, 2015). [Case 2] Our patient, who had a relatively-small,
well-differentiated NET with no nodal involvement and a low MIB-1
index (6.7%), followed a rather aggressive clinical course with distant
metastases, probably associated with the extraordinary intra-mammary
tumour emboli (Histopathology, 2014).
Funding: Grants‐in‐Aid for Scientific Research (No. 16K08654 & No.
16H00668) from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology National Hospital Organization Grant (H29‐
NHO‐01)
PS-01-027
Immune microenviroment in triple negative breast carcinoma
H. Kaya*, H. Sahin Ozkan
*Department of Pathology, Marmara University School of Medicine,
Istanbul, Turkey
Background & objectives: Immune microenviroment has been
researched in many cancer types including breast carcinoma, especially
the triple negative subtype. Our aim is to evalaute immune
microenviroment in triple negative breast carcinoma and to understand
its relationship with prognosis.
Methods: Fifty-one cases of triple negative breast carcinoma with no
history of neoadjuvant therapy, whose resection specimens were exam-
ined in our department between 2012 and 2017, were retrospectively
evaluated using CD8 (C8/144B, monoclonal, mouse, Dako), FOXP3
(EP340, monoclonal, rabbit, Epitomics), PDL1 (SP142, monoclonal, rab-
bit, Ventana) antibodies.
Results: Median age was 49. Majority of the cases (54.9%) were diag-
nosed as invasive breast carcinoma, no special type; while 35.3% were
lymphocyte-predominant breast carcinoma and 9.8% were metaplastic
carcinoma. All cases were histological grade 3. Nine (17.6%) cases ended
with exitus. Five-year overall survival rate was 75.6%.
Immunexpressions of all three antibodies were found to be correlated
with each other (p<0.01). Lymphovasculary invasion and axillary lymph
node metastasis were associated with lower FOXP3 expression (p<0.05).
Higher expression of PDL1 was found in lymphocyte-predominant breast
carcinoma cases (p<0.01). PDL1 expression was related to prolonged
overall survival (p<0.01), whereas neither CD8 nor FOXP3 was associ-
ated with survival.
Conclusion: Tumour immune microenviroment is an important prognos-
tic parameter in triple negative breast carcinoma. Further investigation is
needed to better understand the prognostic role of immune
microenviroment and to manage medical therapy.
PS-01-028
Expression of WNT, Hedgehog, NOTCH, PI3K, NF-kB, PTEN sig-
nalling molecules in HER-2 overexpressed and triple negative breast
cancer with positive and negative ALDH1A1 expression in cancer
cells
N. Kazantseva*, A. Brilliant, Y. Brilliant, S. Sazonov
*Sverdlovsk Regional Oncological Center, Russia
Background & objectives: We investigated the expression of NF-kB,
PI3K, PTEN molecules, as well as WNT, Hedgehog, NOTCH in cells of
triple negative and HER-2 overexpressed breast cancer with high and low
content of cancer stem cells (positive and negative ALDH1A1
expression).
Methods: We studied 110 cases of invasive breast cancer. To determine
stem cells in tumour population, the presence of ALDH1A1 protein in
cancer cells was investigated. In all cases, expression of oestrogen, pro-
gesterone receptors, HER-2 and Ki-67 was studied by immunohisto-
chemistry to determine a subtype of breast cancer. The expression of
molecules PI3K, NF-kB, PTEN, WNT, Notch, Hedgehog was also
explored.
Results: All cases, that were investigated for the expression of
ALDH1A1, were divided into two groups - with a low content of cancer
stem cells (cases with expression of ALDH1A1 0 and 1+), and with a
high content of cancer stem cells (cases with expression ALDH1A1 2+
and 3+). The results are shown in the Table.
Conclusion: Activation of Notch and WNT signalling pathways was more
common for cells of HER-2 overexpressed than Triple-negative subtype
(p<0.05) in the group with high level of ALDH1A1. Expression of
Hedgehog signalling molecule was only positive in the group of low level
of ALDH1A1 expression, it was higher in cancer cells of Triple negative
subtype than HER-2 overexpressed subtype (p<0,05). PTEN signalling was
found more often for Triple negative cases (p<0.05).
PS-01-029
The value of templates to histopathology trainees in cut-up of breast
specimens
M. Kelleher*, A. Hayward, N. Mungalsingh
*High Wycombe Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Junior histopathology trainees often find cut-
up daunting. Cut-up is often protocol driven, and especially for similar
specimens like breast, it suits template usage. Wycombe ST1 to ST4
histopathology trainees were not using cut-up templates. They reported
a lack of confidence in cut-up of mastectomies and wide local excisions
NF-kB
PI3K
PTEN
NOTCH
WNT
Hedgehog
Low level
ALDH1A1
Triple negative
100%
98%
20%
27%
33%
14%
HER-2 overexpressed
100%
100%
11%
30%
29%
7%
High level
ALDH1A1
Triple negative
100%
100%
33%
11%
11%
0%
HER-2 overexpressed
100%
100%
9%
36%
36%
0%
Virchows Arch
(WLEs) and problems with dictation due to lost recordings. 88% of the
trainees felt templates would be helpful.
This project aimed to assess whether cut-up templates help trainee confi-
dence and dictation problems.
Methods: The authors wrote templates for breast WLE and mastectomy cut-
up using Standard Operating Procedures and Royal College of Pathologists
datasets. They were reviewed by departmental consultants, trainees and the
lead biomedical scientist (BMS) and trialled in cut-up for 6 weeks. The BMS
completed the printed template as requested by the trainee performing cut-up.
Trainees answered pre and post-trial questionnaires.
Results: All trainees used both templates during the trial. 75% found them
very helpful. For 39% it helped as a memory aide, 33% it made dictation
easier and 11% it helped with a lost dictation. Trainee confidence improved
from 37% to 75% post-trial. For 75% it was quicker or time equivalent to
complete the case. 100% would continue using the templates. 75% would like
templates for other specimens, especially renal.
Conclusion: Wycombe Hospital histopathology trainees found templates
for breast WLE and mastectomy specimens valuable and helped with
dictation problems. Trainee confidence improved. Most wanted further
templates for other specimens and a template for renal specimens is cur-
rently being trialled with trainees.
PS-01-030
Fibulin-2 expression associates with stromal elastosis and is inversely
related to vascular invasion in breast cancer
T.A. Klingen*, Y. Chen, H. Aas, E. Wik, L. Akslen
*Centre for Cancer Biomarkers CCBIO, University of Bergen,
Department of Pathology, Vestfold Hospital Trust, Norway
Background & objectives: Stromal elastosis relates to good prognosis in
breast cancer, and fibulin-2 helps to stabilize elastic fibres in basement
membranes. We explored perivascular fibulin-2 expression in relation to
elastosis content, vascular invasion, molecular subtypes, tumour detec-
tion mode, and breast cancer survival.
Methods: We performed a population based retrospective study of inva-
sive breast cancers from the Norwegian Breast Screening Program,
Vestfold County (2004-2009) including 200 screen-detected and 82 in-
terval cancers. Perivascular fibulin-2 staining was semi-quantitatively
graded and dichotomized using immunohistochemistry. Elastosis content
was graded and dichotomized as high and low expression, whereas lym-
phatic (LVI) and blood vessel invasion (BVI) were recorded with
immunohistochemistry.
Results: High perivascular fibulin-2 expression was strongly re-
lated to stromal elastosis (p<0.001), and inversely associated with
BVI and LVI (p<0.001 for both). High perivascular fibulin-2 was
associated with luminal breast cancer subgroups (p<0.001) and
inversely with interval cancers compared with screen-detected tu-
mours (p<0.001). By univariate analysis, low perivascular fibulin-
2 was associated with reduced recurrence-free survival (p=0.002)
and disease specific survival (p=0.019) compared to high
perivascular fibulin-2 expression.
Conclusion: Presence of low perivascular fibulin-2 expression was
strongly related to vascular invasion, low stromal elastosis, non-luminal
breast cancer subtypes, interval presentation, and adverse prognosis.
PS-01-032
A new method based on internal extractive electrospray ionization
analysis of breast cancer samples for detection metastases in
sentional lymph nodes
V. Kometova*, V. Frankevich, V. Chagovets, N. Starodubtseva,
M. Rodionova, V. Rodionov
*National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynaecology and
Perinatology named after Academician V.I. Kulakov of Ministry of
Healthcare of Russia, Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: Breast cancer is accompanied by metastases
in lymph nodes in about 30% of cases. Pathological methods is used to
verify metastatic lymph nodes. Faster and specific methods are required
for the identification of metastatic lymph nodes directly during the
surgery.
Methods: New method based on internal extractive electrospray
ionization (iEESI) combined with high-resolution mass spectrom-
etry analysis was developed. It allows to perform rapid (less than
in 5 minutes) molecular profiling of the breast cancer tissue and
the sentional lymph nodes tissue with regard to presence of met-
astatic lesion. Distinctive feature of proposed method allows di-
rect extraction of whole-volume tissue samples rather than their
surface.
Results: Rapid diagnosis of the metastatic lesion of the signal
lymph nodes upon invasive breast cancer on the biopsy tissue sam-
ples was performed in 50 patients. The signals of differential me-
tabolites associated with the occurrence of lymphatic lesion were
identified using high resolution tandem MS analysis and reference
LC-MS analysis. Bioinformatics approaches were developed in or-
der to study the complex relationships between the identified me-
tabolites. It makes it possible to substantially increase the sensitiv-
ity, accuracy and reproducibility of analysis compared with existing
analogues. New analytical advancements were implemented which
allow the sequential ionization of lipids, metabolites and proteins
from the same single biopsy tissue sample.
Conclusion: A fast method, which allows to avoid injury of lymph nodes,
has been developed for the verifying breast cancer metastases in sentional
lymph nodes based on direct mass spectrometric analysis. A mechanism
for metastasis to sentional lymph nodes in breast cancer was proposed.
The reported study was supported by RFBR grant, research project
No.19-515-55021
PS-01-033
Methylation of genes CDO1 and MEST in primary ER-positive
breast cancer with metastases to lymph nodes
V. Kometova*, A. Krasnyi, A. Sadekova, S. Kurevlev, M. Rodionova,
V. Rodionov
*National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynaecology and
Perinatology named after Academician V.I. Kulakov of Ministry of
Healthcare of Russia, Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: Aberrant methylation of genes is associated
with the development of malignant tumours; however, there is insuffi-
cient data on the relationship between methylation and metastasis to re-
gional lymph nodes.
Methods: 116 patients with breast cancer were enrolled into the study. Of
these, 61cases had Luminal A subtype and 49 cases Luminal B subtype
by immunohistochemistry. To assess the level of methylation MS-HRM
(Methylation Sensitive High-Resolution Melting) method was used on
breast cancer samples taken immediately after surgery. The results were
confirmed by pyrosequencing.
Results: The aim of this work was to access the relationship between the
level of genes CDO1 and MEST methylation in the primary breast tu-
mour and metastasis to lymph nodes. It was found that in the tumours of
LumB subtype there was a statistically significant increase in the level of
gene CDO1 methylation and a decrease in the level of gene MEST meth-
ylation. In the tumours of LumA subtype there was an increase in the
level of both CDO1 and MEST genes methylation. The differences were
close to statistical significance (for Mest gene p=0.12, for CDO1 gene
p=0.09).
Conclusion: The results obtained expand our knowledge about pathogenesis
of breast cancer development. Along with other molecular events associated
with the primary tumour they can predict metastasis to lymph nodes.
The reported study was supported by governmental grant №НИОКТР
АААА-А18-118053190016-7
Virchows Arch
PS-01-034
Antibody clone-dependent thyroid transcription factor-1 expression
in a primary breast carcinoma
L. Korsa*, A. Lukac, L. Kovacevic, M. Prutki, Z. Marusic
*Clinical Department of Pathology and Cytology, University Hospital
Centre Zagreb, Croatia
Background & objectives: Thyroid Transcription Factor-1 (TTF-1) can
be a useful marker for lung and thyroid primaries. However, TTF-1 ex-
pression has been reported in up to 2.5% of breast carcinomas. There are
two main commercially available TTF-1 antibody clones: 8G7G3/1 and
SPT24.
Methods: A 60-year-old woman presented with a large tumour involving
the entire right breast together with multiple pulmonary and mediastinal
tumour masses. Due to the aggressive course, the working diagnosis was
a lung primary producing breast metastasis. Breast and lung core needle
biopsies both revealed a TTF-1, ER and GATA3 positive adenocarcino-
ma, while napsin A, PR and HER2 were negative.
Results: Endocrine therapy was administered, leading to significant re-
duction in the size and number of pulmonary and mediastinal metastases.
Two years later, a sanitary mastectomy was performed. The breast tumour
was positive for ER and GATA3, and negative for napsin A and PR. This
time, TTF-1 was performed with both commercially available clones,
showing a positive reaction with SPT24 and a negative reaction using
the 8G7G3/1 clone.
Conclusion: Breast metastases from extramammary malignancies are
rare (0.2-2% of all tumours), with lung being one of the most frequent
primary sites. TTF-1 clone selection can have clinical significance in the
workup of a potential metastatic lung adenocarcinoma, especially in set-
tings with limited amount of tumour tissue. In the setting of breast vs lung
primary, an antibody panel including napsin A and GATA3 should be
used, as occasional ER-positive lung carcinomas as well as TTF-1 posi-
tive breast carcinomas have been documented.
PS-01-035
The CD8 / FOXP3 ratio of tumour infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
predicts the effect of adjuvant radiotherapy in breast carcinomas; an
immunohistochemical analysis in the SweBCG91RT trial
A. Kovács*, A. Stenmark Tullberg, H. Puttonen, M. Sjöström,
E. Holmberg, D. Lundstedt, F. Killander, E. Nimméus, P. Karlsson
*Department of Clinical Pathology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden
Background & objectives: The aim was to analyse the predictive role of
the CD8/FOXP3 ratio of tumour infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) on effect
on radiotherapy (RT) in the SweBCG91RT trial with the primary end-
point of breast cancer recurrence (BCR) within 10 years.
Methods: Patients with stage I and IIA breast cancer were randomised to
breast-conserving surgery and postoperative radiotherapy (n=444) or surgery
only (n=483) between 1991-1997. Median follow-up was 15.2 years.
Primary tumours were scored for TILs on whole slides. CD8 and FOXP3
were scored on tissue microarrays using immunohistochemistry and the ab-
solute stromal area occupied by the respective cell type was calculated.
Results: Among unirradiated patients, a high absolute CD8:FOXP3 bal-
ance (CD8High/FOXP3Low) was associated with a decreased risk of
BCR (HR 0.40, CI 95% 0.21-0.78, p=0.005) compared to the
CD8Low/FOXP3Low group (HR 1.0). RT produced a significant risk
reduction of BCR among CD8Low/FOXP3Low tumours (HR 0.49,
CI95% 0.35-0.70, p<0.001), but not among tumours with CD8High/
FOXP3Low (HR 1.60, CI 95% 0.71-3.6, p=0.26). The interaction be-
tween RT and immophenotype was significant for any recurrence
(p=0.024).
Conclusion: As the values (CD8High/CD8Low and FOXP3High/
FOXP3Low) were combined to create groups reflecting the absolute
balance between CD8+ T cells and FOXP3+ T regulatory cells, it showed
that a favourable immune response (CD8High/FOXP3Low) was protec-
tive for breast cancer recurrence, moreover it was predictive of less ben-
efit from adjuvant radiotherapy. These results may have an impact on
therapy choice regarding postoperative radiotherapy in early breast
cancer.
PS-01-036
Evaluation of angiogenesis as a marker of progression of invasive
carcinoma of no special type
D. Kushch*, M. Mnikhovich, T. Bezuglova, N. Maluygin, V. Balayants,
A. Romanov, P. Bliganov, G. Ushanov
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Activation of angiogenesis is considered a
key step in the invasion and metastatic spread of malignant tumours.
Methods: We studied 86 cases of invasive carcinoma of no special type
(IC NST). The material was studied using light microscopy using IHC.
We used antibodies CD 34, CD 31, VEGF, MMP2. Cases were divided
into 3 groups depending on the degree of differentiation - G1 21 cases
(24.4%), G2 22 cases (25.5%) and G3 43 (50%).
Results: The endothelium of atypical capillaries was unevenly stained
with CD34, marked expression of VEGF and negative expression of
CD31 were noted. The dependence of the degree of vascularization on
the degree of differentiation of carcinoma was established. In low-grade
carcinomas, the number of microvessels in the field of view increased. A
significant difference in vascular density was detected in groups of tu-
mours with moderate and low differentiation (p = 0.019). The largest
difference in the number of vessels was determined when comparing
neoplasias in groups with the degree of differentiation G1 and G3 (p =
0.011).
Conclusion: Establishing the number and density of tumour microvessels
can help establish the degree of differentiation and determine the prog-
nosis of the course of non-specific breast carcinoma, and continue to be
used as an additional criterion in the classification of non-specific breast
carcinomas.
PS-01-037
1% ER positive is not any positive cells
V. Kushnarev*, P. Krivorotko, A. Kudaybergenova, A. Artemyeva
*N.N Petrov Cancer Research Center, Russia
Background & objectives: ASCO/CAP recommends that ER status
should be considered positive if 1% or more of tumour cells demonstrate
positive nuclear staining. We tested the validity of digital image analysis
algorithms for the assessment low-positive ER staining in breast
carcinoma.
Methods: Eighteen ER+/HER2- invasive carcinomas of NST with 1-
10% expression by visual assessment were scanned (Pannoramic 250,
3D Histech) and assessed by digital image analysis (DIA) algorithms
Qupath and QuantCenter (3D Histech) of whole slides images (WSI).
The degree of inter observer variation was determined by using Kappa
statistics (less than 1% and 1%⩾) and intraclass correlation coefficient
(ICC).
Results: In 40% DIA showed ER negative compared to visual positive
assessment in same cases. Agreement between DIA and VA was weak
(weighted kappa =0,46). ICC between DIA and VA was weak
(ICC=0,58).
Conclusion: One percent as cutoff is based on the premise that patients
derive benefit from endocrine therapy even with minimal receptor activ-
ity. False positive results lead to the fact that patients do not receive the
necessary therapy as with triple negative carcinomas. Digital image anal-
ysis algorithms need to consider in group of low ER expression. It can be
an instrument to decreases inter raters variability.
Virchows Arch
PS-01-038
Characterisation of PD-L1 expression in triple negative breast
carcinoma (TNBC) in a comprehensive cancer centre in Mexico City
C. Lara Torres*, J. Reyes Carrasco, J.F. Martínez Herrera, G. Molinar
Flores, R. Gerson
*Surgical and Molecular Pathology Department, The American British
Cowdray Medical Center, Mexico
Background & objectives: Breast cancer represents one of the
main causes of cancer-related death. TNBC has few therapeutic
options, recently the combination of chemotherapy plus immuno-
therapy (nab-paclitaxel+atezolizumab) showing advantage for PD-
L1 positive patients. The use of PD-L1 immunohistochemistry as
a biomarker shows numerous
Methods: difficulties making hard to extrapolate its analytical per-
formance across populations and tumour histologies. We present the
first study in Mexico to evaluate PD-L1 expression in TNBC using
the SP142Ventana companion diagnostic-assay We reviewed the
registries of the Pathology Department for TNBC. Inclusion criteria
were tissue availability and medical information. IHC was per-
formed and evaluated
Results: using the PD-L1 SP142 Ventana-Assay criteria for TNBC.
Fifty cases were identified fulfilling inclusion criteria from 2009-
2019. Average age at diagnosis was 54.9 years (+/- 15.9 yo). The
tissue available for study was: primary breast tumour (84%), metas-
tasis (14%) and 2%(NA). Fifty-two percent of our cases were PD-
L1 positive, (IC1-22%, IC2-10%, IC3-20%). Different histologies
were represented(NOS(30%), medullary-like(8%), apocrine(6%),
metaplastic( 4%), and pleomorphic lobular (2%), with a trend for
PD-L1 positivity in higher grade tumours(84% of G3 PD-L1+ vs
64% G2 PDL-1+). We found no difference on age at presentation,
smoking history, or association with previous treatment on PD-
L1(positive/negative) groups.
Conclusion: We found a slight increase of PD-L1 positivity com-
pared to the IMPASSION130 study(52%vs41%), although sample
bias is a potential issue due to the number of cases studied. TNBC is
a group with different immunogenicity profiles and histologic char-
acteristics
PS-01-039
Expression of melanoma antigen - as in peripheral blood circulating
tumour cells (CTCs) of breast cancer patients
Y. Liu*, X. Fan
*The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University, China
Background & objectives: The purpose of our study is to detect the
expression of MAGE-A genes, including MAGE-A1,-A2,-A3,-
A4and-A6, in peripheral blood circulating tumour cells of breast
cancer patients.
Methods: Multiplex nested RT-PCR was used to detect the level of
MAGE-A mRNA in peripheral blood circulating tumour cells of
106 breast cancer patients and 30 health donors. Restriction endo-
nuclease treatment was used to detect the expression of each mem-
ber of MAGE-A family, including MAGE-A1,-A2,-A3,-A4 and -A6
genes.
Results: The expression rate of MAGE-A gene was 40% (43/106) in
breast cancer peripheral blood. The frequency of MAGE-A expression
in breast cancer peripheral blood was the following order:
A2>A3>A4>A1>A6.
Conclusion: MAGE-A gene expression in peripheral blood of
breast cancer may be as a important maker for detection of breast
cancer CTCs. The expression of MAGE-A1, -A2 and -A4 may be
correlated with prognosis of breast cancer, may be an important
marker for monitoring the treatment and prognosis of breast
cancer.
PS-01-040
Correlation between HER2/NEU protein overexpression on immu-
nohistochemistry and flourescence in situ hybridisation in breast
carcinoma: problems in a developing country
N. Mamoon*, Z. Yaqoob, G. Mudassir
*Shifa International Hospital, Islamabad, Pakistan
Background & objectives: The aim of this study was to correlate the
FISH results with the IHC results and also document the problems we
faced in performing FISH in our particular scenario as a developing
country with limited and nonuniform medical facilities.
Methods: It was a retrospective study conducted at Shifa
International Hospital spanning a period of four years from 1st
Jan 2015 to 31st December 2019. A total of 451 cases of breast
carcinoma who underwent florescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
were analysed for correlation between Her2/Neu over expression on
IHC and its amplification on FISH. Reasons for unacceptable results
were documented.
Results: Out of 451 cases submitted for HER2/Neu testing by FISH from
2015 to 2019, acceptable results were obtained in 391 (86.7%) cases.
Among 348 HER2/Neu 2+ cases, 97 cases (27.9%) showed HER2/Neu
gene amplification on FISH and 251 cases (72.1%) were negative. Out of
39 cases (10.1%) which were scored 3+ on IHC, 36 cases (92.3%) were
amplified and 3 cases (7.7%) were negative. All 4 HER2/Neu 1+ cases
(1.0%) were non- amplified. Overall 63 cases (13.9%) did not yield ac-
ceptable results; 20 due to fixation artifacts (31.7%), 15 due to scanty
tumour (23.8%), 15 due to eosin dye application (23.8%) and 13 due to
crushing artifacts (20.63%).
Conclusion: HER2/Neu gene amplification was seen in 27.9% and
92.3% cases scored as 2+ and 3+ on IHC respectively. In order to get
adequate results on FISH, optimal fixation, adequate amount of tumour
without crushing and dye application are important pre-requisites.
PS-01-041
Cytotoxicity potential of tetragunola laeviceps bee propolis on breast
cancer cells
R. Masadah*, D. Ikram, S. Ekawardhani, R. Eka Putra
*Hasanuddin University Makassar, Indonesia
Background & objectives: The resistance of breast cancer chemothera-
py triggered the researcher to study herbals alternative therapy that have
been known to have anti tumour potential. Propolis has been recognised
to have more than 300 chemical compounds, has pro-apoptosis effect and
selective to target cancer cell, thus could be a candidate for therapy of
breast cancer. Tetragunola laeviceps is a stingless bee that produce prop-
olis, it was found a lot in Southeast Asia include Indonesia.
This study was aimed to analyse the potential of Tetragunola laeviceps
propolis as a pro-apoptosis agent to MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines.
Methods: Propolis Tetragunola laeviceps was extracted by ethanol ex-
traction (EEP extract). MCF-7 breast cancer cells, treated by EEP extract,
supplemented by FBS10%, penicillin-streptomycin 1%, amphotericin
1% in CO2 5% 370C. Cytotoxic effect of EEP to MCF-7 and Vero cells
was examined by MTT test 48 hours after treatment. Absorbance was
measured by microplate reader (450nm) to get the viability presentation
of cells.
Results: There was a decrease of MCF-7 cells viability and an increase of
apoptosis cells after 48 hours of propolis treatment in 200ppm concen-
tration (IC50 79,45 ppm). One-way Anova test showed a significant
difference of mean percentage of MCF- 7 viability (< 0,0001) than con-
trol cells group.
Conclusion: Propolis Tetragunola laeviceps and its bioactive compound
has a selective pro-apoptosis effect to dMCF-7 breast cancer cell lines.
This was an early results of alternative therapy for breast cancer, and
needs more investigations in the future
Key words: Propolis, Tetragunola laeviceps, breast cancer.
Virchows Arch
PS-01-043
High tissue inhibitor of matrix-metalloproteinase 2 expression
correlates with poor prognosis in breast cancer
T. Heyman, C. Joseph, M. Craze, A. Green, C. Nolan, O. Rueda,
E. Provenzano, E. Rakha, I.O. Ellis, A. Mukherjee*
*University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: TIMP2, tissue inhibitor of matrix-
metalloproteinase 2, inhibits the matrix-metalloproteinase, MMP2, but
may activate pro-MMP2. Hence its correlation with prognosis in breast
cancer (BC) is contradictory. This study investigated the correlations of
TIMP2 expression in BC with clinicopathological variables.
Methods: Differential expression analysis of TIMP2 was assessed in the
lymphovascular invasion (LVI) positive versus negative cohorts in the
METABRIC BC dataset. Immunohistochemical analysis for TIMP2
(1:50 dilution) expression was conducted on BC tissue microarrays
(n=1048) and clinicopathological correlations were assessed, including
VI and expression of MMPs, 2, 14 and 15.
Results: TIMP2 was associated with positive LVI in the METABRIC
cohort (p= 0.002). On immunohistochemistry, significant positive corre-
lations were found between TIMP2 protein expression and higher grade
(p=0.019), including its components nuclear pleomorphism (p=0.004),
mitotic count (p=0.000087), LVI (p=0.014) and Nottingham prognostic
Index (p=0.024). TIMP2 expression showed a significant correlation with
negative ER status (0.014) and Triple negative status (p =0.008). TIMP2
expression also showed a positive correlation with cytoplasmic MMP2,
MMP14 and MMP15 (p<0.0001) expression. A significant difference in
10-year BC specific survival (BCSS) was seen between high and low
TIMP2 expression (p= 0.018).
Conclusion: Overall, the study indicates that higher TIMP2 expression
correlates with poor prognostic factors in BC including high grade, neg-
ative ER status, poor NPI and LVI. These effects may be explained
through its activation of pro-MMPs, reflected by positive associations
with MMP expression. Further studies of the ratio between MMPs and
TIMP2 may help delineate its functional role in BC.
Funding: Academy of Medical Sciences and Pathological Society of
Great Britain and Ireland (CDF).
PS-01-044
Low FOXA1 expression in aggressive breast cancer associates with
ER negativity, BRCA1 germline mutations, and gene expression
programs for cellular plasticity and immune cell responses
A.K. Myrmel Sæle*, A.A. Svanøe, C. Askeland, G. Knutsvik,
B. Davidsen, T. Aas, K. Collett, I.M. Stefansson, L. Akslen, E. Wik
*Centre for Cancer Biomarkers CCBIO, Department of Clinical
Medicine, Section for Pathology, University of Bergen, Norway,
Department of Pathology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
Norway
Background & objectives: FOXA1 is linked to oestrogen receptor sig-
nalling, suggested as a factor upstream of the ER-complex, and proposed
to play a role in immune responses. Here, we assessed FOXA1-associated
phenotypes in breast cancer (BC) and explored related gene expression
patterns.
Methods: We analysed three BC cohorts. Cohort-I: Hordaland County;
<70 years; n=612. Immunohistochemical staining of FOXA1 on tissue
microarrays of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded BC tissue. Cohort-II-
III: Global mRNA data; METABRIC (n=997) and TCGA (n=505; in-
cluding BRCA1 germline mutations). Analyses of genes differentially
expressed between FOXA1 high and low cases and gene set enrichment
analyses (GSEA) were performed on global transcriptomic data.
Results: Low FOXA1 associated with higher histologic grade and tumour
cell proliferation (Ki67), triple- negative phenotype, and reduced survival
(P≤0.008). ESR1, GATA3, AGR2, AGR3, and AR were downregulated in
FOXA1-low tumours. Further, FOXA1-low cases were enriched for
signatures of low ER-signalling, stemness, progenitor cells, EMT, and
BRCA1 mutations. Triple FOXA1/GATA3/ER-negative status strongly
predicted a basal-like phenotype (OR≥198; P<0.001) and associated with
higher expression of PD1, PD-L1, and CTLA4 (P<0.001).
Conclusion: Low FOXA1 is a marker of aggressive BC and associates
with BRCA1 germline positive cases. Associated transcriptional pro-
grams reflect increased cellular plasticity and stemness. A triple
FOXA1/GATA3/ER negative phenotype strongly predicts a basal-like
phenotype and relates to immune cell responses.
PS-01-045
Development of a novel clinical trial immunohistochemistry (IHC)
assay using Ki-67, clone MIB-1, monoclonal antibody for Dako
Omnis
G. Nielsen*, Y. Gu, A. Weaver, G. Gegg, S. Tabuena-Frolli,
A.M. Gruver, M. Cajaiba, C. Gottstein
*Agilent Technologies, USA
Background & objectives: Lack of standardized Ki-67 assay perfor-
mance remains an impairment to global clinical research. Therefore, a
novel IHC prototype assay and scoring algorithm were developed for
the Dako Omnis platform to detect Ki-67 expression in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded human breast carcinoma.
Methods: The Ki-67 IHC prototype assay is based on EnVision FLEX
technology using Ki-67, clone MIB-1, primary antibody validated for
Dako Omnis. A scoring guide was developed and optimized for high
inter-observer precision. The assay has been analytically validated for
sensitivity, specificity, precision (inter-day, inter-instrument, inter-lot
and repeatability: intra-instrument/intra-rack/intra-day) and robustness.
Results: Ki-67 IHC detected a relevant range of Ki-67 expression in 148
breast carcinoma specimens, including resection and core needle biopsy
specimens. All precision and robustness studies achieved 95% confidence
interval lower bounds (LBCI) of >90% for negative percent (NPA), pos-
itive percent (PPA) and overall (OA) agreement. Specifically, observer
reproducibility results demonstrated high agreement with 95% LBCI
values for NPA/PPA/OA of: 97.2%/91.7%/95.4% for inter-observer
and 98.3%/94.4%/96.8% for intra-observer.
Conclusion: Our studies demonstrate that the standardized Dako Ki-67
IHC assay for Dako Omnis is sensitive, specific, precise, and robust for
reproducible detection of Ki-67 expression in breast carcinoma. The pro-
totype assay is the first Ki-67 IHC in vitro diagnostic developed on the
Dako Omnis platform for global use in support of patients participating in
the monarchE study (NCT03155997).
PS-01-046
Identification of potential markers of aggressive behaviour in young
women with breast cancer through transcriptomic analysis
F.J. Obiajulu*, M. Allen, A. Anthony, E. Gadaleta, J. Gomm, C. Chalala,
I. Goulding, S. Duffy, J.L. Jones
*Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, United
Kingdom
Background & objectives: Breast cancer in young women (BCYW) is
usually aggressive with devastating consequences. Evidence suggests
that BCYW has a distinct biological behaviour from those of older wom-
en. The study aim is to identify biological markers of aggressive behav-
iour of BCYW.
Methods: The young (≤40 years) and age independent reduction
mammoplasty samples in the GEO datasets (GSE29431, GSE42568,
GSE61304) were analysed with GEO2R. Survival analyses were per-
formed with R survival and prodlim packages on TCGA cohorts.
Statistical significance was defined as p ≤0.05 or False Discovery Rate
(FDR) ≤0.05. The identified genes were validated by qPCR, Western
blotting and Immunohistochemistry.
Virchows Arch
Results: High median expression of Wntless (WLS) (HR=1.927, p0.05),
low median expression of Kinesin Family KIF4A (HR=0.246, p0.006),
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol Specific Phospholipase D1 (GPLD1)
(HR=0.294, p0.004) and Structural Maintenance of Chromosome
(SMC4) (HR=0.331, p0.04) were associated with overall poor survival.
Further analysis showed that SMC4 and KIF4A mRNAs were upregulated
in cancer vs reduction mammoplasty, while WLS and GPLD1 mRNAs
were downregulated. qPCR and western blot revealed higher expression of
SMC4 and KIF4A and low expression of WLS in breast cancer cell lines vs
normal breast epithelial cells. SMC4 immunostaining showed high expres-
sion in young female breast cancer, low expression within this cancer
cohort correlates with Luminal B, TNBC and higher grade.
Conclusion: SMC4, KIF4A, WLS and GPLD1 could be important bio-
logical markers of the aggressive behaviour of BCYW through unknown
pathways. This provides a basis to further investigate the functional sig-
nificance of these pathways in a model system.
Funding: Commonwealth Scholarship Commission UK The British
Division of the International Academy of Pathology (BDIAP)
PS-01-049
Micropapillary variant of mucinous breast carcinoma: a report of
two cases
T. Pikivaca*, L. Korsa, Z. Marusic
*Clinical Department of Pathology and Cytology, University Hospital
Centre Zagreb, Croatia
Background & objectives: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease
composed of various histological types that differ in prognosis and re-
sponse to therapy. Micropapillary variant of mucinous carcinoma
(MPMC) is a subtype with more aggressive behaviour than classic, pure
mucinous breast carcinoma.
Methods: We present two cases of MPMC in female patients of identical
age (51-year-olds). The first patient underwent neoadjuvant therapy for
an extensive right breast tumour, with partial response and extensive
residual disease within the lymph nodes. The second patient underwent
tumourectomy for a recurrence of mucinous carcinoma, 10 years follow-
ing right mastectomy with adjuvant endocrine therapy.
Results: Both cases were characterized by micropapillary clusters of
tumour cells in abundant extracellular mucin, with specific 'inside out'
positive staining for EMA and E-cadherin. The first case presented with
extensive lymphovascular invasion. Both tumours were positive for ER
and PR, with an intense basolateral membranous staining for HER2 in the
first case. Micropapillary carcinoma and micropapillary mucinous carci-
noma are the only breast tumours in which basolateral HER2 staining is
considered positive.
Conclusion: Greater awareness and recognition of the micropapillary variant
of mucinous breast carcinoma has significant prognostic and therapeutic im-
plications by avoiding underestimation of malignant potential for individuals
whose tumours may have been diagnosed as classic mucinous carcinoma.
PS-01-051
Clinical impact of microscopic margin status on invasive breast can-
cer treated with breast-conserving surgery plus adjuvant radiation
therapy at a specialised cancer hospital in Portugal
L.P. Queiroz Rei*, K. Pereira, C. Abrantes, R. Félix, D. Roda,
S. Gonçalves, P. Alves, P. Figueiredo
*Pathology Department, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Coimbra,
Portugal
Background & objectives: Most early-stage breast cancers (BC) are
treated conservatively with breast-conserving surgery plus adjuvant radi-
ation therapy (BCSART). We evaluate the clinical impact of microscopic
margin status in a sample of conservatively treated invasive breast cancer
(IBC) patients, compared to worldwide meta-analyses.
Methods: Unicentric, retrospective, descriptive study including all female
invasive breast cancer (IBC) patients who concluded BCSART treatment in
2012 at a specialized cancer hospital in Portugal. Microscopic margins, as
evaluated and measured by histopathology, were considered positive with
“ink on tumour”, and clinical data was collected from follow-up records.
Analysis was performed with IBM’s SPSS software.
Results: 92 patients were included, 3 with bilateral disease. Of the 95
surgical specimens, 8 had positive margins – 6 for IBC and 2 for ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) – and, of these 8, all but one were submitted to
further re-excision or mastectomy surgery, prior to adjuvant radiotherapy.
After a mean follow-up time of 84 months, wider margins did not prove
protective against relapse, nor otherwise beneficial.
Conclusion: Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer worldwide in
women. For IBC, treatment outcomes with BCSART are comparable to
mastectomy, and the current consensus is to consider “no ink on tumour” as
a negative margin. In patients programmed to undergo adjuvant radiation
therapy, wider surgical margins are not clinically justified. Our results tend
to concur with this consensus, but longer follow-up time may be of value.
PS-01-054
Deployment of a multi-tissue AI-based quality control system in
routine clinical workflow
I. Krasnitsky, I. Yazbin, I. Gross, G. Sebag, J. Sandbank*
*Ibex Medical Analytics, Institute of Pathology, Maccabi Healthcare
Services, Israel
Background & objectives: Maccabi is a large healthcare provider with
centralized pathology institute handling >140,000 accessions/ year, (700
PCNBs and 6850 breast biopsies). IBEX Medical Analytics develops
Galen Prostate (CE-IVD) & Breast AI-based diagnostic solutions that
detect cancer in prostate & breast biopsies.
Methods: The underlying algorithms utilize state-of-the-art Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning techniques and were trained on
many thousands of image samples, obtained from slides from multiple labs
and geographies, and manually annotated by senior pathologists. Galen
Prostate CE-IVD detects and grades prostate core needle biopsies, and
Galen Breast detects invasive and in-situ carcinomas in breast biopsies.
Results: Both algorithms were assessed for performance on independent
data from various labs and demonstrated high specificity and sensitivity,
including identification of cancers missed by pathologists. Maccabi has
deployed both Galen Prostate and Galen Breast as a QC system on all
new prostate and breast biopsies entering the lab. The system raises an
alert whenever it encounters a discrepancy between the automated anal-
ysis and the original diagnosis, prompting a second human review. In this
talk, we will discuss the workflow in the lab and the performance of the
algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, these are the first AI-based
prostate and breast diagnostic systems running in a live clinical setting.
Conclusion: The importance of accurate diagnosis in prostate and breast
biopsies, together with the growing shortage of pathologists, makes a QC
system like this extremely useful for diagnostic accuracy and safety.
PS-01-055
Crosstalk between programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression,
Ki-67 labelling index and tumour infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in
invasive breast cancer: a tertiary care centre study
R. Sharma*, P. Elhence, M. Rao, S. Khera, R. Chaudhary, P. Pareek,
J.R. Vishnoi
*Junior Resident, Department of Pathology, AIIMS Jodhpur, India
Background & objectives: Breast cancer is leading cancer among Indian
females (25.8 per 100,000 women) and accounts for approximately one
fourth of cases worldwide. Present study aimed to ascertain and correlate
PD-L1 expression with Ki-67 labelling index and TILs in Invasive breast
carcinoma
Virchows Arch
Methods: It was a two year (2016-2018), descriptive observational study
including all the diagnosed cases of Invasive breast carcinoma. All Core
biopsy, wedge biopsy, lumpectomy and MRM specimens were examined.
PD-L1 expression was assessed in tumour and stromal TILs and its corre-
lation was done with hormone receptor status and with Ki-67 labelling
index. Appropriate statistical analysis was done using SPSS 23.0v.
Results: Total 114 cases were included in present study, of which
33.33% (38) showed PD-L1+ expression in tumour cells and 47.37%
(54) showed PD-L1+ expression in stromal TILs. Higher Ki-67 labelling
index was observed in 96 cases and low in 18 cases. 49 cases were ER-
and 65 were ER+. Of these 49 cases, 22 cases showed PD-L1+ expression
and from 65 cases, 49 showed PD-L1+ expression.
Present study highlighted a statistically significant relationship between
expression of PD-L1 in tumour cells and stromal TILs. Significant con-
cordance between Ki-67 labelling index and PD-L1 expression was noted
in tumour cells and stromal TILs. An inverse correlation was noted be-
tween PD-L1 expression and ER.
Conclusion: PD-L1 expression in tumour and TILs with high Ki-67
index may have role in targeted chemotherapy. Also, inverse relationship
with ER suggests scope for targeted therapy in ER- Invasive breast cancer
cases. However, further research is required in this area.
PS-01-057
Clinical value of PD-L1 (SP142) expression on immune cells (IC) in
small biopsy specimens (SBS) from untreated triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC) patients - a single institution retrospective study
O. Stanowska*, W. Olszewski, J. Owczarek, J. Barańska, M. Prochorec-
Sobieszek
*Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology,
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Poland
Background & objectives: This study analyses the prognostic signifi-
cance of PD-L1 positivity in SBS from untreated TNBC patients, as
illustrated by complete pathological response(cPR) and aims at targeting
patients for PD-L1 screening by correlating its expression with tumour
infiltrating lymphocytes(TILs) and MIB1 rates.
Methods: We evaluated TILs by HE staining, assessed PD-L1(SP142 assay)
expression on IC and MIB1 on tumour cells by immunohistochemistry in 99
FFPE SBS of untreated TNBC patients diagnosed in 2018-2019. Cases with
≥1%PD-L1 expression were considered positive. MIB1 and TILs were eval-
uated according to the WHO guidelines(table 1-2). The association of PD-L1
status with TILs,MIB1 and cPR was statistically tested.
Results: 29(67,4%) of 43 so far tested cases were PD-L1-positive. PD-L1
positivity was correlated with TILs>30% and MIB1index>70%. PD-L1
positivity was seen in 75% (6/8) cases with pCR.
*IC > tumour cells
Conclusion: Our study confirmed that PD-L1–positive IC have a positive
predictive impact in TNBC cases without PD-L1 therapy and reflect a
trend for better pathologic response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Therefore, PD-L1 could act as a promising marker to predict neoadjuvant
chemotherapy response in TNBC patients. TNBC patients with
MIB1index>70% and/or TILs>30% should be screened for PD-L1 ex-
pression by immunohistochemistry as they may benefit from hybrid neo-
adjuvant treatment with PD-L1 inhibitor.
PS-01-058
Imaging-pathology correlation: concordance analysis between
sonomammographic findings BI-RADS 4 and histopathologic result
in Filipino women in a single institution tertiary university hospital
R. T. Yolo*, P.A.M. P. Paulino, D.P. delos Angeles, R.C. B. Cabalfin,
E.M. N. Bañares, M. B. Geslani, L.G. L. Lim
*Dept of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery; Dept of Medical
Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Dept of Anatomic Pathology, The
University of Santo Tomas Hospital, Manila, Philippines
Background & objectives: Objectives: To correlate between the
sonomammographic findings and pathologic results of BI-RADS 4 le-
sions; compare imaging-pathologic concordance between BI-RADS 4A,
4B and 4C according to age group; Assess concordance of BI-RADS 4
category in palpable and non-palpable breast lesions.
Methods: A retrospective study in Filipino women had mammogram
and/or breast ultrasound with BI-RADS 4 score underwent biopsy or
surgery. Patients were classified as: BI-RADS 4 subcategory, histology,
age groups, and if lesions were palpable or not. Mammogram and breast
ultrasound were performed using mediolateral oblique and craniocaudal
projections. Comparison was done using Chi-square or Fisher’s exact
test.
Results: A total of 203 BI-RADS 4 patients were included with mean age
of 51.18 years old, out of which more than half were ≥50 years old.
Majority were categorized as BI-RADS 4A (n=77). The results indicate
similar likelihood rates of malignancy at 69%, 38% and 9% for BI-RADS
4C, BI-RADS 4B, and BI-RADS 4A, respectively, compared to the com-
puted likelihood rate by the ACR which is validated and followed
worldwide.
Conclusion: Malignancy rate of BIR-ADS 4 lesions were comparable to
the likelihood of malignancy worldwide. There is positive correlation
between BI-RADS 4 malignancy rates supporting the current recommen-
dation for BI-RADS 4 category regardless of subcategory to acquire
histologic diagnosis through biopsy.
PS-01-061
Intratumoral heterogeneity in pure ductal carcinoma in situ of the
breast does not affect the representativity of a biopsy
M.R. Van Bockstal*, C. Stanciu-Pop, M. Berlière, F. Duhoux,
M. Nollevaux, C. Galant
*University Clinics Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium
Background & objectives: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the
breast, a non-obligate precursor of invasive breast cancer, is a heteroge-
neous disease in terms of morphology and genetics. Active surveillance
for low risk DCIS is currently explored as a valid treatment option in
randomised clinical trial setting. The current study investigated the impact
of morphological intra-tumoral heterogeneity in a series of 51 large DCIS
lesions by comparing biopsies with their subsequent resection specimen.
Methods: Nuclear atypia, DCIS architecture, necrosis, calcifications,
stromal architecture and stromal inflammation were assessed in one bi-
opsy slide and three slides from the resection specimen. For each histo-
pathological feature, a histoscore was determined and compared between
the biopsy and the resection. Statistical analysis comprised Friedman
Table1
Pd-L1(+)
Pd-L1(-)
MIB1 <40%
4
6
MIB1 40-70%
7
7
MIB1 >70%
18
1
Table2
Pd-L1(+)
Pd-L1(-)
TILs <5%
Negative
2
3
TILs 5-30%
Low
13
10
TILs 35-50%
High
9
1
TILs >50%
Predominant*
5
0
Virchows Arch
tests, Wilcoxon tests with Bonferroni corrections and Spearman’s
correlations.
Results: Despite substantial morphological heterogeneity in up to 50% of
DCIS, the assessment of each histopathological feature in the biopsy
correlated significantly with the assessment of the histopathological fea-
tures in the resection specimen, with the exception of necrosis.
Morphological heterogeneity was not associated with patient age, DCIS
size or type of surgery, except for a weak association (p=0,048) between
heterogeneous stromal inflammation and smaller DCIS size.
Conclusion: Histopathological features assessed at the biopsy level cor-
related well with the surgical specimen, except for necrosis. Overall mor-
phological intratumoral heterogeneity has limited impact. However, cau-
tion is warranted for the assessment of comedonecrosis in biopsies, as its
presence can be underestimated.
Funding: Postdoctoral clinical mandate (2019-089) of the Foundation
Against Cancer (Brussels, Belgium).
PS-01-062
The diverse molecular landscape of breast cancers with heteroge-
neous HER2 gene amplification
M.R. Van Bockstal*, M.C. Agahozo, R. van Marion, P.N. Atmodimedjo,
H.F. Sleddens, W. Dinjens, L.L. Visser, E. Lips, J. Wesseling, C.H. van
Deurzen
*University Clinics Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium
Background & objectives: Heterogeneous HER2 amplification is noted in
5-41% of breast carcinomas, depending upon its definition. Intra-tumour
heterogeneity drives cancer progression and may enable circumventing
HER2-targeted therapies, thereby causing primary and acquired resistance.
Here, we performed an in-depth molecular analysis of admixed HER2-
positive and HER2-negative breast cancer components.
Methods: We micro-dissected formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded breast
cancer tissue of ten patients. Each tumour contained at least one HER2-
negative and at least one HER2-positive component. Targeted next-
generation sequencing was performed using a 53-gene panel. Somatic
mutations were analysed. Copy number variations were investigated,
based on the available coverage data.
Results: The following (likely) pathogenic molecular anomalies
were identified in 26 genes: 3 splice site alterations, 32 missense
variants, 7 nonsense variants, 9 insertions and 12 deletions. Copy
number gains were identified in the CCND1, EGFR, ERBB2,
FGFR1, MYC and PVT1 genes. Overall, most somatic mutations
and copy number variations were heterogeneously distributed within
the different HER2-negative and HER2-positive tumour components.
The HER2-negative cancer components did not harbour common
alternative drivers.
Conclusion: Breast cancers with heterogeneous HER2 gene amplifica-
tion display several molecular anomalies that might act as alternative or
collaborative drivers of carcinogenesis. However, these genetic aberra-
tions display a heterogeneous distribution as well, and likely contain a
large number of ‘passenger’ mutations.
Funding: Dr. Mieke Van Bockstal is supported by the Belgian not-for-
profit organisation 'Foundation Against Cancer' (Grant 2019-089) and by
the Mathilde Horlait-Dapsens Foundation (Brussels, Belgium).
PS-01-063
HER2-positive apocrine carcinoma of the breast: a population-based
analysis of incidence, treatment, and outcome
F. Skenderi, M.A.M. Alahmad, Y.M. Alahmad, I.H.E. Abdelhafez,
Z. Gatalica, S. Vranic*
*College of Medicine, QU Health, Qatar University, Qatar
Background & objectives: Most of the published clinical studies on
apocrine carcinoma of the breast focused on the triple-negative variant.
In the current study, we investigated clinical, pathological and outcome
characteristics of HER2-positive apocrine carcinomas of the breast.
Methods: We searched Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) program database for HER2+ apocrine carcinomas of the breast
and compared HER2+ enriched (ER-/HER2+) (n=167) and Luminal B
(ER+/HER2+) (n=85) molecular subtypes. The categorical variables
were compared by Chi-squared test. The mortality difference was evalu-
ated using the Kaplan-Meier, Cox regression, and competing risk regres-
sion analyses.
Results: 75% of the patients with HER2+ apocrine carcinoma presented
at an early stage (stages I/II). The average survival by the end of the study
period was 31 months [range, 12.2-48.8 months]. Both HER2+ enriched
and luminal B subgroups showed excellent short-term survival (~90%).
After performing mortality-specific risk analysis, only early-stage pa-
tients that were treated by surgery were found to have better survival.
Other clinicopathological parameters did not reach statistical significance.
Conclusion: Our study indicates that the majority of the patients with
HER2+ apocrine carcinoma presented at early stages (I or II). Only the
tumour stage and surgery exhibited a significant impact on overall sur-
vival. HER2+ apocrine carcinoma patients had an excellent short-term
(first 2-3 years) survival, which is similar to the clinical behaviour of
luminal breast carcinomas (NOS). Further studies are required to explore
the long-term outcome among the HER2+ apocrine carcinomas.
PS-01-064
External quality assessment for PD-L1 testing in triple negative
breast cancer
N. Warrick*, S. Khalid, A. Dodson, S. Parry
*UK NEQAS ICC & ISH, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors are first line treat-
ment options for patients with advanced disease in several tumour types.
They are effective in a subset of patients with advanced triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC). Immunocytochemistry (ICC) assays predict which
patients may benefit.
Methods: Unstained composite slides consisting of tonsil, and both
TNBC tissues and cell lines of known PD-L1 expression levels were
distributed. Participants stained these for PD-L1 by the same method used
in their clinical testing; following return, slides were centrally assessed by
a panel of experts. Methodology details and participants own interpreta-
tion scores for the TNBC cases were also collected.
Results: The UK National External Quality Assessment Scheme for
Immunocytochemistry and In-Situ Hybridisation (UK NEQAS ICC &
ISH) assesses the technical quality of laboratory testing. Here we present
results from the first round of a pilot EQA for PD-L1 staining in TNBC.
The data will be examined for associations between methodological pa-
rameters and test accuracy. In particular, results produced by the recom-
mended companion assay (SP142, Roche Tissue Diagnostics) will be
compared with non-assay results. Participants own interpretive scores
will be examined and compared with those of the expert panel.
Conclusion: This is the first report presenting EQA results for PD-L1
testing in TNBC.
Funding: A generous educational grant was provided by Roche Tissue
Diagnostics, 1910 E. Innovation Park Dr., Tucson, Arizona 85755.
PS-01-065
Significance of S100A8-positive immune cells in relation to other
immune cell subset infiltration in pre-invasive and invasive breast
cancer
J.W. Woo*, Y.R. Chung, M. Kim, C. Hye Yeon, S.Y. Park
*SNUBH, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC)
suppresses anti-tumour immunity. The purpose of study is to evaluate
Virchows Arch
expression of S100A8, one of well-known MDSC markers, and see its
relation to other factors including immune cell (IC) subsets in pre-
invasive and invasive breast cancers.
Methods: A total of 765 cases of breast ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
and invasive carcinoma were included in this study. S100A8 expression
in tumour cells (TCs) and ICs, and infiltration of other IC subsets (CD4+,
CD8+, and FOXP3+ T cells and PD-L1+ ICs) were detected by immu-
nohistochemistry using tissue microarrays.
Results: S100A8 expression in either TCs or ICs did not differ in
frequency between DCIS and invasive carcinoma. In both DCIS
and invasive carcinoma, high-S100A8 in TCs and ICs were com-
monly associated with aggressive pathologic features, such as his-
tologic grade. High-S100A8-IC status positively correlated with
infiltration of CD8+ T cells, and presence of PD-L1+ ICs, in both
DCIS and invasive carcinoma. In survival analyses, high-S100A8
in TCs and ICs was associated with decreased overall survival in
patients with invasive breast cancer, and the difference in survival
was most remarkable in HR-positive tumours. In subgroup analy-
sis, tumours containing high-S100A8 and low-PD-L1 IC showed
worst overall survival compared to other groups.
Conclusion: S100A8+ ICs are already found in pre-invasive stage
as much as in invasive carcinoma and are correlated with CD8+ T
cells and PD-L1+ ICs. S100A8+ ICs exert immunosuppressive
effect in breast cancer, especially in HR-positive and low-PD-L1
IC subgroup.
PS-01-069
Histopathological characteristics and outcome of breast cancer in
non-Caucasian women - a large single institution’s experience
M. Zaakouk*, A. Longworth, M. Evans, A. Shaaban
*Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham,
University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust Queen
Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Breast cancer in non-Caucasian females is
under-studied and its management is based on Caucasian data. 17 % of
the West Midlands females are non-Caucasian. We aimed to elucidate the
pathologic features, molecular profile and outcome of non-Caucasian
breast cancer.
Methods: We identified 7553 breast cancers of different ethnic origins
diagnosed at a large Birmingham tertiary referral hospital between 2000
and 2016. Histopathological and clinical data were collected and statisti-
cally analysed.
6804 cases were excluded; British/white ancestry(n=6191), unconfirmed
ethnicity/diagnosis(n=511), patients with sparse histological/clinical
data(n=94) and male patients(n=8). The remaining 749 cancers com-
prised 735 non-Caucasian patients, of whom 14 had bilateral disease.
Results: 47 in-situ and 702 invasive carcinomas of predominantly
(86.2%) symptomatic presentation and median age of 51 years were
identified. Only 31.2% of invasive tumours measured <15mm and
11.98% were >50mm. Cancers were predominantly of grade3(45%),
followed by grade2(42.4%). Median NPI was 4.35. 65.1% of the carci-
nomas were of luminal subtype, 18.6% were Her2 positive and 16.2%
triple-negative. Median overall survival was 62 months. Five and ten year
survival was 81% & 65.5% respectively.
Ethnicity correlated with higher NPI(p<0.001), larger tumour
size(p=0.001) and larger number of positive axillary nodes(p=0.007).
Negative correlations were found between age at diagnosis and both
invasive tumour size & grade(p<0.001) and between tumour grade and
overall survival(p=0.006).
Conclusion: Compared with Caucasian breast cancer, Non-Caucasian
tumours presented predominantly symptomatically at younger age, were
of larger size, higher grade with more unfavourable phenotypes and
shorter survival. This is important in counselling, planning management
and follows up of those patients.
PS-01-070
Multiplex immunophenotyping of breast cancer tumour
microenvironment
M. Zaakouk*, A. Longworth, K. Hunter, A. Shaaban
*Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham,
University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust Queen
Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Tumour microenvironment in breast cancer
has become recently recognised as important for tumour prognosis and
response to immunotherapy. We aimed to evaluate tumour microenviron-
ment immune cells of breast carcinoma and their relationship to clinico-
pathological parameters.
Methods: 54 core biopsies of grade 2-3 ductal NST carcinoma were
selected and immuno-stained using multiplex immunofluorescence for
CD4, CD8, CD20, CD68 and FOXP3. Cases included were of luminal
(n=28), HER2 positive (n=14) and triple negative, TNBC (n=12) molec-
ular subtypes. Detailed quantitative tumour microenvironment immune
cell count and density were correlated statistically with patient and tu-
mour characteristics and overall survival.
Results: The most frequent immune cell phenotype was CD4 (35/
54;64.8%), followed by CD68 (11/54;20.4%) and CD8 (5/54;9.3%).
TNBC & grade-3 cancers had higher total median counts than other
molecular subtypes & grade-2 cancers, respectively. In luminal cancers;
CD20, CD4 (stromal/total), tumoral CD8 & FOXP3 positive cells corre-
lated positively with survival, whereas CD68 & FOXP3 (stromal/total)
positive cells, correlated negatively with survival in HER2 positive tu-
mours. A statistically significant negative correlation was found between
tumour FOXP3 and number of positive axillary lymph nodes (p=0.036)
and between intratumoral cellular density and age at diagnosis (p=0.026).
Stromal cellular density correlated positively (p=0.018) with survival.
Conclusion: CD4 was the dominant immune cell phenotype, followed by
CD68 and CD8. The profile of microenvironment and its correlation with
survival, varied according to the molecular subtype. Triple negative &
grade 3 cancers had the highest median counts of all immune cells.
Tumour microenvironment immune-cell characterization could therefore
provide prognostic information. The work is being applied to a larger
sample to further elucidate the role of microenvironment in breast cancer.
PS-02-002
Quality of pathology reports for epithelial ovarian cancers at a uni-
versity teaching hospital in Nigeria, West Africa: an audit of the
surgical pathology reports
K. Adeleke*, V. Iyawe, A. Agboola
*Olabisi Onabanjo University and Teaching Hospital, Sagamu, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Ovarian cancer is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality among women. Therefore, pathology reports must contain impor-
tant diagnostic and prognostic information. The objective of this study is to
assess the quality of pathology reports for epithelial ovarian cancers.
Methods: Pathology reports for the years 2006-2019 were assessed for
their conformity with standard universally accepted pathologic diagnostic
and prognostic features sign-out checklist. This involved assessing for the
presence of the following quality indicators on the pathology reports:
histologic type, size, grade, state of the ovarian capsule and stage of
disease.
Results: Majority of the tumours (77.8%) were serous carcinomas. The
histologic type was stated on 96.3% of the reports while information on
the grade of the tumour was also available on 66.7% of the reports.
However, information on size, state of ovarian capsule (intact or ruptured)
and stage of disease was available for only 14.8%, 7.4% and 3.7% of the
reports respectively.
PS-02 Gynaecological Pathology
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: This audit on surgical pathology report of epithelial ovarian
cancers shows that a substantial number of reports lacked information on
important diagnostic and prognostic indicators. This can have negative
consequences on quality of care offered to patients. The use of synoptic
reporting can lead to improvement in quality of surgical pathology re-
ports. A follow up study to evaluate quality of the pathology reports after
adoption of synoptic reporting is necessary.
PS-02-003
Lymphoepithelioma- like carcinoma of the uterine cervix; tumour
microenvironment, tumour budding and p16 expression
K. Adoke*, A. Adoke
*Department of Pathology, FMC KEBBI, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma (LELC)
of the uterine cervix is a rare tumour of the cervix composed of poorly
defined islands of undifferentiated squamous cells in a background in-
tensely infiltrated by lymphocytes. It has striking similarity with its coun-
terpart in the nasopharynx and studies have shown that LELC of the
cervix has a good prognosis. We retrospectively study three cases of
LELC of the uterine cervix over a three years period (2016-2018) with
immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Methods: Three cases of LELC of the uterine cervix were retrieved from
our departmental archives. H&E blocks were cut and (IHC) using
CD3,CD20, AE1/AE3 and P16 antibodies were done. CD3 and CD20
for IM. Tumour buds were defined according to ITBCC, counted at x20
magnification at the invasive front. P16 stain was defined according to
8Th edition of AJCC guidelines.
Results: The patient’s ages were 50, 60 and 65 years respectively.
Histology showed a tumour composed of polygonal cells with prominent
nucleoli and moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm. Intersperse these cells are
numerous lymphocytes. IHC analysis shows the lymphocytes were both
intratumoral and peritumoral CD3+ T cells, while CD20+ B cells were
mainly peritumoral. Tumour budding was less than 5 buds in all cases
which were also P16 positive.
Conclusion: LELC of the uterine cervix good prognosis may be ex-
plained by its low level of tumour buds, tumour microenvironment and
P16 expression
PS-02-004
BCOR immunohistochemistry is a useful tool to evaluate high-grade
endometrial stromal sarcomas but BCOR negative high-grade ESS
cases are also present
N.E. Alkanat*, A. Uner, A. Usubutun
*Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Turkey
Background & objectives: High grade endometrial stromal sarcoma
(HG-ESS) is a malignant mesenchymal tumour of uterus which frequent-
ly demonstrates YWHAE-NUTM2 fusion. Previous studies identified
HG-ESS cases with BCOR gene translocations. Therefore, immunohis-
tochemistry for BCOR could be useful in identifying such HG-ESS cases.
Methods: One hundred seventy-two uterine sarcomas diagnosed be-
tween 2000-2019 were re-evaluated. Tissue microarray blocks were con-
structed from 3 HG-ESS, 19 LG-ESS and 15 uterine sarcomas with high-
grade morphology which were included in this study. Fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) studies using YWHAE and BCOR brake-apart
probes and immunohistochemical studies for BCOR were performed.
Patients’ files were used for clinical information.
Results: Five patients, 4 of which had tumours extending beyond uterus,
had translocations involving YWHAE or BCOR. Four tumours showed
high-grade morphology and revealed YWHAE translocation. One patient
with myxoid morphology revealed BCOR translocation. In immunohis-
tochemistry, all YWHAE translocated tumours showed BCOR positivity,
however, BCOR translocated tumour was negative. One patient is alive
after 18 months, three patients died 4, 18 and 34 months after diagnosis,
one was lost to follow-up.
Conclusion: HG-ESS is an aggressive tumour with poor clinical out-
come. Our study showed that BCOR immunohistochemistry could be a
useful diagnostic tool to identify HG-ESS cases with translocation of
YWHAE gene. However, FISH analysis is essential for definitive diag-
nosis. We also report that molecular analysis and conspicuous myxoid
morphology can help identifying HG-ESS with translocation of BCOR
gene which also seems to have aggressive clinical behaviour. Another
important finding is that BCOR translocated HG-ESS was negative with
BCOR immunohistochemistry.
This research was supported by Hacettepe University - Coordination Unit
of Scientific Research Projects.
PS-02-005
Mismatch repair protein deficiency in the endometria of the general
population: an immunohistochemical study
K. Allen*, N. Gahir, E. Crosbie, N. Orsi, N. Wilkinson
*Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: There is little literature looking into mis-
match repair deficiency in endometrial biopsies of women from the gen-
eral population. This study aims to assess the frequency of mismatch
repair protein deficiency in this group within non-neoplastic and hyper-
plastic endometrium by immunohistochemistry.
Methods: 200 biopsies of polypoid and flat endometrium were
anonymised and allocated to four different diagnostic groups (n = 50
each) for analysis of mismatch repair protein deficiency: non-hyperplas-
tic, disordered proliferation, hyperplasia without cytologic atypia and
hyperplasia with cytologic atypia. Each biopsy was assessed by immu-
nohistochemistry for MLH1, PMS2, MSH2 and MSH6.
Results: One (2%) biopsy within the hyperplasia with cytological atypia
group showed glandular MSH2 and MSH6 deficiency in areas of atypical
hyperplasia and adjacent carcinoma. In the complex hyperplasia group,
two (4%) showed glandular MLH1 and PMS2 deficiency, one with focal
and the other with widespread loss of staining. The disordered prolifera-
tion group contained one biopsy with focal glandular loss of MLH1 and
PMS2. The non-hyperplastic group contained no cases of mismatch re-
pair protein deficiency.
Conclusion: Mismatch repair deficient glands are observed in mor-
phologically benign endometrium from women not known to have
Lynch syndrome. Glandular loss of mismatch repair protein ex-
pression may be an early event in endometrial carcinogenesis and
its detection may identify high-risk women in whom endometrial
surveillance and/or progestin treatment is justified.
Funding: BDIAP Glasgow 2020 Educational Fellowship
PS-02-006
L1 cell adhesion molecule expression in endometrioid endometrial
carcinoma, its prognostic significance, and correlation with survival
S.D. Altindag*, S. Yigit, L. Sen, S. Sen
*Izmir Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM) is a
biological marker that can help identify endometrial cancers with poor
prognostic features, and worse survival. This study aims to analyse the
relationship between L1CAM expression, clinicopathological parame-
ters, and survival in endometrioid endometrial carcinoma.
Methods: Patients diagnosed with endometrioid carcinoma were select-
ed. Grade, presence/depth of myometrial invasion, invasion patterns,
lymphovascular invasion, cervical stromal invasion were re-evaluated.
Age, stage, lymph node metastasis, peritoneal cytology positivity,
Virchows Arch
recurrence, overall and disease-free survival were recorded. Risk classi-
fication was made according to ESMO-ESGO-ESTRO consensus. The
relationship between L1CAM expression and clinicopathological param-
eters and its effect on survival was calculated statistically.
Results: A total of 264 cases were included in the study. L1CAM posi-
tivity was observed in 22 cases (8.3%). A statistically significant relation-
ship was found between L1CAM expression and advanced age, high
grade, deep myometrial invasion, high-intermediate with high-risk cases
and pelvic recurrence. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that
L1CAM positive patients had poorer overall survival and disease-free
survival. L1CAM expression was found to affect overall and disease-
free survival in univariate analysis.
Conclusion: L1CAM expression was significantly associated with ad-
vanced age, high grade, deep myometrial invasion, high-intermediate,
and high-risk cases. Moreover, L1CAM expression predicts pelvic recur-
rence and poorer survival. Although L1CAM is not routinely used in
treatment management algorithms, it seems to be a promising marker
for managing patient follow-up algorithms.
PS-02-007
Myoinvasion pattern evaluation in endometrioid endometrial
carcinoma
C. Amalinei*, A.M. Aignatoaei, R. Balan, L. Lozneanu, R. Avădanei,
S. Giusca, I.D. Caruntu
*"Grigore T. Popa" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Institute of
Legal Medicine, Romania
Background & objectives: Endometrioid endometrial carcinoma has
variable five-year survival rates in FIGO stage I, suggesting the involve-
ment of other factors related to tumour behaviour. Our study is evaluating
the immunoexpression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers
(EMT) in different types of myoinvasion patterns.
Methods: The study has been performed on a study group of 20 cases
selected from the files of “Elena Doamna” Obstetrics and Gynaecology
University Hospital of Iasi, between 2013 and 2017, in patients of 43-78
year-old. The hysterectomy specimens have been evaluated by routine
histology and immunohistochemistry for CK7, E-cadherin, N-cadherin,
β-catenin, and Vimentin.
Results: Clinicopathological parameters have been evaluated. The
myoinvasive pattern has been identified as: MELF (multicystic, elongat-
ed and fragmented glands) (45%), diffusely infiltrative (25%), broad front
(expansile, pushing border) (15%), adenomyosis-like (10%), and adeno-
ma malignum (5%).The evaluation of different myoinvasive patterns of
endometrioid endometrial carcinomas has been challenging, mainly in
appreciation of the depth of myometrium invasion in adenomyosis-like
and adenoma malignum patterns. MELF pattern has been correlated to
age >50 years, deep myometrium invasion (>50%), recurrences (22.22%
of cases), and partial immunoexpression of EMT markers.
Conclusion: The evaluation of myometrium invasion types may open
new perspectives for endometrioid endometrial carcinoma prognosis.
Although our study had been limited, our results are supporting the pos-
sibility of EMT phenomena in MELF. Further studies would validate our
preliminary results.
PS-02-008
Prostatic metaplasia of the vagina and uterine cervix: an androgen-
associated glandular lesion of surface squamous epithelium
W. Anderson*, D. Kolin, G. Neville, D. Diamond, C. Crum, M. Hirsch,
S. Vargas
*Brigham and Women's Hospital, USA
Background & objectives: Prostatic-type differentiation in the lower
female genital tract is rare and its causes not well established. Herein,
we characterize a distinctive form of prostatic-type differentiation that
primarily involves surface squamous epithelium and is associated with
androgen exposure.
Methods: Superficial prostatic glandular proliferations involving the va-
gina or cervix were sought over a 26-year period (1993 – 2019). Cases
were also identified from patients clinically suspected to have either ex-
ogenous or endogenous androgen excess. Clinicopathological features
were reviewed and immunohistochemistry was performed for PSA,
NKX3.1, CK7 and AR.
Results: Fourteen cases were identified involving the vagina (n=13) and
exocervix (n=1). The most common clinical context was gender dyspho-
ria with long-term testosterone therapy (7/14). Five other patients had
congenital disorders of sexual development associated with endogenous
androgen excess. Two had no known exposure to androgen excess.
Immunohistochemically, glands stained for NKX3.1 (93% of cases), an-
drogen receptor (92%), CK7 (92%), and PSA (64%). Follow-up (median:
11 months) showed no masses or neoplasia.
Conclusion: We propose the designation ‘androgen-associated prostatic
metaplasia’ for this distinctive form of prostate tissue not previously
described within the vagina. It is strikingly prevalent among patients
undergoing gender-affirming surgery. Recognition is important to distin-
guish it from other glandular lesions.
PS-02-009
A proposed prognostic panel of immunohistochemical markers for
endometrial carcinoma
M. Arafa*, A. Salama, E. ElZahaf, A. Shebl, A. Awad
*Pathology Department, College of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Sultan Qaboos University, Oman
Background & objectives: Histopatholological prognostic parameters in
endometrial carcinoma (EC) include tumour grade, stage and depth of
myometrial invasion. This study aimed to assess the value of immuno-
histochemistry (IHC) "ER, PR, HER2, Ki67 and p53" in assessing the
prognosis of EC.
Methods: Archival material of 105 EC were retrieved. Sections were
IHC stained and data were evaluated in relation to 3-year overall survival
(OS) and disease-free survival (DFS). Analysis were done using Kaplan
Meier test and log rank Chi-Square test to detect effect of measurements
on survival duration. Cox regression analysis was to detect predictors of
survival using forward wald technique.
Results: The median follow-up duration for the included patients was 38
months (range, 1 - 87 months). Twenty-six patients (24.8%) died during
the 3-year follow-up period. Fourteen patients had local recurrence in the
rectal wall (5 patients), vagina (4 patients) and bladder (2 patients) with
distant metastasis in 3 patients. It was found that PR, HER2 and P53
expression had significant effect on the overall survival, unlike ER and
ki-67. Regarding disease-free survival, PR is the only marker found to
have significant effect on DFS.
Conclusion: ER, PR, HER2, Ki-67 and p53 are not independent
prognostic factors in endometrial carcinoma regarding OS and
DFS. However, a combination of low ER and PR expression
together HER2 overexpression, high ki-67 and aberrant P53 ex-
pression are associated with more aggressive behaviour of endo-
metrial carcinoma.
PS-02-010
Cross talk between TP53, MDM2 and CDKN1A expression and
progression-free survival in patients with ovarian cancer after
platinum-based chemotherapy
A. Asaturova*, T. Zavarikina, A. Tyulandina, S. Hohlova, J. Nosova,
G. Khabas, A. Burdenny, M. Kapralova, V. Loginov, P. Brenner,
M. Atkarskaya, D. Hodirev
*FSBI 'National medical research centre for obstetrics, gynaecology and
perinatology named after V.I. Kulakov', Russia
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: The goal of the investigation is to assess the
link between multiform markers of cell cycle control genes (Arg72Pro of
ТР53, T(-410)G of MDM2 and Ser31Arg of CDKN1A) and progression-
free survival (PFS) in ovarian cancer patients after platinum-based che-
motherapy (CT).
Methods: we analysed 49 tumour tissue samples from ovarian cancer
patients (high-grade serous carcinomas) obtained before platinum-based
CT. All patients were treated with standard protocols and examined till
disease progression. Multiform markers of cell cycle control genes were
investigated with Полиморфные маркеры генов были исследованы
методом Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymor-
phism (PCR-RFLP) and real time PCR.
Results: Results We demonstrated the trend to decrease of PFS median in
allele G of T(-410)G MDM2 carriers. We also have shown the increase of
PFS median in allele Pro of ТР53 (р = 0.045). This phenomenon was
more prominent in minor homozigota Pro/Pro carriers in compare to
patients with Arg/Arg genotype (р = 0.007). In group of patients with
optimal or total debulking minor allele Arg of Ser31Arg СDKN1A car-
riers had the decreased PFS mediana (р = 0.004).
Conclusion: Thus, we revealed the interconnection between investigated
multiform gene markers and remission duration after platinum-based CT.
Further investigation should be conducted to assess prognostic value of
these markers for ovarian cancer patients before CT application.
The investigation was supported by RFF grant 18-08-01258
PS-02-011
Steroid receptors isoforms disbalance in endometrial polyps
pathogenesis
A. Asaturova*, G. Chernukha, I. Ivanov
*FSBI 'National medical research centre for obstetrics, gynaecology and
perinatology named after V.I. Kulakov', Russia
Background & objectives: Steroid receptors directly impact on endo-
metrial polyps (EPs) development, although the role of their isoforms
play even more significant role. The goal of our investigation was to
assess the proportion between proliferative and anti-proliferative steroid
receptors in endometrial polyps
Methods: We assessed ER-alpha, ER-beta, PgR-A and PgR-B
immunohistochemically in 20 EPs and 20 proliferative endometrium.
We also calculated ER-alpha/ER-beta and PgR-B/PgR-A.
Results: We demonstrated higher PgR-B expression in EP in compare to
normal endometrium (NE) (р=0.003).We shew the decrease of glandular
and stromal ER-beta expression (p=0.01 and p=0.04 respectively) and
stromal PgR-A expression (p=0.003) in EPs in compare to NE. The
ER-beta/ER-beta was higher in glands of EPs glands then in NE (1.4
and 1.2 respectively, p=0.006). We did not reveal difference in ER-be-
ta/ER-beta in stromal components of EPs and NE (p>0.05) . The PgR-
BE/PgR-A was higher in glands of the EPs then in NE (1.2 and 1.1
respectively, p=0.04) and in stroma of the EPs then in stroma of NE
(1.4 и 1.1 р<0.001).
Conclusion: In endometrial polyps we revealed the increase of
PgR-B expression which accelerate the proliferation. In addition
we demonstrated the decrease of ER-beta and PgR-A expression
(these isoforms facilitate decidualization and atrophy of the endo-
metrium). This disbalance can promote the proliferation, angiogen-
esis, apoptosis deactivation, cell cycle disturbance leading to endo-
metrial polyps growth.
PS-02-012
Ovarian morphology in patients treated with one-step surgical
procedure for ovarian function activation
A. Asaturova*, L. Adamyan, V. Dementieva
*FSBI 'National medical research centre for obstetrics, gynaecology and
perinatology named after V.I. Kulakov', Russia
Background & objectives: Patients with primary ovarian insufficiency
(POI) have few remaining follicles, their only chance for pregnancy is
through egg donation. We tried to reveal morphological features of ovar-
ian in patients treated with surgical procedure for ovarian function acti-
vation using ovarian fragmentation.
Methods: We histologically investigated 52 samples of ovarian cortex
obtained during surgical operation from 33 patients (19 with POI and 14
with ‘poor’ response to ovarian stimulation. We assess from 1 to 11
fragments of ovarian tissue 0,2х 0,4 to 1,5х1,5 cm in size.
Results: in 26,9% we demonstrated primary or secondary
follicules, in 15,4% - follicle cystic atresia, in 53,8% - corpus
fibrosum. Totally we revealed any of folliculogenesis signs in
82,7% samples. This date proved that operated patients had func-
tional active ovaries and supposed an efficacy of ovarian surgical
activation. In addition, we revealed serous surface proliferation (in
7,7%) and two types of inclusion cysts (ovarian surface epitheli-
um (OSE)-type and fallopian tube-type). Moreover, we demon-
strated samples with preserved OSE so we can suppose that POI
can result in fibrous stroma of ovarian cortex and in basal mem-
brane changes leading to tighter junction between these two his-
tological structures.
Conclusion: Detailed assessment of a deliberately reduced ovarian re-
serve is required to overcome infertility in patients with POI who are
resistant to standard f treatment strategy (including assisted reproduction
methods). The histological examination ovarian cortex let us characterize
the follicular apparatus and surrounding tissue, which is of undoubted
significance in patients stratification and their effective treatment.
PS-02-013
The immunoexpression of COX2, HIF-1α , and VEGF-C in the cer-
vical cancer with neoadjuvant therapy (NAT)
R.A. Balan*, M.M. Gavrilescu, N. Ioanid, I. Scripcariu, I.D. Caruntu,
C. Amălinei, S. Giusca, L. Lozneanu, T.A. Balan, V. Scripcariu
*U.M.F. "Grigore T. Popa", Romania
Background & objectives: Cervical cancer can be clinically staged prior
to surgery, chemoradiotherapy being the elected treatment for locally
advanced disease. Our study aims to assess key biomarkers in NAT
cervical cancer, in order to evaluate their diagnostic and prognostic
potential.
Methods: We evaluated 20 patients with IIB to IVA cervical carcinoma
diagnosed and treated with NAT and subsequent surgery at the Regional
Institute of Oncology of Iasi, between 2016 and 2018. The preNAT
cervical biopsies and postNAT hysterectomy specimens have been
assessed by routine histology and immunohistochemistry for COX2,
HIF-1α, and VEGF-C, the results being correlated with
clinicomorphological parameters.
Results: The histological type of the tumours included in our
study were as follows: keratinized and nonkeratinized squamous
cell carcinoma (16/80%), mucinous adenocarcinoma (1/5%),
mixed tumours, as carcinosarcoma (1/5%), as well as mixed neu-
roendocrine and mucinous adenocarcinoma (2/10%). Of all pa-
tients, none presented a complete response to chemotherapy, the
majority presenting a partial response (19/95%) and a single one
(5%) not responding at all to NAT. The imunoexpression of
VEGF-C was found significantly higher in preNAT carcinoma
(16/80%) than in postNAT malignant cells (11/55%). HIF-1α pos-
itivity was higher in preNAT cervical carcinoma (17/85%) than in
postNAT patients (13/65%). COX-2 expression was more signifi-
cant in preNAT carcinoma (18/90%) than in postNAT (9/45%).
Conclusion: The validation of these elements will enable adjusted
therapeutic strategies to improve the prognosis and reduce the
morbidity of uterine cervical patients, and will identify the mo-
lecular variables that predict either sensitivity or resistance to
chemotherapy.
Virchows Arch
PS-02-014
Seromucinous cystadenomas and adenofibromas: first report of a
case series
A. Ben-Mussa*, G. McCluggage
*Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust,
Northern Ireland, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: In the 2014 WHO Classification of
Tumours of the Female Reproductive Organs, a category of
seromucinous cystadenoma/adenofibroma was introduced as a be-
nign counterpart of seromucinous borderline tumours and carcino-
mas. However, there is minimal literature regarding such benign
ovarian neoplasms.
Methods: The cases were derived from the Department of
Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust archives between
1/1/2010 and 19/11/2019 (n=18). Additional prospective cases
were added from 20/11/2019 till 7/1/2020 (n=3). Most (n=19)
were reported by the second author (W.G.M). All the reports
and slides were retrieved and reviewed. Clinical information was
obtained from the electronic care record.
Results: 21benign ovarian seromucinous neoplasms. Mean age
61years. 19unilateral and 2bilateral. 18cystadenomas and
3cystadenofibromas. Mean tumour size 9cm. The epithelium was
predominantly single layered and consisted of admixture of cell
types:serous and mucinous(14cases)and serous, mucinous and
endometrioid (7cases).12had endometriosis, most commonly in
the same ovary. 3had an ovarian borderline tumour or carcinoma;
a grade1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma within the same ovary and
a contralateral serous borderline tumour and borderline clear cell
adenofibroma.
Conclusion: This represents by far the largest case series of be-
nign ovarian seromucinous neoplasms and we show a close rela-
tionship with endometriosis and endometrioid differentiation.
PS-02-015
Role of six levels in cervical biopsy - is it really required?
D. Bhattacharjee*, A. Irvine, D. Arora
*St James' Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Currently, there is no consensus as to the
optimum number of levels that should be examined in cervical biopsies.
We therefore investigated whether it is necessary to take six levels or
taking three would be sufficient
Methods: We collected prospective data over a four month period
at Leeds. The parameters included: the last smear result, colpos-
copy impression, HPV status, histological abnormality. Six pathol-
ogists independently recorded on which level abnormality was
noted and which was the worst level.
Results: Majority of cases (72.67%) showed abnormality in all
six levels. No particular worst level was seen in 54% (81/150).
The level showing worst changes was L6 - 36.2% (25/69). Level
1 was worst in a single case (0.67%). Level range with worst
changes were L4-6 - 71% (49/69). Levels 1-3 were worst in only
a minority (2.67%) of cases (4/150). L1-3 were shallow in 12.6%
(19/150) in decreasing order from 1 to 3 (12.6, 10.6 and 8%
respectively). Abnormality is seen in increasing order from L1
to 6 (78%, 82%, 86%, 94%, 94 and 94% respectively).
Conclusion: No significant benefit is seen in examining all six
levels as majority of cases show similar changes in all levels.
Three levels may be sufficient to examine. Although worst levels
are more seen in later levels (L4-6), the range needs to be wide
as minority of cases had worst changes even in earlier levels (L1-
3). It may be optimal to cut L1-7,examine alternate HE keeping
coated spares for further work
PS-02-016
Cytology versus endocervical curettage for the detection of HSIL
persistence after loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP)
R. Bishop*, I. Torras, M. Munmany, A. Torne, M. Del Pino, A. Saco,
J. Ordi
*Department of Pathology ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic Barcelona,
University of Barcelona, Spain
Background & objectives: Endocervical curettage (EC) and cytology
are the common methods to determine the risk of persistence/recurrence
after LEEP procedure for high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions
(HSIL) of the uterine cervix, but there is controversy on which method
provides more accurate information.
Methods: Prospective study that included 307 women treated for HSIL
by LEEP between 2013 y 2018. In all cases, EC and liquid-based cytol-
ogy (LBC, Thinprep) were obtained immediately after the procedure. The
follow-up controls were scheduled every 6 months for at least 24 months
and included LBC, HPV testing and colposcopy with biopsy if indicated.
Results: Mean age of the patients was 40.3 ± 10.1. HPV testing was
positive in 128 (41.7%) women, cytology in 46 (15.0%) and EC in 18
(5.9%) of the patients. The samples obtained after LEEP were
insufficient/inadequate in18 (5.9%) of the LBC and in 71/307 (23.1%)
of the EC. HSIL persistence/recurrence was identified in 24/307 patients
(7.8%). The sensitivity and specificity of the LBC were 23.9% and
95.0%, respectively. The sensitivity and specificity of the EC were
16.7% and 92.7%, respectively.
Conclusion: Conclusions:
Cytology provides more accurate information on persistent/recurrent than
EC.
PS-02-017
Application of the promise molecular classification in endometrial
carcinomas: clinical, pathological, metabolical and molecular
characterisation
C. Caral*, A.P. Caresia, C.M. Blazquez, L. Nebot, R. Carrera,
J.A. Vazquez, M.I. Agustin, L. Ribot, Y. Garcia, À. Casalots,
J.C. Ferreres, I. Costa
*Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari. I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Spain
Background & objectives: ProMisE molecular classification recognizes
four groups of endometrial carcinoma (EC), improving morphological
and treatment approaches. The objective of the study is to confirm the
contribution of ProMisE in EC, adding metabolical analyses and test
pyrosequencing (PSQ) in POLE gene study.
Methods: 54 EC diagnosed in our institution were evaluated: histological
type, pathological stage, "MELF" and vascular invasion, metabolical ac-
tivity by PET/TAC and clinical behaviour. Molecular classification was
performed in ProMisE sequential order (MMR-D, POLE-EDM, p53abn
and p53wt): MMR and p53 proteins by immunohistochemistry and co-
dons 286/411 POLE by PSQ. p53 mutational status was analysed by
NGS (TST15) in 7 selected cases.
Results: We collected 21 MMR-D, 1 POLE-EDM, 13 p53abn and 19
p53wt CE: 10 serous carcinomas and 2 carcinosarcomas in p53abn; 3 in/
dedifferentiated carcinomas in MMR-D and 2 clear cell carcinomas in
p53wt. MMR-D and p53wt harboured 34/35 endometrioid carcinomas.
POLE-EDM exhibited high-grade histology. Vascular invasion:
6/21(28,6%)MMR-D, 6/13(46,2%)p53abn, 8/19(42,1%)p53wt.
"MELF" invasion: 1/21(4,8%)MMR-D, 1/13(7,7%)p53abn,
5/19(26,3%)p53wt. Extrauterine disease: 4/21(19%)MMR-D,
4/13(30,8%)p53abn, 6/19(31,6%)p53wt. POLE-EDM was IA and dis-
ease free survival(DFS). 14/21(66,7%)MMR-D, 5/13(38,7%)p53abn
and 17/19(89,5%)p53wt are DFS. SUVmax/SUVpic were higher in
MMR-D than p53abn. p53abn MTV and TLG were the lowest
Virchows Arch
(p<0,005). Only one p53abn(negative pattern) did not correlate with NGS
results. PSQ was restricted to two codons, with frequent contaminations,
but easy and quantitative interpretation.
Conclusion: ProMisE classification exhibits pathological correlation that
improves diagnoses in ambiguous cases, displays strong prognostic val-
ue, above classical ones, and guides treatment. p53 immunohistochemis-
try correlates with molecular status of the gene. Paradoxically, the lowest
metabolical activity is observed in p53abn group. PSQ is a sensitive
technique, allowing an easy interpretation and quantitative results.
However it exhibits some technical limitations. A comparative study with
Sanger approach would have to be carried out.
Funding: BECA CIR (COMITÉ INSTITUCIONAL DE RECERCA)
FUNDACIÓ PARC TAULÍ, 2017 (CIR2017/043).
PS-02-018
Possible etiologic role of human papillomavirus in vulvar seborrheic
keratosis: a study combining whole tissue section-PCR, immunohis-
tochemistry (p16 and e4), and laser capture microdissection-PCR
S. Dasgupta*, R. van Eersel, B. Morrel, H.A. van den Munckhof, V.A. de
Geus, N.M. van der Hoeven, M.M. van de Sandt, W.G.V. Quint, I.A. van
der Avoort, P.C. Ewing-Graham, F.J. van Kemenade
*Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: HPV-DNA has been previously detected in
vulvar seborrheic keratosis (VSK) by performing polymerase chain reac-
tion (PCR) on whole-tissue sections (WTS). However, this has been
refuted as evidence of an etiologic involvement of HPV, as WTS-PCR
does not inform on HPV-integration.
Methods: We explored the association of HPV and VSK by performing
WTS-PCR, immunohistochemistry with p16 and E4, and laser capture
microdissection (LCM)-PCR. p16 and E4 are surrogate markers of HPV-
oncogene expression, and LCM-PCR allows HPV-detection from specif-
ic lesional cells, with a higher precision than WTS-PCR. VSKs were
selected following strict histologic criteria to avoid including the common
differential, HPV-related condyloma acuminata.
Results: HPVs were detected in 73% (11/15) of VSKs through WTS-
PCR (SPF10-PCR-DEIA-LiPA25); these included HPV44 (n=4), HPV6
(n=4), HPV42 (n=2), HPV53 (n=1), and an untypable genotype (n=1).
p16-positivity was noted in 82% (9/11), and E4-positivity was noted in
36% (4/11) of HPV-positive VSKs. LCM-PCR was performed on six
lesional areas (two p16+/E4+ and four p16+/E4-) and one area of adjacent
normal epithelium (p16-/E4-) selected from four HPV-positive VSKs.
HPVs were detected from all lesional areas by LCM-PCR and the results
were concordant with WTS-PCR. HPV could be detected in the basal/
intermediate epithelial layers of the lesional areas, thereby ruling out
surface contamination. The area from normal epithelium was negative
for HPV.
Conclusion: These results imply a pathogenic involvement of HPV in a
proportion of VSKs. p16 and E4-positivity indicated HPV-integra-
tion, and through LCM-PCR, HPVs could be localized to the
lesional cells. The natural of history of these VSKs deserves fur-
ther study.
PS-02-019
Analysis of endometrial carcinoma with subclonal P53 expression
A. Dashora*, E. Thompson, J.V. Broek, A. Lum, J. Senz, S. Leung,
J. Huvila, N. Singh, M. Koebel, J.N. McAlpine, B. Gilks
*Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: To study endometrial carcinoma (EC) cases
showing subclonal p53 expression on immunohistochemistry (IHC) to
determine which molecular category these should be assigned to; in ad-
dition, to develop practical guidance for the interpretation of this novel
and poorly understood expression pattern.
Methods: 278 EC’s were classified into molecular categories using p53
and MMR IHC on whole sections, together with pathogenic POLE mu-
tation testing using targeted next generation sequencing (NGS). Cases
with subclonal p53 IHC expression involving ≥5% of tumour underwent
directed sampling [a single 1mm core for each differentially staining area]
and TP53 sequencing through NGS.
Results: Subclonal p53 expression was observed in 19/278 (6.8%)
cases at levels ranging from 0.5% to 95% (median 11%). 7/19 cases
(37%) were classified as MMRd EC. An additional 5/19 cases
(26%) harboured pathogenic POLE mutations (POLEmut). The re-
maining 7/19 tumours (37%) were MMR proficient (MMRp) and
POLE wild type (POLEwt). Of these, 6/7 contained a TP53 muta-
tion in both the areas with mutant pattern and wild type p53 expres-
sion, the only exception being a tumour where the subclonal loss
was only present in 3% of the tumour cells, and below the limit of
detection of the assay used.
Conclusion: Subclonal p53 IHC reflects underlying TP53 mutation. In
MMRd and POLEmut EC this is secondary and unlikely to show adverse
prognosis. In MMRp and POLEwt EC, however, this pattern appears to
indicate a driver TP53 mutation, ie p53 abnormal EC.
PS-02-020
An audit of histopathology reports of carcinoma endometrium:
assessment of different histology parameters from specimens operated
at a cancer centre in india, between January 2013 and March 2018
K. Deodhar*, D. Singh, A. Budukh, B. Rekhi, S. Menon
*Tata Memorial Hospital, India
Background & objectives: To review histopathology reports of patients
operated for carcinoma endometrium, at our institute between Jan 2013 to
March 2018, and to see our compliance to minimum data sets.
Methods: -After obtaining approval from the Institutional Review Board
(IRB), our hospital records showed a total of 457 reports of carcinoma
endometrium, operated between January 2013 to March 2018. Various
parameters from the reports were noted, and their frequencies were cal-
culated with the help of SPSS software (version 21).
Results: The mean age was 57.5 years, mean tumour size was 3.78
cm. The depth of myometrial invasion and tumour type was men-
tioned in 100% reports, commonest tumour type being endometrioid-
87.3%. The tumour was stage pT1a in 63.9%, stage pT1b in 36.1%
cases. Distance of tumour from uterine serosa was mentioned in
86.4% cases. The FIGO tumour grades were grade II- 56.2%; grade
III- 28.7%; grade I-14.9%; mentioned in 99.8% cases.
Lymphovascular invasion was present in 15.5% cases. The cervix
was reported in 99.8% cases, involved in 10.7% cases. Lymph nodes
were removed in 78.6% cases ( mean lymph node yield 14.01). TNM
stage was mentioned in only 56.2 % cases.
Conclusion: -Overall compliance to minimum data sets in carcinoma
endometrium reports by our team is good. pTNM stage, distance to serosa
need to be mentioned.
PS-02-021
MYB rearrangement is frequent in adenoid cystic carcinomas of the
Bartholin’s gland: a series of 5 cases
D. Doutel*, D. Venda, A. Felix, C. Martins, J. Ferreira
*Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil, Portugal
Background & objectives: Primary vulvar adenoid cystic
carcinoma(ACC) is very rare. In most anatomic locations, MYB-NFIB
and MYBL1-NFIB fusions are oncogenic drivers in ACC. In two prior
series, MYB was rearranged in 2/9 and 3/3 vulvar ACC cases.
Methods: We report the clinicopathologic features of five vulvar ACCs
diagnosed between 1963 and 2020, and we describe the prevalence of
MYB and MYBL1 rearrangements in this series.
Virchows Arch
All HE slides from these cases were reviewed, as well as their medical
records. FISH using MYB and MYBL1 BAC-clones break-apart probes
was carried out.
Results: Patients’ mean age at diagnosis was 52 years. Tumour size
ranged from 0.5-5cm. Microscopic examination revealed tubular and
cribriform patterns. A minor solid component was identified in one case.
No high-grade components were detected. Perineural invasion was seen
in all cases. All patients were treated with surgery, followed by postop-
erative radiation in one of them. Positive surgical margins were reported
in four patients. During follow-up (median:21 years), three patients (all
with positive margins) developed local recurrences treated with surgery
and radiation. Currently, all patients are disease-free.
FISH analysis was successful in 4/5 cases. MYB rearrangement was
present in 3/4 cases, including one with concurrent MYB amplification.
No MYBL1 rearrangements were found.
Conclusion: We corroborate the histological and genetic similarity be-
tween vulvar ACC and ACCs elsewhere. We also confirm that MYB
rearrangement is frequent in vulvar ACC.
PS-02-022
Prognostic role of mismatch repair protein defect in endometrioid
type of endometrial carcinoma
N. El Anwar*, A. Eid, S. Ezzeldin
*Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, Egypt
Background & objectives: Microsatellite instability, associated with
mismatch repair proteins deficiency, is a frequent alteration in endome-
trial cancer(EC) that has been associated with prognosis.
evaluate the state of MLH1 and MSH2 as a potential prognostic factor in
endometrioid type of endometrial cancer(EEC).
Methods: the current work was carried out on 80 cases of EEC retrieved
[with clinical data] from the department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, Tanta University in the period from June 2017 to December
2018. H&E staining and immunohistochemical staining with MLH1and
MSH2 was done for each case.
Results: among 80 cases, 29 (36.3%)showed abnormal MMRP expres-
sion (loss of MLH1 expression was detected in 19 cases (65.5%) and loss
of MSH2 expression was detected in (34.5%) of cases. Loss of MMRP
expression was closely related to some clinicopathologic features (pa-
tient’s age, histopathological tumour grade, and tumour stage) with a
statistically significant relation . No significant relation was found with
myometrial and lymphovascular invasion (p value= 0.054 and 0.028)
Conclusion: a subset of endometrioid type demonstrates MMRP defect;
the MMRP deficient EEC often displays adverse clinicopathological pa-
rameters as poorly differentiated or undifferentiated histology as well as
advanced stage with early age of onset at presentation.
PS-02-023
Non squamous malignancies of vagina and vulva: 33 year experience
at a tertiary centre in UK
R. El-Shennawy*, C. Aird, W. Boyle, J. Yap, A. Williams, R. Ganesan
*Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, College of Medical and
Dental Sciences, The University of Birmingham, United Kingdom;
Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, University of Alexandria,
Egypt
Background & objectives: Under 10% of gynaecological cancers are
diagnosed in the vulva and vagina; mostly squamous cell carcinomas.
Melanoma, Paget disease, basal cell carcinomas and other cancers can
present with vulval/vaginal symptoms.
Methods: The pathology information system of a tertiary referral centre
for vulvo-vaginal cancers was searched for cancers of the vulva and
vagina from 1996 to 2019. Squamous carcinomas were excluded and
the remaining entities were catalogued.
Results: 135 vaginal and 86 vulval cases of non-squamous cancers were
found. 108 cases of metastatic carcinomas from endometrium, cervix,
ovary, bowel, bladder, kidney and breast formed the largest category.
Basal cell carcinomas constituted the 2nd largest category. Others includ-
ed melanomas, Paget disease, and adenoid cystic carcinomas. Primary
adenocarcinomas included porocarcinoma, mammary type carcinoma,
enteric type carcinoma, clear cell carcinoma, Bartholin gland adenocarci-
noma and malignant transformation of hidradenoma papilliferum.
Conclusion: The vulva and vagina can harbour a wide range of non-
squamous malignancies. The most challenging of these are adenocarci-
nomas which can be metastatic from other sites. The dominance of met-
astatic carcinomas in this series is likely to reflect consultation practice of
specialist pathologists
PS-02-024
Vulva carcinoma: an overview of a rare disease and summary of
experience from King Hussein Cancer Center (KHCC)
M.A.A. Erashdi*, M. Al-Hussaini
*King Hussein Cancer Center, Jordan
Background & objectives: Carcinoma of the vulva constitutes only 5%
of female genital malignancies, of which the most common type is squa-
mous cell carcinoma (SCC). There is global variation in the prevalence,
with only few epidemiologic studies were conducted in the Arab world.
Methods: This is a retrospective chart review of all vulva SCC cases
referred to KHCC between 2004-2018. Phase 1; demographic data,
changes in the trends over the years, pathology findings, treatment and
outcome are summarized. Phase 2 (in progress); include immunohisto-
chemical testing for (P16, P53, Ki-67), for detection of Vulvar
intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN), and RFLP-PCR for detection of HPV
infection/serotyping, respectively.
Results: The total number of patients is 62.There is a dramatic increase in
the number of cases (59.7%; 2016-2018). The mean age at diagnosis was
56 years. The average tumour size and depth of invasion were 30.1mm
and 7.73mm, respectively. According to FIGO staging, stage I, II, III and
IV were 46.2%, 5.8%, 28.8%, and 19.2%,respectively. Surgical resection
was offered to 82.8% of cases, with or without chemotherapy/radiother-
apy. With mean follow up duration of 18.4 months, 64.5% are
alive; 90% of them are in complete remission. The 5 years event
free survival, and overall survival rates are 67.65% and 55.51%,
respectively. At this time, prevalence of VIN and HPV infection
are under investigation.
Conclusion: Carcinoma of the vulva is a rare disease that is witnessing an
increased trend in the last few years. It is associated with a favourable
outcome when treated properly. The underlying predisposing and/or as-
sociated risk factors need to be further indicated.
Funding: Phase 2 of this project is currently funded by King Hussein
cancer centre-Jordan.
PS-02-025
Plexiform tumourlets of the uterus: clinicopathological and molecu-
lar analysis of a series
R. Erber*, R. Stoehr, N. Oks, F. Haller, M.W. Beckmann, A. Hein,
B.P. Rubin, A. Hartmann, A. Agaimy
*Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich‐
Alexander University Erlangen‐Nürnberg (FAU), Comprehensive
Cancer Center (CCC) Erlangen-EMN, Germany
Background & objectives: Plexiform tumourlets of the uterus
(PTU) are extremely rare, tiny, multifocal epithelioid mesenchymal
lesions thought to represent variants of epithelioid leiomyoma. They
are detected as incidental histological findings in hysterectomy
specimens for other diseases. However, their pathogenesis remains
unknown.
Virchows Arch
Methods: Seven cases of PTU were identified in routine pathology files
at the Institute of Pathology, Erlangen (2012-2017), and in consultations
files of two authors. Clinical and pathological characteristics were
reviewed. Four cases with sufficient material were investigated for gene
fusions using TruSight-RNA Fusion Panel (Illumina® Inc., San Diego,
CA, USA) and three were assessed for FOXL2 mutations by direct
sequencing.
Results: Age at diagnosis ranged between 44 and 56 years. Patients
received curettage (1 case) or hysterectomy due to perimenopausal bleed-
ing, endometrial carcinoma, symptomatic adenomyosis uteri or uterine
leiomyomas. PTUs presented as solitary lesions (n=2), multiple tiny nod-
ules (n=3) or as tiny lesions extensively involving the myometrium (size
range: 0.15-0.5 mm). None of three cases each successfully tested for
gene fusions by RNA testing or FOXL2 mutations revealed positive
results.
Conclusion: The molecular pathogenesis of uterine plexiform tumourlets
remains elusive.
PS-02-026
PD-L1 expression in different molecular subgroups of endometrial
carcinomas
A. Evsei*, A. Birceanu, N. Copca, A. Dumitru, M. Sajin
*Saint Mary Clinical Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: New oncological treatment guidelines for
endometrial carcinomas (ECs) are constantly evolving with the recent
emphasis on immunotherapy options for distinct subsets of ECs. Our
purpose was to identify specific molecular categories and analyse PDL-
1 expression on these different subtypes.
Methods: We included in our study 50 cases of ECs in a Romanian
cohort over 5 years (2014-2019). For each case, we evaluated a vast set
of pathological parameters and tested p53, MSH6 and PMS2 for MMR
status. PDL-1 expression was quantified in four distinct molecular
groups: MMR-D, MSS, CNH (abnormal expression of p53) and CNL
(wild-type p53).
Results: According to our findings, the mean age for diagnosis was 63
years, with endometrioid subtype being the most frequent. We identified
34 cases - MMR-D, 16 cases - MMR-S, 13 cases - CNH and 37 cases -
CNL. PDL-1 positivity was more than 50% in two MMR-D cases and
one CNH,1-49% in 7 MMR-D cases, 4 CNH cases and 6 CNL cases and
negative in 30 cases.Five-year OS was 84%.
Conclusion: Recent advances in immunotherapy have opened options
for women with the MSI subset of tumours and current trials are
attempting to expand the benefits of immune checkpoint inhibition to a
wider group of patients with ECs. For that reason, we set out to define the
molecular landscape of ECs in Romania and establish what other molec-
ular groups would be suitable for PDL-1 testing. To our knowledge, this
is the first attempt in our country.
PS-02-028
PD-L1 expression in high grade serous carcinoma of the female gen-
ital tract correlates with favourable prognosis - experience within an
immunohistochemically re-classified large clinical cohort
A.K. Fischer, N. Neudeck, M. Grube, B. Ney, H. Boesmueller,
J. Pasternak, K. Greif, C. Beschorner, S. Brucker, D. Wallwiener,
F. Fend, S. Kommoss, A. Staebler*
*Institute for Pathology, University of Tübingen, Germany
Background & objectives: High-grade serous tubo-ovarian carcinoma
(HGSC) is the most lethal carcinoma of the female genital organs. In
recent studies, PD-L1 expression correlates with prolonged overall sur-
vival. We investigated a large consecutive cohort of
immunohistochemically re-classified HGSCs for PD-L1 expression
status.
Methods: A consecutive series of 420 cases diagnosed as HGSC and
treated at the Womens’ Hospital of the University Tübingen from 2000
until 2016 was reviewed by two independent pathologists. Tissue micro-
arrays (TMAs) were stained for a panel of four markers including WT1,
p53, progesterone receptor and Napsin-A. PD-L1 expression was
analysed using Combined Positivity Score (CPS).
Results: In 94.0% of cases (n= 395/420), the diagnosis of HGSC was
confirmed. Within the re-classified 395 (100%) HGSCs, 131 presented
PD-L1 expression (36.7%), 250 were negative (63.3%). Median overall
survival (OS) for mean CPS showed significant differences: 906 days for
patients with PD-L1-negativity (n=250, 63.3%), 1347 days for CPS <1
(n=85, 21.5%) versus 1412 days median OS for CPS 1-25 (n=60,
15.2%)(p<0.001). We found significant association with complete resec-
tion (p=0.049).
Conclusion: Within our cohort of re-classified HGSCs of the female
genital tract, PD-L1 expression was found in 36.7%, whereas the majority
showed negative results (63.3%). In summary, PD-L1 is expressed in a
subgroup of HGSCs associated with a favourable prognosis and presents
a significant overall survival benefit. These results suggest an important
role in the tumour microenvironment and provide a potential therapeutic
target.
PS-02-029
Tumour budding and cell nest size did not prove useful as prognostic
factors in a series of 121 squamous cell carcinomas of the uterine
cervix
A. Flora*, A. Felix
*Rede D'Or São Paulo, Brazil
Background & objectives: Squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix
(SCCC) grading has no prognostic value. Recently, Jesinghaus, M.
et al, proposed a new grading system based on the evaluation of tumour
budding and cell nest size, that could help in prognostic patient
stratification.
Methods: Two pathologists reviewed a series from 2002 to 2016 of H&E
whole slides from SCCC, radical hysterectomies. The clinical files and
tumour grading were evaluated accordingly to the parameters proposed
by Jesinghaus, M. et al. This grading score was correlated with the stag-
ing, treatment and overall survival of the patients.
Results: We studied 121 cases of SCCC. Patients’ mean age was 47
years-old (29-80yrs). Tumour stage was pT1(n=99), pT2(n=21) and
pT3(n=1) and 31%(n=37) had regional lymph node metastases. 77 pa-
tients received adjuvant therapy. Average follow-up was 112 months (5-
210mo). 81% of the patients are alive without disease, 8% died of the
disease or are alive with disease. 11% of the patients died from other
causes or were lost for follow-up. 5%(n=6) had recurrence.
Accordingly to the proposed grading system, 11 cases were grade 1, 35
grade 2 and 75 grade 3. We found no correlation between the new grading
scores and metastasis, staging, follow-up or recurrence.
Conclusion: In our series, the new grading system showed no correlation
with the patient prognostic factors (recurrence, metastasis or follow-up).
Poor reproducibility or different patient characteristics might explain this.
Although the proposed system seems promising and is useful in other
topographies, our results imply that it must be validated in other SCCC
cohorts and institutions.
PS-02-031
Clinical and pathologic variables associated to cervical conizations
without high grade intraepithelial lesions: a series of 399 cases
B. Fuertes Negro*, G. Muñiz, S. Gracia, F.J. Queipo, J.M. Ramón y Cajal
*Pathology Department, Hospital San Jorge, Huesca, Spain
Background & objectives: Between 10-34% of conizations lack ≥CIN-2
(conization without disease, CWD). Our aims are to estimate our CWD
Virchows Arch
rate, to evaluate the usefulness of deeper morphological reassessment
plus p16 to ensure a CWD and to assess clinic-pathologic variables asso-
ciated to CWDs.
Methods: All conizations and colposcopy biopsies from 2010-19 were
reviewed. In CWDs, three deeper extra hematoxylin-eosin slides and one
p16 were performed.
The association of clinical (age, colposcopic extension of lesion, only or
multiple colposcopy biopsies) and pathological variables (lesion size,
lymphocytic reaction in the colposcopy biopsy, conization size; rate of
CWD initially and after extra levels) to CWD were studied.
Results: A total of 399 conizations were performed, with a mean age of
38.59 years. 96% of colposcopic lesions were ≥CIN-2, with mean size of
3.23 mm, occupying in a 60.55% of cases a single quadrant. In a 60.55%
the colposcopy biopsy was unique.
The initial 81 (20.40%) CWDs were reduced to 63 (15.79%), a decrease
of almost a quarter, after applying deeper hematoxylin-eosin levels and
extra p16. Six cases (7.41%) were reclassified as low grade dysplasia after
reviewing the colposcopy biopsies.
CWD was significantly associated to younger age, single quadrant lesion
and a smaller lesional size.
Conclusion: 1.- Our CWD rate is within the published range.
2.- Performing extra hematoxylin-eosin levels and p16 would be a rec-
ommended practice to ensure a CWD diagnosis.
3.- There are scarce clinic-pathological variables associated to CWD.
PS-02-032
Uterine rhabdomyosarcomas: 8 cases, a 10-year retrospective study
in a tertiary institution
J. Gama*, J. Madeira, R. Almeida, H. Moreira, F. Ramalhosa,
V. Almeida, C. Faria, M.B. Pimentão, A. Lai, J. Fraga, R. Oliveira,
T. Simões Silva, M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: WHO defines rhabdomyosarcoma as a rare
and malignant, heterologous mesenchymal tumour showing evidence of
skeletal muscle differentiation. The cervix is the most common localiza-
tion, followed by the uterine corpus.
Methods: We conducted a 10-year-retrospective transversal study at
Coimbra University Hospital, a tertiary hospital in Portugal (2009-
2019) and reviewed all uterine and cervix sarcomas (n=45). Relevant
clinical and pathological data was extracted from the hospital database.
Results: A total of 8 cases of rhabdomyosarcomas were found,
representing 17.8% of uterine and cervix sarcomas. The tumours
consisted of 6 pleomorphic and 2 embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas. No
spindled and alveolar variants were found. In this cohort, 2/8 of the cases
were diagnosed in a biopsy and 6/8 in the surgical specimen. The most
common site was the uterine corpus with 62.5% of cases; the remaining
arose in the cervix.
In our cohort, the median age at diagnosis was 69 years (range:40-
86years) and the median survival was 21.8 months (range:1-86,7
months). Tumour size ranged from 4 to 13 cm.
Conclusion: Uterine rhabdomyosarcoma is a rare entity. In our series,
pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcomas were the most common subtype
followed by the embryonal variant.
PS-02-033
First presentation of Mullerian serous carcinoma as nodal metasta-
ses: a case series
R. Ganesan*, W. Boyle, D. Midha, J. Vella, J. Pascoe, A. Williams
*Birmingham Women's Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: More than of 50% women with serous car-
cinoma of Mullerian origin present at advanced stage. Dissemination
typically occurs via transcoelomic spread. Tubo-ovarian carcinoma
presenting as nodal metastases in the absence of clinical features of pelvic
disease is rare.
Methods: We present a summary of findings in a series of serous carci-
nomas of Mullerian origin, diagnosed on lymph node biopsies. These
cases were seen as a part of the diagnostic and consultation service of a
specialist gynaecological pathology department.
Results: 12 women, 4 each with enlarged axillary and neck nodes, 1 each
with enlarged nodes in the supraclavicular fossa, inguinal, peripancreatic
and retroperitoneal sites; were diagnosed with metastatic serous carcino-
ma of Mullerian origin (10 high grade and 2 low grade). 9 presented with
mass related symptoms, others with nausea, backache and dysphagia.
Pelvic masses were found in 6 cases, 3 patients had lymphadenopathy
only, 3 were lost to follow up.
Conclusion: This case series demonstrates that Mullerian serous carcino-
mas can present as distant nodal metastases in the absence of presenting
symptoms of pelvic disease. It is postulated that malignant cells gain
access to lymph nodes via peritoneal lymphatics or that carcinomas can
arise from Mullerian nodal inclusions. Investigations may demonstrate a
pelvic mass in some cases. Accurate and confident diagnosis of Mullerian
origin can be made by a combination of morphology and immunohisto-
chemistry.
PS-02-034
Evaluation of spontaneous abortion samples following the
Amsterdam Placental Workshop Group consensus statement: study
in a single tertiary hospital centre
N. Gonzalez-Ortega*, M.J. Isorna-Porto, B. Sopeña, A. González-
Quintela, F. Gude-Sampedro, J.M. Cameselle Teijeiro
*Mateu Orfila Hospital, IB-Salut, Spain
Background & objectives: In daily clinical practice, the study of spon-
taneous abortion is usually limited to the morphological confirmation of
pregnancy. In this study we investigated whether the Amsterdam
Placental Workshop Group (APWG) recommendations could provide
relevant information concerning placental lesions, in comparison to rou-
tine study (RS).
Methods: We carried out a 9-month retrospective study of spontaneous
abortion samples collected in our institution. All samples coded as “spon-
taneous abortion” and/or “product of conception” were selected from the
Pathology Department database. Maternal clinicopathological and demo-
graphic variables were collected from the electronic records. All histo-
pathological samples were reviewed a second time by two pathologists
simultaneously using the APWG criteria.
Results: 408 samples were analysed. Mean age 35.5 years (17-48 years),
mean gestational age 9.2 weeks (4-18 weeks). Samples were normal in
405 cases in the RS compared to 352 following our systematic revision.
Relevant data were identified in 3(1%) cases of the RS [mola(1), acute
inflammation(2)] vs. 56(14%) cases with APWG criteria [mola(1), distal
villous hypoplasia(1), accelerated villous maturation(1), infarction(12)].
Fibrin was identified in the intervillous space in 41 samples.
Conclusion: The use of the APWG recommendations for the study of
spontaneous abortion or placental samples resulted in our identifying 18.6
times more pathology than the RS. Most findings suggest poor placental
perfusion, but the intervillous fibrin has uncertain significance.
PS-02-035
Complement system involved in endothelial injury in preeclamptic
placenta
M.T. Gonzalez-Serrano*, M. López-Andreu, A. Sanz-Zorrilla, I. Ruíz-
Núñez, R. Ortega-Salas
*Dept. of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Spain
Background & objectives: Preeclampsia is a potentially severe condi-
tion of pregnancy, characterized by severe hypertension, proteinuria and
Virchows Arch
vascular placental lesions. Links between preeclampsia and oxidative
stress in trophoblast and endothelium were described and have investi-
gated the role of complement system in these placenta
Methods: 34 placentas from patients with severe preeclampsia (PE) diag-
nosed before week 32 of pregnancy were obtained. The control group was 10
placentas of women without a diagnosis of hypertension or preeclampsia.
Placental specimens obtained were processed and microscopic section were
stained for H&E and PAS, as well as for immunohistochemical stains for
CD61 (platelet thrombi) and C4d (complement component).
Results: PE group revealed thickened wall of foetal blood capillaries,
crowded degenerating villi with decreased intervillous spaces, intravillous
and perivillous fibrinoid deposition. Numerous syncytial knots and there
was thickened layer of subchorionic fibrinoid. In addition, PE group showed
atherosis, swollen endothelial cells and intracapillary thrombi with CD 61
immunomarking and C4d deposit.
Conclusion: Our results show a relationship between PE, lesions in vascu-
lar lesions with activation of the complement cascade and C4d deposit.
Identification of mechanisms involved in the triggering of endothelial dys-
function may be a promising therapeutic approach in management of PE.
PS-02-038
Co-expression of GATA-3 and PAX-8: a diagnostic pitfall
N. Herlihy*, R. Arora
*UCLH, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Immunohistochemistryis invaluable in establish-
ing the origin of a poorly differentiated primary tumour or metastatic carci-
noma. Overlapping/atypical staining patterns are a common pitfall. Our ob-
jective was to ascertain the frequency of tumours co-expressing Müllerian
marker PAX-8 and breast/urothelial marker GATA-3.
Methods: We performed a search on our internal pathology I.T. system
(CoPath) for all specimens from 2015-2019 on which PAX-8 and GATA-
3 immunostains were performed. We then collated the cases which
expressed both markers and reviewed the final diagnoses on the pathol-
ogy reports.
Results: PAX-8 and GATA-3 immunostains were performed on 228
surgical and cytological specimens. 22 tumours expressed both markers.
The final histological diagnosis in 12/22 cases (54.5%) favoured tumours
originating in the gynaecological tract; most of these were high-grade
(8/12) and of tubo-ovarian origin (6/12), while 2/12 were uterine, 1/12
was cervical and for 3/12 the particular site of gynaecological origin was
uncertain. 8/22 cases (36.5%) were diagnosed as poorly differentiated/
high grade carcinoma where the site of origin could not be determined;
3/8 of these cases had a background history of previous ovarian or endo-
metrial cancer. 1/22 (4.5%) was diagnosed as high-grade urothelial car-
cinoma and 1/22 (4.5%) as malignant epithelioid tumour.
Conclusion: Immunohistochemistry is commonly used to establish the
origin of poorly differentiated or metastatic tumours. PAX-8 is positive in
approximately 80% of Müllerian tract-derived carcinomas. GATA-3 is
positive in 94% of breast and 86% of urothelial carcinomas. Our study
highlights potential diagnostic pitfalls when both markers are positive,
particularly in the diagnosis of gynaecological tract malignancy, and sup-
ports previous findings of GATA-3 positivity in a subset of endometrial
and ovarian carcinomas.
PS-02-039
Mismatch repair deficiency in uterine carcinosarcoma - a 20 year
retrospective review: 18 cases tested
S. Hernandez Bonilla*, L. El Bouayadi, T. Rivera García,
M.D. Rodríguez Garnica, R.M. Álvarez López, E. Jareño Dorrego
*Hospital Universitario Santa Cristina, Spain
Background & objectives: Immunohistochemistry for mismatch repair
(MMR) proteins is recommended in endometrial carcinomas as a
screening test for Lynch Syndrome. Carcinosarcomas are staged and
treated like other epitelial malignancies, however few studies have eval-
uated the rate of MMR loss in uterine carcinosarcomas.
Methods: A 20 year retrospective database search of uterine carcinosarcomas
was performed at our institution. The histologic diagnoses were confirmed by
a gynaecologic pathologist. One tissue section from each case was stained
with the 4 MMR proteins (MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6) and p53.
Heterologous elements and lymphovascular invasion were noted if
present.
Clinical features were collected.
Results: 18 cases of uterine carcinosarcoma were identified. 16 cases
showed intact expression and 2 mismatch repair deficiency (MMRd) with
loss of MSH6 and aberrant p53 expression. 12 of the total number of
cases showed aberrant p53 expression. 3 cases showed wild-type p53
expression. 2 cases of Lynch Syndrome were identified among
carcinosarcoma patients. Nowadays 17 patients are alive and 1 dead and 1
patient with loss of MSH6 had colorrectal carcinoma.
Conclusion: The rate of MMRd is lower in uterine carcinosarcoma when
compared with endometrioid carcinoma. In the setting of MMR loss, a
diagnosis of dedifferentiated carcinoma should be considered.
Understanding how MMRd contribute to carcinosarcoma pathogenesis
is relevant not only for identifying Lynch síndrome and prevent the de-
velopment of colorectal cancer but also for identifying candidates for
immunotherapy, as defects in MMR have been shown to impart vulner-
ability to checkpoint inhibition.
PS-02-040
Peculiarities of vascularisation of serous adenocarcinoma of fallopian
tubes
N. Hyriavenko*, M. Lyndin, V. Sikora, L. Karpenko, R. Moskalenko,
A. Piddubnyi, A. Romaniuk
*Sumy State University, Ukraine
Background & objectives: Sometimes it is difficult to estimate the de-
gree of neoplastic vascularization. It can be achieved by using the immu-
nohistochemical studies of CD31 receptors.
To study the peculiarities of the serous adenocarcinoma of fallopian tubes
(SAFT) vascularization.
Methods: The study was carried out on 66 samples of tumour tissue of
serous adenocarcinoma of fallopian tubes. For study the CD31 expres-
sion, the rat monoclonal antibodies 1A10 were used.
Results: In well-differentiated tumours, the structured focal localization
of the vessels in papillary formations, which were observed gradually
disappeared in the papillae branched. While neoplasia dedifferentiation,
the disorders of tumour tissue vascularization with chaotic vessels local-
ization were found. Despite the data on the degrees of microvascular
density in different types of carcinoma in case of malignant process de-
velopment, areas with pronounced microvascular density as well as non-
vascular tumour lesions were observed.
Conclusion: The tissue of SAFT is characterized by the structured vas-
cularization of neoplastic tissue with its gradual disorganization under
carcinoma dedifferentiation. These results can be used to predict the tu-
mour course, considering the influence of the increased angiogenesis on
cancer metastasis and the possibility of using the vascular-suppressant
treatment in antitumour therapy.
PS-02-041
Antenatal foetal vascular malperfusion is a placental factor for term
preeclampsia
M. Irfan*
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Currently, there is evidence that late pre-
eclampsia (PE) in full-term pregnancy is more due to metabolic and
Virchows Arch
cardiac dysfunction of the mother’s body than to placenta pathology,
therefore PE in full-term pregnancy should be considered as a patholog-
ical condition different from early preeclampsia.
A comparative histopathological evaluation of the foetal-placental and
uteroplacental compartments of term and preterm placentas from preg-
nancies with preeclampsia was performed.
Methods: Retrospective histological examination of 81 placentas from ab-
normal pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia at 32-35 weeks (n-52) and
full-term (37-41 weeks, n-29) gestation was performed. Histopathological
criteria of maternal vascular malperfusion follows: acceleration of villi devel-
opment and placental infarction (more than 10% the placenta volume); criteria
for foetal vascular malperfusion follows: fibromuscular sclerosis, vascular
ectasia and thrombosis of placental stem villi.
Results: Histopathological signs of maternal vascular malferfusion in all
placentas with preeclampsia were detected in 71 cases (88%). Among
them, with preterm PE in 52(100%) cases, in term gestation - in 19
(66%) cases. Histopathological signs of FVM were detected in 27
(93%) placentas with term preeclampsia and only in 11(21%) placentas
with preterm preeclampsia.
Conclusion: We hypothesize, that FVM is important feto-placental factor
in the development of PE. PE in a full-term pregnancy may be associated
with compensatory activation the tone of feto-placental large vessels in
conditions of clinically latent fetoplacental blood flow disturbance (FVM).
PS-02-042
MRI investigation in preeclampsia for severity diagnostic purposes
M. Irfan*, S. Zhuravlev, D. Kossitsyn, Y. Kotov, O. Kostyleva
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Over the past 5 years, the number of brain
haemorrhages in patients with hypertensive pregnancy disorders has in-
creased 6-fold in the world.
MRI usage prospective in patients with preeclampsia (PE) complaints of
headache for reducing the frequency of its complications.
Methods: 36 delivery cases in patients with preeclampsia that had under-
gone brain MRI were studied.
Results: Brain MRI indications: headache – 35 (97.2%), ophthalmic
lesion – 1 (2.8%). PE intensity before the MRI: severe – 24 (66.7%), mild
– 12 (33.3%). MRI done during pregnancies – 16.5 (31.3%) of which
have revealed abnormalities that prohibit continuing pregnancy: 3 (60%)
– posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), 2 (40%) – vas-
cular focal lesions in the brain; a patients (68.7%) had no pathology.
Conclusion: According to MRI data, changes were revealed in 58.3%
patients with PE and complaints of headache. Data obtained from the
objective assessment of the brain condition helped to avoid unreasonable
pregnancy continuation and contributed to the timely therapy correction,
which helped reducing the frequency of complications. in 2 patients with
PRES and 1 with vascular focal lesions arterial blood pressure and pro-
teinuria levels matched mild PE, but regarding all the revealed changes,
all the patients undergone emergen c-section;
PS-02-043
To evaluate the presentation and time of diagnosis of cervical cancer
and its precursor lesions in a tertiary care hospital of a low resource
country like Pakistan lacking a national screening programme
M. Javed*, R. Rafi, H. Saleem
*Cantonment General Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: The purpose of the study is to evaluate the
most common presentation and diagnosis of cervical cancer and its pre-
cursor lesions in a tertiary care hospital of Pakistan in the absence of a
local or national level screening program.
Methods: A retrospective descriptive study was carried out in which all the
cases of cervical cancer and cervical intraepithelial lesions received in the
Histopathology Department of Foundation University Islamabad (FUI) were
retrieved from January, 2010 to December 2014. All the surgical specimens
were included including biopsies and hysterectomy specimens. The data was
then analysed for clinical presentation and age of diagnosis.
Results: A total of 47 cases of cervical cancer and precursor lesions were
identified in the 5 year study period.out of which 7 patients were diag-
nosed with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia(14.89%)while the rest of the
women were diagnosed with different types of cervical
carcinoma(85.1%).the most common clinical presentation was postmen-
opausal bleeding(90%) followed by dysfunctional uterine
bleeding.(10%).the most common colposcopic findings were cervical
growth/mass(89%).the mean age of diagnosis of CIN1,CIN2 and CIN3
was 44.57 and the mean age of diagnosis of carcinoma was
Conclusion: The burden of disease will continue to increase with more
frequent presentation with invasive carcinoma therefore education of the
public,political support and awarenes is important to combat the disease
PS-02-044
Association of CCL2 (monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) expres-
sion with obesity in endometroid endometrial cancer
P. Jolugbo*, M. Cummings, G. Mappa, R. Hutson, N. Orsi
*Women's Health Research Group, Pathology & Data Analytics, Leeds
Institute of Medical Research at St James's, University of Leeds, United
Kingdom
Background & objectives: Despite the epidemiological association be-
tween endometrial cancer and obesity, the underlying pathophysiological
link remains ill-defined. We investigated the potential association be-
tween obesity and the tumour-associated inflammatory
microenvironment.
Methods: 48 cytokines were profiled by multiplex immunoassay in en-
dometrial cancer (N=93, including 53 endometroid endometrial cancers
(EEC) and 40 non-EECs). Sample-matched cytokine mRNA expression
data were obtained by microarray analysis of laser-captured microdissect-
ed tumour cells. Patient demographics including BMI were also collected
for these women. Non-parametric statistical tests were carried out with
Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple comparisons, as appropriate.
Results: There was no significant difference in BMI between patients
with EECs and non-EECs. No significant association between cytokine
profiles and BMI were identified in the non-EEC group. However, in the
EEC group, there was a significant association between CCL2 expression
and obesity, where CCL2 mRNA was higher in patients with BMI >30
(corrected P=0.008). There was a trend for increased CCL2 protein ex-
pression (uncorrected P=0.008). CCL2 mRNA and protein levels signif-
icantly correlated with each other (SRC=0.551, P<0.00001), as well as
positively with BMI (SRC=0.518 and 0.336; P=0.0001 and P=0.017,
respectively). There were no significant differences in CCL2 expression
between EECs and non-EECs.
Conclusion: We identified an association between tumour epithelial
CCL2 expression and BMI in EEC. These findings suggest a potential
link between obesity-associated systemic inflammation and its localised
effects in the tumour microenvironment.
Funding: Wellbeing of Women (RG1210), Yorkshire Cancer Research
(LPP053), Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland (Career
Development Fellowship awarded to NMO; 1090)
PS-02-046
Pap smear and primary HPV tests results over a recent 3-year period
from a routine laboratory setting in Kenya
A. Kalebi*, R. Mukadam, L. Muchiri
*Pathologists Lancet Kenya
Background & objectives: Cervical cancer is a leading cancer in Kenya
where a National Cancer Screening Guideline was recently released
Virchows Arch
recommending HPV Testing as the primary screening method. We here-
by share experience on Pap smear and HPV tests done at our laboratory.
Methods: We retrospectively retrieved data from our laboratory informa-
tion system (LIS) focusing on conventional cervical cytology done over a
recent 3-year period from July 2016 to June 2019 corresponding to the
period HPV test on Cobas 4800 platform (Roche) was introduced in our
laboratory, which is ISO15189 accredited for both tests and one of the
busiest laboratories in the country.
Results: A total of 27,447 Pap smears were reported with a median age of
38 years, of whom 97.31% had NILM,1.58% HSIL, 0.57% LSIL, 0.33%
ASC-H, 0.02% ASCUS and 0.04% SCC. Up to 43.3% had significant
cervicitis on conventional Pap smear and 13.6% had bacterial vaginosis,
while 8.9% had atrophic changes.
During the corresponding period, a total of 3523 HPV tests were done,
with an over two-fold year-on-year increase in numbers tested. High-risk
HPV (HR-HPV) was detected in 26.6% of the cases, of whom 24.5%
tested positive for HPV non-16/18 type, 6.2% type 16 and 3.9% type 18.
Infection with multiple HPV types was noted in 6% of cases.
Conclusion: The rate of HR-HPV is noticeably high in these women
tested in a routine setting. ASCUS seems unusually, low likely due to
dual reporting by cytologists and pathologists; HSIL and LSIL rates are
comparable to the published literature from Africa
PS-02-047
Clinicopathological features, including immunohistochemical profile
of 14 malignant peritoneal mesotheliomas diagnosed at a
single institution
S. Karmarkar*, B. Rekhi, K. Deodhar, S. Menon
*Department of Surgical Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, HBNI
University, Mumbai, India
Background & objectives: Malignant peritoneal mesotheliomas
(MPMs) are rare tumours with overlapping clinical and histopatho-
logical features, especially with epithelial ovarian carcinomas
(EOCs). There is no substantial documentation on these rare tumours
from our country.
We studied clinicopathological features, including the immunohisto-
chemical profile and clinical outcomes of 14 MPMs, diagnosed at our
Institution.
Methods: This was a retrospective study, wherein, 14 cases of MPM in
female patients,diagnosed at our Institution, between January 2008 and
May 2019 were included, after critical review.
Results: Median age was 54.5 years. Microscopically,most cases(11, 78.6%)
displayed epithelioid morphology, followed by biphasic(2, 14.3%)
pattern.Sensitivity and specificity of calretinin was 100%(13/13) and 85.%;
HBME1 was 100%(5/5) and 100%, and of podoplanin(D2-40) was 60%(2/5)
and 100%. Other positively expressed immunomarkers were EMA (n=2/5,
40%) CK5/6 (n=4/4, 100%) and WT1 (n=9/10, 90%). Most pa-
tients(5/12)(41.7%) were treated with chemotherapy.The 3-year disease-free
and overall survival rates were 25.7% and 54%, respectively.
Conclusion: MPMs can be diagnosed with a combination of clinicopath-
ological features and optimal immunohistochemical markers. Their dif-
ferentiation from EOCs and other metastatic carcinomas is imperative in
view of significant treatment implications.
PS-02-048
Hypoxic damage and endometrial cell antiapoptosis in endometrial
hyperplasia
E. Kazachkov*, E. Voropayeva, E. Kazachkova, A. Zatvornickaya
*South Ural State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Hypoxia stabilizes hypoxia inducible factor-
1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) leading to cell hyperproliferation and antiapoptosis.
However, hypoxic damage and antiapoptosis in endometrial hyperplasia
(EH) remain little studied. The aim was to compare hypoxic damage and
endometrial cells antiapoptosis in EH.
Methods: Endometrial biopsy was obtained from 25 patients with EH
without atypia and 25 healthy women. Expression levels of HIF-1 alpha
and Bcl-2 were determined by monoclonal antibodies (Epitomics, Clone
EP118 and Dako, Clone 124). Videotest - Morphology 5.2 (Russia) was
used for morphometric analysis, and nonparametric statistical methods
were applied.
Results: In the group of patients with EH, the mean area of HIF-1 alpha
immunopositive structures was 41.7% (35.8%; 47.1%). The mean area of
Bcl-2 expression was 68.6% (58.4%; 76,2%). In endometrial samples of
healthy patients, HIF-positive cells were not recorded, and the average
area of immunopositive structures was 0%. The average area of Bcl-2
positive structures was significantly lower in this group compared to
patients with EH and was 22.53% (15.6%; 29,8%).
Conclusion: Significantly increased HIF-1 alpha and Bcl-2 expression in
EH samples indicates hypoxic damage and raised antiapoptotic activity of
intracellular endometrial systems. Increased antiapoptotic activity and
HIF-positive cells presence may be an adverse factor leading to endome-
trial oncotransformation.
The reported study was funded by RFBR, project number 19-315-90101.
PS-02-049
Vitamin D receptors as an additional marker of implantation in ART
programmes
E. Kazachkov*, E. Chuhnina, E. Voropayeva, E. Kazachkova
*South Ural State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Vitamin D receptors (VDR) play an impor-
tant role in endometrial receptivity and implantation. The objective is to
assess the impact of VDR expression levels in stroma and endometrial
glands on the outcomes of ART programs.
Methods: A prospective study of IVF outcomes was performed in 70
women of advanced reproductive age with tubal-peritoneal infertility. An
endometrial pipe-biopsy was taken during the supposed implantation
window. The endometrial samples were formalin-fixed and embedded
in paraffin. For immunohistochemistry, rabbit polyclonal Vitamin D re-
ceptor antibodies were used. The percentage of VDR-positive stromal
cells was calculated.
Results: VDR expression in the endometrial stroma was significantly
higher in the case of successful implantation. The threshold value was
8.7%, since clinical pregnancy was not observed if the percent of VDR
positive cells was equal to or higher than 8.7%. Therefore, the endome-
trium was favourable for implantation in values of less than 8.7%. There
were no significant differences in VDR expression in the endometrial
glands.
Conclusion: The obtained results expand the range of endometrial recep-
tivity markers. The identified reference value of VDR expression in the
endometrial stroma may optimize the preparation of the endometrium for
blastocyst implantation.
PS-02-051
The role of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in the development
of deep endometriosis
E. Kogan*, Т. Demura, A. Mursalova
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: Pathogenesis of endometriosis (EM) is not
completely studied. According recent researches epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) is involved in progression of EM. Purpose. Identifying
the role of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformation in the development
of endometriosis.
Methods: Materials and methods. The study was performed on the sur-
gical materials and from 70 women with deep endometriosis: The control
group consisted of 20 women with local peritoneal endometriosis.
Virchows Arch
Expression levels of panCK, E-cadherin, Vimentin, CD34, SMA were
identified by immunohistochemistry analysis of epithelium and stromal
cells of heterotopic endometrium. Semi-quantitative assessment of the
immunohistochemical results was done.
Results: EMT was found in foci of vascular invasion of deep EM in 47
patients. A hallmark of EMT were the loss of E-cadherin and panCK
expression together with arising of vimentin and SMA in epithelial cells.
Conclusion: Progression of deep EM may be associated with EMT.
Identifying and understanding the signalling mechanisms, promoting
EMT may lead to novel therapeutic strategies, which will inhibit this
cellular transformation
PS-02-052
Study of the effect of gestabutonoil on endometrial proliferation in
female rats
M. Kostyaeva*, I. Kastyro, Y. Gushchina
*Peoples' Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University), Russia
Background & objectives: Progesterone analogues are used to preserve
pregnancy, treat endometrial hyperplastic processes and endometriosis in
combined oral contraceptives. Objective: to evaluate the effect of
gestabutonoil on endometrial proliferation in female rats when taken
orally.
Methods: All groups included 15 female Wistar rats. Microcapsules with
0.002 g gestobutanoil were intragastrically administered to the experi-
mental groups for 30 days: group 1 at a dosage of 2.5 mg/kg, group 2 -
25 mg/kg. 10 rats made up the control group. Endometrial sections were
stained with H&E. Endometrial decidualization was evaluated.
Results: In the first group, the endometrium was in the phase of secretion,
an increase in the number, size and tortuosity of the glands, vacuolization
of the gland epithelium, loosening of the subglandular zone with pro-
nounced decidualization of the cells was noted. In group 2, the prolifer-
ation of glandular epithelium was too intense until the appearance of
glandular hyperplasia in 4 females of this group.
Conclusion: Gestabutonoil in small doses causes a therapeutic effect, but
at high concentrations it contributes to the development of hyperplastic
processes in the endometrium. The use of high doses of gestobanoyl can
provoke further proliferation of glands and melignation against the back-
ground of endometrial hyperplasia
PS-02-053
Expression of mismatch repair proteins, hormone receptors, and
HER2 in metastatic/recurrent endometrial carcinoma
W. Lai*, C. Lai
*Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taiwan
Background & objectives: Endometrial carcinoma is the most common
uterine corpus cancer. Recurrence/metastasis occurs in 1/5 of cases.
Molecular markers tailor adjuvant therapies. We aimed to characterize
therapy-related marker expression including mismatch repair (MMR)
proteins, hormone receptors, and HER2 in metastatic/recurrent endome-
trial carcinoma.
Methods: A retrospective search in our pathology archive for metastatic/
recurrent endometrial carcinoma subsequent to a staging surgery from
2008 to 2019 was performed. Tumours of epithelial origin including
carcinoma and carcinosarcoma were included. Slides were retrieved for
morphology review. Cases with sufficient formalin-fixed paraffin embed-
ded materials were constructed into tissue microarray for immunohisto-
chemical stains.
Results: Thirty-six cases were identified. The median age at diagnosis
was 60 years (34-76) and the median interval to 1st metastasis was 76.4
weeks (1.1 to 795.6). Loss of MMR protein expression was found in
22.2% of cases (seven paired loss of MLH1 and PMS2 and one paired
loss of MSH2 and MSH6). Oestrogen receptor, progesterone receptor,
and HER2 was positive in 65.6%, 43.8%, and 6.3% of cases, respectively.
Thirteen had more than one metastatic event, and paired specimens were
available in seven. Four had discrepant marker expression, with one de-
veloping MMR protein loss, one oestrogen and progesterone receptor
loss, one HER2 gain and one HER2 loss at the last metastasis.
Conclusion: Expression of therapy-related molecular markers is com-
mon in metastatic/recurrent endometrial carcinoma. More than half may
benefit from hormone therapy and some from immune checkpoint or
HER2 inhibitors. Marker expression alters in consecutive metastasis,
warranting re-assaying each time to guide treatment.
Funding: Institutional funding
PS-02-054
Case series: p57 discordant hydatidiform moles, case report series
S.H. Lee*, L. Mcmahon, K. Gillespie, A. Alder, G. Moffat, N. Andrew,
L. Cuthill, P. Chien, L. Christie
*Ninewells Hospital, NHS Tayside, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Diagnosis and subclassification of
hydatidiform moles (HM) is critical to assess the risk of gestational tro-
phoblastic neoplasia (GTN). Rare cases of HM with aberrant p57 immu-
nohistochemistry necessitate genotyping for diagnosis. Here, we present a
case series of p57 discordant villi.
Methods: 675 cases of possible HM referred to the Scottish HM service
between 2016 and 2019 were analysed using haematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) light microscopy examination, ploidy analysis and p57 immuno-
histochemistry. DNA from 5 cases with discordant p57 staining pattern in
cytotrophoblasts and stromal cells were extracted by laser microdissec-
tion and genotyped for further characterisation.
Results: Three cases showed aberrant morphology in keeping with HM
and a discordant p57 pattern being negative in villous stromal cells while
being positive in cytotrophoblasts. Flow cytometry showed a diploid
DNA complement. Stromal cells and cytotrophoblasts were separately
genotyped using laser microdissection and molecular genotyping which
showed mosaicism. Two further cases demonstrated a homozygous and
heterozygous complete mole.
Conclusion: This study emphasizes that a multidisciplinary approach
using light microscopy, immunohistochemistry and molecular studies is
invaluable in subclassifying HM. In particular, rare cases of mosaicism
were identified using such approach which is necessary for understanding
their risk of developing GTN.
PS-02-055
Immunohistochemistry of P16 and P53 in vulvar cancer
M.D.L.M. Lewkowicz*, M.E. Paradeda, F. Gomez Cherey, M.F. Falcon,
F. Garcia Kammermann, D. Sciaccaluga, V. Maldonado, L. Palaoro,
L. Diaz, L. Cardinal
*Hospital de Clínicas "José de San Martin", Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Argentina
Background & objectives: Squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva may
develop in association or independently of HPV infection. We aim to
confirm the association of keratinizing carcinomas with absence of HPV
infection, and warty and basaloid carcinomas with presence of this virus.
Methods: We reviewed clinical manifestations, histological morphology
and immunophenotype of 39 cases. We performed immunohistochemis-
try for p16 and p53, and PCR to evaluate HPV status. Statistical analysis
was performed using Fisher´s exact test and t/ANOVA test.
Histologically we determined 30 classic keratinizing squamous carcino-
mas, 5 warty and 4 basaloid carcinomas.
Results: In the statistical analysis, diffuse expression with p16 was sig-
nificantly associated with younger age (p = 0.0025), presence of high-
grade intraepithelial lesion (p < 0.0001), koilocytosis (p = 0.02), and
morphological subtype (p = 0.02), and was inversely associated with
Virchows Arch
the expression of p53 (p < 0.0001) and the presence of lichen sclerosus (p
= 0.0051). It is curious that 4 keratinizing carcinomas of the cases studied
presented coexpression of p16 and p53. Only 1 warty tumour was nega-
tive for p16 and positive for p53, and 9 keratinizing tumours were positive
for p16 and negative for p53. Four of them were PCR positive for high
risk HPV.
Conclusion: Although these findings show that the use of hematoxylin
and eosin could correctly define tumours associated with HPV, we
strongly suggest the performance of immunohistochemistry, especially
in squamous keratinizing classic carcinomas in young patients with a
history of HPV.
PS-02-056
Cross-talking of two apoptotic molecules in ovarian cancer
L. Lozneanu*, S. Giusca, I.D. Caruntu
*U.M.F.” Grigore T. Popa” Iași, Romania
Background & objectives: Objective: Our study aimed to analyse the
immunoexpression of p53 and c-FLIP in ovarian carcinoma in relation-
ship with the clinicopathological features.
Methods: The study group consisted of 63 cases of ovarian carcinomas
histopathologically diagnosed as serous (44 cases), and non-serous (19
cases); 24 cases were classified as stage I-II and 39 as stage III; 12 cases
were assessed as G1, 24 cases as G2, 27 cases as G3 and G4. Tissue
fragments were immunohistochemically processed by using anti-p53 and
c-FLIP antibodies.
Results: c-FLIP+/p53+ expression was noted in 15 cases and negative in
14 cases. 17 cases exhibited c-FLIP-/p53+ and c-FLIP+/p53- respectively.
Cases with c-FLIP+/p53- profile had the following distribution according
to tumour stage: 8 in stage I and 9 in stage III, and tumour grade: G1 in 6
cases, G2 in 8 cases and G3 in 3 cases. Cases presenting c-FLIP-/p53+
profile were framed as follows: 2 in stage I, 2 in stage II and 13 in stage III;
1 case was graded as G1, 6 cases as G2, 9 cases as G3 and 1 case as G4.
Statistical analysis revealed significant differences between c-FLIP+/p53-
and, respectively, c-FLIP-/p53+ expression, and tumour grade.
Conclusion: The study of FLIP and p53 molecules provides integrated
images of the apoptotic mechanism based on a cross-talk between the
intrinsic and extrinsic pathways
PS-02-057
Hsp70 and Hsp90 expression in normal and tumour endometrial
tissues
M. Lyndin*, V. Sikora, O. Kravtsova, A. Romaniuk
*Sumy State University, Ukraine
Background & objectives: Endometrial cells acquire new peculiarities
during malignant transformation and progression, which plays a signifi-
cant role in the behaviour of neoplastic cells.
The objective of our study presented here was to characterize hsp70 and
hsp90 expressions in normal and tumour endometrium.
Methods: The investigation was conducted on 50 samples with different
types (endometrioid, serous and clear-cell) endometrial carcinoma. Ten
cases of normal endometrium were used for comparison. The presence of
hsp70 and hsp90 was detected by the immunohistochemistry utilizing the
mouse mAb W27 and rabbit pAb (0.1μg/ml), respectively.
Results: Normal endometrium is characterized by the focal nuclear-
cytoplasmic expression of hsp70. Endometrial carcinomas showed an
increase in its expression in tumour cells with the appearance of hsp90.
The de-differentiation of tumours was accompanied by increase chaper-
one response. Both were found in a high proportion of cancer cells. It
should be noted, that most neoplasias had a heterogeneous expression of
chaperons in tumour tissue.
Conclusion: The occurrence and progression of endometrial carcinomas
are accompanied by the change hsp70 and hsp90 expression in tumour
cells. They acquire additional resistance due to the synthesis of chaper-
ones which increase their survival.
PS-02-059
A histological analysis of the placenta for the diagnosis of chronic
abruption-oligohydramnios sequence
S. Minamiguchi*, A. Ishida, S. Sumiyoshi, Y. Chigusa, E. Kondoh,
H. Haga
*Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kyoto University Hospital, Japan
Background & objectives: Chronic abruption-oligohydramnios se-
quence (CAOS) is characterized by diffuse chorioamniotic hemosiderosis
(DCH). We compared the degree and distribution pattern of hemosiderin
deposition (HD) on the chorionic plate (CP) and free membrane (FM).
Methods: We selected 20 CAOS patients, 21 non-CAOS patients as
control group A (CA) matched by gestational weeks and 21 non-CAOS
patients as control group B (CB) with bloody amniotic fluid. Iron staining
of CP and FM was performed for every case. HD was evaluated by a
histological score (HS) determined as positivity (0-3) multiplied by the
staining area extent (0-4).
Results: HD was found in 100% (20/20) of CAOS patients and 14%
(3/21) of CA and 9.5% (2/21) of CB patients. In both FM and CP,
CAOS patients showed a significantly higher HS than control patients
(CAOS, HS=4-12; CA, HS=0-1, p<0.0001; CB, HS=0-3, p<0.0001). In
three CAOS patients, HD was seen only in the CP. The HS of the CP was
significantly higher than that of the FM (p=0.0003).
Conclusion: CAOS was histologically characterized by DCH with an HS
≥4. The CP was better suited for the evaluation of DCH than the FM.
PS-02-060
A review of cases submitted for molecular genotyping by the Scottish
Hydatidiform Mole Service over a 3-year period
S. Mohan*, L. McMahon, N. Andrew, L. Cuthill, A. Alder, K. Gillespie,
P. Chien, L. Christie
*Ninewells Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: In Scotland, suspected molar pregnancies are
referred by the local pathologist to the Scottish Hydatidiform mole service
(SHMS) in Dundee. This is a review of those cases that were diagnosti-
cally challenging and were submitted for molecular genotyping.
Methods: Submitted slides and blocks are booked in and ploidy
analysis undertaken on all cases. If diploid, P57 immunohisto-
chemistry (IHC) performed. Slides are reviewed by the pathologist
and a final diagnosis of complete or partial mole or non-molar
pregnancy reported. Molecular studies were undertaken if the di-
agnosis was equivocal. Genotyping was performed on DNA ex-
tracted from chorionic villi and maternal decidua.
Results: 689 cases received between 2017 and 2019. Histology, ploidy
analysis and p57 IHC sufficient for diagnosis of 95% of referrals. The
remaining 5% (34/689) were submitted for molecular genotyping to con-
firm the diagnosis. Where required, specific populations of chorionic villi
or regions of discordant P57 expression were microdissected. Results
showed, 56% (19/34) of cases were associated with a molar genotype
including complete heterozygous or homozygous complement, or
diandric triploidy. This included 5 cases of complex results including
mosaicism and triandric tetraploidy. Biparental inheritance was reported
in 15% (5/34) of cases. 18% (6/34) of cases were uninterpretable and the
remaining 12% (4/34) of cases were associated with trisomy 21 or digynic
triploidy.
Conclusion: Only a small number of cases submitted to the SHMS re-
quired further investigation by molecular genotyping with several cases
showing complex results that could not be reliably established by other
methods. This work reviews the range of diverse and complex cases seen
by a national referral centre.
Virchows Arch
PS-02-061
Correlation of core needle biopsy to diagnose breast phyllodes
tumours – experience of a tertiary hospital
H. Moreira*, R. Almeida, J. Gama, J. Madeira, C. Faria, M.B. Pimentão,
A. Lai, F. Ramalhosa, T. Simões Silva
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: A retrospective study of diagnosis was per-
formed in patients with phyllodes tumours (PT) of the breast who were
submitted to preoperative core needle biopsy(CNB) and had breast sur-
gery at Centro Hospitalar e Universitário of Coimbra, comparing accura-
cy of both diagnosis.
Methods: Data from 13 patients with PT who underwent preoperative
CNB and breast surgery were retrospectively analysed. We reviewed the
CNB and surgical specimen diagnostic data. A diagnostic test was used to
evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of CNB in diagnosing benign,
borderline, and malignant phyllodes tumours.
Results: All patients were female with a mean age of 50.3 years (range
27-70 years). The accuracy of CNB for diagnosing PT was 38.5% (5/13).
Of the remaining patients, were diagnosed with fibroadenoma or high-
grade sarcoma. The sensitivity of CNB to diagnose benign, borderline,
and malignant phyllodes tumours were 50% (2/4), 25% (1/4), and 20%
(1/5), respectively, whereas the corresponding specificity were 40%,
100%, and 100%, respectively.
Conclusion: CNB provides a pathological basis for the preoperative di-
agnosis of PT of the breast, but it’s accuracy is poor and guidance is
limited for surgical decisions. Considering CNB along with multiple his-
tologic features may improve the ability to accurately diagnose PT.
Literature recommends an integrated assessment using CNBs in combi-
nation with clinical data and imaging features as a reliable strategy to
assist PT diagnosis.
PS-02-062
Predictive assessment and follow-up strategy for patients with CIN 1
based on the use of colposcopic indices and immunohistochemical
markers
S. Mozgovoi*, E. Abrosimova, S. Veremeeva, O. Lazareva
*Omsk State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: There are currently no clear criteria for pa-
tient management with CIN 1. It is important to find diagnostic tests and
approaches that can predict the following development of CIN and justify
the choice of patient management tactics.
Methods: 84 biopsy specimens from patients with a histologically verified
diagnosis of CNS 1 were examined: HPV 16/18 status, colposcopic features,
routine histopathology with koilocytosis evaluation, expression of Ki-67, P53
and P16INK4a by immunohistochemistry. The control study was carried out
12 months later. The patients were divided into 3 groups according to the
results: regression, CIN permanence, progression to CIN 2.
Results: Differences in the colposcopic characteristics using Reid and
Coppleson indexes have been identified. In the group with CIN persis-
tence a well-established increase in the number koilocytosis changes were
revealed, as well as differences in the level of P16ink4a expression
(p<0,05). .After calculation of the quantitative influence of factors and
using the Wald test (non-uniform serial analysis) diagnostic coefficients
for these factors were calculated with the following validity parameters:
sensitivity - 92,7% and specificity - 86,1%. Immunohistochemical detec-
tion of Ki-67 and P53 correlate with the dynamics of morphological
changes but was not relevant to the prediction for the evolution of CIN 1.
Conclusion: CIN 1 is a heterogeneous group with different colposcopic
characteristics and parameters of cell renewal which determine the prog-
nosis. The following characteristics are significant for the forecast:
colposcopic indexes Reid and Coppleson, detection of koilocytosis after
haematoxylin and eosin stain of fixed tissue, evaluation of expression
level of P16ink4a. The proposed method of CIN 1 prognosis assessment
with estimation significant colposcopic, morphological and immunohis-
tochemical indicators is effective.
PS-02-064
Evaluation of PTEN protein expression in normal endometrium and
endometrioid carcinoma surgical specimens
Y. Nishijima*, S. Kobayashi, M. Saio
*Laboratory of Histopathology & Cytopathology, Department of
Laboratory Sciences, Gunma University Graduate School of Health
Sciences, Japan
Background & objectives: In the present study, we examined PTEN
protein expression patterns in normal endometrium (NE) and
endometrioid carcinoma (EC).
Methods: Thirty cases each of FFPE NE and EC samples were examined
by immunohistochemistry for PTEN expression. Specimens were evalu-
ated manually by scoring the staining intensity of the strongest stained
part for glands and stroma separately. The score was 0 to 4; negative, very
weak, weak, medium, and strong. For statistical analysis, Wilcoxon rank-
sum test was used.
Results: Distribution of gland score in NE was 76.6%, 20%, 3.3%, 0%,
0%, (average: 0.266). While, the one in EC was 50%, 16.7%, 20%, 10%,
3.3% (average: 1.000). The average gland score of EC were significantly
higher than that of NE (P = 0.0104). Distribution of stroma score in NE was
10%, 0%, 60%, 30%, 0% (average: 2.1). While, the one in EC was 20%,
0%, 60%, 20%, 0% (average: 1.8). The stroma score was not significantly
different in both groups. In both NE and EC, the stroma score was signif-
icantly higher than the gland score (NE: P<0.0001, EC: P = 0.0065).
Conclusion: PTEN expression in NE is supposed to be weak because
PTEN is not mutated. Indeed, in our analysis, PTEN expression was
mostly negative or very weak, which results were identical to the previous
report. While, in EC, strong expression and no expression was sometimes
observed in the same specimens. Our results indicated that heterogeneous
PTEN gene mutation would happen during progression to cancer and
resulted in a patchy staining pattern.
PS-02-065
Histological pattern of endometrial biopsies in women with abnormal
uterine bleeding in a hospital in North Central Nigeria
O. Olaofe*, I.M. Asuzu
*Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Varied morphological patterns have been
reported in Endometrial biopsies in various parts of our country. We
aim to document fnding from a one-year review of cases seen in a com-
munity group private practice.
Methods: The study is a retrospective cross-sectional study carried out in
the Department of Pathology of Premier Hospital, Abuja, on specimens
received over a one-year period. Four hundred and eighty-six samples of
endometrial biopsies and curettings from women presenting with abnor-
mal uterine bleeding sent to the histopathology laboratory were analysed.
Results: Four hundred and eighty-six samples of endometrial biopsies
and curettings from women presenting with abnormal uterine bleeding
sent to the histopathology laboratory were analysed. The most common
biopsies were those of product of conception which accounted for 304
cases (62.6%). Most of the cases of endometrial hyperplasia were typical.
Endometritis and chorioamnionitis were the infammatory conditions
seen. Twenty-three women had molar pregnancies. The most common
cause of abnormal uterine bleeding in this population is retained products
of conception.
Conclusion: The most common cause of abnormal uterine bleeding in
this population is retained products of conception. There may be need to
retrain some of the staffs involved in the management of pregnancy re-
lated complications. There is need to further evaluate pregnancy related
Virchows Arch
complications to ascertain the causes and circumstances responsible for
them so as to appropriately direct interventional protocols.
PS-02-066
High risk HPV detection in formalin fixed paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) cervical tissue with Aptima HPV assay
G. Kir, Z.C. Olgun*, H. Gunel
*Istanbul Medeniyet University Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: High risk-HPV(HR-HPV) is implicated in
the development of intraepithelial neoplasia and carcinoma of uterine
cervix. Several liquid based HPV detection techniques are available,
and approved by FDA, however there are no FDA approval and enough
experience for HPV detection in FFPE tissues.
Methods: One hundred and ninety-six cervical tissue specimens, each
from a patient, were retrieved for HR-HPV detection. One-hundred and
fifteen of these samples were diagnosed as HSIL and 46 as cervical
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). 36 of these FFPE cervical samples were
normal. Histopathologic diagnosis was accepted as the golden standard.
Results: 189 of the assays provided informative results. HR-HPV was
detected in 99.35% of the HSIL and cervical SCCs. Only one tissue
sample was resulted as false negative and there were no false positive
results. Sensitvity and specifity of the test were 99.35% and 100%
(95%CI: 96.41%-99.98% and 90.26%-100% respectively). Positve pre-
dictive value and negative predictive value was 100% and 97.30%
(95%CI: 83.62%-99.61%). Accuracy for this technique was 99.47%
(95%CI: 97.09%-99.99%)
Conclusion: This HPV detection technique with Aptima HR-HPV Assay
provides a reliable method for HR-HPV testing in FFPE tissue specimens
however there is still need for larger studies.
Funding: HPV detection test cost covered by Hologic
PS-02-067
New approaches in study of pathomorphological aspects of diabetes
on background of pregnancy
T. Pavlova*, A. Kaplin, L. Zemlyanskaya
*Belgorod State University, Russia
Background & objectives: About 422 mln. people are suffered from
diabetes. The birth of children in women with such pathology is very
important question. In this connection, the aim of our research is the
exploration of pathomorphological features of diabetes in pregnant.
Methods: The pregnant with diabetes of 1 type (25), diabetes of 2 type
(22), gestational diabetes (20) were explored. The way of modelling of
pancreatogenic diabetes with relevant insulin insufficiency at partial re-
section of pancreas in rats was designed. The samples of placenta and
uterus of rats and women of line "Wistar" (30) were studied in light and
scanning electron microscope.
Results: Plethora, diapedesis, thrombosis, fibrin were revealed in vessels
of miometrium. Their extension at gestational diabetes was 1,9±0,6μm, at
diabetes of 1 type was 1,4±0,2μm, at diabetes of 2 type was 1,7±0,6μm
(3,0±0,4). The surface of endotheliocytes was altered. Villi of intermedi-
ate type were prevailed in placenta. The vast majority of blood vessels are
full-blooded, with area 33,6±4,3, 40,2±5,0, 49,3±6,6μm (28,7±2,4). The
sites of sclerosis were revealed in stroma.
Conclusion: Necessary correction for improving of pregnancy and child-
birth indexes’ may be conducted by clinicians due to received data
PS-02-068
Analysis of intraoperative consultation in ovarian tumours: an
11-year retrospective study of 321 cases
F. Pereira*, A. Pereira, C. A. Padrão, J. Tinoco, A. T. Alves
*Hospital Prof. Doutor Fernando Fonseca, EPE, Portugal
Background & objectives: The intraoperative consultation evalu-
ation in ovarian tumours is crucial for surgical management. Our
purpose was to assess the concordance, discordance, and deferred
rates of intraoperative diagnosis, along with the agreement in the
behaviour of the tumour.
Methods: A retrospective, 11-year review of consecutive intraop-
erative consultations done between January 2009 and December
2019 at the Department of Pathology, Prof. Doutor Fernando
Fonseca Hospital, was compared with definitive histology reports.
The sensitivity, specificity and predictive values of each category
(benign, borderline/uncertain behaviour and malignant) were
determined.
Results: On a total of 321 intraoperative consultations, 261 re-
ports (81.3%) were concordant with the definitive histology, 34
reports (10.6%) had minor discordances, 3 reports (0.9%) had
major discordances and 23 cases (7.2%) had a deferred report to
paraffin sections. The diagnosis that resulted in most inconsis-
tencies were borderline tumours that turned out to be carcinomas
and benign mesenchymal lesions, highlighting the importance of
some limitations, including the sampling errors. Agreement be-
tween the behaviour of the tumour in the frozen section and
definitive histology was observed in 98.3%, yielding a sensitivity
and a positive predictive value for malignant tumours of 94.9%
and 98.2%, respectively.
Conclusion: This retrospective study shows that frozen section evalua-
tion of ovarian tumours represents a highly sensitive and specific tech-
nique that can be used to guide the surgeon to perform the appropriate
surgical procedure. The authors present the main diagnostic challenges.
PS-02-069
Histopathological spectrum of ovarian tumours- a prospective study
at CMS-TH - Bharatpur - Chitwan - Nepal
H. Regmi*
*Manmohan Memorial Medical College and Teaching Hospital,
Kathmandu, Nepal
Background & objectives: Ovary is the third most common site
of neoplastic lesions in female genital tract. Ovarian tumours oc-
cur in any age group. Ovarian neoplasms have become increas-
ingly important because they have gradually increased mortality
rate due to female genital cancers.
Methods: This study was carried out on 75 cases of surgically resected
ovarian tumour specimens fulfilling inclusion criteria at Department of
Pathology in CMS-TH, from January 2016 to June 2017. Clinical data
was recorded in predesigned proforma. The specimens were grossed,
processed, embedded and stained using standard procedures and were
analysed using light microscopy. Statistical analysis was done using
SPSS 20.0
Results: Age range of the patients was from 10 to 70 years with
maximum cases 32.0 in the age group of 21-30 years.
Histopathological diagnosis was mature cystic teratoma 38.8%,
serous cystadenoma 29.4%, mucinous cystadenoma 8.0%, border-
line mucinous tumour 5.3%, serous cystadenocarcinoma 4.0%,
dysgerminoma 4.0%, steroid cell tumour 2.7%, and borderline
serous tumour, mucinous cystadenocarcinoma, mature cystic tera-
toma transforming into SCC, immature teratoma, Sertoli Leydig
cell tumour and fibroma 1.3%.
Conclusion: Benign tumours were more common than malignant tu-
mours for all age group. Most of the tumours were of surface epithelial
cell origin. Mature cystic teratoma was the most common ovarian tumour
as well as the most common benign tumour. Serous cystadenocarcinoma
and dysgerminoma were most common malignant tumours. Malignant
surface epithelial tumours usually occurred in older age whereas malig-
nant germ cell tumours occurred in younger age. There was significant
statistical Clinico-pathological correlation.
Virchows Arch
PS-02-070
Clinicopathological features, immunohistochemical profile and clin-
ical outcomes of 27 primary peritoneal carcinomas: a single institu-
tional study
B. Rekhi*, S. Karmarkar, K. Deodhar, S. Menon, A. Maheshwari, S. TS,
J. Ghosh, S. Gulia, S. Gupta
*Tata Memorial Centre, India
Background & objectives: Primary peritoneal carcinomas (PPCs)
are rare tumours, with overlapping clinic-pathological features
with epithelial ovarian carcinomas(EOCs) and mesotheliomas.
We studied clinicopathological features, including immunohisto-
chemical profile and clinical outcomes of PPCs diagnosed at our
Institution.
Methods: This was a retrospective study, wherein 27 PPCs, diagnosed
between January 2008 and May 2019 were included, after review, as per
established criteria. Various clinicopathological features were analysed
with Median and average age of patients being 60 and 55 years,
respectively.
Results: Microscopically, 93% tumours (25/27) were of high-grade se-
rous type. Sensitivity and specificity of PAX8 was 100% (13/13) and
87.5%, and for oestrogen receptor (ER) was and 100% (7/7) and 100%.
Most patients (14/23, 60.9%) were treated with neoadjuvant chemother-
apy (NACT), interval debulking surgery (IDS) and adjuvant chemother-
apy. Median disease-free survival (DFS) was 32 months. Estimated 3
year-DFS and overall survival was 47.3% and 69.8%. There were lesser
recurrences in cases of NACT and IDS (4/14) vs. surgery and adjuvant
CT (4/8) (p=0.59).
Conclusion: This constitutes the largest series on clinicopathologic pro-
file of PPCs from our subcontinent. PAX8, ER and calretinin constitute as
useful diagnostic immunostains. It is crucial to differentiate these
tumours from their mimic, mesotheliomas, in view of associated
treatment implications.
PS-02-071
CEACAM1 expression in the normal uterus of rats
K. Sikora, M. Lyndin, O. Kravtsova, V. Sikora, A. Romaniuk*,
B.B. Singer
*Sumy State University, Ukraine
Background & objectives: The carcinoembryonic antigen-related adhe-
sion molecules (CEACAM) play a significant role in numerous physio-
logical processes, such as cell-cell and cell-ECM adhesion, angiogenesis,
proliferation, etc.
The objective is characterization of the CEACAM1 expression pattern in
normal tissues of rat uterus.
Methods: Uterus sections were taken from intact female wild-type Wistar
rats. The immunohistochemical investigation was performed utilizing
mAb Be9.2 (α-rat-CEACAM1, N domain binding, mouse IgG1 kappa),
mAb 11-1H (α-rat-CEACAM1, not-N domain binding, mouse IgG1 kap-
pa) and isotype matched control antibodies kindly provided by
B.B.Singer. Goat anti rat-HRP coupled antibody and a DAB substrate
were used for visualization of the CEACAM1 expression.
Results: CEACAM1 expression was found on the apical cellular polarity
of the luminal and glandular columnar cells along the surface of normal
endometrium and endocervix. This localization was coinciding with the
location of the cellular microvilli. Interestingly, the use of mAb 11-1H
allowed to detect week CEACAM1 expression only in the luminal and
single glandular epithelium, although mAb Be9.2 was expressed by all
endometrium. As expected, single leukocytes diffusely scattered in the
underlying stroma were CEACAM1-positive as shown by Be9.2 and 11-
1H binding and thus served as internal staining control for both
antibodies.
Conclusion: The luminal and glandular epithelium of normal endometri-
um and endocervix express significant amounts of CEACAM1 on the
apical cell surface. However, mAb Be9.2 showed a higher sensitivity for
CEACAM1 in uterus epithelial cells during immunohistochemical inves-
tigation than mAb 11-1H.
PS-02-072
Differential proteomic analysis between low grade, early stage
endometrioid endometrial carcinoma and benign endometrium
I. Ruz-Caracuel*, A. López-Janeiro, L. Yébenes, A. Berjón, J.L. Ramón-
Patino, A. Hernández, A. Redondo, M. Mendiola, D. Hardisson
*Ramon y Cajal University Hospital, Department of Pathology, Spain
Background & objectives: Low grade, early stage endometrioid endo-
metrial carcinomas are the major proportion of endometrial carcinomas.
As a previous step to identify diagnostic biomarkers, we aimed to eluci-
date the differences at the proteomic level between tumour tissues and
matched uterine non-tumour tissues.
Methods: Tumour and non-tumour tissue including endometrium and
myometrium from 16 patients was analysed. Proteins were extracted from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. Quantitative proteomic analysis
was done by isobaric labelling with tandem mass tags (TMT). Tryptic
peptides were performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled
to a nEasy-nLC 1000 nano system (ThermoScientific). MS data were
analysed with Maxquant using standardised workflows.
Results: A total amount of 3,113 proteins were quantified and 730 were
differentially expressed between both conditions. Relevant pathways af-
fected included integrin signalling and inflammation mediated by chemo-
kine and cytokine signalling. The main biological processes altered were
cellular and metabolic processes.
Conclusion: Integrin signalling and inflammation mediated by chemo-
kine and cytokine signalling pathways are promising pathways to identify
diagnostic biomarkers in low grade, early stage endometrioid endometrial
carcinomas.
Funded by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII) (PI17/01723), co-
financed by the European Development Regional Fund ‘A way to achieve
Europe’ (FEDER).
PS-02-073
A morphological and immunohistochemical comparison of primary
low grade, early stage endometrioid endometrial carcinomas and
their relapses
I. Ruz-Caracuel*, A. López-Janeiro, A. Berjón, L. Yébenes, J.L. Ramón-
Patino, A. Hernández, M. Mendiola, A. Redondo, A. Pelaez-Garcia,
D. Hardisson
*Ramon y Cajal University Hospital, Department of Pathology, Spain
Background & objectives: Low grade, early stage endometrioid endo-
metrial carcinomas fall into copy number low and microsatellite unstable
molecular groups. Our main objective was to analyse concordance be-
tween morphological features and immunohistochemical markers used
for molecular classifying in primary tumours and their relapses.
Methods: A total of 19 relapse biopsies from 16 patients were identified
from a single hospital cohort comprising 258 low grade, early stage
endometrioid endometrial carcinomas. Morphological features such as
grade, squamous and mucinous differentiation were evaluated in primary
and relapses. Tissue microarray were constructed and immunohistochem-
ical markers for mismatch repair proteins (MLH1, PMS2, MSH2 &
MSH6) and p53 were performed.
Results: There were 16 biopsies from locoregional relapses and 3 from
lung metastases. Concordance was poor for morphological features such
as grade (kappa=0.023), squamous (kappa=-0.203) and mucinous differ-
entiation (kappa=0.215). Tumour grade at relapse was the same in 8
cases, upgraded in 8 and downgraded in 3. Microsatellite instability in-
terpretation derived from mismatch repair proteins expression and p53
expression had a perfect concordance (kappa=1).
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: There is a perfect surrogate molecular group concordance
between relapses and primaries low grade, early stage endometrioid en-
dometrial carcinomas. Morphological features of primaries are poor pre-
dictor of their relapses.
Funded by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII) (PI17/01723), co-
financed by the European Development Regional Fund ‘A way to achieve
Europe’ (FEDER).
PS-02-074
HPV-independent intraepithelial lesions of the vulva mimicking
HPV-positive squamous intraepithelial lesions
A. Saco*, N. Rakislova, L. Alemany, O. Clavero, B. Lloveras, J. Ordi
*Department of Pathology, ISGlobal Hospital Clínic Barcelona,
University of Barcelona, Spain
Background & objectives: There are two etiopathogenic types of vulvar
squamous cell carcinoma (VSCC), HPV-associated and HPV-indepen-
dent, each one associated with a specific intraepithelial lesion. However,
unusual patters have been described. We aimed to explore these unusual
histological patterns of intraepithelial precursors.
Methods: We analysed 779 DNA HPV negative, p16-negative VSCCs, with
at least 1 cm of skin adjacent to the invasive tumour available. We evaluated
the neighboring skin and performed p53 immunohistochemistry.
Results: 254 tumours (33%) had adjacent intraepithelial lesions. Of
them, 22 (9%) had vulvar acanthosis with abnormal differentiation
/differentiated exophytic intraepithelial lesion, and 232 had differ-
entiated vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (dVIN), which was of con-
ventional type in 184 cases (72%), and mimicked squamous
intraepithelial lesions (SIL) in 48 cases (19%)). Four of these SIL-
like lesions resembled LSIL and 44 simulated HSIL (24 basaloid-
like, 13 warty-like and 7 mixed basaloid/warty features). Thirty-five
of 48 (73%) of these HPV-negative intraepithelial lesions mimick-
ing HSIL showed p53 abnormal staining.
Conclusion: A small, but significant percentage of intraepithelial precur-
sors associated with HPV-independent VSCC mimic SIL, mostly HSIL.
Approximately one-third of these lesions will arise in absence of TP53
mutations.
PS-02-075
An audit of histopathology reports of carcinoma cervix: assessment
of different histology parameters from specimens operated at a can-
cer centre in India, between 2013 and 2018
D. Singh*, K. Deodhar, S. Menon, B. Rekhi, A. Budukh
*Tata Cancer Hospital, India
Background & objectives: To review histopathology reports of patients
operated for carcinoma cervix, at our institute between 2013 to 2018, and
to see our compliance to minimum data sets.
Methods: After obtaining approval by institutional review board (IRB),
our hospital records showed a total of 243 reports of carcinoma cervix,
operated between 2013 to 2018. Various parameters from the reports
were noted down, and their frequencies were calculated with the help of
SPSS software (version 21).
Results: The mean age was 50.5 years (range 15-82). The mean tumour
size being 3.03 cm. The depth of cervical stromal involvement was men-
tioned in 98.8% cases; It was more than half In 67.5% cases. Distance of
tumour from cervical stromal adventital margin was mentioned in 94.2%
cases.The vaginal cut margins were mentioned in all but one case (
99.6%). Right and left parametria were free in 96.7% and 96.3% cases
respectively. The commonest tumour type was squamous (74.5%),
followed by adenocarcinoma (17.6%) followed by adenosquamous car-
cinoma (5.35%). Lymphovascular emboli present in 40.3% cases.The
mean lymph node yield was 18.54. The stage was not mentioned in 127
cases (52.3%).
Conclusion: Compliance to minimum data sets for carcinoma cervix
reports in our hands was generally good. Lymph node yield improved
comparative to previous audit. Stage need to be mentioned.
PS-02-076
Tumour size and mTOR pathway activation assesed by immunohis-
tochemistry as predictor of Silva pattern of invasion in biopsies of
HPV-associated endocervical adenocarcinomas (HPVA)
S. Stolnicu*, S. Segura, M. Boros, K. Park, P. Ramirez, G. Salvo,
R.A. Soslow
*University of Medicine and Pharmacy Targu-Mures, Romania
Background & objectives: We aimed to use small cervical biop-
sies to determine whether markers of mTOR pathway activation
and tumour size associate with aggressive Silva patterns of inva-
sion B and C.
Methods: 34 HPVA biopsies were evaluated for size and
expresion of pS6, pERK and HIF1a. Immunohistochemical stains
were scored semiquantitatively, ranging from 0-4+ with scores 2-
4+ considered positive, and Silva pattern was determined in
follow-up excisional specimens.
Results: 8 cases were pattern A, 4 pattern B and 22 pattern C.
Statistically significant associations were found comparing pS6
and pERK immunohistochemistry with Silva pattern (p=0.034
and 0.05, respectively). pERK was the most powerful for
distinguishing between patterns A and B/C (p=0.026). Large tu-
mour size (≥2 cm) correlated with Silva pattern (p=0.027) with a
moderate association when comparing pattern A with B/C (r:
0.404, p=0.027, R square: 0.163).
Conclusion: Both tumour size and pERK immunohistochemistry can be
used to predict Silva pattern using only small biopsies of HPV-associated
endocervical adenocarcinomas.
PS-02-077
Comparison between P53 immunohistochemical staining pattern
and molecular characteristics of tubo-ovarian high-grade serous car-
cinoma by next-generation sequencing examination
K. Suh*, K.H. Kim
*Chungnam National University Hospital, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: Strong p53 immunohistochemical staining is
one of the hallmarks of tubo-ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma
(HGSC). The aim of this study was to compare between the p53 staining
patterns and the molecular characteristics of HGSC cases identified by
next-generation sequencing (NGS).
Methods: A commercial NGS cancer panel comprising 143 genes, in-
cluding TP53, was used to analyse the genetic profiles of tubo-ovarian
HGSC cases. Eleven HGSC cases were sequenced using formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) sections. Immunohistochemical stain for p53
was performed for each case.
Results: Among 11 HGSC cases, nine novel TP53 somatic mu-
tations from nine patients (81.8%) were identified; missense mu-
tation in 3 cases, frameshift mutation in 5 cases, and nonsense
mutation in one case. Among 9 TP53 mutant cases, p53 IHC
staining revealed strong nuclear overexpression in 3 cases and
complete absence in 6 cases. The remaining 2 cases showed no
TP53 mutation; p53 overexpression in one and complete absence
in the other.
Conclusion: Genomic sequencing in the tubo-ovarian HGSC
cases revealed mutations of TP53 in 81.8%. p53 immunohisto-
chemical staining revealed overexpression in 4 cases (36.4%)
and complete absence (abnormal/aberrant/mutation-type) in 7
cases (63.6%). The p53 IHC staining patterns should be consid-
ered in diagnosis of HGSC cases.
Virchows Arch
PS-02-078
Reproducibility of interpretation of P53 immunostaining in vulvar
squamous cell carcinomas using a pattern-based approach
E. Thompson*, L. Hoang, J. Huvila, K. Talia, N. Tchrakian, A. Palicelli,
L. Horn, C.B. Gilks, N. Singh
*Vancouver General Hospital, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Canada
Background & objectives: p53 immunostaining is a surrogate for TP53
mutation assessment in vulvar squamous cell carcinoma (VSCC) and
allows biomarker-based subclassification into prognostically significant
subtypes, with HPV-independent/p53abn VSCC having the worst prog-
nosis. We assessed the reproducibility of p53 interpretation in VSCC.
Methods: p53 immunostaining (N=69) was performed and evaluated
independently at two institutions, by five pathologists, and classified as
abnormal (basal overexpression, basal and parabasal overexpression,
absent expression, or cytoplasmic staining), wild-type(scattered or mid-
epithelial staining with basal sparing) or indeterminate.
Results: In 51/69 cases (73.9%) there was complete agreement between
all 5 raters. In 12 cases (17.4%) one or more raters considered the p53
staining indeterminate, while the remaining observers agreed that it was
either abnormal or wild-type. In 5 cases (7.2%) there was disagreement
regarding whether the p53 staining was aberrant or wild-type and in the
final case the range of opinions included abnormal, wild-type, and inde-
terminate. The overall Fleiss’ kappa for the five observers was 0.78. If all
indeterminate results were to be resolved by performing sequencing of
TP53, there were only 6 cases with a disagreement (Fleiss’ kappa = 0.91).
Conclusion: There was excellent inter-observer agreement in the inter-
pretation of p53 immunostaining in VSCC, with staining performed in-
dependently at two different laboratories. The main issue identified was
variability in the number of cases considered to show indeterminate stain-
ing i.e. not possible to conclude whether it was abnormal or wild-
type. Although such cases can be resolved through TP53 sequenc-
ing, refined p53 interpretation criteria may help reduce the fre-
quency of indeterminate results.
PS-02-079
P53 immunohistochemical patterns in HPV-related neoplasms of the
female lower genital tract can be mistaken for TP53 null or missense
mutational patterns
E. Thompson*, J. Chen, J. Huvila, J. Pors, H. Ren, J. Ho, C. Chow,
M. Ta, L. Proctor, J.N. McAlpine, D. Huntsman, C.B. Gilks
*Vancouver General Hospital, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Canada
Background & objectives: We recently encountered cases where p53
IHC in HPV+ tumours were confused with mutational-pattern staining.
Herein, p53 IHC were assessed in a cohort of HPV+ invasive and in-situ
squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and adenocarcinomas (EDAC) of the
cervix and vulva.
Methods: Only cases with block-like p16 staining were included. p53
was scored as “wild-type”, “overexpression” (strong diffuse staining),
“null” (absent staining), “markedly reduced” (reduced staining, >70%
of cells, mimicking null staining) and "midepithelial (basal sparing)”
(absent staining in basal cells juxtaposed with strong staining in parabasal
cells). TP53sequencing and HPV in-situ hybridisation (ISH) were per-
formed in select cases.
Results: “Markedly reduced” staining was present in 14/25 SCCs, 7/14
HSIL and 18/20 EDACs. This mimicked null-pattern staining. There was
“mid-epithelial (basal sparing)” in 10/25 SCC and 7/14 HSIL. This mim-
icked overexpression-pattern staining. Wild-type was seen in 1/25 SCC
and 2/20 EDAC. No cases showed overexpression. One EDAC had a
TP53 missense mutation and markedly reduced staining. HPV ISH re-
sults showed an inverse association with p53 immunoexpression, cells
positive for HPV mRNA were negative for p53.
Conclusion: p53 IHC patterns in HPV+ neoplasms can mimic the
null mutational patterns (“null-like”) and overexpression mutation-
al patterns (“overexpression like”). Knowledge of these patterns
can help pathologists avoid misinterpreting p53 status in the set-
ting of HPVA cancers.
PS-02-081
Role of epigenomics in ovarian serous carcinomas
M.M. Ustaioglu*, G. Erdil, M.E. Ercin
*Karadeniz Technical University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: We aimed to determine the difference in
terms of epigenetic modifications between the primary tumour cells, as-
cites tumour cells and metastasis tumour cells of patients with high-grade
and low-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC and LGSOC) by bioinfor-
matic analysis.
Methods: GSE73168 gene’s microarray data were downloaded from the
"Gene Expression OmniBus" data base to investigate the association of
serous ovarian carcinomas with epigenetic modifications. Differentially
expressed genes were generated by re-analyzing them RNA transcripts
from tissues obtained from 5 HGSOC patients and 3 LGSOC patients.
"Biobase", "Limma" and "Geoquery" libraries were obtained with bioin-
formatics analysis and R program.
Results: Cytoscape with Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting
Genes and Molecular Complex Detection plug-in was utilized to visualize
protein-protein interaction of these differentially expressed genes. In
comparing the expression profiles of transcripts, "log2 fold change >1"
and P ≤0.05 were considered statistically significant. Statistically signif-
icant differences were found in genes related to DNA methylation and
histone modifications ( acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation,
ubiquitination, sumoylation) by using the DAVID (Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery) functional annota-
tion system.
Conclusion: A greater understanding of the role of epigenetics in high
grade and low grade serous ovarian carcinomas will provide for improved
therapeutic interventions. Moreover, this study can shift the focusing on
the K-RAS, B-RAF and p53 mutations to genes involved in epigenetic
modifications.
PS-02-082
Concerns of the histological phenotype of the placenta during phys-
iological pregnancy and antenatal foetal death of unknown aetiology
S. Yessen*
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Unfavourable conditions for foetal develop-
ment are associated with the development of diseases in the postnatal
period. Cause of perinatal death is latent or clinically expressed placental
dysfunction, which developed under the exposure of various damaging
factors at any stage of pregnancy.
Methods: A prospective histological study of 106 placentas (37-42
weeks) during physiological pregnancy (n-82) and prenatal death of the
foetus (n-24) was carried out. All placentas were examined in accordance
with Vogel principles (1996). The relative number of immature forms of
villi in 100 peripheral grooves of the representative placental area was
determined.
Results: In 28 placentas, the delayed development of chorionic villi was
determined. Of these, 22 placentas (79%) showed expressed (> 50%
immature villi) and 6 placentas (21%) moderate delay (30-50% of imma-
ture villi) of the development of chorionic villi. In 92% of the placenta,
with antenatal asphyxia of the foetus and in 15% of the placenta during
physiological pregnancy was found an immature histological phenotype
(54.2 ± 12% and 34.3 ± 5.8% of immature villi, respectively). Therefore,
Virchows Arch
postnatal evaluation of placental phenotype can help in the timely iden-
tification of adverse foetal conditions and early stratification of the het-
erogeneous population of new-borns, with identification of individual
risk of disease in post-natal life.
Conclusion: Physiological pregnancy may be accompanied by a
delay in the maturation of chorionic villi and thereby latent
chronic placental insufficiency. In the case of antenatal foetal
death,the placenta becomes the main reliable source of informa-
tion for making a diagnosis.
PS-02-083
Dedifferentiated endometrioid adenocarcinoma of uterus
Ö.N. Yildiz*, M. Yilmaz, C.S. Topal
*Health Sciences University, Turkey
Background & objectives: Dedifferentiated endometrioid adenocarci-
noma is recently described and rare uterine neoplasm which contains both
low grade(FIGO grade 1 or 2) endometrioid adenocarcinoma and undif-
ferentiated carcinoma. This tumour is a new entity and may pose diag-
nostic challenges.
Methods: We discuss a case of 28-year old women who had severe
stomach ache with palpable mass in abdomen. By the surgical examina-
tion we learned that the tumour was mainly located in uterus and invaded
colon, bladder, liver, paraaortic lymph nodes. Hysterectomy specimen
showed polypoid tumour filling endometrial cavity, invading full thick-
ness and exceeding serosa.
Results: Tumour was described by the coexistence of undifferen-
tiated
carcinoma(%85)
and
low
grade
endometrioid
adenocarcinoma(%15).Undifferentiated component was character-
ized by the proliferation of noncohesive, medium size, monoto-
nous epithelial cells growing in a patternless solid fashion. The
transtion between the two tumour components was abrupt with a
sharp border. Undifferentiated cells were negative for epithelial
markers, oestrogen, and progesterone receptors although others
were positive. There were no loss of mismatch repair gene pro-
teins. Metastases contained only undifferentiated component.
Conclusion: Dedifferentiated endometrioid adenocarcinoma has poor
prognosis and aggressive behaviour. It can be misdiagnosed as grade 3
endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Accurate diagnosis requires more aware-
ness of this entity. Morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular
features should be considered for better clinical outcome and patient
survival.
PS-03-001
Ladinin-1, overexpressed in oral squamous cell carcinoma adjacent
to non-cancerous epithelium, is involved in cell motility by mediating
actin and focal adhesion dynamics
T. Abe*, M. Yamazaki, S. Maruyama, J. Tanuma, Y. Ajioka
*Division of Molecular and Diagnostic Pathology, Niigata University
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Division of Oral
Pathology, Department of Tissue Regeneration and Reconstruction,
Japan
Background & objectives: Oral squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) often
form the interface against non-cancerous epithelium. We identified sev-
eral proteins, including ladinin-1 (LAD1), overexpressed in cancer tissue
at the interface by tissue proteomics. This study aimed to examine LAD1
functions in oral SCCs in-vitro.
Methods: Oral SCC cell lines, HSC-2, 3, and 4, were used for in-vitro
functional and immunofluorescence analyses with siRNA knockdown
methods.
Results: LAD1-knockdown cells showed decreasing of cell proliferation
in MTS assay and increasing of numbers of migrated cells in the transwell
migration assay. Morphologically, LAD1 was localized in the peripheral
area of the cytoplasm. High-resolutional morphological analysis using
structured illumination microscopy revealed that LAD1 was co-
localized with actin filaments forming “actin arc”. LAD1-kockdown cells
showed decreasing of elongated filopodial filaments and ruffling of cell
borders compared with controls. In addition, LAD1-kcockdown cells
overexpressed WNT5a and showed prominent accumulations of phos-
phorylated focal adhesion kinases in the cytoplasm.
Conclusion: LAD1 is potentially involved in cell motility by modulation
of actin dynamics and focal adhesion formation in oral SCC cells and the
non-canonical WNT pathway may play a pivotal role in LAD1 functional
association.
PS-03-002
Effectiveness of rapid onsite evaluation of thyroid fine needle
aspiration cytology
F. Ali*, U. Bashir, F. Rehman, S. Shahid, S. Ahmad
*King Edward Medical University, Lahore, Pakistan
Background & objectives: FNA is the first line diagnostic modality in
the evaluation of the thyroid lesions. However, the specificity is variable
which can be improved by the implementation of ROSE, thus, to evaluate
the improvement in adequacy of thyroid cytology with ROSE.
Methods: A comparative cross-sectional study was conducted on 166
patients with thyroid masses (83 in each of the two groups). After the
standard FNA procedure, ROSE was performed by staining the slides
with rapid stains. For inadequate smears, repeat FNA was done at the
same time thus improving the adequacy and reducing the number of
patients’ visits to the hospital for repeated attempts.
Results: RESULTS: The study showed that there was no dramatic in-
crease in the diagnostic rate of thyroid FNA with ROSE (86.7%) as
compared to that without ROSE (72.3%). However, ROSE assisted to
reduce the rate of false negative cytology and the degree of patients’
inconvenience due to delay in the diagnosis ,owing to repeated visits.
Conclusion: Rapid Onsite Evaluation of thyroid cytology smears en-
hances the effectiveness of Fine Needle Aspiration by reducing the rate
of false negative cytology and alleviating the degree of inconvenience to
the patients.
PS-03-003
Assessment of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma: inter-observer agreement and visual
versus digital image analysis comparison
J.A. Baena-Del Valle*, M.A. Palau-Lázaro, C. Buriticá-Cifuentes,
A.M. Baldión-Elorza, A. Escallón-Cubillos, J.A. Hakim-Tawil,
S.P. Perdomo-Velásquez, P.A. Rodriguez-Urrego
*Fundacion Santa Fe De Bogota, Colombia
Background & objectives: TILs correlate with patient outcome in many
cancers. The evaluation of TILs in HNSCC has not been yet standardized.
The aim was to evaluate the inter-observer agreement of visually-assessed
TILs and a visual-versus-digital image analysis (DIA) evaluation
comparison.
Methods: 40 samples from HNSCC patients from the Colombian cohort
of the InterCHANGE study (IARC) were included. TMAs were con-
structed and Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Immunohistochemistry
for CD3, CD4 and CD8 were performed. TILs average score was
assessed independently by three pathologists. Their scores were com-
pared to DIA-scores using QuPath.
Results: The inter-observer agreement coefficients were 0.64, 0.71, 0.55
and 0.70 (ICC p=0.0001) for H&E, CD3, CD4 and CD8, respectively.
When the DIA-scores were compared to visual estimates, the average
PS-03 Head & Neck Pathology
Virchows Arch
scores of the pathologists (H&E: 0.71, CD3: 0.73, CD4: 0.4, CD8: 0.68,
weighted-kappa) had better agreement than comparing individual scores
(H&E: 0.52-0.66, CD3: 0.54–0.79, CD4: 0.33–0.39, CD8: 0.5–0.66,
weighted-kappa). When scores were grouped into categories (low-mod-
erate-severe) the agreement decreased compared to evaluation as contin-
uous parameter.
Conclusion: We show a substantial inter-observer agreement between
pathologists, these scores have moderate agreement with DIA ones, but
improve when evaluated as an average. We consider that visual estima-
tion can be used with an acceptable level of agreement in routine practice
and research. However, in cases when the scores are close to a limit of a
category/range, DIA can be very useful to proper classify the density of
the infiltrate.
Funding: Interchange - HEADSpace (IARC); Researchers own funds
PS-03-004
PIK3CA gene mutations in human papilloma virus 16 head and neck
scamous cell carcinoma
D. Cochicho*, A. Felix, R. Gil Da Costa, L. Martins, M. Cunha,
M. Magalhães
*Clinical Pathology Department, Virology Lab. IPOLFG, Portugal,
NOVA Medical School, NOVA University of Lisbon, Portugal
Background & objectives: Human Papillomavirus (HPV)-associat-
ed head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) typically
arise in the pharynx. HPV active infection may lead to alterations
in key signalling pathways that promote carcinogenesis. Different
studies identified PIK3CA mutations more commonly in HPV pos-
itive tumours (37%).
Methods: We evaluated PIK3CA gene mutations associated with
HPV16+HNSCC patients from the Portuguese Institute of Oncology be-
tween 2007 and 2019. HPV DNA status was evaluated by PCR and
genotyped (INNOLIPA/ALLPLEXHPV28). PIK3CA mutation analysis
was performed by real-time PCR for the qualitative detection of four
mutations (H1047L; E542K, E545K, E545D) in human genomic DNA
extracted from tumour tissue (AmoyDx).
Results: PIK3CA mutations were evaluated in 50 squamous cell carci-
nomas, all HPV16 positive. Co-infection with HPV18, HPV53, HPV58
was present in 2 cases. Ten cases harboured PIK3CA mutations (20%).
Three different mutations H1047R (10%), E545D (50%), E545K (20%)
were identified. Combined E545D/E545K mutations were present in
20% of cases. Mutations in PIK3CA gene were present in cases from
the oral cavity (20%) and the oropharynx (80%).
Conclusion: In our series, a lower frequency of PIK3CA gene mutations
was found among HPV16+ HNSCC compared with other series. These
results may be related to the method used and to clinical aspects and
should be confirmed by other series in Portugal. Multiple PI3K/AKT/
mTOR inhibitors are under investigation as potential therapeutic options
for HNSCC, adding relevance to regional variations in PIK3CA muta-
tions and their identification methods.
PS-03-005
The effect of E6 and E7 knockdown and PARP inhibition on cisplatin
sensitivity in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
H. Crane*, K. Hunter, S. El-Khamisy
*University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Clinical outcomes in HPV- OPSCC are poor,
with a 3-year survival of 57.1%. Although HPV+ has an improved re-
sponse to therapy, a subset of patients suffer from loco-regional recur-
rences and distant metastases, with a poor prognosis.
Methods: The effect of E6 and E7 on cisplatin sensitivity in HPV+
OPSCC was investigated by knockdown of E6 and E7 using siRNA in
a HPV+ cell line. A HPV+ and HPV- cell line were exposed to long term
cisplatin treatment to generate resistant models. Immunofluorescence and
MTS assays were used to assess DNA double strand breaks and cell
viability respectively.
Results: Knockdown of E6 and E7 in a HPV+ cell line did not
significantly effect cell viability in response to cisplatin. Following
long term treatment with cisplatin, the HPV+ and HPV- resistant
cells had a significantly higher half maximal inhibitory concentra-
tion (IC50) compared to the parental cells (HPV- resistant cells
IC50: 47.5 compared to 10.3 and HPV+ resistant cells IC50: 84.9
compared to 40.0) and showed fewer DNA double strand breaks
following cisplatin treatment. Treatment with Olaparib partially
resensitised both HPV+ and HPV- resistant cells to cisplatin.
Conclusion: Although knockdown of E6 and E7 did not appear to sen-
sitise HPV+ cells to cisplatin, Olaparib was able to resensitise both HPV+
and HPV- resistant cells to cisplatin. These findings have implications for
future research in this area.
Funding: Funded by a CRUK/Pathological Society Predoctoral Research
Bursary
PS-03-006
Status of HPV-16 in cervical lymph node metastatic squamous cell
carcinoma of unknown origin - a study of three cases
R. Dolz Gaitón*, R. Dolz, M.J. Roca
*Hospital Vithas 9 de Octubre, Spain
Background & objectives: In head and neck pathology 5% of malig-
nancies present as lymph node metastasis of unknown origin. In up to 45-
80% of cases the primary site can be identified. In identifying the origin,
the study of HPV-16 status can be useful.
Methods: We have studied three patients that presented cervical
lymph node metastases of unknown origin. All three of them
were middle-aged women with no relevant medical history. The
lymph node study was done with hematoxylin eosin slides and
immunohistochemistry techniques including CK5/6, p63 and p16.
The HPV status was studied through DNA-PCR amplification and
microarray hybridization.
Results: All cases showed infiltration in the lymph node of poor-
differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Two of the three cases showed
positivity for p16 and also for HPV-16. The third case was negative for
p16 and HPV. Gynaecological exams were performed in all these wom-
en, with absence of cervical dysplasia. In one of the patients the origin
was identified, being oropharyngeal. The other two patients still remain
with no primary tumour detected.
Conclusion: The presence of HPV seems to be important in this patients
but appears to not have direct relationship with cervical dysplasia or
anogenital origin. Also, in oropharyngeal carcinomas it has been associ-
ated with a more favourable prognosis. This shows that identifying the
presence of HPV should be a routine procedure in all cervical lymph node
metastases.
PS-03-007
PD-L1 expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
(HNSCC) and its correlation with clinical variables
M. Espínola Benza*, A.B. Enguita Valls, L. Iglesias Docampo
*University Hospital 12 de Octubre, Spain
Background & objectives: Immune checkpoint inhibitors have created a
revolution in oncology. Despite a higher likelihood of response to immu-
notherapy in PD-L1 positive tumours, the cut-off remains unclare. The
objective is to describe PD-L1 expression related to clinical variables,
disease-free survival and toxicity.
Methods: Case reports of HNSCC diagnosed between 2014 and
2019, treated with immunotherapy. PD-L1 IHC using the 22C3
antibody was performed. The scores were compared at both the
Virchows Arch
1% and 20% cutpoints, using the CPS result obtained from core
biopsy or resected specimen. Information regarding clinical char-
acteristics was retrieved as documented by the treating
physicians.
Results: 67 patients were identified, both in clinical trials and assistance.
PD-L1 expression was related to gender, smoking, age and histologic
status. Only 11 of them were women. 48 of them received nivolumab
alone, 3 pembrolizumab alone, 7 durvalumab alone. 3 patients received
durvalumab in combination with tremelimumab, another 3 nivolumab
with ipilimumab and 3 combination chemotherapy with pembrolizumab.
Conclusion: To identify more suitable HNSCC cases for anti-PD-1/PD-
L1 therapy, PD-L1 expression in HNSCC should be combined with clin-
icopathologic features.
PS-03-009
Small round blue cell tumours of the sinonasal tract: histopatholog-
ical evaluation of 34 cases
E. Gun*, D. Etit, F. Cakalagaoglu
*Izmir Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Histopathology of the small round blue cell
tumours of the sinonasal tract (SRBCT-SN) remain challenging because
they consist of diverse malignancies including epithelial,
haematolymphoid, neuroectodermal and mesenchymal origin. We aimed
to evaluate the histopathological and immunohistochemical characteristic
of these tumours.
Methods: All the patients who were diagnosed with a SRBCT-SN be-
tween January 2006 and January 2020 in our department were evaluated
retrospectively. The demographical, clinical, radiological, histopatholog-
ical and immunohistochemical findings were recorded.
Results: There were a total of 34 cases with 13 females and 21 males. The
mean age was 58 years. Histopathologically, there were 10 sinonasal
undifferantiated carcinoma, 9 malignant melanoma, 3 rhabdomyosarco-
ma, 3 olfactor neuroblastoma, 3 lymphoma, 2 plasmocytoma, 2 ectopic
pituitary adenoma, 1 Ewing sarcoma and 1 sinonasal neuroendocrine
carcinoma cases. Twenty-two of these cases were located inside the nasal
cavity, whereas 6 were in the paranasal sinuses and 6 were in the naso-
pharynx. When diagnosing these challenging lesions, clinical and radio-
logical findings should be taken into account since they have overlapping
histologic and immunohistochemical findings.
Conclusion: With the help of newly described entities and increased
usage of molecular testing,these tumours can be diagnosed better.A pre-
cise diagnosis is importat especially because some of these tumours be-
have aggresively and the pathological diagnosis will help identifying the
correct treatment.
PS-03-010
Metastatic, non-cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma to the salivary
gland: a cases series observed at the Royal Surrey Hospital
G. Gupta*, S. Di Palma
*The Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Metastasis to the salivary glands tends to
occur from primary squamous cells carcinoma (SCC). Rarely metastases
may be from more distant sites or of non squamous cells cutaneous
tumour. Given the histological variety of salivary tumours, diagnosis
can be difficult.
Methods: Tumours of salivary gland origin discussed at Head and Neck
MDT meeting at the RSH have been reviewed searching from metastasis
versus primary neoplasms with the exception of squamous cell carcinoma
of skin origin. Here we present our experience and differential diagnoses.
Results: Metastasis to the salivary glands included basal cell carcinomas,
a rare merkel cell carcinoma and distant neoplasm such as renal cell
carcinoma and Upper GI tract adenocarcinoma. A metastasis from an
undiagnosed olfactory neuroblastoma to the submandibular gland was
initially interpreted as unusual primary neuroendocrine malignancy. The
primary manifested 6 months after submandibular gland resection. All
cases were diagnosed and confirmed by appropriate immunohistochem-
istry and additional clinical information.
Conclusion: Non squamous cell cutaneous carcinoma metastasizing to
salivary glands is uncommon and difficult to diagnose especially without
sufficient clinical history and familiarity with the long list of primary
malignant tumours of salivary glands.
We propose a high index of suspicion in cases with unusual histological
or immuno-histochemical features and inadequate clinical information
when assessing salivary gland neoplasms.
PS-03-011
The tumour immune microenvironment and its implications
for clinical outcome in patients with oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma
M. Hermanova*, D. Gurin, M. Slavik, M. Hendrych, I. Selingerova,
T. Shatokhina
*First Department of Pathology, St. Anne's University Hospital and
Faculty of Medicine, Central European Institute of Technology
(CEITEC), Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
Background & objectives: To analyse the PD-L1 expression on tumour
cells (TC) and immune cells (IC), and densities of CD3+ and CD8+
tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (OPSCC), and to correlate them with radiotherapy treatment
outcomes and clinicopathological parameters.
Methods: The study included 65 OPSCC treated by definitive intensity-
modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) in curative intent. Immunohistochemical
analysis of PD-L1 expression on TC and IC, and TILs subtyping was
performed on primary biopsy tumour tissues, followed by prognostic
evaluation of these immune response related parameters including clas-
sification into four tumour immune microenvironment (TIM) types. To
evaluate HPV status, p16 immunohistochemistry was performed.
Results: Densities of CD3+ and CD8+ TILs and PD-L1 expressions on
TC and IC were significantly higher in p16+/HPV-mediated OPSCC.
Patients with high densities of stromal CD8+ T cells displayed signifi-
cantly better overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS).
PD-L1 expression neither on tumour cells (TCs) nor immune cells
(ICs) affected survival outcomes. Distribution of TIM types based
on combination of PD-L1 expression on TC and densities of
CD8+ TILs is significantly different in p16+ compared to p16-
OPSCC. In type III TIM OPSCC (TC-PD-L1+/low CD8+ TIL
density), significantly better OS was showed in p16+ group com-
pared to p16- OPSCC.
Conclusion: The role of tumour immune microenvironment was con-
firmed and combining HPV status with evaluation of densities of CD8+
TILs and PD-L1 expression including TIM classification might provide
valuable predictive and prognostic information for patients with OPSCC.
PS-03-012
Perineural invasion of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck
– ten years of experience
P. Hurník*, V. Zidlik, D. Ziak, M. Sporkova, J. Stembirek,
Z. Cermakova, B. Putnova, M. Buchtova
*Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Ostrava, Department
of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava,
Czech Republic
Background & objectives: Perineural invasion has been defined as the
ability of cancer cells to invade through, in or around nerves and is
clinically associated with elevated recurrence and diminished survival.
Virchows Arch
It is morphologically described in many solid tumours (head and neck,
prostate)
Methods: We have retrospectively analysed cases of 532 patients with
squamous cell carcinoma of head and neck in age from 33 to 86 years. In
all cases, cervical block dissection was also perfomed with the resection
of the main tumour. Patients without cervical block dissection were ex-
cluded. All cases were paraffin embedded and 3 um sections were stained
by the hematoxylin/eosin.
Results: The tumour size, depth of invasion, the presence and morphol-
ogy of perineural invasion and the presence of lymfangioinvasion and
hemangioinvasion were evaluated. From the total number of 532 cases,
70 (13,15%) cases with perineural invasion, 22 (4,13%) with
hemangioinvasion and 60 (11,27%) with lymphangioinvasion were en-
countered. Metastases in ipsilateral lymph nodes were found in 249
(46,80%) cases, contralateral metastases were present in 39 (7,33%)
cases. These factors were further compared to other morphological fea-
tures (depth of invasion, tumour budding).
Conclusion: We focused mostly on perineural invasion, which is proba-
bly based on the chemotropism of tumour cells, that can be stimulated by
nerve tissue to further growth. The interactions between tumour and neu-
ral cells is not only limited to cell migration and tumour growth from the
primary location but such interaction can also stimulate axonogenesis or
extend the nerves themselves together with increasing number of axons.
Supported by Ministry of Health Of Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV
NV19-08-00383. All rights reserved.
PS-03-013
Variants in SDHAFx genes in vagal paragangliomas
A. Kobelyatskaya*, V. Pavlov, D. Kalinin, A. Golovyuk, M. Fedorova,
Z. Guvatova, E. Pudova, A. Poloznikov, E. Slavnova, A. Polyakov,
G. Razmakhaev, G. Krasnov, A. Snezhkina, A. Kudryavtseva
*Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: SDHAFx encode assembly factors of the
succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) complex; variants in these genes are
associated with the SDH complex deficiency. The objective of this study
was to analyse the pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in SDHAFx
genes in vagal paragangliomas (VPGLs).
Methods: In the study, we used a set of eight VPGLs collected in the
Vishnevsky Institute of Surgery, Ministry of Health of the Russian
Federation. Exome libraries were prepared using the TruSeq DNA
Exome Kit (Illumina, USA) and were sequenced on the Illumina
NextSeq 500 System in pair-read mode (76x2). Immunohistochemistry
(IHC) was performed using anti-SDHx antibodies (Abcam, USA).
Results: We revealed two patients with VPGLs characterized by likely
pathogenic mutations in SDHAFxgenes. Variant NM_145267
(SDHAF4): c.C223T, p.P75S (chr6:71298323, rs146446063) in
SDHAF4was detected in both patients. In one patient, the variant co-
occurred with a pathogenic mutation in SDHB(NM_003000 (SDHB):
c.541-2A>G (chr1:17350571, rs786201161)), in another patient – with
likely pathogenic variant in SDHFA3(NM_020186 (SDHAF3): c.T157C,
p.F53L (chr7:96747192, rs62624461)). IHC revealed negative and weak
diffuse expression of SDHB protein in these cases.
Conclusion: Variants in SDHAFx are less frequent than mutations in SDHx
in paragangliomas. We revealed likely pathogenic variants in SDHAF3 and
SDHAF4 genes in two patients with VPGLs. According to the IHC results,
we revealed changes in SDHB protein expression in patients with SDHB/
SDHAF4 and SDHAF3/SDHAF4 variants. Thus, co-occurring variants in
SDHAFx genes or present mutations in SDHAFx and SDHx together can lead
to disruption of SDH complex stability and function.
This work was financially supported by the Russian Science Foundation,
grant no.19-15-00419.
This work was performed using the equipment of EIMB RAS “Genome”
centre (http://www.eimb.ru/ru1/ckp/ccu_genome_c.php).
PS-03-014
Germline mutations in metastatic carotid paraganglioma
A. Kobelyatskaya*, A. Snezhkina, V. Pavlov, O. Stepanov, D. Kalinin,
A. Golovyuk, A. Poloznikov, Z. Guvatova, A. Sadritdinova,
M. Fedorova, E. Pudova, M. Savvateeva, G. Krasnov, A. Kudryavtseva
*Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Institute of Gene Biology,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: Carotid paraganglioma (CPGL) is a rare
neuroendocrine tumour of the head and neck that is characterized by
the variable metastasis potential. Mechanisms and biomarkers of this
process are unclear. In the study, we performed a genetic analysis of
metastatic CPGL.
Methods: We carried out the exome analysis of tumour, lymph
node and metastatic tissues derived from a patient with metastatic
CPGL. Exome libraries were prepared using the TruSeq DNA
Exome Kit (Illumina, USA) and were sequenced on an Illumina
NextSeq 500 System (paired-end reads, 76x2). We performed the
search for pathogenic/likely pathogenic germline variants in the
patient using GATK HaplotypeCaller.
Results: Base on in silico prediction tools (PolyPhen2, LRT, SIFT, and
others) and ClinVar database, we analysed the pathogenicity of germline
variants identified in the patient. We found germline pathogenic variants
in ALDH7A1and CBSgenes. Likely pathogenic variants were determined
in a wide range of genes, including HK2, HYDIN, GALC, ZNF717,
MMP28, EIF2AK3, and others.
Conclusion: We revealed a number of germline pathogenic/likely path-
ogenic variants that can be associated with the metastatic CPGL.
Interestingly, no variants were found in any genes, which are frequently
associated with paragangliomas/pheochromocytomas (SDHx, RET, NF1,
etc.). However, likely pathogenic variant was identified in the HK2 indi-
cating alterations in glycolysis. Mutation in HYDIN can also play an
important role because a high mutation frequency of this gene in
CPGLs was previously shown.
This work was financially supported by the Russian Science Foundation,
grant no. 17-75-20105.
This work was performed using the equipment of EIMB RAS “Genome”
centre (http://www.eimb.ru/ru1/ckp/ccu_genome_c.php).
PS-03-015
Immunohistochemical expression of programmed death ligand-1
(PD-L1) in oral squamous cell carcinoma and its clinicopathological
correlation
M. Kumar*, S. Babu, S. Ratnakar
*King George's Medical University, India
Background & objectives: Oral squamous cell carcinoma is responsible
for tremendous cancer related deaths and tumour load in the Indian sub-
continent. To assess the immunohistochemical expression of pro-
grammed death ligand-1(PD-L1) in oral squamous cell carcinoma and
correlation of PD-L1 expression with clinico-histopathological
parameters.
Methods: All 106 cases histopathologically and programmed death li-
gand-1(PD-L1) expression in tumour cells were evaluated separately by
two observers. Only membranous positivity was considered as positive.
Immunoreactivity score for PD-L1 expression was calculated based on
staining intensity as well as percentage. The statistical analysis was done
using SPSS version 21.0 statistical analysis software. P value of <0.05
was considered statistically significant.
Results: Age group 40 to 60 years was most affected. Tongue was the
most commonly involved site. Tobacco smoking was reported in 86.8%
of cases. No statistically significant association of histological grade,
ulceroproliferative pattern, and patient survival could be seen with PD-
L1 immunoexpression scores, however, tumour stage, lymph node me-
tastasis, tumour size (p=0.030), depth of invasion(p=0.005),
Virchows Arch
lymphovascular and perineural invasion (p=0.008) were found to be sta-
tistically significantly associated with immunohistochemical scores.
Conclusion: We conclude that total of 106 cases were included in this
study. PD-L1 expression was evaluated in tumour cells by two observers,
interobserver agreement of 97.1% was present which is in the acceptable
range.PD-L1 pathway plays a significant role in tumour immune evasion
in oral SCC patient. Role of targeted therapy can be predicted by evalu-
ating PD-L1 expression and suggesting the OSCC patients that may be
benefited by immunotherapy.
PS-03-017
P62/sequestosome1(SQSTM1) and GATA3 expression in salivary
duct carcinoma: in comparison with pleomorphic adenoma
K. Kusafuka*, J. Itakura, Y. Otsuki, N. Kuroda, I. Ito, R. Wada,
A. Muramatsu, M. Suzuki, K. Arai
*Shizuoka General Hospital, Japan
Background & objectives: SDC is immuno-phenotypically akin to
mammary apocrine carcinoma (MAC), due to the expression for AR
and GCDFP-15. GATA3 is a well-known biomarker for breast and
urothelial cancers. We aim to elucidate the status of SQSTM1 and
GATA3 expression in SDC.
Methods: We collected 53 cases of SDC, including 30 cases of carcino-
ma ex pleomorphic adenoma (CXPA), and 30 cases of pleomorphic ad-
enoma (PA), and performed the immunohistochemistry for SQSTM1 and
GATA3 on their FFPE sections, adding GCDFP-15 and AR. Finally, we
estimated the positive rates and the pattern for these molecules in SDC
and PA cases, respectively.
Results: The positive rates for GCDFP-15, AR, SQSTM1, and GATA3 in
SDC cases were 91%, 85%, 81% and 89%, respectively. The signals for AR
and GATA3 were limited to nuclei (N), whereas the signals for GCDFP-15
were observed in the cytoplasm (CY). The signals for SQSTM1 were seen
in N and/or CY. Although approximately 27% of PA cases were positive for
GATA3, a few cases of PA were positive for SQSTM1.
Conclusion: SQSTM1 is a molecule related to the autophagy, whereas it
was recently reported that its expression was up regulated in MAC. As
SQSTM1 is also a marker for apocrine differentiation, it is better that
SDC is called “apocrine carcinoma of the salivary gland”. Although
GATA3 has been also reported the consequential positivity in secretory
carcinoma of the salivary gland, it could be one of the sensitive diagnostic
markers for SDC, adding to AR, GADFP-15 and SQSTM1.
Funding: A Grant-in-Aid for Medical Research Support Project of
Shizuoka Prefectural Hospital Organization in 2019 of Japan (to KK).
PS-03-018
PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx helps determine first-line pembrolizumab
eligibility in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients
C. La Placa*, B. Watts, M. Vilardo, M. Polewski, S. Tabuena-Frolli,
M. Jansson, J. Juco, K. Emancipator, F. Jin, B. Gumuscu, J. Ge,
K. Kulangara
*Agilent Technologies, Inc., USA
Background & objectives: PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx is a CE-IVD-
marked assay intended for use in detection of PD-L1 protein in formalin-
fixed, paraffin-embedded non-small cell lung cancer, urothelial carcino-
ma, melanoma, and recently, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) tissues.
Methods: For the HNSCC indication, the device has been validated at
Dako North America on the performance of precision and robustness using
the Combined Positive Score (CPS) ≥1 and CPS ≥20 cutoffs; external
validation studies were performed at three external laboratories. CPS ≥1 and
CPS ≥20 cutoffs were evaluated in KEYNOTE-048, a phase 3 clinical trial.
Results: Analytical validation studies supporting the companion diagnos-
tic indication (CPS ≥1) achieved point estimates of > 85% for negative,
positive, and overall percent agreement. Clinical validation studies show
that patients treated with pembrolizumab as a single agent had an overall
survival (OS) of 12.3 months at CPS ≥1 (95% CI, 10.8-14.3) compared
with patients receiving cetuximab, platinum, and 5-fluorouracil (CPS ≥1
OS of 10.3 months (95% CI, 9.0-11.5)).
Conclusion: Analytical and clinical validation studies demonstrate that
PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx is a robust and precise companion diagnostic
assay, allowing for selection of eligible HNSCC patients for treatment
with pembrolizumab.
PS-03-019
New entities of sinonasal tract tumours: a single centre experience
K. Liyanaarachchi*, C.W. Lee, S. Sunkaraneni, S. Di Palma
*Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Sinonasal tract tumours have been newly
classified according to molecular and immuno-histochemical studies
leading to an expansion of the category of sinonasal undifferentiated
carcinoma (SNUC). Our goal here is to familiarize the new entities with
the pathologists and clinicians.
Methods: We have searched our files to see if there were cases initially
called SNUC and now reclassified according to the recent WHO recog-
nized sinonasal tract carcinoma, classification, which include NUT mid-
line carcinoma, SMARCB 1 deficient sinonasal carcinoma and HPV
related carcinoma with adenoid cystic like features. Participation to clin-
ical trial and follow up was arranged.
Results: When immunohistochemistry and molecular tests were per-
formed, the new tumour entities were identified. Molecular analysis in-
cluding the NUT gene (t15 q14) and immunohistochemistry for NUT
protein was necessary to identify NUT midline carcinoma. T6:9 translo-
cation, hallmark of adenoid cystic carcinoma, was performed to confirm
HPV related carcinoma with adenoid cystic like features which has better
prognosis. Deletion of SMARCB1/22q was observed in a case of
SMARCB1 deficient sinonasal carcinoma.
Conclusion: Our study confirms that sinonasal carcinoma can be
reclassified using immunohistochemistry and molecular testing leading
to new entities with prognostic, diagnostic and therapeutic implications.
Our reclassification allowed a patient with NUT midline carcinoma to be
enrolled in clinical trial for BET inhibition with good clinical response.
PS-03-020
Histopathological processing of sentinel lymph nodes in head and
neck cancer
D. Mooney*, S. Wright
*Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Sentinel node biopsy (SNB) can be offered
to patients with early-stage squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the head
and neck. There is currently no agreed protocol for histopathological
processing of SNBs – an audit was undertaken to inform local practice.
Methods: Seventy seven SNBs from 2013-2016 were retrieved
from our records. We examined each report, recording specimen
size, dissection method, and total number of histological levels
and immunohistochemical stains requested. The positive SNBs were
and the histological level at which metastatic SCC was first seen
was recorded. The results and clinical outcomes for the positive and
negative SNB cases were compared. Results: In all positive SNB
cases, metastatic SCC was present on the first H&E level.
Additional histopathological levels and immunohistochemical stain-
ing did not contribute to the identification of SCC. Histological
levels were required in one case to demonstrate conversion from a
micrometastatic to a macrometastatic deposit and in one case to
demonstrate extracapsular spread. There was no documented clinical
recurrence in any of the negative SNBs.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: We propose examining a single H&E section of each block
without pre-emptive ordering of levels, blanks and immunohistochemis-
try. When a micrometastasis is identified or extra-capsular spread is
suspected, then additional levels may be warranted. In our institution,
examining a single H&E as has a potential cost saving of £25 per block.
PS-03-021
Evolutionary epigenetics: DNA methylation modifications in ultra-
conserved non-coding elements from squamous cell carcinoma of
different species revealed a common epigenetic behaviour
L. Morandi*, S. Sabattini, A. Renzi, A. Rigillo, G. Bettini, E. Dervas,
A. Schauer, D. Gissi, A. Tarsitano, S. Evangelisti, M. Morandi, C. Tonon
*Alma Mater Studiorum - University of Bologna - Department of
Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, Functional MR Unit, IRCCS
Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Italy
Background & objectives: Ultra-Conserved-Non-coding
Elements(UCNEs) represent genomic sequences that exhibit >95% se-
quence identity between human, mammals, birds, reptiles, fishes. Recent
findings reported their functional role in cancers. Aim of this study was to
evaluate DNA methylation modifications in oral-squamous-cell-
carcinoma (OSCC) from different species.
Methods: 50 OSCC, 14 feline stomatitis and 63 normal tissue were
enrolled in this study. DNA purification followed by bisulfite Next
Generation Sequencing protocol were used to quantify the DNA methyl-
ation level of each CpG from seven UCNE(uc.160, uc.283, uc.416,
uc.339, uc.270, uc.299, uc.328). Bioinformatic data analysis was per-
formed in cloud computing using galaxyproject tools, Methylation
Plotter and ClustVis.
Results: 50 OSCC, 26 from human, 17 from cats, 3 dogs, 1 badger, 1
horse, 1 porcupine, 1 bovine, 1 chicken were investigated. Moreover, 14
feline stomatitis and normal tissue from 42 healthy human donors, 7 cats,
5 dogs, 5 horses, 2 caws, 1 badger, 1 iguana were collected as normal
controls. DNA methylation analysis revealed consistent epigenetic mod-
ifications able to correctly stratify OSCC vs feline stomatitis and vs nor-
mal tissue. A common DNA methylation pattern was observed in OSCC
of all the species evaluated in this study with an increasing trend of
hypermethylation starting from normal mucosa, through stomatitis to
OSCC. 57/59 CpGs were statistically significant in Kruskal-Wallis test
(P<0.05).
Conclusion: Our findings indicate that UCNEs are hypermethylated in
human OSCC, and this behaviour is also conserved among different
species of mammals and also in reptiles. These similarities at both clinical
and molecular level have led to the proposal that feline and other mammal
species may serve as a spontaneous model for human disease.
This study was supported by an academic grant (ALMAIDEA) from the
University of Bologna.
PS-03-023
The diagnostic utility of RAS Q61R mutation-specific immunohisto-
chemistry in epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma
T. Nagao*, M. Nakaguro, M. Tanigawa, H. Hirai, Y. Yamamoto, Y. Tada
*Tokyo Medical University, Japan
Background & objectives: Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma (EMC)
is a rare salivary gland tumour characterized by biphasic tubular struc-
tures. The HRAS Q61R mutation is frequent in and specific to EMC. We
evaluated the usefulness of immunohistochemical staining for detecting
this genetic alteration in EMC.
Methods: We investigated 74 EMC cases and 63 cases of salivary gland
tumours with an EMC-like component, including pleomorphic adenoma,
adenoid cystic carcinoma, basal cell adenoma, and myoepithelial carci-
noma. Immunohistochemical staining was conducted using the monoclo-
nal antibody specific to the RAS Q61R mutation (SP174; Abcam,
Cambridge, MA, USA). Sanger DNA sequencing was also performed
for HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS.
Results: The diffuse and membranous RAS Q61R immunohistochemical
expression was observed in 51 of 74 EMC cases (68.9%), in which 50
cases (98.0%) harbored the HRAS Q61R mutation. The immunoreactivity
was largely restricted to the myoepithelial cells in EMC. Conversely, only
one of the EMC cases lacking the HRAS Q61R mutation and no EMC-
like salivary gland tumours showed the abovementioned
immunopositivity. None of the cases examined carried KRAS or NRAS
mutations.
Conclusion: Immunohistochemistry for RAS Q61R is highly sensitive
and specific for detecting the HRAS Q61R mutation in EMC. Further
studies will be needed to clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying
the differences in the immunoexpression between the ductal and
myoepithelial cells in HRAS Q61R mutation-positive EMCs. Since sig-
nificant immunopositivity was exclusively identified in more than two-
third of EMCs but not in the histologic mimics, the immunohistochem-
istry of RAS Q61R is a useful tool for diagnosing EMC in general pa-
thology laboratories.
PS-03-026
BRAF V600E mutations in odontogenic tumours with ameloblastic
epithelium: clinicopathological significance and immunohistochemi-
cal validation
K. Oh*, S. Cho, H. Yoon, J. Lee, S. Hong
*Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: The BRAF V600E mutation is an oncogenic
mutation that can be a therapeutic target. We determined the prevalence
and clinicopathological significance of BRAF V600E mutations in be-
nign and malignant odontogenic tumours and validated immunohisto-
chemistry using a BRAF V600E-specific antibody (VE1).
Methods: BRAF V600E detection was performed using Sanger se-
quencing in a total of 20 odontogenic tumours: 5 ameloblastic car-
cinomas (ACs), 1 metastasizing ameloblastoma, 1 clear cell
odontogenic carcinoma, 7 ameloblastic fibromas (AFs), 2
ameloblastic fibro-odontomas (AFOs), and 4 developing
odontomas. Associations between BRAF V600E and clinicopatho-
logical factors were statistically analysed. VE1 immunohistochem-
istry was conducted and its validity was evaluated.
Results: BRAF V600E mutations were identified in 40.0% of AC,
42.9% of AF, and 50.0% of AFO, although no clinicopathological
factors were significantly associated with the mutation status. VE1
immunohistochemistry showed diffuse cytoplasmic staining in AC,
but no VE1 expression was found in BRAF V600E-mutant mixed
odontogenic tumours. Compared with the sequencing results, VE1
immunohistochemistry yielded a sensitivity of 33.3% (2/6) and a
specificity of 100% (14/14).
Conclusion: Odontogenic tumours with ameloblastic epithelium have
BRAF V600E mutations in common, which suggests the utility of
BRAF-targeted therapy for AC and supports the notion that AFO is a
true neoplasm. Considering the low sensitivity of VE1 immunohisto-
chemistry in odontogenic tumours, molecular tests should be performed
to determine the presence of BRAF V600E mutations.
PS-03-027
Orofacial tumours and tumour-like lesions in Birnin-Kebbi metrop-
olis: histopathological analysis
O. Oluwole*
*University of Abuja, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Orofacial tumours can occur at any age. An
increasing occurrence has made these tumours a significant cause of
morbidity and mortality.
Virchows Arch
Aim
To determine the histopathological pattern of orofacial tumours and
tumour-like lesions in Birnin-Kebbi, North-West, Nigeria.
Methods: This is a 9-year retrospective histopathological analysis of
orbital tumours diagnosed between 2004-2012 in the Department of
Histopathology, Federal Medical Centre, Birnin-Kebbi, Kebbi State,
North-West, Nigeria. All the Haematoxylin &Eosin stained slides and
paraffin embedded blocks were retrieved and studied.
Results: A total of 23 patients were studied, 11 males and 13 females.
The age range is 7-80 years with the mean age of 43.5 years. There is a
bimodal peak age at the fourth and fifth decades. The most common
benign tumour was pleomorphic adenoma, PA (43.5%), while the most
common malignant tumour was adenoid cystic carcinoma, ACC followed
by squamous cell carcinoma, SCC.
Conclusion: Orofacial tumours and tumour-like lesions are common in
our environment. A very high-index of suspicion, good clinical acumen,
adequate histopathologic sampling and reporting can go a long way at
making diagnosis.
PS-03-028
The cytokeratin 7/α-smooth muscle actin immunohistochemical
combination is sufficient to distinguish adenoid cystic carcinoma
from polymorphous adenocarcinoma in small biopsies
R. Ottaviani*, S. Souza, B. Sedessari
*Nove de Julho University, School of Medicine, Brazil
Background & objectives: Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) and poly-
morphous adenocarcinoma (PAC) represent one of the most trou-
blesome examples of morphological overlap seen in salivary gland
pathology. We aimed to demonstrate the combined CK7/α-SMA
immunohistochemical combination as a reliable method to make
this distinction.
Methods: 100 PACs and 79 ACCs samples diagnosed in small incisional
biopsies were submitted to CK7 and α-SMA immunohistochemical re-
actions. Results were described as positive or negative.
Results: ACC group of patients consisted of 53 women and 26 men, with
an overall mean age at presentation of 45.6 years. Cases affected the
palate, upper lip, buccal mucosa, retromolar trigone and paranasal sinus.
All cases were infiltrative biphasic tumours composed by basaloid cells
showing a concordant CK7+/α-SMA+ immunoprofile. The PAC patients
were represented by 80 women and 20 men, with a mean mean age of
58.7 years. Cases affected the palate, upper lip, buccal mucosa and
retromolar region. All were represented by invasive tumours with diverse
architectural growth patterns, displaying a consistently discordant CK7+/
α-SMA- profile.
Conclusion: application of the combined cytokeratin 7/α-SMA antibod-
ies is a trustworthy and cost-effective method to separate ACC from PAC,
even in small biopsy samples.
PS-03-029
Multi-parametric analysis of interferon γ transcription as assessed
by in situ hybridization in head and neck human papillomavirus-
related squamous cell carcinomas
S. Outh-Gauer*, M. Rassy, M. Mandavit, C. Lépine, J. Augustin,
C. Gasne, T. Denize, E. Tartour, C. Badoual
*Georges Pompidou European Hospital, Inserm U970, France
Background & objectives: Patients with Human Papillomavirus (HPV)-
related head and neck (HN) squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) have long
been considered as having a better outcome. However, they still exhibit
variability in their prognosis, that could be linked to micro-environment
heterogeneity.
Methods: Sixty-three patients diagnosed with HPV-positive HNSCC and
confirmed by HPV DNA PCR, were included. For each of them, one
whole slide was stained by Interferon γ (IFNγ) RNAScope® coupled
with pancytokeratin, PD-L1 and CD8. Tyramide signal amplification and
immunofluorescence revelation followed. IFNγ and/or CD8 expressing
cells were quantified in 10 representative high-power fields (distinctively
5 tumoral and 5 stromal).
Results: More than half of HPV-positive oropharyngeal SCC showed
IFNγ transcription. The latter was localised in stromal and tumour infil-
trating immune cells, as well as in carcinomatous cells. Analysis by log-
rank test showed that intra-tumoral IFNγ high expression was
associated with a better overall survival (p=0.035), unlike stromal
IFNγ expression (p=0.806). Furthermore, HPV-positive oropha-
ryngeal SCC showed enrichment of CD8+IFNγ+ lymphocytes,
in both tumoral and stromal compartments (respectively p=0.037
and p=0.048). Of note, the results were independent of PD-L1
expression (positive in 92.1% of all cases).
Conclusion: In conclusion, intra-tumoral IFNγ expression distinguishes
two prognostic groups of oropharyngeal HPV-positive SCC. The associ-
ated enrichment in CD8+IFNγ+ lymphocytes suggests an underlying
mechanism involving the immune micro-environment.
Funding: Fonds de Recherche Société Française de Pathologie
PS-03-030
Foetal parotid gland morphology in cases of toxaemia of pregnancy
O. Reshetnikova*, S. Morozov
*Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Russia
Background & objectives: Salivary gland's adequate function is impor-
tant in maintaining an oral environment. Saliva’s composition alterations
may cause periodontal status and be responsible for the caries develop-
ment. The aim of the study was to examine the foetal parotid gland
morphology under toxaemia of pregnancy,
Methods: 20 foetal parotid glands of 18-22 weeks of gestation were
examined after spontaneous abortions in pregnancies complicated by tox-
aemia of pregnancy. Salivary glands of 15 human foetuses with the same
gestational age in cases of induced abortions due to social and psycho-
logical reasons were in control group(CG). Histological study of H&E
stained slides was followed with morphometry and statistical analysis.
Results: The delay of acini and intralobulae ducts differentiation within
the parotid gland tissue were revealed in the study. Dystrophic changes of
parenchymal elements of large salivary glands were also determined.
Morphometry investigation have shown a reduction of parenchymatous
elements volume fraction, decreased vascularity and decline of
parenchyma/stroma index. The connective tissue volume fraction in pa-
rotid gland tissue increased.
Conclusion: The results of the study present a structural impairments in
foetal parotid gland anternatal development in cases of pregnancies com-
plicated with toxaemia. These alterations perhaps cause functional disor-
ders in salivary gland's activities and may contribute to the pathology of
the oral cavity in childhood and later life.
PS-03-031
Intraosseous adenoid cystic carcinoma – a case series
M. Ryan*, S. Wright
*Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Intraosseous adenoid cystic carcinoma
(ACC) is a rare neoplasm with only a small number of cases described
in the literature. This report describes two cases of intraosseous ACC
arising in the mandible, and discusses their presentation, imaging, histo-
pathology and management.
Methods: The slides and case reports were examined and data was ex-
tracted including demographics, clinical presentation, histological and
immunohistochemical features of each case. Further clinical information
including radiological findings, clinical management and prognosis was
Virchows Arch
obtained from our regional electronic patient record system. A literature
review was performed.
Results: Both cases are those of middle-aged females, presenting with
large lytic lesions involving the mandible. Histopathology of both cases
showed the typical features of a solid adenoid cystic carcinoma and immu-
nohistochemical stains and molecular studies were supportive of this.
Imaging, including PET CT, highlighted metastatic disease at presentation
in both cases. MDT discussion highlighted poor prognosis in each case.
Conclusion: Intraosseous salivary gland neoplasms, although rare, should be
considered in the differential diagnosis for tumours within the mandible. They
have a propensity for local recurrence and metastasis, and complete surgical
resection therefore offers the best outcome. Their clinical and radiological
features can be similar to odontogenic tumours. Accurate histological diag-
nosis is therefore crucial as well as close clinical and radiological correlation
to delineate the most appropriate treatment for these patients.
PS-03-032
Protocols of lymph node sampling in 95 cases of head & neck squa-
mous cell carcinoma: is excessive concern for cost control leading to
understaging and under treatment?
S. Sancheti*, P. Somal
*Homi Bhabha Cancer Hospital, India
Background & objectives: 1. To assess the sampling of large lymph
nodes (LN) (>15mm) in Head and neck cancer as per recommendation
& evaluate its effect on LN stage and prognostication.
2. Does under-sampling of larger grossly uninvolved LN compromise the
patient care.
Methods: 95 cases of head -neck SCC with metastatic lymph
nodes(MLN) were categorized into four groups as small nodes(submitted
entirely), grossly positive LN, bisected LN and both halves show metas-
tasis and LN which were bisected or trisected and only one slice shows
metastatic disease. LN level and the 'N' stage were noted. Retrospective
analysis of its impact on staging was done.
Results: Nine cases out of ninety-five revealed that under-sampling of the
MLN would have missed the detection of metastasis. Surprisingly, there
would have been under-staging of LN stage in five out of these nine cases
if the LN were not sampled entirely. This also changes the prognosis of
the patient and will lead to false staging.
Conclusion: The gross and microscopic examination provides informa-
tion about the number of nodes involved, size of the deposit and presence
of extracapsular extension (ECE) for staging of the disease. Accurate
sampling and thorough examination of LN is perhaps the most important
contribution of a pathologist in the management of head and neck can-
cers. Adequate sampling should be the standard of practice to avoid
compromise in patient care.
Larger grossly uninvolved LN should be submitted entirely for adequate
staging.
PS-03-033
Focal melanocytic lesions of the oral mucosa: an 18-year retrospec-
tive study
T. Santana*, A. Queiroz, L.M. Cerioni Gonçales, A. Fraga Costa Samos
Paris, M. Trierveiler
*School of Dentistry, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil
Background & objectives: This study aimed to compile the focal lesions
of melanocytic origin diagnosed at the Service of Surgical Pathology of
the School of Dentistry of the University of São Paulo and to analyse their
respective clinical and histopathological characteristics.
Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted over an 18-year period.
Patient information was collected from medical charts, and all archived
histopathological specimens with diagnoses of oral melanocytic lesions
were retrieved and reviewed.
Results: We identified 341 melanocytic lesions among 64,695 samples
received for histopathological analysis. Of these, 191 were melanotic
macule; 112 melanocytic nevi; 14 mucosal lentigo simplex; 12 oral mel-
anomas; nine actinic lentigines and one melanoacanthoma. Lesions oc-
curred mostly in women (n=218; 65.5%), with white skin colour (n=217;
74%). The main reported clinical aspect was macular (n=124; 67.6%).
Melanocytic lesions occurred mainly in lip vermilion (n=83; 25.6%),
followed by palate (n=74; 22.8%). The age of the patients was higher in
melanoma patients and these cases had a shorter average duration until
the time of diagnosis. Most lesions were small and only oral melanomas
were larger in size when compared to other lesions.
Conclusion: Melanocytic lesions are an uncommon diagnosis in oral
pathology routines. The most frequent lesions are melanotic macule and
nevus. Patients with these lesions are usually white-skinned women pre-
senting a small, long-lasting, macular lesion on lip vermilion or palate.
PS-03-034
Expression of microRNA-31 in saliva-liquid biopsy of oral squamous
cell carcinoma patients
P. Kumari, S. Syed*, M. Wahid
*Department of Oral Pathology, Dow Dental College, Dow University of
Health Sciences, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Aberrant expression of microRNA-31 in
saliva-liquid biopsy has been reported in various cancers. However, little
is known about its expression in oral-squamous-cell-carcinoma (OSCC).
We aimed to investigate microRNA-31 expression in pre-and post-surgi-
cal OSCC patients and its association with clinicopathological features.
Methods: We investigated salivary microRNA-31 expression in pre-
surgical and post-surgical (6 weeks after surgery) patients with oral squa-
mous cell carcinoma (n=16) and control (n=2) by quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) after ethical approval
from institutional review board (IRB).
Results: Salivary microRNA-31 expression was differentially regulated
in pre- and post-surgical patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma and
controls. MicroRNA-31 was significantly upregulated in pre-surgical
cases (p<0.05). However, the expression was significantly reduced after
6-weeks of surgical excision of tumour, indicating that most of the
microRNA-31 derived from oral squamous cell carcinoma tissues.
Moreover, no significant association was found between pre-surgical
microRNA-31 expression level and age, gender, site, habits, pathological
TNM staging and grading.
Conclusion: Our findings showed increased expression of microRNA-31
in saliva-liquid biopsy, suggesting microRNA-31 an important player in
pathogenesis of oral squamous cell carcinoma.
PS-03-035
HRAS mutation is a surrogate diagnostic marker in challenging
cases of epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma
C. Taverna*, A. Franchi, A. Agaimy
*Division of Pathological Anatomy, Department of Health Sciences,
University of Florence, School of Human Health Sciences Florence, Italy
Background & objectives: Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma (EMC)
is a challenging diagnosis for the wide variety of patterns. We analysed
HRAS status in 3 cases of EMCs with predominant solid-oncocytic and
sebaceous features, as Urano et al (2019) demonstrated HRAS mutation
in 82.7% of EMCs.
Methods: Patients were 2 males and 1 female aged 69-75 years. Two
cases presented prominent solid oncocytic pattern and 1 was character-
ized by extensive sebaceous differentiation (initially diagnosed as seba-
ceous carcinoma). HRAS sequencing were analysed in 3 cases using a
single base primer extension approach (SNaPshot assay) on an ABI Prism
Virchows Arch
3500 genetic analyser. Fragment analysis was performed using
GeneMapper software.
Results: All 3 cases analysed for mutations in HRAS showed positive
results. The site of mutation was exon 2 (p.Gly13Arg; c.37G>C) in one
oncocytic EMC, while the same mutation in exon 3 (Q61R; c.182A>G)
was found in the second oncocytic case and in the sebaceous EMC.
Conclusion: EMCs with prominent unusual variants of histologic fea-
tures can be frequently confused with other entities with different behav-
iour and prognosis. We demonstrated that HRAS mutations are present in
these variant EMCs. Thus assessment of HRAS status is useful in salivary
gland neoplasms that do not entirely fulfil clear diagnostic criteria for
EMC and cannot otherwise be classified as other entities.
PS-03-036
PD-L1 score and CD8 heterogeneity in head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas
S. Tzorakoleftheraki*, V. Kotoula, K. Markou, S. Chrisafi, E. Daskalaki,
E. Sgouramali, P. Hytiroglou, T. Koletsa
*Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Greece
Background & objectives: In an effort to further characterise head and
neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC) phenotypes relevant to the currently
applied immunotherapy with checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), we profiled
PD-L1 status, CD8+ lymphocytic infiltrate density and their heterogene-
ity in these tumours.
Methods: We evaluated p16 protein expression (positive/negative), com-
bined PD-L1 positivity score (CPS, clone 22C3) and CD8+ lymphocyte
density/mm^2 in 228 HNSCC (52.5% laryngeal supraglottic/glottic/
subglottic; 19.7% oral cavity; 12.2% oro-hypopharyngeal; 15.6% other)
informative for all 3 markers. CD8+-density was analysed as continuous
variable. Immunohistochemistry was performed on tissue-microarray
sections with multiple cores per tumour, allowing for the assessment of
intra-tumour heterogeneity.
Results: Out of 228 HNSCC, 16 were p16 positive (7.0%), half of them
oro-hypopharyngeal; 37 (16.3%) were PD-L1 positive with CPS ≥1,
while 7 of them with CPS ≥20 (high PD-L1 expression level); median
CD8+-density was 204.9 (interquartile-range 105.0-437.2). Twenty-two
(9.6%) and 48 (26.7%) tumours exhibited heterogeneous PD-L1 status
and CD8+-density, respectively. p16-positive tumours demonstrated
higher CD8+-density (Wilcoxon rank-sum p=0.0022), but none of them
expressed PD-L1 at high levels (Pearson’s p=0.0008). PD-L1-positive
tumours had higher CD8+-density (Wilcoxon rank-sum p<0.0001); the
latter did not differ for PD-L1 scores 1-19 and ≥20. PD-L1-positivity was
associated with CD8+-heterogeneity (Fisher’s exact p=0.0005), particu-
larly concerning tumours with high PD-L1 expression level (p<0.0001),
independently of tumour location.
Conclusion: PD-L1/CD8 profiles may distinguish previously described im-
munologically “hot” and immunosuppressed HNSCC. CD8+-heterogeneity
may be related to different immunological priming by tumour subpopula-
tions. PD-L1/CD8 assessment may further aid in the distinction of tumour
immunological classification, particularly for predicting efficiency to ICIs.
PS-03-037
Evaluation of high-risk human papillomavirus mRNA silver in situ
hybridisation diagnostic assays in oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinomas
M. Volavšek*, M. Poljak, P. Strojan, D. Velkavrh, L. Hošnjak, K. Fujs
Komloš, N. Zidar, L. Bolha, A. Aničin, N. Gale
*Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Slovenia
Background & objectives: Testing is required to distinguish human
papillomavirus (HPV) driven oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas
(OPSCC) with favourable treatment response and prognosis from HPV
negative tumours. Recently developed RNA ISH probes complementary
to HPV E6/E7 mRNA enable direct visualization of viral mRNA.
Methods: Sensitivity/specificity of high-risk (HR) HPV mRNA silver in situ
hybridization (SISH) for HPV16, HPV18 and HPV33 was tested for the first
time. 67 FFPE OPSCC and 3 papillomas from 62 patients diagnosed between
2006-2014 were tested with SISH, Abbott RealTime High Risk HPV test, in-
house GP5+/6+/68 PCR test and p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Results: Using HR-HPV PCR, 46 (69%) OPSCC were HPV+, with single
HPV type in 44/46 (38 HPV16+, 2 HPV33+, 3 HPV35+, 1 HPV58+), 2/46
with co-infections (HPV16/X, HPV16/35). Of HR-HPV PCR+ OPSCC, 45/
46 overexpressed p16, 43/46 were SISH+. Others were PCR HPV16+/p16-/
SISH-, HPV35+/p16-/SISH-, HPV58+/p16-/SISH-.
Sensitivity/specificity/AUC with 95% confidence interval of combined
SISH+ (HPV16/33) and p16 IHC compared to PCRs were 100.0%,
100.0% and 1.00. HPV+ group had favourable overall survival (p<0.001).
Conclusion: mRNA SISH methodology for FFPE tissue reliably detects
HPV-driven OPSCCs without need for additional tests in most cases, with
clearly positive signals easily detectable at 10x/20x magnification, enabling
visualisation of viral transcripts required to recognise clinically relevant HPV
infection. Compared to PCR, clear signals reliably exclude false-positivity,
but rare/tiny signals require experienced pathologist or a team for consensus
interpretation of results.
Funding: Roche Ventana provided mRNA probes for SISH
PS-03-039
An audit to compare the turn-around times of oral and maxillofacial
resection specimens including and excluding bone
H. Walsh*, D. Brierley
*Unit of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Clinical Dentistry,
University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: To identify the turnaround times (TATs) for
resection specimens and to assess for compliance with The Royal College
of Pathologists Key Performance Indicators that 80% of resection cases
(excluding those with bone) should be reported within 10 calendar days.
Methods: Two cycles of the audit were completed. All resection speci-
mens (including and excluding bone) over 3 separate and comparable 3-
month periods were assessed. The average TATs and percentage of cases
reported in both 10 working days and 10 calendar days was recorded.
Results: There have been significant improvements between cycles one
and two with the average TAT for resection cases without bone decreas-
ing from 12.9 to 10.4 calendar days. The percentage of resections without
bone reported within the recommended timeframe increased from 31.4%
to 57%. The average TAT for resections including bone decreased from
29.2 to 20.4 calendar days, although in both cycles 0% of cases were
reported within 10 calendar days.
Conclusion: TATs for specimens including bone are significantly higher
with decalcification processes being a major contributory factor. To im-
prove patient care, work is required to achieve the target within the rec-
ommended timeframe. A possible solution includes use of alternative
decalcification techniques.
PS-04-001
Acral melanomas in Singapore
I. Busmanis*, P.Y. Tang, L. Oon
*Singapore General Hospital, Singapore
Background & objectives: Singapore population has higher incidence
of acral melanoma compared with Caucasians, with fewer BRAF muta-
tions compared with cutaneous melanomas. Our Singapore study
PS-04 Dermatopathology
Virchows Arch
correlates molecular findings in acral melanomas with clinicopathological
features and compares with other Asian data.
Methods: 195 cases of melanoma with molecular analysis for
mutations in exon 15 of the BRAF gene and exons 9, 11, 13,
and 17 of the ckit gene in genomic DNA by polymerase chain
reaction amplification and direct Sanger sequencing were retrieved
from Singapore General Hospital files (2007-2020
Results: Of 195 cases, 72(37%) were cutaneous, 69(35%) acral
and 54(28%) mucosal. Of 69 acral tumours, 16/53(30%) were
BRAF positive. Of 28 acral cases with ckit mutational analysis,
11/43(26%) were ckit positive. The majority of BRAF positive
cases were of Chinese ethnic group (12/16), female (11/16), mean
age 59 years, located at acral non-pressure sites (12/16) and foot
(12/16). No significant differences in the incidence of ulceration
were seen between the BRAF positive (52%) and BRAF negative
(42%) tumours, and also ckit positive (55%) and ckit negative
(63%) tumours. The incidence of nodal metastasis was markedly
different between ckit positive tumours (55%) compared with ckit
negative tumours (33%).
Conclusion: The BRAF positive mutation rate in Singaporean ALM was
comparable with data from China, Korea, Taiwan and Japan (range 25-
42%). Our findings suggest a possible relationship between ckit mutation
and the incidence of nodal metastasis.
PS-04-002
Histopathologic features of dermatologic eruptions due to immune
checkpoint inhibitors [monoclonal antibodies targeting cytotoxic T
lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4), programmed cell death
protein 1 (PD-1) or programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1)]
C. Cabañuz Rocatallada*, V. Baena Romero, M.J. Beato-Merino
*Hospital Universitario La Paz, Spain
Background & objectives: Checkpoint inhibition induces
immune-related adverse events. Skin toxicity is one of the most
common, mostly as a maculopapular rash, less frequently as vit-
iligo, psoriasis and auto-immune diseases. This review describes
the histopathologic aspects of dermatologic irAEs induced by
checkpoint inhibitors.
Methods: We reviewed19 biopsies, obtained from 16 patients
who were referred to the Dermatology Department of “La Paz”
University Hospital, a tertiary care hospital. All patients had de-
veloped dermatologic toxicity while receiving either anti-PD-1,
anti-PDL1, or anti-CTLA4 agents, from January 2017 to January
2020.
Results: Patients were 9 males and 7 females, with a medium age
of 64 years. Lung carcinoma was the most common tumour being
treated, followed by gastric adenocarcinoma and melanoma. In
twelve biopsies the patient was on anti-PD-1 agents, in 4 on
anti-PDL1, and in 3 on anti-CTLA4 plus anti-PD1 or anti-PDL-
1 treatment.
The most common histopathologic pattern was “interface derma-
titis”, in 10 biopsies (52,6 %), which was lichenoid in 6 of them.
Other patterns observed (sometimes overlapped) were:
psoriasiform (15,3%), spongiotic,vesiculobullous (bullous pemphi-
goid and Grover’s disease) and urticarial (10,5% each). One pa-
tient with melanoma, showed loss of melanocytes, which was
interpreted as vitiligo.
Conclusion: The results reveal that histopathologic features of reac-
tions secondary to check point inhibitors therapy arequite heteroge-
neous. Clinical correlation is needed for definitive diagnosis. Despite
interface dermatitisis the most common pattern, florid lichenoid pat-
tern was observed in just 6 biopsies (31,6%). It is important that
doctors are familiar with these increasing adverse effects, quite un-
known to date, for the correct management of patients.
PS-04-003
Subcutaneous sarcoidosis: a series of 8 cases
M.I. Cevallos*, Í. Martínez de Espronceda Esquerro, Y. Rodriguez,
M. Bronte, G. De Lima Piña, S. Oscoz Jaime, C. Llanos, A. Cordoba
*Department of Pathology, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Subcutaneous involvement has been
described in up to 16% of patients with cutaneous sarcoidosis. It
consists of sarcoid granulomas affecting mainly subcutaneous tis-
sue and manifests clinically as erythematous, flesh-colored, violet
or hyperpigmented nodules, mostly in upper limbs.
Methods: We reviewed our institutions' archives from 2013 to
2019 and found eight cases. Histopathological diagnosis of sub-
cutaneous sarcoidosis was demonstrated by the presence of non-
casefying granulomas in subcutaneous tissue while excluding oth-
er causes of granulomatous panniculitis.
Results: Patients’ ages ranged between 33 and 76 years old. Six
had nodules in limbs, one in scalp and one in face and breast.
Seven patients presented with subcutaneous sarcoidosis at the be-
ginning, being the only sign of disease in four of them. Two
cases showed other sarcoid cutaneous manifestations and two
others, bilateral hilar adenopathies. Two cases had history of der-
matomyositis under treatment and another, prostate adenocarcino-
ma with hormone therapy.
Conclusion: Our series' results are consistent with current litera-
ture. It is important to recognize subcutaneous sarcoidosis since
this would allow earlier diagnosis and treatment of systemic dis-
ease. It is remarkable that three patients had history of immuno-
suppressive therapy; also reported as cases of subcutaneous sar-
coidosis related to this type of treatment.
PS-04-004
Nevus sebaceous with associated uncommon pathologies
Q. Chundriger*, M.U. Tariq, S. Moeen, S. Fatima
*Aga Khan University Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: The obectives were to study clinico-
pathological features of Nevus Sebaceous and associated other
pathologies – benign and malignant, reported from 2010 till
February 2020 in the section of Histopathology at our
University Hospital.
Methods: We retrieved ten year data from our archives, using our
Integrated Laboratory management system software, by using
words “Nevus Sebaceous”. Demographics including age, gender,
site and presence of other pathologies was recorded. Frequencies
of benign and malignant lesions were calculated.
Results: 111 cases of Nevus Sebaceous were reported from 2010
till February 2020. Age ranged from 3-85 years (mean age 31.2
years). 74.7% of patients were above 20 years. 57.6% were male
and 40.5% females. 45.9% were located on scalp, face (42%), ear
(4.5%), back (1.8%) and neck (0.9%). Site was unknown for 8
cases (7.2%). 23/111 cases (20.7%) showed associated lesions.
These included Syringocystadenoma Papilleferum (39.1%),
Epidermal Nevus (17.4%) and Trichoepithelioma (8.7%). One pa-
tient each had Syringoma, Solar Lentigo, Actinic Keratosis,
Tumour of Follicular Infundibulum, Intradermal Nevus and
Hemangioma. Two showed metaplastic bone formation and
Amyloidosis respectively. Two patients (1.8%) had Basal Cell
Carcinoma, one of them below 20 years.
Conclusion: Knowledge of the probability of encountering other
benign or malignant lesions arising within a nevus sebaceous is
essential for correct diagnosis, as they might be missed due to
inadequate sampling, which may adversely affect patient manage-
ment and follow up.
Virchows Arch
PS-04-005
Primary cutaneous CD4+ small/medium T-cell lymphoproliferative
disorder - the presence of dual lineage rearrangements
A. Cordoba*, M.D.R. Mercado, C. Llanos, A. Larrea, I. Yanguas,
J. Mitxelena, I. Fernandez, D. Guerrero-Setas
*Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: The Primary cutaneous CD4+ small/medium
T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder (PCSMP-TLPD). It is included in the
Peripheral T -cell lymphoma with follicular T helper phenotype; which
are the providers of T- cell help to B cells for the development of germinal
centres
Methods: We have studied the cases diagnosed in our hospital from 2012
until now. We have reviewed 16 cases and analysed them with CD3,
CD4, CD8, CD7, CD10, Bcl6, PD-1, CD20, CD38, Kappa and lambda.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed to analyse clonal expan-
sion of T and B cells.The mean age at diagnosis was 58.6 years (range 31-
85).
Results: There was a women predominance (10 women out of 16 cases).
Histologically, the lymphoid infiltrated shows nodular arrangement; a
very focal epidermotropism and extended folliculotropism. By immuno-
histochemical analysis, all cases showed a mixed population of T-cells
that expressed T helper phenotype, and B cells.
All are cases were positive for TCR gene arrangements, but 4 of 10 cases
tested were also positive for IgH gene rearrangements and one was
pseudoclonal.
Conclusion: -The mixed nature T and B could make a challenging diag-
nosis in PCSMPTLPD.
-The presence of dual lineage rearrangements in cutaneous lymphopro-
liferative disorders is documented but rare phenomenon.
-The presence of two distinct monoclonal populations could confirm the
reactive nature.
PS-04-006
A 5-year retrospective study reviewing the histopathological features
of cutaneous and subcutaneous malignant melanoma metastases
M. Craescu*, T. Georgescu, A.C. Lisievici, M. Leventer, T. Tebeica
*Colentina Clinical Hospital, Pathology Department, Romania
Background & objectives: Melanoma can metastasize either by lym-
phatic or haematogenous route and may develop either satellite, in-transit,
regional lymph node or distant metastases. Cutaneous and subcutaneous
metastases can be difficult to diagnose in the absence of clinical suspicion
or hallmark histopathological characteristics.
Methods: In this study, we reviewed the medical records of 21 patients
who presented in our Dermatopathology unit with cutaneous and subcu-
taneous metastatic melanoma during a period of five years (2014-2019).
We thoroughly re-examined clinical photos, Hematoxylin-Eosin and im-
munohistochemistry slides, aiming to identify characteristic histological
features.
Results: Most tumours presented as nodular proliferations of atypical
epithelioid cells with abundant clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm,
hyperchromatic, atypical nuclei with prominent nucleoli and high mitotic
index. Approximately half of them presented with pigment formation.
Four of them presented necrosis and only two of them presented
epidermotropism. One particular case, had a blue nevus-like appearance,
with round-oval and spindle cells, subtle atypia, fibrous stroma, varying
pigmentation and extremely rare mitoses. This study included patients
with various clinical presentations, from a 24-year-old male with no his-
tory of melanoma, to a 74-year-old male with two concurrent metastases.
Conclusion: Although they are a common occurrence in
Dermatopathology, up to 10% of melanoma metastases appear in the
absence of a previously diagnosed or currently detectable primary tu-
mour. We identified common histological hallmarks and rare features
such blue nevus-like metastasis.
PS-04-007
Malignant melanoma arising in tattooed areas: report of two cases
M. Craescu*, T. Georgescu, A.C. Lisievici, G. Dodan, T. Tebeica
*Colentina Clinical Hospital, Pathology Department, Romania
Background & objectives: Malignant melanoma is an aggressive type of
skin cancer, with a high risk of metastasis in late stage disease, making
early diagnosis essential. The relationship between melanomas and tat-
toos is still unclear.
Methods: We report two cases of a 33-year-old and a 35-year-old
patient, both males, each presenting with a cutaneous melanocytic
lesion on a tattooed area, located on the upper extremity. We
examined the Hematoxylin-Eosin slides and clinical photos of
the lesions.
Results: We present two extremely rare cases, both from a clinical per-
spective (tattooed area) as well as a histopathological one (nevoid mela-
noma and completely regressed melanoma), both of them historically
documented with clinico-pathological images.
First case was a naevoid melanoma with 2.9 mm Breslow index (pT3a)
and Clark level IV. Low-power appearance was that of an intradermal
nevus with hypercellular dermal papillae featuring “puffy-shirt-sign” with
3 mitoses/mm², anisomorphic nuclei, 1-3 nucleoli and no maturation.
Second case was a completely regressed melanoma which presented as
tumoral melanosis, with dense fibrosis and lymphoplasmacytic inflam-
mation. Breslow maximum depth was of 8.1 mm, corresponding to Clark
level V.
Conclusion: Despite paucity of literature data regarding malignant mel-
anoma in tattooed areas, establishing a clinico-pathological connection
between the two could increase chances of early detection and therefore,
effectiveness of treatment. Both lesions presented in young patients and
were challenging to diagnose.
PS-04-008
Primary cutaneous CD4+ small/medium T-cell lymphoproliferative
disorder: one-year experience in one dermatopathology unit
M. Craescu*, T. Georgescu, A.C. Lisievici, A.M. Stanciu, G. Dodan,
T. Tebeica
*Colentina Clinical Hospital, Pathology Department, Romania
Background & objectives: Primary cutaneous CD4+ small/medium T-
cell lymphoproliferative disorder is characterized by a solitary cutaneous
lesion on the face, neck or trunk, with excellent prognosis. According to
4th Edition of the Blue Books it is a provisional entity, with uncertain
malignant potential.
Methods: In this retrospective study, we examined the clinical records of
4 patients diagnosed with Primary cutaneous CD4+ small/medium T-cell
lymphoproliferative disorder in our Dermatopathology unit. We thor-
oughly reexamined clinical photos, Hematoxilyn-Eosin and immunohis-
tochemistry slides (CD3, CD20, CD4, PD-1, CD 8, BCL6, Kappa and
Lambda).
Results: Each patient (median age 44-years-old), presented with a single
lesion: three on the trunk and one on the forearm. In two cases, the lymphoid
infiltrate featured a lichenoid pattern, predominantly affecting the papillary
and upper reticular dermis. In the other cases, the lymphoid infiltrate was
nodular and mostly affected the reticular dermis. The lymphoid proliferation
was constituted primarily of small-sized lymphocytes, with fewer medium-
sized lymphocytes and peripherally situated plasma cells. One of the cases
presented with epidermotropism, and in all of them, the infiltrate surrounded
cutaneous adnexa. Immunohistochemically, all cases were positive for CD3,
CD4, PD-1 and negative for CD20 and CD8.
Conclusion: We highlight the importance of recognizing this entity in
order to avoid misdiagnosis as lymphoma and subsequent over-treatment.
In the case of Primary cutaneous CD4+ small/medium T-cell lymphopro-
liferative disorder, intralesional steroids or simple excision are sufficient,
with rare recurrences.
Virchows Arch
PS-04-009
Slow Mohs micrographic surgery in dermatofibrosarcoma
protuberans: 6 years experience in one dermatopathology unit
M. Craescu*, T. Georgescu, A.C. Lisievici, A.M. Stanciu, M. Leventer,
T. Tebeica
*Colentina Clinical Hospital, Pathology Department, Romania
Background & objectives: Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans is a soft
tissue sarcoma with aggressive local behaviour and high recurrence risk.
Due to its seemingly benign cytological appearance and irregular pattern
of invasion, some cases may raise difficulties in determining whether the
surgical margins are clear.
Methods: We present 12 cases of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
which were surgically removed using Slow Mohs micrographic surgery.
All surgical specimens were intraoperatively marked by the surgeon and
then photographed, inked and sectioned in our pathology lab, according
to our slow Mohs protocol. All sections were examined using
Hematoxylin-Eosin and CD34 immunolabeling.
Results: Patient age was 15-55 years, with male predominance (58%).
Tumours presented either on the torso or head and neck area, apart from
one, located on the foot. Two cases presented with clear margins after first
excision, the rest having positive deep excision margins. The highest
number of interventions was 5, the average being 3. One case presented
with fibrosarcomatous transformation, featuring hyperchromatic nuclei
and 21 mitoses per 10 HPF.
Our experience to date demonstrates that Mohs microsurgery combined with
immunohistochemical evaluation is a reliable method of providing patients
with complete surgical excision, especially when facing tumours in challeng-
ing locations, which are growing between nerves and/or tendons.
Conclusion: Slow Mohs micrographic surgery offers the surgeon a his-
tological confirmation before closing the wound. If the resection margins
are positive, the surgeon can further remove the areas marked by the
pathologist, sparing as much healthy tissue as possible.
PS-04-010
Melanocytic nevus and osseous metaplasia: pathological features of 5
cases
C. D'Angelo*, C. Torre Carrera, A.L. De la Guardia Rodriguez,
E. Sobrino Reig, P. Gomez Iglesias, M.d.l.Á. Muñóz Fernández
*Hospital Universitario de Mostoles, Spain
Background & objectives: Wide variety of histopathological changes
may be found in melanocytic nevi. Osseous metaplasia represents an
unusual finding, sometimes misunderstood or overlooked, characterized
by foci of bone formation adjacent to or surrounded by melanocytic nests
exhibiting a normal maturation pattern.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective review, using our database from
the last 15 years. Clinicopathologic features were gathered: age, sex,
location, nevus type, intra or extralesional ossification and presence of
dermal inflammation. Five cases were identified, four osteonevi of Nanta
and one blue osteonevus.
Results: There were three men and two women. The ages ranged from 32
to 81 with a mean age of 53 years. Of these nevi, only one had congenital
features, four showed presence of fatty marrow, three were intradermal
and two compound, and all were on the upper part of the body. There
were two of them with inflammation associated, and one with foreign-
body granuloma. Four cases presented intralesional bone formation.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this represents the largest series of such
cases in Spanish literature, and the fourth example of blue ostenevus ever
reported. Bone formation in nevi represents an unusual finding, and only
small series have been reported. We confirmed the upper body location,
intradermal type predominance and age span, similar to literature. In
contrast to previous series, we found a slight predominance in males.
The pathogenesis of osseous metaplasia in nevi is not fully understood
and requires further study.
PS-04-011
Neuronevus of masson: four cases with typical clinicopathological
features
F.J. Díaz de la Pinta*, C. Santonja Garriga, M.D. Suarez Massa, C. Saus,
I. Eraña Tomás, L. Carrasco Santos, L. Requena Caballero
*Pathology Department Hospital Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Spain
Background & objectives: The so-called “blue neuro-nevus of Masson”
or "Masson neuronevus" (MN) is a benign variant of the cellular blue
nevus that due to its cellularity and abundant pigment is sometimes
misdiagnosed as melanoma.
Methods: We present four cases obtained from the files of our hospitals.
Results: The patients were three women and a man, whose ages were 8,
19, 35 and 50 years. All lesions were localized on gluteal areas, consisting
of asymptomatic, brownish to greenish nodules, one of them presumed to
be since birth.
Histologically all cases were circumscribed tumours situated in medium
and deep dermis, with intact epidermis, growing in a fascicular pattern,
with a “hourglass” configuration.
Cytologically they were composed of ovoid and/or spindled cells,
surrounded by fibrous tissue containing sparse dendritic cells and
melanophages, without mitotic figures. All of them where immunoreac-
tive for S100, SOX10 and HMB45 (the latter only focally at the periph-
ery). Betacatenin was negative in all of them.
Conclusion: MN can mimic melanoma because of the size, the involve-
ment of deep dermis and the abundance of melanophages. The absence of
mitosis (or <1/mm²), necrosis and atypia, without infiltrative margins sup-
ports the diagnosis. Unlike deep penetrating nevus, Beta-catenin is absent.
PS-04-012
Blastic plasmocytoid dendritic cell neoplasm: a rare cutaneous lym-
phoma - analysis of 3 cases
C. Faria*, M.J. Julião, J. Fraga, F. Ramalhosa, J. Gama, J. Madeira,
J.C. Cardoso, M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Blastic plasmocytoid dendritic cell neo-
plasm represents less than 1% of cutaneous lymphomas, being more
common in males. Although some cases are indolent, the course is
often aggressive with involvement of the bone marrow, peripheral
blood and lymph nodes.
Methods: We report the cases of three male patients with ages
between 57 to 85 years old, with diagnosis from 2013 to 2019, that
presented multiple purpuric, painless and non-ulcerated nodules on
the trunk, extremities and face. All patients didn't present systemic
symptoms.
Results: Histopathological examination revealed a dermal infiltrate by a
population of medium-sized cells with nuclear pleomorphism, several
nucleoli and a moderate to scant cytoplasm. The mitotic count was high,
and the epidermis was spared. In one case there was a lobular pattern
extended to the subcutis.
Immunohistochemistry study showed positivity for CD4 and CD56 in all
cases; however, in one case it revealed focal positivity for LCA and CD43
that could lead to a differential diagnosis of cutaneous infiltration by
myelomonocytic leukaemia. CD3, CD20, TdT, CD138, CD30 and CD8
were negative.
All patients had involvement of the bone marrow and there was affection
of the cervical lymph nodes in two cases.
Conclusion: The expression of CD56 and CD4 favoured the diagnosis of
blastic plasmocytoid dendritic cell neoplasm in all cases and
immunophenotyping by flow cytometry was concordant. The median
survival varies from 10 to 20 months. In our study, one patient died three
months after the diagnosis and the others showed initial response to che-
motherapy; however, advanced age, negative expression of TdT and bone
marrow involvement have a negative impact on prognosis.
Virchows Arch
PS-04-013
Cutaneous leukemic infiltrates: unusual manifestation of haemato-
logical diseases - study of 4 cases
C. Faria*, M.J. Julião, J. Fraga, M.B. Pimentão, V. Almeida, A. Lai,
R. Almeida, H. Moreira, J.C. Cardoso, M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Leukaemias are neoplastic proliferations in
the bone marrow and peripheral blood that rarely involve the skin as non-
specific lesions like purpura, vasculitis and vesicular eruptions that may
simulate acantholytic dermatoses. Reports of specific involvement have
been documented in several subtypes.
Methods: We describe the cases of three males and one female patients
with ages between 44 to 78 years old, that had previous diagnosis of
chronic myeloid leukaemia and myelomonocytic leukaemia. Now they
present multiple non-symptomatic purpuric to reddish cutaneous lesions
in the scalp, trunk, arms and legs.
Results: Histopathological examination revealed a diffuse and interstitial
dermal infiltrate composed by atypical round to polygonal cells with
slight nuclear pleomorphism with dispersed chromatin and small nucle-
oli; cytoplasm was moderate to scant. High mitotic count, apoptosis and
epithelial hyperplasia with mild acanthosis were present in all cases.
Immunohistochemistry study showed positivity for LCA, CD34, CD117
and myeloperoxidase in two cases, favouring the cutaneous involvement
by chronic myeloid leukaemia. Diffuse positivity for CD4, CD56, CD68,
CD163 and lysozyme with negativity for CD34 and CD117 in the other
two patients, suggesting cutaneous infiltrate by chronic myelomonocytic
leukaemia. CD3, CD5, CD20, CD79 and CD30 were negative in all
cases.
Conclusion: Most cutaneous involvement by myeloid leukaemia follow
an aggressive clinical behaviour. In our analysis, two patients died in less
than six months following the appearance of the cutaneous lesions despite
systemic chemotherapy. Both cases were from elderly patients (>70 years
old): one with chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia that had transforma-
tion to acute myeloid leukaemia and other with chronic myeloid leukae-
mia. Advanced age is also associated with shortened survival.
PS-04-014
Kaposi sarcoma: a 3-year retrospective study with emphasis on
epidemiology in a non-endemic country
T. Georgescu*, A.C. Lisievici, M. Craescu, A. Stanciu, A. Stancu,
B. Simona, O. Voinea, T. Tebeica
*Department of Pathology, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy; Department of Pathology, "Dr. Leventer Centre", Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is a malignant vascular
proliferation usually encountered in elderly middle eastern men, young
African-American and patients with iatrogenic immunosuppression or
AIDS. Patients usually present with multiple coalescent red macules or
nodules located on the distal lower extremities.
Methods: This is a retrospective study including 32 cutaneous KS diag-
nosed in our unit during a period of four years (2016-2019). We aimed to
analyse the epidemiologic features and establish clinico-pathological cor-
relations regarding KS diagnosed in Romania. Clinical information was
retrieved from the virtual database. We thoroughly re-examined all
Hematoxylin-Eosin and immunohistochemically (HHV-8, CD34, D2-
40, SMA) stained slides.
Results: Patient age ranged from 25 to 85 years. Lower extremities were
frequently involved (55.2%), followed by upper extremities (27.6%), face
(10.3%) and buttocks (6.9%). The overwhelming majority of the patients
were males (72%) and nodular stages of the disease represented 65.5% of
cases. Clinical diagnosis varied from Kaposi’s sarcoma (58%),
haemangioma (10.3%), carcinoma (20.7%), sarcoma (7%) and melanoma
(3.4%). “Promontorium sign” was present in 60% of patches and plaques
cases. Clinical diagnosis accuracy increased in patients who already de-
veloped nodules.
Conclusion: Most cases in our study consisted of classic Kaposi’s sarco-
ma developing on acral sites, with only one exception encountered on the
face of a young male. In our experience, KS should be considered when
encountering vascular lesions on acral sites.
PS-04-015
Slow Mohs micrographic surgery in extramammary paget disease:
3-year experience in one dermatopathology unit
T. Georgescu*, A.C. Lisievici, M. Craescu, S.A. Barbu, G. Dodan,
M. Leventer, T. Tebeica
*Department of Pathology, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Department of Pathology, "Dr. Leventer Centre", Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: Extramammary Paget disease (EMPD) is
known to have a local recurrence rate of 34-40% after surgical
excision, while the recurrence rate after Slow Mohs micrographic
surgery is only 12%. This way, the wound is left open, awaiting
the pathological report.
Methods: We re-evaluated 4 cases of extramammary Paget disease
which were cured in our unit (2016-2019) using this technique. All spec-
imens were received with marking sutures. Excision margins were inked,
sectioned, mapped and submitted in separate blocks, in regard to the
suture mark. All resulting slides were evaluated using Hematoxylin-
Eosin staining and CK7 immunolabeling.
Results: All patients were females in their sixties and most lesions were
located on the labia (75%) or in the perianal area (25%). In 50% of cases,
the lesion spread in opposite directions, requiring multiple excisions per
intervention. The total number of blocks used ranged from 18 to 38. First
interventions required larger excisions (40/21/3 mm to 115/85/10 mm),
while the last ones were much smaller (16/9/2 mm to 42/8/2 mm).
Patients required 3 to 5 reinterventions in order to achieve curability.
No case featured dermal invasion or signs of recurrence to date. This
technique combined with immunohistochemistry is a reliable technique
which increased the curability of EMPD in our unit.
Conclusion: Slow Mohs micrographic surgery allowed the clinician to
remove a targeted area with residual tumour located between specific
hour intervals, thus sparing healthy tissue. In this manner, many
reinterventions can be done, in order to achieve curability.
PS-04-016
The MANIAC: pagetoid spread in benign acral nevi
T. Georgescu*, A.C. Lisievici, M. Craescu, G. Dodan, M. Leventer,
T. Tebeica
*Department of Pathology, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Department of Pathology, "Dr. Leventer Centre", Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: Melanocytic acral nevus with intraepidermal
ascent of cells (MANIAC) was first described by LeBoit et al. in 1997.
Although the lesion is characterized by suprabasal scatter of single mela-
nocytes, it is considered benign and has good outcome.
Methods: In this study we re-evaluated the clinical records of 8 patients
diagnosed with MANIAC in our Dermatopathology unit within the last 3
years. Average age was 20.5 years. Upon follow-up, none of the lesions
recurred or progressed. We thoroughly re-examined the slides and
analysed the clinical data retrieved from the virtual database.
Results: Most lesions were located on the toes, followed by the lateral
aspects of the foot and palms. Histologically, 75% were compound and
25% were junctional nevi. 50% were well-circumscribed, 25% were
moderately well-circumscribed, and 25% were poorly circumscribed.
No cytological atypia or lymphocytic infiltrate were noted. All lesions
Virchows Arch
featured intraepidermal ascent of melanocytes throughout the entire epi-
dermis, and 25% of the cases even showed rare melanocytes within the
cornified layer as pigmented columns above the sulci or crista profundae
intermediae. Well-circumscribed and symmetric lesions occurring
in young adults which feature maturation and lack cytological
atypia or brisk lymphocytic infiltrate usually manifest as benign
nevi.
Conclusion: Practicing pathologists should be aware that suprabasal scat-
ter of melanocytes is not pathognomonic for melanoma in acral nevi
without other worrisome features like lateral confluence of junctional
nests, cytological atypia or lymphocytic infiltrate.
PS-04-017
Merkel cell carcinoma of an unknown primary origin, 5 case report
I. Guvendir*, I.E. Zemheri, M. Ozcelik
*Health Sciences University, Umraniye Education and Training Hospital,
Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Merkel cell carcinoma(MCC) is a rare neu-
roendocrine tumour of the skin. MCC of an unknown primary
origin(MCCUP) is much rarer; approximately 200 cases have been re-
ported in literature. In this study,5 patients diagnosed with MCCUP in the
lymph node in our hospital between 2015-2019.
Methods: The age distribution was 69-84(mean=75.8),3 were female;2
were male.2 patients had axillary; 3 patients had involvement in the
inguinal region lymph nodes. All patients had skin examinations; no
primary skin lesion was found. Diagnosis was made from axillary in 2
patients and inguinal lymph in 3 patients. The diameter of the lymph
nodes assessed macroscopically was 6.42 cm(average).
Results: In the examination after diagnosis,3 patients were identified as
pT0NxM1a Stage 4 and 2 patients as pT0N1M0 Stage 3.2 patients with
stage 4 received palliative chemotherapy+radiotherapy,1 patient received
palliative radiotherapy.2 patients with stage 3 had definitive surgery.
While 3 patients with stage 4 were exitus,2 patients with stage 3 didn’t
develop locoregional recurrence or distant metastasis, one of them was
followed for 3,5 years and the other for 9 months without disease.
Conclusion: Polyomavirus, accused in the aetiology of MCC, was de-
tected more rarely in MCCUP (76% vs 31% P = 0.001), and these two
entities were thought to use different biological pathways. MCCUP is a
tumour that shows a better progress compared to metastatic MCC and has
different views on treatment. We presented our cases reported in a single
centre for the purpose of contributing to the literature with clinical, his-
tological and treatment methods.
PS-04-019
Study of the sebostatic effect of retinoic acid on rat sebaceous glands
M. Kostyaeva*, B. Viktor, I. Kastyro, E. Irina, I. Zhuk, Y. Ondar,
M. Grinberg
*Peoples' Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University), Russia
Background & objectives: Morphological changes in the skin with acne
are characterized by acanthosis, parakeratosis and intercellular oedema in the
epidermis, lymphocytic infiltration of the dermis and sebaceous gland (SG)
hypertrophy. Using retinoic acid reduces the synthetic activity of SG cells.
Methods: 10 Wistar male rats (ExpG) were applied a 0.05%solution of
retinoic acid on the clipped surface of the skin daily, for 10 days in the form
of an application. The control group (CG) included 10rats of the same line.
Histological sections were stained with H&E. 5 section was examined from
each animal, in which up to 30 SG profiles were measured.
Results: The histostructure of SG of ExpG was distinguished by poly-
morphism. The gland profiles are visually unevenly reduced. The cyto-
plasm of individual sebocytes loses the cellular structure, the cells look
like undifferentiated. Morphometric studies confirmed the results of vi-
sual assessment. A retinoic acid solution significantly reduces the average
area of SG profiles (3323.42±82.65) in the section compared to CG
(3940.19±67.12) (p<0.001). The proportion of undifferentiated sebocytes
in the area of SG increases(p<0.001).
Conclusion: Applications with retinoic acid have a pronounced
sebostatic effect, manifested in the reduction of sebaceous glands and
an increase in the area occupied by undifferentiated sebocytes.
Sebaceous gland profiles are visually and morphometrically reduced.
This minimizes the etiological factor of acne.
PS-04-020
Pathohistological examination of early detection of skin melanoma
by ytterbium porphyrin complex gel
A. Nesterova, O. Olisova, E. Orlova, L. Smirnova, E. Shtemplevskaya,
D. Kusraeva*
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: The optimum diagnostics is the melanoma
development in situ.
The present study considers the potential of melanoma fluorescent diag-
nostics by ytterbium porphyrin complex (YbPC) and consequent
pathohistological examination of its effectiveness.
Methods: The method of using the laser consists in the ability of
YbPC to accumulate well in tumour cells, they also have intense
luminescence. First the pharmaceutical product containing Yb-2,4-
dimethoxyhematoporphyrin IX is applied to the lesions. 30 mi-
nutes later we measured the luminescence intensity in the near
infrared range (900-1100 nm) using the Onkoflurometer” laser
device.
Results: The study involved a group of 28 patients aged from 19 to 67
years with dysplastic naevus as provisional diagnosis. The examinees
were examined by means of dermatoscopy, a diagnostic laser with use
of fluored gel containing YbPC, with exposure time of 30 minutes and
evaluation of the depigmentosus part, the hyperpigmentosous parts in the
centre and in peripheral zones.
Among 28 biopsies, 3 melanomas were detected at stages 1 and 2.
However, there were no signs of melanoma during dermatoscopic
examination
Conclusion: This method is highly sensitive and specific and can be
implemented directly into the routine practice of specialists.
PS-04-021
Melanocytic matricoma: report of two cases of a rare entity
S. Lerias*, D. Tomas, J. Costa Rosa
*Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa, Francisco Gentil; Instituto
de Anatomia Patológica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de
Lisboa, Portugal
Background & objectives: Melanocytic matricoma is an extremely
rare benign tumour derived from the hair matrix and may be
misdiagnosed because of its peculiar morphological features.
Methods: We report two cases of melanocytic matricoma: one from a 77-
year-old man presented with a pigmented papule, 5 mm across, on the
nose and the other from an 85-year-old female presented with an ulcer-
ated dark-brown tumour, 12 mm across, on the right lower leg. We also
review the literature.
Results: CASE 1: Microscopically, it was a nodular polypoid dermal
proliferation of atypical basaloid cells, with prominent nucleoli. Some
shadow cells were present. A conspicuous melanocytic proliferation
was colonizing matrical areas. Mitosis: 18/10hpf(400x).
CASE 2: Histology showed a nodular dermal tumour, with prominent
shadow cell formation. A conspicuous scattered proliferation of the me-
lanocytes was also seen. Mitosis: 32/10hpf(400x).
Basaloid cells were cytokeratins+, p63+ and β-catenin+. Melanocytes
were S-100+ and SOX-10+.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Melanocytic matricoma is a very rare entity with about 25
cases described in the literature. Its morphology can be confused with
pilomatricoma, pilomatrical carcinoma with melanocytic hyperplasia or
other malignant epithelial tumours. A prominent melanocytic pro-
liferation and melanin in a tumour with cytological atypia and
high mitotic count may lead to the erroneous diagnosis of malig-
nant melanoma. Its distinction is important to ensure adequate
treatment and follow-up.
PS-04-022
A 3-year retrospective study reviewing the spectrum of orofacial
granulomatosis: granulomatous cheilitis and Melkersson-Rosenthal
syndrome
A.C. Lisievici*, T. Georgescu, M. Leventer, D. Iordache, M. Craescu,
T. Tebeica
*Department of Pathology, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Department of Pathology, "Dr. Leventer Centre", Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: Granulomatous cheilitis or Miescher cheilitis
is a rare condition often related to hypersensitivity or atopy, characterized
by protuberant swelling of one or both lips, and is sometimes associated
with facial nerve palsy and fissured tongue, condition known as
Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome.
Methods: In this study we examined the clinical records of six patients
presenting with granulomatous cheilitis which were examined in our
Dermatopathology unit during a 3-year period (2016-2019). We thor-
oughly re-examined the slides, analysed the clinical data retrieved from
the virtual database and correlated all the findings.
Results: Patients ranged from 28 to 60 years. Lower lip and upper lip
were equally often involved, and males were slightly more frequently
affected (66% males, compared to 33.3% females). One patient also pre-
sented with facial nerve palsy, consistent with Melkersson-Rosenthal
syndrome. None of the patients had any previous history of Crohn dis-
ease. Upon histologic examination, all patients had non-necrotising gran-
ulomas, with mild dermal oedema and no sign of epidermal ulceration. If
the histologic examination reveals non-necrotizing granulomas in the
lamina propria, often protruding into and obstructing the vessels, then
also Crohn disease, sarcoidosis or granulomatosis with polyangiitis
should also be considered.
Conclusion: Granulomatous cheilitis is a rare entity. Taking into consid-
eration the numerous reports of patients with orofacial granulomatosis
and no gastrointestinal symptoms which were discovered with
colonoscopic features consistent with Crohn disease, further check-up
should be advised in such cases.
PS-04-023
Sentinel lymph node excision in malignant melanoma: 3-year expe-
rience from one dermatopathology unit
A.C. Lisievici*, T. Georgescu, M. Craescu, F.T. Bobirca, T. Tebeica
*Department of Pathology, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Department of Pathology, "Dr. Leventer Centre", Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: Sentinel lymph node (SLN) technique is
used worldwide in patients with invasive breast carcinoma or malignant
melanoma. It is recommended for patients with melanoma stage pT2 or
pT3 and it could be considered in patients with pT1b or pT4 melanomas.
Methods: In this study we retrospectively analysed 84 patients which
underwent SLN excision between 2017 and 2019, after being diagnosed
with malignant melanoma. Each lymph node received in our pathology
department was sectioned at 2-3 mm intervals and entirely submitted. All
resulting paraffin embedded sections were examined at multiple levels in
Hematoxylin-Eosin, Melan A and Tyrosinase.
Results: Out of 84 cases, 26.5% had lymph node metastases, and 12.05%
had incidental capsular nevi. Positive SLN stemmed from pT2 cases
(14.3%), pT3 (52.3%) and pT4 (33.3%). Most of them were axillary
(54.5%), followed by inguinal (31.8%). Patients age ranged from 30 to
77 with both genders equally involved. Most cases featured one affected
lymph node (75%), while 21.8% had two involved and only 3.2% had
more than 2 affected.
Conclusion: This technique can provide important information which
should be considered in the follow-up and treatment of patients. In our
study size of the metastatic deposit ranged from 0.1 mm to 12 mm and
only 4.7 % had extranodal extension. Statistical analysis showed that the
number of lymph nodes involved, size of the metastatic deposits and the
presence of extranodal extension strongly correlated with more advanced
stage of disease (pT4) and presence of ulceration in the primary tumour.
PS-04-024
Nodulotumoral cutaneous involvement in adult T-cell leukaemia/
lymphoma: report of two cases
A.C. Lisievici*, T. Georgescu, M. Craescu, M. Mihai, T. Tebeica
*Department of Pathology, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Department of Pathology, "Dr. Leventer Centre", Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: Adult T cell leukaemia/lymphoma (ATLL)
is a rare lymphoproliferative disorder, encountered in HTLV-1 carriers,
which may be associated with cutaneous manifestations, ranging from
patches, plaques, nodules to erythrodermia. Patients with the
lymphoma-type variant of the disease have a worse prognosis.
Methods: We report two cases of ATLL, one in a 44-year-old male,
known with systemic disease and HTLV-1 infection which developed
cutaneous nodules, and one in a 66-year-old male, who presented with
cutaneous manifestations, without any prior relevant medical history.
Both patients had multiple red, tender nodules on the forearms and hands,
which were clinically suspicious for cutaneous lymphoma.
Results: Both excision specimens revealed a diffuse intradermic lym-
phoid proliferation composed of medium-large cells, with marked
epidermotropism and angiotropism. The lesions from the patient
known with systemic disease also featured central ulceration.
Immunohistochemistry revealed CD3, CD4 and CD5 positive
cells, which were negative for CD8. Both lesions had a KI67
proliferative index of 50%. Unfortunately, both patients died with-
in the next 4 to 6 months.
Conclusion: We report two cases of cutaneous manifestation in patients
with lymphomatous and acute ATLL variants, respectively. The only
difference between the two lesions was that the one originating from
the patient with systemic disease also had central ulceration and the cells
were immunoreactive for CD30. The patient with no prior medical history
was positive upon subsequent HTLV-1 testing. Both cases had an aggres-
sive clinical course, associated with nodulotumoral presentation of the
disease.
PS-04-025
Dermatomyofibroma: a short series of a great mimicker
A.C. Lisievici*, G. Tiberiu-Augustin, B. Simona, M. Craescu, G. Dodan,
A. Stanciu, T. Tebeica
*Department of Pathology, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Department of Pathology, "Dr. Leventer Centre", Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: Dermatomyofibroma is a rare benign neo-
plasm, first described by Kamino et al. in 1992, histologically composed
of spindle cells of fibroblastic/myofibroblastic origin. Patients are typi-
cally young females presenting with a plaque on the neck, shoulders and
upper trunk.
Virchows Arch
Methods: In this study we examined the clinical records of five patients
diagnosed with dermatomyofibroma in our Dermatopathology
Department during a 3-year period. We thoroughly re-examined the
slides and analysed the clinical data retrieved from the virtual database.
Histologic examination reveals fascicles of spindle cells arranged parallel
to the epidermis. Ancillary studies included S100, SMA and CD34.
Results: All patients were females in their thirties, with tender
plaques located either on the upper trunk (60%) or proximal ex-
tremities (40%). Clinical diagnosis ranged from granuloma
annulare (40%) to dermatofibroma (40%) and lymphoma (20%).
Histologic examination revealed a diffuse spindle cell proliferation
involving the reticular dermis. The neoplastic cells featured abun-
dant eosinophilic cytoplasm and elongated nuclei. All cases fea-
tured faint SMA positivity, while S100 and CD34 were completely
negative.
Conclusion: Dermatomyofibroma is a rare benign neoplasm, which
should always be considered when evaluating a spindle cell proliferation
from the upper trunk of young females. Due to inconsistency of immu-
nohistochemical results, one should establish this diagnosis after exclud-
ing other benign mesenchymal proliferations, like leiomyoma or
dermatofibroma Early lesions tend to show immunoreactivity for SMA,
while older lesions are negative for SMA, S100 and CD34. This
diagnosis should be kept in mind, even when SMA shows no or
only weak positivity.
PS-04-026
Cutaneous involvement by diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: clinical-
pathological correlation
G. Malheiros*, M. Araujo Fonte Boa, Y. Gonzaga, S. de Oliveira
Romano, J. Leite de Oliveira
*National Cancer Institute / INCA, Brazil
Background & objectives: Cutaneous involvement by diffuse large B
cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is uncommon and may be primary or secondary
to systemic spread. Skin biopsy leads to diagnosis. Our main objective is
to describe clinico-pathological correlation between lesions and the skin
infiltrate.
Methods: We report four cases of DLBCL whose initial manifestation
was the appearance of distinct cutaneous lesions diagnosed through skin
biopsy, describing clinical, histopathological and immunohistochemical
findings.
Results: Case 1 - a man with multiple tumour lesions affecting the entire
right lower limb; case 2 - a woman with tumoral and ulcerated lesions in
the breast, simulating breast carcinoma; case 3 - a man with infiltrative
and arciform lesions on the back, with a non-neoplasic appearance; case 4
- a woman with an ulcerated and necrotic lesion in the right leg. All cases
were diagnosed as DLBCL through histopathological and immunohisto-
chemical examination of skin biopsy.
Conclusion: Although uncommon, skin lesions can be the first and sole
manifestation of DLBCL and may have multiple clinical presentations.
We report four cases of cutaneous involvement by DLBCL and describe
the clinical-pathological correlation.
PS-04-027
Making mountains out of molehills – a study of possible links be-
tween malignant melanoma genotypes and their Royal College of
Pathologists dataset phenotypes
A. Mokhtari*, T. Heaton, B. Mathew
*Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: With the rise of molecular analysis in histo-
pathology, malignant melanoma can be classified based on its genotype to
allow for targeted therapy. This study aims to find a link between BRAF
and NRAS mutations in malignant melanoma and histological phenotype.
Methods: Data was gathered from 337 cases of metastasizing malignant
melanoma occurring between 2015 and 2018 that were tested for BRAF
and NRAS mutations. The Royal College of Pathologists core data items
were recorded from the primary skin lesions in each case. Data from
BRAF positive, NRAS positive and wildtype cases was compared to
assess patterns between mutation and histological phenotype.
Results: On comparing each genotype and histological phenotype, sev-
eral trends have been noted. The most noteworthy of these were seen in
the following dataset items: tumour subtype, tumour location and mitotic
rate. These trends, as well as those of the remaining dataset items will be
discussed further in this poster, as well as an assessment of the statistical
significance of the data gathered.
Conclusion: The results generated from this study highlighted trends
which could indicate that tumour phenotype can be predicted by genotype
testing and vice versa. Future studies could also incorporate non-core data
items from the dataset such as age, gender and prognosis.
PS-04-028
Evaluation of histopathologic prognostic variables in cutaneous mel-
anoma in a black African cohort
O.A. Odigwe*, U. Ezenkwa, G. Ogun
*Department of Pathology, University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria
Background & objectives: The aim of this study was to evaluate the
clinico-pathological prognostic variables in cutaneous melanoma cases in
a black population, where it is believed to be rare and to run a more
aggressive course compared to Caucasians.
Methods: This was a 20-year retrospective study (1997-2016) in a tertia-
ry institution. Thirty-one H/E-stained tissue slides were reviewed.
Microscopic features documented included histologic subtype, tumour
thickness, level of invasion, ulceration, mitoses and vascular invasion.
The relationship between these variables in addition to patient's age, gen-
der and tumour site were assessed using Spearman rank correlation.
Statistical significance was set at p<0.05.
Results: The median tumour thickness was 7.00mm (2.1-19.5mm).
Twenty-five (80.6%) of tumours had pT4 stage and also had Clark level
IV and V. Ulceration was present in 30 (96.8%) cases and 20 (64.5%) had
evidence of vascular invasion. Thirteen (41.9%) of the patients had me-
tastasis at presentation. There was significant positive correlation between
tumour thickness and level of invasion (r=0.7, p<0.001), mitotic rate
(r=0.45, p=0.01) and vascular invasion (r=0.42, p=0.02). Furthermore,
level of invasion showed significant correlation with mitotic rate
(r=0.41, p=0.02), and gender (r=0.37, p=0.04).
Conclusion: The findings of this study showed that cutaneous melano-
mas in our population are characterized by very poor prognostic histolog-
ic factors at presentation. Achieving early detection and treatment of this
malignancy is advocated.
PS-04-029
WT1: a useful immunomarker for the diagnosis of
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
E. Piombino*, G. Broggi, G. Fuccio Sanzà, W. Saliba, S. Martello,
R. Caltabiano, M. Barbareschi, G. Magro
*Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Advanced
Technologies, G.F. Ingrassia, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria
"Policlinico Vittorio Emanuele", Anatomic Pathology, School of
Medicine, University of Catania, Italy
Background & objectives: The most common malignant soft tissue
tumours of the dermis/subcutis is dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the immunohistochemical
expression of WT1 in primary and recurrent dermatofibrosarcoma
protuberans and in its main morphological mimickers.
Methods: The cases were retrieved from Anatomic Pathology of the
University of Catania and Santa Chiara Hospital of Trento. The following
tumours were collected: 57 cases of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans; 15
Virchows Arch
cases of dermatofibroma; 8 cases of dermal scars; 5 cases of deep-seated
fibrous histiocytoma. The antibody against the N- terminal portion of WT1-
6F-H2, was used.
Results: The majority of dermatofibrosarcomas protuberans (54 out of 57),
exhibited cytoplasmic staining for WT1. The immunohistochemical ex-
pression was diffuse, heterogeneous or focal, respectively, in 75%, 15%
and 6% of cases. With the exception of 4 cases showing a weak to moderate
staining in different areas of the same tumour, the staining intensity was
diffuse and strong. All recurrent tumours showed diffuse and strong WT1
cytoplasmic immunoreactivity while the fibroblasts of the associated scar
tissue were negative. None of the other tumour or tumour-like, bland-
looking spindle cell lesions examined, were WT1-positive.
Conclusion: WT1 is an ancillary immunomarker, exploitable in combi-
nation with CD34, in confirming the diagnosis of dermatofibrosarcoma
protuberans, including in the recurrent tumours.
PS-04-030
The relationship between BRAF mutation status and certain clinical
and pathological features in melanoma
J. Potts*, G. Feddern, Y. Zhang
*North Bristol NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: BRAF mutation in melanoma predicts re-
sponse to BRAF and MEK inhibitor therapy. This study investigated the
relationship between clinicopathological characteristics of primary and
metastatic melanomas with BRAF mutation status, in cases sent for test-
ing in the period 2012-2016.
Methods: A total of 519 samples were identified. Patient age, gender
and melanoma reporting dataset items were gathered from the histol-
ogy report. Each variable was analysed against BRAF mutation
status.
Results: 58% of patients were male and 42% were female with similar
mutation rates for both (37% and 38% respectively). 40% of the samples
were primary tumours, 57% were metastases and 3% were recurrences.
74% of mutations were v600E and there was no significant difference in
type of mutation between primary and metastatic tumours. BRAF muta-
tions were more common in metastases than primary tumours
(41% and 33% respectively). BRAF mutation was significantly
associated with superficial spreading and nodular histological sub-
types; younger age; and location of metastasis. High rates of
BRAF mutation were seen in brain metastases (78% positive).
BRAF mutation was not associated with mitotic count, Breslow
thickness, or ulceration.
Conclusion: BRAF mutation in our cohort is more common in younger
patients and in metastatic tumours, in keeping with the published litera-
ture. We found high rates of mutation in metastasis to the brain, the
reasons for which are unclear.
Funding by: BDIAP educational fellowship for Glasgow 2020
PS-04-032
A case series of granular cell tumour with malignant potential; a rare
cutaneous tumour
A. Randhawa*, M. Elgoweini, S. Digby, S. Tavadia, D. Torley,
S. Holmes, S. Lo
*Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Granular cell tumour (GCT), is an uncom-
mon soft tissue neoplasm of neural in origin. These tumours are usually
slow growing and benign. The malignant counterpart is extremely rare in
the skin with a potential to metastasize.
Methods: Histologically, this can be diagnosed using the Fanburg-Smith
criteria. We report a series of 3 cases with a histological diagnosis of
granular cell tumour with malignant potential and evaluate the clinical
presentation, investigations and progress.
Results: Case1-7 year-old boy presents a growing lump on his right
shoulder. Histology revealed an incompletely excised GCT with atypia.
Wider excision was consistent with a malignant GCT. Case2- 67 year-old
female with firm nodule on her abdomen. Excised lesion revealed an
atypical GCT. Consensus was to manage as a potentially malignant
GCT. Case3-72 year-old man presents with a rapidly growing nodule
on his right eyebrow. Excision biopsy favoured malignant GCT.
Conclusion: Clinical diagnosis of GCTs are difficult and should be in-
cluded in the differential diagnoses of head and neck cutaneous lesions.
Clinicians should be aware that atypical and malignant variants exist.
There is some degree of pathological debate regarding classification of
these lesions, especially in borderline atypical/malignant cases. There is a
lack of consensus regarding the optimal management of this tumour but
in our experience, we recommend a wide local excision for all GCTs and
discussion at the multi-disciplinary team level.
PS-04-033
Ultraviolet impact on rat skin
G. Sulim, M. Lyndin, V. Sikora, K. Sikora, N. Hyriavenko, A. Romaniuk*
*Sumy State University, Ukraine
Background & objectives: The aim of our study was to establish a
>model imitating of UV-B (wavelength peak is 311 nm) therapy for rat’s
skin and to find match macroscopical and following histological skin
changes including melanocytes spreading and melanin distribution.
Methods: We used 6 laboratory rats with white and 12 with black coating
applying UV-B light source (9 W power) during minimal erythe-
ma dose. The changes were studied by macroscopical and histo-
logical methods.
Results: In 3 of 18 of observations transitional symptoms looking alike,
actinic keratosis occurred (1 black, 2 white rats). Other passing side ef-
fects (exfoliation, erythema) occurred and were successfully removed
with exposure correction. Typical histological changes (chronic inflam-
mation, hyperkeratosis, epidermal cells dystrophy) are more noticeable in
rats with side effects, but still present in the rest of rats. Expected changes
of melanocytes and melanin distribution could not be displayed with
routine histological staining.
Conclusion: UV-B therapy model is a valid method to investigate it itself
or to investigate chronic UV-exposure effects. The typical histological
effects following UV-B exposure and their depending on macroscopical
changes were found.
PS-04-036
Prognostic value of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes and mitotic rate
in melanoma
A. Stanek-Widera*, B. Nikiel, D. Lange, E. Chelmecka
*Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Poland
Background & objectives: The use of immunohistochemistry to assess
the number of CD3 and CD8 lymphocytes and an objective assessment of
mitotic index, using computer-assisted image analysis allows for a more
accurate assessment of the values of these parameters.
Methods: Our study included primary tissues from 88 non-consecutive
cutaneous melanoma patient who were retrospectively examined at Maria
Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology, Gliwice in
2005-2008 years. We used to determine the mitotic index Phosphohistone
H3, Rabbit Polyclonal Antibody (PHH3) and to determine TILs
:Polyclonal Rabbit Anti-Human CD3 and Monoclonal Mouse Anti-
Human CD8.
Results: Statistically significant differences were found in the number of
CD8 lymphocytes depending on the depth of the infiltrate (p <0.01), in
the number of lymphocytes depending on the stage (p <0.05). Differences
in lymphocyte counts between T1 and T3 (p <0.05) and T1 and T4 (p
Virchows Arch
<0.05) were demonstrated. Analysing the number of abnormal mitoses
depending on the stage, differences between T1 and T3 (p <0.05) were
found, similarly between T1 and T4, as well as T2 and T4. Statistical
differences were found for the number of mitoses depending on the state
of the lymph nodes (p <0.05).
Conclusion: Identifying CD3 and CD8 instead of together as TIL allows
a better understanding of the significance of these factors as elements of
good prognosis, and the use of PHH3 allows a reliable assessment of the
mitotic index as a factor of poor prognosis. The use of computer image
analysis for routine diagnostics would improve the reliability of the as-
sessment and the associated significance of prognostic factors.
PS-04-037
Persistent late reactions in decorative tattoos: a series of eight cases
with immunohistochemical study
A. Vicente Cid, M. Ginarte, L. Casas Fernandez, C. Aliste Santos,
J.M. Suárez Peñaranda*
*Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Santiago de
Compostela, Spain
Background & objectives: Persistent late reactions (PLR) in decorative
tattoos are difficult to treat and their nature is not completely understood.
They show different, poorly characterized histopathological patterns.
Methods: Eight cases of PLR in decorative tattoos have been retrieved form
he files of the Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Santiago de
Compostela (Spain). Clinical and histopathological features have been
reviewed and immunohistochemical study performed in all cases.
Results: Seven women and one man, 21 to 39 years, presented PLR in
decorative tattoos. Seven cases were related with red colour and one with
black. Lesions started from two weeks until 2 years after performing the
tattoo and were refractory to topical treatments.
Biopsies showed dermal lymphoid infiltrate, reaching the reticular der-
mis. Moderate to severe interface lesion was present in all but one case,
the only one with well-formed granulomas. Five cases showed interstitial
inflammatory infiltrate, mimicking granuloma annulare, but extensive
collagen degeneration was present in only two cases.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated a clear predominance of T lympho-
cytes, balanced for CD4 and CD8. CD8 lymphocytes were predominant
in the interface lesion.
Conclusion: Decorative-tattoos- related PLR are characterized by a com-
bination of inflammatory patterns, interface dermatitis with CD8 lympho-
cytes being the most common. Grannuloma annulare.-like lesions are also
common, but collagen degeneration is usually limited. Well-formed gran-
ulomas are not a usual feature.
- Liver
PS-05-001
Morphofunctional and histochemical changes in liver tissue with pre-
dominant copper (Cu-10%) content in the experiment
K. Abdikadirova*, S. Zhautikova, F. Abikenova, B. Chergizova,
Y. Talaspekova
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Liver is a barrier to toxic substance and is
primarily affected by pathogenic effect. Xenobiotics are metabolized ex-
actly in this organ.
Evaluation of morphofunctional and histochemical changes in liver tissue
at the exposure of polymetallic copper (Cu-10%) content dust.
Methods: The experiment included outbred white male rats weighing
120-170 g for 30 days. The dust was injected once intratracheally (50
mg/1.0 ml of physiological saline). Method of cytophotometry was used
for quantitative characterization of the enzymes activity in liver cells. All
manipulations, including elimination, were carried out by «Rules for
biomedical experiments conducting» of MH RK (12.11.2009 №697).
Results: A histochemical study determined a sudden decrease of hepato-
cyte glycogen level. Glycogen was absent in cells containing altered
nuclei. The activity of the enzymes was reduced – up to a complete
absence. The activity enzymes showed the expressed decrease in com-
parison with control group: acid phosphatase by 54.5% (P<0.001), suc-
cinate dehydrogenase by 46.79% (P<0.001), lactate dehydrogenase by
56.96% (P<0.001), glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase by 36.48% (P
<0.05), glycogen by 46.31% (P<0.001).
Conclusion: The liver cells are the first target of non-synthesized toxins
Dust exposure intensified the trophic-circulatory disorders and exacerbat-
ed the alterative-dystrophic and inflammatory changes in the organ. The
free lipids level increased in the cytoplasm of both liver cells and stellate
reticuloendotheliocytes, which indicates increased destructive changes in
cytoplasmic membranes and membrane complexes. Simultaneously, gly-
cogen utilization in liver hepatocytes is enhanced, that led to inhibition of
enzymes synthesis.
PS-05-002
Potential role of neutrophil extracellular traps in non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis
S. Arelaki*, T. Koletsa, G. Germanidis, E. Sinakos, K. Ritis, E. Akriviadis,
P. Hytiroglou
*National Center of Tumour Diseases, Heidelberg, Germany; Pathology
Department, Faculty of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
Greece
Background & objectives: Recent experimental evidence suggests that
there are elevated levels of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) in sera of
patients with NASH. We investigated the presence of NETs in liver
biopsy specimens with NASH and potential correlations with inflamma-
tion and fibrosis.
Methods: This retrospective study included 40 liver biopsy specimens
from 21 patients with NASH. Fourteen patients underwent sequential
liver biopsies according to clinical indications. We assessed the presence
of NETs by double immunofluorescence using the markers neutrophil
elastase (NE) and citrullinated histone 3 (citH3). Immunofluorescence
signals and colocalization of these markers were visualized with a con-
focal microscope.
Results: NETs were detected in 60% of the biopsy specimens, as extra-
cellular colocalization of NE with citH3. In 54% of the NET-positive
biopsies significant production of NETs was apparent, in an aggregated
pattern, within areas of portal and lobular inflammation. In contrast, 46%
of the biopsies showed small numbers of NETs, despite the presence of
inflammation and/or fibrosis. In most cases of mild inflammation or
established cirrhosis NETs were absent.
Conclusion: Our findings suggest that neutrophils are involved in the
pathogenesis of NASH through NET release. Further research will be
needed to clarify whether production of NETs is involved in the progres-
sion of NASH to cirrhosis or the development of hepatocellular carcino-
ma as suggested by recent experimental studies.
Funding by: Hellenic Association of the Study of the Liver
PS-05-003
Histopathological features of inflammatory pseudotumours of the
liver on resection specimens
A. Baltan*, E. Stoica-Mustafa, C. Pechianu, A. Iorgescu, A. Procop,
A. Bancu, D. Hrehoret, I. Popescu, V. Herlea
*Emergency University Hospital Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Inflammatory pseudotumours of the liver are
nonneoplastic masses that cause clinical confusion due to their capacity to
PS-05 Digestive Diseases Pathology - Liver
Virchows Arch
mimic malignancy. The aim of this study was to identify the histopatho-
logical features of these lesions and their clinical correlates.
Methods: We have reviewed the slides of 15 hepatic inflammatory
pseudotumours resected between 2013-2018. The localization, presence
of a pseudocapsule, the type and distribution of inflammatory cells, the
presence of bile ductules/ducts within the lesion and of perilesional oc-
cluded large vessels and the degree of fibroblastic proliferation and fibro-
sis were noted. These were analysed in conjunction with clinical and
imaging data.
Results: The mean age was 63 years and there was a slightly male
predominance among patients. The relevant clinical associations
were chronic cholecystitis, HBV infection, obesity, type 2 diabetes
mellitus and malignancy. The masses had an average maximum
diameter of 5 cm. The most common histological features were lack
of a pseudocapsule, presence of foamy cells, variable inflammatory
cells and necrosis, in both perihilar and peripheral localization. Two
cases were entirely composed of lobules of foamy cells with no
atypia. One case lacked foamy cells and necrosis, but showed no
association with IgG4-related disease and no periductal growth. No
relapse was noted, although three cases were complicated by post-
operative abscesses.
Conclusion: Inflammatory pseudotumours of the liver have similar clin-
ical correlates to other infectious/inflammatory lesions. Their pathologi-
cal spectrum may be related to various aetiologies or inflammatory re-
sponses among individuals. Further studies are needed to clarify the path-
ogenesis and to classify these lesions.
PS-05-005
Paediatric and adult non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
pathogenia: lymphocyte populations characterisation in the liver
microenvironment
V. Cairoli, E. De Matteo*, C.G. Giadans, P.C. Casciato, E. Mullen,
A. Pedreira, C. Lezama, M. Galoppo, G. Bertot, M.V. Preciado, P. Valva
*Multidisciplinary Institute for Investigation in Paediatric Pathologies
(IMIPP), CONICET-GCBA, Pathology Division, Ricardo Gutiérrez
Children’s Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Background & objectives: The immune system is one of the main
drivers of NAFLD pathogenesis. The role of each liver lymphocyte pop-
ulation of the infiltrate in the pathogenesis is uncertain. Aim: to charac-
terize liver infiltrate in relation to histological damage in NAFLD
patients.
Methods: Twenty-six paediatric [11.5 yrs (4-17)] and 34 adult NAFLD
patients [50 yrs (28-72)] were enrolled. On liver biopsies histological
changes as well as T helpers Lymphocyte (Th), Cytotoxic T
Lymphocytes (CTL), Regulatory T lymphocytes (Treg) and Th17 local-
ization and frequency were evaluated by immunohistochemistry.
Statistical analysis were performed to assess the relation between the
immune response and the observed damage.
Results: Portal-periportal-CTL and -Th frequencies were similar
in paediatric and adult NAFLD cases. Th17 seemed to be nearly
exclusive of this location. In children Treg and Th17 counts were
comparable, but in adults Tregs were higher than Th17 cells. In
intralobular area CTL>Th>Treg predominance was observed both
age group. Comparison between them demonstrated higher portal-
periportal-Treg (p<0.006), intralobullar-CTL, -Th and -Treg
counts (p=0.025, p=0.0004 and p=0.013) and lower Th17/Treg
ratio (p=0.041) in adults.
In children higher intralobular-Treg were associated with inflammation
severity (p=0.026), while in adults more severe inflammation stages
showed lower Treg and higher Th17 counts. Paediatric and adult cases
with fibrosis ≥2 displayed portal-periportal lower Treg and higher Th17.
Conclusion: The composition of the inflammatory liver infiltrate differ
between paediatric and adult NAFLD, but the interplay between Treg and
Th17 seems to condition the progression of the damage in both groups.
PS-05-006
Digital histopathological characterisation of b cell subsets in early
and advanced biliary atresia
M. Elghobashy*, M. Harris, A. Patel, C. Lloyd, R. Brown, D. Kelly,
G. Reynolds, Z. Stamataki
*Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Centre for Liver and
Gastrointestinal Research, University of Birmingham UK, United
Kingdom
Background & objectives: Biliary atresia (BA) is a neonatal
cholangiopathy of various potential aetiologies. The role of B lympho-
cytes in the pathogenesis of BA has been hypothesised through murine
models. We aimed to characterise B cell subsets in BA using triple
immunohistochemistry.
Methods: CD20, CD24 and CD38 immunohistochemistry was carried
out on three samples (hilum and peripheral liver (wedge) samples at time
of Kasai hepatoportoenterostomy and an explant sample) for each patient
(n=28). The slides were scanned to allow digital appraisal. Semi-
quantitative analysis of inflammatory cells and fibrosis was performed.
Phenotypic groups were formed using inflammatory cell frequencies and
correlated with clinical outcome.
Results: Three B cell subsets were identified in the wedge samples at
Kasai and the explant samples. CD20+CD24+CD38-cells were present in
both sample types in all 28 patients. CD20+CD24-CD38+cells were
present in 1 of 28 wedge samples and 3 of 28 explant samples. CD20+
CD24+CD38+cells were identified in 4 of 28 explant samples. Patient
stratification based on inflammation at the hilum did not predict
transplant-free survival. CD20+CD24+CD38-cell frequency correlated
with fibrosis scores.
Conclusion: The histopathological analysis of three distinct tissue
regions using triple immunohistochemistry in this study is a novel
method in studying the evolution of the disease from the extrahe-
patic (hilum) to intrahepatic biliary system. This work is the first to
report distinct B cell subsets in BA and hypothesises the possible
role of CD20+CD24+CD38-B cells in biliary damage. This opens
the scope for their potential use as therapeutic targets to halt the
progression of this highly morbid disease.
PS-05-007
Mesenchymal hamartoma of the liver - diagnostic difficulties
E. Iżycka-Świeszewska*, M. Murawski, K. Buczkowski, J. Gulczyński,
J. Stefanowicz, P. Czauderna
*Medical University of Gdansk, Poland
Background & objectives: Mesenchymal hamartoma of the liver
(MHL) is a rare paediatric lesion, usually multicystic, slowly growing,
and accompanied by slight elevation of serum alpha-fetoprotein.
Diagnosis of MHL depends on its radiological and clinical presentation,
while histopathology shows wide spectrum of changes.
Methods: Eight children with mesenchymal hamartoma diagnosed radio-
logically or histologically, operated in one paediatric surgery centre dur-
ing last 10 years are presented. The clinical data analysis and detailed
pathological examination with wide panel immunophenotyping covering
epithelial and stromal components was performed.
Results: There were two girls and six boys in the age ranged 4 – 19
months. All tumours presented with abdominal enlargement, AFP eleva-
tion from 80 up to 10000. Radiologically five lesions were problematic,
showing some indefinite features of vascular lesion(2),
hepatoblastoma(2) or inborn defect(1). Two tumours were mainly solid,
while the rest were multicystic. Three cases primarily underwent needle
biopsy, with erroneous hepatoblastoma diagnosis in one boy and incon-
clusive answer in the second child. The final histological diagnosis of
MHL was based on morphology and immunophenotyping. Two cases
diagnosed radiologically as mixed hamartomatous lesion, were cavernous
haemangioma with defect in portal veins and bile duct proliferation.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Mesenchymal hamartoma of the liver can cause diagnostic
and therapeutic problems, mainly due to its rarity and different presenta-
tion in pathological and clinical aspects. Core needle biopsies in MHL
may not be informative to establish the final diagnosis. Some rare vascu-
lar hepatic lesions enter the differential diagnostic field of MHL.
Funding: ST02-0562/07 MUG
PS-05-008
Primary biliary cholangitis: histological criteria to predict UDCA
therapy response - a case series
D. Naranjo-Hans*, J. Gimeno Beltran, A. Puche Gallego, L. Serrano
Munne, J. Masso Castella, M. Garcia-Retortillo, B. Lloveras Rubio
*Hospital del Mar, Spain
Background & objectives: Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) is a prev-
alent hepatic chronic cholestatic autoimmune disease characterized by
chronic non-suppurative cholangitis affecting small to medium sized in-
terlobular bile ducts. Its progression to cirrhosis and liver failure is asso-
ciated with the response to UDCA therapy.
Methods: Determine if there is a statistical association between any his-
tological feature included in either the Ludwig stage, the Scheuer stage
and the recently proposed FBI score and the response to UDCA treatment
in our series of patients with PBC. All the biopsies were obtained before
starting UDCA treatment.
Results: 57 patients were studied with 39 cases percutaneous liver biop-
sies collected retrospectively from the files of our Institution. The histo-
logical evaluation according the FBI system showed a bile duct ratio
(BDR) index of 0.9 with only one case presenting ductopenia. Respect
lobular interphase hepatitis (LIH), five cases showed no LIH, 21 cases
showed mild to moderate LIH and three cases showed severe LIH.
Regarding fibrosis, 37 patients were in early stages (0-1), and only one
biopsy showed histological criteria of cirrhosis. Statistical analysis
showed non-statistical association between any histological criteria nor
stage and the absence of response to UDCA therapy. However, we de-
tected a trend between UDCA-therapy response and LIH.
Conclusion: The classical scores for staging PBC do not include histo-
logical features such as LIH, which might be useful to detect those po-
tential patients whom may benefit from a combined or alternative therapy.
PS-05-009
Identification of differential immune circuits in preneoplastic and
neoplastic stages of hepatocellular carcinoma using murine
(ABCB4-/-) and human tissues
M.A. Qureshi*, M. Ashfaq Khan, A. Qureshi, S. Sharafat, D. Schuppan
*Dow International Medical College, Dow University of Health
Sciences, Department of Pathology, Karachi, Pakistan
Background & objectives: While HCC is a potential candidate for im-
munotherapy, immune circuits that drive the inflammatory-to-tumour mi-
lieu remain to be explored. In this study, we have characterized immune
landscape in preneoplastic and neoplastic microenvironment of HCC
using murine and human HCC tissues.
Methods: In-vivo murine model of HCC was generated using 3-5 days
old Mdr2(Abcb4)-/- mice with intraperitoneal-injection of DEN followed
by administration of 0.05%phenobarbital. Moreover, a total of 42 patients
diagnosed with HCC and undergoing biopsy/resection were recruited in
the study. Mice without carcinogenic-regime and liver from transplant
donors were included as controls. Tissues were subsequently analysed
using immunohistochemistry, flowcytometry and PCR.
Results: Mdr2-/- mice receiving DEN-and-PB exhibited a significantly
different pathology with high proliferative index, increased lymphocyte
infiltration, increased neoplastic progression, and increased fibrosis.
Microscopically, tumour phenotype ranged from pseudo-tubular to
trabecular-type morphology. Importantly, alternatively-activated-
macrophages (M2) were heavily infiltrated in in the intra-tumoral com-
partment as early as 6 weeks. Liver from these mice were heavily infil-
trated by the recently identified immune cells ILC1 and ILC2. Moreover,
mRNA transcripts of MMP12, MMP13, MMP9, TIMP1, TGF , IL1, IL6,
iNOS, CD68 and YM1 were differentially expressed in murine tissues. In
human HCC-tissues, there was increased infiltration of macrophages,
neutrophils and B-cells, while infiltration of T-cells (CD4+ and CD8+)
was not different compared to the controls.
Conclusion: We report detailed analyses of preneoplastic and neoplastic
microenvironment of HCC in murine as well as human tissues. These
differentially regulated cells may represent novel targets for HCC immu-
notherapy.
PS-05-010
Differential morphologic characteristics between autoimmune hepa-
titis (AIH) and drug induced liver diease (DILI)
Y. Rodriguez-Gil*, L. Cuevas del Campo, M. Camara, P. Arribas,
B. Agredano, C. Jimenez-Revilla, E. Gómez-Dominguez
*Hospital Universitario 12 Octubre, Surgical Pathology Department,
Spain
Background & objectives: Distinguishing DILI from AIH can be a
challenge. There aren´t pathognomonic features of AIH. We reviewed a
series of cases to find the more useful morphological features to differ-
entiate DILI and HAI and selected and standardized them in a score.
Methods: We selected a series of 32 patients with clinically well-
characterized AIH and DILI (14 DILI and 18 AIH). CIOMS-RUCAM
and evolution parameters (including steroids responsiveness) were used
to discriminate the patients in the two groups.
Retrospective observational cohorts study was performed assessing 31
histologic variables and comparing them between the two groups. Chi
Square and non-parametric tests were applied.
Results: Following histological evaluation of 31 variables, we performed
a comparative analysis and only five variables showed statistically sig-
nificant differences between the DILI and AIH biopsies (p<0,05). AIH
more frequently presented portal plasma cells and intra-acinar plasma
cells inflammation; meanwhile DILI presented more frequently canalic-
ular and/or hepatocellular cholestasis, portal neutrophilic inflammation
and intra-acinar neutrophils.
A model combining the five variables with detailed histological evalua-
tion in four grades and a standardized score predicted the diagnosis of
most of the cases (AUC 0,913) with high specificity and sensibility
Conclusion: There are some overlap of most histologic findings between
AIH and DILI, five variables showed differences: Portal plasma cells,
intra-acinar plasma cells, portal neutrophilic inflammation, intra-acinar
neutrophilic inflammation and canalicular and hepatocellular cholestasis.
We were able to develop a score that could simplify histological evalua-
tion and with clinical data allow the differential diagnosis. To validate our
results we are performing a second analysis in a blinded manner by 4
pathologist.
PS-05-011
Role of set protein in hepatocellular carcinoma: an immunohisto-
chemical study
M. Samara*, N. Asaad, M. Shaban, D. Taie, M. Gadallah, S. Elkholy
*National Liver Institute, Menoufia University, Egypt
Background & objectives: HCC targeting therapy still remains unsatis-
factory. SET protein is a potent inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A
(PP2A) through its interaction with PP2A-regulated oncogenic pathways.
We investigated the oncogenic role of SET in HCC tumorigenesis and
clinical aggressiveness in Egyptian patients.
Methods: This study was carried out on 100 HCC Egyptian patients. For
each case, paired representative samples were collected from the tumour
Virchows Arch
tissue and the adjacent non-tumorous liver tissue of the same surgical
specimens and analysed for the immunohistochemical expression of
SET. Correlation between SET expression levels in HCC and the avail-
able clinicopathological parameters and overall survival was done.
Results: SET protein showed significantly higher expression levels in
HCC than in the adjacent non- tumorous liver tissue (P<0.0001). 54%
of HCC cases exhibited overexpression of SET protein that correlated
significantly with large tumour size (P=0.012), lymphovascular invasion
(p-value=0.028) and shorter overall survival (P<0.001).
Conclusion: These findings suggested the oncogenic role of SET protein
and the adverse prognostic outcome of SET protein overexpression in
HCC and the potential to be used as a new prognostic tool and a thera-
peutic target.
PS-05-012
A clinico-pathological audit of the effect of medical liver biopsies on
patient management
S. Seth*, G. Kohnen, P. Konanahalli, K.A. Oien
*University of Glasgow, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital (QEUH),
United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Medical liver biopsies are used to investigate
patients with hepatic dysfunction and diffuse disease on imaging, when
non-invasive methods yield insufficient information. We aimed to eval-
uate our medical liver pathology practice and its influence on patient
management, using national standards.
Methods: The UK’s Royal College of Pathologists (RCPath) produces
“Tissue pathway” guidelines promoting good practice in specimen han-
dling and reporting. We used RCPath audit proformas to collect data on
specimen quality/reporting and clinico-pathological effect. The QEUH
pathology database was searched for liver specimens in 2019. Reports
were retrieved for review (by SS, academic trainee), alongside clinical
information from electronic patient records.
Results: After excluding resections, targeted biopsies and referral
cases, we identified 135 medical liver biopsies reported in 2019
between three consultant histopathologists (GK,PK,KO). Sixty con-
secutive cases were included for audit. 51/60 (85%) biopsies met
RCPath criteria for adequacy (length>15mm or ≥6 portal tracts);
three (5%) samples were inadequate and six reports (10%) lacked
enough information to evaluate. Most reports (56/60;93%) were
judged to have helped patient management. The clinical diagnosis
changed in 23/60 (38%); the different diagnosis was previously
unanticipated in nine (39%). Patient management altered in 48/60
(80%); in most of these (33/48; 69%), the decision would not have
been possible without the pathology report.
Conclusion: This audit highlights the clinical value of medical liver
biopsy in diagnostic work-up and follow-up of patients with liver disease.
These results will help optimise the content of our reports and wider
clinico-pathological communications.
PS-05-014
Diagnostic utility of von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor gene
product in intrahepatic/extrahepatic bile duct and gallbladder
adenocarcinomas
A. Tanoglidi, N. Stavrinou, A. Sykaras*, G. Liadakis, C. Kouvidou,
C. Vourlakou
*Evangelismos General Hospital, Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: Von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor gene
protein’s (pVHL) loss of expression has been observed in many
tumours. Our aim is to assess pVHL expression in intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (ICC), pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC), bile duct adenocarcinoma (BDAC) and gallbladder ade-
nocarcinoma (GBAC).
Methods: We examined the immunohistochemical expression of pVHL
in ICCs (n=10), PDACs (n=5), GBACs (n=10) and bile duct adenocar-
cinomas (BDACs) (n=5) in biopsies and surgical resection specimens. A
cytoplasmic and membranous staining was treated as positive if at least
5% of the tumour cells exhibited immunoreactivity. Positive staining was
further graded as 1+(5%-25% of the tumour cells), 2+(26%-50%), 3+
(51%-75%) or 4+(>75%).
Results: All cases of ICCs were diffusely and strongly positive (mem-
branous and cytoplasmic staining 3+ or 4+). One out of five cases of
PDACs was focally positive (1+) whereas the remaining were negative.
Two out of five cases of BDACs were negative, one showed 3+ and two
2+ positivity. Four out of ten cases of GBACs were negative, two showed
4+, two 3+ and two 2+ positivity. Non-neoplastic epithelium served as
positive internal control. Our results for ICCs and PDACs are in accor-
dance with published data, but positive percentages in BDACs /GBACs
are higher than those in the literature. We observed reduced positivity in
less differentiated areas especially the tumour front.
Conclusion: pVHL immunohistochemistry can be used as a diagnostic
tool in differentiating ICC from PDAC but isn’t so helpful in
distinguishing ICC from GBAC or extrahepatic bile duct adenocarcino-
ma. Its prognostic and diagnostic role needs further investigation.
PS-05-015
Liver biopsy in non-neoplastic paediatric liver diseases: 10 year
experience at National Liver Institute, Menoufia University,
Egypt
T. Talab*, Z. Fayed, M. Soltan, N. Ehsan
*National Liver Institute, Menoufia University, Pathology Department,
Egypt
Background & objectives: Liver biopsy despite being invasive tech-
nique is considered fundamental in diagnosis and management of paedi-
atric liver diseases. The aim of this study was to assess the role of liver
biopsy in diagnosis of non-neoplastic paediatric liver diseases.
Methods: Pathological reports of paediatric patients with non neoplastic
liver diseases collected from January 2010 through January 2019 and
sorted according to the diagnosis. Pathological diagnoses were sorted into
five groups; cholestasis ( extrahepatic biliary outflow obstruction and
intrahepatic cholestasis), inflammatory (chronic hepatitis and granuloma-
tous inflammation) , metabolic/storage diseases , cirrhotic and finally
others that include the remaining entities.
Results: A total 2157 histopathological studies were found; 52.2%
were boys, and 47.8% were girls. The major age group was young
infants which biopsied mainly for cholestasis (37.5%). Other cate-
gories diagnosed included inflammatory group (29%), group with
metabolic/ storage diseases (10.6%), group with cirrhosis (5.5%)
and the remaining percentages were for other entities (17.4%).
Biliary outflow obstruction and intrahepatic cholestasis were the
most common diagnoses in young infants while chronic hepatitis
was the main diagnosis of elderly children.
Conclusion: Liver biopsy is a main integral component in setting the
initial diagnosis of many non-neoplastic paediatric liver diseases.
Biliary outflow obstruction, intrahepatic cholestasis, chronic hepatitis
and metabolic/ storage diseases are the most common diagnosed diseases.
PS-05-016
The influence of the chronic alcohol intoxication on the morpho-
functional status of the liver of rats at the age of 6 months
M. Kozlova, Y. Kirillov, D. Areshidze, I. Chernov, E. Shtemplevskaya,
S. Timofeev*
*Tyumen State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: The circadian rhythmicity of biological pro-
cesses is one of the important properties of the mammalian organism. The
Virchows Arch
aim of this work was to study the effect of chronic alcohol intoxication on
the circadian rhythmicity of some micromorphometric liver parameters.
Methods: The 72 6-month-old male Wistar rats, divided into 2 groups,
were kept under fixed light conditions for three weeks, the experimental
group received ad libitum a 15% ethanol instead of drinking water.
Animals were sacrificed at 9, 15, 21 and 3 hours. Micromorphometric
liver parameters were measured. The amplitude-phase characteristics of
circadian rhythms were investigated using cosinor-analysis.
Results: In the control, circadian rhythms were found for every parame-
ter. Acrophases for the rhythms of nuclear area, cell area, and nuclear-
cytoplasmatic ratio (NCR) were noted at 12.16, 10.22, 13.56 hours, am-
plitudes were 38.47 μm2, 99.23 μm2 and 0.030, respectively. In the
experiment, only the nuclear area rhythm was detected - acrophase at
5.18 hours and an amplitude of 12.72 μm2.
The study testifies that chronic intoxication with ethanol leads to signif-
icant violations in the organization and synchronization of CR of the
studied morphometric parameters, reflecting the morphological and func-
tional state of the liver of male Wistar rats.
Conclusion: The destruction of the СR of cell area and NCR, as well as
change in the amplitude-phase rhythm's characteristics of the nuclear area
is evidence of desynchronosis, which is an important link in the patho-
genesis of a many of diseases.
PS-05-017
The influence of modification circadian rhythms during the chronic
alcohol intoxication
E. Shtemplevskaya, M. Kozlova, Y. Kirillov, D. Areshidze, I. Chernov,
S. Timofeev*, M. Bereza, V. Kukushkin
*Tyumen State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: The increased consumption of alcohol is a seri-
ous problem in modern society. The goal of this study is to find out the effect
of circadian rhythms on alcohol intoxication in 72 six-month old male rats.
Methods: The first group was kept at a fixed light mode, light-dark 14:10
and the second in conditions of constant light-light for 3 weeks. The
animals were fed with a 15% ethanol solution ad libitum. Animals were
removed from the experiment at 9am, 3pm, 9pm and 3am. The material
was examined histologically, histochemically and through an electron
microscope.
Results: In liver samples, small and large droplet fatty degeneration of
hepatocytes, expansion and cellular infiltration of portal tracts, focal ne-
crosis in the liver lobules were seen. The increase in alcohol consumption
for the able-bodied population operating in continuous cyclic enterprises
is a particular danger, since under these conditions, the rhythmic distur-
bances in biological processes caused by levelling of the time of day can
be aggravated by the use of ethanol.
Conclusion: Changes in the CR, through the introduction of continuous
lighting, when modelling chronic alcohol intoxication are accompanied
by an increase in the concentration of ethanol in the blood and liver
parenchyma and an increase in its toxic effect.
PS-05-018
Lymphocytic apoptosis among the criteria of the histological diagno-
sis of autoimmune hepatitis in acute-on-chronic patients: the experi-
ence of a tertiary referral Italian centre
F. Vasuri*, T. Franceschini, M. Riefolo, P. Muratori, D. Malvi, M. Lenzi,
A. D'Errico
*Pathology Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna University, Italy
Background & objectives: Liver biopsy represents the diagnostic gold
standard in autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), but histological diagnostic
criteria lack consensus and reproducibility.
Aims: (i) to redefine the histopathological criteria for AIH; (ii) to validate
portal apoptosis as a histopathological criteria for AIH diagnosis.
Methods: We retrospectively evaluated 65 biopsies from AIH patients at
their first access to our Center. Forty-five (69.2%) had a previous diag-
nosis of AIH (follow-up patients, FUP), for 20 (30.8%) the AIH diagnosis
was made at the moment of the present biopsy (first-diagnosis patients,
FDP).
Fourteen histopathological variables were collected, including the count
of lymphocytic apoptosis within the portal tracts.
Results: As expected, all variables of active hepatitis were higher in the
20 FDP compared to the 45 FUP (p<0.05), while fibrosis Ishak’s stage
was >2 in 11 (55.0%) FDP and 8 (17.8%) FUP (p=0.005).
Mean number of apoptotic bodies in portal tracts was 5.00±4.45 and 9.45
±6.95 in FUP and FDP respectively (p=0.002). Moreover, apoptosis
count positively correlated with fibrosis and almost all variable of inflam-
matory activity.
Conclusion: Most FDP showed an acute-on-chronic histology, highlighting
the key role of early diagnosis in AIH patients to prevent fibrosis progression.
Moreover, the count of the lymphocytic apoptotic bodies within the portal
tracts might reinforce the pathological criteria for AIH diagnosis.
PS-05-019
The role of c-Met signalling pathway in hepatocarcinogenesis and its
involvement in Sorafenib resistance
P. Korhan, Y. Oztemur Islakoglu, F. Yilmaz*, D. Nart, N. Atabey
*Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Development of resistance to conventional
therapies in Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an important problem.
This study aims to explore the role of c-Met signalling in the acquisition
of aggressive phenotypes in HCC.
Methods: HCC cell lines and HCC cases were analysed using immuno-
histochemistry, Western Blot, motility and invasion assays for c-Met
expression. In-vitro mechanistic studies using overexpression and silenc-
ing vectors for the demonstration of for c-Met activation were made.
Specific c-Met inhibitors were used for the reversal of sorafenib resistance
in HCC cells.
Results: Immunohistochemical analyses of HCC cell lines and HCC
cases, showed that immunoreactivity of phospho-Met and c-Met are in-
creased in HCC compared to normal and cirrhotic tissues. Our Western
Blot, motility and invasion assays showed higher c-Met expression in
poorly-differentiated, highly motile and invasive HCC cell lines than
well-differentiated ones. Our further in-vitro mechanistic studies using
overexpression and silencing vectors revealed that c-Met activation was
occurred mostly independent of HGF in HCC cells, including receptor
cross-talk, non-coding RNAs and environmental factors. We demonstrat-
ed that miR-181a-5p regulates c-Met signalling in HCC and played a role
in the acquisition of sorafenib resistance. We reversed sorafenib resis-
tance in HCC cells using c-Met specific inhibitors.
Conclusion: Our results provide mechanistic insight into c-Met signal-
ling in HCC and sorafenib resistance. These findings suggest that c-Met
might be used as a predictive biomarker to guide patient selection for
clinical trials of Met-related therapies.
PS-06-001
Determination of mean HbA2 levels on high performance liq-
uid chromatography (HPLC) in known beta thalassaemia trait
individuals
R. Akbar*
*Cantonment General Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Beta thalassaemia is one of the most com-
mon inherited haemoglobin disorders. The present study was conducted
PS-06 Haematopathology
Virchows Arch
to determine mean HbA2 levels of known β thalassaemia trait individuals
on HPLC in South East Asian population, taking cellulose acetate elec-
trophoresis as gold standard.
Methods: A descriptive cross sectional study was conducted from
Dec 2018 to Dec 2019. A total of 495 patients who were diagnosed as
β thalassaemia trait on cellulose acetate haemoglobin electrophoresis
were included in the study. The blood samples were run on High
Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) and HbA2 levels were
recorded on the proforma.
Results: Mean and standard deviation were calculated for HbA2, MCV
and MCH. Frequency and percentage were calculated for gender. Effect
modifiers like age and gender were controlled by stratification and post
stratification independent sample t test was applied. Mean HbA2 levels of
β thalassaemia trait individuals on HPLC was 5.63%. This percentage
was higher than the mean value of HbA2 on Cellulose Acetate
Electrophoresis, which is generally taken as >3.5%. There was no effect
of age (p=0.07) and gender (p=0.14) on mean HbA2.
Conclusion: Measurement of HbA2 level on HPLC is a reliable way of
detection of β thalassaemia trait individuals. However, a higher threshold
of HbA2 is needed to label an individual as Beta Thalassaemia trait in
South East Asian population.
PS-06-002
Histopathologic diagnosis of lymph node biopsies in paediatric
population: a 5 year descriptive study in a tertiary hospital
V. Baena Romero*, C. Cabañuz Rocatallada, E. Garcia Fernandez
*Hospital Universitario La Paz, Spain
Background & objectives: Lymphadenoapathy is a relevant clinical
problem in children and biopsies are usually needed to determine if the
cause is neoplastic or non-neoplastic. The aim of this study was to deter-
mine the histopathological spectrum of lymphadenectomies undertaken
in our hospital.
Methods: An amount of 580 lymph node biopsies of 196 patients were
carried out in our hospital from 2015 to 2019 in children from 0 to 18
years old. We reviewed the histological diagnoses in our database for
each patient.
Results: Normal lymph node (33%) and reactive lymphoid hyperplasia
(29%) were more common. Lymphomas were 14 %, most of them
Hodgkin lymphomas. Metastatic lesions make up 8 % which included
neuroblastoma, papillary thyroid carcinoma and melanoma metastases.
Necrotizing tuberculous granulomatous lymphadenitis was the most
common diagnose among infectious pathology (9%). Other diagnoses
were post-transplant (6%) or inmunodeficiency related pathology (6%).
Conclusion: Lymph node biopsy plays an important role in establishing
the cause of lymphadenopathy. Among the biopsied nodes, one of the
most common diagnoses was lymphoid reactive hyperplasia, that shares
sometimes common features with neoplastic lesions. It is important to
recognise the different patterns of lymph node pathology in children to
avoid misdiagnosis.
PS-06-003
Differential expression of BCL-2 and LEF1 in mature T-cell lympho-
mas and reactive hyperplasia
L. Brown*, S. Prakash, L. Wang
*University of California, San Francisco, USA
Background & objectives: T-cell lymphomas may lack morphologic atypia
or T-cell antigen loss, making differentiation from reactive conditions diffi-
cult. The goal of our study is to evaluate BCL-2 and LEF-1 expression in
reactive lymphoid hyperplasia versus mature T-cell lymphomas.
Methods: BCL-2 and LEF-1 immunohistochemistry was performed on
43 and 42 previously diagnosed cases of T-cell lymphoma and 18 and 17
cases of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, respectively, confirmed by
clinical follow up. Expression was recorded as positive (>90% of cells
staining), partial loss (<50%), and negative (<10%).
Results: BCL-2 showed partial loss in 4 cases (9%) and complete loss in
3 cases (7%) of T-cell lymphoma. LEF-1 showed partial loss in 7 cases
(17%) and complete loss in 17 cases (40%) of T-cell lymphoma. None of
the 18 cases with reactive lymphoid hyperplasia showed complete loss of
BCL-2 or LEF-1. Two cases of paracortical hyperplasia showed partial
loss of BCL-2, one of which also showed partial loss of LEF-1.
Conclusion: Complete loss of BCL-2 or LEF-1 expression is often seen
in T-cell lymphoma but not in reactive lymphoid hyperplasia and may be
helpful in the diagnosis of challenging cases of T-cell lymphoma without
other T-cell antigen loss.
PS-06-004
Molecular characterisation of acute myeloid leukaemia among
Filipino patients using comprehensive next-generation sequencing
F.V. Casimero*, L.K. Cabral, M.L. Enriquez, R.A. Salamat, D. Villegas,
M.A. Rodriguez, P. Caguioa, F.V. Lopez, D.F. Natino, J.A. Malala, M.C.
Abad, J.J. Andal, A. Arevalo, D. Ang
*St. Luke's Medical Center, Philippines
Background & objectives: AML is the most common adult acute leu-
kaemia. New molecular technologies allowed prognostication & targeted
therapy. To date, AML molecular characterization in the country is non-
existent. The study determined the prevalence of somatic mutations in
Filipino AML patients using NGS.
Methods: All 44 bone marrow aspirates or peripheral blood samples of
patients diagnosed with AML between January 2018 to August 2019
were subjected for mutational analysis using a NGS platform (Miseq),
to screen for mutational hotspots in 40 genes relevant to myeloid neo-
plasms (Ampliseq Myeloid Panel, Illumina). Clinical characteristics of
patients were recorded.
Results: Of the 44 cases in our study, there were 23 males and 21 females
with a median age of 41 (9 to 75 years old). At least one non-synonymous
gene mutation was detected 42 our AML patients (95%). There was an
average of 2.8 mutations (range 1-8) per case. KIT (27%) was the most
common mutation, followed by RUNX1 (20%); CEBPA, NPM1, TET2,
FLT3 (13%); and NRAS, IDH1, IDH2, ASXL1, WT1 (7%) . The remain-
ing genes showed a frequency of <5%. In our study, the most frequently
identified mutations involve signalling and kinase pathways followed by
epigenetic modifiers. We detected NPM1 and FLT3-ITD mutations at
frequencies similar to previous reports.
Conclusion: Our study underscores the heterogeneity of AML among
Filipinos. Although it is challenging to implement molecular testing in
resource-limited countries, our study highlights the necessity of
implementing NGS testing in AML patients, to aid in risk stratification
and treatment planning.
PS-06-005
Epstein Barr virus (EBV) recruits PD-L1 + cells in paediatric
Hodgkin lymphoma microenvironment
O. Jimenez, S. Colli, M. Garcia Lombardi, M.V. Preciado, P. Chabay,
E. De Matteo*
*Multidisciplinary Institute for Investigation in Paediatric Pathologies
(IMIPP), CONICET-GCBA, Pathology Division, Ricardo Gutiérrez
Children’s Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Background & objectives: Introduction: In Hodgkin lymphoma (HL),
PDL1 are expressed by tumour cells and its expression could be upregu-
lated in the microenvironment as well. Aim: To evaluate PD-1 /PDL1
pathway in children with HL from Argentina, a population with increased
EBV-associated lymphomas
Methods: Methods: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded biopsy samples
(FFPE) of 94 patients with HL (2-18 years, median 9) were collected at
Virchows Arch
Ricardo Gutiérrez Children's Hospital. PD1 and PDL1 expression was
studied by immunohistochemistry (IHC). FISH for 9p24.1PDL1 gene
amplification in HRS cells was performed in 38 patients. EBV status
was defined by in situ hybridization for EBERs and IHC for LMP1.
Results: Results: 64 % of cases were EBV+. There were no statistical
differences for the mean PD1 + cells in EBV + vs EBV- groups(p> 0.05).
A 5% of cases displayed PDL1 amplification, 18% copy gain, 11% copy
gain and amplification. There was no significant differences in the means
of PDL1+ HRS cells (p> 0.05, MW test), or in PDL1 gene alterations
among EBV + vs EBV- cases (p> 0.05). No differences were found in the
PDL1+ cell count with and without 9p24.1 gene alterations (p> 0.05). A
significant increase in the number of PDL1 + cells in the microenviron-
ment was detected in EBV + cases (p= 0.042).
Conclusion: Conclusions: EBV positivity in HRS tumour cells may not
influence PDL1 gene amplification or copy gain in paediatric HL.
However, EBV presence would favour the recruitment of PDL1+ cells
at the microenvironment in paediatric, possibly leading to a tolerogenic
milieu.
PS-06-007
Prognostic value of the immunoexpression of H3K4me3 and
H2K27me3 epigenetic marks in follicular lymphoma
J. Gama*, S. Chacim, S. Paulino, C. Jerónimo, R. Henrique
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Follicular lymphoma is the second most
common subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Additional prognostic
markers are under investigation. Epigenetic changes are now recognized
as playing an important and early role in the lymphomagenesis process,
contributing to the disease progression.
Methods: A retrospective transversal study was completed using archival
biological material from 48 patients with follicular lymphoma, diagnosed
between 2007 and 2012 at the Portuguese Oncology Institute Porto. The
H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 marks were assessed by immunohistochem-
istry, using the Hscore. Relevant clinical and pathological data was ex-
tracted from the database of the Department of Oncohaematology.
Results: In this series, the median age at diagnosis was 60 years and
recurrent/transformed disease was experienced by 34% of the patients.
The median follow-up time was 71.5 months. The overall survival was
estimated as 74.7% at 5 years. The disease-specific survival was estimat-
ed as 77.3% at 5 years. No difference in prognosis was observed
concerning gender (p=0.755). The FLIPI score (p<0.001) and age at the
time of diagnosis (p=0.019) were confirmed as prognostic factors. There
was a statistically significant association between the immunoexpression
of H2K27me3 and the FLIPI score (p = 0.038). When evaluating the
epigenetic marks H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 no significant association
with clinical outcome was found.
Conclusion: In this study, the immunoexpression H3K4me3 and
H3K27me3 did not disclose prognostic value. A larger study is needed
to fully determine the prognostic value of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3.
PS-06-008
Morphology and histotopography of megakaryocytes in Ph-negative
JAK2-mutated, CALR-mutated and triple-negative myeloprolifera-
tive neoplasms
D. Gogoleva*, G. Sychugov
*Chelyabinsk Bureau of Pathology, Russia
Background & objectives: The aim of study was to assess the quantity
of megakaryocytes, histotopography (endosteal translocation), clusters
formation, nuclear features (bulbous, staghorn-like, naked, dysmorphic,
separated nuclei) in bone marrow biopsies (BMB) of patients with JAK2-
positive, CALR-positive and triple-negative (TN) myeloproliferative
neoplasms (MPN).
Methods: We investigated 62 BMB of patients with Ph-negative
MPN. Patients were divided into the groups: JAK2 (N=31), CALR
(N=17), triple-negative (N=14). Serial sections from BMB were
stained with haematoxylin-eosin. A standard light microscope
(х400) was used. The quantity of megakaryocytes, the nuclei and
clusters were assessed in 10 HPF. The endosteal translocation were
assessed on the full histological section.
Results: The biggest quantity of megakaryocytes was detected in JAK2-
group (mean value (MV): JAK2=203,7±79,1; CALR=142,1±52,9;
TN=134,4±48). The smallest number of clusters was in TN-group
(MV: TN=7,5±4; JAK2=18,8±6; CALR=11,7±5,8). The bulbous nuclei
were prevalent in JAK2-group (MV: JAK2=29,8±26,3; CALR=12,6
±12,5; TN=3,2±2,9), the dysmorphic nuclei were prevalent in CALR-
group (MV: CALR=14,5±2,5; JAK2=3,2±3; TN=5,2±6), the separated
nuclei were detected only in TN-group (MV: TN=3,2±1). There was no
significant difference in counting of other nuclear forms.
Tendency to the endosteal translocation was demonstrated by CALR-
group in 82% (14/17) in comparison with JAK2-group - 58% (18/31)
and TN-group - 43% (6/14).
Conclusion: Ph-negative MPN with various mutation status have differ-
ences in morphology and histotopography of megakaryocytes. According
to the results, the MPN can be divided into additional molecular subtypes.
It can be useful for supporting the diagnosis and classification.
PS-06-009
Impact of accurate quantification of bone marrow plasma cells in the
trephine core biopsy for the diagnosis of multiple myeloma patients
I. Hernández Alconchel*, S. Marcos González, M. Briz del Blanco,
A. Bermudez Rodriguez, J. García Reyero, E. Ocio, S. Montes
Moreno
*HUMV, Spain
Background & objectives: The presence of clonal PCin≥10% marrow
cellularity is the threshold for diagnosis of PCM. Cellular counts differ
between bone marrow aspirate (BMA)and bone marrow biopsy
(BMB).We evaluated the concordance in the PC quantification by aspi-
rate cell count and absolute quantification by IHC withMUM1 staining
and the clinical correlation in cases with discordant results.
Methods: We analysed BMA and BMB samples at diagnosis from 48pa-
tients. Quantification of BM plasma cell infiltrates in the BMB was done
by MUM1 immunohistochemistry. 3 representative images at HPF (40X)
were acquired, the number of MUM1 positive and negative cells was
quantified by visual enumeration. Semiquantitative estimation of the
%of plasma cells was done by 2 pathologists in 28 cases with a BMA
count below10%. A three-tiered score was used:<10%,10-60%
and>60%MUM1+ cells.
Results: 71%of cases showed a concordant result between the BMA
and BMB counts [20 cases with≥10%plasma cells(PC) and 14cases
with<10%PC in both samples] 29% of cases were discordant
with≥10% MUM1+PC in the BMB and<10%in the BMA.5 out of
these 14cases fulfilled clinical criteria(CRAB)for MM and 9cases
were considered smouldering MM. Cohen´s kappa coefficient for
the semiquantitative categorization of cases according to the BMB
cell counts was 0,862with only 2out of 28cases with discordant
results among the 2 pathologists
Conclusion: Bone marrow trephine biopsy evaluation of plasma
cell infiltrates is critical for the early identification of MM pa-
tients. The conversion rate of BMA PC<10% patients to ≥10% in
BMB after absolute quantification of MUM1+PC was 29%.In
10%of the cases the patients fulfilled clinical criteria for overt
MM. In cases with low BMA cell counts, semiquantitative eval-
uation of BMB plasma cell infiltrates with MUM1 immunohisto-
chemistry is consistent among pathologists and may be used in
the diagnostic setting when absolute quantification methods are
not available
Virchows Arch
PS-06-011
BCL2 in follicular lymphomas (FL): the overrated guy?
D. Marchiori*, F. Magnoli, C. Amaglio, D. Sabatino, V. Martin,
M. Merli, L. Campiotti, F. Sessa, M.G. Tibiletti, S. Uccella
*Dept. of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy
Background & objectives: The t(14;18)(q32;q21) is considered the ge-
netic hallmark of FL. However, some authors have observed a high pro-
portion of FL lacking t(14;18), supposing geographic differences.
Our aim was to test the incidence of BCL2- FL and investigate alternative
genetic aberrations.
Methods: We collected a series of 76 consecutive FLs from our
Pathology Department between 2013 and 2016. All lymphomas
underwent histopathological revision and were immunohistochemically
characterised. Interphasic fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was
performed targeting BCL2, IGH, BCL6 and MYC on paraffin embedded
(PE) and fresh frozen (FF) specimens. Conventional cytogenetic was
applied to a subset of cases as well.
Results: Overall, BCL2 rearrangements and protein expression were de-
tected in 54% and 87% of cases, respectively, with statistical correlation
between the two dramatically increasing with increasing intensity of im-
munostaining (p<0.0001). BCL2 expression was related to a lower pro-
liferative index, as assessed by Ki-67 (p=0.02).
Among cases lacking t(14;18), 6 showed IGH rearrangement, and were
further tested: 1 was characterized indeed by a variant BCL2 transloca-
tion, 1 had a IGH/BCL6 rearrangement, whereas the other 4 were nega-
tive for both BCL6 and MYC. FISH performed on FF specimens detected
small BCL2-rearranged clones in three BCL2-negative PE cases. Finally,
karyotype reconstruction documented 3q27 and 1p abnormalities in 3
cases, respectively.
Conclusion: Our study suggests that t(14;18) is not a constant finding in
FL, its incidence being probably affected by geographical factors.
Alternative genetic aberrations exist in negative cases, and conventional
cytogenetic may still represent a useful tool to investigate their role in
lymphomagenesis.
PS-06-012
Haematological indicators of Dengue illness and recovery: emphasis
on white blood cells
A. Rai*, S. Sahu, N. Kulkarni
*MGM Medical College, Navi Mumbai, India
Background & objectives: In Dengue, as a norm platelet count guides
the treatment and prognosis. This study assesses if WBC (white blood
cell) count can be used as an equally sensitive parameter and it also
analyses other haematological parameters in dengue.
Methods: This is a retrospective observational hospital-based study con-
ducted over 6 months. 140 cases of dengue fever were included by com-
plete enumeration method. Consecutive WBC count, Platelet count,
WBC differentials and haematocrit were obtained from day of admission
till discharge as part of treatment. Analysis was done using Spearman's
rank correlation method and descriptive statistics to find for associations
and patterns.
Results: Majority (67%) were males with mean age 30 years. On day of
admission, 51% patients had leukopenia while 89% showed thrombocy-
topenia. By third day, leukopenia was seen in 33% patients while throm-
bocytopenia noted in 94%. On discharge, 12% patients showed leukope-
nia while 70% had thrombocytopenia. On day of admission, third day and
day of discharge, mean WBC count obtained were 4568, 5547 and 6989
respectively and mean platelet count were 88217, 78479 and 131850
respectively. Mean WBC count and platelet count showed moderately
positive correlation (R=0.6,p<0.05). Neutrophils showed decreasing
trend while lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils and haematocrit
showed an increasing trend post admission. Reactive lymphocytes were
noted in conjunction with lymphocytosis.
Conclusion: In dengue patients, WBC count normalized with clinical
improvement earlier than platelet count for majority making it an equally
important parameter and a good indicator of recovery. The other studied
haematological parameters also contributed in understanding the disease
progress.
PS-06-013
The study of the toxic effect of the heavy metals salts on the erythro-
poiesis in the rats
Y. Lyndina, V. Sikora, M. Lyndin, Y. Soroka, S. Romaniuk, L. Karpenko,
A. Romaniuk*
*Sumy State University, Ukraine
Background & objectives: Heavy metals salts (HMS) are the most com-
mon pollutants that are proved to have the negative effect.
The objective is to determine the morphological features of the marrow in
rats, caused by the combined effect of the heavy metals salts.
Methods: The study was carried out on the laboratory male rats (n=24),
which were divided into 2 groups (control and experimental – the
rats received HMS (zinc, copper, iron, manganese, lead, chromi-
um). The animals were taken out from the experiment on the 30th
and 90th day.
Results: The HMS intake leads to the significant changes among the
precursors of the erythropoiesis. The islet location of its predictors has
been disturbed, they were found as the indistinct assembles of the cells
and separately in the areas of myxomatosis and oedema. The size of the
survived islets and the number of the cells in their structure gradually
reduce, the single precursors of the erythropoiesis with the features of
dyserythropoiesis: the signs of karyorhexis, irregular shape of the nuclei,
internuclear bridges, are observed among them. The morphological
changes in the marrow increase with the extension of the experiment
and reach the maximum on the 90th day.
Conclusion: The excessive entry of the HMS to the animals’ body leads
to the qualitative (dyserytropoiesis) and quantitative (reduced number and
size of the erythroid islets) changes in the erythropoietic tissue, which
depend on the term.
PS-06-014
Multiparametric flowcytometry in the diagnosis of plasma cell
disorders
N. Stoyanov*, T. Dikov, P. Ganeva, G. Balatzenko, M. Guenova
*NSBALHZ, Bulgaria
Background & objectives: Plasma cell disorders present a spectrum
from benign to aggressive course. The diagnosis involves clinical, labo-
ratory, and imaging data. Multiparametric flowcytometry (MFC) is used
to determine clonality and aberrant immunophenotypes.
Evaluate the contribution of MFC to the diagnostic work-up.
Methods: All patients with plasma cell disorders (n=203) diagnosed
between 2008 and 2014 and followed up for a median of 46 months. A
comprehensive flow cytometry panel was applied to bone marrow aspi-
rates, supplemented by biopsies with immunohistochemistry. Antigen
aberrations and clonality differentiated between normal and abnormal
cells. Expression patterns and quantitative characteristics were further
correlated with clinical and lab tests.
Results: MFC-confirmed clonality and abnormal antigen expression sup-
ported diagnosis. Antigens were frequently co-expressed (CD20, 29%,
and CD28 43%, p<0,001 CD200, 90% and CD27, 41%, p=0,008), or
appeared mutually exclusive (CD20, 29% and CD56, 72%, p=0.023).
Phenotypically abnormal plasma cells showed correlation with tumour
volume - ISS stage (p=0.002), haemoglobin (p=0.001) and platelet counts
(p=0.01) and, expectedly, morphological bone marrow infiltration
(p<0.001). Moreover, myeloma patients with abnormal/total plasma cell
ratio of <95% at diagnosis had significantly lower tumour volume and
Virchows Arch
excellent overall survival compared to other similarly treated patients.
This correlation was maintained in patients receiving stem cell transplant
(not reached vs. 51 months) or non-intensive therapy (73 vs. 16 months,
p=0.003).
Conclusion: MFC supports the diagnosis of plasma cell disorders and
contributes valuable prognostic data.
PS-06-015
Primary cerebral lymphoma: clinicopathological analysis of 9 cases
R. Szodorai*, I. Egyed-Zs., L. Banias, E. Horváth
*"George Emil Palade" University of Medicine, Pharmacy, Science and
Technology of Targu Mures, Romania
Background & objectives: Primary cerebral lymphomas are relatively
rare neoplasms (represent < 4 % of all brain tumours) and in this context
diagnostics and treatment are accordingly challenging.
Methods: We enrolled newly diagnosed cases between 2015-2019.
Patients who were diagnosed with secondary CNS lymphoma (n = 4)
or acquired immune deficiency syndrome (n = 4) were excluded.
Remaining cases were retrospectively analysed considering localization,
tumour morphology and immunophenotype, prognosis and overall
survival.
Results: Nine cases diagnosed as primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) were analysed. The patient’s age ranged between 33-74 years,
predominantly females (F/M-7:2). On stereotactic biopsy samples, all of
them were diagnosed as DLBCL. In four cases the histological differen-
tiation was limited by the reduced tissue sampling, rich in necrosis, with-
out distinct tumour mass. Microscopic examination mostly highlighted an
angiocentric growth pattern of tumour cells. Applying the Hans algo-
rithm, using CD10, BCL-6 and MUM-1, 6 cases belonged to non-
germinal centre subtype, associated with high Ki67 (>70%). In the sub-
group of elderly patients (over 65 years), a high Ki67 index and non-
germinal centre subtype has been associated with short survival (three
months).
Conclusion: Stereotaxic biopsy and histology of the affected area in most
cases will provide a reliable diagnosis. The diagnosis of primary cerebral
lymphomas is complex, the histological subtypes are difficult to evaluate
due to reduced tissue sampling and requires the application of a large
immunohistochemistry arsenal. Non-germinal centre subtype with a high
Ki67 index in our patients has been associated with worse survival.
PS-06-016
Molecular signatures of anaplastic large cell lymphoma, ALK-
negative – pilot study with 125 genes panel and recurrent
MSCE116K mutation testing
A. Szumera-Cieckiewicz*, B. Bikowska-Opalach, A. Dansonka-
Mieszkowska, M. Łukasik, A. Tysarowski, M. Prochorec-
Sobieszek
*Institute of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Diagnostic
Haematology Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research
Institute of Oncology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Poland
Background & objectives: Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, ALK-
negative [ALCL-ALK(-)] is CD30-positive T-cell neoplasm which
should be distinguished from primary cutaneous ALCL, other B-cell/T-
cell lymphomas with anaplastic features and CD30(+) and classic
Hodgkin lymphoma. Lately, a novel molecular signature [MSCE116K
mutation] has been described.
Methods: We selected 4 cases with clinically and histopathologically
confirmed ALCL-ALK(-). The immunohistochemical assessment includ-
ed: pan-B/pan-T panel, ALK-1, the axis: CD30-IRF4/MUM1-MYC. All
cases were tested with FusionPlex Lymphoma 125 genes panel. The
MSCE116K mutation was evaluated in the Sanger technique.
Results: The patients were 2 males: 2 females with a median age of 68
years and generalized lymphadenopathy and advanced clinical stage of
the disease. None of the patients had skin involvement. The histopatho-
logical characteristics and immunophenotype were concurrent: pan-T(+),
ALK1(-), CD30(+), IRF4/MUM1(+), MYC(+) in >40% of cells. None of
the cases were DUSP22 rearranged nor had ALK alteration; all lympho-
mas had splicing mutation of KMT2A[c.11321+2delC] gene and one case
presented p63 fusion. Additionally, none of the cases harboured the
MSCE116K mutation.
Conclusion: Molecular profiling of ALCL-ALK(-) started to be a key
point in prognostication. The presented series of ALCL-ALK(-) could be
categorized molecularly as 3 cases triple-negative, and 1 case p63
rearranged (poor prognostic factor). According to the literature, the
MSCE116K mutation has been found among DUSP22 rearranged lym-
phomas only (none of our cases). The quality and validation of molecular
testing from FFPE is relevant.
Funding: This work has been implemented using the Project infrastruc-
ture POIG.02.03.00-14-111/13.
PS-07-001
Diagnosing congenital malaria in the eastern province of Rwanda - a
comparison of infant peripheral blood smear, cord blood smear and
placental histopathologic examinations
F. Byiringiro Mugabe*, J. Uwinkesha, P. Ntihinyurwa, P. Nkurunziza,
D. Nyirahabimana
*Department of Clinical Biology, School of Medicine and Pharmacy,
University of Rwanda, Kigali, Rwanda
Background & objectives: Congenital malaria is detected within a neo-
nate’s first week of life and the diagnosis is made by detecting
Plasmodium parasites in peripheral blood smear (PBS). We compared
the results of placenta histology to blood smears for diagnosis of congen-
ital malaria.
Methods: Peripheral and cord blood smears (CBS) were sampled, from
neonates whose mothers were diagnosed with positive (+) malaria within
the last 2 weeks of pregnancy, for light microscopic exam as well as
placenta histology (PH) for detection of malaria parasites after consenting
the mother. Regression analysis were done and results were considered
significant if p-value <0.05, 95%CI.
Results: 111 neonates were recruited for 5 months. 86(77%) had at least
one of the 3 tests positive. 58% had CBS+, 56% had PH+ and 44% had
PBS+. Of those with PBS+, 61.6% had CBS+, while 50% had PH+.
Neither the PH nor CBS alone was significant predictor of a positive
PBS. However, when both were positive, there was a 95.5% chance that
the PBS will be positive (p-value: 0.000, RR: 18.8).
Conclusion: There is high prevalence of congenital malaria in new-borns
from mothers presenting malaria during the last two weeks of pregnancy.
Combined PH and CBS can be more reliable in early detection of para-
sites and allow treatment without sample from neonate.
PS-07-002
Strongyloides stercoralis: hyperinfection syndrome with
periumbilical purpura
M.D.L.M. Lewkowicz*, A. Bruno, J. Rodriguez Catan, C. Waldblaun, A.
Paes de Lima, M.A. Avagnina Iribarren, M.A. Allevato, M.d.l.A. Juarez
*Hospital de Clínicas "José de San Martin", Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Argentina
Background & objectives: Strongyloides Stercoralis is a pathogenic
filariform nematode which causes mostly an asymptomatic chronic disease.
Under immunosuppression conditions its life circle is exacerbated. Massive
PS-07 Infectious Diseases Pathology
Virchows Arch
multiplication of larvae develops clinical manifestations within the usual pat-
tern of migration, which is known as hyperinfection syndrome.
Methods: We report two cases of strongyloides stercoralis hyperinfection
syndrome with periumbilical purpurae.
Results: 25-year-old female, HTLV1 positive, presented with abdominal
pain, loose stools, severe malnutrition and non-confluent petechial and
purpura lesions in abdominal region, flanks and proximal limbs.
Tomography evidenced alterations in the gastrointestinal tract.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed petechial involvement of the du-
odenum and jejunum.
Biopsies of skin and colon evidenced mature filariform larvae.
40-year-old male with history of smoking and cocaine addiction
consulted for abdominal pain, diarrhoea, unquantified weight loss and
non-confluent petechiae in the periumbilical abdominal region.
Tomography evidenced a heterogeneous consolidation in right lung and
parietal thickening of jejunum and ileum. We received a bronchoalveolar
lavage cytology, where mature filariform larvae were encountered.
Stool culture revealed Strongyloides Stercoralis in both cases.
Conclusion: Petechial and purpuric lesions in abdomen, flanks and limbs
have been documented in the literature as a rare form of cutaneous pre-
sentation of hyperinfection syndrome but they may be a valuable diag-
nostic sign. Skin biopsy is essential for accurate diagnosis.
PS-07-003
Histoplasmosis presenting as a cecal mass: report of two cases
M.D.L.M. Lewkowicz*, R. Malerba, G.A. Daniela Fernanda, A. Wonaga,
C. Waldbaum, G. Benchetrit, J. Hevia, C. Cerisoli, J. Sorda, M.A. Avagnina
Iribarren
*Hospital de Clínicas "José de San Martin", Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Argentina
Background & objectives: Histoplasma Capsulatum is a dimorphic fungus,
worldwide disseminated. It presents as a self-limited respiratory infection or is
asymptomatic. Disseminated disease occursinimmunocompromised individ-
uals. Gastrointestinal involvement is rare. Ileum is the most common site and
clinical manifestations are exceptional and unspecified.
Methods: We report two cases of disseminated Histoplasmosis syndrome
initially presented as a cecal mass, one in a non immunocompromised patient.
Results: 67-year-old woman, treated with oral medication for type 2
diabetes mellitus presented with anorexia and weight loss (10kg).
Videocolonoscopy showed a sessile lesion, with central ulceration in
the cecum. Biopsy specimens were obtained.
26-year-old male, HIV positive, presented with abdominal pain, liquid bowel
movements, chills and unintentional weight loss in the last two months.
Videocolonoscopy showed deformed, ulcerated and indurated cecum.
Diagnosis of histoplasmosis was done in both cases by histological ex-
amination of cecum biopsies, which revealed multiple intracellular small
organisms suggestive of Histoplasma capsulatum.
First patient was HIV negative with positive serology for Histoplasma
Capsulatum and PCR negative bronchoalveolar lavage. Second patient
PCR in bronchoalveolar lavage was positive.
Conclusion: Histoplasmosis with gastrointestinal presentation and with-
out respiratory symptoms is rare, as well as disseminated disease in pa-
tients without immunosuppression. Symptomatology can mimic tubercu-
losis infection, malignant lesions and others. Biopsy during endoscopic
evaluation should be obtained to achieve the correct diagnosis.
PS-07-004
Abdominal actinomycosis simulating a colorectal neoplasia – 2 cases
J. Madeira*, J. Gama, F. Ramalhosa, J. Fraga, M.B. Pimentão, A. Lai,
C. Faria, V. Almeida, H. Moreira, R. Almeida, R. Oliveira, M.R. Silva,
M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Intra-abdominal actinomycosis (AIA) is a
progressive, granulomatous and suppurative disease that can simulate a
neoplastic process and consequent inadequate treatment. It is most com-
monly ileocecal, mimicking colorectal neoplasia, often requiring surgery.
Methods: We present two cases in women with 60 and 84 years, with
abdominal pain and a palpable mass with 1.8 and 3.2 months of evolution,
one located in the right iliac fossa and the other in the right hypochondrium.
Imaging examination did not exclude neoplasia. Endoscopy revealed conges-
tive mucosa and biopsies showed ischemic colitis.
Results: After an antibiotic cycle without improvement, both underwent
segmental colectomy resection. The macroscopic evaluation did not ex-
clude a neoplastic process, and histological study showed pseudotumoral
lesions consisting of fibrous tissue with abscesses and colonies of actino-
myces (Grocott), without evidence of malignancy.
Until the moment of submission, patients were well, without any compli-
cations or reinfection.
Conclusion: AIA diagnosis is difficult due to non-specific features. It is often
clinically confused with neoplasia or other inflammatory diseases. AIA is rare
and a diagnosis of exclusion, usually made after surgery and histological
analysis. It should be considered in immunocompromised patients.
PS-07-005
Histopathological and MPT64 immunohistochemical diagnosis of
extrapulmonary tuberculosis at the Muhimbili National Hospital
C. Ngimba*, A. Mwakigonja
*Muhimbili National Hospital, Mutokiti Diagnostic Laboratory,
Tanzania
Background & objectives: Extra-pulmonary Tuberculosis (EPTB) has
diagnostic challenges in resource limited setting. Confirmation depends
on histology and Ziehl Nielsen stain (ZNS). Immunohistochemistry using
anti-MPT64 can detect mycobacterium TB complex proteins. We de-
scribe the histomorphology and anti-MPT64 immunoreactivity on
Formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) biopsies.
Methods: FFPE tissue blocks and haematoxylin-eosin stained slides of biop-
sies which were signed out as EPTB (July 2015 - June 2017) were retrieved
from the archive. Slides of included cases were reviewed to confirm the
diagnosis prior to resectioning for ZN staining and IHC. Demographic, clin-
ical and histopathologic data were analysed. Proportions of AFB positivity for
ZNS and anti-MPT64 immunoreactivity were calculated.
Results: 110 biopsies signed out as EPTB were analysed and biopsies were
from patients aged between 2-76 years with mean of 36.3 years. Female
represented 60% (n=66), lymph node was more frequent (41.8%, n=46) site
and necrotizing granuloma was the most (69%, n=76) frequent lesion. IHC
and ZNS positivity were found in 71% and 8% of the biopsies respectively.
All ZN positive biopsies were also positive to MPT64 by IHC.
Conclusion: EPTB is encountered frequently among biopsies submitted
at our hospital. Despite the challenges faced in establishing EPTB diag-
nosis, the histomorphology of necrotizing granulomas should be regarded
as a strong indicator of EPTB, particularly in TB endemic areas.
Furthermore, IHC by anti-MPT64 appears to be useful particularly in
controversial cases where ZN staining is negative. EPTB affects mostly
young adults in reproductive age group and the female gender and TB
lymphadenitis is the most common type of EPTB presentation at MNH.
PS-07-006
Laboratory and anatomopathological aspects in the diagnosis of
Dengue in Ceara in 2011 and 2012: the role of the Death
Verification Service
D. Nunes de Melo*, L. Matias Albuquerque, G. Bitu dos Santos
Ponte, S. André de Souza Júnior, D. Nunes Oliveira, J. Carneiro
Melo, L. Pamplona de Góes Cavalcanti
*State Secretary of Health, Brazil
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: In Brazil, has expressive epidemic outbreaks
of dengue and not all the cases with fatal evolution are diagnosed by the
public health service. Evaluate the impact of Death Verification Service
(DVS) for detecting non-suspected dengue deaths in Ceara.
Methods: Post-mortem examinations were performed in the period from
2011 to 2012 in cases suspect of dengue and cases non-suspected by the
clinician but that were suspected by pathologist. The test to IgM, NS1, viral
isolation and PCR and immunohistochemical test were performed. Deaths
due to dengue were confirmed only if they fulfilled the WHO criteria.
Results: Were performed 214 post-mortem examinations in which 121
(56.5%) were confirmed as dengue, however 90 of these were asymptomatic
for dengue. Co-infections were detected in 46 cases in which bacterial organ-
isms were the most prevalent (93.5%). Oedema and haemorrhage occurred in
all exams and organs with more pronounced oedema in the lungs (79%) and
central nervous system (71%). Haemorrhage was predominant in the adrenals
(31%) and lungs (24%). Acute respiratory failure (47.1%) and shock (33.8%)
were the most frequently reported causes of death.
Conclusion: The DVS ,Center for Epidemiological Surveillance and
Central Public Health Laboratory helped to increase by 5.1 times the
number of dengue’s related deaths. This is the largest historic series of
autopsied deaths due to dengue in the world.
PS-07-008
Diagnosis of tuberculous lymphadenitis: from morphology to molec-
ular analysis
B. Pehlivanoglu*, B. Aydin Turk, S. Aksoz
*Adiyaman University, Turkey
Background & objectives: Culture is still the gold standard for diagnosis
of tuberculosis (TB), however, molecular methods have also been shown
to be effective diagnostic tools. We aimed to investigate the association
between histopathological features and molecular TB positivity in this
retrospective study.
Methods: Slides of 36 consecutive patients who had undergone lymph node
resection with clinical suspicion of TB lymphadenitis (TBLA) were re-eval-
uated. Molecular TB testing was performed on formalin fixed-paraffin em-
bedded (FFPE) tissues using a real-time polymerase chain reaction
(Anyplex™MTB/NTM, Seegene, Inc). The findings were statistically
analysed.
Results: The majority (n=26) were female and median age was 44.50±14.42
(range 17-69 y.o.). All but 2 patients had granulomatous inflammation, how-
ever, TBLA was confirmed by molecular analysis in only 8 patients, 5 of
which had pure caseous granulomas. 2 patients with confirmed TBLA had
mixed caseous and sarcoid-like granulomas, and 1 had suppurative necrotiz-
ing granulomas. The bacilli could be demonstrated by acid-fast staining in
only 1 TBLA patient. TB-DNA was negative in 14 patients with mixed
caseous-sarcoid granulomatous inflammation, 4 with suppurative necrotizing
granulomatous lymphadenitis and 8 with sarcoid-like granulomas. Molecular
TB positivity was significantly associated with the presence of caseation
(p=0.018). No other significant association was found.
Conclusion: Molecular testing seems to be more sensitive for diagnosis
of TB in FFPE tissues compared to acid-fast staining. Morphological
overlaps of different granulomatous patterns can be seen in TB, and
although widely considered to be characteristic for TB, caseation is not
always a sign of TB positivity.
PS-07-010
Tissue reactions in cases of progression of tuberculosis in patients
with HIV/AIDS
A. Sapargaliyeva*, B. Alibekov, S. Koybakov, I. Sergeyeva
*Pathology Bureau of the City of Almaty, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Development of the inflammatory response
in pulmonary tuberculosis in patients with HIV/AIDS are of interest from
the point of view of establishing mechanisms of resistance to infection,
and, accordingly, finding ways to increase resistance to tuberculosis
Methods: We conducted a retrospective morphological analysis of 15
autopsies of patients with HIV/AIDS with progressing tuberculosis
(2016-2018). All patients (3 women and 12 men) had a diagnosis of
pulmonary TB, MBT (+), TBMLU. The duration of inpatient treatment
varied from 7 to 100 days. The average age of patients was 37 years.
Results: The progression of TB varied: in 6 cases we observed the de-
velopment of a tissue reaction in organs with the formation of giant cell
granulomas with central caseous necrosis and limited foci of tuberculous
inflammation from the surrounding tissue. In 9 cases, there was a pre-
dominance of the exudative type of tissue reaction with the formation of
large fields of caseous necrosis, surrounded by perifocal oedema. In the
latter case, the inflammatory process was widespread with the involve-
ment of both lungs, parietal pleura, and peritoneum. The cause of death
was pulmonary haemorrhage (14 cases), diffuse purulent peritonitis (1
case). In all cases, cachexia was established.
Conclusion: Tuberculous inflammation in patients with HIV/AIDS is
characterized by a variety of morphological manifestations, including a
predominance of productive tissue reactions and the development of ex-
udative reactions with massive zones of caseous necrosis. Differences in
tissue reaction can be considered as one of the cytological mechanisms of
sensitivity and resistance of tissues to tuberculosis infection.
PS-07-011
Immediate death causes in HIV infection
V. Zinserling*, O. Leonova, M. Vassilyeva
*VA Almazov Research Center, SP Botkin Infectious Hospital, Russia
Background & objectives: HIV remains important infection frequently
revealed in the deceased. In spite of numerous clinical investigations,
many questions can be discussed only basing upon the results of post-
mortem autopsy findings.
Methods: Detailed analyses of pathology records since the first lethal
cases occurring in S.P. Botkin infectious hospital and Cities’ centre for
Diagnostics and treatment of AIDS. Minor discrepancies between clinical
and pathological diagnosis are revealed in majority of cases. Practically in
all observations several secondary diseases (till10) are diagnosed, in
many cases they disappear from the statistical analysis.
Results: Analysing the spectrum of secondary infections and immediate
death causes we noted not significant changes since 1996. Thus, recently
we observed increase of PML ( 25 in 2018) and different neoplasms (35
in the same year). Among The number of cases with pneumocystosis (51)
, cytomegaly (2), cryptococcosis (17) and toxoplasmosis (38) formed
sinusoid like variations. In HIV encephalitis we started to see giant-cell
reactions never noted before.
In rare lethal cases of the treated patients we considered the cases not
directly associated with HIV (in 2016 - 348). In certain cases we still can’t
exclude the indirect role of the virus.
Conclusion: Thus, the exact data concerning HIV lethality and better
understanding of the disease mechanisms can be obtained only in com-
plex studies including post-mortem morphological.
PS-08-001
Morphological findings in frozen non-neoplastic kidney tissues of
patients with kidney cancer from large-scale multicentric studies on
genomics of renal cancer
B. Abedi-Ardekani*, D. Nasrollahzadeh, L. Egevad, A. Warren,
C. Carreira, J. Viksna, J. Mckay, G. Scelo, P. Brennan
*Int Agency for Research on Cancer-WHO, France
PS-08 Nephropathology
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Analysis of non-neoplastic tissues helps to
better understand the process of carcinogenesis. We performed micro-
scopic examination of non-neoplastic kidney tissues from kidney cancer
patients who were recruited to large-scale multi-centric kidney cancer
genomic studies from countries with variable incidence rates.
Methods: By applying digital pathology, we performed micro-
scopic examination of 1012 frozen non-neoplastic kidney tissues
from kidney cancer patients from Czech Republic, Romania,
Serbia, United Kingdom, and Russia, with variable incidence rates
of kidney cancer. Renal parenchyma was evaluated and scored for
the interstitial inflammation and fibrosis, tubular atrophy,
glomerulosclerosis, and arterial wall thickening, globally called
chronic renal parenchymal changes.
Results: Moderate or severe chronic renal parenchymal changes
was observed in 54 (5.3%) with predominance of occurrence
among patients from Romania (OR=2.67, CI 1.07-6.67) and
Serbia (OR= 4.37, CI 1.20-15.96) in reference to Russia. To as-
sess the potential confounders, we adjusted for age, sex, history
of hypertension and diabetes mellitus, percentage of medulla,
stage of tumour, tumour size, and type of nephrectomy, which
rendered no significant effect on the risk estimates.
Conclusion: Frequency of chronic renal parenchymal changes in
kidney cancer patients varies by country, significantly more fre-
quent in countries located in central and southeastern Europe
where the incidence of kidney cancer has been reported to be
high. This is unlikely to be due to sampling method or known
confounding factors. We suggest that these parenchymal changes,
possibly linked to environmental exposures, may be relevant to
renal carcinogenesis in these countries.
Funding: Part of the samples are from CAGEKID study that is funded by
European Union FP7 241669.
PS-08-003
Lymphocyte populations in lupus nephritis
I.D. Caruntu*, T. Azoicai, R. Avădanei, L. Lozneanu, A.D. Timofte,
S. Giusca
*UMF "Grigore T. Popa", Iasi, Romania
Background & objectives: Studies targeting the profile and role
of lymphocyte populations in lupus nephritis (LN) are limited,
most of them being from experimental research. Within this con-
text, our study aims to analyse the T lymphocytes (Ly) popula-
tions in different classes of LN.
Methods: 53 LN renal biopsies (2 cases class II, 4 cases class III,
19 cases class IV, 22 cases class V, 6 cases class VI) were
immunohistochemically investigated by using anti-CD4 and anti-
CD8 antibodies. CD4 and CD8 T Ly were quantified in three
distinct territories: periglomerular, intraglomerular and interstitial,
at 400X. The results were expressed as the number of positive
cells/mm2.
Results: We registered significant differences (p<0.05) for:
periglomerular CD4 T Ly, class II versus class III; interstitial
CD4 T Ly, class IV versus class V and class V versus class
VI; periglomerular and intraglomerular CD8 T Ly, class III versus
class IV; periglomerular and interstitial CD8 T Ly, class IV ver-
sus class V. Significant differences between CD4 Ly and CD8 Ly
were recorded in all three territories, in all LN classes.
Conclusion: Quantification of T Ly offers the possibility to ana-
lyse their involvement in the immune pathogenic mechanism. LN
lymphocytic infiltrate is predominantly composed of CD8 T Ly.
This finding is in agreement with the immunological theory that
supports the effector role of CD8 T Ly and that of initiator and
target for CD4 T Ly. Our data complement the limited number of
published studies on this topic and support the different behaviour
of the two T Ly populations in LN pathogenesis.
PS-08-004
Expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 in tubular epithelial
cells in renal grafts as a key feature of maintaining the local
immunosuppression
P. Donizy*, M. Banasik, A. Hałoń, O. Mazanowska, D. Janczak,
M. Krajewska
*Department of Pathomorphology and Oncological Cytology, Wroclaw
Medical University, Poland
Background & objectives: Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) is an
enzyme that contributes to inducing local immunosuppression. The aim
of our study was to evaluate the expression of IDO1 in renal transplant
biopsies and to analyse the correlations between IDO1 expression and
clinical parameters.
Methods: Immunohistochemical expression of IDO1 was analysed
in 121 renal transplant biopsies in three tissue compartments:
tubular epithelium (TE), glomeruli (G), and in foci of interstitial
immune infiltrates (III). The scores for TE and G were dichoto-
mized into two categories: no or any expression. IDO1-positive
cells in foci of immune infiltrates were dichotomized into nega-
tive or positive group (any IDO1-positive cells).
Results: Rejection was observed in 32% (25/76) of patients with
IDO1 expression in tubules (TE 1 or 2), and in 62% (28/45) of
patients without IDO1 expression in tubules (TE 0) (p=0.0017).
Increased number of IDO1-positive interstitial immune infiltrate
cells was correlated with the presence of histopathologic features
of any type of rejection. Rejection was observed in 56% (45/80)
of patients from IDO1-positive group vs 19.5% (8/41) in IDO1-
negative group (p=0.0001).
Conclusion: The expression of IDO1 in tubules had a potential protective
role but enhanced number of IDO1-positive interstitial immune cells was
associated with the presence of rejection. The analysis of IDO1 expres-
sion in renal transplant biopsies might be considered for better transplant
immunological risk assessment. Our preliminary results should be vali-
dated in a larger group of patients.
PS-08-005
Dent’s disease: clinicopathologic and genetic findings of two patients
with novel variants/mutations in the CLCN5 and OCRL genes
H. Gakiopoulou*, A. Stofas, E. Dermitzaki, D. Lygerou, E. Drosataki,
S. Maragkou, E. Daphnis, K. Stylianou
*1st Department of Pathology, The National and Kapodistrian University
of Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: Dent’s disease is a rare X–linked-disorder
characterized by low-molecular-weight proteinuria and often considered
a renal tubular disease. It is frequently underdiagnosed or diagnosed after
patients have failed an immune suppression regimen. We present two
well documented cases of Dent’s disease.
Methods: A Caucasian boy aged 9,5years and a young Caucasian man
aged 30years, underwent a renal biopsy due to low molecular weight
proteinuria (1.3-1.9gr/24h), without haematuria, with normal renal
function.
Light microscope, immunofluorescence, electron microscope (EM) and
genetic testing [Kidney Seq TM v3.0. and Whole Exome Sequencing
(WES)] were performed.
Results: The main histologic finding in both biopsies was the presence of
intratubular calcium salts (Von Kossa+).
Immunofluorescence and EM were negative or nonspecific.
Genetic testing revealed that the boy was hemizygous for a pathogenic
variant in CLCN5, NM_000084:c1934-2A>G. Variants in this gene are
responsible for X-linked Dent’s disease. This variant alters a canonical
acceptor splice site and has not been reported by the Genome
Aggregation Database. The young man had a new mutation in the
OCRL gene (p.Asp631Glu) which was verified by Sanger sequencing.
Virchows Arch
Further analysis showed that the patient was homozygous for the
c.2986G>T polymorphism in the CASR gene and heterozygous for the
c.2878C>T polymorphism in the same gene.
Conclusion: Two cases of Dent’s disease with novel variants/mutations
in the CLCN5 and OCRL genes - corresponding to Dent’s disease 1 and
Dent's disease 2, respectively- are presented. Dent’s disease must be kept
in mind in the differential diagnosis of nephrocalcinosis and genetic test-
ing should be performed.
PS-08-006
Factors affecting outcome in pauci-immune crescentic glomerulone-
phritis: a single centre study
P. Gupta*, A. Bhalla, D. Rana, A. Gupta
*Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, India
Background & objectives: Pauci-immune crescentic glomerulonephritis
(PICN) presents as rapidly progressive renal failure. Present study was
undertaken to determine factors influencing renal survival based on
Berden’s classification, renal risk score (Brix et al.) and individual risk
factors.
Methods: Retrospective study done from January 2013 to December
2018. Cases were grouped into focal, crescentic, mixed and sclerotic
categories based on histology. Serum creatinine, eGFR at biopsy and
follow-up, were recorded. Renal biopsies were scored based on renal risk
score [% of normal glomeruli (>25%,10-25% and <10%), percentage of
tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis(≤25%,>25%) and eGFR(>15ml/
min,≤15ml/min)] into 3 risk categories.
Results: 51 adult patients were included. Mean serum creatinine at biop-
sy was 7.05±4.57 mg/dl and eGFR was 13.6±12.16 ml/min/1.73m2. 33
cases were ANCA positive and 18 were negative. Based on Berden’s
classification, cases were grouped as focal(4), crescentic(29), mixed(12)
and sclerotic(6). Based on renal risk score cases were grouped as
low(8),medium(23) and high(20). Univariate Cox regression analysis
showed eGFR at biopsy (p 0.024), % IFTA (p 0.001) and % normal
glomeruli(p 0.023) are predictors of ESRD. Multivariate Cox regression
analysis confirmed IFTA (p<0.001) and % normal glomeruli (p 0.018) as
significant predictors of ESRD. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis for his-
tological categories (Log-Rank p=0.046) and the renal risk categories was
done (Log-Rank p=0.002).
Conclusion: Percentage of normal glomeruli, IFTA and eGFR at time of
biopsy were important risk factors influencing renal survival. Our study
validate that renal risk score is a better predictor of survival as compared
to histological classification proposed by Berden.
PS-08-008
C4d deposition in lupus nephritis; clinicopathological correlation
S. Kiremitci*, R. Eren Sadioglu, S. Kutlay
*Ankara University Medical School, Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: C4d deposition in native kidney has been in-
vestigated increasingly in recent years. For lupus nephritis, there are few
studies reported and the results are conflicting. We aimed to investigate the
association of C4d deposition with histopathological and clinical parameters.
Methods: Renal biopsies of 51 biopsy-proven lupus nephritis patients were
evaluated for C4d immunohistochemistry. Clinical information at the time of
biopsy and follow up data were collected from hospital database. Glomerular
C4d staining scores, separately for mesangial and capillary wall, were obtain-
ed considering the pattern, extent and intensity of C4d deposition. Spearman’s
correlation analysis was used for nonparametric correlations.
Results: According to 2003 ISN/RPS classification system for lupus ne-
phritis; 5 biopsies were classified as class II (9.8%), 16 as class III (31.4%),
16 as class IV (31.4%) and 12 as class V (23.5%) in the cohort. All biopsies
except one showed glomerular C4d staining in mesangium and/or capillary
wall. Glomerular staining scores were significantly higher in class V
compared to class III (p=0.016), whereas it was not significant between
class III and class IV. Glomerular capillary wall staining was positively
correlated with levels of 24-h proteinuria (p:0,020), and the staining scores
were significantly lower in patients in remission compared to patients with
active lupus nephritis (p:0.006).
Conclusion: C4d immunohistochemistry is useful to show both the pres-
ence and the localization of immune deposits in lupus nephritis. Besides,
glomerular C4d load is correlated with clinical disease activity in terms of
proteinuria.
PS-08-009
The value of DARC expression as diagnostic marker in renal trans-
plant biopsies
J. Kläger*, F. Eskandary, G. Böhmig, S. Segerer, H. Regele
*Department of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Background & objectives: Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines
(DARC) is one of the genes most upregulated in antibody mediated
rejection (ABMR) and is associated with endothelial injury. We investi-
gated whether immunohistochemistry (IHC) for DARC might serve as a
diagnostic marker for active ABMR.
Methods: 82 renal allograft biopsies performed during a prospective
clinical trial (BORTEJECT Study) with detailed patient and biopsy char-
acteristics available were included. IHC for DARC was performed on
2μm paraffin sections using a mouse monoclonal anti-human DARC-
Fy6 antibody. DARC-IHC positive peritubular capillaries (PTC) were
quantified and the distribution of the cortical stained PTC were further
described
Results: DARC that was mainly observed in peritubular capillaries
(PTC) and in small venules and arterioles. 61 biopsies showed pos-
itive DARC staining in ≥5% of PTC, mainly located in areas of
interstitial fibrosis or inflammation. Most of the ABMR cases were
DARC positive (n=40 vs. n=7, p=0.01), but a substantial amount of
biopsies without signs of rejection still showed DARC positive PTC.
C4d positivity was not associated with DARC positivity (p=0.365).
On a molecular level, we see a significant difference of DARC gene
expression in DARC positive vs. negative biopsies with higher
DARC gene expression linked to more DARC positive PTC in biop-
sies (log scale: 8.68(7.91-9.32) vs. 7.52(6.99-8.14), p<0.001;
rs=0,546, p<0,001)).
Conclusion: DARC expression on endothelial cells generally matches
DARC gene expression and is associated with ABMR. However,
DARC expression could also be observed in biopsies without signs of
rejection which limits its value as diagnostic marker for ABMR.
PS-08-010
Co-occurrence of spherocytosis and UMOD disease causing variant
in a three-generation family presenting with kidney failure in
adulthood
N. Kojc*, A. Meglič, J. Kovač, M. Debeljak, A. Trampuš Bakija,
V. Rajić, K. Podkrajšek Trebušak
*Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Slovenia
Background & objectives: Hereditary spherocytosis is clinically and
genetically heterogeneous disorder, but patients rarely present with kid-
ney diseases. Seven patients from the same family with spherocytosis
were evaluated to assess the kidney failure presented in all affected adult
patients.
Methods: Clinical, radiological and laboratory investigations were
assessed to evaluate the spherocytosis and kidney disease. We performed
genetics testing with next generation sequencing of genes related to he-
reditary spherocytosis, inherited glomerular disorders and tubulo-
interstitial kidney disease.
Virchows Arch
Results: Two adults had end-stage kidney disease and one chronic kid-
ney disease stage 4 with histopathological findings of interstitial fibrosis/
tubular atrophy and glomerulosclerosis. There were no signs of kidney
disease in four paediatric patients. Novel nonsense variant in SPTB gene
(NM 001024858; c.4796G>A; p.Trp1599Ter) was detected in all family
members with spherocytosis. Furthermore, all adult patients with kidney
failure and two paediatric cousins of the index patients were heterozygous
for the UMOD gene variant (NM 003361.3:c.552G>C, NP
003352.2:p.Trp184Cys) previously reported in patients with autosomal
tubulo-interstitial kidney disease. UMOD variant was not present in the
index patients. Renal biopsy in two adult patients revealed diffuse inter-
stitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy and glomerulosclerosis.
Conclusion: Kidney failure in all adult patients was probably related to
disease causing UMOD variant characterized by deficient production of
functional uromodulin. It is not possibly to evaluate whether the
haemolytic crises due to spherocytosis were influencing the progression
of the UMOD related renal disease. The kidney disease in the family is
warranting the regular monitoring in UMOD positive paediatric patients
in order to recognize early signs of tubular injury.
The study was supported by the financial support from the Slovenian
Research Agency (research core funding P3-0343 and P1-0170).
PS-08-011
A histopathological study of childhood clinically complicated acute
diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis and correlation with serum
creatinine and serum albumin. A study at a tertiary care hospital in
Sri Lanka
K. Liyanaarachchi*, S. Thalgahagoda, N. Rathnathunga
*Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Acute diffuse proliferative glomerulonephri-
tis (ADPGN) is usually self-limiting. This study was conducted to docu-
ment reversible and irreversible pathologies seen in complicated ADPGN
in a paediatric population and to ascertain whether biochemical parame-
ters would give a clue to the changes observed.
Methods: Forty-eight ADPGN proven renal biopsies were assessed.
Severity of the glomerular injury and tubular injury were scored as GI
1+ and 2+ (reversible lesions), 3+ and 4+ (irreversible lesions), TI 0(no
lesions), 1+ and 2+ (reversible lesions), 3+ (irreversible lesions) . Serum
creatinine (SC) and serum albumin (SA) were correlated with above
lesions using the “Spearman’s rank-order correlation”.
Results: All cases showed glomerular injury. 69% had reversible glomer-
ular lesions while 31% were irreversible. Irreversible lesions included
crescents and necrotizing lesions. Tubular injury was present in 46%
and 92% were reversible and 8% were irreversible. Irreversible tubular
injuries included tubulorrhexis. The group that showed reversible glomer-
ular injury did not have crescents or necrotizing lesions at all. However,
42% had tubular injuries. A significant statistical correlation was not seen
between the glomerular/tubular injuries and serum creatinine and serum
albumin (P value was > 0.05).
Conclusion: Approximately 2/3 of the lesions in complicated ADPGN are
reversible where the kidney is salvageable. More than a third have non-
reversible lesions possibly culminating later on sclerosis of glomeruli.
Determining the renal pathologies on the biochemical parameters is not
possible.
PS-08-013
Fibrillary glomerulonephritis concurrent with IgA nephropathy: a
case series of 14 patients
S. Said*, S. Nasr
*Mayo Clinic, USA
Background & objectives: Fibrillary glomerulonephritis (FGN) is a rare
glomerular disease characterized by glomerular deposition of randomly
oriented fibrils that stain with IgG and DNAJB9. In contrast, IgA ne-
phropathy (IgAN) is characterized by IgA-dominant glomerular deposits
which appear granular by electron microscopy (EM).
Methods: The characteristics of 14 cases of FGN (defined by smudgy
glomerular staining for IgG with corresponding randomly-oriented fibrils
on EM, mean thickness 16 nm) concurrent with IgAN (defined by gran-
ular mesangial IgA by immunofluorescence with corresponding granular
electron dense deposits by EM) are provided. This represents the first
study on the clinicopathologic and outcome characteristics of this dual
glomerulopathy.
Results: The cohort included 11 males & 3 females, mostly White, with
median age of 56, who presented with haematuria (86%), proteinuria
(100%), and renal insufficiency (71%). 1 patient had carcinoma, 1 hepa-
titis C, and 1 lupus. None had hypocomplementemia or monoclonal
gammopathy. On follow up (median 27 months), 8 progressed to
ESRD. Histologically,12 cases showed mesangioproliferative GN, 1
crescentic GN and 1 mesangial sclerosis. DNAJB9 IHC was positive in
all.
Conclusion: Most cases of FGN concurrent with IgAN are idiopathic,
and not associated with liver disease, hepatitis C, malignancy, autoim-
mune disease, or monoclonal gammopathy. The pathologic diagnosis can
be established by correlating the findings on immunofluorescence and
electron microscopy. DNAJB9 IHC is useful to establish the diagnosis
of FGN in these cases, particularly in centres that do not perform electron
microscopy. The prognosis of this dual glomerulopathy is guarded with
>50% of patients progress to ESRD within 2 years.
PS-08-014
Immunological prospective of glomerulonephritis
S. Sarfaraz*, S. Anis, R. Muzaffar
*Dow University of Health Sciences, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Glomerulonephritis (GN) is a manifestation
of various immune mediated and inflammatory mechanisms.
Autoantibodies play a significant role in the diagnosis and pathogenesis.
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) were reported in 33% patients. This re-
search aims to determine various autoantibodies in glomerulonephritis
patients.
Methods: Two hundred clinically diagnosed patients of glomerulone-
phritis were included who had ANA. These patients were further evalu-
ated for presence of anti-dsDNA and anti-extractable nuclear antibodies
(ENA). ANA (pattern and titer) and Anti-dsDNA were evaluated via
Indirect immunoflourecence assay. Anti-ENA were determined by
Immunoblot assay which included anti-Sm, -anti-SSA, anti-SSB, anti-
Scl-70, anti-jo-1, anti-PCNA, anti-Histones, anti-nucleosomes, anti-
CENP B, anti-PM-Scl and anti-Rib.P-protein antibodies.
Results: Main causes of glomerulonephritis were Lupus nephritis
126(63%), idiopathic membranous GN 10(5%), post infectious GN
7(3.5%), FSGS 6(3%), Overlap syndrome 8(4%), RPGN 5(2.5%),
Systemic sclerosis 3(1.5%) in 35(17.5%) no underline cause was identi-
fied. Autoantibodies were detected in 111(56%) patients. Anti-dsDNA
was found in 56(50.4%) whereas anti-ENA were detected in 94(84.7%)
patients. Single antigen specificity was found in 55(27.5%) individuals.
Frequencies of various anti-ENAs were anti-SSA 58(61.7%),-Sm
18(19.1%), - histones 18(19.1%),-Rib. P-protein 15(16%)-RNPs
13(13.8%),-SS-B 8(8.5%), -Scl-70 7(7.4%),PCNA 3(3.2%),-Jo-1
3(3.2%) -CENP B 2(2.1%) and-PM-Scl 2(2.1%). Single ANA patterns
was observed in 181(91%),among them speckled pattern was most com-
mon 72(36%).Frequencies of ANA titer were 1:40 ;30(15%), 1:80 ;
28(14%), 1:160; 62(31%), and ≥1:320; 80(40%)
Conclusion: ANA are hallmark of autoimmune connective tissue disor-
ders however they are also found in normal individuals (5%-10%) and in
other diseases and infections. ANA profile (anti-dsDNA and anti-ENA)
helps in identifying underlying diseases, hence improves management in
patients primarily presenting with glomerulonephritis. In this study
Virchows Arch
patients were identified having high ANA titer with no underline autoim-
mune disorder. This group needs close monitoring as autoantibodies de-
velop earlier before clinical manifestation of disease
PS-08-015
BK-virus associated nephropathy in native kidneys and BK-virus in
urothelial carcinoma
J. Schmitz*, J. Gottlieb, J. Korth, C. Bara, M.A. Kuczyk, H. Haller,
J.H. Bräsen, A. Schwarz
*Institute of Pathology, Nephropathology Unit, Hannover Medical
School, Germany
Background & objectives: Patients with non-renal organ or stem cell
transplantation (Tx) may suffer from BK-viral nephropathy (BKVN) of
their orthotopic kidneys by reactivating their own viral population living
in latency of urothelial cells. BK-virus might be underdiagnosed in such
uncommon patients.
Methods: We identified yet unknown cases and aimed to know how
patients with BKVN after non-renal organ transplantation and patients
with urothelial tumours differ from renal transplant patients with BKVN.
We screened the past 20 years of the pathology archives of Hannover
Medical School for suspective cases (lung-, heart-, liver-, stem cell- tx,
patients after solid organ tx with urothelial carcinoma).
Results: We evaluated SV40 immunohistochemical stains in >100 iden-
tified cases and followed retrospectively the clinical course of patients
with BKVN. Six lung-Tx, two lung-Tx/HSCT, one heart-Tx, one leukae-
mia and two stem cell-Tx patients showed positivity for SV40 in their
renal biopsies. Three other patients after heart respective combined heart/
kidney respective kidney-tx developed urothelial carcinoma with SV40
positive tumour cells six respective five respective nine years after high
BK-viruria. Currently, BKV genotypes are being identified by PCR from
the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues.
Conclusion: BKVN in orthotopic kidneys is seen preferentially af-
ter lung transplantation. In patients with BKVN after non-renal or-
gan transplantation diagnosis is often established late and with high
viral load of long persistence. Patients develop severe renal insuffi-
ciency and often end-stage renal disease. The course of BKVN of
orthotopic kidneys after non-renal transplantation might be more
detrimental than BKVN in renal transplants. BKVN might be a risk
for urothelial cancer in Tx-patients.
PS-08-016
Computer-assisted measurement of glomerular size in IgA nephrop-
athy: practical issues and correlation with the Oxford Classification
M. Shamassi*, S. Shi, E.S. Ayva, I.S. Roberts
*Department of Anatomical Pathology, Monash Medical Centre, Monash
Health, Melbourne, Australia
Background & objectives: Glomerular size has been demonstrated as an
independent prognostic marker in IgA nephropathy. Using digital pathol-
ogy, this study aims to determine reproducibility of GD measurement,
defining minimum number of glomeruli required for accurate measure-
ment, and correlating GD with MEST-C scores.
Methods: The diameter of all non-sclerosed glomeruli from renal biop-
sies of 420 patients with IgA nephropathy was measured independently
by 3 pathologists, using the ruler device on Aperio ImageScope software.
Inter-observer and intra-observer variability was then assessed using in-
terclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Mean and maximum GD were cor-
related with Oxford Classification MEST- C scores, using the indepen-
dent samples T test.
Results: There was excellent interobserver (between 3 pathologists) and
intra-observer (one pathologist measuring 2 levels from the same biopsy)
correlation with ICC of >0.9. Accuracy of measurement of maximum and
mean GD increased with number of glomeruli measured, levelling off
between 12-15 non-sclerosed glomeruli. T score was the only MEST-C
variable to significantly correlate with glomerular diameter.
Conclusion: Use of the ruler device on digital slide viewing soft-
ware provides a rapid and reproducible estimate of glomerular
diameter. Greater than 12 non-sclerosed glomeruli are required
to provide an accurate measurement of the glomerular diameter.
Glomerulomegaly results from adaptive changes associated with
hyperfiltration that is in part determined by the severity of chronic
renal injury, reflected by correlation of GD with Oxford
Classification T score.
PS-08-018
A clinicopathological study to determine the different morphological
patterns of renal biopsy in adult patients of nephrotic syndrome
D. Vedant*, V. Kaushal, S. Vikrant, S. Thakur, S. Asotra
*Department of Pathology, AIIMS Jodhpur, India
Background & objectives: Nephrotic syndrome is pathognomonic of
glomerular diseases. Examination of renal biopsies only by light micros-
copy is not sufficient. Immunofluorescence studies can modify the final
diagnosis. Hence this study was undertaken to know the spectrum of
histopathological changes and immunofluorescence pattern.
Methods: A prospective observational study over a period of one year.
Ultrasound guided renal biopsies of newly diagnosed patients of nephrot-
ic syndrome were included. 10% Neutral buffered formalin fixed biopsies
were processed and stained with H and E, PAS, Jones Silver, Masson
Trichrome and congo red. Direct immunofluorescence studies done on
saline samples with IgG, IgM, IgA, C3 and C1q.
Results: Present study evaluated 87 cases. Membranous nephropathy
was the commonest type. FSGS was more common in elderly age group.
In Membranous Nephropathy IgG positivity was seen in 97% of the cases
whereas IgM positivity was seen in 26.4% cases. Linear pattern was the
commonest pattern for both IgG (44.8%) and IgM (24.1%) followed by
the granular pattern. Final diagnosis was modified in 8.05 % of cases after
immunofluorescence studies.
Conclusion: Immunofluorescence studies are necessary for the evalua-
tion of renal biopsies as they can modify the final diagnosis in a signifi-
cant number of cases. Many cases of nephrotic syndrome can be diag-
nosed without the aid of electron microscopy. This study may help to
understand the regional geographical variations in various aetiologies of
nephrotic syndrome.
PS-09-001
PlexinA1 receptor and its ligand, axon guidance molecule
semaphorin 6D are implicated in medulloblastoma progression
M. Alshemeili*
*France
Background & objectives: Medulloblastomas (MBs) are the most com-
mon malignant childhood brain tumours. Axonal guidance molecules
specifically activated during brain development such as Semaphorin path-
ways also participate to the molecular signature of SHH and subgroup 4
of medulloblastoma which act with plexins.
Methods: - Cohort study of patients for QRT-PCR mRNA and protein
analysis of PlexinA1 / Sema6D expression(13 MBs biopsies).
- Animals and cerebellar granule precursor cells purification
- Immunoblotting PlexinA1 and Semaphorin 6D antibodies. (Abcam (ab
32960) and R&D systems MAB 2095)
- Apoptosis and Proliferation assay (BrdU immunofluorescence staining
and caspase 3 activity).
- Transwell migration assay and Immunofluorescence.
PS-09 Neuropathology
Virchows Arch
Results: - Sema6D mean values tended to be higher in demsoplastic
MBs.
- PlexinA1 transcript expression was increased in all classic MBs com-
pared to desmoplastic MBs.
- mRNA & protein PlexinA1 expressions are restricted to DEV cell line.
- High expression of PlexinA1 found in classic MB which enhance mi-
gration process.
- Higher expression of PlexinA1 was found in group 4 MBs and in
metastatic MBs (6D).
Conclusion: We underscored a new role for Sema6D/PlexinA1, promot-
ing MB cell migration and further correlated PlexinA1 expression to
metastatic status. Altogether these data showed that Sema6D/Plexin-A1
may provide new insights into MB metastatic potential. The striking
in vitro blockade of cell migration resulting from PlexinA1 ectodomain
deletion let envision new fields of research to target this receptor in MBs.
PS: Immuno-histochemistry study of plexinA1 in MBs in progress.
PS-09-002
Clinical management and genomic profiling of paediatric low-grade
gliomas in Saudi Arabia
M. Alzahrani*, N. Mobark, M. Alharbi, L. Alhabeeb, L. AlMubarak,
R. Alaljelaify, M. AlSaeed, A. Almutairi, F. Alqubaishi, M. Ahmad,
H. Al-Khalidi, D. Barakeh, M. Abedalthagafi
*McGill University, Canada
Background & objectives: Paediatric Low Grade Gliomas (PLGGs)
display heterogeneity regarding morphology, genomic
drivers and clinical outcomes. The treatment modality dictates the out-
come and optimising
patient management can be challenging.
Methods: In this study, we profiled a targeted panel of cancer-related
genes in 37 Saudi Arabian patients with pLGGs to identify genetic ab-
normalities that can inform prognostic and therapeutic decision-making.
Results: We detected genetic alterations (GAs) in 97% (36/37) of cases,
averaging 2.51 single-nucleotide-variations (SNVs) and 0.91 gene fu-
sions per patient. The KIAA1549-BRAF fusion was the most common
alteration (21/37 patients) followed by AFAP1-NTRK2 (2/37) and
TBLXR-PI3KCA (2/37) fusions that were observed at much lower fre-
quencies. The most frequently mutated-genes were NOTCH1-3 (7/37),
ATM (4/37), RAD51C (3/37), RNF43 (3/37), SLX4 (3/37) and
NF1(3/37).
Conclusion: To our knowledge this is the first report of GOPC-ROS1
fusion in PLGG. Taken together, we reveal the genetic characteristics of
pLGG patients can enhance diagnostics and therapeutic decisions. In
addition, we identified a GOPC-ROS1 fusion that may be a biomarker
for pLGG.
PS-09-003
Review of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumours in a tertiary hospital
F. Arias*, E.M. Pena Burgos, R.M. Regojo Zapata, M.I. Esteban
Rodríguez
*Hospital Universitario La Paz, Spain
Background & objectives: Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumour (AT/RT)
is a rare entity accounting for 1-2% of all paediatric brain tumours. It is
characterized by inactivation of SMARCB1 (INI1) or SMARCA4
(BRG1) genes. Our aim is to review the AT/RTs diagnosed in our
hospital.
Methods: We searched our database for every AT/RT diagnosed since
the introduction of immunohistochemical staining for INI1 in our hospital
(2013). For each case we studied age, sex, location and tumour extent,
tumour size measured by magnetic resonance, histopathological patterns
(including rhabdoid, small-cell, gland-like and spindle cell patterns),
immunophenotype, follow-up time, treatment and outcome.
Results: We gathered 5 AT/RTs. Four of them were children (median age
of 4,5 years; range 1-11 years) and one was an adult (46 years). Male-to-
female ratio was 1:1,5. Median tumour size was 6,4 cm and cerebrospinal
fluid dissemination was found in one case. Histopathological analysis
always revealed a combination of patterns. Rhabdoid features were pres-
ent in 4/5 cases, being the predominant pattern in one of them. Every case
showed negative INI1 expression by immunohistochemistry. Three pa-
tients died (mean survival 43 weeks), one was lost to follow-up, and one
of the paediatric patients (11 years) is still on follow-up after 72 weeks.
Conclusion: AT/RTs have a wide differential diagnosis. We emphasize
the importance of considering AT/RT in heterogeneous tumours in pae-
diatric population, especially in infants. Due to its low prevalence in
adults, other INI1-negative tumours should be ruled out prior to diagnos-
ing AT/RT and the performance of additional studies should be sug-
gested. We present our experience willing to provide data for a better
understanding of this uncommon entity generally associated with poor
prognosis.
PS-09-004
Diffuse gliomas with non-canonical IDH mutations
E. Bariani*, A. Eccher, C. Ghimenton, M. Simbolo, L. Piredda, G. Pinna,
F. Sala, A. Scarpa, V. Barresi
*Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, Section of Pathology,
University of Verona, Italy
Background & objectives: The majority (90%) of IDH mutated diffuse
gliomas carry IDH1 R132H mutation, while other (non-canonical) IDH1
or IDH2 mutations are rare. In this study, we aimed to analyse the histo-
pathological features of diffuse gliomas with non-canonical IDH
mutations.
Methods: We sequenced by Sanger IDH1/IDH2 genes in 89 IDH1
R132H immuno-negative diffuse gliomas and validated our findings
using data in TGCA database.
Results: Diffuse gliomas with non-canonical IDH mutations were rare
(3.3%). Non-canonical mutations in IDH1 were exclusive to astrocytic
tumours, while IDH2 mutations were significantly more frequent, though
not exclusive to, oligodendrogliomas (P= 0.0019). In
oligodendrogliomas, IDH2 mutation was significantly associated with
frontal lobe localization (P=0.005). Similarly to diffuse gliomas with
IDH1 R132H mutation, those with non canonical IDH mutations were
significantly more frequent in patients < 55 years (P< 0.0001) and had
significantly better prognosis than IDH wt gliomas (P< 0.0001).
Conclusion: Non-canonical IDH mutations are mainly found in diffuse
gliomas of younger patients and have prognostic significance similar to
that of IDH1-R312H mutation. Non-canonical IDH1 mutations are ex-
clusive to astrocytic tumours, IDH2 mutations associate with oligoden-
droglial histotype and frontal lobe localization.
PS-09-005
Clinicopathological characterisation of tumours of the pineal region
(tpr): a case series
A.R. Coelho*, R. Pestana Silva, M. Honavar
*Department of Pathology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João,
Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: TPR are rare and present most frequently in
children. Variable biological behaviour and histological features makes
tumour grading a challenge. This case series aims to study the clinico-
pathological features of these tumours diagnosed at a Portuguese tertiary
centre.
Methods: All cases of TPR diagnosed in our institution from 1999 to
2019 were retrieved from our files. Their clinicopathological features,
including imaging, histology and imunophenotype, treatment and follow
up (six years on average) were reviewed.
Virchows Arch
Results: We identified 24 TPR (16 males, 8 females; 19.8 years on
average at diagnosis): eleven tumours of pineal parenchyma (six
pineoblastomas, five parenchymal tumours of intermediate differentia-
tion); four papillary TPR; four germ cell tumours; two embryonal tu-
mours; one rosette-forming glioneuronal tumour and a pilocytic astrocy-
toma. Nineteen patients received radiotherapy, fourteen of whom had
additional chemotherapy. Three patients had disseminated disease at di-
agnosis; four had craniospinal spreading on follow up (after 21 months on
average). One patient died 23 months after the initial diagnosis. In our
case series, recurrence and mortality were associated with disseminated
disease at the time of diagnosis and high grade histology irrespective of
tumour type.
Conclusion: The prognosis of TPR depends on the clinical factors and
response to therapy, but also on the pathological features. However, fur-
ther molecular characterization is essential to make an accurate
diagnosis, establish prognosis, define therapeutic targets and pre-
dict therapy response.
PS-09-006
Embryonal tumour with multilayered rosettes; unusual stromal
desmoplasia and extracranial extension; a case report and review
of literature
M. El Mahdy*, K. El Bahy, E. Sloan, D. Solomon, A. Perry
*Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University,
Egypt
Background & objectives: Embryonal tumour with multilayered ro-
settes (ETMR), is a recently described very rare tumour entity included
in the latest update of the WHO classification of tumours of the central
nervous system.
Methods: A case of ETMR in the left frontal lobe in a 3-year-old
girl with extensive extracranial extension and associated
desmoplastic stroma. The child complained of seizure, vomiting
and headache. MRI showed a huge heterogenous left frontal mass
infiltrating the skull with extracranial soft tissue extension. The
diagnosis of ETMR was established based on histopathologic,
immunohistochemical and molecular features.
Results: Histopathologic examination showed a neoplasm composed of
primitive small cells arranged in sheets with scattered multilayered ro-
settes with extensive foci of desmoplastic stroma. Immunohistochemistry
was performed using panel of antibodies and revealed positive expression
for synaptophysin, glial fibrillary acidic protein, Olig2, smooth muscle
actin, and LIN28A. Molecular testing revealed focal amplification of the
chromosome 19q13.42 microRNA cluster (C19MC) with breakpoints of
the amplification immediately preceding the C19MC locus at the 5'
boundary and within the TTYH1 gene at the 3' boundary, thus confirming
the integrated diagnosis of ETMR, WHO grade IV. The other chromo-
somal copy number changes in the tumour were losses of interstitial 5q
and portions of 10q.
Conclusion: Desmoplastic stroma can occur as a very rare and unusual
histologic finding in ETMR due to tumour invasiveness with extracranial
extension.
PS-09-007
Bifocal, anaplastic cerebellar liponeurocytoma with ABL1-L292M
mutation
M.A.A. Erashdi*, A. Tbakhi, Y. Al-Othman, W. Naser, M. Al-Hussaini
*King Hussein Cancer Center, Jordan
Background & objectives: Cerebellar liponeurocytoma (cLNC) is a rare
tumour of adults with no sex predilection. MRI/CT scan, with fat-
suppressed views can support preoperative diagnosis. It is a WHO grade
II, neurocytic tumour with lipomatous component, minimal atypia and
low proliferative index.
Methods: The specimen was routinely processed, H&E-stained,
then immunohistochemicaly stained for glial fibrillary acid protein
(GFAP), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, neuronal
nuclear antigen (NeuN), S-100, neurofilament (NF), and Ki-67.
Furthermore, the specimen was submitted for Next generation se-
quencing (NGS) analysis using TruSight solid tumour panel.The
generated reads were aligned against the hg19/Genome Reference
Consortium Human Build GRCh37.
Results: Here is a 41-year-old lady presented with headache and
fever. MRI highlighted two contrast enhancing masses in both cer-
ebellar hemispheres ( 3.2 x 2.6 x 2.3 cm and 1.9 x 1.6 x 1.2 cm).
Gross total resections were performed, two months apart.
Histologicaly, both tumours were similar. They showed sheets of
monotonous neurocytic cells, admixed with fatty component. The
tumour cells are positive for GFAP, Vimetin, Synaptophysin and
Chromogranin, with weak focal expression of Neu-N, Desmin, and
negative for EMA, ATRX, CD34, NFP and P53 immunostains.
Anaplastic features and high Ki-67 (10%) were seen. NGS revealed
ABL1-L292M mutation with alternate variant frequency of 5%.
TP53, PTCH, CTNNB1 abnormalities were not detected.
Conclusion: We are reporting the fifth case of a multifocal cLNC in
English literatures. Only a few other reports are describing cLNC with
anaplasia, either as a tumour recurrence or with history of chemotherapy
exposure due to other cancers. Limited data is available on the molecular
genetic background of cLNC. There was no enough evidence in the
literature to support the pathogenicity of the ABL1-L292M mutation
detected in our case.
PS-09-008
Comparison of clinicoradiological and histological findings in 8
patients with radionecrosis following treatment of cerebral avms
with stereotactic radiosurgery: a single institution case series
M. Helley*, K. Agyemang, A. Stan, E.J. St.George
*Department of Neurosurgery, Institute of Neurological Sciences,
Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: "Radionecrosis" is a poorly defined entity,
occurring in 7.1% patients following stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) for
arteriovenous malformation (AVM).
We report an unmatched case series of 8 patients who underwent
surgery for suspected Radionecrosis at our institution over a 15-
year period.
Methods: Retrospective interrogation of prospectively captured records
of eight patients that underwent symptomatic lesion resection following
SRS treatment for AVM was carried out. Patient Demographics, AVM
clinical/angiographic features and treatment modality prior to SRS were
reviewed and compared with histopathological findings, paying note to
presence of AVM, fibrotic response, necrosis and evidence of neoplasia.
Results: 75% of patients underwent embolisation prior to SRS, median
time from embolisation to SRS was 18.5 months (1-45m). Median laten-
cy from SRS to Radionecrosis was 91.5 months (12-209m) Shorter la-
tency in patients who underwent prior embolization. 100% had MRIT1
post-gadolinium enhancement. FLAIR-signal change was average 2.3
times the size of the enhancing lesion
All patients had angiographic confirmation of obliteration of AVM post
SRS. 5 patients had evidence of AVM on histology. 2 patients were
reported to have changes in keeping with suspicion of Radionecrosis,
supported by presence of fibrinoid degeneration and gliosis. Gliosis was
present in 5 patients, haemorrhage in 3. No patients had evidence of
neoplasia.
Conclusion: The latency and histopathological classification of
Radionecrosis following SRS for Cerebral AVM requires definition.
Our case series demonstrates a latency of 7.5 years. The heterogenous
nature of the histology and presence of active AVM despite radiological
obliteration requires further interrogation.
Virchows Arch
PS-09-009
Glioblastoma with extracranial metastasis – case report and genetic
analysis
M. Hendrych*, P. Solar, H. Valekova, R. Jancalek, Z. Mackerle, M.
Vecera, A. Kopkova, O. Slaby, R. Lakomy, T. Kazda, M. Hermanova
*First Department of Pathology, St. Anne's University Hospital and
Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
Background & objectives: Glioblastoma (GBM) is aggressive brain
tumour with low rates of extracranial metastases, affecting only 0.4 –
0.5% of patients. Molecular alterations in GBM are well described but
there is only limited understanding of alterations associated with meta-
static potential of GBM.
Methods: A case report of 44-year-old woman with left frontal GBM
(IDH wildtype), surgically resected followed by standard chemoradiation.
Five month after surgery, the patient was diagnosed with extracranial
intraspinal metastasis, with no signs of intracranial tumour recurrence.
Next generation sequencing analysis of both primary and metastatic
GBM tissues was perfomed using Illumina TruSight Tumour 170 assay
and NextSeq 500 sequencer.
Results: The number of the single nucleotide variants (SNVs) observed
in the metastatic sample was more than 2-times higher compared to the
primary GBM. Mutations in TP53, PTEN and RB1 observed in the both
samples are indicative for mesenchymal subtype of GBM. Among others,
there were two inactivating mutations (Arg1026Ile, Trp1831Ter) in the
NF1 gene and two novel NOTCH3 variants of unknown significance
predicted to be damaging (Pro1505Thr, Cys1099Tyr) detected only in
the metastatic sample.
Conclusion: Based on the literature evidence, inactivation of NF1 and
NOTCH3 could explain, at least in part, acquired invasiveness and met-
astatic potential in this particular GBM case. Further data are warranted to
confirm these findings.
This work was supported by Grant Agency of Masaryk University
(MUNI/A/1429/2019) and the Czech Health Research Council project
NV18-03-00398.
PS-09-010
Apoptosis of neurons in the hippocampus in rats during septoplasty
modelling
I. Kastyro*, M. Kostyaeva, V. Torshin, Y. Gushchina, A. Kovalenko,
P. Pryanikov, N. Ermakova, I. Reshetov
*Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University), Russia
Background & objectives: Damage to the nasal septum when modelling
septoplasty in rats blocks the peripheral link of the olfactory analyser is
also damaged. Objective:to study the effect of modelling septoplasty in
rats on the activation of apoptosis of neurons in the hippocampus.
Methods: The mucous membrane of the nasal septum in rats was scari-
fied over its entire length in 20rats under anesthesia. Brain sections were
stained 2&4days after surgery with mouse anti-p53 antibodies. Apoptotic
neurons in each hippocampal subfield (CA1,CA2,CA3&DG)in the pyr-
amid layer was calculated over a length of 574.3±13.5μm and a width
of121.94±31.5μm. The results obtained were compared with a control
group(CG,10rats).
Results: On the 2nd day, more apoptotic neurons were detected in the
hippocampal subfields CA1, CA2, CA3 (35.54±2.31, 38.91±3.05, 24.09
±3.65), respectively, compared with CG (10.77±1.68, 11.54±2.04, 9.66
±2.12, respectively) (p <0.001). On the 4th day, p53-positive neurons
decreased compared to the 2nd day (26.13±2.78, 31.27±2.43, 18.85
±2.99) (p <0.01), but there were more of them than in the CG (p <0.001).
Conclusion: The septoplasty modelling in rats provokes an acceleration
of triggering of apoptosis mechanisms of hippocampal neurons in the
CA1, CA2, CA3 subfields.
This work was supported by a grant from the Medical Institute of RUDN
University No. 031823-0-000.
PS-09-012
Inflammation and macrophage imbalance as risk factors for rupture
in saccular intracranial aneurysms
M. Koblížek*, M. Stratilová, A. Hejčl, A. Štekláčová, V. Beneš,
J. Zámečník
*Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, 2nd Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
Background & objectives: Mechanisms leading to rupture of saccular
intracranial aneurysms (IA) are still insufficiently described. Based on our
findings from preliminary study, we compared structural and inflamma-
tory changes in the aneurysmal walls between unruptured and ruptured
IAs from updated set of patients.
Methods: Samples of 41 aneurysms resected after clipping (ruptured n =
14; unruptured n = 27), and 11 control samples of analogous regions of
the circle of Willis were included to this study. For each sample we
evaluated structural changes, and quantified lymphocytes, as well as
M1 and M2 subtypes of macrophages using immunohistochemistry (an-
ti-LCA, anti-HLA-DR, and anti-CD163, respectively).
Results: The absence of the internal elastic membrane was observed in
both, ruptured and unruptured aneurysms. The presence of organized
thrombus and severer fibrosis of vessel wall was more frequent in rup-
tured IAs. The inflammatory infiltrate was significantly smaller and the
M1 subset prevailed among the macrophages in unruptured IAs. In the
ruptured IAs, there was significantly more intense lymphocytic infiltra-
tion, and ratio of M1/M2 was almost balanced. Neither structural nor
inflammatory changes were observed in controls.
Conclusion: Our findings suggest that chronic inflammation along with
decreasing of the M1/M2 macrophages ratio may play a role in the pro-
gression of cerebral aneurysms to rupture.
Funding: Supported by grant AZV 17-32872A.
PS-09-013
Clinical relevance of BRAF V600E mutation status in brain tumours:
a review of evidence and directions for the management
A. Kowalewski*, J. Durślewicz, D. Grzanka, Ł. Szylberg
*Department of Clinical Pathomorphology, Collegium Medicum in
Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, Poland
Background & objectives: Despite limitations imposed by the blood-
brain barrier, heterogeneity and adaptive tumour resistance, the possible
application of BRAF-targeted therapy in brain tumours grows continu-
ously. In this study, we explore the relationship between BRAF mutations
and prognosis following the accesible treatment options.
Methods: We analysed clinical strategies that address BRAF activation
in primary brain tumours. Next, we verified current recommendations
regarding screening for BRAF mutations and discussed issues that need
to be solved before implementation of the treatment.
Results: There is preliminary evidence for a range of positive responses
in certain brain tumour types harboring BRAF V600E mutation. We
selected groups of patients, in which the immunohistochemical screening
should be considered. Finally, we portrayed how these patients might
benefit from targeted therapy.
Conclusion: BRAF V600E mutation emerges as a promising mo-
lecular target. Herein, we propose workup and treatment algorithm
for primary brain tumours with the particular emphasis on BRAF
V600E mutation.
PS-09-014
An embryonal tumour with NUT expression and CIC-NUTM1 rear-
rangement mimicking desmoplastic infantile astrocytoma (DIA) –
unsolved diagnostic boundaries
T. Maia*, J. Passos, D. Gonçalves, M. Mafra
*Instituto Português de Oncologia, Francisco Gentil, Lisbon, Portugal
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: DIA is a rare grade I central nervous
system (CNS) tumour usually following a favourable course re-
gardless of a possible poorly differentiated component.
Conversely, grade IV poorly differentiated/embryonal tumours
(ET) include the NOS category (ET,NOS) sometimes exhibiting
limited glial differentiation.
Methods: We describe a case highlighting challenging differential
diagnostic problems between DIA and ET,NOS. The tumour per-
tains to an 1 year-old child that presented with apathy and de
novo strabismus associated with a large frontoparietal mass whose
imagiologic features were consistent with DIA. Total gross
ressection was performed.
Results: Histologic exam showed a tumour comprising: a)
desmoplastic areas with mature spindle astrocytes (GFAP positive)
surrounded by a dense reticulin network and pericellular collagen
IV (DIA-pattern); b) a poorly differentiated component (GFAP
negative) of small round blue cells. Mitotic figures were restricted
to poorly differentiated areas; microvascular proliferation and ne-
crosis were absent. A diagnosis of DIA was made. Recurrence
with aggressive progression within few weeks led to comprehen-
sive genomic profiling that revealed a CIC-NUTM1 rearrange-
ment. Additional immunohistochemical study showed strong
NUT expression within both DIA-patterned and poorly differenti-
ated components. The tumour was reclassified as ET,NOS with
extensive mature astrocytic differentiation in a DIA-like pattern, a
feature not previously described.
Conclusion: ET,NOS harbouring CIC-NUTM1 rearrangements
may exhibit extensive astrocytic DIA-like differentiation, blurring
diagnostic boundaries with “true” DIA, a differential diagnostic
problem not previously addressed. NUT immuno-expression may
be diagnostically useful in identifying these cases. DIA-patterned
tumours may need molecular workup for appropriate classifica-
tion/management.
PS-09-015
Retrospective observational study of gliosarcomas
S. Marcos González*, L. Ferreira Freire, A. García Castaño, M. Drake
Pérez, E. Marco de Lucas, J. Martino González, E.E. Arrojo Alvarez,
J. Freire, A. Azueta Etxebarria
*HUMV/IDIVAL, Spain
Background & objectives: Gliosarcoma (GSM) is a variant of
glioblastoma IDH-wiltype, characterized by a biphasic pattern,
with areas of glial and mesenchymal differentiation. Our objective
is to describe the population and results obtained in a cohort of
patients with GSM.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective observational study from
2010 to 2019, of patients with GSM over the total glioblastomas
(GBM) in that period, reviewing the clinical histories and histo-
pathological characteristics. In one of them a molecular genetic
analysis (NGS) is carried out.
Results: We reviewed 8 GSM out of a total of 238 GBM (3.3%).
5 women and 3 men with a mean age at diagnosis of 57 years.
At debut, the most frequent symptoms were behavioural distur-
bance, motor and sensory deficit. The temporal localization was
the most frequent (87%) and all tumours were more than 3 cm in
size, necrosis and oedema in MRI. Complete resection in one of
them. 100% IDH-wildtype and 75% EGFR-negative tumours. One
patient completes the entire treatment and 63% have progression.
The molecular genetic analysis is performed in one of the cases,
in which the result was an imbalance in NTRX1.
Conclusion: There is a great shortage of studies on GSM due to its low
incidence, hence the importance of molecular study to identify
target alterations that help improve the prognosis and quality of life of these
patients.
PS-09-016
Globular glial tauopathy type I presenting as atypical progressive
aphasia, with comorbid limbic-predominant age-related TDP-43
encephalopathy
R. Matej*, G. Kovacs, J. Keller, Z. Csefalvay, R. Rusina
*Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and Thomayer Hospital, Czech Republic
Background & objectives: Globular glial tauopathies (GGT)
have heterogeneous presentations with little available information
regarding typical clinical manifestations. We report on a case of
atypical primary progressive aphasia due to comorbid GGT and
limbic TDP-43 proteinopathy.
Methods: The initial clinical phenotype of a 69-year-old, right-
handed man was compatible with the nonfluent-agrammatical var-
iant of primary progressive aphasia and early hippocampal amne-
sia. Progressively, parkinsonism and supranuclear oculomotor im-
pairment occurred, and finally, late mutism with frontal type de-
mentia, impaired comprehension, and behavioural manifestations
developed.
Results: The neuropathology was characteristic of globular glial
tauopathy type I with vascular changes and comorbid limbic-
predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy (LATE).
Conclusion: Our findings expand the clinical spectrum of globular glial
tauopathies to include a complex progressive aphasia syndrome. The
extraordinary feature, in this case, was the combination of two progres-
sive aphasia subtypes, i.e., the early nonfluent-agrammatical variant and
the late semantic variant. Our findings also expand the spectrum of neu-
ropathological comorbidities in GGT.
Supported by the Grant Agency of Czech Ministry of Health
(NV18-04-00346, NV19-04-00090) and Charles University
(Progress Q27/LF1, Q35/LF3) and DRO (Thomayer Hospital –
TH, 00064190).
PS-09-017
Carbonic anhydrase IX expression in high grade astrocytomas
R. McLendon*, P. Healy, K. Rodriguez, N. Cort, E. Lipp
*Duke University, USA
Background & objectives: Carbonic Anhydrase IX (CAIX) ex-
pression has been associated with a negative overall survival (OS)
in Grade III-IV astrocytomas (AA+GBM). The effect of IDH sta-
tus on CAIX status with regards to OS in AA+GBM is relatively
unexplored.
Methods: 748 AA+GBM were examined prospectively over 7 years by
IHC for CAIX Labeling Index (LI%), Ki-67 LI%, MGMT promoter
methylation (PM), EGFR LI%, EGFRvIII LI%, VEGF LI% and
VEGF-R2 LI%; 602 Grade IV (GBMs) and 146 Grade III (AA) were
studied.
Results: Mean age was 55 years. 502 AA+GBM were newly diagnosed
(ND) and 246 were recurrent (RD). CAIX expression (defined as CAIX
LI>5%) was identified in 456 GBM (76%) and 32 (22%) AA. IDH status
performed on 222 AA+GBM (30%) revealed 197 wild type (AA+GBM
IDH1 mutated n=25). IDH WT AA+GBM exhibited a higher median
CAIX LI%. Only in GBMs was Ki-67 LI correlated with CAIX
expression.
Conclusion: In AA+GBM, VEGF LI%, VEGFR2 LI%, and
EGFRvIII LI% correlated with CAIX expression. The correlation
between CAIX and VEGFR2 LI% was independent of grade.
Among GBM, factors associated with an adverse OS were
MGMT PM and age. Among AA, factors associated with an ad-
verse OS were CAIX, Ki67 LI% and age. CAIX negative AA
have a prolonged survival not seen with CAIX positive AA and
all GBM. CAIX expression is useful in characterizing prognosis
in AA+GBM.
Virchows Arch
PS-09-018
Histomorphological spectrum and trend of neoplastic spinal lesions:
a 40-year review
I. Nwadiokwu*, I. Iwuagwu, A. Salami, U. Ezenkwa, D. Mashor, M. Ajani
*Department of Pathology, University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Neoplastic spinal lesions cause signifi-
cant morbidity with poor neurological outcome in many patients.
Studies describing their spectrum are generally few. Our objec-
tive was to determine the histomorphological spectrum of neo-
plastic spinal lesions and the trend in occurrence over four
decades.
Methods: We reviewed Patients’ age, gender and histomorphological
data of all the neoplastic spinal lesions from the patients’ hospital records
over a 40-year period (January 1st, 1980 to December 31st, 2019). All the
cases seen were classified as either benign or malignant neoplasms with
their spectrum, frequencies and trends in decades determined using
Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS), version 20.
Results: Ninety-four cases of neoplastic spinal lesions were seen
over the four decades of study with the highest number of cases
observed in the last decade. The male to female ratio was 1.2:1.
The mean age was 34.8 years with a peak incidence in the 5th
decade. Benign and malignant spinal neoplasms comprised 55.3%
and 44.7% respectively. Meningiomas and peripheral nerve sheath
tumours had the highest occurrences (16% each), while germ cell
tumours had the least occurrence (2.1%). Other spectrum of spinal
tumours seen include metastatic tumours (14.9%), soft tissue tu-
mours (14.9%), haemato-lymphoid tumours (9.5%), glial tumours
(8.5%), bone tumours (7.5%), Vascular tumours (5.3%) and neu-
ronal tumours (5.3%).
Conclusion: This study showed that benign spinal tumours are more
common than malignant spinal tumours, with a slight male predominance
and most of the spinal tumours occurring below 50 years. The increased
number of spinal tumours observed in the last decade of study may be due
to an increase in skilled personnel and improved diagnostic facilities in
our health institution in addition to rising awareness of disease among the
populace.
PS-09-019
Two rare cases of IDH1-mutated gliosarcomas arising in IDH1-mu-
tated, 1p/19q non-codeleted diffuse gliomas with prominent oligoden-
droglial morphology
J. Soukup*, M. Bartos, V. Hobza, P. Kasparova, A. Kohout, T. Cesak
*The Fingerland Department of Pathology, University Hospital and
Faculty of Medicine Hradec Kralove, Charles University,
Czech Republic
Background & objectives: Gliosarcomas may arise de novo or represent
tumour progression in previously diagnosed diffuse glioma. Majority of
gliosarcomas are IDH1/2 wildtype and mutated tumours are rare. Here we
present two such cases.
Methods: Two males (case 1 - age 49, case 2 -age 39) were diagnosed
with IDH1-mutated diffuse gliomas in left temporal (case 1) and left
frontal (case 2) area. They recurred as gliosarcoma after 6 and 5 years
respectively. Gliosarcomas and concurrent/precursor gliomas were stud-
ied using immunohistochemistry (IDH1 R132H, ATRX, GFAP, Olig2,
SOX10, p53) and FISH (1p/19q probes).
Results: Both tumours showed conspicuous oligodendroglial morpholo-
gy in glioma component. In both primary gliomas, immunohistochemis-
try showed expression of IDH1 R132H and ATRX and these were also
expressed in sarcoma components. In case 1, repeated FISH showed no
1p/19q codeletion. In case 2, partial deletion of 1p (in 40% of cells)
without loss of 19q was detected. Sarcoma components showed positive
reticulin stain, loss of Olig2 expression and loss of GFAP expression in
majority of tumour cells. Mutant-type (strong and diffuse) p53 expression
was observed in both gliosarcomas, but not in the glial component of case
2. In case 1, 50% of cells of original glioma showed p53 expression.
Conclusion: We report two IDH1-mutated gliosarcomas, arising in
IDH1-mutated/ATRX-positive gliomas with oligodendroglial morpholo-
gy and lack of 1p/19q codeletion. In one case, mutant-type p53 expres-
sion was acquired in sarcomatous component during progression of the
tumour.
Supported by MH CZ NV19-01-00435 and European Regional
Development Fund-Project BBMRI-CZ: No: EF16 013/0001674.
PS-09-020
The role of skeletal muscle biopsy in the diagnostic algorithm of anti-
signal recognition particle myopathy
R. Tanasa*, A. Bastian, G. Grigore, C. Constantinescu, M. Craescu,
E. Manole
*Colentina Clinical Hospital, Pathology Department, Romania
Background & objectives: Myopathies with serum antibodies to the
signal recognition particle (anti-SRP) represent a rare category of refrac-
tory immune-mediated necrotizing myopathies. Muscle biopsy, along
with immunological and clinical data may provide key information in
understanding the pathological mechanisms of these controversial
diseases.
Methods: Open muscle biopsy was performed on 42 patients with
suspected inflammatory myopathy during the year 2019 in our hospital.
We evaluated the main pathological features using histological, immuno-
histochemical, enzyme histochemical techniques, routine and special
stains on cryosections and paraffin-embedded tissue. Among them, we
identified 3 patients (7%) with myopathology suggestive for anti-SRP
myopathy. Anti-SRP antibodies were further tested positive.
Results: Muscle biopsies showed the picture of a severe active necrotiz-
ing myopathy with marked variability in size of the fibres, numerous
necrotic and regenerating fibres and rare scattered mononuclear cells in
all three cases. ATPase staining showed type 1 fiber predominance myo-
pathic pattern with a reduced size of type 2 fibres. Immunomarking with
MHC Class I antibody showed a rather unexpected prominent expression
in non-necrotic fibres in two cases and normal expression in the third one.
Differential diagnosis with other types of inflammatory myopathies, es-
pecially dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and anti-HMGCR myopathy,
even with muscle dystrophies proved sometimes to be challenging be-
cause of the similarity of both clinical and morphological aspects.
Conclusion: Anti-SRP myopathy is a distinct entity in terms of clinical
traits, biopsy changes and response to conventional combined immuno-
suppressive therapy. Histopathology of muscle, along with complemen-
tary investigation, may provide useful clues regarding the correct diagno-
sis, in deciphering the mechanisms of this disease with a major impact on
clinical management of this potentially life-threatening disease.
PS-10-001
Composite hemangioendothelioma - a clinicopathological study of
site, composition and immunohistochemistry of an additional series
K. Adoke*, D. Suleiman
*Department of Pathology, FMC KEBBI, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Composite Hemangioendothelioma (CHE)
is a recently described new entity classified under the
Hemangioendothelioma group of vascular tumours, it was first described
in 2000 by Nayler et al, and it is a rare vascular neoplasm of low malig-
nancy that exhibits a composite of hemangioendothelioma variants. It
usually presents on the skin and soft tissue of upper and lower extremities,
PS-10 Paediatric and Perinatal Pathology
Virchows Arch
especially the lower leg and foot. We describe additional series of CHE in
paediatric age group.
Methods: Three cases of CHE were retrieved from our archives. Blocks
were cut and stained with H&E. Immunohistochemical stains were done
using DB Biotech protocol. Antibodies used include CD34, EMA and
vimentin
Results: All cases of CHE encountered in this study were in the paediatric
age group that is 8, 10 and 14 years respectively. The sites of presentation
of CHE were head and neck, upper and lower extremities. Histology
showed composite of hemangioendothelioma variants that is, Dabska,
retiform, epitheloid and spindle cell haemangioma in varying proportions
with brisk mitosis seen. All were positive for CD34 and vimentin but
negative for EMA.
Conclusion: CHE can present with composite of hemangioendothelioma
variants. In our environment this vascular lesion of low malignant poten-
tial is mostly seen in the paediatric age group. No recurrence was seen
after one year of follow up.
PS-10-002
Correlation between histology and genetic testing in surfactant
dysfunction disorders
X. Ara Mancebo*, A. Navarro-Jimenez, J. Camacho-Soriano, E.M.
Fuentes-Camps, C. Alborch-Gil, S. Ramón y Cajal, M. Garrido-Pontnou
*Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Spain
Background & objectives: Genetic surfactant dysfunction disorders are
rare paediatric conditions. Three major genes are involved in their path-
ogenesis (ie STFPB, STFPC, ABCA3). Histologically, several patterns
may be observed, and although suggestive for one of these disorders, they
are not specific.
Methods: 10 patients with a positive genetic testing were identified.
We blindly reviewed their biopsies (H&E, trichrome, PAS, SMA,
CK7 and CD68 stains), recording the main histological findings ac-
cording to a previous set list of items. Electron microscopy (EM)
findings were also assessed, when available. The collected informa-
tion was correlated with the corresponding mutation. Finally, we
revised the clinical outcomes.
Results: 6 patients were female and 4 male, aged 0 to 11 (mean 1.6
years). The most common mutation was SFTPC(50%), followed by
ABCA3(40%) and SFTPB(10%). All the biopsies presented features of
chronic pneumonitis of infancy (CPI), with alveolar simplification, thick-
ened septa and type II pneumocyte hyperplasia. All the cases with
ABCA3mutation showed the most prominent fibrosis and muscularization
of the septa. The histology in SFTPCmutated cases was more variable.
The only patient with a SFTPBmutation died shortly after birth (3 weeks),
presenting an unspecific histology. Electron microscopy was available in
3 cases, yielding a definite diagnosis in 2 of them.
Conclusion: Surfactant dysfunction disorders present histologically as
CPI, but the accompanying morphological findings are variable. The
most relevant finding is the marked fibrosis and muscularization of the
alveolar septa in ABCA3mutated cases. SFTPBis reportedly the most
severe of the mutations, as seen in our series. EM is helpful in achieving
a definite diagnosis.
PS-10-003
The role of placental examination in evaluating perinatal death: a
retrospective analysis of 192 cases
M. Boros*, E.M. Popescu, A. Judea, A. Pascalau, O. Pop, A.A. Barbis
Vesa
*Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
University of Oradea, Romania
Background & objectives: Most common causes that lead to intrauter-
ine foetal death are the placental abnormalities. The aim is to analyse how
many of the intrauterine/ perinatal deaths present morphological changes
in the placenta and which are the associated clinical-pathological factors.
Methods: We have retrospectively analysed all placentas sent to the
Pathology Laboratory from the Maternity of Oradea (Romania) during
December 2018 - June 2019 from a clinical, macroscopic and microscop-
ic point of view. We reassessed and compared the “sick” placentas (those
with worse foetal outcome) with the “healthy” ones.
Results: 197 placentas were sent for histopathological examination. Of
the autopsies performed during the same period, 22 had the placenta
examined. The analysis of the association between the sick and the
healthy placentas reveals statistically significant differences regarding
education (p = 0.01), the type of birth (p = 0.0002), the gestational age
(P <0.0001), the aspect of amniotic membranes (p = 0.011) and placental
anomalies (p = 0.0012).
Conclusion: The low socio-economic status and prematurity are the risk
factors associated statistically with a higher rate of adverse foetal out-
come. Placental abnormalities, infections, and placental abruption are
most commonly noted. A systematic histopathological analysis of the
placenta is imperative in order to more accurately assess the causes of
death and to reduce the rate of unexplained deaths.
PS-10-004
Identification of SRF-STAT6 fusion transcript in a cellular
myofibroma of the forearm in a 15 years old boy: expanding the
molecular spectrum of the recently described entity
C. Bouvier*, H. Nihous, J. Baud, M. Nicolas, A. Haffner, F. Tirode,
J. Jouve, J. Gentet, F. Le Loarer
*Department of Pathology, Timone Hospital, France
Background & objectives: The spectrum of mesenchymal tumours
keeps increasing with the input of NGS. Recently myofibroblastic tu-
mours arising within deep soft tissue with high cellularity and a more
differentiated immunophenotype towards myoid lineage have been de-
scribed harbouring a recurrent SRF-RELA fusion.
Methods: We report the case of a 15 years-old patient who presented
with a calcified soft tissue mass of the left forearm. Histological features
and unpreviously reported genetic data are described.
Results: Microscopic examination showed a fascicular proliferation
mainly composed of spindle cells with variable eosinophilic cytoplasm.
Areas with higher cellularity with basophilic cells were also found giving
a biphasic appearance. Tumour stroma contained calcifications. There
were no necrosis and mitotic index was 1 mitosis/50HPF. Cells stained
for alpha smooth actin, H-caldesmon and desmin. Whole RNA-
sequencing identified SRF-STAT6 fusion that joined SRF exon 5 to
STAT6 exon 17. STAT6 immunohistochemistry was positive.
Conclusion: We have described a new variant of SRF-rearranged neo-
plasm. This case shared histological features with the recently described
group of SRF-rearranged myofibroblastic neoplasms but involved
STAT6 as a 3’ partner, which resulted in a strong nuclear expression of
STAT6, a potential diagnosis pitfall with solitary fibrous tumours. The
clinical relevance of this novel fusion requires further investigations.
PS-10-005
Histological chorioamnionitis in placentas of extremely premature
neonates: the impact of maternal and foetal inflammatory responses
on clinical findings and neonatal outcome
E. Budal*, J. Kessler, C. Ebbing, M. Bentsen, O.H. Haugen, S.M. Aukland,
M. Vollsæter, G.E. Eide, K. Collett
*Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway
Background & objectives: The aim of this study was to explore if
placental histological chorioamnionitis (HCA) with or without a foetal
inflammatory response (FIR) differ in clinical findings and neonatal out-
comes in a group of extremely premature (EP) neonates.
Virchows Arch
Methods: Singleton neonates with gestational age (GA) < 28 weeks and
HCA at placental examination were included in the study. Data on ma-
ternal history, delivery, neonatal course, and placental findings were re-
corded prospectively. Staging of the inflammatory responses was per-
formed in accordance with the Amsterdam Placental Workshop Group
Consensus. A multivariate logistic regression model was used for predic-
tion of neonatal outcomes.
Results: Of 84 included cases, 59 (70%) had FIR. FIR was associated
with preterm prelabour rupture of membranes (PPROM) (p=0.002), clin-
ical chorioamnionitis (CCA) (p=0.003), use of antibiotics before/during
birth (p<0.001), antenatal steroids (0.008), higher neonatal leucocyte
levels (p<0.001), and bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) (p=0.007).
No significant association was found for other common neonatal compli-
cations of extreme prematurity. After adjusting for GA and birth weight
(Z-score), babies of mothers with clinical chorioamnionitis (CCA) had
increased odds of neonatal death (OR=10.75, p=0.007). Surprisingly, FIR
seemed to have a protective effect (OR=0.15, p=0.036) on mortality.
Conclusion: In a group of EP neonates with HCA, FIR was significantly
associated with PPROM, CCA and BPD. CCA increased the odds of
infant death during the first year, but a foetal inflammatory response
seemed to have a protective effect.
Funding: Helse Vest Research Fund
PS-10-006
A histopathological study of paediatric teratomas in Khartoum state
2010-2018
N. El Dawi*, S.A.M. Tamimeldar
*Soba University Hospital, Sudan
Background & objectives: To study the histological spectrum of terato-
mas and clinical presentation in paediatric patients presenting in
Khartoum State hospitals.
Methods: Paediatric teratoma cases that underwent surgery at the main
state hospitals in Khartoum State during the period from 2010 to 2018
were enrolled in a retrospective analytical study. The case slides were
reviewed and correlated with the clinical data submitted.
Results: A total of 60 cases were included of which 82% were fe-
males and 26.7% were less than one year of age and 56.6% were 6-
16 years of age. The main presentation was a mass. The site of origin
was the ovaries in 57% (49), sacrococyx in 25%, abdomen in 8.3%,
pelvis in 8.3%, head and neck in 6.7%, chest in 3.3% and testis 0.9%
(1). Mature teratomas accounted for 81.7%, mixed teratomas for
13.3% and 5% were immature. Altman class I was the main classi-
fication in 53.3% of sacrococcygeal teratoma cases. Immature grade
3 was the predominant (62.5%) with neural component the
commonest (71.4%).
Conclusion: Presentations were diverse regarding age, location, gross
features and degree of differentiation. Mature teratomas predominate
and the majority of the sacrococcygeal teratomas were mature in females
less than one year of age.
PS-10-007
Epidemiology of children and adolescents served in burning ambu-
latory in Brazilian public hospital
M.d.F. Figueiredo*, T. Farias Batista, D. Palácio Cardoso, T. Praça
Brasil, T. Maciel Valente, M.E. Maciel de Brito, R.L. Freitas de Almeida
*University of Fortaleza, Brazil
Background & objectives: Among domestic injuries in children
and adolescents, skin burns deserve special attention because
they can lead to serious residual injuries.In adolescence, alcohol
burns are the most common. Describe the epidemiological profile
of hospitalizations of children and adolescents who suffered
burns.
Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study analysed hospitalizations
between 2013 and 2019, regarding gender, age, severity of injury and
causative agent. The data on the care provided at the Burn Clinic in a
reference hospital in the Northeast of Brazil.
Results: During the study period, 2.564 patients were admitted, of
which 1.433 were children between 4 and 12 years of age and
1.131 adolescents between 12 and 19 years of age. The odds ratio
among children and adolescents was (OR = 1.5; CI 1.3-1.7) and
boys are (OR = 1.3; CI 1.2-1.4) times more likely to suffer burns
than girls. Among adolescents, the prevalence of burns is higher
among girls (59.6%) (OR = 1.2 CI 1.1 - 1.4). Liquids were
responsible for most accidents and adolescent girls are more like-
ly to suffer burns with liquids when compared to boys in the
same age group (OR = 1.6; CI 1.32-2.0).
Conclusion: The epidemiological surveys provide objective information
on dangerous agents and on the profile of the populations where burns are
most likely to occur. They are essential for the development of appropri-
ate prevention strategies.
PS-10-008
Value of autopsy examination in early neonatal death: report of 4
unusual cases
J. Filipe*, L. Monteiro
*Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, Instituto Português de Oncologia de
Lisboa Francisco Gentil, Lisbon, Portugal
Background & objectives: Early neonatal death (ENND) is defined as
newborn´s death in the first week of life. We present the unexpected
autopsy findings in four cases of ENND that can change the clinical
tenders and the Genetic counselling.
Methods: Gross and histopathological findings of four ENND post-
mortem examinations.
Results: The four cases included 3 newborn males and 1 newborn female,
aged between 25’ and 3 days old. The causes of death were clinically
unexpected and clearly assessed by the post-mortem examination:
extralobar pulmonary sequestration, cardiac malformation, iatrogenic
pericardial effusion and thymus hypertrophy with heart compression.
None of them were previously diagnosed.
Conclusion: Although the main causes of ENND are perinatal asphyxia,
low birth weight/prematurity, and infections, a few unexpected congenital
malformations or other causes are detected when a systematic autopsy
examination is performed. These unusual cases highlight the importance
of a minicious post-mortem examination in ENND, its important role in
the knowledge of neonatal pathology and its contribution for Genetic
counselling.
PS-10-009
Foetal autopsies, a retrospective study in a tertiary institution
J. Gama*, A. Lai, R. Almeida, J. Madeira, J. Fraga, F. Ramalhosa,
C. Faria, M.B. Pimentão, H. Moreira, V. Almeida, R. Pina, M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Foetal neoplasias are rare and have a poor
prognosis. They can be associated with death and are an indication for
termination of pregnancy. A diverse range of tumours affecting foetuses
have been described.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective study at a tertiary hospital in
Portugal – Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, and reviewed
1482 cases of autopsied foetuses.
A description of each case correlating with the gestational age, placenta
histology, karyotype and ecographic findings was made.
Results: We have identified 10 foetal autopsies with neoplasias out of
1482 autopsies (0.67%). 60% were benign and the remaining malignant.
The following tumours were found: cervical lymphangioma (n=4),
Virchows Arch
choroidal plexus papilloma (n=2), neuroblastoma (n=1), embryonal tu-
mour with abundant neuropil and true rosettes (n=1), immature
sacrococcygeal teratoma (n=1) and diffuse astrocytoma (n=1). 60% of
the autopsies were result of termination of pregnancy and 40% resulted
from intrauterine death.
Conclusion: In this study, we concluded that histologically benign tu-
mours can also result in intrauterine death as the location, size and other
factors influence the clinical outcome. Foetal tumours are different from
childhood’ tumours in their distribution, incidence and clinical outcome.
PS-10-010
Morphological defects in distal 18q deletion syndrome: a case report
T. Georgescu*, A.C. Lisievici, S.A. Barbu, A. Dumitru, O. Voinea,
R. Bohiltea, O. Munteanu
*Department of Pathology, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Department of Pathology, "Dr. Leventer Centre", Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: There are two groups of 18q deletions: with-
in the bottom half of the centromere (distal deletions) and closer to the
centromere (proximal deletions). Distal 18q deletion syndrome can lead
to a wide variety of signs and symptoms among affected individuals.
Methods: We report the case of a 35-year-old female admitted to the
Department of Obstetrics-Gynaecology with a 21-weeks pregnancy fea-
turing multiple cerebral and cardiologic malformations detected on foetal
MRI. The multidisciplinary commission recommended therapeutic abor-
tion with subsequent genetic analysis and the patient agreed. The product
of conception, placenta and umbilical cord were sent to the Department of
Pathology for histopathological evaluation.
Results: The most striking morphological defects were the presence of
right cleft lip, bilateral anophthalmia with wide nasal base and low im-
plantation of the ears. The eyelids appeared normal, but the lachrymal
puncta were absent. Palpebral apertures were sealed and no vestigial
ocular globe was identified. Orbital cavities were smaller than normal.
A perimembranous ventricular septal defect measuring 0.3 x 0.2 cm with
overriding aorta was also present. A modified female profile with a loss of
genetic material was identified on chromosome region 18q21.1-18q23
with the size of 30.5 Mb. According to the databases, this region is
responsible for deletion syndrome 18q, which presents with a clinically
variable picture.
Conclusion: The most common phenotypic aspects of distal 18q deletion
syndrome are small stature, intellectual disabilities, learning difficulties,
hypotonia, hearing problems, microcephaly, cleft lip and cleft palate, foot
abnormalities and heart malformations.
PS-10-011
Childhood and adolescent malignant solid tumours in Rwanda:
distribution of tumour types and challenges to diagnosis
A.B. Igihozo Sindikubwabo*, R.R. Flores, B. Rugwizangoga, T.Z. Muvunyi,
D. Ruhangaza
*School of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Rwanda, Kigali,
Rwanda
Background & objectives: Data on paediatric tumours are very scarce in
Rwanda. The goal of this study is to determine the distribution of child-
hood and adolescent malignant solid tumours in Rwanda and to shed light
on the pathology-specific limitations to their diagnosis.
Methods: In this retrospective, descriptive multicenter analysis, we col-
lected cases of solid malignant tumours diagnosed in patients aged 0-18
years from four regional hospitals over a 3-year period (2016 to 2018).
Tumours were classified using the International Classification of
Childhood Cancers (ICCC). All cases were then analysed in terms of
age, age group, gender, residence, morphological features and
immunophenotype, where possible.
Results: This study revealed that the most common solid tumours
in children and adolescents diagnosed in Rwanda were retinoblas-
toma, followed by nephroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and oste-
osarcoma. The most common tumours by category were retino-
blastoma (25%), soft tissue sarcomas (20%), renal tumours
(18.5%) and bone tumours (14%). These tumours were more fre-
quently seen in children between 1 and 4 years of age and were
less frequent in infants. There was a slight male predilection (M/F
ratio = 1.18). Among the cases where staging information was
available, most patients presented at early stages; however, stag-
ing was not applicable or not provided for most cases (83.5%).
Diagnostic immunohistochemistry was not performed in 46.1% of
cases.
Conclusion: In slight contrast to other studies of paediatric malignant
solid tumours in the region, our study showed the most common paedi-
atric tumour was retinoblastoma. Specialty-trained pathologists and diag-
nostic tools such as immunohistochemistry are paramount for accurate
diagnosis of paediatric tumours.
PS-10-012
Peripheral medulloepithelioma: two cases report
I. Beliamime, R. Karam*, F.N. Dasilva, M. Regragui, N. G.Bennani,
S. Benayad, M. Karkouri
*Department of Pathology, Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Casablanca,
Morocco
Background & objectives: Medulloepithelioma is an extremely rare, of
high malignancy embryonic tumour, generally located in the eye or in the
central nervous system; a peripheral location is even rarer and will be the
subject of our report.
Methods: We report two cases of female children; 30 months and 8 years
old with a pelvic mass. Imagery found a secondary hepatic nodules in one
of the two cases.
Histologically, it showed a proliferation of embryonic appearance of pap-
illary, tubular and rosette architecture expressing CKAE1/AE3; CD56;
WT1 and synaptophysin, without expression of CD99, AFP, CD30, Oct3
/ 4 and BHCG.
Results: Medulloepithelioma is an embryonic tumour classified in the
subgroup of primitive neuro-ectodermal tumours. It is a rare and highly
malignant tumours made up of undifferentiated cells resembling germ or
matrix cells of the embryonic neural tube.
These tumours most often survive during the first decade of life and have
specific radiological, histological features.
It is most often found in the nervous system and in the eye.
Peripheral locations are extremely rarely known.
Treatment is based on chemotherapy, surgery and radiotherapy, targeted
anti-PDGFR therapies are being evaluated.
Conclusion: We report two paediatric cases of peripheral
medulloepithelioma.
Since this entity is rare with an unusual location, peripheral
medulloepithelioma requires a correct diagnosis and proper classification
to predict the clinical behaviour and for optimal management.
PS-10-013
Cardiomyopathy in paediatric autopsy: the importance in the
diagnosis after death
A. Lai*, M.B. Pimentão, R. Almeida, H. Moreira, J. Fraga, C. Faria,
V. Almeida, F. Ramalhosa, J. Gama, J. Madeira, R. Oliveira, C. Cerdeira,
M. Venâncio, R. Pina
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Cardiomyopathy is defined as a myocardial
disorder in which the heart muscle is structurally and functionally abnor-
mal, without a cardiac malformation.
Virchows Arch
Our objective was evaluate cardiomyopathies in paediatric autopsies (PA)
and correlate with genetic studies performed for further counselling.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the PA performed in a third care
centre in Portugal between 2007 and 2019, contemplating those with
heart disease (excluding heart malformations) and correlate with ultraso-
nography results and with the genetics reports when possible.
Results: From 2007-2019, were performed 1482PA. Four have a cardio-
myopathy (0,23%), including one female and three male; one was a
stillbirth death (29weeks, with normal ultrasonographic evaluation at
21weeks), two neonatal deaths (one peri-partum, other at 7hours of life)
and one with 5months old.
The autopsy findings describe two dilated cardiomyopathy (one endocar-
dial fibroelastoses) and two hypertrophic, without any evidence that could
point a diagnosis, principally storage diseases.
One case had performed echocardiographic study (consistent with the
autopsy findings).
There was family history of heart related disease in two and only in one of
them was found a deletion (c.94316_94317del (p.Val31439Alafs*), clas-
sified as probably pathogenic in TTN gene, in heterozygosity.
Conclusion: Cardiomyopathy in children can be a diagnostic challenge,
even after the autopsy. But due to the possibility of genetic cause, it is
important to put our efforts in the correct diagnosis to provide guidance
for the family and future generations.
PS-10-014
Expression of VEGF and its receptors in placental villi in early and
late preeclampsia
O. Mishnev*, V. Lyapin, U. Tumanova, A. Shchegolev
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University (RNRMU),
Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: Preeclampsia is formidable complications of
pregnancy. An important role in the development of preeclampsia is
assigned to violations of the expression of angiogenic factors. A compar-
ative analysis of VEGF expression and its receptors in early (EPe) and
late (LPe) preeclampsia.
Methods: We performed complex morphological and immunohisto-
chemical study of 9 placentas from EPe cases, 14 placentas from LPe
cases and 10 term placentas from uncomplicated pregnancies (control
group). VEGF expression and its receptors (VEGFRs -1 and -2) in
syncytiotrophoblast and endothelium of capillaries of terminal villi were
detected by immunohistochemical methods.
Results: As a result of an immunohistochemical study, we identified changes
in the expression levels of VEGF and its receptors in the structures of terminal
villi in EPe and LPe.In the EPe observations, expression levels of VEGF and
VEGFR-2 in syncytiotrophoblast and capillary endothelium were lower than
in the control group.VEGFR-1 expression levels were slightly lower than
control values.Similar changes were detected in the LPe, but the degree of
deviation from the control levels were less.
Conclusion: The detected changes of VEGF and its receptors expressions
indicate violations of angiogenesis in the placental villi. More pronounced
changes in EPe reflect the features of the damage pathogenesis and compen-
satory processes in the placenta with various forms of preeclampsia.
PS-10-015
Unsuspected myocarditis presenting as sudden death in infants and
children
O. Neagu*, S. Stenton, M. Cohen
*University Emergency Hospital Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Acute myocarditis is an inflammatory disease of
the heart mostly diagnosed in young people which can present as sudden
death. The aetiology includes infectious agents, systemic diseases, drugs and
toxins. We aim to characterise myocarditis in infants and children.
Methods: Retrospective evaluation of 813 paediatric post-mortems conduct-
ed at Sheffield Children’s Hospital between 2009-2019. Data retrieved in-
cluded histological features, virology, microbiology and clinical history.
Results: 23c of 813c corresponded to acute myocarditis (2.7% incidence)
and 1c to a dilated cardiomyopathy related to undiagnosed remote
Parvovirus infection. Most cases were below 2 years age. Histological
features showed diffuse myocardial inflammation in 15c, focal in 8c and
none in dilated cardiomyopathy. PCR identified Enterovirus (7c),
Parvovirus (7c, 2 also with HHV6 and 1c with EVB), Influenza A (1c),
Parainfluenza type 3 (1c). 2c were hypersensitivity myocarditis, 1c was
Group A Streptococcus related and 5 idiopathic myocarditis.
Enterovirus was frequent in infants (7/10), and in new-borns was
associated to meningoencephalitis or congenital myocarditis.
Presenting symptoms included vomiting, abdominal pain (2-3 days) and
breathing difficulties (up to 10 days).
Conclusion: Myocarditis represents almost 3% of all sudden deaths in
infants and children. Enterovirus and Parvovirus represented the most
common aetiologies. Although patients experienced preceding viral
symptoms, all remained clinically unsuspected, highlighting the need
for clinical awareness of this condition.
PS-10-016
Malignant childhood solid tumours in Ile-Ife, Nigeria: a 10-year
retrospective review
I. Olorunsola*, O. Omoyiola, A. Adefidipe, A. Komolafe
*Department of Morbid Anatomy and Forensic Medicine, Obafemi
Awolowo University Teaching Hospitals, Ile-Ife, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Childhood cancer is fast becoming a global
challenge especially in developing countries where morbidity and mor-
tality is still very high. The review is to determine the pattern of malignant
solid tumours and to compare this with previous studies.
Methods: A 10-year retrospective review in which all histologically di-
agnosed childhood malignant solid tumours between ages 0-15 years
were analysed.
The surgical daybook and the histopathology request card were
retrieved and the patient’s biodata, nature of specimen and site
were extracted. The histopathology reports were also retrieved and
the size of the tumour, diagnosis, grade and stage (where appli-
cable) were retrieved.
Results: A total of 120 cases of malignant childhood solid tumours were
analysed in the study period with an average of 12 cases per year. 75 (62.5
%) cases were male, while 45 (37.5%) cases were female, hence a male to
female ratio of 1.7:1. The peak age group was 5-9 years accounting for
37.5 %, while 0-4 years and 10-15 years accounted for 33.3% and 29.2%
respectively. The fIve commonest tumours were lymphoma (27; 22.5%),
nephroblastoma (25; 20.8%), soft tissue sarcoma (20; 16.7%), central
nervous system tumours (13; 10.8%) and retinoblastoma (10; 8.3%).
Conclusion: Lymphomas as a group is the still the commonest childhood
solid tumour in our centre as previously reported. However,
nephroblastoma is the commonest single entity. There seems to be a
decline in the diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma in our centre over the last
10 years, whether this translate to reduction in incidence of Burkitt lym-
phoma needs further clarification.
PS-10-017
Placenta referrals in a teaching hospital
F. Auld, L. Kean, C. Platt*
*Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives:
• To document and quantify reasons for referral of placenta specimens
for histological analysis.
• To establish whether referrals are often received in line with RCPath
guidelines (October 2019) (Appendix A).
Virchows Arch
•
To investigate reasons behind inappropriate or ambiguous referrals,
and to consider steps to minimise these in the future.
Methods:
• 215 sequential referrals were prospectively collected, in which placenta
specimens were referred for histopathological analysis.
• Referrals were categorised according to which part of the Appendix A,
RCPath (October 2019) guidelines they pertained to (some fell into
more than one category).
• Inappropriate and ambiguous referrals were investigated further using
WinPath but not rejected.
Results: The majority (97%) of referrals for placenta pathology are in line
with RCPath guidelines. Common reasons for referral are; severe foetal
distress, requiring neonatal unit admission (23%), prematurity of less than
32+0 weeks gestation (20%) and prematurity between 32+0 and 36+6
weeks (17%). No referrals were made for foetal hydrops, maternal coag-
ulopathy and maternal substance abuse.
No referral information received in 1.9% specimens. Chorioamnionitis
was sole indicator in 7 cases.
Conclusion: The overwhelming majority of referrals are appropriate.
No clinical information was offered in a small percentage
Chorioamnionitis and sepsis are not in the RCPath criteria, however ma-
ternal pyrexia is
Referral practice in Low Apgar Scores requires further study
PS-10-018
Violation of immunological tolerance as a predictor of the develop-
ment of complications of allogeneic pregnancy
E. Rudenko*, E. Kogan, Т. Demura, N. Trifonova, N. Zharkov
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: The high frequency of complications in al-
logeneic pregnancy is presumably associated with a violation of the im-
munological privilege of uteroplacental region. It is necessary to study the
expression of markers reflecting the formation of immunological toler-
ance in placenta and placental bed.
Methods: the study was performed on placenta material and pla-
cental bed biopsies from 89 women; a histological and immuno-
histochemical examination was performed using antibodies to
CD8, CD138, CD56, CD4, CD 25. xpression was evaluated by
a quantitative method for calculating the number of stained cells
in 10 fields of view at SW 400.
Results: Placentas taken from women after allogeneic pregnancy had
pronounced signs of immune alteration, such as chronic histiocytic
intervillositis, lymphoplasmacytic deciduitis, chronic chorioamnionitis,
chronic villitis, perivillous fibrinoid with lymphocytes (p (F) <0.05).
Immunohistochemical study of the placentas showed accumulation of
CD138 + plasma cells, CD8 + T-lymphocytes and uNK cells, and a
decrease in the number of CD25 \ CD4 + Treg cells in the structures of
the uteroplacental region (Kruskal-Wallis test, p <0.05)Placentas after
IVF with donor oocytes are characterized by similar changes associated
with the development of chronic inflammation in the structures of the
placenta and immunohistochemical signs of impaired immunological tol-
erance at the maternal-foetal interface.
Conclusion: The obtained data allow us to classify pregnancies under the
surrogate motherhood programs and oocyte donation as a risk factor for
the development of pregnancy complications with immune pathogenesis.
PS-10-019
Correlations between mismatches in HLA II in mother-recipient –
child couples and immunomorphological characteristics of placentas
in allogeneic pregnancy
E. Rudenko*, E. Kogan, Т. Demura, N. Zharkov, N. Trifonova
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: The number of mismatches in the HLA II
gene system during allogeneic pregnancy can affect the development of
complications and be a selective factor in the selection of a donor
blastocyst.
Methods: Allelic polymorphisms of class HLA II genes (DQA1,
DQB1, DRB1) were studied in pairs of 89 mother-child pairs by
PCR. In accordance with the results, all pairs were divided into 4
groups according to number of mismatches (from 0 to 3).
Morphological and IHC studies using antibodies to HLA-DR,
HLA-C were performed on the material of placentas and placental
sites.
Results: It was shown that with an increase in the number of
mismatches, the incidence of foci of chronic inflammation in the
tissues of the placenta and placental bed increases: perivascular
infiltrates of the radial arteries, chronic chorioamnionitis, basal
deciditis (p (F) <0.05). In the absence of discrepancies and with
their maximum number, a change in the optimal level of HLA-C
expression by villi syncytiotropholastome occurs, as well as an
increase in HLA-DR expression in deciduas basalis and the stro-
ma of the placental bed (Kruskal-Wallis test, p <0.05)
Conclusion: Both a high degree of antigenic spillage and signif-
icant coincidence in the HLA gene system result in structural
changes and an imbalance in the immunological balance in the
structures of the placenta and placental bed, which can be a se-
lective factor in the selection of donor oocytes and the recipient
mother.
PS-10-020
Assessment of umbilical cord tissue morphology with α-SMA and
desmin expressions under circulatory hypoxia
L. Rudiuk*, O. Reshetnikova
*Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Kaliningrad, Russia;
Regional Clinical Hospital of the Kaliningrad region, Kaliningrad,
Russia,
Background & objectives: The umbilical cord(UC) insertion site,
anatomical abnormalities are associated with foetal growth poten-
tial and clinical outcomes for the newborn. The aim of present
study is to elucidate UC structural features in gestations under
conditions of congenital heart disease(CHD) in pregnant women.
Methods: 35 full term placentas were divided into group I(20
cases of maternal CHD) and 15 cases of physiological
pregnancy(control group-CG).The length and diameter of the UC
were measured. Histological sections stained with H&E were
studied microscopically, then by computer morphometry. The
immunohistochemical(IHC) staining with monoclonal murine anti-
bodies to α-SMA and Desmin conducted. The differences be-
tween groups were elucidated by the non-parametric Mann-
Whitney U-test,p<0.05.
Results: Results of the study showed a decrease in the length (31.37±1.43
cm) and the diameter (1.01±0.11 cm) of the UC during pregnancy with
CHD compared to the control group (respectively: 34.40 ±1.76 and 1.55
±0.22 cm, p<0.05). Microscopic examination revealed an enhanced fi-
brosis and lack of Warton’s jelly in the fiber- free stromal clefts. α-SMA
and desmin expressions were higher and more diffuse in the group I than
in the CG.
Conclusion: The decreased area of the jelly-filled UC stomal
clefts, reduced hydrophilicity of the tissues is accompanied by
enhanced sclerosis a reduction of its turgidity. This results in
the advancement of the sensitivity of the vessel walls to damag-
ing mechanical influences. The umbilical cord structure remodel-
ing is considered in the aspect of placental adaptation to circula-
tory hypoxia due to hemodynamic impairments in women with
CHD.
Virchows Arch
PS-10-021
Structural profile of the placental terminal villi stroma remodelling
with emphasis on oxidative stress during pregnancy
L. Rudiuk*, O. Reshetnikova
*Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Kaliningrad, Russia;
Regional Clinical Hospital of the Kaliningrad region, Kaliningrad, Russia
Background & objectives: Morphological alterations of placental termi-
nal villi can cause organ’s dysfunction, leading to deficiency of a foetal
oxygen and nutrients supply.
The aim of this study was to investigate the remodelling of the placental
terminal villi stroma under oxidative stress conditions.
Methods: Morphological study was carried out in following groups: I- 20
placentas from mothers with non-operated congenital heart defects
(CHD);II- 19 cases of operated CHD and 15 cases of physiological
pregnancy-control group(CG).The immunohistochemical(IHC) staining
protocol with monoclonal mouse antibodies to collagen IV and collagen
III for placental tissue has been developed. The differences between
groups were identified by Mann-Whitney U-test at p<0.05.
Results: Histological study revealed violations of the placental chorionic
villi maturation in CHD groups, especially in the I group. Morphometry
showed a decreased volume fraction (VF) of the terminal villi stroma in
CHD cases(I– 20.0(11),II- 20,0(4),CG- 24.0(12)%,p<0.05). IHC analysis
discovered the expression of the atypical collagen III type in the group I.
The VF of the type IV collagen decoration area consistently decreased
from I to the II group and to the CG(respectively:19,0(6)-16,0(5,75)-
11,5(7,75)%,p<0.05).
Conclusion: Hypoxia during gestation impacts both maternal health and
foetal development. Placental villi maturation disorder with enhanced villi
immaturity may cause the disruption of foeto-maternal metabolism and gas
exchange via placental membrane(PM). The decreased VF of the villi stro-
ma contributes the thinning of PM, thus promoting to the enhancement of
transplacental exchange. Placental villi stroma remodelling, the role of col-
lagen types III and IV discussed in the aspect of placental adaptations to
oxidative stress due to hemodynamic disorders in CHD cases.
PS-10-023
Basal plate myometrial fibres: a lesion of shallow placental
implantation
J. Stanek*
*Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Division of Pathology, USA
Background & objectives: Basal plate myometrial fibres (bpmf) with or
without intervening decidua is the earliest and clinically asymptomatic
lesion of abnormal placentation. This retrospective analysis is an expan-
sion of our clinicoplacental studies combining bpmf and occult placenta
accreta.
Methods: 169 most recent consecutive cases with placental bpmf with or
without intervening decidua (Group 1) were compared to 1661 cases
without bpmf (Group 2). Frequencies of 25 independent clinical and 40
placental phenotypes were statistically compared between the groups.
Results: Of 1830 placentas examined since 2009, 169 showed bpmf
(11.2%). Placentas with bpmf as compared with placentas without bpmf
were statistically significantly (p<0.05) more common in association with
cesarean sections (11.2% vs 7.5%), antepartum haemorrhage (17.7% vs
11.6.%), gestational hypertension or preeclampsia (23.1% vs 6.0%), com-
plicated 3rd stage of labor (18.9% vs 6.4%), villous infarction (14.2% vs
8.9%), uterine pattern (14.8%, vs 9.6%), massive perivillous fibrin depo-
sition (9.5% vs 5.3%), chorionic disc chorionic microcysts (21.8% vs
15.9%), clusters of maternal floor multinucleate trophoblasts (27.8% vs
21.2%), excessive trophoblasts of chorionic disc (24.3% vs 17.3%), seg-
mental villous avascularity (27.8% vs 19.9%), and foetal vascular ectasia
(26.2% vs 15.2%).
Conclusion: Because of the association of bpmf with increased
extravillous trophoblasts in the chorionic discand maternal floor
trophoblastic giant cells, they should be included into the spectrum of
placental lesions of shallow placental implantation rather than linked to
decidual deficiency only.
PS-11-001
Polytropic effect of polymetallic dust on the experimental rats lungs
K. Abdikadirova*, C. Zhienbayeva, S. Arinova, L. Bystrevskaya,
I. Medvedeva
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Polytropic effect of dust depends on a com-
plex chemical composition, which impact with possible effects of sum-
mation or potentiation on the organism. To study the polymetallic dust
effect on the lung tissue of experimental animals at intratracheally
exposure.
Methods: The experiment included 30 outbred white male rats weighing
180-220g. for 30 days. Lung pieces were fixed in neutral formalin 10%,
morphological studies were carried out according to standard methods.
The object of the study was the lung tissue of experimental animals. The
experiment was realized according to «Rules for biomedical experiments
conducting» of MH RK (November 12, 2009 №697).
Results: The initial stages of desquamative bronchitis and a pathological
tumour in the middle lobes of the lungs with compaction of the lungs
stroma of oncological nature were revealed after intratracheal dusting. An
accumulation of dust as rounded formations surrounded by fibroblasts,
fibrocytes and macrophages was noted in the adventitial bronchi
membrane.
The number of destroyed alveoli increased, the formation of pronounced
emphysematous zones occurred subpleural in the lungs of rats.
Conclusion: It can be assumed that dust causes a polytropic effect on
lung tissue, provokes the formation of a tumour of a malignant nature and
degeneration of fibrous tissue, since it is associated with a violation of the
parenchyma of the lungs and blood vessels with the subsequent formation
of cell-dust foci and expressed subpleural emphysematous zones.
The preserved alveoli were different shape, the blood vessels were char-
acterized by plethora and severe perivascular oedema.
PS-11-002
Pathomorphological changes in the lung parenchyma at the exposure
of multicomponent polymetallic dust
K. Abdikadirova*, B. Chergizova, Y. Talaspekova, B. Suleimenova,
I. Baryshnikova
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: The clinical picture of dusty diseases indi-
cates damage of the lung tissue and respiratory tract with the development
of pneumosclerosis, chronic bronchitis and bronchial asthma.
To study the pathomorphology of the lung parenchyma after exposure of
dust in various doses.
Methods: Experimental study was carried out on outbred white rats
weighing 180-220 g for 30 days. Effective doses of the toxicant 10 mg/
m3 and 25 mg/m3 were used. The experiment was carried out by «Rules
for biomedical experiments conducting» of MH RK (November 12, 2009
№697).
Results: The initial stage of desquamative bronchitis was revealed in the
bronchi; in the bronchi adventitia, cell-dust foci of polymetallic dust
accumulation surrounded by fibroblasts, fibrocytes and macrophages
were observed. The number of destroyed alveoli increased with dose
increasing, and the formation of expressed emphysematous zones of
pneumosclerosis increased.
PS-11 Pulmonary Pathology
Virchows Arch
The behavioural activity of rats was studied after dust inhalation. The
motor activity decreased after dusting dose increase.
Conclusion: The metals of the dust cause a polytropic effect with an
increase of the toxicant dose, have high bioactivity and accumulate in
the stroma of the bronchi and alveolar tissue. A significant decrease in the
weight and muscle strength was observed at the exposure of dust maxi-
mum dose, which was clearly expressed by the experiment end.
The behavioural activity of rats at a dose of 10 mg/m3 was moderate, at
25 mg/m3 – expressed behavioural reactions were reduced.
PS-11-003
Congenital pulmonary airway malformation diagnosed at elderly
age – experience from a tertiary hospital
V. Almeida*, R. Almeida, J. Madeira, J. Fraga, V. Sousa, L. Carvalho
*CHUC, IAP-PM, FMUC, Portugal
Background & objectives: Congenital pulmonary airway malforma-
tion (CPAM) is a nonhereditary lung anomaly mainly detected
prenatally or during early life, but some remain asymptomatic
during adulthood.
This study summarizes the clinicopathological features of CPAM diag-
nosed in elderly patients over a 10-year period.
Methods: We retrospectively identified all CPAM diagnosis between
2009-2019 and selected all the cases in which patient age was equal or
superior to 70-years-old. These cases were reviewed and classified ac-
cording to the Stocker system. Clinical and radiological data were obtain-
ed from Hospital registries.
Results: Five CPAMs were diagnosed on patients older than 70-years;
two were men. Three patients had registries of previous pneumonia and
two were former smokers.
Presentation symptoms were haemoptysis, cough and/or fever. TC scan
showed nodular formations or caveated masses. All patients were submit-
ted to lobectomy: four were diagnosed with Stocker type I CPAM, one
with Stocker type II CPAM. Two patients were concurrently diagnosed
with mucinous adenocarcinoma.
Conclusion: CPAM can be asymptomatic or course with nonspecific
lung infections, so it must be considered at any age.
Two patients presented with mucinous adenocarcinoma, supporting the
need to treat every CPAM as it can potentially evolve to carcinoma.
PS-11-004
Results of intraoperative consultation in lung and mediastinal lesions
E. Kilic Bagir*, D. Gumurdulu, A. Acikalin, M. İnceman, A. Avci
*Cukurova University, Faculty of Medicine, Pathology Department,
Turkey
Background & objectives: The determination of histopathological diag-
nosis during mediastinal surgery is important for proper surgical staging.
The aim of our study is to determine the accuracy rate of our intraoper-
ative consultation results and to review the diagnostic problems that may
cause errors.
Methods: In this study, frozen results of 563 lung, pleural, mediastinal
masses and lymph nodes diagnosed by intraoperative consultation be-
tween December 2013 and July 2018 at Çukurova University Faculty
of Medicine Pathology Department were retrospectively evaluated.
Frozen sections were compared with paraffin sections.
Results: One hundred fifty six (27.6%) cases were female and 407
(74.4%) were male. The mean age was 57.6 years (3-90). The diagnostic
accuracy rate was 95.9% in the frozen section results. Of the 16 patients
who were misdiagnosed, 6 (1.06%) had false positives and 10 (1.77%)
had false negative results. In 7 (1,24%) cases, the diagnosis was left to
permanent sections. In the re-evaluation of 16 cases with incorrect results
in our series, we found that the causes of misdiagnosis were caused by
macroscopic sampling error, technical reasons and interpretation error.
Conclusion: Intraoperative consultation is a procedure that effects to
surgery in mediastinal and lung parenchymal lesions. In order to mini-
mize misdiagnosis rates, it is important to have sufficient number of
samples and to eliminate technical problems.
PS-11-005
An AI-based tool to identify cancer areas in lung biopsies
L. Björk*, H. Elfving, S. Elwing, M. Andersson, C. Lindskog, L. Kajland
Wilen, P. Micke
*KBH, Karolinska Institutet, Contextvision AB, Sweden
Background & objectives: Histopathology of lung-cancer forms the
backbone of diagnostics but is dependent on the experience of the pathol-
ogist. Even skilled pathologist, has a challenge to evaluate biopsies. To
better the process, we trained a deep-segmentation neural-network to
identify cancer in lung-biopsies.
Methods: We retrieved 90 retrospective cases of lung cancer, containing
200 WSIs of H&E-stained biopsies including clinical metadata form
Uppsala University Hospital. The slides were scanned and two patholo-
gists made pixel-level multiclass annotations, one reviewing the other,
using Contextvision´s INIFY viewer and annotation tool. A U-Net was
trained on 160 of the WSIs and was evaluated on the remaining 40 WSI’s
Results: Visual comparisons using probability heat maps revealed strik-
ing agreements between manual annotations and the predicted cancer
areas selected by the model. In addition, the model correctly assigned
areas to the Benign, Necrosis, or Cancer histological subgroup.
The table shows the median pixel-level performance statistics on the
evaluation images:
Conclusion: We present a deep learning network that could identify and
outline cancer in lung biopsies with good accuracy. This network could
be further developed into a decision support tool for pathologists in their
routine diagnostic process.
Funding by: VINNOVA—Sweden's innovation agency
PS-11-006
Her family genes, DDR2 and PI3KCA mutations may be early events
in pre-neoplastic lesions and in atypical bronchial type epithelium
L. Carvalho*, A.F. Ladeirinha, A. Alarcão, M.R. Silva, T. Ferreira,
A. Rodrigues, C. Vilasboas, A. Figueiredo, F. Barata, V. Sousa
*Institute of Anatomical and Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine
of the University of Coimbra, Portugal; CIMAGO - Research Center for
Environment, Genetics and Oncobiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Coimbra, Portugal; University Hospital Anatomical
Pathology Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Early diagnosis will decrease lung cancer
incidence through molecular changes identification in pre-neoplastic
and in pre-invasive lesions.
NGS was applied to either adenocarcinoma and atypical bronchial type
epithelium and to cases of AIS and MIA.
Methods: Three pulmonary adenocarcinomas and concomitant
atypical bronchial type epithelium were manually/independently
microdissected from FFPE blocks; adenocarcinoma in situ (1
case) and minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (2 cases) were also
selected.
Benign
Necrosis
Cancer
Precision
0.95
0.97
0.81
Recall
0.93
0.73
0.72
Virchows Arch
Routine immunohistochemical panel was applied for precise diagnosis.
NGS (colon/lung panel) was performed in a PGM platform and ALK,
ROS1 and MET FISH analysis was also performed on 4-μm-thick.
Results: Adenocarcinomas expressed CK7 /TTF1; two also expressed
Vim and p63 to a lesser extent. AIS and MIA cells expressed CK7 and
TTF1.
Identified somatic mutations concerned KRAS, FGFR2 and DDR2 in two
adenocarcinomas and respective ABTE; PI3KCA, EGFR and MET repre-
sented another duet while ERBB2 raised up also.
ALK and ROS1 rearrangements or MET amplifications were not found
by FISH.
The AIS case exhibited ERBB2/4, EGFR and SMAD4 somatic mutations
while the two MIA cases were sequencing apparently wild-type for the
applied panel.
Conclusion: Mutational status in ABTE identical to concomitant adeno-
carcinomas provides concern about early genetic events present in lung
adenocarcinoma carcinogenesis deserving further studies to be empha-
sized as pre-neoplastic lesion to lead early clinical guidance for high-risk
patients identification in bronchial – pulmonary carcinoma in screening.
PS-11-007
Nucleolin expression in pleural mesothelioma – a potential therapeu-
tic target
L. Carvalho*, A.C. Gregório, N.A. Fonseca, V. Sousa, A. Alarcão,
A.F. Ladeirinha, M.R. Silva, T. Ferreira, A. Rodrigues, C. Vilasboas,
J.N. Moreira
*Institute of Anatomical and Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine
of the University of Coimbra, Portugal; CIMAGO - Research Center for
Environment, Genetics and Oncobiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Coimbra, Portugal; University Hospital Anatomical
Pathology Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Treatment of pleural mesothelioma includes
surgery/chemotherapy often palliative. Cisplatin/pemetrexed constitute
current standard but curative therapy remains unclear. Nucleolin involve-
ment in tumorigenesis/angiogenesis might be related to metastisation
raising nucleolin expression determination in pleural mesothelioma
necessary.
Methods: Biopsies/lobectomy samples of 21 mesotheliomas without any
preoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy treatment and classified after
calretinin/CK5.6/WT1/vimentin/podoplanin/Ber-Ep4/TTF1 had
nucleolin expression validated through positive cells percentage/field:
0% = 0 (negative); 1-10% = +1 (low positive); 11-49% = +2 (positive)
and ³50% = +3 (highly positive).
Results: Histopathological characteristics and nucleolin scoring correlat-
ed biphasic mesothelioma +3 – eight cases; epithelioid mesothelioma +2-
five cases and +3-four cases and sarcomatoid mesothelioma +1 – +3 –
three cases, all with consistent fusiform cellular stroma. Positive and
strong staining of the nucleus was observed in all the cases, albeit it
was also possible to see some cells that did not express the protein.
Cytoplasmic staining accompanied by membrane staining was observed
in 3 of the 20 mesothelioma samples analysed.
Conclusion: Nucleolin value as both prognostic factor and possible ther-
apeutic target in several types of cancer has been extensively studied.
Also subject of interest for targeted delivery systems in the context of
oncological diseases reveals to be a promising mesothelioma therapeutic
target.
PS-11-008
NUT carcinoma: a tertiary single institute experience with a case of
EWSR1 rearrangement
H. Cho*, M.J. Song, K. Cho, J.S. Song
*Department of Pathology, University of Ulsan, College of Medicine,
Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: NUT carcinoma is a rare and aggressive
tumour, defined by chromosomal rearrangement of NUT (nuclear protein
in testis, i.e. NUTM1) gene. Herein we describe clinical and histological
characteristics of seven cases in a single institute experience.
Methods: Seven cases of NUT carcinomas were identified from
June 2014 to February 2020. All cases were confirmed by diffuse nuclear
NUT immunoreactivity and/or NUT rearrangement by FISH. Clinico-
pathologic parameters were reviewed. Next-generation sequencing
(NGS) was performed in three cases.
Results: Primary sites included lung, frontal and ethmoid sinuses, larynx,
and axillary area. Five patients had multiple metastases at the time of
diagnosis. The tumours showed small round cell morphology
with/without abrupt keratinization. The tumour were immuno-positive
for cytokeratin (ck, 6/6, 100 %) and p40 (4/5, 80%). One showed
EWSR1 rearrangement by FISH which initially diagnosed as Ewing sar-
coma. Another one showed mutations of NF1 and APC genes by NGS.
Conclusion: NUT carcinoma is a diagnostic challenging disease and has
been misdiagnosed as poorly differentiated carcinoma, squamous cell
carcinoma, Ewing sarcoma, and desmoplastic small round cell tumour.
The recognition of this entity is important to prevent misdiagnosis and to
suggest the proper treatment. In addition, the name of NUT rearranged
tumour is more favourable due to CK -negative NUT positive tumour.
PS-11-011
A unique case of extrasomatic angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma aris-
ing from the pulmonary hilum
T. Costa Pereira*, E. Rios, S. Guimarães
*Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Portugal
Background & objectives: Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is
an uncommon soft tissue tumour that typically occurs in the extremities.
Fewer than 10 cases having been reported in the pulmonary region.
Herein we report the first case of AFH arising from the pulmonary hilum.
Methods: A 32-year-old male presenting with recurrent haemoptysis was
found to have a hypervascular mass (53mm) in the right pulmonary hilum,
involving the pulmonary vein, the interlobar artery and the middle lobe bron-
chi on CT scan. The routine staging including PET scanning, disclosed no
evidence of disease elsewhere. After several inconclusive biopsies, a right
pneumonectomy was performed due to massive haemoptysis.
Results: The tumour comprised a multinodular proliferation of bland
spindle to histiocytoid cells with dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate
and angiomatoid features, which had invaded into bronchial and vessel
walls (exhibiting an impressive endovascular growth) and two hilar
lymph nodes. There was no significant atypia, mitosis or necrosis.
Immunohistochemical profile (CD99, CD68, EMA diffusely positive;
desmin focally positive with dendritic-like pattern) and detection of
EWSR1(22q12) gene rearrangements confirmed the diagnosis of AFH.
Conclusion: AFH can occur at unusual sites, including the pulmo-
nary hilum. Diagnosis can be extremely difficult, especially in lim-
ited biopsies or when involving lymph nodes. Once completely
resected, pulmonary AFP discloses a benign clinical behaviour,
even if nodal metastases occur.
PS-11-012
Pitfalls in ROS1 immunohistochemistry in non-small cell lung carci-
noma: equivocal ROS1 immunostaining can be associated with alter-
native mutation status
M. Cotter*, J. Gorman, N. Nadeem, C. O’Brien, S. Finn, A. Fabre
*Department of Histopathology, St. Vincent’s University Hospital, Elm
Park, Dublin, Ireland
Background & objectives: ROS-1 gene rearrangement is an important
predictive biomarker for targeted tyrosine kinase inhibition. The College
of American Pathologists supports the use of ROS-1
Virchows Arch
immunohistochemistry as a screening tool followed by confirmation of
rearrangement by sequencing in all positive cases.
Methods: We retrospectively examined the correlation between immu-
nohistochemistry (IHC) using the Ventana SP384 ROS-1 antibody, on
routine diagnostic tissue sections, and rearrangement status by next gen-
eration sequencing (Lung panel Oncomine Focus Assay, Ion Torrent).
Clinicopathological details including age at diagnosis, tumour morphol-
ogy and rearrangement /molecular status were collated.
Results: The cohort included 39females and 25males, age range 36-88
(average 66). 64 were tested: 2 lung resections, 52 biopsies(40
lung/pleura, 5 bone/soft tissue, 5 lymph node, 2 liver) and 10 cytology
specimens. 55/64(86%) were adenocarcinomas. ROS-1 expression was
detected in 33%(21/64). 3/21 showed strong positive staining with 1
confirmed CD74-ROS1 fusion, 1 KRAS codon 12 mutation and 1 neg-
ative for fusions/mutations. Equivocal expression was present in
28%(n=18) without subsequent ROS-1 rearrangement, but with
KRAS(39%, n=7), EGFR(17%, n=3), and HER2(6%, n=1) mutations,
giving a false positive rate of 17%. 3 showed no fusions/mutations and
4 were insufficient/not sequenced. ROS-1 expression was also noted in
reactive type II pneumocytes and mesothelial cells.
Conclusion: ROS-1 immunoreactivity should be interpreted with caution as
tumours lacking ROS-1 rearrangement may still express ROS-1 by IHC and
harbour alternative mutations (i.e. KRAS in 39%). Reporting of IHC staining
should be done in conjunction with mutational status if possible.
PS-11-013
Bronchiolar adenoma: a report of four cases with morphological,
immunophaenotypic and genomic analysis
X. Wang, J. Huang, J. Da*
*National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/
Cancer Hospital & Shenzhen Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, China
Background & objectives: To improve the capacity of differential diag-
nosis and avoid confusion of recognition caused by various morpholog-
ical changes of bronchiolar adenoma(BA).
Methods: Various patterns and trilineage cell of four cases were reviewed
morphologically and immunohistochemically (IHC), and meantime, per-
formed genomic analysis by Next-generation sequencing (NGS, Illumina
Hiseq).
Results: Different intensity/pattern of immunophenotype was demonstrated
at trilineage cell, including basel cells(BCs), ciliated cells(CCs), mucous
cells(MCs). #1 was composed of bilayers of BCs with both MCs and CCs,
the MCs was predominant. IHC expressed strong for TTF-1, NapsinA, p40,
and Braf-specific antibodies with Braf mutation(p.V600E). #2 was similar to
#1. However, luminal cells consisted of MCs, negative for NapsinA without
Braf mutation. #3, “distal-type BA” contained predominant CCs and cuboidal
cells without MCs, papillary/glandular architecture. Bilayered architecture
were equivocal, and possible to overlie BCs layer by luminal cells. IHC
showed strong for TTF-1, NapsinA, EGFR; weak p40; with EGFR mutation
(L858R, E709K). #4 appeared to BA mixed with malignant component.
Conclusion: Variour morphology, immunophenotype and gene mutation
appeared in our four cases. This suggests that BA may arise from
different stem cells or differentiate for different lineage cells. It is
possible that BA occured at respiratory bronchiole lacks complete-
ly bi-layered architecture.
PS-11-014
Alveolar proteinosis: The Cruces University Hospital experience in
the last 20 years
S. Gamba Torrez*, S. Fernández Solé, A. Marcos Muñoz, G. Garcia De
Casasola Rodriguez, D. Parron Collar, I. Diaz De Lezcano Manrique De
Lara, A. Gartzia Rivero, Y. Aberasturi Plata, M.I. Imaz Murga, M. Saiz Camin
*Department of Pathology, Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo, Spain
Background & objectives: To describe the clinic-pathological features
of patients with alveolar proteinosis (AP) diagnosed in our Institution
during the last 20 years.
Methods: Archive retrieval and retrospective study of the histolog-
ical sections of cases diagnosed of alveolar proteinosis and review
of clinical records (including follow-up) of patients in the period
1998-2019.
Results: Four cases with the diagnosis of alveolar proteinosis (3 adults - 2
males, 1 female) were found in the retrospective review. The average age
was 37 (range 27-44). A fourth case was diagnosed in a 2-year-old girl
and was confirmed as hereditary. Diagnostic biopsies were obtained by
thoracotomy. The 3 adult cases were smokers, one of them having had
professional contact with aluminium, and another being cocaine user.
Crazy paving pattern was detected in the two patients in whose CT scan
was performed. Histological sections showed in all cases the typical pasty
eosinophilic material fulfilling the alveolar spaces. Three cases were treat-
ed with whole-lung lavage with good initial response.
Conclusion: Alveolar proteinosis consists in the accumulation of surfac-
tant in alveolar macrophages and alveoli and results in severe gas ex-
change impairment. It is considered a rare disease. 90-95% of adult cases
have an autoimmune origin and the rest are secondary. Less than 1% of
the cases are congenital. The diagnosis requires lung biopsy which shows
the typical histology of diffuse alveolar fulfilment of proteinaceous eo-
sinophilic material.
PS-11-015
Driver mutations and PD-L1 expression frequency in Galician non-
small cell lung cancer patients
S.M. García Acuña*, M. Sanchez Ares, J.R. Antúnez, J.M. Cameselle
Teijeiro, M.F. Fraga Rodriguez, I. Abdulkader Nallib
*Clinical University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela, University of
Santiago de Compostela, Spain
Background & objectives: Driver mutations and PD-L1 expression in
lung cancer are potential therapeutic targets. We investigate the preva-
lence of these molecular alterations in a group of Galician non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and compare it with reported in the
literature.
Methods: Paraffin-embedded tissue samples from 103 NSCLC patients
from our files were reviewed. Immunohistochemical study for PD-L1
expression, mutational screening for EGFR, KRAS, NRAS and BRAF
by PCR and analyses for ALK and ROS1 rearrangements by fluorescence
in situ hybridization were performed.
Results: PD-L1 expression levels were as follows: ≥50% in 14.5% cases;
1%-49% in 27.2% and <1% in 58.3%. The overall frequency of muta-
tions were: EGFR 10.7%; ALK 2.9%; ROS1 0.97%; KRAS 22.3% and
BRAF 1.94%. There were no tumours with NRAS mutations.
Conclusion: Compared to the literature, frequencies of driver mutations
and PD-L1 expression level ≥50% are consistent, but frequencies of 1-
49% levels are lower and those of <1% higher than expected, probably
due to interobserver variability and tumour heterogeneity.
PS-11-016
Matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in foci of pulmonary
fibrosis in workers of a plutonium production facility
D. Gogoleva*, E. Kazachkov, G. Sychugov, T. Azizova, V. Revina,
A. Sychugov
*Chelyabinsk Bureau of Pathology, Russia
Background & objectives: Morphogenesis of radiation-related pulmonary
fibrosis (PF) has not been sufficiently investigated. Current studies are fo-
cused mainly on matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) and their inhibitors
(TIMP). The present study was aimed to investigate the role of MMP-
TIMP in pathogenesis of radiation-related PF.
Virchows Arch
Methods: We investigated immunomorphological characteristics of PF
based on autopsy material taken from 101 Mayak nuclear workers. 32
samples of plutonium-induced PF (PuPF); 34 samples of non-plutonium
PF (non-PuPF) collected from workers with a clinical diagnosis of chron-
ic obstructive pulmonary disease; 35 samples of normal tissue free from
pulmonary pathology. The sections were incubated with antibodies
against MMP-2, MMP-9, TIMP-1, TIMP-2.
Results: MMP and TIMP expression was examined in macrophages and
stromal fibroblastic components. MMP-2 density was markedly lower in
PuPF specimens (0.37:0.15;1.14) compared to non-PuPF specimens
(1.41:0.53;3.40) and normal lung tissues (0.84:0.48;1.76), p=0.0012.
On the contrary, MMP-9 was hyper-expressed in PuPF and non-PuPF
(5.02:4.08;7.75 and 4.17:3.30;6.55, respectively) compared to normal
lung tissues (0.87:0.53;1.47), p<0.0001. TIMP-1 was downregulated in
PuPF specimens, while TIMP-2 was markedly upregulated (p=0.0365
and p=0.0021, respectively).
MMP hyper-expression and proteinase-anti-proteinase disbalance in PF
foci in individuals who had been occupationally internally exposed to
alpha radiation over prolonged periods might promote disruption of the
extracellular matrix and basal membranes and the lung connective tissue
remodelling.
Conclusion: The MMP disbalance is likely to contribute to the pulmo-
nary neoplastic process. This study provides findings on expression of
components of metalloproteinase-anti-proteinase system of the pulmo-
nary tissue and its role as a potential histological marker for diagnostics
and prognosis purposes.
PS-11-017
A potential panel of four-long non-coding RNA signature to improve
survival prediction of small cell lung cancer
J. Kim*
*Chonnam National University Hwasun, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: The prognostic significance of long non-
coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) remains un-
clear and needs to be investigated.
Methods: We obtained and analysed lncRNA expression profiles in two
cohorts of 69 SCLC patients by repurposing the publicly available RNA
sequencing and microarray datasets from the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) database. Functional enrichment analysis of lncRNAs-related pro-
tein-coding genes (PCGs) includes DAVID bioinformatic tool, GSEA,
and cytoscape enrichement map.
Results: In the discovery series of 48 patients, we identified a set of four
lncRNAs that was significantly associated with patients' overall survival (OS)
using univariate Cox regression analysis. The four-lncRNA signature classi-
fied patients of the discovery series into the high-risk group and low-risk
group with significantly different survival outcome (p < 0.0002). The four-
lncRNA signature was further tested in the independent dataset. Moreover,
the prognostic value of the four-lncRNA signature is independent of conven-
tional clinical factors. Functional analysis suggested that four-lncRNA signa-
ture may be involved with SCLC through exerting their regulatory roles in
known cancer-related pathways, DNA repair, glycosylation and metabolism.
Conclusion: Our study not only highlighted the potential role for
lncRNAs to improve clinical prognosis prediction in patients with
SCLC but also provided alternative biomarkers and therapeutic targets
for SCLC patients.
PS-11-019
A lipofuscin-detecting immunohistochemical marker of senescence
relates with low proliferation and poor prognosis in non-small-cell-
lung cancer
M. Kouroupi*, K. Balaska, M.I. Koukourakis, A. Giatromanolaki
*General Hospital of Alexandroupolis, Pathology Department, Greece
Background & objectives: Cancer cell senescence is associated with a
permanent cell cycle arrest. Senescent cells exert potent bystander effects
that may regulate clinical tumour behaviour. Senescence role in defining
local and metastatic aggressiveness at a clinical level remains obscure.
Methods: A sensitive histochemical/immunohistochemical method
(SenTraGor™/STG) has been developed to detect senescent cells, based
on the synthesis of a hapten-linked Sudan Black B analogue that selec-
tively binds to lipofuscins and labels accumulating dysfunctional lyso-
somes. In our study, we validated the STG method in 98 paraffin embed-
ded surgically resected non-small-cell-lung carcinomas. Proliferation in-
dex MIB1 (PI), p16 and p21 was in parallel assessed.
Results: Strong expression of SGR in 10-100% in 36/98 cases (36.7%),
but no association with stage, histology or differentiation was noted.
Linear regression analysis showed a significant inverse association be-
tween SGR and PI (p=0.007, r=0.28). SGR was related with p21, but not
with p16 expression. Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed a direct as-
sociation of high STG expression with poor postoperative prognosis and
independent of stage. MIB1 was not related with prognosis.
Conclusion: STG provides a reliable methodology to detect lipofuscin
accumulation in cancer cells, in paraffin-embedded tissues, opening a
new field for translational studies focusing on senescence. High presence
of SGR+ senescent cells relates with poor prognosis in NSCLC.
PS-11-021
PD-L1 assays and their performance in Nordic immunohistochemi-
cal quality control (NordiQC)\
H.L. Kristoffersen*, R. Røge, S. Nielsen
*NordiQC, Denmark
Background & objectives: Immunohistochemistry for PD-L1 expres-
sion is applied in different cancer types to identify patients eligible for
treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors. NordiQC provides profi-
ciency testing for immunohistochemical (IHC) demonstration of PD-L1
expression with primary focus on non-small cell lung carcinomas
(NSCLC).
Methods: NSCLC samples characterized for PD-L1 with critical and
relevant expression levels, using the companion diagnostic (CDx) assay
22C3, Agilent, as reference standard method, were used for the assess-
ments. In each assessment, tissue micro arrays comprising 6–12
NSCLCs, were constructed. Sections were circulated to the participants
performing IHC for PD-L1 by their routine method. Results were evalu-
ated by experienced assessors.
Results: Between 2017-19, six PD-L1 assessments were performed. The
number of participants have increased from 68 in C1 to 182 in C6 with a
total number of 881 submitted protocols in the first six runs. The pass-rate
varied from 50% in C1 to 91% in C3, with an average of 81%. 37% of the
participants used CDx assays performed accordingly to vendor guidelines
provided an average pass-rate of 92%, compared to 67% for laboratory
developed (LD) assays, used by 44%. 19% modified the protocol settings
for CDx assays, providing a pass-rate of 88%. 75% of insufficient results
were characterized by false negative staining reactions changing PD-L1
status of the included carcinomas.
Conclusion: Results obtained in all six assessments showed performance
differences between LD and CDx assays. Within LD assays, meticulous
calibration and validation is required. Participation in proficiency testing
has improved the overall pass-rate for PD-L1 in NSCLC in NordiQC.
PS-11-023
BAP1 loss in malignant mesothelioma: distribution according the
histological subtype
J. Martin Lopez*, P. Martin Acosta, C. Salas Antón
*Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro,
Spain
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Malignant mesothelioma (MM) constitutes a
diagnostic challenge overall in small biopsies and cytology. Recently,
BAP1 Loss, MTAP and EZH2 IHC and NF2 and CDKN2A/p16 FISH
has immerged as useful tools and could help in problematic cases of
mesothelial proliferations.
Methods: We evaluate the distribution of histological subtype of MM
and the immunohistochemical expression of BAP1 in complete sections
of 42 cases diagnosed between 2005 and 2018 in our institution (Hospital
Universitario Puerta de Hierro).
Results: A cohort of 42 patients was recruited, 31 males (73,8%)
and 11 females (26,2%) from 35 to 79 age. The specimens were
small biopsies in 4 cases (9,6%), surgical biopsies in 30 cases
(71,4%), surgical resection in 6 cases (14,2%) and metastatic tissue
in 2 cases (4,8%). All cases were initially evaluated with at least
two mesothelial and two carcinoma markers. Regarding to the his-
tologic subtype were 30 cases of epithelioid mesothelioma (71,4%),
3 sarcomatoid (7,1%) and 9 biphasic (21,5%). Loss of BAP1 protein
expression was observed in 21 of 42 MM cases (50%). According
the histologic type, 66.6% of biphasic, 46.6% of epithelioid, and
33.3% of sarcomatoid MM were BAP1-deficient.
Conclusion: In our series we usually obtained the diagnosis of MM in
surgical biopsies. BAP1 immunohistochemistry could help in mesothelial
proliferations. According our data we observed BAP1 loss more frequent-
ly in biphasic and epithelioid subtypes.
PS-11-024
Retrospective analysis of lung transplant explants: incidence of inci-
dental malignancies in our institution
J. Martin Lopez*, R. Laporta Hernández, C. Salas Antón
*Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro,
Spain
Background & objectives: The incidental discovered of unexpected
neoplasms in lung explants has importance due to the immunosuppres-
sive therapy that patients received and, in some cases determine the over-
all survival. Few series evaluate this incidence, and usually describe it as
0,7% and 2%.
Methods: We evaluated the rate of incidental malignancies detected in
explanted lungs at our institution in a period of 24 years. A literature
review was performed to evaluate the prevalence and the risk factors
mainly involved.
Results: 6 of 639 consecutive explanted lungs have unexpected cancer
(0,9%). All male smokers. There were 4 cases of adenocarcinoma
(66,6%), 1 squamous cell carcinoma (16,6%) and 1 case of metastatic
papillary thyroid cancer (16,6%). Of them, 3 cases were in the setting of
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) (50%), 2 cases in the setting of chron-
ic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (33,3%) and one case due to
bronchiectasis (16,6%). 1 of 6 neoplasms was detected at an advanced
stage in the setting of IPF and recurrence occurred 5 months after
transplantation.
Conclusion: Incidence of unexpected cancer in our lung explants was 0,9
% and more frequently due to adenocarcinoma in the setting of IPF
similar with the data published in the literature.
IPF is an indepent risk factor associated with lung cancer and regarding to
the literature, IPF seem to be risk factor for undetected neoplasms in lung
explants. Efforts to improve screening in these populations could
be considered.
PS-11-025
Peribronchiola metaplasia (lambertosis) what is the pathological
significance?
O. Matsubara*, Y. Jin
*National Defense Medical College, Japan
Background & objectives: Peribronchiolar metaplasia (PBM) is a non-
specific reaction to injury, resulting in the extension of bronchiolar epi-
thelium through the canals of Lambert into alveoli. The genesis remains
unknown. We aim to investigate the character of this lesion.
Methods: We reviewed the resected operation materials of 70 patients
with the primary lung cancer and 13 patients of metastatic lung cancer
(MLC). Comprehensive histological review and immunihistochemical
staining for TTF-1, p40, ALK and Ki-67. We checked the lesions of
PBM, atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH), lung fibrosis, tumourlet
and smoker’s bronchiolitis.
Results: We observed PBM was in 20(28.6%) in 70 cases; 14(28%) in
adenocarcinoma (AC), 2(15.4%) in 13 squamous cell carcinomas.
(SCC), in 3(60%) in 5 large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC),
and in one (7.7%) in MLC 13 cases. AAH wass in 12(17.1%) in 70 cases;
11(22%) in AC, 0 in SCC, one (20%) in LCNEC and in one (7.7%) in
MLC cases. Lung fibrosis was in 9(12.9%) in 70 cases; in 5(10%) in AC,
4(30.7%) in SCC, in 0 in LCNEC and in one (7.7%) in MLC cases.
Tumourlet was in (11.4%) in 70 cases; in 7(14%) in AC, in 0 in SCC,
in one (20%) in LCNEC.
Conclusion: PBM is a very common finding in the lungs of the primary
lung cancer (28.6%) vs. in the lung of MLC (7.7%). Our results suggest
also PBM may be related to the pathology of AAH and tumourlet in lung
adenocarcinoma.
PS-11-026
ROS1 (SP384) screening in non-small cell lung cancer: experience in
real conditions
L.O. Moscoso Miranda*, J. Hernandez Losa, L. Salazar Huayna,
J. Castellvi Vives, S. Ramón y Cajal, I. Sansano Valero
*Vall d´Hebron University Hospital, Spain
Background & objectives: ROS1 is a mandatory biomarker in metasta-
tic lung adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is accepted as a
screening method. Our study aims to show our experience with Ventana
ROS1 clone antibody SP384 and to propose a diagnostic algorithm based
on ROS1 H-score.
Methods: We have reviewed all the ROS1 tested in our centre since the
introduction of anti-ROS1 antibody (SP384 clone) and re-evaluated 2 old
positive cases. We have calculated an H-score 0-300 using chocolate as a
visual aid for ensuring internal reproducibility. We have calculated the
best cut-off value with a ROC curve test using STATA software.
Results: We have performed 170 ROS1 IHC and found some expression
in 41. We could perform in situ hybridization in a total of 33 cases,
identifying positivity by FISH in 7 cases (21,2%). The H-score range
was 10-300 (mean 117 and median 95). The best cutoff to identify
ROS1 rearrangements was ≥200 with a sensitivity of 100% and a spec-
ificity of 100%. The total percentage of ROS1 positive rearrangements in
the new set of samples was 2,9%.
Conclusion: In our experience ROS1 SP384 clone is a useful screening
tool and performing FISH/NGS only in those cases with an H-score ≥200
would be a cost-effective approach. We plan to enlarge the sample and
test the reproducibility of the H-score method in a multicenter study.
PS-11-027
PD-L1 expression in non-small cell lung cancers, data of the molec-
ular pathology lab of National Institute of Oncology in Hungary
between May 2018 and February 2020
K. Németh*, E. Tóth, L. Fülöp
*National Institute of Oncology, Hungary
Background & objectives: Immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy have
improved the survival of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
Programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) tumour proportion score is
Virchows Arch
correlating with response and survival. Our goal was to examine the PD-
L1 expression rates of NSCLC cases.
Methods: PD-L1 immunohistochemistry (IHC) was carried out on 1687
NSCLC patients’ formalin fixed paraffin embedded material. In vitro
diagnostic DAKO PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx assay performed on
DAKO Autostainer Link 48. The evaluation of the PD-L1
immunhistochemistry was done according to the guidelines. PD-L1 tu-
mour proportion score (TPS), the histologic subtype and the mutational
status of the tumours were compared.
Results: From the 1275 adenocarcinoma, 496 (38,9%) was negative, 368
(28,9%) showed 1-49% TPS and 411 (32,2%) were more or equal to
50%. Of the 412 squamous cell carcinomas TPS distribution was equal
in each group, 34,7%, 34% and 31,3% respectively.
42,1 % of the adenocarcinomas were KRAS mutant, 12,5 % were EGFR
mutant. KRAS mutant tumours showed higher fraction of TPS>50%,
than KRAS wild type tumours. EGFR mutant tumours generally showed
low PD-L1 expression.
Conclusion: Our results show strong correlation with the literature datas.
Mutation types has effect on PD-L1 expression.
PS-11-028
Mortality for lung cancer among women in the state of Ceara, Brazil
D. Nunes Oliveira*, S. André de Souza Júnior, P. Vitória Pereira
Motoyama, V. Holanda Ferreira, J. Carneiro Melo, A. Rolim Campos,
R.L. Freitas de Almeida, N. A Roger Marie Piton, J. Benoit Sabourin
*University of Fortaleza, Brazil
Background & objectives: Lung cancer in women has shown an in-
crease in its incidence and mortality worldwide. The objective of this
study was describe the epidemiological profile and the temporal and
spatial trend of lung cancer mortality of the female population.
Methods: This is an ecologic study. Data was collected from the
Mortality Information System - Brazilian Ministry of Health. Cases of
lung cancer were selected in women recorded in Ceará, Brazilian state,
between 2000 and 2015.
Results: A predominantly upward growth pattern was observed in the
analysed period. Of a total of 4883 deaths for lung cancer in women ,2729
(55,9%) were in the age groups of 60-69 and 70-79 years of age; mainly
among brown and white women, with little or no education. The eastern
region of the state had a higher relative risk of lung cancer mortality.
Results consistent with the global trend, showing an increase in rates,
especially in advanced age groups.
Conclusion: The survey sought to contribute to a better understanding of
the mortality of lung cancer; targeted preventive interventions are needed
to combat smoking and occupational risk factors associated with the
incidence of lung cancer.
PS-11-029
Histological pattern and trend of malignant pleuropulmonary
tumours: a ten-year experience review
O. Ogunbiyi*, W. Ogunsanya, I. Nwanji, U. Ezenkwa, D. Mashor
*Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Lagos State
University College of Medicine (LASUCOM), Ikeja, Lagos, Nigeria
Background & objectives: In both sexes combined, lung cancer is the
most commonly diagnosed cancer and the leading cause of cancer death
globally. Diagnosis is increasingly being made on small tissue samples
and cytological specimens. We present here our institutional experience
regarding this.
Methods: We reviewed histo- and cytomorphological data of lung
and pleural tumour specimens received over a 10-year period (2010-
2019). Data was sourced from the surgical pathology records and
population-based cancer registry. Diagnostic materials were mainly
trucut biopsies of the pleura and lung. Appropriate statistics was
applied to evaluate tumour subtype proportions and associate clini-
copathological factors.
Results: There were 230 cases consisting of 166 (73%) biopsies and 64
(27%) cytology specimens from 103 (44.8%) males and 127 (55.2%)
females giving a female-to-male ratio of 1.2:1. The mean age was 58
±16 years. Primary tumours constituted 167 (72.6%) of the cases whilst
63 (27.4%) were metastatic tumours. Of the primary tumours, adenocar-
cinoma was the predominant histologic subtype (52.7%), with small cell
carcinoma and mesotheliomas occurring in 3.6%% and 2.4% of patients,
respectively. The number of cases diagnosed rose by 37% in the past 5
years (2014-218). Diagnosis of primary versus metastatic tumours was
significantly associated with gender (p=0.003), females having more met-
astatic tumours, likely a reflection of gender incidence.
Conclusion: Our finding suggests a rising incidence of diagnosed
pleuropulmonary tumours in this population. This reflects both the in-
creased effort by surgeons to obtain tissue for diagnosis as well as a real
projected increase in cancer burden being witnessed in developing countries
including lung cancers. As in previous studies, adenocarcinomas predom-
inate in the histomorphology. There is now a need to interrogate adenocar-
cinomas for smoking association using available genetic markers.
PS-11-030
Synchronous squamous cell carcinoma and malignant pleural meso-
thelioma: a rare case report
D. Ozyigit Buyuktalanci*, A. Veral, D. Nart, S. Tasbakan, A.G. Ergonul
*Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Izmir,
Turkey
Background & objectives: The co-existence of malignant pleural meso-
thelioma (MPM) and lung carcinoma is extremely rare. Herein, we report
an uncommon case of co-presence of squamous cell carcinoma (SHC)
and MPM.
Methods: A 75-year-old man presented with hemoptizia and dyspnea.
He had a history of smoking but no exposure to asbestos. Chest computed
tomography (CT) revealed the presence of a right lung mass combined
with right pleural effusion and multiple pleural nodules. Positron emis-
sion tomography/CT showed increased uptake in the right upper lung
mass (maximum standard uptake value:21.16). Then a right thoracentesis
was performed.
Results: The smear of the pleural fluid revealed atypical cells with
anisokaryosis and hyperchromasia forming papillary arrangements. The
tumour cells were immunoreactive to mesothelial markers (calretinin,
HBME-1, WT-1, CK5/6 were positive; BAP1 and desmin were negative)
and the patient was diagnosed with MPM. The patient underwent bron-
choscopy and there was no endobronchial lesion. Bronchial washing and
brushing were diagnosed as benign cytology. The lung mass,24x20 mm
in dimension, was evaluated on frozen section during surgery.
Histologically, islands of large polygonal malignant cells containing ker-
atin and intercellular bridges were seen and it was diagnosed SHC.
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections of the same specimens
showed immunoreactivity for p40 and CK5/6. At the same surgery, pleu-
ra biopsy was performed and epithelioid type MPM was confirmed.
Conclusion: We presented an extremely rare case of collision of MPM
and pulmonary SHC. Possible coexistence of MPM and lung carcinoma
should be considered in patients with pleural nodules and effusion.
PS-11-031
Primary pulmonary classical Hodgkin lymphoma with underlying
interstitial lung disease: a case report and review of the literature
M.B. Pimentão*, J. Fraga, L. Carvalho
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: A primary pulmonary lymphoma consists of
clonal lymphoid proliferation in the lung parenchyma or bronchus,
Virchows Arch
without extrapulmonary disease in the next 3 months. Classical Hodgkin
Lymphoma (CHL) is an indolent clonal lymphoproliferative neoplasia
originated in germinative follicular centre.
Methods: We present a case of an 81 years old man, with hypertension,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, revealed left lower lung lobe nod-
ule in a Chest X-ray. CT scan demonstrated multiple mediastinal lymph
nodes, a spiculated solid lesion, with 3x2cm, hypercaptant on PET scan
and diffuse thickening of pleural leaflets on the same lobe. Pleural thick-
ening was considered as inflammatory changes.
Results: It was performed an wedge resection of a semilunar pulmonary
fragment weighing 17.6g and measuring 5x3,5x2,5cm. Grossly it was
observed an area of 3,2x2,1x1,5cm, heterogeneous, where whitish areas
were mixed by black reticulation. Remaining scarce whitish and spongy
lung tissue with subpleural cavitation. Histologically revealing a Classic
Hodgkin's Lymphoma - nodular sclerosis variant. It was composed by
several distinct populations, with predominance of two: Reed-Stenberg
neoplastic cells and bulky Hodgkin cells. Both populations expressed
CD20, PAX5, CD30, CD15, MUM1 and EBER test was positive.
Involving the neoplasia, BALT hyperplasia with lymphoid follicles and
activated germinative centres, were present. This case also presented an
Usual interstitial pneumonia and an Epstein-Barr virus infection.
Conclusion: The misunderstood spectrum of interstitial preceding tissue
where pulmonary Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma – nodular sclerosis,
might be more frequent than what is commonly observed, suggesting that
pulmonary inflammation and time remodelling can be similar to EBV
lymph node infection.
PS-11-032
Comparative histopathological and digital scoring between
microfluidic and standard immunohistochemistry for p40 and
TTF1 on non-small cell lung carcinoma
M. Procopio*, M. Houmani, S. Brajkovic, A. Leblond, D.G. Dupouy,
A. Soltermann
*Lunaphore Technologies SA, Switzerland
Background & objectives: Microfluidic-based immunohistochemistry
(IHC) for the non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) differential diag-
nostic markers p40 (squamous cell carcinoma) and TTF1
(adenocarcinoma) was previously optimized.
Here, we aim to prove its non-inferiority with respect to standard assay for
NSCLC differential diagnosis.
Methods: Comparative scoring of p40 and TTF1 immunoreactivity be-
tween the two techniques was assessed on a NSCLC tumour microarray
(TMA) cohort (160 resected patients, two cores each). The QuPath soft-
ware was trained by manual annotation for cancer cell identification and
employed for digital quantification of p40 and TTF1 signal intensity,
reported as average score of tumour cells’ nuclei per TMA core.
Results: The microfluidic-based IHC for p40 and TTF1 was previously
optimized to achieve an analytical performance comparable to standard stain-
ing, while shortened to 26 minutes - including the antigen retrieval step.
The concordance rate between the microfluidic (LabSat®) and gold-
standard (BenchMark® ULTRA) IHC staining technique was 100% for
both p40 (n=194 cores, 126 patients) and TTF1 (n=175 cores, 119 pa-
tients) when visually scored as positive or negative as routinely done in
the histopathological practice.
Furthermore, comparison of digitally quantified staining intensity on the
same NSCLC TMA for p40 and TTF1 resulted in a very strong positive
correlation for the two techniques with a Pearson coefficient of 0.94 and
0.95, respectively.
Conclusion: Overall, the microfluidic-based IHC assay represents an
equivalent approach to the standard chromogenic staining, allowing for
NSCLC classification into squamous cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma
by automated, rapid and accurate detection of p40 and TTF1,
respectively.
Funding: KTI 25736.1 PFLS-LS
PS-11-034
Two unexpected and overlapped endobronchial benign lesions
C. Rivero Colmenarez*, S. Palomo Cousido, J. Castelao Naval, J. Fernandez
Frances, D. Luján Rodriguez
*Guadalajara University Hospital, Spain
Background & objectives: Benign neoplasms comprise less than 10%
of tumours involving the bronchi. Primary Pulmonary Leiomyoma (PL)
is very rare and usually solitary. In the other hand, solitary squamous cell
papillomas (SSP) are exceedingly rare and account <1% of all lung
neoplasms.
Methods: We present a 57-year old man presented with a several
month history of cough. The bronchoscopy image showed an
obstructive upper left bronchial lobe mass. Histology revealed an
squamous epithelial exophytic-papillary tumour with acanthosis
and a submucosal proliferation of monomorphic cells arranged
in whorls and fascicles with spindly nuclei. No necrosis or mitotic
activity.
Results: PL are uncommon both in adults and children, constituting
2% of benign lung tumours, symptoms are due to partial/complete
airway obstruction, can simulate asthma or be complicated (bron-
chiectasis and recurrent infections), besides that, endobronchial
growth can cause cough, wheeze, haemoptysis. There are four types
of respiratory papillomas: recurrent respiratory papillomatosis, soli-
tary squamous papilloma, solitary glandular papilloma and mixed
papilloma. They are 3 times more common in men that are usually
in their 6th decade of life, presented with obstructive symptoms and
up to 25% could be asymptomatic. CT scan reveals endobronchial
plaques, nodules or thickening. They are usually central and
endobronchial. The size range is 0,7 to 9 cm.
Conclusion: PL are the rarest benign neoplasms of the respiratory
tract and treatment should be conservative but as SSP`s local
recurrence-transformation into squamous cell carcinoma is uncer-
tain, surgical and more aggressive manage is recommended. We
present this overlapped benign endobronchial lesion case due to
their low incidence, the fact that SSP could be misdiagnosed as a
carcinoma and the need of diagnostic/manage algorithms to avoid
unnecessary thoracotomies and wedge resections.
PS-11-035
Proposition of a morphological score to predict the STK11 variation
status in lung adenocarcinomas without genotyping
L. Claude, N. Piton, A. Lamy, F. Marguet, J. Sabourin*
*Rouen University Hospital, France
Background & objectives: STK11 is the third mutated gene in lung
adenocarcinomas (LUAC). STK11-mutated LUAC are resistant or poor
responders to immunotherapy. Our objective was to build a morpholog-
ically predictive score that could assess STK11 mutation status before
genotyping.
Methods: LUAC surgical specimens resected during a 2-year pe-
riod were included. Twenty-eight morphological criteria were
assessed. Among them, 2 criteria, i.e. presence of mucinous con-
tingent and presence of lymphoid nodule at low magnification,
seemed more frequent in STK11-mutated LUAC. A morphologi-
cal score was built attributing one point to the presence of these 2
criteria: minimum 0 and maximum 2.
Results: Forty-eight STK11-mutated and 235 STK11-wild type
LUAC were morphologically evaluated. With a threshold defined
at 1, our morphological score showed a sensitivity of 94%, a
specificity of 34%, a negative predictive value of 95% and a
positive predictive value of 29%. Of note, lymphoid nodules are
usually associated with a better response to immunotherapy. In
STK11-mutated LUAC, immune response seemed to be impaired,
explaining this paradoxical finding.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: In a recent study using deep learning-image analysis,
STK11 mutational status was predicted using only morphological criteria,
which were not determined.
Our good results, using a 2-criteria morphological score, warrant
further validation in a larger muticentre series of LUAC.
PS-11-036
Cryobiopsy in lung transplant patients: diagnostic yield and long-
term mortality
L.E. Salazar Huayna*, K. Loor, O. Moscoso Miranda, J. De Gracia,
M. Culebras, C. Berastegui, A. Alvarez, I. Sansano Valero
*Vall d´Hebron University Hospital, Spain
Background & objectives: Transbronchial biopsy (TB) is a routine pro-
cedure to assess rejection in lung transplant patients. Cryobiopsies are a
kind of TB that provides more tissue with few complications. We report
the diagnostic yield and long-term mortality in our series.
Methods: We have reviewed the 429 cryobiopsies’ diagnosis and follow-
up of 256 patients transplanted at Vall d’Hebron University Hospital
between April 2011 and April 2016.
Results: Of the 429 cryobiopsies analysed we could reach a multidisci-
plinary diagnosis in 421. All-cause 5-year mortality was 25.8% (n=66).
Three patients died within 30 days (1.2%). Only one of these cases (0.2%)
was directly related to the procedure (pneumothorax). Nine patients died
within 90 days (3.5%) and 29 patients died within 360 days (11.3%).
Conclusion: Safety of cryobiopses has been recently questioned in
terms of long-term mortality in patients with difuse parenchymal
disease. We can say that this observation is not true for transplanted
patients. Our series has a high diagnostic yield and a 5 years mor-
tality rate that is halve the observed in lung transplanted patients
demonstrating that cryobiopsies are safe and can potentially im-
prove patients’ outcomes.
PS-11-037
Pluripotency factors in mesothelioma
F. Seiwerth, F. Sedlic, A. Sepac, S. Sikiric, L. Batelja Vuletic, S. Seiwerth*
*UZSM, Croatia
Background & objectives: Pluripotency factors and PI3K-AKT path-
way regulate tumour differentiation status and could be responsible for
local and distal spreading of the tumour, resistance to therapy and other
unfavourable characteristics of malignancy. We tested their expression in
mesothelioma and mesothelium.
Methods: We tested samples of 66 patients diagnosed with Epitheloid
Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma. Of them male (93%), with median age
of 62 (27- 82) at the time of diagnosis. Pathohistological samples have
been analysed and subclassified into 6 subtypes: solid (23 cases, 34.8%) ,
tubulopapillary (18, 27.7%), pleomorphic (12, 18.1%), trabecular (8,
12%), micropapillary (3, 4.5%) and microcystic (2 cases, 3%).
Results: Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed median overall survival
of 15 months (95% CI 10.2- 19.7), but without statistical significance
between various histological subtypes (chi square 9.176, p=0.102).
Immunohistochemical staining was performed to determine expression
of pluripotency factors Sox2, Oct-4, Akt and Nanog as well as the Pi3k-
bcl 2 signalling pathway in mesothelioma histological subtypes. Sox 2
expression was high in all MPM samples, while the expression of oct-4
was negative regardless of subtype. Other proteins had moderate to high
expression. Correlation between transcription factors expression and
overall survival time was calculated. Nanog (Pearson corr. 0.282,
p=0.022) and Sox-2 (0.281, p=0.023) suggesting correlation significance.
Conclusion: Human mesothelioma exhibits enhanced expression
of NANOG, SOX2 and AKT proteins and reduced expression of
BCL2 representing the basis for further pluripotency studies.
Funding by: HRZZ Grant
PS-11-038
Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis with extensive lung involve-
ment in a young woman with juvenile-onset form
M. Souto Moura*, A. Tavares, S. Saleiro, L.P. Afonso, M. Jácome,
A.L. Cunha
*Department of Pathology, IPO-Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis(RRP),
human papilloma virus(HPV–mostly 6 and 11) related, is charac-
terized primarily by laryngeal papillomatous lesions rarely affect-
ing the nasopharynx, tracheobronchial tree(2-5%) and pulmonary
parenchyma(1-3.3%). Juvenile-onset form (JORRP) develops be-
fore 20-years-of-age (mean 3-5.5 years) mainly due to vertical
transmission.
Methods: We report the case of a 28-years-old female, non-HPV vacci-
nated, non-smoker, with JORRP since 3-years-of-age, submitted to
dozens of larynx papillary lesions endoscopic CO2-laser exci-
sions. Lastly, tracheal lesions were discovered and CT-scan re-
vealed several bilateral (mostly inferior lobes) lung cavitated le-
sions(4-24mm) and a 12mm inferior right lung lobe solid lesion,
consistent with RRP imaging findings. The solid lesion was
biopsied.
Results: All the larynx lesions previously removed were histologically
compatible with squamous cell papillomas with HPV infection
cytopathic signs and some with areas of mild dysplasia. The cur-
rent lung biopsy revealed intra-alveolar nests of squamous epithe-
lium (consistent with RRP lung involvement) with focal necrotic
and degenerative aspects that were suspicious but not sufficient
for a malignancy diagnosis. HPV genotyping of one of the most
recent larynx lesions and of the lung biopsy revealed infection
with HPV11.
In this case, histopathological findings were consistent with RRP with
lung involvement and the scarcity of material prevented the conclusion of
malignant transformation.
Conclusion: JORRP is generally more aggressive than adult form with
multiple papillomas, high recurrence rate and need of several sur-
geries, increasing downward/lung dissemination possibility.
HPV11, age-of-onset and multiple recurrences represent risk fac-
tors for aggressiveness (our case) and malignant transformation
(<1% of cases).
PS-11-039
The role of pulmonary collapse in radiation-induced lung injury
S. Timofeev*, Y. Kirillov, I. Chernov, Y. Malysheva, O. Rozenberg
*Tyumen State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Radiation therapy is used for the treatment of
cancer but it has a severe effect on other organs. The goal of this study is
to find out the morphological characteristics of pulmonary collapse after a
single dose of X-ray exposure.
Methods: For this study, two groups of Wistar male rats, aged between 8-
9 weeks, were used. The main group of rats received a single
dose of X-Ray. In both groups, surfactant phospholipids were
checked. At various time points, each of the rats were sacrificed
and lung samples were analysed through light and electron
microscopy.
Results: On days 1 - 3, changes in the lung tissue could only be observed
by electron microscopy in the subpleural areas. We discovered
signs of endothelial and type II alveolocyte’s damage, such as
oedema, disturbances in the location of the organelles,
osmiophilic bodies and destruction of the surfactant. At the end
of the first week, partial atelectasis were seen by light microsco-
py. Moreover, during this time, zones of pulmonary collapse ex-
panded from the subpleural area to the lung’s root. Between 2
and 7 weeks, there was a noticeable change in the lung and
Virchows Arch
constriction of the bronchus was widespread. After 7 weeks, a
‘honeycomb’ pattern and pulmonary fibrosis was observed.
Conclusion: This study showed that after a single dose of X-ray expo-
sure, atelectasis starts from the distal, subpleural areas and moves down.
There are different causes of pulmonary collapse, including surfactant
damage, hypoxia, the destruction of the epithelium cells and bronchial
constriction.
PS-11-040
The oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction in radiation-induced
lung injury
Y. Malysheva, Y. Kirillov, I. Chernov, S. Timofeev*, V. Kukushkin
*Tyumen State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Irradiation of organs of the thoracic cage to
treat malignancies causes frequent complications that manifest as radia-
tion pneumonitis and fibrosis. The purpose of this study is to evaluate
oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction in radiation induced lung
injury(RILI).
Methods: Two groups or the Wistar-male-rats were used. One group had
been irradiated by a single dose 12Gy of X-ray on the right lung. Non-
irradiated group had been instilled with a saline solution into trachea.
Animals from both groups were sacrificed on the different days after
the beginning of the experiment and their lungs specimen had been
analysed.
Results: Signs of the endothelial dysfunction were discovered by electron
microscopy in the lung’s capillaries such as spasm, endothelial
dystrophy and neoangiogenesis in the first hours after the start.
IHC showed the reduction of the endothelial function markers
(CD31, CD34, CD117, VEGFR1, VEGFR2, e-NOS) but their ac-
tivity had been recovered in a few weeks. The local maximum of
the residual fluorescence identified on the spectrum of the speci-
mens is conditioned by toxicity of– OH radicals, superoxide anion
radicals – O2 and some quantity of – CH3 radicals in the tissues.
Superoxide anion radicals reduced the amount of nitrogen oxides
converting them into peroxynitrites (ONOOH).
Conclusion: The results show that signs of oxidative stress and endothe-
lial dysfunction could be detected within the first 24 hours after the ini-
tiation of the experiment by electron microscopy. Raman-fluorescent
shows peaks by the 3rd day and the activity decreases by the 50th day
of the experiment. Free radicals play the key role in oxydative stress and
mediate the extent and intensity of the endothelial dysfunction.
PS-11-041
The use of multigene next generation sequencing to improve accura-
cy of lung cancer staging in multiple tumours
S. Toomey*, P. Bennett, D. Moore
*United Kingdom
Background & objectives: In patients with multiple lung carcinomas,
pathological staging depends upon whether these are considered indepen-
dent. Molecular profiling has value in making this distinction. We
reviewed a case series in which multigene sequencing was performed
and assessed the impact on staging.
Methods: We searched the case database of the Sarah Cannon Molecular
Diagnostics laboratory to identify patients with multiple synchro-
nous lung carcinomas which had undergone NGS. The histopa-
thology reports from these cases were reviewed alongside the
tumour mutational profiles to determine evidence of clonality
and whether the staging of their lung carcinoma was affected
following the results of NGS.
Results: The patients included in the study were all diagnosed with lung
adenocarcinoma, and the tumour nodules showed similar histolog-
ic types. Seven patients were identified and for 5 of these cases
the tumours showed differing somatic mutations indicating that
these are likely to be independent primaries. In the remaining 2
patients, there were overlapping variants in the detected mutation
profile, indicating that these are highly likely to represent separate
nodules of the same tumour. TNM stage was altered in 2 cases
overall as a result of the molecular profiling.
Conclusion: The integration of multigene molecular profiling alongside
conventional histopathological reporting can improve the accuracy of
TNM staging in multiple pulmonary tumours.
PS-11-042
Clinical and economic impact of the current testing scenario for ALK
rearrangements in Spain compared to a hypothetical no-testing
scenario
H.E. Torres Rivas*, L. Cabezón, E. Nadal, D. Bautista, A.L. Ortega, F. Rojo,
L. Ruiz de Alda, F. García, P. Vieitez, D. Carcedo
*Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Spain
Background & objectives: Biomarkers play an essential role in diagno-
sis, treatment, and management of lung cancer. The aim of this study is to
assess, for the first time, the clinical and economic impact of current ALK
testing scenario in Spain.
Methods: Estimate the cost-health outcomes of NSCLC patient compar-
ing current testing scenario vs no-testing scenario. A panel of expert
established the assignment of the target treatment (true and false posi-
tive-negative). 3-states Markov model was developed, where progression
free-survival and overall-survival curves were parameterized using expo-
nential extrapolations to model transition of patients among health states.
Only medical direct costs were included (€2019).
Results: A target population of 7,628 NSCLC (non-squamous and never-
smoker squamous) patients was estimated. Over a lifetime horizon, the
current ALK testing scenario produced additional 4,291 life years and
3,120 quality adjusted life years (QALYs), compared with no-testing
scenario. More analyses such as the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
(ICER) (9.855 €/QALY), effect of increasing the testing rate and sensi-
tivity analyses, to confirmed the robustness of the base-case results, were
carried out.
Conclusion: The resulting ICER shows that performing molecular test-
ing to the appropriate population of NSCLC patients is a cost-effective
strategy in Spain.
Funding by: ROCHE Farma
PS-11-043
Analysis of frequency of EGFR and ALK mutations, and PD-L1
expression in patients with lung adenocarcinoma in Bosnia and
Herzegovina
D. Udovicic-Gagula*
*Clinical Center University of Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
Background & objectives: Molecular testing of lung adenocarcinomas
has become a standard and required part of pathological report. We
analysed the EGFR, ALK-mutation status, and PD-L1 expression in a
representative cohort of patients with lung adenocarcinomas in Bosnia &
Herzegovina and correlate with clinical data.
Methods: Newly diagnosed patients within 12 months with histological
proven primary lung adenocarcinomas were included. Mutational analy-
ses for EGFR mutations were performed on a Cobas z 480 analyser. ALK
immunohistochemistry was performed using the D5F3 clone on Ventana
Ultra Benchmark instrument, and PD-L expression data obtained with
Antibody DAKO 22C3.
Results: Of the 158 patients, 61,4 % (97) were male. Median years was
61, range from 29 to 84 years. Most of the patients were current or former
smokers (95%). EGFR mutations were found in 12% of the patients, and
of these mutations, exon 19 deletion was the most common (45.1
Virchows Arch
%). ALK mutation were present in 3,8% of the patients. The
EGFR was more often detected in women and non-smoking,
while ALK mutation had no gender predilection. Analysis of
PD-L1 expression showed that 21% had a PD-L1 tumour propor-
tion score (TPS) < 1%, 33 % had a PD-L1 TPS of 1–49% and
46% had a PD-L1 TPS of ≥50%.
Conclusion: The detected mutation rates demonstrated expected preva-
lence of EGFR-mutations and ALK-gene rearrangement, in comparison
with the rates in other European countries, while PD-L1 expression was
some higher than previously reported, but it maybe be ascribe to high
percentage of smokers.
PS-11-044
Histopathologic features of the pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma
H. Ürer*, N. Fener, N. Unver
*University of Health Sciences, Turkey
Background & objectives: Pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma are poor-
ly differentiated cancers. The current classification includes pleomorphic
carcinoma (PC), spindle cell carcinoma (SCC), giant cell carcinoma
(GCC), carcinosarcoma (CS) and pulmonary blastoma. Our goal is to
determine the histological features of sarcomatoid carcinomas.
Methods: Sarcomatoid carcinoma cases reported in our pathology labo-
ratory over the last decade have been scanned. Histopathological features
of the cases were evaluated.
Results: A total of 70 cases were detected. In cases, 53 PC, 3 SCC, 3 GCC, 9
CS, 2 pulmonary blastomas were found. In CS, carcinoma component was 6
squamous cell carcinoma, 2 adenocarcinoma, 1 nonsmall cell carcinoma.
Sarcoma component was 5 chondrosarcoma, 2 osteosarcoma, 1 synovial
sarcoma. Lymphovascular invasion was detected in 48 cases. Nodal involve-
ment was found in 17 cases at N1 level and 7 at N2 level.
Conclusion: Pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinomas are a heterogeneous
tumour group containing different histological components. This tumour
group has its own spesific histologic profile.
PS-11-045
The decline of surgical lung biopsy in interstitial lung disease: a tertiary
centre experience 2009-2019
S. Waise*, N. Singh, E. Shaw, L. Veryard, S. Jogai
*University Hospital Southampton, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: High-resolution computerised tomography
(HRCT) is increasingly used as a non-invasive diagnostic tool in intersti-
tial lung disease (ILD). The aim of this analysis was to examine the
impact of HRCT on annual rates of histological ILD diagnosis over the
last decade.
Methods: A search of the laboratory information management system
was performed to identify cases diagnosed between 2009 and 2019 at
Southampton General Hospital. Paediatric cases were excluded. The re-
maining reports were examined, and only those in which ILD was the
primary or favoured diagnosis were included in the final count.
Results: A total of 503 cases were identified, 462 of which were in adults.
Of these, 202 had a diagnosis appropriate for inclusion in analysis. Over
the 10-year period, the number of annual diagnoses was variable (range 7-
32). However, the overall trend was a decrease in the annual rate of ILD
cases diagnosed at histology, down 50% in 2019 from 2009. In contrast,
the number of annual referrals to the ILD team has increased approxi-
mately fourfold.
Conclusion: The use of HRCT by specialist thoracic radiologists, togeth-
er with specialist chest physicians, has obviated the need for diagnosis on
surgical biopsy: the majority of cases can be diagnosed on the basis of
clinical and imaging features. However, there is a subset of cases with
overlapping features where histology plays a pivotal role in determining
the diagnosis and accordingly, management.
PS-11-046
Pulmonary carcinoid tumours with elevated proliferation rates –
should there be a grade 3 subgroup of neuroendocrine tumours (NET)?
J. Wright*, E. Lim, A. Rice, C. Brambilla, J.L. Robertus, A.G. Nicholson
*Department of Histopathology, Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS
Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: The current WHO classification of pulmo-
nary neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) includes low-grade typical carci-
noid (TC) tumours to intermediate-grade atypical carcinoid tumours (AC)
to high-grade large cell neuroendocrine tumours (LCNEC) and small cell
carcinomas (SCC).
Methods: We wished to review of an emerging group of tumours that
have histologic features of carcinoids but mitotic counts exceeding 10 per
2 mm2 which by the current WHO 2015 criteria are classified as LCNEC.
We performed a retrospective analysis of 50 neuroendocrine
tumour cases diagnosed at our institutions between 2005 – 2020.Detailed
microscopic review was undertaken.
Results: Of the 50 cases reviewed,14 cases (28%) showed histological
features of carcinoids but mitotic counts exceeding 10 per 2 mm2.Three
cases showed combined AC and LCNEC morphology and one case
showed combined AC and SCC morphology. In all included cases, the
highest mitotic count was >10 per 2mm2.The median highest mitotic
count was 19 (IQR 15.5 -31.0).In eight out of fourteen cases, the Ki67
proliferation index was >20 (IQR 13.7 – 40).
Conclusion: A
subgroup of NETs exists with morphology closer to carcinoid than non-
small cell carcinoma, but with a raised proliferation rate 10 per 2 mm2.
These may be better classified in alignment with carcinoids than LCNEC.
PS-11-047
Plastic bronchitis: expanding clinical associations and identifying
specific histologic characteristics compared to other intraluminal
casts
J. Wright*, M. Kokosi, E. Renzoni, S. Desai, A. Devaraj, P.L. Molyneaux,
V. Kouranos, F. Chua, G. Peter, A.U. Wells, A. Rice, A.G. Nicholson
*Department of Histopathology, Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS
Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Plastic bronchitis is a rare condition in
which airway casts develop in the tracheobronchial tree causing
airway obstruction. Casts may be expectorated or lead to asphyx-
iation. Patients with casts can clinically be divided into those with
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) and plastic bron-
chitis (PB).
Methods: The PB group may be subdivided into post-operative
cases including those following congenital, paediatric, adult or
transplant surgery. We wished to determine whether there is a “pri-
mary” PB subgroup and, if so, did it have specific histopathological
features. We performed a retrospective analysis of 30 consecutive-
cases diagnosed at our institutions between 1999-2019.Clinical his-
tory was reviewed to classify the cases. Relevant histological fea-
tures were semi-quantitatively scored.
Results: The 30 cases reviewed were classified as follows: APBA (12),
postoperative (6) and “primary” PB (12).M<F (11:19). Median age:38 (2
months – 82 years). Casts from the “primary” PB group contained sig-
nificantly more lymphocytes compared to neutrophils (p=0.0037) and
increased lymphocytes compared to the ABPA group casts (p=0.0292).
All “Primary” PB casts comprised loose fibrillary material which was
only seen in 1/6 post-operative cases (p=0.0007) and none of the
ABPA cases which all comprised thick mucin (p=0.0001).
Conclusion: Five cases showed clinical evidence suggestive of abnor-
malities in lipid metabolism. We have identified a group of “primary”
plastic bronchitis casts with distinct microscopic features, in some cases
associated with abnormal lipid metabolism.
Virchows Arch
PS-11-048
Upregulation of phagocytosis in senescence cells in UIP and COPD to
supplement their metabolic need, and their interaction with immune
cells
D. Xhemalaj*, L. Brcic, S. Eidenhammer, W. Timens, P. Kapisyzi, H. Popper
*University Hospital of Lung Diseases "Shefqet Ndroqi", Tirana, Albania
Background & objectives: Senescence cells (SeC) were demonstrated in
usual interstitial pneumonia/idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (UIP/IPF),
driving the fibrotic process. They upregulate LDH and Glut1 to keep with
hypoxia. How senescent cell interfere with the immune system has not
been studied.
Methods: Tissues from patients with UIP of different aetiologies and
COPD were investigated. Sections were incubated with antibodies for
phagocytosis activation markers tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase,
Rab7, and LAMP1. The tissues were evaluated for CD47, an inhibitor
of phagocytosis. SeC/p16+/p21+ were evaluated for the inflammatory
mediators TNF , iNOS, and VEGF. To elucidate the interaction of SeC
with the immune system.
Results: Macrophages and lymphocytes were analysed using antibodies
for CD4, CD8, CD20, CD68, CD206.Senescent cells are found in remod-
eling areas in UIP and COPD. They express positivity for p16 and p21,
upregulate autophagy, and express phagocytosis markers.
They are negative for CD47. The cells secrete inflammatory molecules,
and thus drive the repair process inducing proliferations of
myofibroblasts, finally resulting in fibrosis.
Conclusion: Senescent cells secure their metabolic needs by
phagocytosis, and to keep with hypoxia activate alternative meta-
bolic pathways by LDH and GLUT1 upregulation, either for an-
aerobic glycolysis, or using the Warburg effect of glycolysis in
hypoxia.
They also influence the polarization of macrophages, whereas the distri-
bution of lymphocyte subtypes are not influenced.
PS-11-049
Mature cystic teratoma of the lung: an exceptional disease
F. Zerd*, E. Vuhahula
*MUHAS, Tanzania
Background & objectives: Teratomas are tumours composed of tissues
derived from more than one germ cell line. Intrathoracic teratomas are
usually seen in the mediastinum; they rarely occur in the lung as
intrapulmonary teratomas. The criteria for pulmonary origin are the ex-
clusion of a gonadal site or other extragonadal primary sites and the
exclusive origin of the tumour from the lung. This case aims to demon-
strate the clinicopathological description of a teratoma mimicking a lung
mass querying aspergilloma.
Methods: A retrospective review was conducted. The case was obtained
from the Pathology archives at the Muhimbili National Hospital,
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Age, gender, the clinical presentation was re-
corded. Histopathological diagnosis was confirmed by gross examination
and hematoxylin and eosin sections, characteristics of mature cystic ter-
atoma was seen.
Results: A 32-years-old woman presented with long standing cough for
over 13 years and episodes of hemoptysis and chest pain, no weight loss.
She has been treated with anti TB with no improvement. CT showed left
sided upper heterogeneous mass with areas of calcification. A 7x8x6cm
specimen was received at histopathology showed cysts and calcifications
grossly, and microscopy revealed a tumour with mature tissue from all the
3 germ cell layers.
Conclusion: The diagnosis has to rely on the radiologic imaging, which
demonstrates calcification, cavitations, and peripheral translucent areas
and confirm by histopathology. Patients present with chest pain, cough,
hemoptysis and trichoptysis. Surgical removal is the curative treatment of
this condition.
PS-12-001
Incidental lung hamartomas
C. Amalinei*, L. Riscanu, T. Iov, C. Amalinei, A. Grigoraș
*"Grigore T. Popa" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Institute of
Legal Medicine, Romania
Background & objectives: Lung hamartomas or pulmonary
chondromas or pulmonary chondromatous hamartomas are considered
rare benign tumours. We report two cases of lung hamartomas inciden-
tally discovered in the necroptic examination, in a man of 58 years and a
woman of 61 years old.
Methods: Necroptic examination has been associated to collection of
tissue specimens for microscopy. Paraffin-embedding, followed by rou-
tine hematoxylin-eosin (HE) and Masson’s trichrome stainings have been
performed.
Results: One case revealed, in a bronchial wall, a circumscribed
incidental lesion, of approximately 10 mm and another had a
parenchymal nodule, of approximately 13 mm diameter. They
consisted in mature, disordered hyaline cartilage, containing areas
of ossification, in one case, along with variable amounts of adi-
pose tissue, smooth muscle, and entrapped clefts of respiratory
epithelium, corresponding to the features of lung hamartomas.
No cellular atypia has been observed. Lung hamartomas may oc-
cur as a component of Carney triad, a rare non-hereditary condi-
tion with young women prevalence that also includes gastrointes-
tinal stromal tumours and extra-adrenal paragangliomas, which
has been excluded in our cases.
Conclusion: Despite their rarity, lung hamartomas should be considered
in the differential diagnosis of lung cancers or benign tumours, such as
lipoma, leiomyoma, myxoma, and fibroadenoma. They may be inciden-
tally discovered during necropsy and microscopic examination may cer-
tify the diagnosis.
PS-12-002
Developmental hepatic lesions in forensic pathology
C. Amalinei*, A. Grigoraș, L. Riscanu, C. Teodorescu, T. Iov
*"Grigore T. Popa" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Institute of
Legal Medicine, Romania
Background & objectives: Developmental hepatic lesions are attributed
to abnormal growth of the biliary tree. The aim of our study is to
evaluate the necroptic findings of developmental hepatic lesions
from our files.
Methods: The reports from autopsies performed in the last 5 years in our
Department, have been reviewed and 7 cases of developmental hepatic
lesions, with age distribution between 50 to 73 years old, 4 male and 3
female, have been selected. These cases have been investigated by routine
paraffin-embedding, followed by haematoxylin-eosin (HE) and Masson’s
trichrome stainings.
Results: The microscopic exam revealed multiple large cysts asso-
ciated with renal cysts, in 3 cases, diagnosed as polycystic liver
disease, small or dilated bile ducts surrounded by fibrous stroma,
characteristic features for incidental biliary hamartoma (“von
Meyenburg complex”), in 2 cases, and incidental simple solitary
hepatic cysts, in other 2 cases. Differential diagnoses included
pseudocysts, infection pathology, neoplastic diseases, and
traumatic-related lesions.
Conclusion: Developmental hepatic lesions are relatively rare, occur as
simple cysts, biliary hamartomas, polycystic liver disease, as reported in
our files, along with Caroli disease and ciliated hepatic foregut duplica-
tion cyst, reported in literature, their differential diagnosis being important
in forensics.
PS-12 Autopsy Pathology
Virchows Arch
PS-12-003
Case report: post-mortem diagnosis of eosinophilic myocarditis
Z. Argyropoulou*, C. Santos, C. Gomes, R. Manso
*National Institute of Legal Medicine and Forensic Sciences of Portugal,
Portugal
Background & objectives: Eosinophilic myocarditis is a form of myo-
cardial inflammation, characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of the
myocardium and often accompanied by eosinophilia. We present a case
of a cardiorespiratory arrest with histologic evidence of eosinophilic in-
filtrate of the myocardium during the autopsy.
Methods: A medico-legal autopsy, toxicological laboratory exams and a
histological diagnosis were conducted.
Results: A 48-year old, female patient with no relevant background his-
tory presented cardiorespiratory arrest, with previous complaints of
interscapular pain. Laboratory findings revealed elevated levels of d-di-
mer, troponin I, reactive protein C and creatine kinase and no peripheral
eosinophilia. Imagiological testing and coronary angiography, excluded
aortic dissection, pulmonary embolism as well as, an acute coronary
syndrome. Organ support was suspended because of the presented insta-
bility and an unknown reversible cause. Macroscopic appreciation, dur-
ing autopsy revealed a slight heterogenic coloration of the myocardium,
and no other apparent causes of death. The histology revealed interstitial
haemorrhage of the heart and an eosinophilic infiltrate of the septal
subendocardic myocardium.
Conclusion: The clinical presentation of Eosinophilic myocarditis
varies from paucisymptomatic to acute fulminant myocarditis. It is
often fatal with high in-hospital mortality, in particular when it
presents as fulminant form. Eosinophilic myocarditis is probably
under-recognized and frequently discovered on post-mortem exam-
ination. We present a case of EM discovered on post-mortem exam-
ination were no associated systemic disorder was identified, as such
considered an idiopathic/undefined EM.
PS-12-004
Correlation of digital and invasive post-mortem examinations
K. Brougham*, K. Manoharan
*St Helens and Knowsley NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Invasive autopsy is the gold standard for
determining cause of death (COD). Digital autopsies have been used in
the Sefton Coroner’s jurisdiction since August 2018. We compared pro-
posed digital COD with invasive COD and compared assessment of cor-
onary artery disease.
Methods: All autopsies that had both digital and invasive exami-
nation at Whiston Hospital between August 2018 and January
2019 (6 month period) were included. Reports were interrogated
for major and minor discrepancies along with coronary artery dis-
ease assessment. The data was compiled in Microsoft Excel and
analysed in both Microsoft Excel and IBM SPSS.
Results: A total of 303 autopsies were digitally scanned of which
134 proceeded to invasive post-mortem examination. A total of 51
minor discrepancies were identified, which would not affected
cause of death not were otherwise significant. There were 6 major
discrepancies identified that would have altered cause of death.
57% had similar estimations of coronary artery disease. Only 64%
of cases had no discrepancies between the radiological and invasive
examinations.
Conclusion: Our cohort population is significantly different from
those of previous studies. Often due to lack of clinical information
there are many unanswered questions remaining after DA, so inva-
sive PM is required. The use of digital autopsies has to be refined
based on appropriate case selection since some COD cannot be
detected or are likely to be missed on radiological examination.
PS-12-005
Acute fatty liver disease of pregnancy: a difficult diagnosis in a case
of maternal death
L. Chinezu*, H. Jung
*George Emil Palade University of Medicine, Pharmacy, Science and
Technology of Targu Mures, Romania
Background & objectives: Acute fatty liver disease of pregnancy
(AFLP) is a rare condition and an obstetric emergency with high rates
of severe maternal morbidity and mortality. We present a case of a 29-
years old female, who died shortly after the delivery.
Methods: She presented in emergency department with abdominal pain,
nausea, and vomiting five days after her first delivery. She died shortly after
due to liver failure. To establish the cause of death, a full autopsy was
performed at the Institute of Forensic Medicine of Targu Mures, Romania.
Results: On autopsy examination, massive oedema of the lungs and fatty
appearance of the liver were seen. At microscopy, the lungs exhibited acute
extensive oedema and pulmonary capillary congestion. The liver presented
microvesicular fatty infiltration of the hepatocytes visible only in the central
and mid zonal parts of the lobule. The fat droplets surrounded centrally
located nuclei with a foamy appearance of the cytoplasm. The fatty infil-
tration spared a thin rim of cells around the portal tracts.
Conclusion: The histological aspect of the liver was consistent with
AFLP. The differential diagnosis with hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes
and low platelets syndrome (HELLP) is difficult, since there are some
clinical, biochemical and pathological overlapping. Some of the authors
consider these entities as different stages of the same disease.
PS-12-006
CMV pneumonia mimicking lung tumour - an autopsy case report
D. Crisan*, R. Ghica, C. Albu, C. Lazar, B. Pop
*Dept. of Pathology, “Iuliu Hatieganu” University of Medicine and
Pharmacy” Cluj-Napoca, Dept. of Pathology, Emergency Clinical
County Hospital Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Background & objectives: Viral infections may cause acute exacerba-
tions in patients with usual interstitial pneumonia. Cytomegalovirus
(CMV) pneumonia ranges from mild interstitial infiltrates to diffuse al-
veolar damage and can sometimes mimic a lung tumour on macroscopy
and Hodgkin’s disease on microscopic examination.
Methods: We present a case of a 46-year-old woman, previously diag-
nosed with usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), suffering progressive
worsening of respiratory function, brought by ambulance into the emer-
gency department. Chest CT scan showed ground glass appearance and
multiple nodules in her lungs, suggestive of acute respiratory distress
syndrome. The patient died several hours after admission.
Results: Autopsy showed multiple confluent firm tumour-like gray-white
nodules in the middle and lower lobes of the right lung, encasing hilar
structures, with yellow-gray areas of necrosis and associated pleural and
pericardial retraction. Dark red areas of haemorrhage were also seen.
Frozen section examination during autopsy raised suspicions of malignan-
cy, but permanent sections showed no malignant cells. Pneumocytes were
large and displayed a single basophilic intranuclear inclusion, surrounded
by a clear halo, resembling Reed-Sternberg (RS) cells. We also found the
honeycombing pattern characteristic of UIP and interstitial lymphocytic
infiltrate, focal hyaline membranes, areas of hemorrhagic necrosis with
central neutrophilic response and histiocytes within the airspaces.
Conclusion: On immunohistochemistry, the RS-like cells were pan-
cytokeratin positive, TTF-1 and LCA negative and stained for anti-
CMV antibody. CD15 was positive in some RS-like infected
cells, but CD30 was negative.This case illustrates the diagnostic
pitfalls in CMV pneumonia, mimicking a tumour, both macro-
scopically and histologically, and highlights the challenges pathol-
ogists face in autopsy examination.
Virchows Arch
PS-12-007
Video documentation in autopsy practice
D. Dzhenkov*, G. Stoyanov, L. Petkova
*Medical University Varna, Bulgaria
Background & objectives: Video documentation devices for personal
use have become widely available in the last decade, many of whom are
able to record the point of view of the pathologist and serve as aids in
protocol finalization and educational tools for students.
Methods: Five separate wearable devices for video documentation were used
in the standard autopsy practice of a single pathologist – two sport cameras, a
pair of camera glasses and two pairs of smart glasses – Cloud-I II and Google
glass – XE V2. The five devices were compared for their individual pros and
cons and feasibility in autopsy and educational practice.
Results: A total of 50 consecutive autopsies, performed by a single pa-
thologist were recorded for the period of one year. Only the sports
cameras and Google glass provided sufficient resolution to be con-
sidered efficient aids. Ten of the autopsies were recorded simulta-
neously with the two devises, with the sports cameras performing
superiorly in providing the proper point of view, due to their adjust-
able nature, video-resolution and audio quality, together with suffi-
cient battery life. As of February 2020, however, Google glass XE
V2 is no longer supported and is no longer a viable oprion.
Conclusion: Video documentation of autopsies using new generation
wearable devices is a feasible option for both individual autopsy cases
and educational purposes of both students and young pathologists.
PS-12-008
Differential heart weights in diabetics and hypertensives compared to
apparently healthy adults - a post-mortem review
U. Ezenkwa*, O. Ogunbiyi, S. Omenai, O.A. Odigwe, U. Eze, A. Salami
*University College Hospital Ibadan, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Diabetes mellitus (DM) and hypertension are
insidious chronic disease conditions associated with multiple end-organ
damage. This study investigated the effects of these two conditions, indi-
vidually, and as comorbidities, on heart weights at post-mortem com-
pared to apparently healthy decedents.
Methods: Eleven-year (2008-2018) Postmortem records were reviewed
for apparently healthy, diabetic, hypertensive, and hypertensive-diabetic
decedents aged 18 to 70 years. Absolute heart weights (without the peri-
cardium), gender, body length and age were documented. The difference
in mean heart weight and predictors of heart weight were determined
using Kruskal Wallis (with post hoc test) and multivariate regression
statistics on SPSS version 20.
Results: Two hundred and thirty-three cases from 159 males and 74 females
met the inclusion criteria comprising of 85 apparently-healthy, 29 diabetic-
only, 43 hypertensive-diabetic and 76 hypertensive-onlydecedents with mean
heart weights of 296.9±44.1g, 349.0±121.4g, 404.8±111.0g, and 434.7
±129.2g, respectively. The observed difference in mean heart weights was
significantly different across groups (p <0.0005).On post hoc test, this signif-
icant difference was sustained between diabetic-only and apparently-healthy
(p = 0.032), diabetic-only and hypertensive-diabetic (p = 0.006), apparently-
healthy and hypertensive-only (p <0.0005), but not between hypertensive-
diabetic and hypertensive-only (p = 0.305) groups. Hypertension and male
gender were predictors of heart weight significantly (p <0.05), whilst age, and
DM did not reach statistical significance.
Conclusion: Hypertensive individuals
(including hypertensive-diabetic) have significant differential heavier
hearts compared to apparently healthy and non-hypertensive diabetic in-
dividuals. The possible effect of DM on heart weights seen between
diabetic and apparently healthy decedents waned on multivariate analy-
sis. Hence, its role remains unclear.
PS-12-009
Fibrinous pericarditis as cause of death in chronic kidney disease:
study of a series of clinical autopsy cases
S.A. Galeano Reyes*, C. Guerrero Márquez, P. Ramos Ponton, B. Tristán
Martín
*Hospital Universitario Fundación Alcorcón, Spain
Background & objectives: The need to determine the causes of
underdiagnosed fibrinous pericarditis (FP) makes autopsy a fundamental
tool for its study. Our goal is to describe a series of cases and draw
conclusions about the pathogenesis and its link with other entities.
Methods: We review 219 clinical autopsies, selecting cases with diagno-
sis of FP.
Results: Seven patients, 4 women (57.2%) and 3 men (42.8%). Mean
age: 71±9.6 years. Chronic kidney disease (CKD): 6 cases (85.7%).
High urea and creatinine in all cases. Shock during hemodialysis in 2
cases, exitus before 24 hours in 3, acute bronchopneumonia in 6, liver
cirrhosis in 3. The pericardial exudate was sterile in 6 cases.
Enterococcus faecium was isolated in a patient with chronic liver disease
due to congestive heart failure.
Conclusion: This study emphasizes the importance of clinical autopsy in
the diagnostic of FP as cause of death in CKD. Capillary
hyperpermeability due to uremic toxins coinciding with infections is
probably related to its aetiology. Liver disease can decline the prognosis.
PS-12-010
Autopsy examination in sudden cardiac death
P.J. Gallagher*, J. Banner, C. Basso, I. Kholova, K. Michaud
*Medical Education, Bristol Medical School, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: In sudden cardiac death autopsy is the essen-
tial step in establishing a diagnosis of inherited cardiac disease and iden-
tifying families that require cardiac screening.
Methods: To evaluate aspects of post-mortem practice in Europe a ques-
tionnaire was designed and circulated to both clinical and forensic pathol-
ogists. There was a 48% response rate. The results, which were from a
total of 14 countries, showed a wide variety in the management of sudden
cardiac death, with a general tendency towards a lack of thorough
investigation.
Results: In up to 40% of cases autopsies were not performed in subjects
less than 50 years who may have died from cardiac disease. Reasons for
this were lack of finance and lack of interest from police, legal authorities
and doctors. Only 50% of pathologists followed a standard protocol for
autopsy examination. Lack of expertise and/or training were reasons for
this.
Conclusion: The results of our questionnaire suggest that although the
standard of practice during autopsy in many centres is appropriate in
many centres, the results indicate that many more cases should be sub-
mitted for autopsy, especially in sudden cardiac death in the young. On a
positive note when autopsies were performed histology and toxicology
were almost always performed, genetic studies were generally available
and retention of the heart for specialist study was permitted in most cases.
PS-12-011
Suspected tuberous sclerosis complex in a foetus in the third trimes-
ter of the gestation: pathological and genetic findings
È. Iglesias Martínez*, R. Ruiz Onandi, E. Sarasola Diez, G. Pérez de
Nanclares Leal, N. Santiago Quispe, A.P. Martínez Aracil, I. Gorostiaga
Altuna, A. Perez, N. Barriobero Alonso, A. Sagasta
*Clinical Department Unit of Pathological Anatomy, OSI Araba, Araba
University Hospital, Bioaraba Health Research Institute, Vitoria-Gasteiz,
Alava, Spain
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a
multisystemic neurocutaneous genetic condition with autosomal
dominant inheritance, characterized by hamartomatous lesions in
multiple organ systems. TSC is caused by mutations of either of
the following tumour suppressor genes, TSC1 (9q34) and TSC2
(16p13.3).
Methods: A complete foetal autopsy and a mutational analysis of
the genes TSC1 and TSC2 by Sanger method were performed.
Foetus blood sample, for genetic study, was obtained from
cordocentesis.
Results: Foetal cardiac tumours were diagnosed by routine sono-
graphic study in utero at 32 weeks. Subsequent foetal brain MR
imaging at 33 weeks showed multiple nodules. The combination
of both findings suggested the diagnosis of tuberous sclerosis
complex. Therefore, late termination of pregnancy was decided
and autopsy performed. Cardiac rhabdomyomas and brain cortical
tubers were histologically confirmed.
A heterozygous TSC2 mutation c.5024C>T (p.Pro1675Leu) was identi-
fied in the genetic study. This variant is classified as pathogenic in the
literature.
Conclusion: The clinical suspicion of tuberous sclerosis complex was
confirmed by pathological and genetic findings.
The progenitors of the foetus were a healthy nonconsanguineous
couple with an unremarkable family history. However, genetic
study of the parents is recommended to rule out that they are
carriers in mosaicism of the pathogenic variant. If positive result,
there would be risk of recurrence in future pregnancies.
PS-12-012
Features of the diagnosis of intravital fracture of ribs
M. Irfan*, V. Bogoslavskiy, M. Narmagambetov, R. Dusmailov, K. Olga
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Fractures of ribs are accompanied by
mixture of fragments with continued breathing, friction occurs
on the surfaces of fragments of ribs and appearance of traces that
make it possible to judge the duration of the post-traumatic period
and the lifetime.
Methods: To study the morphological picture of traces of friction
of fragments to determine the intravital origin of the fracture.56
materials from corpses with chest injuries were studied by
stereoscopy.
Results: It has been established: with continued breathing, a rigid
surface with a rough relief is introduced into a less rigid surface.
Therefore, at the beginning of friction on a less rigid surface there
are multiple tsar-pins in the direction of movement of fragments.
Experiment: for the formation of traces, about 25 respiratory
movements are necessary, which corresponds to the duration of
the agonal period. Further friction of fragments on a softer surface
gives the marginal fracture site the appearance of a shiny site and
corresponds to a post-traumatic period of up to 6 hours.
Conclusion: Signs of friction initially appear on the surface of the rib,
which experienced a tensile stress during the formation of a fracture. On
extensor fractures, these signs are more pronounced.
PS-12-013
Malignant neoplasms in clinical autopsies: the importance of the
autopsy – a 13-year retrospective study in a tertiary hospital
J. Madeira*, A. Lai, R. Almeida, E. Coutinho, J. Gama, F. Ramalhosa,
M.B. Pimentão, C. Faria, V. Almeida, H. Moreira, R. Oliveira, M.R. Silva,
M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Technology improvements have contributed
to increase life expectancy; however, in 20% of clinical autopsies (CA)
neoplasms are the cause of death.
We pretend to identify malignancies in CA and compare the data from
autopsies with diagnostic hypotheses proposed during medical care.
Methods: Clinical and anatomopathological data were collected from
reports at our institution, over a 13-year period (January/2007 to
December/2019).
Staging was determined according to the 8th edition TNM/AJCC.
Discordance rate was established between clinical data and autopsy
diagnoses.
A total of 238 cases were reviewed, of which 17 correspond to malignant
neoplasms.
Results: Our cohort included 17 cases with a median age of 61 years (34-
86 years) with a slight male predominance (9M/8F).
The most requesting department was Internal Medicine (41%).
Most of our tumours were carcinomas (41%) and lymphomas (41%) and
the remaining (18%) were chondrosarcoma, glioblastoma and melanoma,
all in advanced stage, mostly with multiorgan involvement (29%).
Primitive location of carcinomas was: lung (1), pharynx (1), thymus (1),
breast (1), pancreas (2) and prostate (1).
The discordance between clinical and autopsy diagnoses of malignant
neoplasms was 41%, mainly due to suspected infection conditions.
Conclusion: The discrepancies between clinical and autopsy diagnoses
continue to occur and confirm the importance of the post-mortem
examination.
Autopsy examination would allow a better understanding of the evolution
course of the disease and it remains a useful tool, enabling the identifica-
tion of occult neoplasms, clinically unknown.
PS-12-014
Cystic fibrosis (F508del / W1282X): clinical and morphological anal-
ysis of a 23-year-old patient
N. Malyugin*, D. Kushch, V. Balayants, A. Romanov, M. Mnikhovich,
T. Bezuglova, P. Bliganov, G. Ushanov
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Patient U., 23 years old, is admitted to the
hospital with bronchopulmonary infection. Receives antimicrobial and
antifungal treatment without effect. The patient died of respiratory and
renal failure.
Methods: A clinical anatomical analysis of the case of cystic fi-
brosis with multiple continuously recurring infectious complica-
tions in a 23-year-old patient was carried out. The diagnosis of
AA amyloidosis with kidney damage with severe nephrotic syn-
drome was morphologically verified.
Results: At autopsy: The filling of the bronchi of all calibers is deter-
mined up to bifurcation of the trachea with a viscous purulent secretion.
In the interstitium of the lungs, interstitial fibrosis, bronchial and
bronchiolectasis.
In the kidneys, the border between the cortical and medulla is not distin-
guishable. Spleen 12x8x5 rocky density
Desquamative bronchitis, goblet cell hyperplasia, papillary prolif-
eration and squamous metaplasia of bronchial epithelium are mi-
croscopically determined. The lumens of the bronchi are filled
with purulent contents mixed with desquamated epithelial cells
and cellular detritus. Amyloid deposition is noted in the kidneys.
Intrafollicular deposition of amyloid masses in the spleen.
Conclusion: This clinical and anatomical observation demon-
strates a rare genetic disease of cystic fibrosis (F508del \
W1282X: heterozygous mutation), which is practically
untreatable, leading to multiple complications in the form of sec-
ondary amyloidosis and death.
Virchows Arch
PS-12-016
Analysis of medical students’ previous knowledge about autopsy
J. Carneiro Melo*, A.B. Arrais Lima Costa, B. Henrique Nogueira
Ramos, M. Melo Gontijo, M. Martins Negreiros, A. Cavalcante
Colares, G. Studart Gurgel Dias, D. Nunes Oliveira
*University of Fortaleza, Brazil
Background & objectives: Autopsy is an essential procedure for identi-
fying the cause of post-mortem death; however, contact with medical
professionals usually occurs only after graduation. Evaluate the general
knowledge of medical students about the concepts related to the practice
of an autopsy.
Methods: Cross-Sectional epidemiological study performed with medi-
cal students from seventh (7th) and eighth (8th) semesters of a University,
the first and the second after finisnh pathology that are passing and al-
ready passed by of pathology, through the application of a questionnaire
using the google forms platform.
Results: The sample consisted of 85 students, 61 (71.8%) from the
7th and 24 (28.2%) from the 8th. In the 7th semester, when asked
about the definition of autopsy, only 9.83% answered correctly,
80.3% knew the instructions for sending cases to the Death
Verification Service (DSV) and 52.5% to the Institute of Legal
Medicine (ILM), however 100% did not know the autopsy tech-
niques. As for the students of the 8th semester, 87.5% knew the
concept of autopsy, 100% knew the instructions for sending cases
to the DSV and 87.5% to the ILM and regarding the autopsy
techniques 54.17% knew at least two.
Conclusion: This study shows that the importance of teaching autopsy in
medical school.
PS-12-017
A "lost generation" of patients with AAA - lessons from the
mortuary
A. Milton*, J. DeSiqueria, K. Griffin, M. Troxler, D. Cole, L. Barker
*West Yorkshire Foundation Program, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) are
localised dilatations of the abdominal aorta. AAA are usually asymptom-
atic unless they rupture, with a mortality rate ~80%. The UK AAA
screening programme aims to reduce AAA-related-mortality, inviting
men aged 65+ for a "one-off" ultrasound.
Methods: An electronic database (CoPath) was searched to ascer-
tain cause of death for all post-mortem examinations performed in
a tertiary hospital from 2013-2019. AAA-rupture deaths were
identified and patient demographic data collected. The UK AAA
screening programme (NAAASP) database (SMaRT) was cross-
checked to interrogate screening-status and to categorise causes
of non-screening.
Results: There were a total of 105 cases where death occurred as a result
of ruptured AAA (66%men, 35%women). Only 6 patients were known to
any screening program; of these, 1 declined attendance, 1 died prior to
attendance, 1 did not attend and 1 was screened out-of-region. Only 2
patients underwent ultrasound locally. The mean age of the male cohort
was 77.6 years (SD 7.81). Only 5 deaths (4.8%) occurred in patients aged
<65 years old.
Conclusion: This autopsy-based study identifies a potential "lost-
generation" of elderly patients at risk of fatal AAA rupture. More
work is needed to investigate the disease burden in this un-
screened population. Research should focus on the suitability of
these patients for intervention, particularly in light of draft NICE
guidelines restricting endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) in
un-ruptured AAA.
PS-12-018
Sudden death secondary to schistosomiasis, case report and litera-
ture review
G. Nhlonzi*
*National Health Laboratory Service, South Africa
Background & objectives: Report a case of sudden death secondary
to schistosomiasis. Schistosomiasis is caused by a parasitic trem-
atode worms. The parasite has a complex life cycle that includes
contamination of water by excreta, specific fresh water snails as
intermediate hosts and mammalian water contact. Acute schistoso-
miasis is generally benign and self limited, whilst the chronic form
causes major morbidity. This case report aims to highlight autopsy
findings in sudden death secondary to schistosomiasis and suggest
possible pathogenesis thereof.
Methods: This is a case report to highlight an unusual clinical
presentation of schistosomiasis in a previously healthy 32 year
old female who collapsed suddenly and became unresponsive.
Emergency medical unit investigations revealed ventricular fibril-
lation. Despite resuscitation, the patient demised. Consent for au-
topsy was granted. Patient's record review, autopsy examination
and literature review was undertaken as part of the work-up.
Results: Following the review of the literature and the index case
histopathological findings comprising parasitic pulmonary arterial
embolization with minimal to absent tissue reaction, urinary blad-
der fibrosis and transmural schistosome ova and clinical history of
ventricular fibrillation, pulmonary hypertension secondary to
schistosomiasis was suggested as the aetiology of abnormal cardi-
ac electrical activity. Other systems including heart, liver, kidneys,
spleen, brain and thymus were unremarkable.
Conclusion: Parasitic arterial embolisation as an exclusive cause of
pulmonary hypertension and sudden death is unusual, hence more
studies are warranted in understanding the pathogenesis of schis-
tosomiasis associated pulmonary hypertension.
PS-12-019
Schistosomiasis as an autopsy diagnosis in a patient with massive
digestive haemorrhage
G. Nora*, J. Silva, S. Longarini Gonçalves
*Hospital de Base (FAMERP - Medical School of São José do Rio Preto),
Brazil
Background & objectives: To report a case of schistosomiasis diag-
nosed at autopsy.
Methods: Review of medical record and autopsy report.
Results: A 33-year-old man arrived at the hospital with a massive
episode of hematemesis. An urgent high digestive endoscopy
showed a large amount of clots in the esophageal lumen, and
massive active bleeding from thick varicose cords. During the
endoscopic examination, the patient presented cardiac arrest.
Cardiopulmorary resuscitation maneuvers were performed for 30
minutes, but vital signs did not return. At the autopsy, the patient
presented areas of periportal fibrosis and an abundant presence of
blood throughout the entire gastrointestinal tract, due to active
bleeding from the distal oesophagus. Microscopically,
Schistosoma mansoni eggs were identified in the liver and in both
lungs (Loeffler syndrome), clarifying the aetiology of portal
hypertension.
Conclusion: Schistosomiasis is a rare disease in southeastern Brazil.
In the present case, this pathology leaded to portal hypertention
and the patient died due to hypovolemic shock in consequence of
massive upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
Virchows Arch
PS-12-020
Mortality pattern in children in a Nigerian tertiary hospital: an au-
topsy study
S. Omenai*, U. Ezenkwa, G. Ogun
*Edo University Iyamho, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Childhood mortality is high in developing
countries and, under 5 mortality is highest in sub-Saharan Africa.
Autopsies validates cause of death. This study retrospectively reviewed
post-mortem records observing the causes of death and paediatric autopsy
trend in our institution.
Methods: Post-mortem records of children 17yrs and below between
2008 to 2017 in our institution were reviewed. All post-mortem exami-
nations were duly consented. The causes of death were classified using
ICD-10. The data was analysed using SPSS 23. P ≤0.05 was considered
significant.
Results: There were 89 paediatric cases representing 8.2% of the 1092
autopsies done within the study period. Infections (34.8%), and malig-
nancies (12.4%) were major cause of deaths. Infections accounted for
50% of under 5yr mortality. Pneumonia is the most common infectious
disease with 48.4% of all infections followed by bacteria sepsis of new-
born at 9.7%. Malignancies were commoner in children above 10yrs old
accounting for 36% of causes of death within this age group. The modal
age was the first year and early neonatal deaths constituted 40% of this
group. There is 33.8% decrease in autopsy request rate in the later 5yrs of
study period.
Conclusion: This study shows that a major cause of childhood
mortality in our environment is infection with majority of under 5
children dying from infections which is majorly pneumonia.
Better hygiene and infection control with prompt adequate man-
agement might be lifesaving.
PS-12-021
Hepatic necrosis in haemophagocytic lymphohistiocystosis
J. Potts*
*North Bristol NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: A 41 year old man died of multi-organ dys-
function after admission to intensive care. His only previous illness was
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL). His white count (36 X 109/l) was
stable and he was receiving no specific treatment for this.
Methods: A full autopsy was performed including detailed histology,
immunohistochemistry and molecular studies.
Results: The premortem ferritin level was > 60,000mg/l. The
most striking post mortem finding was substantial liver enlarge-
ment (4.1kg) with extensive hepatocyte necrosis. There was para-
aortic lymphadenopathy with widespread histiocytic phagocytosis
of erythrocytes. Histological sections from the spleen and lymph
nodes confirmed CLL. No other form of lymphoma/leukaemia
was identified. There was no autopsy evidence of sepsis or acute
lung injury. The heart was enlarged (560g) but there was no
evidence of myocardial pathology.
Haemophagocytic lymphohistiocystosis (HLH) was diagnosed his-
tologically. HLH is a poorly understood condition associated with
viral and bacterial infections, some lymphoid malignancies, solid
neoplasms, various multi-system disorders and genetic abnormali-
ties. CLL is not specifically associated with HLH.
Conclusion: No underlying cause for HLH was found. The cause of the
florid hepatocytic necrosis was not established but it was beyond what
would be expected in multi-organ failure. Whether it was the cause or
consequence of HLH is uncertain.
PS-12-022
Hydroxychloroquine-induced cardiomyopathy with endomyocardial
fibrosis of unknown cause
J.D. Prieto Cuadra*, L. Perez Villa, M. Alvarez, M.I. Hierro Martín
*Pathology Department, Virgen de la Victoria University Hospital,
Malaga; SYNLAB Pathology, Malaga, Spain
Background & objectives: The differential diagnosis of Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus (SLE) affecting the heart is Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)
Cardiotoxicity.
Endomyocardial Fibrosis (EMF) can be confused with other hypertrophic
cardiomyopathies (HCM).
We raised the possibility that EMF could be related to compounds of
valvular prosthesis.
Methods: A 41-year-old female with SLE and mitral valvulopathy
with mechanical prosthetic and HCQ treatment. She was admitted
with decompensated heart failure and fever. Echocardiogram
showed functional worsening and presence of fibro-calcified areas.
The patient was died, a partial clinical autopsy was requested.
Lungs and heart were studied. Genetic studies were ordered, and bio-
chemical studies of cardiac tissue and prosthetic material.
Results: In gross view, the transversal section of the heart showed
extensive areas of white and partial calcified fibrosis in the endo-
cardium of left ventricle, that had diffusely thickened the lining of
the chamber and involved the papillary muscles
Microscopically, the heart tissue showed alterations of HCM. An
intense subendocardial myocyte vacuolization (MV) was ob-
served, which also affected the sinus node.
Genetic study was performed by massive sequencing to overrule Fabry
Disease, resulting in negative non-identified pathogenic genetic variants.
However, two uncertain significance variants were found.
The prosthesis has been analysed with semi-quantitative Wavelength X-
ray fluorescence, and heart tissues analysed by Inductively Coupled
Plasma Mass Spectrometry High Resolution
Conclusion: The histopathologic features are diagnostics of HCQ-
induced cardiomyopathy. However, EMF remains of unknown
aetiologies.
The results obtained in the high-resolution molecular biochemical tech-
niques could support the hypothesis of the relationship between inert
compounds of the valvular prosthesis and EMF.
PS-12-023
Ante-mortem and post-mortem diagnoses of pulmonary infections in
HIV/AIDS patients in a tertiary hospital in Ghana
S. Quayson*, T.C. Bouton, A.D. Abrahams, I.J. Erskine, A. Kwara,
A.A. Adjei, E.J. Carter
*Department of Pathology, University of Ghana Medical School,
University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana
Background & objectives: HIV/AIDS patients suffer from opportu-
nistic infections with pulmonary infections being the commonest
cause of morbidity and mortality. The study aimed to investigate
the burden of pulmonary infections HIV deaths in Ghana, and the
drug susceptibility of the causative organisms.
Methods: 95 consecutively consented HIV/AIDS-related deaths
were prospectively included. Standard autopsy procedure was
followed with review of record of deceased. Lungs were sampled
with two representative specimens taken from each lobe, and then
processed with histology-stains and cultures for micro-organisms.
Drug susceptibility testing was performed. Baseline characteristics
Virchows Arch
using Pearson, chi-squared, Fisher’s exact and student t tests were
applied where appropriate.
Results: Bacterial pneumonia was the most common cause of death (66.3% )
followed by TB (35%). The ante-mortem clinical diagnosis of TB compared
to confirmed-autopsy diagnosis was 78.8% sensitive (95% CI 62.2-89.3) and
67.3% specific (95% CI 54.1-78.2). Of culture-proven M. tuberculosis cases,
23.8% failed to identify TB as an ante-mortem clinical cause of death, of
which20% were rifampin mono-resistant. Bacteria and fungi culturesresulted
in several isolates. E. faecalis, E. coli, K. pneumonia, Staphylococcus species
and Candida species are among the organisms identified. Gram-negative
bacteria are most susceptible to cefoxitin but highly resistant to cefuroxime
sodium whereas, the Gram-positives are highly susceptibility to vancomycin
but resistant to flucloxacillin.
Conclusion: Our findings emphasize that pulmonary TB and pneumonia
are major causes of death in HIV/AIDS patients. A significant
percentage of missed TB-infections demonstrated drug resistance.
There is the need for heightened awareness coupled with aggres-
sive TB screening amongst HIV/AIDS patients.
Funding: The “Providence/Boston Center for AIDS Research (P30 AI042853)
PS-12-024
When the association gets ambiguous – VACTERL in a new-born
autopsy – case report
P. Sequeira*, C. Carneiro, H. Oliveira Coelho
*Hospital Garcia de Orta, Portugal
Background & objectives: To present an autopsy case-report of
VACTERL association (vertebral; anal atresia; cardiac; tracheo-oesoph-
ageal fistula; renal; limbs) in a new-born with 33 weeks of gestation, with
ambiguous sexual development.
Methods: A 34-years old woman, from Angola, presented at our emer-
gency department in spontaneous labour. The previous ultrasound
showed oligohydramnios and foetal malformations (cardiac, spinal, gen-
itourinary and gastrointestinal). The delivery occurred without incidents
(33 weeks of gestation). The new-born died within 3 days and an autopsy
was performed.
Results: The gross examination showed a new-born with 33 weeks an-
thropometry; 2350g weight; a slight lumbar kyphosis, male external gen-
italia (micropenis with hypospadias and scrotum); faeces in the urethral
meatus and imperforate anus. The internal examination showed: right
atrium, right ventricular and ascending aorta dilatation; bilateral pulmo-
nary hypoplasia; medium oesophageal atresia with tracheo-oesophageal
fistula; inverted colonic rotation with distal colon/rectum dilatation and
recto-vesical fistula; polycystic fused kidneys with horse-shoe conforma-
tion (larger right kidney) and dilated right ureter. Both ovaries and
Fallopian tubes were present without evidence of uterus. There were no
alterations in the limbs.
Conclusion: VACTERL association is rare (incidence of 1:10.000-
40.000) and most cases are sporadic. There are few cases with
ambiguous genitalia. It should present at least three of the six
anomalies described and it overlaps with other entities, namely,
the CHARGE syndrome.
PS-12-026
Hypophosphatasia: a rare metabolic genetic disease: an autopsy
study
B. Tristán Martín*, C. Guerrero, P. Ramos Ponton, S.A. Galeano Reyes
*Hospital Universitario Fundación Alcorcón, Spain
Background & objectives: Hypophosphatasia is a rare metabolism
bone disease, caused by a mutation with loss of function in the
Alkaline phosphatase, tissue-nonspecific isozyme (ALPL).This ge-
netic disorder produces a deficiency throughout the body being
more severe in the liver, kidney and bone.
Methods: We present an autopsy study of a 15+4-week foetus,
resulting from a legal interruption of pregnancy, with prenatal
diagnosis of bone dysplasia. The foetus weighed 79.8 g and pre-
sented anthropometric measurements at the lower limit of normal-
ity for its gestational age.
Results: Externally, it drew attention to the shortening and defor-
mity of the lower and upper limbs. These alterations were
corresponded radiographically and in the macroscopic examina-
tion with multiple fractures in the diaphysis of the long bones.
Histologically, it is characterized by the pathological persistence
of columns of hypertrophic chondrocytes 2-3 in the metaphysis
and adjacent diaphysis of long bones with absence of bone trabec-
ulae and osteoid matrix. In this case, the mutation was positive for
the ALPL gene. Later studies showed that the mother is a hetero-
zygous carrier, so we would be facing an autosomal recessive
inheritance pattern.
Conclusion: Hypophosphatasia is a rare disease with a large clini-
cal variability. It needs to be suspected by a compatible clinic and
confirmed by a genetic study. Differential diagnosis will be mainly
made with rickets and imperfect osteogenesis (most common skel-
etal dysplasia)
PS-12-027
Causes of death of cancer patients in the emergency hospital
Y. Rudenko, R. Ukrainets*, Y. Korneva
*Smolensk Regional Institute of Pathology, Smolensk State Medical
University, Russia
Background & objectives: The peculiarity of medical care in the
emergency hospital is prevalence of severely decompensated pa-
tients, among which there are patients with malignant tumours.
Objective: to analyse the complications in cancerous patients in emer-
gency hospital.
Methods: Out of 1519 autopsy reports (2017-2019) 207 cases were
death due to cancer, misdiagnosed in 50% in hospital; only 9,2%
patients already had diagnosis of malignant tumour. Cancer of
colon, stomach, pancreas and also heamoblastoses were dominant.
Usually the patients had a set of complication, among which it was
very difficult to extract a fatal one.
Results: 41,5% patients had cancerous cachexia; 34,8% cases had
decompensated obstruction of hollow organs due to tumour grow;
29,0% had secondary pneumonia; 31,9% died because of toxic
shock due to tumour destruction; 27,7% had posthemorrhagic
anaemia (half cases due to tumour decay and another half – due
to bleeding fromsymptomatic erosions in GIT). 15%cases had
paraneoplastic coagulopathy,manifested by pulmonary embolism
or ischemic stroke.
Conclusion: Dealing with the patients of advanced cancer in emer-
gency hospital clinician must be ready to face a complicated case
with overlapping complications, blurring the clinical picture.
Pathologists also may be stumpted looking for the immediate
cause of death during autopsy.
Virchows Arch
PS-12-029
Regulation of clinical autopsies in Russia
P. Malkov, V. Zinserling*
*VA Almazov Research Center, SP Botkin Infectious Hospital, Russia
Background & objectives: Clinical autopsies still play an important role
in healthcare. In different countries they are regulated quite differently. In
Russia there is long-term tradition in autopsy pathology and a set of
documents regulating this work.
Methods: Brief concise presentation of the basic documents and results
of their use according the federal law N323 (accepted on the 21.11 2011)
of Russia procedure of clinical autopsies is determined by Ministry of
Healthcare and special order of the federal ministry 6.06 2013.
Results: Procedure of autopsy and the forms of record (common and
perinatal: foetus, stillborn or new-born). Clinical autopsy has to be con-
ducted when patients died from diseases. In cases of death due external
causes and in absence of documents - legal investigation. In RF autopsy is
obligatory if there is suspicion on violent death, impossibility to formulate
exactly the final clinical diagnosis, hospitalization for less than 1 day,
possible relationship with therapeutic or diagnostic medicaments, in cases
related to medical interventions, infectious diseases (including suspect),
oncology without histology, results of ecological catastrophes, pregnant,
in childbirth, new-borns in age till 28 day, stillborn. Clinical autopsies
were divided in 5 categories of difficulty
Conclusion: According to reports from regions of Russia in 2018 were
done approximately 469000 autopsies. The percentage of discrepancies
between clinical and pathological diagnosis – 6,3 % ( from 1,2% to 12,1%
in different years) we consider not to be objective.
PS-13-001
Utility of fine needle aspiration cytology in the distinguishing between
parathyroid and thyroid lesions
E. Bakula Zalewska*, J. Dlugosinska, O. Stanowska, J. Galczynski,
P. Góralski, M. Prochorec-Sobieszek
*Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology
(MSCNRIO), Department of Pathology, Warsaw, Poland
Background & objectives: Fine needle aspiration (FNA) smears of para-
thyroid glands is often confused with thyroid. Thus, majority FNA of
parathyroid glands is unintended. However, ultrasound guided FNA is
increasingly used to localize parathyroid glands in abnormal location and
in hyperparathyroidism.
Methods: 91 patients underwent parathyroid FNA either unintended dur-
ing the sampling of thyroid nodules (36 patients) and suspicions metasta-
tic lymph node (7 patients) or specifically to localize parathyroid lesions
(48 patients). In addition to cytological examination, measurement of
parathyroid hormone in the needle washouts (FNA-PTH testing) was
performed in all examined patients and immunocytochemical examina-
tion (IC) on 16 FNA specimens.
Results: The most frequent cytological features included: stippled
chromatin (34), scattered naked nuclei (30), loose clusters (22),
large crowded clusters (17), oxyphilic cytoplasm (13), cribriform
or trabecular architecture (10) and follicular pattern (7). Cells with
small, dark nuclei and colloid-free background was another sign
suggestive of parathyroid origin. 87 FNA smears were correctly
diagnosed as parathyroid lesions in conjunction with FNA-PTH
testing and/or IC.
Conclusion: The architectural pattern and cellular features help to distin-
guish between parathyroid and thyroid in the FNA smears. FNA-PTH
testing in conjunction with FNA is the most useful adjunct to determine
whether the FNA specimen represents parathyroid or thyroid lesions. In
addition immunocytochemical examination increases the diagnostic ac-
curacy of the FNA.
PS-13-002
Clinicopathological impact of C228T mutation of telomerase reverse
transcriptase promoter in follicular cell-derived thyroid carcinoma
M. Bella-Cueto*, R. Carrera, M.d.C. Ramos, R. Onieva, C.M. Blazquez,
M.R. Rodriguez-Millan, J.A. Vazquez, C. Padilla, N. Combalia,
S. Castro, B. Bella, M. Solorzano, F.J. Guirao, I. Capel, J.C. Ferreres
*Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari, I3PT, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Sabadell, Spain
Background & objectives: C228T mutation of telomerase reverse tran-
scriptase promoter (TERTp) has been identified as specific for malignan-
cy in thyroid and indicative of poorer prognosis.
Objective: to determine the prevalence and prognostic value of C228T
TERTp mutation in thyroid malignancies of our institution.
Methods: From 1993 to 2017, 147 cases of thyroid follicular cell-derived
carcinomas were identified with histological material available, corre-
sponding to 122 women and 47 men, with age range between 7 and 83
years. C228T TERTp mutation was determined by pyrosequencing.
Histopathological and clinical data were recorded. Follow-up was avail-
able in 143. Statistical analysis for variables of clinical interest was
performed.
Results: The mutation was identified in 18 of the 147 cases (12.2%), with
higher percentages in poorly differentiated carcinomas and well differen-
tiated carcinomas with a poorly differentiated component than in well
differentiated carcinomas (37.5% vs 7.3%), with statistically significant
difference. None of the cases of anaplastic carcinoma held the mutation. It
was more prevalent in stages II to IV vs stage I (25.8% vs 8.62%), in cases
that presented recurrence or persistence vs cases that did not (25.9% vs
9.56%), and in cases with death due to disease or persistent disease at
follow-up vs cases free of disease (28.57% vs 9,83%), with statistically
significant differences in all of them (p<0,05) .
Conclusion: C228T TERTp mutation was more prevalent in poorly dif-
ferentiated thyroid carcinomas and carcinomas with poorly differentiated
component, and in cases with higher stage, persistence and / or recurrence
of the disease and worse prognosis. These associations suggest that the
presence of this mutation could indicate a more intense treatment or a
closer follow-up.
Funding by: Ayuda Merck Serono de Investigación 2016. Fundación
Merck Salud. Beca Taulí de Recerca 2016. Institut d'Investigació i
Innovació Parc Taulí.
PS-13-003
NIFTP vs FVPTC: a cyto-histo morphological study with clinical
correlation and diagnostic challenges
K. Bhattacharjee*
*Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, India
Background & objectives: NIFTP , introduced in WHO 2016 classifi-
cation of endocrine tumours is an indolent lesion distinct from FVPTC
with strict diagnostic criteria. It's cytological features aren't clearly
defined.
To study the cyto-histo morphological features and uncover useful mor-
phological clues to distinguish them.
Methods: Retrospective study (Jan 2016- Dec 2019). All cases of NIFTP
and FVPTC diagnosed during this period are included. The FNAC
smears were reviewed for: cellularity, nuclear features (9 parameters)
and architectural features (11 parameters). Gross details (5 parameters)
and Histopathology (9 parameters) were documented for each case.
Results: NIFTP: 12 cases, FVPTC: 14 cases. FNAC: Nuclear
membrane irregularity, chromatin margination, atypical bare nuclei
PS-13 Endocrine Pathology
Virchows Archiv
was more frequent in FVPTC (40%, 10%, 50%) than NIFTP (14%,
0%, 29%). Gross: FVPTC was more multifocal (36% vs 0%).
Haemorrhage on cut-section was seen more in NIFTP (67% vs
21%). Histopathology: Capsule thickness >2mm was more frequent
in FVPTC (57% vs 25%). Mitosis <1/10hpf was common in
NIFTP (67% vs 29%).
Conclusion: Although cytomorphological overlap does exist between
NIFTP and FVPTC, there do exist certain features on FNAC, gross and
histopathology that can differentiate the two convincingly.
PS-13-004
Increase of thyroid cancer in the area of Santiago de Compostela
(northwest Spain)
J.M. Cameselle-Teijeiro*, G. Carnero, C. Beiras-Sarasquete,
I. Abdulkader-Nallib, M. Sanchez-Ares, A. Fernandez-Pombo,
V. Pubul-Nunez, J.M. Cabezas-Agricola, F. Gude-Sampedro,
J.A. Punal-Rodriguez
*Clinical University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela, Spain
Background & objectives: The incidence of thyroid cancer (TC) is
increasing worldwide. The aim of this study was to analyse the incidence
of TC in Santiago de Compostela (northwest Spain) during the period of
1990-2015. This is a population-based cross-sectional study.
Methods: 905 cases of TC were diagnosed in the area of Santiago
de Compostela between 1990-2015. Mean age at diagnosis was
51.96 years, and 79.9% were women. The histological types were:
78.8% papillary carcinoma (ca) (PTC), 8.7% follicular ca (FTC),
5.5% Hurthle cell (oncocytic) ca (HCC), 2.5% medullary ca,
1.7%, anaplastic (undifferentiated) ca, 1.5% poorly differentiated
ca, and 1.3% other.
Results: A significant increase in the incidence of TC was observed: 2.14
per 100,000/year (1991-1996) to 16.88 per 100,000/year (2011-2015).
This increase was mainly due to PTC, which increased from 1.34 to
14.30 per 100,000/year (from 0.95 to 5.52 per 100,000/year, when ex-
cluding papillary microcarcinomas). There was also an increase in the
incidence of FTC from 0.19 to 1.12 per 100,000/year and in HCC from
0.09 to 0.77 per 100,000/year.
Conclusion: Our data confirmed an increasing trend in the inci-
dence of TC in the area of Santiago de Compostela, Spain. PTC
was the most common histological type found, and the increase of
incidence was mainly due to PTC, with FTC and HCC also
playing a role.
Funding: Grant PI19/01316-FEDER, Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities, Spain.
PS-13-005
Clinicopathologic analysis of pulmonary and gastroenteropancreatic
large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
V. Delektorskaya*, A. Senderovich, G. Chemeris
*N.N. Blokhin National Medical Research Center of Oncology, Russia
Background & objectives: Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
(LCNEC) is a rare and aggressive neoplasm, representing a histologically
and biologically heterogeneous group of tumours. The aim of this study
was to evaluate clinico-morphological features, the immunophenotype,
genotype, and follow-up of LCNEC of different locations.
Methods: We studied 39 surgically resected LCNECs of pulmo-
nary and extrapulmonary origin. Clinical data was retrieved from
medical records. The mean patient age was 54.2 years (range, 28
to 81 y), and the male/female ratio was 1.2. Pathological analysis
included morphological study, re-evaluation of tumour prolifera-
tion rate (mitotic count) and differentiation, immunohistochemistry
(chromogranin A, synaptophysin, SSTR-2A, p53, Ki-67) and se-
quencing (TP53).
Results: In the whole cohort, 18 patients had tumours that originated
from the lung and 21 patients were of the gastroenteropancreatic
(GEP) location. Neuroendocrine differentiation was confirmed in
all cases with Ki-67 index 40%-80%. SSTR-2A expression was seen
in 19% of GEP cases and in 11% of the lung tumours. p53 protein
was strongly expressed in 64% of the cases, including 72% of lung
LCNECs and 57% of GEP LCNECs. Eigh of the 18 lung LCNECs
were additionally sequenced for TP53 exons 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Only
one case showed exon 5 missense mutation of the TP53 gene. P53
and SSTR2A were not found to be a prognostic markers.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that abnormal p53 expression is
a more frequent event in LCNECs of the lung than in GEP loca-
tion. There was no correlation between mutant form of p53 pro-
tein and morphology or prognosis. Lower Ki-67 index correlated
with normal/wild-type p53 pattern and positive SSTR-2A expres-
sion. Further studies are needed to compare genetic information
with p53 protein immunoreactivity and other possible prognostic
biomarkers such as SSTR-2A for LCNEC patients.
PS-13-006
Thyroid needle core biopsy: usefulness and improvement in its
efficiency with the gross management by histotechnicians
B. Fuertes Negro*, G. Muñiz, S. Gracia, A. Vidal, F.J. Queipo
*Pathology Department, Hospital San Jorge, Huesca, Spain
Background & objectives: Thyroid pathology is very prevalent
in Spain. Our aim is to show the percentage of unsatisfactory
thyroid needle core biopsies (TNCB) and diagnostic delay (DD)
depending on the gross sampler (pathologist or histotechnician)
and the correlation between TNCB and thyroidectomy.
Methods: We reviewed the TNCB reports from January 2013 to
February 2020. The TNCBs were performed with a 18G core. Until
April 2019 the sampling was made by pathologist and later by
histotechnicians.
DD was defined as the dates from biopsy registry day to signing the
pathology report.
Results: In this time were performed 794 TNCBs, being 82 (10.33%)
unsatisfactory, with an average DD of 6,37 days.
In the first lapse there were 701TNCBs, being 73 (10.41%) un-
satisfactory, with an medium DD of 6,68 days. In the second time
there were 93 TNCBs being 9 (9.68%) unsatisfactory, with a
mean DD of 4,03 days.
Comparing both periods of time, the unsatisfactory biopsies and the DD
has been reduced in a 7.01% and 39.67%, respectively.
The global correlation between TNCB and thyroidectomy is a 74.64%. In
Bethesda ≥III it grows up until 80.00%.
Conclusion: TNCB show some advantages:
a) It has a low percentage of unsatisfactory results.
b) The sampling by histotechnicians improve the efficiency.
c) TNCB possesses a robust correlation with thyroidectomy.
Take everything in account TCNB is an efficient alternative to FNA.
PS-13-007
Prognostic implications of CD10 and CD15 expression in papillary
thyroid carcinoma
C.K. Jung*, E.J. Oh, J.S. Bae, D. Lim
*Department of Hospital Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea, Cancer Research
Institute, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea,
Seoul, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: Patients with papillary thyroid carcino-
ma (PTC) have excellent survival, however, recurrence remains a
major problem in the management of PTC. We aimed to determine
Virchows Arch
the prognostic impact of the expression of CD10 and CD15 on
patients with PTC.
Methods: Immunohistochemistry for CD10 and CD15 was performed on
the tissue microarrays of 515 patients with PTC. Clinical significance of
MME (CD10) mRNA and FUT4 (CD15) mRNA expression was
analysed in 454 PTC patients using the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
data.
Results: CD10 and CD15 expression was detected in 201 (39.0%) and 295
(57.3%) of 515 PTC cases, respectively. Extrathyroidal extension and BRAF
V600E were associated with the expression of both CD10 and CD15.
Recurrence was inversely correlated with CD15 expression (p = 0.034) but
not with CD10 expression. Patients with CD15 expression had an adjusted
hazard ratio of 0.509 (p = 0.027) for recurrence-free survival and an adjusted
odds ratio of 2.511 (p = 0.028) for predicting no clinical evidence of disease.
CD10 expression was not associated with clinical outcomes. In the TCGA
dataset, the expression level of CD15 mRNA was higher in the low/
intermediate-risk group than the high-risk group.
Conclusion: Taken together, CD15 expression was an independent prog-
nostic marker for improved prognosis in PTC patients.
This study was supported by a grant (2017R1D1A1B03029597) from the
Basic Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea.
PS-13-010
Synchronous DIPNECH and paraganglioma in PALB2 mutation
carrier: just a coincidence?
D. Martins*, E. Rios, S. Guimarães
*Centro Hospitalar Universitário São João, Portugal
Background & objectives: Diffuse idiopathic pulmonary neuroendocrine
cell hyperplasia(DIPNECH) and paraganglioma are both rare neuroendocrine
tumours. While paraganglioma harbour well-known germline/somatic muta-
tions, the genetic background of DIPNECH remains unknown.
We herein report for the first time their coexistence and discuss the ge-
netic results.
Methods: A 56-year-old female with a previous history of papillary thy-
roid carcinoma and breast ductal carcinoma, was found to have multiple
lung nodules (from 4mm to 9mm) in a follow-up CT scan. Biopsies
disclosed a neuroendocrine tumour. Subsequently, a Ga-68 DOTANOC
PET/CT was performed disclosing a mass (20mm) near the left carotid
artery that was removed before the lung surgery.
Results: Cervical lesion was a paraganglioma and lung lesion was a carcinoid
tumour with associated tumourlets and neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia
(DIPNECH). Genetic study for mutations in SDHAF2, SDHB, SDHC,
SDHD, MEN1, MAX, TMEM127 and VHL genes was negative. A variant
of unknown significance in the PALB2 gene (c.1408A>G) was found in the
peripheralbloodwhileageneticcauseforthebreastcancerwasbeingpursued.
Thisgeneticvariantwasalsodetectedinonecloserelativewithbreastcancerat
younger age. The patient is symptom-free over two years of follow-up.
Conclusion: It´s well-recognized that DIPNECH may be associated with ma-
lignancies like breast and thyroid carcinomas, however its association with
paraganglioma has never been reported. Mutations in PALB2 might be the
keytoexplainthisuniquecaseofsynchronousDIPNECHandparaganglioma.
PS-13-011
Non-invasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear
features (NIFTP): report of an institutional experience
T. Meizoso Latova*, C. D'Angelo, A.L. De la Guardia Rodriguez,
C. Diego Hernández, E. Hernández Suárez, M.d.l.Á. Muñóz Fernández,
M. Boiza, C. Torre Carrera, E. Sobrino Reig, G. Riesco-Eizaguirre
*Hospital Universitario de Móstoles, Spain
Background & objectives: The diagnostic criteria for non-invasive fol-
licular thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features (NIFTP) was
recently proposed. The frequency of this new entity is unknown. The aim
of this study was to report our institutional experience with NIFTP.
Methods: Thyroid tumours diagnosed as follicular variant of papillary
thyroid carcinoma (FVPTC) or NIFTP between 2005 and 2019 were
identified using our data base. Information regarding patient demo-
graphics, clinical presentation, fine-needle aspiration (FNA) results,
multifocality, pathology stage, type of surgery, lymph node, systemic
metastasis and follow-up were recorded, and the archived slides of the
cases were reviewed.
Results: 13 patients (median: 50,3 years) were identified and classified as
NIFTPs representing 5,4% of all cases of thyroid carcinomas. The FNA
results were indeterminated including AUS/FLUS (33,3%) and suspi-
cious for follicular neoplasm (33,3%), benign (25%) while malignant
(8,3%) was les common. Treatment consisted of lobectomy (n=9) and
total thyrodectomy (n=4). None of them had prophylactic cervical lymph
node dissection. All the patients were free of disease in the follow-up.
Conclusion: NIFTP comprises a significant fraction of cases previously
diagnosed as PTC. Typically, most NIFTP were diagnosed as
indeterminated in cytology. None of our patients developed metastases
or recurrences. Establishment the correct diagnosis of NIFTP requires
adequate macroscopy examination protocol and rigorous morphologic
criteria in order to avoid unnecessary overtreatment of these tumours.
PS-13-012
Adrenocortical carcinoma prognostisation with digital pathology
M. Cebula, B. Aszodi, J. Töke, M. Toth, T. Micsik*
*1st Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
Background & objectives: Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare
malignant tumour with hardly predictable prognosis. Weiss-score (WS)
defines malignancy criteria, while ENSAT and Helsinki score might be
used for prognostisation. We aimed to introduce digital pathology
methods for the precision work-up of ACC.
Methods:HE,Ki-67andPhospho-HistonH3(PHH3)stainedslidesof34ACC-
cases were digitized and analysed with Pannoramic 250 Scanner and Pattern/
HistoQuantSoftwares(3DHistech,Hungary).ForDigitalPrognostisationIndex
(DPI) following variables were measured on whole slides: size and shape of
tumour cells, necrosis, Ki-67 proliferation Index and PHH3 (for mitotic count).
Results were correlated with data from clinical follow up.
Results: ENSAT-stage (Stage2:35 versus Stage 3-4:15 months, p=0,09),
correlated better with modified Weiss-score and both showed moderate
impact on survival. The presence of necrosis (threshold at 1%) resulted in
lower overall survival ( 21,5 versus 39 months, p=0,08). WS, mWS and
ENSAT stage could predict 18-month survival in less than 60% of cases.
Ki-67 proliferation index defined by pathologists and by Digital Image
Analysis correlated well (Spearman: 0,804), but PHH3, Ki-67, size and
shape of tumour cells did not have prognostical impact alone on overall
survival. If we combined above mentioned data into a Digital
Prognostisation Index, it could predict 18-month overall survival in 21
of 27 (78%) cases.
Conclusion: Helsinki and ENSAT score can tell something about
the metastatic spread of ACC, but ACC still remains a disease
with hardly predictable survival or outcome. Our study shows that
thorough morphological examination with digital image analysis
might bring some increase in the accuracy of predicting overall
survival. Though more studies involving more patients are still
needed for validating our findings.
PS-13-013
Study of the role of NEUROD1, Nkx2.2, Isl1 and somatostatin in
congenital hyperinsulinism
L. Mitrofanova*, A. Hazratov, A. Sukhotskaya, V. Bairov, D. Ryzhkova
*The Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Russia
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Objective: a morphological study of the
NeuroD1, Nkx2.2, Isl1, somatostatin in various forms of congenital hy-
perinsulinism (CH).
Methods: Materials and methods included immunohistochemistry exam-
ination with NeuroD1, insulin, somatostatin, ChrA, Nkx2.2, Isl1, and
morphometric analysis of pancreas fragments from 18 CH children and
9 normal pancreases.
Results: The number of cells with the expression of ChrA, Isl1, Nkx2.2
and NeuroD1 was significantly higher than in the normal pancreas in
contrast to somatostatin. The level of Isl1expression corresponded to
Nkx2.2 expression. NeuroD1 was expressed in 58,4±9,7% and 83
±4,7% of endocrine cells in diffuse CH and in focal CH respectively.
This transcription factor was observed in 65,5±7,4% and 77,3±9,4% of
exocrine cells accordingly.
Conclusion: The expression of the studied transcription factors in the
endocrine part of the pancreas with any form of CH is significantly higher
than in the normal pancreas. The most significant marker of CH is
NeuroD1.
PS-13-014
Distribution of sex hormones and lymphocytes in reproductive wom-
an with thyroid papillary carcinoma and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
T. Muzashvili*, M. Gachechiladze, S. Kepuladze, G. Burkadze
*Tbilisi State Medical University, Georgia
Background & objectives: The aim of our study was to analyse the
expression of hormone receptors, lymphocytic infiltration and
thyreocyte/lymphocyte proliferation index in thyroid papillary carcinoma
and in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
Methods: Study included 115 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tis-
sue material from the teaching, research and diagnostic laboratory of
Tbilisi State Medical University. Study material was divided into follow-
ing groups: normal thyroid gland (n=15), Non-invasive Follicular
Thyroid Neoplasm with Papillary-Like Nuclear Features (NIFTP)
(n=15), classic papillary carcinoma (CPC)(n=20), follicular variant of
papillary carcinoma (FPC) (n=17), cylindric-cell variant of papillary car-
cinoma (CCPC)(n=9), Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) (n=25) and the co-
occurrence of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and papillary carcinoma (HTPC)
(n=14). Standard immunohistochemistry was used to detect ER, PR,
Ki67, CK19, CD56. In addition, lymphocytic infiltration was evaluated
in H&E stained specimens.
Results: Study results showed that ER and PR expression is higher
in FPC, CCPC and HTPC compared to CPC (p<0.001), whilst
lymphocytic infiltrate is lower in FPC and CCPC compared to
CPC (p<0.05). In addition, ER and PR expression is higher in
HTPC compared to HT only (<0.001). The thyreocyte/
lymphocyte proliferation index is increased in FPC and CCPC
compared to CPC and it is also higher in HTPC compared to only
HT (p<0.05).
Conclusion: Increased expression of hormone receptors may represent
the risk factor for the development of thyroid papillary carcinoma and
immune regulation plays an important role in this process.
PS-13-015
Morphological, molecular and outcome characteristics of non-
invasive follicular thyroid neoplasms with papillary-like nuclear fea-
tures in a Romanian population: a retrospective, institutional study
A. Nechifor-Boila*, A. Cota, C. Banescu, V. Moldovan, A. Borda
*Department of Histology, UMFST Targu Mures, Romania
Background & objectives: The aim of our study was to assess the mor-
phological, molecular and outcome characteristics of NIFTPs (non-inva-
sive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features) in a
Romanian population.
Methods: All cases of non-invasive encapsulated follicular variant of
papillary thyroid carcinoma (EFVPTC) registered at Târgu-Mureş
Pathology Department between 2008-2015 with available follow-up data
were reviewed by two pathologists and re-classified as NIFTPs in accor-
dance with the WHO 2017 diagnostic criteria. All NIFTP cases were
subjected to RT-PCR amplification targeting the BRAFV600E and
RAS (KRAS, NRAS, HRAS) somatic mutations.
Results: Our study included 66 cases. More than half of the cases oc-
curred in patients younger than 55 years-old (68.2%), with a significant
female predominance (86.4%); the mean tumour size was 28.65±15.29.
RAS mutations were identified in 22 (33.3%) cases, with the following
distribution: HRAS (11 cases), NRAS (10 cases) and HRAS (1 case).
Any NIFTP case was associated with BRAFV600E mutation. The mean
follow-up period was 53 months. Most of the patients (n=61 cases,
91.4%) were treated with total thyroidectomy and received RAI (I131
therapy) (90.9%). All cases had a disease-free status at the last clinical
assessment, including 5 cases treated with lobectomy only.
Conclusion: RAS mutations are common among NIFTPs, being identi-
fied in 1/3 of the cases included in our study, whereas BRAFV600E
mutation is absent. Our follow-up data highlight the indolent behaviour
of non-invasive EFVPTCs reclassified as NIFTP
PS-13-016
Adaptive alterations of pinealocytes after the long-term influence of
heavy metal salts on the body
N. Hryntsova, O. Timakova, O. Romaniuk, Z. Timchenko, A. Korobchanska,
A. Romaniuk*
*Sumy State University, Ukraine
Background & objectives: Epiphysis and parathyroid glands take part in
the regulation of the adaptive capacity of the body. The aim was to study
of morphological and immunohistochemical features of epiphysis's
pinealocytes and parathyroid cells under heavy metal salts influence.
Methods: The experiment was conducted on 24 rats aged 5-6 months (1
control and 1 experimental group). Animals received normal drinking
water for 30 days after a 90-day exposure to a combination of heavy
metal salts: zinc, copper, iron, manganese, lead and chromium. To reveal
the neuroendocrine cells, the immunohistochemical study of
Chromogranin A, using the rabbit monoclonal antibodies, was
performed.
Results: Heavy metal salts cause the morphological and immunohisto-
chemical alterations in all structural components of the epiphysis and
parathyroid glands. Perivascular oedema, significant vascular plethora,
thickening and impaired permeability of the vascular wall with the for-
mation of diapedesis haemorrhages were observed. The vast majority of
pinealocytes had signs of significant cytoplasmic vacuolation with an
increase of Chromogranin A expression compared to control animals.
The number of neurosecretory cells in the peripheral areas of the gland
was especially increased, while the pinealocytes of the control animals
were spread evenly throughout the gland. At the same time the amount of
parathyroid cells and their Chromogranin A accumulation were
decreased.
Conclusion: The change of Chromogranin A expression and
amount of pinealocytes and parathyroid cells indicate their dis-
turbed secretory activity, at the same time the evacuation of hor-
mones inside the vessels has impaired as a result of pathological
alterations of vascular wall.
PS-13-017
Dyshormonogenetic goiter: a study of 3 cases
I. Saguem*, S. Moussa, C. Kammoun, M. Bouhamed, S. Graja,
T. Boudawara, L. Ayadi, R. Kallel
*Department of Pathology, Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Dyshormonogenetic goiter is a genetic thy-
roid hyperplasia secondary to an enzyme defect in hormonal synthesis.
Malignant transformation is one of the complications, rarely reported in
the literature. We aim to analyse the clinicopathological and prognostic
aspects of this rare entity.
Methods: In our pathology department, three cases of dyshormonogenetic
goiter were diagnosed between 2012 and 2019.
Results: Patients were all males aged from 18 to 40 years. All patients
presented with a goiter and one of them was followed for congenital
hypothyroidism. A total thyroidectomy was performed in all cases.
Sectioning demonstrated multiple nodules measuring from 0.2 to 5 cm.
Histologically, the thyroid presented a marked nodular architecture
formed by microfollicles or trabecular structures, separated by thick fi-
brous bands with foci of haemorrhage, necrosis and calcification. The
follicles were lined by thyrocytes with eosinophilic or clarified cytoplasm
and an enlarged nucleus with conspicuous nucleoli. There was no vascu-
lar or capsular invasion. In one case we identified 2 micro-nodules (0.2
and 0.4cm) fulfilling the criteria of papillary microcarcinoma.
Conclusion: Dyshormonogenetic goiter is a rare entity characterized by
an architectural and cellular pleiomorphism which can mimic neoplasia
and cause diagnostic difficulties.
PS-13-018
Myelolipoma of the adrenal gland
I. Sotirova*, R. Hristoskova, A. Fakirova, B. Ilcheva
*Military Medical Academy - Sofia, Bulgaria
Background & objectives: Myelolipomas of the adrenal gland are rare,
benign neoplasms, without any known gender predilection, mostly
asymptomatic and an incidental finding. We will study 4 cases to obtain
addition relevant information and compare to what is already known on
these lesions.
Methods: We present 4 cases of myelolipoma of the adrenal gland,
diagnosed in our department over the course of 5 years. We evaluated
the morphology (relative proportions of mature fat to haematopoietic
elements), clinical presentation, differential diagnosis, lab results, image
studies and any additional relevant medical information that we were able
to obtain regarding these patients.
Results: Three of the patients were female, one was male, ages between
35 and 74 years. All patients had complaints of abdominal discomfort and
occasional pain, one had dyspnea, one presented through the ER. Three of
the neoplasms were located in the right adrenal gland. The fourth
myelolipoma was associated with a splenic cyst. One patient had an
associated adrenal adenoma, one had cortical hyperplasia.
Conclusion: Our microscopic observations regarding the composition of
these neoplasms showed no significant differences between all four cases.
All four myelolipomas were morphologically identical and composed of
predominantly fat with scant haematopoietic elements. The main clinical
differential diagnosis of these neoplasms is retroperitoneal lipoma, al-
though on gross examination liposarcoma can also be suspected.
PS-13-019
Comparison of risk stratification scores and predictors of metastasis
in pheochromocytoma: a 14-year institutional case review
T. Oliveira*, J. Boavida, D. López-Presa
*Department of Pathology, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, Portugal
Background & objectives: Pheochromocytoma is an adrenal medulla
tumour whose behaviour cannot be reliably predicted by clinical, histo-
logical, molecular or biochemical parameters alone. We aimed to com-
pare two commonly used risk stratification scores and correlate them with
the patients’ follow-up.
Methods: A senior pathologist and a pathology resident reviewed all
primary pheochromocytoma cases diagnosed in a tertiary healthcare
institution over a 14-year period, from 2001 to 2014, and determined their
“Pheochromocytoma of the Adrenal Gland Scaled Score” (PASS) and
“Grading system for adrenal pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma”
(GAPP) score. Clinical records and the National cancer registry were
assessed for metastasis during follow-up.
Results: Of the 27 cases examined, 17 showed a PASS equal or greater to
4, while 10 and 1 cases showed GAPP scores of 3-6 (moderately differ-
entiated type) and over 6 (poorly differentiated type), respectively. There
was a 50% concordance in risk stratification out of the 20 cases rated as
intermediate to high-risk by at least one of the scores. Of the cases with
metastatic disease, one had scored over 4 with PASS (6) and was of the
moderately differentiated type by the GAPP score (3), while another had a
PASS over 4 (17) and was graded as poorly differentiated with the GAPP
score (8).
Conclusion: Although risk stratification through both scores is not al-
ways consistent, they can still help select the cases in which a closer
follow-up is warranted.
PS-13-020
Large discrepancies between pre-operative biopsy and surgical
resection diagnosis in pulmonary carcinoids
L. Moonen, J. Derks, B. Hermans, L. Hillen, A. Dingemans, E.J. Speel*
*Maastricht UMC, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Neuroendocrine pulmonary carcinoids can
be classified into typical and atypical carcinoids based on mitotic count
and presence of necrosis in surgical resection specimens. Objective was to
assess the reliability of carcinoid classification on pre-operative
(transbronchial/transthoracic) biopsies, which guide treatment decisions.
Methods: We have analysed all pulmonary carcinoid diagnoses
established in the Netherlands between January 2003 and December
2012 using both the Dutch Pathology Registry (PALGA) and the
Netherlands Cancer Registry (IKNL). Paired biopsy-resection specimens
were available in 330 cases of which we have compared the pre-operative
biopsy specimen diagnosis with the surgically confirmed diagnosis using
pathology report conclusions.
Results: In total 160 typical carcinoids (TC), 88 atypical carcinoids (AC)
and 82 carcinoid not otherwise specified (N.O.S.) were diagnosed on
resection specimens. Results showed that in 57% (189/330) of the pa-
tients the pre-operative biopsy specimen diagnosis did not match with the
paired resection diagnosis. This was in 36% of TC, 40% of AC, and 65%
of carcinoid N.O.S., respectively. Moreover, 24% of pre-operatively di-
agnosed TC were subsequently classified as AC in the resection
specimen.
Conclusion: In conclusion, biopsy specimen diagnosis of pulmonary
carcinoids is unreliable and should not be used in decision making for
type of surgery (e.g. sparing vs complete). Our results indicate the neces-
sity for additional (molecular) markers to guide pulmonary carcinoid
biopsy classification.
Funding: Dutch Cancer Society (KWF)
PS-13-021
RB expression in relation to survival in pulmonary neuroendocrine
neoplasms with well differentiated morphology but high prolifera-
tion index
B. Hermans, J. Derks, L. Moonen, C. Habraken, J. von der Thüsen,
L. Hillen, A. Dingemans, E.J. Speel*
*Maastricht UMC, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: It is unclear if pulmonary neuroendocrine
neoplasms (NENs) with well-differentiated morphology but high prolif-
eration index should be regarded as large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
or high-grade carcinoids. We analysed 9 of these cases for pRb expres-
sion in relation to overall survival.
Virchows Arch
Methods: Cases with well differentiated morphology, but MI >10/2mm2
and/or Ki-67 proliferation index >20% were selected based on pathology
reports of consecutive pulmonary NENs in our university medical centre
(Maastricht UMC+, 2007-2018) and confirmed by pathological review.
Immunohistochemistry was performed to assess pRb expression.
Results: Nine cases were included in this study. Median overall survival
in stage IV was 8 months (95% CI 4-12 months). Cases with preserved
pRb expression (4/8) had an increased survival compared to cases with
loss of pRb expression (4/8) (45 months vs. 5 months, p=0.042).
Conclusion: A subgroup of pulmonary NENs with well differentiated
morphology but high proliferation index likely exists. pRb staining might
be helpful to predict prognosis, but clinical relevance remains to be studied.
Funding: Dutch Cancer Society (KWF)
PS-14-001
A wet specimen of “sarcoma of the orbit” from the pathology muse-
um of Turin at the dawn of radiotherapy
L. Ferrari*
*ASL AT Asti, Italy
Background & objectives: The Pathology Museum of Turin houses
specimens dating back between the late 1800s and the early 1900s.
Among these specimens there are 10 cases of ENT pathology. A case
labelled as “sarcoma of the orbit” was selected for the study.
Methods: The wet specimen is a case of sarcoma of the orbit dating back
to the year 1920. The label shows the autopsy number and an archive
research was carried out.
Results: The wet specimen was collected performing an autopsy on a 50-
year-old male. The autopsy report also describes his clinical history: he
had a neoplasm at the basis of the orbital cavity which was treated with
roentgen therapy. After the treatment the neoplasm was reduced. Later the
patient had vertebral metastases and spinal cord compression with para-
plegia. He died for purulent cystitis with fistulas.
Conclusion: This case shows one of the historical first attempt to cure
sarcomas with roentgen therapy in Turin. Therefore, it is of historical inter-
est since it shows the outcomes of a first treatment with a new therapy.
PS-14-002
Dry congenital arterial anomalies in the museum
R.H. Henriques de Gouveia*, T. Ferreira, L. Carvalho
*Pathology, INMLCF & IAP-PM, FMUC & Pathology, CHLO, Portugal
Background & objectives: Stroke is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality. Arterial congenital malformations, namely of vertebral arteries,
is pointed as a promoting ætiological factor. The authors aim to draw
attention to the issue, using the resources of historical museums.
Methods: A retrospective study of the specimens – human liquid-fixed
and dehydrated (dry) ones, as well as wax and clay artificial models – of
an historical Anatomo-Pathological Museum was performed, searching
for anomalous vertebral arteries. Photographies of the specimens were
taken. The literature was reviewed.
Results: Three (n=3) dehydrated (dry) specimens from adult/elderly au-
topsies were found. Each item presented a left vertebral artery with anom-
alous origin – emerging directly from the aortic arch, between the
brachiocephalic trunk and the left common carotid artery ostia.
Conclusion: Reported congenital anomalous origin of vertebral arteries range
6.7%. The most usual anatomical variant matches our findings. It acquires
relevance in acute cerebro-vascular events, sudden death, surgical, traumatic
settings. Historical, Anatomo-Pathological University Museums fulfil their
didactic mission using such specimens.
PS-14-003
Historical overview of the development of the haematopoietic stem
cell concept
M.T. Ramieri, M. Marino*
*IRCCS Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy
Background & objectives: The haematopoiesis was first discovered as
blood islands in extraembryonic tissues (area opaca/ yolk sac).In 1846 a
liver role was discovered by Weber and Kӧlliker. In 1868, the bone
marrow was identified as source of haematopoiesis by Neumann and
Bizzozero.
Methods: Early blood staining techniques were developed by Ehrlich
and refined by Pappenheim, allowing them to study the maturation se-
quence of blood cell lineages. Subsequently in the XX century, tech-
niques of radiation biology provided experimental tools to distinguish
among the dualistic and unitarian theory on haematopoiesis of the two
scientists. Later on, radiation biology techniques extended to bone mar-
row transplantation research.
Results: P. Ehrlich and A. Pappenheim came to different conclu-
sions, the first proposing a precursor marrow cell for the myeloid
series and a lymphatic-derived precursor for lymphocytes (dualistic
theory), and A. Pappenheim proposing that a primitive mononuclear
cell he identified was precursor of all blood cells (unitarian theory).
The blood stem cells were investigated by the scientists E. Neumann
and A. Pappenheim both in physiological haematopoiesis and in
various forms of leukaemia. A. Pappenheim was aware that ‘stem
cells' ("Stammzelle")"or ‘mother cells’ (Mutterzellen) had the poten-
tial to differentiate into diverse cell lines. From the early 1960s the
studies on stem cells in haematopoiesis led to the beginning of
modern stem cell research
Conclusion: The concept of Stem cells includes both positive meanings
of common heritage and normal development as well as a negative sig-
nificance as potential source of cancer. In the second half of the XX
century the history of leukaemia research considered stem cells both as
a ‘biological force for good’ in the framework of bone marrow transplan-
tation as well as having a ‘dark side’ through the concept of cancer stem
cell.
PS-14-004
Evolution of intestinal metaplasia definition (term) as reflection of
history of medicine
S. Mozgovoi*, E. Abrosimova, L. Panyushkin, A. Kononov
*Omsk State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Metaplasia is the replacement of one differ-
entiated somatic cell type with another differentiated somatic cell type in
the same issue. Historically, the development of ideas about metaplasia
(and, in particular, intestinal metaplasia) was accompanied by a signifi-
cant semantic modification.
Methods: Content analysis through systematic review of publica-
tions (PubMed, Embase) using key words metaplasia and intestinal
metaplasia was carried out. Substantial evolutionary modification of
these terms was noted from Rudolph Virchow (he coined the term
“metaplasia” at the VIIIth International Medical Congress in
Copenhagen in 1884) to the present time. A comparative method
and a substantial analysis of sources were used.
Results: The main evolutionary stages of terms modification were
identified and designated: general biological approach, pathology
and epidemiology-based approach, association with stem cells and
genetic regulation. Each period was associated with basic values and
features of the development of medical knowledge. The forecast of
the further evolution of the term based on the current ideas of mod-
ern pathology was indicated. Expanding on earlier discussion that
metaplasias can develop when mature cells dedifferentiate and pro-
PS-14 History of Pathology
Virchows Arch
liferate the modern aspects of this process is discussed about con-
tribution of huge number of associated factors and conditions. There
are numerous similarities between gastric and esophageal intestinal
metaplasia,suggesting an idea that the mechanisms would be
identical.
Conclusion: The main feature of metaplasia is changing in cellular iden-
tity associated with transcription factors that inhibit and/or maintain cel-
lular characteristics. Improved surveillance of metaplasia might lead to
cancer prevention. All elements in terminology system affect each other
with the following changes of conceptual apparatus (metaplasia-
transdifferentiation). It means changing not only the terminology itself,
but significantly affects the assessment of the pathological process: its
diagnosis and the development of therapeutic strategies.
PS-14-005
Pathology museum: the old way for learning medicine on modern
times
A. Nocito*, R. Lattante, D. Zicre, L. Mora, F. Calderone, D. Vidonne,
P. Santesteban, L. Pezzino, M. Mondino
*School of Medicine, Argentina
Background & objectives: Learning pathology is fundamental for a
successful medical practice. Nowadays, new methods of teaching have
been developed, leading pathology museums to be obsolete Hereby, we
present a collection of macroscopies existing in our Pathology
Department.
Methods: We want to highlight the importance of pathology museums,
given than they are part of the history of medicine, and extremely useful
for teaching Pathology. We counted the macroscopic samples, group
them in the different body systems and finally these samples were
catalogued taking into account the nosological entities they represented:
inflammatory, vascular and degenerative processes, tumours, amongst
others.
Results: We have 1275 specimens placed in sealed formalin bottles. The
majority of them represented pathologies of gynaecological, digestive
and respiratory system (18,5 % 16% 9,5%). The most frequent illnesses
are neoplasms, except in: cardiovascular system, spleen and thyroid, for
which inflammatory diseases, infarcts and goiter were prevalent.
Conclusion: This presentation is important to seize this learning material
to teach medicine. It represents the illness in an extremely tangible state
and allows to make a correlation between clinical, imagenologic, and
pathological findings. It’s our duty to ensure that the contribution of
macroscopic material to pathology museums is carried out in a consistent
and continuous way. By doing so, they will endure over time and will
continue being an invaluable source of teaching for the generations to
come.
PS-15-001
Reliability and interrater agreement of tumour purity estimate in
frozen tumour tissues: comparison between a panel of pathologists
and copy number variation-based algorithm
B. Abedi-Ardekani*, D. Nasrollahzadeh, F. Azmoudeh-Ardalan,
A. Nikmanesh, H. Saffar, J. Scoazec, S. Serra, M. Sotoudeh, S. Moody,
J. Mckay, L. Humphreys, G. Scelo, E. Chanudet, M. Stratton, P. Brennan
*Int Agency for Research on Cancer-WHO, France
Background & objectives: Heterogenous structure of tumour tissues
leads to mixed sequencing signals. Microscopic examination to estimate
“tumour purity” before sequencing ensures high-quality data. We aim to
estimate the level of consistency among pathologists and their agreement
with CNV-based algorithms for tumour purity.
Methods: We selected 40 of 450 sequenced oesophageal tumours
from the Mutographs study, through clustering by country of ori-
gin, method of preservation, and post-sequence assessment of pu-
rity. Four pathologists examined frozen sections and scored them
for quality, percentage of tumour and inflammatory cells and ne-
crosis. Inter-rater reliability (IRR) was estimated for the consisten-
cy among pathologists and their agreement with bioinformatics
measurements.
Results: Average and individual IRR (95%CI) of purity estimates among
pathologists was 0.73 (0.61 – 0.81) and 0.40 (0.28 – 0.52) respectively.
The average IRR for inflammation and necrosis were 0.69 (0.56 – 0.79)
and 0.37 (0.09 – 0.57). Modified weighted kappa for agreement between
pathology and CNV-based methods ranged from 0.66 (0.44 – 0.87) to
0.51(0.29 – 0.73). When the quality of samples was accounted for, agree-
ment improved to 0.72.
Conclusion: Microscopic examination of frozen tissues is applicable for
purity estimation in NGS-era and higher quality improves the estimate.
We observed moderate to good reliability among pathologists and a mod-
erate but variable agreement with post-sequencing measurement. This
variation could not be explained solely by the quality of samples or
differences in non-tumoral components. Harmonizing the method of es-
timation of cellular elements and regular communication between pathol-
ogists and bioinformaticians in case of disagreement might help to ame-
liorate this practice.
Funding: CRUK Grand Challenge Program
PS-15-003
Utility of national next generation sequencing-based cancer profiling
tests: experience from a series of 172 patients in a large private lab-
oratory in Brazil
D. C Andrade*, E. Napolitano e Ferreira, R. Natalino, M.M.Á. Stiepcich, M.
Eloi, R. Watanabe Nonose, V. Ceola Pereira, C. Mônaco Moreira,
A. dos
Santos Fornari, P. Silva Felicio, R. Alves da Silva, D. Guimarães Nadale de
Souza, M. Nakamoto Provisor Santos, A. Souza Felipe da Silva
*Grupo Fleury, São Paulo, Brazil
Background & objectives: Gene panels based on next-generation-
sequencing (NGS) have been increasingly used as a tool to improve
individualized care in cancer patients. Herein we present the results of
the application of two in-house gene panels (ONCOFOCO) in a reference
centre in Brazil.
Methods: Two gene panels using NGS technology were applied to 172
patients: 113 patients were submitted to a 366-gene panel and 59 patients
to a 72-gene panel. The presence of single nucleotide variations (SNV),
copy number variations (CNV), and insertion-deletions (Indels) was
assessed, as well as microsatellite instability (MSI) and tumour mutation
burden (TMB).
Results: The most common tumour types submitted to our gene
panels were biliopancreatic adenocarcinoma (n=23;13.4%), breast
carcinoma (n=23;13.4%), colorectal adenocarcinoma (n=22;12.8%),
lung adenocarcinoma (n=18;10.5%), ovarian carcinoma
(n=17;9.9%), sarcomas (n=13;7.6%) and carcinomas with unknown
site of origin (n=9; 5.2%). Pathogenic somatic variants were identi-
fied in all the major tumour types evaluated, and actionable variants
were identified in all major tumour types except sarcomas. One case
of lung adenocarcinoma presented high TMB. Cases of lung adeno-
carcinoma presented a higher frequency of detection of actionable
variants when compared to the remaining major tumour types
(47.1% vs. 19.4%, p=0.026), and cases of colorectal adenocarcinoma
presented more commonly variants associated with drug resistance
(59.1% vs. 6.8%,p<0.001).
Conclusion: Our in-house gene panels (ONCOFOCO) were able to suc-
cessfully detect actionable variants in most of the major tumour types
evaluated, with greatest output in cases of lung and colorectal
adenocarcinoma.
PS-15 Molecular Pathology
Virchows Arch
PS-15-004
Variant detection with the ion torrent Genexus Integrated Sequencer
and Oncomine Precision Assay across multiple sites
J.L. Costa*, P. Jermann, M. Hummel, B. Hirsch, K. Kleo,
A.M. Rachiglio, D. Chi, D. Gozuyasli, C. Allen, N. Normanno
*Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of
Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: The objective of this study was to evaluate
performance of the Genexus Integrated Sequencer in detecting genomic
variants relevant to cancer using the Oncomine Precision Assay across
multiple sites in Europe.
Methods: The same set of commercially available and custom de-
veloped controls were analysed and used for cross-site calculations
such as reproducibility and correlation. Each site then selected their
own set of clinical samples, both FFPE and liquid biopsy, previous
characterized by NGS or other technologies. The results to the pre-
viously obtained to determine concordance across the different ge-
nomic variant types.
Results: The cross-site analysis with control materials showed correlation
and reproducibility ranging from 97% to 100% across all variant types.
Concordance to pre-characterized samples showed results ranging from
90% to 100% across all variant types. No statistically significant differ-
ence was observed between the different extraction methods or the results
derived from FFPE or liquid biopsy samples.
Conclusion: The concordant and reproducible results demonstrate that
the Genexus Integrated Sequencer and Oncomine Precision Assay are a
complete and reliable molecular profiling solution that can be adopted by
molecular diagnostic laboratories for testing of variants relevant for can-
cer treatment in an automated and fast manner.
PS-15-005
Personalised mapping of tumour development in synchronous
colorectal cancer patients
M. Cotter*, V. Thomas, M. Tosetto, Y.L. Khaw, R. Geraghty, D. Winter,
E. Ryan, K. Sheahan, S.J. Furney
*Department of Histopathology, St. Vincent’s University Hospital, Elm
Park, Dublin, Ireland
Background & objectives: Synchronous colorectal cancers (syCRCs)
are defined as two/more primary tumours identified simultaneously in a
patient. Previous studies report high inter-tumour heterogeneity between
syCRCs, suggesting independent origin and potential different treatment
responses. No specific guidelines are currently available rendering man-
agement challenging.
Methods: We performed an in-depth characterisation of 12 tumours from
3 treatment naïve syCRC patients by analysing histopathological, whole
genome sequencing and RNA-sequencing data. We assessed the extent of
genetic overlap between syCRCs and examined associations between
clinicopathological information and the molecular, microbial and im-
mune features of each tumour genome.
Results: We found mixed microsatellite status between and within patient
tumours. Synchronous lesions within patients harboured distinct muta-
tions in the same known CRC genes, although overlaps of known driver
mutations such as BRAF V600E did occur. DNA analysis of gut micro-
bial organisms revealed the presence of Fusobacterium nucleatum species
in BRAF mutant, hypermutated, microsatellite unstable tumours.
Quantification of tumour immune infiltration showed varying immune
responses between syCRCs. Inter-tumoral transcriptomic heterogeneity
classified each tumour into different consensus molecular subtypes. High
genetic heterogeneity between syCRCs suggest these tumours originate
independently while accessing the same mutational processes.
Conclusion: The importance of personalised genome/transcriptome se-
quencing of synchronous lesions is highlighted. Potential drug targets
will vary depending on the mutational status in synchronous tumours
from the same patient. This may aid in therapy decisions and improve
management of syCRC patients.
PS-15-006
Classification of central nervous system tumours in cerebrospinal
fluid based on cfDNA methylation profiling
W. de Leng*, S. Richardson, L. Priesterbach-Ackley, J. van Kuik, E. van
der Biezen, A. Scheele, M. de Boer, P. Robe, P. Wesseling
*Department of Pathology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht
University, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling
allows for tumour classification of central nervous system (CNS) tu-
mours. The aim of this study is to determine the feasibility of liquid
biopsy methylation array analysis for the diagnosis of CNS tumours.
Methods: 34 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples (0.05–9.5ml per case)
from adult and paediatric patients with a primary central nervous system
(CNS) tumour were evaluated for their eligibility for methylation profil-
ing based on cfDNA quantity. Of these, eight samples with at least 15ng
cfDNA were analysed using the Infinium EPIC BeadChip 850k methyl-
ation array and the DKFZ brain tumour classifier tool.
Results: In this cohort, no correlation was observed between the quantity
of cfDNA and the volume of CSF sample per patient. We found that
methylation profiling using minimally 15ng cfDNA can lead to a correct
histomolecular diagnosis in 63% (5/8) of the samples. Of note, 15 ng
cfDNA from the CSF samples would have been available of 98% of the
patient samples in case >7ml CSF would be submitted per sample.
Conclusion: Methylation profiling of CNS tumours based on CSF liquid
biopsy is feasible. More in depth study is needed to determine how this
minimally-invasive approach can be used in clinical practice for the di-
agnosis of primary CNS tumours.
PS-15-007
Molecular pathology testing for non-small cell lung cancer: which
information on the test request and result report is essential to make
a solid choice of therapy?
K. Dufraing, K. Van Casteren, J. Breyne, N. D'Haene, I. Nauwelaers,
C. Van Campenhout, S. Vander Borght, E. Dequeker*
*University of Leuven, Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
Biomedical Quality Assurance Research Unit, Belgium
Background & objectives: For patients with non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), targeted therapies are becoming part of the standard treatment.
It is questioned which information the clinicians provide on test requests
and how the laboratories adapt test conclusions to this knowledge and
regulations.
Methods: This study consisted of two components; checking the pres-
ence of pre-defined elements (administrative and key for therapy-choice)
on completed requests and corresponding reports in Belgian laboratories,
both for tissue- and liquid biopsy (LB)-testing and opinion analysis from
Belgian pathologists/molecular biologists and clinicians during national
pathology/oncology meetings. Data from 4 out of 6 Belgian laboratories
with ISO-accreditation for LB-testing were analysed.
Results: On the scored requests (N=4), 12 out of 19 ISO-required ele-
ments were present for tissue and 11 for LB-testing. Especially relevant
patient history, such as line of therapy (for LB), tumour histology and the
reason for testing were lacking. Similarly, 11 and 9 out of 18 elements
were present in the reports (N=4) for tissue and LB, respectively.
Elements that pathologists/molecular biologists (N=18) were missing on
requests were the initial activating mutation, previous therapies, clinical
question and testing-related information. For reporting, an important item
for both groups is the clinical interpretation of the test result. Clinicians
(N=28) indicated that they also wish to read the tumour load for tissue
testing.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Communication flows between the laboratory and the clini-
cian, together with possible pitfalls were identified. Based on the study
results, templates for complete requesting and reporting were proposed.
The project was financially funded by AstraZeneca Belgium.
PS-15-009
Contribution of cytogenetic study in a series of foetal losses: genetic
and autopsic correlation
R.B. García-Chamón Brígido*, N. Baena Díez, M. Guitart Feliubadaló,
M. Bella-Cueto, S. García Hernández, M. Solorzano, J.C. Ferreres
*Hospital Universitari Parc Taulí, Spain
Background & objectives: Foetal loss is sometimes poorly understood
due to the difficulty or impossibility to determine the cause. Our objective
is to evaluate the contribution of the cytogenetic study to establish the
cause of death and to correlate it with autopsy findings.
Methods: Retrospective cohort analysis of spontaneous foetal losses from
12th to 40th gestational weeks, from 1999 to 2018. Analysed data included:
gestational age, genetic studies, foetal autopsy and histopathological exami-
nation of the placenta. Cytogenetic study was made by chorion villi, amniotic
fluid, placental tissue or foetal cartilage. Abnormal results of karyotype, foetus
and placenta were classified using Tulip and CODAC classifications.
Results: During 19 years of the study period, there were 755 foetal losses.
Successful karyotyping was possible in 614 cases (81.3%). In 82 cases
(13.4%) karyotype was abnormal. Parents gave consent for foetal autopsy
in 39 cases (47.6%) of the 82 cases with abnormal karyotype. Chromosomal
abnormality was the only finding in 11 cases (28.2%); in the other 28 cases
(71.8%) a cause that justifies foetal loss by itself was found. Placental pathol-
ogy was the first cause of death, followed by infections. 12 cases (30.8%) had
structural chromosomal defect. In 18 cases (46.1%) the autopsy did not detect
phenotypic expression of the genetic alterations.
Conclusion: Chromosomal abnormality has been the only finding detect-
ed in 11 cases (28.2%). Karyotype adds complementary information in
the other 28 cases (71.8%) in which other cause has been found at autopsy
study. Understanding the aetiology of foetal loss enables classification of
recurrence risk, improves the management of future pregnancies and
facilitate the development of preventive strategies. We recommend the
integration of the genetic analysis in the study of foetal losses.
PS-15-011
Prognostic significance of substance P/ neurokinin 1 receptor and its
association with hormonal receptors in breast carcinoma
S.A. Gilani*
*The University of Lahore, Pakistan
Background & objectives: To evaluate the expression and
Immunolocalization of Substance P (SP)/ Neurokinin-1Receptor (NK-
1R) in Breast Carcinoma (BC) patients and it’s association with routine
proliferative markers (ER, PR, HER2/ neu and Ki-67).
Methods: There were 23 cases of group A (Grade III), 8 of group B
(Grade II) and only 3 cases of group C (Grade I). HE, ER, PR, HER2
and Ki-67 staining was performed as routine biomarkers. Samples were
then processed for immunomarkers study of Substance Pand NK-1R
immunohistochemistry was performed for few cases.
Results: 61% of group A, 88% of group B and 67% cases of group C were
SP positive. Overall, strong staining (≥10% tumours cells), labelled as “3+”,
was observed in 9/14 (64.2%) cases of group A and 1/8 (12.5%) case of
group B. Moderate staining labelled as “2+” (in ≥10% tumour cells) was
observed in 3/14 (21.4%) cases of group A, 4/8 (50%) cases of group B.
Conclusion: SP and NK-1R is overexpressed in breast carcinomas and
there is significant association between grade of tumour and their over
expression. It may serve as a novel bio-marker for grading of BC. We also
suggest that NK-1R antagonists as a potential therapeutic strategy to
inhibit and manage BC.
PS-15-012
Next generation RNA sequencing assay for comprehensive gene fu-
sion detection in solid tumour samples using FusionSync detection
technology
R.K. Gottimukkala*, A. Marcovitz, V.K. Mittal, G.G. Bee, J.M. Kilzer,
E. Wong-ho, C. Allen, C. Yang, Y. Tseng, S.P. Myrand, P.D. Williams,
S. Sadis, F. Hyland
*Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA
Background & objectives: Gene fusions can play a critical role in on-
cogenesis making them useful biomarkers in solid tumour samples. We
developed an Oncomine targeted RNA sequencing assay for fusion de-
tection using FusionSync detection technology that combines three dif-
ferent approaches for improved sensitivity.
Methods: The assay includes amplicons designed to target >1200
recurrent known fusions in 49 driver genes. They also enable de-
tection of non-targeted fusion isoforms (i.e., novel combinations of
drivers and partners genes). We also included amplicons across the
exon junctions of ALK, RET, FGFR2, NTRKs to detect novel
fusions using 3’/5’ expression imbalance. We developed algorithms
to detect targeted and novel fusions.
Results: We tested the assay using the Ion GeneStudio S5 sequencer with
Seraseq formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) V4 fusion mix and iden-
tified the 18 expected fusion isoforms including MET Exon 14 skipping
isoform and EGFRvIII deletion. We sequenced a penta-fusion control sample
mixed with cell-lines positive for ALK, RET, ROS1, FGFR3 and NTRK1
fusions and detected all the fusion isoforms with 100% sensitivity and spec-
ificity. We tested the exon tiling method for ALK, RET and NTRK1 genes
with the penta-fusion sample and observed concordant results. We sequenced
10 FFPE and 10 total RNA negative samples and detected no known fusion
isoforms or novel fusions thus confirming high specificity of the assay.
Conclusion: We developed a highly multi-plexed RNA assay using Ion
AmpliSeq targeted sequencing chemistry for comprehensive, sensitive and
specific fusion detection in FFPE samples with sample input as low as 10ng.
For research use only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.
PS-15-013
Prognostic value of BRCA mutations in triple-negative breast cancer
D. Guerrero-Setas*, J. Freire, P. Garcia-Berbel, Y. Ruiz De Azúa,
S. De La Cruz, P. Armendariz, M.D.R. Mercado, B. Aguiar,
M. Arriola, J. Gómez-Román, A. Córdoba
*Department of Pathology, Hospital Complex of Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is
characterized by its aggressiveness. TNBC patients lack directed thera-
pies and chemotherapy is the standard treatment. Nevertheless, they
might benefit from PARP inhibitors as 15-20% of them display BRCA
alterations that should be studied.
Methods: Next-generation sequencing was performed to analyse BRCA1
and BRCA2 genes in DNA extracted from paraffin-embedded tumours
resected from 30 TNBC patients. The Oncomine™BRCA Research Assay
(ThermoFisher) was used, with a total coverage of all the exons. The associ-
ation between the molecular and clinico-pathological variables was per-
formed by SPSS statistical package, considering a median follow-up of more
than 7 years.
Results: A percentage of 30% of the TNBC patients displayed mutations
(Types 3 to 5), being 44.4% present in BRCA1 and 55.6% in BRCA2.
There was an association between the presence of BRCA mutations and
the presence of metastasis (p=0,0318). BRCA mutated patients displayed
a worse prognosis than BRCA patients without BRCA mutations inde-
pendently of the presence of metastasis, although the statistical value did
not reach significance (p=0.116). More studies with numerous popula-
tions are needed to address this issue.
Conclusion: - Analysis of the BRCA mutational status in TNBC patients
is of prognostic significance.
Virchows Arch
- Additional studies to evaluate the prognostic and predictive value of
these alterations are needed.
PS-15-015
Tracking tumour mutations in liquid biopsies from patients with
metastatic melanoma using custom Ion Torrent AmpliseqHD NGS
analysis
M. Berger, A. Thueringer, D. Franz, G. Richtig, E. Richtig,
H. Gerritsmann, A. Aigelsreiter, K. Kashofer*
*Medical University of Graz, Austria
Background & objectives: Ion AmpliseqHD uses single molecule tag-
ging to allow for error correction and counting of individual DNA mol-
ecules. We tested performance of custom Ion AmpliseqHD NGS panels
to track mutations in ctDNA from patients with metastatic melanoma.
Methods: Patients undergoing SOC therapy were enrolled to a IRB approved
study (29-450 ex 16/17). Liquid biopsy samples were collected in Streck
tubes, ctDNA was extracted by Promega Maxwell and NGS was performed
with two custom Ion Ampliseq HD panels covering hotspots in BRAF,
CTNNB1, CYSLTR2, EIF1AX, GNA11, GNAQ, HRAS, KIT, KRAS,
MAP2K1, NRAS, PIK3CA, PLCB4, PTEN, RAC1 and SF3B1.
Results: Primary tumour FFPE tissue was analysed with Ion Torrent
Ampliseq to obtain initial mutation profile. Subsequently, liquid biopsy spec-
imens were collected at defined intervals during targeted and immune thera-
py. A total of 159 plasma samples were analysed. ctDNA amounts were
generally above 5ng/ml plasma and only marginally influenced by hemolysis.
AmpliseqHD libraries were generated from 10 ng DNA and sequenced with
at least 3mio reads. Analysis was successful in 100% of cases, molecular
depth was 1000-2000 molecules per amplicon. Analysis revealed patients
without detectable mutations, patients with mutations detectable only in the
baseline LBx, and patients with levels of mutated plasma ctDNA correlating
with treatment.
Conclusion: Custom Ion AmpliseqHD analysis is able to track mutations
during extended treatment periods with high specificity and sensitivity. Using
Streck tubes, Promega Maxwell and Ion Torrent Ampliseq HD allows to
reliably analyse large numbers of relevant mutation hotspots in liquid biopsy
samples collected in a real-world clinical setting. Mutations were detectable in
LBx of the majority of patients and variant allele frequencies closely followed
treatment events.
Funding: Novartis Pharma GmbH, Stella-Klein-Löw-Weg 17, 1020
Vienna, Austria
PS-15-017
Transcriptome signature associated with tmprss2-erg molecular sub-
type in prostate cancer
A. Kobelyatskaya*, G. Krasnov, A. Snezhkina, A. Dmitriev,
N. Melnikova, V. Pavlov, E. Pudova, A. Kudryavtseva
*Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russia, Institute of Gene Biology, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: In 40% of cases, prostate cancer (PC) is
represented by the TMPRSS2-ERGfusion-transcript molecular subtype.
In this work, we aimed to compare the results of qPCR testing with
whole-transcriptome analysis of signature introduced by the active ex-
pression of TMPRSS2-ERGfusion-transcript.
Methods: RNA-Seq analysis of 74 locally advanced PC samples was per-
formed with Illumina NextSeq500 system. qPCR detection of TMPRSS2-
ERGfusion transcripts (T1:E4, T2:E4, T1:E2, etc.) was done on 7500 Real-
Time PCR Systems with using TaqMan Gene Expression Assays kits.
Results: qPCR analysis detected TMPRSS2-ERGfusion-transcript in 39
of 74 (52%) PC samples (mainly T1:E4), but only 26 of 39 samples
(67%) demonstrated TMPRSS2-ERG-associated transcriptomic signature
(overexpression of ERG, its downstream targets and other genes). The
overexpressed genes included: ERG, PLA1A, TDRD1, PLA2G7,
ATP8A2, GUCY1A1, MYO6, FZD8, CACNA1D, ALOX15, PEX10,
TBX1, KCNH8. Additionally, we detected TMPRSS2-ERGbreakpoints
directly in Illumina reads, and this method gave the most similar results
to the RNA-Seq expression analysis. In 3 samples, we did observe the
transcriptome signature, but qPCR gave negative results.
Conclusion: The study showed that not all TMPRSS2-ERG-positive PC
samples (according to qPCR), demonstrate TMPRSS2-ERG-associated tran-
scriptome signature, and this phenomenon requires further investigation. The
detected transcriptome signature should be considered as an additional tool to
clarify the molecular subtype of TMPRSS2-ERGin PC.
This work was funded by the Russian Science Foundation grant no. 18-
75-10127.
This work was performed using the equipment of EIMB RAS “Genome”
centre (http://www.eimb.ru/ru1/ckp/ccu_genome_c.php).
PS-15-018
Differentially methylated CpG sites as potential prognostic markers
in prostate cancer
A. Kobelyatskaya*, E. Pudova, G. Krasnov, K. Nyushko, M. Fedorova,
A. Snezhkina, B. Alekseev, A. Kudryavtseva
*Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russia, Institute of Gene Biology, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: The search for informative markers for
choosing the best therapeutic concept for patients with high-risk prostate
cancer (PC) is an urgent task. The aim of this study is to search for
prognostic markers among differentially methylated CpG sites.
Methods: The study included PC samples methylation data of The
Cancer Genome Atlas. The cohort was divided into two groups: patients
with biochemical relapse (19 cases) and relapse-free patients (66 cases).
To analyse differential methylation BiSeq package was used. The Mann-
Whitney test, beta-regression and logistic regression models were used
for statistical analysis.
Results: In total, 611 differentially methylated CpG sites were identified
potentially associated with biochemical relapse in PC. The most interest-
ing CpG sites are those in promoter regions. Hypermethylated CpG sites:
cg22663872 (chr7: 149120266 in ENSR00000219606), cg11536940
(chr8: 97658076 in ENSR00000227434), cg07576175 (chr19:
59049843 in ENSR00000111888), cg21446511 (chr2: 179316481 in
ENSR00000126971), cg22343001 (chrX: 100914848 in
ENSR00000423862). And hypomethylated CpG sites: cg13691599
(chr9: 74863413 in GDA gene promoter), cg07286253 (chr5:
111496047 in ENSR00000185293).
Conclusion: Were found out differentially methylated CpG sites in sev-
eral promoter regions: cg22663872, cg11536940, cg07576175,
cg21446511, cg22343001, cg13691599, cg07286253. These methylation
changes in promoters could affect gene expression GDA, CPQ, PRKRA,
ARMCX2, ZBTB45, and also ncRNA SNORA13, EPB41L4A-AS1.
This work was financially supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic
Research, grant no. 17-29-06083.
This work was performed using the equipment of EIMB RAS “Genome”
centre (http://www.eimb.ru/ru1/ckp/ccu_genome_c.php).
PS-15-019
Сirculating micrornas, potentially associated with progression
during therapy in castration-resistant prostate cancer
A. Kobelyatskaya*, E. Pudova, K. Nyushko, G. Krasnov, M. Fedorova,
A. Snezhkina, G. Razmakhaev, D. Dolotkazin, M. Kiseleva, A. Kaprin,
B. Alekseev, A. Kudryavtseva
*Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russia, Institute of Gene Biology, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: CRPC develops is a molecular events result
that lead to resistance emergence of tumour cells to therapy and to further
progression. The aim of study is to search for predictive markers during
therapy, based on circulating exosomal microRNAs of plasma.
Methods: From the plasma exosomes of the patients in periods of remis-
sion and progression (12 time points in each group), total RNA was
isolated, on the basis of which microRNAs libraries were prepared,
followed by high-throughput sequencing on the Illumina platform.
Next, the bioinformatic analysis of differential expression between
groups in statistical environment R was carried out.
Results: As a result of the comparison of the groups (progression and
remission), the following differentially expressed microRNAs were
found that were potentially associated with the progression of CRPC: -
221-3p, -99b-3p, -145-5p, -375-3p, -20a-5p, -21- 5p, -451a, -199a-5p, -
183-5p, -let-7i-5p, -let-7f-5p, -451a (p-value < 0,05). Identified
microRNAs have previously established oncogenic significance in vari-
ous types of cancer.
Conclusion: Thus, identified miRNAs are aberrantly expressed in the
studied progression group and can be considered for subsequent valida-
tion by qPCR as potential predictive markers for CRPC.
The reported study was funded by RFBR, project number 17-29-06085.
This work was performed using the equipment of EIMB RAS “Genome”
centre (http://www.eimb.ru/ru1/ckp/ccu_genome_c.php).
PS-15-021
Investigation of NTRK fusion in solid tumours
M. Leiner*, E. Bencze, E. Tóth
*National Institute of Oncology, Hungary
Background & objectives: Neurotropic tyrosine kinase (NTRK) fusions are
oncogenic drivers of solid tumours and detection of it has a clinical impor-
tance due to efficacy of targeted therapy. We present our results with RNA
based sequencing in different solid tumours until February 2020.
Methods: Recent guidelines prefer NGS based RNA sequencing. RNA
was extracted from biopsies, cytology smears, and formalin-fixed paraf-
fin-embedded tissues. A maximum of 100 ng of RNA was used. The
assay was performed on an IONTORRENT S5 SYSTEM using the
Ocnomine Focus panel kit. Data was evaluated using IONRIPORTER
SOFTWARE.
Results: 123 cases of solid tumours were analysed: 74 lung, 25 salivary
gland, 9 soft tissue, 8 gastrointestinal, 4 thyroid, 1 breast, 1 neuroendo-
crine, 1 kidney tumour.
NTRK fusion was confirmed in 2 cases: secretory carcinoma of the pa-
rotid, and myofibroblastic sarcoma. Other mutation of clinical signifi-
cance were also detected: 6 cases of Met exon skipping, 4 cases of
ALK translocation in lung adenocarcinoma, 1 case of KIF5B(15)-
RET(12) fusion in non small cell carcinoma. 109 cases were negative.
Conclusion: The advantage of NGS is that it allows multiple genes to be
tested. NTRK fusion was identified only in two typical tumour types. The
assay was advantageous especially for lung cases, with that in mind that it
detects all fusions with clinical relevance.
PS-15-022
Differential expression of DNA methyltransferases and demethylases
among the various subtypes of testicular germ cell tumours
J. Lobo*, R. Guimarães, V. Miranda-Gonçalves, S. Monteiro-Reis,
M. Cantante, L. Antunes, I. Braga, J. Maurício, L. HJ Looijenga,
C. Jerónimo, R. Henrique
*Portuguese Institute of Oncology - Porto, Department of Pathology,
Portugal
Background & objectives: Very distinct DNA methylation profiles charac-
terize the most common subtypes of testicular germ cell tumours(TGCTs),
seminomas (SEs) and non-seminomas (NSs), pointing towards differential
expression of DNA methyltransferases(DNMTs) and demethylases(TETs).
We aim to characterize the expression of such players in TGCTs.
Methods: An in-silico analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas database
was performed to select the most relevant enzymes of each family.
Transcript levels were assessed in four TGCT cell lines. Findings were
further validated in our own patient cohort, by real-time quantitative PCR
and immunohistochemistry.
Results: DNMT3B was significantly more expressed in NS-related cell
lines, while the inverse was seen for TET2. Significantly higher mRNA
expression levels of DNMT3A/B were observed in embryonal carcino-
ma, indicating a role of de novo methylation in reprogramming.
Significantly higher protein expression of TET2 was observed in SEs,
indicating active demethylation as contributor to the demethylated back-
ground. All enzymes were differentially expressed among the various
subtypes, related to differentiation.
Conclusion: DNA modifying enzymes are differentially expressed in
TGCT subtypes and seem to influence phenomena like reprogramming
and differentiation. Better understanding of these patterns may be helpful
in designing protocols for experimentation with novel targeted therapies
for TGCT patients.
Funding: Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (PTDC/MECONC/
29043/2017 and SFRH/BD/132751/2017)
PS-15-023
Designing a model for predicting informative liquid biopsy-based
microRNA biomarkers in germ cell tumours: insights from in vitro,
in vivo and patient-derived data
J. Lobo*, A. JM Gillis, A. van den Berg, L. Dorssers, G. Belge,
K. Dieckmann, H. Roest, L. van der Laan, J. Gietema, R. Hamilton,
C. Jerónimo, R. Henrique, D. Salvatori, L. HJ Looijenga
*Portuguese Institute of Oncology - Porto, Department of Pathology,
Portugal
Background & objectives: Liquid biopsy-based biomarkers, such as
microRNAs, represent valuable tools for patient management.
However, often these candidate microRNAs do not make it to integration
in the clinic. In this work, we aim to explore these issues in the setting of
germ cell tumours, for which novel biomarkers are needed.
Methods: We describe a model for predicting clinically relevant
microRNAs for germ cell tumour patients, using both in vitro (cell lines)
and in vivo (mouse model) data, employing a high-throughput pipeline.
Initial wide screening of microRNAs is performed (Taqman Low-Density
Array cards), followed by targeted analyses, in several bodily fluid patient
samples.
Results: We describe a model for predicting clinically relevant
microRNAs for germ cell tumour patients, using both in vitro (cell lines)
and in vivo (mouse model) data, employing a high-throughput pipeline.
Initial wide screening of microRNAs is performed (Taqman Low-Density
Array cards), followed by targeted analyses, in several bodily fluid patient
samples.
Conclusion: Our approach is informative to identify the best candidate
microRNAs to pursue in liquid biopsies. A patent application was filed
covering the finding of using miR-885-5p as molecular marker for tera-
toma and the effect of miR-885-5p on the P53 pathway.
This work was funded by Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (POCI-
01-0145-FEDER-29043). JL is supported by an FCT fellowship
(SFRH/BD/132751/2017).
PS-15-026
Detection of KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA by microarray technology for
targeted therapy in patients with pancreatic cancer: a single centre
experience
G. Petrusevska*, A. Eftimov, R. Jovanovic, B. Krsteska, V. Janevska
*Institute of Pathology, Skopje, North Macedonia
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: In the carcinogenesis of the pancreatic car-
cinoma, one of the early events is the mutation of the oncogene KRAS,
which is found altered in 20% of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia and
this percentage increases with progression to invasive carcinoma.
Methods: We tested 46 patients with diagnosed pancreatic adenocarci-
noma for the frequency and type of mutations in KRAS, BRAF и
PIK3CA on paraffin-embedded surgical tissue specimen, by using
Multiplex PCR amplification on Randox Platform. We correlated the type
of mutation with the clinical stage and histological grade of the tumour,
and with the histological type of the tumour.
Results: Twenty-eight of the cases diagnosed pancreatic carcinoma were
males and 19 cases were females. The mean age of the group was 62.2 y.
Seven of the patients were in stage I, 14 of the cases were in stage II, 7 of
the cases were in stage III and 8 patients were in stage IV. Ten of the cases
were with an undetermined clinical stage. The molecular analyses re-
vealed alteration of the KRAS in 22 of the patients and in one patient
was found combined alteration of the KRAS and PIK3CA. The patients
with present alterations of the KRAS were almost equally distributed
accordingly to the clinical stage.
Conclusion: KRAS is a late event in the development of pancreatic
carcinoma and probably has a role in tumour progression. Testing of
the pancreatic carcinoma tissue by a `larger panel of oncogenes with the
next sequencing techniques should be done.
PS-15-027
Predictively significant mutational analysis of routine NSCLC biopsy
samples: a pilot study comparing conventional gene by gene and
NGS tests
L. Plank*, D. Loderer, M. Grendar, F. Anna, L. Zora, V. Barbora,
K. Ivana, B. Martina, J. Luboslava
*Comenius University, Slovakia
Background & objectives: FFPE samples of adenocarcinoma NSCLC
(ADC) were conventionally tested for alterations of EGFR, ALK and
ROS1 genes rearrangement by CE-IVD techniques. The retrospective
study was performed to verify sensitivity and specificity of DNA/RNA
analyses using NGS of identical samples.
Methods: 81 samples with known EGFR status were tested for DNA anal-
yses and 78 with known status of ALK and ROS1 for RNA with
AmpliSeq™for Illumina® Focus Panel (Illumina, CA, USA) using
bioinformatical software Finalist Dx (IAB, Czechia) for DNA and RNA
Amplicon App. Version2.0.1 (Illumina, CA, USA) for RNA samples. The
results were compared with those of conventional approach.
Results: The comparison showed 100% specificity and sensitivity for
DNA analyses and 100% specificity for RNA analyses. The sensitivity
was 100% for ROS1 rearranged and 76.5% for ALK rearranged cases.
The discordant cases by conventional testing showed 100% agreement
with IHC for ALK positive and 100% agreement with FISH results for
ROS1 positive cases.
Conclusion: The implementation of NGS allows precise understanding
of molecular background of ADCs and therapeutical management of
individual patients. The cases showing lower sensitivity will be further
reanalysed using more complex NGS analyses.
PS-15-028
Microfluidic-based automated chromogenic RNA in situ
hybridization
M. Procopio*, V. Murlidhar, E. Doolittle, B. Zhang, D.G. Dupouy,
X. Ma
*Lunaphore Technologies SA, Switzerland
Background & objectives: The RNAscope® in situ hybridization (ISH)
assays allow for single RNA molecule detection at cellular resolution
within tissue and cellular morphological context.
Here, we aimed to automate the RNAscope® 2.5HD-BROWN chromo-
genic ISH (CISH) assay on the Lunaphore’s microfluidic device LabSat®.
Methods: Deparaffinization of the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
specimens was performed manually. Each CISH protocol step was optimized
separatelyonLabSat®,whileperformingtherestoftheassaymanuallyaccord-
ingtoAdvancedCellDiagnostics’(ACD)datasheet.Slideswerescannedusing
bright-field microscopy and analysed using the RNAscope® scoring system.
Results: The full RNAscope® 2.5HD-BROWN protocol, from pre-
treatment to counterstaining, was successfully automated on LabSat®, a
pressure-driven system allowing for rapid and uniform delivery of reagents
on a tissue section in a temperature-controlled closed reaction chamber via the
fast-fluidic exchange (FFEx) technology. The RNAscope® assay, based on
ACD's technology for signal amplification and background suppression, was
optimized on LabSat® to result in well-preserved morphology, uniform stain-
ing with excellent signal-to-noise ratio and readily detectable punctate signal
dots - comparable to the manual assay on mouse and human FFPE samples.
Concomitantly, the assay turn-around time was shortened with respect to the
manual and other automated CISH protocols.
Conclusion: Overall, we have proven the capability of the microfluidic
platform LabSat® to automate the RNAscope® 2.5HD-BROWN CISH as-
say with reproducible staining results. The microfluidic platform brings the
benefits of a shorter run time and reliability of a compact desktop system.
PS-15-029
The role of molecular tumour board in lung cancer: current practice
A. Puche Gallego*, S. Clavé, L. Camacho, D. Casadevall, C. Farriols,
C. Fernandez-Rodriguez, J. Gibert, M. Hardy-Werbin, R. Longarón,
J. Perera, M. Salido, A. Taus, E. Arriola, B. Bellosillo, L. Pijuan
*Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain
Background & objectives: The use of a Molecular Tumour Board
(MTB) may become a useful tool to provide personalized assessment of
lung cancer patients in high stages with molecular studies. We aim to
characterize the patients discussed in our MTB.
Methods: We retrospectively analysed data collected from 588 patients
presented on the MTB since September 2017 to August 2019. The MTB
took place on wednesdays every week and involves different medical
professionals (oncologists, pathologists, biologists, bioinformatics, tech-
nicians, palliative care and residents).
Results: We found out that 405 (69%) were newly diagnosed cases with
metastatic disease, 82 (14%) were patients with progressive disease with a
known molecular marker, 62 (10.5%) patients with molecular results were
received from outside (external laboratory, clinical trials), 20 (3.5%) were
cases with possible disease progression, pseudoprogression or
hyperprogression after immunotherapy, 12 (2%) patients that stored material
for new diagnostic studies/techniques. 7 (1%) patients undergo surgery with
multifocal disease that require definitive staging.
Conclusion: MTB gathers all sources of information in order to create
specific strategies for each patient also giving a rich opportunity to in-
crease the understanding and knowledge for all medical professionals,
boosting research of new molecular techniques and clinical assessment.
PS-15-030
Pan-cancer multiomics analysis of TC2N suggests its important
role(s) in tumorigenesis of many cancers
M.A. Qureshi*, S. Syed
*Dow International Medical College, Dow University of Health
Sciences, Department of Pathology, Karachi, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Role of TC2N in carcinogenesis has been
largely unfathomed until recently when it was identified as a novel onco-
gene in lung cancer. We present first report on pan-cancer multiomics-
analysis of TC2N, highlighting TC2N as an important player in cancer-
circuits.
Virchows Arch
Methods: We investigated TC2N mRNA expression, its promoter meth-
ylation, effects on overall patient survival, somatic mutations in TC2N
gene and correlation between TC2N mRNA expression and other cancer
genes in pan-cancer by using data available from the Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) and the Genotype Tissue Expression (GTEx) databases.
Results: TC2N mRNA expression was upregulated in cholangiocarcinoma,
ovarian-serous-cystadenocarcinoma, rectal-adenocarcinoma, stomach-
adenocarcinoma and thymoma and downregulated in pheochromocyto-
ma-&-paraganglioma, skin-cutaneous-melanoma, thyroid-carcinoma and
uterine-carcinosarcoma. TC2N promoter was hypermethylated in most can-
cers while hypomethylated in head-&-neck-squamous-cell-carcinoma and
kidney-renal-clear-cell carcinoma. TC2N transcription was positively corre-
lated with transcription genes from Myc, cell-cycle, Nrf2, Wnt, PI3K, Hippo,
Notch, TGFβ and RAS/RTK pathways. Poor prognosis was associated with
higher TC2N mRNA levels in pancreatic-adenocarcinoma and brain-lower-
grade-glioma and lower TC2N mRNA levels in kidney-renal-clear-cell-car-
cinoma, mesothelioma, sarcoma and skin-cutaneous melanoma. Highest
pathogenic somatic mutation rates in TC2N were found in skin-cutaneous-
melanoma, uterine-corpus-endometrial-carcinoma, colon-endocervical-ade-
nocarcinoma, bladder-urothelial-carcinoma and breast-invasive-carcinoma.
Conclusion: This is the first report detailing pan-cancer multiomics anal-
ysis TC2N, unravelling various molecular players in cancer circuits.
PS-15-032
Prognostic value of liquid biopsy with determination of circulating
tumour DNA in early diagnosis of metastases in patients with colo-
rectal cancer
G. Smagulova*, S. Yessentayeva, Z. Ilyanova, Z. Zhakenova,
A. Kerimov, G. Sarsenbayeva, A. Baymahasheva
*Kazakhstan Russian Med University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Liquid biopsy is a minimal invasive approach to
obtain ctDNA that used for molecular profiling tumour cells. The possibility
of using ctDNA for prognosis assessment and detection of minimal residual
disease, monitoring of treatment efficacy therapies at CRC are studied.
Methods: The molecular testing performed by acPCR. liquid biopsy
were collected at patients with mutated ras gene. ctDNA was detected
on Idylla Biocartis automatic system. LB was performed in 35 patients
with a primary diagnosis of CRC with a mutated RAS gene, after surgical
treatment, prior to initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy. In all cases, there
was a localized process (T2-3N0-1M0).
Results:Ofthe1318patientswithCRCRASmutationsfoundin689cases.
Of the 35 patients examined by the LB, ct DNA in peripheral blood was
detectedinonly5(14,2%)patientswithmoderatelydifferentiatedintestinal
adenocarcinoma. All patients within 6-8 months passed from 6 to12
courses of adjuvant chemotherapy. In the control CT examination in 7/35
(20%)cases, theprogressionoftheprocesstotheliverandlungswasnoted
against the background of adjuvant treatment, of them in 5 cases with a
positiveonctDNAconfirmedbeforethestartofchemotherapy.Onepatient
with a constant positive ctDNA after adjuvant treatments with a fatal out-
come during the year.
Conclusion: Thus, the positive result at LB for ctDNA at the RAS study can
be considered as a predictor of an unfavourable prognosis of the CRC , and in
non-operable patientswhentumour tissue is inaccessible, use it asa diagnostic
predictive marker. The possibility of using ctDNA as a marker for monitoring
of treatment efficacy therapies requires further study.
Funding: Scientific Medical Society of Kazakhstan and pharmaceutical
company
PS-15-034
Pan-cancer multiomics analysis of S-phase kinase-associated protein-2
S. Syed*, M.A. Qureshi, R. Kumar
*Department of Oral Pathology, Dow Dental College, Dow University of
Health Sciences, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Dysregulated expression of S-phase kinase-
associated protein-2 (SKP2) contributes to tumorigenesis in breast, pros-
tate and lung cancers. However, exact mechanistic role of SKP2 in other
cancers remains unfathomed. We present first report on pan-cancer
multiomics analysis of SKP2 in all cancers.
Methods: We investigated SKP2 mRNA expression, methylation pat-
terns, effects of SKP2 transcription on overall patient survival and
somatic-mutations in SKP2 gene in pan-cancer by analysing data avail-
able from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the Genotype-Tissue
Expression (GTEx) databases.
Results: SKP2 mRNA expression was upregulated in 12/33 TCGA tu-
mour types. SKP2 promotor was significantly hypomethylated in most
cancers while hypermethylated in colon-adenocarcinoma, oesophageal-
carcinoma, kidney/renal-clear-cell-carcinoma, lung-squamous-cell-
carcinoma and pancreatic-adenocarcinoma. Increased SKP2 transcript
levels significantly reduce overall-survival in adrenocortical-carcinoma,
uterine-carcinosarcoma, skin-cutaneous-melanoma, mesothelioma, lung-
adenocarcinoma, liver-hepatocellular-carcinoma, brain-low-grade glioma
and kidney-renal-papillary-cell-carcinoma. Low SKP2 expressions were
significantly associated with short survival in thymoma, thyroid-
carcinoma and ovarian-serous-cystadenocarcinoma. A total of 109 somat-
ic mutations were found in SKP2 gene including missense mutations to
be the highest. The highest somatic mutation rates in SKP2 were found in
uterine-corpus-endometrial-carcinoma followed by lung-adenocarcino-
ma, head-and-neck-squamous-cell-carcinoma, skin-cutaneous-
melanoma and bladder-urothelial-carcinoma.
Conclusion: Our findings unravel several unfathomed pathways related to
the role of SKP2 in oncogenesis of several cancers, suggesting SKP2 as an
important player in oncogenesis and a potential candidate for cancer-ther-
apy.
PS-15-036
Microsatellite instability testing, a 7-year experience
Z. Tsvetanova*, T. O'Grady, R. Cummins, H. Barrett, A. O'Shea,
C. Ryan, B. Doyle
*Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
Background & objectives: The role of microsatellite instability(MSI)
testing has expanded to include treatment prediction. We set out to assess
the demand for MSI testing in our laboratory over a 7-year period. We
also assessed whether there was change in positivity rates.
Methods: Beaumont Hospital/RCSI acts a referral laboratory for a num-
ber of molecular pathological tests, including MSI. Cases tested for MSI
were selected using an in-house laboratory database search between
January 2014 and December 2019. Information regarding a positive or
negative test was collected.
Results: The total number of MSI tests request has increased by approx-
imately threefold over the period of the audit (106 cases in 2014, 182 in
2015, 264 in 2016, 340 in 2017, 393 in 2018 and 342 in 2019). The
percentage of MSI positive cases over this period was 31% in 2014,
19% in 2015, 16% in 2016, 15% in 2017, 18% in 2018 and 19% in 2019.
Conclusion: Overall, the demand for MSI testing has increased approxi-
mately threefold over the past 7 years. This likely reflects a broadening of
the indications for testing. Although there has been an increase in the
number of cases tested, positivity rates have remained quite stable during
this period.
PS-15-037
Identification of gene fusions in non-small cell lung cancers using two
diagnostic approaches - can we significantly improve the detection
rate?
A. Tysarowski*, K.A. Seliga, M. Wagrodzki, A. Gos, R. Zub,
K. Olszewska, M. Knetki-Wroblewska, M. Krzakowski, J.A. Siedlecki,
M. Prochorec-Sobieszek
Virchows Arch
*Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology,
Poland
Background & objectives: The fusion gene detection in several tu-
mours, including NSCLCs, is currently crucial step in diagnostic and
qualification to targeted therapies. The aim was to: identify the gene
fusions and compare two testing approaches: the IHC/NGS vs NGS.
Methods: In total 763 solid tumours FFPE specimens from NSCLCs
patients were analysed. The two-step IHC/NGS test (402 cases), included
the IHC screening using a pan-receptor tyrosine kinase cocktail of anti-
bodies targeting ROS1, ALK and NTRK proteins followed by an RNA-
based anchored multiplex-PCR NGS assay in IHC positive specimens. In
one step NGS analysis, all the 361 samples underwent NGS.
Results: Overall, we identified 56 gene fusions. In the IHC/NGS analysis,
gene fusions were detected in 15 /402 samples, which gave detection rate of
3.7%. In the one step NGS analysis gene fusions in 41/361 samples were
found, giving the detection rate of 11.3%.
Conclusion: The two-step IHC/NGS approach is regarded as cost-effec-
tive, but our results indicate that this strategy may omit several important
fusions.
PS-15-038
NTRK gene fusion testing adoption readiness in three European
countries
P. Camacho, M. Sciortino, J. Iparraguirre, G. Courtois, S. Elbaz-Selecki,
A. Capece, C. Veiga*
*Diaceutics Ltd, Portugal
Background & objectives: NTRK gene fusions occur in few rare cancer
types and infrequently in some common cancers. To determine real-world
laboratory readiness for NTRK adoption we investigated current meth-
odologies used by 83 laboratories from three European countries for
NTRK fusion testing.
Methods: This study used real-world pathology laboratory data from 83
laboratories in France, Spain and Italy performing NTRK testing. The
Diaceutics proprietary global laboratory database was analysed for the de-
scribed setting in the period between May and December 2019 to understand
NTRK testing capabilities currently available in these laboratories.
Results: Table 1 – NTRK fusion testing adoption and testing methodol-
ogies in 83 labs from 3 European countries.
Country
Solid tumour
pathology
labs
NTRK testing
adoption
rates
Methodologies for NTRK
fusion testing
NGS RT-PCR FISH IHC
France
21
67%
86%
7%
7%
36%
Italy
33
45%
80%
20%
27%
67%
Spain
29
55%
69%
0%
19%
94%
Total
labs
83
-
NTRK
testing
labs
-
45
Conclusion: NTRK gene fusion testing has been perceived as a new
challenge by European laboratories. The agnostic nature of NTRK fu-
sions leads to the use of different testing algorithms based on the type of
tumour. There are differences between the adopted methodologies for
NTRK gene fusion testing by the laboratories. This highlights the neces-
sity for guidance and testing harmonization around the detection of
NTRK fusions in the clinic.
PS-15-039
PIK3CA testing adoption readiness for breast cancer in nine
European countries
C. Veiga*, P. Camacho, M. Sciortino, S. Elbaz-Selecki, N. Holtkamp
*Diaceutics Ltd, Portugal
Background & objectives: PIK3CA represents a new molecular bio-
marker for HR+ HER2- BRCA- advanced breast cancer patients.
Recently FDA approved the first PIK3 inhibitor with a RT-PCR CDx.
Laboratory readiness for PIK3CA molecular testing adoption in Europe
was accessed for 111 laboratories.
Methods: This study used real-world pathology laboratory data from 111
laboratories that test breast cancer samples in Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Sweden and Switzerland.
The Diaceutics proprietary global laboratory database was analysed in
the period between January and July 2019. In addition, we compared
RT-PCR uptake for solid tumour tissue testing versus NGS and Sanger
sequencing, per country.
Results: Table 1 – Molecular methodologies for solid tumour testing in 111
laboratories from 9 European countries and PIK3CA testing adoption rates.
Country
Molecular methodologies
for solid tumour testing
Total
labs
PIK3CA
testing
adoption
rates
RT-PCR NGS
Sanger
Seq.
Austria
65%
53%
6%
17
57%
Belgium
35%
65%
0%
17
65%
Denmark
100%
75%
0%
8
86%
Finland
40%
40%
0%
5
40%
Netherlands
71%
71%
6%
17
71%
Norway
20%
100% 0%
5
80%
Portugal
61%
39%
11%
18
33%
Sweden
67%
78%
0%
9
56%
Switzerland
47%
80%
27%
15
80%
Solid tumour labs
by methodology
64
71
8
111
PIK3CA testing
labs by
methodology
2
57
7
67*
Conclusion: The existing testing landscape for PIK3CA appears to be
supportive of the future launch of PI3K inhibitors in the nine European
countries included in this study. Despite NGS is the preferred methodol-
ogy for PIK3CA testing as the biomarker is included in panels for indi-
cations such as lung and colorectal cancer, single-gene testing by RT-
PCR is highly adopted for solid tumours.
PS-16-001
Pleomorphic adenoma of the lacrimal gland: a study of five cases
with high proportion of myoepithelial component
L. Alfaro*, R. Dolz, M.J. Roca
*Hospital Vithas 9 de Octubre, Valencia, Spain
Background & objectives: Lacrimal gland tumours are similar to those in
salivary glands. Pleomorphic adenoma is the most common. They are char-
acterized by combining epithelial and mesenchymal elements. Different
PS-16 Ophthalmic Pathology
Virchows Arch
patterns are found, but lacrimal gland tumours usually have higher proportion
of myoepithelial cells.
Methods: We have reviewed 5 tumours of the lacrimal gland studied in
our institution with diagnosis of pleomorphic adenoma. They
corresponded to three women and two men with ages between 40 and
57 at the time of diagnosis. One of them was a recurrence but without
evidence of malignant transformation. We used immunohistochemistry to
assess myoepithelial and mesenchymal epithelial components.
Results: The five tumours studied presented a canalicular pattern with
patent lights lined by cuboidal or columnar cells and surrounded by fusi-
form elements sometimes of clear cells. These cells expressed p63,
GFAP, s100, and actin myoepithelial markers while the luminal cells
were positive for keratins 5/6, 7 and 34βE12. In all cases Ki67 was
expressed below 10% and in all, the myoepithelial component was supe-
rior to the epithelial. The mesenchymal component did not exceed one
third of the tumour volume. None of the cases presented an absence of
myoepithelial component, unlike many salivary tumours.
Conclusion: Although lacrimal pleomorphic adenomas reproduce the
same patterns and elements as salivary, the proportion of myoepithelial
component is more abundant and resembles biphasic patterns of epi-
myoepithelial carcinoma, so a denomination epimioepithelial adenoma
would be representative of its more usual features.
PS-16-002
Prognostic role of immunoexpression of autophagy-related proteins
in uveal melanoma
G. Broggi*, L. Salvatorelli, L. Puzzo, E. Piombino, A. Ieni,
G.M. Vecchio, G. Tuccari, G. Magro, R. Caltabiano
*Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Advanced
Technologies, G.F. Ingrassia, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria
"Policlinico Vittorio Emanuele", Anatomic Pathology, School of
Medicine, University of Catania, Italy
Background & objectives: We studied the immunoexpression of
autophagy-related proteins such as p62, Beclin-1 and ATG-7 in patients
affected by uveal melanoma (UM) both with and without metastases, in order
to assess the prognostic significance of autophagy in this rare neoplasm.
Methods: We retrospectively analysed clinical data and histological sam-
ples of 62 patients affected by UM (n= 35 free from metastases; n= 27
with metastatic disease) with the respective follow-up data. p62 and
Beclin-1 were immunoexpressed both in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus
of neoplastic cells, while ATG-7 only showed cytoplasmic staining.
Results: Stain intensity (IS) and percentage of immunopositive cells
(Extent score; ES) were assessed as follows: IS was graded on a scale
of 0–3 and ES on a scale of 0-4. IS was multiplied by the ES to obtain the
intensity reactivity score (IRS; < 6 = low expression, > 6 = high expres-
sion). High Beclin-1, p62 and ATG-7 levels were observed in 30/35, 32/
35 and 29/35 non-metastatic UMs, respectively. Kaplan-Meier survival
analyses showed higher survival times free from metastasis in patients
with high expression of the abovementioned proteins.
Conclusion: Autophagy role in cancer still remains controversial. We sug-
gest that autophagy-related proteins might be considered promising positive
prognostic factors of UMs. However, further investigations with additional
markers involved in the autophagy process may be required to confirm our
findings.
PS-16-003
Ocular melanoma: clinicopathological features of 7 cases
A.L. De La Guardia Rodríguez*, C. D'Angelo, C. Torre Carrera,
E. Sobrino Reig, T. Meizoso Latova
*Hospital Universitario de Móstoles, Spain
Background & objectives: Ocular melanoma represents the most com-
mon primary intraocular malignant tumour in adults and the second most
common type of melanoma. The aim of this report is to present a series of
seven cases.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective review of all ophthalmologic
pathology specimens received between 2005 and 2019, using depart-
ment’s database. From these records, sex, age, location, clinical presen-
tation, and histologic type were analysed.
Results: The age varied from 35-84 years, with a mean age of 65 years.
Of them, 85% were located in the uvea, and 14% in conjunctiva. Almost
all of them (71%) debuted with visual loss, while the rest presented retinal
detachment (28%). The majority were mixed type. None of them present-
ed local recurrence, but 42% had hepatic metastases. At the time of this
study, 71% had died, 57% from metastatic disease.
Conclusion: Ocular melanoma represents a rare and lethal clinical entity
with a poor prognosis. Our findings agree with the reviewed literature.
Uvea is the most frequent location and visual loss is the most common form
of presentation. Hepatic metastases were the most prevalent and approximate-
ly 57% died with metastatic disease. In our series, the most common type was
the mixed type in opposition to the reviewed literature. In conclusion, we
found a higher lethal prognosis in relation with non-spindle-cell type.
PS-16-004
Histopathologic features of descemet membrane endothelial kerato-
plasty graft detachment
T. Demura*, S. Trufanov, N. Fisenko, E. Kogan
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: Descemet membrane endothelial kerato-
plasty (DMEK) is the selective replacement of posterior corneal
layers. The major postoperative complication is donor graft de-
tachment. The purpose of this research is to study morphologic
features involved in graft detachment after DMEK.
Methods: In a prospective case series, 14 patients (14 eyes) with FECD
underwent a primary DMEK. The mean age of the recipients was 68.5
±9.5. Intraoperatively obtained recipients’ endothelium-Descemet’s
membranes (EDMs) were investigated histologically (hematoxylin-eosin
staining). The postoperative donor graft status was assessed as attached or
detached by anterior segment optical coherence tomography (RTVue;
Optovue, Inc, Fremont, USA).
Results: Local graft detachment occurred in 4 eyes (29%), which re-
quired a second intervention with SF6 gas injection in the anterior cham-
ber performed on 6±3 days. Regarding histologic investigations, residual
recipient’ stromal collagen fibrils fixed to EDM were detected in all cases
with graft detachment. In contrast, a complete removal of single EDM
was observed in patients with adherent EDM grafts.
Conclusion: Deep disruption of recipient’ posterior corneal stroma may
induce graft detachment as a postoperative complication of DMEK.
PS-16-005
Histopathological pattern of conjunctival tumours, a single centre
experience: a twelve-year review
O. Egbo*, E. Ugiagbe, D. Obaseki, C. Ukah, I. Obahiagbon, G. Ogun,
S. Omenai
*Edo University, Iyamho, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Conjunctival tumours are either malignant or
benign and constitute an important cause of morbidity and mortality. The his-
tologicalspectrumofthesetumoursvarieswidelywithprognosticimplications.
ThisstudyisareviewofconjunctivaltumoursinaNigeriantertiaryinstitution.
Methods: This is a retrospective study conducted in pathology depart-
ment of our institution. All conjunctival tumours from the records and
files of the Department of Morbid Anatomy, over a 12 year study period
spanning from January 1, 2003 to December 31, 2014 were reviewed and
subsequently classified using World Health Organisation Histologic
Classification of the Eye, Fourth Edition 2018.
Virchows Arch
Results: A total of 101 cases were retrieved. The patients’ ages ranged from
1 to 84 years with a median age of 28 years. The age groups of 20 - 29 years
and 30 – 39 years were most affected accounting for 24 (23.8%) and 28
(27.7%) respectively. There were 50 males (49.5%) and 51 females
(50.5%), giving a ratio of 1:1.02. Conjunctival tumours show almost compa-
rable frequency of 42 (41.6%) and 48 (47.5%) for benign and malignant
tumours, while premalignant tumours accounted for 11 (10.9%). Squamous
cell carcinoma 42 (41.6%) and squamous cell papilloma 18 (17.8%) were the
most prevalent malignant and benign tumours respectively.
Conclusion: Conjunctival tumours affect all age group with a slight
female predominance. Malignant tumours were commoner than
benign tumours. Squamous cell carcinoma was the most prevalent
tumours and closely followed by squamous cell papilloma.
PS-16-006
Clinicopathologic high risk features in retinoblastomas as seen in a
tertiary hospital, south west, Nigeria
V. Iyawe*, K. Adeleke
*Olabisi Onabanjo University and Teaching Hospital, Sagamu, Nigeria
Background & objectives: The role of histopathology in retinoblastoma
is not necessarily for diagnosis as this is usually made clinically, histopa-
thology is employed for staging, prognostication and evaluation in met-
astatic disease, hence the identification of high-risk clinicopathologic
features in retinoblastoma is principal.
Methods: This retrospective, descriptive study was carried out utilizing re-
cords and blocks taken from patients with retinoblastoma who presented and
were treated in our hospital between January 2007 and December 2018.The
International Classification of Retinoblastoma (ICRB) as well as the Reese-
Ellsworth (RE) classifications were used for the clinical staging while the high
risk features were as documented in several large studies.
Results: Eight (8) cases of retinoblastoma were confirmed in our histo-
pathology laboratory. All tumours were unilateral and there were no
positive family history. Half of the cases were at clinically advanced
stage. Five (62.5%) had tumour up to the optic nerve surgical margin as
well as microscopic intraocular spread. Choroidal and intrascleral inva-
sion were present in 5(62.5%) and 6(75%) respectively.3 years after con-
clusion of treatment, 5 were lost to follow up.
Conclusion: The morbidity of retinoblastoma(blindness) has drastically re-
duced with new treatment approaches, and cure rates of up to 100% have
been achieved. In low and middle income countries however the morbidity
and mortality is disproportionately high. Patients present at advanced stages
of the disease requiring more invasive and expensive medical interventions
with less favourable outcomes. The identification of high-risk clinicopatho-
logic features will assist the clinician on the choice of adjuvant therapy re-
quired to reduce the occurrence of metastasis and subsequent mortality.
PS-16-007
Choroid melanoma with distant metastases and without them: pecu-
liarities of intraorgan spread and cell renewal in the tumour
E. Kazachkov*, A. Shamanova, A. Vagenin, I. Panova, A. Semenova,
E. Glazyrina, E. Samkovich, O. Vlasova
*South Ural State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: To characterize morphological and immunohis-
tochemical peculiarities of the intraorgan spread of choroid melanoma and its
cellular renewal depending on the presence or absence of distant metastases.
Methods: Surgical material (eye enucleation) from 31 patients with choroid
melanoma served as the object of the study: Group 1 - observations with liver
metastases (n = 14), Group 2 - without distant metastases (n = 17).
Results: The patients’ median age in Group study 1 was 58.0 (51.75; 62.75),
in Group 2 - 64.0 (57.0; 73.0). The differences in the number of tumour
emboli with prevalence in Group 1 appeared to be statistically significant (p
= 0.003). Immunohistochemistry revealed significant differences in the
number of tumour cells expressing Bcl-2 and p53, with a predominance in
the Group 2: in Group 1, the values of Bcl-2 and p53 were 26.0 (22.25; 48.0)
and 8.0 (5.0; 16.0); in Group 2 - 56.0 (48.5; 58.5) and 25.0 (17.5; 32.5)
respectively (p <0.0001 in all cases). No differences in the expression level
of the Ki-67 marker were revealed (p = 0.856).
Conclusion: The number of tumour emboli in choroid melanoma and the
expression rates of Bcl-2 and p53 tumour cells statistically differ signif-
icantly for metastatic tumours and neoplasms without metastases; so, they
can be used as prognostic indicators of melanoma generalization.
PS-16-008
Primary lymphoma of ocular attachments - analysis of a retrospec-
tive cohort at the National Cancer Institute
G. Malheiros*, C. Gustavo Stefanof, M. Diniz de Matos Ricci, I. Avila
Small, I. Gonçalves Antunes Pereira
*National Cancer Institute / INCA, Brazil
Background & objectives: Primary lymphomas of the ocular attach-
ments (OAL) appear in places such as orbit, conjunctiva and lacrimal
gland. The objective is to evaluate clinical, epidemiological and histo-
pathological characteristics of patients with OAL, at the National Cancer
Institute (INCA) for eleven years.
Methods: This is a cohort study, with data collection from the bank of the
Division of Pathology (DIPAT) of INCA, with diagnosis of primary lympho-
ma of ocular attachments in the period from 1999 to 2019.
Results: According to the analysis of the DIPAT data, 98 cases were
selected. 57.82% of the sample was female, 54.88% MALT lymphoma
and 69.58% affecting the orbit. The most prevalent age group, with
58.80%, was 60 years or older. The diagnosis was made by biopsy of
the lesion followed by histopathological and immunohistochemical
exams. Diagnostic staging assesses the extent of the disease, with approx-
imately 60 to 80% of lymphomas of the ocular attachments presenting as
a localized disease at diagnosis.
Conclusion: Currently, there are no official data on the incidence and
prevalence of primary ocular lymphoma in Brazil. Since INCA is a ref-
erence body in the treatment of neoplasms, it is estimated that the data
collected may add information necessary for diagnosis and treatment, in
addition to recording statistical and epidemiological data on the disease.
PS-16-009
Malignant orbital tumours in Gwagwalada / Abuja: histopathologi-
cal analysis
O. Oluwole*, A. Ayanniyi
*University of Abuja, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Tumours of the eye and ocular adnexa have been
reported to be more common in Africa than other parts of the world, making
ophthalmicneoplasmsamajorcauseofclinicalmorbidityandmortalityonthe
continent.
Aim: To describe the pattern of malignant orbital tumour in our environment
Methods: This is a 5-year retrospective study of malignant orbital tumours
diagnosed between 2005-2009 in the Department of Histopathology,
University of Abuja Teaching Hospital, Gwagwalada, Abuja, Federal
Capital Territory, Abuja, Nigeria. All the Haematoxylin &Eosin stained slides
and paraffin embedded blocks were retrieved and studied.
Results:Atotalof23patientswerestudiedduringthisreview,12malesand11
females.Theagerangeis3-60years,withthemeanageof31.5years.Thepeak
age in this study is in the fourth decade. The most common malignancy was
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) 78.2%, followed by retinoblastoma and ade-
noid cystic carcinoma each having 8.7% respectively and Kaposi sarcoma
(4.4%).
Conclusion: The most common orbital tumour in this study is squamous
cell carcinoma followed by retinoblastoma with one case each of adenoid
cystic carcinoma and Kaposi sarcoma.
Virchows Arch
PS-16-010
Clinico-histopathological correlation of orbito-ocular lesions: a
hospital based study
S. Upadhyaya Kafle*
*Birat Medical College Teaching Hospital, Department of Pathology,
Nepal
Background & objectives: The orbital and ocular lesions, either non-
neoplastic or neoplastic require correct preoperative provisional diagnosis
along with series of investigations and clinical examinations for better
treatment. However, the histopathological examination of the same re-
main as mainstay in confirmation of the diagnosis.
This study was aimed to analyse the histomorphological spectrum with
clinico-pathological correlation of orbito-ocular lesions and to evaluate
the need of ancillary techniques for confirmation of diagnosis.
Methods: Prospective cross sectional hospital based study conducted at
Birat Medical College Teaching Hospital for a period of one year among
orbito-ocular surgical biopsies obtained in the Department of Pathology,
studied as per epidemiological, clinical and histopathological findings.
Results: Patients age from ten month-82 years, M:F=1.1:1. Orbito-ocular
lesions were highest in < 20 years age group. Cornea-conjunctiva was
commonly involved site. Clinical diagnosis was consistent with histo-
pathological diagnosis in approximately 66% cases. Non-neoplastic, be-
nign and malignant lesions were 36.75%, 33.51% and 29.72% respec-
tively. SCC formed 50.90% of all malignant lesions followed by seba-
ceous carcinoma and melanoma. The special stains and immunohisto-
chemistry study recommended for 19.45% and 11.35 % respectively.
Conclusion: Findings suggest HPE along with clinical findings correlation is
useful for diagnosing the wide spectrum of orbito-ocular lesions. The clinico-
pathological diagnostic correlation was good (66%) along with recommenda-
tionofancillarytechniqueslikespecialstainsandimmunohistochemistrypanel
study was made.
PS-16-011
Retinoblastoma metastasizing to the ankle joint, case report from
Kigali university teaching hospital
D. Uwamariya*, G. Ntakirutimana, M.C. Ndayisaba
*University of Rwanda, Rwanda
Background & objectives: Retinoblastoma is the most common intra-
ocular neoplasm in childhood representing 3% of all childhood malig-
nancies. It rarely metastasizes to the soft tissue. We present a case of
retinoblastoma that has metastasized to the ankle joint.
Methods: The case was obtained from the Pathology archives at the
University Teaching Hospital of Kigali (CHUK), Rwanda. Age, gender,
patient history, clinical presentation and imaging were recorded.
Histopathological diagnosis was confirmed by hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) sections and immunohistochemistry.
Results: A 5-year and 6months old male presented at CHUK with left
ankle painful swelling for 7 months on past history of bilateral retinoblas-
toma at the age of 5 months. Imaging found a soft tissue lesion and bone
structures were intact. A small round blue cell tumour was noted on H&E
stain and neoplastic cells were positive for CRX and Synaptophysin.
No other metastatic focus seen
Conclusion: Local spread with brain involvement are the most common
in advanced retinoblastoma. Distant metastasis in the soft tissue may
rarely be seen even after 5 years’ post-chemotherapy. Symptoms are
not specific and H&E alone is insufficient to make the diagnosis.
PS-16-012
Histopathological and molecular features of a conjunctival
caruncular deep penetrating nevus
J. van Ipenburg*, J. Damman, D. Paridaens, R. Verdijk
*Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Lesions located at the lacrimal caruncle are un-
commonandthedifferentialdiagnosisincludesmanydifferententities,because
thecaruncleharboursbothskinandconjunctivalelements.Wedescribethefirst
presentation of a deep penetrating nevus (DPN) on the lacrimal caruncle.
Methods: Case report
Results: This lesion was seen in an 18-year-old woman presenting with
haemorrhage of a long-standing pigmented caruncular mass, histopatho-
logically revealing two different melanocytic components. The differen-
tial diagnosis, based on histological examination, was a conventional
melanocytic nevus, a Spitz nevus or a combined melanocytic nevus. On
the molecular level, both components harboured a BRAF V600E muta-
tion, with one of the components revealing a mutation in the CTNNB1
gene encoding the β-catenin protein.
Conclusion: This presentation of a DPN of the lacrimal caruncle empha-
sizes the similarities of the caruncle with the skin and shows that molec-
ular analysis might be necessary in rendering a correct diagnosis.
PS-16-013
Clinicopathological features of 51 cases of retinoblastoma cases from
Sudan
A. Zulfu*, S. Mekki
*Omdurman Islamic University, Sudan
Background & objectives: Retinoblastoma is the most common child-
hood ocular neoplasm worldwide and in Sudan. Most patients is Sudan
present with late clinical stage. The aim of this study is to investigate the
clinicopathological features of 51 Retinoblastoma cases from Sudan
Methods: This is a Retrospective study investigating 51 cases of enucleation
specimen received at Ibn Alhaitham Histopathology Laboratory serving the
Mekka Opthalmic hospital at Khartoum /Sudan during the year 2019.
Demographic data, clinical information, macroscopic and microscopic fea-
tures and pathological TNM staging for all cases were collected and slides for
all cases examined. Data were analysed using SPSS 31
Results: Fifty-one were studied, 30 (58.2%) were males &21(41.2%) fe-
males with mean age of 3 years. All cases presented with Leukocoria, there
were 2 cases of bilateral tumours. the youngest patient was 3 months old.
The mean size of tumours is 15mm. All cases (100%) show tumour inva-
sion pf the anterior chamber, the posterior chamber and the vitrous.
Pathological TNM staging for the tumours were as follows: 24 (47%) cases
with PT4NXMX, 15 (29%) with stage PT1, 6 cases (11%) pT2 &2cases
(11%) pT3.
Conclusion: Most cases in this series presented with advanced histopath-
ological stage (47%) with extensive intra-orbital &extra-orbital tumour.
The very late clinical presentation made vision salvage impossible Early
detection and screening of Retinoblastoma cases in Sudan is highly rec-
ommended.
PS-17-001
A ’triple edged sword’; high tumour budding, stromal desmoplasia
and low host inflammatory response are associated with poor prog-
nosis in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: a review from a resource
poor setting
K. Adoke*, S. Ahmed, Y. Iliyasu
*Department of Pathology, FMC KEBBI, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a
highly aggressive cancer that is not usually detected early and associated with
treatment resistant/ failure. It has ability to rapidly disseminate to the lym-
phatics and distant organs. Most patients have advanced stage disease with
median survival of less than one year. Pancreatic cancer is not common in our
PS-17 Pathology in Favour of Developing Countries
Virchows Arch
environment; hence data on PDAC is limited. We review five cases of PDAC
over a two-year period (2018-2019).
Methods: Five cases of diagnosed PDAC were retrieved, H&E and im-
munohistochemical stains (IHC) were performed using AE1/AE3 for
tumour budding, tumour buds were defined according to ITBCC and
were counted at x20 magnification (field area 0.785mm2) at the invasive
front. CD 3 and CD 20 were used for the host immune microenvironment
while stromal desmoplasia was accessed using SMA.
Results: The patient’s ages were 40- 70 years respectively. The tumour
was located in the head of pancreas in all patients. Three of the patients
died within one month of surgical intervention. Histology showed marked
desmoplastic stroma. Tumour budding was ≥10 in the invasive front, four
of the patients showed few inflammatory responses with CD3+T cells
and CD20+ B cells were mainly present at the peritumoral areas. One
patient had tertiary lymphoid structures.
Conclusion: The dismal prognosis in PDAC especially in our environ-
ment includes but not limited to high tumour budding which entails pres-
ent of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), marked stromal
desmoplasia and low host immune response.
PS-17-002
A histopathology reporting system for resource limited departments
in low income countries
N. Baker, A. Birungi, M. Sharrif, M. Yekosani, R. Atwine, D.J. Roberts,
D. Griffiths*, M. Rogers
*Cardiff University, Wales, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Modern histopathology laboratories rely on
computer management systems (LIMS) for accessioning and reporting.
Most laboratories in sub-Saharan Africa do not have the resources to
afford a commercial LIMS. Open source cloud-based environments offer
an alternative for providing essential LIMS functionality
Methods: A minimal specification was developed and an experienced
software consultant produced a web based system using the Grails appli-
cation framework with the data being stored in a PostgreSQL database.
These are popular open source technologies. The system facilitates
accessioning, reporting, authorisation, the production of supplementary
reports, and basic workload statistics. A simple disease coding system is
included to facilitate research.
Results: Total development time was approximately 120 hours. After
commissioning the system has now run without outage for one year,
accessioning 1400 surgical and 500 cytology cases. Patient demographics
conform to local custom (two names, age and village). The number of
steps involved in producing a report has been reduced and a printed or
emailed PDF report is available immediately following electronic autho-
risation resulting in a reduction in turn-around-times. The system can be
accessed via any modern internet enabled device (mobile phones, tablets
and computers), is resilient in local power outages and complies with
local data protection requirements. Running costs of the server are less
than 800USD per year.
Conclusion: We have demonstrated practically of using a low-cost web-
based system as a LIMS in a low resource environment. The system has
been embraced by staff and could be adapted for use in any laboratory
with internet access.
Funding: Path of Logic, Durango, CO a non-profit, has provided funds
for the rental of the server.
PS-17-003
Starting a pathology explanation clinic in a tertiary care hospital of a
developing country: a challenging but rewarding task
M. Javed*, R. Rafi, R. Akbar
*Cantonment General Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Pathology explanation clinic (PEC) is an
innovative type of clinic where the pathologist interacts directly with
the patient and discusses their reports and findings, providing direct in-
sights to the patient regarding disease process, stage, grade, prognosis and
other details.
Methods: A PEC was setup at Cantonment General Hospital which is
located in Rawalpindi, Pakistan. A total of 150 patients were enrolled in
the study and their histopathology reports were discussed with them by
two expert consultant pathologists. Furthermore all of their queries were
appropriately addressed. A feedback form was provided to be filled by the
patients after consultation.
Results: 89% of patients reported better satisfaction and understanding of
the reports when explained by the pathologist and 75% patients reported
better communication with the clinician after pathology clinic consulta-
tion. None of the patients gave a negative feedback about the
consultation.
Conclusion: PEC is a novel idea which may help to improve the concept
of patient centered care and empower patients in integral decision-making
process. However, the financial, logistic and administrative implications
have to be sorted out.
PS-17-004
The evaluation of homegrown digital scanner as learning and assess-
ment tool of haematoxylin and eosin stained slides in pathology
R. Kanthan*, R. Swaminathan, S. Sundaram, P. Nagarajan
*University of Saskatchewan, Canada
Background & objectives: Digital scanning of glass slides in pathology
is usually the purview of expensive, time consuming, labor intensive
machines. In this study the Morphle a low-budget, cost-effective scanner
is explored as an ideal tool for continued learning and assessment in
pathology.
Methods: Six surgical-pathology glass slides sets (20) were scanned and
evaluated by the pathology post-graduate students at SRMC. Each whole-
mount scanned case-slide was presented as an interactive group discus-
sion. Each slide-set had a post-slide review test as formative assessment.
Sixty screen shots of the scanned images were evaluated as final summa-
tive assessment. Student feedback questionnaires and self-reflective
learning documents were obtained
Results: The scanning of each twenty-slide-set took 2.5 hrs. Each session
reviewed whole-mount scanned images that were zoomed to high power
to demonstrate specific pathological findings in a stress-free, engaging,
learning environment with simultaneous group/peer learning. The
scanned images were also available digitally for individual/self-learning.
The final summative review test scores demonstrated increased knowl-
edge gain. All students liked this digital format of teaching as an exam
preparatory tool in comparison to microscopic sessions and self-reported
improved personal knowledge.
Conclusion: Digital scanning of pathology slides using Morphle is user-
friendly and cost-effective. The real-time zooming of the whole mount
scanned images is easy and of great clarity with high resolution that
allows for assessment with just-in-time learning suitable for group/peer
or individual self-learning. This low cost, time-sensitive scanner also
provides a permanent digital resource for continued deep learning with
the ongoing potential of real-time portability and knowledge sharing
across digital divides
PS-17-005
An open-access atlas of cytology – a collection of 500 cases
A. Luebke*, S. Frank, M.G. Mostafa, L. Bubendorf, A. Hinsch, K. Glatz,
P. Dalquen
*University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Inspired by the experiences made during many
years of the iPath-network, which enables contact with colleagues from
countries with restricted resources and gives insights into their needs, we
compiled this collection of cases as a resource for learning and teaching.
Methods: The specimens are from serous cavities (96), CNS (56), soft
tissue and bone (46), cervical smears (40), pancreas/biliary tract (38),
thyroid (29), breast (27), lymph nodes (22), liver (15), urine (12), ovary
(10), adrenal gland (9), intestinal (9), mediastinum (9), salivary glands
(8), joint spaces (7), pituitary gland (5), testis (4), kidney (4), skin (2),
bone marrow (2), prostate (1).
Results: Each case is presented on two pages: On the first page, the
cytological findings and the necessary clinical information are displayed.
The second page reveals the final diagnosis together with a description of
the morphology, differential diagnostic considerations, histological cor-
relation (when available), and literature references. Cases were collected
from all over the world (iPath-network), and the contributing institutions
are located in Germany (336 cases), Switzerland (103 cases), Bangladesh
(58 cases), Afghanistan (2 cases), and China (1 case).
Conclusion: To provide accessibility for everyone, with particular consid-
eration of institutions with limited resources and developing countries, we
choose the open-source internet platform WordPress. We intend to create a
continuously expanding dynamic collection of special or characteristic
cases. The platform will be maintained, and new cases will be added. The
collection contains cases from digital consultations, classic educational ex-
amples, and unique cases with diagnostic pearls and pitfalls.
PS-17-007
Cancer incidence in a Nigerian tertiary institution
S. Sonusi*, R. Akinde, Z. Ikeri, O. Oguntunde
*Lagos University Teaching Hospital, Nigeria
Background & objectives: About 100, 000 new cancer cases occur yearly
in Nigeria. There are, however, difficulties in sustaining cancer registration
in developing countries. This is a retrospective study to review all malig-
nancies received in our department from January 2005 to December 2017.
Methods: Records of patients with a histologic diagnosis of cancer made
in the department were retrieved. These data were then classified and
cumulated according to site (based on organ systems), age, sex and his-
tologic type i.e. carcinoma, sarcoma, lymphoma, blastoma, melanoma
and others not specified. These results were analysed in rank, percentage
frequencies and presented in tables, charts and graphs.
Results: A total of 6540 malignancies were analysed during the study
period. There was a general increase in cancer incidence over the 13 years
of study. The male to female ratio was 1:2.2 for all the malignancies. The
commonest cancers in this study are breast and cervical cancer amongst
women; prostate cancer among men; and lymphoma among children.
Carcinomas accounted for 86.1% of cases, sarcomas 5.7%, lymphomas
3.9%, blastomas 2.1%, melanomas 0.4% and other histologic subtypes
accounted for 2.2%. The peak age of occurrence was in the 6th decade for
men, 4th decade for women and under 5years for children.
Conclusion: More population-based cancer registries are needed in
Nigeria. This is feasible despite the challenges. Studies like this could
further strengthen the cancer surveillance of the existing cancer registries
in the country for evidence-based planning for cancer prevention and con-
trol. An effective cancer screening programs will significantly reduce can-
cer morbidity and mortality in the countries because the most common sites
of involvements especially, breast, cervix and prostate are easily assessable.
PS-17-008
Histopathological spectrum of solid cancers in childhood and adoles-
cents: a single institutional experience from north-east Nigeria
D. Suleiman*, I.O. Adogu
*Dept. of Histopathology, Abubakar Tafawa Balewa University
Teaching Hospital, Bauchi, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Data systems on childhood cancers are re-
quired to drive quality improvement and policy decisions. The study aims
to review the histopathological and epidemiological characteristics of
solid cancers diagnosed in ATBUTH Bauchi, between 2014 and 2019,
among children aged (0-19 years)
Methods: All cancer cases entered into the departmental records over a 6-
year period (2014-2019) in the age group 0-19 years were extracted. The
patients’ request cards, case notes and histology slides were retrieved and
relevant data extracted. Histological review of the slides was done and all
the collected data were subjected to descriptive statistical tabulation and
analysis.
Results: Childhood solid cancers constituted 3.9% of all solid ma-
lignancies seen during the study period. The histological spectrum
included lymphoproliferative disorders (19.5%), small round blue
cell tumours (19.5%) and Soft tissue sarcomas (excluding embryo-
nal rhabdomyosarcoma)- (12.2%). Epithelial neoplasms ranged from
colorectal, salivary gland, thyroid, conjunctival and skin cancers and
were commoner in the older age group (15-19 years) where they
constituted 60% of all malignancies diagnosed in that age bracket.
The lymph nodes were the commonest site of tumour occurrence
constituting 19.5% of all tumour locations and include Hodgkin
lymphoma (50%), Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (20%) and Kaposi sar-
coma (20%). Burkitt lymphoma occurred at relatively low frequen-
cy, constituting 4.9% of all tumours.
Conclusion: There is a wide spectrum of solid tumours in the paediatric
age group. Some of these tumours (i.e. lymphomas) are potentially treat-
able and/or curable. For this reason, the provision of adequate diagnostic
and treatment facilities for paediatric cancers is highly advocated.
PS-17-009
Patterns of hormone receptors and HER2/NEU status in Sudanese
endometrial cancer cases: a single institution experience
A. Yousuf*, M. Elhassan, R. Abbadi, A. Mohamedani
*University of Gezira, Faculty of Medicine, Sudan
Background & objectives: Endometrial carcinoma (EC) is Sudan's third
most common gynaecologic cancer. Hormone receptors and Her2/neu
expression could be implicated in the prognosis and targeted therapy of
EC. We aim to assess the unknown status of these receptors in EC among
Sudanese women.
Methods: Samples of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue of 40
patients with EC diagnosed at the university of Gezira Medical
Laboratory between January 2018 and December 2019 were
immunohistochemically studied for hormone receptors (ER,PR) and
Her2/neu and the results correlated with histology.
Results: The patients median age was 60(range:35-80 years).
Histologically, 27(67.5%) cases were type 1 EC and 13(32.5%) were type
II EC; in type II EC, 11(27.5 %) cases were papillary serous carcinoma
and the remaining two were clear cell and undifferentiated carcinoma.
ER, PR, and Her-2/neu expression were positive in 26(65%), 23(57.5%)
and 14(35%), respectively. of the ER positive cases 19(73%) were type 1
and 7(27%) were type II. of the PR positive cases 18(78.3%) were type 1
and 5(21.7%) were type II. of the Her2/neu positive cases 4(30.8%) were
type 1 and 9(69.2%) were type II. 10(25%) cases were negative for all
markers (triple negative). Her2/neu expression was associated with higher
grades.
Conclusion: Our study provides important original data on the status of
hormone receptors and her2/neu in Sudanese EC patients; This
provides for better comprehension of the biology of the disease,
and conforms with international literature the importance of
implementing molecular diagnosis in EC.Multi-center studies with
larger sample sizes and funds are essential to validate the findings
of this study, as they may contribute to better management guide-
lines of EC in Sudan.
Funding: i have received the educational fellowship award from BDIAP.
Virchows Arch
PS-18-001
Primary malignant melanoma of the urinary tract; case series with
clinicopathologic and molecular insights
A. Acikalin*, E. Kilic Bagir, S. Karim, A. Bisgin, S. Erdogan
*Cukurova University, Medical Faculty, Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Primary melanoma of the urinary tract is rare
and causes difficulties both in diagnosis and management. We aimed to
present eight primary urinary case series with clinical, pathologic and
molecular findings to add more insight to this challenging entity.
Methods: We documented retrospectively the eight cases from our ar-
chive of our department, and searched for clinical, treatment, prognostic
data. Additionally, cases were evaluated for histopathologic, immunohis-
tochemical and molecular findings.
Results: The mean age of the eight patients (five men, three women) was
67.25 years. The most common location was urethra (n=6), followed
bladder and ureter one patient for each. Half of the cases were metastatic
at diagnose. One case had local recurrence. Vertical growth phase, epi-
thelioid and/ or spindle cell type, increased mitotic activity, necrosis was
common. HMB45, Melan-A, S-100 were positive and Keratin was neg-
ative in all. Six patients’ molecular results were available, and five of
them revealed various mutations, including BRAF in two and KIT in one.
Conclusion: Awareness of nested growth pattern and in situ melanocytic
component at the edges is helpful in histopathologic diagnose, especially
in amelanotic or hypomelanotic tumours. Presence of genetic mutation
may be related to metastasis, as well as an option for management.
PS-18-002
Alternations in cell proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transi-
tion (EMT) pathways with progression in recurrent non-muscle in-
vasive bladder cancers
V. Agrawal*, N. Bharti, R. Pandey
*Department of Pathology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India
Background & objectives: More than 2/3rd of bladder cancers are Non-
Muscle Invasive (NMIBC) with high risk of recurrence. To understand
the differences in cellular signalling in primary NMIBCs and their recur-
rences with/without progression, we studied the expression of molecules
on tissue microarrays (TMA).
Methods: TMA of 106 NMIBCs (53 primary/53 recurrence) were con-
structed. Immunohistochemistry was performed for oncogenic (p53, p21/
WAF1/Cip1), growth-factor signalling (Her2/neu), EMT (E-cadherin,
Beta-catenin, vimentin), apoptosis (p53), cell proliferation (Ki-67,
IMP3), angiogenesis (VEGF, VEGFR1), cell motility (MMP9) and im-
mune tolerance (PDL1) pathways. Immunostaining was analysed by the
semi-quantitative H-score (Histo-score, range 0-300) and differences in
expression levels by the paired sample t-test.
Results: The mean time to recurrence was 30.3 months (range 3-
109). p21 loss was defined as <10% nuclear expression and PDL1
positive when >5% cells showed membranous expression.
Recurrent tumours showed higher p53, Ki-67, Her2/neu, PDL1,
vimentin expression and p21 loss. 32 of 53 (60%) primary tumours
showed progression in stage/grade/both at recurrence. Progressive
tumours showed higher Ki-67 proliferation and expression of Her2,
IMP3 and MMP9 and lower p21, beta-catenin, E-cadherin and
VEGFR1 as compared to non-progressive tumours. Higher Ki-67
proliferation index and lower surface beta-catenin expression cor-
related with shorter time to progression. Two primary and four
recurrent tumours were PDL1 positive. More recurrent tumours
showed PDL1 positive tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs).
Conclusion: Recurrent and progressive NMIBCs acquire differences in
expression of molecules of cellular growth and proliferation, EMT and in
immunomodulatory pathways, which correlate with the time to
progression.
Funding: Project funded by Government agency, Department of
Biotechnology [Grant no. 6242-P2/RGCB/PMD/DBT/VAWL/2015].
PS-18-003
Low grade oncocytic tumour of the kidney: a review of 19 cases
M. Akgul*, M. Idrees
*University of Indiana, USA
Background & objectives: Low grade oncocytic tumour (LOT) is an
emerging entity with distinct morphology, characteristic immunoprofile,
and indolent nature. LOT is diagnosed under several terminologies and
poses a diagnostic challenge due to a lack of defined criteria, thus hin-
dering definitive clinical decisions.
Methods: Institutional electronic database was searched between 2005 –
2020. It included all nephrectomies, partial resections, and biopsies per-
formed during this period. A total of 7459 adult primary renal neoplasms
were identified, and only tumours with characteristic LOT features were
selected for the study. Age, gender, procedure type, surgery date, tumour
stage, immunoprofile, and follow up data were recorded.
Results: 19 LOTs with CK7+/CD117- expression were identified. The
median age was 67 years (range 47 - 84), and male/female ratio was 10/9.
The median size was 4 cm (range 1.5 - 9.5 cm). All cases were confined
except one with renal sinus invasion (pT3a). Nodal or distant metastases
were not identified. 6 patients had long-term follow-up (median 43
months; range 24 - 93), and are alive without disease.
Conclusion: Renal oncocytic neoplasms are a diverse group of tumours.
Recent data suggest that several distinct entities may exist within this
group. LOT may particularly be confused with oncocytoma or eosino-
philic chromophobe renal cell carcinoma. Strict morphologic criteria in-
cluding eosinophilic oncocytoma-like morphology, solid growth with
occasional archipelago-like tumour clusters with edematous stroma, dif-
fuse CK7 expression with negative CD117 are mandated. These tumours
display low malignant potential; however, due to limited reported cases,
additional studies are required to further characterize its behaviour.
PS-18-004
Epithelioid trophoblastic tumour: a review of 10 cases
M. Akgul*, M. Idrees, T. Ulbright
*University of Indiana, USA
Background & objectives: Non-choriocarcinomatous trophoblastic tu-
mours are rare in testis. They are morphologically analogous to epitheli-
oid trophoblastic tumour (ETT) and placental site trophoblastic tumour in
females. Here we present the largest cohort of ETT in men with testicular
cancer.
Methods: Trophoblastic tumours at our institution between 2013 - 2019
were retrospectively reviewed. ETT were identified based on their mor-
phological features. Since most testicular ETT are associated with
postchemotherapy and mixed germ cell tumours (MGCT); their differ-
ences and similarities to female tumours were recorded. Age, gender,
procedure type, surgery date, tumour stage, immunoprofile, and follow
up data were recorded.
Results: Median age was 34 years (19 - 59). One ETT was a primary
testicular tumour. 2 cases had pure ETT, the remainder were part of the
MGCT. 5 were identified in retroperitoneal lymph nodes, 4 were post-
chemotherapy. Liver, lung, cervical lymph node, and posterior shoulder
soft tissue were other sites. In 3/7 patients with follow-up, ETT occurred
as late recurrence.
Conclusion: ETS has common association with teratoma, chemotherapy,
and late recurrence. Limited data suggest that ETT has favourable
PS-18 Uropathology
Virchows Arch
prognosis when compared to choriocarcinoma. Surgical resection re-
mains the treatment of choice when only teratoma is present. No further
recurrences of ETT recorded.
PS-18-005
PD-L1 expression in seminoma correlates with higher pathological
stages
V. Almeida*, L. Veloso, H. Moreira, A. Lai, J. Gama, C. Faria,
R. Almeida, V. Sousa
*CHUC, IAP-PM, FMUC, Portugal
Background & objectives: PD-L1 is not constitutively expressed in
testicular tissue, but its presence in numerous tumours makes it a land-
mark in immunotherapy strategies.
This study evaluates PD-L1 expression in seminomas diagnosed at our
Hospital during 2019, correlating its presence with pathological stage.
Methods: An experienced uropathologist determined PD-L1 expression -
Tumour Proportion Score (TPS) - with Dako 22C3 antibody on all
seminomas diagnosed during 2019. A 1% cut-off was applied for PD-
L1 positivity. Data was analysed using IBM SPSS v24.
Results: Twelve seminomas were diagnosed during 2019. Median age at
diagnosis was 39 (range: 23 - 66). Mean size tumour was 6,38 cm (0,7 -
18 cm).
Pathological stage: pT1 (6), pT2 (3), pT3 (2) and pT4 (1).
Seven cases showed PD-L1 heterogeneous expression within the tumour.
All TPS-negative results were documented on pT1 stage seminomas, and
all pT ≥2 tumours had TPS positive results. Accordingly, PD-L1 expres-
sion on tumour cells, measured by TPS, showed a statistically association
with pathological T-stage ≥2 (Fisher's non-parametric test, p = 0.015).
Conclusion: In our series seminoma´s PD-L1 expression on tumour cells
was statistically associated with ≥pT2 staging, in line with published data
advocating worst prognostic to PD-L1 expressing GCT.
Results from ongoing clinical studies are expected to demonstrate prog-
nostic value and eventually therapeutically utility of PD-L1 expression,
particularly in selected cases with higher stages or in patients not suitable
or refractory to conventional therapies.
PS-18-006
PD-L1 expression in renal cell carcinoma – higher expression in
higher WHO/ISUP grade
R. Almeida*, H. Moreira, R. Oliveira, J. Fraga, A. Lai, M.B. Pimentão,
C. Faria, V. Almeida, F. Ramalhosa, J. Gama, J. Madeira, V. Sousa,
M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) represent 2-3%
adult malignancies, and encompass different entities with variable morpho-
logic and pathologic features. Programmed death receptor ligand 1 (PD-L1)
pathway therapies are of the utmost importance, mainly in metastatic RCC.
Methods: We selected 80 random cases of surgical specimens of RCC
diagnosed over a period of 2-years (Januray-2018/December-2019).
Clinical and pathological data was analysed and PD-L1 immunohisto-
chemistry (22C3 pharmDx, Dako Omnis) was performed in all cases.
PD-L1 expression was evaluated by two experienced pathologists and
was quantified as percentage of tumoral cells with membranous staining.
Statistical analysis performed with SPSS software.
Results: Our cohort had a median age of 64±11.7 years-old (32-86), 23
female (28.7%) and 57 male (71.3%).
Regarding histologic types of RCC: clear cell (48.8%), chromophobe
(25.0%), type 1 papillary (8.8%), type 2 papillary (8.8%), clear cell pap-
illary (5.0%), MiT family translocation (2.5%) and mucinous tubular and
spindle cell carcinoma (1.3%).
WHO/ISUP grades: G1 in 2.5% cases, G2 in 36.3%, G3 in 31.3% and G4
in 5%.
AJCC stages: I (68.8%), II (13.8%), III (15.0%) and IV (2.5%).
Considering PD-L1 expression: 0% (62.5%); 1-50% (28.8%) and >50%
(8.7%).
We have found statistical significance between higher PD-L1 expression
and higher WHO/ISUP grade (p=0.032), without association with stage
or histologic type.
Conclusion: In this study we have found statistical significance between
WHO/ISUP grade and PD-L1 immunohistochemical expression. Higher
grade was associated with increased expression of PD-L1, what may
suggest that these cases may benefit from immunotherapy, even without
metastatic disease.
The aim of this study was to add some contribute for a greater knowledge
of RCC and highlight some potential therapeutic targets, as PD-L1 path-
way.
PS-18-007
Prostate amyloidosis: a rare finding usually associated with aging
M. Álvarez Sarria*, J. Sánchez Ramos, J. Domínguez de Dios,
M.P. San Miguel Fraile, J.A. Ortiz Rey
*Servicio Galego de Saúde (SERGAS), Spain
Background & objectives: Prostate amyloidosis (PA) is an unusual
disease rarely reported in the literature. The amyloid deposits appear as
thickening of small vessel walls. Changes may be focal and subtle. We
present clinical, histological and immunohistochemical features of 7
cases of PA.
Methods: PA was diagnosed in seven cases studied in our department
from 2015 to 2019. They were 5 prostate needle biopsies (performed
because of raised serum PSA level), 1 transurethral resection and 1 pros-
tatectomy. Immunohistochemistry for kappa and lambda light chains,
amyloid A and transthyretin (TTR) was performed.
Results: The patients were aged 72-94 years (mean=82), without any
rectal examination or transrectal ultrasound unusual findings.
Histologically, amyloid deposits were inside arteriolar walls (sparse in 5
cases, extense in 2). Immunohistochemically the amyloid corresponded
to lambda light chain in one patient (who had a monoclonal gammopathy
of unknown significance), and TTR in the other 7 cases. They did not
have familiar history or clinical manifestations attributable to amyloid-
osis. Most, but not all, of these cases correspond to TTR amyloidosis,
concordant with a senile change.
Conclusion: Amyloidosis is a rare asymptomatic histological finding in
the prostate.
The pathological finding of PA makes advisable complementary studies,
at least immunohistochemistry to characterize the type of amyloid.
Clinical evaluation to rule out systemic or haematological diseases could
be considered.
PS-18-008
Grade group 2 and 3 prostatic adenocarcinomas with positive surgi-
cal margins
A. Armutlu*, O. Akman, B. Hazır, K. Kösemehmetoğlu, B. Akdogan,
B. Gumuskaya, M.C. Kiremit, E. Koseoglu, Y. Kordan, A.E. Canda,
T. Esen, D. Ertoy Baydar
*Koc University Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey
Background & objectives: The surgical margin(SM) status after radical
prostatectomy for prostate cancer is an important risk factor for biochem-
ical recurrence(BCR).The aim of this study is to investigate whether
tumour grade at the positive SM in score-7 group is significant to predict
BCR.
Methods: The records of 3 university hospitals between 2006-2019 were
searched for SM positive Gleason score-7 (3+4 or 4+3) prostatic adeno-
carcinoma with at least 12 months follow-up and no adjuvant therapy.
Clinicopathologic features that may have prognostic value as well as
Virchows Arch
follow-up information were collected. Post-op PSA>0.2 ng/ml was ac-
cepted as BCR. Chi-Square test were used to correlate different variables
and BCR.
Results: 138 patients were included into study. The mean patient age was
63 years (range: 45-77) and median follow-up was 30 months. 73.1%
patients were grade group (GG) 2 while 26.9% were GG-3. Distribution
of pathological stages: pT2=41, pT3a=66 and pT3b=31. BCR occurred in
45 patients (32%). The two parameters that significantly correlated with
BCR were the largest diameter of positive SM (p=0,03) and presence of
lymphovascular invasion (LVI) (p=0,013). Gleason grade at the margin
did not appear as an independent risk factor for BCR.
Conclusion: In Gleason 7 (GG-2&3) tumours, existence of pattern 4 at
the positive surgical margin does not have influence on BCR. The largest
length of positivity and detection of lymphovascular invasion are two
significant determinants of PSA recurrence.
PS-18-010
Immunohistochemical study of PD-L1 and CD8 in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma
A. Azueta*, S. Marcos González, J. Hoz Fernández, L. Grande Gozález,
M.P. Diaz García, J. Freire Salinas, M.P. Garcia Arranz, D. Rodríguez
Villar, J. Gómez-Román
*HUMV/IDIVAL, Spain
Background & objectives: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma is the leading
renal malignancy. In recent years immunotherapy with immune control
point inhibitors has been introduced for its treatment, specifically anti-
PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 antibodies, especially in metastatic renal
carcinomas.
Methods: 49 cases were reviewed and immunohistochemical study per-
formed, in a block of representative tissue fixed in formalin and included
in paraffin, of PD-L1 (Clone 22C3, Agilent) using the EnVision FLEX
visualization system in Autostainer Link 48 and CD8 (Clone C8/144B,
Agilent). Both PD-L1 is titrated on tumour and inflammatory cells to
potentially improve the assessment of patients treatable with
immunotherapy.
Results: Increased immunohistochemical expression of PD-L1 in both,
tumour cells and lymphocytes, in high histological grade of clear cell
renal carcinoma. Positive association between the presence of CD8+ T-
lymphocytes and the expression of PD-L1 in the same.
Conclusion: The immunohistochemical study of CD8 and PD-L1 could
better reclassify patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma as candidates
for a greater response to immunotherapy. To do so, a correct immunohis-
tochemical technique and subsequent evaluation is absolutely necessary.
PS-18-012
Microvascular proliferation in prostate cancer is associated with
aggressive tumour features, recurrence and high contrast
enhancement by multiparametric MRI
A. Borretzen*, L.A.R. Reisæter, K. Gravdal, C. Beisland, L. Akslen,
O.J. Halvorsen
*Centre for Cancer Biomarkers CCBIO, and The Gade Laboratory for
Pathology, Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen,
Norway, Department of Pathology, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, Norway
Background & objectives: Angiogenesis is essential for carcinomas to
grow and spread. Here, we studied the proliferation of immature
microvessels in prostate cancer by Nestin/Ki67, focusing on relations to
estimated in vivo blood flow from multiparametric MRI, clinico-
pathologic
phenotype, recurrence and survival.
Methods: Sections from 67 radical prostatectomies were
immunohistochemically stained for Nestin/Ki-67. Vascular proliferation
index (VPI), evaluated as the ratio between proliferating vessels (pMVD)
and overall microvessel density (MVD), as well as the presence of
glomeruloid microvascular proliferations (GMPs), were recorded.
Anatomically corresponding blood flow imaging parameters from
multiparametric MRI were acquired preoperatively.
Results: High pMVD, high VPI and the presence of GMPs were associ-
ated with high Gleason score, large tumour dimension, extraprostatic
extension, high pathologic stage, and for GMP also positive surgical
margins. By univariate survival analyses, high pMVD was associated
with shorter time to biochemical- and clinical recurrence (p=0.044,
p=0.052). Further, high pMVD and high VPI were associated with pres-
ence of high contrast enhancement on anatomically correlated areas from
multiparametric MRI (p=0.025).
Conclusion: Proliferation of newly formed microvessels by Nestin/Ki67
is associated with increased blood flow by high contrast enhancement on
multiparametric MRI and linked to aggressive tumour features and dis-
ease recurrence, unravelling potential prognostic and
therapeutic opportunities in prostate cancer.
Funding: Partly supported by the Research Council of Norway (Centres of
Excellence funding-scheme, project-number 223250), grants from University
of Bergen/Cancer Society of Norway/ Helse-Vest Research Fund.
PS-18-013
Validation of ISUP grading of clear cell & papillary renal cell carci-
noma on the digital pathology platform
R. Colling, C. Verrill, L. Browning*
*Department of Cellular Pathology, The John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Pitfalls in digital diagnosis require acknowl-
edgement as pathologists adapt to digital reporting. In urological pathol-
ogy one pitfall is said to be grading of renal cell carcinoma (RCC). We
investigated concordance in grading between digital and glass slides.
Methods: 50 clear cell RCCs (CCRCC) and 10 papillary RCCs were
assessed by three specialist urological pathologists who assigned an
International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) grade on the digital
images, and on the corresponding glass slides following a two week
wash-out period. The pathologist’s grade for each on digital and glass
was recorded, and compared using Cohen’s and Fleiss’ kappa.
Results: Comparing ISUP grading on digital versus glass images for all
60 cases, agreement was 0.70, 0.57, 0.70 for each pathologist (concor-
dance of 78%, 65%, 77% respectively), and for CCRCC alone, it was
0.72, 0.58, 0.75 (concordance of 80%, 66%, 80%). Agreement between
the three pathologists on digital was 0.58 and on glass was 0.45, again
with improved agreement for CCRCC alone (0.62 vs 0.50).
Conclusion: ISUP grading of RCC conveys prognostic information in
CCRCC and papillary RCC, and potentially influences clinical trial entry.
There was moderate to good agreement on ISUP grade between digital
and glass for individual pathologists, agreement being slightly better if
analysis limited to CCRCC. We therefore show that the concordance of
ISUP grading between digital and glass appears acceptable, especially in
the absence of evidence concerning reproducibility of the ISUP grade.
Funding: LB and CV are partly funded by the NIHR Oxford Biomedical
Research Centre (Molecular Diagnostics Theme/Multimodal Pathology
Subtheme)
PS-18-014
Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis confirmed histologically: a
retrospective study of 10 cases
D. Chiba*, S. El Arem, A. Baccouche, Z. Nfikha, M. Hamdani,
O. Belkacem, M. Ben Othmen, A. Bdioui, G. Tlili, M. Jaidane,
S. Hmissa Belhaj Salah
*Department of Pathology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse,
Tunisia
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis
(XGP) is an uncommon chronic inflammatory process of the kid-
ney, resulting in renal destruction. It accounts for only 0.6% of all
chronic pyelonephritis cases. Herein, we report the main clinical,
biological, histological, radiological, and therapeutic features of
XGP.
Methods: We carried out a retrospective study of XGP diagnosed and
treated in the Urology Department, Sahloul Hospital, Sousse (Tunisia)
during 2004-2019.
Results: A total of 10 patients was reported with a median age of 47
years, and sex-ratio of 1.5. The most common presentations were
lower back pain 100%, isolated(n=4),febrile(n=4), associated with
the biological inflammatory syndrome(n=6) and accompanied by
lower urinary tract symptoms(n=6).Radiological-CT findings of
the patients were non-functioning kidney with renal calculi(n=8),
pyonephrosis(n=4), associated phrenic collection(n=1), and retro-
peritoneal abscess(n=2). The diagnosis of XGP was suspected
only in one patient. Percutaneous deep pus drainage was per-
formed four times. The germs identified were E.coli, P mirabilis,
E.faecium, M.morganii, E.coli, and B.stercoris. Surgical proce-
dures included nephrectomy(n=9) and partial nephrectomy(n=1).
Perioperative complications included colostomy and abscess for-
mation. Histology of all the specimens concluded to XGP.
Conclusion: XGP is an uncommon histologic variant of the kid-
ney induced by recurrent bacterial urinary tract infection. Kidney
cancer is the main differential diagnosis. Although the diagnosis
can often be suspected based on imaging studies, the definitive
diagnosis requires histological examination and early diagnosis
and treatment is very important for decreasing morbidity and
mortality.
PS-18-015
Recurrent KRAS mutation identified in papillary renal neoplasm
with reverse polarity – a comparative study with papillary renal cell
carcinoma
S.S. Kim, Y.M. Cho, G.H. Kim, K.H. Kee, H. Kim, K.M. Kim, J. Kim,
C. Choi*
*Chonnam National University Medical School, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: Comprehensive molecular analyses re-
vealed that papillary renal cell carcinoma (PRCC) is a heterogenous
entity. Papillary renal neoplasm with reverse polarity (PRNRP) is a
subset of PRCC with characteristic histomorphologies such as low-
grade nuclear features, inverted nuclear location, eosinophilic cy-
toplasm, and indolent clinical behaviour. We tried to define the
molecular, clinicopathological, histologic, and immunohistochem-
ical features of PRNRP by comparing them with type 1 PRCC
(PRCC1) and type 2 PRCC (PRCC2).
Methods: A cohort of 30 PRNRP, 23 PRCC1, and 26 PRCC2 cases was
used. Targeted sequencing of 90 cancer-related genes including
KRAS was performed in 26 PRNRP tumour samples. PNA-
mediated clamping PCR of KRAS was performed using paired
normal and tumour DNA from 30 PRNRP, 23 PRCC1, and 26
PRCC2 cases.
Results: Recurrent mutations in KRAS were detected in 28 of the 30
PRNRPs. However, there were no KRAS mutations in any PRCC1 or
PRCC2 cases. PRNRP exhibited distinct clinicopathological features:
small tumour size, lower pathologic T stage, and no disease-specific death
during the follow-up period. Histologically, peritumoral lymphoid aggre-
gation, prominent papillary architecture (>80% of tumour), hyalinized
papillae, inverted nuclear location, and lower nuclear grade were
observed.
Conclusion: The findings suggest that PRNRP is a subtype of papillary
renal neoplasm that is different from PRCC1 and PRCC2.
PS-18-016
Diagnosis of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and atypical small
acinar proliferation in prostate biopsies: interobserver variation,
and impact on patient management and follow-up diagnosis
S. Khan, R. Colling*, H. Colling, L. Browning, C. Verrill, I.S. Roberts
*University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: With increasing use of multiparametric
magnetic resonance imaging for prostate cancer diagnosis, the
relevance of reporting prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN)
and atypical small acinar proliferation (ASAP) in prostate biop-
sies (PBs), is questioned. The aim of this study was to deter-
mine reporting rates of ASAP and PIN between different
uropathologists and determine the association between initial bi-
opsy diagnosis and follow-up biopsy rate and diagnosis.
Methods: Diagnoses in PBs reported by three specialist
uropathologists in a single tertiary centre over a three-year peri-
od (2016-18) were evaluated. The association between initial
biopsy findings, re-biopsy rate and final diagnosis (12-48 month
follow-up) was determined. 2941 PBs were reported during this
period with 1602 adenocarcinomas, 652 benign, 42 ASAP, 525
PIN, and 107 PIN + ASAP.
Results: There was a significant difference between categories
reported by the three uropathologists (p<0.00001) and the rates
of ASAP and PIN diagnoses (p=0.0156). In contrast, there was
no difference in the frequency of cancer diagnoses between pa-
thologists (p=0.5758). The re-biopsy rate was lower (p<0.0001)
for benign (9.7%) than ASAP/PIN (17.6%), but there was no
significant difference in rates of re-biopsy cancer (p=0.5912),
with the positive predictive value of ASAP+/-PIN only 44%.
Conclusion: PIN and ASAP in PBs are subjective and systematically
suffer from inter-observer reporter bias. Although non-malignant diagno-
ses influence re-biopsy rates, ASAP and PIN have little value in
predicting malignancy in follow-up biopsies.
PS-18-017
Grading of non-invasive urothelial carcinoma on transurethral
resection: a comparison of digital whole slide image vs. glass slide
R. Colling*, H. Colling, B. Moxley-Wyles, L. Browning, C. Verrill
*University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Digital pathology is non-inferior to mi-
croscopy for diagnosis, however the evidence-base for grading is
limited and is an area of uncertainly as these technologies are
adopted. This study aims to compare bladder cancer grading
between glass slide and digital reporting.
Methods: 48 consecutive transurethral bladder resections of non-
invasive papillary urothelial carcinomas were graded by three
specialist uropathologists - initially on a digital screen, followed
by glass slide after a two-week washout period. Both WHO
2004 and 1973 systems were compared using linear weighted
Cohen’s and Fleiss’ kappa.
Results: Agreement between all three pathologists on glass was
0.56 (2004) and 0.49 (1973), whereas on digital was 0.61 (2004)
and 0.44 (1973). Comparing individual digital vs. glass, agree-
ment for pathologist A was 0.74 (2004) and 0.70 (1973), pathol-
ogist B 0.82 (2004) and 0.77 (1973), and pathologist C 0.53
(2004) and 0.77 (1973). Consensus grade digital vs. glass agree-
ment was 0.78 (2004) and 0.82 (1973).
Conclusion: Moderate agreement was demonstrated between pathol-
ogists for bladder cancer grading. Agreement for individual patholo-
gists between modalities was actually superior overall than agree-
ment amongst pathologists on glass. These results suggest that grad-
ing bladder tumours on digital systems is non-inferior to glass.
Virchows Arch
PS-18-018
Testicular cancer in Polish men in NHS Lothian: a collaboration
between histopathology and public health medicine aiming to im-
prove migrant health
J. Connelly*, C. Lenouvel, K. Bielecki, K. Pollock, A. Law, D. Gorman,
M. O'Donnell
*University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Poland has a similar incidence of testicular
cancer to the UK but higher mortality. In our practice, we observed cases
of testicular cancer in Polish men with a poor outcome.
Methods: This study aimed to retrospectively identify differences in the
clinico-pathological features of testicular cancer in Polish men compared
to non-Polish controls in Lothian, over a ten-year period.
15 Polish cases and 32 non-Polish controls were identified from a total
sample of approximately 260 patients in ten years. We collected clinico-
pathological data from our electronic laboratory management and health
record systems.
Results: We found no difference in the distribution of seminoma
versus non-seminomatous germ cell tumours between the Polish
and non-Polish cohorts. However, a different spectrum of NSGCT
(possibly enriched for embryonal carcinoma) was seen in the
Polish group. We observed a non-significant decrease in pT1 stage
(40.0 vs 50.0%), increase in pT3 stage (20.0 v 9.4%), and increase
in nodal (26.7 v 9.4%) and visceral (13.3 v 3.1%) metastases in
the Polish cohort compared with the control cohort. We found the
mortality rate in the case cohort to be higher than both the mor-
tality rate in the control cohort and the overall ten-year mortality
in our centre.
Conclusion: Although the findings described are not statistically
significant, they are suggestive of poorer outcomes in Polish
men with testicular cancer in our region. We recommend that this
study is replicated in other centres with large Polish migrant pop-
ulations.
PS-18-019
MMP-13 and E-cadherin expression in prostate proliferation
C. Constantinescu*, I. Tudor, V. Nica, M. Craescu, R. Tanasa, O. Stefan,
C. Luca, G. Grigore, L. Nichita, L. Sticlaru, V. Cauni, A. Vilaia,
S.A. Zurac
*Colentina Clinical Hospital, Pathology Department, Romania
Background & objectives: Studies show that E-cadherin and MMP-13
plasma concentration can be used to predict prognosis and out-
come in prostate cancer. The aim of this study is to identify a
possible correlation between MMP-13 and E-cadherin tissue ex-
pression in prostate proliferation.
Methods: Our study included 45 consecutive patients with ADKP and 45
BPH cases diagnosed on TURP specimens. We generated multi-tissue
blocks including representative samples from each case. E-Cadherin and
MMP13 stains were performed. The results were also correlated with
Gleason score in ADKP.
Results: E-cadherin expression was intensely, continuous membra-
nous, positive in HBP cases, and focal, incomplete or absent in
carcinoma. There was no significant difference between MMP-13
stromal expression in ADKP and BPH cases. Gleason score nega-
tively correlates with E-cadherin expression but not with MMP-13
stromal expression.
Conclusion: E-cadherin could be useful in diagnosis and prognosis in
prostate cancer but the impact of MMP13 upon prognostic data remains
questionable.
Funding: Work partially supported by a Romanian-Ministry-of-
Research-and-Innovation grant no.61PCCDI/2018PN-III-P1-1.2-
PCCDI-2017-0341.
PS-18-020
Possible implication of HER2 amplification in progression of
urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder
M. Dinca*, D. Costache, A.-.M. Vrancianu, L. Nichita
*Pathology Department, Colentina University Clinical Hospital,
Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: The role of HER-2 in oncogenesis of
many malignancies has been well described and drugs targeting
HER-2 are currently approved in some cancers. The aim of this
study is to evaluate the immunohistochemical expression of HER-
2 in bladder urothelial carcinoma.
Methods: Multi-tissue blocks were made from 84 urothelial blad-
der cancer samples and 12 non-neoplastic bladder samples, re-
moved during transurethral resection. Immunohistochemistry was
performed on coresponding slides and the expression of HER-2
was evaluated considering the intensity of expression and the per-
centage of positive cells. The results were correlated with tumour
grade in relation to non-neoplastic urothelium.
Results: Our findings demonstrate that HER-2 expression is statis-
tically significantly higher in patients with urothelial carcinoma of
the urinary bladder than in patients without neoplastic lesions. It is
also higher in invasive, high-grade tumours in comparison with
non-invasive, low-grade tumours.
Conclusion: Higher HER-2 expression in high grade, invasive bladder
carcinoma, compared to low grade, non-invasive tumours and to non-
tumoral urothelium may suggest an implication of HER-2 amplification
in tumour progression. Further studies are needed to determine its role in
the pathogenesis and to formulate a targeted therapy strategy in patients
with urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder.
PS-18-021
PD-L1 expression in penile squamous cell carcinoma: correlation
and concordance between two commercially available antibodies
J. Domínguez de Dios*, R. Morellón-Baquera, M. Álvarez Sarria, P. San
Miguel Fraile, Á. Salgado-Barreira, Á.M. Castro-Iglesias, E. López-Díez,
C. Gómez de María, T. García-Caballero, J.A. Ortiz-Rey
*Servicio Galego de Saúde (SERGAS), Spain
Background & objectives: The need for new therapeutic options in
penile squamous cell carcinoma (PSCC) has led to investigate the immu-
nohistochemical expression of the programmed cell death ligand-1(PD-
L1). We have evaluated the correlation and concordance between the two
more used available assays.
Methods: Whole-slide sections from 23 PSCC (8 HPV related and 15
non-HPV related) were immunostained for PD-L1 using Ventana SP263
and Agilent 22C3 assays. PD-L1 expression was assessed estimating the
percentage of positive tumour cells (TCs) of the total number of TCs. To
evaluate correlation and concordance, Spearman coefficient and kappa
indexes were calculated.
Results: Expression of PD-L1 was 0-80% with SP263 and 0-60% with
22C3 assays. In 14 cases (60.8%) the staining was less extense with the
22C3 assay. Staining was always heterogeneous in each tumour. Positive
cases for different cutoff points comparing SP263/22C3 were: for cut-
off=1%, 15 (65.2%) / 9 (39.1%); and for cutoff=5%, 13 (56.5%) / 8
(34.7%). The two antibodies exhibited strong correlation (r=0.851;
p<0.001) mainly in high-percentage-positive cases, but moderate concor-
dance (k=0.511; p=0.005) in low-percentage-positive and the negative
cases. This fact emphasizes the importance of standardization as well as
the need to choose carefully the most clinically useful cutoff and assay to
evaluate PD-L1.
Conclusion: Expression of PD-L1 in TCs of PSCC is heterogeneous and
varies depending on the assay (from 34.7 to 65.2 %). The Ventana SP263
and Agilent 22C3 assays have showed strong correlation mainly in high-
Virchows Arch
percentage-positive cases, but moderate concordance in low-percentage-
positive and the negative cases. It is highly relevant the need of optimal
assays with best standardization and choice of a useful cutoff.
PS-18-022
PD-1 and PD-L1 expression in neuroendocrine carcinomas of
bladder
S. Erdogan*, A. Acikalin, E. Kilic Bagir, M. İnceman
*Cukurova University, Medical Faculty, Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Neuroendocrine carcinomas of bladder are
rare and aggressive tumours. We aimed to search the relationship between
PD1 and PDL1 expression and clinicopathologic features.
Methods: Fifteen cases diagnosed between 2009 and 2018 in our insti-
tute were selected. Immunohistochemically PD1 and PDL1 were per-
formed to formalline fixed paraffine embedded tissues. The results were
compared with clinicopathologic data.
Results: Male/female ratio was 13/2. Mean age was 61.9 (31-79).
Histopathologically; seven cases were mixed (urothelial + small cell)
carcinoma, six cases pure small cell carcinoma, one large cell neuroen-
docrine carcinoma, one mixed urachal (mucinous + neuroendocrine) car-
cinoma. Mean survival was 17.6 (1-60) months. PDL-1 positivity in
tumour cells was present in five cases and, in tumour infiltrating lympho-
cytes in three cases. PD1 positivity was present in tumour infiltrating
lymphocytes in seven cases
Conclusion: PD1 and PDL1 positivity in these aggressive tumours may
be a good alternative treatment choice in terms of immunotherapy.
PS-18-023
Eosinophilic solid and cystic renal cell carcinoma – an emerging
entity
J. Fortune*, V. Lynch
*Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Eosinophilic solid and cystic renal cell
carcinoma (ESC RCC) is a rare and emerging subtype of renal cell
carcinoma. This tumour is known to occur in association with
tuberous sclerosis complex but has recently been described in the
sporadic setting.
Methods: We present two patients diagnosed with ESC RCC in the
Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, in 2018 and 2019.
Results: The patients are both female, aged 58 and 30 years, and found to
have small incidental renal tumours. Gross examination showed a solid
tan tumour in one specimen and a solid and cystic tan tumour in the other.
Microscopic examination demonstrated the characteristic cytological ap-
pearance of neoplastic cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and
basophilic stippling, solid and acinar architecture, macro- and microcysts
and multinucleate cells. On immunohistochemistry, the tumour cells were
positive with PAX-8 and negative with CD117. One tumour had a
CK20+/CK7- immunophenotype, whilst the other was CK20+/CK7+, a
less common finding. Both patients remain well with no recurrence or
metastasis at 13- and 14-months follow-up.
Conclusion: ESC RCC is an important consideration in the differential
diagnosis of eosinophilic renal tumours as these cases have been labelled
as ‘unclassified renal cell carcinoma’ or ‘unclassified renal neoplasm with
oncocytic or eosinophilic morphology’ in the past.
PS-18-025
Hypertension and risk of cancer histotypes in the kidney and urinary
tract in UK women
K. Gaitskell*, S. Floud, B.J. Cairns, K. Pirie, I. Barnes, J. Green, V. Beral,
G.K. Reeves
*Cancer Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Hypertension has been associated with in-
creased risk of kidney cancer; evidence for cancers elsewhere in the
urinary tract is mixed. We examined associations between hypertension
and cancer incidence in the kidney and urinary tract in a cohort of UK
women.
Methods: At recruitment in 1996-2001, participants completed a ques-
tionnaire on lifestyle and health factors, including hypertension requiring
treatment. They were followed for cancer and death via record linkage to
national registries. We used Cox regression models to estimate relative
risks (RRs) of cancers of the kidney and urinary tract, associated with
self-reported hypertension requiring treatment at recruitment, adjusted for
potential confounders.
Results: In 1,319,718 women without previous cancer, 211,663 (16%)
reported at recruitment that they were currently being treated for hyper-
tension. After 16.9 years’ (SD 4.6) mean follow-up, 5391 kidney cancers,
including 4248 renal cell carcinomas and 442 urothelial carcinomas, ac-
crued. Hypertension requiring treatment at recruitment was associated
with a significantly greater increase in the risk of renal cell carcinomas
(RR=1.69, 95% CI: 1.57-1.82) than urothelial carcinomas of the kidney
(RR=1.27, 95% CI: 1.00-1.62); heterogeneity by histotype, p=0.02.
There were no clear associations between hypertension at recruitment
and the risk of urothelial carcinomas elsewhere in the urinary tract (ureter:
n=249, RR=0.82, 95% CI: 0.57-1.17; bladder: n=2929, RR=1.00, 95%
CI: 0.91-1.11).
Conclusion: Hypertension is strongly associated with an increased
risk of kidney cancer, with significant heterogeneity by histotype.
The risk of renal cell carcinoma is substantially increased in those
with a history of hypertension, but there is little or no association
with urothelial carcinomas, either in the kidney or the rest of the
urinary tract. These differences by histotype can help inform on-
going debates as to possible underlying biological mechanisms.
Funding: Million Women Study: funded by Cancer Research UK
(C570/A16491), Medical Research Council (MR/K02700X/1).
KG: supported by a National Institute for Health Research
Clinical Lectureship (CL-2017-13-001).
PS-18-026
PD-L1 as a potential biomarker in high grade non muscle invasive
bladder cancer
M. Gándara Cortés*, Á.M. Castro-Iglesias, C. Gómez de María,
J.R. Antúnez, T. García-Caballero, E. López Díez, J.A. Ortiz Rey,
M.P. San Miguel Fraile
*Department of Pathology, University Clinical Hospital of Santiago de
Compostela, Spain, Department of Morphological Sciences, School of
Medicine, University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain
Background & objectives: PD-L1 is an important immune checkpoint
involved in different tumours, including advanced bladder cancer. There
are few studies evaluating the expression of PD-L1 in stage Ta and T1
urothelial carcinomas, that constitute a heterogeneous group with differ-
ent risk of progression.
Methods: Immunohistochemistry was performed on tissue arrays
sections corresponding to 129 patients with Ta and T1 high grade
urothelial carcinomas. A qualitative immunohistochemical assay
anti-PD-L1 clone SP142 (Ventana) was used. PD-L1 status was
determined by the proportion of tumour area occupied by PD-L1
expressing tumour-infiltrating immune cells (positivity: >/=5% of
any intensity).
Results: 41 (31,8%) cases were categorized as negative 0 (no expression
of PD-L1), 15 cases (11,6%) as negative <1% (minimal expression), 45
cases (34,9%) as negative 1-5% (low expression) and 26 cases (20,2%)
were positive >5% (intermediate-high expression). In 19 cases (14,7%)
membrane staining was found in tumour cells that has not been consid-
ered as positivity. Finally two cases (1,6%) were not classifiable for loss
of the tissue.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Positivity for PD-L1 (SP142) was found in 20% of Ta and
T1 high grade urothelial carcinomas. Aditional studies could be desirable
to correlate this result with bladder cancer molecular classification (basal
and luminal types, that have a different behaviour), and in future to ana-
lyse if these patients could benefit from immunotherapy.
PS-18-027
Prostatic cancer cytokeratin 19 expression across Gleason patterns
and its implications for sentinel lymph node examination using
RT-PCR
P. González-Peramato*, A. López-Janeiro, E. Garcia Fernandez
*La Paz University Hospital, Pathology Department, Spain
Background & objectives: Since breast sentinel lymph node examina-
tion using Cytokeratin19 (CK19) mRNA detection gained approval, there
are ongoing efforts to translate this success to other scenarios, including
prostate cancer. We evaluated the protein expression of CK19 in prostate
cancer.
Methods: We retrieved 22 consecutive prostate biopsies and prostatec-
tomy specimen as well as a single macrometastatic lymph node from our
hospital archives. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to evaluate
CK19 expression across different Gleason patterns and normal prostatic
glands. Percentage of positive cells as well as stain intensity was record-
ed. If present, CK19 expression in the intraductal component was also
assessed.
Results: There was high heterogeneity of CK19 expression across biop-
sies and intra-biopsy. Overall CK19 expression ranged from 0 to 100%
across samples (Median = 60%, IQR 5%-95%). All Gleason patterns
analysed showed great variability in the percentage of cells stained.
IQR were 10-100% for Gleason 3, 3-98% for Gleason 4-ill-defined
glands, 5-80% for Gleason 4-cribriform pattern and 25-100% for
Gleason 5. Of note, only 5% of the neoplastic cells in the lymph node
metastasis included in this study showed positivity for CK19 IHC while
previous prostate core biopsy showed 95% positivity for CK19.
Conclusion: CK19 expression is highly heterogeneous in prostate cancer
and in all Gleason patterns. This heterogeneity makes CK19 evaluation in
prostate cancer challenging and implies potential limitations for the ap-
plication of CK19 mRNA based detection of metastasis in prostate lymph
nodes.
PS-18-028
The protein arginine methyltransferases PRMT1 and PRMT4/
CARM1 are implicated in the pathogenesis and progression of pros-
tate cancer
I.M. Grypari*, S. Logotheti, V. Bravou, V. Zolota, M. Melachrinou,
V. Tzelepi
*Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Patras,
Greece
Background & objectives: Arginine methylation is a post-
transcriptional protein modification mediated by Protein Arginine
Methyltransferases (PRMTs), involved in many cellular functions includ-
ing epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and transcriptional regula-
tion. However, little is known about their expression during the progres-
sion of prostate cancer (PCa).
Methods: The immunohistochemical expression of PRMT1 and
PRTMT4/CARM1 was examined in tissue microarrays constructed from
276 prostatectomy specimens of patients with PCa (44 low-grade, 119
high-grade, 63 hormonally treated, 40 castrate-resistant and 10 neuroen-
docrine carcinomas and 61 lymph node metastasis and 78 non neoplastic
peripheral zone tissue samples). In addition, their expression was corre-
lated with the EMT markers, ZEB1 and TWIST.
Results: Both markers were mainly expressed in the nucleus.
Cytoplasmic staining was also seen in some cases and was separately
evaluated. Nuclear expression of PRMT1 and PRMT4/CARM1 was
higher in carcinomas compared to non-neoplastic peripheral zone tissue
(p<0.001 and p=0.001, respectively). Nuclear expression of PRTMT4/
CARM1 gradually increased from low grade to high grade (p<0.001) and
treated (p=0.022) carcinomas and was higher in lymph node metastasis
than in primary carcinomas (p<0.001). Cytoplasmic and nuclear PRMT4/
CARM1 were strongly correlated with each other (p<0.001, r=0.504).
Nuclear PRMT1 expression was positively correlated with ZEB1 expres-
sion (p<0.001, r=0.478).
Conclusion: PRMT1 and PRTMT4/CARM1 may be implicated in the
initiation of PCa. In addition, CARM1 is gradually increased in the early
stages of prostate cancer progression, as a response to androgen ablation
and during the development of lymph node metastasis. The correlation of
PRMT1 with the EMT marker ZEB1 is of interest and needs further study.
Funding: This research was supported by a grant (56570000) from the
Research Committee of the University of Patras via “K. Karatheodori”
program.
PS-18-029
Clinical and prognostic evaluation of the histopathological charac-
teristics of adenocarcinoma of the prostate in radical prostatectomy
specimens according to WHO 2016 classification
E. Gun*, I. Ocal
*Izmir Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Although prostate adenocarcinoma is the
most common cancer in men,survival is quite high. With the help of
histopathological examination,patient management strategies are
developing.We aimed to evaluate the correlation between the histopath-
ological and prognostic features in patients who underwent radical
prostatectomy.
Methods: A total of 285 prostate adenocarcinoma cases that underwent
radical prostatectomy between January 2009 and December 2017 and
followed up for at least 3 months postoperatively in our institution were
included in the study.The cases were re-evaluated according to WHO-
ISUP 2016 classification and postoperative PSA values,clinical and prog-
nostic findings of the patients were recorded and statistically analysed
using SPSS program.
Results: The mean age was 63,4 years. Gleason scores of the cases were
as follows: 3+3 144 cases (50,5%), 3+4 81 cases (28,4%), 4+3 28 cases
(9,8%), 4+4 7 cases (2,5%), 3+5 6 cases (2,1%), 5+3 2 cases (0,7%) and
4+5 17 cases (6%). There were 198 (69,5%) pT2, 54 (18,9%) pT3a and
33 (11,6%) pT3b cases. The mean follow-up time was 44,1 months and
biochemical recurrence was detected in 97 cases (34%).There was a sig-
nificant correlation between preoperative PSA value, extraprostatic ex-
tension, seminal vesicle invasion, surgical margin positivity, tumour vol-
ume, pattern 4 percentage, presence of cribriform glands and biochemical
recurrence and recurrence free survival in both univariate and multivariate
analysis.
Conclusion: Histopathological evaluation is of great importance in
predicting biochemical recurrence in prostate adenocarcinoma cases.
The Group Grade system seems to be helpful in this regard. More studies
should be done to prove the relatively worse prognostic effect of cribri-
form glands.
PS-18-030
Solid field and comedonecrosis Gleason 5 growth patterns have in-
dependent predictive value for post-operative metastasis-free surviv-
al in prostate cancer patients
T. Hansum*, E. Hollemans, E. Verhoef, C. Bangma, J. Rietbergen,
S. Osanto, R. Pelger, T. van Wezel, H. van der Poel, E. Bekers, J.
Helleman, M. Roobol, G. van Leenders
*Erasmus Medical Center, The Netherlands
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Cribriform Gleason pattern 4 prostate cancer
is associated with adverse outcome. Our objective was to analyse the
occurrence and predictive value of Gleason 5 growth patterns (G5) in a
radical prostatectomy (RP) cohort.
Methods: We reviewed 1,064 consecutive RPs and recorded Grade
Group (GG), pT-stage, surgical margin status, Gleason 4 and 5 growth
patterns. Single cells, strands and/or cords were analysed together as
cords. The clinical endpoint was post-operative distant metastasis.
Results: G5 was present in 339 (32%) RPs, as primary (14%), secondary
(49%) or tertiary (37%) pattern. Cords were present in 319 (94%) tu-
mours, solid fields in 61 (18%) and comedonecrosis in 32 (9%).
Cribriform architecture was present in 568 (53%) tumours and observed
in 179/274 (65%) men with cords and 61/61 (100%) men with solid fields
(P<0.001). Metastasis occurred more frequently in GG2-5 patients with
cribriform and/or solid fields (23%) than in patients with neither (2%,
P<0.001). In multivariable analysis, cribriform (HR7.2; 95%CI2.9-18,
P<0.001), solid fields (HR1.8; 95%CI1.1-3.1, P=0.03) and
comedonecrosis (HR1.9, 95%CI1.1-3.3, P=0.03) were independent pre-
dictors for metastasis-free survival in GG2-5 patients, while cords were
not (HR1.2; 95%CI0.7-1.8, P=0.55).
Conclusion: In conclusion, solid fields and comedonecrosis are more
aggressive growth patterns than single cells, strands and/or cords
Gleason pattern 5 prostate cancer, as they have independent predictive
value for metastasis-free survival.
This research was supported by a grant from the Jaap Schouten
Foundation.
PS-18-031
Cribriform architecture outperforms individual Gleason scores in
predicting outcome of grade group 4 prostate cancer patients
E. Hollemans*, E. Verhoef, C. Bangma, J. Rietbergen, S. Osanto,
R. Pelger, T. van Wezel, H. van der Poel, E. Bekers, J. Helleman,
M. Roobol, G. van Leenders
*Erasmus Medical Center, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: The Grade Groups (GG) are one of the most
important parameters for prostate cancer outcome. GG4 includes Gleason
score (GS) 3+5, 4+4 and 5+3 tumours. Our aim was to investigate the
clinicopathological characteristics of individual GS and cribriform
architecture.
Methods: We reviewed 1,064 consecutive radical prostatectomy speci-
mens for GG, GS, pT-stage, surgical margin status, and Gleason 4 and 5
growth patterns. We identified 140 GG4 prostate cancer patients for anal-
ysis. Biochemical recurrence, post-operative distant metastasis and
disease-specific death were used as endpoints.
Results: GS3+5 (n=76;54%), 4+4 (n=46;33%) and 5+3
(n=18;13%) tumours had comparable pathological features, al-
though patients with GS5+3 presented with higher PSA levels
(P=0.05). Biochemical recurrence, metastasis and disease-specific
death were not significantly different for GS3+5 and 5+3 tumours.
Biochemical recurrence (63% versus 41%, P=0.02), metastasis
(39% versus 18%, P=0.02), and disease-specific death (15% ver-
sus 5%, P=0.06) occurred more often in GS4+4 than 3+5 patients.
Cribriform architecture was present in 87 (62%) tumours and as-
sociated with higher pT-stage (P=0.003). Cribriform architecture
was an independent predictive parameter for biochemical
recurrence- (HR2.0; 95%CI1.0-3.9, P=0.04) and metastasis-free
survival (HR3.5; 95%CI1.0-12.0, P=0.05), whereas different GS
were not. No deaths were reported in patients without cribriform
architecture.
Conclusion: Cribriform architecture had independent predictive value for
biochemical recurrence- and metastasis-free survival in GG4 prostate
cancer patients, while individual GS did not.
This research was supported by a grant from the Jaap Schouten
Foundation.
PS-18-032
ERG expression in HGPIN is a marker of coexisting adenocarcinoma
- a pilot study in totally embedded cystoprostatectomy specimens
N. Juanpere Rodero*, A. Martínez, M. Lorenzo, L. Segalés,
S. Hernández, L. Fumadó, L. Cecchini, G. Parini, B. Lloveras,
J. Lloreta-Trull
*Department of Pathology, Hospital del Mar-Parc de Salut Mar,
Barcelona, Spain
Background & objectives: The prevalence of ERG rearrangement in high
grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) without PCa is unknown.
We aimed to assess the status of ERG in HGPIN with and without concurrent
PCa in radical cystoprostatectomies (RCP) with fully analysed prostates.
Methods: A preliminary series of 31 fully embedded prostates from RCP
were included (Parc de Salut Mar-Biobank). All selected cases had HGPIN
foci. Cases with prostatic infiltration by bladder carcinoma were excluded.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for ERG was performed in HGPIN and PCa
foci, and maps of these lesions with their respective ERG status were drawn.
Results: There were 16 cases of isolated HGPIN foci (Group 1, G1), and
15 cases with both HGPIN and prostatic adenocarcinoma (Group 2, G2).
ERG-positive HGPIN was observed in only 1 of 16 cases (6.25%) in G1. In
G2, 8 of 15 PCa (53.3%) were ERG-positive of which 3 cases (37.5%), had
ERG-positive HGPIN (p=0.27). The global prevalence of ERG expression
was 12.9% for HGPIN (4/31) and 53.3% for PCa (8/15) (p=0.02).
Conclusion: ERG overexpression in HGPIN is associated to ERG+ PCa,
with a lower prevalence of ERG+ in isolated PIN. This could indicate that
the acquisition of the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion by HGPIN is a crucial step
towards the development of PCa. ERG IHC of HGPIN foci should be
performed in needle biopsies without PCa, as most of the ERG+ HGPIN
cases seem to be associated to a concomitant PCa.
Funding: ISCIII/FIS-FEDER grant PI15/00452
PS-18-033
CK14 expression identifies a basal/squamous-like type of papillary
non-muscle-invasive upper tract urothelial carcinoma
M. Jung*, I. Jang, K. Kim, K.C. Moon
*Seoul National University Hospital, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: CK14 is an important marker of basal/
squamous-like (BASQ)-type muscle-invasive bladder carcinoma.
However, CK14 expression and its significance in non-muscle-invasive
upper tract urothelial carcinoma (NMIUTUC) remain unknown. We in-
vestigated the prognostic and transcriptional characteristics associated
with CK14 expression in papillary NMIUTUC.
Methods: Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for CK14 was conduct-
ed in 204 papillary NMIUTUC specimens. CK14 positivity was defined
as a positive signal in >0% of tumour cells. RNA sequencing data were
analysed from 8 papillary high-grade NMIUTUC fresh-frozen specimens
consisting of 4 CK14-positive and 4 CK14-negative tumours.
Results: CK14 positivity was significantly associated with poor
progression-free survival (p = 0.015). Gene set enrichment analysis dem-
onstrated that the CK14-positive tumours had characteristics reminiscent
of the BASQ subtype. In addition, differentially expressed genes between
CK14-positive and CK14-negative tumours enriched in positive regula-
tion of cellular proliferation in CK14-positive tumours. Consistent with
this, the mean Ki-67 proliferative index was higher in CK14-positive
tumours than it was in CK14-negative tumours (p = 0.002).
Conclusion: CK14-positive papillary NMIUTUC is an aggressive sub-
type with BASQ-like molecular characteristics and dynamic proliferative
activity. We propose that CK14 IHC staining can be a useful biomarker of
BASQ-type papillary NMIUTUC that can be applied in daily practice
with the aim of precision oncology.
This was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry
of Education (grant number 2018R1D1A1B07045763).
Virchows Arch
PS-18-034
Morphological characteristics and immunophenotype of renal cell
carcinomas with light cytoplasm
E. Kogan*, Y. Osmanov, G. Demyashkin
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: The heterogeneity of renal cell carcinomas
with a light cytoplasm creates certain difficulties in the correct morpho-
logical verification of these neoplasms. Objective: to study the morpho-
logical and immunophenotypic features of rare variants of renal cell car-
cinoma with light cytoplasm.
Methods: The study was performed on surgical material obtained from
264 patients with a kidney tumour. Immunohistochemical studies were
performed on paraffin sections according to a standard protocol using a
wide panel of antibodies against 36 molecular markers.
Results: Based on morphological analysis and immunohistochemical
studies, the tumours were divided into 4 groups: cystic kidney tumours
with low nuclear gradation (n = 65; 25%); kidney tumours of a solid and /
or tubular and papillary structure with low nuclear gradation (n = 98;
37%); kidney tumours with high nuclear gradation (n = 94; 36%); and
polyphase renal cell carcinomas (n = 7; 2.7%).
Conclusion: The results obtained suggest that among the morphological
forms of clear cell renal cell carcinoma there is a direct relationship be-
tween the degree of nuclear gradation and the histological picture of the
tumour.
PS-18-035
The relationship between PD-1 and COL6A1 expressions and prog-
nosis in renal cell carcinoma
Y.Y. Karabulut, E. Köse*, M. Bozlu, F. Tuncel, G.E. Yüksek, D. Etit,
H.S. Toru, B. Akkaya, Z.E. Çelik, M. Öznur, G.O. Temel
*Mersin University Research Hospital, Turkey
Background & objectives: Programmed cell death receptor-1 (PD-1)
and Collagen 6 alpha-1 polypeptide subunit (COL6A1) have prognostic
significance in clear-cell renal cell carcinoma. In this study, we evaluated
the expression of COL6A1 and PD-1 in 4 different renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) subtypes.
Methods: A total of 161 RCC cases from five different centres were
included in this study. Clinical data of the cases were taken from elec-
tronic records of the institutions. Paraffin blocks of cases were re-
evaluated by an expert uropathologist. The correlation of COL6A1 and
PD-1 expression with sex, age, tumour type, lymphovascular invasion,
WHO/ISUP grade and tumour stage (pT) was analysed.
Results: In this study, COL6A1 and PD-1 immunohistochemical staining
intensities did not have statistically significant correlations with any of
these parameters. When COL6A1 and PD-1 expressions were examined
on a case-by-case basis, no statistically significant relationship was found
between COL6A1 and PD-1 expressions (p> 0.05).
Conclusion: In high-grade renal cell carcinomas, COL6A1 and PD-1
were not associated with other prognostic parameters included in the
study, but further studies are needed to elucidate a possible relationship
between lymphovascular invasion and COL6A1 immunohistochemical
staining intensity because of slight correlation between these parameters.
PS-18-036
KIF11 as a poor prognostic factor in clear cell renal cell carcinoma
A. Kowalewski*, D. Jaworski, P. Antosik, M. Smolińska, D. Grzanka,
Ł. Szylberg
*Department of Clinical Pathomorphology, Collegium Medicum in
Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, Poland
Background & objectives: Broad resistance to systemic therapies
remains a major challenge in renal cancer-related research. We
investigated associations of KIF11 expression with the clinical
course of clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) using the tissue
microarray (TMA).
Methods: The TMA contained specimens from 88 ccRCC patients,
tumour and matched normal adjacent tissue (1 core/case). To as-
sess KIF11 protein expression levels, we performed immunohisto-
chemical staining. The overall survival (OS) was analysed using
the Kaplan-Meier method and log-rank statistics. We used Cox
proportional hazard models to conduct univariate and multivariate
analyses.
Results: Median follow up for the TMA cohort was 7.0 years.
Mean cytoplasmic expression of KIF11 in tumour tissues was
lower than that in adjacent controls (p<0.05). 49 of 88 ccRCC
tissues (55.7%) presented high KIF11 cytoplasmic expression.
Mean OS of patients with high KIF11 expression was 61.6 months
vs 65.5 months in those with low KIF11 expression (p<0.05).
KIF11 expression positively correlated with tumour grade
(p<0.05). We found no association between KIF11 expression
and stage of the disease.
Conclusion: Elevated KIF11 protein expression served as an indepen-
dent unfavorable prognostic indicator of survival in ccRCC. This
observation, together with the emerging reports, suggest that
KIF11 in kidney cancer may contribute to development of the
resistance to systemic therapies.
This study was supported by grant POWR.03.02.00-00-I019/16 from The
National Centre for Research and Development.
PS-18-041
Testicular germ cell tumours: p53/MDM2 expression and association
with patient outcome
J. Lobo*, M.A. Alzamora, R. Guimarães, M. Cantante, P. Lopes,
I. Braga, J. Maurício, C. Jerónimo, R. Henrique
*Portuguese Institute of Oncology - Porto, Department of Pathology,
Portugal
Background & objectives: p53-MDM2 axis is reported to have a role in
the pathobiology of testicular germ cell tumours (TGCTs). However,
protein expression of these players has been scarcely explored. We aim
to characterize their immunoexpression patterns in a large cohort of
TGCTs,
Methods: We performed immunohistochemistry for p53 and
MDM2; in order to improve the consistency and reproducibility
of our findings, p53 and MDM2 immunoexpression was evaluated
using a digital image analysis system (GenASIs™, Israel), which
semi-automatically quantified nuclear immunostaining. The H-
score for each sample was calculated, corresponding to the sum
of the products of each immunostaining score by its proportion.
Results: 230 TGCT chemo-naive primary tumour components were
included, together with 12 cisplatin-resistant metastases. There
was a significant positive correlation between p53/MDM2
(r=0.590,p<0.0001). Non-seminomas showed significantly higher
expression of both p53/MDM2 (p=0.0002,p<0.0001), especially
embryonal carcinoma/choriocarcinoma. MDM2 was significantly
overexpressed in chemo-treated metastases compared to chemo-
naïve primary tumours (p<0.0001). Higher MDM2 expression as-
sociated with higher stage and IGCCCG prognosis group and as-
sociated with a tendency for poorer relapse-free survival
(p=0.057).
Conclusion: These data reinforce the suggestion of MDM2 in the
acquisition of a more aggressive phenotype, with tendency for
recurrence and for becoming resistant to cisplatin. p53-MDM2
interaction inhibitors and MDM2 antagonists may be particularly
useful in TGCTs.
Funding: Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia (PTDC/MECONC/
29043/2017 and SFRH/BD/132751/2017).
Virchows Arch
PS-18-042
Investigation of biomarkers predictive of relapse in stage I testicular
germ cell tumour patients on surveillance
J. Lobo*, A. JM Gillis, A. van den Berg, L. HJ Looijenga
*Portuguese Institute of Oncology - Porto, Department of Pathology,
Portugal
Background & objectives: Better biomarkers for assessing risk of re-
lapse in stage I testicular germ cell tumour patients are urgently needed,
which can complement classical histopathological variables, such as vas-
cular invasion. We aimed to assess the prognostic value of previously
suggested biomarkers, related both to proliferation (MIB-1 and TEX19)
and to the immune microenvironment (CXCL12, CXCR4, beta-catenin
and MECA-79), in a true surveillance cohort of stage I testicular germ cell
tumour patients.
Methods: A total of 70 tumour samples (42 non-seminomas and 28
seminomas) were included in the study. Immunohistochemistry for the
above-mentioned markers was performed. Impact on relapse-free surviv-
al (RFS) was assessed, including multivariable analyses.
Results: Patients with no vascular invasion but with >50%MIB-1 stain-
ing showed significantly shorter RFS (p=0.042). TEX19 nuclear
immunoexpression was confirmed in spermatogonial cells, but not in
tumours. Non-seminoma patients exhibiting vascular invasion and
CXCL12-positive stromal/inflammatory cells showed significantly im-
proved RFS (p=0.015). Exclusively nuclear immunoexpression of
CXCR4 associated with better RFS (p=0.032), lost after adjusting for
vascular invasion. Higher beta-catenin score-patients showed a tendency
for poorer RFS (p=0.056). MECA-79 immunoexpression was absent.
Conclusion: The informative protein biomarkers (i.e., MIB-1, CXCL12,
beta-catenin, and possibly CXCR4) may prove useful for risk-stratifying
patients if validated in larger, multicentric and well-defined studies.
Currently, classical histopathological features of testicular germ cell tu-
mours remain key for relapse prediction.
Funding: JL is supported by FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia
(POCI-01-0145-FEDER-29043 and SFRH/BD/132751/2017).
PS-18-043
Infertility testicular biopsy. Review from 2004 to 2019 in our
institution
S. Marcos González*, I. Hernández Alconchel, M.Á. Correas Gómez,
M.T. Gómez López, M.P. García Arranz, A. Azueta Etxebarria
*HUMV/IDIVAL, Spain
Background & objectives: The male factor as a cause of infertility can
account for 50% of reproduction consultations. From the therapeutic
point of view, it is important to distinguish whether an azoospermia or
oligospermia is obstructive or secretory.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective descriptive study of men who
attend infertility consultations, with testicular surgical biopsy, over a pe-
riod of 16 years (2004-2019) in our institution, with a total of 136 pa-
tients. Those who get sperm in surgery are cryopreserved. We describe
the basic lesion patterns of testicular biopsy received in the pathology
department.
Results: Of the total of 136 patients, 49 samples of testicular pulp are
received in the pathology department, resulting in two of them not valu-
able. The age is between 23 and 48 years, with an average of 33.8 years.
In surgical intervention (n=136)
- Mobile spermatozoa: 77
- Non-mobile spermatozoa: 4
- Non spermatozoa: 55
Histological findings (n=49)
- Obstructive pattern: 7
- Sertoli Cell-Only Syndrome: Madure: 14, Dysgenetic: 9
- Mixed Atrophy: 3
- Maduration Arrest: 8
- Hypospermatogenesis: 4
- Tubular Hyalinization y fibrosis: 2
- Not valuable: 2
Conclusion: The histological examination of the testicular parenchyma is
the fundamental diagnostic method to know in depth what is happening
inside the testicle, and to inform us of the reversibility or progressivity of
the lesions and their causes.
PS-18-044
Fibronectin and galectin- 3 expression in urinary bladder cancer
S. Masic*, Š. Šoipi, M. Vučić, B. Spajić, A. Demirovic, B. Krušlin,
M. Ulamec
*Clinical Department of Pathology and Cytology "Ljudevit Jurak",
University Clinical Hospital Center Sestre Milosrdnice, Zagreb, Croatia
Background & objectives: Urothelial carcinoma comprises most cases
of urinary bladder cancer. The aim of this research was to determine the
expression of fibronectin and galectin-3 in urothelial carcinoma epitheli-
um and stroma and its relation to tumour grade, stage and disease relapse.
Methods: In this study, 110 patients with bladder urothelial carcinoma
were grouped according to tumour grade and stage. Tissue was routinely
stained for HE and immunohistochemistry performed according to man-
ufacturer protocol. Epithelial and stromal fibronectin and galectin- 3 ex-
pression was scored regarding to intensity and percentage of positive
cells.
Results: Positive correlation between fibronectin tumour epithelium ex-
pression and tumour grade (p=0,044), pT stage (p=0,001) and pN stage
(p=0,037) was found. Positive correlation between fibronectin stromal
expression and disease relapse (high grade tumours, Ta/T1) (p=0,03)
was determined. Negative correlation between fibronectin stromal ex-
pression and pT stage was demonstrated (p=0,001). Galectin- 3 in tumour
epithelium positively correlated with pT stage (p=0,046) and disease
relapse (tumour group with lymph node metastasis T2N1/2) (p=0,00).
Conclusion: Fibronectin and galectin-3 are glycoproteins of extracellular
matrix active in cell adhesion, dedifferentiation, profibrotic, proinflam-
matory changes, growth and apoptosis. Epithelial and stromal compo-
nent, as well as changes in extracellular matrix protein expression are
responsible for tumour progression and formation of protumoral micro-
environment. Our research demonstrated that increased expression of
fibronectin and galectin-3 in tumour epithelium and decreased fibronectin
tumour stromal expression is related to aggressive tumour growth, there-
fore these markers are possible candidates to indicate aggressive behav-
iour of this tumour.
PS-18-046
Nephogenic adenoma: clinico-pathological study of 36 cases
M. Mercado*, L. Nova, A. Panizo, M. Zelaya, M. Gomez-Dorronsoro,
C. Cerezo, A. Cordoba
*Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra-Pamplona, Spain
Background & objectives: Nephrogenic adenoma (NA) is an unusual
benign lesion of controversial histogenesis, that can be confused with
malignant primary and metastatic carcinomas.
We report the morphological variants of NA and the role of
inmunohistochemistry in the differential diagnosis
Methods: We studied a retrospective series of 35 patients that were diag-
nosed of NA in our institution between 2013 and 2019. Demographic
characteristics were obtained from clinical records. All the histological
preparations were reviewed. Immunohistochemical analysis of P504S,
PSA, CD10, EMA, GATA 3, PAX8 and p63 was performed on
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded 4-mm sections in all cases.
Results: 86% were male patients. Age range was 40-92 years. Two only
patients had no history of urinary trauma or neoplasia. The most common
symptom was haematuria follow by obstruction.
Virchows Arch
The most common location was urinary bladder (20 patients), urethra (8),
urether, kidney and prostate (2 patients each) and perirenal fat (1).
The most common patter was tubular (51%), mixed (26%), fibromixoid
(11%), papillary (9%) and polypoid (3%). Tubulo-papillary was the most
frequent mixed pattern (23%).11/36 patients had a concomitant lesion
which 17% correspond to urothelial carcinoma
All cases were inmunoreactive for PAX8 and negative for p63. One case
was negative for AMARC (prostatic localization) and four cases were
positive for GATA 3.
Conclusion: NA displays morphological features that often coexist.
Recognition of its characteristic and unusual architectural features is
needed to distinguish this lesion from malignant neoplasms.
According to our results the most reliable IHQ stains for NA differential
diagnosis is PAX 8 and p63 to rule out a urothelial and prostatic
carcinoma.
NA outside the urinary system is quite rare, but when founded is usually
associated to previous surgery (specially renal).
PS-18-047
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome secondary to diffuse intra-
sinusoidal liver metastasis of urothelial carcinomas
M. Mercado*, I. Amat Villegas, R. Beloqui, P. Azcue Sanroman,
R. Guarch, A. Larrea, M. Gomez-Dorronsoro
*Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra-Pamplona, Spain
Background & objectives: Diffuse intra-sinusoidal (DIS) liver metasta-
sis of urothelial carcinomas is exceptional leading to hepatic failure sec-
ondary to sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS).
We report histological and immunhistochemical classification of DIS
metastatic urothelial carcinomas, as PD-L1 status in the primary tumour
Methods: Over a period of 2000-2019, we recorded all cases of metasta-
tic liver urothelial carcinomas in our institution, only four showed DIS
infiltration pattern. Histochemical and immunohistochemical stains with
Masson trichome, reticulin, CK5-6, CK20, P40, P63 and GATA3 were
studied.
PD-L1 (SP 142- Ventana) immunohistochemistry status was studied in
the primary tumour
Results: Four cases were studied (three males) aged ranged was
53-64 years. Histological subtypes were: Three high grade
urothelial carcinomas (one with trophoblastic differentiation and
one micropapillary variant) and one undifferentiated urachal car-
cinoma. All of them presented SOS and three died of fulminant
hepatic failure. All cases showed a luminal immunhistochemical
profile. PD-L1 status was positive in 1 case.
Conclusion: DIS liver metastasis of urothelial carcinomas with second-
ary SOS is exceptional. SOS is related to sinusidal-endothelial damage
that conditions a prothrombotic state that is lethal in 90% of severe cases.
PD-L1 status could represent a new alternative treatment in disseminated
tumours.
PS-18-048
PD-L1 expression in urothelial carcinomas - concordance among 2
commercially available antibodies and correlation with CD8 T lym-
phocyte count
H. Moreira*, R. Almeida, A. Lai, M.B. Pimentão, C. Faria, V. Almeida,
F. Ramalhosa, V. Sousa
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Immunotherapy has transformed the man-
agement of advanced urothelial carcinoma (UC) of the urinary tract.
Programmed death ligand1 (PD-L1) immunohistochemistry serve as a
predictor biomarker of anti-PD-L1/PD1 therapy. Different PD-L1 anti-
body assays have been approved for specific immune checkpoint
blockade.
Methods: We characterized PD- L1 expression in 60 urothelial carcino-
mas using 2 commonly used and commercially available PD-L1 antibod-
ies [clones 22C3(cutoff 10) and SP142(cutoff 5%)]. PD-L1 expression on
tumour cells (TC) and tumour-infiltrating immune cells (IC) were
assessed and tumours were defined as high density with the presence of
≥50 CD8+ intraepithelial lymphocytes per high power field in a given
spot.
Results: Our series was composed of 58 high grade infiltrating UC and 2
squamous cell carcinomas. Cases of high grade G2/G3 infiltrating
urothelial carcinomas showed higher PD-L1 score results for clone
22C3 than SP142 (41.5%>36.6% and 64.7%>58.6%, respectively).
Concordance of both PD-L1 expression status was present in 57/60 cases
(95%). CD8 T-cells density did not correlate with PD-L1 expression.
Urothelial carcinomas of higher grade were more frequently associated
with high density intraepithelial T lymphocytes (G2:24.4% and
G3:47.1%). Squamous cell carcinoma showed expression for both PD-
L1 clones, in one case.
Conclusion: The correct assessment for PD-L1 expression is essential for
immunotherapy decision, improving the outcomes of patients. Higher
grade was associated with higher PD-L1 expression and high density of
intraepithelial T lymphocytes. We observed high concordance between
both PD-L1 clones used.
PS-18-049
Characteristics of metastatic renal cell carcinomas, observed in a
5-year period
B.R. Nataras*, A. Dema
*Department of Pathology, Clinical County Hospital Timisoara,
Romania
Background & objectives: The purpose of this study was to highlight
the metastatic potential of renal cell carcinomas (RCC), investigating the
predilection of those tumours for certain anatomical sites. We also wanted
to evaluate the ratio between primary RCC and metastatic RCC cases.
Methods: From the database of our pathology department, we evaluated
all the cases diagnosed as renal cell carcinomas from 2015 to 2019,
selecting the metastatic RCC tumours.
Results: We included in this study 32 cases of secondary RCC (6 women
and 26 men). The median age at diagnosis was 62.6 years for females, and
63.8 years for males. Anatomical sites involved: brain (40.6 %), bones
(21.8 %), skin (6.25%), periosseous soft tissue (6.25%), distant lymph
nodes - axillary and supraclavicular (6.25%), duodenum, ovary and ad-
renal gland (3.12 % each); a case presented subcutaneous and peritoneal
involvement. Histologic types: clear cell (90.6%) and chromophobe
(3.12%); the histologic type could not be specified in 6.25% of the me-
tastasis. In 46.8 % of the cases, the secondary tumour was diagnosed prior
to the renal neoplasm. The primary RCC/metastatic RCC ratio was 9.4.
Conclusion: The brain was the main organ involved, the overwhelming
majority of the cases being clear cell RCC. An effective screening tool for
RCC is needed to detect renal neoplasms in early stages, for a better
therapeutic management of the patients.
PS-18-050
Immune profiling of prostate cancer using multiplex immunofluores-
cence and gene expression panels
C. Ntala*, J.M. Salmond, A.V. Teodosio, L. Officer, G. Thalmann,
J. Le Quense, H. Leung
*University of Glasgow, Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, United
Kingdom
Background & objectives: Prostate cancer is known for its biological
and clinical heterogeneity. The aim of this study was to investigate the in-
situ phenotype of tumour infiltrating immune cells in order to determine
whether they correlate with metastasis to regional lymph nodes.
Virchows Arch
Methods: We applied multiplex immunofluorescence to characterise the
immune microenvironment of tissue samples obtained from radical pros-
tatectomy. Patients with pathologically confirmed regional lymph node
metastases were matched with patients without nodal metastases. The
identified immune signature of nodal metastasis was validated in a com-
parable independent patient cohort. The functional orientation of immune
cells was explored using a targeted gene expression panel.
Results: Patients with nodal metastasis had significantly decreased stro-
mal effector CD4 cells (p=0.0003). This CD4 immune cell density was a
significant predictor of lymph node spread in multivariate analysis. An
independent cohort of 184 patients was also stained with the same panels
and the CD4 cell density remained a predictor of nodal spread. The
targeted gene expression analysis revealed increased extracellular matrix
components expressed within primary prostate cancers with nodal spread.
Conclusion: Together, these findings suggest differences in the immune
infiltrate (particularly CD4 effector T cells) between prostate cancer patients
with vs without lymph node metastasis. This suggests that prospective clinical
studies could test its value in the diagnostic setting in order to improve patient
stratification for regional lymph node dissection. Also, gene expression anal-
ysis suggested increased extracellular matrix components in tumours with
nodal spread and although this requires further mechanistic exploration it
highlights the potential for stroma-modifying treatments in those patients.
Funding: CRUK
PS-18-051
Histomorphological characteristics and distribution of prostate
carcinoma foci using multiple site-specific labelled core biopsies
O. Ogunbiyi*, D. Mashor, S. Omenai, S. Adebayo
*Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Lagos State
University College of Medicine (LASUCOM), Ikeja, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Evolving prostatic biopsy sampling tech-
niques aimed at improving diagnostic accuracy, prognostication and lo-
calization of prostate cancer assist to dictate treatment options. This study
analysed the Histomorphology, spatial distribution and prognostic impli-
cations of site-specific core biopsies of the prostate gland.
Methods: Double-sextant prostate biopsy cores were microscopically
examined prospectively over an 18-month period representing the medial
and lateral aspects of the left and right apices, mid-gland and bases of the
glands. These were obtained by transrectal ultrasound guidance. H&E-
stained slides were examined for the presence, volume, Gleason score and
ISUP grade-group of cancer. Frequency statistics was utilized to evaluate
the data.
Results: A total of 91 patients aged 48 to 88 years with a median age of
70 years were seen. Entire sextant regions showed cancer in 68.1% of
cases whilst cancer was restricted to one sextant region in 8.8% and to two
regions in 7.7% of cases. The apical, mid-gland and basal regions were
positive for cancer in 35.6%, 33.8%, and 30.6% of the time respectively.
Tumour was restricted to apices and mid-gland in 9.9% of the cases whilst
it was restricted to bases in 2.2% of the cases. ISUP grade group 5 was
most frequently seen with grade group 2 least frequent. Carcinoma vol-
ume was lowest in basally located cancers.
Conclusion: Prostatic carcinomas in this environment have poor prog-
nostic indicators of poor differentiation and high tumour volume and
multifocal occurrence of tumours. Site-specific labelling of biopsies en-
abled determination of spatial distribution of prostate cancers and involv-
ing all sextants ensures clear assessment.
PS-18-052
Prognostic impact of rhabdoid differentiation incorporated in a nov-
el two-tiered grading system for chromophobe renal cell carcinoma
R. Ohashi*, K. Takamura, C. Ohe, H. Kobayashi, P. Schraml, N. Rupp,
N. Kuroda, T. Tsuzuki, Y. Ajioka, H. Moch
*Histopathology Core Facility, Niigata University Faculty of Medicine, Japan
Background & objectives: A histological grading system of chromo-
phobe renal cell carcinoma (chRCC) is highly desirable to identify 5–
10% of tumours at risk for progression. In this study, we evaluated the
prognostic value of rhabdoid differentiation in chRCC.
Methods: Vimentin immunohistochemistry was done to detect rhabdoid
differentiation in chRCC. Log-rank test and Cox proportional-hazard
model for time to progression (TTP) (i.e. cancer-specific death or recur-
rence after surgery) were used for survival analysis. 11 of 142 (7.7%)
Japanese chRCCs exhibited rhabdoid differentiation.
Results: Presence of rhabdoid differentiation was significantly associated
with shorter TTP (P<0.001, log rank test). When rhabdoid differentiation
was incorporated together to previously reported grading scheme, 2-
tiered grading system based on three components including necrosis
and/or sarcomatoid differentiation and/or rhabdoid differentiation were
significantly associated with shorter TTP (P=0.003) and gave stronger
prognostic power than previous system based on two components with
sarcomatoid differentiation and/or necrosis (P=0.005).
Conclusion: These findings support the grading system recommendation
incorporating presence of rhabdoid differentiation. Further validation on
the interobserver variability has to be tested.
Funding:SwissNational ScienceFoundationgrant (No.S-87701-03-01toH.M.).
PS-18-053
Synoptic versus narrative reporting of prostate biopsies at a tertiary
healthcare institution challenges, successes, and expectations
N. Orah*, C. Anunobi
*College of Medicine, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Cancer pathology reports are expected to
contain all information required for patient management and disease sur-
veillance. Moreover, reports for patients with prostate cancer have be-
come increasingly complex with the addition of more pathological de-
tails. This study aimed to compare narrative and synoptic prostate cancer
reports for core needle biopsies received at a tertiary hospital in Nigeria in
order to determine which form was most complete according to interna-
tional standards.
Methods: All malignant prostate cancer histopathology reports received
from 2010 to 2015 were analysed for the presence of important clinico-
pathological parameters, including the numbers of cores taken and those
involved by the tumour, percentage of tumour involvement, Gleason
score and the presence of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasms
(HGPINs) and perineural and lymphovascular invasion.
Results: There were 27 narrative and 56 synoptic reports. The documen-
tation in narrative reports was significantly incomplete compared to syn-
optic reports as follows: number of cores (33.3% versus 96.4%), number
of cores involved by the tumour (11.1% versus 94.6%), percentage of
cores involved by the tumour (3.7% versus 100.0%) and the presence of
HGPINs (7.4% versus 100.0%) and perineural (59.3% versus 98.2%) and
lymphovascular (48.1% versus 100.0%) invasion (P <0.001 each).
Conclusion: Synoptic reports of malignant prostate cancer biopsies re-
ceived at the Lagos University Teaching Hospital were found to contain
more complete information than narrative reports. Highlighting signifi-
cant parameters may contribute to management decisions, thereby im-
proving the quality of patient care.
PS-18-054
Can BCL-2 be a potential prognostic marker for clear cell renal cell
carcinoma?
R.B. Girgin, S. Ozkanli*, T. Soylemez, G. Kir, A. Yildirim
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Renal cell tumours are among the common
tumours in adults. The most common type is clear cell renal cell carcino-
ma. Although the formation mechanism of the tumour is largely resolved,
Virchows Arch
an immunohistochemical marker that determines the prognosis has not
been detected yet
Methods: 84 cases of clear cell renal cell carcinoma diagnosed between
2008-2015 in our institution were re-evaluated by two pathologists who
were blind to outcome. One representative block from of all tumours was
selected to perform Bcl2 immunhistochemistry. The immunoreactivity
was evaluated semi-quantitatively based on the percentage of positively
stained cells (proportion) and also staining intensity.
Results: Our follow-up range was 4-141 months. Statistical analysis re-
vealed that there was an inverse relationship between bcl 2 expression and
clinical course. The decreased levels of bcl2 were statistically related with
metastasis, shorter disease free survival and shorter overall survival on
both univariate and multivariate analysis (univariate analysis p=0.019,
p=0.05, p=0.009 respectively, multivariate analysis OR=2.136, 95%
CI=0.222–0.625, p= 0.012, HR=1.856, 95% CI=0.034–0.725, p=
0.018, OR=1.552, 95% CI=0.703–0.645, p= 0.06) Kaplan-Meier survival
curves revealed statistical significance (p< 0.05) between decreased ex-
pression levels and strong and moderate levels.
Conclusion: The role of apoptotic mechanisms in both programmed cell
death and tumour formation have not been fully elucidated. There may be
compensatory relations that we do not yet know among these complex
chain of events.
However, our study may constitute a base for further research in the field
of prognostic estimation, as bcl-2 expression is statistically significant
with metastasis, recurrence, and overall survival.
PS-18-055
Low-grade oncocytic tumour: retrospective reappraisal of previous
diagnosis
A. Pereira*, F. Galante Pereira, C. A. Padrão, J. Tinoco, A. T. Alves
*Hospital Prof. Doutor Fernando Fonseca, EPE, Portugal
Background & objectives: In 2019, new renal entities were described
that include an oncocytic tumour that is CD117 negative and diffusely
CK7 and e-cadherin positive, with specific morphologic features. Our
aim was to retrieve cases that could fit this new entity.
Methods: We analysed 47 resections and 8 needle core biopsies of renal
cell tumours from January/2018 to January/2020. We excluded 7 biopsies
and 45 resections based on the incompatible morphology or immunohis-
tochemistry required for this diagnosis. Immunohistochemical panel of
CK7, CD117 and e-cadherin was performed, when missing. Clinical
history and outcome was examined, when provided.
Results: In the last 2 years, in our institution, we found 3 oncocytic renal
cell tumours with inconclusive sub-classification that fit the description
for this new entity: Low-grade oncocytic tumour. The 3 selected cases
belonged to men between 69 and 72 years old, were unifocal with sizes
ranging from 15mm to 60mm, grossly well delimited, with yellow and
brown areas. All patients are currently alive and well, one still awaiting
surgery. All cases have round to oval nuclei, low Fuhrman grade (1-2),
solid/tubular growth pattern, diffuse positivity for CK7 and e-cadherin,
and were negative for CD117.
Conclusion: Renal cell oncocytic tumours sometimes show non-specific
morphology and immunophenotype leading to inconclusive sub-
classifications between multiple renal cell tumours with oncocytic change.
This optimization in classification can help reduce diagnostic observer var-
iability and discover potential therapeutic targets or outcome predictors.
PS-18-056
Intraluminal inclusions cause apoptosis in prostate cancer tissue
A. Piddubnyi*, R. Moskalenko, A. Romaniuk
*Sumy State University, Ukraine
Background & objectives: Intraluminal inclusions (IIn) in prostate
cancer (PCa) causes the development of inflammation, tumour
progression and metastasis. However, their effect on apoptosis
remains unstudied.
Objective: To study the influence of intraluminal inclusions on apoptosis
of prostate cancer cells.
Methods: 60 PCa samples (group within 30 samples of PCa with IIn
(prostatic calculi and corpora amylacea) and group of 30 samples without
IIn) were used for study. All samples were examined by hematoxylin-eosin
staining and by immunohistochemistry (p53, Bax and Casp3). All data
were analysed by Shapiro-Wilk test, Mann-Whitney’s U-test and
Student’s t-test.
Results: We have indicated no significant difference in expression of p53
protein between groups. However, the localization of p53-positive cells was
associated with IIn. PCa with IIn had a significant higher expression of Bax
(p<0.001) and Casp3 (p<0.001). It may indicate a stimulation of apoptosis by
IIn. The intensity of immunostaining was also higher in PCa tissue with IIn.
Conclusion: IIn promote cell injury of PCa cells and modification of cell
live cycle. It results in higher level of apoptosis in tumour tissue. This may
indicate a adverse effect of IIn on the course and progression of PCa.
PS-18-057
Correlations between different tumour architecture compounds
assessed through fractal analysis and tumour cells specific features
in prostate adenocarcinoma
I.E. Plesea*, M. Șerbănescu, D.V. Ciovică, A. Ștefan, D. Gologan,
S. Mușat, M.C. Popescu, V.T. Moldovan, R.M. Pleșea
*"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: The authors’ aim is to assess the correlations
between the main tumour constitutive elements evaluated using the fractal
dimension (FD) and three main features of tumour cells in prostate ade-
nocarcinoma (PC).
Methods: 269 fields with different PC architectural patterns were select-
ed then classically and immunohistochemically stained.
Images were binarized. The FD (<1.5=“linear-like”-LLD and >1.5=“ar-
ea-like”-ALD distributions) was computed for each binary image.
Immunohistochemical stain intensities were assessed through a proprie-
tary computational algorithm.
Tumour cells architecture-GO, tumour stroma architecture-TC, vascular
network-VN, the capacity to degrade extracellular matrix-ECMD, inter-
cellular adhesion-ICA and aggressiveness degree-AgD were assessed.
Results: MMP9 intensity trend was smoothly descending as GO evolved
towards ALD and ascending as TC evolved towards ALD distribution.
PTEN intensity, instead smoothly increased as GO evolved towards ALD
and decreased as TC evolved towards ALD.
MMP2 intensity trend was descending as both GO and TC evolved to-
wards ALD.
E-CAD intensity trend was ascending as both GO and TC evolved to-
wards ALD.
MMP9 and E-CAD intensities had no correlation with VN while MMP2 and
PTEN had both a smoothly descending trend as VN evolved towards ALD.
Conclusion: Tumour cell behaviour (ECMD, ICA, AgD) is different
according to architectural distribution of tumour cells architecture, tu-
mour stroma architecture and vascular network, suggesting a dynamic
interrelation between the heterogeneous tumour cell population and tu-
mour microenvironment.
PS-18-058
Correlations between different tumour architecture compounds
assessed through fractal analysis and different grading systems in
prostate adenocarcinoma
I.E. Plesea*, M. Șerbănescu, D.V. Ciovică, A.M. Istrate-Ofițeru,
G.C. Roșu, L. Iovan, A.D. Ciobănoiu, E.C. Nistor, R.M. Pleșea
Virchows Arch
*"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: The aim of the study is to assess the corre-
lation of the main tumour architecture constitutive elements evaluated
using the fractal dimension (FD) with three different grading systems of
prostate adenocarcinoma (PC).
Methods: Gleason modified system-GS with GS2, GS3A, GS3B, GS3C,
GS4-Fused, GS4-Cribriform, GS5A and GS5B patterns, Srigley system-
SS with SS1, SS2, SS3, SS4 and authors’ system-PS with Necrotising-N
and Solid-S groups were used.
Tumour cells architecture-GO, stroma architecture-TC, vascular network-
VN were assessed on binarized images from 420 fields with PC patterns
by computing fractal dimensions-FD (<1.5=“linear-like”-LLD and
>1.5=“area-like”-ALD distributions) for each image.
Results: GO FD value classes (VCs) showed an obvious ALD trend,
irrespective the used grading system. Conversely, VN FD value classes
showed an obvious LLD trend. TC FD value classes showed a trend in
between LLD and ALD.
GO FD VCs were better grouped by the SS and also by the PS.
TC FD VCs showed almost the same distribution irrespective the used
grading system.
VN FD VCs showed an increased LLD in most poorly differentiated
groups of all grading systems.
GO and VN FD VCs strongly correlated with all tested grading systems
(c2 test p values<0.05).
TC FD VCs proved instead no correlation with any of the three grading
systems.
Conclusion: The results suggest that tumour cell architecture proved the
strongest relationship with the degree of differentiation irrespective the
used grading system. Srigley’s and our systems proved to be more accu-
rate in defining the degree of differentiation than Gleason system.
PS-18-059
Correlation between PD-L1 (22c3) immunoexpression and panel
next generation sequencing (pngs) analysis in innusual high grade
urothelial carcinoma (hguc) subtypes
J.D. Prieto Cuadra*, A. Garrido Aranda, M. Alvarez, I. Garcia,
M.I. Hierro Martín
*Pathology Department, Virgen de la Victoria University Hospital,
Malaga; SYNLAB Pathology, Malaga, Spain
Background & objectives: The PD-L1 immunoexpression has been a
suboptimum predictive response biomarker, often being negative in ag-
gressive and infrequent UC subtypes such us micropapillary or nested.
New assays seem to be promising in predicting sensitivity to ICIs, such as
pNGS, among others.
Methods: Immunohistochemical studies (IHQ) with PD-L1 (22C3,
Agilent) have been done on 25 samples of paraffin-embedded tumour
tissue from 23 patients.
They correspond to HGUC mixed with variant pattern. We have studied
the correlation between PD-L1 IHQ and these phenotypes, and performed
a pNGS (Oncomine comprehensive assays v3) on each of the samples
Results: Combined Positive Socre (CPS) of each case and each different
variant subtypes has been calculated, and they were positive: 2/4 squa-
mous; 1/2 lipid-rich; 1/2 poorly differentiated; 2/4 sarcomatoid and the
only one plasmocytoid differentiation.
In pNGS study, molecular alterations related to ARID1A, TSC1, ERCC2,
PIK3CA and TP53 stand out. Several of these alterations´ve been linked
in the literature to a greatly accelerated rate of tumour growth and clinical
deterioration after ICIs.
To this end, we highlight one of the case which is positive because of the
squamous areas, although micropapillary areas were negative. And its
corresponding pNGS showed genomic alteration in 2 alleles of
PIK3CA, RB1, ERCC2, TP53 and ARID1A.
Conclusion: We should give special interest to cases that combine sev-
eral histological subtypes with divergent PD-L1 expression, since a glob-
al positive score could be obtained in a case wich could have PD-L1
negative unusual areas that result in a hyper-progressive patient.
PS-18-060
The neurosafe proof feasibility study: a report of the concordance
between intraoperative frozen-section assessment of margin status
and subsequent paraffin-embedded sections
S. Raveendran*, E. Dinneen, A. Haider, A. Freeman, J. Oxley,
C. Jameson, M. Ratynska, I. Ben-Salha, T. Briggs, S. Nathan,
J. Grierson, R. Persad, G. Shaw
*University College Hospital London, Department of Histopathology,
United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Intra-operative neurovascular structure-
adjacent frozen-section examination (NeuroSAFE technique) aims to
guide safe preservation of neurovascular bundles (NVB) during radical
prostatectomy (RP) regarding margin status to increase rates of nerve
sparing. We report the findings of the NeuroSAFE PROOF feasibility
study (NCT:03317990).
Methods: Forty-nine men at two regional uro-oncology centres
underwent robot-assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP) between
May 2018 and March 2019. 25 men underwent NeuroSAFE RARP
(intervention) as per random allocation. Intra-operative frozen-section
margin was compared with subsequent paraffin-embedded margin assess-
ment for each section (NVB).
Results: 50 NVBs were analysed in the NeuroSAFE arm with a total of
250 individual frozen-sections; mean 10 sections per patient, 5 sections
per NVB. On an NVB basis (n=50), diagnostic accuracy was 94%, sen-
sitivity was 100%, specificity 92.7% and kappa’s coefficient for agree-
ment was 0.831 (p=<0.0001). Slightly lower specificity was on account
of 3 positive margins on frozen section that were changed to narrowly
clear on final paraffin section diagnosis. On an individual frozen-section
to paraffin-section basis (n=250), diagnostic accuracy was 97.2%, sensi-
tivity 100%, specificity 99.2%. Kappa’s coefficient for concordance was
0.914 (p<0.0001). There were no false negatives.
Conclusion: We note excellent concordance between frozen-section
margin and final histological margin diagnosis that shows good patho-
logical conduct of the NeuroSAFE technique in the feasibility study. The
full NeuroSAFE PROOF RCT is currently underway at 4 NHS centres.
Funding: JP Moulton Charitable Foundation NHS NIHR UCL Hospitals
Charitable Foundation Rosetrees trust
PS-18-061
The significance of the NOTCH3 expression in the urothelial bladder
cancer patients’ follow-up
A. Ristic-Petrovic*, S. Stojnev, D. Stokanovic, M. Potic Floranovic,
I. Djordjevic, L. Jankovic Velickovic
*University of Nis, Medical Faculty, Department of Pathology, Serbia
Background & objectives: Angiogenesis is the hallmark of the
urothelial bladder cancer (UBC) and NOTCH3 is a very important recep-
tor in this process. The aim was to determine the association between
NOTCH3 expression and the long-term clinical outcome in UBC
patients.
Methods: The present research included 614 UBC samples incorporated
in paraffin tissue microarrays, analysed for immunohistochemical
NOTCH3 expression. The majority of the UBC samples were
NOTCH3 positive (over 90%). We semi-quantified the membranous ex-
pression (0-3), and the mean degree was 1.81±0.94.
Results: The median follow-up in the study group was 45.0 (24.0-64.0)
months. During this period, the mortality rate was 42.5%, cancer specific in
most of the cases (69.7%). There was a weak negative correlation between
Virchows Arch
NOTCH3 expression and overall-survival (p<0.001) and cancer-specific
mortality (p<0.05). Each higher degree of positivity was associated with
1.3 higher risk of mortality (p<0.001), and 1.4 higher risk of cancer-specific
mortality (p<0.001). Even though we identified NOTCH3 as a possible
predictor, it was not shown to be an independent predictor of cancer-
specific mortality. Recurrences occurred in 230 (37.5%) patients, mostly
one time (58.7%). In this study NOTCH3 expression was not a statistically
significant predictor of recurrence-free survival.
Conclusion: NOTCH3 could be used as a predictor of cancer related
mortality and for selecting the UBC patients that require an intensive
follow-up, especially if they are elder and presented with high grade
and high stage disease.
This work was supported by Grant no. 175092 from the Ministry of
Education and Science of Serbia.
PS-18-062
Investigation of the role of tumour cell immune escape by PD-1 / PD-
L1 interaction and microsatellite instability on the failure of BCG
therapy in high grade urothelial carcinomas
F.G. Salman*, D. Kankaya, H. Özakıncı, Y. Şahin, E. Kubilay, E. Süer,
S. Hayme, S. Baltacı
*Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Turkey
Background & objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate the
role of PD-1/PD-L1 interaction on BCG failure and the relation between
MSI status and BCG response to evaluate the option of immune check-
point inhibitors on treatment of BCG resistant urothelial carcinomas.
Methods: Expressions of PD-L1(SP263), MSH2,MSH6, PMS2, MLH1
were evaluated immunohistochemically on TUR materials of 29 BCG-
refractory and 30 BCG-responsive high grade urothelial carcinomas(Ta,T1).
PD-L1 expression on tumour cells and tumour associated immune cells were
categorized as Negative/Low and High expression. DNA MMR protein ex-
pression were classified as “reduced (≤30%)” and “preserved(>30%)”.
Microsatellite analysis was performed by PCR using 5 mononucleotide
markers.
Results: PD-L1 expression did not show any difference between neither the
pre- and post-treatment biopsies in the BCG refractory group, nor the BCG
refractory and the BCG responsive groups. Most of the carcinomas (70.8%)
with reduced expression of DNA MMR proteins were in the BCG respon-
sive group (p=0.022). All the carcinomas were microsatellite stable (MSS).
Conclusion: Immune escape mechanism by PD-1/PD-L1 interaction
seems to have no role on BCG failure of urothelial carcinomas. It can
be suggested that reduced DNA MMR protein expression may lead to
predict cases that will respond to BCG therapy, but this should be sup-
ported by larger case series. Finally, according to our results the presence
of immunexpressions of DNA MMR proteins, even focal, seems to be
enough to determine MSS cases.
Funding: The Scientific And Technological Research Council Of Turkey
(TUBITAK) and Scientific Research Projects Coordinator of Ankara
University.
PS-18-063
Inter-observer variability in Gleason grading of prostate cancer
biopsies
E. Salmo*, S. Thampy, J. Coyne, M. Yousif
*Royal Oldham Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Prostate cancer is frequently diagnosed ma-
lignancy and Gleason scoring is an important parameter for therapeutic
decision of prostate cancer patients. The aim is to determine inter-
observer variability in the reporting of Gleason scoring in tissue biopsies.
Methods: A total of 30 cases reported at the Royal Oldham Hospital were
reviewed by three local pathologists with a special interest in urological
pathology and the results also compared with a central Specialist Urology
MDT (SMDT) review to ascertain the degree of agreement in Gleason
scoring and the Grade Group.
Results: Within the 3 local pathologists, there was complete agreement
for Gleason pattern in 15 cases (50%). These were most with 3+3 (10
cases), 3+4 (1 case), 4+4 (3 cases) and 4+5 (1 case). Including the SMDT
opinion, the complete agreement with regard to Gleason pattern drops
from 50% to 30% (9 cases). With regard to Grade Group, exact agreement
within the 3 local pathologists was 63% (19 cases) and when the SMDT
opinion included, this drops to 43% (13 cases). Only 2 cases showed
complete agreement in Gleason score 7 between the 4 pathologists (in-
cluding SMDT review). One case had a complete agreement as 3+4.
Conclusion: Inter-observer agreement in Gleason score differs between
studies as some literature reporting up to 71% exact agreement. In our
review, total agreement was demonstrated in only 50% of cases which
indicate a low degree of concordance between the pathologists.
PS-18-064
Granulomatous prostatitis: clinicopathological and histomorphologic
study
I.V. Samarska*, T. Marcelissen, J. van Roermund, V. Winnepenninckx,
A. zur Hausen
*Department of Pathology, GROW School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center,
The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Granulomatous prostatitis clinically
mimics prostate cancer by causing PSA elevation and giving low
signal intensity on T2 MRI. The aim of this study was to evaluate
the aetiology of granulomatous prostatitis and its association with
prostate adenocarcinoma.
Methods: A retrospective analysis of 3250 prostatic specimens received
in the pathology department was done over a period of 16 years (2004 to
2020). We identified 15 cases of granulomatous prostatitis (GP) diag-
nosed in our hospital. Clinical data were collected retrospectively from
the medical records and the histological slides were reviewed. Additional
stainings (Ziehl Neelsen, Gram, PAS+ and Groccot) were performed.
Results: Samples were obtained from 15 males with a median age of
64.0yrs with a median follow-up period of 21.5 months. The incidence
of GP was very low (0.46%). Histological examination showed poorly
formed granulomas with negative stains for microbiological agents. Two
patients had a previous history of BCG treatment because of the papillary
urothelial cell carcinomas (2/15). None of the patients had previous trans-
urethral prostate resection or systemic granulomatous disease. Six pa-
tients (6/15; 40%) had a concurrent prostate adenocarcinoma. Three pa-
tients had Grade Group 1 adenocarcinoma (Gleason score 3+3), one
patient had a Grade group 2 (Gleason score 3+4), and another two pa-
tients Grade group 3 (Gleason score 4+3) adenocarcinoma.
Conclusion: Granulomatous prostatitis was a rare disease and the major-
ity of cases showed nonspecific granulomatous prostatitis in our popula-
tion. A concurrent prostate adenocarcinoma can be seen in a subset of
cases, hence a close follow-up and possibly re-biopsy can be considered.
PS-18-065
Prognostic value of CD36 expression in urothelial bladder carcinoma
T. Sanhueza*, J.C. Pardo, V. Ruiz de Porras, J.P. Fernández, A. Font,
C. Carrato
*Pathology Department, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol., Spain
Background & objectives: CD36 has been related to tumour invasion
and metastases in several cancer types. We aim to study CD36 expression
in urothelial bladder carcinoma (UBC) devoid of distant metastases and
explore its correlation with tumour stage and progression-free survival,
among others.
Virchows Arch
Methods: Eight tissue microarrays containing samples from 208
cystectomy specimens were studied. No neoadjuvant therapy had been
administered to patients. CD36 immunostaining (HPA2018, Sigma-
Aldrich, 1:100) was performed and the percentage of neoplastic cells with
positive membrane and cytoplasmic expression was assessed. Cases
showing CD36 immunoreactivity in at least 1% of neoplastic cells were
considered to be CD36-positive.
Results: Thirty cases (15.3%) were immunoreactive for CD36. Positive
cases showed higher pT stage (pT3b-pT4) than negative ones (pT1-pT3a)
(p=0.007). In addition, the median 12-month progression-free survival
was shorter (6.505 months) in the CD36-positive group than in the neg-
ative group (8.44 months) (p=0.034). Although tumours with regional
lymph node metastases tended to be CD36-immunoreactive (66% of
them were CD36-positive), the trend did not reach statistical significance.
Conclusion: Our results indicate that CD36 expression could constitute a
negative prognostic factor in UBC, similarly to what has been described
in other tumour types such as melanoma and lung, ovary and breast
carcinomas. Further studies, with more cases and different clinical sce-
narios, are needed to evaluate CD36 as an independent prognostic factor,
its relation to the metastatic process, and its possible role as a predictive
factor of chemotherapy in UBC.
PS-18-067
Incidence of involvement of pre-prostatic fat samples in robotic pros-
tatectomy specimens
G. Stark*, J.M. Salmond
*University of Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: In our institution, separate samples of pre-
prostatic fat are usually taken at robotic prostatectomy surgery. This study
aims to determine how often these specimens are involved by tumour,
and the associated laboratory costs.
Methods: Pathology reports for robotic prostatectomy surgery (n=669)
were analysed. 144 were excluded due to pre-prostatic fat not being
submitted or not being reported. Within the remaining 525 cases, the
presence of tumour and/or benign or malignant nodes was recorded. An
estimate was made of the laboratory costs of processing the tissue (two
blocks with a single H&E slide from each).
Results: 50 (9.5%) specimens had ≥1 benign node present, and 2 (0.38%)
had malignant nodes.
The 2 cases with malignant nodes also had pelvic nodal dissections yielding
malignant nodes. Therefore, regardless of the positive pre-prostatic nodes,
the nodal staging was N1. Within 3.5 years of data analysed, we were
unable to find a single case where analysis of pre-prostatic fat changed
the stage. Technical costs were approximately £5360 over the period.
Conclusion: In our experience, pathological analysis of pre-prostatic fat
samples does not change the staging of prostatic carcinoma following ro-
botic prostatectomy but does have a financial cost. We consider the analysis
of pre-prostatic fat specimens to be of doubtful clinical value and that it
should not be carried out routinely following robotic prostatectomy.
PS-18-068
An immunohistohemical study of transforming growth factor beta-1
expression in urothelial bladder cancer and its prognostic significance
S. Stojnev*, A. Ristic, M. Krstic, A. Ristic-Petrovic, I. Conic,
J. Todorovic, M. Mladenovic, L. Jankovic Velickovic
*University of Nis, Medical Faculty, Department of Pathology, Serbia
Background & objectives: Deregulation of transforming growth factor-
beta (TGF-β) signalling pathways plays important roles in tumour devel-
opment and progression. This study aimed to analyse the profile of im-
munohistochemical expression of3 TGF-β1 in urothelial bladder cancer
(UBC) and to evaluate its prognostic impact.
Methods: Immunohistochemical analysis of TGF-β1 expression was
performed on 647 UBC samples, obtained by transurethral resection,
incorporated in tissue microarrays. Expression status was correlated with
clinicopathological and follow-up data. The median follow-up was 61
months.
Results: High TGF-β1 expression was observed in 66.5% of tumours
and was significantly associated with high tumour grade, and advanced
pathologic stage (p<0.001, respectively). There was no significant asso-
ciation with tumour recurrence (p=0.387). TGF-β1 was directly linked to
cancer-specific mortality (p=0.001). Survival analysis showed that high
TGF-β1 was associated with shorter overall survival of the patients
(p=0.005). In multivariate regression analysis, TGF-β1 manifested as
an independent predictor of poor outcome (p<0.001).
Conclusion: This study recognized the expression of TGF-β1 as an
important prognostic factor in UBC, where high TGF-β1 expression in
tumour cells indicates shorter survival and poor prognosis. Assessment of
TGF-β1 status in UBC patients may provide useful predictive informa-
tion and identify patients that could have the most benefit from therapy
targeting TGF-β signalling cascade.
PS-18-069
CD10 and carbonic anhydrase 9 expression in sarcomatoid transfor-
mation in renal cell carcinomas
J.M. Suárez Gómez*, E. Garcia Fernandez, P. González-Peramato
*Hospital Universitario La Paz, Spain
Background & objectives: Renal sarcomatoid carcinomas are a pathway
of dedifferentiation, present in all subtypes of renal cell carcinomas
(RCC). Their prognosis is poor. Although uncommon, underlying RCC
subtype may not be detected. We hypothesize CD10 and carbonic
anhydrase 9 (CAIX) may help.
Methods: We retrieved renal carcinoma cases from our archives between
2009 and 2019. We looked for those cases of any RCC with either
sarcomatoid transformation (ST) or rhabdoid transformation (RT). We
recorded subtype of renal carcinoma; percentage of ST and RT. Later,
we performed CD10 and CAIX staining.
Results: Out of 677 cases of renal carcinomas, 13 showed ST with or
without RT and 5 exclusively presented RT. Prevalence was 2%.
Percentage of ST ranged between 5% and 100% (mean: 43.92%), and
RT ranged between 0% and 85%. RCC subtype most frequently associ-
ated with was clear cell RCC (8 /13). CD10 showed positive staining in
88% and, 33% presented CAIX expression in the ST. RT showed a
similar immunoexpression.
Conclusion: The uncommon presence of ST encountered in our study is
concordant with literature. CD10 may be more useful than CAIX identi-
fying ST regardless of underlying RCC subtype, meanwhile, CAIX ap-
pears to be closely associated with ST of clear cell RCC.
PS-18-070
Prognostic significance of P16 expression in high-grade prostate
adenocarcinoma
T. Takahara*, T. Tsuzuki
*Aichi Medical University, Japan
Background & objectives: Management of advanced hormone-naïve
prostate cancer is a critical public health issue. Useful prognostic markers
are needed to select patients who will benefit from chemotherapies. This
study is aimed to determine whether p16 expression would be an adverse
prognostic marker.
Methods: Patients diagnosed with adenocarcinoma with Gleason score ≥8 by
needle biopsy from 2010 to 2013 at Aichi Medical University were enrolled
(n=79). p16 staining was considered positive when nuclear and/or cytoplas-
mic staining was observed in regions where > 50% cells were stained.
Virchows Arch
Results: The median patient age was 73 (range, 52–87) years. The me-
dian follow-up was 62 months (range, 2-98). Fourteen patients had p16-
positive samples. Fifteen patients died from prostate cancer, 10 of whom
were in the p16-positive group. p16 positivity was associated with clinical
T stage (P<0.001), presence of IDC-P (P<0.001), distant metastasis
(P<0.001) and lymph node metastasis (P<0.001). p16-positive patients
had significantly worse prognoses for CSS and PFS (P<0.001, P<0.001,
respectively).
Conclusion: Our results indicate that p16 expression is associated with
adverse prognostic factor of prostate cancer and suggest that p16 expres-
sion may provide useful information for treatment planning and identify-
ing suitable candidates for upfront chemotherapy or androgen receptor
axis-targeted therapy.
PS-18-071
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma - the real deal?
O. Tica*, O.A. Tica, N. Beladi
*County Hospital of Oradea, University of Oradea, Romania
Background & objectives: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for
more than 90% of adult kidney cancers, occurring more frequently in
males and histology is dominated by clear cell RCC. The goal of this
study is to highlight the necessity of routinely genetic assays.
Methods: We included in our study a total of 155 adult patients with
RCC excised by radical nephrectomy between 2016-2018 with focus on
identifying incidence, social aspects, histologic subtypes (correlated with
WHO 2016 guidelines), nuclear grade, immunohistochemical features
and all relevant prognostic factors. Only a few patients benefit of genetic
tests and results were compared with morphology and molecular
phenotype.
Results: Males were affected more commonly than females with a ratio
of 1,44:1 and mean age was 61 years ± 12,6. The majority of RCC were
unifocal, confined to the kidney and with nuclear grade 2. Histology
revealed that most of clear cell RCC had classical acinar pattern admixed
with papillary, cystic, tubular or sarcomatoid features. Although clear cell
RCC is still the most common subtype of adult kidney cancers, the inci-
dence of this subtype has slightly decreased over these years, from 72% to
68% in our study. Even with adequate sampling and nearly correct fixa-
tion time, immunostains expression is variable, being not very helpful for
positive diagnosis.
Conclusion: Clear cell RCC is probably over-diagnosed due to its mul-
tiple histologic patterns and it is likely to lose this kind of supremacy in
future pathology reports.
Molecular and genetical subtyping needs to be included in an accurate
RCC diagnose.
PS-18-072
HOXB13 – future opportunities in sporadic prostate cancer profiling
A.D. Timofte*, I.D. Caruntu, S. Giusca, N. Girlescu, A. Rusu
*UMF Grigore T. Popa, Iasi, Romania
Background & objectives: HOXB13 plays a key role in normal prostate
development, regulating cellular response to androgens. Tissular overex-
pression of HOXB13 has been studied, particularly in hereditary prostate
cancer. We focus on establishing HOXB13 as a potential prognostic
biomarker, in non-inherited prostate cancer.
Methods: The immunohistochemical expression of HOXB13 was
assessed on a preliminary lot of 25 prostatectomy specimens with spo-
radic prostate cancer. Results were correlated with ERG and SPINK1
molecular subtypes and histopathological variants. For estimating the
potential prognostic value, HOXB13 expression was correlated, using
chi square and Fisher tests, with age of onset, Gleason Grade, Gleason
Score, predominant pattern, staging, PSA levels.
Results: All 25 cases, were ERG IHC positive and, thus SPINK1 nega-
tive, and only 60% of these showed moderate and strong IHC expression
of HOXB13, suggesting a positive link between ETS rearrangements and
HOXB13. Also, tumours with Gleason Score ≥7, overexpressed nuclear
HOXB13 in 73% of the cases, with moderate and strong staining ob-
served in dominant histopathological variant ≥G4. All tumours staged
pT3 or pT4 (16%) showed moderate to strong HOXB13 nuclear signal.
HOXB13 expression was not statistically correlated with PSA levels (p
value of 0.18423), and also with the age of onset, Gleason Score or
Gleason grade, mainly due to the small size of the lot.
Conclusion: In pursuit of novel prostatic biomarkers, for detecting indo-
lent and aggressive forms of disease, and for refining the therapeutic
management, HOXB13 appears to be a potential candidate, apparently
combined with other consistent markers, but validation on bigger popu-
lations is required.
PS-18-073
Histopathology of cryptorchidism. Review of ten undescended
testicles from 2012 to 2019
M. Trujillo Coronado*, I. Hernández Alconchel, L. Rodríguez Merino,
A. Azueta Etxebarria, P. Calleja Hermosa, S. Marcos González
*Hospital Universitario Fundación Alcorcón, Spain
Background & objectives: Cryptorchidism refers to an absence of at
least one testicle in the scrotal sac. Testicles develop in the abdomen,
scrotal migration is usually completed around 35 weeks’ gestation.
About 3% of full-term/30% of premature infants are born with unde-
scended testicles.
Methods: Undescended testicles are associated with decreased fertility,
increased germ cell tumours (more commonly seminomas), torsion and
inguinal hernias. Orchidopexy is the preferred mode of management in
case of viable testes, recommended before 1 year of age.
We will review 10 cases of cryptorchidism diagnosed in Hospital
Universitario Marqués de Valdecilla from 2012 to 2019, detailing their
clinical and histologic features.
Results: Our cohort was aged from 3-month old to 48-year-old patients
(mean age: 17.8-year-old). Location was inguinal in 8 patients and
intraabdominal in 2 patients. 9 cases were left-sided and 1 case was
bilateral. Every testicle was age-adjusted atrophic, with volumes ranging
from 0.3 cm3 to 7.5 cm3 (mean volume: 2.8 cm3), except for a 21.9 cm3
testicle with gonadal dysgenesis (GD) syndrome.
Conclusion: Histologic features included atrophic seminiferous tubules,
hypospermatogenesis, Leydig cells hyperplasia, Pick adenomas,
intratubular microlithiasis, fibrous parenchyma with interspersed pres-
ence of Fallopian tube, ovarian cortex and endometrial tissue in the GD
patient, and parenchymal haemorrhage in two patients with testicular
torsion.
Understanding the spectrum of features associated with undescended
testicles is essential in order to be able to detect suspicious lesions.
PS-18-075
Mismatch repair protein status and GATA3 expression in bladder
urothelial carcinoma
A. Vilaia*, L. Peter, D. Mocanu, M. Cioplea, A. Cioroianu, A. Tanase,
L. Nichita
*Colentina University Hospital, Pathology Department, Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: Mismatch repair genes and GATA3 are im-
portant in preserving genetic stability and cell proliferation. Although
GATA3 is used as a marker for urothelial differentiation, there are few
reports regarding MMR status or its correlation with GATA3 in bladder
urothelial carcinoma.
Virchows Arch
Methods: 66 patients who underwent transurethral resection of bladder
tumour were selected. Multi-tissue blocks were made and slides were
stained for GATA3, MLH1, PMS2, MSH2 and MSH6. We evaluated
MMR status and GATA3 expression in muscle invasive high-grade
(MIBC - 36 cases) and non-invasive low grade (NMIBC - 30 cases) bladder
urothelial carcinoma and correlated them with pathological parameters
Results: Four cases express loss of MMR protein (three for PMS2; one
for MSH6). Three of them were MIBC with extensive necrosis or squa-
mous differentiation. Only one NMIBC showed loss of PMS2 and it was
associated with early onset and papillary features We found a statistically
significant correlation between GATA3 expression and invasion status
(p<0,001) and tumour extent (p<0,05). There was an inverse relationship
between GATA3 expression and perineural/perivascular invasion or tu-
mour necrosis but it was not statistically significant (p=0,173). Although
GATA3 presumably interacts with MSI through TGBβ pathway we
found no correlation between these two in our study.
Conclusion: MMR loss is rare in bladder carcinoma and the most fre-
quent mutation is for PMS2. GATA3 expression was significantly lower
in high versus low grade tumours and it correlates with tumour extent.
PS-19-001
Aortic medial degeneration: a clinicopathologic study of 269 cases in
a cardiovascular centre
R. Arias*, M.J. Pineda, A. De Luna
*Zamboanga City Medical Center, Philippines
Background & objectives: This study aimed to apply the Consensus
Statement on surgical pathology of the aorta from the Society for
Cardiovascular Pathology and Association for European Cardiovascular
Pathology on Noninflammatory Degenerative Diseases – Nomenclature
and Diagnostic Criteria in a Philippine cardiovascular centre.
Methods: This retrospective cross-sectional study involved archival
cases from institutional and surgical pathology files from the Division
of Laboratory Medicine from patients who underwent aortic surgery be-
tween January 2009 to December 2016. Slides were reviewed to evaluate
histologic abnormalities. Standardized reporting is applied based on the
Consensus Statement from the Society for Cardiovascular Pathology and
the Association for European Cardiovascular Pathology.
Results: A total of 269 cases were included in the study [male = 183
(68%), female = 86 (32%), range of 12-82 years, mean age of 53.27
years]. Majority of surgical indications (97%) were aortic aneurysm
and/or dissection. Concomitant surgery was performed on 163 patients
(61%), mostly aortic valve replacement (41%). Overall, 184 patients
(61%) had one or more forms of acquired cardiovascular disease includ-
ing systemic hypertension in 65%. Mucoid extracellular matrix accumu-
lation was the predominant component of medial degeneration (82%) and
48% of cases were moderate medial degeneration. There were 35 deaths
among 269 patients, 24 (69%) of which died as a result of aortic dissec-
tion or rupture.
Conclusion: We identified the clinicopathologic features of patients with
aortic medial degeneration using the consensus grading system which
provides a standardized and unified method for surgical pathology
reporting of noninflammatory degenerative aortic pathology.
PS-19-002
The spectrum of rheumatic valvular heart disease in a cardiovascu-
lar centre in the Philippines spanning 40 years
O.P. Balisan*, A. De Luna
*Philippine Heart Center, Philippines
Background & objectives: High incidence of rheumatic heart disease
(RHD) is still reported in underdeveloped nations. In this study, we de-
scribed the socioeconomic, demographic, clinical pattern, and histopa-
thology of patients with RHD in a cardiovascular centre in the
Philippines from 1977 to 2016.
Methods: This retrospective cross-sectional study involved archival
cases from institutional and surgical pathology files from the Philippine
Heart Center from patients with RHD who underwent valvular replace-
ment surgery, repair, and redo, and in whom clinical history and histo-
pathologic data were concordant, from January 1977 to December 2016.
Medical charts and/or hospital information system records were reviewed
and corresponding data were recorded.
Results: The study group of 4,455 patients consists of predominantly
female (54%), with interquartile mean age of 16 (paediatric) and inter-
quartile mean age of 31 (adult). Patients from low-income households
consists of 51.20%, most of which hail from Central Luzon (21.80%).
Associated comorbidities include pulmonary hypertension (15.98%),
congestive heart failure (11.31%), and cerebrovascular accident
(2.96%). The mitral valve is mostly implicated in chronicity, severity,
and rheumatic activity (53.74%).
Conclusion: The spectrum of RHD comprises low socioeconomic status
from dense populated regions, female gender, and early adult age at
presentation. There still exists a significant number of cases of RHD in
the Philippines. Updated screening tools should be explored, and preven-
tive practices from developed countries with declining incidences should
be modelled upon. Early detection, community education, and efficient
diagnostics are instrumental for appropriate antibiotic coverage to thwart
development of acute rheumatic fever and to cull the rise of RHD.
PS-19-003
New strategy for investigations bioelectrical signals during
embryogenesis
A. Capuani*, M. Nistri
*Private Organization Carrara, Italy
Background & objectives: The Looping of the human primitive cardiac
tube transforms the straight tube in a helical Loop by complex atrioven-
tricular (AV) rotations and cells migrations which may lead to the most
complex congenital heart diseases (CHD).
Cell polarity and electrotaxis play an important role in the embryogenetic
process.
We present a new device focusing on endogenous bioelectric field in
chick embryo model comparable to the human and on the effects of
applied electrical DC tensions that implements morphologic patterning.
Methods: We assumed the Maxwell’s equations in a biological system,
the Coulomb law and the Lorentz’s forze concept expressed as vector at a
given embryogenetic point.
We designed a passive two terminal condenser storing a uniform
800 mV/mm electric field (EF) between two aluminium plates
13.5x25 cm each other faraway 6 cm connected to the poles of
48/V battery.
Inside the EF is positioned a two wood shelfs container with 6
orizontal fertilized eggs almost simultaneously led with their long
axis perpendicular to the plates so the EF forces will act perpendic-
ular to the embryo’s primitive streak, from 18 till 40 hours of incu-
bation ( gastrulation looping septation periods). Inverting the poles in
other 6 eggs we reverse the polarity of the EF and therefore of the
embryos. The chicks at birth are sacrificed, stored in liquid nitrogen -
196 and the heart is micro-examined.
Results: The experiments are ongoing. We present the preliminary
results.
Conclusion: We believe that reversing the embryonic polarity may
deeply influence the AV rotation therefore the incidence of complex
CHD.
PS-19 Cardiovascular Pathology
Virchows Arch
PS-19-004
Congenital heart diseases: linking embryology to clinical practice
A. Capuani*
*Private Organization Carrara, Italy
Background & objectives: The classical paediatric cardiac surgery in se-
vere Congenital Heart Diseases (CHD) still carries high mortality and poor
results: operative mortality in Fontan 1.2%; Glenn/Emi-Fontan 2.5%; Arterial
Switch-VSD 5.3%; Truncus Arteriosus 9.4%; Norwood procedure 15.7%.
Can we do better? On the light of the current molecular biology, a very early
diagnosis and not invasive treatment during pregnancy would strongly
affect the medical and surgical history of these severe malformations.
Methods: We reconsidered:
- The embryogenesis and the morphology of the most severe CHD focusing
on the right ventricle and the trabecula septomarginalis (TSM) anatomy in
malformed cardiac phenotypes from dextroposition of the aorta to tetralogy
of Fallot, double outlet or single outlet ventricles, transpositions of great
arteries, univentricular hearts reviewing the related literature.
- The last advances of molecular biology on cardiac lateralization, cell
polarity, cells migration and exosome characterization.
Results: Findings.
- The TSM rotates and follows the development of the right ventricle,
- The abnormal connections recapitulate an abnormal embryogenesis at
Horizon X-XI (somite number 4-20) secondary to a pathological Looping
and Lateralization of the primary cardiac tube
Conclusion: - NGS targeted sequences of selected genes panel known or
suspected associated with a specific phenotype during the first month
after conception can detect specific maternal cardiac exonic variants
linked to an abnormal Looping (Lateralization),
- Stem-cells or CRISPR-Cas9 based techniques have the potential to
interfer with the TSM rotation process leading up to less severe or normal
cardiac phenotypes.
PS-19-005
Plasma cell infiltrate in the carotid plaque
G. Cerrone*, M.L. Lai, D. Fanni, A. Bordonali, C. Gerosa, G. Faa, L.
Saba
*Department of Medical Science, Division of Pathology, University
Hospital San Giovanni di Dio, University of Cagliari, Italy
Background & objectives: Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory
disease that mainly involves T lymphocytes and monocytes. B lympho-
cytes and plasma cells have occasionally been detected. The aim of this
study is to assess plasma cells frequency in a series of carotid plaques.
Methods: We evaluated retrospectively 50 carotid endartherectomies
analysed at the Pathology Department of the University of Cagliari be-
tween January and May of 2018 and March and July of 2019. The histo-
logical assessment was confirmed with CD38 immunostain.
Results: Groups of at least 5 plasma cells were observed in 28% of cases:
18% were distributed in clusters (5-10 plasma cells) and 10% in sheets
(more than 10 plasma cells). In almost half of cases (24 out of 50 cases)
scattered plasma cells were revealed. No plasma cells were observed in 12
cases out of 50 cases analysed (24%).
Conclusion: Our preliminary data evidence that plasma cell infiltrates
characterise more than a half of the carotid atherosclerotic plaques.
Moreover, clusters or sheets of plasma cells are present in almost one
third of cases. Further studies will highlight the clinical significance of the
"plasma cell" subgroup of atherosclerotic plaques.
PS-19-007
Sudden arrhythmic death syndrome specialist referral centre: results
from a national biobank
M. Cotter*, J. Carron, A. Blum, C. McGorrian, J. Galvin, D. Ward,
A. Fabre
*Department of Histopathology, St. Vincent’s University Hospital, Elm
Park, Dublin, Ireland
Background & objectives: Rarely sudden cardiac death in the commu-
nity is due to underlying genetic disease. In Ireland 10,000people carry
mutations for inherited cardiac conditions (ICC). A biobank created in
2015 facilitates testing from autopsies, including a referral service for
cases requiring expert pathology.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed all referred cases between
May 2015-Jan 2020 from those who have had tissue samples taken
for genetic testing at the time of autopsy. Patient age, sex, weight,
height, heart weight, thickness of left and right ventricles, toxicology
results and diagnosis were recorded together with results from mo-
lecular analysis.
Results: 187 cases were bio-collected, including 121males and 66fe-
males, age range 5weeks-79years. 32% of the hearts were structurally
normal. 34.7% were cardiomyopathies. Genetic studies were performed
on 21 probands. 19 had a full 380 inherited gene panel and 2 had targeted
cardiomyopathy 173-gene panel. 9 (43%) showed genetic variants: 4
were American College of Medical Genetics Class IV/V pathogenic mu-
tations, and 5 were class III variants of uncertain significance (VUS).
Follow-on familial screening detected 3 positive genotypes in 9 first-
degree relatives. Screening of relatives of probands who displayed a
VUS showed 5 ICC diagnoses in 19 first-degree relatives. Despite nega-
tive gene testing in 12cases, 9.5% of relatives were given an ICC
diagnosis.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates the unique potential our
biobank has to offer in terms of identifying those most at risk.
Increased awareness of the current screening pathway is pivotal to
diagnose these potentially lethal cardiac conditions and prevent fur-
ther deaths.
PS-19-008
Cardiac tumours – a 20 year-long experience in a tertiary Portuguese
institution
R. Cruz*, C. Quadros, D. López-Presa
*Department of Pathology, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, Instituto
de Histologia e Biologia do Desenvolvimento, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
Background & objectives: Heart tumours(HT) are known to be very
rare, occurring in <1% of the population, supported by autopsy and clin-
ical data-they showed that primary tumours(PT) have a lower prevalence
than secondary tumours(ST). We present our expertise through a 20 year-
long series.
Methods: Retrospective data pertaining to the period 2000-2019, includ-
ing biopsy and excision specimens, were evaluated for the following
criteria: diagnosis, age and sex.
Results: A total of 125 cases were assessed, 53%(n=66) were biopsies
and 47%(n=59) were excision specimens; 64%(n=80) corresponding to
women, 36%(n=45) to men; the mean age was 64,5 years, (maxi-
mum:86; minimum:18). From all, 95%(n=119) were diagnosed with
PT and about 5%(n=6) with ST. Regarding PT, two-thirds (n=76) were
diagnosed in women; from these 96%(n=114) were benign and
4%(n=5) were malignant. In the benign group, 85%(n=97) were cardiac
myxomas, followed by papillary fibroelastomas, haemangiomas, lipo-
ma, paraganglioma and inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour. In the
malignant group, there were lymphomas, leiomyosarcomas and one
myxofibrosarcoma. Concerning the ST group, carcinomas prevailed
(67%) followed by melanoma, direct extension of thymoma and a pe-
culiar case of intravenous leiomyomatosis.
Conclusion: HT are rare, mainly benign, occurring in women on the
seventh decade, being predominantly myxomas, as described in the liter-
ature. The obtained data showed a higher frequency of PT once our
sample did not include autopsy data.
Virchows Arch
PS-19-009
Inborn errors of energy metabolism are an infrequent cause of heart
failure in adults undergoing cardiac transplant
B. Cerbelli, E. Perli, A. Pisano, M.G. Pignataro, E. Zacara, F. Re, P. Lilla
della Monica, G. d'Amati, C. Giordano*
*Sapienza, University of Rome, Italy
Background & objectives: Aim of the study was to assess the preva-
lence and phenotype of cardiomyopathy due to inborn errors of energy
metabolism in adult patients undergoing cardiac transplant (CT).
Methods: A total of 110 hearts, consecutively explanted at the
Department of Cardiac Surgery of San Camillo Hospital of Rome over
an 8-years period, were retrospectively reviewed. The population
consisted of 82 males and 28 females, mean age 50 years (range 19-73).
Results: Cardiomyopathy due to disorders of energy metabolism was
observed in 4 out of 110 patients (3,63%), 2 males, mean age 25 years
(range 20-45).
In three patients, skeletal muscle biopsy, performed before cardiac trans-
plant, guided the diagnosis. Diagnoses were confirmed by genetic
analysis.
Gross cardiac examination showed symmetric, biventricular hyper-
trophy (n=3) and biventricular dilation with multiple foci of myo-
cardial scarring (n=1). Histologic examination showed extensive
vacuolation of cardiac myocytes (n=4). Immunohistochemistry for
lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2 (LAMP2) allowed diag-
nosis of Danon disease in one patient. Combined cytochrome c
oxidase/succinate dehydrogenase stain demonstrated mitochondrial
dysfunction in two patients. Ultrastructural analysis revealed glyco-
gen accumulation (n=1), massive mitochondrial proliferation (n=2),
autophagic vacuoles (n=1).
Conclusion: Cardiomyopathy due to inborn errors of energy metabolism
are a rare cause of CT in adult. Pathologists may play a role in unravelling
the aetiology, provided that a detailed diagnostic flowchart, including
histology and ancillary technique is followed.
PS-19-010
Amitosenescence cells in aging heart
E. Kogan*, A. Syrkin, O. Blagova
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: Human aging occurs both at the body level
and at the cell level. Postmitotic cells may develop senescence and are
called amitosenescence cells. The goal was to investigate
amitosenescence cells in aging heart.
Methods: 42 biopsies of the heart and 48 autopsy cases (38 women and
62 men) were taken: 1 group - 80 patients (average age 72.9 ± 13.3 years)
and 2 group - 20 patients, (average age 42.9 ± 13.3 years). Serial paraffin
sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, picrofuchsin; p16ink,
Apocas, CD68 and CD 45 were detected by immunohistochemistry
(DakoCytomation).
Results: Amitosenescence cells were found in in myocardium of 77
aging patients and 2 young patients (premature aging?).
Amitosenescence cells were characterized by prominent degenerative
changes, that results of distuebances in intracellular regeneration, accu-
mulation of lipofuscin in perinuclear zone of cytoplasm - which is the
marker of mitochondria disfunction and increased lipid peroxidation.
Reduction and sclerosis of capillary bad caused ischimia, cell degenera-
tion and apotosis. Stroma of aging heart was lightly infiltrated with
CD68+ macrophages and CD45+ lymphocytes. The latter may result
from proinflammatory activity of amitosenescence cells.
Conclusion: Aging heart has increased number of amitosenescence cells
that are characterized by disturbances in intracellular regeneration and
protein metabolism, mitochondria dysfunction, genome alteration and
proinflammatory response that may result in deterioration of heart dis-
eases in aging patients.
PS-19-011
Tissue expression of ligand to programmed death receptor 1 (PD-L1)
in endomyocardial biopsies of patients after heart transplantation -
association with allograft rejection
S. Szymanska*, M. Sobieszczanska-Malek, A. Wieckowska-
Karkucinska, W. Grajkowska
*The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Poland
Background & objectives: Data suggest that PDL1 expression in donor
tissue can down-regulate recipient alloreactive T cell responses by inter-
action with the PD-1 receptor expressed on alloreactive T cells, thus
limiting the local inflammation leading to rejection and vasculopathy.
The aim of the study was to assess the relation between PDL-1 expression
in endomyocardial biopsies (EMBs) of adult patients after heart trans-
plantation and allograft rejection.
Methods: The study included 15 patients with diagnosed antibody-
mediated rejection (AMR), 12 patients with diagnosed grade 2 R acute
cellular rejection (ACR), and 16 patients with no rejection. PDL-1 and
C4d immunohistochemical stainings were performed in all EMBs. Graft
rejection was evaluated according to ISHLT criteria. The non-parametric
tStudent test was used to compare the results.
Results: 6 patients were diagnosed with AMR 1 (I), 4AMR 1 (H) and 5
AMR 2. Among all 15 patients with AMR, 5 additionally had grade 1R
ACR features. The difference in PDL-1 expression within the groups was
very different from the rest (patients with simultaneous AMR and ACR
had a higher percentage of marker tissue expression), while the individual
groups did not differ statistically from each other.
Conclusion: It seems that higher tissue expression of PDL-1 may be
associated with a faster graft rejection resolution, however, it is not related
to the type of rejection.
Funding: Internal grant of The Children's Memorial Health Institute for
the development of young scientists no M36/18.
PS-19-012
Microvascular shift in dilated cardiomyopathy
O. Tica*, O.A. Tica
*County Hospital of Oradea, University of Oradea, Romania
Background & objectives: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a myo-
cardial structural disease with reserved prognosis and "malignant
behaviour". Our goal is to create a model of microvascular alteration
and highlight a pattern that can be included in these new regenerating
therapies.
Methods: From a total of 211 corpses, we randomly selected 35 cases
with DCM related deaths and used automated immunostudies (CD34,
CD31, Vimentin and Desmin). We compared our results with a control
group of 7 patients (who died without cardiac causes) in purpose of
quantifying fibrosis and correlate it with clinical evolution.
Results: In areas with advance fibrosis, endothelial expression (CD31
and CD34) was scarce combined with severe structural alteration
(Desmin). These immunomarkers helped us revealing vascular channels
near myocardial fibres. In 4 patients who died from malignant heart
rhythm disorders, histology revealed subendocardial muscle nodules with
central fibrous scar. These findings can be promising in the new
regenerating therapies because it can show the quality of myocardial
interstitial tissue.
Conclusion: Damage of cardiac microcirculation stands almost alone at
the base of myocardial destruction, scarring and development of pump
dysfunction.
Using gene recombining techniques (transferring 4 transcription factors),
we can transform fibroblasts directly into endothelial cells stopping myo-
cardial death and eventually, fibrillogenesis.
When applied in endomyocardial biopsies, advanced stage of fibrosis,
severe structural changes can lead to inadequate response to new
therapies.
Virchows Arch
Unfortunately, the affecting myocardium is patchy and can mislead us in
grading structural lesions depicted in small biopsies.
PS-19-013
Modification of alcoholic cardiomyopathy by changing circadian
rhythms (CR) in wistar rats in modelling of chronic alcohol
intoxication
I. Chernov, Y. Kirillov, M. Kozlova, D. Areshidze, S. Timofeev*,
M. Bereza, E. Shtemplevskaya
*Tyumen State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Alcohol abuse is a serious problem for mod-
ern society. The biological processes occurring in the eukaryotic organ-
ism undergo cyclic fluctuations associated with a change in the time of the
day, the study of the chronotoxicity of ethanol seems relevant.
Methods: The study was conducted on 72 six-month-old male rats, di-
vided into 2 groups, over 3 weeks. The first group (n=36) was kept under
the fixed mode “light-darkness” (14 hours / 10 hours) and the second
group (n = 36)-under constant lighting. Animals received a 15% solution
of ethanol ad libitum. The material was examined histologically, histo-
chemically and by electron microscope.
Results: In the first group of rats, the heart cavities did not expand. 19.4%
of rats shows a moderate fatty degeneration of cardiomyocytes, small foci
of cardiosclerosis and plasma impregnation of the walls of the arterioles.
At ultrastructural level, a slight swelling of the mitochondria, single ac-
cumulations of lipofuscin were found. In the second group of rats, mod-
erate hypertrophy of the heart was shown. The cavities of the heart,
especially the left ventricle, were dilated. The myocardium in the section
had a pale appearance. Fatty degeneration of cardiomyocytes, focal or
diffuse cardiosclerosis were determined in all individuals. Electron mi-
croscopy revealed single Mallory bodies in the myocardium.
Conclusion: The results of the study suggest that changes in the CR lead
to increased toxic effects of ethanol on the myocardium and the appear-
ance of morphological markers of ethanol abuse (Mallory bodies).
PS-19-015
A qualitative and quantitative study of cardiac innervation in the
myocardium of the normal human heart
J. Westaby*, M. Sheppard
*St George's, University of London, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Sudden cardiac death (SCD), mediated by
ventricular arrhythmia (VA), is the most common cause of death world-
wide. Recent studies have highlighted the importance of the autonomic
nervous system (ANS) as a trigger and predisposing factor for VA. We
aim to provide detailed topography and quantification of general, sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic cardiac innervation in the normal heart.
Methods: Panel reviewed normal heart control cases had a non-cardiac
cause of death. From ten cases, six sections of right ventricle and three of
left ventricle were stained with PGP9.5, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and
the choline transporter (CT). Slides were scanned using a Hamamatsu
Nanozoomer 2.0RS and analysed using Visiopharm software.
Results: Within the epicardial fat there are large nerve fascicles and
ganglia, most prominent around coronary arteries. These extend into the
myocardium associated with blood vessels arborizing and becoming fi-
bres and fibrils extending between and lying in close contact to myocytes.
Very thin fibrils are seen in the subendocardium. No ganglia are seen in
the myocardium.TH is predominantly distributed in the epicardial nerve
fibres whereas CT is predominantly distributed in the small fibrils within
the myocardium. We extrapolate that sympathetic nerves exert their effect
through the epicardial ganglia whereas parasympathetic nerves act direct-
ly through cell to cell contact.
Conclusion: Defining the normal cardiac innervation, alongside po-
tential mechanistic mediators that cause innervation alterations in
the ANS within SCD victims with cardiomyopathy will identify
novel targeted neuromodulatory techniques and therapeutic strate-
gies. Specific innervation profiles will be established, enabling im-
proved diagnostic characterisation and risk factors for SCD.
Funding: Cardiac Risk in the Young Pathological Society British
Division of the International Academy of Pathology
PS-20-001
CINtec plus dual stain immunoassay and cobas HPV DNA test for
triaging women with a history of LSIL referred to colposcopy
S. Ratnam, L. Gilbert, R. Alghehbandan*, D. Jang, M. Schell, R. Needle,
A. Ecobichon-Morris, A. Wadhawan, D. Costescu, G. Zahariadis,
M. Chernesky
*University of British Columbia, Faculty of Medicine, Vancouver,
Canada
Background & objectives: We assessed the clinical application of
CINtec PLUS to serve as an adjunct test in comparison with cobas
HPV DNA assay (Roche Diagnostics) for triaging women referred to
colposcopy with LSIL cytology history.
Methods: Patients with LSIL history seen at the colposcopy clinic,
Juravinski Hospital, Hamilton, Canada were prospectively enrolled with
informed consent. Residuals of cervical specimens collected in
PreservCyt at enrolment were tested with CINtec PLUS and HPV tests
once at baseline. Biopsy confirmed cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 2 or
worse (CIN2+) served as the clinical endpoint.
Results: Among all ages, there were 266 (44.3%) patients testing CINtec
PLUS positive, and 331(55.2%) HPV positive (p <0.05). For those >30
years, these figures were 41.2% and 50.8%, respectively. There was a
significant difference between CINtec PLUS positivity and age groups:
50% in <30 years vs 41.2% in >30 years. These figures were 63.1% and
50.8%, respectively, for HPV positivity. Overall, 79.3% of CINtec PLUS
positive cases were associated with HPV infection. In total, there were 54
(26%) cases of CIN2+ among 226 having biopsy. Sensitivity to detect
CIN2+ was 81.5% for CINtec PLUS vs. 94.4% for HPV testing; speci-
ficities were, 52.4% and 44.1%, respectively.
Conclusion: CINtec PLUS assay or HPV DNA test is suitable for
triaging women referred to colposcopy with a history of LSIL cytology
and could serve as a predictor of CIN2+ with high sensitivity. Either test
can significantly reduce the proportion of LSIL referral population requir-
ing further colposcopy clinic visits, investigations and follow up, espe-
cially women >30 years. A greater reduction is achievable with cobas
HPV testing through genotype 16/18-specific risk threshold.
PS-20-002
Lower resection rate and higher risk of malignancy in Asian series
alter predicted outputs of the Bethesda system for reporting thyroid
cytopathology
A. Bychkov*, H. Vuong, H. Ngo, T. Vu, K. Lu, T. Kondo, C.K. Jung,
K. Kakudo
*Kameda Medical Center, Nagasaki University, Japan
Background & objectives: There is a growing evidence to suggest that
clinicians employ different management approach while using The
Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology (TBS). We
aimed to study the difference between Western (USA, Europe) and
Asian series of thyroid nodules.
Methods: PubMed engine was queried from January 2010 to January
2019. Meta-analysis of proportion and their 95% confidence intervals
PS-20 Cytopathology
Virchows Arch
(CIs) were calculated using the random-effect model. We used indepen-
dent samples t-test to compare frequencies, RRs, and ROMs between
Western and Asian practices.
Results: A total of 38 studies with 145,066 nodules were analysed.
Compared to Asian series, Western cohorts had a significantly lower
ROM in most of TBS categories while the RR was not statistically dif-
ferent. Focusing on indeterminate nodules, RR in Western series was
significantly higher (51.3% vs. 37.6%, p = 0.048) while ROM was sig-
nificantly lower (25.4% vs. 41.9%, p = 0.002) in comparison to those in
Asian series.
Conclusion: This study demonstrated a difference in Western and Asian
thyroid cytology practice, especially regarding the indeterminate catego-
ries. Lower RR and higher ROM suggest that Asian clinicians conducted
more conservative approach while immediate diagnostic surgery was
favoured in Western practice for indeterminate nodules. The addition of
Asian series into meta-analysis of TBS increased ROM for most of the
diagnostic categories compared to the original TBS outputs, which should
be considered in the future revisions of TBS.
PS-20-003
Audit on success rate of molecular testing in neoplastic lung cytolog-
ical material in an Irish lung cancer centre
D. Di Capua*, A. Fabre
*St Vincent's University Hospital, Ireland
Background & objectives: Lung carcinomas are often diagnosed via
cytological specimens and tissue is often not available. Molecular
methods have been adapted for cytological material. This audit assesses
molecular testing success rates on cytological material obtained from lung
cancers St Vincent’s University Hospital.
Methods: All neoplastic lung cytological specimen reports between
January 2016 and September 2019 in SVUH were reviewed. Sample
types included EBUS-FNAs, pleural fluid, and bronchial washing/
brushings. Data collected included tumour type, tumour content, molec-
ular testing status, and whether molecular testing was performed on prior/
concurrent tissue.
Results: 473 cytology reports were included, representing 432 unique
patients. Molecular testing was conducted on 81 specimens (cell blocks,
single gene/Oncomine lung panel), with 89 patients investigated on prior/
concurrent tissue. Testing was successful in 68 cases (84%), with a mean
tumour yield of 47% (median 50%, range 10%-90%). Failed tests mean
tumour yield was 19% (median 10%, range 5%-80%). Tumour yield was
significantly correlated to success rate (p=0.015). There was no statistical
difference in the success rates between different sampling methods
included.
Conclusion: Our success with molecular testing on cytological material
indicate that this is a viable technique, particularly when tissue is limited.
Further, success rates in our department are similar to other institution’s
reported rates. This audit also highlights the importance of high tumour
yield, however, high yields still produced failed exams. We propose DNA
yield be also reported and used to assess specimen quality in order to limit
failed tests.
PS-20-004
Introducing the Milan system for reporting salivary gland cytopa-
thology in the UK - how does it help?
A. Chandra, E.D. Rossi, H. Mathew, S. Di Palma*
*Department of Histopathology, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: The latest WHO Head&Neck Pathology
edition includes 45 salivary glands tumours which, in combination with
their rarity makes histological assessment difficult. The challenges are
greater when reporting cytology specimens (FNA). Here we suggest the
Milan System as a helpful tool.
Methods: To overcome some of these difficulties the Milan System for
Reporting Salivary Gland Cytopathology (MSRSGC) was created to pro-
vide more standardized reporting and, mostly, a new category of Risk of
Malignancy (ROM). ROM can guide cytological diagnosis, avoid
medico-legal challenges of false positive/negative results, improve pa-
tient management. The MSRSGC is being successfully tested in several
countries including the UK.
Results: Preliminary observations at the Royal Surrey Hospital -UK in-
dicate: the introduction of ROM in cytopathology reports is clinically
relevant to a) help cyto-pathologists to group salivary glands lesions into
clinically meaningful categories, b) useful guide for treating clinicians to
decide if further management according to the ROM category is required,
c) meet turn-around time targets set for cancer treatment d)promote dis-
cussion of cytology reports in multidisciplinary Team (MDT) meetings.
Conclusion: The Milan System for Reporting Salivary Gland
Cytopathology in the UK is a helpful tool in routine reporting of FNA
specimens from salivary glands. A group of histo- and cyto-pathologists
has been created to widen knowledge of MSRSGC & to implement
application in routine practice in the UK. Given the shortage of
cytopathologists in the UK MSRSGC can provide clinical guidance even
in cytopathologists' absence at MDTs. Further work is recommended to
create awareness of the MSRSGC in the NHS.
PS-20-006
Diagnostic value of fine-needle cervical lymph nodes cytology and
needle washout thyroglobulin measurement for preoperative diagno-
sis and staging of papillary thyroid carcinoma
I. Dimitrova, A. Shinkov, K. Videnov, R. Kovacheva, R. Ivanova*
*Department of Endocrinology, Medical University of Sofia, Bulgaria
Background & objectives: In this study we aimed to evaluate the diagnos-
tic value of fine-needle cervical lymph node aspiration cytology (FNAC-LN)
and needle washout thyroglobulin measurement (FNA-Tg) for preoperative
diagnosis and staging of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC).
Methods: Twenty-eight patients with PTC with cervical lymph node
metastasis (LNM) (n=23) and no LNM (n=5) on histology were included.
Preoperative neck US, US-guided thyroid nodule FNAC and US-guided
FNAC-LN with FNA-Tg measurеment were performed. All the cases
underwent surgery and histological examination. The sensitivity, speci-
ficity and accuracy of FNAC-LN and FNA-Tg for preoperative detection
of LNM were calculated.
Results: The cyto-histological verification showed that in the group of
cases with PTC and LNM, FNAC-LN was non-diagnostic in 4 cases
(17%), benign – in 1 case (4%), suspicious for LNM –in 4 cases (17%)
and positive for LNM in 14 cases (61%). In 21 patients with LNM (91%)
FNA-Tg was positive (mean 158.20±115.39 ng/ml, 10.1-371.0 ng/ml) and
in the remaining 2 cases (9%) –FNA-Tg was negative. In all PTC cases
without LNM, FNAC-LN was benign and FNA-Tg was negative. The
sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of FNAC-LN and FNA-Tg were
78.3%, 100% and 82.1% and were 91.3%, 100% and 92.9%, respectively.
Conclusion: Combined use of FNAC-LN and FNA-Tg showed im-
proved sensitivity and accuracy in the preoperative diagnosis of metasta-
tic PTC in cervical lymph nodes.
PS-20-008
Celldetect® results of a novel diagnostic staining method for detect-
ing urothelial neoplasms
I. Katikaridis*, E. Botsfari, R. Valeri, A. Nikolaidou, G. Moustakas,
S. Skevoudi
*Department of Breast Surgery, Theagenion Cancer Hospital,
Thessaloniki, Greece
Background & objectives: Urothelial cell carcinoma is the most com-
mon malignancy in the urinary system. Urine cytology has low sensitivity
Virchows Arch
for detecting low-grade urothelial neoplasms. Our objective is to evaluate
the results of a new biomarker (CellDetect®) that promise improvement
of diagnostic sensitivity.
Methods: Voided urine was collected from 78 patients undergoing
follow-up for urothelial carcinoma or presented haematuria. Each sample
was processed by ThinPrep® into two smears, one stained with
Papanicolaou method and the other with CellDetect® technique.
Results were compared with cystoscopy reports and patients' history.
Results: The Papanicolaou slides were classified according to the Paris
reporting system. 78 were enrolled in the study. 26 were negative, 22 low
grade urothelial neoplasms (LGUN), 10 high grade urothelial carcinoma
(HGUC) and 20 atypical.
Interpretation of CellDetect® results is based on the combination of cell
colour and morphology. CellDetect® was positive in all LGUN and
HGUC as well as in 14/20 atypical cases. Nuclear staining of the neo-
plastic cells was red-purple, clearly distinguishable from the green shade
of nonneoplastic cells.
Conclusion: Our findings show that CellDetect® is a promising novel
staining technology that improves diagnostic sensitivity and can lead
to the reduction of unnecessary cystoscopy. Additional research is
required for establishing a minimum cell number for a positive
CellDetect® result.
PS-20-010
Atypical breast cytology: a one-year experience
U. Klopcic*
*Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Slovenia
Background & objectives: Atypical breast cytology poses significant
diagnostic and management problems. The aim of the study was to re-
view our experience with atypical breast cytology samples (C3 according
to NCI criteria) and to correlate them with subsequent histological exam-
ination and/or radiological follow-up.
Methods: A total of 3504 breast cytology samples comprising fine needle
aspiration biopsies and discharge smears were analysed in the year 2016.
Among them, 270 cases (7.7%) were reported as atypical (C3). Follow-up
was available for 173 cases (64%).
Results: Out of 173 cases with atypical cytology, subsequent histological
examination was performed in 65 cases (37.6%), while the radiological
follow-up only was provided in 108 cases (62,4%). None of the cases
with radiological follow-up only was suspicious for malignancy.
Histological examination was negative for malignancy in 44 cases
(67.7%), and malignant in 21 cases (32,3%) . The overall malignancy
rate was 12.1% (21 out of 173 cases).
Conclusion: Due to the relatively high percentage of histologically con-
firmed malignancy in atypical breast cytology samples (roughly 12% in
our series), radiological follow-up should be mandatory for these patients,
eventually supplemented by histological examination in cases with
atypical/suspicious radiological features.
PS-20-011
The use of P16/ki67 double-stain immunocytochemistry in liquid-
based exfoliative cytology specimens to screen for precursor lesions
of the anal canal cancer in patients infected with HIV
L. Maia*, C. Scapulatempo, L. Rufino, F. Carneiro, L. Berriel, P. Oliveira
*DASA, Brazil
Background & objectives: Considering the role of p16 and Ki67 co-
expression in high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, we hypothe-
sized that CINtec PLUS®, an immunostain test that shows the simulta-
neous staining for p16/Ki67, has the same performance in detecting high-
grade anal intraepithelial neoplasia anal.
Methods: Liquid-based cytology and biopsy of anal samples from 33
men and women infected by the Human Immunodeficiency Virus
(HIV), with no visible lesions detected on external examination, were
evaluated by immunocytochemistry using a morphology independent
interpretation of the double-stain for p16/Ki67 and by the
PapilloCheck® test for HPV detection.
Results: positive samples were observed in 77.77% of those with cyto-
logical abnormalities and in 42.85% of the negative samples.
Concomitant positive expression of p16/Ki67 (p16/Ki67+) was observed
in 33.33% of samples with cytological abnormalities. P16/Ki67+ cytolo-
gy samples showed double-stained cell clusters and most positive cells
were atypical cells. In biopsy with high-grade squamous intraepithelial
lesion (HSIL), double-stained cells were observed in full thickness of the
epithelium.
P16/Ki67 expression was observed in the only sample diagnosed as HSIL
by biopsy, but only one of the seven samples diagnosed as low grade
squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) was p16/Ki67+.
Conclusion: The results suggest that p16/Ki67 immunostaining is a
method that may be useful for improving cytology specificity in detecting
high-grade anal squamous intraepithelial lesions.
PS-20-012
The accuracy of liquid based cytology in the diagnosis of salivary
gland lesions
H. Morris*, M. Elgoweini
*Department of Pathology, Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of
Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Fine needle aspiration (FNA) is widely used
to investigate salivary gland lesions (SGLs), traditionally by conventional
smear but increasingly by liquid based cytology (LBC). Our aim was to
assess accuracy of LBC in the diagnosis of SGLs.
Methods: FNA was performed freehand or under ultrasound guidance
(USG), collected into PreservCyt and Papanicolou-stained ThinPrep slide
prepared. Specimens were classified as non-diagnostic or diagnostic
(subclassified as specific or indeterminate - descriptive or differential
diagnosis). Compared to histology, they were classified as non-
concordant or concordant (subclassified as complete - correct specific
diagnosis, or satisfactory - correctly classified as benign or malignant).
Results: Over 3 years, 84 FNAs were received with 45 (53.6%) diagnos-
tic and 39 (46.4%) non-diagnostic. The percentage of non-diagnostic
specimens is slightly higher than that reported in the limited literature
(up to 40%). Using freehand sampling, 50.9% were non-diagnostic, while
38.7% of USG specimens were non-diagnostic. The specific diagnosis
with USG FNAs was 41.9%, more than double that of freehand (18.9%).
18/27 lesions which underwent a histological assessment had an initial
FNA classified as diagnostic. 17/18 (94.4%) were concordant, with 6/18
complete and 11/18 satisfactory. The overall concordance at 94.4% is
slightly higher compared to that previously published (75.5-91.1%).
Conclusion: In most cases LBC is sufficient for correct classification of
SGLs as benign or malignant, appropriately directing further manage-
ment. However, a specific diagnosis could be provided in more cases
with greater use of USG.
Funding: Hayley Morris is an NHS Education for Scotland funded
Clinical Lecturer in Pathology.
PS-20-015
Comparison between cytology and biopsy in the diagnosis of lung
nodules using the Papanicolaou Society of Cytopathology system
for reporting respiratory cytology
G. Nora*, R.F. Maciel Andrade, S. Longarini Gonçalves
*Hospital de Base (FAMERP - Medical School of São José do Rio Preto),
Brazil
Background & objectives: To compare the results of respiratory cytol-
ogy and corresponding biopsy specimens in the diagnosis of lung nodules
Virchows Arch
using the Papanicolaou Society of Cytopathology System for Reporting
Respiratory Cytology, published in 2019.
Methods: 68 patients (42 male and 26 female) with suspected lung le-
sions by imaging studies underwent a CT-guided biopsy between August
2019 and January 2020. Cytologies were reported according to the pro-
posed by the Papanicolaou Society of Cytopathology in its most recent
publication and subsequently compared with their respective biopsy spec-
imens. The results were obtained through statistical analysis.
Results: The average age of patients included in this study was 63.5 years
old. The comparison resulted in 41 true-positive cases, 3 false-positive
cases, 7 false-negative cases and 17 true-negative cases. Statistical analysis
leaded to a sensitivity of 85.4%, specificity of 85.0%, positive predictive
value of 93.2%, negative predictive value of 70.8% and accuracy of 85.3%.
Conclusion: The recent system for reporting respiratory cytology is very
useful, with high rates of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. This fact
highlights the importance of the incessant search for the improvement of
the standardization of cytological reports, aiming at making a more accu-
rate examination. In addition to better results for patients, these standards
facilitate the communication and understanding of pathologists and
cytopathologists from all over the world.
PS-20-016
Fine needle aspiration biopsy of atypia of undetermined significance
(AUS) with predominant Hurthle cells of the thyroid
D. Ozyigit Buyuktalanci*, D. Nart, Y. Ertan, A. Veral, M. Ozdemir,
U.E. Soyaltin, S. Ozbek
*Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Izmir,
Turkey
Background & objectives: Thyroid nodules with Hurthle cells(HC) com-
prise different pathologic entities; Hashimoto Thyroiditis, HC adenoma-
carcinoma and oncocytic type papillary carcinoma(PC).Various diagnostic
cytological criteria have been proposed in FNAs containing HCs to distin-
guish nonneoplastic from neoplastic lesions but there is limited agreement
between the investigators.
Methods: FNAs of thyroid nodules, were diagnosed as being atypia of
undetermined significance (AUS) with predominant HCs (>%50), between
2015-2019, were included in the study. All patients underwent surgical
resection at our institution. FNAs were retrospectively reviewed for the
presence of cytomorphologic features; cellularity, cytoarchitecture, percent-
age of HCs and dyscohesive HCs, presence of multinucleated cells, nuclear
pleomorphism, nucleolar prominence.
Results: We also evaluated small cell dysplasia, large cell dysplasia, back-
ground colloid, chronic inflammation, cystic change, papillary nuclear fea-
tures (glassy nucleus, elongation, nuclear irregularity, groove, overlapping
and intracytoplasmic inclusion).The results were estimated by using SPSS
analysis. A total of 20 FNA samples (5 nonneoplastic, 9 oncocytic type PC,3
classic type PC,2 follicular type PC,1 HC carcinoma) from 16 females and 4
males with a median age of 42.5, were reviewed. All cases were divided into
two categories on the basis of the diagnosis; benign HC lesion(BHCL)(n=5)
and malignant HC neoplasia (MHCN)(n=15).Presence of multinucleated gi-
ant cells was evaluated statistically significant(p=0.014) in predicting BHCL
cases; nucleolar prominence (p=0.033)and small cell dysplasia(p=0.014)
were significant in malignant cases.
Conclusion: The cytologic distinction between HC lesions can be diagnos-
tically challenging. More comprehensive studies are needed in this regard.
PS-20-017
Non 16/18 hrHPV genotyping – results from the Northern-
Portuguese cervical cancer screening program
S. Petronilho*, A. Varelas, L. Leça, C. Lobo, A. Tavares, H. Sousa,
P. Monteiro, R. Henrique
*Pathology Department, IPO-Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: The Northern-Portuguese Cervical Cancer
Screening Program is primarily based on Human Papillomavirus detec-
tion of 14 high-risk(hr) genotypes.
Aims:To determine (1) the prevalence of hrHPVs, particularly non-16/18
hrHPVs; and (2) the prevalence of persistent infection with non-16/18
hrHPV 1-year after detection.
Methods: Retrospective cohort study at IPO-Porto with (1) 88,890 wom-
en screened from May 2017 to April 2018; and (2) 461 non-16/18
hrHPV-positive women screened in May2017 and without cytological
abnormalities, who were retested for hrHPV after 1-year.
Clinicopathological information was collected from electronical clinical
files (age, hrHPV subtype and cytological classification according to
Bethesda 2015).
Results: A total of 10,246/88,890(12%) women, mean age of
44years(range:24-66), tested positive for hrHPV. Distribution of hrHPV
genotypes was as follows HPV16(15%)|-18(5%)|-31(16%)|-33(4%)|-
35(5%)|-39(15%)|-45(4%)|-51(12%)|-52(12%)|-56(10%)|-58(9%)|-
59(7%)|-66(10%)|-68(15%). Co-infections (2-8 genotypes) were ob-
served in 2878(28%). Of the 10,246 hrHPV-positive cases, 8484(83%)
underwent cytological evaluation: NILM(60%)|ASC-US(23%)|ASC-
H(3%)|LSIL(11%)|HSIL(2%)|SCC(<0.1%)|AGC(<0.1%)|AIS(<0.1%)|-
Unsatisfactory(2%). Of the 8102 women with exclusive non-16/18
hrHPV infections, 3075(38%) had abnormal cytologies [abnormal results
for single-HPV infections ranging from 26%(HPV45)-44%(HPV51)].
Co-infections were associated with higher percentages of abnormal re-
sults (68%vs32%;p<0.001).
Of the 461 women with non-16/18 hrHPV-positive cytology retested
after 1-year, 47% maintained hrHPV-positivity, including 184(84%) with
persistent infections and 34(16%) with new hrHPV infections (29/34
non-16/18). Excluding HPV16/18 infections, cytologic abnormalities
were tendentially more frequent in women with persistent infection
(38%vs21%,p=0.097).
Conclusion: In conclusion, genotyping of non16/18 hrHPV, including
determination of the presence of co-infection and accurate definition of
viral persistence, provides valuable information from an epidemiological
and clinical perspective.
PS-20-018
Significant clinico-radiological factors affecting risk of malignancy in
atypical diagnostic category by the Yokohama system for reporting
breast fine needle aspiration cytopathology
P. Peungkiatpairote*, S. Chowsilpa
*Chiang Mai University Hospital, Thailand
Background & objectives: Atypical diagnostic category by the
Yokohama system for breast fine-needle aspiration (FNA) reveals risk
of malignancy (ROM) from 13 to 25%. Selecting cases for further man-
agement may reduce invasive procedures. We aim to determine signifi-
cant clinico-radiological factors that affect ROM
Methods: All breast FNAs with atypical diagnostic category at Chiang
Mai University Hospital between 2015 – 2019 were selected. Surgical
follow-ups were compared for calculated ROM. The clinical and radio-
logical findings were analysed to find the significant factors which were
associated with increased ROM, using multivariable logistic regression.
Results: There were 240 aspirates from patients aged between 15-77
years old. The tumour size ranged from 0.2 to 9.5 cm. The breast imaging
showed 42 cystic lesions, 187 solid lesions, 19 architectural distortion, 32
intra-tumoral calcification. Histology were available in 218 cases. The
ROM was 27.52%. The significant clinico-radiological factors were
age; 40-60 years (p-value 0.033); >60 years (p-value <0.001), size;
>1 cm (p-value <0.001); intra-tumoral calcification (p-value < 0.001).
Conclusion: Atypical diagnostic category revealed a variety from benign
to malignant in histological diagnoses. However, most cases in this cat-
egory were benign (ROM 27.52%). For these reasons, this category was
Virchows Arch
difficult to make clinical decisions. This study showed the significant
clinico-radiological factors that increased malignant behaviour, including
age (>40 years), tumour size (>1 cm), and intra-tumoral calcification.
Selecting cases with these findings for further management may reduce
invasive procedures and improve cost-effectiveness.
PS-20-019
The relevance of rapid onsite evaluation in endoscopic ultrasound-
guided fine-needle aspiration to improve the diagnosis of autoim-
mune pancreatitis
O.B. Popescu*, M.C. Castillo Torres, M.P. Martínez-Onsurbe
*Hospital Universitario Príncipe de Asturias, Spain
Background & objectives: Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle
aspiration (EUS-FNA) and biopsy (EUS-FNB) represent important tools
in the evaluation of pancreatic masses, having high sensitivity and spec-
ificity rates. The diagnosis has a great impact on surgical approach and the
management of the patient.
Methods: We present three cases of male patients with solid pancreatic
masses, one of them with suspicion of autoimmune pancreatitis. All pa-
tients underwent EUS-FNA and two of them underwent EUS-FNB using
SharkCore needle with a rapid onsite evaluation (ROSE) by a
cytopathologist.
Results: The smears showed a haemorrhagic background with abundant
cellularity represented by large stromal fragments with embedded chronic
inflammatory infiltrate, including neutrophils and eosinophils.
These findings raised the suspicion for an autoimmune process. Since
autoimmune pancreatitis has diagnostic criteria that cannot be evaluated
in a smear, a EUS-FNB was performed.
The cell block material revealed cylindrical fragments consisting of nor-
mal pancreatic tissue and fragments of pancreatic tissue substituted by
abundant fibrosis with a storiform pattern around the ducts, associated
with lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory infiltrate with few neutrophils and
eosinophils.
Conclusion: According to the International Consensus Diagnostic
Criteria (ICDC) EUS-FNA is not considered to be a good method for
cytopathological diagnosis of autoimmune pancreatitis.
ROSE allows an immediate assessment and feedback about the adequacy
of the material which leads to the improvement of the diagnosis and
reduces the number of FNA passes. At the same time, it allows to evaluate
the need for a FNB sample.
PS-20-020
Role of repeat fine needle aspiration in diagnosis of tuberculous
lymphadenopathy
S. Shrestha*
*Norvic International Hospital, Nepal
Background & objectives: Tuberculous lymphadenopathy due to its
protracted course associated with variable morphological findings, may
at times cause difficulty in its diagnosis.
This study aims to find how a repeat aspiration study was beneficial in the
diagnosis of Tuberculous lymphadenopathy.
Methods: The study included a total of 23 cases in which aspiration
studies on the lymph node was performed and was earlier reported as
reactive lymphadenitis. Repeat aspiration was performed on these same
cases due to the persistence of lymph node enlargement from January
2019 to January 2020.
Results: A total of twenty-three (23) cases of cervical lymphadenopathy;
twenty-one (21) of which were diagnosed initially as Reactive lymphad-
enitis and two (2) were diagnosed as suppurative lymphadenitis
underwent repeat fine needle cytology aspiration procedure. The duration
between the two procedures was 10-22 days. The result of the second
procedure revealed marked differences in the cytomorphological features.
Seventeen (17) cases showed frank caseous necrosis with positive Ziehl
Nelsen stain for acid-fast bacilli. Remaining six (6)cases showed granu-
lomas, giant cells, and caseous necrosis.
Conclusion: Repeat aspiration studies can be very helpful in cases of
Tuberculosis lymphadenopathy. A proper patient counselling and com-
munication with the clinician helps the patient to undergo repeat aspira-
tion procedure thereby sparing the clinician from diagnostic uncertainty.
PS-21-001
The prognostic impact of CD73 and a2a adenosine receptor (a2ar)
immunohistochemical expression in colorectal cancer
L.S. AboElnasr*, A. Abdou, H. El-Rebey, A. Mohamed
*Pathology Department, Menoufia University, Egypt
Background & objectives: In immune cells, CD73 degrades adenosine
triphosphate into adenosine, which binds the A2A adenosine receptor
(A2AR). This interaction potently inhibits immune responses against
cancer. However, the expression of these two markers has never been
studied in colorectal cancer (CRC) simultaneously.
Methods: We evaluated the immunohistochemical expression of CD73
and A2AR in tumour cells and stromal lymphocytes in tissue microarrays
collecting tumour and adjacent non-tumour tissue specimens of 103 pa-
tients with CRC. Each of CD73 and A2Ar staining was evaluated by H-
score.
Results: H-score values of CD73 and A2AR in tumour tissues were
significantly higher compared to matched adjacent non-tumour tissues.
Higher H-score values of both CD73 and A2AR in tumour cells were
significantly correlated with advanced stage, poor overall survival and
short recurrence free survival. However, High CD73 stromal expression
was significantly correlated with better overall survival. Multivariate
analysis further confirmed that both markers were independent prognostic
markers for CRC patients.
Conclusion: CRC cases harbouring high levels of CD73 and A2AR are
more liable for tumour progression. Therefore, these markers could be
used as predictors for high risk patients, thus, to optimize individualized
treatment for this group.
Funding: British Division of International Academy of Pathology, edu-
cational fellowship
PS-21-002
Colonic polyps in Nigerians; are adenomatous polyps on the rise?
O. Adegoke*, M. Ajani
*University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria
Background & objectives: The increasing access to colonoscopy
services in sub-Saharan Africa has led to a rise in the number of
adenomatous polyps seen, suggesting that they may well play an
important role in the increased incidence of colorectal carcinomas
in this region
Methods: This was a retrospective review of all colonic polyp specimens
received at the Department of Pathology in our hospital between 2010
and 2018(9 years) utilizing the histopathology request cards and the
Haematoxylin and Eosin stained slides. The specimens included both
endoscopic biopsies and surgical resection specimens. Histologic diagno-
sis was confirmed and adenomatous polyps were subtyped and graded for
dysplasia.
Results: 125 cases were reviewed in the study period. 60 cases(48%) were
adenomatous polyps, 52 (42%) were inflammatory polyps while the re-
maining 10% included 9 hyperplastic polyps, 3 juvenile polyps and 1
PS-21 Digestive Diseases Pathology - GI
Virchows Arch
harmatomatous polyp. The age of patients ranged from 5 to 86 years with a
mean age of 55 years. The Male to female ratio was 1.75:1. Amongst the
adenomatous polyps, 56 were tubular adenomas(93%), 3 were villous ad-
enomas(15%) and 1 was a tubulovillous adenoma(2%). 16 of the adeno-
matous polyps showed high grade dysplasia (27%) while 44 only showed
low grade dysplasia(73%). 2 of the adenomatous polyps were associated
with colonic carcinoma in other parts of the colon.
Conclusion: Adenomatous polyps are increasingly being seen amongst
Africans in the Sub-Sahara region and perhaps they aren’t as rare as it was
once thought. They may yet play a more important role in the pathogen-
esis of colorectal carcinomas in Africans.
PS-21-003
Pancreatic heterotopy: an unusual finding in cholecystectomy
specimens - report of three cases
D. Adrian*, S. Gradinaru, C. Alius, O. Pătrașcu, M. Sajin, M. Costache,
A. Baltan, A. Birceanu, A. Procop, A. Evsei
*Department of Pathology, University Emergency Hospital, Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: Heterotopic pancreatic tissue can be located
in various regions of the digestive system with the least reported location
being in the gallbladder. Gallbladder pancreatic heterotopia can be either
an incidental finding or diagnosed in association with cholecystitis.
Methods: We report three cases of heterotopic pancreatic tissue in the
gallbladder. One patient was a 24-year old male who presented with acute
pancreatitis symptoms and an ultrasonographic mass in the gallbladder
which proved to be heterotopic pancreatic tissue. The other two cases
were female patients aged 24 and 32 respectively incidentally diagnosed
on histopathological examination.
Results: A 24-year old man presented to the hospital with a intense
upper abdominal pain radiating to the back. Ultrasonography re-
vealed a mass initially believed to be an enlarged Mascagni lymph
node and therefore laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed.
After the surgical removal, the tissue fragments were sent for pro-
cessing and examination to our Department of Pathology. Gross
examination revealed a white-yellowish pseudo tumoral mass,
slightly lobulated. Microscopic examination showed a well-
circumscribed fully developed heterotopic pancreatic tissue in the
muscularis layer and extending to the subserosal adipose connective
tissue. The findings were consistent with type 1 pancreatic
heterotopia according to the Hindrich classification. In the other
two patients, ectopic pancreatic tissue was incidentally discovered.
Conclusion: Despite being a exceptional encounter, gallbladder pancre-
atic heterotopia should be considered as a potential diagnosis in cases of
cholecystitis and as an explanation for unusual ultrasonographic findings.
In any case, the definitive diagnosis is only by histopathological exami-
nation.
PS-21-005
Gallbladders – a “grumble” for patients and pathology departments
– a model for potential savings?
I. Ahmed*, J. Going, K. Oien, J. MacLean, S. Harrower, G. Kohnen
*NHS Greater Glasgow & Clyde, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: As numbers of specimen requests increase so
do workload pressures in Histopathology. Over 60,000 UK patients un-
dergo cholecystectomies/year. We determined diagnostic yield and pro-
cessing costs based on block numbers per gallbladder. We propose re-
source savings through reduction in block numbers.
Methods: Numbers of gallbladders and block numbers were determined
for the years 2012-19 from the pathology database of Greater Glasgow &
Clyde NHS trust with SNOMED codes for chronic inflammation, dys-
plasia and adenocarcinoma for disease patterns. Workload and cost
details were determined for a 12-month period in 2017/18. Complex
resections and referrals were excluded.
Results: Annual gallbladder block numbers varied between 5555 and
7694 with requests static at approximately 2200 per annum. Mean num-
ber of blocks per gallbladder was 2.2. Approximately 72.5% of gallblad-
ders show chronic inflammation. Significant pathology, including dys-
plasia (0.2%) and adenocarcinoma (0.1%) are rare. Processing costs for
one block approximate £8.84, two blocks £11.29. Reducing the number
of tissue blocks processed by one would save ~ £5000 per annum.
Conclusion: Reduction in the number of tissue blocks may improve
turnaround times and reduce block storage costs. There is little good
evidence for the cost-effectiveness of different tissue sampling strategies
in Histopathology. Such evidence would allow more effective use of
finite resources.
PS-21-006
A tale of two cities: a comparison of current practice in two district
general hospitals looking at the impact of routine elastin staining to
detect venous invasion in colorectal cancer resections
J. Aldridge*, E. Walsh, S. Umar, M. Toy, I. Georgiades
*Harrogate District Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Venous invasion (VI) is a well-established
independent prognostic indicator in colorectal carcinoma.
Elastin is a useful adjunct for detecting VI.
We compared VI reporting between Harrogate District Hospital (elastin
as standard) and York Teaching Hospital (not using elastin as standard).
Methods: The reporting of venous invasion in all colorectal cancer re-
sections was retrospectively audited at Harrogate District Hospital and
York Teaching Hospital over a 1-year period (October 2018 – October
2019). The results were compared to the RCPath recommended standards
and analysed for any significant impact in the routine use of elastin stain-
ing in Harrogate on the detection rate.
Results: 89 colorectal cancer resections from Harrogate and 210 cases
from York were included for analysis.
Venous invasion was identified in 95 colorectal resections in York.
Elastin staining was requested in 1 case and confirmed the presence of
extramural venous invasion detected on Haematoxylin and Eosin.
There is a significantly higher detection rate of venous invasion in
Harrogate where elastin is used as standard compared to York (p = 0.037).
York Teaching
Hospital [n=210]
(%)
Harrogate District
Hospital [n=89]
(%)
P value
Cases with
Identified
Venous Invasion
95 (45)
52 (59)
0.037
Cases without
Identified
Venous Invasion
115 (55)
37 (41)
Conclusion: Both trusts are exceeding the recommended RCPath
reporting standards for detecting venous invasion in a minimum of 30%
colorectal cancer resections.
Our comparison demonstrates a significantly higher detection rate of
venous invasion in Harrogate where elastin is used as standard.
PS-21-007
Clinicopathological and molecular characteristics of poorly differen-
tiated adenocarcinoma of the stomach
T. Arai*, N. Inoshita, K. Nonaka, J. Aida, T. Ishiwata
*Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital, Japan
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Adenocarcinoma with little glandular for-
mation is classified as poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (PDA)
including signet-ring cell carcinoma (SRCC), non-solid type PDA
and solid-type PDA. The present study aimed to clarify the relation-
ship among clinicopathological and molecular features of gastric
PDAs.
Methods: We randomly collected 154 PDAs (75 solid-type PDAs, 52
nonsolid-type PDAs, and 27 SRCC) from 154 patients. According to the
method by Gonzalez et al., PDAs were classified into 4 groups using
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization: EBV-associated GCs
(EBV), microsatellite-unstable GCs (MSI), chromosomal-unstable GCs
(CIN), and genomically stable GCs (GS). These clinicopathological var-
iables were analysed statistically.
Results: Solid-type PDA showed significantly higher proportion
(44%) of MSI in comparison with those (4% and 7%) of non-
solid-type PDA and SRCC, respectively. Although most of non-
solid type PDA and SRCC showed CIN and GS, proportion (85%)
of GS in SRCC was significantly higher than that (48%) in non-
solid-type PDA. In addition, SRCC preferred to occur in the middle
third (70%) whereas non-solid type PDA developed in both middle
third (35%) and lower third (35%).
Conclusion: These results suggest that solid-type PDA is different tu-
mour from non-solid type PDA and SRCC. Moreover, although non-
solid type PDA and SRCC shared several features, it is possible that
SRCC which maintains signet-ring morphology is different from tumour
which can transfer to non-solid type PDA.
Funding by: Governmental grants
PS-21-008
Topical application of high dose mesna prevents adhesion formation:
an experimental animal study
G. Arslan*, M. Berkeşoğlu, Y.Y. Karabulut, D. Derici Yıldırım,
Ö.M. Türkmenoğlu, M.M. Dirlik
*Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Mersin University,
Turkey
Background & objectives: Adhesions are common complications of
abdominal surgeries. Mesna is a drug used in surgical field to facilitate
tissue dissection. The aim of this experimental animal study was to in-
vestigate the effect of mesna on prevention of intraabdominal adhesion in
rats.
Methods: 28 Wistar albino rats were used in the study. Cecum was
abraded to create abdominal adhesion. No surgeries were performed other
than adhesion in Group 1. 0.9% saline administered to Group 2, 40 mg/kg
mesna for Group 3 and 400 mg/kg mesna for Group 4. Rats were
sacrificed on postoperative 21st day. Histopathological and macroscopic
evaluations of adhesion were performed.
Results: There were statistically significant differences in median
severity, quantity, and total adhesion scores, but there were no sta-
tistically significant differences in median degree of adhesion scores.
Group 4 had lower median quantity score than Group 1 (p<0.038)
and 2 (p=0.049). Group 4 rats had lower median severity score
(p=0.042) and median total score (p=0.038) than Group 2.
Although there were no statistically significant differences in median
degree of adhesion scores, Group 4 rats had lowest median degree of
adhesion score than others. There were significant differences in me-
dian histopathological grading scores between the groups. Group 4
had lower median adhesion grading score than Group 1 (p<0.001)
and Group 2 (p=0.003).
Conclusion: This is the first study for mesna on prevention of abdominal
adhesion in rats. We concluded that dose-dependent reduction of adhe-
sion was achieved by mesna which may indicate it as a potential
adhesion-preventing agent for abdominal surgeries in the future.
PS-21-009
Histopathologic assessment of appendectomy specimens in elderly
patients
E.S. Ayva*, P. Aydin Aribal, I.M. Gocer, B.H. Ozdemir
*Baskent University, School of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Turkey
Background & objectives: The aim of our study is to determine the
histopathological findings of appendectomy specimens in elderly patients
who were over the age of 60.
Methods: Histopathological records of 130 appendectomy specimen
submitted to the pathology Department at Baskent University in Ankara
between 2011-2020 were reviewed retrospectively. The demographic
data of 130 patients (59 males, 71 females; age range, 61-96 years) were
noted. Histopathological diagnosis, acute appendicitis, gangrene and per-
foration rate, negative appendicectomy rate, and unusual findings on
histology were recorded.
Results: Out of the 130 cases, acute appendicitis were detected in 104
(80%) specimens. Perforation rate was %38, gangrene rate was 18% and
negative appendectomy rate was 1%. There was no statistically signifi-
cant difference between males and females in the rate of perforation and
gangrene. Low grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm (n=8), carcinoid
tumour (n=2), adenocarcinoma (n=1), diverticular disease (n=4), serrated
polyp (n=3), hyperplastic polyp (n=13) and adenomatous polyps (n=14)
were observed.
Conclusion: The findings suggest that acute appendicitis is the main
histopathological findings in elderly population. In spite of the fact that
the rate of acute appendicitis is high, precursor lesions and neoplasia were
detected in 31.5% of specimens. Therefore, appendectomy specimens
should be subjected to careful histologic examination in this age group.
PS-21-010
Comparative analysis of PD-L1 as prognostic factor in stage II and
III colonic adenocarcinomas with the expression of mismatch repair
proteins
P. Azcue Sanroman*, M. Mercado, A. Galbete, J. Suarez, L. Álvarez,
D. Guerrero-Setas, I. Encío Martínez, M. Gómez-Dorronsoro
*Institut de Recherches Internationales Servier. Paris, France, Spain
Background & objectives: Results of PD-L1 expression in colon carci-
noma are heterogeneous, due partly to antibody selection and expression
assessment, rendering its prognostic value unclear. We aim to study the
prevalence and disease-free survival of PD-L1 expression and its relation-
ship with MMR proteins.
Methods: Tissue microarrays (TMA) of 144 paraffin embedded tissue
samples from early stage colon carcinoma patients were constructed.
TMAs included four samples of central and infiltrative areas of each
patient and were automatically stained for PDL-1 (SP142) and MMR
proteins (MLH1/PMS2, MSH2/MSH6). PDL-1 expression was assessed
in the tumour- stroma interface.
Results: Prevalence of deficit MMR proteins was (12.5%) and (20.1%)
for PDL-1. The latter was significantly more expressed in deficient MMR
tumours (p<0.001), right-sided localization and providing a better
relapse-free survival p(log-rank) = 0.012. Additionally, the lack of
PDL-1 presented a HR (95% CI) of 2.15 (0.91, 5.04) consistent with
previous results. In the infiltrating zone, tumour-associated immune cells
were more intense and frequent in PDL-1 expression compared to tumour
cells.
Conclusion: The presence of PDL-1 in microsatellite stable tumours
seems protective for both OS and RFS, while lack of expression confers
a worse prognosis. Pathological assessment of PDL-1 is determinant,
outstandingly if any trace of PDL-1 expression is considered positive
“PDL-1 Sensitive”, it reaches statistical significance for OS and DFS
Virchows Arch
and an overall risk reduction in the multivariate analysis of HR=0.52
(0.27, 0.98). The value of PDL-1 and MMR as a predictive maker for
anti PD-1 therapy remains to be studied.
Funding: Project funded by European Development Fund.
PS-21-011
In search of an immunohistochemical classification of early stage
colon adenocarcinomas, results of a tertiary hospital
P. Azcue Sanroman*, I. Fernandez de los Rios, A. Galbete, M. Mercado,
J. Suarez, R. Vera, I. Encío Martínez, M. Gómez-Dorronsoro,
D. Guerrero-Setas
*Institut de Recherches Internationales Servier, Paris, France
Background & objectives: Through transcriptomics, four Consensus
Molecular Subtypes were delineated to classify colorectal cancer patients,
however remains unviable to most hospitals. The aim is to emulate the
concordant immunohistochemical panel proposed by Trinh et.al and
Mismatch-Repair proteins and validate its prognostic utility.
Methods: For a cohort of 160 colon cancer stage II and III patients, four
samples of each paraffin-embedded tissue sample (2 central and 2 infil-
trating areas) were automatically stained for MMR proteins and CDX2,
FRMD6, HTR2B and ZEB1 using tissue microarrays (TMAs). TMA
slides were then digitalized and assessed. Score classifier was retrieved
from the published online tool (crcclassifier.shinyapps.io/appTesting/).
Results: Subtype prevalence was CMS1=12.5%, CMS2/3=80.6% and
CMS4=6.3%. Disease-free survival curves for the three groups were sta-
tistically significant (p=0.012), where CMS4 presented the worst prog-
nosis. Right-sided localization related to CMS1 (p=0.003) who also pre-
sented a lower lymph node ratio and better prognosis. Pathological pa-
rameters as vascular or perineural invasion were also bad prognostic
factors.
Conclusion: Our results correlate to those presented by Trihn et.al, par-
ticularly of CMS4 with known poor prognosis factors, which are also
consistent with published literature and with clinical impact. Subtype
prevalence seems diminished compared to Trinh, most likely due to early
stage tumours of our cohort. Strikingly, more than 50% of patients were
classified very near the proposed cut-off value. The sub-classification of
CMS2 and CMS3 remains the biggest challenge.
Project funded by European Development Fund.
PS-21-013
Molecular characterisation of an adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of
the ooesophagus: case report and literature review
H. Bukhari*, D. M. Van Pel, C. Lai, T. Ng, H. Yang
*University of British Columbia, Canada
Background & objectives: Adenoid cystic carcinoma is commonly as-
sociated with salivary glands but has been reported in other sites such as
skin, breast and rarely, oesophagus. ACC has a distinctive biphasic mor-
phology and is associated with specific molecular changes, namely the
MYB-NFIB fusion.
Methods: We assessed a case of ACC of the oesophagus in a 74-year-old
male for the presence of MYB-NFIB fusion. We also assayed for the
presence of mutations in a Next Generation Sequencing panel of known
cancer-associated genes. Finally, we present a review of the literature of
ACC of the oesophagus.
Results: Our case of oesophageal ACC does not possess the MYB-NFIB
fusion gene; however, sequencing of a panel of cancer genes revealed the
presence of a mutation in TP53 (c.737T>G; M246R), which is a common
mutation in salivary gland ACC. Reviewing recent literature cases of
ACC of the oesophagus, we identified a tendency to misdiagnose oesoph-
ageal ACC.
Conclusion: This is, to our knowledge, the first description of the geno-
mic analysis of ACC of the oesophagus. These results suggest an alternate
genetic aetiology for ACC of the oesophagus compared to the majority of
salivary gland ACC, and a similar lack of actionable mutations. Finally,
we recommend a high index of suspicion for ACC in morphologically
atypical squamoid malignancies in the oesophagus, and a low threshold
for requesting appropriate immunohistochemical stains to rule it out.
PS-21-014
Duodenal gangliocytic paraganglioma
S. Cesarec Augustinović*, N. Barsic, D. Tomas, A. Demirovic
*Department of Pathology and Cytology, Sestre Milosrdnice University
Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia
Background & objectives: Gangliocytic paraganglioma in duodenum is
exceedingly rare entity. Most gangliocytic paragangliomas are benign but
metastases to regional lymph nodes are described in 10% of cases.
Tumour size and invasion depth are considered as risk factors of lymph
node metastases.
Methods: We present a case of a 72-year-old man who underwent upper
gastrointestinal endoscopy as a part of normocytic anaemia workup.
Endoscopy revealed a small duodenal subepithelial lesion adjacent to
papillary orifice. Endoscopic ultrasound was subsequently performed,
which demonstrated a 7 mm hypoechoic lesion localized in the submu-
cosal layer, with no direct attachment to the muscle layer.
Results: Underwater endoscopic mucosal resection was performed.
Microscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed a well-
circumscribed submucosal tumour with characteristic triphasic, organoid
growth pattern composed of three cell types: epithelioid carcinoid-like
cells, Schwann-cell like spindle cells and ganglion type cells.
Immunohistochemical reaction was positive for S100 in spindle cells,
synaptophysin in epithelioid cells and calretinin in ganglion type cells.
The resection margin was tumour free.
Conclusion: These findings are consistent with gangliocytic
paraganglioma. Gangliocytic paraganglioma is extremely rare in duode-
num but it should be included in the differential diagnosis when dealing
with duodenal tumours. Tumour size and the depth of bowel wall in-
volvement should be stated in the pathology report. Underwater endo-
scopic mucosal resection can be safe and effective technique for these
subepithelial lesions.
PS-21-015
Gastric intestinal metaplasia: prevalence and distribution of
Helicobacter pylori infection, dysplasia and carcinoma in its subtypes
S. Chalise*, S. Pradhan
*Kathmandu Medical College Teaching Hospital, Nepal
Background & objectives: Gastric intestinal metaplasia is considered as
a precursor lesion for gastric adenocarcinoma. The aim of this study
was to evaluate the prevalence of gastric intestinal metaplasia and
distribution of Helicobacter pylori infection, dysplasia and carcino-
ma in its subtypes.
Methods: This prospective study was conducted at Kathmandu Medical
College Teaching Hospital between December 2018 to December 2019.
The endoscopic biopsies were evaluated for intestinal metaplasia and its
subtyping was done with the help of periodic acid- Schiff/Alcian Blue
and High Iron Diamine- Alcian Blue stain at pH 2.5. The biopsies were
assessed for Helicobacter pylori, dysplasia and carcinoma.
Results: Intestinal metaplasia was observed in 182 (13.5%) out of 1350
biopsies. Type III intestinal metaplasia was the most frequent subtype
found in 48.3% of cases. Helicobacter pylori was positive in 74(40.6%)
cases most commonly observed in type I subtype (69.2%) whereas dys-
plasia (2.7%) and carcinoma (13.7%) were commonly seen in type III
subtype.
Conclusion: Intestinal metaplasia is the common finding in endoscopic
biopsies. Subtyping and long term follow-up studies is necessary with or
Virchows Arch
without eradication of helicobacter pylori to clarify the natural history of
intestinal metaplasia and also to define the value of type III intestinal
metaplasia as a precursor lesion for gastric carcinoma.
PS-21-017
Colorectal adenomas with high-grade dysplasia and pT1 adenocar-
cinoma arising on adenomas – significant morphologic prognosis
factors
D. Costache*, C. Popp, L. Nichita, M. Cioplea, M. Dinca, R. Mateescu,
B. Mastalier, A.-M. Vrancianu
*Pathology Department, Colentina University Clinical Hospital,
Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Colorectal adenomas can harbour high-grade
dysplasia. Malignant polyps are defined by the invasion of adenocarcino-
ma, limited to the submucosa (pT1). This study compares the morpho-
logical features of these two entities to see how they affect the manage-
ment of patients.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective, comparative study including 90
cases of colorectal adenomas (30 cases with high-grade intraepithelial
neoplasia, 30 cases with intramucosal adenocarcinoma and 30 cases of
pT1 adenocarcinoma arising on adenomas), recording age, gender, local-
ization, size, tumour budding, angiogenesis, inflammatory response, ne-
crosis, stromal reaction, vascular invasion, involvement of lamina
propria, muscularis mucosa or submucosa and resection margins.
Results: The study included 50 males (55.55%) with ages between 36-81
and 40 females (44.44%) with ages between 35-87 years. 67 (74.4%) of
the lesions were localized on the left colon. The size of the tumour cor-
related with the percentage of high-grade dysplasia (p=6,97E-08), with
tumour budding grade (p=0.0002), with stromal reaction (p=0.001) and
with the rate of angiogenesis (p= 0,00004). Vascular invasion was detect-
ed in 5 cases with pT1 (16.66%) and in a case of intramucosal adenocar-
cinoma (3,33%). In 15 cases the resection margins were positive and this
correlated with the degree of recurrence and progression. 27 (30%) pa-
tients had more than one lesion in the colon.
Conclusion: Adenomas with high-grade dysplasia and pT1 adenocarci-
noma arising on adenomas are more frequent in men and in the left colon.
Tumour budding, angiogenesis, stromal reaction, vascular invasion and
complete resection are the most important prognostic factors.
PS-21-018
Prognostic significiance of poorly differentiated clusters in mucinous
colorectal adenocarcinoma
S. Demir*, U. Oflazoglu, B. Bolat Kucukzeybek, A. Alacacioglu,
Y. Kucukzeybek, A. Akder Sarı
*Izmir Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Mucinous adenocarcinoma (MAC) of the
colon has >50% extracellular mucin within the tumour area. Currently
there are no established histopathological parameters to accurately predict
prognosis. Our aim is to evaluate prognostic value of poorly differentiated
clusters (PDC) in MACs.
Methods: A total of 70 mucinous colorectal adenocarcinomas (MACs)
with curative resections were included in the study. Tumours were graded
according to the glandular differentiation (WHO; low&high grade) and
on the count of poorly differentiated tumour clusters (PDC). The amount
of extracellular mucin was classified into two categories as low (51-90%)
and high mucin (>|90%).
Results: The median age was 56 years (min24-max85) with a M:F ratio
of 43/27. Overall 42% of cases were stage 2, 48% were stage 3 and 10%
were stage 4. According to the PDC; 50 (71.4%) of cases were PDC-
grade1, 8 (11%) PDC-grade2, and 12 (17%) PDC-grade3. Based on glan-
dular differentiation, 51 (73%) of cases were low grade and 19 (27%)
high-grade. The proportion of extracellular mucin was low in 39 (56%)
and high in 31(44%). tumours. Follow-up data was available for 44 pa-
tients and ranged between 5 to 135 months (median 34 months). 35%
patients had recurrence and 30% of the patients died of disease.
Conclusion: PDC-grading, glandular differentiation and amount of mu-
cin did not show prognostic significance in MACs. Our result is in con-
flict with previous limited-data on PDC-grading which found PDC to be a
promising prognostic indicator in MACs. Further studies are required to
establish PDC as a prognostic factor.
PS-21-019
Role of lymph node ratio in resected gastric cancer: a comparison
with traditional N-staging
C. Díaz del Arco*, L. Estrada Muñoz, L. Ortega Medina, S. García
Gómez de las Heras, M.Á. Cerón Nieto, E. Molina Roldán,
M.J. Fernández Aceñero
*Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain
Background & objectives: Gastric cancer (GC) shows high incidence
and mortality rates. AJCC TNM classification system is the main tool for
GC staging, and it determines patient prognosis and management.
Lymph-node ratio (LNR) is a recently studied feature which could im-
prove patient stratification.
Methods: Retrospective study of 198 cases of GC surgically resected in a
tertiary hospital (Spain, 2000-2017). Clinicopathological features were
collected, statistical analyses were performed and Kaplan-Meier curves
were plotted and compared. LNR was categorized into 5 groups for sur-
vival analysis: score 0 (0%), 1 (>0%-<25%), 2 (25%-<50%), 3 (50%-
<75%) and 4 (≥75%).
Results: 68% of patients were N+ (mean LNR:0.22). N-stage and LNR were
significantly associated with vascular invasion, perineural infiltration, recur-
rences, and tumour death. Overall survival Kaplan-Meier curves depending
on LNR showed good stratification, and three risk groups could be differen-
tiated (scores 0+1,2+3, 4). N-stage curves were more overlapped and showed
an inconsistent better survival for N2 patients in the first months. In cases with
≥15 LN resected, LNR showed an excellent stratification into 5 groups. N
stage curves improved, but still showed overlapping. In cases with <15 LN
resected, LNR curves were non-informative (p=0.692). Regarding disease-
free survival, both LNR and N-stage showed good stratification but LNR
curves were more evenly spaced.
Conclusion: LNR seems to stratify patients better than N-stage for GC
recurrence and survival. LNR could be used as an adjunct to the tradi-
tional TNM classification. Unlike some previous studies, we have found
that the retrieval of less than 15 LN could affect LNR prognostic signif-
icance, and LNR may not be used as an alternative to N-staging in this
context. More studies are needed to confirm LNR prognostic role in GC.
PS-21-020
Prognostic role of TBK1 expression in resected gastric cancer
C. Díaz del Arco*, L. Estrada Muñoz, F. Grizzi, L. Ortega Medina,
E. Molina Roldán, M.Á. Cerón Nieto, S. García Gómez de las Heras,
M.J. Fernández Aceñero
*Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain
Background & objectives: TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) belongs to
the non-canonical nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-KB) pathway. It is in-
volved in cell proliferation, survival, metabolism, immune response,
and autophagy. However, its role as oncogene or tumour suppressor
depending on tumour origin is unclear.
Methods: Our aim is to evaluate the prognostic role of TBK1 immuno-
histochemical (IHC) expression in gastric cancer (GC). Retrospective
study of 77 cases of GC surgically resected in a tertiary hospital
(Spain). Tissue microarrays were constructed, TBK1 IHC expression
was assessed and statistical analysis were performed.
Virchows Arch
Results: Most patients were T3 stage (61.6%) and N+ (77.5%). 50.7% of
patients recurred and 36.2% died due to GC. TBK1 was positive in 64.4%
of cases. TBK1 expression was associated with tumour desmoplasia and
systemic symptoms, and inversely correlated to tumour stage. The asso-
ciation with Laurén subtype and tumour stage tended to significance.
Disease-free survival curves successfully stratified patients into two sig-
nificant risk groups, according to TBK1 expression (p=0.006). Survival
analysis using Kaplan-Meier curves tended to significance (p=0.065).
Patients with negative TBK1 tumours showed poorer prognosis than
TBK1-positive patients. Multivariate analysis showed that TBK1 expres-
sion was independently associated with tumour recurrence.
Conclusion: Although nearly all previous studies recognize TBK1 as an
oncogene, our results support the study published by Lee et al., in which
TBK1 expression in GC was associated with better prognosis. Careful
should be taken when extrapolating TBK1 prognostic role to other tu-
mour types. Further research in larger sample sizes is needed to clarify the
prognostic impact of TBK1 in different stages of GC.
PS-21-021
Prognostic role of YAP and P53 expression in gastric cancer
C. Díaz del Arco*, L. Estrada Muñoz, E. Molina Roldán, M.Á. Cerón
Nieto, L. Ortega Medina, S. García Gómez de las Heras, M.J. Fernández
Aceñero
*Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
Spain
Background & objectives: Yes-associated protein (YAP) is the nuclear
effector of the Hippo-signalling pathway, which regulates cell prolifera-
tion and apoptosis. YAP overexpression has been identified in many
cancers, but its role as oncogene or tumour suppressor gene is
controversial.
Methods: Our aim is to investigate the clinical significance of YAP
immunohistochemical (IHC) expression in gastric cancer (GC), and its
relationship with p53 IHC expression. Retrospective study of 206 cases
of GC surgically resected in a tertiary hospital (Spain, 2000-2017).
Clinicopathological features were collected and tissue microarrays were
constructed. YAP and p53 IHC expression were assessed and statistical
analysis were performed.
Results: Both high YAP expression and complete loss of YAP expres-
sion were considered abnormal YAP staining. 83.4% and 16.6% of cases
showed abnormal and “wild-type” YAP staining, respectively. Abnormal
YAP staining was significantly correlated with lymphovascular invasion
and tumour death. Stratification by YAP expression was significantly
associated with overall survival. Multivariate analysis identified YAP
expression as an independent prognostic factor. Kaplan-Meier curves
were plotted, and patients with “wild-type” YAP expression showed sig-
nificantly better survival rates. We further classified our patients into three
groups: YAPabnormal+p53high, YAPabnormal+p53”not high” and
YAPwild-type. This classification was also significantly and indepen-
dently related to patient survival, and Kaplan Meier curves showed three
groups with significantly different survival rates.
Conclusion: Abnormal YAP expression may be associated with GC
prognosis, and p53 accumulation could enhance its prognostic impact.
More studies are needed to clarify the role of YAP expression, its inter-
action with p53, and its effect on chemotherapy and immunotherapy.
PS-21-022
Differential expression of cytokine-coding genes BMP8B, LEFTY1
and INSL5 in ulcerative colitis and crohn’s disease
Z. Dolenc Strazar*, D. Jevsinek Skok, N. Hauptman, N. Zidar
*Faculty of Medicine, UL, Institute of Pathology, Slovenia
Background & objectives: Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease
(CD) are characterized by imbalance between pro-inflammatory and anti-
inflammatory cytokines, interfering with resolution of inflammation.
New insights into their profiles would help to improve understanding of
pathogenesis and enable development of new treatment modalities.
Methods: We analysed cytokine expression profiles of UC and CD,
revealing 201 statistically significant differentially expressed cytokine-
coding genes in UC and 36 in CD tissue samples. From 10 genes with
inverse expression, BMP8B, LEFTY1 and INSL5 were selected for ex-
perimental validation with qPCR on endoscopic biopsies from 31 patients
with UC, 25 patients with CD and 22 samples of normal mucosa.
Results: BMP8B was down-regulated in both diseases, but more in UC,
followed by CD in the colon and the least in CD in the ileum. LEFTY1
was up-regulated in CD in the colon and down-regulated in the ileum, and
less down-regulated in UC in the colon. INSL5 was down-regulated in
CD in the colon and less in UC, while it was not expressed in the ileum.
Conclusion: Using bioinformatics approach, followed by an experi-
mental validation, we found differences in expression profiles be-
tween UC and CD for INSL5, LEFTY1 and BMP8B. These three
genes seem promising as potential diagnostic and therapeutic targets
in CD and UC.
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Slovenian
Research Agency through research core funding No. P3-0054.
PS-21-023
Tumour budding in colorectal carcinoma: results of TCGA dataset
C. Ercan*, E. Sayar, V. Kancherla, C.K.Y. Ng, L.M. Terracciano,
A. Lugli, S. Piscuoglio
*Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland
Background & objectives: Tumour budding (TB) is an independent
adverse prognostic factor in colorectal carcinomas(CRC) and morpholog-
ical representation of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions. However, its
extensive correlation with genomic features is still missing. Here, we
sought to perform genotype-phenotype correlations in the Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) data.
Methods: TB was evaluated and graded on the digital H&Es slides of
CRC from TCGA (n=631) according to the guideline by two patholo-
gists. TB defined as single cells or small clusters (<5 cells) at the
peritumoral invasive front (pTB) and within the main tumour body
(iTB). Association with molecular features was performed from the
TCGA matched data.
Results: In the preliminary analysis reported here %34 (217/631) of
TCGA colorectal carcinoma samples’ H&E slides were evaluated.
The level of agreement between observers was very high. We found
high correlation between grade 1 pTP and low grade pTP. Higher
grade of tumour buds, both iTB and pTB, were found significantly
correlated with metastatic disease (p<0.01, both). High pTB and
iTB showed significant correlation with microsatellite stable
(p<0.05, p<0.01, respectively) and cancer molecular subtype 4 mes-
enchymal type (p<0.01, iTB)
Conclusion: Tumour bud is a worse prognostic parameter on colorectal
carcinoma with particular genomic signature which reflects its position on
EMT. Additionally, intratumoral tumour buds convey similar prognostic
and characteristic information from tumours and they are big candidates
on treatment decisions by endoscopic biopsies in the future.
PS-21-024
The feasibility of tissue microarray in immunohistochemical assess-
ment of mismatch repair proteins in colorectal cancer – preliminary
results
S. Farkash*, N. Edison, S. Greenberg, H. Balhanes Peled, J. Krausz
*HaEmek Medical Center Afula, Israel
Background & objectives: Tissue Microarray (TMA) enables allocating
dozens of specimens to a single paraffin block. This is cost-effective for
Virchows Arch
expensive tests like Mismatch Repair (MMR) in colorectal cancer (CRC).
This study demonstrates the accuracy of TMA in testing MMR mutations
in CRC.
Methods: 864 2mm-TMA tissue cores were obtained from paraffin tissue
blocks of 11 CRC patients who underwent previous immunohistochem-
ical analysis of tumoral MMR status. 52 cores were incorporated into
each TMA block and stained with specific antibodies for 4 MMR proteins
(MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, PMS2). TMA-MMR staining was compared to
the original results of each patient.
Results: The sensitivity rates for each MMR protein were 100%, with
lower 95% confidence interval (95%CI) of 85%. The specificity of
MSH2 and PMS2 were also 100% with lower 95%CI of 98.6%. The
specificity of MLH1 and MSH6 were 96% with 95%CI: 94.3%-100%;
and 98% with 95%CI: 96.6%-100%, respectively. Over-fixation seems to
inhibit PMS2 staining (46.6% of the cores did not stain), whereas the rest
had negligible unstaining rates (0%-0.93%).
Conclusion: Our results show remarkable per core sensitivity and spec-
ificity of TMA tissue samples. These results suggest that TMA may be
considered an option for CRC MMR testing. Further studies which will
estimate sensitivity and specificity per patient should be considered.
PS-21-025
Mast cells in colorectal cancer: potential prognostic marker?
A. Filin*, V. Danilenko, I. De-George, A. Bobrovskikh, M. Bobrovskikh,
D. Bugrimov, E. Chupandina, P. Markin, E. Ulitina, S. Selyavin
*Voronezh State Medical University named after N.N. Burdenko,
Dept. of Pathological Anatomy, Voronezh, Russia
Background & objectives: The aim of the study is to assess the role of
Mast cells (MC) in the morphogenesis of colon cancer and to identify the
relationship between the prevalence of MC and the prognosis of the
disease.
Methods: Two groups (n=30 each) of patients: death within the first year
and patients who have lived more than 5 years since diagnosis. MC was
identified by histochemical method (Giemsa staining). Quantitative eval-
uation of MC was performed in the stroma of the tumour and in invasive
margin.
Results: MC were distributed unevenly the largest number was found in
the invasive margin of the tumour. No significant difference was found
between patients with different survival rates. However, in the group with
early death without regional metastases, the number of MC in the inva-
sive region was more than 2 times higher than the number of cells in
individuals with metastases (4.5±0.4 and 2.1±0.3, respectively). All
groups showed an increase in the number of MC in the invasive margin
with decreasing degree of differentiation: in the group with early death:
2,1±0,2 (G1), 3,5±0,3 (G2), 11.4±0,4 (G3); in the group with five-year
survival 1,6±0,2 (G1), 2,4±0,2 (G2), 3,6±0,4 (G3), respectively.
Conclusion: Quantitative indicators of MC were most different in
groups with different degrees of tumour differentiation. MC can be
used to assess tumour progression (the degree of differentiation in
dynamic biopsy studies).
PS-21-026
Evaluation of toll-like receptors 9 expression in colon cancer
A. Filin*, E. Chupandina, V. Danilenko, A. Bobrovskikh,
M. Bobrovskikh, D. Bugrimov, I. De-George, P. Markin, E. Ulitina,
S. Selyavin
*Voronezh State Medical University named after N.N. Burdenko, Dept.
of Pathological Anatomy, Voronezh, Russia
Background & objectives: The role of TLR9 in the cancer process is
ambiguous: they are involved in antitumour immunity and contribute to
the evasion of tumour from the immune response. The aim is evaluation
of the expression of TLR9 receptor in colon cancer.
Methods: Two groups (n=30 each) of patients: death within the first year and
patients who have lived more than 5 years since diagnosis. Identification of
TLR9 was performed using an immunohistochemical method.
Results: TLR9 expression in the centre of the tumour was observed in all the
studied groups. Expression in the invasive region was found in 35% of
patients with early death and in 80% of patients who lived 5 years or more.
In the invasive margin, the average number of TLR9 positive cells in the first
group was 0.6±0.3, and in the second group 1.2±0.3. The expression of TLR9
varies in the studied groups. In patients with a survival rate of more than 5
years, TLR9 expression is more pronounced. Increased expression at the edge
of the invasion can be used as a criterion for predicting survival in patients
with cancer.
Conclusion: The study of TLRs allows us to evaluate the activity of
immune processes in the tumour microenvironment and the dependence
of the clinical course of the tumour on these indicators.
PS-21-027
Low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm (LAMN), an incidental
finding?
M. Florea*, F. Vasilescu, V. Mageriu, M. Bogdan, L. Radu, G. Becheanu
*Emergency University Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: LAMN are rare and account for 1% of the
gastrointestinal neoplasms. They can determine a variable clinical behav-
iour. In case of rupture, the mucin spreads to the adjacent peritoneum,
leading to pseudomyxoma peritonei, associated with poor prognosis.
Methods: We present three cases of LAMN: an incidental finding in a
81-year-old female patient who underwent surgery for ascending colon
cancer, a 32-year-old female patient who underwent caesarean section at
38 weeks and appendicectomy and a 78-year-old female patient with non-
specific symptoms, who performed a CT scan that revealed an enlarged
appendix, with fluid content and calcifications of the wall.
Results: On gross examination, the appendix was dilated in all cases, up
to 4 cm in diameter, with abundant luminal mucin and smooth serosa.
Microscopic examination revealed predominantly a flat proliferation of
the mucinous epithelium, with focally villous/papillary pattern, mild
atypia of the epithelium, marked atrophy of the lymphoid tissue, fibrosis
of the appendiceal wall and calcifications. A pushing pattern of invasion
was identified in one of the cases. The dysplastic epithelial cells were
positive for CK20, CDX2 and MUC2.
Conclusion: Frequently, LAMN are found incidentally. In one of our
cases, the association between LAMN and ascending colon cancer raises
the question if they might share the same mutation. Even if the prognosis
is excellent for tumours limited to the appendix, radiological and clinical
surveillance is required to prevent the risk of tumour recurrence.
PS-21-029
Predicting the patterns of response to neoadjuvant chemoradiother-
apy in patients with locally advanced rectal cancer
C. Graham Martinez*, A. Rombouts, S. Bosch, C. van de Water,
K. Vierrijp, H. de Wilt, F. Simmer, I. Nagtegaal
*Pathology Department, RadboudUMC, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: To consider organ-preserving approaches for
rectal cancer, favourable pathological response is needed. Since response
is diverse, the goal of this project is to identify genetic predisposing
factors and immune tumour microenvironment markers that could predict
tumour response to therapy.
Methods: A cohort composed of 15 patients with complete tumour re-
gression (TRG 0) and 15 patients with poor-or-no regression (TRG 3/4)
was collected. Materials were formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded biopsies
and post-chemoradiotherapy resections. Next-generation sequencing was
performed using a targeted gene panel. Histological tumour patterns of
regression were determined. Immunofluorescence-multiplex was
Virchows Arch
performed for several immune markers, as well as an LC3-II stain for
autophagy.
Results: Biopsies of bad responders tended to have higher intra-tumoral
autophagy values compared to good responders. In tumour resections
with response, intra-tumoral autophagy was higher in cases with a
fragmented pattern compared to shrinkage pattern (p-value = 0.03). No
clear difference in mutation patterns were observed. Results of the mul-
tiplex immunofluorescence stain of lymphocytes associated with the tu-
mour will follow.
Conclusion: We showed a biological correlation between autophagy and
tumour response pattern. The beneficial pattern of shrinkage is associated
with low intra-tumoral autophagy. In advanced cancer cases, autophagy is
considered a tumour growth promoter and is associated with tumour
fragmentation.
Funding by: Alpe d'HuZes/KWF grant (Dutch Cancer Society).
PS-21-030
Redefining patterns of tumour response to chemoradiotherapy in
oesophageal cancer with the aid of ai
C. Graham Martinez*, A. Al-Kaabi, T. Strausz, J. Bokhorst, C. Rosman,
P. Siersema, I. Nagtegaal, R. van der Post
*Pathology Department, RadboudUMC, The Netherlands
Background & objectives: Tumour response has been categorized in
many ways within-and-between tumour types. In order for tailored treat-
ment decisions to be made, there is a need for a reproducible, objective
and standardized assessment of response which combines histological
patterns and downstaging.
Methods: Our cohort was composed of 100 patients with oesophageal
adenocarcinoma (cT2-T3) and treated with chemoradiotherapy. Three
H&E slides per patient were analysed by a panel of pathologists and
run through an algorithm to determine tumour cell percentage, size and
distance between tumour fragments. Clinical data was used to determine
correlations to survival and recurrence.
Results: Four histological patterns of regression were distinguished;
fragmented (clustered or scattered), shrinkage and no-response. Tumour
cell percentage was found to be significantly higher in clustered fragmen-
tation subtype compared to scattered subtype in the mucosa (p=0.04) and
tended to be higher in submucosa (p=0.08), muscularis (p=0.15) and
subserosa (p=0.32). Recognition of these patterns of response and corre-
lation with clinical outcome could provide a useful prognostic marker for
further treatment. Preliminary results were obtained with only 70 patients,
which we hope to raise to 100.
Conclusion: By using trained algorithms it is possible to accurately de-
termine subtypes of patterns of response in an unbiased approach which
might form the basis of predictive biomarker research. Moreover, our
algorithms might be transferable to other cancer types.
Funding by: Alpe d'HuZes/KWF grant (Dutch Cancer Society)
PS-21-031
Gene hypermethylation of surrogate genes in subtypes of colorectal
cancer
D. Guerrero-Setas*, P. Azcue Sanroman, I. Fernandez, I. Monreal,
J. Suarez, R. Vera, E. Mata, M. Arriola, M. Gómez-Dorronsoro
*Department of Pathology, Hospital Complex of Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Colorectal cancer is one of the leading causes
of cancer-related death. Our objective was to evaluate aberrant gene
methylation of a recent panel of surrogate markers (CDX2, FRMD6,
HTR2B and ZEB1) used to identify Consensus Molecular Subtypes with
different clinical background
Methods: Methylation status of CDX2, FRMD6, HTR2B and ZEB1
genes was analysed in paraffin-embedded DNA by PCR and pyrose-
quencing in a series of 150 CRC patients and normal tissues. The
presence of methylation of these genes was correlated with pathological
and clinical variables by Kaplan-Meier curves and Cox regression model.
Results: - Gene hypermethylation was higher in right colon com-
pared to left colon, being remarkable in the case of ZEB1 hyper-
methylation (p=0.002).
- CDX2 and ZEB1 hypermethylation were more frequent in cases without
progression (p=0.053, p=0.047, respectively).
Conclusion: - Aberrant methylation is present in surrogate genes
that help to distinguish between molecular subtypes.
- CDX2 and ZEB1 hypermethylation could be clinical indicators of good
prognosis.
PS-21-032
Immunoprofile of tumour cells, in wild-type- versus mutant TP53
gastric carcinomas
S. Gurzu*, H. Sugimura, R.I. Van Staden, I. Jung
*University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tirgu-Mures, Romania
Background & objectives: The aim of this paper was to highlight the
immunoprofile of gastric carcinoma (GC) cells, in correlation with the
TP53 gene profile.
Methods: In 266 consecutive cases of GCs, mutations in exons 4 to 11 of
the TP53 gene were checked and correlated with the immunohistochem-
ical expression of HER-2, p53 and one of the p53-target gene, being
known as Maspin protein.
Results: The mutation rate was 33.83% (90/266 cases), all of the muta-
tions being identified in exons 4-8 and 10-11. Longer survival was proved
for wild-type cases, compared with the mutant TP53, even in locally
advanced tumours (p=0.01). From the 266 cases, 21 (7.89%) did not
expressed Maspin; all of these cases showed lymph node metastases
and risk for distant metastases and were TP53 mutant GCs, with muta-
tions in exon 7. The p53 negativity was identified in 40 cases (15.04%),
without correlation with p53 protein immunoexpression or HER-2 status.
The Dukes-MAC-like staging system was proved to exert the most sig-
nificant independent prognostic value (p=0.0006).
Conclusion: Despite the intention of including new prognostic bio-
markers, the pTN stage remains the strongest predictors of out-
come of patients with GC. The p53-target gene Maspin might be
downregulated in patients with TP53 gene mutations in exon 7.
These data are firstly reported in literature. The paper is prepared
for publication in extenso.
Supported by the grant PN-III-P4-ID-PCCF-2016-0006, CNCS –
UEFISCDI, number 20 PCCF/2018, SRF (HS) and AMED,
Japan (HS).
PS-21-033
Colorectal gastrointestinal stromal tumour: clinicopathological study
of nine cases
M. Hamdani*, O. Belkacem, A. Baccouche, N. Jelidi, D. Chiba,
Z. Nfikha, A. Bdioui, S. Hmissa Belhaj Salah
*Department of Pathology, Sahloul University Hospital of Sousse,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Colorectal Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumour
(GIST) is a rare tumour. This tumour is mainly observed in the transverse
and descending colon.
Our aim is to study the clinicopathological characteristics of colorectal
GISTs and their prognosis.
Methods: It is a retrospective study including nine cases of colorectal
GISTs identified over a period of 17 years, between 2000 and 2017, in the
Department of Pathology of Farhat Hached University Hospital of Sousse
(Tunisia).
Results: Five men and four women with a mean age of 55.14 years
presented with rectal bleeding, followed by abdominal pain and an
Virchows Arch
occlusive syndrome. The tumour was rectal in 3 cases and ileocecal in 3
other cases. The tumour’s mean size was 10.5cm. Mitosis was greater
than 5/50 CFG in 83% of the cases. The surgical margins were positive in
22.2% of cases. Immunohistochemistry showed an expression of CD117
in 75% and DOG1 in all cases. The risk of recurrence was high in 77.8%
of cases.
One patient who had a rectal tumour developed liver metastases after 1
year. A second patient had a tumour recurrence after 2 months.
Conclusion: Colorectal GISTs are rare. Although their mode of revela-
tion is similar to that of conventional adenocarcinomas, a precise diagno-
sis of these tumours is imperative because their prognosis and their ther-
apeutic management are different.
PS-21-034
Assessment of HER2 status in appendiceal mucinous neoplasm
E. Ignat, C. Popp, S. Zurac, E. Grămadă, A. Bastian, A. Cioroianu,
B. Mateescu, F. Mădălin, D. Răduță*
*Colentina University Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: Appendiceal mucinous neoplasms are rare
and heterogeneous mucinous epithelial proliferation, divided into low and
high grade tumours (LAMN; HAMN). Therapeutical significance of
HER2 status is currently evaluated in tumours of the gastrointestinal tract.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective study, including 8 cases: 5-
LAMN and 3-HAMN. Two of HAMN cases displayed pseudomyxoma
peritonei. We analysed tumours’ expression of HER2 and Ki67 and we
correlated the results with clinicopathological data.
Results: Membrane positivity for HER2 was detected in 2/5 cases of
LAMN (40%) and 2/3 cases of HAMN (66.66%). HER2 medium levels
of expression were found similar in both types of appendiceal tumours
(11%-LAMN; 11.66%-HAMN). Media of Ki67 index resulted 2 times
higher in HAMN as opposed to LAMN neoplasms (19.2%-LAMN;
33.66%-HAMN). Both pseudomyxoma peritonei cases were positive
for HER2.
Conclusion: HER2 expression in appendiceal mucinous neoplasms ex-
hibits low levels regardless of the tumour type. These findings indicate
the need to initiate larger studies in order to search for patterns in the
marker expression of this particular malignancy of the appendix.
PS-21-035
Late stage diagnosis of oesophageal cancer - facts from a developing
country
N. Jaffar*, I. Ahmed Bhatti
*Jinnah Sindh Medical University, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Oesophageal cancer is one of the most ag-
gressive malignancy. Most cases are initially diagnosed in either stage 3
or 4. Our study aimed to determine the frequency of Oesophageal
Carcinoma in different ethnic groups of Karachi and to identify factors
responsible for late stage diagnosis.
Methods: A multi-institutional prospective cross-sectional study was
conducted at Oncology ward, JPMC & AEMC Karachi. Non-
probability convenient sampling technique was implemented. Chi
square/Fisher Exact was applied to observe any association between eth-
nic groups, grade, stage and risk factors of delayed diagnosis.
Results: Out of 93 patients, Squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) was the
most common (80.6%) type. Lower 1/3 was the most frequent site
(53.8%). Sindhi ethnicity was most commonly effected (33.3%).
Moderately differentiated grade was seen in good number of cases
(67.7%). First visit to a general physician (GP) was within a month in
54.8% patients. A delayed referral was advised in 21.5% patients. Biopsy
was delayed in 19.4% cases. Significant association was noted between
late stage diagnosis & factors including late referral (P 0.003), non-
availability of laboratory (P 0.018), site of tumour (P 0.000), age of the
patient and size of tumour (P 0.001).
Conclusion: Initial diagnosis of most of the patients was made in late
stage. Important contributing factors of late diagnosis were inadequate
knowledge of patients, delayed initial investigations, poor socioeconomic
status and late referrals to oncologist by GP. Sindhi ethnicity was fre-
quently affected however, no significant association was observed be-
tween ethnicity and EC grading or staging.
PS-21-037
Role of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in serosal invasion of colon
carcinoma
J. Jeruc*, B. Ranković, E. Boštjančič, M. Žlajpah, N. Zidar
*Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Slovenia
Background & objectives: Serosal invasion is a well-recognized adverse
prognostic feature in colon cancer (CC). Our aim was to investigate the
involvement of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in serosal inva-
sion by analysing the expression of the miR-200 family and their target
genes in CC.
Methods: We analysed the expression of miR-200 family and their target
genes CDKN1B, ONECUT2, PTPN13, RND3, SOX2, TGFB2 and
ZEB2 using qPCR. Thirty-three cases of formalin-fixed paraffin-embed-
ded tissue were included (20 CC without and 13 CC with serosal inva-
sion). Microscopically normal colon mucosa from surgical margins was
used as control.
Results: Association analysis showed a gradual increase of expression of
ONECUT2 from normal mucosa to pT2/pT3 and pT4 CC (Rho=0.621,
p=0.001). We observed statistically significant change in expression for
miR-429 in CC pT2 (p=0.031), for ONECUT2 in CC pT3 (p=0.035) and
ONECUT2 (p=0.006), ZEB2 (p=0.017) and SOX2 (p=0.025) in CC pT4a
compared to normal mucosa. In addition, there was statistically significant
difference in expression of PTPN13 (p=0.037) and ZEB2 (p=0.017) be-
tween CC without (pT2/pT3) and CC with serosal invasion (pT4a).
Conclusion: Our results provide further evidence that EMT is involved in
the progression of CC, including serosal invasion. Decreased PTPN13
expression in advanced CC suggests a potential tumour suppressor role of
PTPN13, at least regarding serosal invasion.
This research was funded by Slovenian Research Agency, grant number
J3-1754 and P3-0054.
PS-21-038
Agreement in the assessment of depth of invasion in pT1 colorectal
adenocarcinoma
M. Jimeno*, D. Villán, L. Díaz
*Hospital de Granollers, Spain
Background & objectives: One of the strongest independent factors for
predicting lymph node metastasis in pT1 colorectal adenocarcinoma is
depth of invasion. The aim of this study was to determine the agreement
between pathologists to assess this measurement.
Methods: Forty pT1 CRC cases previously diagnosed (20 pedunculated,
20 sessile) were selected. Three pathologists (one GI experienced pathol-
ogist, one general experienced pathologist and one non-experienced pa-
thologist) evaluated the depth infiltration level by measuring it in
millimetres. Haggitt level was also assessed in pedunculated polyps.
Statistical analysis was performed to calculate paired and global interob-
server agreement (SPSS version 24).
Results: Fair global agreement was found in sessile polyps (CCI=0,42)
with excellent value between experts (CCI=0,99), and moderate in pe-
dunculated ones (CCI=0,72). Nonetheless, poor global agreement was
shown for Haggitt level (weighted kappa=0,11), improved by one paired
Virchows Arch
observation (moderate agreement). Best concordance values were
achieved by the 2 experienced observers.
Conclusion: Interobserver agreement in the classification of level of in-
vasion has shown consistency between experienced pathologists in our
study, especially for sessile polyps. Measurement with Haggitt level has
shown, however, significant limitations. The quantitative value of inva-
sion as recommended, should be the method of choice to evaluate this risk
factor. Reviewing by an experienced operator or consultation between
pathologists within the multidisciplinary team must always be consid-
ered.
PS-21-039
Mixed tumours of the colon and rectum
R. Kanthan*, S. Kanthan, S. Tharmaradinam
*University of Saskatchewan, Canada
Background & objectives: Mixed tumours of the gastrointestinal tract
are rare biclonal neoplasms composed of mixed epithelial-
neuroendocrine elements of benign and malignant potential that are dif-
ficult to diagnose. This project is dedicated to study mixed tumours of the
colon and rectum.
Methods: The Laboratory Information System [LIS] computer was
searched with terms “adenocarcinoma and/or adenoma, neuroendocrine”
for the past 20-years [2000-2019] . The pathological slides were reviewed
to confirm the diagnosis with confirmation of the neuroendocrine com-
ponent by immunohistochemical stains in all cases. Detailed clinicopath-
ological review including age, sex, tumour location, histological type,
lymph node status and management outcomes was undertaken.
Results: Twenty-one cases of mixed tumours of the colon and rectum
were identified in ages 32-87 years with majority in 7th-8th decade with
male predominance-13 cases. Dominant right colon lesions-10,
rectosigmoid-5, left colon-4 and rectum-2. Epithelial component was
adenocarcinoma-20 and tubulovillous adenoma-1. Neuroendocrine com-
ponent: low-grade-NET-G1 [5], G2 [4], high grade-NETG3 [2] and neu-
roendocrine carcinoma [NEC10]. Node positivity seen in 15 cases.
Overall disease survival was poor in the tumours with NEC in compari-
son to NET1-2 lesions
Conclusion: Mixed tumours of the colon/rectum are rare and remain
poorly understood entities associated with highly malignant potential
and poor prognosis. We propose that any poorly differentiated histology
should be investigated with immunohistochemical stains for neuroendo-
crine differentiation and be reported regardless of its percentage volume
as the degree of component differentiation influences the prognosis more
than volume. Accurate histological identification of these tumours is vital
to determine appropriate treatment strategies.
PS-21-040
Hyperganglionosis in pneumatosis coli –cause or effect- chicken or
the egg –a case series
R. Kanthan*, S. Tharmaradinam, S. Kanthan
*University of Saskatchewan, Canada
Background & objectives: Pneumatosis-coli[PC], a rare entity is not an
isolated diagnosis but a finding that suggests an underlying process
whose pathogenesis is not well understood. In this pilot case series, we
explore a novel histopathological finding of hyperganglionosis in PCC as
cause-vs-effect.
Methods: An index case of PC with hyperganglionosis led to a twenty-
year search of the Laboratory Information Service [LIS] that identified a
total of fifteen cases with reported finding of PC. All histopathological
slides were reviewed to confirm the PCC. One representative block was
subjected to immunohistochemical staining with antibodies to S100,
Calretinin and CD68 for further evaluation with clinical correlation.
Results: This pilot study reports on four cases of pneumatosis coli that
have been studied in detail with their additional stains. All cases upon
review confirmed the presence of the multiple non-communicating cysts
of PC. Additionally, prominent, enlarged hypertrophic ganglion associ-
ated with hypertrophic nerve fibres were seen in the mucosa/submucosa
that were highlighted by S100 and Calretinin. CD68 stained slides
outlined the histiocytes and giant cells surrounding the cyst of PC
Conclusion: The exact pathogenesis of non-communicating air-filled
cysts within the bowel wall remains poorly understood including me-
chanical theory of mucosal injury, bacterial theory of gas production,
counterperfusion-saturation theory and pulmonary gas theory. We pro-
pose “Neuronal theory” of dysgenetic ganglion cells with abnormal peri-
stalsis resulting in ‘reversal airflow’ with intramural accumulation of
intraluminal air or maybe they are the effect of forced mucosal expansion
of cysts; thus reminiscent of the chicken-egg scenario
PS-21-041
Expression and prognostic relevance of RIPK3 and MLKL in human
colon cancer
E. Keller*, K. Janssen, D. Wilhelm, R. Langer, W. Weichert, P. Jost,
J. Slotta-Huspenina
*Institute of Pathology, Technical University of Munich, Germany
Background & objectives: Receptor-interacting protein kinase 3
(RIPK3) and mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) might yield
therapeutic potential in cancer. The aim of this study was to investigate
the protein expression of RIPK3 and MLKL and its prognostic relevance
in human colon cancer.
Methods: 375 primarily resected tumours were analysed. Cytoplasmic
expression of tumoral RIPK3 and MLKL was determined by immunohis-
tochemical staining of tissue micro arrays of formalin fixated paraffin em-
bedded tissue. Level of protein expression was determined by calculation of
immune reactive score (IRS). Expression levels were correlated with histo-
pathological parameters (pT, pN, M, G) and overall survival (OS).
Results: High RIPK3 expression was detected in 25,4% (95/373) of
the tumours. 64,9% (242/373) showed low expression and 9,7%
(36/373) were negative. MLKL was highly expressed in 24% (90/
375), 53,1% (199/375) showed low MLKL expression and 22,9%
(86/375) were negative. Positive staining of RIPK3 was significant-
ly associated with positive MLKL staining (p<0.001). However, in
18% of the tumours (67/373) we observed the combination of pos-
itive RIPK3/negative MLKL and in 4,8% (18/373) negative RIPK3/
positive MLKL. Positive RIPK3/negative MLKL expression pattern
was significantly associated with peritoneal metastasis (p=0,009).
High RIPK3 tended towards higher pN status (p=0,089). However,
no significant association of RIPK3 and MLKL expression with pT,
G and OS was found.
Conclusion: Our data does not provide evidence of RIPK3 and MLKL
protein expression being independent prognostic factors for OS in human
colon cancer. However, we identified cases with exclusive expression of
either RIPK3 or MLKL (18% and 4,8% respectively) proposing two
distinct biological sub-groups in colon cancer. RIPK3 in the absence of
MLKL might be promotive of peritoneal metastasis in colon cancer.
Funding: Else Kröner-Fresenius Foundation
PS-21-042
Oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma in Hargeisa/Somaliland: a
study of 90 cases
S. Khalil*
*Needle Medical Center, Somalia
Background & objectives: Presenting demographic view and data of
oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma in Hargeisa/Somaliland, in 30
month, from August 1st 2017 to Jan 1st 2020.
Virchows Arch
Methods: Retrospective study in our centre in Hargeisa city, Somaliland,
of oesophageal SCC diagnosed in endoscopic biopsies received in our
lab, within a period of 30 month, between August 1st 2017 to January 1st
2020, in the city of Hargeisa/Somaliland. All cases diagnosed by routine
H&E stained sections. IHC is not available in the country.
Results: We had 90 cases, (28 female and 62 males), age range between
26 to 85 yr (mean age 51 yr), two cases involved patients under age of 30
yr. 13 cases were of keratinizing SCC, and the remaining (77) cases were
of non-keratinizing type; with one case of well differentiated SCC, 8
cases of poorly differentiated SCC, one case of sarcomatoid SCC, and
one case of pleomorphic giant cell SCC.
Conclusion: Oesophageal squamous cells carcinoma is a serious fatal
health condition, with remarkable incidence rate compared to the popu-
lation count in Hargeisa, capital city of Somaliland, that need more atten-
tion and further study.
PS-21-043
Investigative and management pathways, histopathology reporting
and clinical outcomes in patients with biopsy features suspicious of
eosinophilic oesophagitis
C.Y. Kong*, C.Y. Toh, N. Maka
*School of Medicine, University of Glasgow, Department of Pathology,
NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: The diagnosis and management of eosino-
philic oesophagitis (EO) remains a challenge due to differing definitions,
clinico-pathological similarities with gastro-oesophageal reflux and a
paucity of evidence. We aim to elucidate the current clinical pathways
and outcomes of patients with suspected EO.
Methods: A retrospective cohort review was performed on all consecu-
tive patients with oesophageal biopsies which had histopathological fea-
tures suggestive of EO over a year’s period within a single health-board
with a catchment population of 1.2 million people. We reviewed diag-
nostic sampling practices, histopathological reporting, management path-
ways and clinical outcomes in these patients after a minimum of 1 year’s
follow-up.
Results: A total of 107 patients had EO-suspicious biopsies. Of this,
38.3% had potentially non-diagnostic single-site or undifferentiated
multiple-site biopsies. Eosinophilic densities were not reported in
34.5% of biopsies.
Patients were managed with a wide variety of regiments incorporating
proton-pump-inhibitors (PPIs), steroids, dietary exclusion, or combina-
tions thereof.
Only 37.5%, 44.4% and 43.8% of patients with documented therapeutic
responses had a good response to PPIs, steroids, and PPI-steroids combi-
nation therapy, respectively.
Conclusion: This study suggests wide variability and inconsistencies
exists in current endoscopic sampling, histopathological reporting, man-
agement, and outcomes of EO. Therefore, there remains an unmet need
for EO patients with its associated high morbidity due to recurrent issues
of food bolus and chronic oesophageal strictures. Standardised protocol-
based diagnostic and treatment pathways would reduce the need for re-
peat sampling, assist with earlier detection and establish patients on ap-
propriate treatment sooner.
PS-21-044
A model for predicting risk of distant metastasis in stage II colorectal
cancer
A. Konstantinov*, K. Shelekhova, A. Gratchev
*St. Petersburg Clinical Research and Practical Center for Specialized
Oncological Care, Russia
Background & objectives: Non-metastatic colorectal cancer can recur as
a distant metastasis. It is important to identify a subgroup of patients with
the highest risk of relapse. This study aimed to identify the
pathomorphological prognostic factors for the selection of this subgroup.
Methods: A retrospective cohort lymph node-negative colorectal cancer
with complete surgical resection was studied included 48 and 52 patients,
with and without distant metastasis respectively. The mean follow-up
period was 5 years. A twenty-one histopathological characteristics of both
the cancer cells and tumour microenvironment have been evaluated.
Variables that have shown p<0.05 were incorporated into model.
Results: In univariate and multivariate analyses, the following factors had
significant correlation with metastasis p<0.05 or less: high-grade bud-
ding, lymphovascular invasion, feeble stromal inflammatory infiltration,
low ratio macrophages type 1 to type 2, low number of intraepithelial
lymphocytes, nuclear expression of beta-catenin, low pericyte coverage
of the tumour vasculature. The colon cancer recurrence nomogram pre-
dicted distant metastasis have been proposed.
Conclusion: Proposed model based on tumour parenchyma and micro-
environment features interconnection seems to be better personalized
prognostication system by identifying patients both the high- and low-
risk of relapse within stage II colorectal cancer.
PS-21-045
Fluorescence application for stomach cancer metastasis verification
Y. Korneva*, E. Tsygankova, M. Belyakov, O. Shisterova,
A. Dorosevich
*Smolensk Regional Institute of Pathology, Smolensk State Medical
University, Russia
Background & objectives: One of the methods of spectroscopic analysis
is the method of the luminescence recording, that is fluorimetry.
Objective: to compare spectra of luminescence of stomach adenocarci-
nomas (SAC) and their metastasis to different organs.
Methods: We examined 20 cases of SAC with their metastasis to lymph
nodes, liver, lungs and omentum (42 specimens).To study the structure of
the substance we registered luminescence of unstained de-waxed histo-
logical sections to detect tissue composition using hardware and software
complex "Fluorat-02-Panorama". The luminescence and synchronous
scanning spectra were obtained (roughly approximate spectrum of exci-
tation of the luminescence) and compared.
Results: Metastasis in lungs have more angular curves and less noticeable
peak in the region of long waves, while the study of the of lymph nodes
metastasis spectra showed the presence of a greater number of peaks in
the area of long waves, and their peaks are also higher and steeper than
similar peaks from the other organs.
Conclusion: It was noticed that the spectra of SACs are qualitatively
similar to their metastasis: they have the same number of peaks and
maxima at approximately the same excitation wavelengths (280-290 nm
and 336-340 nm). Metastasis in omentum and liver have the maximum
similarity with the main tumour of synchronous scanning. But also, there
are some differences reflecting the impact of the tissue accepting metas-
tasis in spectra. This method of spectral analysis can be used to verify
metastasis of stomach cancer.
PS-21-047
Y chromosome loss is a frequent event in Barrett’s adenocarcinoma
and associated with poor outcome
H. Loeser*, C. Woelwer, F. Gebauer, H. Alakus, T. Zander, R. Buettner,
A. Hillmer, A. Quaas
*University Hospital Cologne, Germany
Background & objectives: The loss of the Y chromosome (LoY) in
frequently described in various malignancies. There is no reliable infor-
mation on the frequency, significance for tumour progression including
prognostic significance, type of Y chromosome loss or homogeneity in
oesophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC).
Virchows Arch
Methods: We analysed a large tumour collective of more than 650 EAC
with fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) using tissue micro arrays
(TMA) and statistically considering further molecular tumour alterations
andclinical aspectswith follow-up data. Commerciallyavailable FISH probes
were validated in oesophageal cell lines of known Y chromosome status.
Results: The median follow-up for the entire cohort was 57.7 months
with a 5-year survival rate of 26.6%. LoY of one chromosome arm was
present in 3.4%, complete LoY in 55.7%. LoY was not affected by ad-
ministration of neoadjuvant treatment. LoY was strongly associated with
shortened overall-survival (OS) in the entire patients’ cohort with an OS
of 19.4 months (95%CI 14.8 - 24.0 months, p < 0.001). Patients with
presence of Y chromosome showed a median OS of 58.8 months (95%CI
33.1 - 83.2 months). In multivariate analysis, LoY is an independent
prognostic marker with a hazard ratio of 0.558.
Conclusion: Taken together, LoY is a frequent event in EAC and asso-
ciated with a poor outcome. Furthermore, the phenomenon of male dom-
inance of up to 9:1 in EAC is still unclear. However, the literature and the
study results here provide an informative basis for a biologically and
functionally relevant role of LoY in EAC. Also, there might be a direct
influence of Y deficiency on the tumour immune microenvironment
PS-21-048
Incidental findings neoplasm in appendectomy specimens with acute
appendicitis, during routine histopathological examination
R.D.P. Lopez-Panqueva*, B. Díaz-Gómez.
*Department of Pathology and Laboratories, Fundación Santa Fe de
Bogotá, Colombia
Background & objectives: Acute appendicitis remains the most com-
mon surgical emergency encountered by the general surgeon, diseases
and tumours of the appendix are very rare. This study aimed to show the
presence of appendicular tumours in patients with acute appendicitis.
Methods: A retrospective study between January-2009-December-2019.
The pathology reports of 5628 cases with acute appendicitis and cases
with an appendix neoplasm were retrieved to determine the incidence of
concomitant appendicular tumours, identify the risk factors associated the
incidental appendectomies, or presurgical diagnosis of injury, were ex-
cluded. The statistical analysis of the data was compared using quartiles,
χ2test and student's t test.
Results: Appendiceal neoplasms were found in 118 out of 5628 acute
appendicitis, the overall incidence was 2.09%. 70 females and 48 males
from 11 to 86 years old. The unusual histopathological findings include:
Neuroendocrine tumour (n=49,41.5%), Low-grade mucinous neoplasia
(n=40,33.8%), Adenocarcinoma (n=11,9.3%), Adenomatous polyp
(n=18,15.2%). None of these patients with subsequent diagnosis of tu-
mour were suspected prior to the appendectomy.
Conclusion: The incidence of appendicular malignancies may be
underreported; proper histopathological evaluation and being aware of
these unusual diseases, allows an adequate treatment. Tumour prevalence
in acute appendicitis was low. Younger patients may be at a higher risk of
occult appendiceal neuroendocrine neoplasms than other age group.
Tumour risk was significantly higher in complicated acute appendicitis
compared with uncomplicated acute appendicitis.
PS-21-049
Clinicopathological study of tumours of the gastrointestinal stroma
tumour (GIST) in a reference centre in Bogotá, Colombia
R.D.P. Lopez-Panqueva*, G. Herrera Almario, M.J. Miranda, M.J. Ortiz
Pereira, M.C. Toscano Madero, R.E. Andrade Perez
*Department of Pathology and Laboratories, Fundación Santa Fe de
Bogotá, Colombia
Background & objectives: GIST is the most common mesenchymal
neoplasm of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT); little information has been
described in third world countries. We Describe pathologic characteristics
of 205 patients in the University Hospital FSFB in Bogotá, Colombia,
between 2001-2019.
Methods: A cross-sectional observational study using non-probabilistic
sampling for convenience of patients with diagnosis of GIST referred to
the Pathology Department was performed. Variables as age of diagnosis,
institution, sex, immunohistochemically expression of C-Kit, CD34,
DOG 1, PDGFR 1, desmin, S-100, tumour location, pattern, symptoms,
treatment and classification according to the four risk categories accord-
ing to Fletcher modified scale were analysed.
Results: The clinicopathological and epidemiological profiles has few
differences to what has being describe in the literature. The age of diag-
nosis remains on the fifth decade of life (55 % female vs 44% of men, the
most common symptoms were 62.6% abdominal pain, 21.3% bleeding.
70% of tumours were of fusiform C-KIT was expressed in 98.5%. 57.5%
were primarily gastric, 24.9% small intestine, 3.1% colorectal and 14.5%
extragastrointestinal. CD34 was positive in 83.8%, DOG1 45.8% and
PDGFR in 1.7%. 51.2% of tumours classified as high risk at the time of
diagnosis. In terms of treatment, 35.5% received surgical treatment and
among these 13.8% had received targeted therapy, Imatinib.
Conclusion: This study represents an approximation to the current situ-
ation of GIST tumours in a pathology reference centre in Colombia. Most
of the patients are woman and at the time of diagnosis presented with a
high-risk tumour, in contrast with what is referred in the literature. This
differences in incidence reflect variation in population risk and warrants
further investigation in our Country.
PS-21-050
HER2 expression pattern in gastric adenocarcinomas in a Nigerian
tertiary hospital by immunohistochemistry
M. Mashor*, U. Ezenkwa, J. Ogunbiyi, G. Ogun, M. Ajani
*Department of Pathology, University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria
Background & objectives: The demonstration of HER2 in gastric ade-
nocarcinoma (GA) tissues by immunohistochemistry assists in deciding
whether targeted therapy would be optimal for HER2 positive GAs pa-
tients. HER2 status of GA patients in this environment is unknown, hence
the need for this study.
Methods: Data on age, gender, site of lesion and histological subtype of
gastric adenocarcinomas were retrieved and reviewed. Tissue array
blocks were made from archived formalin fixed paraffin embedded gas-
tric tumour tissue. Slides cut from these blocks were stained with anti-
human HER2 antibody by immunohistochemistry and scored using
ToGA trial criteria. Ethical approval was obtained from the institutional
ethical review committee
Results: There were 80 cases with a male to female ratio of 1.9:1. The
mean age was 55.65 ±13.50 years whilst the modal age group was 60-69
years. Only 7 (8.75%) of the tumours involved the proximal part (cardia)
of the stomach whilst 73 (91.25%) involved the distal parts (pylorus,
body and fundus). The intestinal, diffuse and mixed morphological sub-
types constituted 53.8%, 31.2% and 15.0% of the cases respectively.
Overall, A great majority of the tumours (92.5%) showed negative
HER2 expression with only 6 cases (7.5%) showing strong positivity
for HER2. The HER2 positive tumours include 2 of the 7 (28.6%) prox-
imal and 4 of the 73 (5.5%) distal tumours.
Conclusion: HER2 showed slightly lower overexpression rate than stud-
ies from many parts of the world. This overexpression was significantly
higher in proximal than distal tumours suggesting differences in their
molecular pathogenesis and more likelihood of response to trastuzumb
by proximal tumours.
PS-21-051
Biological and molecular profile of colorectal cancer is dependent on
the tumour microenvironment
Virchows Arch
M. Melnikova*, J. Bramsen, C.L. Andersen, S.J. Dutoit-Hamilton,
I.E. Holm
*Department of Pathology, Randers Regional Hospital, Denmark
Background & objectives: Colorectal cancer (CRC) has been stratified
into prognostic groups based on gene expression profile and tumour
microenvironment (TME) composition.
The goals of this study are to identify prognostic biomarkers within TME
using immunohistochemistry and to improve understanding of tumour
biology.
Methods: This study utilized 281 CRC samples for immunohistochem-
ical stainings with biomarkers for T-cells (CD3, CD8), B-cells (CD20),
macrophages (CD68, CD163), cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF) (α-
SMA, FAP). Biomarker expression has been quantified at the tumour
core (TC) and invasive margin (in carcinomas) / neoplasia border (in
adenomas) (IM/NB) as areal fraction with digital pathology software
(Visiopharm).
Results: Expression of all biomarkers was strongly correlated in both re-
gions but was significantly higher at the IM/NB compared to TC (except for
anti-CD68 in adenomas). In more advanced pathological tumour stages T-
cell expression and B-cell expression were decreasing, whereas CAF ex-
pression was increasing. CD68-positive macrophages were more prevalent
compared to CD163-positive macrophages in carcinomas with no signifi-
cant difference in adenomas. High expression of CD163-positive cells was
associated with presence of BRAF mutation(s) and microsatellite instable
tumours, whereas low macrophage expression was associated with micro-
satellite stable tumours. Moreover, high expression of T-cells was associ-
ated with microsatellite instable tumours and low expression group was
associated with microsatellite stable tumours.
Conclusion: This study provides insight into relationship between TME
and molecular/biological tumour profile. To improve our understanding
of tumour biology and enhance personalized treatment it might be bene-
ficial to combine TME with conventional patho-anatomical tumour clas-
sification/grading.
Funding: Health Research Fund of Central Denmark Region.
PS-21-052
The new scale for the semi-automatic assessment of the immune mi-
croenvironment in gastric cancer has great prognostic value com-
pared to generally accepted scales
I. Mikhailov*, N. Danilova, V. Khomyakov, A. Chayka, N. Oleynikova,
P. Malkov
*Lomonosov Moscow State University, Russia
Background & objectives: Generally accepted scales for assessing im-
mune microenvironment in gastric cancer are based on manual calcula-
tion of average number of cells in hot spots (predominantly intratumoral
and in invasive margin). This is time-consuming process, development of
new assessment scales is required.
Methods: After immunohistochemical staining average area of CD8+
cells (square micrometres) in three fields of view (lens magn.x20) was
assessed separately in central part of tumour and in morphologically
normal mucous membrane of peritumoral region directly adjacent to tu-
mour tissue. Automatic segmentation method based on colour separation
(RGB system) implemented in the Leica LASX tool was used.
Results: We also counted average number of cells in three hot spots (lens
magn.x20) in tumour and normal mucous membrane. Multivariate anal-
ysis of factors affecting overall survival was performed using Cox pro-
portional hazard model (N=43). Risk ratio (RR) for intratumoral CD8+
cells using hot spot counts was 1,001 (CI: 0,995–1,008, p<0,01) and
when using the new scale RR=1,009 (CI: 0,532–1,914, p<0,01). By using
the hot spot count obtained RR for CD8+ cells in normal mucosa using
hot spot calculation was 1,005 (CI: 0,999–1,011, p<0,01) and when using
the new scale RR=1,599 (CI: 0,519–4,917, p<0,01).
Conclusion: Our proposed scale for assessing immune microenviron-
ment in gastric cancer showed that average area of CD8+cells assessed
in normal mucosa by automatic segmentation is strong negative prognos-
tic factor. Values obtained using hot spot calculation were not significant-
ly related to prognosis.
PS-21-053
Dysplasia in patients with Barrett’s oesophagus
L. Mikchaleva*, K. Voytkovskaya, E. Fedorov, A. Shidiy-Zakrua
*Research Institute of Human Morphology, Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: Barrett's oesophagus (BE) is a premalignant
condition defined as any type of columnar metaplasia of the distal oe-
sophagus higher than 1 cm above gastro-oesophageal junction. Intestinal
metaplasia is well-known risk factor for developing oesophageal adeno-
carcinoma, while studies of cardiac-type metaplasia are controversial.
The aim of our morphological study was to identify and characterize
dysplasia in patients with BE.
Methods: We examined endoscopic biopsy specimens of 80 patients
with BE, stained with haematoxylin-eosin. Combined PASD/Alcian
Blue stain was used for detection of goblet cells. Immunohistochemical
evaluation was performed in cases with dysplasia, including immuno-
staining with MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, CDX2 and villin. Of
80 patients with morphological features of BE 50 had intestinal metapla-
sia and 30 – cardiac-type metaplasia.
Results: Dysplasia was found in 12 patients (15%). Dysplasia in most
cases (83,3%) was multifocal. Among patients with dysplasia 11 showed
evidence of intestinal metaplasia and one patient with high-grade dyspla-
sia had cardiac-type metaplasia. Immunohistochemical evaluation in foci
of dysplasia revealed pure cardiac phenotype (MUC1+, MUC5AC+,
MUC6+, MUC2-, CDX2- and villin-) in 3 cases (15%) and mixed ade-
nomatous phenotype (MUC1+, MUC5AC+, MUC6+, MUC2+, CDX2+
and villin+) in 9 cases (75%).
Conclusion: Dysplasia is much more frequent in patients with BE with
intestinal metaplasia and in most cases is multifocal. Mixed adenomatous
immunophenotype is the most common immunophenotype in BE with
dysplasia.
PS-21-054
Alteration of circadian rhythm proteins expression in inflammatory
bowel diseases
K. Mosna*, P. Janega, P. Babál
*Institute of Pathological Anatomy, Comenius University Bratislava,
Slovakia
Background & objectives: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is con-
sidered to be a chronic, relapsing, multifactorial disease. Over the past
years a possible connection of IBD with circadian system has been pro-
posed, which we further explored in this work.
Methods: We performed a semiquantitative immunohistochemical anal-
ysis of the expression of 8 core circadian proteins (BMAL1, BMAL2,
PER1, PER2, PER3, CLOCK, NPAS2 and TIMELESS) in the epithelial
cells of intestinal mucosa of 24 patients with Crohn’s disease (CD) and 26
patients with ulcerative colitis (UC), which we subsequently compared
with 25 control samples.
Results: The expression of 5 core circadian proteins (BMAL1, PER1,
PER3, TIMELESS and NAPS2) was statistically significantly decreased
in patients with IBD in comparison to control samples, whereas expres-
sion of BMAL1 and PER1 was more noticeably decreased in UC patients
and PER3, TIMELESS and NPAS2 in CD patients. The most pro-
nounced changes were noted in BMAL1 protein expression, where larger
segments of neighboring epithelial cells showed loss of staining in in-
flamed mucosa. Our work represents a complex immunohistochemical
Virchows Arch
study evaluating the changes in circadian proteins expression in intestinal
mucosa of IBD patients.
Conclusion: We demonstrated apparent changes of circadian proteins
expression in patients with IBD, confirming connection between IBD
and disruption of circadian rhythms. Our results suggest a number of
possible new diagnostic or prognostic markers, with BMAL1 protein
being the most potent one.
Funding: Supported by APVV-14-0318 grant
PS-21-055
HER2 status in gastric precancerous lesions
S. Mozgovoi*, M. Keruchenko, A. Shimanskaya, L. Panyushkin,
M. Livzan, A. Kononov
*Omsk State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Amplification of HER2 gene can occur early
stages of gastric cancer, but information about that is extremely scarce.
The aim of the study was to reveal the frequency and patterns of HER2
protein and gene expression on the spectrum of carcinogenesis.
Methods: The study included 82 gastric biopsy samples: atrophic gastri-
tis (18), 17 - uncertain dysplasia (17); intestinal type adenomas and non-
polypoid lesions with low grade dysplasia (14) and high grade dysplasia
(17); invasive adenocarcinoma (18). Serial sections of tissues were used
for routine examination, HER2 immunohistochemistry and silver-
enhanced in situ hybridization (SISH) with adapted manual tissue micro-
array technique.
Results: Overexpression of HER2 (2+ and 3+) with the presence of a
membrane or basolateral immunohistochemical label was found in 3
cases among invasive carcinoma group only with SISH confirmation of
all 2+/3+ positive cases. The presence of non-conventional staining var-
iants of HER2 expression were revealed in 62 cases: apical label (partial
membrane staining of the apical edge of the cell), cytoplasmic (diffuse
staining of cell cytoplasm), “strip form” (focal cytoplasmic staining of the
cell, forming a strip) and nuclear staining. There were no statistically
significant differences in the expression of HER2 between different cat-
egories of dysplasia and invasive adenocarcinoma as well as between
variants with different phenotypic differentiation ( (p<0,05).
Conclusion: We did not reveal the presence of HER2 overexpression
during early precancerous changes. Non-conventional HER2-staining
needs more data and additional analysis for practical interpretation and
implementation. These results don’t exclude the possibility of using this
marker in differential diagnostics in the situations of small volume or low
informative biopsy material as a method with high specificity.
PS-21-056
Orientation of the biopsy material as a way to increase the informa-
tiveness of the pathologists’ conclusion in assessing of gastric mucosal
atrophy
S. Mozgovoi*, M. Parygina, L. Panyushkin, A. Shimanskaya,
E. Pomorgailo, V. Lippert, A. Kononov
*Omsk State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: The diagnostic value of the study of gastric
biopsy specimens can be reduced due to the artificial changes especially
lose of appropriate orientation. The possible way to reduce the interpre-
tation difficulties is orientation of the gastric mucosa fragments.
Methods: 60 diagnostic cases (248 biopsy fragments) were divided into 2
groups: oriented and not oriented. The orientation of tissue samples was
performed by using specialized orientation strip. After that biopsy frag-
ments were embedded and stained according to the standard methods. 3
pathologists assessed the gradation of atrophy in the obtained biopsy
material with the calculation of the agreement level (Cohen’s kappa).
Results: A comparative analysis of the diagnostic effectiveness of the
gastric mucosa atrophy evaluation was performed on both groups. In
group with oriented specimens 119 from 124 (95.97%) remained orien-
tation regardless of the side of biopsy material in contact with the strip.
Appropriate orientation was not reached with an extremely small volume
of biopsy material. Cohen’s kappa was 0,92. In second group only 59
fragments (47.58%) remained the appropriate orientation under micros-
copy examination with impossible to make a diagnostic judgement on
atrophy and kappa level 0,58.
Conclusion: The orientation of gastric biopsy specimens improves the
quality of morphological diagnosis. The best way to orient is to use
specialized strips for biopsy material, which is due to the high effective-
ness of reaching the orientation of tissue fragment and low level of arti-
ficial deformation. The use of adhesive strips significantly increases the
level of diagnostic agreement due to the objective detection of atrophy.
PS-21-058
High micro-vessel density correlates with higher peri-tumoral
immune response in colorectal cancer
G. Raghuram, W. Fadhil, D. Sculthorpe, M. Ilyas, A. Mukherjee*
*University of Nottingham, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Microvessels, a significant component of the
tumour microenvironment in colorectal cancer (CRC), have traditionally
been assessed in full-face sections. This study aimed to assess the
microvessel density (MVD) in CRC tissue microarrays (TMAs) and de-
termined correlations with clinicopathological variables.
Methods: TMAs from 1000 consecutive cases (2008-2014) of CRC from
a tertiary centre were immunostained with clinical grade CD34 antibody
(1:500 dilution). Stained microvessels and core areas were annotated on
digital images (Nanozoomer) and assessed (3D Histech). The MVD was
adjudged in luminal, central and peripheral tumour cores as well as adja-
cent normal, and results correlated to clinicopathological variables
(SPSS).
Results: Of 985 assessable cases, 490 had a high overall tumour MVD.
The mean tumour MVD was lower than the mean MVD in the adjacent
normal area (p<0.001). A higher overall and peripheral tumoral MVD
was associated with lower T stage (p=0.04) and lower overall stage
(p=0.02). Average tumour MVD (as well as peripheral and luminal spe-
cific MVD) correlated with a conspicuous peri-tumoral lymphocyte den-
sity (p<0.0001). Higher tumour MVD also correlated with mismatch
repair (MMR) proficient state (p<0.001). The MVD in the adjacent nor-
mal neither correlated with the immune response nor with the MMR
status. Higher overall tumoral MVD was associated with alive survival
status at 5 years (p=0.045).
Conclusion: MVD in the CRC microenvironment is correlated with low-
er stage, a conspicuous peri-tumoral lymphocyte response and is higher in
MMR proficient tumours. Digital annotations of core stromal areas may
further refine clinical correlations of MVD in CRC.
Supported by the Nottingham Molecular Pathology Node
PS-21-059
Searching for the aetiology of gastric mucosa pigmentation – some-
times a teamwork
F. Neacsu*, C. Pop, A. Tomescu, C. Ciora, I.A. Ostahi, M.A. Bara,
G. Becheanu
*Emergency University Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: Gastric mucosa pigmentation is a rare find-
ing and it can be associated with exposure to exogenous agents including
hydralazine, thiazide, furosemide, beta blockers and iron supplements,
the pigment deposits consisting of iron, calcium, barium sulphate, char-
coal, melanin, lipofuscin and others.
Methods: We report two cases of a 34-year-old and 40-year-old female
patients with dyspeptic syndrome and oral treatment with bismuth
tripotassium (De NOL, respectively Ulcamed) and PPI. Because of
Virchows Arch
persistent symptoms and black stools, gastroscopy was performed in both
cases.
The first gastroscopy revealed a diffuse inflammatory mucosa, with a
friable and “solid plaque”-like aspect, suspicious for a gastric lymphoma.
Results: The biopsies taken from the body of the stomach showed a
diffuse chronic gastritis, erosive, non-atrophic, negative for Hp, with mild
hyalinosis of the lamina propria and the presence of amorphous black-
brown pigment deposits on the mucosal surface, within the exudate and
under the superficial regenerative epithelium.
The second patient had a friable and erosive gastric mucosa. Biopsies
showed oxyntic type mucosa with lesions erosive gastritis, with abundant
neutrophils, discrete exudate and focal grey-black pigment covering the
mucosa and beneath the regenerative cubic. Hp was absent. Both cases
presented negative Pearls stain.
After a detailed discussion with the patients and the gastroenterologist the
on-going treatment containing Bismuth was revealed.
Conclusion: These cases highlight the need for the differential diagnosis
and show the importance of communication between the gastroenterolo-
gist and pathologist. Bismuth is known to induce oral pigmentation and
even mucosal oesophageal necrosis when associated with salicylates.
PS-21-060
Markers of epithelial-mesenchymal-transition in oesophageal adeno-
carcinoma for decision strategy of surgical versus endoscopic
therapy
D. Neureiter*, C. Mayr, P. Winkelmann, B. Neumayer, E. Klieser,
A. Wagner, C. Hufnagl, K. Emmanuel, J. Holzinger, O. Koch,
T. Kiesslich, M. Varga
*Institute of Pathology, PMU/SALK, Austria
Background & objectives: The decision for endoscopic submucosal dis-
section (ESD) versus esophagectomy of oesophageal adenocarcinomas
(EACs) is based on clinical evaluation of tumour depth and invasion,
whereby marker profiling of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition
(EMT) could be helpful to ordain which procedure is more appropriate.
Methods: We investigate retrospectively the immunohistochemical ex-
pression levels of several EMT-related proteins (Claudin-1, E-Cadherin,
Ki67, P53, SNAIL/SLUG, Vimentin, ZEB1, ZEB2) and microRNAs
(141, 200a, 200b, 200c, 429, 205) in ESD- and surgically resected sam-
ples of EACs. By doing this we aim to evaluate whether pre-operative
measurement of EMT marker expression might support the decision re-
garding ESD versus surgery of EACs.
Results: ESD resected samples display high expression of epithelial pro-
tein markers, whereas surgically resected samples display high expression
of mesenchymal markers. Additionally, the anti-EMT microRNA-205
was significantly higher expressed in ESD-resected samples, whereas
we found no significant differences in the expression levels of
microRNA-200 family members. Additionally, statistical cluster and re-
gression analysis reveal a significant cluster determination based on the
EMT and miRNA expression pattern.
Conclusion: On molecular level, tumour invasion is strongly associ-
ated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) and
microRNAs. Our retrospective approach demonstrates that measure-
ment of selected EMT markers and microRNA-205 has significant
discrimination power to distinguish ESD-resected and surgically
resected samples. We suggest the assessment of EMT status of
EAC samples on molecular level might support clinical evaluation
regarding the applicability of ESD in future.
Funding: Cancer Cluster Salzburg
PS-21-061
Non-genetic HER2 intratumoral heterogeneity with newly discov-
ered HER2 positive tumour cells in gastric cancer: HER2 mRNA
expression in amplified HER2 gene tumour cells without HER2 pro-
tein over-expression
H. Nitta*, A. Kaito, A. Lo, A. Murillo, D. Munroe, A. Ochiai, T. Kuwata
*Roche Tissue Diagnostics, USA
Background & objectives: HER2-positive gastric cancer (GC) demon-
strates more HER2 intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) compared to breast
cancer (BC) and GC patients don’t respond to HER2-targeted therapy
well. Our objective was to investigate HER2 ITH at HER2 gene,
mRNA, and protein levels in GC.
Methods: GC tissue biopsy and post-HER2 therapy surgical resection
samples of previously diagnosed HER2 positive GC patients were
analysed for HER2 ITH statues with consecutive sections using: 1)
HER2 gene-protein assay (GPA) for concurrent detection of HER2 gene,
chromosome 17 centromere, and HER2 protein at the individual cell level
and 2) HER2 RNA in situ hybridization (ISH).
Results: We discovered a new type of HER2 positive cell popula-
tions that are amplified-HER2 gene tumour cells without HER2
protein over-expression among HER2-positive GC cases with ITH
using GPA (non-genetic ITH). This new HER2-positive tumour cell
type could be found in mucosal and more deeply invasive cancer
areas of submucosa and disrupted muscularis propria. HER2 genetic
ITH was also observed in GC. HER2 gene and protein negative GC
cells lacked HER2 RNA expression while homogeneous HER2 gene
and protein positive tumour cells demonstrated high HER2 RNA
expression levels. However, HER2 RNA ISH revealed that over-
expression of HER2 RNA was detected in the newly discovered
HER2-positive tumour cells without HER2 protein over-expression.
Conclusion: Non-genetic HER2 ITH in GC was confirmed by a
discovery of the new type of HER2 positive tumour cells presenting
amplified-HER2 gene and over-expressed-HER2 RNA, but without
HER2 protein over-expression. This unique HER2 ITH might be a
cause of inefficient efficacy of HER2-targeted therapy that requires
HER2 protein as the target. Thus, we propose to redefine the defi-
nition of GC HER2 ITH by including non-genetic HER2 ITH.
PS-21-062
The correlation between metastatic lymph node ratio, location of the
tumour, and tumour differentiation in 97 colorectal cancers with
lymph node metastasis
A. Nomikos*, S. Sina, P. Christodoulou, G. Kapogiannatos,
L. Abou-Asabeh, S. Chranioti, M. Digalakis
*Department of Pathology, Asklipieion Voulas, Greece
Background & objectives: The proportion of the number of involved
lymph nodes (LNs) to the number of examined LNs—defined as meta-
static LN ratio (mLNR)—has been considered as a prognostic parameter
in colon cancer.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective study of 97 patients (55
males and 42 females) who were initially diagnosed with colon can-
cer at General Hospital Asklipieion Voulas from 2010 to 2019. In our
study, a cut-off of 0.4 was used for the mLNR. The distributions of
the patient characteristics were assessed by the Chi square test.
Results: A high mLNR (≥0.4) was significantly correlated with tumour
differentiation. No significant correlation was observed between mLNR
and the location of the tumour.
Conclusion: Many authors have introduced the metastatic lymph node
ratio (mLNR) in examining various malignant tumours. Berger et al. first
reported the prognostic role of mLNR in colon-rectal cancer, though no
detailed information regarding the criteria for high mLNR is currently
available. Recently, the mLNR has been explored as a prognostic factor
on survival outcomes and time to progression for patients with colon
cancer. Further detailed cumulative assessment is needed to confirm the
optimal criteria of high mLNR.
Virchows Arch
PS-21-063
High expression of PLK4 as a predictor of poor prognosis for locally
advanced rectal cancer patient: a prospective analysis
H. Oh*, H.C. Shin, H.R. Jung, I. Hwang, S.Y. Kwon, M. Choe,
Y.N. Kang, S.P. Kim, H.W. Lee
*Dongsan Medical Center, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: Recent studies highlight the importance of
regulating PLK4 on the basis of PLK4 overexpression in various neo-
plasms. Meanwhile, radio resistance is an important issue in rectal cancer
treatment. Therefore, it will be demonstrated PLK4 as a novel target to
overcome radio resistance.
Methods: We constructed the tissue microarray, containing of 73 paired
rectal cancer tissues, both pre- and postoperative specimens. PLK4 ex-
pression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Response to therapy
was evaluated after surgery by pathologic tumour regression grade. And
the association between PLK4 immunoreactivity levels and clinicopath-
ologic parameters were evaluated. Functional studies for tumour prolifer-
ation and migration were performed in cell line models.
Results: Overexpression of PLK4 in pre-radiotherapy specimens is sig-
nificantly associated with better overall survival. And our results were
consistent with large cohort public data analysis. In addition, it was
proved in vitro study. However, expression in post-radiotherapy speci-
mens was not associated with survival.
Conclusion: Based on our human tissue study results, PLK4 expression
can be suggested as a potential prognostic factor and predictor of preop-
erative radiotherapy resistance. Therefore, clinical development of PLK4
could be an effective therapeutic strategy for radioresistant locally ad-
vanced rectal cancer.
PS-21-064
Mismatch repair (MMR) protein expression and next-generation
sequencing (NGS) result in microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H)
colorectal cancer
J.H. Park*, H.S. Han
*Konkuk University Medical Center, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: MSI-H CRC accounts for 15% of all CRCs.
MSI phenotype can be
detected by PCR-based molecular test or immunohistochemical (IHC)
staining for MMR
proteins. Recently, NGS has been increasingly utilized. We compared
and analysed the IHC staining and NGS results.
Methods: We reviewed the medical records of 625 colon cancers, col-
lected from 2005 to 2017 in our institution. 60 cases of 625 cases (9.6%)
were MSI-H tumour detected by PCR-based molecular tests. We evalu-
ated MMR proteins (MLH1, MSH2, MLH6, and PMS2) expression by
IHC staining method. And NGS was performed using dissected
Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) tumour tissue.
Results: Among the 60 MSI-high patients, MMR protein expression
pattern was categorized to 7 groups(group1, loss of MLH1 and
PMS2(n=28); group2, loss of PMS2(n=4); group3, loss of MSH2 and
MSH6(n=11); group4, loss of MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2(n=1); group5,
loss of MSH2(n=1); group6, loss of MSH6(n=9); and group7, retained
expression of 4 MMR proteins(n=6)).
NGS using 44 tumour tissue showed the following results : group1, path-
ogenic MLH1 mutation(n=6) and pathogenic PMS2 mutation(n=2);
group2, pathogenic MSH6 frameshift variant mutation(n=1) and MSH2
Conflicting interpretations of pathogenicity(n=1); group3, MSH2
mutation(n=5), MSH6 mutation(n=2) and pathogenic MSH3
mutation(n=3); group4, pathogenic MSH6 and MSH3 mutation(n=1);
group6, pathogenic MSH6 mutation(n=7), MSH2 mutation(n=7) and
Pathogenic MSH3 mutation(n=1); group7, MSH2 mutation(n=1).
Conclusion: NGS is useful to understanding the molecular mechanism of
MMR protein deficiency in CRCs.
PS-21-065
KRAS and NRAS mutations and histopathological characteristics of
colorectal adenocarcinoma in vojvodina
M. Popović*, N. Stanulović, T. Vasiljević, V. Kojić, D. Jakimov,
N. Šolajić, T. Ivković Kapicl
*University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Histology
and Embryology, Oncology Institute of Vojvodina, Sremska Kamenica,
Serbia
Background & objectives: RAS pathway alteration is important in co-
lorectal carcinogenesis. Detections of KRAS and NRAS mutations are a
standard in the management of metastatic colorectal cancer. We evaluated
histopathological characteristics of colorectal adenocarcinoma between
tumours with RAS mutation and wild type tumours.
Methods: 100 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples of colorectal
adenocarcinoma were analysed for KRAS mutations and NRAS muta-
tions (exons 2, 3 and 4). Analysis was performed at Oncology Institute of
Vojvodina. Results were compared with histopathological characteristics
of diagnosed tumours. Patients were divided into two groups: I – patient
with RAS mutations (n=44) and II – patient with wild type (n=56).
Results: KRAS mutations were detected in 86.36% of patients (exon 2 in
82%) and 15.9% of patients had NRAS mutations (exon 3 in 70%). The
average age of patients in group I were 64.5 years and 65.3 years in group
II. Most frequent tumour sites were rectum (group I 31.8%; group II
32.14%), sigmoid colon (in both groups 25%) and rectosigmoid junction
(group I 18.2%; group II 12.5%). Most subjects had the tumour descriptor
status T3 (group I 63.6%, group II 64.3%) and the node descriptor status
N0 (group I 40.9%, group II 41%). 70.45 % of tumours from group I and
76.78% of tumours from group II were medium grade.
Conclusion: This study proved higher rates of KRAS mutations and
low rates of NRAS mutations. Most frequent tumour localisation
was rectum. In both groups, most of the tumours had the same:
histological grade (medium), tumour descriptor status (T3) and node
descriptor status (N0).
PS-21-068
Inflammatory spectrum of Crohn’s terminal ileitis
S. Sevim*, B.P. Kovari, A. Yavaş, F.G. Salman, Z. Melekoğlu Ellik,
B. Savaş, H. Çetinkaya, A. Ensari
*Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Turkey
Background & objectives: Crohn’s terminal ileitis (TI) may present with
a histopathologic spectrum ranging between active ileitis to chronic
active/inactive ileitis.
Aim of this study was to evaluate inflammatory patterns of Crohn’s TI in
initial & follow-up biopsies.
Methods: Initial biopsies(IB) and follow-up biopsies (FUB) of 152 pa-
tients diagnosed as Crohn’s disease were reviewed in correlation with
their clinical and endoscopic records. Inflammatory patterns were
grouped as chronic active (CA), chronic inactive (CI) and active/acute
ileitis (AI). Accompanying colonic biopsies were evaluated for involve-
ment patterns classified as TI, TI with segmental colitis (SC), and TI with
diffuse colitis (DC).
Results: There were 63 CA, 63 CI and 26 AI in TI biopsies with no
difference found between IB and FUB. Ulcer, basal lymphoplasmocytosis,
foveolar metaplasia were significantly more frequent in the CA group,
followed by CI and AI groups(p=0.008 and p<0.001, respectively).
Predominant involvement pattern was TI(n=98) followed by SC(n=45),
and DC(n=9). Majority of the cases (n=126, (82,9%)) had patchy lamina
propria inflammation which was significantly higher in TI group(n=87,
88.8%) compared to SC group(n=32, 71.1%)(p=0.009) in both IB and
FUB. Granuloma was significantly more common in DC (n=2, 22.2%)
than SC group (n=5, 5.1%) (p=0.025). No difference was observed between
TI, SC, DC groups for inflammation patterns of TI.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Our results suggest that chronic ileitis characterized by
patchy inflammation, either active or inactive, is the predominant inflam-
mation pattern of Crohn’s terminal ileitis, regardless of the time of the
biopsy.
PS-21-069
Clinical implication of ABC transporters and cancer stem cell
markers expression in colorectal cancer
E. Shin*, B. Kim
*Hallym University Dongtan Sacred Heart Hospital, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: The prognostic implication of cancer
stem cell (CSC) and protective function of ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) protein for CSC have been suggested. We aimed to assess
the prognostic significance of CSC markers and ABC transporters in
colorectal cancer.
Methods: Expression of ABC transporters, including ABC subfam-
ily C member 2(ABCC2), ABCC3 and ABC subfamily G member
2(ABCG2) and CSC markers including aldehyde dehydrogenase
1(ALDH1), leucine-rich repeat-containing G protein-coupled recep-
tor 5(LGR5) and sex determining region Y-box 2(SOX2) were
determined by immunohistochemistry in 331 colorectal cancer tis-
sues and were assessed according to the patients' prognoses.
Results: ABCC2 and SOX2 expression was associated with lower
pathologic T stage (P=0.001, each). SOX2 was associated with
favourable overall survival rate (OS; P=0.001), and ABCG2 and
SOX2 were associated with increased disease-free survival rate
(DFS; P=0.029 and 0.005, respectively). SOX2 was the prognostic
factor for OS in multivariate Cox proportional hazard model for
overall survival (HR=2.641, P=0.048).
Conclusion: The expressions of ABCG2 and SOX2 in colorectal
cancer tissues were associated with patients’ prognosis. Especially,
SOX2 can be a potential predictive marker for patients with colo-
rectal cancer.
PS-21-070
Predictive and prognostic value of Peritoneal Regression Grading
Score (PRGS) in peritoneal metastasis
J. Baake, H. Bösmüller, G. Nadiradze, A. Königsrainer, F. Fend,
M.A. Reymond, W. Solass*
*Institute for Pathology and Neuropathology, University of Tübingen,
Germany
Background & objectives: Peritoneal biopsies are increasingly used to
evaluate therapy response of peritoneal metastases. Peritoneal Regression
Grading Score (PRGS) is a new, reproducible tool to determine histolog-
ical regression of PM. Study aim is examination of possible predictive
and/or prognostic significance of PRGS.
Methods: Registry study. Explorative analysis. Prospective cohort 97
pre-treated patients with histologically proven PM: Gastric (n=33);
CRC/appendiceal (n=25); HBP (n=20); ovarian/tubal (n=8); others
(n=11) treated with various regimen. 4 biopsies taken from abdominal
quadrants. Analysis by independent pathologist. Calculation of mean
PRGS from all available biopsies. Increasing PRGS was considered as
POD, decreasing PRGS as OTR. Survival statistics: Kaplan-Meyer, Cox
regression.
Results: Out of 97 patients, 36 (37%) has a PRGS < 2 (favourable), 61
(63%) PRGS ≥2 (unfavourable) at first laparoscopy. Favourable PRGS
predicted favourable overall survival (median (CI 5-95%): 12.1 (7.8-
16.4) months vs. 8.0 (5.1-10.8) months, p < 0.001. Out of 62 patients
(64%) eligible for histological response assessment (≥2 laparoscopies),
42 (70%) had a histological OTR. Median survival was 14.6 (CI 95% 6.0-
23.2) months in OTR vs. 6.9 (CI 95% 0-14.9) months in POD patients.
Conclusion: This is the first evidence suggesting a predictive and prog-
nostic value for PRGS in PM. This pilot data should now be confirmed in
adequately powered studies. If this data is confirmed, PRGS might have a
clinical potential for individualized therapy of PM of various origin.
PS-21-071
Duodenal neuroendocrine cells hyperplasia in coeliac disease
A. Sykaras*, D. Sampaziotis, C. Stamou, I. Kalliakmanis, C. Kouvidou,
C. Vourlakou
*Evangelismos General Hospital, Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: Several studies have reported increased num-
ber of neuroendocrine (NE) cells in the duodenal epithelium of patients
with celiac disease (CD). We investigated if the hyperplasia of NE cells in
CD correlates with the Marsh-Oberhuber classification of histological
findings.
Methods: Immunohistochemistry with an antibody against
Chromogranin A was performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
sections of biopsies obtained from the 2nd segment of duodenum.
Biopsy samples were obtained from control group (n=5), CD Marsh I
patients (n=5), CD Marsh II patients (n=5) and CD Marsh III (n=6 in-
cluding IIIa, IIIb and IIIc). NE cells number was quantified per 1mm2 of
duodenal mucosa.
Results: Biopsies from CD patients had visually increased number of NE
cells in crypts in comparison to the control group. Furthermore, in 2/6
samples from CD Marsh III group we noticed clusters of 3-5 NE cells in
crypts. There was a statistically significant difference in number of NE
cells between groups as determined by one-way ANOVA (p=0.04).
Tukey’s post-hoc test revealed that there was only a statistically signifi-
cant difference between CD Marsh III group and control group (p=0.03)
and not between the CD groups or between CD Marsh I-II groups and the
control group.
Conclusion: Our pilot study confirmed the hyperplasia of NE cells
in CD, especially in cases classified as Marsh-Oberhuber III. Further
studies are needed to characterize which subtypes of NE cells are
increased and how the inflammatory milleu drives NE cell hyper-
plasia.
PS-21-072
SOX2 expression in serrated neoplasia pathway
K. Takamura*, Y. Ajioka, R. Ohashi, A. Annenkov, S. Kondo
*Division of Clinical Pathology, Niigata University Faculty of Medicine,
Japan
Background & objectives: Many sessile serrated lesions (SSLs) and
some colon cancers (CCs), especially BRAF-mutant cases, express
SOX2. Additionally, most of BRAF-mutant CCs probably derive from
SSLs (so-called serrated neoplasia pathway: SNP). Therefore, we aimed
to investigate the role of SOX2 in SNP.
Methods: In order to clarify the association of SOX2 with SNP, we
evaluated SOX2 expression profile in SNP and compared to that in tra-
ditional adenoma-carcinoma sequence. The expression of SOX2 was
investigated by applying immunohistochemistry in SSL (n=50), SSL with
cytological dysplasia (n=20), carcinoma in SSL (n=13), conventional
adenoma (tubular and tubulovillous) (n=53) and carcinoma in adenoma
(n=27).
Results: SOX2 was expressed with significantly higher frequency in SSL
(54%, 27/50) than in adenoma (11.3%, 6/53) (p<0.0001). SOX2 expres-
sion of the dysplasia part and the carcinoma part in SSL, and the carci-
noma part in adenoma were 20% (4/20), 30.8% (4/13), and 14.8% (4/27),
respectively. SOX2 expression rate was considerably higher in advanced
stage of histology in SSL than that in adenoma, though the difference was
not statistically significant.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: These results indicate that SOX2 may be associated with
histogenesis, rather than carcinogenesis, of SSL. However, this may pos-
sibly be attributed to the present small-sized sample study. Thus, further
validation of the present results with additional samples is ongoing.
PS-21-073
Analysis of clinical and histopathological findings in microscopic
colitis
G. Topel*, I. Cakir, I. Aydin, F.H. Dilek, A. Akder Sarı
*Izmir Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training and Research Hospital
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Microscopic colitis is a chronic inflammato-
ry bowel disease encompassing a triad of chronic diarrhoea, normal en-
doscopy and characteristic histological findings. Based on the histological
features, it is divided into collagenous colitis (CC), lymphocytic colitis
(LC) and incomplete microscopic colitis (MCi).
Methods: The histopathological parameters were evaluated in 53 micro-
scopic colitis (37 CC, 7 LC, 9 MCi) diagnosed between 2012 and 2019.
The presence of a broad subepithelial collagen band ≥10 μm in thickness
and ≥20 intraepithelial lymphocytes(IELs)/100 enterocytes were consid-
ered diagnostic for CC and LC respectively. The presence of 5-10 μm in
thickness or 5-20 IELs/100 enterocytes were evaluated as MCi.
Results: CC had female predominance (%70) with a mean age of 59 (22-
87) while LC and MCi showed male predominance (%100,%78). The
most distinct localization for CC and LC was right colon (%60,%77)
while for MCi left colon (%60).
All of CC,LC,MCi had lymphoplasmocytosis in lamina propria (slight
%46,%86,%100, moderate/severe %54,%14,%0). The majority of CC
(%97) showed 5-19 IELs/100 enterocytes. The striking point was the
presence of ≥20 eosinophils/1HPF in lamina propria in %78,%43,%11
of CC,LC,MCi respectively. Desquamation, flattening, vacuolization,
loss of mucin in the surface epithelium were %73,%51,%65,%62 of
CC, %21,%86,%43,%71 of LC while %33,%11,%22,%33 of MCi re-
spectively. None of CC,LC had crypt distortion, crypt abscess, giant cell,
granuloma, ulceration.
Conclusion: Histopathologically the presence of distinct
lymphoplasmositosis, increased eosinophili and epithelial damage
should alert for the diagnosis of complete microscopic colitis.
Collagenous colitis may demonstrate intraepithelial lymphocytosis.
Awareness of microscopic colitis that is common treatable cause of
chronic diarrhoea needs to increase and we should be careful on
histopathological examination in order not to miss the diagnosis of
hidden cases.
PS-21-074
Combined eosinophilic oesophagitis and lymphocytic oesophagitis: a
new entity?
M. Tural*, D. Koyuncu Yamak, Z. Kuloğlu, A. Kansu, B. Savaş,
A. Ensari
*Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Turkey
Background & objectives: Combined eosinophilic oesophagitis(EoE)-
lymphocytic oesophagitis(LyE) has recently been reported in literature.
Whether or not EoE/LyE is a separate entity is yet to be determined. In
this study, eosinophil and lymphocyte counts were determined and their
diagnostic significance for EoE/LyE was evaluated.
Methods: Oesophageal biopsies of 75 patients including 29 EoE (10 had
follow-up biopsies), 6 LyE, 20 gastroesophageal reflux disease(GERD)
and 20 controls were evaluated for histopathologic features comprising
papillary elongation, basal cell hyperplasia, vascular congestion while
eosinophils and lymphocytes were counted in hot spots at x40
magnification, on H&E and CD3 stained sections, respectively. Clinical
findings were retrieved from electronic records.
Results: There were 22 males and 7 females, with a mean age of 10.8
years. Mean number of eosinophils and lymphocytes were significantly
(p=0,000) higher in EoE (47.2; 58) compared to LyE (0; 46.8), GERD (1;
21), and controls (0; 11). Lymphocytes ≥29,5 and eosinophils ≥12
yielded the highest sensitivity and specificity (100% & 87.5%, 100%
&100%, respectively) for EoE. Lymphocytes were above the cut-off in
87.5% of EoE, 84% of LyE, and 25% of GERD. Eosinophil count
(100%) followed by lymphocytes (94%) and basal cell hyperplasia
(78%) were the most important discriminant parameters EoE/LyE. No
significant difference was found between initial and follow-up biopsies
for eosinophil and lymphocyte counts.
Conclusion: The diagnosis is compatible with EoE, when eosinophils,
LyE, when lymphocytes, combined EoE/LyE, when both are above cut-
offs, and GERD when both are below cut-offs. We suggest that eosino-
phil and lymphocyte counts should be routinely evaluated for a diagnostic
algorithm.
PS-21-077
Clinical and pathological features of rectal neuroendocrine tumours:
experience from a single centre in Singapore
Z. Zhao*, L.M. Wang, T.L. Ang
*Singapore General Hospital, Singapore
Background & objectives: Rectal neuroendocrine tumours (recNETs)
constitute one-quarter of gastrointestinal NETs and are often man-
aged by endoscopic mucosal (EMR), submucosal (ESD) or full-
thickness (EFTR) resection. A retrospective review was performed
to assess the clinicopathological features and management of
recNETs in our institution.
Methods: A search of pathology database for recNETs between January
2016 and December 2019 was performed and slides of biopsy and resec-
tion specimens [polypectomy, EMR, ESD, EFTR transanal minimally
invasive surgery (TAMIS)] were reviewed. Clinicopathological parame-
ters of identified cases were analysed.
Results: 58 specimens (29 biopsy, 14 polypectomy, 5 EMR, 3 ESD, 3
EFTR, 4 TAMIS) from 39 patients were identified (male: female=26:13;
mean age=57.9 range 35-83). Indications for colonoscopy were usually
altered bowel habits and haematochezia.
64.1% recNETs were solitary sessile polyp. 82.1% (32/39) were <1 cm
(0.2-2.5 cm). 95% were grade 1 tumours [G1 37 (94.9%); G2 2 (5.1%)].
Histologically, 13 recNETs showed intratumoral dense sclerotic stroma.
Positive margin was reported in 4 of 11 endoscopic (ESD/EMR/EFTR)
resection specimens and 3 of these (75%) were associated with dense
sclerotic stroma. Most (38/39) were stage I. 27 patients had follow-ups
until 48 months. No local recurrence was observed after definitive ESD/
EMR/EFTR/TAMIS.
Conclusion: Most recNETs were G1 and <1cm with a favourable prog-
nosis. Local recurrence and distant metastasis were rare. Endoscopists
need to be aware that it is more difficult to achieve a pathological negative
endoscopic resection margin for sclerotic recNETs.
PS-22-001
Sensitivity and specificity of pancreatic EUS-FNA cytology: a retro-
spective review from a National Surgical Centre for Pancreatic
Cancer
K. Beauchamp*, S. Khan, N. Nadeem, J. Murphy, N. Swan
*St Vincents University Hospital, Ireland
PS-22 Digestive Diseases Pathology - Pancreas
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Endoscopic ultrasound and fine needle aspi-
ration (EUS-FNA) is the preferred method for assessing solid pancreatic
lesions.
We aimed to retrospectively review patients with solid pancreatic lesions
who had EUS-FNA cytology and compare the diagnosis with the subse-
quent histological diagnosis.
Methods: EUS-FNA cytology from January 2016-December 2019 was
identified using our laboratory system. Cystic lesions were excluded.
Standard cytological terminology was used: C1 non-diagnostic, C2 be-
nign, C3 atypia, C4 suspicious for malignancy, C5 malignant. Sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value
(NPV) were calculated twice, firstly considering C4/C5 test positive and
again with only C5 considered positive.
Results: 386 patients were identified with solid pancreatic lesions who
underwent FNA. 76% had a C5 diagnosis; 4% C4, 6% C3, 10% C2, and
3% C1. Subsequent histological specimens were available in 28%.
When C4 and C5 diagnoses were considered positive cytology, sensitiv-
ity was 86%, specificity 64%, PPV 95% and NPV 35%.
When only C5 was considered positive cytology sensitivity was 76%,
specificity 91%, PPV 99% and NPV 31%.
Conclusion: Multiple factors affect the sensitivity of EUS-FNA. Our
sensitivity is in keeping with international standards (85-93%) and our
non-diagnostic category was superior to international standards (4.7-
9.2%). EUS-FNA provides valuable diagnostic information in appropri-
ately selected patients.
PS-22-002
The combined benefit of cystic fluid biochemical markers and cytol-
ogy in assessing cystic pancreatic lesions: a review from a National
Surgical Centre for Pancreatic Cancer
K. Beauchamp*, S. Khan, N. Nadeem, J. Murphy, N. Swan
*St Vincents University Hospital, Ireland
Background & objectives: Cytological and biochemical analysis of pan-
creatic cyst fluid facilitates the detection of neoplastic mucinous cysts.
Our aim was to retrospectively review patients with cystic pancreatic
lesions who underwent endoscopic-ultrasound -fine needle aspiration
(EUS-FNA) for cytology and fluid biochemical markers (amylase, CEA).
Methods: EUS-FNA cytology from January 2016-December 2019 was
identified using our laboratory system. All cytology reports were
interpreted using a standardised five tier diagnostic criteria. The cytolog-
ical diagnosis was correlated with biochemical markers and surgical re-
section specimens. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value
(PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) were calculated.
Results: 77 patients with cystic lesions who underwent FNA were identified.
27% had subsequent biopsy or surgical resection. 60% of the total number of
patients had cystic biochemical markers performed and these were only per-
formed on C1 C2 and C3 specimens. 20% had raised CEA (>192) and 91%
had elevated CEA and or amylase. The cytological diagnoses were: C1 30%,
C2 40%, C3 8%, C4 3%, C5 19%. Final histological diagnoses were: mu-
cinous cysts 57%, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 28%; neuroendocrine
tumour 5%; pancreatitis 5%; serous cystadenoma 5%.
When we considered C3/C4/C5 or raised cystic CEA (>192) and or
amylase as test positive sensitivity was 85%, specificity 100%, PPV
100% and NPV 40%.
Conclusion: Cytology alone usually has poor diagnostic accuracy in cystic
lesions compared with solid. Cystic fluid biochemistry has a role in ruling
out malignant neoplasms. Our cytology-biochemistry results are sensitive
and highly specific for mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas.
PS-22-003
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in undifferentiated carcinoma
of the pancreas with osteoclast-like giant cells
R. Bernasconi*, G. Paolino, G. Fiadone, R.T. Lawlor, C. Luchini,
A. Scarpa
*Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona,
Italy
Background & objectives: Undifferentiated carcinoma of the pancreas
with osteoclast-like giant cells is a peculiar tumour, characterized by the
presence of undifferentiated neoplastic cells intermingled with histiocytes
and giant cells resembling osteoclasts. This study aims at clarifying if the
process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
Methods: Twelve cases of UCOCG were stained for two well-known
EMT markers, Twist1 and Slug. Immunohistochemistry was performed
with anti-Twist1 (clone: Twist2C1a, 1:80 dilution, Santacruz/USA) and
anti-Slug (clone: rabbit, 1:350 dilution, Xeptagen/Italy) antibodies, using
4 μm formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections. The evidence of a pos-
itive staining was defined as the presence of a nuclear pattern of staining
in the neoplastic cells.
Results: Two cases of UCOCG showed a nuclear staining pattern for
Twist1 and Slug. This result highlights that EMT is not a key process in
UCOCG and cannot explain the peculiar morphology of this entity. Future
research should focus on the inflammatory landscape of these rare cancers.
Conclusion: Two cases of UCOCG showed a nuclear staining pattern for
Twist1 and Slug. This result highlights that EMT is not a key process in
UCOCG and cannot explain the peculiar morphology of this entity.
Future research should focus on the inflammatory landscape of these rare
cancers.
PS-22-004
Standardised pathology reporting in donor pancreata within the
quality and safety in organ donation (QUOD) tissue bank: a new
resource for pancreatic research
Y. Bury*, N. Kattner, N. Dyson, C. Jones, T. Ness, R. Coulthard,
T. Davey, L. Eliasson, M. Honkanen-Scott, J. Doyle, R. Ploeg,
G. Klöppel, D. Tiniakos, J.A. Shaw, W.E. Scott III
*Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: The MRC-funded Quality and Safety in
Organ Donation (QUOD) Expand programme enabled the creation of a
tissue biobank of whole donor pancreata for multimodality phenotyping
of defined anatomical regions underpinned by standardised clinical pa-
thologist reporting.
Methods: Examination of 8 anatomical regions (anterior/posterior) resulted
in 16 FFPE tissue blocks with corresponding fresh frozen and electron
microscopy (EM) samples. A standardised semi-quantitative histological
scoring system has been developed for reporting human pancreatic tissue,
assessing lobular/perilobular/peripancreatic compartments for inflamma-
tion, fibrosis, PanIN and other changes. Duplex-immunohistochemistry
was applied to characterise pancreatic islets for hormone expression and
identify PP lobe.
Results: To date 63 donor pancreata have been collected with comprehen-
sive clinical and laboratory data. Thus far, donor organ sub-cohorts have
been fully characterised to assess the applicability of the histological scoring
system (n=10) and underwent quantitative assessment of acute cellular
stress using the Newcastle EM Ischaemia Score (NEMIS) (n=16). PanIN
was found in 14/24 organs (58%) and in 33/188 tissue blocks (18%).
Fibrosis varied between organs, although was mostly mild following a
spectrum of severity and patterns. Islet amyloidosis (n=1) and peliosis
(n=1) were noted. The PP lobe has been identified in all pancreata.
Conclusion: Extensive sampling of 8 pancreatic regions and a detailed fully
searchable scoring system is valuable for deceased donor human pancreatic
tissue / islet provision to the research community to maximise translational
impact. PanIN is an unexpectedly common finding. The presence and under-
lying cause of pancreatic fibrosis requires further investigation.
Virchows Arch
Funding from Medical Research Council (MRC) and infrastructural sup-
port from NHS Blood and Transplant (NHS BT).
PS-22-005
Solid pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas: analysis of clinico-
pathological characteristics and immunoreactivity of BAP1 in 9 cases
E. Çomut*, N. Çallı Demirkan
*Pamukkale University Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Solid pseudopapillary neoplasms of pancreas
almost always present somatic activating mutations of CTNNB1.
Inactivating mutations of epigenetic regulators like BAP1 may play role
in their malignant behaviour. Our aim was to investigate the role of BAP1
in this sense.
Methods: We investigated a retrospective clinicopathological analysis of
patients (n=9) who were diagnosed as solid pseudopapillary neoplasm
between 2010 and 2019 in our department. BAP1 antibody (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, clone C-4, 1:100 dilution) was used in paraffin-
embedded tissue sections. Nuclear immunostaining for BAP1 was de-
fined as ‘negative’ or ‘positive’, without considering a cut-off value.
Results: The median follow-up time for the patients was 31 months
(range 6-102 months). There was no local recurrence or metastasis.
Aggressive tumour behaviour was defined as having at least two of the
histopathological features including parenchymal invasion, vascular in-
vasion, perineural invasion, cytological atypia, adipose tissue invasion
and > 5% Ki67 index. ‘Aggressive’ group (n=4) and relatively low-risk
group (n=5) were compared in terms of BAP1 expression but there was
no statistically significant relationship (p=0.722). However, there was one
case with loss of BAP1 expression showing five out of six aggressive
histopathological features and also with a short survival time (12 months).
Conclusion: Loss of BAP1 expression may be associated with more
aggressive clinicopathological features in solid pseudopapillary neo-
plasm of the pancreas. Larger case series are needed to reveal the
possible effects of BAP1 expression on the prognosis of this unique
neoplasm.
PS-22-006
Assessing the impact of neoadjuvant therapy on lymph node yield, lymph
node status and excision margin status in pancreaticoduodenectomy
specimens: a ten-year review
A. Doyle*, N. Nadeem, J. Murphy, N. Swan
*St James's Hospital, Ireland
Background & objectives: Pancreaticoduodenectomy is the primary
surgical treatment for pancreatic malignancies. Pathological examination
of the specimen including lymph node dissection, is essential for staging.
We assessed the effect of neoadjuvant therapy on lymph node yield and
lymph node and resection status.
Methods: All pancreaticoduodenectomy specimens at St Vincent’s
University hospital between January 2009 and December 2019 were re-
trieved via a SNOMED search of the laboratory information system
(n=714). Margin status, lymph node yield and lymph node status was
obtained from pathology reports. Details of neoadjuvant therapy were
retrieved from the patient chart or the clinical history provided on the
specimen request card.
Results: 272 pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) specimens contained pan-
creatic ductal adenocarcinoma and neoadjuvant therapy (NAT) was ad-
ministered to 61 patients. The mean lymph node yield for NAT patients
was equivalent to that of non-NAT patients (14.7 versus 14.6). The mean
nodal positivity for patients without NAT was 2.6 versus 1.7 for patients
treated with NAT. R0 margin status was achieved in 135 (64%) cases
with no NAT versus 49 (80.3%) of NAT cases.
Conclusion: Our study has shown that neoadjuvant therapy has a positive
impact on both the nodal status (N) and the resection (R) status. We have
also shown that neoadjuvant therapy does not reduce lymph node yield in
pancreaticoduodenectomy specimens.
PS-22-007
Immunohistochemical profile of galectin-8 in pancreatic ductal
neoplasia – a preliminary report
S. Giusca*, I.D. Caruntu, D.G. Ciobanu Apostol, C. Amalinei, R. Balan,
A. Rusu
*U.M.F. ”Grigore T. Popa” Iași, Romania
Background & objectives: Galectin 8 (Gal8), a “tandem-repeat”-type
galectin, is currently studied in numerous tumours as prognostic factor,
but limited data for pancreatic malignancies are available. Our study aims
to analyse the immunohistochemical profile of Gal8 in pancreatic ductal
neoplasia.
Methods: We investigated 25 cases of pancreatic ductal carcinoma, 13 of
them associating intraductal proliferation (PanIN). Gal8 was assessed
qualitative and semiquantitative (based on the percentage of positive cells
and intensity of reaction). The semiquantitative assessment allowed the
stratification in three classes: low Gal8, moderate Gal8 and high Gal8.
The Gal8 immunoprofile was correlated with pTNM stage and histolog-
ical variants.
Results: Qualitatively, 21 cases of pancreatic ductal carcinoma presented
cytoplasmic and nuclear Gal8 expression, with low/moderate intensity; 3
cases displayed exclusively cytoplasmic expression, 1 case – only nucle-
ar. In PanIN, Gal8 was strong cytoplasmic or cytoplasmic and nuclear,
similar with normal pancreatic tissue. Semi-quantitatively, 11 cases had
low score, 9 cases – moderate score, and 5 cases – high score. Significant
correlations were noted between high Gal8 and pN stage (p=0.019).
Conclusion: Overall, our results indicated a loss of Gal8 expression from
normal exocrine pancreas to preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions. To the
best of our knowledge, our study represents the second report regarding
Gal8 profile in pancreatic malignancies, preneoplastic lesions and normal
pancreatic tissue, opening interesting perspective for larger studies in
order to define a better stratification of cases and to correlate Gal8 ex-
pression with clinico-pathological features.
PS-22-008
Transcriptomic correlation of fine-needle aspiration samples and
paired surgical specimens from pancreatic ductal carcinomas
J. Guerrero Pineda*, L. Pedrosa, J. Maurel, T. Sauri, I. Garrido, I. Araujo,
M. Cuatrecasas, M.T. Rodrigo, A. Gines
*Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Spain
Background & objectives: There is evidence of transcriptomic signatures
obtained from surgical specimens associated with survival in pancreatic duc-
tal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Most cases were diagnosed by
endosonography-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA). We aim to eval-
uate the molecular concordance between EUS-FNA and surgical specimens.
Methods: We used a 52-gene signature by NanoString technology that
identifies three populations: Cluster-1 (inflamed, stromal-dependent)
characterised by upregulation of CAF and EMT-related genes. Cluster-
2 (inflamed, non-stromal-dependent) presents enrichment for immune
checkpoint genes and features of EMT. Cluster-3 (non-inflamed) lacks
such upregulated genes. The percentage of fibrosis/epithelium was eval-
uated in all samples.
Results: Paired samples from 18 PDAC patients who underwent EUS-
FNA for cytological diagnosis and surgical resection were analysed. The
study was closed prematurely due to low concordance (5%). All three
clusters were identified in EUS-FNA samples in 1 (6%), 8 (44%), and 9
(50%) cases, respectively, whereas all resected specimens where classi-
fied as cluster-1. There was less fibrotic component representation in
FNA specimens (mean 10%) than in surgical specimens (mean 60%),
associated with cluster-1 features.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: The epithelial compartment is well represented in EUS-
FNA samples, but fibrotic transcriptomic information is under-represent-
ed, which poses the question whether FNA material is adequate or not for
molecular classification of PDAC. Further analysis with microdissection
is required in order to identify the cell population aspects that explain
molecular discrepancies and their impact in the prognosis.
PS-22-009
Tumour regression grading of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma:
value of immunohistochemical and molecular markers
L. Haeberle*, A. Cacciato Insilla, K. Fuchs, A.M. Poma, D. Campani,
W.T. Knoefel, I. Eposito
*Heinrich Heine University and University Hospital Duesseldorf,
Institute of Pathology, Germany
Background & objectives: Tumour regression grading (TRG) of pan-
creatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) based on histomorphology is
non-standardized. Only limited data support its prognostic significance.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the prognostic value of immuno-
histochemical (IH) and molecular parameters in PDAC-TRG.
Methods: Tissue samples from patients with neoadjuvant treated PDAC
were reviewed (n=18). CAP (College of American Pathologists) TRG
score was determined for primary tumour, lymph node metastases, and
distant metastases, if present. Expression of p16, p53, SMAD4, and pro-
liferation index (Ki67) were evaluated by IH. Additionally, next genera-
tion sequencing (NGS) using the Cancer HotSpot Panel v2
(ThermoFisher) was performed.
Results: Most cases were CAP score 2 (partial response; 78%). Based on
IH, co-existent aberrant p16 and p53 expression showed association with
reduced overall survival (OS) (p=0.06). SMAD4 loss was also associated
with poor OS (p=0.07). NGS was successful in n=16. Pathogenic variants
found in n=14 included variants of KRAS (87.5%), TP53 (68.7%),
CDKN2A (25%) and SMAD4 (25%). Identical variants were found
pre- and post-therapy (n=3). SMAD4 variants were correlated with poor
OS (p=0.02). TP53 variants correlated with the presence of distant me-
tastasis (p=0.03). CAP-TRG was not correlated with OS. However, high
CAP score (poor regression) showed a trend for positive correlation with
the total number of mutated genes (p= 0.07).
Conclusion: CAP was not correlated with patient survival, questioning
its role as prognostic factor. However, an association of CAP with the
number of mutated genes was noted, suggesting that the mutational bur-
den of PDAC might be involved in therapeutic response. Adding IH and
molecular analyses may be more reliable for PDAC-TRG compared to
using histomorphology alone. Evaluation in larger independent cohorts of
patients is needed to validate our preliminary results.
PS-22-011
Nerve fibres in the tumour microenvironment are co-localised with
tertiary lymphoid structures and is associated with a better survival
in pancreatic cancer patients
L. Heij*, X. Tan, J. Kather, J. Niehues, S. Sivakumar, S. Oldedamink,
M. Aberle, N.T. Gaisa, G. Wiltberger, U. Neumann
*Department of General, Gastrointestinal, Hepatobiliary and Transplant
Surgery, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Germany
Background & objectives: Pancreatic Cancer (PDAC) is a lethal cancer.
Here we want to define the role of small nerve fibres in cancer stroma and
determine the influence on survival. We hypothesize that small nerve
fibres are important in progression.
Methods: 155 PDAC slides were stained with immunostaining PGP 9.5
Nerve Fibre Density (NFD) was evaluated by counting the nerves and
scored into 3 categories:
1. none
2. 1-10 nerve fibres
3. >10 nerve fibres
The dominant type of immune cells was scored into three categories:
1. lymphocyte predominant
2. neutrophil predominant
3. no immune cells.
Results: We found a highly significant correlation in the group with a
high NFD (group 3; having more than 10 positive nerve fibres) and an
overall survival. Univariate analysis showed that lymphocytes are present
in the tumours containing more stroma. By machine learning we deter-
mined the mean distance from the nearest tumour gland from each im-
mune cell. The patients with a high Nerve Fibre Density have lympho-
cytes more distant from the nearest tumour gland. These lymphocytes
stain positive for B-cells (CD20), T-cells (CD8) and dendritic cells
(CD21), matching a Tertiary Lymphoid Structure (TLS).
Conclusion: In this study we found a high NFD correlates with a better
survival in PDAC. The spatial distribution of the lymphocyte predomi-
nant phenotype showed lymphocytes more abundant from the tumour in
high NFD cases. The nerve fibres are co-localized with TLS.
We have shown that small nerve fibres in PDAC are co-localized with
TLS. This can be a new therapeutic strategy in increasing life expectancy
of patients with PDAC.
PS-22-012
Predicted prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients by machine
learning
M. Higashi*, S. Yokoyama, A. Tanimoto
*Department of Human Pathology, Japan
Background & objectives: Pancreatic cancer remains a disease of high
mortality. Mucins play crucial roles in carcinogenesis and tumour inva-
sion. This study investigates whether the methylation status of three mu-
cin genes from specimens could serve as a predictive biomarker for out-
come after surgery.
Methods: We evaluated the methylation status of MUC1, MUC2, and
MUC4 promoter regions in pancreatic tissue samples from 191 patients
with various pancreatic lesions using methylation-specific electrophore-
sis. Then, integrating these results and clinicopathological features, we
used support vector machine-, neural network-, and multinomial-based
methods to develop a prognostic classifier.
Results: Significant differences were identified between the positive- and
negative-prediction classifiers of patients in 5-year overall survival (OS)
in the cross-validation test. Multivariate analysis revealed that these prog-
nostic classifiers were independent prognostic factors analysed by not
only neoplastic tissues but also non-neoplastic tissues. These classifiers
had higher predictive accuracy for OS than tumour size, lymph-node
metastasis, distant metastasis, and age and can complement the prognos-
tic value of the TNM staging system.
Conclusion: Analysis of epigenetic changes in mucin genes may be of
diagnostic utility and one of the prognostic predictors for patients with
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
PS-22-013
Rapid on-site evaluation of endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle
aspiration of pancreatic lesions reduces repeat procedures and inad-
equate samples: a retrospective study from a national centre in
Ireland
S. Khan*, K. Beauchamp, N. Nadeem, J. Murphy, N. Swan
*St. Vincent's University Hospital, Ireland
Background & objectives: Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle
aspiration (EUS-FNA) is the preferred diagnostic procedure for tumours
involving the pancreas. The aim of this study was to evaluate the influ-
ence of rapid on-site evaluation (ROSE) by a pathologist on specimen
adequacy for pancreatic EUS-FNA.
Virchows Arch
Methods: All patients who underwent EUS-FNA for a pancreatic lesion
between 2016 and 2019 whose cytology was reviewed in our centre were
retrieved from the laboratory information system, which included speci-
mens reviewed from outside institutions. Information on cytological di-
agnosis, presence of ROSE, subsequent histological specimens and repeat
procedures was collected.
Results: Four-hundred-and-sixty-three patients underwent pancreas EUS-
FNA. Of the 242 patients with ROSE performed at least once, 4%(n=10)
did not achieve an adequate sample, compared to 11%(n=25/221) of pa-
tients who never had ROSE. Repeat procedures were performed on
12%(n=57), including 8%(n=18) of patients who never had ROSE and
15%(n=37/241) of those who did not have ROSE on a first procedure,
versus 5%(n=10) of those who had ROSE on the first procedure.
Conclusion: This study found that ROSE in our national centre was
associated with reduced inadequate sample rates and a reduced need for
repeat procedures. Our findings support the practice of ROSE during
pancreatic EUS-FNA as an effective and efficient means of procuring
high-quality specimens.
PS-22-014
A multicenter interobserver study identifies the International
Tumour Budding Consensus Conference-scoring as a reliable and
reproducible method for the assessment of tumour budding in pan-
creatic ductal adenocarcinoma
P. Lohneis*, I. Esposito, I. Zlobec, M. Wartenberg, D. Schaeffer,
S. Kalloger, S. La Rosa, C. Sempoux, E. Karamitopoulou-Diamantis
*University of Cologne, Germany
Background & objectives: Tumour budding (TB) is a strong and inde-
pendent prognostic factor in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
Its implication into daily diagnostics would improve prognostic stratifi-
cation. We performed a multicenter interobserver study to identify the
optimal method of TB assessment in PDAC.
Methods: TB was scored by independent observers at five participating
centres in Switzerland, Germany and Canada. Two serial sections were
stained for H&E and pan-cytokeratin. Pathologists assessed TB on a
digital pathology platform comparing H&E with pan-cytokeratin staining
in 10 high power fields (10HPF) and one HPF hotspot (1HPF), as well as
in one H&E hotspot at 20x magnification.
Results: 50 resected PDACs TNM-stage I-III were evaluated. Correlation
coefficients for TB-counts between centres ranged from r=0.58648 to
r=0.78641 for H&E and from r=0.69288 to r=0.81764 for pan-
cytokeratin stained slides. Interobserver agreement across all centres
was excellent for pan-cytokeratin 10HPF: ICC=0.81764 followed by
one H&E hotspot at 20x magnification: ICC=0.78641. Assessment of
TB on 1HPF reached only moderate agreement both for H&E
(ICC=0.59526) and pan-cytokeratin (ICC=0.69288).
Conclusion: Based on the rates of interobserver agreement and the prac-
ticability of the method, we recommend the one H&E hotspot at 20x
magnification score - as suggested by the International Tumour
Budding Consensus Conference (ITBCC) 2016- as a simple, reliable
and reproducible method for assessing TB in PDAC.
PS-22-015
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours, experience in a reference hos-
pital in Bogotá, Colombia - a series of cases
R.D.P. Lopez-Panqueva*, Y.F. Guzmán Ruiz, G. Ardila, A. Vera Torres,
D. Gonzalez Devia
*Department of Pathology and Laboratories, Fundación Santa Fe de
Bogotá, Colombia
Background & objectives: Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours (pNET)
are a rare and heterogeneous group of tumours with very variable mor-
phologies, functional and behaviours characteristics. Usually grow
slowly and behave indolently. However, they have the metastatic poten-
tial being difficult to predict their behaviour
Methods: Patients were selected from the pathology databases; re-
classified according to the 2017- WHO-Classification. A retrospective
analysis of pathological characteristics found in the surgical specimens
of the adult population, the correlation with pathological data and overall
survival (OS), disease-free survival (DFS) and progression-free survival
(PFS) as the outcome measures. Univariate analysis, the Kaplan–Meier
method and log-rank test were used.
Results: There were 29 female and 26 male patients with a mean age of
53 (31-77 range), median follow-up 42 months. Well differentiated Grade
1, Grade 2 and Grade 3 (n=47:85.4%) and Poor differentiated/
Neuroendocrine Carcinoma (n=8:14.5%). CK-19 expression was corre-
lated with 9 months less PFS and 12 months less OS. A significant
difference in PFS, NETG2 had more PFS than NETG3. Surgical treat-
ment had 26 months longer OS than other treatments.
Conclusion: Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours are rare tumours com-
prising 2% of all pancreas neoplasms. In the last decade, our understand-
ing of this disease has increased allowing for advancements in the treat-
ment of pNETs. Positive CK-19 expression can be used as a predictor of
poor prognosis. The surgical treatment is the only potentially curative
therapeutic modality if resection can be complete which is associated with
increased OS.
PS-22-016
Endoscopic ultrasound-guided sampling of solid pancreatic masses:
the role of aspiration in fine needle biopsy
D. Martins*, J. Lopes, H. Barroca
*Centro Hospitalar Universitário São João, Portugal
Background & objectives: Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle
biopsy (EUS-FNB) play an essential role in the diagnosis of pancreatic
cancer, providing a minimally invasive method of obtaining tissue for
pathological examination.
Compare the accuracy of diagnosis of specimens collected with EUS-
FNB with or without aspiration.
Methods: We performed a prospective study in a general hospital, with
34 patients undergoing EUS-FNB for a solid pancreatic mass (May 2019
to January 2020). All the samples were collected in 2 passes (with and
without aspiration). Pathologists were blinded to the sample collection
method. The evaluated criteria were: Papanicolaou category; hematic
contamination; suitability for diagnosis and best sample (size according).
Results: The results from EUS-FNB analysis were accurate for
82%(n=28) of all cases (19 adenocarcinomas, 6 neuroendocrine tu-
mours, 2 metastasis and 1 chronic pancreatitis), without significant
differences between the samples obtained with and without aspira-
tion. However, the quality of the samples with aspiration, according
to the size, was better in 55% of the cases, regardless of the hematic
contamination.
Pancreatic lesions features, like size and location, didn´t interfere with the
accuracy of the diagnosis.
Conclusion: In our study no differences were found in the diagnostic
accuracy of EUS-FNB with or without aspiration. Our results, in spite
of the small cohort, are in line with the literature.
More studies are needed in order to optimize the tissue obtained, not only
aiming an accurate diagnosis but also to acquiring enough sample for
ancillary studies and target therapy evaluation.
PS-22-017
Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours treated with CAPTEM or
everolimus. A multicentric study of MGMT, NDRG-1 and PHLDA-3
immunohistochemistry expression as predictor of outcome
M. Mercado*, A. Viudez, G. Crespo, M.L. Gomez Dorronsoro,
M. Benavente, J. Hernando, S. Goñi, B. García-Paredes, I. Sevilla,
Virchows Arch
V. Alonso, I. González-Borja, C. Lopez, A. Custodio, I. Hernández-Garcia,
M. Llanos
*Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra-Pamplona, Spain
Background & objectives: Previously our group showed the use a score
(SPI) of MGMT, NDRG-1 and PHLDA-3 immunohistochemistry expres-
sion as predictor of outcome in operated Pancreatic Neuroendocrine
Tumours.
Objective: To analyse the predictive role of SPI in advanced PanNET
treated CAPTEM or everolimus.
Methods: 60 of 105 patients have been fully analysed. 30 treated with
CAPTEM and 30 with everolimus. Paraffin-embedded tissues from
resected tumours were stained. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) nuclear
staining for MGMT and PHLDA-3 is being scored: 0, 1-5%, 6-50%
and ≥51%. For NDRG-1, we are using a cytoplasmic score from 0 to 2
based on distribution pattern (null, patched or diffuse).
Results: Median lines were 1 (21.7% chemotherapy previously), and
91.7% of patients had ki67 <20%.
65.5%, 10.2% and 29.1% were null for MGMT, NDRG-1 and PHLDA-3
IHC analysis. Analysis showed significant differences for PFS or OS based
on best response observed and number previous lines received. Patients treat-
ed with CAPTEM, showed significant differences for PFS (p=0,047) and OS
(p=0,040). Similar, although not significant, results were observed in
everolimus-treated cohort for PFS
Conclusion: As it was described previously in operated PanNET, our SPI
also seems to own predictive role in patients with advanced PanNET
treated with CAPTEM or everolimus.
The present project is funded by grant from 2016 GETNE.
PS-23-001
Ultrastructural features of angiogenesis in invasive carcinoma of no
special type
D. Kushch*, M. Mnikhovich, T. Bezuglova, V. Chernikov, N. Maluygin,
A. Romanov, V. Balayants, P. Bliganov, G. Ushanov
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Activation of angiogenesis is a key step in
the invasion and metastatic spread of malignant tumours.
Methods: We studied 86 cases of invasive carcinoma of no special type
(IC NST). Tumour sizes ranged from 1 cm to 8 cm, the average size of the
tumour node was 2.8 + 2.6 cm. Ultrathin sections were examined by
using a «Zeiss Libra 120» electron microscope.
Results: Proliferation of the endothelium, dissociation of interendothelial
contacts with the intercellular clefts and canals, and local lysis of the
basement membrane with endothelial cords resembling growth buds were
noted in the vascular bed in the zone of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition
The vessels didn’t reach full maturity and were represented by
microvessels of the capillary, venular and sinusoid type, which had an
abnormal wall structure, which made it difficult to limit the type.
Tonofilaments and a small accumulation of cytoplasmic organelles were
in the cytoplasm of the endothelium of tumour capillaries. We noted an
accumulation of luminal and cytoplasmic micropinocytotic vesicles,
which were an indicator of the activity of cell metabolism.
Conclusion: Ultrastructural changes (absence of pericytes and a formed
basement membrane) clearly indicate the presence of microvascular mim-
icry in the tumour, imperfect angiogenesis, accompanied by the appear-
ance of tumour nests without endothelial lining, shows the presence of
retraction gaps with a thinned wall.
PS-23-002
Ultrastructural and immunohistochemical evaluation of breast
cancer fibroblasts
M. Mnikhovich*, T. Bezuglova, N. Maluygin, D. Kushch, V. Balayants,
A. Romanov, P. Bliganov, G. Ushanov
*Research Institute of Human Morphology, Russia
Background & objectives: It is known that tumour cells interact closely
with their microenvironment, which includes tumour-associated fibro-
blasts (CAFs), immune cells, endothelial cells, pericytes, and extracellular
matrix components. All these components induce the development of an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Methods: 82 cases of invasive carcinoma of no special type (IC NST) were
studied. Transmission electron microscopy, histochemical analysis (PAS re-
action) and immunohistochemical analysis using EMT markers were used.
Ultrathin sections were studied in a Zeiss Libra 120 electron microscope.
Results: We identified 3 varieties of CAF in invasive carcinoma of no
special type: those associated with α-SMA, subplanin, and CD44.
Expression of all 3 markers was maximally expressed in zones of invasive
growth. At the ultrastructural level, tumour stromal fibroblasts have a
different degree of maturity, in their structure they do not differ from
non-tumour tissue fibroblasts. in the narrow tanks of which an accumu-
lation of fine-fibrous flocculent material and its entry into the extracellular
space is noted. The Golgi apparatus is well expressed, large single mito-
chondria are noted. There are fibroblasts in which vesicles of the type of
cross-secretory granules are formed, with microfilaments inside the ex-
panded GER (myofibroblasts).
Conclusion: When studying the stroma of invasive carcinoma of no special
type (IC NST), 3 types of CAF were identified with ultrastructural features of
proliferating, able to migrate and possessing secretory fibroblast activity.
CAFs are maximally represented in invasive growth zones (EMTs).
PS-23-003
Ultrastructural diagnosis of neonatal herpes simplex virus infection
presenting as fulminant hepatitis
V. Papa*, N.C.M. Salfi, I. Bettocchi, R. Costa, E. Ricci, D.M. Cordelli,
F. Caramelli, G. Cenacchi
*DIBINEM, Alma Mater Studiorum Università di Bologna, Italy
Background & objectives: Among neonatal fatal diseases noteworthy is
the Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV) infection as cause of fulminant hepatitis
as viral diagnosis may be difficult to establish. A healthy new-born male
hospitalized for status epilepticus worsened rapidly to death.
Methods: A metabolic disease with multi-organ involvement was firstly
suspected and skin and muscle biopsies were obtained. Muscle biopsy
was routinely processed for histoenzymatic and ultrastructural analysis.
Autoptic samples, kidney, liver and myocardium were routinely proc-
essed for histology and immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis and some
also for ultrastructural analysis.
Results: Muscle biopsy showed unspecific myopathic damage with mito-
chondrial alterations. Ultrastructurally, liver samples showed many
rounded-polygonal viral particles (70 nm) with an electrondense core (her-
pes-like virus), mainly detectable both in the nucleus and cytoplasm of
hepatocytes. IHC analysis defined viral particles as type I HSV.
Moreover, type I HSV positivity has been confirmed also in cortical adrenal
glands.
Conclusion: Ultrastructural analysis, even in autoptic cases, allows to
make a precise diagnosis when clinical features are not suggestive: ful-
minant hepatic and multi-organ failure can be induced by HSV infection.
It has high mortality for untreated neonates and early diagnosis is difficult
as the characteristic vesicular rash may be absent, early symptoms often
nonspecific and HSV infection maternal history not evident. Neonatal
HSV infection, although rare, can cause neonatal hepatic failure.
PS-23 Electron Microscopy
Virchows Arch
PS-24-001
Digital pathology; awareness, practice, and challenges in a develop-
ing country like Pakistan
F. Ali*, S. Hameed, F. Iqbal, F. rehman, M. Rubab, S. Ahmad,
M.Z. Sarwar
*King Edward Medical University, Lahore, Pakistan
Background & objectives: In the past decade, a revolution in pathology,
digital pathology, is defined as the electronic capture, analysis, and dis-
tribution of gross or microscopic specimens. The aim of this study is to
determine the perception of various pathologists regarding digital pathol-
ogy, its applications, and challenges.
Methods: A cross sectional descriptive survey was conducted involving
76 surgical pathologists including postgraduate residents of different
levels and consultants belonging to different governmental and private
institutions of Pakistan. The respondents were evaluated by means of a
self-designed questionnaire prepared after extensive literature search.
Data was entered and analysed using SPSS version 21.
Results: The overall response rate was 98%. The awareness regarding
digital pathology and its uses varied among respondents depending upon
their level of residency. Many practical perspectives of this field were
either missing or not being followed in spite of provision in some insti-
tutions. However, majority of the institutions were lacking in this facility.
Many challenges in implementation included lack of awareness, financial
constraints, improper technical support and backup, and disinterest in the
new technology.
Conclusion: Awareness among residents and practicing surgical pathol-
ogists can be increased by encouraging their participation in dedicated
workshops thus familiarizing them to its various advantages. Teaching
undergraduates using different digital pathology techniques is perhaps the
best way to demonstrate its effectiveness.
PS-24-002
Low cost diagnosis support system using the remote desktop
M. Chosokabe*, S. Tajima, N. Matsumoto, S. Naruki, A. Endo, M. Doi,
J. Koike
*St. Marianna University, Japan
Background & objectives: Although WSI scanners have become
more sophisticated in recent years, they are still expensive. For
consultation, WSI is useful, but small hospitals need cheaper sys-
tems. Therefore, the usefulness of the system using the remote desk-
top (RDP) was verified.
Methods: We collected 50 intraoperative diagnostic specimens. On the
RDP distribution side, a pathologist or clinical technician operated the
microscope and displayed the image obtained from the CCD camera. On
the receiving side, a RDP connection was made from a smartphone via a
4G line, and pathologists diagnosed while instructing the viewing site via
telephone. Then, we compared the coincidence rate.
Results: Regarding diagnostic accuracy, no statistical difference was
found between the diagnosis using RDP and using microscope.
However, the diagnosis time tended to be slightly longer when RDP
was used. This tendency was remarkable when the laboratory technician
operated the sender. In addition, in the diagnosis by RDP via the 4G line,
there was almost no problem of the diagnosis due to the delay of the
image and the unclear image.
Conclusion: It was shown that even a low-cost system using a conven-
tional CCD camera and RDP can provide sufficient performance for
consultation for rapid intraoperative diagnosis. If it is a small specimen,
it can be applied to a consultation system for routine diagnosis. This
system can be configured at about one tenth the price of a WSI scanner
and can be installed in many small hospitals. It is considered that this
system may contribute to the equalization of diagnostic accuracy.
PS-24-003
Views on digital pathology: a departmental survey
J. Crosby*, J. Salmond
*Queen Elizabeth University Hospital Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Prior to the changeover to digital pathology
at the Queen Elizabeth University Hospital Glasgow (QEUH) we aimed
to investigate the views that pathologists held towards it, to allow a com-
parison with a repeat questionnaire once the changeover is complete.
Methods: A printed questionnaire was handed to all trainee and consul-
tant pathologists (total=59) in October 2019. Participants were asked to
rate their views towards the plans to change to digital pathology and
whether they thought reporting biopsy and resection specimens would
be faster or slower. Free text fields for perceived advantages and disad-
vantages of digital pathology were also given.
Results: 44 completed questionnaires were returned (14 trainees, 26 con-
sultants). Feelings towards the introduction of digital pathology were
generally positive (average = 4.1, 1 being very negative and 5 being very
positive), particularly amongst trainees (average = 4.4). The main per-
ceived advantages were measuring, sharing slides with colleagues and
experts, access to archive and ergonomics. The main perceived disadvan-
tages were IT issues, costs, image quality and a delay caused by scanning.
Conclusion: At the QEUH there is a positive attitude towards
digital pathology, but concerns remain. The changeover to digital
pathology is now underway and digital workstations are being
installed for both consultant and trainee pathologists. This study
serves as a baseline measurement and will allow for a meaningful
comparison with a repeat questionnaire in 2 years’ time, to see if
real-life use of digital pathology changes pathologists’ views to-
wards it.
PS-24-004
Detection of lymph node metastasis in colorectal cancer with the help
of deep neural network
C.M. Kindler*, G. Milli, C. Ottosson, K. Euren, L. Kajland Wilen,
M. Nikberg
*Västmanlands Hospital Västerås, Sweden
Background & objectives: Lymph node status predicts prognosis and
guides management in colorectal cancer. At least 12 lymph nodes are to
be assessed for proper staging. The examination of lymph node metastasis
is an important but tedious task for the pathologist.
Methods: The primary aim was to develop a deep learning algorithm that
can detect and outline metastatic cancer in digitalised histologic sections
of colorectal lymph nodes with at least the same sensitivity and specificity
as pathologists. Lymph nodes with and without metastases from patients
with colorectal cancer operated at Västmanlands Hospital were included
and the glasses scanned on a Hamamatsu scanner.
Results: To maximize the performance of the deep learning algorithm
two pathologist annotated, on pixel level, areas of metastases in each
positive node. A deep learning algorithm pre-trained with Camelyon data
was trained on 270 (138 with cancer and 132 benign) whole slide images
(WSI). The performance was evaluated on 26 WSI with cancer and 9
benign. The median sensitivity for cancer images was 0.88 and the me-
dian specificity for benign images was 1.00.
Conclusion: These encouraging preliminary results indicate that a deep
neural network could be developed to identify and outline lymph node
metastasis in colorectal resections. This deep neural network will be
further developed and in the future may serve as a decision support tool
for pathologists in their routine diagnostic process.
PS-24 IT in Pathology
Virchows Arch
PS-24-005
Deep learning as a tool for the diagnosis of mycosis fungoides
E. Köse*, Y.Y. Karabulut, U. Dinç
*Mersin University Research Hospital, Turkey
Background & objectives: Mycosis Fungoides (MF) is a form of
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma where lymphoid cells with atypical nu-
clei infiltrate epidermis. Nuclei detection is an application of deep
learning and in this study, we utilized deep learning for the diagnosis
of MF.
Methods: 25 MF and 25 non-MF cases were enrolled in this study.
Photographs of cases were then classified via a deep learning algo-
rithm. Nuclei are detected, features are extracted, values are visual-
ized and integrated on to the same image with colour codings above
each lymphocyte as to whether that lymphocyte nucleus is atypical
or not.
Results: Nucleus area, hue, saturation, heterogeneity, roundness,
convexity extracted from each nucleus showed that all features
showed statistically significant difference between MF and non-
MF cases. The deep learning algorithm developed during this study
achieved 85% accuracy in classifying lymphocytes as atypical or
normal.
Conclusion: MF is a type of cutaneous lymphoma that is potentially fatal,
so correctness of the diagnosis is of utmost importance. In order to diag-
nose MF, pathologist should determine if the lymphocytes seen in the
biopsy specimen are atypical or not. We developed a deep learning algo-
rithm that can achieve high accuracy in this task. This algorithm may be
used as a secondary tool in the diagnosis process in the future.
PS-24-006
The efficacy of virtual microscopy in teaching practical pathology to
medical students at an international college of medicine in Thailand:
a comparison of pre-test and post-test scores with student satisfaction
T. Laohawetwanit*
*Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat University,
Pathumthani, Thailand; Division of Pathology, Thammasat University
Hospital, Pathumthani, Thailand
Background & objectives: Historically, conventional light microscopy
(CLM) was the preferred learning modality in pathology courses for
almost two centuries. Virtual microscopy (VM) has been recently chal-
lenging traditional practices and providing a new realm for pathology
diagnostics. However, most medical schools in Thailand still use CLM
to teach pathology for medical students. This study aims to evaluate the
effectiveness of digital pathology in terms of undergraduate teaching,
which is the first experience at Thammasat University.
Methods: Participants were 29 second-year medical students who sat in
the practical session of the alimentary system pathology using VM as a
teaching modality. Students took pre- and post-test with 12 items cover-
ing common alimentary diseases, followed by ten survey questions with a
five-point Likert-style scale. Test and satisfaction scores were analysed.
Results: There was a significant difference (p<0.01) between students'
pre-test scores (mean±SD, 1.7±2.1) and post-test scores (7.1±3.4). VM
was viewed as efficient in terms of undergraduate education, mainly
because of its portability (mean: 4.9 on the five-point Likert-scale), sat-
isfactory quality of images (4.4), allowing learning in less time (4.3), and
stimulating cooperation between students with improving interaction
with teachers (4).
Conclusion: The students' perceptions regarding VM as a new teaching-
learning tool and their excellent performance on the knowledge exam
suggest that VM has a potential role in undergraduate teaching. Further
studies with a comparison with CLM, recruiting more participants, and
other practical sessions are needed to prove whether VM is useful in terms
of undergraduate teaching in Thailand.
PS-24-007
Evaluation of Ki67 stained neuroendocrine tumours of the gastroin-
testinal tract
N. Mola*, E. Hodneland, V. Krasontovitsch, S. Leh
*University of Bergen, Norway
Background & objectives: Despite the established role of the Ki67
labelling index for neuroendocrine tumours (NET), its evaluation suffers
from subjectivity and technical shortcomings. We perform a study to
assess different Ki67 quantification techniques including manual evalua-
tion, traditional image analysis, and machine learning.
Methods: Eighty regions of interest from ten Ki67 stained NETs were
chosen randomly. To assess the ground truth, an experienced pathologist
counted positive and negative tumour cell nuclei on digital slides. For
traditional image analysis, the Aperio Nuclear Algorithm was applied.
Finally, a machine learning system (Aiforia™) was trained with a training
data set (29 digital slides).
Results: The observed correlation between traditional image analysis and
ground truth was not significant (R2=0.4). This may be justified by the
difficulty of the Nuclear Algorithm to only include tumour cells and
ignore interstitial cells and lymphocytes nuclei. We also found that the
algorithm could not properly separate overlapping tumour cell nuclei. On
the other hand, an intra-observer study noted that traditional image anal-
ysis offers increased reproducibility compared to manual evaluation
(R2=0.9). Finally, the machine learning approach successfully identified
and segmented tumour cell nuclei and offered a performance, in one test
sample, of overall 90% precision and 94% sensitivity.
Conclusion: Nuclear detection and segmentation in NET for
assessing the Ki67 labelling index is a challenging task for traditional
image analysis. A machine learning solution on the other hand, once
trained and verified, delivers reliable and reproducible results and is
hence preferable.
PS-24-009
Blinded external validation of a multi-feature AI-based algorithm in
prostate core needle biopsies
L. Pantanowitz, G.M. Quiroga-Garza, L. Bien, R. Heled, D. Laifenfeld,
C. Linhart, J. Sandbank*, A. Shach, V. Shalev, M. Vecsler, P. Michelow,
S. Hazelhurst, R. Dhir
*Ibex Medical Analytics, Institute of Pathology, Maccabi Healthcare
Services, Israel
Background & objectives: There is high demand to develop clinically
useful computer-assisted diagnostic tools to evaluate prostate core needle
biopsies (CNBs). Clinical validation of AI systems able to analyse histo-
pathology images of prostate cancer, especially in large independent
blinded studies, is still lacking.
Methods: Ibex Medical Analytics has developed an AI-based algorithm
that identifies various cell types, tissue structures and morphological fea-
tures within whole-slide-images (WSI) of prostate CNBs trained on
1,357,480 image patches.
Results: We validated the performance of the algorithm on detection
of adenocarcinoma, Gleason scoring, identification of perineural in-
vasion, and calculation of cancer proportion in an external dataset of
100 consecutive cases (1,627 slides) from UPMC digitized on an
Aperio AT2 scanner. Ground truth ascertainment was conducted for
a subset of the slides with two independent pathologists, resulting in
adjustment of diagnoses in accordance with the algorithmic output in
some cases.
The algorithm demonstrated high AUCs for all parameters, and specifi-
cally an AUC of 0.991 for adenocarcinoma detection, the highest reported
in the field in a blinded data set.
Conclusion: These results suggest that this AI-based algorithm can be
used as a computer-assisted diagnostic tool to automate screening of
Virchows Arch
prostate CNBs for primary diagnosis, assess signed-out cases for QA
purposes, and standardize reporting to improve patient management.
We will further discuss the performance of the algorithm and its clinical
utility in routine use in a pathology lab.
Ibex Medical Analytics funded the study.
PS-24-010
Going virtual: a medical students’ performance assessment
A. Vaduva*, A. Muresan, R. Cornea, A. Jurescu, C.L. Serban, A. Dema
*University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes Timisoara,
Department of Pathology, Romania
Background & objectives: The change to virtual microscopy in our
Pathology Department approaching, we aimed to compare long term
information retention following a classical power point (PPT) presenta-
tion versus virtual slides (VS) as tutorial teaching material, in order to
assess students’ performance.
Methods: We recruited 3rd year medical school students, French
Division, from the University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes
Timisoara. A cross-over design was employed, and students were ran-
domly allocated into 2 study groups: G1(n=14) – 1st lab PPT and 2nd lab
VS and G2(n=18) – vice versa. Student performance was assessed on
memory retention MCQ tests, administered two weeks later.
Results: Significant higher scores were found in favour of VS, in between
comparisons when comparing G1 with G2, with a mean difference of
3.32 points with 95%CI (1.86;4.79) in lab 1 and a mean difference of
2.23 points with 95%CI (0.67;3.79) in lab 2 and within each group: a
mean difference of 3.1 points with 95%CI (1.23;4.9) for G1 and a mean
difference of 2.5 points with 95%CI (1.35;3.64) for G2.
Conclusion: Our results show that for our French Division students, the
change of the teaching materials used in the tutorial part of the microsco-
py labs from PPT to VS is beneficial from the point of view of long-term
information retention.
PS-25-001
Predictive value of serial daily platelet count in assessing progression
to Dengue shock syndrome amongst Dengue patients
R. Akbar*, M. Javed
*Cantonment General Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Early identification of adults presenting with
dengue who are likely to develop DSS can decrease mortality and re-
source allocation in endemic areas. The objective of this study was to
assess the values of haematocrit and platelet count in predicting DSS.
Methods: In a prospective observational study, we analysed data of 325
adult patients admitted between May-Nov 2019. The population com-
prised of all adults with laboratory-confirmed dengue enrolled between
days 1–4 of illness. Logistic regression was the main statistical model for
all univariate and multivariable analyses. Prognostic value of daily
haematocrit levels and platelet counts were assessed on each day of
illness.
Results: Amongst the 325 patients included in our study, 29 (9%)
progressed to DSS. Significant baseline risk factors for DSS included a
history of vomiting, higher temperature, cough, and hepatosplenomegaly.
Prediction models that included serial daily platelet counts demonstrated
better ability to discriminate patients who developed DSS from others,
than models based on enrolment information only. However, inclusion of
daily haematocrit values did not improve prediction of DSS.
Conclusion: It was concluded that serial daily platelet counts provide
useful additional information to identify adults at an early stage who are
likely to develop DSS, in addition to other risk factors e.g.,
hepatosplenomegaly, cough, vomiting, and high temperature.
PS-25-002
Challenges of participation in proficiency testing by different surgical
pathology laboratories; a perspective from Pakistan
F. Rehman, F. Iqbal, W. Ahmad, W. Ahmad, F. Ali*, S. Ahmad
*King Edward Medical University, Lahore, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Proficiency testing is mandatory for any
surgical pathology laboratory in order to achieve accreditation and for
improvement. Aim of this study is to determine the perception of labora-
tories regarding PT, their routine practice and challenges in a developing
country like Pakistan.
Methods: A cross sectional descriptive survey was conducted involving
35 surgical pathology laboratories including both private and govern-
ment, from different regions of Pakistan. Their participation in various
proficiency testing modules was evaluated. The respondents were evalu-
ated by means of a self-designed questionnaire prepared after extensive
literature search. Data was entered and analysed using SPSS version 21.
Results: The different PT providers included; CAP, UKAS and
RCPATH Australia. Only one laboratory was CAP accredited while
some of them were just participating in either technical or diagnostic
modules of PT. Many laboratories were accredited for ISO15189 by
Pakistan National Accreditation Council. Laboratories which were not
participating in PT were either unaware of it or had financial constraints.
Few of the laboratories were participating in inter-laboratory comparison
as part of external quality assurance program.
Conclusion: PT results in improved laboratory standards and perfor-
mance. Laboratories especially in developing countries should be
encouraged to participate in PT by easy accessibility to various PT
providers, maintaining their performance graphs, awareness
workshops/seminars and offering them discounted rates for different
modules.
PS-25-003
Pan-TRK immunohistochemistry in 9 secretory carcinomas
I. Amat Villegas*, Y. Ruiz De Azúa, R. Beloqui, A. Larrea, L.M. Nova,
M. Bronte, P. Fernandez-Seara, A. Córdoba
*Hospital de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase
(NTRK) gene family encodes tropomyosin receptor kinases (TRKA,
TRKB, TRKC) in which gene fusions are oncogenic drivers of various
tumours, one of them, secretory carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry
(IHC) can be used as a screening for those alterations.
Methods: We reviewed information from the medical records of 9 pa-
tients aged from 4 to 68 years with pathologic diagnosis of secretory
carcinoma between 1990 and 2019 at our institution. Tumours were lo-
cated in the parotid gland or breast parenchyma. NTRK overexpression
was studied by immunohistochemistry.
Results: We reviewed information from the medical records of 9 patients
aged from 4 to 68 years with pathologic diagnosis of secretory carcinoma
between 1990 and 2019 at our institution. Tumours were located in the
parotid gland or breast parenchyma. NTRK overexpression was studied
by immunohistochemistry.
Conclusion: Secretory carcinomas are invasive tumours composed of
epithelial cells with intracytoplasmic vacuoles often associated with
E7V6- NTRK fusion.
IHC can be used to detect TRK overexpression and be useful as an
effective screening tool for NTRK gene fusions. Positive results should
be followed with a confirmatory molecular test if TRK inhibitors treat-
ment is considered.
PS-25 Other Topics
Virchows Arch
PS-25-004
Gliclazide suppresses inflammation via modulation of cyclooxygen-
ase and immune pathways in an experimental diabetic model
N. Baig*, T. Roome, T. Ali, A. Razzak, Q. Ilyas
*Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Dow Institute of Medical Technology and
Department of Biochemistry, Dow International Medical College, Dow
University of Health Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan
Background & objectives: N-(2-cyclohexyl-4-nitrophenyl) methane
sulfonamide (NS-398), a reported inhibitor of cyclooxgenase-2 (COX-
2) belongs to sulfonylurea group. In this study we aim to assess and
explore anti-COX-2 and β-cell protective activity of Gliclazide
(sulfonylurea) an antidiabetic drug using both in-silico and in-vivo tools.
Methods: COX-2 (PDB: 3QMO) was docked with Gliclazide using
AutoDock Vina (Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm) and ArgusLab
software. Prostaglandin E2, EP4, COX-2, COX-1, IL-1β and
TNF-α were measured in STZ-induced diabetic models (β-cells),
carrageenan-induced paw oedema and peritonitis in albino rats
treated with Gliclazide (i.e. Sulfonylurea) using ELISA and RT-
PCR. β-cell functional genes PDX1, NKX6.1 and MAFA expres-
sion were quantified using RT-qPCR.
Results: Binding interaction of Gliclazide with the side chains of
R120 and Y355 in COX-2 channel were same as NS-398. H-
bonding and van-der-Waal interaction were appreciated with
R120, W387, A527, S530 and L531. Expression levels of COX-
1, COX-2, TNF-α and IL-1β were inhibited 96±2.1%, 73±0.8%,
93±0.7% and 63±0.3%, respectively. Paw oedema, PEG2 levels
and expression of PDX1, NKX6.1 and MAFA showed promising
results with the therapeutic doses of Gliclazide. Inhibition of car-
rageenan induced paw-oedema and peritonitis, reduced levels and
expression of PGE2, EP4, COX-1/2, IL-1β and TNF-α along with
improved expression of β-cell functional genes (PDX1, NKX6.1,
MAFA) revealed gliclazide anti-inflammatory potential and sup-
ported its interaction with catalytic residues of COX-2.
Conclusion: Taken together, breaking IL-1β/COX-2/PGE2 path-
way loop using single therapeutic dose of Gliclazide revealed its
therapeutic potential to improve β cell function and insulin secre-
tion by its anti-COX-2 and β-cell protective activity besides its
antidiabetic activity.
PS-25-005
Companion diagnostics in immunotherapy: evolving role and impact
of PD-L1 testing within a referral laboratory
A. Bancu*, R. Cowan, A. Chaturvedi
*The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Cancer management guidelines continue to
evolve by merging PD-1/PDL-1 testing with introduction of companion
diagnostic approaches. Aim of this study was to provide a comprehensive
overview of the requirements and potential challenges for laboratories
resulting from introduction of PDL-1 assessment.
Methods: Histopathology reports (5-year period - Jan 2014 to Jan 2020)
incorporating PDL-1 test results were identified and analysed for tumour
type, clone and result (as per recommendations).
Results: PDL-1 testing requested in 238 cases was undertaken in
199 of them - with a clear majority in the last two years.
Commonest tumour types included pulmonary (76%) and urological
(15%) with remaining 9% including eight other tumour sites/ types.
Majority (59%) of cases were reported to be PD-L1 positive.
Conclusion: This study highlights an interesting recent trend for
test requests in cancer settings, with resulting reporting challenges
in the absence of similar defined guidelines and, potential require-
ment for validation of more than one antibody clone to meet test
recommendations.
PS-25-006
Assessment of immune cell heterogeneity in the tumour
microenvironment
L. Brennan*, J. Brouwer-Visser, M. Karpova, A. Heller, F. Gaire,
E. Nuesch, K. Korski, B. Gomes
*Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, USA
Background & objectives: Levels of tumour infiltrating lymphocytes
are critical biomarkers for quantifying the therapeutic value of cancer
immunotherapies. We sought to understand marker variability across
and/or within patients, with diversity including indications, treatment
history, tumour heterogeneity, lesion site and type.
Methods: Utilizing data from >1000 baseline tumour samples from clin-
ical trials and commercially available sources, we compared how markers
of immune activation (Ki67+ CD8A+ T cells/mm2) or tolerance
(FOXP3+cells/mm2) varied by demographics, indication, lesion site, le-
sion type, fresh or archival status, and treatment history. Where multiple
tumours were available from the same patient, we evaluated how densi-
ties fluctuated within individuals.
Results: We found meaningful and statistically significant differences in
both proliferating CD8+ T cells and FOXP3+ cells by indication, lesion
type and site, and prior treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors,
chemotherapy or hormone-related therapies. There was no significant
linear relationship between time since treatment and density of either cell
population. Within-patient differences by lesion site and type were small-
er than between-patient differences but still statistically significant. Fresh
core needle biopsies had almost twice the density of Ki67+ CD8 T cells
than archival tissue and the difference was meaningful even within pa-
tients. We found no statistically significant difference in either immune
cell marker level by age or gender.
Conclusion: We identified factors that vary in baseline and on-treatment
samples and are associated with immune infiltrate levels, creating bias—
even within patients. Applying our results towards an algorithm for bio-
marker analysis will improve the accuracy of measuring treatment-related
effects on the tumour microenvironment. Understanding lymphocyte het-
erogeneity can provide opportunities for patient selection and define new
markers of tumour and immune cell engagement to predict susceptibility
to immunotherapy or identify biological modulation.
PS-25-007
The evaluation of fixation practices on VENTANA immunohisto-
chemical assays
L. Caldwell*, M. Manoogian, P. Towne, E. ElGabry
*Roche Tissue Diagnostics, Companion Diagnostics (CDx), USA
Background & objectives: During the development of VENTANA
immunohistochemical (IHC) assays, fixation studies are conducted
to ensure assay performance is acceptable within established stan-
dards and to provide information on any limitations observed with
fixatives or fixation times that may yield inaccurate results.
Methods: Fresh tissues well characterized for biomarker expression were
harvested to limit ischemic time. Samples were immediately subjected to
various fixatives for a range of 1-72 hours. The samples were then com-
pared to a reference fixed within established guidelines. This data set
compiles the results of these studies across eleven VENTANA assays
tested with various formalin, alcohol, and glyoxal based fixatives.
Results: Across all VENTANA IHC assays tested, crosslinking
formalin-based fixatives yielded more consistent results within 6-
72 hours by demonstrating overall percent agreement (OPA) rates
of 95.4% and 98.5%, respectively, to the reference sample.
Comparatively, 1-72 hours in formalin fixatives yielded 88% and
87.6% OPA, respectively. Alcohol and glyoxal-based fixatives ex-
hibited more variability within 6-72 hours of fixation resulting in
OPAs of 12.8% and 38%, respectively.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: The potential of fixative types and fixation times to
yield inaccurate results necessitated the need for standardization
such that The College of American Pathologists (CAP) and
American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) developed guid-
ance for HER2 Testing in Breast Cancer (2018). These data cor-
roborate the established CAP/ASCO guidelines and demonstrate
the importance of standardization in fixation practices to yield
accurate IHC results, particularly for predictive assays that aid in
determining patient treatment regimens.
PS-25-008
Twitter is a useful and effective tool for pathologists worldwide in the
diagnosis of breast pathology
I.J. Expósito Afonso*, T. Labiano Miravalles, C. Miguel Ruiz, M. Prieto
Pozuelo, P. Meseguer García
*Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria, Spain
Background & objectives: In Pathology the use of Twitter with
educational purposes has increased recently. Under the hashtag
#breastpath is tagged reliable information about breast pathology.
The aim of this study is to highlight Twitter as a tool to share
educational information.
Methods: Using the advanced Twitter search tool we tracked the
#breastpath tag during the period between April 2018 and
June 2019. We studied this variables: author, number of com-
ments, retweets and “likes”. We added together tweets according
to its objective (teaching, consultation, sharing information of con-
gresses or papers) and according to the type of Breast pathology
(special subtypes, benign pathology,...).
Results: 300 tweets from 136 pathologists from 27 countries were
reviewed. The pathologists who most frequently publish came from the
US, Spain and Brazil, the most active being Jenny Pincus (@jennpincus,
USA), Gerônimo Junior (@GeronimoJrLapac, Brazil) and Idaira
Expósito (@ijexpafo, Spain). The user with the highest average of
likes/tweet was Mario Prieto (@dr_MPrieto, Spain) and retweets was
Kalyany Bambal (@kriyer68, USA). The goal of the tweet was 59%
for teaching purposes, 7% to share doubts, 22% related to congress and
13% to highlight a paper. Regarding pathologies tweets were about: be-
nign lesions (35%), special subtypes (16%), NOS carcinoma (5%), met-
astatic lesions (4%) and molecular pathology and immunohistochemistry
(5%).
Conclusion: Twitter is a useful and effective tool for sharing and teaching
information about breast pathology. It also generates a valuable interac-
tion between professionals around the world involved in the diagnosis of
breast cancer and benign breast lesions.
PS-25-009
Quality improvement project: a survey on the use of photography
during cut-up at Wycombe Hospital, United Kingdom
M.V. Foy*, G. Wathuge
*Pathology Dept., Wycombe Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: We sought the views and experiences of
Histopathologists in our department regarding the use of photography
during specimen cut-up, with the aim to determine whether the creation
of a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) would be useful.
Methods: We asked all the Histopathology consultants, staff grades and
trainees in our department (n: 16) to complete a qualitative and quantita-
tive survey comprising a combination of 13 open and close-ended ques-
tions. The survey was open for 1 month, after which the data was
analysed.
Results: The response rate was 87.5%. 100% of the respondents an-
swered they thought it was useful to take photographs of specimens
during cut-up, mostly on a case-by-case basis. 64% answered they were
aware of consent and data protection issues. 64% answered they had used
photography during cut-up before, but 93% said they did not know where
to find the camera and 79% did not know how to use it. 93% did not know
where to upload the images and 79% did not know how to make users
aware of them. Finally, 86% answered that it would be useful to have an
SOP to guide through the process of specimen photography.
Conclusion: The survey showed an awareness of the need for pho-
tography during cut-up in our department, but highlighted a lack
of knowledge of the processes involved and how to access the
images, deeming the creation of an SOP appropriate. We therefore
propose a potential SOP for our department, to include the desig-
nation of a ‘Camera Supervisor’ to oversee any issues related to
the camera and/or images.
PS-25-010
Importance of the size of the field of view for standardized biomarker
evaluations
S. Schöniger, G. Bänfer, R. Diezko, B. Jasani*
*Targos Molecular Pathology GmbH, Kassel, Germany
Background & objectives: Interest in digital microscopy has increased
exponentially. Guidelines for standardized evaluation of biomarkers are
mainly defined for light microscopy (LM). This study aimed to define
parameters for alternative standardized use of digital and light microscopy
for biomarker evaluations.
Methods: Microscopes with field numbers (FNs) 23 and 18, respectively,
a HD computer monitor with diagonal of 56 cm, 100% size scaling and
1920x1200 resolution and a 3K computer with monitor diagonal of 31
cm, 200% size scaling and 2736x1824 resolution were used. PD-L1
stained cancer sections were scanned with Leica Aperio AT2 slide scan-
ner and evaluated with Aperio ImageScope.
Results: Field of view (FOV) adjustment was required to enable stan-
dardized PD-L1 scoring. Light microscopic FOV was calculated using
the FN of the ocular, and digital FOV using Aperio ImageScope. At 20x
setting identical size areas could be examined in 10 and 16 LM FOVs
using the microscopes with FNs 23 and 18, and 23 and 45 digital FOVs
for computers with monitor diagonals of 56 and 31 cm, respectively.
Conclusion: This preliminary investigation has helped to identify
field of view (FOV) and field number (FN) as the two key param-
eters for standardized evaluation of biomarkers by physicians and
scientists in multicenter studies equipped with different light mi-
croscopic and digital imaging apparatus. The adjustment for these
two parameters could also facilitate a comparison of retrospective
research data obtained with different microscope or digital image
settings, and standardized training of pathologists in scoring of
PD-L1 on glass slides and digital images.
PS-25-011
Computer-assisted analysis of sources of variability in PD-L1 com-
bined positive score (PD-L1cps) estimation
A. Zhailauova, S. Schöniger, J. Nowak, R. Diezko, B. Jasani*
*Targos Molecular Pathology GmbH, Kassel, Germany
Background & objectives: PD-L1cps is used for immune-oncological
typing of solid tumours. Study investigated sources of variability in esti-
mation of its constituent parameters: number of viable tumour cells
(vTC), PD-L1-positive tumour cells (PD-L1PTC) and PD-L1-positive
immune cells (PDL1PIC), in head-and-neck cancer (HNC).
Methods: A digital image of HNC stained for PD-L1 with 22C3
pharmDx kit, was analysed for vTC, PD-L1PTC, and PD-L1PIC using
Visiopharm tissue selection application, to determine PDL1cps in 3 non-
overlapping 0.64 mm2 digital fields, 3 independent times by an expert
trained medical student. Mean % coefficient of variation (MCV% of the 3
repeats) was calculated as an index of variability.
Virchows Arch
Results: The mean (range) counts of vTC, PD-L1PTC, and PD-L1PIC
included within 0.64mm2 digital image frames (n = 9) as manually de-
termined on three repeat analyses, were found to be 819 (478-1559); 165
(75-255); 125 (89-166), respectively. For each of these three parameters,
the relative variability (MCV% = 1 standard deviation/mean x 100) was
calculated to be 33, 50 and 19, respectively, and that for PD-L1cps to be
21. According to statistical criteria applied to small samples MCV% of
<20 is considered to be a reflection of good reproducibility; <30 as indic-
ative of acceptable reproducibility; and that of >30 as representative of
overall poor reproducibility.
Conclusion: Visiopharm tissue selection application provides a means of
determining the sources of variability in PD-L1cps estimation by
allowing simple manual annotation of individual cells of interest in
predefined areas of digital images. The poor reproducibility of vTC and
PD-L1PTC estimation indicates need for more objective methods for
identification of viable tumour cells and PD-L1-labelled tumour cells,
whilst the higher precision noted in estimation of PD-L1IC acknowledges
its greater clinical utility.
PS-25-012
Immunohistochemical detection of FAS in formalin-fixed paraffin
embedded tissues
A. Jungbluth*, D. Frosina, J. Geronimo, E. Hernandez, N. Lewis,
A. Dogan
*Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, USA
Background & objectives: FAS is a receptor protein of the the tumour
necrosis factor receptor superfamily. Engagement with its ligand FASLG
induces the formation of death inducing signalling complexes triggering
apoptosis. FAS is a pivotal immune-regulator involved in peripheral tol-
erance and other processes.
Methods: Various mAbs were batch-tested for suitability in IHC of FFPE
tissues. Various tissues and antigen retrieval methods (AGR) were tested.
All assays were performed on a Leica automated stainer platform.
Clone
Company
Order #
EPR5700
Abcam
ab133619
B-10
Santa Cruz
sc-8009
C18C12
Cell Signalling
4233S
Y599
abbexa
abx233017
LT95
Novus
NB500-503
DX2
BioLegend
305614
APO-1-1
eBioscience
BMS151
UB2
MBL
MD-10-3
Results: All antibodies were tested on a panel of ten normal tissues and
modifications of the staining protocol employing different buffer solu-
tions as well as enzyme pre-treatment. However, most antibodies did not
render any staining at all or demonstrated diffuse overall labelling not
compatible with FAS expression. Clone EPR5700 showed moderate
good staining congruent with FAS expression employing heat-based
AGR and a hipH buffer. Best and most consistent immunostaining was
achieved with clone mAb LT95 when employing enzyme pre-treatment
(Leica, Enzyme 1). Staining was intense and membranous with variable
cytoplasmic component. Specificity was confirmed by comparative anal-
ysis of LT95 staining with immunostaining of FAS-defining mAb APO-1
on frozen tissues.
Conclusion: Proper evaluation of molecules involved in immune-
regulatory processes is mandatory for the understanding of tumour biol-
ogy especially in the context of novel immunotherapeutic approaches
such as checkpoint therapy. Interestingly, few data about death receptor
FAS are available. Moreover, most data were gathered on frozen speci-
mens and/or with discontinued polyclonal reagents. Our present study
allows for accurate assessment of FAS in archival pathology material
using commercially available reagents and equipment.
PS-25-013
South-south collaboration as a mechanism to strengthen pathology
residency training in Africa: Tanzania and Rwanda experience
A. Kimambo*, F. Nawagi, E. Vuhahula
*Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences (MUHAS),
Tanzania
Background & objectives: African medical schools have traditionally
focused to western collaborators for technical assistance to strengthen
their education and research programmes. The disproportionate cost and
the advanced pathology diagnostics don’t match with treatment protocols
which affect the realization of the intended goals.
Methods: African pathology residency elective’s placement model under
GEMx in partnership with COPECSA was initiated in 2019. Among the
participants, three MUHAS senior residents were placed to Rwanda
University in exchange of three residents from Botswana and Rwanda
for 4-8 weeks. Total cost was provided by GEMx through COPECSA.
Every participating resident submitted a semi-structured report to pro-
gramme organizers.
Results: The semi-structured reports of the six elective residents, showed
the following: i) significant improvement in their diagnostic skills, knowl-
edge, attitude and professionalism ii) development of cultural and inter-
personal competences iii) professional and career development, iv) a cost-
effective model in comparison to a similar placement in Western coun-
tries was observed. This model initiated a practical and sustainable pro-
gram, if well adopted can progressively improve the diagnostic skills,
knowledge and attitude which is relevant to Africa context.
Conclusion: Regional exchange programme for pathology residency
have a potential to produce highly competent pathologists who are able
provide quality laboratory services. Identification of strengths in each
institution and a well-planned programmes for pathology residents is
mandatory to improve the model.
PS-25-014
Expert assessment of damages on the clothes and skin of a person
N. Konyssov*
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Injuries caused by blunt objects are a com-
mon type of mechanical injury in forensic medicine. However, the issues
of identifying traces caused by different models of shoes with rubber soles
remain poorly studied to date.
Methods: The purpose of the work is to identify the features of damage
by various models of shoes and identification of the rubber trace-forming
surface using spectral methods. Samples of rubber soles of various
models of shoes and traces on various tissues and skin flaps of corpses
removed from the hip areas within no more than a day after death were
examined.
Results: The analysis of the results showed that contact-diffusion and x-
ray methods were not effective for detecting metals in traces.
Visualization of traces on black tissues using research in infra-red rays
in most cases was inconclusive. Direct stereomicromorphoscopy revealed
overlays of grey foreign matter of different intensity in the areas of traces
on non-biological and biological objects, and separate black foreign mi-
croparticles of various shapes similar to rubber particles. The conducted
spectral studies have shown the identity of the qualitative chemical com-
position of the rubber sole of various models of "civilian" Shoe samples,
the marking elements of which are zinc and iron, as well as admixtures of
calcium, silicon, aluminium, magnesium and manganese.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: The data obtained prove the need to study the damage and
traces on the skin of the victims ' clothing in order to establish the possi-
bility of their cause by a foot shod in tight shoes with a rubber sole.
PS-25-015
Pathological study of stillbirths’ placentas at Muhimbili National
Hospital, Tanzania
A. Malango*, J. Kitinya
*Muhimbili National Hospital, Tanzania
Background & objectives: Stillbirth is foetal death that occurs at gesta-
tional age of ≥28 weeks. Majority of causes of stillbirths can be identified
by placenta examination hence the study aimed to describe fatal patho-
logical changes in the placentas of stillbirths
Methods: A descriptive cross-sectional study done for the period of 6
months, it involved examination of 80 placentas of stillbirths born at
gestational age of ≥28 weeks, placentas were fixed in 10% neutral buff-
ered formalin for 8-12 hours. Grossing and interpretation of placenta
pathology was according to Amsterdam Placental Workshop Group
Consensus Statement.
Results: Out of 80 stillbirths, 32(40%) had unknown clinical diagnosis.
Majority of stillbirth placentas 71(91%) found with either one or com-
bined pathologies with the risk to cause stillbirth. Maternal vascular
malperfusion was the commonest pathology and was significantly asso-
ciated with preterm stillbirths. Maternal floor infarction, a placenta pa-
thology with risk to cause foetal death and high risk of recurrence was
among the pathologies found, was seen in 4(5%) of stillbirth placentas.
Conclusion: Findings in this study clearly indicated the importance of
pathological examination of placenta in determining cause of stillbirth.
Placenta examination in stillbirths can identify more pathology related to
stillbirths than clinical assessment alone. Placenta examination is not
routinely done in our setting and it highlighted its importance as more
pathologies are identified some of them with risk of recurrence which
necessitate counselling and close follow up of the future pregnancies.
Placenta examination is recommended in each case of stillbirth.
PS-25-016
Hyperbilirubinemia improves clinical course of autoimmune
arthritis
K. Mikus Kuracinova*, T. Sykora, K. Bauerova, P. Janega, P. Babal
*Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University,
Slovakia
Background & objectives: Rheumatoid arthritis is relatively common
multisystem chronic disease that causes mainly inflammatory arthritis of
the peripheral joints. In the present work, we examined the effect of
bilirubin administration in experimental adjuvant-induced arthritis in rats
Methods: Male Lewis rats were randomised into four groups: con-
trol, adjuvant-induced arthritis, adjuvant-induced arthritis with bil-
irubin administration and control group with bilirubin administra-
tion. Bilirubin was administered intraperitoneally from day 14 till
the end of the experiment at day 28. The volume of the hind paw
was the marker of clinical progression. Blood cell count, DNA and
tissue damage were evaluated.
Results: Clinical signs of disease progression evaluated as the vol-
ume of hind paws, significantly decreased after 7 days of bilirubin
administration. Bilirubin administration leads to a significant de-
crease of leukocyte, lymphocyte and erythrocyte counts, increase
of platelets, to significantly decreased C-reactive protein and
ceruloplazmin plasma levels. DNA isolated from lymphocytes
showed significantly lower damage after bilirubin administration.
Joint damage assess by granulocyte invasion and fibrin deposition
was a significantly reduced in rats with bilirubin administration.
Conclusion: Bilirubin significantly reduces markers of inflamma-
tion, white blood count, inflammatory cells and fibrin accumulation
in joints in the animals with adjuvant-induced arthritis. One of the
possible protective mechanisms might be the reduction of oxidative
stress by bilirubin.
PS-25-017
Hypoglycaemic properties of 2-morpholino-5-phenyl-6h-1,3,4-
thiadiazine hydrobromide are correlated with increased extra-islet
insulin and PDX1 expression
E. Mukhlynina*, I. Gette, I. Danilova, K. Sokolova
*Ural Federal University, Institute of Immunology and Physiology,
Russia
Background & objectives: Previous studies show anti-hyperglycaemic
properties of 2-morpholino-5-phenyl-6H-1,3,4-thiadiazine hydrobromide
(L-17) in diabetic rats. However, mechanisms of L-17 anti-diabetic action
are not completely clear. Our study aimed to characterize regenerative
process in the pancreas in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats treated
with L-17.
Methods: Forty male Wistar rats were divided into 4 groups: control,
control plus L-17, streptozotocin diabetes (T2DM) and T2DM treated
with L-17. T2DM was induced by intraperitoneal injection of nicotin-
amide (110 mg/kg) and streptozotocin (65 mg/kg). L-17 was injected
intramuscularly (40 mg/kg/day, 12 injections for 4 weeks).
Biochemical, haematological, histological and immunohistochemical in-
vestigations were performed.
Results: L-17 decreased fasting blood glucose, glycated haemoglobin,
urea and alkaline phosphatase in diabetic rats. Haematological anal-
ysis did not reveal any negative effects of this substance. L-17
treatment had no impact on the pancreatic islets’ quantity, their
diameters, β-cells number and CD117 expression (both in islets
and acinar part). However, L-17 caused increasing of total islet
cells, extra-islet insulin-producing cells (especially in acinar part),
PDX1+cell in acini and ducts in T2DM-rats.
Conclusion: Our studies suggest that observed plasma glucose and
glycated haemoglobin improvement appears to be occurred by the way
independent from islet β-cells recovery. However, it may be related to
extra-islet acinar and ductal insulin-positive cells development, as indi-
cated by increased insulin and PDX1 expression in these areas.
This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation grant (16-
15-000390-П).
PS-25-018
A quality review of amended reports in the histopathology depart-
ment of a tertiary referral hospital and cancer centre
E. O'Connor*, S. Phelan
*University Hospital Galway, Ireland
Background & objectives: Amended reports are issued when the
final report diagnosis changes due to either a change in interpre-
tation or new pathological information. We reviewed 24-months of
amended reports to assess reporting standards, identifying areas of
good practice and areas requiring improvement.
Methods: Our histopathology department participates in the Irish
National Quality Improvement Programme (NQIP) and thereby a
quality code is applied to all amended reports (Q021). Using the
Q021 code, all amended reports issued from January 2018 to
December 2019 were identified and reporting standards were
assessed. The cases collected spanned multiple reporting patholo-
gists and included all speciality practices within the department.
Results: In 53 of 73,610 cases, an amended report was issued (0.07%).
Of these, the change in final diagnosis occurred as a result of
Virchows Arch
interpretive discrepancy (n=40), external review (n=4), levels
(n=4), new clinical information (n=3) and immunohistochemistry
(n=2). Of the 6 cases where levels or immunohistochemistry
changed the final diagnosis, 5 final reports did not document the
request for additional information nor label the original report
provisional. 35 amended reports (66%) did not document notifying
the clinician of the change. The importance of clinical correlation
was seen. In 3 cases, evaluation of the clinical picture at MDT led
to a review of histology and a change in final diagnosis.
Conclusion: The percentage of amended reports (0.07%) met the Irish
Quality Improvement target of <1%. It is local policy that all amended
reports should be communicated to the clinician. This is an area that
should be improved upon by the department.
PS-25-019
Reducing turnaround times Tallaght University Hospital
Department of Cellular Pathology: from red to green
K. O'Hare*, S. Crowther, S. Delaney, A. Madden
*Department of Cellular Pathology, Tallaght University Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland
Background & objectives: TUH Department of Cellular Pathology has
struggled to reach the National Quality Assurance Scheme turnaround
time (TAT) standards for a number of years.
Objectives: Achieve national NQAIS TATs by reviewing end to end
processes in the laboratory and introduce change improvement.
Methods: A working group was established to review work prac-
tices, workflow and to assess potential areas of change. A lean
improvement approach was used to identify and eliminate waste
with the use of process maps and risk assessments. All staff –
clerical staff, medical laboratory aides, medical scientists & con-
sultants -were consulted and were encouraged to propose areas for
improvement
Results: The changes were introduced into the department from
February 2019. Multiple changes were identified starting at receipt
and booking in of samples by MLAs, typing priorities by the
secretaries, re-categorisation of samples in line with TAT targets
and, Scientific/Consultant rota changes and introduction of voice
recognition reporting. There has been a dramatic improvement in
achievement of TATs since introduction of the changes. All day 5
TATs were improved from 38.5% in 2018 to 88% in 2019, and all
day 7 TATs improved from 67.5% in 2018 to 90.5% in 2019.
Conclusion: Through the collaboration and cooperation from all
staff, the multiple changes in work practice had a compounding
positive effect on the TATs in the laboratory. The quality im-
provement intervention achieved an effective and streamlined his-
topathology service with reduced TATs within a challenging work
environment, resulting in an improved patient care pathway.
PS-25-020
Cancer incidence and survival among young adults in Hospital Prof.
Dr. Fernando Fonseca in young adults (2008-2018)
C. A. Padrão*, A. Pereira, F. Pereira, J. Tinoco, N. Inácio, R. Theias
Manso
*Hospital Prof. Doutor Fernando Fonseca, EPE, Portugal
Background & objectives: The incidence of cancer in younger adults is
lower but carries a higher burden.
Our goal is to evaluate the incidence and mortality of malignant neo-
plasms diagnosed in our hospital among patients, aged 15-39 years, dur-
ing a 10-year period.
Methods: Cases of cancers diagnosed in patients aged 15-39 years, were
collected from our hospital oncologic registry between 2008 and 2018.
Two different age subgroups were analysed: 15-24 and 25-39 age-groups.
Descriptive statistics and incidence rates were calculated. Vital status was
determined until December 2014; survival was estimated using the
Kaplan-Meier survival function.
Results: A total of 524 cancer cases were diagnosed from 2008 to 2018:
40 males and 30 females in the 15-24 age-group; 159 males and 295
females in the 25-39 age-group. Overall incidence rate was 10.7 and
33.6 per 100.000 young adults, respectively.
A tendency for lower incidences over time was observed in the 25-39 age-
group.
The 5-year overall survival was 93.3% in the 15-24 age-group and 74.5%
in the 25-39 age-group, with 69.7% for males and 77.5% for females (P =
0.04) in the 25-39age-group.
The most frequent tumours were: Hodgkin’s lymphoma, thyroid and testis in
the 15-24 age-group; Breast, cervix-uteri and thyroid in the 25-39 age-group.
Conclusion: Comparing with European population the most frequent
tumours were similar, incidence rates were lower, with higher survival
in the 15–24age-group, but lower in the 25-39age-group.
This study is important to strengthen prevention and therapeutic ap-
proaches, and ramp-up future studies.
PS-25-021
Effect of zinc and selenium deficiency on haemoglobin level, linear
growth, and sexual maturation in Sudanese children with sickle cell
anaemia
A. Salman*, A.A. Alkordofani
*Alneelain University, Sudan
Background & objectives: Sickle cell disease is an inherited haemolytic
anaemia. Trace elements have been claimed to affect growth and Hb
level. The objective is to measure the levels of Zinc, selenium, Hb in
those patients & correlate them with linear growth and sexual maturation.
Methods: This is a case control study. 31 patients with sickle cell anaemia,
attending the referred clinic in Jaafer Ibn Auf Hospital in the period between
October to December 2010, and 19 healthy children were studied. Plasma
zinc and selenium were measured chemically by Atomic Absorption
Spectrophotometry. patients were studied by means of questionnaire, clin-
ical examination, growth measurements and laboratory investigations.
Results: 51.6% of the patients had zinc deficiency, and 71% had seleni-
um deficiency as compared to control (p=0.00). The Hb levels were lower
in those with zinc deficiency with a mean of 6.2g/dl as compared to a
control group in whom the mean zinc level was 7.2g/dl (p=0.837). In the
studied patients, heights were below normal 51.6% were at (-2SD) and
16.1% were at (-3SD) as compared to the control group of whom 78.9%
were normal (p=0.00). Seventy one percent of the patients were children,
the rest 29% were found to have delayed sexual maturation. The differ-
ence in results were statistically significant.
Conclusion: Most of patients with sickle cell anaemia have low plasma
zinc and selenium levels. Lower Hb level, growth retardation and delayed
sexual maturation have been found in zinc and selenium deficient pa-
tients. These differences are statistically significant, it is anticipated that
supplementation of these trace elements may improve growth and well-
being of these children.
PS-25-022
Mechanisms of macrophages effect on extra-islet insulin-positive cells
in experimental diabetes
K. Sokolova*, M. Baykenova, I. Gette, I. Danilova, M. Abidov
*Ural Federal University, Institute of Immunology and Physiology,
Russia
Background & objectives: In diabetes insulin-positive cells can be de-
tected outside of the islets of Langerhans in the pancreatic acini and ducts.
Macrophages can affect the formation of such cells. We aimed to detect the
mechanisms of macrophages’ action on extra-islet insulin-positive cells.
Virchows Arch
Methods: Immunohistochemical staining for insulin, f4/80, PDX1 and c-
kit at formalin-fixed pancreases from male Wistar rats with streptozotocin-
nicotinamide-induced type 2 diabetes and after injections of 3-
aminophthalhydrazide derivatives (APH), which is a macrophage activity
modulator, were made. Content of stem cell factor (SCF), TNFα, Ifnγ and
TGFβ were determined in blood and pancreas by ELISA.
Results: After administration of APH the number of extra-islet insulin-
positive cells and optical density of insulin in them increase. Blood glu-
cose significantly decreases vs. diabetic rats from 11.64±0.93 mmol/L to
7.18±0.19 mmol/L. APH administration is accompanied by increase in
the number of macrophages and expression of PDX1 transcription factor
in non-endocrine part of the pancreas and a shift in the macrophage
production towards anti-inflammatory cytokines. The effect of APH on
the number of c-kit+ cells in non-endocrine part of the pancreas, reduced
in diabetes, was not detected. However, concentration of c-kit ligand SCF
after injections of APH decreases in blood and increases in pancreas vs.
diabetic meanings.
Conclusion: Mechanisms of macrophages effect on extra-islet insulin-
positive cells in non-endocrine part of the pancreas may be associated
with the activation of PDX1 gene, decrease in the content of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and increases of SCF amount.
This work was supported by the RSF (project №16-15-00039-П).
PS-25-023
Systematic review for tumour classification
V. White*, M. Hyrcza, I. Cree, I. Indave
*International Agency for Research on Cancer, France
Background & objectives: New methods of evidence synthesis are nec-
essary to classify/reclassify histologically similar tumours. Our objective
was to assess the distinction between adenosquamous (ADSQ) and
mucoepidermoid carcinomas (MEC) using systematic review methodol-
ogy to summarise published molecular information on these two tumours.
Methods: We performed a systematic literature search of Medline,
Embase and Web of Science from 1990-2019 for articles studying
molecular alterations in MEC and ADSQ from any site. Retrieved
citations were screened and reviewed for eligibility by two indepen-
dent reviewers. A third reviewer arbitrated. Two reviewers indepen-
dently extracted data and conducted a Risk of Bias assessment of
included studies
Results: Of 6688 references, 113 met the criteria for further review. Only
3 articles directly compared these two tumour types. They showed that
MAML2 rearrangement was present in 29/44 (66%) MEC and in none of
67 (0%) ADSQ. 53/113 articles studied MAML2 rearrangement in MEC
only. 57 of 113 articles studied commonly mutated genes, and in these
EGFR mutations were reported in 33% (526/1594) of ADSQ versus 4%
(8/202) MEC. Mutations in KRAS were found in 19% (85/451) ADSQ
versus 2.5% (4/161) MEC. 100% (51) pancreatic ADSQ had mutations in
KRAS.
Conclusion: We found no published molecular evidence to support sim-
ilarities between ADSQ and MEC, supporting the separation of these
neoplasms. Systematic review methodology provides a tool for assessing
molecular data accruing on tumours and may assist in their classification/
reclassification.
PS-25-024
When immunohistochemistry may be useful in the evaluation of
necrotic tumour tissue?
M. Zdrenka*, A. Kowalewski, E. Bogajewska-Ryłko, N. Ahmadi,
M. Pyrek, B. Dziekan, V. Filas, A. Marszałek, Ł. Szylberg
*Department of Tumour Pathology and Pathomorphology, Oncology
Center, Prof. Franciszek Łukaszczyk Memorial Hospital, Bydgoszcz,
Poland
Background & objectives: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) enables the
visualisation of the distribution and number of specific molecules present
in tissues using antigen-specific antibodies. IHC technique enables the
differentiation of benign and malignant tumours, as well as determine the
site and origin of primary tumour.
Methods: We investigate the sensitivity and specificity of IHC studies on
necrotic samples derived from adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma
and melanoma with different markers.
Results: The morphological analysis of necrosis within tumours revealed
88% sensitivity and 56% specificity for Melanoma TC, 95% and 92% for
CK5/6, 95% and 83% for CK20, 37% and 95% for p63, 69% and 97% for
Melan A, 88% and 92% for SOX-10, 98% and 56% for CKAE/AE3 and
75% specificity for CK7. Our results demonstrated good preservation of
cytoplasmic markers. Antibodies such as CK5/6, CK20 and CKAE1/AE3
should be considered reliable markers in demonstrating the epithelial
nature of suspected tumour mass, especially SCC. A combined panel of
Melan-A and SOX-10 also showed excellent preservation of markers in
necrotic melanoma tissue; however, when used individually, these
markers may give false-negative results.
Conclusion: Immunohistochemistry of necrotic tissues cannot exclusive-
ly be used to establish a definitive diagnosis; however, it is a useful tool in
directing further clinical evaluation and may provide clinically useful
information when conventional histology fails to give a diagnosis.
PS-26-001
Solitary fibrous tumour of head and neck - a distinct entity
T. Asghari*, N. Uddin, M.U. Tariq
*Agakhan University Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Solitary fibrous tumour (SFT) of head and
neck region is a distinct entity with characteristic morphological features.
The objective of this study is to bring this entity to light and to study the
clinicopathological features.
Methods: 24 cases of head and neck SFT were identified from the ar-
chives of histopathology at AgaKhan University Hospital between 2010-
2019. The cases were reviewed by two consultant histopathologists.
Clinical data was obtained from histopathological reports and follow up
was obtained via telephonic conversation.
Results: The median age was 45 years. The tumour site showed a predi-
lection for nasal cavity. A total of 17 cases could be retrieved from the
archives for review, out of which, 88.23% showed necrosis,41.17%
showed fascicular and storiform arrangement, amanthoid fibres were seen
in 35.29% cases and hemangiopericytoma like vasculature was seen in
94.11% cases. Six cases showed features of malignancy such as mitosis,
necrosis and pleomorphism. 87.5% cases were CD34+ and 62.5% were
STAT6+. Follow up of 9 patients could be attained and one was found to
have expired due to some undiagnosed pulmonary disease, rest were all
healthy. Most of the patients were treated with surgical excision.
Conclusion: SFT of head and neck is a distinct entity with majority of them
behaving in a benign fashion, commonly treated by local excision. IHC
stain CD34 was consistently positive in all of the cases. Chances of recur-
rence and need for neoadjuvant therapy is restricted for those with positive
margins. A NAB2-STAT6 gene mutation has been reported. Hence, recent-
ly STAT6 has been considered as a reliable marker for diagnosis.
PS-26-004
Histological and molecular characteristics of primary solitary
fibrous tumours of the bone – diagnostic pitfalls and criteria of
aggressiveness
PS-26 Soft Tissue and Bone Pathology
Virchows Arch
A. Chrzan*, K. Seliga, A. Tysarowski, M. Prochorec-Sobieszek,
M. Wagrodzki
*Department of Pathology and Laboratory Diagnostics, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology, Warsaw,
Poland
Background & objectives: Primary solitary fibrous tumour of the bone
(SFTB) is a rare entity, and it is crucial to use proper ancillary tests for
correct diagnosis. Herein we report four SFTB cases and discuss
histological-radiological correlation in regard to their malignant
behaviour.
Methods: Clinical data pertaining to age and sex of patients were gath-
ered. Known malignant histological features of SFTB, i.e.
hypercellularity, marked atypia, tumour necrosis and mitotic activity
(MA) more than 4/10 HPF were assessed. The microscopic findings were
correlated with imaging studies. IHC for STAT6 and other markers were
carried out. FISH and NGS analyses were performed in each case.
Results: SFTB showed spindle-shaped to round cell morphology with
pattern-less pattern and HPC-like vessels. In all cases MA was more than
4/10 HPF and radiologically destructive growth pattern was evident.
Other malignant histological features of SFTB were not present.
STAT6 IHC was positive in all cases (100%). FISH confirmed STAT6
rearrangement only in two cases (50%). NGS detected NAB2-STAT6
fusion in all cases (100%).
Conclusion: - All SFTB were radiologically aggressive and 50%
metastasised to other bones.
- MA more than 4/10 HPF seems to be sufficient to render a diagnosis of
malignant SFTB.
- STAT6 is a specific and sensitive IHC marker for SFTB. CD34 can be
negative. SATB2 is negative.
- NGS/rtPCR is the best genetic test to confirm SFTB.
PS-26-006
Extrapulmonary inflammatory myofibroblastic tumours occurring
at unusual locations: a report of 30 cases
A. Ghauri*, Z. Ahmad, N. Uddin
*Pathology and Lab Medicine, Pakistan
Background & objectives: The study aims to describe the clinicopath-
ological features and occurrence of IMT in unusual locations. Although
the lung is the best known and most common site, IMT occurs in diverse
extrapulmonary locations and in any age group.
Methods: 94 cases of IMT were retrieved from the archives of
Histopathology at The Aga Khan University Hospital between years
2006-2019.Out of these,30 cases involved quite unusual sites.
H&E slides were evaluated for characteristic findings. Relevant
IHC stains performed were CKAE1/AE3, ASMA, ALK protein,
Desmin, CD34, S100 and CD117.FISH analysis for ALK gene
rearrangement had been done on two cases. Treatment/follow up
details were obtained by calling the patients.
Results: The described unusual tumour sites were abdominal wall(n=2)
kidney(n=3), eye(n=1),orbit (n=2),intracranial but extra-axial (n=2)
and rest included cheek, parotid gland, oropharynx, epiglottis,
supraclavicular area, hypochondrium, vocal cord, liver, adrenal
gland, urinary bladder, gluteal region, popliteal fossa and big toe.14
patients were female and 16 were male. Ages ranged from 01-64
years with a mean age of 21 years. Specimen were received as trucut
biopsies, excised nodular masses or in multiple pieces. The IHC
results were CKAE1/AE3(n=19),ASMA(n=30),ALK protein(n=30)
Desmin (n=21),CD34(n=13), S100(n=23),CD117(n=12).Follow up
of 13 patients was attainable.6 found to have expired of their disease.
Of the remaining 7 alive patients, 3 were alive with recurrence. Of the
4 alive patients without recurrence, 3 received chemo and radiother-
apy while 01 was treated by resection alone.
Conclusion: Inflammatory Myofibroblastic Tumour (IMT) is an uncom-
mon neoplasm with intermediate behaviour. Because of its vari-
able presentation but possible highly aggressive course and ten-
dency to recur, occurrence of IMT should always be suspected
whenever a spindle cell lesion with marked inflammation arises
at unusual sites in body specially in children and young adults.
Long-term follow up with serial imaging techniques may be rec-
ommended to clinch possible local aggressive behaviour and re-
currence.
PS-26-007
Infiltrative growth of retroperitoneal liposarcoma may cause
recurrence
T. Hirose*, A. Kobayashi
*Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Hyogo Cencer Center, Japan
Background & objectives: Atypical lipomatous tumour (ALT) and
dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDLPS) arising in the retroperitoneum re-
cur frequently and are associated with a dismal outcome. To address this
issue, the growth pattern of retroperitoneal ALT/DDLPS was pathologi-
cally studied.
Methods: The materials consisted of surgical specimens of two cases of
ALT and seven of DDLPS, all of which arose in the retroperitoneum. The
surgical margins were retrospectively re-evaluated in all tumours.
Immunostainings for p16 and HMGA2 were applied to investigate the
growth pattern of tumour cells.
Results: In all tumours, we confirmed tumour cell infiltration at
surgical margins. Tumour cells including lipogenic cells and atyp-
ical stromal cells were diffusely positive for p16, whereas they
were sparsely positive for HMGA2. The boundaries between tu-
mours and surrounding tissues were well-demarcated or infiltra-
tive. At the latter, p16-positive atypical stromal cells infiltrate
along fibrous septa of normal-appearing adipose tissue. Besides,
daughter nodules were occasionally found apart from main
tumours.
Conclusion: As the retroperitoneal ALT/DDLPS are usually large
in size, they tend to be marginally resected. Infiltrative growth of
atypical stromal cells and daughter nodules may also cause recur-
rence. The p16, rather than HMGA2, immunostaining is useful to
detect infiltrating tumour cells and to evaluate the surgical mar-
gins. As the complete excision may be impossible, novel, molec-
ular target therapies are desirable for the treatment of the retroper-
itoneal ALT/DDLPS.
Funding: Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C) (TH, 18K06989)
from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
PS-26-009
TFE3-rearranged pecoma: expanding gene fusion knowledge
A.B. Larque Daza*, G. Frigola, N. Castrejon, C. Romagosa, F. Balaguer,
A. Castells, M. Cuatrecasas
*Pathology Department, Biomedical Diagnostic Center (CDB), Hospital
Clinic, University of Barcelona, Spain
Background & objectives: TFE3-rearranged PEComas are rare mesen-
chymal tumours morphologically similar to other TFE3-associated neo-
plasms. Data on the molecular alterations in these tumours are limited.
We analyse 2 cases of TFE3-rearranged PEComas using RNA-
sequencing to identify gene fusion partners.
Methods: Clinical and morphologic features were reviewed. We per-
formed immunohistochemistry for mismatch repair deficiency (case1),
TFE3, SMA, and HMB45; FISH (TFE3), and RNA-sequencing.
Case1 was a 49-year old male with a Lynch syndrome and a previous
rectal carcinoma, presenting with a suspicious 2.5 cm pelvic tumour.
Virchows Arch
Case2 was 20-year old man with a 1.7 orbital mass clinically diagnosed as
a haemangioma.
Results: Histologically, both tumours were composed by nests of epithe-
lioid cells with clear cytoplasms, separated by delicate fibrovascular sep-
ta. Both positive for HMB-45, TFE3, and focally for SMA. RNA se-
quencing revealed gene fusion PSF/SFPQ-TFE3 in case1 and NONO-
TFE3 in case2. Both patients had no evidence of disease at 20 and 10
months, respectively.
44 TFE3-rearranged PEComas have been reported, 28% showing an
aggressive behaviour, and 75% show PSF-TFE3 gene fusion.
Conclusion: TFE3-rearranged PEComa is a recently described tumour
clinically mimicking different neoplasms. We report a second case of a
TFE3-rearranged PEComa in the orbit with an unusual NONO-TFE3
gene fusion. In summary, our data may expand further the clinicopatho-
logic features and the gene fusion knowledge of TFE3-rearranged
PEComas.
PS-26-010
Prognosis and survival of patients diagnosed with well differentiated
and dedifferentiated retroperitoneal liposarcoma - tertiary hospital
experience
F. Leiva Cepas*, J. Osuna-Soto, T. Caro Cuenca, L. López-Marín
*Pathology Unit, Universitary Hospital "Reina Sofia" Cordoba, Spain
Background & objectives: Retroperitoneal liposarcomas (LPSR) have a
steep growth and poor prognosis compared to other tumours. We analyse
the clinical presentation in patients with differentiated and
dedifferentiated LPSR in the last 15 years, identifying histopathological
variables affect patients’ morbidity and mortality.
Methods: Cases between January 2002 and May 2019 will be reviewed.
85 patients with primary LPR were treated between this period and 33 of
them with well-differentiated or dedifferentiated LPR subtypes. Variables
(survival, affected surgical margins and recurrence) will be compared
between patients diagnosed with LPS (well or dedifferentiated). A value
of P <0.05 will be considered statistically significant.
Results: The overall survival at 5 years was 60%, with a disease-free
survival at 38% per year. The recurrence of the disease occurred in
42% of cases, especially in those where the margins were affected, being
associated in this group with a lower survival, especially when the histo-
logical type is dedifferentiated or affected kidney and large vessels.
Surgical complications from wide resections reached 23%. The presence
of the dedifferentiated component and its degree of malignancy were
independent prognostic factors for disease-specific survival and survival
free from local recurrence.
Conclusion: The histologic subtype, margin of resection and wide sur-
gical resections are prognostic for survival in LPSR. Dedifferentiated
histological subtype and the need for contiguous organ resection (exclud-
ing nephrectomy) was associated with an increased risk of local and
distant recurrence. Nephrectomy may be necessary to achieve complete
resection, but its absence does not increase survival. Pathological studies
on new multimodality approaches are warranted.
PS-26-012
Deep learning algorithm support classification of small round cell
sarcomas: a proof of concept study
L. Nicolè*, S. Ghidoni, R. Cappellesso, M. Sbaraglia, A. Righi,
M. Gambarotti, A.P. Dei Tos
*Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Italy
Background & objectives: Ewing sarcoma (ES) and Ewing-like sarco-
ma (ELS) are aggressive mesenchymal tumours with overlapping mor-
phology that makes diagnosis challenging. Aim of this study is to imple-
ments a computational pipeline in order to distinguish ES versus ELS
using hematoxylin/eosin stained virtual slides.
Methods: ES and ELS (comprising BCOR/CIC-rearranged) slides were
retrieved and digitized. Tumour area was outlined in each virtual-slide
and divided into a set of tiles creating three categories (BCOR, CIC, and
EWING). An automatic classification system based on Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) was trained and then tested in order to auto-
matically assign each tile to the correct category.
Results: A total of three CNNs were implemented in order to classify
each category versus the others. Each network was trained on a dataset
composed of 20.000 images (size 384x384 pixels) for each category.
Based on a test dataset of 16.000 tiles, preliminary results show that the
three categories can be well discriminated using trained CNNs, with an
average recognition accuracy of 94.3%.
Conclusion: CNNs-based algorithms are promising tools to support pa-
thologist. Future work will focus on retrieve more cases for each catego-
ry; add new categories as monomorphic synovial sarcoma and
desmoplastic round-cell sarcoma; implementing CNNs complexity in
order to increase recognition accuracy.
PS-26-013
Femoral head trabecular architecture in patients with osteoporotic
hip fractures and correlation with vitamin D levels
A. Nomikos*, S. Chatzopoulos, D. Begkas, L. Athanassiou, O. Mascha,
A. Giannakopoulos, A. Pastroudis, I. Kostoglou-Athanassiou
*Department of Pathology, Asklipieion Voulas, Greece
Background & objectives: Hip fracture is a devastating event with a
high risk of death. Approximately 5% of all-cause mortality is attributable
to hip fracture. Hip fractures have been found to be related to vitamin D
(Vit-D) deficiency.
Methods: In a group of 11 patients, who had undergone surgery after a
hip fracture the femoral head was histologically studied. Blood levels of
25(OH)D3 were also measured. All patients had also a DEXA scan for
the diagnosis of osteoporosis.
Results: Histological analysis revealed thinning/loss of bone trabeculae.
In 2 patients extreme thinning of bone trabeculae was observed. In 3
patients extreme loss of bone trabeculae was observed. Patients with
low Vit-D levels had extreme thinning and loss of bone trabeculae. It
appears that in patients with osteoporosis who had undergone a hip frac-
ture thinning and loss of bone trabeculae is noted and this seems to be
related to Vit-D deficiency.
Conclusion: In the current era of effective drug treatment for osteoporo-
sis and effective surgical management for a hip fracture the acquirement
of deeper knowledge regarding the histology of the bone in patients with a
hip fracture is extremely interesting and important, as it may aid into the
deeper understanding of the biology of osteoporosis and fracture.
PS-26-015
Clinicopathological, immunohistochemical and molecular cytogenet-
ic profile of 32 cases Ewing sarcoma with epithelial differentiation,
including cases with “adamantinoma-like” features: a single institu-
tional experience, India
B. Rekhi*, O. Shetty, T. Vora, A. Gulia
*Tata Memorial Centre, India
Background & objectives: Ewing sarcomas(ESs) with epithelial differ-
entiation, including “adamantinoma-like” features are rare tumours.32
cases of ES with epithelial differentiation, diagnosed during 2011-2018,
in 17 males and 15 females (M:F ratio=1.1:1), were included after critical
review.
Methods: Immunohistochemistry was performed on formalin-fixed/
paraffin-embedded tissue sections by immunoperoxidase method
using a MACH2 Universal HRP-Polymer detection kit. Twenty-five
tumours(78.5%) were confirmed by EWSR1 rearrangement, using
fluorescence in-situ hybridization(FISH).Twenty-seven tumours
Virchows Arch
were either diagnosed as ES(n=23) or favoured as ES over synovial
sarcoma(SS)(n=4). Three were diagnosed as ‘preferably’ SSs and
single case, each, as a poorly differentiated carcinoma(PDCA) and
undifferentiated sarcoma.
Results: Age range was 8-61 years(average=23, median=23.5). Common
locations were upper extremities(9), pelvis(7), paravertebral tissues(5),
lower extremities(7), followed by neck region(3) and lung(1). Most com-
mon histopathologic pattern was nesting-type, containing round to oval
basaloid cells. Immunohistochemically, tumour cells showed membra-
nous positivity for MIC2(32/32), Fli1(19/19); synaptophysin(6/16); var-
iable positivity for pancytokeratin(AE1/AE3)(29/30) and EMA(4/5).
Therapeutically (n=19, 59%), most patients(12/19)(63.1%) were treated
with resection and specific neoadjuvant chemotherapy(CT), neoadjuvant,
including 6 with adjuvant radiotherapy. Four(21%) patients were offered
CT and radiotherapy, 2, CT and single RT(palliative). Three cases devel-
oped recurrences and 4 developed metastasis. Finally(n=8, median follow
up=18 months), 6 patients were alive-with-disease; 2 free-of-disease.
Conclusion: This study constitutes one of the largest documentation of
these rare tumours. Diagnosis of ESs with epithelial differentiation re-
quires molecular confirmation. Exact diagnosis has treatment implica-
tions, as these tumours are treated differently from their mimics, especial-
ly SSs and PDCAs.
PS-26-017
Soft tissue tumours of the skin with aneurysmal features: a compar-
ative morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular study
C. Taverna*, A. Franchi, A. Agaimy
*Division of Pathological Anatomy, Department of Health Sciences
University of Florence School of Human Health Sciences Florence, Italy
Background & objectives: Fibrohistiocytic tumours of the skin with aneu-
rysmal features are rare and challenging lesions. We aimed to characterize a
series using morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular methods, to
identify new possible markers that can help in the differential diagnosis.
Methods: Twenty-four aneurysmal dermatofibromas (AD), 5 angiomatoid
fibrous histiocytomas (AFH) and 4 pleomorphic dermal sarcomas with
aneurysmal features (PDS) were studied using immunohistochemistry for
CD10, EMA, desmin, ALK, P53, Rb1 and p16. FISH analysis was con-
ducted on AFH, while 4 AD, 3 AFH and 1 PDS were also studied with a 15
gene mutation panel and 507 gene RNA fusion panel.
Results: AD: all positive for CD10, 68% for p16; EMA, desmin and
ALK negative. AFH: negative for CD10 and p16; all positive for EMA
and desmin, ALK in 60%. UPSs: positive for CD10 (75%) and for EMA
(33%), negative for ALK and desmin. Rb1 protein: always retained. P53:
wild-type in 96% of cases. EWSR1 rearrangement. found in AFHs. RB1
mutated in one PDS. Mutations or fusions in AD or PDS: negative.
Conclusion: While AFH has a peculiar immunohistochemical and mo-
lecular profile, AD and PDS require careful evaluation of cytological and
morphological features including atypia and pleomorphism, number of
typical and atypical mitosEs and infiltration of deep soft tissues.
Significant molecular alterations were only found in AFH, despite the
wide panel used in this study.
PS-26-018
Hepatic epitheloid hemangioendothelioma: clinicopathologic,
immunhistochemical, and molecular genetic analysis of 15 cases
H.G. Yeter*, G. Gedikoglu
*Hacettepe University, Turkey
Background & objectives: Epithelioid haemangioendotheliomas (EHE)
of the liver are rare, malignant and often indolent vascular tumours that
are known to demonstrate WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion and YAP1-TFE3
fusion in a smaller subset, in which TFE3 immunohistochemistry is sug-
gested to be positive.
Methods: 15 malignant vascular tumours of the liver, 12 of which are
EHE, diagnosed in between 1996-2019 were re-evaluated and included in
the study. A 4-mm diameter tissue microarray block was constructed. 4
micrometre thick sections were stained immunohistochemically with
TFE3. WWTR1-CAMTA1 fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was
studied. Patients’ files are used for the clinical information.
Results: Among all, 10 patients were female, 5 male. Mean age at diag-
nosis was 43.8 years. 9 patients presented with multiple intrahepatic nod-
ules with a maximum size of 11 cm. at diagnosis. Follow-up information
was available for 10 patients. 1 patient with transplantation was alive with-
out disease, 6 patients were alive with disease and 3 patients died of disease.
5 patients were known to have lung metastases. 11 patient had immunore-
activity with CD31 and CD34, 6 with ERG. Immunohistochemically,
TFE3 was studied in 9 patients and all found negative. WWTR1-
CAMTA1 FISH results are pending.
Conclusion: Diagnosis of EHE is challenging and the course of the
disease can be unpredictable. Identification of the fusion genes in EHEs
provides significant diagnostic data, especially in cases with unusual
morphology or when biopsy material is limited.
PS-27-001
Giant mediastinal thymolipoma: a case report
S. Gamal*
*Sultan Qapoos University Hospital, Oman
Background & objectives: Diagnosis of thymolipoma should be con-
sidered in case of mediastinal mass with fat density, especially if it is
interspersed with strands of soft tissue attenuation on (CT) scans.
Sometimes it is difficult to differentiate radiologically from other medi-
astinal fatty tumours.
Methods: A 44-year-old woman presented with chest discomfort on
exertion for the past 4 years. A chest computed tomography (CT) showed
a large heterogeneous fatty anterior mediastinal mass causing compres-
sion against right lung with no infiltration of the adjacent structures. The
mass was excised surgically. The histopathological examination con-
firmed the diagnosis of thymolipoma.
Results: A 44-year-old woman presented with chest discomfort on
exertion for the past 4 years. A chest computed tomography (CT)
showed a large heterogeneous fatty anterior mediastinal mass caus-
ing compression against right lung with no infiltration of the adja-
cent structures. The mass was excised surgically. The post-operative
period was incident-free, and the patient was discharged 5 days after
surgery. Pathology examination results showed a tumour measuring
30x20x10 cm, consisting of large lobules of mature adipose tissue
interspersed with small areas of thymic tissue and the diagnosis of
thymolipoma was made.
Conclusion: Thymolipoma is a very rare benign mediastinal tumour,
consisting of thymic and fatty tissue. Preoperative diagnosis is frequently
based on CT and MRI findings. FNAB remains controversial. Surgical
intervention is the only cure and also provides the definitive diagnosis.
PS-27-002
Clinico-pathologic study of 255 resected thymomas: a single institu-
tion experience
A. Bille, C. Cavalli, T. Routledge, G. Papaxoinis, D. Nonaka*
*Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: WHO scheme defines type B thymomas
(B1-B2-B3), which is correlated with prognosis. Type A/AB tumours
share similar features, including GTF2I mutation. A subset of them show
PS-27 Thymic and Mediastinal Pathology
Virchows Arch
atypical features (so-called atypical type A), but this atypical category is
not well-characterised.
Methods: 255 thymomas resected from 250 patients were retrieved and
reviewed. A variety of clinical and histopathologic parameters were
analysed, with particular emphasis on identifying prognostic factors in
type A and AB group.
Results: There were 46 tumours (type A), 105 (AB), 22 (B1), 47 (B2), 32
(B3), 1 (metaplastic) and 2 (completely necrotic tumour). Type B group
was more often of advanced stage compared to A/AB.
In A/AB group, multivariate Cox proportional hazard models demonstrat-
ed that mitotic count was the only independent prognostic factor as con-
tinuous variable (HR 1.15, 95%CI 1.07-1.24, p<0.001). A/AB patients
were classified as typical if mitotic count was 0-19 / 2mm2 and atypical if
≥20 mitotic figures per 2mm2. Multivariate Cox proportional hazard
models demonstrated that the strongest prognostic factors were the new
subtype classification, the presence of necrosis, the status of surgical
margins and neoadjuvant treatment.
Conclusion: Our results suggests that atypical type A and AB could be
defined as tumours with ≥20 mitotic figures per 2 mm2.
PS-27-003
Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma of the mediastinum: a case report of
a rare dendritic tumour of the right thoracic outlet
I. Provatas*, K. Pavlou, N. Stavrinou, F. Dolkiras, M. Georgia
*Department of Pathology, Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens,
Greece
Background & objectives: Follicular dendritic cell sarcomas are rare
mesenchymal neoplasm arising from follicular dendritic cells of lym-
phoid follicles at nodal and extranodal sites. The patients are mainly
adults, with a median age of 50 years and they present primarily with
localized disease.
Methods: We describe a case of 74-year male with a tumour 5,5 cmin
greater diameter at the region of the right thoracic outlet. The tumour, nine
lymph nodes, a part of the right clavicle and a segment of mediastinal
adipose tissue were submitted for histological examination. Diagnosis
was set with Hematoxylin – Eosin stains and supported by the necessary
immunohistochemical assays.
Results: Microscopy revealed a tumour showing nodular, diffuse or fas-
cicular to storiform growth pattern, composed of oval to spindled, occa-
sionally multinucleate, cells, with eosinophilic and fibrillar cytoplasm,
small nucleoli and frequently pseudoinclusions. 15 mitoses per 2mm2
were counted. Perivascular lymphocyte cuffs and admixed population
of lymphocytes, eosinophils, plasma cells and neutrophils were also ob-
served. Tumour showed positivity for CD21, CD23, CD35, D2-40 and
negativity for CD1a, CD4, CD14, CD15, CD30, CD68, Langerin, S-100
and HMB-45. One lymph node was infiltrated by the tumour, whereas the
rest of the specimens did not show evidence of infiltration. Based on these
findings, Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma was diagnosed.
Conclusion: Although follicular dendritic cell sarcomas are of
intermediate-grade malignancy with low recurrence and distant metstasis
rate (28% and 27% respectively), large tumour size (≥6 cm), high mitotic
count (≥5 mitoses per 2mm2), coagulative necrosis and significant cyto-
logical atypia are associated with poorer prognosis. Lethal paraneoplastic
syndromes (such as refractory pemphigus or myasthenia gravis) may also
occur in some patients.
PS-27-004
Malignant solitary fibrous tumour and type B3 thymoma: a rare case
of coexisting tumours
I. Provatas*, K. Pavlou, C. Stamou, E. Kammenou, H.J. Trihia
*Department of Pathology, Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens,
Greece
Background & objectives: Malignant solitary fibrous tumours are rare
fibroblastic neoplasms accounting for 10% of pleural solitary fibrous
tumours. Type B3 thymomas are epithelium-predominant thymic epithe-
lial tumours, representing 21% of thymomas. Our objective is to present a
case of patient with coexisting tumours.
Methods: We report a 58-year old female patient who underwent surgery
for a tumour at the right hemithorax, 16 cm in greater diameter and a
tumour at the anterior superior mediastinum, 3 cm in maximum diameter.
Both tumours were resected and sent together to our Department of
Pathology with a segment of the right middle lobe of the lung.
Results: Microscopy revealed the following:
First Tumour: Hypercellular hyalinized tumour with fibroblastic spindle
cell morphology, without specific architecture, with 47 mitoses/2 mm2.
Tumour cells expressed STAT-6, CD34, CD99 and Bcl2.
Second Tumour: Thymic epithelial tumour composed of midly atypical
polygonal tumour cells with solid growth pattern, with intermingled im-
mature T-cells. Neoplastic cells expressed CK7 and CK19 and Immature
T-cells Tdt.
Infiltration of the pulmonary parenchyma by tumour cells was not
demonstrated.
Based on the microscopical findings, the diagnosis of Malignant Solitary
Fibrous Tumour of the pleura was set for the first tumour and Type B3
Thymoma - Masaoka Stage IIb for the second tumour.
Conclusion: The coexistence of these tumours makes the prognosis for
the patient rather unclear. The high mitotic rate of Malignant Solitary
Fibrous Tumours is indicative for their aggressive behaviour, whereas
the 10-year survival rates for Type B3 Thymomas are 81%.
PS-27-005
Myelolipoma of posterior mediastinum – a rare localisation for an
extra-adrenal tumour
A. Szumera-Cieckiewicz*, O. Kuczkiewicz-Siemion, K. Sokół,
O. Stanowska, R. Włodarczyk, M. Prochorec-Sobieszek
*Institute of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Diagnostic
Haematology Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research
Institute of Oncology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Poland
Background & objectives: Myelolipoma (MYLP) is a benign neoplasm
composed of mature adipocytes and haematopoietic tissue. It is common-
ly found in the adrenal gland with an incidence of 3-5%. However, extra-
adrenal myelolipoma can also occur including the presacral region,
retroperitoneum, liver, spleen, stomach, greater omentum,
leptomeninges, and mediastinum.
Methods: The largest summary of mediastinal localization includes only
28 cases of MYLP. The patients remain asymptomatic or may present
with endocrine disorders, anemia, hypertension, splenomegaly.
A 56-year-old male with a tumour localized in the posterior mediastinum
was admitted to Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of
Oncology for diagnostics and treatment.
Results: The radiological imaging revealed a hypodense tumour on the
Th10 level, in the largest diameter 190mm, with suspicion of malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumour. The tumour was surgically resected in
thoracotomy and in microscopical examination presented as classical
histological myelolipoma; among mature lipomatous tissue abundant
haematopoietic tissue with erythroid and granulocytic, and megakaryo-
cytic differentiation were identified. The immunohistochemical stainings
(CD71, MPO, and CD61 respectively) were helpful in the differential
diagnosis and the blastic change (CD34(-), CD117(-), TdT(-)) was elim-
inated as well. The clinical investigation was negative for any etiological
factors i.e. splenomegaly, primary myelofibrosis, endocrine disorders.
After 3 months patient remains with no evidence of disease (NED).
Conclusion: In conclusion, the described case represents a category:
“common tumour in uncommon localization”. At present, there is no
Virchows Arch
standard treatment for mediastinal myelolipoma. Surgical resection is an
optimal treatment option that allows histopathological exclusion of other
severe malignancies.
Funding: "This work has been implemented using the Project infrastruc-
ture POIG.02.03.00-14-111/13".
PS-27-006
Ectopic mediastinal parathyroid adenoma in association with
metachronous intrathymic choriocarcinoma in an elderly woman.
A coexistence never described before
H.J. Trihia*, A. Chatzimichalis
*Department of Pathology, 'Metaxas' Memorial Cancer Hospital,
Department, Greece
Background & objectives: Primary choriocarcinoma of the mediasti-
num is a rare form of extragenital germ cell tumour, occurring almost
exclusively in young men. We present a unique-never described before-
case of a postmenopausal woman with a coexistent ectopic parathyroid
adenoma and intrathymic choriocarcinoma.
Methods: A 76-year old woman was admitted in our hospital for the
investigation of blood loss from the rectum. At the same time, she was
diagnosed with hypercalcemia, due to ectopic mediastinal parathyroid
adenoma. Two years later she re-appeared with shortness of breath, due
to a bulky anterior mediastinal mass. An attempt was made for surgical
debulking of the tumour.
Results: Histologic examination of the mass was diagnostic of an
intrathymic mediastinal choriocarcinoma in close proximity with an
intrathymic parathyroid adenoma.
Conclusion: Our case indicates that the occurrence of a mediastinal mass
in an elderly woman, cannot exclude an extragenital choriocarcinoma-
although a curiosity- and also the coexistence with an ectopic parathyroid
adenoma poses a base for consideration on the histogenesis of these
tumours. Although, it has been hypothesized that extragonadal germ cell
tumours are a consequence of aberrant midline migration of primordial
germ cells, a somatic thymic stem cell derivation has not been excluded to
date.
Poster Sessions
One-Day Computational Pathology Symposium
One-Day Molecular Pathology Diagnostics and Translational Research
Symposium
PS-CP-01-001
A novel deep learning-based diagnostic algorithm for detection and
segmentation of amyloid in digital whole slide images
A. Azam*, S. Bashir, S.A. Khurram, D. Snead, N. Rajpoot
*Department of Cellular Pathology, University Hospitals Coventry and
Warwickshire, NHS Trust, Department of Computer Science, University
of Warwick, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Amyloid identification on whole slide im-
ages can be diagnostically challenging due to its subtle appearance and
lack of polarized filters. We aim to develop a deep learning-based com-
puter-assisted diagnostic (CAD) tool for automated amyloid recognition
to improve diagnostic accuracy and efficiency.
Methods: H&E and Congo Red slides of different tissue types from
known cases of amyloidosis as well as normal control samples were
retrieved, digitized and WSI extensively annotated to highlight amyloid
as well as background in a training set. A deep learning-based
segmentation model recently developed by our group named MILD-
Net1was trained on both positive and negative examples.
Results: Our preliminary results have shown that the deep learning algo-
rithm can predict the presence of amyloid in digitized histological sam-
ples confidently with desirable accuracy. When tested out on the held-out
set, the algorithm was able to detect and segment amyloid with patch-
level F1 score of 0.83 and recall of 0.9 within the equal proportion of
positive and negative amyloid patches.
Conclusion: We report the first deep learning-based tool for amyloid de-
tection which may overcome the requirement of Congo Red staining and
polarized microscopy. Further testing and validation on a larger dataset
could provide a reliable and fast method for amyloid detection in digital
slides. The automated mapping and accurate quantification of amyloid
produced by our tool has the potential to improve diagnostic accuracy,
workflow, patient management and augment the pathologists’ expertise.
Funding: BDIAP Fellowship
PS-MD-01-001
Role of histone H3 in high grade gliomas
X. Ara Mancebo*, E.M. Fuentes-Camps, C. Alborch-Gil, S. Ramón y
Cajal, E. Martínez-Saez
*Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Spain
Background & objectives: The classification of gliomas is nowadays
largely based on molecular findings. Along with other genes, such as IDH
or ATRX, histone 3 (H3) plays an important diagnostic and prognostic
role. We report an illustrative case where molecular pathology is crucial.
Methods: A 24-year-old man, without remarkable history, sought med-
ical consultation for a two-month history of dysarthria. After an altered
neurologic examination, a brain CT and MRI were performed, showing a
mass in the left frontal lobe. A diagnostic biopsy was carried out.
Results: The histologic examination showed a dense cellular prolifera-
tion with small-sized and hyperchromatic nuclei, some with prominent
nucleoli, pseudoinclusions and scarce eosinophilic cytoplasm. Mitotic
activity reached 7 mitosis/10HPF. Neither necrosis nor vascular prolifer-
ation was identified.
Immunohistochemistry showed intense, patchy GFAP expression. No
IDH R132H mutation was found, ATRX expression was lost, and p53
overexpressed. Ki67 reached 50% of the cells.
Molecular analyses of several genes were performed by PCR. B-RAF,
IDH1 and IDH2 were wildtype, while the gene H3F3A showed a
[c103G>A; p. G34R] mutation. With all these findings, a diagnosis of
high-grade glioma, consistent with anaplastic astrocytoma, IDH-
wildtype, 2016 WHO classification grade III, with H3 G34R mutation
was achieved.
Conclusion: Although H3 K27M mutation is the best known H3 muta-
tion, other alterations in this gene are important and have prognostic
implications, like G34R in this instance.
PS-MD-01-003
Diagnosis of a paediatric renal tumour with the aid of molecular
studies: a case presentation
J. Filipe*, R. Adame Cabrera
*Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, Instituto Português de Oncologia de
Lisboa Francisco Gentil, Lisbon, Portugal
Background & objectives: An accurate pathological diagnosis of pae-
diatric renal tumours is essential to determine therapy and prognosis.
However, histological diagnosis may be difficult, even with
PS-CP-01 Posters One-Day Computational Pathology Symposium
PS-MD-01 Posters One-Day Molecular Pathology Diagnostics and
Translational Research Symposium
Virchows Arch
immunohistochemistry. Molecular studies may help in their classifica-
tion, by either confirming or excluding entities with similar
morphologies.
Methods: Case presentation of a 3-year-old girl with a kidney tumour in
the setting of presumed nephroblastomatosis, who underwent a renal
tumorectomy after pre-operative chemotherapy, in which the final diag-
nosis required the aid of molecular studies.
Results: The tumour was capsulated, had serpiginous architecture, with
monomorphic oval and spindle cells, with scant cytoplasm, vesicular
nuclei and high mitotic activity. Neither anaplasia nor areas of
nephroblastomatosis were seen. Immunohistochemical studies showed
positivity for PAX8, CCND1 and NSE, and negativity for WT1,
cytokeratins and CD99. No rearrangements in YWHAE or ETV 6 genes
were found by FISH, but there was deletion of the WT1 gene in 70% of
the nuclei. CGH revealed a complex pattern of chromosomic alterations,
with 1p-, 1q+, and deletion of the entire chromosome 11. A diagnosis of
blastemal nephroblastoma was rendered.
Conclusion: In the present case, a final diagnosis was not possible with-
out the aid of molecular biology studies. They are fundamental in the
differential diagnosis of this tumours with clear cell sarcoma, neuroblas-
toma, primitive neuroectodermal tumours and other tumours with the
same morphology. This case emphasizes the importance of an integrated
approach between morphology, immunohistochemistry, and molecular
studies to reach an accurate diagnosis.
PS-MD-01-004
Haemorrhagic vasculitis associated with the factor V Leiden muta-
tion: difficulties of diagnosis and management
K. Popova*, O. Olisova, N. Teplyuk, O. Grabovskaya, D. Kusraeva,
L. Smirnova
*Sechenov University Department of Skin and venereal diseases, Russia
Background & objectives: Atypical clinical pictures of many diseases
could be resulted from the congenital or acquired thrombophilia, which is
dangerous due to the development of acute thromboses and a chronic
disorders of blood flows. One of the factors causing congenital
thrombophilia is Leiden mutation.
Methods: Female patient 32 years old for 6.5 years suffered from various
undifferentiated lesions of her hearing and vision organs, the gastrointes-
tinal tract, the skin in the form of symmetrical, disseminated urticaria
spots, ecchymosis and petechiae, periorbital oedema and scarring as a
result of ulcerative defects in the history. To make a diagnosis, a biopsy
was performed, and a study was conducted to identify genetic mutations.
Results: Skin biopsy specimen showing mild hyperkeratosis, focal
lympho-macrophage (neutrophils, eosinophils) infiltration in the papil-
lary layer of the dermis, leukoclastic vasculitis. According to the generic
with G1691A polymorphism of the V factor gene (Leiden mutation)
Conclusion: This observation indicates that without genetic tests and
careful analysis of the medical history, it is impossible to make an accu-
rate diagnosis corresponding to the severity of organ damage that is the
cause of an inadequate therapy.
PS-MD-01-005
Rare case of fibrolamellar variant of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) with DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion gene
L. Frauenfeld*, F. Otto, F. Fend
*University of Tübingen, Institute for Pathology and Neuropathology,
Germany
Background & objectives: Tumours of the liver are heterogeneous, with
classic HCC as most common subtype, frequently associated with cirrho-
sis in over 80% (West). Rare subtypes of liver tumours can be difficult to
diagnose in biopsy specimens due to tumour heterogeneity.
Methods: mRNA was extracted from the liver resection specimen and
reverse transcribed in cDNA which was used for the detection of the
fusion gene DNAJB1-PRKACA in RT-PCR. Aa product will appear on
the gel if the fusion is present.
FISH (pending): BAC-clones will be established, and results will be
presented.
Results: A biopsy specimen from a 28-year-old male patient with liver
mass and no history of liver disease was diagnosed as classic hepatocel-
lular carcinoma. In the subsequent resection specimen, the tumour
showed a distinct heterogeneity with areas of classic fibrolamellar HCC
morphology with hepatocytes with pale bodies, separated by broad fi-
brous septae. In addition, focal areas with classic HCC morphology were
evident, explaining the discordant diagnosis in the biopsy. Surrounding
liver parenchyma showed no signs of steatosis, fibrosis or inflammation,
atypical for classical HCC. The detection of fusion transcript DNAJB1-
PRKACA in RT-PCR confirmed the diagnosis in this case.
Conclusion: Morphology remains the mainstay for diagnosis of HCC,
but molecular methods are useful in difficult biopsy specimens. The de-
tection of the DNAJB1-PRKACA transcript can confirm the diagnosis of
fibrolamellar variant of HCC.
E-Posters
E-PS-01-001
Primary meningeal spinal cord melanoma: a clinical and morpho-
logical analysis of a 72-year-old patient’s case
V. Balayants*, M. Mnikhovich, T. Bezuglova, N. Maluygin, D. Kushch,
A. Romanov, P. Bliganov, G. Ushanov, S. Snegur, Y. Pavlova, I. Vasin
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Meningeal melanoma is a rare tumour that
occurs most often in the posterior cranial fossa and along the spinal cord,
with severe neurological symptoms due to the appearance and growth of
volumetric formation.
Methods: Analysis of clinical and anatomical data: CT and MRI of the brain
and spinal cord, analysis of the autopsy protocol, followed by histological,
immunohistochemical and genetic studies. IHC panel: HMB antibodies - 45,
Melan A, EMA, Ki - 67, pancytokeratin AE1 / AE3, S100.
Results: The patient died of brain oedema. At autopsy: on the meninges
of the spinal cord and subdurally at the Th8-L1 level, numerous merging
foci of dark brown colour, friable consistency, with fuzzy borders, com-
pression of the substance of the spinal cord with occlusion of the spinal
canal were found. A sharp expansion of the spinal canal at all levels,
above Th-8, with severe hydrocephalus dislocation of brain structures
with the cerebellar hemispheres wedged into the large occipital foramen.
Histological examination: dense infiltration of the meninges by tumour
melanocytes. LV(+),Pn(+).The tumour grows by 0.5 s tissue of the spinal
cord. An immunohistochemical study: a positive reaction with HMB-45,
Melan A,S100;negative reaction to EMA,AE1/AE3;Ki 67-80%,BRAF
mutations were not detected.
Conclusion: This clinical and anatomical observation demonstrates a rare
tumour - primary meningeal melanoma, which is difficult to diagnose and
leads to death early.
E-PS-01-002
Splenic littoral cell angiosarcoma with hepatic and pulmonary
metastases
M. Berrios-Hernandez*, C. Aliste Santos, J.M. Cameselle-Teijeiro,
I. Abdulkader-Nallib, J.R. Antúnez
*Clinical University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela, Spain
E-PS-01 Autopsy Pathology
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Splenic angiosarcoma (SAG) is a rare, ag-
gressive and poor prognosis malignant entity, which apparently derives
from the sinusoidal vascular endothelium in red pulp. SAG usually debuts
with metastasis, with the liver being the most common site.
Methods: A 65-year-old woman presented with a general syndrome
displaying joint pain and oedema, which had evolved during the three
previous months. A PET-CT scan showed an uptake area of liver segment
VIII, with no evidence of splenic alterations. Later, the patient presented
hemodynamic instability with multiorgan failure, which evolved into
refractory shock causing death. A clinical autopsy was performed.
Results: Post-mortem examination evidenced a subcapsular, poorly-
defined lesion (2.5 x 1.5 cm) located in segments VII-VIII of the liver.
Microscopically a marked hepatic infiltration caused by a malignant vas-
cular tumour was detected; this neoplasm formed channels containing red
blood cells delineated by histiocytoid-like tumour cells. Occasional mi-
toses and tumour projections could be seen. Spleen had massive AG
infiltration and a similar morphological appearance was also found in
metastatic lung microscopic foci.
Conclusion: Splenic littoral cell angiosarcoma is a neoplasm with aggres-
sive behaviour and unfavourable prognosis due to high rates of metastasis
caused by hematogenous spread. Early diagnosis and prompt splenecto-
my are very important for survival.
E-PS-01-003
Dandy-Walker syndrome - case report
V. Charalampidis*, I. Kontou Founta, P. Konstantinidou, R. Leontari,
E. Zagelidou, D. Anestakis
*Aristotle Univ. Thessaloniki, Forensic Histopathology, Greece
Background & objectives: Dandy-Walker syndrome is a congenital
brain malformation. It's characterized by incomplete configuration of
the cerebellum, dilatation of the fourth ventricle, an enlarged posterior
fossa and the formation of cysts. Its incidence is 1-30.000 births and
account for approximately 1-4% of hydrocephalus cases.
Methods: Histological examination of brain, heart, lungs, liver and kid-
neys of patient with history of Dandy-Walker syndrome. The measuring
and weighing of these were within normal values. However, the brain was
in places with indications of encephalopathy, hydrocephalus. The myo-
cardium was in places with ischemic lesions and the lung tissue blocks
were with oedema and in places with fibrosis and thickening.
Results: The results included brain in places with indications (macro-
scopic – microscopic) of encephalopathy, hydrocephalus, myocardium
in places with ischemic lesions and lung tissue blocks with oedema and
in places with fibrosis and thickening
Conclusion: Dandy-Walker syndrome is associated with chromosomal
abnormalities, Mendelian disorders, syndromic malformations, congeni-
tal infections, CNS disorders, including various malformations.
Hydrocephalus is a common complication of the disease in almost 80%
of the cases. With regard to the diagnosis, it depends on ultrasound as the
first imaging modality in assessing foetal brain and on MRI after the 20th
week of gestation. Treatment is generally focused on alleviating hydro-
cephalus and posterior fossa symptoms and it consists of treating the
manifestations and associated comorbidities.
E-PS-01-004
Sudden cognitive decline: a presentation of intravascular large B-cell
lymphoma
C. D'Angelo*, E.L. Hernández Suárez, A.L. De la Guardia Rodriguez,
C. Torre Carrera, E. Sobrino Reig, T. Meizoso Latova, C. Diego
Hernández
*Hospital Universitario de Mostoles, Spain
Background & objectives: Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma
(IVLBCL) is a rare and aggressive subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma,
characterized by growth of large cells within the lumen of blood vessels.
We report a case, given an early diagnosis is crucial to altering the disease
course.
Methods: We present a 72 year-old male patient who initially presented a
sudden cognitive decline, with gait alterations, anaemia, thrombopenia,
splenomegaly, asthenia and weight loss. MRI revealed leptomeningeal
enhancement. Given the main clinical suspicion was autoimmune menin-
goencephalitis, steroids were administered, with no improvement, and
Glasgow scale score fluctuations. Once in the ICU, a multidisciplinary
committee decides to perform a diagnostic/therapeutical splenectomy.
Results: Large atypical lymphocytes with prominent nucleoli and scant cy-
toplasm were identified within capillaries, small arteries and veins. Tumour
cells positive for CD20, CD79a, BCL-2, BCL-6 and Mum-1, while negative
for CD3 and CD10. These findings suggested the diagnosis of IVLBCL.
Despite therapeutical efforts, the patient died, and an autopsy was performed.
The microscopical exam of sampled tissues, especially kidney and CNS,
showed the same findings seen on the splenectomy specimen.
Conclusion: Uncommonly, our patient was diagnosed premortem, al-
though not at an early stage. Since we are dealing with a rare and unusual
disease, a diagnostic suspicion, communication among different special-
ties, along with early and adequate biopsy are critical to establishing an
accurate diagnosis and initiating therapy.
E-PS-01-005
Aortic occlusion by tumour embolus complicating surgical resection
of a pulmonary carcinosarcoma: a post-mortem case report
H. Hawrot*, K. Griffin, E. Carling
*United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Occlusion of the aorta by embolic tumour
material is rare, and, to our knowledge, has never been reported in asso-
ciation with pulmonary carcinosarcoma. Our objective is to review the
literature and increase awareness of this uncommon complication of tho-
racic surgery.
Methods: Case Presentation (Methods/ Results)
A 69-year-old man underwent right pneumonectomy for a screen-detect-
ed, asymptomatic, 10 cm carcinosarcoma of the right upper lung. On
recovery after anaesthetic, the patient developed immediate post-
operative paraesthesia and mottling of both lower limbs. A computerised
tomography (CT) scan revealed an aortic thrombus with focal ischaemia
of the spleen and left kidney...
Results: Case Presentation (Methods/ Results) (continued)
…following failed angioplasty attempts and bilateral axillo-femoral bypass
grafts, above-knee amputations were performed. However, despite these
measures, the patient's clinical condition deteriorated and he sadly died.
The case was referred to the Coroner and post-mortem examination re-
vealed occlusion of the aorta and other large arteries by firm pale material.
This was histologically confirmed to represent tumour embolus and is-
chaemia and infarction were identified in multiple organ systems includ-
ing the spleen, kidneys and intestine.
Conclusion: This patient died of arterial obstruction by embolic tumour,
causing ischaemia of vital organs. Although rare, autopsy pathologists
should be vigilant to the fact that advanced lung cancers can invade large
pulmonary veins, facilitating embolization of tumour around the body.
E-PS-01-006
Primary liver chorioncarcinoma in a 36-year-old man: clinical ana-
tomical analysis
M. Mnikhovich*, T. Bezuglova, D. Kushch, V. Balayants, A. Romanov,
N. Maluygin, P. Bliganov, G. Ushanov
*Research Institute of Human Morphology, Russia
Background & objectives: Primary chorioncarcinomas of the liver are
rare.A case of primary chorioncarcinoma of the liver in a 36-year-old man
Virchows Arch
flowing under the guise of a low-grade carcinoma of the stomach with
metastases to the liver, lungs, and mesenteric root is presented.
Methods: A clinical and anatomical analysis of the case of primary
chorioncarcinoma of the liver in a 36-year-old man. IHC was performed with
antibodies: β-hCG, Pan-cytokeratin AE1 / AE3, CK 7 CD10, CD146, CD56,
CD99, S-100, NSE, CD57, SMA, Melan-A, CD31, CD34.
Results: At autopsy, in the liver, a rounded knot of 18.0 cm, with
haemorrhagic patches, friable consistency, in the centre of foci of necro-
sis. In the mesentery of the small intestine, a mottled-looking node is 9.0
cm. In the lower lobes of both lungs, subpleural foci are 0.5-0.8 cm with
clear boundaries, of dense consistency. The tumour node of the liver
consisted of cytotrophoblastic cells with homogeneous rounded nuclei,
transparent cytoplasm, with large multinucleated syncytiotrophoblastic
cells with bizarre nuclei, and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. In cells
of a cytotrophoblast there are figures of mitosis. In a liver tumour: diffuse
expression of β-hCG, Pan-cytokeratin AE1/AE3;CK7,CD10, CD146 -
diffuse expression of intermediate trophoblast by cells.
Conclusion: Electron microscopy revealed syncytrophoblasts, but there
were no open lacunae lined with microvilli. Most mononuclear cells with
ultrastructural features of mature cells, as evidenced by a more complex
cytoplasm than is observed in typical cytotrophoblastic cells.
Tumour wasn't detected in the testicals.
A case of primary chorionic carcinoma of the liver with an aggressive
course is presented, with multiple distant metastases in a young patient
without testicular damage.
E-PS-01-007
A case of sudden death associated with two incidental primary
tumours
A. Muresan*, B. Suciu, R. Barna, D. Herman
*Department of Pathology, Emergency County Hospital "Pius Brinzeu",
Timisoara, Romania
Background & objectives: The prevalence of incidental cancers is low
due to current advanced diagnostic methods. This study reports the case
of a 64-year-old man who presented at the emergency room with dys-
pnoea at rest, orthopnoea, palpitations, and precordial pain.
Methods: Paraclinical tests revealed elevated serum pancreatic enzymes (li-
pase), lactate dehydrogenase and creatine kinase‐MB. Electrocardiography
showed ST-T wave changes in the inferior territory and atrial fibrillation with
high ventricular rate. Thoracic front X-ray points out an irregular opacity in
the left upper lobe, adjacent to the pulmonary hilum. The patient died within 2
hours and necropsy was performed.
Results: Necropsy findings show acute necrotizing pancreatitis, multiple
small gallstones, macroscopic early changes of myocardial infarction, an
advanced stage lung cancer extending to the oesophagus, and two tumours
in the right kidney. These two renal tumours are both circumscribed, but they
look differently: one is orange-yellowish, with cystic and haemorrhagic areas
and the other one is tan and solid. We found multiple metastases in the
mediastinal lymph nodes, brain, and liver.
Histological examination showed a poorly differentiated pulmonary ade-
nocarcinoma, widely metastatic in mediastinal lymph nodes, brain, and
liver. In the kidney, there was a conventional clear cell renal cell carci-
noma (RCC) and a papillary RCC type 1, respectively.
Conclusion: Although incidental cancer is less common, there are some
indolent cancers that remain undiscovered during life and do not contrib-
ute to death.
E-PS-01-008
Dressler’s syndrome: an autopsy of a rare complication of myocar-
dial infarction
G. Nora*, S. Corrêa Garcia Pires D’Ávila, S. Longarini Gonçalves
*Hospital de Base (FAMERP - Medical School of São José do Rio Preto),
Brazil
Background & objectives: To report an unusual complication of myo-
cardial infarction in the age of reperfusion therapy. Dressler’s Syndrome
is a type of pericarditis that rarely occurs after damage to the heart, from
occasions such as myocardial infarction or surgeries.
Methods: Review of autopsy report. The case was analysed both macro-
scopically and microscopically.
Results: A 71-year-old woman was referred for autopsy 4 days after
hospital discharge, when she was treated for myocardial infarction.
During the examination, pericardial cavity was filled with approximately
300mL of a reddish-brown fluid with cloudy appearance. The internal
surface of the pericardial sac showed a fibrous exudate, as well as the
epicardial surface. In cross section, there was marked concentric myocar-
dial hypertrophy, especially in the left ventricle. The myocardial tissue on
the anterior left ventricular wall showed a soft-elastic consistency and was
dark red. Microscopically, the pericardium exhibited fibrinous exudate
and inflammatory cells. Histology of the heart showed wavy cardiac
muscle cells and presence of numerous immune cells, especially
neutrophils.
Conclusion: Dressler’s Syndrome occurred in approximately 1% - 5% of
myocardial infarction cases. With the advancement of therapies for such
condition, its incidence has dropped dramatically and nowadays it is
estimated to be less than 1%, with some studies even suggesting that
the syndrome may have disappeared.
E-PS-01-009
Hyperammonomemic encephalopathy in a patient with fibrolamellar
hepatocellular carcinoma: autopsy at 25 years old
G. Nora*, S. Corrêa Garcia Pires D’Ávila, D. de Santi Neto, S. Longarini
Gonçalves
*Hospital de Base (FAMERP - Medical School of São José do Rio Preto),
Brazil
Background & objectives: To report a case of a rare liver tumour, with
an unusual complication.
Methods: Review of medical record and autopsy report.
Results: A 25-year-old woman was referred to Hepatology service due to
an ultrasound finding that revealed a massive liver tumour. Imaging
exams showed inferior vena cava thrombosis, that required an implant
of a temporary filter. On the day following the procedure, patient de-
creased level of consciousness. Laboratory tests showed markedly
elevated serum ammonia levels. Hyperammonemia was treated
with ammonia scavengers, but the patient did not respond to treat-
ment and died. At autopsy, a tumour measuring 21,3 x 16,4 x
11,6 cm was identified. Microscopic analysis leaded to the diag-
nosis of fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FHCC).
Neoplastic cells were large, polygonal, with oncocytic cytoplasm,
accompanied by parallel lamellae of dense collagen bundles.
Conclusion: FHCC is a very rare tumour. In the United States, it
corresponds to less than 1% of all liver tumours. Hyperammonemic
encephalopathy in patients with FHCC is also a very rare compli-
cation; some aetiologies have been proposed for it's emergency, and
one of them is intrahepatic shunting. As the clinical worsening
occurred after placing the filter in intimate contact to the liver, it
is believed that this was the cause.
E-PS-01-010
Ruptured ectopic pregnancy: autopsy at 42 years old
G. Nora*, J. Silva, R.F. Maciel Andrade, S. Longarini Gonçalves
*Hospital de Base (FAMERP - Medical School of São José do Rio Preto),
Brazil
Background & objectives: To report a ruptured ectopic pregnancy di-
agnosed at autopsy.
Methods: Review of medical record and autopsy report.
Virchows Arch
Results: A 42-year-old woman died few minutes after arriving at the
hospital, complaining of abdominal pain in the last 24 hours. At
autopsy, she exhibited marked cutaneous-mucous paleness. At lap-
arotomy, there was a marked amount of haemorrhagic fluid in the
abdominal cavity, and the focus was identified in the right uterine
tube. At salpingotomy, a foetus was exteriorized measuring 3.5 cm
in length, with genitalia still ambiguous - morphological character-
istics compatible with 8-9 weeks of gestational age. Microscopic
analysis showed large chorionic villi of the placenta inside the right
uterine tube. The cause of death, therefore, was given as a hypovo-
lemic shock due to ruptured ectopic tubal pregnancy.
Conclusion: In the present case, the early search for medical care would
have a modifying impact on the prognosis. In cases of abdominal pain,
especially in women of childbearing age, gynaecological causes should
always be considered.
E-PS-01-011
Analysis of cases referrals for the Death Verification Service
D. Nunes de Melo*, V. Maria Maia Amorim de Morais, S. Capelo
Barroso Garcia, G. Guerra Moita, V. Thayson Damasceno dos Santos,
R. Abreu Silva, D. Nunes Oliveira, J. Carneiro Melo
*State Secretary of Health, Brazil
Background & objectives: The Death Verification Service (DVS) and
the Institute of Legal Medicine, are responsible for performing the autop-
sies and sometimes cases are incorrect referral to each service and be-
tween them. Analysed the cases that were forwarded to Death
Verification Service.
Methods: It was performed a retrospective cohort study, evaluating data
from Death Verification Service of the state of Ceara, Brazil from 2019’s
January-February .
Results: During this period, there were more than 1300 deaths re-
ferred to the DVS and of these 28 cases were incorrectly referred to
the DVS when they should have been sent to the Institute of Legal
Medicine with 9 (33%) deaths from exogenous intoxication, 6
(21%) deaths without medical assistance, 5 (18%) due to falling
from their own height, 2 (7%) due to aspiration of foreign bodies,
1 (3.5%) suicide, 1 (3.5%) drug addiction, 1 (3.5% ) electric shock
and the other 3 (10.5%) were due to other causes.
Conclusion: In conclusion, although there are very specific indications
for referring a corpse to one of these institutions, erroneous referral of
cases to any of these are still recurring and those mistakes may compro-
mise future mortality indicators based assessments.
E-PS-01-012
Sudden death in young adults in Ceará, Brazil
D. Nunes Oliveira*, G. Guerra Moita, V. Maria Maia Amorim de Morais,
V. Thayson Damasceno dos Santos, R. Abreu Silva, S. Capelo Barroso
Garcia, C. Alves Carneiro, J. Carneiro Melo
*University of Fortaleza, Brazil
Background & objectives: Sudden death (SD) refers to a non-
violent death occurring less than 24-hours from the onset of symp-
toms and in young adult is uncommon, but reaffirms its societal
burden, especially for screening programs. Evaluate the causes of
SD in young adults.
Methods: Cross-sectional study, evaluating autopsy data from Death
Verification Service of the State of Ceara, Brazil from January to
February of 2019.
Results: There were 195 cases of sudden death and of these, 26 were
patients under 40 years of age, predominantly mixed race, average age of
28 years (median 36 years) and 80% were male. 61.5% deaths due to
cardiac causes, 19.23% of which due to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
and 38.5% deaths due to non-cardiac causes.
Conclusion: Sudden death is rare in young people, but it has a
disproportionate impact on the community and the most often, death
is due to a heart abnormality. Even when analysed in a short period,
many cases of SD are found and potentially preventable with correct
diagnosis and risk stratification.
E-PS-01-013
A case of widespread metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma,
signet-ring cell variant
G. Paolino*, A. Mombello, R. Bernasconi, R.T. Lawlor, A. Scarpa,
C. Luchini
*Department of Pathology and Diagnostics, University and Hospital
Trust of Verona, Italy
Background & objectives: We report the case of a 58-years old man
with multiple metastasis from unknown primary, who died from respira-
tory failure. Autopsy revealed a metastatic signet-ring cell adenocarcino-
ma of the pancreas, which is a very rare variant of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma.
Methods: A comprehensive autopsy study has been performed,
which highlighted the presence of a large pancreatic mass, with
extension to regional and distant lymph nodes. The lungs showed
a solid aspect. The presence of gastric-intestinal primitive tumours
was excluded. During autopsy, several specimens were collected for
histological diagnosis.
Results: Histology revealed a signet-ring cell adenocarcinoma of the
pancreas, with multiple metastasis. The pancreatic origin of the neoplasm
was confirmed by immunohistochemical positivity for cytokeratin 7, 8/18
and for MUC1. Both lungs showed diffuse foci of tumour thrombotic
microangiopathy (TTM), a rare condition caused by accumulation of
neoplastic cells and fibrin clots within pulmonary vessels. This is the first
report of TTM due to pancreatic signet-ring cell carcinoma.
Conclusion: Histology revealed a signet-ring cell adenocarcinoma of the
pancreas, with multiple metastasis. The pancreatic origin of the neoplasm
was confirmed by immunohistochemical positivity for cytokeratin 7, 8/18
and for MUC1. Both lungs showed diffuse foci of tumour thrombotic
microangiopathy (TTM), a rare condition caused by accumulation of
neoplastic cells and fibrin clots within pulmonary vessels. This is the first
report of TTM due to pancreatic signet-ring cell carcinoma.
E-PS-01-014
Causes of lethal outcomes in children, born from mothers with type I
diabetes
T. Pavlova*, A. Kaplin, L. Zemlyanskaya
*Belgorod State University, Russia
Background & objectives: The pregnancy, complicated by diabetes
of 1 type, is related to group of high risk of early reproductive
losses, obstetric complications and congenital malformations of foe-
tus. The aim of research is to study children, born from mothers
with diabetes.
Methods: The 15 autopsies of new-borns, died in early and late neonatal
period were researched. Their mothers had diabetes of 1 type.
Results: It was revealed that 88,8% of childbirths were premature, intra-
uterine infection was detected in 83,3% of childbirths, syndrome of re-
spiratory dysfunction of new-born was detected in 12%, congenital
anomalies were in 11% of cases. The direct causes of death of children,
born from mothers with diabetes of 1 type were neonatal respiratory
distress syndrome (50%), necrotizing enterocolitis (16.6%), cerebral oe-
dema (16.7%), acute heart failure (11.1%), intraventricular haemorrhage
(5.6%)
Conclusion: The pregnancy on background of diabetes of 1 type is ac-
companied by serious complications in foetus, what can lead to premature
childbirths and further death of premature new-born.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-01-015
Fulminant myocarditis: a case report
E. Prados Pérez*, I. Torralba Cloquell, M.A. Martínez Ortega,
R.F. Ramos Asensio
*Hospital Universitario Son Espases, Spain
Background & objectives: Myocarditis is an inflammatory disease
of the myocardium often associated with dilated cardiomyopathy
and sudden cardiac death. The most frequent aetiology is viral
infections; other causes are non-viral infections, drugs or autoim-
mune diseases, which could be diagnosed by endomyocardial
biopsy.
Methods: We performed a complete autopsy. Samples of the heart´s
myocardium were taken for its microscopic study. CD3, CD4, CD8,
CD20, CD68, perforin and granzyme immunostains were made in order
to identify inflammatory cells.
Results: We report a case of a 44-year-old female with a medical history
of bilateral acute pyelonephritis, left renal abscess and obstructive ureteral
lithiasis treated with JJ stenting. The patient presented with abdominal
pain and fever. As acute pyelonephritis was suspected, she underwent
several analytic and imaging tests, without any relevant results. The pa-
tient died three days later.
The macroscopic examination of the heart revealed no abnormalities be-
sides a friable consistency of the myocardium. Microscopy exposed an
intense inflammatory infiltrate in association with myocyte necrosis af-
fecting both ventricles. Mature T lymphocytes, macrophages and isolated
polymorphonuclear neutrophils constituted the main components of the
infiltrate.
Conclusion: Myocarditis is an inflammatory disease that can lead
to unexpected death, as in our case. Histologically, myocarditis is
defined by the Dallas criteria, based in the presence of inflamma-
tory infiltrates in the myocardium as well as non-ischemic
myocyte necrosis.
E-PS-01-016
Bile pulmonary embolism in 81-year old male - case report and
review of the literature
A. Puche Gallego*, N. Papaleo, J. Lop Gros, G.M. Parini, M. Gonzalez,
G. Tagmouti, D. Naranjo-Hans, J. Gimeno, B. Lloveras
*Hospital del Mar (Barcelona), Spain
Background & objectives: Bile pulmonary embolism (BPE) is a very
uncommon process usually diagnosed post-mortem. Fistulation between
biliary system and venous blood makes bile to reach lung vessels. We
present the autopsy findings of 81-year-old man with BPE secondary to
acute abscesified cholecystitis.
Methods: We perfomed clinical autopsy and after definitive diagnose, we
made a systematic review of the Literature.
Results: The autopsy determined as primary cause of death sepsis sec-
ondary to an acute abscessified cholecistitis. Massive BPE in small sized
pulmonary arteries were found, causing dyspnoea and cough with green-
ish expectoration.
Bilepulmonary embolism is a rare complication associated to fistulous
communication between the bile ducts and the hepatic veins. The most
commonly reported causes are iatrogenic medical procedures (ERCP),
pancreatic or hepatic tumours and, less frequently, acute cholecystitis.
Almost 20 cases reported since 1980’s showed that this is an uncommon
and severe event often presenting initially unspecific abdominal pain and
progressive dyspnoea, leading to haemobilia, pulmonary hypertension,
acute respiratory failure or acute right heart failure with fatal
consequences.
Conclusion: Both clinicians and pathologists should be aware of this
entity, whose incidence might rise during the next years since non-
surgical treatment for acute cholecystitis is recommended in patients with
comorbidities.
E-PS-02-001
Traumatic neuroma after mastectomy for breast cancer: case report
P. Aguiar Feitosa*, L.F. Torres Filgueira, G.Z. Carhuancho Flores, G.
Holanda Maia, G. Leal de Carvalho, A. Lobo, L.S. da Costa Silva e Silva,
M.V. Pitombeira Ferreira
*Federal University of Ceará, Medical School, Dept. of Pathology, Brazil
Background & objectives: Traumatic neuroma is a failed attempt to
regenerate an injured or ruptured nerve from trauma or surgery. They
are benign and non-neoplastic lesions that can appear in different parts
of the body but are rarely seen at the mastectomy site. They are formed by
a tangle of neural fibres, schwann cells and fibroblasts. The objective is
describe and discuss a case of traumatic neuroma after mastectomy for
invasive breast cancer.
Methods: This is a report of a case of traumatic neuroma close to the
mastectomy scar in a 71-year-old woman who underwent mastectomy
and chemotherapy for invasive breast carcinoma four and a half years ago
and was being followed up at the mastology outpatient clinic. Clinical,
diagnostic and literature data are presented for comparison.
Results: Asymptomatic patient with normal physical examination pre-
sented an ultrasound scan of a nodule in the right mastectomy store in the
anterior axillary line measuring 0.4 x 0.3 cm. The microscopic analysis of
the thick needle biopsy in hematoxylin and eosin staining showed prolif-
eration formed by numerous nerve wires in the middle of the fibromyxoid
connective tissue and concluded the diagnosis of post-mastectomy trau-
matic neuroma. Absence of breast cancer recurrence.
Conclusion: Traumatic neuromas occur in the age of 31 to 78 years, 2 to
22 years after mastectomy and measure from 0.2 to 1.6 cm. Rare after
mastectomy with incidence of 0.09%. It´s necessary to distinguish from
recurrence of breast carcinoma.
E-PS-02-002
Histopathological analysis of male breast cancer in Southwestern
Nigeria: a single-centre retrospective study
M. Ajani*, S. Odetola, B. Awosusi, E. Fatunla, A. Salami
*Department of Pathology, University College Hospital, Ibadan,
Oyo state, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Breast cancer in men is an uncommon dis-
ease accounting for 1% of all breast cancer cases. The study aimed to
review all the male breast cancer cases over a ten-year period and to
compare the findings with other similar studies.
Methods: This was a retrospective review of all histologically diagnosed
cases of male breast cancers in the Department of Pathology, University
College Hospital Ibadan over a ten-year period. Clinicopathological pa-
rameters and specific histological sub-types were extracted from surgical
day book and Cancer Registry of the Department. The data was analysed
using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences, version 22 (SPSS-22).
Results: Forty-two cases of male breast cancer were seen accounting for
1.7% of all breast cancer cases. The age range was between 22-91 years
with a mean age of 60.3 years and a peak occurrence was in the 8th
decade. The right breast was more commonly affected accounting for
52% of cases. Most of the patients presented with a retro-areolar mass.
The commonest histological sub-type found in this study is the invasive
ductal carcinoma accounting for 88% of the cases. The peak incidence of
male breast cancer cases was in 2013 with 8 cases while the least inci-
dence of 2 cases was seen in the year 2012 .
Conclusion: Breast cancer in men is relatively uncommon compared to
female breast cancers. Breast cancer in males and females however share
similar clinico-pathological features. Male breast cancer is more common
in the older age group and invasive ductal carcinoma is still the
E-PS-02 Breast Pathology
Virchows Arch
commonest histological subtype seen in our environment. Many gaps still
remain in our knowledge about breast cancers in men.
E-PS-02-004
Florid Liesegang rings, closely mimicking filarial parasites within a
screen detected breast lesion: a challenging diagnostic entity
S. Bakhiet*, K. Grover, E. Khalifa, A. Hubberd, B. Elahi, A. Osman
*Hull Royal Infirmary, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: ‘Liesegang rings’ are laminated globular
structures that occasionally associated with mammary cystic, lactational
or inflammatory conditions. Liesegang rings are rare but known diagnos-
tic pitfalls, commonly misinterpreted as filarial parasites, resulting in
inappropriate management.
Methods: A 72 years female presented with a screen-detected lesion in
the right breast (R3/U3). Histology revealed microcalcification associat-
ing multi-cystic spaces, lined by bland cuboidal epithelium and appear
partially filled with multiple globular pink structures, closely mimicking
filarial parasites with focal areas showing granulomatous reaction (CD68
stain positive). There is also marked periductal chronic inflammation with
no atypia or malignancy identified.
Results: Liesegang rings typically lack the internal structures of true
parasites. The diagnosis, however, would be challenging in degener-
ative forms of filarial parasites. The experts’ opinion (from The
London Hospital of Tropical Diseases) described these structures as
a special type of secretion, so-called ‘Liesegang rings’. The variable
size of rings, the absence of distinct internal organs of parasites in
addition to the lack of relevant travel history (to an endemic place) in
our case, all favoured Liesegang rings over filarial parasites. The
special stains requested initially (Iron stain, Von Kossa, PAS,
GIEMSA, MAST) were all negative.
Conclusion: We describe a rare histopathological finding ‘Liesegang
rings’ that mimics parasites histologically. The recognition of such a rare
entity is crucial to avoid labelling the case with a different disease process
and targeting such patients with an inappropriate form of therapy and
management.
E-PS-02-005
Unusual synchronous presentation of lobular breast carcinoma and
anorectal melanoma
G. Benkhedda*, H. Ait Kaci, Y. Bouanika
*EHS Centre Pierre et Marie Curie, Algeria
Background & objectives: In women, 5 to 10% of breast cancers are
attributed to mutations in predisposing genes.
Epidemiological studies have provided suggestive evidence of a link
between skin melanoma and breast cancer. The association breast carci-
noma and anorectal melanoma is somewhat exceptional.
Methods: We report the case of a 55-year-old patient with synchronous
lobular carcinoma of the left breast treated by hormone therapy followed
by mastectomy and lymph node dissection, and anorectal melanoma ini-
tially diagnosed as a poorly differentiated carcinoma, followed by prima-
ry radiotherapy with deferred surgery and where the diagnosis of mela-
noma was made on the rectal resection after an immunohistochemical
study.
Results: The microscopic study of the anorectal tumour showed diffuse
tumour proliferation with weakly cohesive cells with granular cytoplasm
and nuclei with a prominent nucleolus.
The immunohistochemical showed a negativity of epithelial markers,
GATA3 and the hormone receptors and positivity for anti-Melan-A,
HMB45 and PS100.
The microscopic study of the tumour breast showed the presence of an
invasive lobular carcinoma. The IHC showed a positivity for GATA3 and
hormone receptors.
Conclusion: This observation raises the possibility that the pathways
involved in the development of breast cancer and melanoma of the skin
or mucous membranes overlap.
E-PS-02-006
Synchronous bilateral breast cancer of distinct histomorphologic and
intrinsic subtypes: a case report
B. Binboga*, F. Oz Puyan, E. Tastekin, N. Kurt, E. Genc Erdogan
*Trakya University Medical Faculty, Turkey
Background & objectives: The incidence of bilateral synchronous
breast cancer is accounting %1-%2.6 of all patients with breast cancer.
These patients have relatively shorter overall survival rates. All patients
with breast cancer should be carefully examined by radiological screening
methods.
Methods: 81-year-old female patient presented with palpable mass in her
right breast. Mammography demonstrated a spiculated contoured 25 mm
sized upper quadrant mass on the right breast and 30 mm sized lesion
under areola region of the left breast. Lesion on the right breast was
classified as BI-RADS category 5, left breast lesion was classified as
BI-RADS category 4.
Results: Tru-cut biopsy was performed for both breast lesions. On the
biopsy of the right breast lesion, there was solid sheets of infiltrative
ductal structures with desmoplastic stromal reaction. Left breast lesion,
revealed an infiltration of neoplastic cells arranged in a single-file linear
pattern in a fibrous stroma containing intracytoplasmic lumen. Bilateral
mastectomy with bilateral axillary dissection was performed. Right breast
lesion was diagnosed as invasive breast carcinoma of no special type and
left breast lesion was diagnosed as invasive lobular carcinoma. Right
breast tumour was ER, PR negative while HER2 was +++/+++. Left
breast tumour showed %100 positive immunereactivity for ER and PR,
HER2 was negative.
Conclusion: This case demonstrated that two distinct characterized tu-
mours may develop in the same patient in bilateral setting.
E-PS-02-007
Adenosarcoma of the breast – a case report
M. Biskup-Fruzynska*, A. Stanek-Widera, D. Lange
*Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Poland
Background & objectives: Sarcomas account for less than 1% of breast
malignancies. A 58-year-old woman without significant medical history
noticed a lump in the right upper quadrant of her right breast. The clini-
cians asked for a second opinion on the tumorectomy slides.
Methods: The USG and FNAB results suggested a benign lesion (BI-
RADS 3; epithelial cells without atypia). The tumorectomy specimen was
4x3x2 cm with greyish, lobulated cut surface. The original diagnosis of
adenosarcoma was established basing on HE stain for the presence of
both sarcomatoid and adenoma-like components. To exclude metaplastic
carcinoma and determine the direction of differentiation, immunohisto-
chemistry was applied.
Results: The tumour was biphasic: there was a poorly differentiated
sarcomatoid stroma (suspected of having lipogenic lineage) with variable
cellularity and admixed benign epithelial structures resembling adenosis
and tubular adenoma, at the periphery and within the more cellular areas.
There was no phyllodes tumour component and no necrosis. The mitotic
index was about 8/10 HPF. Ki67 index was about 15%. The spindle-cell
component was negative for CK AE1/AE3, CK 5/6 and MDM2. The
glandular component was positive for ER, PR, with myoepithelia positive
for p63 and CK 5/6.The consultation diagnosis was adenosarcoma, inter-
mediate grade, originating from the breast stroma (ER, PR-positive), with
myogenic differentiation (SMA-positive, actin, desmin and MyoD1 fo-
cally positive).
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: To our knowledge, similar lesions located in the breast have
not been reported yet. As this abstract is being submitted, the patient is 5
months from primary tumorectomy and 6 weeks from radicalization due
to narrow (0,1 mm) surgical margin (quadrantectomy - negative for neo-
plastic disease), with no signs of dissemination or recurrence. The Soft
Tissue Multidisciplinary Team will continue the management, presum-
ably requesting molecular tests on the tumour.
E-PS-02-008
Differences in GATA3 expression among histological/molecular sub-
types and grades in infiltrating breast carcinoma (IBC)
M. Boros*, A.A. Barbis Vesa, T. Csilip, S. Stolnicu
*Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
University of Oradea, Romania
Background & objectives: GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a
sensitive and relatively specific marker in IBC. Its relationship
with different IBC histologic/molecular subtypes/grades has not
been specifically defined. The aim was to determine GATA3 ex-
pression among different histological and surrogate molecular BT
subtypes.
Methods: Immunohistochemical staining of ER, PR, ki67, HER2
and GATA3 was performed in a cohort of 84 consecutive cases of
primary IBCs. The association of GATA3 expression with differ-
ent histological subtypes, grades and surrogate intrinsic molecular
subtypes was assessed.
Results: The overall positivity of GATA3 across various histological
subtypes was 71.43% with no correlation with histological type
(p=0.849). GATA3 expression was positively correlated with low histo-
logical grade (G1/G2 vs G3: p=0.001; OR=0.174 95%CI=0.057-0.535)
with most of G3 (57.89%) cases being negative and with luminal A
(72.22%) and B (84.62%) subtypes (p=0.00001; OR=17.544,
95%CI=4.202-71.429) while most of the triple negative (87.5%) and
HER2-overexpressed (66.67%) being negative for GATA3 (p=0.0001).
Conclusion: GATA3 exhibits a relatively high sensitivity for IBC.
GATA3 expression is associated with IBC most frequently en-
countered histological subtypes, with luminal A/B molecular sub-
type and low G1/G2 histological grade. Caution must be payed
when dealing with an IBC metastasis of HER2-overexpressed or
triple negative molecular subtypes or G3, since in these categories
GATA3 is frequently negative and cannot be used for diagnosis of
tumour origin.
E-PS-02-009
Human dirofilariasis: report of a case presenting as a breast lump
E. Botsfari*, B. Sidiropoulou, B. Christoforidou, P. Xirou, S. Barbanis,
D. Gerasimidou, C. Kontos, A. Kiziridou
*Department of Pathology, Theagenion Cancer Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece
Background & objectives: Human dirofilariasis (HD) is a rare zoonotic
infection caused by filarial nematodes belonging to the genus Dirofilaria.
The main clinical manifestations in humans are subcutaneous nodules
and pulmonary lesions. We report a case of HD, presenting as a breast
lump.
Methods: Our patient, a 75-year-old woman, presented with a mass in the
left breast, measuring 1.5 cm in maximum diameter. Lumpectomy was
performed.
Results: Macroscopically, the mass was well-circumscribed, white, solid
and hard on palpation.
Histological examination revealed a lymph node with necrotic, granulo-
matous inflammatory reaction. In addition, within the necrotic tissue, a
worm with histological features consistent with Dirofilaria repens was
identified.
Conclusion: HD has been reported in countries with temperate, semi-
tropical, or tropical climates.
The infection of humans occurs through a mosquito bite that has obtained
larvae-containing blood from an infected animal.
The commonest Dirofilaria species are D. repens and D. immitis, respon-
sible for subcutaneous and pulmonary dirofilariasis, respectively.
HD can mimic a tumoral process, so it is important to develop practical
techniques for histological and serological diagnosis, to avoid radical
surgery.
E-PS-02-010
Neuroendocrine neoplasm versus solid papillary carcinoma of the
breast with neuroendocrine differentiation? Tricky lesion to
recognise
A. Bourigua*, H. Dali, S. Bendjaballah, D. Boulenouar, E. Demblocoque
*Pathology Department, Simone Veil Hospital Beauvais, France
Background & objectives: Solid papillary carcinoma (SPC) is consid-
ered a rare malignant breast tumour.
Given its monomorphous aspect, other differential diagnoses are most
often mentioned.
Herein a rare and tricky case of SPC with a neuroendocrine (NE)
differentiation.
Methods: A 52-year-old female patient consulted for nodule in her
right breast. Palpation revealed a firm, ill-defined nodule of upper
external quadrant with palpable axillary lymph node.
Mammography revealed an ill-defined opacity of 20mm classified
BIRADS IV.
The patient underwent breast conserving surgery with axillary lymph
node dissection.
Results: On macroscopy, there was a nodule of 19 mm.
On histology, it had a solid architecture with very unconspicious fibro-
vascular cores and nests of monomorphous oval and rounded epithelial
cells, moderate to high in size. There was little nuclear pleomorphism,
and numerous mitotic figures (up to 14,8/mm²). 1 lymph node was met-
astatic with capsule rupture.
Tumour cells were positive for Oestrogen and progesterone receptors,
synaptophysin and chromogranin A, and negative for HER-2.
Given solid growth, monorphous cell tumours, reactivity to NE markers,
we conducted firstly a neuroendocrine carcinoma.
we concerted breast pathologists who proposed as diagnosis: solid papil-
lary carcinoma with a neuroendocrine differentiation.
Conclusion: SPC is characterized by solid growth pattern with delicate
fibrovascular cores.
NE differentiation is frequent. Its important to differentiate it from other
subtypes of breast neoplasms: papilloma with florid usual ductal hyper-
plasia, medullary carcinoma, pure neuroendocrine neoplasm .
Due to its rarity and lack of sufficient clinical data, treatment and prog-
nosis are calculated as invasive breast carcinoma.
E-PS-02-011
Retrospective evaluation of breast carcinoma brain metastases
E. Buyuktalanci*, G. Serin, O. Zekioglu, N. Ozdemir, Y. Ertan, T. Akalin
*Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: The second most common cause of metasta-
tic brain tumours is breast cancer and lifetime risk of brain
metastasis(BM)in breast cancer patients is 10-16%.In this study, we
aimed to discuss immunohistochemical and prognostic features of pa-
tients diagnosed as BM of breast cancer.
Methods: Between January 2012 and April 2018, 28 patients diagnosed
as BM of breast carcinoma in our department and patients with known
follow-up were re-evaluated with age, gender, primary tumour diagnosis,
survival time, immunohistochemical properties and histological degrees.
Virchows Arch
Results: When the cases were divided into groups according to hormone
receptor and HER2 status; ER/PR positive in 17.85% (n = 5) of the cases
(Hormone positive group); only ER positive (ER positive group) in
28.57% (n = 8); HER2 amplification in 32.14% (n = 9) (HER2 positive
group); ER/PR/HER2 negative in 21,42% (n=6) (Triple negative group).
Median overall survival was 8 ± 2.6 months (2.8-13.2) after diagnosis of
brain metastasis, while 30 ± 10.9 months (8.5-51.5) in the hormone pos-
itive group; 7 ± 8.5 months(0-23.6) in the ER positive group; 10 ± 3
months(4.2-15.8) in HER2 positive group and 4 ± 1.6 months (1.7-6.3)
in triple negative group (p: 0.03).
Conclusion: BM seriously affects the quality of life and survival in breast
cancer patients, that's why development of effective treatment methods is
more important and urgent. In our study the longest survival was detected
in the hormone positive group and very low in the triple negative group.
This result might be a guide in determining new treatment methods.
E-PS-02-012
Basaloid carcinoma of the breast: case report of a rare entity
D. C Andrade*, V. Chiavelli, M.M.Á. Stiepcich
*Grupo Fleury, São Paulo, Brazil
Background & objectives: Basaloid carcinoma of the breast (BCB) is a
rare triple-negative breast tumour, with a difficult differential diagnosis
with neuroendocrine neoplasms, adenoid-cystic carcinoma and secondary
disease.
Methods: A 40-year old female patient with no prior history of malig-
nancies was submitted to a magnetic resonance imaging of the breast,
which showed a spiculated, irregular nodule measuring 1,4x1,1x1,5 cm
located in the posterior third of the upper-outer quadrant of the right
breast.
Results: The morphological study demonstrated a high-grade, solid ma-
lignant neoplasm, with groups of cells with scant cytoplasm and
hyperchromatic nuclei organized in clusters with peripheral palisading
and comedonecrosis. The immunohistochemical panel showed that the
tumour cells were positive for Cytokeratin 7 and Cytokeratin 34BetaE12,
but negative for Cytokeratin 20 and EPCAM. There was also focal pos-
itivity for GATA-3, BRST-2 and c-KIT, and the proliferative index
assessed with Ki67 was 70%. There was no expression of Oestrogen
Receptor, Progesterone Receptor, or HER2. The neuroendocrine markers
Chromogranin and Synaptophysin were negative, as well as the
myoepithelial markers p63, CD10, SMA and Cytokeratin 5. Finally, there
was no staining with TTF1, CDX2 or PAX8.
Conclusion: Herein we reported a case of BCB, a rare tumour of the
breast. Exclusion of the main differential diagnosis is necessary and
was performed with a thorough immunohistochemical study assessing
the presence of myoepithelial cells, neuroendocrine characteristics and
the possibility of metastasis. Awareness of the characteristic morphology
of this tumour is warranted for its correct diagnosis.
E-PS-02-013
Polymorphous adenocarcinoma of the breast: a rare salivary gland-
like tumour
D. C Andrade*, V. Chiavelli, E. Muniz de Freitas Alves,
M.M.Á. Stiepcich
*Grupo Fleury, São Paulo, Brazil
Background & objectives: Salivary gland-like tumours of the breast are
rare entities with a wide clinic-morphological spectrum. Polymorphous
adenocarcinoma is considered the counterpart of salivary-gland “poly-
morphous low-grade adenocarcinomas”, and only three cases had been
reported to date.
Methods: A 70-year old female was submitted to a screening mammog-
raphy, which identified a 2.0 cm spiculated nodule in the upper-outer
quadrant of the right breast, considered as undetermined for malignancy.
Results: Histologic sections demonstrated a well-differentiated neoplasm
infiltrating the stroma and adipose tissue, composed of epithelial cells
with enlarged nuclei, small nucleoli and scant cytoplasm organized in
tubules and occasionally as foci of isolated cells. The immunohistochem-
ical study showed that the tumour cells were positive for Cytokeratin 7
and E-Cadherin, but were negative for GATA3, BRST2, Oestrogen re-
ceptor (ER), Progesterone receptor (PR) and HER2. Furthermore, there
was focal positivity for p63 in rare areas of the neoplasm, but no staining
for the myoepithelial markers CD10, SMA and Cytokeratin 5. The tu-
mour cells also exhibited focal positivity for CD117, diffuse positivity for
BCL2, and the proliferative index assessed with Ki67 was 60%.
Conclusion: Herein we describe a case of Polymorphous adenocar-
cinoma of the breast, a rare tumour characterized by diverse mor-
phology, negativity for ER, PR and HER2, absence of a biphasic
cellular pattern and diffuse positivity for BCL2. This diagnosis
should be suspected in carcinomas with apparent discrepancy of a
triple-negative immunoprofile and a well-differentiated histology,
and without the typical dual cell population of other salivary
gland-like neoplasms of the breast.
E-PS-02-014
Solitary cylindroma (dermal analogue tumour) of the breast: 20-year
follow-up
A. Cordoba*, M. Mellado, R. Beloqui, I. Amat, D. Guerrero-Setas
*Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Solitary Cylindroma (SC) of the breast are
very uncommon lesions and can be diagnostically challenging. Little is
known about the behaviour of SC of the breast. We present a case of SC
with a radiological 20-year follow-up.
Methods: A 69-year old Caucasian female presenting with a 15 mm
suspicious spiculate nodule in the upper quadrant of the left breast was
seen in screening mammography. The needle core biopsy was diagnosed
as a radial scar. Due of its size over 1 cm, the lesion was completely
excised. Histologically, the epithelial proliferation was confirmed to be
centred in breast.
Results: The tumour was composed of ducts and solid islands of two type
of cells, the outer layer of basaloid cells and the inner row of luminal cells
in a “jigsaw pattern”. Immunohistochemistry showed no expression of
HR and HER-2. Solitary Cylindroma (SC) of the breast was diagnosed.
The rest of the screening mammographies was reviewed. We could ob-
serve that the lesion was noted from 1997.
Conclusion: Solitary Cylindroma (SC) or Dermal analogue tumours of
the breast was first described in 2001.
SC was composed of a dual population, luminal (CEA, CK 7, C-Kit and
EMA positive) and outer myoepithelial layer (p63 positive), surrounded
by basal membrane (Actin, IV Collagen).
Even if the clinical behaviour of Solitary Cylindroma (SC) remains to be
defined, the case we present here confirm the indolent nature of this
disease, confirmed after 20 years of follow up.
E-PS-02-015
Evaluation of HER2 scoring algorithms for identification of HER2-
low breast cancer
S. Costache*, Á. Nagy, K. Billingham, H. Haynes, A. Chefani,
T. Thomas, S. Wedden, C. D'Arrigo
*Poundbury Cancer Institute, Dorchester, United Kingdom; University
Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Her2-low is a novel biomarker for a
Her2-antibody-drug conjugate currently trialled in breast cancer
and assessed by Her2 IHC using a unique scoring algorithm.
We determined prevalence of Her2-low and concordance with
conventional Her2 algorithm.
Virchows Arch
Methods: We assessed a retrospective cohort representing all breast can-
cer diagnoses from a single institution in a calendar year (2019). The
cohort included both screening and symptomatic cases. Her2 had been
assessed previously using IHC and ISH. Cases were re-scored using the
new Her2-low algorithm and results compared with previous diagnoses
obtained using the conventional Her2 algorithm.
Results: Her2-low cannot be identified robustly using exiting Her-2 data
derived using the conventional scoring algorithm and retrospective cases
will require reassessment with the new algorithm. At present, prevalence
of Her-2 low in the breast cancer patient population is uncertain and this
study is an attempt to identify its prevalence and its association with
tumour type and grade, age at presentation, type of presentation (screen-
ing or symptomatic) and Er status. In addition, we show data on concor-
dance between individual pathologists after specific training in the new
Her2-low scoring system and we compare scoring obtained on glass
slides with digital pathology (DP) slides.
Conclusion: Conventional Her-2 scoring algorithm are designed to iden-
tify patients with Her2 overexpressing/HER2 amplified breast cancer. A
new drug for Her2-low requires a unique Her2-low category for which
there is a new algorithm. We show that the conventional scoring system
has poor specificity to identify Her2-low and historical cases will require
re-scoring. Pathologists will need training in this new biomarker. An
assessment programme to monitor diagnostic concordance could use
DP effectively.
E-PS-02-016
Recognising Magtrace in a sentinel lymph node biopsy – a case
report
H. Davies*
*Whiston Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: A 40-year old female had a wide local exci-
sion and sentinel lymph node biopsy for a grade three invasive ductal
carcinoma NST post neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Morphologically both
nodes were negative for metastatic carcinoma and a response to neoadju-
vant therapy.
Methods: On examination, both nodes contained an abundance of pig-
ment laden macrophages within the sinuses and a prominence of eosino-
phils. The patient had no significant past medical history including skin
conditions or tattoos. Both nodes were negative for AE1/AE3. However,
a Perls’ stain was strongly positive. On further questioning it became
apparent that Magtrace had been used during surgery.
Results: The changes identified were iron deposition due to the use of
Magtrace. The Magtrace and Sentimag Localisation System is a magnetic
system used to guide sentinel node biopsies in patients undergoing sur-
gery for breast carcinoma. Magtrace comprises of iron nanoparticles
which is injected into the breast. The Sentimag probe then uses magne-
tism to detect the particles and identify the sentinel node by producing an
audible signal and brown stain.
Conclusion: It is important for histopathologists to be made aware of the
changes associated with Magtrace because it is predicted that in the future
Magtrace will be used more frequently as clinical studies have shown it to
be just as effective as traditional techniques as well as being easy to use
and flexible whilst avoiding radiation exposure.
E-PS-02-018
Molecular classification of breast cancer among Egyptian patients: a
single institute experience
M. El Mahdy*, R.A. Ibrahim, M.I. Halim
*Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University,
Egypt
Background & objectives: Breast cancer is classified into molecular
subtypes to predict clinical outcomes independent of other prognostic
indicators. The aim of this study is to investigate the distribution of breast
cancer molecular subtypes among Egyptian females in correlation with
clinicopathological parameters.
Methods: This retrospective study included a cohort of 1072 breast can-
cer cases from archives of Pathology laboratory at Ain Shams University
hospital, Egypt, between 2015 and 2019. Molecular subtypes (luminal A,
luminal B, Her2-enriched, and triple-negative) were determined based
upon immunohistochemical analysis of ER, PR, Her2, Ki-67, plus
SISH for Her2. These data was correlated with the clinicopathological
and prognostic indicators.
Results: The mean age of the patients was 51.4 (±12.4) years. The most
prevalent subtype was luminal A in 463 cases (43.2%), followed by
luminal B in 430 cases (40.1%), Her2-enriched in 91 cases (8.5%), and
then triple negative in 88 cases (8.2%). Invasive ductal carcinoma was the
most common histological type (91.1%) then lobular carcinoma (6.5%)
and the other types accounted for (2.4%). Most of the tumours were
grade-II (85%). The triple-negative patients' mean age was 48 years; the
lowest among the other subtypes (p=0.02). Both HER2-enriched and
triple-negative cases had the highest percentage of T3 stage tumours.
HER2 subtype was associated with highest nodal (p=0.02) and distant
metastasis (p=0.03).
Conclusion: Luminal A and luminal B subtypes are the most common
among Egyptian breast cancer patients. Her2-enriched subtype correlates
with aggressive clinical behaviour having the highest tendency for me-
tastasis, and triple-negative subtype is more frequent among the younger
age group.
E-PS-02-020
Neuroendocrine mammary carcinoma with long-interval adrenal
metastasis: a case report
O. Elaiwy*, A. Haider
*Hamad Medical Corporation, Qatar
Background & objectives: Neuroendocrine mammary carcinoma
(NEMC) is a rare neoplasm comprising about 1 % of breast malignancies.
Methods: We report a case of patient who had NEMC four years ago,
now presenting with right adrenal mass. A right adrenalectomy was done
and the current mass was examined along with the previous case.
Results: Reviewing the histology revealed identical morphological and im-
munohistochemical features in both specimens. A tumour with
neuroendocrine-like cells is seen. Tumour cells expressed diffuse GATA3,
E-cadherin, BCL-2, ER (2+ in 80% of tumour cells), PR (2+ in 2% of tumour
cells), Synaptophysin, CK AE1/AE3 and focal CK 7 and Chromogranin .Ki-
67 proliferative index was 30%. Inhibin A, P53, EMA, Melan-A, Vimentin,
GCDFP-15, Mammoglobin, WT-1, S100 and Calretinin were all negative. A
diagnosis of metastatic NEMC was made.
Conclusion: NEMC is a rare mammary neoplasm with scarce literature
regarding its course, metastatic potential and therapy. A few authors reported
metastasis to various sites, in some cases years after initial diagnosis.
E-PS-02-021
Double trouble: artifactual epithelial displacement mimics invasion
in a papilloma with extensive usual duct hyperplasia mimicking a
solid papillary carcinoma
C. Galant*, M.R. Van Bockstal, F. Noël, M. Berlière
*Pathology Department, Cliniques Universitaires Saint Luc, Belgium
Background & objectives: Mammary solid papillary carcinoma (SPC)
and usual duct hyperplasia (UDH) of the breast are morphological look-
alikes, characterized by cellular streaming, solid growth and a lack of
high-grade nuclear atypia. Immunohistochemistry is helpful to distin-
guish these entities from one another.
Methods: A 48-years-old woman presented with a palpable lump at three
o’clock in the left breast. Medical imaging revealed a slightly irregular
Virchows Arch
10 mm mass. A core needle biopsy showed a solid papillary proliferation
of epithelial cells with oval to round overlapping nuclei, surrounded by a
sclerotic stroma. This distorted lesion contained peripheral clefts and
cellular streaming, without high-grade nuclear atypia.
Results: Immunohistochemistry for oestrogen receptor (ER),
cytokeratin-5 (CK-5), chromogranin and synaptophysin distinguished
this sclerosing papilloma with extensive UDH from an SPC.
Immunohistochemistry is helpful to distinguish both entities from one
another, since UDH shows no immunoreactivity for chromogranin and
synaptophysin, and presents with a mosaic-type expression pattern of ER
and CK-5.
The lumpectomy specimen revealed a second challenge: multiple epithe-
lial islets without surrounding myoepithelial cells were observed near the
papilloma in three consecutive tissue blocks, mimicking an invasive car-
cinoma. However, they were surrounded by steatonecrosis and reactive
fibroblasts, indicating a location within the biopsy needle tract, resem-
bling a comet’s tail.
Conclusion: A sclerosing papilloma with extensive UDH is a morpho-
logically mimic of an SPC. Diagnosis is confirmed by immunohisto-
chemistry. Displaced epithelial islets in the biopsy tract mimicked in
invasive carcinoma. Breast pathologists should be aware of this uncom-
mon double pitfall.
E-PS-02-023
How many cells should we count in digital assessment of the prolif-
eration marker Ki67 in breast cancer?
A. H. Skjervold*, M. Valla, H.P. Sahlin Pettersen, A.M. Bofin
*Dept.of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
Background & objectives: Recent studies suggest that downgrading of
Ki67 levels occurs when >2-300 cells are counted in breast cancer (BC)
sections. To investigate this, we used digital image analysis (DIA) to
count Ki67-positive cells in digitally identified hot-spots.
Methods: Sections from 200 BC cases, stained for Ki67, were assessed
using QuPath software. The percentage Ki67-positive cells was recorded
in five 100-cell groups in digitally identified hot-spots. Then increments
of 100 cells up to 500 cells, were compared. The number of positive cases
at each of three clinically relevant cut-off levels (15%, 20%, 30%) was
calculated in each group.
Results: At all three cut-off levels the percentage positive cases were
lowest when counting 500 cells and highest when counting 1-200 cells.
At the 15% cut-off level, 172 and 184 cases were positive at the 500- and
100-cell increments respectively, implying that 12 cases were
downgraded with increasing number of cells assessed. At the 20% and
30% cut-offs, 30 and 25 cases respectively were similarly downgraded.
The differences in the number of Ki67-positive cases between all five
100-cell increments were higher at the 20%- and 30% cut-off levels
compared to the 15% cut-off level.
Conclusion: In this study, the percentage of Ki67-positive cells was
diluted with increasing number of cells counted, leading to downgrading
of the proliferation status of some tumours. When using DIA, the highest
Ki67 levels may be achieved by counting 1-200 cells.
E-PS-02-024
Pathological assessment of breast carcinoma specimens undergoing
neoadjuvant chemotherapy
A. Hassan*
*University of Lahore, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Breast Carcinoma (BC) is the frequent type
of diagnosed cancers in females. In this study, Miller Payne system of
classification was used for the pathological assessment of breast tumour
in patients going through neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Methods: Representative segments of local wide excision and mastecto-
mies were taken and were fixed in 10% formalin. Hematoxylin and eosin
staining was done on the representative sections to observe the patholog-
ical changes that occurred after a minimum of 4 cycles of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Miller Payne system for classification was used for
reporting the chemotherapeutic effects of neoadjuvant therapy.
Results: Out of 40 cases, mostly having histological grades 3 and 2. pCR was
observed in 17.5% patients according to Miller Payne Classification (grade
5). Incomplete response is observed, out of which 12.5% cases showed Miller
Payne Classification grade 4, 20% cases showed grade 3, 42.5.5% belongs to
grade 2 and 7.5% cases showed Miller Payne chemotherapy effect grade 1.
Only one case with pCR reported ductal carcinoma in situ.
Conclusion: Conclusions: Neoadjuvant therapy is now becoming the
standard of care and is a treatment modality that is often used for breast
cancer patients. Pathologic assessment as a prognostic marker is still a
gold standard for patient’s adjuvant for research and clinical trials.
Keywords: Breast carcinoma, Complete pathological response (pCR),
Miller classification, Neoadjuvant therapy, Prognostic marker
E-PS-02-026
Prediction of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in Egyptian
patients with locally advanced breast cancer: the evolving role of
tumour infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
R. Ibrahim*, M. El-Mahdy, R. Hamed, M. Elkady, W. Bayoumy, M. El-
Din, Z. Elsayed
*Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University,
Egypt
Background & objectives: Presence of TILs in breast cancer indicates
better therapeutic responses to neoadjuvant-chemotherapy (NAC), in-
creased pCR and improved outcome. We aim at evaluation of TILs in
breast cancer biopsies in correlation with pathological response after
NAC in locally advanced breast cancer
Methods: This study was conducted at Ain Shams university hospital and
Maadi Military hospital in Egypt. 45 female patients with locally advanced
breast cancer were treated with NAC, pathological response was assessed.
Tumours were categorized into: luminal A, luminal B, Her2 enriched and
TNBC. Assessment of TILs (CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes) was based on
Immuno-Oncology Biomarker Working Group guidelines
Results: Tumours were classified into high and low TIL groups using the
interquartile range cut-off (29%). High CD4 group showed increased
pCR (p = 0.003) and smaller residual tumours (p= 0.04). High CD8 group
showed a significant association with smaller residual tumours (p=0.003).
At follow-up of 24-months, CD4 and CD8 high groups showed signifi-
cantly higher 2-years DFS. The difference between CD4 high and low
groups was significant in regards to oestrogen receptor status, showing
higher levels in hormone-negative tumours (p= 0.029). Patients with
Her2 subtype showed higher CD4 (p= 0.007) and CD8 expression
(p=0.018). In CD4 & CD8 low groups, more patients developed local
recurrence and distant metastasis (P= 0.025).
Conclusion: We concluded that TILs may predict response to NAC and
overall prognosis of breast cancer. The evaluation of TILs in correlation
with morphological or genomics-based parameters helps to stratify pa-
tients of breast cancer.
E-PS-02-027
Cytological evaluation of breast lesion in patients presenting at
Machakos level 5 hospital, Kenya: a retrospective study
T. Kamau*
*Machakos Cancer Care and Research Centre; Machakos Level 5
Hospital, Kenya
Background & objectives: Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) has
gained popularity due to its fast and easy approach, being inexpensive,
Virchows Arch
and can be performed with little complications. It has become popular as a
valuable tool in preoperative assessment of breast masses.
Methods: Medical records of 90 patients presenting to Machakos Cancer
Care and Research Centre in Machakos Level 5 Hospital, Kenya between
August 2019 and January 2020 were evaluated retrospectively.
Results: Of the 90 diagnosed breast lesions, 89% (n = 89) occurred in
females, while 1 % (n = 1) occurred in males, giving rise to a female-to-
male ratio of 89:1. Neoplastic breast lesions (n = 85) comprised 94.4 %,
while non-neoplastic breast lesions (n = 5) comprised 5.5 % of all diag-
nosed breast lesions. The neoplastic lesions were classified as 23.5% (n =
20) benign and 76.4% (n = 65) malignant, resulting in a benign-to-
malignant ratio of 3.25:1.
Conclusion: Neoplastic and non-neoplastic breast lesions were effective-
ly diagnosed using breast cytology.
E-PS-02-028
Breast metastasis of oesophageal carcinoma: a rare case report
G. Kir*, H. Gunel
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Metastatic breast carcinomas from
extramammarian malignancies are very rare and breast metastasis of oe-
sophageal carcinoma is even rarer.
Methods: 38-year-old female patient presented with a breast mass. On
breast ultrasonography hypoechoic solid nodular lesion (BIRADS 5) was
seen and the patient underwent core-needle biopsy.
Results: On microscopic evaluation, solid clusters was seen on low magni-
fication view. On high power, poorly differentiated cells with scant cytoplasm
and hyperchromatic nuclei was seen. The patient's history of oesophageal
squamous cell carcinoma was known. Immunohistochemically, tumour cells
were negative with Gata-3, ER and PR whereas positive with p63 and CK5/6.
The case was evaluated as the metastasis of the oesophageal carcinoma to the
breast.
Conclusion: Oesophageal carcinomas rarely metastasize to the breast.
However, when a breast tumour is detected in a patient with oesophageal
carcinoma metastatic tumour should be kept in mind.
E-PS-02-029
Radiation associated angiosarcoma two years after primary breast
cancer: a case report
H. Gunel, G. Kir*, S. Ozkanli, A.N. Toksoz Yildirim
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Radiation-associated angiosarcomas (RAS)
of the breast may arise in a previous radiation field of primary breast
cancer. They occur rarely but confer a high probability of local recurrence
and poor prognosis.
Methods: A 85-year-old woman with left breast invasive ductal carcino-
ma was treated with breast conserving surgery, sentinel lymph node ex-
cision, and standard radiation therapy to the breast two years ago. After
two years, the patient applied with an erythematous oedematous lesion in
the incision area. PET-CT revealed thickening of the breast skin and
increased FDG uptake in the axillary lymph nodes.
Results: A punch biopsy was taken from this area and reported as
angiosarcoma. The patient underwent mastectomy and axillary lymph
node dissection. Macroscopically, an irregular tumoral lesion measured
28x23cm with ulceration which caused thickening of the skin was ob-
served. Histopathologically, epithelioid and spindle cell areas and eryth-
rocyte extravasations were seen. Necrosis and mitosis were common.
Metastasis was observed in two lymph nodes. Immunohistochemically,
tumour cells were diffuse and strongly positive with CD31, FLI1, and
ERG, while ER, PR, and Gata-3 were negative.
Conclusion: We reported the case as a poorly differentiated
angiosarcoma. RAS is defined by three characteristics: a sarcoma in the
previous field of radiation, a latency period of at least 3 years and a
histological distinction from the primary neoplasm. The reported median
latency period between radiation and diagnosis of RAS is 6–7 years.
However, secondary angiosarcoma in our case occurred only two years
after primary breast carcinoma.
E-PS-02-030
The role of HER2 gene copy number variations in
immunohistochemistry-equivocal (2+) breast cancer
I. Kocsmár*, A.M. Tokes, D. Käfer, E. Kocsmar, K. Attila Kristóf,
J. Kulka, G. Lotz
*2nd Department of Pathology, Semmelweis University, Hungary
Background & objectives: Due to tumour heterogeneity of breast can-
cers, HER2 amplified cells can be identified even in HER2 fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) negative/equivocal cases. We aimed to de-
termine the prognostic significance of these copy number variations in
HER2 negative breast cancers.
Methods: From the period of 2010-2015, HER2 immunohistochemistry-
equivocal (IHC 2+) cases of female breast cancer (with primary, unilateral
tumours without treatment before sampling) with negative/equivocal re-
sult of dual-colour FISH were collected from the database of our institute.
Molecular subtypes were defined according to the St. Gallen 2013 con-
sensus. The IHC and FISH analyses were performed based on the
ASCO/CAP 2013 guidelines.
Results: The impact of the ratio of amplified cell population on
distant metastases-free survival (DMFS) was analysed in breast
cancers with less than 50% amplified cells (HER2 negative tu-
mours). The median follow up of the153 patients was 43.48
months. Distant metastases were observed in 28.29% of the cases.
Univariate analysis revealed significant positive correlation be-
tween the ratio of the HER2 amplified cells and the longer
DMFS (p=0.014). By analysing the subtypes separately, this cor-
relation remained significant only in the HER2 negative luminal
B-like group (p=0.025), where by using multivariate analysis, the
ratio of the amplified cells proved to be an independent prognostic
factor from the Ki67 and progesterone receptor expression.
Conclusion: According to our results, within the 0-49% range, the higher
HER2 amplified tumour cell ratio surprisingly might be a positive prog-
nostic variable for the HER2 negative luminal B-like breast cancers.
However, further validation of our results on larger cohorts is required.
This study was funded by the Start Up grant 11722 of Semmelweis
University, Budapest.
E-PS-02-031
Negative conversion of biomarkers in liver metastatic breast cancer:
a single centre study
E. Kolay*, G. Esendagli
*Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Receptor conversion phenomenon involves
changes in oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) or human
epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2) in metastatic breast carcinoma. It is
important to notice this discordance to modify therapy modalities.
Methods: Receptor conversion phenomenon was found relatively fre-
quent in liver metastasis so we reviewed 16 liver metastatic breast carci-
noma and compared their receptor status with their primary breast carci-
noma and discussed the literature about the possible mechanisms of this
situation and relation to the treatment, prognosis. Primary tumour HER2
amplification was assessed both by immunohistochemistry and dual in
situ hybridization.
Results: The characteristics of the primary tumour are preserved in most
of the metastatic patients. No positive conversion was found among them.
Three of the metastases altered their HER2 expression to negative.
Virchows Arch
Possible mechanisms for this negative conversion was discussed. The
sample size was too little to associate with prognosis.
Conclusion: The receptor conversion mechanisms in metastatic lesions are
still unclear and debateful. It can be due to tumoral heterogeneity, genetic or
epigenetic alterations or intervening therapies. HER2 negative conversion
is mostly associated with chemotherapy and trastuzumab and is still con-
sidered as a bad prognostic factor. Awareness of this mechanisms is impor-
tant to decide the best therapy options especially in metastatic lesions.
E-PS-02-032
The existence of calcifications in breast cancer tissue doesn’t affect
expression of HER2-neu protein
O. Kolomiiets*, O. Yazykov, I. Lukavenko, V. Andriushchenko,
A. Romaniuk, R. Moskalenko
*Department of Pathology, Sumy State University, Ukraine
Background & objectives: There is evidence that calcifications in breast
cancer (BC) may have an active role in mitogenesis and upregulation of
gene expression.
Aim. To investigate the effect of presence of microcalcifications in breast
cancer tissue on Her2-neu expression.
Methods: In this study 468 tissue samples of BC were examined, 55 of
which had microcalcifications, and 413 surgical biopsies showed no signs
of calcification. The immunohistochemical study of Her2-neu expression
and statistical analysis of the results (Chi-square test) was used in this
work. Samples with strong expression of the Her2-neu protein were se-
lected for the study.
Results: In the study of BC samples with calcifications, it was found that
the proportion of Her2-neu-positive cases among them was 20,93%. In
the control group of BC without calcification Her2-neu expression was
detected in 16,71% (p>0,05).
Conclusion: The expression of Her2-neu protein in the groups of BC
patients with the presence and absence of calcifications was not statisti-
cally different. Our study shows no association between the presence of
calcifications in breast cancer tissue and Her2-neu receptor expression.
E-PS-02-033
Molecular and genetic factors of metastases to regional lymph nodes
in breast cancer patients
V. Kometova*, V. Bozhenko, Y. Dergunova, M. Rodionova,
L. Mikchaleva, V. Rodionov
*National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynaecology and
Perinatology named after Academician V.I. Kulakov of Ministry of
Healthcare of Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: Breast cancer is accompanied by metastatic
lymph nodes in 40% of cases. To identify molecular and genetic predic-
tive factors of metastases to regional lymph nodes in breast cancer pa-
tients based on the analysis of gene expression profile of the primary
tumour.
Methods: The study included 200 patients with morphologically verified
unicentric invasive breast cancer T1-4N0-3M0 in 2 groups: 100 cases
with metastases in lymph nodes and 100 cases without it. The molecular
genetic testing of tumour tissue was carried out using reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); the diagnostic panel consisted of
28 functional genes.
Results: The primary breast tumour in the group of patients with
metastases to regional lymph nodes was characterized by increased
proliferative activity based on expression of Ki-67 gene (p = 0.03),
as well as an increased level of mRNA of genes NAT (p = 0.04)
and CD68 (p <0.001) and decreased expression of PTEN (p
<0.001) and gene ESR1 (p = 0.04). According to the results of
discriminatory analysis, the predictive accuracy of presence or
absence of metastases to regional lymph nodes based on molecular
genetic testing of the primary tumour in 7 genes expression panel
was 91.9% and 78.8%, respectively.
Conclusion: Molecular genetic testing of the primary breast cancer tissue
using the panel of 7 genes (PTEN, CD68, CCNB1, MGB1, MYC, BCL2,
ESR1) can become an additional diagnostic tool for predicting the pres-
ence of lymph node metastases when planning the volume of axillary
surgery in breast cancer patients.
The reported study was supported by governmental grant №НИОКТР
АААА-А18-118053190016-7
E-PS-02-034
Changes of the luminal A subtype of breast cancer in local metastasis
K. Konyshev*, S. Sazonov, N. Kazantseva
*Institute of Medical Cell Technologies, Ural State Medical University,
Russia
Background & objectives: Subtype discordance in primary and meta-
static breast cancer (BC) is the possible reason of lower therapy effect.
Objective of the study: to evaluate changes in the luminal A subtype of
breast cancer in regional metastasis.
Methods: Samples of primary tumour and local metastasis obtained
from 36 patients were stained immunohistochemically with anti-
bodies to ER, PR, Her2/neu and Ki67. Primary tumour in all cases
had the luminal A subtype (according to St. Gallen 2015 consen-
sus). The frequency of changes in BC subtype in metastasis was
evaluated, the detected frequencies were compared using a Fischer
exact probability test.
Results: Regional metastasis had the discordant subtype in 11 cases
(30.6%, 95%, 16.9-48.3%) and concordant (luminal A) subtype in 25
of the 36 cases (69.4%, 95%, 51.7-83.1%). In 10 cases the metastatic
tumour had the luminal B subtype (27,8%, 95% DI 14,8-45,4%), in 1
case - triple negative subtype (2,8%, 95% DI 0.1-16.2%). The difference
in the frequency of primary tumour and metastasis subtype concordance
and discordance was statistically significant (p=0.002), as well as the
difference in the frequency of occurrence of luminal B and triple negative
subtypes of metastases (p=0.006).
Conclusion: Changes in the luminal A subtype of breast cancer in re-
gional metastasis were observed in 30.6% of cases, while the frequency of
cases with concordant subtype was significantly higher. Among cases
with discordance of primary tumour and regional metastases subtypes,
the luminal B subtype of the metastasis is more common (27.8%) than the
triple negative subtype (2.8%).
Supported by Ural State Medical University state assignment №056-
00145-19-00
E-PS-02-035
Secretory breast carcinoma with poor prognosis - a case report
A. Kouchkar*, A. Ladjeroud, A. Cayre, R. Nasri, F. Penault-Llorca,
G. Benkhedda
*Department of Pathology, Centre Pierre et Marie Curie, Algeria
Background & objectives: Secretory breast carcinoma (SBC) is a very
rare disease; it accounts for less than 0.05%. The SBC is defined by a
pattern of pathological, phenotypical and specific molecular features.
Reports of death from distant metastasis are very rare.
Methods: A 37 year-old woman with a stage IIB tumour. Diagnosed on
core-needle biopsy as a triple negative infiltrative carcinoma grade II of
SBR. She received a neoadjuvant chemotherapy with six cycles of a
combination of carboplatin AUC5 plus docetaxel for 3 cycles followed
by 3 cycles of FAC. She underwent a radical mastectomy with lymph
node dissection
Results: The patient had no response to chemotherapy, with an extensive
residual disease (RCBIII) of a SBC with no axillary lymph node metas-
tasis. The tumour cells showed a mild positivity for oestrogen receptor
Virchows Arch
(ER) score 5 of Allred and negative for progesterone receptor (PR), with
no overexpression of HER2. GCDFP15, Mammaglobine and CK5/6
were positives. The fluorescence in situ hybridization showed a rear-
rangement of the ETV6 gene. She received chest wall radiotherapy. 18
months after the end of treatment the patient had a pleuro-pulmonary
metastasis and died three months after.
Conclusion: The management of SBC is usually surgical with an indo-
lent evolution. In our case the misdiagnosis on core-needle biopsy led us
to treat it as a triple negative disease. The metastatic disease is extremely
rare in SBC. The clinical course of SBC may be age dependant; our
patient was over 20 years. Guidelines to manage these rare tumours are
not available.
E-PS-02-036
An unusual presentation of paediatric malignant phyllodes tumour
of the breast in a 13 year old girl with review of the literature
A. Kovács*, E. Molnar, T. Parris, K. Helou, S. Janeva
*Department of Clinical Pathology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden
Background & objectives: In June 2018, a premenarchal 13 year old girl
presented with a 40 mm large lump in the central and lateral part of her
right breast with brown nipple discharge. Ultrasound examination re-
vealed a fibroadenoma-like lesion with code 3.
Methods: Fine needle aspiration cytology proved to be inconclusive. It
showed inflammation containing mesenchymal cells and atypical epithe-
lial cells with tendency to papillary fronds. It raised the suspicion of
fibroadenoma, a cystic or papillary lesion. Core biopsy (14G) revealed
only necrotic and haemorrhagic mass without viable epithelial or stromal
cells.
Results: Excision biopsy was performed. Microscopical examination de-
tected a 44 mm large malignant phyllodes tumour (MPT) with extensive
necrotic/haemorrhagic changes. Leaf-like stromal fronds were present.
The tumour border was focally infiltrative to the adjacent stroma.
Atypia was observed in the epithelial part. The hypercellular stroma
was dominated by an atypical spindle cell proliferation with stromal
overgrowth and with a high number of mitoses (11-15 per 10 high power
fields).
Conclusion: The final diagnosis of MFT came only from excision biop-
sy, followed by total mastectomy for a tumour free margin. The patient is
recurrence free 1.5 years after the operation. Examination of pathology
records revealed 39 MPT cases between 1982-2020 with only one pae-
diatric case (46% of the patients were aged ≤50 years, the youngest eight
patients were between 23-36 years of age). MPT constitutes <1% of all
primary breast neoplasms, which can occur in adolescents and young
adults.
E-PS-02-037
Analysis of clinicopathologic features of glycogen-rich clear cell
carcinoma (GRCC) of the breast
Y. Liu*, S. Niu
*The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University, China
Background & objectives: Glycogen-rich clear cell carcinoma (GRCC)
accounting for 1%-3%. This article aims to explore the clinicopatholog-
ical features of GRCC of the breast in order to further deepen the under-
standing of the disease and improve the diagnostic level.
Methods: Six patients with pathologically diagnosed GRCC of the breast
from January 2015 to December 2019 were collected, and their
pathomorphological features, clinical pathological features, and
immunophenotypic features were analysed.
Results: All 6 patients were female, and the age of onset was 46-57 years
old, most common among middle-aged women. All 6 cases underwent
pathological examination and found that triple negative breast cancer
accounted for 50%, which indicates that the malignancy of GRCC is
relatively high and the prognosis is poor.
Conclusion: GRCC of the breast is a rare type of breast cancer. Pathology
is an important means of diagnosis. It depends not only on the morpho-
logical characteristics of the tumour tissue, but also on the expression of
its specific immunohistochemical indicator period acid-Schiff (PAS).
Differentiate other diseases to achieve the purpose of early diagnosis
and early treatment.
E-PS-02-038
Breast cancer containing eggs of schistosoma
C. Lopes*, A. Fuentes, L. Lara-Santos
*ICBAS, Portugal
Background & objectives: The presence of eggs of Schistosoma
haematobium is commonly associated with squamous cell carcinoma of
the urinary bladder. The finding of eggs in other tumours is rare. We
describe one case of breast cancer in which eggs were also seen.
Methods: A 48-year-old female was seen at the Cancer Institute
of Angola for swelling in the left breast, with heterogeneous cal-
cifications on mammography. After a needle biopsy, a diagnosis
of invasive breast carcinoma NST was made at the cT2N1 stage.
Surgery was performed and the specimen was studied with HE
and immunohistochemistry
Results: Neoplasia with 3.8cm was found, aside with 12 lymph nodes in
the axilla, some with a metastatic pattern. Histological study confirms the
diagnosis; invasive breast carcinoma NST, G3, with metastasis in 3 of 16
lymph nodes. In the middle of tumour frequent eggs of Schistosoma,
many already calcified were seen.
On immunohistochemistry, ER and PR were positive in 10% of the neo-
plastic cells; HER2 was also positive (3+) in most of the neoplastic cells.
Ki67 was strongly positive in 60 to 70% of cells.
Eggs of Schistosoma have a recognized carcinogenic effect on
urothelium, being associated with squamous cell carcinoma of the bladder
Their presence in breast cancer is occasional
Conclusion: The presence of eggs in neoplasias of other sites, namely in
the breast that is a site where parasitic migration does not occur usually,
has not been reported before. The case presented here is exceptional and,
therefore, justifies its description.
E-PS-02-039
Breast cancer in Angola: new data with immunohystochemical
contribution
C. Lopes*, L. Lara-Santos, F. Miguel, L. Vieira-Lopes, R. Pinto
*ICBAS, Portugal
Background & objectives: Breast cancer is common in Angola. The
report of new cases is important to strengthen data related to prevalence
and to help the development of programs of screening and early diagno-
sis; training technical staff and improving survival rates.
Methods: 285 new cases diagnosed in Cancer Institute of Angola and
Clinica Sagrada Esperança between January 2011 and February 2020
were included. 32 cases were withdrawn because the quality of the ma-
terial was deficient. The tissue was studied by histology and immunohis-
tochemistry using the following markers: ER, PR, HER2; Ki67; E
cadherin; CK5/6; p63; PGFR.
Results: Age (years): average 48.2; min 24; max 84. Histological types:
NST invasive breast carcinoma: 73.2%; invasive lobular carcinoma:
8.4%; mucinous carcinoma: 5.3%; invasive papillary carcinoma: 1.3%;
metaplastic carcinoma: 1.2%; others: 10.6%. Grade - 1: 4.0%; 2: 57.0%;
3: 39%. Staging (%): DCIS 0; I: 0.8; IIa: 7.1; IIb: 14.2; IIIa: 24.5; IIIb:
29.6; IIIc: 7.9; IV: 15.9. Molecular types (%): luminal A: 23,7; luminal B:
27,3; HER2 pos: 12,7; triple negative: 29,2; Luminal B Her2 positive:
7,1; Triple negative: 74 cases (29,2%) distributed as follows: basal cells
53; medullar type 10; apocrine 6; metaplastic 3; adenoid cystic 1. Total of
HER2 + : 51 (19.8%); total ER+: 151(59.7%);
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Breast cancer in Angola is diagnosed at advanced stages.
The percentage of triple-negative and luminal B cases is high. The data
obtained are a good indicator of the modalities of screening and treatment
to be developed.
E-PS-02-040
Primary well-differentiated breast angiosarcoma with cutaneous
affectation: an unusual clinical finding
A. Martínez García*, C.B. Marta Casanova, M.R. Oncins Torres,
M. García, L. Requena Caballero, C. Santonja Garriga, T. Gracia
Cazaña, L. Pérez Domingo, H. Iliev Iliev, M. Sánchez Lazcano
*HCU Lozano Blesa (Zaragoza), Spain
Background & objectives: Angiosarcomas are the most frequent prima-
ry sarcomas of the breast, though they are still very uncommon (<0.05%
of breast malignancies). They may arise spontaneously (primary
angiosarcoma) or following radiation therapy for breast cancer (second-
ary angiosarcoma).
Methods: A 42-year-old female, with a right breast primary well-
differentiated angiosarcoma, diagnosed in January 2016. Three years af-
ter quadrantectomy, follow up imaging studies revealed several systemic
infiltrative nodules at both breasts, left lung, liver, bones and skin.
Clinically, the patient was initially asymptomatic, though clinical pro-
gression was early evident by interspersed cutaneous papules. A biopsy
of an skin lesion was performed.
Results: Histologic examination showed a notorious small and medium-
sized vessels proliferation, with dilated or collapsed spaces, covered by a
bland-appearance endothelium. Immunohistochemical study revealed
positivity for CD31 and CD34, focal c-myc expression, and actin stain
partial positivity. HHV 8, CD138, ER and D2-40 were negative and
endothelial cells exhibited focal increased proliferative activity (Ki-67).
A definite diagnosis of metastatic low-grade angiosarcoma with cutane-
ous extension was made.
Conclusion: Primary breast angiosarcomas typically occur in young women
with no history of previous cancer and without other risk factors. Despite
histological grading was previously considered predictive, recent data have
indicated that angiosarcoma grade has no prognostic value. Low-grade le-
sions usually can metastasize, being cutaneous affectation quite rare.
E-PS-02-041
Morphological evaluation of vasculogenous mimicry as an alterna-
tive method of tumour blood supply
M. Mnikhovich*, T. Bezuglova, P. Bliganov, V. Balayants, N. Maluygin,
D. Kushch, A. Romanov, G. Ushanov
*Research Institute of Human Morphology, Russia
Background & objectives: Vasculogenic mimicry(VM) is an alternative
method of blood supply to the tumour, realized through the formation of
channels limited by the basement membrane (BM) and formed without
the participation of endothelial cells (ECs).
Methods: Light microscopy was used, immunohistochemical and histo-
chemical studies were carried out using CD34, CD31 "Dako", E-
cadherin, vimentin, and PAS reaction. 18 cases of CMM (10 men and 8
women) and 26 cases of breast invasive carcinoma of no special type (IC
NST) were retrospectively studied.
Results: A large part of the tumour cell population (84%) of breast cancer
in the central regions of the tumour node and invasive growth zone in the
thickness of the anaplastic component during double staining with PAS
and CD34 reagents was CD34- / PAS+ phenotypically and participated in
the formation of vasculogenic channels. In the remaining 16% of the
cells, expression of both PAS and CD34 - CD34+/ PAS+ tumour cells
was detected.
Conclusion: Despite various points of view regarding the true genesis of
vasculogenic channels, it is currently believed that their appearance
among TCs contributes to the appearance of malignant invasive and met-
astatic properties of the tumour.
E-PS-02-042
Malignant phyllodes tumour with osteoclastic giant cells in a young
female, a very rare histology
S. Muhammad Amin*, D.A. Memon, N. Kayani, M.B. Qureshi
*Aga Khan University Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Phyllodes Tumour is a fibroepithelial neo-
plasm accounting for 0.3-1% of primary breast neoplasms. The presence
of giant cells in malignant phyllodes tumour (MPT) is rare and much rarer
is the occurrence of osteoclastic giant cells in MPT.
Methods: Here, we present the case of a 39 year old woman who had
history of cystic left breast swelling since 3 years. Grossly, it was a partly
skin covered breast tissue. Cut surface showed a solid cum cystic and
haemorrhagic lesion that measured 13 x 10 x 4 cm.
Results: Microscopy revealed breast tissue exhibiting cleft like areas
showing compressed breast ducts and spindly stroma with transition to
high grade tumour composed of small fascicles of spindle shaped cells
with vesicular nuclei, conspicuous nucleoli and moderate eosinophilic
cytoplasm interspersed with scattered uniform distribution of osteoclast
giant cells. Approximately 20 mitosis were identified.
Immunohistochemical epithelial markers were negative in osteoclastic
giant cells and showed CD68 expression. Spindle cells were positive
for SATB2. Based on these morphological and immunohistochemical,
it was diagnosed as MPT with osteoclastic giant cells.
Conclusion: MPT with osteoclastic giant cells is very rare. This can be
confused for metaplastic carcinoma and undifferentiated pleomorphic
sarcoma (UPS). MPT is usually associated with fibrosarcomatous type
of stromal differentiation but very rarely UPS like differentiation may
occur giving rise to a diagnostic dilemma. A definite distinction is imper-
ative considering the better prognostic implications of malignant phyl-
lodes tumour than UPS and metaplastic carcinoma and different manage-
ment options available.
E-PS-02-043
Interest of CD10 immunostaining in grading of phyllodes tumours of
the breast
M. Njima*, S. Mabrouk, A. Bellalah, N. Ben Abdeljelil, C. Chebaane,
A. Moussa, R. Hadhri
*Department of Pathology, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital,
Monastir, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Phyllodes tumours (PT) of the breast are
classified as benign, borderline, and malignant according to histological
features which still unclear to discriminate between different grades. This
study aims to highlight the interest of CD10 immunostaining in grading
of these tumours.
Methods: This study included 64 PT (47 benign, 9 borderline, and 8
malignant) collected over 14 years (2006-2019). The expression of
CD10 was studied in using immunohistochemistry to evaluate whether
differences in expression correlated with tumour grade of the WHO grad-
ing system.
Results: Patients ages ranged from 19 to 65 years (mean, 42). Three of
the 47 cases of benign PT cases stained positively for CD10 in the stromal
cells. Six of the nine borderline PT cases were positive and seven of the
eight malignant PT cases were positive. These results showed highly
significant correlation between CD10 expression and the tumour grade
(P<0.0001) between benign and borderline tumours. But these correlation
was statically insignificant (p=0.33) between borderline and malignant
tumours.
Conclusion: There is a strong correlation between CD10 expression
and tumour grade (benign/borderline) which could be an important
Virchows Arch
observation that may have both diagnostic and prognostic implica-
tions as well as promising potential target for development of novel
therapies.
E-PS-02-044
Myoepithelial carcinoma arising within an adenomyoepithelioma of
the breast - case report with a short review of the current literature
A. Nomikos*, E. Stavrou, C. Tasiopoulou, N. Tzanakis,
L. Abou-Asabeh, S. Chranioti, M. Chatzipetrou
*Department of Pathology, Asklipieion Voulas, Greece
Background & objectives: Adenomyoepithelioma of the breast is a rare
tumour characterized by biphasic proliferation of both epithelial and
myoepithelial cells. A myoepithelial carcinoma arising within an
adenomyoepithelioma is even more unusual.
Methods: A 100-year-old woman presented with a tumour of the left
breast. Gross examination showed a tumour, measuring 5x2cm.
Microscopic examination showed a tumour composed of oval, spindle
and a few clear cells with foci of necrosis and glandular-like structures.
Three mitoses were counted in 10 HPF. Tumour cells were positive for
SMA, S-100,CK5/6, CK903, CK7,CK8-18, and negative for ER, PR,
Desmin,CD34.
Results: The diagnosis of myoepithelial carcinoma arising within an
adenomyoepithelioma was given.
Conclusion: Malignant myoepithelial tumours are either pure
myoepithelial carcinoma or an adenomyoepithelioma with a compo-
nent of myoepithelial carcinoma. The definitive diagnosis of
myoepithelial carcinoma is based on histological and immunohisto-
chemical findings. The treatment of choice is surgical, namely wide
tumour excision or mastectomy with regional lymph node excision.
Adjuvant radiotherapy or chemoradiation are often administered in
order to minimize local recurrence. Myoepithelial carcinoma has an
aggressive course, with locally invasive and widespread metastatic
potential to several organs.
E-PS-02-045
Granular cell tumour of the breast: a case report
T. Pasupati Meenakshi*, S. Merilyn George, B. Karikalan
*Clinipath Malaysia Sdn Bhd, Malaysia
Background & objectives: Granular cell tumour (GCT) is a soft tissue
neoplasm mainly found in the skin, oral cavity or digestive tract. A GCT
involving the breast parenchyma is rare and is seen approximately 1 in
1000 breast cancers.
Methods: A 62-year-old woman presented with a 3-month history of
lump in left breast. Mammography revealed a heterogeneous, irregular
mass, strongly suspicious for malignancy.
Grossly, a piece of unremarkable greyish yellow fibro-fatty tissue, mea-
suring 35mm x 27mm x, 15mm was received. Sections were studied with
H&E, and IHC markers S100, CD56, Inhibin and CD68 and were report-
ed digitally using Aperio Imagescope.
Results: Representative sections of the right breast lesion showed irreg-
ular stellate configuration of fibro collagenous tissue, surrounded by ad-
ipose element, scattered within which large cells with bright eosinophilic,
granular cytoplasm ,and vesicular nuclei with occasional prominent nu-
cleoli within were observed.
These large cells were seen insinuating and interspersed within the
fibrocollagenous framework in trabecular, anastomosing, and nest-like
pattern without any well-defined capsule. Occasional foci of lymphoid
aggregates toward the periphery with germinal centres were noted.
Scattered granular cells throughout showed strong expression for S100,
CD68, Inhibin and for CD56.
Immunohistochemistry studies confirmed benign granular cell tumour of
the breast.
Conclusion: Although, GCT is one of the rare tumours of the breast, it
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of benign and malignant
lesions of breast. Mammographically and clinically it can mimic carcino-
ma of breast. Large granular cells should not be mistaken for malignant
cells and reported as malignancy. Wide local excision is the treatment of
choice for these lesions.
E-PS-02-046
Primary angiosarcoma of the breast: a case report of an unusual
malignancy
L. Pérez Domingo*, J.I. Franco, A. Martínez García, H. Iliev Iliev,
M. Sánchez Lazcano, E. Mejía Urbáez, M.J. Cardiel García, M. Moros
García, M. Álvarez Alejandro, N. Alonso Marín
*CUH Lozano Blesa, Spain
Background & objectives: Primary angiosarcoma, a malignant neo-
plasm of breast without clear aetiology and not associated with history
of radiation exposure, is the most frequent sarcoma of the breast but still
very uncommon. We report this unusual case with emphasis on histolog-
ical features.
Methods: We report the case of a 57-year-old woman with no known
history of radiation exposure, who present, in screening programme, a
well-circumscribed 20-mm-diameter tumour at the upper outer quadrant
of left breast. After core-needle biopsy, a wide local excision with suffi-
cient margins was performed.
Results: On gross evaluation, breast sample showed a well-
circumscribed haemorrhagic mass, measuring 25 mm, without areas of
cystic degeneration. On microscopic examination, the lesion showed low-
grade features, with well-formed interanastomosing vascular spaces that
dissected through mammary stroma and adipose tissue, lined by
hyperchromatic endothelial cells, with focal papillary formations.
Mitoses were scant and necrosis as well as foci of stromal haemorrhage
were not observed.
Conclusion: Primary angiosarcoma of the breast is an uncommon neo-
plasm with worrisome prognosis. It is important to evaluate histological
features as well as size, but recent studies showed that grade does not
correlate with prognosis, because morphologically well-differentiated le-
sions can metastasise.
E-PS-02-047
Breast carcinosarcomas: a case series from the cancer registry
M. Puchinskaya*, L. Levin
*Minsk City Clinical Oncologic Dispensary, Belarus
Background & objectives: Breast carcinosarcomas (BCS) are rare bi-
phasic malignant tumours. They are often encountered within metaplastic
breast cancer entity. Results from some studies show that epithelial-
mesenchymal transition may be one of possible mechanisms of BCS
development.
Methods: Data on BCS cases were automatically extracted from the
Belarusian Cancer Registry (search criteria “ICD-O code of histology:
8490/3” and “ICD-10 code C50” and retrospectively analysed. 25 cases
of BCS were registered during 1995 – 2019 years.
Results: Mean age at diagnosis was 57 (range 28 – 82) years. Right breast
was affected in 9 (36%) cases, left in 16 (64%). Most often the tumour
was located in upper external quadrant (n=10, 40%), followed by lower
external and internal (both n=2, 10%) and upper internal (n=1, 5%),
central part was involved in 2 (10%) cases, in 9 (39.1%) tumour involved
several parts. The disease was diagnosed in stage I in 5 cases (20%), II –
13 (52%), III – 4 (16%). Metastases to regional lymph nodes were present
in 9 (36%) cases. No data on histological components of the tumours
were available in the records.
Conclusion: Here we presented an analysis of BCS incidence and clin-
icopathologic characteristics based on the data from population registry.
Virchows Arch
BCS are rare tumours, mostly affecting women in 6-7 decades of life,
with clinical characteristics at presentation similar to those of breast car-
cinomas. Histological examination of tumour biopsy or surgical specimen
is the only method for correct diagnosis.
E-PS-02-048
Comparison of GATA3, gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 and
mammaglobin in primary, metastatic and triple negative breast
carcinomas
M. Rao*, R. Chaudhary, P. Singh, R. Sharma, P. Elhence, A. Nalwa,
J.N. Bharti, S. Khera
*AIIMS, Jodhpur, India
Background & objectives: Mammaglobin and GCDFP-1 are traditional
IHC markers utilized to recognize metastasis of breast carcinoma in an
unknown primary. This study was done to evaluate and compare GATA3
with GCDFP-15 and Mammaglobin in invasive primary, metastatic and
triple negative breast carcinomas.
Methods: IHC for GATA3, GCDFP-15 and Mammaglobin was applied
on 100 cases of primary breast carcinomas, including 20 triple negative
cases and 30 cases of metastatic breast carcinomas. Staining scores were
given for each marker by multiplying the percentage of positive tumour
cells by the intensity of staining (1+, 2+ or 3+), with scores ranging from
0 to 300.
Results: GATA3-3 was expressed in 92% of primary, 80% of metastatic
and 60% of triple negative breast carcinomas, with an average staining
score of 270. Mammaglobin was expressed in 68% of primary, 56.7% of
metastatic and 25% of triple negative breast carcinomas, with an average
staining score of 180. GCDFP-15 was expressed in 48% of primary,
26.7% of metastatic and 05% of breast carcinomas, with an average
staining score of 60.
Conclusion: GATA3 has a higher sensitivity and increased staining
scores in primary breast carcinomas, metastatic breast carcinomas as well
as in triple negative breast carcinomas.
Funding: Institutional intramural research grant
E-PS-02-049
Demographic and histopathologic characteristics of breast lesions at
a district hospital in Nigeria
S. Raphael*, K. Ezike
*University of Abuja, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Breast cancer is the most common cancer
and a leading cause of cancer deaths in women globally. Consequently,
breast lumps cause anxiety, necessitating evaluation of its nature. This
audit describes the histopathological spectrum of breast lumps in a district
hospital.
Methods: This was a retrospective study of all histologically diagnosed
breast lesions seen at a pathology laboratory over a 5-year period.
Laboratory request forms and duplicate copies of histopathology reports
of all cases were retrieved, and relevant clinical information was extract-
ed. The corresponding slides were also retrieved and reviewed. The tu-
mours were classified according to WHO International Classification of
breast tumours
Results: 839 breast tumours were diagnosed during the study period, females
and benign tumours accounted for 98.3% and 70% respectively. The age
range is 10-96 years with a mean age of 33.3 years. Fibroadenoma (50.9%)
and fibrocystic change (27.3%) were the most common benign tumours.
Malignant tumour incidence peaked in the 40-49 and 30-39 years age groups.
The most common malignant tumours were invasive ductal carcinoma
(84.5%), and invasive mucinous carcinoma.
Conclusion: The study showed that breast tumours are common, with
benign tumours being more than twice as common as malignant tumours.
Benign tumours are common in females of reproductive age group, with
fibroadenoma being the most common type in this study followed by
fibrocystic change. There is a declined in mean age of patients with
malignant breast tumours in our study, with invasive ductal carcinoma
(NST) being the most common type followed by invasive mucinous
carcinoma and invasive lobular carcinoma.
E-PS-02-050
Paget’s disease of the breast: differential diagnosis using additional
immunohistochemical panels
A. Romanov*, M. Mnikhovich, T. Bezuglova, D. Kushch, N. Maluygin,
P. Bliganov, G. Ushanov, V. Balayants, D. Bulanov
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Paget's disease in most cases is associated
with one or more tumours. Currently, there is a tendency towards over-
diagnosis of Paget's disease of breast in the world. The aim of study is to
find additional differential diagnostic IHC-markers of Paget's Breast
disease.
Methods: We studied surgical material that was obtained from 10 women
aged 28-63 years with a confirmed diagnosis: Paget's breast disease. The
average age of patients is 43 years. In addition to the primary diagnostic
antibodies, such as: HER2, CEA, ER, PR, the following antibodies were
used: CK7, CD138, E-cadherin, MUC1, GATA3
Results: In the presented samples was observed: Intense, broad cytoplas-
mic expression of CK7, broad but less intense membranous expression of
CD138 and E-cadherin, Intense, but less broad nuclear expression of
GATA3, Low cytoplasmic expression of MUC1
Conclusion: CD138 can be used as the primary differential diagnostic
marker between Paget`s cells and Toker`s cells. Toker`s cells have low
CD138 expression.CK7 can be used as an additional IHC marker of
Paget's disease of the breast due to high sensitivity. It cannot be used as
the primary marker due to its low specificity.GATA3,MUC1 and E-
cadherin can be used as additional markers of Paget`s disease of the breast.
E-PS-02-051
Assessment of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes presence in biopsies
with different biological subtypes of breast cancer
L. Rudiuk*, O. Reshetnikova, S. Korenev
*Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Kaliningrad, Russia,
Regional Clinical Hospital of the Kaliningrad region, Kaliningrad, Russia
Background & objectives: Tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes(TIL) are a
manifestation of the antitumor activity of the immune system. TIL con-
sidered as a prognostic biomarker of the effectiveness of immunotherapy.
The aim of this study was to correlate the TIL variety with different
immunohistochemical(IHC) subtypes of BC.
Methods: 100 breast biopsies from patients with BC were divided into
following groups:1-(luminal A)-20;2-(luminal B,HER2 positive)-
20;group 3(luminal B,HER2-negative)- 20; group 4(HER2- positive) -
20; group 5(triple negative)- 20 cases. H&E slides were studied micro-
scopically. IHC analyses were carried out with the help of monoclonal
mouse antibodies: to ER, PgR, HER2, Ki67.Relations between parame-
ters were assessed by Spearman's rank correlation coefficient.
Results: Analysis of the volume fraction of TIL presence in the tumours’
stroma revealed variations of parameters in different IHC subtypes of BC.
The values of indicators in the groups were as following: group 1 – 6.5
±5.26%, group 2-28.05±10.95%, group 3-15.35±10.44%, group 4-28.90
±5.73%, group 5-46.85±8.66% of a tissue with TIL presence' volume
fraction. The study of multiple correlations between groups revealed a
positive correlation between the values of r=0.71986.
Conclusion: BCs characterized with high heterogeneity. Molecular sub-
types of BC identified by immunohistochemical study are used in clinico-
morphological practice. All subtypes have different reaction to chemo-
therapy. Histological study of TIL presence in BC biopsies discussed in
Virchows Arch
the aspect of prognostic biomarker and potentially predictive parameters,
which can help in stratifying patients with possible clinical progression
results. Further study of the tumour stroma' immune response will con-
tribute to improve the prognosis of BC patients.
E-PS-02-052
Desmoid fibromatosis of the breast: report of a rare entity with a
challenging diagnosis
I. Saguem*, S. Graja, M. Triki, C. Chaari, M. Zghal, C. Kammoun,
T. Boudawara, R. Kallel
*Department of Pathology, Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Desmoid fibromatosis (DF) accounts for
0.2% of all breast tumours. It has a high rate of local recurrence without
metastatic potential. We report a case of a breast-DF to emphasize its
clinico-histological features and to discuss its differential diagnoses.
Methods: We present a case of DF of the breast in a 33-year-old woman
who presented with a single lump of the left breast measuring 15 mm.
Results: Ultrasound showed a hypoechogenic spiculated mass suggest-
ing an invasive carcinoma. Biopsy revealed a spindle cell proliferation of
fibroblasts and myofibroblasts without atypia or mitoses. There was no
epithelial component. Immunohistochemical analysis showed negativity
for keratin and CD34 and was inconclusive for β‑catenin and Desmin.
Wide local excision was completed and revealed the same proliferation
with infiltration of the adjacent breast tissue. All surgical margins were
free from tumour. Immunohistochemistry led to the diagnosis of DF
confirmed by positive nuclear staining for β-catenin. Tumour cells were
also positive focally for SMA and negative for Desmin. The patient is
followed now for 4 months with no apparent recurrence.
Conclusion: The breast is an unusual site of DF. Biopsy is not always
successful to make the exact diagnosis. Differential diagnoses include
phyllodes tumour, fibromatosis-like metaplastic carcinoma and
myofibroblastoma. Wide local excision with clean margins is considered
as the standard treatment.
E-PS-02-054
Number of tumour-involved sentinel nodes as a predictor of axillary
lymph node metastases in breast cancer: single institution study
N. Stanulović*, T. Ivković Kapicl, T. Vasiljević, M. Popović, F. Vicko,
Z. Radovanović
*Oncology Institute of Vojvodina, Sremska Kamenica, Serbia
Background & objectives: The axillary lymph node status is one of the
strongest prognostic factors in breast cancer. Modifications in manage-
ment of breast cancer based on biology of the tumour, raised questions
about axillary dissection necessity for patients with sentinel lymph node
metastases.
Methods: We observed pathohistological data of 1976 patients (mean
age 58 years) who underwent intraoperative lymphatic mapping and sen-
tinel lymph node dissection of potentially curable breast cancer at our
institution between January 2014 and June 2019.We assessed the relation
between number of sentinel node metastases and tumour grade, tumour
size, hormone receptors, HER-2-expression as well as number of positive
non-sentinel nodes.
Results: 455 (23,05%) of examined sentinel nodes had macro- (87,5%)
and micrometastases (12,5%). 81,53% of sentinel nodes had 1 tumour-
involved lymph node. 57,8% of examined axillar lymph nodes were
positive. The incidence of non-sentinel node metastases increased with
the number of sentinel node macrometastases and micrometastases (p<
0,05). In patients with T1 and T2 lesions, the incidence of 1 sentinel node
involvement was 54,33%. Patients with T1 or T2, hormon-receptor pos-
itive tumours and 1 sentinel node metastasis had a low incidence of
nonsentinel node metastases (p<0,05).
Conclusion: Number of tumour-involved sentinel lymph nodes may be a
strong predictor of axillary lymph node metastases. Axillary lymph node
dissection may not be necessary in patients with T1/T2 stage and hor-
mone receptor positive tumours with detected 1 sentinel node metastasis.
E-PS-02-056
Fibroadenoma of left axillary ectopic breast tissue, a clinical
mimicker of tuberculous lymphadenitis: a case report
H. Thomas*, B. Rugwizangoga, T. Nizeyimana, D.L. Nyenyeri
*University of Rwanda, Rwanda
Background & objectives: A fibroadenoma left axillary ectopic tissue is
such a rare entity in literature. A first case is hereby reported.
The objectives
1) describe the single first case in our clinical settings
2) inform clinicians about this diagnosis among other differentials
Methods: case report, a descriptive study in which we reviewed the
clinical profile of the patient and the cytological diagnosis with histopath-
ological diagnosis confirmation
Results: A fine needle aspiration onto two nodules favoured
fibroadenoma left axillary ectopic breast tissue which was definitely con-
firmed by histopathological analysis of the excisional biopsy
Conclusion: Though rare is fibroadenoma left axillary ectopic breast
tissue, it should be always mentioned into differentials diagnoses of ax-
illary masses.
E-PS-02-057
Tall cell variant of papillary breast carcinoma. A case report of a
very rare tumour entity
H.J. Trihia*, P. Lambropoulos, I. Provatas, L. Karelis
*Department of Pathology, 'Metaxas' Memorial Cancer Hospital, Greece
Background & objectives: Tall cell variant of papillary breast carcinoma
(TCVPBC) is a subtype of papillary carcinoma of the breast resembling
the tall cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. We describe an addi-
tional case of TCVPBC and the problems correlating with its diagnosis.
Methods: A circumscribed nodule of 0,9cm, in the UOQ of the right
breast, of a 71 year-old woman, was discovered incidentally during a
mammographic examination. A hook was placed and the lesion was
excised for diagnostic evaluation. Sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB)
was also performed.
Results: Microscopically, the majority of the tumour consisted of solid
circumscribed nodules of epithelial cells with a focal papillary and trabecular
arrangement of cuboidal or tall columnar cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm
and round to oval nuclei with reverse nuclear polarity and occasional grooves.
Myoepithelial markers, TTF-1, thyroglobulin, hormone receptors and c-erb-
B2, were negative. The diagnosis was of an invasive tumour with features
consistent with tall cell papillary breast carcinoma.
Conclusion: TCVPBC is a recently described, rare, special histologic
subtype of invasive breast carcinoma with specific morphologic, immu-
nohistochemical and molecular features, with overall favourable progno-
sis, which has to be differentiated from other papillary lesions of the
breast and metastatic thyroid carcinoma. Wide excision is the treatment
of choice with lack of evidence for SLNB.
E-PS-02-058
Frequency of triple-positive breast cancer, according to
pathomorphological laboratory
M. Urezkova*, A. Artemyeva, T. Semiglazova, A. Kudaibergenova
*N.N. Petrov National Medical Research Center of Oncology, Russia
Background & objectives: Immunophenotypic heterogeneity in BC de-
termines a different prognosis and response to therapy. HER2-expression
Virchows Arch
leads to a worse prognosis. Expression of hormonal receptors together
with the expression of HER2 (triple-positive breast cancer) leads to a
worse response to therapy.
Methods: We analysed pathological reports in our laboratory during the
period 2011-2019 y.y. All cases were stained with antibodies to hormone
receptors, HER2 protein and Ki-67.We examined only patients who were
not treated before surgery. In all cases, the degree of differentiation
(grade), the presence or absence of metastases, and the stage were
assessed. The comparison group selected ER + BC.
Results: In total over the period of 2011-2019 years, 3182 cases were
operated for BC without neoadjuvant therapy. The proportion of TPBC
was 5.2% of their number. Most TPBCs were grade 3 (58%), only 2 cases
were grade 1. Ki-67 index ranged from 5 to 90%, the average value was
28.4%, median 25%, mode 40%. Among TPBC 35.9% of tumours had
metastases in regional lymph nodes according to the pathological report,
although the clinical stage before surgery was N0.
Conclusion: According to Patrizia Vici et al., TPBC accounts for up to
50% of HER2 + BC, 5-15% of all BC. We have similar data. TPBC have
a higher grade and Ki-67 index compared to other ER + tumours. The N+
status is higher than in the general population of ER + breast tumours.
These data confirm the thesis that TPBCs have worse prognosis and more
aggressive behaviour.
E-PS-02-059
Distinguishing features of solid papillary carcinoma in breast needle
core biopsies
W.F. Wan Abdul Rahman*, N.F. Mohd Zuhdi, M.M. Yahya,
N.H. Othman
*Department of Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains,
Malaysia
Background & objectives: Papillary lesion of the breast is the most
challenging diagnosis that causes frequent reason of referral. Solid papil-
lary carcinoma (SPC) is one of the papillary lesion with distinct entity that
should not be missed including in needle core biopsy samples.
Methods: Presenting to you two cases of SPC diagnosed in biopsies and
confirmed by excised samples. Both cases are from women at 60s with
painless breast lump without nipple discharge. Breast ultrasound shows
lobulated hypoechoic lesion and mammogram shows features of highly
suspicious of malignancy with BIRADS V.
Results: Microscopically, the lesion exhibits solid tumour arranged in
sheets, displaying streaming pattern resemblance florid usual ductal hy-
perplasia, but with arborizing papillae, fibrovascular cores and hyaline
collagen. Another key feature includes perivascular pseudorosettes for-
mation and the presence of extracellular mucin. The cells are monoto-
nous, polygonal in shape with low nuclear grade. Mitotic figures are
occasionally seen. No myoepithelial cells observed within the lesion or
outer nodules. Immunohistochemical staining shows diffuse positivity for
ER, PR and synaptophysin but negative for HER-2, P63 and CK5/6. The
presence of invasive foci, absence of myoepithelial cells at the periphery
and the jigsaw pattern render a diagnosis of invasive SPC.
Conclusion: Both cases were subjected for wide local excision with
axillary clearance. One case positive for sentinel lymph node, the other
one was negative. To conclude, there are distinct features of SPC that
enable pathologist to suggest a diagnosis in biopsy sample and not to
overcall as invasive carcinoma of no special type.
E-PS-02-060
Malign adenomyoepithelioma of breast
Ö.N. Yildiz*, M. Yilmaz, C.S. Topal
*Health Sciences University, Turkey
Background & objectives: Breast adenomyoepithelioma is an unusual
benign neoplasm characterized by biphasic proliferation of epithelial and
myoepithelial cells. Although most tumours are benign, rarely malign
transformation of the myoepithelial cells, ductal epithelial cells or both
may occur.
Methods: We discuss a case of 75 year old women who had a pain and
discharge in her left breast with a grand mass. Breast ultrasound showed
7x6 cm, solid and hypoechoic lesion in the superior half of the left breast.
This lesion was reported as BIRADS5 category.
Results: Modified radical mastectomy and ipsilateral axillary lymph
node dissection were performed. Microscopic examination revealed
adenomyoepithelioma consisting of tubular epithelial and spindle
myoepithelial component. Malignancy in the current case was evidenced
by the presence of infiltrating growth pattern, high mitotic index, cyto-
logical aytipi and necrosis. There were no metastasis in lymph nodes.
Immunostains were used to show epithelial and myoepithelial
components.
Conclusion: Malign adenomyoepithelioma is a rare neoplasm. It should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of other solid breast lesions.
Recognition of the cellular elements and the characteristic architecture in
combination with immunohistochemistry are essential for correct diagnosis.
E-PS-02-062
PD-L1 status of triple negative breast cancer in Russia
G. Frank, O. Kuznetsova, L. Zavalishina*, Y. Andreeva, L. Moskvina,
V. Karaseva, S. Tjulandin
*Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional Education,
Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: The purpose of the study was to evaluate the
features of PD-L1 expression in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) in
the Russian population.
Methods: We determined the PD-L1 status of 81 patients with TNBC as
part of a scientific study of the RUSSCO. In each case, an immunohisto-
chemical study was performed using Ventana Bench Mark Ultra auto-
matic stainer according to a closed protocol with rabbit monoclonal anti-
bodies Ventana PD-L1 SP142, Opti View DAB IHC Detection Kit with
Opti View Amplification Kit.
Results: Positive PD-L1 status was detected in 38.27% of TNBC cases.
Almost all tumours had an expression level up to 10%. Only 3.70% of
cases showed ligand expression on tumour cells.
Conclusion: According to the results of the experience of testing PD-L1
in TNBC in Russia, we obtained data comparable to those of large inter-
national studies. RUSSCO's information and logistic support allows mak-
ing this analysis available to all citizens of the country.
E-PS-03-001
Allopurinol and drug induced myocarditis
C. Albuquerque*, S. Ramos
*Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Portugal
Background & objectives: Myocarditis is an inflammatory disease and
an important cause of acute heart failure, sudden death, and dilated car-
diomyopathy. Viruses account for most cases of myocarditis, but other
etiologic agents include drugs, toxic substances, or autoimmune
conditions.
Methods: A 49 year-old male presented to the emergency depart-
ment with fever and limb myalgia. His past history included epi-
sodes of microcrystalline pyrophosphate oligoarthritis for which he
was receiving allopurinol. Laboratory workup showed neutrophilia
and increased CRP. Patient was admitted with fever of unknown
origin. Transoesophageal echocardiography revealed a left atrial
wall thickening, and a nodular area in right atrial wall.
E-PS-03 Cardiovascular Pathology
Virchows Arch
Results: Histological findings (myocyte necrosis and inflammation)
were consistent with the diagnosis of myocarditis in left and right
atrium. There were no findings suggestive of neoplasia. The patient
was still on allopurinol, which can affect the myocardium in a late
(type IV) hypersensitivity reaction, even in the absence of systemic
inflammation. Thus, allopurinol was stopped and patient significant-
ly improved his clinical condition. After 1 month, MRI didn’t show
inflammation.
Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS)
syndrome is a multiorgan hypersensitivity reaction mostly caused by
drugs in patients with a genetic predisposition. Polymorphisms in
HLA alleles, such as HLA-B*58:01, explain the increased risk for
the development of allopurinol-induced DRESS syndrome.
Conclusion: Although allopurinol has ability to induce
hypersensibility reactions, myocardium is not the most common site
of involvement.
Advances in cardiac non-invasive techniques have been useful in diagnostic
setting, but toxic, infectious-inflammatory, infiltrative, or autoimmune pro-
cesses may need endomyocardial biopsy to establish the right aetiology.
This case highlights the importance of a correlation between
endomyocardial biopsy and clinical history, since early diagnosis and
prompt discontinuation of the drug is essential.
E-PS-03-002
Fulminant eosinophilic myocarditis
C. Albuquerque*, S. Ramos
*Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Portugal
Background & objectives: Eosinophilic granulomatosis with poly-
angiitis is one of the most common systemic vasculitides to affect the
heart. Cardiac involvement is associated with eosinophilia, and in-
cludes myocarditis, coronary vasculitis, myocardial infarction, ar-
rhythmias and sudden death. Definite diagnosis is exclusively
established by histology.
Methods: A 22-year-old male presented to the emergency depart-
ment with chest discomfort. Patient had history of asthma and aller-
gic rhinitis. Laboratory workup showed marked eosinophilia, high
levels of LDH, troponin and NT-proBNP. Echocardiogram revealed
severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Patient had a rapid clin-
ical deterioration, with acute heart failure, respiratory failure and
acute kidney injury. It was performed endomyocardial biopsy
(EMB).
Results: Histology showed severe myocardial necrosis, myocyte damage
and diffuse eosinophilic inflammatory infiltrate. Perivascular spaces had
mixed inflammatory infiltrate, with abundant eosinophils.
The diagnosis of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis was
confirmed, as four out six criteria were present: asthma, eosinophilia
>10%, extravascular eosinophils on EMB and paranasal sinusitis
(showed by maxillary and ethmoidal sinus opacifications in
paranasal sinus CT).
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, also known as Churg–
Strauss syndrome, is a rare systemic necrotizing vasculitis involving
small-to-medium-sized vessels, associated with asthma and blood and
tissue eosinophilia. According to the American College of
Rheumatology, the presence of four or more out of the criteria establishes
the diagnosis (sensitivity of 85%; specificity of 99.7%).
Conclusion: Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis has an ex-
tremely low incidence (0.5 to 6.8 new cases per million patients/ year).
Myocarditis is one of the most common cardiac manifestations of the
disease, and literature suggests that younger patients have higher risk in
its development.
This was a rare case of rapidly progressing vasculitis, presenting with
fulminant myocarditis, where EMB had a high diagnostic value for diag-
nosis and treatment decision.
E-PS-03-003
Autoimmune myocarditis: a case report in relation to MHC class I
polypeptide-related sequence A, NKG2D, and CD4+ lymphocytes
J.C. Celis Pinto*, I. Fernández Vega, A. Alonso Fernández-Velásco,
L. Crespo Villoria, M. Granda Lobo, M.A. Bermúdez Fernández,
S. Sánchez Luizaga, L.A. Pérez Pavón, I.H. Calzada, A. Astudillo
*Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Spain
Background & objectives: Autoimmune myocarditis is an uncom-
mon situation that has been associated with different types of
stressors. The relationship between the immune system and the
myocardiocytes en surrounding endothelium is a topic of great
debate.
Methods: H&E stain, Immunohistochemistry (CD68, CD4), and immu-
nofluorescence MHC class-I polypeptide-related sequence A -MICA,
NKG2D, dendritic cell, C4, IgG).
Results: We present a case report of a 48 years old male who
underwent autoimmune myocarditis that led to a cardiac transplant,
dying a month after the surgery. Specific tests were performed to
filiate the disease, observing an interesting interaction between
myocardiocytes, antigen-presenting cells, and lymphocytes.
Immunofluorescence showed MICA expression in dendritic and en-
dothelial cells and its interaction with NKG2D+ CD4+ T cells.
NKG2D ligands are stress-induced proteins, with a restricted tissue
distribution in the intestinal epithelium and can be enhanced under
stress conditions such as viral/bacterial infections or malignant
transformation. In this way, NKG2DLs act as danger signals to
activate NK cells and CD8+ T lymphocytes upon NKG2D receptor
engagement.
Conclusion: The cross-talk between MICA expressing cells and
cytotoxic NKG2D+ T cells could lead to endothelial damage medi-
ated by activation of complement via C4, although the underlying
mechanisms are not yet fully understood and need further investi-
gations.
E-PS-03-004
Situs inversus totalis and adult sudden cardiac death
R.H. Henriques de Gouveia*, C. Santos, F. Corte Real
*Pathology, INMLCF & IAP-PM, FMUC & Pathology, CHLO, Portugal
Background & objectives: Situs Inversus Totalis (SIT) is a rare congen-
ital condition, appearing, in vivo or at autopsy, as an incidental finding or
with clinical manifestations. It may include organ malformations, namely
cardiovascular. The authors draw attention to this entity in post-mortem
settings.
Methods: A retrospective study to 7890 autopsies with anatomo-
pathological examination was performed, searching for SIT cases and
their outcomes. The literature was reviewed.
Results: One (n=1, 0.01%) case was found: a 64 year-old male that
died sudden and unexpectedly on a road, despite resuscitation
manœuvers. Toxicology results were not relevant. Post-mortem ex-
ternal habitus was not noteworthy (apart a thoracic scar). Internal
habitus exposed the Situs Inversus Totalis, with cardiomegaly.
Macro and microscopic evaluation of the heart and organ samples
disclosed Congenitally Corrected Transposition of the Great
Arteries (ccTGA) with Atrial Mirror Image. Upon this congenital
malformation, valvular degenerative pathology, bi-atrial dilation and
bi-ventricular hypertrophy were documented. Patent foramen ovale
was present. Atherosclerotic lesions were observed.
Conclusion: Congenitally Corrected Transposition of the Great
Arteries (ccTGA) with Atrial Mirror Image is reported in
Dextrocardia, Situs Inversus and Situs Inversus Totalis. Sudden
and unexpected death may supervene due to rhythm disturbances,
valvular pathology, ventricular disfunction and/or heart failure.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-03-006
Borrelia-associated chronic myocarditis - case report
E. Kogan*, Т. Demura, O. Blagova, A. Kukleva
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: Most myocarditis are caused by viruses. Rare
pathogen of myocarditis is Borrelia. Heart damage occurs in 1-10% of all
cases borreliosis.
Methods: Case report of endomyocardial biopsy of 62-years-old
forester who contacts with acarusis. Patient admitted with terminal
symptoms of heart failure. Coronary artery disease wasn't revealed
by examination. Obtained samples were stained by hematoxylin and
eosin, picrofuxin to Van Gison, silver-stain for reveal of Borrelia
and IHC-research.
Results: Lymphocytic infiltrates (more than 14 lymphocytes in the 10
fields of vision), hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes and empty
cardiomyocytes were observed in samples stained to hematoxylin and
eosin. Diffuse perimuscular and perivascular sclerosis is revealed by
picrofuxyn to Van Gison. Positive expression CD3 (more than 14 lym-
phocytes in 10 fields of vision) and CD45 (more than 7 macrophages in
10 fields of vision) proved active phase of chronic myocarditis. Selective
stain by silver confirms Borrelia.
Conclusion: Patient obtained anti-spirochetosis therapy with effect. Our
data of morphological research describe chronic myocarditis caused by
Borrelia.
E-PS-03-007
Hamartoma on the tricuspid valve in a new-born
L. Krivošíková*, A. DalGrande, M. Mináriková, M. Kaldarárová,
P. Valentík, M. Hrebík, P. Babál
*Institute of Pathological Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius
University in Bratislava and University Hospital Bratislava, Slovakia
Background & objectives: We describe a hamartoma on the tricuspid
valve with unique histologic structure that meets the criteria for true
hamartoma. Few cases of a hamartoma on the heart valve have been
described, but none of them is parallel to our finding.
Methods: A new-born with atrial septal defect and dysplastic tricuspid
valve with a pendant formation flying in the right atrium was indicated for
surgery. A canvas-like tissue with fibrous/adipose appearance, bound by
fibrous tendrils to annulus of the tricuspid valve was removed.
The surgical specimen was routinely processed and stained with special
stains and examined immunohistochemically.
Results: The specimen was composed of finger-like projections made of
fibrous, focally myxomatous tissue with presence of elastic fibres and
diffuse vascular network. The tissue contained bands of cross-striated
muscle arranged longitudinally with the shape of the tissue portion.
Conclusion: Hamartomas, according to classical definition, consist of
disorganized tissue that is normally present in the given place.
However, the term “hamartoma“ is used variably for several benign tu-
mours and tumour-like lesions in the literature.
In our case, the specimen was composed of tissue types that are found in
the atrioventricular valves and the myocardium. These characteristics
meet the criteria for diagnosis of a true hamartoma on the tricuspid valve.
E-PS-03-009
Mesothelial/monocytic incidental cardiac excrescence (MICE) in a
patient with suspected acute rheumatic heart disease: a case report
S.H. Lai*, Z. Zhao
*Singapore General Hospital, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore
Background & objectives: Rheumatic heart disease (RHD) manifests as a
pan-carditis resulting from altered immune response to Streptococcal phar-
yngitis. The acute phase is seldom seen in surgical pathology practice.
Mesothelial/monocytic incidental cardiac excrescence (MICE) is a rare
benign incidental finding in cardiothoracic surgery.
Methods: We present a case of MICE associated with suspected acute
RHD. A 17-year-old male was found to have a pansystolic murmur on
pre-enlistment medical examination. Transthoracic echocardiography re-
vealed mitral valve prolapse with severe mitral regurgitation. During
surgery for mitral valve replacement, the surgeon reported thickened mi-
tral valve and possible pericarditis. A 2.5cm anterior mediastinal lymph
node was also excised.
Results: Microscopic examination showed mitral valve endocarditis.
Aggregates of activated macrophages were seen with focal peripheral
palisading surrounding central fibrinous areas, reminiscent of the
Aschoff nodules. The “mediastinal lymph node” included two small re-
active lymph nodes and a loose nodular fragment comprising sheets of
histiocytes admixed with rare islands of mesothelial cells. There were also
entrapped adipocytes, fibrin and mixed inflammatory infiltrate. The his-
tiocytes were positive for CD68 and CD31, and negative for S100 and
CD1a. Diagnosis of MICE and possible acute RHD was made.
Retrospectively, the patient admitted that he had two to three days of sore
throat before his enlistment check-up.
Conclusion: MICE is believed to be part of the entity “histiocytosis with
raisinoid nuclei”. A reactive or iatrogenic aetiology has been proposed.
About 15% of MICE are associated with RHD. Diagnosis requires close
clinico-pathological correlation.
E-PS-03-010
Leiomyosarcoma of the descendent aorta, a case report
L. Lozneanu*, T.A. Cernomaz, K. Bilavschi, I.D. Florea
*U.M.F. ”Grigore T. Popa” Iași, Romania
Background & objectives: Leiomyosarcoma (LMS) of the descendent
thoracic aorta is extremely rare and described in few reports. The vast
majority are diagnosed post-mortem. We report a case of aortic LMS
underlining the difficulty of in vivo diagnosis.
Methods: A 75 years old male, presented for precordial pain, dyspnoea,
feeling of chest constriction, dysphagia; thorax CT raised a lung cancer
suspicion. Positive pathology diagnosis was reached employing a series
of minimally invasive procedures. The patient underwent imagistic as-
says, toracocenthesis and ultrasound guided transthoracic biopsy, follow-
ed by histopathological examination through routine staining and
immunohistochemistry.
Results: Thoracic CT scan showed a mass abutting descending aorta. As
bronchoscopic and pleural fluid cytology were inconclusive, the hypoth-
esis of thrombosed aortic aneurism was put forward but unsubstantiated.
Ultrasound guided transthoracic biopsy followed by histopathological
exam revealed a highly cellular proliferation containing spindle cells with
positivity for caldesmon and SMA and negativity for desmin, p63, TTF1,
S100, CD34, MDM2, EMA, CK7 and CK cocktail, supporting a diagno-
sis of aortic LMS. Proliferation factor was positive in 30-40% of the
tumour cells. Patient was referred to oncology services, declined specific
therapy and survived 2 months after diagnosis.
Conclusion: Imagistic approaches are usually not enough to establish a clear
diagnosis of aortic LMS. Minimally invasive bioptic approaches have a good
safety profile and adequate efficacy, still cytological examination may not
always reach diagnosis despite the advanced stage of tumour.
E-PS-03-011
Cardiac sarcoidosis or arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomy-
opathy?: a diagnostic challenge
O. McCabe*, W. Smith, S. Wright
*Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (AC) and
cardiac sarcoid can be identified in explanted heart specimens. Both are
Virchows Arch
morphologically and histopathologically distinct but studies have shown
histological overlap between so-called “burnt-out” sarcoid and AC. This
case highlights the diagnostic challenge for the histopathologist.
Methods: A middle-aged male with no past medical history, presented
with syncope and complete atrioventricular block and underwent dual-
chamber pacemaker insertion. Imaging showed biventricular dilatation,
late gadolinium enhancement and possible FDG avidity within hilar
lymph nodes. However, the study quality was poor. Despite immunosup-
pression therapy for suspected sarcoid, the patient rapidly deteriorated
into severe biventricular failure, necessitating cardiac transplantation.
Results: Macroscopic examination of the explanted heart showed right
ventricular wall atrophy and fibrofatty replacement. The left ventricle was
largely normal.
Microscopy showed extensive fibrosis and fatty replacement of the
myocardium in the right ventricle, with extension into the poste-
rior left ventricle, with focal areas of lymphocytic inflammation
but the inflammatory cells did not appear to be associated with
myocyte damage. There was a single giant cell present but no
well-formed granulomas were identified.
Conclusion: The distribution of fibrofatty replacement without granulo-
mas suggests AC. Genetic confirmation is awaited. Following cardiac
transplantation the patient shows no evidence of recurrent sarcoidosis.
Histological features of cardiac sarcoid can mimic AC, thus posing a
diagnostic difficulty for histopathologists.
E-PS-03-012
Investigation of the presence of neutrophils and macrophages in the
tissues of calcified aorta affected by atherosclerosis
I. Radomychelski, A. Romaniuk*, A. Piddubnyi, A. Krush,
R. Moskalenko
*Sumy State University, Ukraine
Background & objectives: The presence of aortic calcification causes
severe tissue overstretching. Neutrophils and macrophages promote ex-
perimental abdominal aortic aneurysm formation.
Aim: to compare the number of neutrophils and macrophages in the tissue
of the atherosclerotic aorta with calcification and without it.
Methods: We examined 30 samples of aorta with calcification (group I)
and 10 samples of aorta wall tissue without biomineralization (group II),
which were considered as control group. All samples were examined by
histology and immunohistochemistry. Samples were fixed, embedded in
paraffin and analysed for neutrophils and macrophages accumulation
with anti-MPO and anti-CD68 antibodies.
Results: MPO expression was increased in aortic tissues with calcifica-
tions (42.08±2.85 cells per 1 mm2) in comparison to those without them
(33.3±2.23, p<0.05, Student’s t-test). Both groups I and II had 48.31 ±
3.53 and 32.1 ± 2.69 macrophages per 1 mm2 respectively (p <0.01).
Conclusion: Thus, calcified aortic tissue has a higher number of neutro-
phils and macrophages, which may affect the risk of aortic wall rupture.
E-PS-03-014
What histologic differences exists between primary or secondary
dilative cardiomyopathy?
O. Tica*, O.A. Tica, M.I. Popescu
*County Hospital of Oradea, University of Oradea, Romania
Background & objectives: Dilative cardiomyopathy (DCM) represents
a myocardial structural disorders associated with mechanical dysfunc-
tions and rhythm disturbances that causes enlargement of both ventricles.
More than 50% of primary DCM are familial diseases and identifying
those forms is essential for discovering asymptomatic patients.
Methods: We included in our study 353 dead patients with DCM for a
period of 3 years. We eliminated all secondary known cases of DCM. At
autopsy, the heart was measured and trimmed by four-chamber view or
short axis (bread loafing) slicing technique. Histology assessments were
made using paraffin embedding and slides were stained routinely and
with special enzymes.
Results: Primary DCM was suspected in 55 patients and those fam-
ily members were advised to have regular cardiologic examinations
and genetic assays. At autopsy, patient’s heart with DCM has an
increased weight with globular shape and decreased tonus. In endo-
cardium fibrous thickening starts mainly in the septum of left ven-
tricle affecting trabecular muscles. Histology revealed different de-
grees of myocyte enlargement, “box-car” nuclei and protruding col-
lagenous fibres arranged diffuse or perivascular. Majority of
myocytes exhibit degenerative brown pigment (lipofuscin) and in
interstitial space we found moderate cellularity represented by fibro-
blasts, fibrocytes and lymphocytes. Comparing slides form patients
with primary and secondary DCM there were insufficient data use-
ful for distinguish these two entities.
Conclusion: Primary DCM is proposed to be included in
“cytoskeletopathies” and without cardio-pulmonary transplant, these pa-
tients have an ominous prognosis with reduced 5-year survival rate. A good
correlation was found between clinical or functional status and the extent of
microscopic lesions (expressed mainly by interstitial fibrosis). An early
detection of DCM and proper treatment can improve quality of life in these
patients. Histology alone is not useful for differential diagnosis.
E-PS-04-001
Diagnostic accuracy of rapid onsite evaluation of retroperitoneal
masses
F. Iqbal, A. Ahmed, A. Ashraf, F. Rehman, S. Ahmad, S. Hameed,
F. Ali*
*King Edward Medical University, Lahore, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Various mass lesions can arise in
retroperitoneum. ROSE determines adequacy of material obtained for cytolog-
ical analysis on site and can provide insight into the nature of mass. Aim of this
study is to determine diagnostic accuracy of ROSE of retroperitoneal masses.
Methods: A cross sectional study was conducted in King Edward
Medical University/ Mayo Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan. 77 patients with
retroperitoneal masses were subjected to ROSE and histopathology of
radiologically guided biopsy. Adequacy of cellularity of material obtain-
ed for cytology was analysed and reported by pathologist in the radiology
suite. Keeping histopathological diagnoses as gold standard, diagnostic
accuracy of ROSE was established.
Results: Overall diagnostic accuracy of rapid onsite evaluation technique
was found to be 75 % in our setup. Majority of lesions were positive for
malignant cells and most of these were of lymphoid origin. Remaining
cases were benign and of variable morphology.
Conclusion: ROSE of retroperitoneal masses will help in improving the
adequacy rate, diagnostic yield and accuracy of procedure thus saving
time and resources of both patients and physicians. A preliminary diag-
nosis made on the basis of ROSE may help physicians.
E-PS-04-002
Positive peritoneal cytology in endometrial cancer: report of a case
presenting with ascites
E. Botsfari*, S. Lypiridou, P. Fytili, R. Valeri, P. Xirou, S. Skevoudi
*Department of Pathology, Theagenion Cancer Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece
Background & objectives: Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most com-
mon gynaecologic malignancy. Patients’ symptoms may vary from
E-PS-04 Cytopathology
Virchows Arch
abnormal uterine bleeding to abdominal pain or change in bowel/ bladder
function in advanced stages.
Methods: Ascites is a rare initial presentation and, to the best of our
knowledge, only a few isolated cases have been reported in the literature.
Our patient, a 70-year-old woman, presented with ascites. MRI examina-
tion revealed a mass in uterine cavity and numerous omental implants.
Fine needle aspiration of peritoneal fluid and endometrial biopsy with a
Pipelle aspiration catheter were performed.
Results: Peritoneal smears showed the presence of neoplastic cells
with cytological and immunocytochemical (CK7+, ER+, Vimentin+,
CEA-) features consistent with metastatic endometrial carcinoma.
Histological evaluation of the tissue samples revealed high grade
serous endometrial carcinoma. In the differential diagnosis, carci-
nosarcoma should be included because of areas with solid/diffuse
patterns.
Our patient received chemotherapy and remains alive, 6 months after
initial diagnosis.
Positive peritoneal cytology (PPC) is associated with EC characterized by
deep myometrial invasion, cervical stromal invasion, large tumour size,
non-endometrioid histologic type, and lymphatic metastasis. Moreover,
the incidence of PPC in patients with early stage EC has been reported to
range from 5% - 10%.
Conclusion: PPC constitutes a controversial issue in EC in terms of its
prognostic value. Although the International Federation of Gynaecology
and Obstetrics (FIGO) removed the presence of PPC from the staging
criteria in 2009, compared to FIGO 1988, PPC has to be reported
separately.
E-PS-04-003
Cytological and immunocytological features of solid-pseudopapillary
neoplasm: a series of cases
D. Bueno Sacristán*, M.T. Martínez, E. Romio, A. Benito-Berlinches,
A. Navarro-Cantero, A. Sanjuanbenito-Dehesa, S. López-Duran,
J. Foruni-Olcina, E. Vázquez-Sequeiros, M. Muñoz-Beltran, C. De la
Pinta, R. Fuentes-Mateos, C. Perna-Monroy, A. Caminoa
*Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, Department of Pathology, Spain
Background & objectives: Solid-pseudopapillary neoplasm (SPN) is a
low-grade malignancy primary pancreatic epithelial neoplasm accounting
for 1% of all exocrine pancreatic tumours. SPN occurs predominantly in
young women and occasionally in men. Cytological diagnosis is crucial
for patient management.
Methods: We reviewed all cytological cases obtained by ecoendoscopy
in a referral centre between 2009 and 2020. Smears were studied with
Papanicolaou and Diff-Quick stains. Immunocytochemistry for CD10,
synaptophysin, Cyclin-D1 and beta-catenin was performed on
Papanicolaou or cell blocks. In one case histological material was
available.
Results: Four cases of SPN with cytological material were found, 3
males and 1 female from 27 to 84 years-old. Characteristically,
smears usually were highly cellular. Cells were uniform with round
to oval nuclei, dispersed or granular chromatin and small indistinct
nucleoli. Nuclear grooves were frequently found and cytoplasm size
ranged from scant to moderate. Neoplastic cells were arranged sin-
gly, in cohesive clusters or branching papillary structures.
Fibrovascular core stroma appeared myxoid and metachromatic.
Hyaline globules were occasionally present. Inmunocytochemical
studies showed positive stain for neuroendocrine markers
(synaptophysin or cromogranin), oestrogen receptor (in female pa-
tients), CD10 and beta-catenin. Differential diagnosis were
established with neuroendocrine tumours and acinar cell carcinoma.
Conclusion: Cytology and immunocytochemistry are essential to SPN
diagnosis. Beta-catenin is one of the most reliable marker in the diagnosis
of this entity. Although SPN usually affects female patients, our series
showed a male preponderance.
E-PS-04-004
Mucinous breast lesions: fine needle aspiration diagnosis and pitfalls
S. Chowsilpa*, B. Chaiwun, S. Rangdaeng
*Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University,
Thailand
Background & objectives: Mucinous breast lesions (MBL) are uncom-
mon and range from benign to malignant conditions. Fine needle aspira-
tion (FNA) is one of the techniques for evaluating breast masses. This
study aims to correlate between cytologic and histologic findings in mu-
cinous spectrum.
Methods: A search for mucin, mucocele-like lesion (MLL), and
mucinous carcinoma (MC) from Chiang Mai University Hospital
cytologic electronical database between 2017-2019 was performed.
All cytologic slides were reviewed to determine cytomorphological
characteristics that specific for benign or malignant MBL, including
background, cellularity, arrangements, and nuclear with cytoplasmic
details.
Results: 16 FNA diagnoses from females aged 34-84 years were 2
(12.5%) proliferative lesions with atypia (PLA), and 14 (87.5%) ma-
lignancy. Correlation with histology, two PLA were 1 fibroadenoma
with myxoid stroma (FAM) and 1 MC. 14 malignant cases were 9
(64.3%) MC, 2 (14.3%) mixed MC and invasive ductal carcinoma
(IDC), NOS, and 1 (7.1%) for each ductal carcinoma in situ with
mucin content, MLL, and metastatic lung adenocarcinoma. Our study
showed MC can be accurately diagnosed. However, the cytologic
findings cannot entirely distinguish between benign and malignant
tumours. Benign lesions, particularly FAM and MLL, can be missed
diagnosed as MC. IDC, NOS and metastatic adenocarcinoma can
mimic breast MC.
Conclusion: FNA is useful to detect MBL. Awareness for the possible
differential diagnoses, correlation with clinical and radiologic findings as
well as history of other primary cancer are crucial for accurate diagnosis.
E-PS-04-005
Potential misdiagnosis of reactive mesothelium as metastatic carcino-
ma based on Ber-EP4 staining
C. Díaz del Arco*, M. Saiz-Pardo Sanz, L. Ortega Medina,
M.J. Fernández Aceñero
*Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
Spain
Background & objectives: The distinction between reactive mesotheli-
um and carcinoma in serous effusions can be difficult.
Immunocytochemistry (ICC) is widely used to improve body fluid cytol-
ogy accuracy, and several markers have been proposed. Ber-EP4 has
shown high sensitivity and specificity in previous studies.
Methods: We here report two cases of pericardial effusions misdiagnosed
as metastatic carcinoma, based on Ber-EP4 staining. Pericardial fluid was
processed by centrifugation and ICC markers were performed. In the
second case, a pericardial biopsy was also obtained and immunostained.
Literature was reviewed and all studies describing Ber-EP4 staining in
cytological samples have been summarized.
Results: Our first case was a 41 year old man who consulted on
thoracic pain. Imaging studies showed a large pericardial effusion.
Cytology revealed atypical tridimensional groups. Ber-EP4 showed
strong membranous staining, and it stained most cells of several cell
groups (40%). A pericardial biopsy was performed and also showed
patchy intense membranous Ber-EP4 positivity in 40-50% of meso-
thelial cells. The second case was a 82 year old man with history of
ischemic cardiomyopathy who consulted on abdominal pain.
Pericardial fluid showed tridimensional cell clusters. Ber-EP4
strongly stained most cell groups, and percentage of cells stained
varied between groups (10-100%). Both patients were evaluated
(PET-CT, endoscopy) and no malignancy was found.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Most cases of Ber-EP4 positivity in mesothelium show
weak/patchy staining, but intense staining may be seen both in cytological
and histological specimens. ICC should always be interpreted cautiously
and correlated with clinical tests, other ICC markers and patient’s previ-
ous history.
E-PS-04-006
Melanoma and breast cancer metastases in our cytopathology teach-
ing collection: comparing tasks and tools from a quarter century ago
with today
J. Duskova*, O. Sobek
*Institute of Pathology, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic
Background & objectives: To compare the possibilities and impacts of
diagnosis of metastases of two aggressive malignancies a quarter of a
century ago and now.
Methods: A Cytological educational collection has been built up with
histological correlates of more than 450 cases over 25 years. Metastases
are included for their differential diagnostic difficulty.
Results: Three selected cases from the beginning of the collection had
limited possibilities of confirmation of the primary at the cytological level
using special methods. Comparative morphology was the most powerful
tool. It does not lose its role at present, but the use of immunocytochem-
ical procedures has become the rule and accurate confirmation has be-
come the primary goal. In the recent cases, more frequently a positive
tumour history in a longer time interval was observed.
Conclusion: The exact diagnosis of melanoma and breast cancer metas-
tases in today's cytodiagnostic practice differs by:
- A real chance to influence the treatment process.
- Diagnostic procedures and detection reagents have progressed.
- Current therapeutic possibilities justify increased demands on accurate
diagnostics.
Supported by: Charles University, Progress project Q28/LF1; Ministry of
Health of Czech Rep. - project RVO VFN64165
E-PS-04-009
The prevalence and distribution trends of cervical abnormalities on
Pap test according to the Bethesda system 2014: a study from
Pakistan
M. Javed*, R. Rafi, H. Saleem, A. Awais, I. Kehkeshan, R. Akbar
*Cantonment General Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: To evaluate the trends and distribution of
cervical pathologies based on
Papanicolaou (Pap) smear results, in a local population in Pakistan,
reclassified
according to The Bethesda System 2014(TBS).
Methods: A retrospective analysis of Pap smear (PS) test reports received
in the Histopathology Department of Foundation University Islamabad
(FUI) was done from January, 2011 to December, 2015 and they were
reviewed according to The Bethesda 2014.The abnormalities were also
correlated according to age distribution.
Results: Of the 2272 cases reviewed in women aged between 20-80
years, 32 showed epithelial cell abnormalities which constituted 1.40%
of the total smears screened. Negative for intraepithelial lesion or malig-
nancy (NILM), Atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance
(ASC-US), Low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL), High-
grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) and Squamous cell
carcinoma(SCC )were detected in 98.6%, 0.35%, 0.52%, 0.35% and
0.17% of the Pap smears respectively. The rate of positive specimens
increased from 0.47%in 2011, to 1.23%in 2012, 1.71% in 2013, 2.01%
in 2014, and 1.01% in 2015.In our study, 69.1% of the epithelial abnor-
malities were in the age group 60 and above.
Conclusion: This study highlights the need for implementation of an
education and awareness program regarding the risk factors and possible
preventive measures for cervical cancer
E-PS-04-010
Metastatic breast cancer to the parotid gland - a case report
I. Katikaridis*, E. Daskalaki, P. Xirou, M. Kynigou, R. Iosifidou,
S. Skevoudi
*Department of Breast Surgery, Theagenion Cancer Hospital,
Thessaloniki, Greece
Background & objectives: We present a case of metastasis to the parotid
gland, in a 76-year old female patient, with a history of breast ductal
carcinoma, who was admitted to our hospital to investigate a painful, hard
mass in her right parotid region.
Methods: Fine needle aspiration of the mass and examination of Smears
and thin prep slides.
Results: In the smears, multiple large malignant cells were seen, isolated
and in loose groups, with large hyperchromatic nuclei, conspicuous nu-
cleoli and sparse cytoplasm.
The tumour cells were ER(+), PR(+), Ca 15/3(+), e-cadherin(+) and
Her2(+2). The Ki76 index was low.
In combination with the patients history, the final diagnosis was metasta-
tic ductal carcinoma.
The cytological diagnosis was later confirmed with a biopsy and the
patient was treated with hormone therapy.
Conclusion: Metastatic ductal carcinoma to the parotid gland is
rather unusual, with only 24 cases reported in the literature.
Further research is required as to this day, there is no optimal pro-
tocol for treating a breast metastasis to the parotid and the prognosis
is generally low.
E-PS-04-011
Total cell count in cerebrospinal fluid Giemsa staining cytological
specimen by computer-assisted image analysis
S. Kobayashi*, M. Saio, M. Fujimori, Y. Nishijima, T. Fukuda
*Laboratory of Histopathology & Cytopathology Department of
Laboratory Sciences Gunma University Graduate School of Health
Sciences, Japan
Background & objectives: We counted total cell number in cerebrospi-
nal fluid (CSF) Giemsa staining (Giemsa) stained cytological specimens
by computer-assisted image analysis (CAIA).
Methods: We analysed total 35 cases including clinically and cytologi-
cally negative (Negative), non-haematological tumour cytologically pos-
itive (Non-HT positive), and haematological tumour cytologically posi-
tive (HT positive); 10, 12, and 13 cases, collected in Gunma University
hospital from 2001 to 2011. Whole area of specimens was captured by
virtual slide scanner, analysed total cells by CAIA. P-values < 0.05 were
considered statistically significant.
Results: The average of total cell number of Negative, Non-HT positive,
HT positive group were 25165±46563、15477±26778、53978±106176
respectively. There was no significant difference in total cell number
between Negative and Non-HT positive group (p=0.5887). HT positive
group tended to have many cells compared with Negative group
(p=0.1069), and HT positive had significantly more total cell number
than Non-HT positive group (p=0.0167). Our results suggested that cell
number on the specimens was increased in haematological tumour cases.
While, in Non-haematological tumour cases, the cell number did not
increase in comparison to Non-tumour cases.
Conclusion: When screening CSF cytological specimens, increased cell
number would indicate existence of haematological tumour cells.
However, in non-haematological tumour cases, it is important not to miss
atypical cells because cell number does not change.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-04-012
Pericardial effusions: a one-year single institution analysis with
reclassification according to the new international system for
reporting serous fluid cytopathology
A. Luebke*, S. Feldhaus, P. Dalquen, A. Hinsch
*University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany
Background & objectives: Our study aimed to compare our spectrum of
samples with the data in the literature, correlate it to the clinical history,
and apply the new International System for Reporting Serous Fluid
Cytopathology.
Methods: The pericardial fluid (PF) specimens of a one year period
(2018) were retrieved. Clinical history and cytological diagnosis
were recorded. All specimens were re-classified according to the
new International System for Reporting Serous Fluid
Cytopathology.
Results: 87 PF specimens were obtained from 70 patients (36 males
and 34 females). Of these, one (1,1%) was Non-diagnostic (ND), 62
(71,2%) were categorized as Negative for Malignancy (NFM), and
24 (27,6%) were classified as Malignant (MAL). The benign PF
specimens were most frequently related to malignancy (18/29%),
followed by unknown/unclear cause (15/24,2%), infection
(9/14,5%), cardiac disorder (9/14,5%), rheumatic disease (6/9,7%),
and other (5/8%). In males, the most common tumour producing
malignant PF was lung carcinoma (7/11); other malignancies were
rare (oesophageal, bladder, AML, Adenocarcinoma NOS). In wom-
en, the leading neoplasm was breast cancer (7/13), followed by lung
carcinoma (3/13). Single cases revealed ovarian cancer,
plasmablastic lymphoma, and neuroendocrine carcinoma.
Conclusion: Our findings are well comparable with the results of
previous studies. Most benign pericardial effusions are related to
malignancy (29%). The vast majority of PFs can be related to clin-
ical history or a specific disease (75,8%). By far, metastatic carci-
noma was the most common cause of malignant PF (22/24; 91,7%)
with the top differential diagnoses of lung and breast carcinoma.
However, malignant mesothelioma involving the pericardium was
not present.
E-PS-04-014
International telecytology diagnosis using whole slide images (WSI)
I. Mori*, R. Matsuoka, T. Shiomi
*Dept. Path., School of Medicine, International University of Health and
Welfare, Japan
Background & objectives: Cytology specimens are difficult to apply for
digital pathology. Our university opened a Japan-style health check facil-
ity in Ho-Chi-Minh city in 2018 and asked to make telecytology diagno-
sis for uterine cervical specimens.
Methods: We use NanoZoomer S210 as WSI scanner. We used
Liqui-PREP LBC system for preparation. Slides were scanned by
40x mode with 3 layer Z-stack with 2 μm thickness. Vietnamese
pathologists who learned Japanese style cytology diagnosis in Mita
hospital make primary diagnosis using conventional microscope in
Vietnam, then we observe WSI images and make secondary
telecytology diagnosis from Japan.
Results: The Papanicolaou staining showed different colour between
Japan and Vietnam. We need to condition our eyes to the Vietnamese
colour. Until the end of December 2019, almost 14 months, we performed
600 tele cytology diagnosis. The WSI quality and the concordance rate of
diagnosis was fairly good between Vietnamese and Japanese patholo-
gists. The ratio of NILM in cervical cytology was about 98% which is
almost similar to Japan.
Conclusion: Good LBC preparation, 40x mode scanning, and good stain-
ing are essential for digital cytology.
E-PS-04-015
EUS-FNA of pancreas: an initial 3-year Malaysian study in private
laboratory
T. Pasupati Meenakshi*, B. Karikalan, A. Narayanan
*Clinipath Malaysia Sdn Bhd, Malaysia
Background & objectives: Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided fine-
needle aspiration (FNA) is being increasingly used in the diagnosis and
management of pancreatic mass. Gastroenterologists in Malaysia have
been increasingly using EUS FNA, owing to its increasing precision,
and relative safety of the procedure.
Methods: This is a cross sectional study conducted on clinical and cyto-
logical characteristics on all the EUS-FNA cytology samples of pancreas
received in Clinipath Laboratory from 2017 to 2019. Data collected in-
cluded patient demographics (gender, age and mass lesion location) and
tumour characteristics. 679 cases of EUS-FNA were received and report-
ed as per the new guidelines of Papanicolaou Society of Cytopathology.
Results: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma ranging from well-differentiated to
poorly differentiated was confirmed in 506 cases. Mucinous cystic neo-
plasms, neuroendocrine tumours, lymphomas, spindle cell tumours and
small blue round cell tumours constituted 36 cases. Benign lesions and
chronic pancreatitis were 62 in number. The rest of the samples showed
pauci-cellularity or complete absence of epithelial cells to arrive at any
conclusion. In very occasional cases, atypical cells that were suspicious of
an underlying malignancy but not affirmative were also reported.
Correlation with clinical picture and CT scan findings were undertaken
in all cases.
Conclusion: EUS-FNA is emerging to be the most useful technology in
the diagnosis of pancreatic lesions In Malaysia. The precision of the
procedure and accuracy of the results of EUS-FNA samples have dramat-
ically increased over the past few years. This initial study carried out for
the first time in Malaysia is to document the increasing diagnostic capa-
bility of EUS-FNA in the management of pancreatic lesions in a private
set up.
E-PS-04-019
Basal cell adenoma of parotid: a cytological diagnosis confirmed by
histology
I. Provatas*, K. Pavlou, F. Dolkiras, H.J. Trihia, M. Chroni,
E. Kammenou
*Department of Pathology, Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens,
Greece
Background & objectives: Basal cell adenomas of the parotid are benign
tumours resembling pleomorphic adenoma , accounting approximately
2% of epithelial tumours of salivary glands, affecting usually adults,
mostly females, being more common in the mid- to late sixth decade of
life.
Methods: We report a 46-year old male patient with a tumour of the right
parotid, who underwent Fine Needle Aspiration (FNA) and subsequently
surgical resection of the tumour. The FNA specimen was sent to our
Department of Cytology, where it was stained using conventional
(Papanicolaou) and liquid-based methods. The surgical specimen was
sent to out Department of Pathology for histological examination.
Results: The cytological examination revealed aggregates, sheets or syn-
cytial fragments of uniform oval epithelial cells with ill defined cyto-
plasm, round-to-oval nuclei, surrounded by a bright hyaline bands. The
diagnosis of a basal cell adenoma was set and surgical resection of the
tumour followed. Multiple sections from the tumour for histology con-
firmed the cytological diagnosis, revealing a well-circumscribed, encap-
sulated tumour presenting solid, trabecular, tubular and membranous ar-
chitecture, composed of cells with two cell morphologies: Basaloid cells
with peripheral palisading, positive for Vimentin and Actin and larger
central (ductal) cells from the bulk of the nodules, angular in shape with
Virchows Arch
more cytoplasm and pale round nuclei, positive for cytokeratin and
S100a.
Conclusion: Basal cell adenomas of the salivary glands have a low re-
currence rate and they rarely demonstrate malignant transformation. FNA
is usually followed by surgery, in order to assure the complete resection
and to minimize the chances for recurrence.
E-PS-04-020
Outcome of thyroid nodules diagnosed as atypia or follicular lesion of
undetermined significance: a 10-year single institutional experience
R. T. Yolo*, J.N. C. Sabido
*Dept of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery; Dept of Medical
Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Santo Tomas, Manila,
Dept of Anatomic Pathology
Background & objectives: Determine the outcomes of patients seen at a
single university based-institution who were initially diagnosed with
AUS/FLUS as to the rate of malignancy, management protocol, result
of repeat cytology, and final histopathologic diagnoses.
Methods: This is a retrospective correlation study includes patients
who has at least one FNA diagnosed as AUS/FLUS, and with
follow up data such as repeat FNA or surgery. The rate of ma-
lignancy after surgery, correlation with age and sex after initial
diagnosis of AUS/FLUS were identified. Data are tabulated using
Microsoft Excel® and analysed using SPSS® (Chicago, IL,
USA).
Results: Most of the patients underwent immediate surgery after initial
FNAB diagnosis of AUS/FLUS compared to repeat FNAB recommend-
ed by The Bethesda System (TBS). Majority of the lesions are benign; the
calculated malignancy rate was between 33.33% to 37.29% which was
higher compared to TBS’s 10% to 15%. Papillary thyroid carcinoma was
the most common malignancy, while adenomatous colloid goiter was the
most common benign lesion. There was no significant association be-
tween age and gender, with the risk of having a benign or malignant
pathology.
Conclusion: AUS/FLUS is associated with higher risk of malignancy.
Recommendation of TBS of repeat aspiration after initial diagnosis of
AUS/FLUS should be reconsidered. Further refinement of this category
and its associated clinical outcomes is desired to establish appropriate
case-based management.
E-PS-04-021
Ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration biopsy of superficial lymph
nodes performed by pathologist
H.E. Torres Rivas*, L.M. Fernández Fernández, K. Villar Zarra,
L.A. Pérez Pavón, M.d.l.P. González Guitiérrez
*Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Spain
Background & objectives: Ultrasound plays a prominent role in the
diagnosis of lymphadenopathies due to its versatility, low cost, and ab-
sence of side effects. Properly trained interventional pathologists perform
ultrasound-guided FNA biopsy procedures with a methodology which
has proven to be very efficient.
Methods: For two years, the cases of ultrasound guided FNA biopsy of
superficial lymph nodes performed by a pathologist were counted in our
institutions. In situ microscopic assessment was done in all the cases. The
following variables were taken into account: clinical data, lymph node
characteristics, number of passes, need for ancillary techniques and cyto-
logical diagnosis.
Results: There were 363 cases. 96.42% were representative samples.
Only one pass was necessary in 40% of cases, and on average less than
2 passes were performed. Overall, insufficient samples represented
3.58%, and specifically 8.18% in lymph nodes smaller than 11mm in
diameter (n=110), and 1.57% in lymph nodes larger than 10mm
(n=253). Of the 13 insufficient samples, the average lymph node size
was 9.9mm.
Conclusion: During ultrasound guided FNA biopsy of superficial
lymph nodes, real-time decision making is determined by rapid on
site evaluation. Determining the minimum number of passes re-
quired to reach diagnosis (and reducing time and cost) is only pos-
sible when it is immediately assessed for adequacy.
In Spain, ultrasound guided FNA biopsy performed by pathologists has
been well established in two hospital centre for 5 years.
E-PS-04-022
Cytology of inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour of the lung: a case
report
H. Yaegashi*, T. Sakuma, S. Ono, R. Chiba, K. Takahashi, Y. Watanabe,
K. Nakano, M. Kaneko, H. Hojo, C. Hirayama
*Dept. of Pathology, Iwate Prefectural Central Hospital, Japan
Background & objectives: Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour (IMT)
of the lung is a rare condition that may mimic cancer. In adults, it occurs
in less than 1 % of all lung tumours(WHO 2015). To date there have been
few reports on cytology of IMT of the lung.
Methods: Here we report the case of an asymptomatic 30-year-old man
who presented an abnormal shadow in his left lung at his annual health
check in his institution.
Results: CT scan of the chest demonstrated an intrabronchial mass in the
left B3 bronchus. A bronchoscopy for airway inspection found an
endobronchial tumour obstructing the left B3 bronchus. A transbronchial
biopsy(TBB) and brush cytology with bronchial washing were per-
formed. Cytology disclosed abundant spindle-shaped atypical cells seen
in various-sized clusters and singly intermixed with prominent mature
plasma cells and lymphocytes. Histology of the TBB specimen by immu-
nohistochemistry suggested IMT. Segmentectomy(upper segment of left
upper lobe) specimen with immunohistochemistry and FISH examination
of ALK gene rearrangement confirmed IMT, namely a mesenchymal
tumour with spindle cells(myofibroblastic nature) and abundant inflam-
matory cells.
Conclusion: The cytologic diagnosis of pulmonary IMT is challenging
due to its rarity. However highly cellular cytological specimens with
myofibroblastic spindle cells, plasma cells and lymphocytes could be a
clue for differential diagnosis of IMT.
E-PS-04-023
Cyto-histological analysis of salivary gland tumours in central
Kazakhstan
Z. Zhumabek*
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Salivary gland tumours make up 4% to 25%
of all human body tumours. The choice of treatment tactics for salivary
gland tumours depends on the histology of the biopsies, which is why the
study of their pathomorphology is relevant.
Methods: The purpose of the study is to study the cyto-histological
characteristics of common tumours of the salivary glands in the
Central Kazakhstan.64 preparations with salivary gland tumours
were studied. Cytological (Romanovsky-Gimza staining) and histo-
logical studies (hematoxylin-eosin staining) were performed to ver-
ify the tumours.
Results: During the verification of preparations, red blood cells, single
white blood cells, flat epithelium without atypia were found in 16 cases,
which indicates that the process is benign, in 10-proliferating cubic epi-
thelium, in 6 – polymorphic adenoma, in 3 – cylindroma, in 1 – lympho-
sarcoma. In malignant tumours-in 8 cases, a picture of carcinoma was
found, in 8 – red blood cells, proliferating cubic epithelium, in 6-
cylindroma, in 6 – adenocarcinoma. Histological analysis revealed the
Virchows Arch
presence of pleomorphic adenoma in 31 cases, monomorphic adenoma in
4,and adenolymphoma only in 1case. In malignant variants of both the
cylindroma and the adenocarcinoma were identified in 12 cases.
Conclusion: Benign tumours of the salivary glands are more often rep-
resented by polymorphic adenoma. In malignant tumours of the salivary
glands, the predominant tumours are cylindroma and adenocarcinoma,
morphologically, the tumours are similar.
E-PS-05-001
Chondroid syringoma with extensive mature bone and cartilage
formation: a case report and review of the literature
A. Al-Omari*
*Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHSFT, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Chondroid syringoma is a rare, skin adnexal
tumour, mostly involves the head and neck region. It is usually present as
a skin painless nodule. We present a rare case of chondroid syringoma
with extensive mature bone and cartilage formation.
Methods: Chondroid syringoma is a rare, skin adnexal tumour, mostly
involves the head and neck region. It is usually present as a skin painless
nodule. The histopathological are usually composed of variable mixture
of epithelial and myoepithelial structures on a background of
chondromyxoid and fibrous stroma. It rarely shows mature bone or car-
tilage formation.
Results: To the best of our knowledge, only several cases of chondroid
syringoma with bone formation and few cases of chondroid syringoma
with cartilage formation have been reported in published studies up to
date. Here, we report a case of chondroid syringoma with extensive ma-
ture bone and cartilage formation which is probably the first reported case
showing this mixture of appearances.
Conclusion: Histopathologically, the presence of tumour with extensive
mature bone and cartilage formation may cause diagnostic difficulties and
wide differential diagnosis. Therefore, awareness of this rare entity can be
helpful to avoid future diagnostic pitfalls, particularly when the appear-
ances are unusual.
E-PS-05-002
Primary cutaneous amyloidoma: a case report
M. Aydemir*, I.E. Zemheri, I. Zindanci
*Health Sciences University Umraniye Education and Training Hospital,
Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Amyloidoma is defined as solitary, localized,
tumour-like deposit of amyloid in any organs without systemic
amyloidosis.
Methods: Here we report the case of a 66 year old female patient with a
tumoral mass located on the left upper lip with ulcerated. The mass mea-
suring 1×1 cm had grown in size over the past 2 years.
Results: Histologic examination revealed dense amorphous material
stained with Congo red and Cristal violet in whole dermis. The amyloid
type was determined immunohistochemically as ALκ amyloid. Systemic
amyloidosis was not detected on systemic examination. The mass was
removed surgically, recurrence have not been found.
Conclusion: Although amyloidoma has been reported in many different
anatomic regions such as respiratory, genitourinary and gastrointestinal
tracts, nervous system, breast and soft tissue, the skin involvement is a
very rare condition, and only a few cases have been described in the
literature so far.
So we reported our case with solitary, cutaneous amyloidoma, because of
rarity.
E-PS-05-003
Cutaneous lymphadenoma: a case report of a rare entity
R.D. Badea*, G. Kingston
*Royal Berkshire NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: We report a case of cutaneous
lymphadenoma in the left pre-auricular region of a 35 year old man.
Although a rare entity, cutaneous lymphadenoma is recognised as a be-
nign lesion and surgical excision is curative.
Methods: A nodule measuring 6x6x4mm was excised from the
preauricular region of a 35 year old man with no significant medical
history. Microscopic examination reveals within the dermis an epithelial
tumour composed of sheets and nests of loosely cohesive epithelioid
cells, without retraction artefact, surrounded by a single layer of small
basaloid cells. Admixed with the epithelial cells are numerous bland
lymphocytes.
Results: The immunohistochemistry panel performed shows that the ep-
ithelial cells exhibit strong diffuse expression of Cytokeratin(AE1/AE3),
CK5/6 and bcl-2, and the majority of cells express p63.BerEP4 highlights
the epithelial cells at the periphery of the nests and sheets. Only a minority
of cells express EMA and CEA is negative. Interspersed there are S100
protein positive intralobular dendritic cells. The presence of small bland
lymphocytes infiltrating the epithelial component is confirmed by LCA
immunoexpression.
Conclusion: Cutaneous lymphadenoma is a rare neoplasm with 56 cases
reported in the English literature as at 2014.It usually presents as a slow-
growing nodule, most commonly on the head and it is clinically mistaken
for dermatofibroma, sebaceous hyperplasia or basal cell carcinoma.
Cutaneous lymphadenoma may be readily misdiagnosed due to its resem-
blance to the more common basal cell carcinoma. Although a rare entity,
an accurate diagnosis can be achieved on close examination of morpho-
logic features and hence ensure appropriate surgical treatment.
E-PS-05-004
Don’t forget about perianal hidradenoma papilliferum!
R. Barna*, D. Brebu, A. Dobrescu, C. Lazureanu, R. Cornea, S. Taban,
M. Cornianu
*Department of Pathology, Emergency County Hospital "Pius Brinzeu",
Timisoara, Romania
Background & objectives: Hidradenoma papilliferum (HP) is a rare
benign tumour of the apocrine sweat glands. It occurs mostly in women,
being more frequent in the vulvar area and uncommon in the perianal
region.
Methods: We describe a case of HP from a 37-year-old woman who
presented to the Surgery Department with a progressively increased
perianal nodule, accompanied by small bleeding after bowel movement.
She has first noticed the lesion approximately 3 months before. Her past
history was unremarkable and she denied any other symptoms.
Results: Examination of the perianal region revealed a well-defined,
erythematous nodule, measuring 7x6 mm and being localized within
the right posterolateral quadrant of the anal margin. The tumour was
excised with 3 mm surgical margin.
Gross examination showed a nodular, skin-covered lesion measuring 7 mm in
diameter, with grey-white cut surface. Histological analysis revealed tubular
and cystic structures along with papillary folds, lined by a dual population of
columnar to cuboidal cells with apocrine differentiation and pale nuclei.
Tumour exhibit reduced fibrous stroma with scanty plasmocytes. The patho-
logic diagnosis was hidradenoma papilliferum.
No postoperative complications were observed. The patient recovered
well and showed no evidence of recurrence after 24 months follow-up.
Conclusion: Becoming aware of the existence of HP is essential for
differential diagnosis of ano-genital lesions. Even though it is hard to
diagnose, HP seems to have a favourable prognosis and preferred treat-
ment option is surgical excision.
E-PS-05 Dermatopathology
Virchows Arch
E-PS-05-005
DRESS syndrome that resembles graft versus host reaction after
chemotherapy in a paediatric patient: a case report
M. Barros Barraza*, M. Rolon, C. Ortiz, J. Álvarez
*Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia
Background & objectives: DRESS syndrome is a potentially life
threating adverse drug-induced reaction that can mimic other diseases.
The aim of this article is to describe a case of DRESS syndrome associ-
ated with chemotherapy, whose histopathological presentation was sim-
ilar to graft-versus-host-disease.
Methods: We present the case of a 4-year-old male patient who started
chemotherapy with Vincristine, Cytarabine and Etoposide. The first clin-
ical signs consisted in fever, hemodynamic instability and itchy erythema
on the inner thigh with irregular plaques. Those lesions began to affect the
whole body surface. He also presented non-blanchable violaceous mac-
ules and papules, which did not involve the oral mucosa.
Results: Biopsies of skin lesions were taken and hyperkeratosis, local
parakeratosis, acanthosis with slight spongiosis and intraepithelial
dyskeratotic cells were observed. There was perivascular lymphoid infil-
trate with abundant eosinophils in the dermis. Additionally, permeation of
the eosinophils to the acrosyringium and the epithelium were found.
Conclusion: DRESS syndrome is a drug-induced reaction that share
histopathological findings in skin to those seen in graft-versus-host-dis-
ease. The key to differentiate between these two diseases is by observa-
tion of the least amount of apoptosis and the greater amount of eosino-
phils presented, that guide the diagnosis towards DRESS syndrome.
Despite the histological findings are not pathognomonic they were char-
acteristic enough to be of importance in differential diagnosis.
E-PS-05-006
Severe psoriasis associated with advanced liver fibrosis: a case report
M. Barros Barraza*, M. Rolon, M. Tapias, J. Álvarez
*Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia
Background & objectives: Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin
disease and a risk factor for development of metabolic syndrome and
related comorbidities such as hepatic failure. The aim of this article is to
describe a case of cirrhosis that was associated with psoriasis.
Methods: We present the case of a 62-years-old female patient with medical
history of obesity and liver cirrhosis secondary to non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis. The first clinical signs were the appearance of erythematous
plaques in the trunk and the scalp, which soon developed crusts. Those
lesions were not painful or itchy. For its study, biopsies of the skin were taken
Results: The histopathologic study showed marked hyperkeratosis and
parakeratosis of the epidermis associated to foci of mononuclear cell
infiltration as well as neutrophils forming Munro’s microabscesses.
Besides, there were psoriasiform hyperplasia of the epithelium with tel-
angiectasias in the dermal papillae and slight perivascular lymphoid in-
filtrate. Because of these findings, diagnosis of psoriasis was made.
Conclusion: Patients with psoriasis are at high risk of developing hepatic
disease. Previous studies have shown that proinflammatory cytokines via
interleukin 17 signalling can led to advanced liver fibrosis.
E-PS-05-007
Giant verrucous carcinoma of the lower extremity in a sub-Saharan
E. Cabeza Abati*, E. Cuello Entrena, J. Doña Girón, F.J. Velasco
Albendea, F. Martínez Ortiz
*Hospital Universitario Torrecárdenas, Spain
Background & objectives: Verrucous carcinoma is an unusual variant of
well-differentiated verrucous carcinoma, with slow-growing but locally
invasive. Most of them are non painful exophytic white plaques in the
oral cavity of middle-aged men. Its presentation in extremities is rare.
Methods: 53 years old Sub-Saharan male with ulcerovegetating lesion of
13 years of evolution located in the anterolateral region of left ankle and
foot. In 2014, Primary Care suspected a vascular origin, advising sporadic
local cures. In 2018, Dermatology took an incisional biopsy of a purulent
lesion with raised borders, fibrin plaques and central necrosis. Magnetic
resonance ruled out muscular invasion.
Results: The diagnosis was verrucous carcinoma. The patient rejected
amputation. In 2019, he consulted because of pain and fetid smell due to
an infection of the skin and soft tissues. He accepted infracondileal am-
putation. The lesion of 27 cm was yellowish white, well-defined and
unctuous diagnosing exophytic verrucous carcinoma with some mitosis,
perineural invasion, expansive growth, and Breslow thickness of 1´9 cm
and with the proximal margin greater than 4´5 cm.
Conclusion: Verrucous carcinoma is a low grade tumour associated to
VPH infection, repeated traumatism or tobacco and alcohol intake.
Histopathological diagnosis in small biopsies is controversial, so clinic-
pathological correlation is determining. The treatment of choice is surgery
with large resection margins due to high risk of local recurrence. It rarely
metastasises to regional ganglia. The significance of this case resides in its
clinical context and rare location, taking longer to treat.
E-PS-05-008
Syringocystadenocarcinoma papilliferum
N. Cociuba*, D. Szilagyi, M.S. Nemes, M. Bercea
*Emergency County Hospital Timisoara, Romania
Background & objectives: Syringocystadenocarcinoma papilliferum
(SCACP) is a rare adnexal tumour of the skin, derived from sweat glands,
with apocrine differentiation, the malignant variant of
Syringocystadenoma papilliferum (SCAP). Until the present day, there
are less than 50 cases reported in the literature.
Methods: A 74 years old woman clinically presented with a solitary tumour
located on the face, under the left infra-orbital margin. The lesion developed
slowly over the past 7 years. On clinical examination, the tumour was poorly
demarcated, painful, ulcerated, indurated, with purulent discharge, measuring
2/2/1 cm. A split-thickness technique was used for excision.
Results: The lesion presented as an ulcerated 1.6/1.4 cm nodule, with
grey-brownish cut surface. Histologically, an exophytic and endophytic
well circumscribed, non-encapsulated tumour, located in the dermis, with
pushing invasion into the subcutaneous fat. Superficially, there were pap-
illary structures lined by double layered cells (reminding of the benign
counterpart of the lesion - SCAP) forming funnel-shaped structures, com-
municating with cystic spaces; epithelial lining had pleomorphic cells and
increased mitotic activity. The deep component presented solid areas with
squamoid features. Stroma was reduced, with plasma cell rich infiltrate
and areas of necrosis and ulceration. The tumour cells were positive for
EMA, CK7, weakly positive for BerEP4 and negative for SMA and S100.
Conclusion: SCACP is an extremely rare skin tumour, in this case with
architectural features of SCAP and moderately differentiated squamous
invasive component, showing us the importance of broad differential
diagnosis and a correct diagnosis to provide the best possible patient care.
E-PS-05-009
Epstein-Barr Virus-associated hydroa vacciniforme, excellent
response to antiviral treatment
I. İmren, N. Çallı Demirkan, E. Çomut*, Ş. Duygulu
*Pamukkale University Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: A 16-year-old female patient is admitted to
the dermatology clinic for vesicupapular rashes on the nose that have
been repeated for 2 years in the spring-summer season. She had no known
systemic disease and no history of drug use.
Methods: This year, the patient’s complaints increased compared to the
previous year. Her complaints, which started in April last year and
Virchows Arch
regressed in October, this year continued during the winter and lesions
spread in the malar region and hand dorsum. In her systemic examination,
there was no abnormal finding other than mobile 1 cm diameter subman-
dibular lymphadenopathy.
Results: On the dermatological examination, vesicle and papules completely
covering the nose and haemorrhagic overlying epidermis were seen. Also
there were several hyperpigmented varioloform scars in the malar region
and hand dorsum. Leishmania, fungi and mycobacterium were not detected
in microbiological examination. On histopathological examination, intense
inflammation (mostly lymphocytes) under the ulcerated epidermis was ob-
served. Lymphocytes were stained in the reactive pattern with CD3,4,5,30
and nuclear positivity was detected with EBER. Direct immunofluorescence
was negative. EBV-VCA IgG andEBNA IgG positivity showninperipheral
blood. Patient was diagnosed as EBV-associated hydroa vacciniforme with
the clinical and histopathological findings.
Conclusion: Valaciclovir treatment was given to patient and her lesions
regressed with post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation at 2-month follow-
up. Systemic screening was performed due to the risk of developing
lymphoproliferative syndrome, but there was no finding. The patient
was followed up for periodic biopsies in terms of the risk of developing
EBV-associated hydroa vacciniforme-like lymphoproliferative disease.
E-PS-05-010
PRAME: a marker of sebaceous differentiation
I. Katikaridis*, M. Sajin, A. Chefani, T. Thomas, V. Ilankovan,
R.A. Karr, A. Lee, S.M. Taibjee, C. D'Arrigo
*Poundbury Cancer Institute, Dorchester, United Kingdom, University
Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: PRAME (PReferentially expressed Antigen
in MElanoma) is a member of the CTA (cancer testis antigens) family
originally identified as overexpressed in melanoma. We describe the use
of PRAME in the diagnosis of sebaceous cutaneous lesions.
Methods: We observed expression of PRAME in normal sebaceous
glands. The current panel of adjunctive stains (EMA, Adipophilin, AR
and Oil Red-O) is of limited effectiveness. We present two cases of
sebaceoma, both with a clinical diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma. We
stained for PRAME and compared them to a number of skin tumours that
may enter in the differential diagnosis.
Results: Both are well-circumscribed basaloid tumours lacking epider-
mal connection. One shows distinctive rippled, petaloid and labyrinthine
architecture. Both have scattered cells showing cytoplasmic vacuolation
and nuclear indentation lying singly or in small clusters, suggestive of
sebaceous differentiation. PRAME-IHC confirms sebaceous differentia-
tion in these cells and highlights numerous others more basaloid cells
with less obvious sebaceous phenotype. One case is MMR deficient
(MLH1 & PMS2). The other lesions are negative for PRAME.
Conclusion: The identification of cutaneous tumours with sebaceous
differentiation is important because of their association with ds-DNA
mismatch repair (MMR) syndromes (Lynch or Muir-Torre syndrome).
Sebaceous cells are key to this diagnosis however they can be scant in
sebaceoma (and sebaceous carcinoma). PRAME helps identify sebaceous
differentiation even in cells with little cytoplasmic vacuolation and does
not stain other clear cells. PRAME is a useful adjunctive stain to demon-
strate sebaceous differentiation.
E-PS-05-011
Hyperkeratosis lenticularis perstans (Flegel disease) in an uncom-
mon localisation
F.J. Díaz De La Pinta*, J.V. Margarita, I. Eraña Tomás, D.R. Jose Luis,
F.S. Maria Carmen, L. Requena Caballero
*Pathology Department Hospital Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Spain
Background & objectives: Hyperkeratosis lenticularis perstans (also
known as Flegel´s disease) is a rare dermatosis first described in 1957,
caused by an abnormal disorder of the keratinization, that usually has
characteristic clinicopathologic features, typically affecting the dorsal feet
and lower extremities.
Methods: We present a case from our hospital.
Results: A 79 year-old woman presented with a one-year history of
small, orange, asymptomatic and hyperkeratotic papules on her back.
Patient´s medical history was unremarkable. These lesions were
interpreted as horn plugs, suggesting Darier´s or Grover´s disease.
Histopathologic findings revealed focal and compact hyperkeratosis over-
lying a flattened epidermis, a well-circumscribed band-like mononuclear
infiltrate in the papillary dermis.
The infiltrate was predominantly of CD3-T cells (similar CD4 and CD8-
positive cells).
Conclusion: In only one previous report, as far as we know, hyperkera-
tosis lenticularis perstans involved the back region, supporting the local-
ized disorder of this disease.
It has been noted to be an autosomal dominant disease. However, our
patient seems to be an sporadic case.
Despite typically involving feet and legs, we remark the importance of
adding this entity to the differential when this kind of lesions occurs in
thorax and back, meanwhile we review its specific histological findings.
E-PS-05-012
Two case reports of hamartomatous lesions of the hair follicle
A. Dimitriadi*, N. Poulianitis, g. Koutsonikas, A. Kostopoulou,
A. Linardou, G. Kakiopoulos, T. Choreftaki
*General Hospital of Athens “G. Gennimatas”/Department of Surgical
Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: We present two cases of rare hamartomatous
lesions of the hair follicle in the skin.
Methods: The first case was a cystic lesion of the scalp.
Microscopically, it consisted of a cystically dilated hair follicle,
containing hair shaft fragments and communicating with the epider-
mis. It was lined by stratified squamous lesion with a granular cell
layer and numerous hair follicles arising from the cystic wall. Thus,
it was diagnosed as trichofolliculoma.
Results: In the second case we received a papule of the nose.
Histologically, there was a central cystic cavity, with keratin pearls and
without hair shafts, connected with numerous small sebaceous nodules.
Each epithelial component was surrounded by a dense collagenous stro-
ma. There were also small vessels, with perivascular fibroplasia. It was
diagnosed as a folliculosebaceous cystic hamartoma (FSCH).
Conclusion: Due to the rarity of the lesion, some studies consider FSCH
to be a very late stage of trichofolliculoma. However, the lack of com-
munication with the surface, along with the stromal component is con-
sidered a distinct difference between the two entities. Moreover, a study
of chronological changes in trichofolliculoma showed no features indi-
cating the replacement of the regressing secondary hair follicles by any
sebaceous elements.
E-PS-05-014
Primary anorectal melanoma – a diagnostic challenge of a mimicking
neoplasm
J. Gama*, J. Fraga, J. Madeira, F. Ramalhosa, C. Faria, V. Almeida,
M.B. Pimentão, A. Lai, R. Almeida, H. Moreira, M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Anal melanoma represents 0,5-2% of all
anorectal neoplasias and less than 2% of all melanomas. It is the third
most common melanoma after cutaneous and ocular melanoma, and it is
the most common site of occurrence in the gastrointestinal tract.
Methods: We present a case report of a 69-year old woman admitted to
our hospital with a history of mucus rectal discharge and rectorrhagia. A
Virchows Arch
colonoscopy was performed showing a 4,0 cm lesion in the anorectal
transition. The patient was submitted to an excisional biopsy.
Results: Gross examination revealed two fragments, with 4x2.5x2.5cm
and 2x1x0.5cm. The biggest showing one ulcerated lesion with
4x1.8x1.8cm, well defined, firm and whitish.
Histologically, we observed an expansive malignant melanocytic neopla-
sia, with lamina propria invasion and mucosa ulceration. The tumour
exhibited a solid pattern, composed by epithelioid and fusiform cells, with
an eosinophilic cytoplasm and pleomorphic nuclei with evident nucleoli,
sometimes with multinucleation. Melanic pigment was present irregularly
through the neoplasm. The stroma was fibrovascular with a slight lym-
phocytic permeation. Tumoral thickness was 19 mm with 2 mitosis/mm2,
focally coincident with the deep surgical margin.
Conclusion: The patient was submitted to abdominoperineal amputation,
that revealed lymph node metastasis. One year later, there was a relapse
with multiple distant metastasis: lung, liver, left kidney, pancreas, stom-
ach and subcutaneous tissue.
The prognosis is poor and distant metastasis are the main cause of mor-
bidity and mortality among these patients.
E-PS-05-015
Intermediate proliferating pilar tumour, case report and review of
literature
M. Hanks*, S. Elsheikh
*Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Proliferating pilar tumours (PPT) are rare
entities arising from the outer root sheath of hair follicles; it is thought
to arise from pre-existing pilar cysts. PPTs are usually benign however
malignant transformation has been recorded in very rare cases.
Methods: Current literature categories PPT into 3 categories - be-
nign, low grade malignant and high grade malignant. Low grade
features include stromal invasion and mild cytopathological abnor-
malities. Infiltrative growth, marked atypia, high mitotic activity
and geographic necrosis may indicate malignant transformation.
The differential diagnosis includes squamous cell carcinoma and
trichilemmal cysts.
Results: We report a case of a 70 year old gentleman with a 9 month
history of a rapidly growing scalp mass. Radiology demonstrated a multi
cystic lesion with bony erosions and small vessels connecting the lesion
to the epidural space. Initial biopsy revealed mildly atypical squamous
nests with evidence of trichilemmal keratinisation. A proliferating
trichilemmal neoplasm was suspected however further characterisation
could not be made. The excision was performed and showed features
consistent with a low grade PPT. The tumour showed mild to moderate
cytological atypia and focal infiltrative growth pattern. There was no
evidence of tumour necrosis or abnormal mitotic figures.
Conclusion: The determination of malignant potential in a proliferating
pilar tumour can be challenging given the small number of cases reported
in current literature. A high level of clinical suspicion and a multi-
disciplinary approach is necessary to facilitate effective patient care.
E-PS-05-016
Pseudotumoral presentation of cutaneous Rosai-Dorfman disease
M. Gonzalez, H. Iliev*, G.M. Parini, L. Serrano Munné, A. Puche
Gallego, J. Sanchez-Schmidt, R. Pujol, C. Barranco, B. Lloveras
*HCU Lozano Blesa (Zaragoza), Spain
Background & objectives: Cutaneous Rosai-Dorfman (CRD) disease is
a rare entity characterized by a histiocytic proliferation in the skin. CRD
diagnosis remains a challenge because of its often nonspecific histologic
presentation.
Methods: We present the case of an 82 y/o male with an isolated lesion
on the forehead, slowly growing over a period of more than 3 years,
evolving from a plaque stage to a tumour-like lesion. Multiple biopsies
were performed between 2015 and 2018.
Results: Biopsies showed a vaguely nodular histiocytic infiltrate in the
upper dermis, increasing over time to occupy all of the dermis thickness.
By immunohistochemistry, the histiocytes expressed CD68, S100, but
not CD1a. This was accompanied by an intense polymorphous inflam-
matory infiltrate, composed predominantly of plasma cells with mild
atypia, prominent nucleoli, but no light chain restriction. Initially the
plasma cell infiltrate was periadnexal and interstitial, but eventually be-
came diffuse. Neither peripheral blood alterations nor adenopathies or
visceromegalias were noted. A broad spectrum of entities was considered,
including malignant soft tissue tumours, but the special studies along with
the histology and the emperipolesis in the last biopsy, allowed the diag-
nosis of CRD.
Conclusion: CRD exhibits varied and occasionally confounding histo-
logic and clinical features, such as a pseudosarcomatous lesion, as in our
case report. Systemic work-up should be performed to rule out
extracutaneous involvement. Immunohistochemistry is particularly im-
portant to rule out other pathologies.
E-PS-05-017
Effects of platelet rich plasma in treatment of atopic dermatitis
N. Jaffar*, R. Ghani
*Jinnah Sindh Medical University, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Atopic Dermatitis is a chronic T cell
mediated inflammatory disease. Steroids and other immunosup-
pressant therapies are used for its treatment. Platelet rich plasma
(PRP) has been utilized as an alternative treatment option for var-
ious disorders. The aim of our study was to treat a patient of
Atopic Dermatitis with PRP.
Methods: A 16 year old girl presented to Musavvir Stem Cell clinic,
Karachi with itchy cutaneous lesions on both palms for past 7 months.
She was a diagnosed case of Atopic Dermatitis. After explaining the
procedure and obtaining consent, 15 cc blood sample was drawn. The
base line lab tests including CBC, ESR, random blood sugar, C - reactive
protein (CRP) & Ig E were performed. Rest of the blood sample was
transferred to PRP kit. The collected PRP was placed in Adilight 2 for
activation. The final product was transferred through cutaneous injections
into both palms. Three panels of PRP were administered with a gap of 15
days each. We assessed the patient by examination and by laboratory
parameters.
Results: Initially, raised levels of ESR, eosinophils, CRP and abnormal
Ig E were noted. After the first panel, mild improvement was seen.
However, after the second and third therapy, the patient reported marked
control on the itchiness, disappearance of rash as well as improved ESR,
CRP, normal eosinophils and IgE levels.
Conclusion: This study reports the beneficial effect of PRP therapy in a
patient of Atopic Dermatitis. It proves to be a safe & cost effective alter-
native treatment option.
E-PS-05-018
Disseminated extrafacial rosacea- acne rosacea papulonecrotic
type- a case report
S. Jakovljevic*, A. Fejsa Levakov, N. Vuckovic, L. Vujanovic,
J. Sekulic, L. Djurdjev
*Faculty of Medicine Novi Sad, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad,
Serbia, Clinic of Dermatovenereology Diseases, Clinical Center of
Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia
Background & objectives: Extrafacial rosacea is a rare form of chronic
acneiform skin disorder. It may occur in middle-aged males on the head
and neck, earlobes, arms and upper parts of thorax with diverse clinical
manifestation, whether affecting face or not.
Virchows Arch
Methods: We present a 56-year-old male patient with untreated skin
changes on the cheeks, scalp and chest in the form of dark erythematous
and oedematous confluent plaques, domed nodules and individual pus-
tules lasted for four months. Cauliflower-like appearance of plaques and
small pustules were located on the both earlobes. Having done a skin
biopsy, the accurate diagnosis was reached.
Results: The pathology analysis described an irregularly thickened, hy-
perkeratotic epidermis with ulceration and crust on the surface. Diffuse,
mixed inflammatory infiltrate was sited in superficial and mid dermis
invading hair follicles and forming adnexal pustules as well as extensive
necrotic areas. Small groups of epithelioid cells were located within in-
filtrate. The causing agent Demodex was seen in pilosebaceous unit.
Histopathological features of acne rosacea- papulonecrotic type con-
firmed the diagnosis.
Conclusion: Our report indicates an uncommon form of rosacea that may
be misdiagnosed. In the lack of typical clinical characteristics, in order to
differentiate from other skin disorders, such as folliculotropic mycosis
fungoides, and determine the proper diagnosis, histopathology examina-
tion plays essential role.
E-PS-05-019
Superficial CD34 positive fibroblastic tumour: the first case with a
targeted sequencing finding
J. Kim*, N.I. Kim
*Chonnam National University Hwasun, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: Superficial CD34 positive fibroblastic tu-
mour (SCPFT) is a recently described rare mesenchymal neoplasm of
borderline malignancy with only 42 cases reported to date.
Methods: Herein, the authors describe the case of a 52-year-old male
with a mass at the submandibular area.
Targeted sequencing of 93 cancer-related genes was performed on a
tumour DNA in the absence of paired normal.
Results: The tumour is characterized by its superficial location and
unique histologic features of striking pleomorphism, sparse mitotic fig-
ures, and diffuse CD34 immunoreactivity.
The sequencing result showed 3 single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) and
their corresponding variant allele fraction (VAF) and dbSNP ID number:
ATM M1321I (48.24%, rs35184530), BRAF D22N (43.18%,
rs397507456), TERT promoter (47.12%, rs10462697). Two missense
SNVs (ATM M1321I and BRAF D22N) were reported in COSMIC
database, but, considering VAF, these 3 SNVs could be a heterozygous
germline variants. Three genes belong to a group of 152 genes that con-
tribute to cancer susceptibility based on literature review.
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, this report presents the first
case of SCPFT with genetic findings. A combination of germline variants
could lead to a higher susceptibility for tumorigenesis.
E-PS-05-020
New case paradoxical reactions under TNF-α blocking agents
L. Smirnova, E. Orlova, G. Gabrielyan, A. Tsucanova, L. Kaiumova,
D. Kusraeva*
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: Paradoxical psoriasis is a side effect caused
by TNF-α blockade, independent of the specific drug and associated with
increased activation of innate immunity. Paradoxical psoriasis is pro-
voked by biological agents without identified predisposing factors.
Methods: Under the care there were 2 patients with a diagnosis “Psoriasis
Vulgaris, psoriatic arthritis” received therapy with the certolizumab
pegol.
Results: One of them a 41-year-old woman had an exacerbation of
palmoplantar pustulosis psoriasis after the fifth course of certolizumab
pegol in the dosing is 400 mg (given as 2 subcutaneous injections of
200 mg each). Another a 65-year-old man had an exacerbation of
palmoplantar pustulosis and plaque psoriasis after the third course of
certolizumab pegol in the same dose. The histology of a skin biopsy from
the affected areas was in keeping with palmoplantar pustular psoriasis:
histology of the skin biopsy revealed confluent parakeratosis, acanthosis,
neutrophils in stratum corneum and a dermal infiltrate of lymphocytes.
Conclusion: There are different theories that have been proposed to ex-
plain PAEs, the most realistic hypothesis is an imbalance in cyto-
kine production, which can contribute to the development of new
pathological pathways and cause PAEs.
The onset of PAEs close surveillance of newly available biological
drugs is necessary in order to detect the occurrence of new and/or
undescribed PAEs.
E-PS-05-021
Chemotherapy-induced ulcerative necrotic skin lesions: clinical cases
of pyoderma gangrenosum on the background of targeted therapy
for haematologic disorders
D. Kusraeva*, O. Olisova, N. Teplyuk, O. Grabovskaya, E. Orlova,
V. Varshavsky
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: Multiple ulcerative necrotic lesions of the
extremities in patients with oncohaematological diseases reduce the qual-
ity of life, provoking reduction or cancellation of chemotherapy. Analysis
of development mechanisms optimizes complex therapy increasing the
effectiveness of treatment.
Methods: Two cases of pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) in patients receiv-
ing targeted therapy. The first patient with multiple myeloma received
inhibitor of proinflammatory cytokines (lenalidomide), the second patient
with chronic B-cell lymphocytic leukaemia received a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (ibrutinib).
Results: Histological examination of skin samples demonstrate: in 1 case
- the dense neutrophilic infiltrate in the dermis with the formation of
subepithelial microabscesses, necrosis of individual collagen fibres, in 2
case - profuse neutrophilic infiltration of the dermis and hypodermis
without signs of leukocytoclastic vasculitis, which confirmed the diagno-
sis of PG. With a break in the specific treatment of oncohaematological
disorders, rashes regressed.
Conclusion: Multiple PG ulcers are regarded as a consequence of an
imbalance of cytokines and a decrease in the regulation of the TNF-
dependent apoptosis pathway provoked by biological drugs.
E-PS-05-022
Primary cutaneous eccrine carcinoma with pagetoid spread: a case
report and review of literature
S. Lashin*, S. Elsheikh
*University of Nottingham, United Kingdom; Menoufia University,
Egypt
Background & objectives: Primary eccrine carcinoma is an extremely
rare cutaneous malignant tumour arising from the eccrine glands. The aim
is to discuss the complex classification of these tumours and the role of
immuno-profile to differentiate between primary eccrine adenocarcinoma
and metastatic adenocarcinoma.
Methods: We report an 89-year-old white man who presented with a one
year history of indurated scaly plaque on the right cheek , clinically
suspected as squamous cell carcinoma. The patient has a past history of
multiple basal cell carcinoma affecting the head and neck. There was no
lymph node involvement.
Results: Histopathological examination showed epidermal infiltration by
monoclonal malignant cells, which were highlighted by CK7 and CEA
staining. The dermal component composed of nests of malignant epithe-
lial cells with evidence of ductal differentiation. The tumour extended to
Virchows Arch
the eccrine ducts in intraductal carcinoma (DCIS) like pattern. Perineural
invasion is identified. Immunohistochemistry and clinical assessment ex-
cluded extra-cutaneous adenocarcinoma. The patient was treated with
wide local excision with three- year follow up without evidence of local
recurrence or distant metastasis.
Conclusion: Primary eccrine carcinoma is a locally aggressive with a
high rate of recurrence or distant metastasis. It mimics cutaneous meta-
static adenocarcinoma from breast, lung or colon. Clinical exclusion of
extra-cutaneous adenocarcinoma and immunohistochemistry are essen-
tial to exclude cutaneous metastatic adenocarcinoma.
E-PS-05-023
Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma of the skin: a case report
S. Pappa, A. Linardou*, N. Poulianitis, D. Bouklas, A. Kostopoulou,
E. Gkamatsi, T. Choreftaki
*General Hospital of Athens "G.Gennimatas"/, Department of Surgical
Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma is de-
fined as a rare and poorly differentiated variant of squamous cell carci-
noma, with prominent reactive inflammatory infiltrate mimicking undif-
ferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma and has uncertain origin.
Methods: We present a case of a 59-year-old woman with a noose pap-
ule, measuring 1,2cm in diameter. The lesion was excised with a clinical
hypothesis of basal cell carcinoma.
Results: Microscopically, the tumour is composed of irregular nests
of malignant epithelial cells in a background of reactive lymphoid
cells including mature plasma cells in dermis. The tumour cells
were mainly polygonal in shape with an eosinophilic cytoplasm,
containing vesicular nuclei, prominent atypia, numerous mitoses,
diffuse lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate surrounding the epithelial
nests and an infiltrating tumour margin. Immunohistochemistry re-
vealed cytokeratin-positive cells (AE1/AE3) and p63 protein, indi-
cating epithelial histogenesis and squamous differentiation. The
tumour cells were negative for CK7, CK20, S100 and BerEp4.
Lymphoid infiltrate was positive for CD3 and CD20. Indirect
nasolaryngoscopy and Epstein-Barr virus immunoperoxidase stain-
ing excluded metastasis from a nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Conclusion: According to literature review, the histogenesis of
lymphoepitheliomalike carcinomas remains controversial between an ad-
nexal origin and an infiltrated squamous cell carcinoma. In spite of the
high-grade histologic features of LELCS, patients have a good prognosis,
without recurrences or metastases.
E-PS-05-025
Plaque-like cutaneous mucinosis: an unusual disorder at an unusual
age
A. Martínez García*, N. Torecilla, M. Álvarez, I. Colmenero, H. Iliev
Iliev, L. Pérez Domingo, M. Sánchez Lazcano, M. García, M.J. Viso
Soriano
*HCU Lozano Blesa (Zaragoza), Spain
Background & objectives: Plaque-like cutaneous mucinosis (PCM) is a
rare and heterogenous group of skin disorders related by mucin accumu-
lation in the dermis, of which there are 15 cases reported. It affects more
women in the third and fifth decade.
Methods: A healthy 11-year-old boy with a midline back lesion with
progressive growth in the last 6 months. It is a well-defined, raised, soft
plate, with several yellowish papules on its surface. Imaging studies only
revealed lesion at the level of the dermis and superficial subcutaneous
tissue. The diagnostic impression was of smooth muscle hamartoma. A
biopsy was performed.
Results: Microscopically, the most striking finding is dermal mucin,
arranged interstitially and perianexially (Azul-Alcian PAS positive), but
not intrafollicular, without striking increase in fibroblasts or other alter-
ations in collagen or elastic tissue. There is also present an slight chronic
inflammatory infiltrate in a follicle and epidermis with reactive changes.
The clinical presentation and the histological signs found, suggest the
diagnosis of plaque-like cutaneous mucinosis (PCM).
Conclusion: The onset of PCM in childhood is even more infrequent, and
it can suppose a diagnostic challenge to differentiate from other cutaneous
connective tissue diseases or systemic inflammatory dermatoses.
E-PS-05-026
Idiopathic cutaneous angiosarcoma: about two cases
K. Marwa*, B. Sriha, A. Bchir, S. Mestiri, Z. Lajmi, A. Bdioui, M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, F. Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Angiosarcoma represents 5% of all malig-
nant skin tumours. It is an aggressive neoplasia showing blood or lym-
phatic vessel differentiation. The head and neck are the most common
sites.
We aimed to delineate the clinical and histopathological features of the
cutaneous angiosarcoma.
Methods: We report two cases of cutaneous angiosarcoma diagnosed in
the year of 2019. The first patient was a 56-year-old man who presented
erythematous infiltrated lesion centred by two purple keratotic papules in
the nose. The second patient was a 74-year-old man who presented ul-
cerative lesion with infiltrated border of the scalp for 6 months.
Results: Both patients have had a skin biopsy. Histopathologic examina-
tion revealed irregular anastomosing vascular channels in the dermis,
lined by endothelial cells with enlarged and hyperchromic nuclei, dissect-
ing collagen bundles, and surrounding vascular structures and eccrine
ducts. Initially, for the second case, a melanoma of the scalp was strongly
suspected. An immunohistochemical study, for both patients, was done. It
was positive for CD31 and ERG and negative for CD34 , HHV-8 and
HMB-45. The diagnosis of cutaneous angiosarcoma was retained. A
granulomatous rosacea was associated to the angiosarcoma of the nose.
Conclusion: Cutaneous angiosarcoma is a rare malignant vascular
tumour and predominantly seen in the white‑skinned people. In
most cases, its aetiology is unknown. its location at the head and
the neck of the elderly is a great mimicker with many clinical pre-
sentations.
E-PS-05-030
Trichoblastic carcinosarcoma in the pre-sternal region: a case report
F. Mundim*, M. Engelman, R. Grande, T. Lopes, P. Mundim, N. Sousa,
B. Rodrigues, A.C. Borges, M. Lopes, G. Miranda, R. Reis
*UNIVAS, UNIFENAS, Brazil
Background & objectives: Trichoblastic carcinosarcoma is a rare case be-
cause it is a biphasic tumour. Second polyclonal theory in which two or more
strains of multipotent cells generate epithelial or mesenchymal components.
Methods: CRS, female, 93 years old, Brazilian. He sought outpatient
care an ulcerated nodular lesion, which was painless and had evolved
for 9 months. On examination, the tumour lesion measured about five
centimetres in diameter and had a vegetating ulcerative aspect in the pre-
sternal region. Underwent surgery for excision of the lesion, after being
referred to the pathology service.
Results: The result of the anatomopathological examination was biphasic
neoplasia consisting of epithelial and stromal components with a high mi-
totic index. Immunohistochemical examination reveals biphasic malignant
cutaneous neoplasia consisting of a basaloid cell component of eosinophilic
cytoplasm, a high nucleus-cytoplasm ratio, and evident nucleoli, forming
infiltrative beams with important mitotic activity and follicular differentia-
tion. There is a distinct and intermixed component to the epithelial blocks,
consisting of atypical spindle cells and with mitotic activity a myxoid stro-
ma. The immunoassay panel shows positivity for p63 protein in the
Virchows Arch
epithelial component, with a high proliferative index in both components.
The set of findings favours low-grade trichoblastic carcinosarcoma.
Conclusion: Trichoblastic carcinosarcoma is a recently recognized ad-
nexal neoplasm in the WHO classification of skin. The rarity of this
tumour may be due to under-recognition and under-reporting. This case
represents the ninth reported trichoblastic carcinosarcoma in the world.
E-PS-05-031
Spitz-type melanocytic tumours with the same morphological
diagnosis and different genetic alterations: 3 case report series
N. Musteikaite*, J. Makstiene
*Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Lithuania
Background & objectives: Atypical Spitz tumour (AST) is a diagnosti-
cally challenging group of melanocytic lesions that share features of
benign Spitz nevi (SN) and Spitz melanoma. Biological behaviour and
clinical course of AST remains largely unknown. Nevertheless, ancillary
diagnostic techniques offer new opportunities.
Methods: We present three clinical cases of skin lesions for female pa-
tients of 17, 6 and 44 years old. Local excision was performed and AST
diagnosis was established with recommendations to obtain sentinel
lymph node (SLN) biopsy. Positive SLN were detected in two cases.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) and molecular testing was performed to
present more relevant diagnosis.
Results: Intrinsic pattern was observed in IHC reactions with p16 and
p21, aberrations at typical chromosomal loci were detected in FISH, and
no mutations were identified after HRAS/BRAF genetic testing for a 17
years old patient. No chromosomal aberrations were identified for a sec-
ond patient after comparative genomic hybridization. Significant cytolog-
ical atypia, strong positive IHC reaction with HMB-45 and Ki-67 activity
10% were observed in metastatic cells of adult patient’s SLN.
Conclusion: AST diagnosis remained just for a 17 years old patient,
meanwhile SN and a Spitzoid melanoma diagnoses were established in
the other two cases, respectively. Discussed cases of Spitz lineage tu-
mours represent a diagnostic testing position towards stepwise implemen-
tation of ancillary diagnostic techniques assisting to improve accuracy of
challenging ambiguous Spitzoid neoplasms diagnosis, and understand
that routine histological testing alone may not be considered as a clini-
cally reliable method for the accurate validation.
E-PS-05-032
Diffuse multiple syringomas of the scalp in scarring alopecia: guilt by
association?
N. Nardini*, C.G. Wanniarachchi, C.M. Stefanato
*Department of Dermatopathology, St John's Institute of Dermatology,
Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Syringomas and syringoma-like eccrine
sweat duct proliferations may occur in association with alopecia. Some
of these proliferations are focal incidental findings and not the primary
cause of the alopecia.
Methods: A 57-year old woman, skin type V, presented with multiple ill-
defined patches of alopecia in absence of erythema, scale, tufting or
follicular plugging. The patient was otherwise fit and well with no rele-
vant past medical history.
Results: Histopathology from the scalp biopsy revealed diffuse loss of
hair follicles and multiple cystic structures with ‘tadpole’ appearance
lined by ductal epithelium within a hyalinised stroma in the superficial
dermis. Rare miniaturised hair follicles and follicular scars were present.
Inflammation was minimal. A diagnosis of scarring alopecia with diffuse
multiple syringomas was made.
Mehregan & Mehregan described syringoma-like eccrine sweat duct pro-
liferations in scarring and non-scarring alopecia; they felt that eccrine duct
hyperplasia was an incidental finding and did not play a major role in
causing alopecia. Conversely, other authors believe that these prolifera-
tions are true syringomas causing scarring alopecia.
Conclusion: Whilst this finding may be incidental, in this instance we
believe it may be a relevant cofactor in the pathogenesis of scarring
alopecia. Our case underscores the value of clinicopathological correla-
tion and biopsy in the setting of scarring alopecia.
E-PS-05-033
Double-hit primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma
N. Nardini*, D. Markiewicz, E. Calonje
*Department of Dermatopathology, St John's Institute of Dermatology,
Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Double-hit lymphoma (DHL) is defined
as a high grade B-cell lymphoma (BCL) with MYC translocation
combined with an additional translocation involving BCL2 and/or
BCL6. The most common type is MYC/BCL2 DHL, whereas MYC/
BCL6 is rare.
Methods: An 83 year old woman presented with a nodular well demar-
cated reddish lesion with smooth surface in right popliteal fossa.
Her past medical history war remarkable for melanoma.
Results: Histology showed a non-epidermotropic, dense and diffuse der-
mal and subcutaneous infiltrate separated from the epidermis by a Grenz
zone and composed of sheets of large, fairly uniform, atypical lymphoid
cells with prominent nucleoli. No germinal centre formation was seen.
Ulceration was absent.
By immunohistochemistry, tumour cells showed an activated B-cell phe-
notype (CD20, CD79, PAX5, MUM1, BCL2 and BCL6 positive) with
negative staining for CD3, CD10, CD30 and EBER. Diffuse weak pos-
itivity for CD5 was noted. The proliferation index was high.
Staging including a PET scan was negative.
Fluorescence in situ hybridisation showed MYC and BCL6 rearrange-
ment, in keeping with a double-hit primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.
Conclusion: The classification of primary cutaneous BCL displaying
diffuse pattern and predominantly large cell morphology can be challeng-
ing. Correlation with clinical presentation, staging, histological features,
immunohistochemistry and molecular analysis is crucial to reach the di-
agnosis that will allow prognostication and therapy.
E-PS-05-034
Nilotinib-induced alopecia: a clinicopathologic challenge
N. Nardini*, W. Hunt, T. Wright, E. McGrath, C.M. Stefanato
*Department of Dermatopathology, St John's Institute of Dermatology,
Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Nilotinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor used
in the therapy for chronic myeloid leukaemia. Dermatological reactions
(keratosis pilaris, pruritus, dry skin, alopecia) are its most common non-
haematological adverse effects. Their management is challenging, in the
absence of alternative anticancer agents.
Methods: A 49 year old woman presented with a 10 year history of hair
thinning and hair loss in the fronto-temporal area with no discrete patches,
focal perifollicular scale and mild erythema. Her past medical history was
remarkable for chronic myeloid leukaemia treated with Nilotinib.
Results: Histopathology from the scalp biopsies showed an increased
number of telogen hair follicles and an increased number of fibrous tracts
in the subcutaneous tissue. Interface changes were seen at the infundibu-
lum, with perifollicular lymphocytic infiltrate and fibrosis. Partial loss of
the sebaceous gland was also present.
Although clinically non-scarring, a histopathological diagnosis of scar-
ring alopecia consistent with early lichen planopilaris on a background of
female pattern hair loss was made. In view of the clinical history, the
findings were interpreted as secondary to Nilotinib therapy.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: The mechanism of adverse reactions to tyrosine kinase in-
hibitors is not well understood. As the treatment of alopecia can be chal-
lenging, further investigation into the underlying mechanism involved in
these effects may provide potential therapeutic target. Furthermore, our
case highlights that the identification of one pathology in alopecia spec-
imens does not exclude other concomitant aetiologies and pathologists
should be aware of that.
E-PS-05-035
A rare case of cutaneous lymphoepithelial - like carcinoma
B.R. Nataras*, R. Barna, C. Lazureanu
*Department of Pathology, Clinical County Hospital Timisoara,
Romania
Background & objectives: Poorly differentiated variant of cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma – lymphoepithelial carcinoma (lymphoepithelioma
– like carcinoma) is an uncommon entity. The morphology and immunohis-
tochemistry (IHC) are crucial for the diagnostic process.
Methods: From the database of our pathology department, we extracted
the case of a 83-year old male patient that presented in the plastic surgery
department with a painless cutaneous nodular tumour, with imprecise
borders, ulcerated and inflamed, measuring 2/1.5 cm, localized in the
temporal area. Regarding the surgical specimen, routine paraffin embed-
ding, haematoxylin&eosin staining and immunohistochemistry was
performed.
Results: Microscopically, the malignant epithelial proliferation had solid
and lobular patterns, showing a dense inflammatory infiltrate (predomi-
nantly plasmocytic). The tumour was composed from 2 cell populations:
the majority of the malignant cells had vesicular nuclei with nucleoli and
eosinophil cytoplasm, the other cells having chromophobe cytoplasm
(adipocyte-like). The tumour cells were positive for panCK (AE1/AE3),
EMA, p63, CK8/18 and negative for S100, Melan-A and sinaptophysin.
Conclusion: The morphology of cutaneous lymphoepithelial carcinoma
is often misleading and needs to be correlated with immunohistochemical
studies. The IHC profile allowed us to eliminate metastatic undifferenti-
ated nasopharyngeal carcinoma (lymphoepithelioma), Merkel cell carci-
noma, lymphoma and melanoma from the differential diagnosis list.
E-PS-05-036
An uncommon and rare coexistence of basal cell carcinoma with
molluscum contagiosum
O. Oguntunde*, A. Wilson
*Yeovil District Hospital NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the
commonest skin cancer worldwide. Molluscum contagiosum on the other
hand is a skin infection caused by a double stranded DNA virus, pox
virus.
Methods: The coexistence of BCC and molluscum contagiosum has only
been reported once in the literature to the best of our knowledge and there
is no known documented case in the UK. We present an 80-year old man
who was referred to the plastic surgery department by a dermatologist for
excision of possible BCC on the helical root of the left ear
Results: The only past medical history was atrial fibrillation for which
they were taking Rivaroxaban. He had no history to suggest immunosup-
pression. He underwent excision of the clinically convincing BCC along
with the underlying cartilage.
Histologically, the skin excision revealed two different lesions. The first
lesion showed basaloid proliferation with artefactual retraction consistent
with nodular type basal cell carcinoma. In another separate focus was a
cup crater filled with large cells that have eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclu-
sions in keeping with Molluscum contagiosum. The margins were
completely excised. BCC in skin excisions are part of the routine fairly
straight forward cases
Conclusion: commonly diagnosed by a general pathologists. There have
been documented association of BCC with several other skin lesions. It is
also important to bear in mind the possibility of a co-existence with MC
irrespective of the immune status.
E-PS-05-037
Renal cell carcinoma cutaneous metastasis: two cases of atypical
metastatic presentation
B. Cobanoglu Simsek, T. Soylemez, Z.C. Olgun*, S. Ozkanli
*Istanbul Medeniyet University Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: RCC can metastasize to all organs, but most
frequently to lung, bone, brain and liver. The skin and especially the scalp
is a very unusual site. We present two cases of cutaneous metastatic clear
cell RCC to the skin.
Methods: A 74-year-old male patient presented with multiple nodular
masses on the scalp. He was diagnosed as clear cell renal cell carcinoma
a year ago, and
a 63-year-old male patient with no medical or surgical history presented
with nodular masses on the buccal mucosa and neck. Excisional biopsy
was performed in both.
Results: On microscopic examination of both, the tumours were arranged
in a diffuse, sheet-like pattern interrupted by small, thin walled vascular
structure in dermis. Tumour cells had uniform, hyperchromatic nuclei and
large, clear cytoplasm. The immunoprofile of these tumours showed dif-
fuse staining for PAX8,CD10,vimentin,and negative staining for
SOX10,HMB45,Melan A,CD68,CK 7,and CK20. Therefore, consider-
ing the morphological findings and immunohistochemistry results of
these neoplasms, the patients were diagnosed with RCC metastatic to
the skin.
Conclusion: The skin and particularly the scalp is a rare site of RCC
metastatic involvement. Metastases to the skin should be kept in
mind due to similarity of primary skin tumours. The morphological
findings and immunohistochemistry results may be able to distin-
guish between primary and secondary neoplasms. Despite poor
prognosis, diagnosis and surgical excision are crucial and may im-
prove the survival.
E-PS-05-039
Cutaneous metastasis from hepatocellular carcinoma: a case report
A.N. Toksoz Yildirim, S. Ozkanli*, G. Cihaner
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Hepatocellular carcinoma(HCC) is a tumour
with increasing incidence in the recent decade. The most frequent sites of
extrahepatic metastasis of HCC are the lungs, bones, adrenal glands; the
skin is a very rare site for metastasis. We report a case of cutaneous
metastasis of HCC.
Methods: We present the case of a 67-year-old man who was diagnosed
with HCC six years ago and presented with a 1-month history of an
enlarging skin lesion at the left malar region. Clinically, it appeared as a
reddish nodule with red/blue lacunas visible on dermoscopy. As the ap-
pearance was suggestive of a haemangiomatous lesion, it was sampled as
punch biopsy.
Results: Histopathological evaluation of biopsy specimen showed that
the lesion consisted of trabeculae of polygonal cells with eosinophilic
cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli. The tumour cells were positive for
hepatocyte antigen and negative for EMA and PANCK, confirming the
diagnosis to be metastatic HCC.
Conclusion: Metastases of HCC should be included in the differen-
tial diagnosis of growing lesions on unusual localizations. Biopsy is
essential to confirm the diagnosis. The diagnosis of HCC from a
cutaneous lesion is very uncommon and is associated with poor
prognosis.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-05-040
Cellular neurothekoma: A potential pitfall in cutaneous neoplasms
G. Cihaner, B. Cobanoglu Simsek, S. Ozkanli*, A.S. Karadag
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Cellular neurothekoma is a rare, benign,
cutaneous neoplasm which frequently causes diagnostic difficulty.
Recent studies have shown that cellular neurothekoma is unrelated
to classical neurothekoma and is more likely of histiocytic lineage.
Methods: A twelve year-old female patient represented with a rap-
idly growing, painless nodular lesion on the back. The creamy
coloured lesion was 0,8cm in diameter, localised in the subcutane-
ous tissue. In the dermis, clusters of mostly epithelioid, and rarely
spindled cells with vesicular nuclei forming groups, sometimes
micronodular; separated by dense collagenous stroma are seen on
a myxoid background. The lesion contains approximately 12-13/
10HPF mitoses.
Results: Fibrohystiocytic tumours, muscle derived lesions and neural
lesions such as nerve sheath myxoma were considered in differential
diagnosis. Immunohistochemical studies showed strong positive
staining with vimentin, MITF and NSE. Negative staining of
PanCK and EMA and strong positive staining with vimentin support-
ed lesion’s mesenchymal origin. While S100 and SOX10 negativity
excluded neural sheath tumours and classical neurothekoma, nega-
tive staining of desmin and MyoD1 excluded muscle derived tu-
mours. CD34 negativity excluded dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.
GFAP was performed due to lesion’s resemblance of cutaneous me-
ningioma and came out negative. In order to exclude atypical
fibroxanthoma CD99 negativity was used. Histopathological and im-
munohistochemical findings were consistent with cellular
neurothekoma.
Conclusion: This uncommon benign neoplasm should be included in the
differential diagnosis of dermal nodules in children as they can be mis-
taken for malignancy due to high mitosis rates and cause unnecessary
treatment.
E-PS-05-041
A case report: histopathological study of an acneiform eruption viz
chloracne
A. Rai*, R. Dhar, S. Sahu
*MGM Medical College, Navi Mumbai, India
Background & objectives: Chloracne, a rare variant of acne caused by
systemic over-exposure to halogenated aromatic compounds
(chloracnegen) either occupational or environmental. These are
acneiform eruptions commonly affecting the face in males and should
be considered a differential diagnosis in similar presentations.
Methods: This study is about a 28-year-old-male working at a
chemical industry, who presented with multiple hyperpigmented
papules and comedones on face and upper limbs. We examined
the histopathological aspects of the disease and correlated clinically.
Results: Histopathology revealed skin tissue lined by keratinized
stratified squamous epithelium showing dilated infundibulum filled
with keratotic plug composed of orthokeratotic basket-weave baso-
philic corneocytes. Other dilated infundibulum containing eosino-
philic laminated or granular sebum were also seen. Few mature
sebaceous glands were noted. Hyperpigmentation of the lesions re-
sulted from presence of abundant melanin along the basal layer of
the epidermis and epithelium of the infundibular plugs. A diagnosis
of Chloracne was confirmed.
Conclusion: Though rare, chloracne is still prevalent and should
be familiar to all practitioners to be considered a differential di-
agnosis in case of acneiform eruptions with relevant history of
exposure to the chloracnegens and further confirmed on
histopathology.
E-PS-05-042
A case report: histopathological study of an unusual presentation of
lupus vulgaris
A. Rai*, S. Sahu, R. Dhar
*MGM Medical College, Navi Mumbai, India
Background & objectives: In practice, some cases of cutaneous tuber-
culosis do not readily fit into any clinical or histological categories. This
case is one of those rarity and we illustrate the challenges faced in
reaching up to the diagnosis.
Methods: A 65-year-old-male, presenting with single ill-defined ery-
thematous plaque with dirty-yellow crusting over the back was biopsied.
The histopathological aspects were assessed. Few other investigations
were performed and clinical correlation done.
Results: Multiple histopathological sections revealed skin tissue lined by
hyperkeratotic stratified squamous epithelium comprising small foci of
inflammatory cell collection. The upper dermis showed infiltration of
lymphocytes. Non-necrotizing granulomas composed of epithelioid cells,
Langhans type giant cells with characteristic peripheral arrangement of
the nuclei along with foreign body type giant cells and numerous lym-
phocytes were noted in the dermis. Other investigations were performed
and correlated.
Conclusion: After a detailed histopathological examination along with
consideration of differentials, a diagnosis of Lupus Vulgaris was con-
firmed.
E-PS-05-043
Porocarcinoma of skin – report of a rare case
A. Romanov*, M. Mnikhovich, T. Bezuglova, D. Kushch, V. Balayants,
N. Maluygin, P. Bliganov, G. Ushanov
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Eccrine porocarcinoma (EP) is a rare type of
skin cancer (from 0.005 to 0.01%) that forms from the sweat glands which
difficult to diagnosis, because tumour have many common structures.
Methods: A case analysis of a postoperative skin biopsy obtained from a
39-year-old patient with a diagnosis of porocarcinoma of the right upper
limb(hand projection)was carried out.
Results: The patient underwent 2 relapses. The debut of the second
relapse was the tumour invasion into the soft tissues and bones of the
forearm and distant lung metastases. The stump of the upper limb
was amputated at the level of the upper third of the shoulder. Light
microscopy shows elongated epidermis composed of interconnection
strands of atypical epithelial poroid tumour cells, Solid aggregates of
tumour cells and duct structures, and cystic epithelial cell nests ag-
gregates. Prominent mitotic figures and atypical mitoses often ob-
served. IHC study shows diffusely positive cytoplasmic staining for
pancytokeratin AE1 / AE3, CK6 and CK7. Prominent cytoplasmic
expression of CEA and EMA was observed only in Ductal and cystic
structures.
Conclusion: This case broadens our understanding of the nature, physi-
ology, and pathology of porocarcinomas. This gives hope for the timely
and adequate diagnosis of these tumours with subsequent treatment.
E-PS-05-044
A misleading heavily pigmented melanocytic tumour
I. Saguem*, M. Triki, K. Sellami, O. Boudaouara, B. Massara, H. Turki,
M. Nicolas, D.L.F. Arnaud, T. Boudawara, M. Mellouli
*Department of Pathology, Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: The differential diagnosis of heavily
pigmented melanocytic neoplasms is wide including melanoma, blue
nevus, pigmented epithelioid melanocytoma (PEM), deep penetrating
Virchows Arch
nevus and pigmented Spitzoid lesions. We report a case of a pigmented
melanocytic tumour that posed a diagnostic challenge.
Methods: We report a case of a 43-year-old man who presented with a
4-year history of a scalp nodule that had enlarged slowly in the last 4
months.
Results: Physical examination revealed a blue dome-shaped mass, sized
1.7 cm. A marginal excision was performed. Histological examination
revealed an epithelioid and spindle-shaped proliferation in the dermis,
composed of mildly atypical melanocytes with heavy pigmentation.
Nuclei were vesicular with prominent nucleoli and rare mitoses
(1/10HPF). No tumour necrosis was observed. An additional junctional
dendritic component was associated. Immunohistochemical staining
showed expression of HMB45 and a low proliferation index
(Ki67<1%). From the above findings, the proposed diagnosis was
PEM. The case was sent to a referent centre of dermatopathology in
France. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for PRKAR1A and
molecular testing revealed a mutation for GNAQ and no mutation of
BRAF, NRAS and CKIT.
Conclusion: Compound blue nevus (CBN) is a rare variant in the vast
clinical and morphological spectrum of blue melanocytic proliferations.
CBN is a distinctive histopathologic variant of blue nevus with a chal-
lenging diagnosis. In fact, these lesions can be misdiagnosed as combined
blue nevus, PEM and melanoma. Molecular analysis is necessary to make
the right diagnosis and avoid unnecessary invasive procedures.
E-PS-05-045
ALK-positive histiocytosis: rare disease with tremendous implica-
tions - case report
J. Liu, K. Norga, X.B. Trinh, M. Ruppert, V. Siozopoulou*
*Department of Pathology, Antwerp University Hospital, Belgium
Background & objectives: ALK-positive histiocytosis is a newly de-
scribed non-Langerhanscell tumour. It mainly affects children or adoles-
cents and can be localized or systemic with involvement of many organs
such as skin, liver, spleen, bone marrow. In disseminated cases can even
lead to death.
Methods: We report a case of a 2 years old girl with a small vulvar lesion,
clinically described as a cyst. There was no medical history. The lesion
was excised and sent for histopathological investigation.
Results: The microscopy showed a non-circumscribed dermal lesion
consistent of round to spindle cells with minimal cytomorphologic atypia.
There were scattered mitotic figures. No necrosis.
Immunohistochemistry showed positivity of the cells for CD68 without S100
expression. These cells were also diffusely and strongly ALK-positive.
Further molecular analysis with NGS revealed a KIF5B-ALK gene fusion.
The diagnosis of an ALK-positive histiocytosis was then suggested.
The patient underwent computed tomography, ultrasonography and
blood sampling, which demonstrated hepatosplenomegaly and slight el-
evated level of eosinophils in the blood. Liver and bone marrow biopsies
showed no signs of disease. Our patient showed no relapse 10 months
after the initial diagnosis.
Conclusion: Only limited cases of ALK-positive histiocytosis are report-
ed in the English literature. Given its rarity, there is limited information
about the possible therapeutic options and the prognosis. Awareness of
the entity would help in better recording of the disease.
E-PS-05-046
Clinicopathological features of cornu cutaneum: a tertiary centre
experience
B. Cobanoglu Simsek, T. Soylemez*, S. Ozkanli
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Cornu cutaneum (CC) or cutaneous horn is a
clinical term that describes conical protruding hyperkeratosis. This study
aims to focus on the experience of a tertiary centre encountered through-
out 11 years of surgical pathology and dermatopathology practise.
Methods: Medical reports of patients who had clinical diagnosis
and underwent surgical excisions of CC lesions and also that had
their respective histopathologic reports during the period from 2008
to 2019 at Istanbul Medeniyet University Goztepe Training and
Research Hospital were analysed. A total of 137 patients with CC
were detected from the pathology archive.
Results: Majority of the lesions were located on the head and neck(n=86,
63.2%). Twenty-one patients had a lesion on the upper limbs(15.4%),
fifteen patients had a lesion on the lower limbs(11%), fourteen patients
had a lesion on the trunk(10.3%). Base of the lesions were diagnosed as
actinic keratosis in twenty-seven patients, verruca vulgaris in five pa-
tients, seborrheic keratosis in four patients, microinvasive squamous cell
carcinoma in one patient, squamous papilloma in one patient.
Conclusion: Cutaneous horns are generally benign entities; however
possibility of approximately one third of them harbouring prema-
lignant or malignant skin lesions should be kept in mind.
E-PS-05-047
A five-year retrospective analysis of basal cell carcinoma: a
monocentric study
S. Ozkanli, T. Soylemez*, H. Keskin, H. Seneldir, B. Cobanoglu Simsek
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: This study aimed to define the histopath-
ological subtypes, body site distribution, and single or multiple
incidence rate(s) of BCC patients in Istanbul, Turkey, which has a
population comprised of millions of people from many different
areas of the country.
Methods: We retrospectively analysed data concerning 896 cases of
BCC treated at Istanbul Medeniyet University Goztepe Training
and Research Hospital between 2014 and 2018.
Results: Our univariate analysis showed age, tumour size, and tumour
multicentricity to all be significantly related to gender(p = 0.011, p =
0.001, and p = 0.021, respectively). Further, age, male gender, and tu-
mour size were all significantly related to tumour multicentricity(p =
0.003, p = 0.021, and p = 0.001, respectively).BCC was found to be most
common in men, and the diameters of the BCC tumours were also larger
in male patients. Multiple BCC was more frequently seen in older and in
male patients, and the tumours again had larger diameters in these groups.
The nodular type of BCC was the most frequently seen type in all the age
groups.
Conclusion: As our study is the first BCC study that has the most
number of cases in Turkey and as Istanbul reflects the population of
Turkey, it is important for the data of BCC cases in Turkey.
E-PS-05-048
Cutaneous metastasis of bladder urothelial carcinoma: a case report
H. Gunel, T. Soylemez*, B. Cobanoglu Simsek
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Cutaneous metastasis from transitional cell
bladder carcinoma is a rare clinical entity associated with poor prognosis.
We present a case of cutaneous metastasis arising from an urothelial
bladder carcinoma in a male patient who had undergone a radical
cystectomy 17-months previously.
Methods: A 86-year-old male presented with a 20-day history of an
ulcerated nodule in his upper lip. His past medical history included a
radical cystectomy that he had undergone 17 months previously, due to
a high-grade urothelial bladder carcinoma(pT3). Punch biopsy was per-
formed to the patient with suspicion of skin tumour.
Results: Microscopic view of biopsy showed subcutaneous infiltration of
tumour. The infiltrative neoplastic cells were arranged haphazardly with
Virchows Arch
the loss of polarity. The nuclei were hyperchromatic and, prominent
nucleoli were present. Immunohistochemical staining showed strong dif-
fuse positive staining for PanCK, p63 and Gata-3. With these findings,
the histopathological report was summarized as an invasive poorly dif-
ferentiated bladder carcinoma metastasis.
Conclusion: We presented a rare case of cutaneous metastasis of urothelial
carcinoma of the bladder. Metastatic disease should always be in the dif-
ferential in any patient who presents with cutaneous lesions. Skin biopsy
should be performed for histochemical analysis to prevent misdiagnosis.
E-PS-05-049
Basal cell carcinoma with intravascular invasion: an unusual finding
of uncertain significance
J.M. Suárez Peñaranda*, G. Pita da Veiga, C. Aliste Santos
*Department of Pathology. University Hospital of Santiago de
Compostela, Spain
Background & objectives: Risk factors for aggressive behaviour in bas-
al cell carcinoma (BCC) include histological type, the presence of a squa-
mous component, perineural invasion, and the distance to the nearest
margin. Yet, lymphovascular invasion is very rarely reported and its
relevance remains unknown.
Methods: A 85-year-old woman consulted for a slowly-growing lesion in
her nose. Personal medical history included no previous skin diseases.
Clinical examination revealed a 9 mm, erythematous, indurated, lesion on the
tip of her nose. Actinic damage was noted as well as two actinic keratosis.
The lesion on the nose was removed with the clinical diagnosis of BCC.
Results: Histopathological examination revealed a conventional BCC,
with infiltrative pattern. In the section corresponding to one of specimen
tips, neoplastic intravascular invasion was noted. Immunohistochemical
study confirmed the lymphatic nature of the vessels, which stained with
antibodies for CD31 and D2-40. Intravascular neoplastic cells were pos-
itive for Ber-EP4 but not for Cytokeratin 20, Chromogranin-A,
Synaptophysin or TTF-1.
Given the advanced age of the patient, close follow-up was considered the
safest option and no additional treatment was done. The patient is free of
disease 4 months after surgery.
Conclusion: Contrarily to perineural invasion, intravascular invasionin
BCC is exceedingly rare, and its clinical significance remains unknown.
No guidelines currently exist for adjuvant treatment or diagnostic mea-
sures in patients with this condition.
E-PS-05-050
A rare case of metastatic cutaneous cholangiocarcinoma
A. Sykaras*, S. Pantelakos, D. Sampaziotis, K. Christofidis, C. Kouvidou
*Evangelismos General Hospital, Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: Cutaneous metastases from internal malig-
nancies are uncommon. In cholangiocarcinomas the occurrence of cuta-
neous metastases is extremely rare.
Methods: A 52 year old woman was presented to Dermatology depart-
ment with a skin lesion on the upper lip and another on the scalp. A CT
scan revealed a 8 cm mass located in the hilar of the liver, one month ago
with the diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma. Skin biopsies were performed
with the clinical diagnosis of herpes zoster, folliculitis or metastases.
Results: The histopathology revealed neoplastic cells in the papillary and
reticular dermis of the skin with immunohistochemical features (CK19+,
CK17+, VHL+) consistent with metastases from intrahepatic cholangio-
carcinoma according to the clinical findings. The patient treated with
chemotherapy but the disease progressed resulting in the death of the
patients 4 months later.
Conclusion: The most common tumours that metastasize to the skin are
breast, lung, colorectal, oral mucosa, gastric, hepatocellular and oesoph-
ageal. Cutaneous metastases is a rare manifestation of visceral tumours
and represent advanced stages and are associated with poor prognosis.
E-PS-05-051
Aberrant epidermal hyperplasia in a case of spitzoid melanoma - a
diagnostic pitfall
D. Tapoi*, A. Dumitru, M. Costache, M. Sajin, I. Dandu - Colceriu,
A. Ciongariu, M. Tampa, A. Evsei, A. Birceanu
*University Emergency Hospital Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Squamoid epidermal hyperplasia is a poorly
described and rarely reported lesion associated with underlaying dermal
tumours. The histopathologic appearance is sometimes worrisome and
may be misleading, raising the suspicion of a synchronous in situ or
malignant epithelial overgrowth.
Methods: The aim of our study is to gain further insight into the epider-
mal hyperplasia associated with a spitzoid melanoma. Emphasis is placed
on the importance of immunohistochemistry for establishing the correct
diagnosis, as well as on the differential diagnosis with other entities.
Similar to basaloid hyperplasia and Borst-Jadassohn phenomenon, the
true nature of squamoid epidermal induction is poorly understood.
Results: We present a case of a 42 year old female diagnosed with
spitzoid melanoma with peculiar epidermal hyperplasia. On standard ex-
amination the tumour exibits characteristic features of a malignant
spitzoid lesion with marked atypical epidermal hyperplasia initially con-
sidered a synchronous squamous cell carcinoma. Ancillary test were used
to document these lesions. In this way the diagnosis of squamous cell
carcinoma was ruled out, and the epidermal changes are considered
benign.
Conclusion: Sometimes melanoma is associated with
pseudoepitheliomatous epidermal hyperplasia. The presence of
prominent epidermal changes may make the clinical recognition dif-
ficult and lead to confusion with a collision scenario of squamous cell
carcinoma and melanoma. Furthermore, a pathologist focusing on the
epidermal changes may consider a squamous cell carcinoma and fail
to recognize the melanoma if, for example, a superficial biopsy in
performed. Immunohistochemistry is crucial for establishing the cor-
rect diagnosis for this type of lesion and for the differential diagnosis.
E-PS-05-052
Malignant proliferating trichilemmal tumour- a rare entity with ag-
gressive pathological features
S. Teoran*, A. Dema, M. Cornianu, A. Budica, R. Cornea
*Department of Pathology, Emergency Clinical County Hospital “Pius
Brinzeu” Timisoara, Romania
Background & objectives: Malignant Proliferating Trichilemmal
Tumour (MPTT) is an uncommon, controversial, appendageal skin tu-
mour, usually developing on the scalp. Only hundreds of cases are report-
ed, fewer than 50 being well-documented. We report a case of MPTT and
discuss associated aggressive pathologic features.
Methods: A 47 –year old woman presented to the Hospital, with 3 large,
firm, painless, subcutaneous nodules, in the occipital and vertex region,
which have grown fast in recent months. The patient underwent surgery,
the tissue fragments being referred to the Pathology Department. For
histological examination we used HE stained slides and immunohisto-
chemical staining for CD34, calretinin, EMA and Ki67 antibodies.
Results: Two of the lesions proved to be pilar cysts. The third tumour
(occipital region), was a relatively well circumscribed 3.9x3.8x1.2cm
nodule; histologically a subepidermal squamous infiltrative proliferation
was identified, with multilobular architecture, solid and cystic areas. The
cystic areas had centrally dense keratin and necrotic material, lined by
squamous epithelium with trychilemmal keratinisation and cytological
atypia. The solid lobules displayed marked atypia, epithelial pearls for-
mation, frequent mitoses (7/HPF) and Ki67-90%.
Conclusion: Based on CD34 and calretinin intense positive
immunoreactions in tumour cells, lacking connection to epidermis
and cystic areas resembling proliferating pilar tumour, we made the
Virchows Arch
final diagnosis of MPTT. In short, we present a very rare case of
MPTT, its particularity consisted of histological aggressive features:
marked cytological atypia, numerous atypical mitotic figures and
very high Ki67 index. Considering these characteristics, we believe
that a more aggressive therapeutically management is needed (clas-
sically local wide excision being recommended).
E-PS-05-053
Primary mucinous eccrine adenocarcinoma of the scalp: a case
report
P. Tziakou*, E. Arkoumani, A. Ieronymaki, E. Souka, A. Zizi-
Sermpetzoglou
*Pathology Department, Thriasio General Hospital of Elefsina, Greece
Background & objectives: Primary mucinous eccrine adenocarcinoma,
a rare malignant neoplasm of the skin adnexa, usually occurs in the head
and neck region. The most common sites for its occurrence are the eyelid,
the peri-orbital region and the scalp.
Methods: A 75-year-old female patient presented with a palpable, non-
tender nodule measuring 3x2 cm in the scalp, which was firm in consis-
tency and at gross examination showed multiple, gelatinous tissue bits.
The largest bit measured 2 x 1.5 cm and the cut surface was gelatinous.
Results: Microscopic examination showed large pools of mucin ar-
ranged in lobules, separated by collagenous septae. Epithelial tumour
cells arranged in small clusters, tubules and cribriform patterns were
floating in the pools of mucin. Individual tumour cells showed scant
cytoplasm and hyperchromatic nuclei. Immunohistochemically, the
tumour cells were positive for CK7, ER, PR and negative for CK20,
CDX2, S100p, Chromogranin, Synaptophisin, as the Ki67 was very
low.
Conclusion: Cutaneous mucinous carcinomas may present with a variety
of clinical presentations. Metastatic deposits from undiagnosed visceral
and breast adenocarcinoma are virtually indistinguishable microscopical-
ly from sweat gland carcinoma and must be considered before a diagnosis
of sweat gland carcinoma is made.
E-PS-05-054
Eosinophilic cellulitis associated with LLC
S. Vazquez Navarrete*, R. Jimenez Peña, A. Diaz Lagama
*Hospital de L Linea, Spain
Background & objectives: Wells syndrome is an uncommon skin con-
dition of unknown aetiology. Some authors believe it may be a local
hypersensitivity reaction. It may occur associated with other diseases.
However, first it should be ruled out an hematologic disease especially
LLC.
Methods: We describe a cases of Wells' syndrome in a 67-year-old fe-
male with several episodes of recurrent pruritic eruptions of oedematous
plaques on the during the process. The patient was diagnosed with B-cell
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia which was revealed through the investi-
gation of the cutaneous disease.
We do Histological examination of the skin and Direct
immunofluorescence.
Results: The skin biopsy showed a prominent lymphohistiocytic cell
infiltrate rich in eosinophils both interstitial and angiocentric in the super-
ficial and deep dermis and in the subcutaneous tissue. flames figures were
not found. Direct immunofluorescence showed no findings of
immunobullous diseases
Conclusion: The patient was diagnosed as eosinophilic dermatosis of
hematologic malignancy based on the medical history, recurrent skin
lesions and histologic manifestation excluding other causes of tissue eo-
sinophilia .The clinical and pathological correlation allowed the WS di-
agnosis, with complete resolution of the cutaneous clinical picture after
chemotherapy for leukaemia treatment.
E-PS-05-055
Plasma cell granuloma of the skin
S. Vazquez Navarrete*, R. Jimenez Peña, A. Diaz Lagama
*Hospital de L Linea, Spain
Background & objectives: The plasma cell granuloma is included in the
group of inflammatory pseudotumors, It is a rare benign lesion, of un-
known cause. Only a few cases having been reported in the s
Methods: We perform histological examination and immunohistochem-
ical evaluation, with kappa and lambda markers.
Results: The histological examination revealed a well-defined dermal
nodule of plasmacytoid cells, without connection or infiltration of the
epidermis. The epidermis cells showed signs of infection of VHS. At high
power the polymorphous cellular infiltrate was constituted by lynfocites
and dense infiltrate of plasma cells. Myofibroblatic cells were not found.
On immunohistochemical evaluation, both kappa and lambda markers
were positive and there was no light-chain restriction.
Conclusion: We believe that the term cutaneous inflammatory
pseudotumors subsume lesions of diverse aetiology. Tumours with de-
tectable myofibroblasts represent true cases of IMT while Cutaneous
PCG is a disorder biologically distinct from conventional IMT
representing a reaction pattern that is also found in vascular and infectious
disorders like our present case.
E-PS-05-056
Porphyria cutanea tarda and bowenoid papulosis as primary presen-
tation in a HIV infected patient - a rare association
D. Vedant*, A. Bains, S. Saha, I. Begam, S.P. Rajkumar, P. Elhence
*Department of Pathology, AIIMS Jodhpur, India
Background & objectives: Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is a rare met-
abolic disease which can be hereditary or acquired. Association of PCT
with HIV infection is poorly understood. Here we report a rare case of
HIV infected patient with PCT and bowenoid papulosis (BP).
Methods: A 37 year male patient presented with fluid filled lesions over
hands for the last 2 months. On examination multiple tense haemorrhagic
bullae and crusted erosions were seen on the dorsa of the hands and over
nose. Multiple hyperpigmented verrucous papules present over glans pe-
nis and prepuce were seen. Routine investigations and biopsies from hand
and glans were done.
Results: Patient’s baseline routine investigations were within normal
limits. Serum was non-reactive for anti-HCV and HBV surface antigen.
He was found positive for HIV testing. His skin biopsy from bulla over
hands showed morphology of PCT, whereas biopsy form papule over
glans showed features of bowenoid papulosis.
Conclusion: Dermatological symptoms can be the first manifestation of
HIV infection. Bowenoid papulosis clinically resembles genital warts but
the histopathology shows squamous cell carcinoma in situ. There can be a
possibility of HIV infection causing increased susceptibility of patients to
PCT. More large scale studies are required for the validation of this
hypothesis.
E-PS-05-057
A case report of scrotal sebaceous carcinoma with carcinoma-in-situ
S. Zafar*, S.U. Siddiqui, S. Fatima
*Aga Khan University Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Sebaceous carcinoma is a malignant cu-
taneous neoplasm of sebaceous gland, commonly seen in the ocu-
lar area but extra ocular tumours are also seen. Carcinoma in-situ
is usually seen in periocular lesions however these changes are not
seen in extraocular sites.
Methods: Representative specimens were submitted for permanent
paraffin sections from multiple sites of the patient viz. left arm,
Virchows Arch
right arm, lower abdomen, penile shaft and scrotum. Gross exam-
ination showed multiple hypopigmented lesions, then subsequent
microscopic examination was performed.
Results: Sebaceous carcinoma with carcinoma- in-situ component
was reported in scrotal tissue whereas, Sebaceous adenoma was
diagnosed in specimens from right arm, left arm and lower abdo-
men and viral wart changes were identified in tissue from penile
shaft.
Conclusion: We report a rare case of Sebaceous carcinoma with in-situ
component in scrotum. The periocular lesions often show a pagetoid or
carcinoma-in-situ change, such changes are usually not seen in
extraocular cases. Hence, we conclude that Sebaceous carcinoma should
be considered as a differential entity while examining adnexal lesions
from the perineal area. Further case evidence and surveillance studies
are required from around the world to ascertain the epidemiological sig-
nificance.
E-PS-05-058
Features of the development of severe allergic reactions in
oncohaematological diseases: a clinical case of toxic-allergic derma-
titis in a patient with acute leukaemia
A. Zybareva*, E. Orlova, I. Gadaev, L. Smirnova, G. Gabrielyan
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Oncohaematological diseases alter the
immune-inflammatory response, which, when treated with conven-
tional drugs, leads to cumulation with the development of aller-
gies. Analysis of a case of toxic-allergic dermatitis in a patient in
the regional phase of primary myelofibrosis provoked by
furosemide.
Methods: А 62-year-old male with hepatosplenomegaly on the back-
ground of acute myelomonoblastic leukaemia, a permanent form of atrial
fibrillation, pulmonary hypertension of the second art., chronic heart fail-
ure (CHF) of the first art., bilateral hydrothorax and hydropericardium.
Against the background of adding furosemide 100-140mg per day to the
complex therapy, blisters and erosions appeared during the day, accom-
panied by severe lymphorrhea.
Results: The results of the biopsy revealed necrosis with the formation of
pustules, perivascular mixed infiltrate with a predominance of neutrophil-
ic and eosinophilic granulocytes, destruction and infiltration of the vessel
walls by granulocytes, and fibrin deposits in the vessel walls.
Conclusion: The appearance of severe toxic-allergic dermatitis is
due to the reaction to the introduction of furosemide against the
background of an altered immuno-inflammatory response, since the
chemical structure of furosemide contains sulfone groups that give
cross-allergic reactions.
E-PS-06-002
Clear cell sarcoma-like tumour of the small intestine presenting as an
intussusception in an adult patient: a case report
Z. Abdawn*, G. Langman
*University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, United
Kingdom
Background & objectives: Small intestinal Clear Cell Sarcoma-Like
Tumour (CCSLT) is a rare malignant neoplasm exhibiting melanocytic
differentiation at a morphological, immunohistochemical and ultrastruc-
tural level with a distinct molecular profile. The clinical presentation of
intussusception is uncommon with only one previous case described.
Methods: Clinical case review and review of the literature.
Results: We present a case of a 56 year old lady who presented with
acute abdominal pain and tenderness. CT abdomen and pelvis
showed an area of intussusception at the ileocaecal junction. The
patient subsequently underwent a right hemicolectomy.
Macroscopic examination confirmed the presence of intussusception
within which a solid mass was identified. Microscopy showed a
poorly differentiated neoplasm with solid growth pattern. The tumour
was positive for S100, Sox 10 and CD56 on immunohistochemical
analysis. A metastatic malignant melanoma was excluded clinically.
Molecular testing confirmed the presence of EWSR1-CREB1 gene
fusion, confirming the diagnosis of primary small intestinal clear cell
sarcoma-like tumour.
Conclusion: Small intestinal clear cell sarcoma-like is a rare and aggres-
sive neoplasm that affects young adults. Whilst uncommon, it needs to be
considered as primary cause of intussusception in adults.
E-PS-06-003
Fatal outcome due to sarcina ventriculi infection in a case of emphy-
sematous gastritis
D. Adrian*, S. Gradinaru, C. Alius, G. Tiberiu-Augustin, M. Sajin,
M. Costache, A. Baltan, A. Evsei, A. Birceanu
*Department of Pathology, University Emergency Hospital, Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: Sarcina ventriculi is an extremely rare path-
ogen. These gram-positive cocci bacteria are rarely identified in gastric
biopsies and usually described in the literature as an incidental finding,
particularly in patients with delayed gastric emptying, gastroparesis, em-
physematous gastritis or gastric perforation.
Methods: Fewer than 30 cases of human infection have been described in
the literature so far, but rarely this microorganism is mentioned as a
potential cause of death. We report the case of a 76-year-old patient with
gastric perforation due to massive infection with Sarcina ventriculi. To
date, this is the first report of human infection with Sarcina ventriculi in
Romania.
Results: A 76-year-old male with severe abdominal pain was admitted
for evaluation. CT scan showed a large pneumoperitoneum with parietal
tear along the lesser curvature of the stomach. During the surgical proce-
dure in which the perforation of the gastric wall was repaired, tissue
samples were subsequently sent to the Pathology Department.
Histopathological examination revealed marked acute inflammation,
haemorrhagic areas and extensive necrosis of the fatty tissue. There was
abundant bacterial overgrowth, including the presence of Sarcina micro-
organisms with characteristic microscopic features. Many such bacteria
were present in the blood capillaries of the analysed fragments.
Unfortunately, the patient died shortly after surgery, due to the compli-
cations induced by sepsis and multiorgan failure.
Conclusion: Although the pathogenesis of Sarcina spp. is well
studied in veterinary literature, its role in human disease is not
entirely understood and very few scientific studies identify this
microorganism as a potential cause of death.
E-PS-06-004
Medullary carcinoma of the intestine in combination with intestinal
lymphangiectasia leading to severe malabsorption syndrome
M. Afonina*, E. Kogan, E. Rudenko, A. Akulova
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: Clinical case of medullary carcinoma (MC)
of the intestine in combination with intestinal lymphangiectasia at the 33-
year patient accompanied by malabsorption syndrome during 10 years
who died due to multi-organ failure.
Methods: Histological examination was made of the autopsy material.
Immunohistochemistry was performed for the differential diagnosis
E-PS-06 Digestive Diseases Pathology - GI
Virchows Arch
between low-grade adenocarcinoma, mesothelioma, T-cell and B-cell
lymphomas, gastrointestinal stromal tumours.
Results: The diagnoses of lymphomas (CD45, CD20,CD3,CD8,CD30
negative), mesothelioma (Calretinin negative reactions), gastrointestinal
tumour (DOG1, CD117 negative – non-specific staining in extra calls),
neuroendocrine carcinoma (CD56, Chromogranine negative) were
rejected. The tumour was positive to PDL1(+ve)/CK7(+ve)/CD10(+ve)/
Vimentin(+ve)/CD10(+ve)/HgoD1(+ve)/PanMel(+ve)/MCK(+ve)/
SATB2(+ve), that was typical for MC. The combination of MC of the
intestine in combination with intestinal lymphangiectasia leaded to ab-
normality in absorption of food nutrients across the gastrointestinal tract
and manifested as severe malabsorption syndrome
Conclusion: Taking into account the localization of the tumour, as well
as its morpho-immunophenotypic characteristics, the neoplasm was ver-
ified as medullary carcinoma of the intestine. The tumour was character-
ized by a high malignant potential: clinically rapid progression and early
metastasis to regional lymph nodes, histologically and
immunohistochemically - a high proliferation index and mitotic index.
E-PS-06-005
The morphological changes of extraintestinal organs by the bacterial
translocation in rats during of disruption of the mesenteric blood
flow and reperfusion
D. Amanova*, M. Tussupbekova, P. Ivachyov, T. Komarov,
Y. Turgunov
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: The aim is studying morphology of internal
organs by the bacterial translocation during of ischemia and reperfusion
in rats.
Methods: 40 male rats were separated into 3 groups:1st(n=15)- 30/60min
ischemia/reperfusion,2nd(n = 15)-30/120 min ischemia/reperfusion,3rd
(n=10) –sham group. Mesentery ischemia was made by clamping mes-
enteric artery, Reperfusion was lead by removing clamps.BT was exam-
ined after injecting of fluorescent E.coli by microbiological method in
organs. Morphological study (liver and lung) were observed by “Leica
DM 1000” microscope. Significance of differences was determined by
Fisher's exact test.
Results: in group 1 the positive BT was in 12(80%) of cases, mean a
while histological frank full-blooded sign of liver central vein with saved
structure with forming the lymphoid follicles in lungs were observed. In
2nd group with 2 hours of revascularization, BT was found in 11 (71%) of
rats, morphologically the full-blooded sinusoids and veins in liver and
lymphoid infiltration in lungs were revealed too. The aren't significance
differences of BT frequency between 2 experimental groups (p>0,05).
The organs of sham-operated rats were intact and BT was not detected.
Conclusion: Thus, the changes of morphological structure liver and
lungs are similar and depend on fact of BT, but don’t depend on length
of ischemia-reperfusion period.
E-PS-06-006
Sprue-like enteropathy associated with Olmesartan
I. Amat Villegas*, L.M. Nova, L. Zabalza, D. Martínez-Acitores de la
Mata, M. Gómez-Dorronsoro, I. Fernandez, A. Larrea, C. Cerezo
Aguirre, G. Aisa, R. Beloqui
*Hospital de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Sprue-like enteropathy associated with
Olmesartan (Angiotensin II Receptor Blocker) was first described in
2012 and patients typically present with diarrhoea and sprue-like histo-
pathologic findings, which can begin months or years after having started
taking it.
Methods: A retrospective study of patients with olmesartan-induced en-
teropathy diagnosed in our hospital in the last two years was performed.
Medical records and H&E stained slides were reviewed, paying special
interest in GI symptoms, time from onset till first visit and duration of
Olmesartan use before symptoms.
Results: Four cases were found, all of them had diarrhoea and weight
loss; three also had vomiting. Gastroscopy displayed only mild gastritis in
all cases.
Histologically duodenal villous atrophy and apoptosis were found in all
cases and intraepithelial lymphocytes were increased in three cases.
The time from onset symptoms till first visit was 3-8 weeks and the
duration of olmesartan use before symptoms was 4-8 years. The follow-
up was 3-11 months.
Conclusion: Olmesartan-associated sprue-like enteropathy is a recently
described entity clinically featured by severe diarrhoea and weight loss,
and histopathologically by intestinal villous atrophy, variable
intraepithelial lymphocytosis and inflammation of lamina propria. Our
cases were also associated with chronic gastritis.
Cessation of olmesartan results in complete resolution of clinical and
histologic features.
E-PS-06-007
14 cases of resected pancreatectomies after neoadjuvant treatment
for primary unresectable ductal adenocarcinomas
I. Amat Villegas*, A. Larrea, M.D.R. Mercado, M. Bronte, V. Ubieto,
L.M. Nova, I. Fernandez
*Hospital de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is an aggressive
malignancy whose only potentially curative treatment is surgery. Most
cases are unresectable because of distant metastases or vascular invasion.
Neoadjuvant therapy (NAT) is used as an effort to downstage locally
advanced tumours, allowing surgical resection.
Methods: We present a retrospective study of patients diagnosed
with locally advanced pancreatic carcinoma treated with NAT and
subsequently operated from 2017 to 2019. Changes in radiological
and pathological TNM stage and adjuvant treatment were
reviewed, paying special interest in tumour regression degree
(modified Ryan Scheme), presence of positive nodes, margins
status and occurrence of relapses.
Results: Fourteen cases were found aged between 44 and 81. One case
showed total response to treatment (GRT0); 10 cases, partial response
(GRT2) and 3 cases, low response (GRT3). Nine cases showed positive
nodes, 7 of which were not imaged detected previous to NAT. Surgical
resection margins were negative in eleven cases. 6/12 cases that received
post-adjuvant treatment developed posterior locoregional relapses or dis-
tant dissemination (average time to follow-up 10 month)
Conclusion: NAT allows a potentially curative surgical treatment of
locally advanced pancreatic tumours, reduce tumour volume and allows
negative resection margins. Accurate measurement of tumour size and
consequently staging after NAT is difficult; therefore tumour regression
grade becomes more relevant.
Imaging tests have limitation for the detection of nodes suspected of
infiltration
E-PS-06-009
Collision tumour of the stomach: choriocarcinoma and adenocarci-
noma in an elderly woman
A. Baltan*, E. Stoica-Mustafa, A. Procop, A. Bancu, V. Herlea
*Emergency University Hospital Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Gastric choriocarcinoma accounts for
less than 0.1% of gastric cancers, almost always showing admixed
adenocarcinoma. We present a case of a 78 year-old woman with
recurrent upper digestive tract haemorrhage and subsequent severe
anaemia.
Virchows Arch
Methods: The patient underwent upper endoscopy which revealed
a large tumour located in the proximal portion of the stomach.
Biopsies were taken and showed moderately differentiated adeno-
carcinoma. The CT scan identified numerous enlarged perigastric
lymph nodes, hepatic and peritoneal metastases. Beta hCG levels
were not preoperatively determined. Palliative gastrectomy was
performed, as the patient did not respond to conservative therapy.
Results: The specimen showed an 11 cm sessile, ulcerated tumour,
located along the lesser curvature of the stomach, also involving the
gastroesophageal junction. Microscopically, the tumour had two dis-
crete components: the distal part of the tumour consisted of tubulo-
papillary adenocarcinoma, while the proximal portion of the mass
was represented by choriocarcinoma. The latter showed
cytotrophoblastic nests/sheets inconstantly rimmed by
syncitiotrophoblast, with wide areas of haemorrhage and necrosis,
and was vaguely reminiscent of squamous cell carcinoma,
particularily because it also involved the oesophageal squamous
mucosa. The choriocarcinomatous differentiation was confirmed
by immunohistochemical stains, which revealed positivity for
hCG, PLAP, CK7 and p63.
Conclusion: Gastric choriocarcinomas are aggressive, frequently
haemorrhagic tumours. Thus, preoperative diagnosis is important and
can be established through adequate bioptic samples and preoperative
hCG levels. They may also mimic squamous cell carcinoma, but careful
evaluation and immunohistochemical stains clarify this issue.
E-PS-06-010
Metastatic melanoma to an ileostomy reversal specimen – an inciden-
tal finding
A. Bancu*, A. Procop, E. Stoica-Mustafa, A. Baltan, M. Mihai, V. Herlea
*Fundeni Clinical Institute, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: A 57-year-old male patient with a known
history of rectal adenocarcinoma, treated with neoadjuvant radiotherapy
and low anterior resection, presented to our clinic for a programmed
ileostomy reversal procedure.
Methods: The fixed ileal segment was examined. Two discrete indurated
areas were found close to the resection margins. They showed focal haemor-
rhage on cut section and were entirely submitted. Microscopically, two intra-
mural well-circumscribed deposits of 1 and 0,5 cm were found; sheets of
pleomorphic epithelioid cells with cytoplasmic granular brown pigment and
prominent nucleolated nuclei eroded the overlying mucosa.
Results: The morphology was consistent with metastatic melanoma.
According to the clinician, a previous diagnosis of dysplastic nevus was
made three years earlier in another unit. This cutaneous tumour, located
on the anterior chest wall, was completely excised. Because no other
radiologic or endoscopic abnormalities were found during admission,
three-month follow-up was decided. Unfortunately, the patient presented
shortly before with massive upper digestive haemorrhage. Similar de-
posits were found along the resected duodenal specimen and in a liver
biopsy performed once the patient was stable.
Conclusion: Careful macroscopic examination of seemingly bland spec-
imens is of paramount importance in daily practice, especially because
complete patient history may sometimes be lacking at the time of pro-
cessing. In our case, thorough sampling led to better patient care, with
targeted therapy being considered at the moment by the multidisciplinary
team. Additionally, closer dermatology follow-up should be considered
in patients with dysplastic nevi.
E-PS-06-011
Unusual histopathological findings in cystic lymph node
M. Barros Barraza*, M. Mejía, M. Rolon, J.D. Hernández, J. Álvarez
*Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia
Background & objectives: The aim of this article is to report two cases
of unusual histopathological findings in lymph nodes of the gallbladder
due to fungal infection and metastatic colon primary tumour.
Methods: The first case is a 45-years-old female, who had a recent
trip to North America and consulted for epigastric pain, paresthesias
in the upper limbs and asthenia. The second case is a 60-years-old
female, who had history of colorectal cancer and consulted for pain
in the right hypochondrium of sudden onset that got worse when
feeding.
Results: In the cystic lymph node of the first case were observed round
fungal microorganisms that had spherules containing endospores. The
histochemistry study showed that the microorganisms were PAS positive
but were negative for Grocott's methenamine silver stain and
mucicarmine. Because of these findings, diagnosis of coccidioidomycosis
was made. In the cystic lymph node of the second case were observed
epithelial tumour cells and lymphovascular invasion of soft tissues.
Immunostaining for cytokeratin 20 and CDX2 were positive in contrast
with cytokeratin 7 that was negative. Those findings suggested a metas-
tasis of colorectal cancer.
Conclusion: Despite infectious and metastatic processes in lymph nodes
of the gallbladder are very rare findings they should be considered when
making differential diagnosis to ensure a prompt clinical intervention
E-PS-06-013
Incidental gallbladder tumours and pseudotumours in cholecystec-
tomy specimens: a retrospective study of 40 cases
O. Belkacem*, F. Limaiem, M.D. Zran, R. Ayadi, S. Gharbi, S. Bouraoui
*Department of Pathology, University Hospital Mongi Slim La Marsa,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Gallbladder tumours display a wide range of
histological subtypes. Gallbladder polyps are classified as benign or ma-
lignant. In this study, we investigated the characteristics of incidental
benign and malignant gallbladder tumours in our institution.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed all of the cholecystectomy
specimens in the archives of the Pathology Department in the
University Hospital Mongi Slim during a twelve-year period
(January 2008-January 2020). The clinicopathological characteris-
tics were extracted from the patients’ clinical charts, which includ-
ed symptoms, radiological findings, laboratory data, and surgical
procedures as well as the outcome.
Results: There were 13 men and 27 women (sex-ratio M/F = 0,48) aged
between 24 and 76 years (mean = 65 years). All patients underwent
cholecystectomy (either open or laparoscopic). Histological examination
of the surgical specimens established the diagnosis of adenoma in five
cases, cholesterol polyps in six cases, intestinal-type adenocarcinoma in
26 cases, adenosquamous carcinoma in two cases and neuroendocrine
carcinoma in one case.
Conclusion: Only 30% of gallbladder carcinomas are suspected preopera-
tively, and the remaining 70% are usually discovered incidentally by patho-
logical examination during or after surgery. Gallbladder cancer has a poor
prognosis because of its late diagnosis. Thorough sampling and careful atten-
tion on histological examination of all parts of cholecystectomy specimens
allow the detection of early cancer with a better prognosis.
E-PS-06-014
A case report of indolent T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder of the
gastrointestinal tract – a rare differential to consider in gastric
biopsies
P. Borralho Nunes*, C. Vale, R. Brodbeck Ilgenfritz, H. Guerreiro,
S. Matos
*Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, Hospital Cuf Descobertas, Faculdade
de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Indolent T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder
(T-LPD) of the gastrointestinal tract is a rare provisional entity in the
revised WHO classifications. It has a clonal nature and indolent behav-
iour, primarily affecting the small intestine and colon.
Methods: A 59-year-old African male, with HBV infection in the
past, presented with nausea and weight loss, associated to long-
standing postprandial fullness. Physical examination was unre-
markable. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with biopsies was
performed.
Results: Thickened gastric folds and mottled mucosa were ob-
served endoscopically. Morphology showed diffuse infiltration of
gastric mucosa by a monotonous population of small lymphoid
cells, expressing CD3, CD5, Bcl-2 and CD8, without expression
of CD10 and CD20, and low proliferation index. No intraepithelial
lesion, glandular disruption, inflammatory activity or intestinal
metaplasia were seen. Immunohistochemistry for H. pylori was
negative. Morphology and phenotype were consistent with indo-
lent T-LPD of the gastrointestinal tract. Clonal TCR rearrange-
ment analysis is under progress. Peripheral blood analysis showed
mild lymphocytosis. Bone marrow biopsy was normal. Thoracic,
abdominal and pelvic CT showed no evidence of lymphadenopa-
thy or extranodal disease.
Conclusion: We herein present a case of gastric involvement by T-
LPD. Indolent T-LPD of the gastrointestinal tract poses a range of
differential diagnosis between an inflammatory/non-neoplastic
process and lymphoma, and its treatment and natural history are
not yet fully established. Our case had exclusive gastric presenta-
tion, in contrast with most of previously reported cases, which
were localized in the lower gastrointestinal tract.
E-PS-06-015
Somatostatin-producing NET of the ampulla of Vater: a case report
E. Botsfari*, P. Xirou, S. Barbanis, G. Kyriakopoulos, P. Skliris, N.
Vladika, Z. Nitsa, A. Kiziridou
*Department of Pathology, Theagenion Cancer Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece
Background & objectives: Somatostatinomas are functioning
well differentiated neuroendocrine neoplasms, with uncontrolled
somatostatin secretion causing somatostatinoma syndrome, where-
as somatostatin-producing NETs are tumours composed of
somatostatin-immunopositive cells but lacking the symptoms of
somatostatinoma syndrome.
We report a case of somatostatin-producing NET of the ampulla.
Methods: Our patient, a 64-year-old man, presented with weight loss and
mild indigestible disorders.
Endoscopic ultrasound and CT scan revealed a 2 cm ampullary tumour
with dilatation of both the distal common bile duct and the main pancre-
atic duct.
A pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed.
Results: Macroscopically, an intramural mass was found in the ampullary
region, measuring 1.8 cm in maximum diameter.
Histologically, the tumour was predominantly composed of
tuboglandular structures, with numerous psammoma bodies.
Immunohistochemically, the tumour cells were positive for ker8/18,
synaptophysin, chromogranin and somatostatin. The Ki-67 proliferative
index was 1%.
Histological and immunohistochemical features were consistent with a
somatostatin-producing well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumour, grade 1.
Our patient received no further treatment and remain alive, 1 year after
initial diagnosis.
Conclusion: Somatostatin-producing NETs of the ampulla and
periampullary region typically manifest with symptoms related to bile
duct obstruction, abdominal pain and cholelithiasis, whereas
somatostatinoma syndrome is rarely observed. They have also been as-
sociated with von Recklinghausen disease.
Histologically, the glandular pattern and psammoma bodies may cause
confusion with well-differentiated adenocarcinoma.
The treatment of choice is surgical resection. Tumours that are <2 cm or
limited to the ampulla have a better prognosis.
E-PS-06-016
Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia in colonic mucosa of patients with
inflammatory bowel disease
A. Cohn*, G. Terinte-Balcan, C. Meianu, F. Neacsu, D. Enea, A. Florea,
M. Diculescu, G. Becheanu
*Emergency University Hospital Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Neuroendocrine cells (NEC) of the in-
testinal mucosa seem to play an important role in the pathophysiol-
ogy of inflammatory bowel disease. The aim of this study is to
evaluate the density of NEC in the colorectal mucosa of patients
with IBD.
Methods: 52 patients with IBD (27 UC, 25 CD) and 49 patients
screened for colorectal cancer underwent lower GI endoscopy.
Two biopsies from every segment of the large intestine were tak-
en. Immunohistochemical staining for synaptophysin (Syn),
chromogranin A (CrA) and serotonin (5-HT) was performed. The
number of neuroendocrine cells was counted manually for all
crypts and expressed as a mean density/crypt/patient.
Results: In IBD patients, IHC reveals a patchy and superficial distribu-
tion of the NEC, forming nests of 3-5 cells and small nodules. The mean
densities of CrA, Syn and 5-HT were significantly higher (1.84, 1.22,
0.91 NEC/Crypt) compared to the control group (1.01, 0.62, 0.37 NEC/
Crypt), p<0.05. Each large intestine segment showed a significantly
higher mean density of NEC, for all neuroendocrine markers (p<0.01).
We analysed the distribution of NEC according to their neuroendocrine
expression: the highest density of CrA and serotonin was expressed in the
rectum.
There was a significantly higher density of NEC positive for 5-HT in
rectal mucosa of patients with UC than in patients with CD.
Conclusion: This study proves that in patients suffering from IBD there
is a hyperplasia of NEC, evaluated on a significant, large number of
crypts. Moreover, NEC positive for 5-HT might be a novel therapeutic
target and could explain the symptoms associated with IBD. There is
limited data regarding the density distribution of NEC in IBD patients
and further studies are necessary.
E-PS-06-017
Common variable immunodeficiency and gastric cancer: a study of
morphology, virus infection and immunological microenvironment
C. Costa*, I. Gullo, S. L. Silva, A. Motta, C. Ferreira, A. E. Sousa, P.
Rosmaninho, C. Oliveira, J. C Machado, F. Carneiro
*Department of Pathology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João,
Porto, Portugal, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine of the
University of Porto (FMUP), Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: Patients with Common Variable
Immunodeficiency (CVID) have a 6/10-fold risk of developing gastric
carcinoma (GC), which represents the most common cause of death in
this population. Objective: analysing histopathology, Helicobacter pylori,
Virchows Arch
Epstein-Barr-virus(EBV), Cytomegalovirus(CMV) infection and immu-
nological microenvironment in CVID-associated GC.
Methods: Non-neoplastic mucosa (Non-NM) and GC from six
CVID patients, four females, median age: 41.5y (range 27-62y),
with previous diagnosis of infection by H. pylori (4/6), CMV (3/6)
and EBV (2/6) and pernicious anaemia (2/6), were analysed by
RNA in situ hybridisation (ISH) for EBV and immunohistochemis-
try (IHC) for CMV, CD20, CD4, CD8, FOXP3 (Treg-cells),
GATA3 and PD-L1.
Results: Non-NM showed lymphocytic gastritis(6/6), atrophic
gastritis (6/6) with active inflammation (2/6), lymphoid aggregates
(3/6) and/or intestinal metaplasia (5/6). Most patients were diag-
nosed at early-stage: pT1a (n=3); pT1b (n=2); pT2 (n=1).
Histopathology showed tubular (n=3), mucinous (n=2) and poorly
cohesive (n=1) histotypes, with intestinal-type adenoma in two
cases. EBV-ISH and CMV-IHC were negative in all cases.
Digital automated counting of immune cells (nº positive cells/
20x power-field) showed abundance of CD4+, GATA3+ and
CD8+ T-cells in non-NM(stroma:245/152/181; intraepithelial:8/
23/46) and CD4+, CD8+ and FOXP3 T-cells in GC (stro-
ma:133/48/46; intraepithelial:27/33/26). Non-NM and GC immune
infiltrate showed paucity of CD20+ B-cells (stroma:32/5;
intraepithelial:0/0). PD-L1 was expressed exclusively in GC stro-
mal cells: <1%(n=2); 1-10%(n=3); 10-50% (n=1).
Conclusion: We found that CVID-associated GC featured marked T cell
infiltration in the absence of EBV/CMV, with heterogeneous expression
of PD-L1 and high frequency of GATA3+ and FOXP3+ cells.
E-PS-06-018
An unusual case of osseous metaplasia in a metastatic colorectal
carcinoma with endochondral ossification
D. Crisan*, M. Badan, A.T. Domsa, A. Buruiana-Simic, B. Gheban
*Dept. of Pathology, “Iuliu Hatieganu” University of Medicine and
Pharmacy” Cluj-Napoca, Dept. of Pathology, Emergency Clinical
County Hospital Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Background & objectives: Osseous metaplasia in colorectal carcinoma
is a rare occurrence with incidences ranging from 0.15% to 0.4%.
Although several articles report cases of such instances, very few cases
with heterotopic ossification in metastatic colorectal carcinoma have been
reported.
Methods: We present the case of a 60-year-old male patient with ad-
vanced metastatic colorectal carcinoma presenting with a hypogastric
eventration adjacent to a terminal surgical stoma with suspected second-
ary lesions.
Results: The patient underwent right hepatectomy and liver lobectomy
two years ago for metastasis and was currently being treated with chemo-
therapy. Prior to surgery, positron emission tomography-computed to-
mography showed an additional liver lesion as well as calcifications on
the midline of the anterior abdominal wall, consistent with the suspected
peristomal secondary lesions. Histopathological examination of the afore-
mentioned lesions showed multiple metastases of colorectal carcinoma
with extensive osseous metaplasia and focal cartilaginous endochondral
ossification.
Conclusion: Heterotopic ossification or osseous metaplasia is defined by
the extra-skeletal formation of bone tissue. This phenomenon is widely
found in a variety of neoplasias, benign or malignant in nature. Studies
suggest that a stromal pluripotent cell transformation into osteoblasts is
involved rather than tumour cell differentiation. This case report under-
lines the possibility of bone formation in colorectal cancer metastases
with diagnostic relevance to radiologists, oncologists, and
gastroenterologists.
E-PS-06-019
Endothelial NOVA2 expression in gastric cancer as a prognostic
factor
R. D'Amato Pascarella*, G.M. Pini, S. Crotta, F. Sessa, C. Ghigna,
A.M. Chiaravalli
*Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy
Background & objectives: NOVA2, a splicing regulator with a role
in angiogenesis and vascular development, is up-regulated in ovar-
ian and colorectal carcinomas. The aim of the study is to assess its
expression in gastric carcinomas and its correlation with clinico-
pathological features.
Methods: Twenty-seven consecutive AGCs, treated only with sur-
gery, in 1986 were immunohistochemically investigated for
NOVA2 expression as well as ERG (endothelial specific marker)
and mismatch repair proteins. Positive NOVA2 nuclei were count-
ed along tumour invasive margin in five consecutive HPFs and the
mean value was calculated. NOVA2 values were correlated with
clinico-pathological features and statistical analysis was performed
with SPSS.
Results: NOVA2 expression was observed in ECs inside the tu-
mour and in the surrounding tissue, but not in tumour cells. A
direct correlation between NOVA2 and ERG was found (R² =
0.5845, p<0 .001).
High levels of NOVA2 (>33 cells/HPF) are most frequently found in
association with lymph-node metastases (p=0.07), intestinal-type
GCs (p=0.024), stage III disease (61%) and mismatch repair
(MMR) proficient system (57%). After a 20 years follow-up high
levels of NOVA2 had a significant association to cancer-related
death (p=0.007). Both diffuse histotype and high expression were
unfavourable independent prognostic factors, at multivariate Cox
regression analysis.
Conclusion: Advanced Gastric Cancer (AGC) has a limited num-
ber of therapeutic weapons, but from surgery. Thus, it is funda-
mental to identify new specific targets for therapy. As it was seen
for ovarian and colorectal carcinomas, our data demonstrates that
high levels of NOVA2 are related to poor prognosis and may
affect AGCs progression. NOVA2 and its products, from alterna-
tive splicing, could represent a novel target for new therapeutic
strategies.
E-PS-06-021
Malignancies that metastasise to the stomach
H. Dinçer*, M. Cin, E. Yarıkkaya, B. Noyan, E.M. Yildiz, N. Dursun
*University of Health Sciences Dept., Turkey
Background & objectives: Metastasis to the stomach from other
solid organs is extremely rare and this rate ranges from 0.2%-
1.7% in clinical and autopsy studies. In the few studies found in
the literature, lung and breast are the leading organs that metasta-
size to the stomach.
Methods: Clinical and histopathological findings of secondary gastric
malignancies diagnosed with endoscopic biopsy and / or gastrectomy at
the U.H.S Istanbul Training and Research Hospital pathology clinic were
analysed.
Results: 39280 endoscopic biopsy materials from the six year
period between 2013-2019 were scanned. A total of 10 metastatic
lesions were detected. 4 of the cases were female and 6 were
male and the average age was 60. Most of the lesions were
localized in corpus and two showed multifocal involvement.
Histopathologically, 4 cases were malignant melanoma, 3 cases
were squamous cell carcinoma, 3 cases were adenocarcinoma,4
Virchows Arch
of them has skin origin, 4 had lung origin, and 2 were tumours
with breast origin.
Conclusion: Since metastatic lesions in the stomach are frequently
seen in patients with widespread disease, it is very critical to make
an accurate diagnosis in treatment management because their prog-
nosis is often poor.
E-PS-06-022
The role of cancer stem cells in gastrooesophageal junction
adenocarcinoma
K. Dinneen*, C. Ryan, A. Baird, B. Hernandez, S. Brennan, P. Smyth,
J. McFadden, M. Reidy, P. Nevins Selvadurai, O. Sheils
*Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
Background & objectives: Gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinomas
(GEJA) have increased in incidence in recent years and are associated
with adverse clinical outcomes. We sought to determine the role of epi-
thelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem cells (CSC) within
aggressive areas of these tumours.
Methods: Paired samples were taken from 'indolent' and 'aggres-
sive' areas of tumour from each patient, as defined histologically.
Each sample was analysed using RT-PCR and immunohistochem-
istry to determine the mRNA, miRNA and protein expression pat-
terns associated with EMT and CSC. Differences in expression
patterns between paired samples were analysed. Additionally,
these expression patterns were correlated with clinical outcomes
for each patient.
Results: Our molecular studies identified a range biomarkers
expressed in GEJA which were significantly associated with ad-
verse clinical outcomes, including tumour regression grade, dis-
ease recurrence, overall survival and disease free survival. These
biomarkers showed potential for use as prognostic biomarkers
individually, or as part of a combined predictive model.
Additionally, interrogation of mRNA and miRNA expression data
revealed a number of signalling pathways involved in regulation
of CSCs in GEJA.
Conclusion: Biomarkers of EMT and CSCs hold great promise in GEJA
as prognostic aids and in development of drug therapies. Presently,
GEJA are often treated with therapies designed for gastric and/or
oesophageal adenocarcinomas, yet it is believed that GEJAs rep-
resent a biologically distinct subset of tumours. In light of the
aggressive characteristics associated with CSC and EMT, accurate
delineation and a greater understanding of these processes in
GEJA is important to improve our treatment of patients with this
disease.
Funding: BDIAP Trinity Translational Medicine Institute Trinity College
Dublin
E-PS-06-023
Concomitant bifocal Kaposi sarcoma with tubular adenoma and
hyperplastic polyp in a background of ulcerative colitis
M.A. Diwan*, N. Ud Din
*Aga Khan University Hospital Karachi, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Kaposi sarcoma is a Human Herpes Virus-8
associated vascular neoplasm characterized by spindle cell growth
with formation of erythrocyte containing clefts. Incidence rate ap-
proaches 50% in immunocompromised individuals. Occurrence as
primary colonic neoplasm is very rare with concomitant polyps.
Methods: We present the case of a 36 year male who was a known
case of ulcerative colitis with long term immunosuppressive ther-
apy and developed complications of steroid use. Grossly total
proctocolectomy specimen received comprising of terminal ileum
to rectum. One pseudopolyp is identified in transverse colon. One
polyp is identified in descending colon. 04 polyps are identified in
rectum
Results: Microscopy of descending colon polyp and smaller rectal polyp
revealed a fascicular spindle cell lesion in submucosa with extravasated
red blood cells and frequent mitoses. Cells demonstrated positive expres-
sion of CD31, ERG and focal HHV-8 positivity. Section from larger
rectal polyp shows features of tubular adenoma and sections from trans-
verse colon polyp shows hyperplastic polyp. Rest of the bowel shows
features of ulcerative colitis.
Conclusion: Kaposi sarcoma with coexistent polyps of different
types in ulcerative colitis is extremely rare. Immunosuppression
with inflammatory bowel disease predisposes to the development
of KS.
E-PS-06-024
Pouch associated cancer: an usual cancer in a rare location
F. Dolkiras*, C. Stamou, D. Sampaziotis, A. Sykaras, C. Vourlakou
*Evaggelismos General Hospital Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: An 60 y.o. woman with history of ulcerative
colitis that was subject to total colectomy 30 years ago. Subsequent bi-
opsies from the pouch showed marked inflammation without dysplastic
change. During follow-up a polypoid mass was identified and biopsies
were taken.
Methods: Multiple whitish biopsy segments from the pouch were re-
ceived on maximum diameter 0,1 to 0,3cm.
Microscopical examination of the tissue was performed.
Results: Microscopic examination was consistent with a high
grade adenoma -like dysplasia associated lesion or mass
(DALM) with concurrent transformation to an invasive low grade
adenocarcinoma
Conclusion: A meta analysis from thirty-four articles reported a
cumulative incidence of pouch-related adenocarcinomas at 0.33%
50 years after the diagnosis and 0.35% 20 years after IPAA. In
our case the previous biopsies showed no dysplastic-changes. In
tandem with the presumed evolution of these adenocarcinomas from
dysplastic precursor lesions maybe there is a need for general rather
than specific surveillance as it might offer a time window for cancer
prevention.
E-PS-06-025
A rare case of immunoglobulin G4-related oesophagitis mimicking
dysplasia
D.I. Enea*, S. Gimenez de Mestral, V. Suteau, M. Camus, J. Fléjou
*Pathology Department, Saint-Antoine Hospital, Paris, France;
University Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: IgG4-related disease is an autoimmune
systemic condition characterized by tumour-like lesions with in-
tense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate and abundant IgG4-positive
plasma cells. Oesophageal involvement is exceptional and only a
few cases were reported so far.
Methods: We report a case of an 81-year-old man, operated 5 years prior
for a squamous cell carcinoma of the lower third of the oesophagus (pT1),
whose surveillance endoscopy showed a circumferential erosive lesion,
above the gastro-oesophageal anastomosis. The first biopsies revealed
severe ulcerative oesophagitis and areas described as suspicious for
high-grade epithelial dysplasia. Subsequent biopsies were assessed in
our department.
Virchows Arch
Results: Histologically, a wide area of the epithelium showed ulceration.
In its lower third, adjoining the ulcerative lesion, the oesophagus lining
was thinner, depicting features of cytonuclear atypia. However, in the
context of acute inflammation, these alterations were rather in keeping
with the diagnosis of indefinite for dysplasia, probably regenerative.
Accompanying these findings, an unusual inflammatory infiltrate, rich
in plasma cells, was observed in the sub-epithelial connective tissue.
Immunohistochemistry showed >150 IgG4-positive plasma cells/HPF
and the ratio of IgG4+/IgG+ plasma cells >80%. This allowed to make
the diagnosis of IgG4-related oesophagitis.
Conclusion: Considering the lack of specific findings and its rarity,
IgG4-related oesophagitis can be overlooked or misinterpreted as
dysplasia, as shown herein in this patient with cancer history.
Immunohistochemistry is mandatory to confirm the diagnosis and
to provide adequate treatment.
E-PS-06-027
Cyclooxygenase-2 expression in colorectal carcinoma and corre-
sponding normal colorectal tissues
U. Ezenkwa*, O. Ogunbiyi, C. Okolo, G. Ogun, U. Eze, A. Salami,
M. Ajani, O. Adegoke, D. Mashor
*University College Hospital Ibadan, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Most available data suggest a prognostic role
for cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) in popu-
lations where this has been studied. Similar studies among the black
population are scarce, thus necessitating this study.
Methods: Sectioned formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded colectomy tis-
sues from CRCs and their corresponding non-tumour margin-of-
resection were stained with COX-2 antibody and scored for percentage
of stained cells (<5%=0; 6%-25%=1; 26%-50%=2; 51%-75%=3; 76%-
100%=4) and intensity (no staining=0; yellow=2; yellowish-brown=3,
brown=4). Total immunoscore (percentage + intensity score) ≥4 was
classified positive (COX-2 overexpression). Clinicopathological data
were statistically evaluated to determine COX-2 expression-associated
and predictor variables.
Results: Ninety-five (95) CRC cases and 27 corresponding non-tumour
tissues were included in this study. The overall patient mean age was 56.1
±12.6years with a male-to-female ratio of 1.1:1.
COX-2 was differentially overexpressed in CRCs 69/95 (72.6%) whilst in
non-tumour tissues 5/27 (18.5%) showed COX-2 overexpression. this
difference was statistically significant (p <0.0005). The histologic tumour
grade, advanced pT-stage, tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes, and dirty ne-
crosis were significantly associated with COX-2 expression (p <0.035;
0.043, 0.035 and 0.004, respectively). Multivariate analysis showed that
dirty necrosis (OR, 0.006; CI: 0.000-0.21) and crohn-like lymphocytic
aggregates (OR, 11.312; CI: 1.652-77.45) were predictors of COX-2
expression (p <0.05).
Conclusion: Our finding suggests that COX-2 is significantly
overexpressed in CRCs compared to non-tumour colorectal tissues. Its
significant association and relationship with tumour-associated lympho-
cytes, and, also, higher tumour grade and pT-stage, suggests a modulation
of tumour immunity favouring tumour progression.
E-PS-06-028
Lymphoid cells containing Russell bodies as a prognostic factor in the
survival of patients with gastric cancer
M. Bobrovskikh, A. Bobrovskikh, A. Filin*, V. Danilenko, D. Bugrimov,
E. Ulitina, E. Chupandina, I. De-George, P. Markin
*Voronezh State Medical University named after N.N. Burdenko, Dept.
of Pathological Anatomy, Voronezh, Russia
Background & objectives: Lymphoid cells containing aggregated
immunoglobulins in the form of Russel bodies (RB) are found in a
variety of diseases. The aim is to evaluate the possibility of using
RB-cells as a prognostic criterion for the immune response in gastric
cancer.
Methods: The authors of the study collected 40 cases of gastric cancer
with various morphological forms, divided into groups with short (1-2
years) and long (up to 10 years) postoperative survival. The material was
stained with the three-color Masson method in combination with alcian
blue at ph = 1.0. Electron-microscopic and immunohistochemical studies
were performed selectively.
Results: In a retrospective study of a group of patients with long postop-
erative survival, regardless of the histological form of cancer, a signifi-
cantly larger (p <0.01) number of cells with Russel bodies in their mucous
layer was recorded compared with a group of patients with short postop-
erative survival.
Conclusion: The data obtained expand the idea of the participation
of cells with Russell's bodies in the antitumor reaction of local
gastric immunity as a prognostic factor in the survival of patients
with gastric cancer.
E-PS-06-029
Immunohistochemistry and molecular analysis of colorectal cancer
in young patients
J.P. Flores Gutierrez*, H.S. Ramos Marrero, L.P. Chapa Montalvo, N.
Vilches Cisneros, O. Barboza Quintana, R. Garza Guajardo, M. Molina
Ayala
*Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Mexico
Background & objectives: Microsatellite instability (MSI) is a rec-
ognized pathway in the development of colorectal cancer. Its di-
agnosis can be made through immunohistochemistry or PCR. We
conducted a comparative study to find out the difference between
these two methods regarding MSI detection.
Methods: In total, 59 colorectal cancer cases were studied for
meeting at least one of the revised Bethesda criteria. In all cases,
the expression of DNA repair proteins (MLH-1, MSH2, MSH-6
and PMS-2) was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Real-time
PCR of DNA repair proteins was conducted in all of them using
the IdyllaTM Biocartis system.
Results: cases studied, the average age was 39.7 years, the most
frequent side of tumour presentation was the left (54.23%) and the
most frequent variety found was intestinal (50.84%). According to
the results, 24 (40.67%) presented alterations in at least one of the
DNA repair proteins through immunohistochemistry. The remain-
ing 35 cases (59.32%) did not present any alteration. In the mo-
lecular analysis through PCR for all cases, 17 (28.81%) presented
MSI-high phenotype and 42 cases (71.18%) were stable. Sen =
70.83%, Spe = 83.33%, PPV = 70.83%, NPV = 83.33%.
Conclusion: Immunohistochemistry has a good specificity to be
used as a screening method. In case of an altered or inconclusive
result, it is necessary to perform a molecular test to confirm the
diagnosis. It is advisable to perform any diagnostic test available
to all patients with colorectal cancer that are under 50 years of age,
since MSI findings modifies patient management.
E-PS-06-030
A case of small bowel intussusception in an adult caused by hetero-
topic gastric mucosa in the jejunum: a case report
S. Gamal*, A. Shalaby
*Sultan Qapoos University Hospital, Oman
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Intussusception is a common gastro-
intestinal emergency in paediatric patients. In adult it is rare and
mostly caused by malignancy. we report an extremely rare case of
intussusception in 20- year old boy caused by heterotopic gastric
mucosa in the jujenum.
Methods: A 20 year old boy presented to the emergency depart-
ment with one day history of abdominal pain, localized to right
iliac fossa. . Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis
showed a small bowel intussusception, likely involving distal ileal
loops with severe dilatation. Subsequent emergency surgery re-
vealed jejuno-jejunal intussusception with grossly dilated proxi-
mal small bowels with fecalization.
Results: The resected jejunum was opened to reveal a large pro-
truding polypoidal mass seen in mucosal surface measures
3.5x2x2 cm. Cut section shows an invaginated thickened wall.
Microscopic examination showed heterotopic gastric mucosa and
heterotopic submucosal mucous glands composed of oxyntic-type
gastric mucosa. The overlying foveolar epithelium exhibited a
hyperplastic change. No dysplasia, malignancy, or Meckel diver-
ticulum was present. The background small intestinal mucosa
showed extensive mucosal ischemic change secondary to
intussusception.
Conclusion: Approximately 90% of adult intussusceptions have
an organic cause, malignant neoplasm being the most common.
Jejunal heterotopic gastric mucosa is a very rare cause of intus-
susception among adults. A definitive diagnosis of heterotopic
gastric mucosa is established by histopathological examination.
Heterotopic gastric mucosa is usually clinically silent and surgical
intervention can be considered in patients with complications such
as gastrointestinal haemorrhage and intestinal obstruction
E-PS-06-032
Intramucosal adenocarcinoma on foveolar-type adenoma in proxi-
mal oesophagus: a rare case report
Y. Gomez Navarro*, M. García Martos, M.J. Fernández Aceñero,
I. Peligros Gómez
*HGU Gregorio Marañón, Spain
Background & objectives: Foveolar-type adenomas are rare neo-
plasm in the stomach. Extragastric sites of foveolar-type adenoma
include the gallbladder, duodenum, bile duct, and oesophagus. We
present a case of foveolar-type adenoma in proximal oesophagus
with evolution 4 months later an intramucosal adenocarcinoma.
Methods: A 64-year-old female with medical history of acromegaly and
benign thyroid follicular nodule in follow up. Cervical ultrasound exam-
ination revealed a lesion suggestive of diverticulum at the level of cervical
oesophagus. In a gastroscopic study, it was found to correspond to a
polyp with maximal diameter 20 mm near to an area suggestive of co-
lumnar heterotopia of gastric origin.
Results: Histologically, a polypoid lesion consisting of gastric py-
loric glands was initially detected, with an intramucous adenocar-
cinoma focus and heterotopic gastric mucosa (Inlet patch) in the
oesophagus is an embryological lesion that has been described less
than 10% of gastroscopies. The most common diagnostic chal-
lenge with foveolar-type adenomas have a well-formed apical mu-
cin cap, label immunohistochemically with MUC5AC, and are
negative for MUC6, in contrast to pyloryc glands adenomas.
Immunohistochemical profile revealed positive MUCA5 and focal
MUC6.Althought most of them are asymptomatic, as our patient,
they can cause dysphagia or hearburn; even a rare association with
adenocarcinomas has been described.
Conclusion: We think the patient has a inlet patch which prolif-
erated and degenerated into an adenoma and adenocarcinoma, a
extremely infrequent sequence for this frequent disorders.
E-PS-06-033
Gallbladder metastasis from clear cell renal cell carcinoma
D. Goutas*, N. Katsoulas, E. Felekouras, I. Vagios, A. Nonni
*First Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, The National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens - "Laikon" General Hospital of
Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: Gallbladder metastasis from renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) represents a rare site, as to our knowledge, only
59 cases have been reported in the literature. We report a case of
intraluminal polypoid metastasis of clear cell RCC (ccRCC) in the
gallbladder.
Methods: We present a case of a 71 year old woman who had
undergone a radical nephrectomy for ccRCC, ten years ago. A
polypoid intracystic gallbladder mass was incidentally discovered
on U/S and MRI examination. The radiological findings were
suggestive of primary gallbladder carcinoma. Therefore, the pa-
tient undergone a laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Results: Grossly, the gallbladder cyst revealed a tan brown
exophytic polypoid mass, arising from the posterior wall of the
cyst, 2,5cm in maximum diameter. Microscopically, the polypoid
mass corresponded to neoplastic tissue with extensive ulceration
and necrosis on the surface. The neoplastic cells were large, with
abundant clear cytoplasm and small, hyperchromatic nuclei. They
were arranged in nests and islets, with no evidence of cyst wall
invasion. A panel of immunohistochemical markers was performed
in order to determine the origin of the tumour. The neoplastic cells
were positive for Vimentin, CAM 5.2, CD10, CAIX and PAX8
and negative for CK7, Inhibin, HMB45 and napsin.
Conclusion: The above morphological and immunohistochemical
features are compatible with a clear cell renal cell carcinoma
(RCC). Taking into consideration the known patient’s medical
history of such a tumour, 10 years ago, it is concluded that the
neoplasm is a metastasis from the RCC. Although the radiological
features were suggestive of a primary tumour, it is clear that the
final diagnosis is made on pathological examination and immuno-
histochemistry.
E-PS-06-034
Interobserver variability and value of histological examination in the
diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (experience of Hassan
II University Hospital Fez)
I. Gouzi*, L. Tahiri, A. Douida, A. Mazti, N. Hammas, H. El Fatemi,
L. Chbani
*Department of Pathology, CHU Hassan II, Fez, Morocco
Background & objectives: Diagnosis of IBD include a histological ex-
amination by a statistically discriminants between ulcerative colitis and
Crohn’s disease (CD)
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the interobserver variability and
the value of histological examination in the diagnosis of IBD.
Methods: 100 cases of IBD collected in the Department of
Pathology of Hassan II university hospital of Fez were reviewed
independently and without endoscopic or clinical information
(ECI) by three pathologists. Their diagnoses were compared to
the initial diagnosis retained by knowing the ECI. Interobserver
Virchows Arch
agreement in the diagnosis of various histological evidence was
evaluated.
Results: The interobserver agreement examination in the diagnosis
of various histological evidence was low to medium. The diagno-
sis of ulcerative colitis (UC) was concordant in 63% of Crohn
disease in 38% of IBD and indeterminate in 33%. The architectur-
al changes were more marked in UC (81% of cases) than in
Crohn’s disease. In the latter dominate the inflammatory infiltrate
and especially the basal plasmacytosis in 96% of cases.
Conclusion: This work shows poor reproducibility of the histolog-
ical criteria used in the diagnosis of IBD. Apart from a consensus
definition of histological criteria, the diagnosis of IBD is contin-
gent on histological, clinical and endoscopic confrontation.
E-PS-06-035
Metastatic lobular carcinoma presenting as a sigmoid colon stricture
P. Grech*, A. Arnaout
*St George’s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United
Kingdom
Background & objectives: Metastatic breast carcinoma to the gas-
trointestinal tract is rare, with an estimated incidence of 0.5%. The
stomach is preferentially affected; reports of colorectal involvement
are limited to small case series. In the overwhelming majority of
patients there is a known history of breast carcinoma and the la-
tency period is often years to decades. We describe a highly un-
usual case of metastatic lobular carcinoma mimicking a primary
colonic tumour in a patient with no history of breast malignancy.
Methods: -
Results: A 55-year old woman presented to her general practition-
er with fatigue. She was noted to be anaemic and referred for
colonoscopy, which revealed stricturing of the sigmoid colon.
Biopsy showed focal infiltration of the lamina propria by
discohesive malignant cells, which were positive for CK7,
GATA-3 and oestrogen receptor. CK20, CDX2, E-cadherin and
HER-2 were negative, in keeping with lobular carcinoma of breast
origin. She was subsequently seen in the breast clinic and
underwent imaging, which revealed a unilateral breast mass.
Upon biopsy, this was proven to be invasive lobular carcinoma
and she was referred for systemic therapy.
Conclusion: This is a rare case of metastatic lobular carcinoma
presenting in the colon of a patient with no known diagnosis of
breast malignancy. Metastatic lobular carcinoma is associated with
a range of clinical presentations and is diagnostically challenging
as it can mimic primary carcinoma of the colon. Pathologists must
have a high index of suspicion to ensure distinction between pri-
mary and metastatic disease, allowing prompt treatment and
preventing unnecessary surgical intervention.
E-PS-06-036
Inflammatory fibroid polyp of gastrointestinal tract: report of two
cases and review of the literature
I.M. Grypari*, E. Iliopoulos, I. Kehagias, T. Makatsoris, V. Tzelepi
*Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Patras,
Greece
Background & objectives: Inflammatory fibroid polyps (IFP) are
rare, benign neoplasms encountered in the gastrointestinal tract
(GI) with distinct pathologic features and molecular profile. Two
interesting cases are reported herein, while the second is associat-
ed with an adenoma.
Methods: First case: A 73year old woman presented with symptoms
of intestinal obstruction. Intussusception was diagnosed and seg-
mental resection of the affected part of the ileum was performed.
Second case: A 59year old man presented with anaemia. A pro-
truding mass was revealed in the antrum, treated with partial gas-
trectomy. In direct continuity with it, a second polypoid mass was
noted.
Results: On macroscopy, the masses had a white-greyish and
gelatinous cutting surface. Histopathology in both cases revealed
a submucosal neoplasm with medium cellularity consisting of
spindle cells in a collagenous background. Abundant inflamma-
tory cells were scattered throughout the neoplasm, while eosin-
ophils clustered around the blood vessels. Mitotic rate was low.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated positivity for CD34 and
CD99 and no reaction for ckit, DOG1, ALK, aSMA, Ck8/18
and S100. Both cases were diagnosed as IFP. A PDGFRa muta-
tion (exone 12) was identified via PCR. The polypoid mass above
the IFP was diagnosed as a tubular adenoma with focal high-
grade dysplasia. The patients are disease-free 24 months after
the initial diagnosis.
Conclusion: IFP should be considered in the differential diagnosis
of ckit and DOG1 negative mesenchymal neoplasms of the GI.
Surprisingly, It shares the same mutations with Gastrointestinal
Stromal Tumours even they do not have metastatic potential or
recurrences. To sum up, IFP may have a worrisome clinical ap-
pearance but has a benign behaviour.
E-PS-06-037
Analysis of the microsatellite instability in Tunisian colorectal cancer
M. Hamdani*, O. Belkacem, A. Baccouche, N. Jelidi, Z. Nfikha,
D. Chiba, M. Hachana, A. Bdioui, S. Hmissa Belhaj Salah
*Department of Pathology, Sahloul University Hospital of Sousse,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Colorectal Cancer (CRC) represents a
health problem whose frequency is increasing. Microsatellite
Instability (MSI) status in CRC has prognostic and therapeutic
implications.
Our aim is to study the frequency of the MSI in CRC and to analyse the
clinicopathological particularities.
Methods: It is a retrospective study including 30 cases of CRC
identified in the Department of Pathology of Farhat Hached
University Hospital of Sousse (Tunisia). MSI analysis was done
by PCR targeting five markers of Microsatellite: BAT-25, BAT-
26, D5S346, D2S123 et D17S250.
Results: This study included 17 men and 13 women. Instability of
D5S346 microsatellite was uncommon (10%).
MSI analysis showed 3 statuses: MSS in 15 cases (50%), MSI-H
in 11 cases (37%) and MSI-L in 4 cases (13%). MSI-H CRC
were significantly more common in patients under the age of 50
(p = 0.002). This phenotype was more frequent among men, in
the left colon, in well differentiated forms and in advanced
stages of parietal infiltration but without a significant
association.
Conclusion: MSI is an important genetic marker in CRC that can
be useful in diagnosis, prognosis, and even treatment. Further ef-
forts should be made to improve molecular techniques developed
for detection of MSI and to develop drug strategies based on spe-
cific tumour molecular characteristics.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-06-038
New immunohistochemical and molecular biomarkers in gastric
carcinoma
V. Herlea*, A. Procop, S.O. Dima, M. Hortopan, M. Mihai, A. Baltan,
I. Popescu
*Fundeni Clinical Institute, Bucharest, "Titu Maiorescu University",
Faculty of Medicine, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: The Lauren classification divides gastric
carcinomas into 3 major types: diffuse, intestinal and mixed with
a recent clustering in prognostic groups based on new protein
expressions
Methods: The purpose of this study was to present a series of 17
cases of gastric carcinomas diagnosed in Fundeni Clinical Institute
and their classification in prognostic groups. The immunohisto-
chemical profile included a series of diagnostic biomarkers
(EBV, the microsatellite instability profile - MLH1, PMS2,
MSH2, MSH6, p53, E-cadherin, Muc2, Muc5AC, Muc6, CDX2,
CD10, Her2neu)
Results: 12 were male patients with a mean age of 54.33 years
and 5 female patients with an average age of 46.8 years. We
studied the histopathological parameters, tumour budding,
lymphovascular and perineural invasion in all cases. Seventeen
cases showed an EBV negative, stable microsatellite phenotype
with diffuse nuclear positivity for MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6
and diffuse positivity for E-cadherin. The difference in staining
was observed with p53, placing them in the fourth and fifth prog-
nostic groups, with subtyping based on aberrant Muc2, Muc5AC,
Muc6 and CDX2 expression. Her2neu immunopositivity revealed
4 cases identified as 3+ (positive) and 8 cases established as 2+
(equivocal).
Conclusion: The classification of gastric carcinomas based on
molecular and immunohistochemical biomarkers is applicable
for diagnostic purposes in order to establish de novo gastric
cancer prognostic groups and the novo targeted therapies, aside
from Trastuzumab eligible patients with Her2neu positivity . The
future aim of these studies is to increase the survival rate in
gastric cancer (the current 5 year survival rate in gastric carci-
nomas is 20%)
E-PS-06-039
Collagenous gastritis in a teenager - a case report
A. Iorgescu*, G. Becheanu, A. Constantinescu, M. Dumbrava
*Fundeni Clinical Institute, Romania
Background & objectives: Collagenous gastritis is a rare condition
of unknown aetiology histopathologically diagnosed by the pres-
ence of a subepithelial collagen band accompanied by inflamma-
tion. We report a rare case of collagenous gastritis in a teenage
Romanian girl.
Methods: A 17-year-old woman was admitted to the Fundeni
Clinical Institute, Gastroenterology Department, in January 2020.
The patient is known to have iron deficiency anaemia for several
years for which she received iron supplements without constant
improvement of the haemoglobin levels. Her laboratory profile
revealed hypochromic Microcytic Anaemia (Hb 10.60 g/dl) and
iron levels of 12μg/dl.
Results: Esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed and showed
oedema and hyperaemia accompanied by nodularity in the gastric
body; duodenal mucosa looked normal. The gastric biopsy per-
formed showed mild chronic gastritis and subepithelial collagen
deposits highlighted by tenascin and trichrom stains on both antral
and gastric body mucosa. Colonoscopy was also performed and
showed a normal mucosal appearance.
Conclusion: Considering the rarity of this entity, especially in the
paediatric population, the lack of etiological factors and the fact
that it has not yet been proven the transition from paediatric-type
to adult-type disease, endoscopic and histological follow-up of
these patients is mandatory. No current treatments seem to be
constantly effective or improve the evolution.
E-PS-06-041
Correlation of programmed death ligand 1 with the two antibody
immunohistochemistry profile (PMS-2 and MSH-6) for microsatel-
lite instability in colorectal carcinoma
J. Kini*, E. Sethi, S. Sreeram, H. Kini
*Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore, Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, Karnataka, India
Background & objectives: Colorectal carcinoma is the third most
common cancer in men and second in women worldwide. PD-L1,
an immune checkpoint inhibitor is of interest currently. In our
study, we correlated immunohistochemical expression of PD-L1
with PMS-2 and MSH-6 in colorectal carcinoma
Methods: Seventy nine colorectal carcinoma cases, 48.1% above
the age of 60 years and male to female ratio was 1.2:1 were re-
trieved from Department of Pathology, Kasturba Medical College,
Mangalore archives from January 2017 to December 2018. Pre-
operative treated cases were excluded. PD-L1 (CAL 10 clone),
PMS-2 and MSH-6 immunostaining for microsatellite instability
was done on paraffin embedded formalin fixed blocks.
Results: Of the 79 cases, most common histological type was ad-
enocarcinoma (88.6%) with grade 2 seen in 57% patients. Most
were T- stage 3 (51.9%) and 4 (20.3%) with 51.9% patients having
nodal positive status. PD-L1 staining was quantified by intensity
of staining and percentage of tumour positive cells. PD-L1 tumour
cell intensity and percentage was highly significant with each oth-
er along with PD-L1 immune cell intensity and percentage, MSH-
6, peritumoral lymphocytic response and significant with PMS-2+
MSH-6 loss of nuclear expression and tumour infiltrating lympho-
cytes. PD-L1 immune cell percentage had highly significant asso-
ciation with MSH-6, peritumoral lymphocytic response and signif-
icant with age, tumour infiltrating lymphocytes, lymphovascular
invasion and tumour deposits.
Conclusion: PD-L1 tumour cell positivity (>5%) was seen in near-
ly third (41.1%) of the colorectal carcinomas cases studied. It was
significantly associated with loss of MSH-6. The study suggests
the possible scope for immunotherapy to be considered in our
subset of Indian patients.
E-PS-06-042
A rare malignancy of perianal region: case report and review of the
literature
E. Kolay*, P. Uyar Göçün, S. Leventoğlu
*Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Leiomyosarcoma(LMS) of non visceral
soft tissues are rare tumours and there are limited numbers of
tumour that arise from ischiorectal fossa. The diagnosis should
be discussed with a multidisciplinary approach as it has uncom-
mon clinical, radiologic and histopathological findings.
Virchows Arch
Methods: This case report describes the case of a 67 years old
woman presented with a perianal mass with no medical history.
During perianal examination no rectal mucosal lesion was found,
the abscess was the preliminary diagnosis. After the pathologic
examination of supericial biopsy, the mass located at ischiorectal
fossa was excised. Superficial and excisional biopsy shared similar
morphologic, immunohistochemical properties.
Results: Although the spindle and storiform areas with “cigar”
shaped nuclei appropriate for the leiomyosarcoma was not in-
cluded in the first superficial biopsy, immunohistochemistry
was supportive for the diagnosis. Gross total excision was per-
formed and macroscopic, microscopic examination revealed a
malignant tumour with epithelioid morphology. Carcinomas and
malignant tumours with epithelioid morphology were ruled out.
Immunohistochemistry revealed that neoplastic cells expressed
h-caldesmon, smooth muscle actin, muscle specific actin and
smooth muscle myosin. Lenfovascular invasion and focal micro-
scopic invasion of surgical margins were found.
Conclusion: Both epithelioid morphology of LMS and ischiorectal
fossa location are quite rare. We review the morphologic charac-
teristics, diagnostic pitfalls of LMS and add another case to the
literature. Awareness of this “ignored” anatomic location and this
rare malignant tumour is important.
E-PS-06-043
Amyloidosis of the duodenum: report of a case
X. Grammatoglou, N. Poulianitis, G. Theodoropoulou, D. Bouklas,
A. Kostopoulou*, E. Gkamatsi, G. Kakiopoulos, T. Choreftaki
*General Hospital of Athens G.N.A. G.Gennimatas, Department of
Surgical Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: We present a case of duodenal
amyloidosis.
Methods: A 78 years-old man was presented in our hospital suf-
fering from severe diarrhoea, melaena and abdominal pain.
Gastroscopy was performed showing bile reflux in stomach and
duodenum. Gastric mucosa of the body had micronodular appear-
ance and antral mucosa was erythematous with erosions. The
second-third and third-fourth portions of the duodenum were ery-
thematous, with oedema, brittle and local dented.
Results: Histologically the duodenal mucosa revealed glassy pink
material in the lamina propria and chronic inflammatory infiltrate
predominantly composed of lymphocytes. Congo-Red staining
demonstrated amyloid deposits in the duodenal specimens. These
observations confirmed the diagnosis of duodenal amyloidosis.
Gastric and colon biopsies showed no amyloid deposition.
Conclusion: The term amyloidosis includes a heterogenous group
of disorders characterized by acellular hyaline deposits of protein-
aceous substance referred as amyloidosis, The disease may be
localized or systemic, affecting any organ or tissue, although all
types of amyloidosis may affect the gastrointestinal tract. The
stomach and the rectum are more likely to be involved than is
the small intestine.
E-PS-06-044
Adenosquamous carcinoma of the oesophagus: a case report
Z. Lajmi*, A. Bdioui, A. Bchir, T. Tlili, K. Marwa, B. Sriha, M. Mokni
*Department of pathology, F.Hached hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Adenosquamous carcinoma (ASC) of the
oesophagus is uncommon. It contains both squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) and adenocarcinoma (AC) components. We re-
port a case of oesophageal adenosquamous carcinoma to show its
epidemiologic, clinical, pathological and prognostic features.
Methods: We report a case of 29-year-old men presented with dysphagia
and weight loss for 2 months. An oesophagogastroduodenoscopy with
endoscopic biopsy showed an adenocarcinoma. Oesogastrectomy was
performed
Results: Macroscopic aspect of the chirurgical sample showed an
ulcerous and infiltrative tumour. Histopathologically, the tumour
was composed of separate malignant squamous and glandular
components. The SCC element contained keratin pearl formation
and intercellular bridges, while the AC element had tubular and
glandular structures. Perineural invasion and tumoral embols were
detected. Five metastatic lymph nodes were detected among 19.
An adenosquamous carcinoma was finally retained. The main dif-
ferential diagnosis was Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma that is com-
posed of an admixture of malignant epidermoid, intermediate and
mucous cells. Two years later, the patient presented cerebral
metastasis.
Conclusion: ASC is a rare tumour subtype among oesophageal
carcinomas with aggressive clinical behaviour and a prognosis
worse than either AC or SCC.
E-PS-06-045
Granular cell tumour of the rectum: a rare entity in an uncommon
location – a case report
N.J. Lamas*, J.R. Brandão, A. Coelho, J.R. Vizcaíno
*Anatomical Pathology Service, Department of Pathology, Hospital and
University Center of Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: Granular cell tumours are mostly benign
neoplasms arising from Schwann cells, more commonly occurring
in skin, subcutaneous tissue, oral cavity, and gastrointestinal tract,
with oesophagus being the most frequent location and with only a
few cases described in the rectum.
Methods: We report the case of a 68-year-old male who is homo-
zygous for a MUTYH-associated polyposis mutation, with previ-
ous history of colon adenocarcinoma, jejunal adenocarcinoma,
multiple GI tract polyps and a gastrointestinal stromal tumour
(GIST) of the colon, who has been under continuous surveillance
in our institution, presenting with a novel polypoid rectal lesion.
Results: We received a 6mm polyp whose histological analysis
showed colic-type mucosa with preserved glandular architecture
and a subepithelial proliferation of spindle to epithelioid cells,
occasionally forming intertwined cell bundles. A polymorphic
inflammatory infiltrate was observed in the lesion periphery,
which was centred on the submucosa and involved the lamina
propria. There were no mitosis, necrosis, capsule formation nor
vascular hyalinization. The neoplastic cells showed strong and
diffuse expression using antibodies against S100 protein and
were not immunoreactive for CD34, DOG1, SMA, CD117,
Desmin and GFAP. The histochemical study using PAS and
PAS after diastasis revealed the presence of intracytoplasmic
eosinophilic granules. Endoscopic resection margins were free
of neoplastic cells.
Conclusion: This case illustrates the main features of this extreme-
ly rare benign rectal lesion, which can have malignant variants.
The potential association between the MUTYH-associated
polyposis mutations and the development of granular cell tumours
remains to be established.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-06-046
Calcifying fibrous tumour of small intestine – a case report of a rare
entity and review of the literature
N.J. Lamas*, J.R. Brandão, A. Coelho, J.R. Alves, J.R. Vizcaíno
*Anatomical Pathology Service, Department of Pathology, Hospital and
University Center of Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: The calcifying fibrous tumour (CFT), initial-
ly described in 1993, is an extremely rare benign tumour with a predilec-
tion for children and young adults, usually arising in the subcutaneous
and deep soft tissues, among other locations.
Methods: We report the case of a 46-year-old female with a two-day
history of epigastric colicky pain, diarrhoea, nausea and vomits. C-
reactive protein levels and leucocyte counts were increased. The CT scan
showed a 13cm distal ileal segment invagination conditioning small in-
testine occlusion, with a non-specific calcium-like density in the invagi-
nated lumen. The patient underwent surgery to resolve the intestinal
occlusion.
Results: We received a 16cm long small intestine segment with a lobu-
lated area 1,2cm from the nearest surgical margin. Upon section, we could
observe a 2,7x2,5x2cm well-circumscribed neoplasia centred in the sub-
mucosa and muscular layers, firm, whitish and vitreous. The histological
analysis showed an ileal segment containing a hypocellular neoplasia
with well-defined borders and mainly composed by bland spindle cells
imbued in abundant and dense stroma, with hyalinized areas and contain-
ing lamellar collagen. There were dystrophic calcifications and small
aggregates of chronic inflammatory cell infiltrates. No mitotic figures or
necrosis were observed. The immunohistochemistry study using antibod-
ies anti-CD34, Desmin, CD117, DOG1 and Her2 showed only focal
positivity for CD34.
Conclusion: This case illustrates the main features of this extremely
uncommon benign small intestine lesion, which has been previously as-
sociated with a few cases of intestinal intussusception.
E-PS-06-047
Nuclear JAK-2 with serine 727 phosphorylated STAT-3 in colorectal
cancer
P. Lewitowicz*, A. Radowicz-Chil, M. Zaremba, A. Plusa, L. Madej,
M. Wawszczak, A. Horecka-Lewitowicz
*Collegium Medicum of Jan Kochanowski University, Poland
Background & objectives: An unclear Jak-2 nuclear downstream has
not been explained and moreover the meaning of that is also unsolved to
the present day.
The objective of the present study was to analyse the nuclear Jak-2
downstream
Methods: Ninety-eight cases of colorectal cancer were included to study.
A tissue microarray was performed and micro-samples to DNA isolation
were taken from FFPE blocks. We examined a Jak-2 V-617f, BRAF,
KRAS, NRAS mutation and also Jak-2, serine 727 phosphorylated
Stat3, anti-thymidyne phosphorylase, INI-1, NKX3, EZH-2, FOX-P1
by classical immunohistochemistry.
The study has been approved by the Ethical Commission.
Results: We observed low ratio Jak-2 V61fF mutation, comparable to other
results disturbances of BRAF, KRAS, and NRAS, very common Jak-2 nu-
clear transfer positively correlating with INI-1 and NKX-3. All data are still
under statistical analysis and will be presented during the poster session.
Conclusion: The study suggests nuclear Jak2 would be Stat3
independent.
The study was supported by financial resources of The Collegium
Medicum Jan Kochanowski University in Kielce, Poland.
E-PS-06-049
Well differentiated liposarcoma presenting as a duodenal polyp: a
rare case presentation
K. Liyanaarachchi*, J. Warnick, C. Fisher, I. Bagwan
*Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Despite being one of the most common soft
tissue sarcoma in the retro-peritoneum and extremities, liposarcoma are
extremely rare in the gastrointestinal tract. Only three cases have been
reported in the duodenum in the literature.
Methods: A PubMed search was carried out for previous cases, using the
reference terms; “small bowel”, “duodenal” and “liposarcoma”. A 77
year old patient presented with intermittent malena and endoscopy
showed a 45 mm polypoid lesion in D2.
Results: Histology revealed a partially circumscribed adipocytic le-
sion containing variable fibrous septa with spindle cells including
cells with enlarged hyperchromatic or multiple nuclei. The spindle
cells were CD34 positive and negative for CD117 and DOG1.
Interphase FISH studies performed revealed amplification of
MDM2 gene, confirming the lesion as an atypical lipomatous
tumour/ well differentiated liposarcoma.
Conclusion: The diagnosis of well differentiated lipomatous tumours
apart from lipoma at unusual site such as gastrointestinal tract is extreme-
ly difficult on routine H&E examination. The use of FISH studies for
MDM2 amplification would help in the confirming the diagnosis.
Accurate diagnosis is important as surgical resection with negative mar-
gin is the mainstay of treatment for patients with well-differentiated
liposarcoma.
E-PS-06-050
Epithelioid gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GISTs) simultaneous
and rare coexistence with gastric schwannoma
R.D.P. Lopez-Panqueva*, A. Rueda, M. Pineda, F. Arias
*Department of Pathology and Laboratories, Fundación Santa Fe de
Bogotá, Colombia
Background & objectives: Gastric GISTs represent 2% of all malignant
tumours in the gastrointestinal tract, while the Schwannoma only 0.2%,
the simultaneous occurrence is very rare. We report of a case in a patient
with simultaneous coexistence of Schwannoma and GIST.
Methods: A gastric submucosal lesion was found on a follow up endos-
copy of a 63-year-old male with a history of duodenal ulcer. CT revealed
a 6.5 cm mass in the lesser curvature of the stomach. During the surgical
resection, a second lesion of 0.8 cm was identified in the fundus. A
laparoscopic gastric resection of the two lesions was performed.
Results: Microscopic examination revealed in the larger tumour spindle
tumour cells proliferation surrounded by a peripheral lymphoid cuff,
without atypia, mitosis and necrosis. The immunohistochemistry (IHC)
showed positivity for S-100 and GFAP, and it was negative for CD34,
CD117, DOG-1 and muscular markers. The smaller tumour was composed
of epithelioid tumour cells without mitosis and Immunohistochemistry study
was positive for CD117 and DOG-1 and negative for S-100. The larger
tumour was classified as a schwannoma and the smaller as an epithelioid
GIST.
Conclusion: GISTs and Schwannomas are mesenchymal tumours of
the gastrointestinal tract and the synchronic occurrence of the two
diseases is very unusual, with a few cases referred in the literature.
Diagnosis of these entities is difficult with only endoscopy and diag-
nostic images, and requires a complete histopathological and immu-
nohistochemical approach for a correct diagnosis and treatment of
these lesions.
Virchows Archiv
E-PS-06-051
Primary small bowel leiomyosarcoma as a subsequent malignancy in
a retinoblastoma survivor: case report
R.D.P. Lopez-Panqueva*, D. Cañón, I. Gonzalez, B. Díaz-Gómez.
*Department of Pathology and Laboratories, Fundación Santa Fe de
Bogotá, Colombia
Background & objectives: Small bowel tumours are <5% of
gastrointestinal(GI) malignancies. Small bowel leiomyosarcoma is rare
and aggressive, 40-80% local recurrence, 55-70% metastasis rate.
Secondary malignancies in patients with retinoblastoma-history may be
side effects of radiation/chemotherapy, higher in hereditary-retinoblasto-
ma13.7% rather than in sporadic1.5%.
Methods: A 54-year-old man with abdominal pain, weight loss and his-
tory of retinoblastoma treated at 2.5 years old with radiotherapy and
enucleation. Resection of a small bowel segment with a 10.5 x 7 x
6 cm mesenteric mass was performed. 4 months later, liver metastases
were detected. The patient refused further treatment.
Results: Microscopic examination revealed: spindle cells neoplasm with
interlocking bundles and fascicles, with moderate nuclear pleomorphism,
numerous atypical mitosis and necrosis. Immunohistochemistry, positive
for muscular markers (caldesmon-calponin-demin), and EMA. Negative:
CD10, DOG1, CD34 and S100. KI67: 60%. The diagnosis of a high-
grade pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma was made, with intestinal submucosa
involvement. Genomic study was performed (Foundation one):
Microsatellite Instability: Intact, TMB-Tumour Mutational Burden: low,
other genomic alterations: ATRX, E1288, RB1 V65fs14, tp53.
Conclusion: Primary Leiomyosarcoma in the small bowel is rare, treat-
ment relies on accurate diagnosis and a surgical approach. Have a dis-
tinctive clinicopathological and immunohistochemical features and ag-
gressive behaviour. Sarcomas need to be considered when facing patients
with history of retinoblastoma, alterations of RB1 seem to be involved in
the pathogenesis of the secondary malignancy and after treatment of
retinoblastoma. Knowledge of this rare pitfall is important.
E-PS-06-052
A rare duodenal tumour with uncommon histopathological features
and aggressive clinico-biological behaviour
S. Makni*, O. Boudaouara, S. Aloulou, M. Bouhamed, S. Moussa,
T. Sellami, N. Gouiaa
*Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Mixed neuroendocrine non-neuroendocrine
neoplasms (MiNENs) are rare epithelial neoplasms of the gastro-entero-
pancreatic tract with well-defined diagnostic criteria. We report a case of a
duodenal MiNEN aiming to illustrate its site-specific clinical features
focusing on its histopathological heterogeneity and treatment outcomes.
Methods: We describe a case of a duodenal MiNEN diagnosed in our
pathology department and treated in surgical and medical oncology de-
partments of Sfax and Gabes hospitals.
Results: A 56-year-old-woman presented with chronic painless jaundice,
clay-coloured stools and darkened urines with biological cholestasis.
Ultrasound, computed-tomography and magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography showed extrahepatic cholestasis without evi-
dent obstruction. Upper-endoscopy revealed a 3cm-exophytic-duodenal-
mass extending to the Vater’s ampulla. Endoscopic-biopsy concluded to
a grade 3-neuroendocrine-tumor (G3NET). A Whipple
duodenopancreatectomy was then performed. Grossly, the tumour in-
volved both duodenal wall and ampulla. The diagnosis of MiNEN was
made based on the presence of a three-component-neoplasm: G3NET,
intestinal-type-adenocarcinoma and squamous-cell carcinoma, accounting
for nearly 30% of the tumour each. The patient was subsequently found to
have an advanced disease and showed progression within 5 months despite
a palliative chemotherapy following an adenocarcinoma-like protocol.
Conclusion: Due to the rarity of this entity and inconsistency of termi-
nologies, MiNENs’ management and outcomes remain controversial, al-
though their prognosis is often poor driven by the neuroendocrine com-
ponent frequently of high-grade.
E-PS-06-053
Terminal ileum endometriosis causing acute small bowel
obstruction-case report and literature review
R. Malima*, E. Vuhahula, H. Chande, C. Ngimba
*Muhimbili Medical University, Tanzania
Background & objectives: Endometriosis is a benign condition with ex-
istence of dynamic functioning endometrial tissues consisting of glands ex-
ternal to the uterine cavity. Terminal ileum endometriosis is extremely rare.
Objective-To describe clinical pathological findings in a case of terminal
ileum endometriosis and literature review.
Methods: We report a case of small bowel endometriosis which present-
ed with recurrent massive ascites and acute intestinal obstruction. The
case was retrospectively obtained from histopathology laboratory at
Muhimbili National Hospital. Demography and other clinical information
were recorded from the files. Histopathological diagnosis was confirmed
by a routine Hematoxylin and Eosin stains. Microscopic photos of the
histology slides were taken.
Results: A 23years old female presented at Emergency Department, with
signs and symptoms of acute intestinal obstruction. In previous 6 months,
she had recurrent ascites and was kept on trial ant-TB medications, de-
spite negative results for Tuberculosis. Laparotomy findings were fibrosis
and obstruction in the terminal ileum which was re-sectioned. Histology
showed nests of endometrial glands with stroma embedded in submucosa
and muscularis. Final diagnosis was endometriosis of terminal ileum.
Conclusion: Endometriosis occurs in 3%-37% of women in child bearing
age. Gastrointestinal endometriosis does occur mostly in the
rectosigmoid, small bowel endometriosis is less frequent and mostly re-
ported in the distal ileum while terminal ileum endometriosis is extremely
rare endometriosis, with massive ascites should be considered as mas-
querade of diseases due to its varied and disguised ways of presentation. It
requires high index of suspicion among medical practitioners and confir-
mation made by histology of the affected segment.
E-PS-06-055
Primary pleomorphic intestinal liposarcoma: a case report
G. Meijide Santos*, M. Poch Arenas, M. Carvajal Alvarez, R. Rodríguez
Aguilar, D. Rodríguez Villar, E. Asensi Miranda, J. Cuevas Fernández
*Sº Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Universitario de Cabueñes, Gijón,
Spain
Background & objectives: Liposarcomas are the most common group
of malignant mesenchymal neoplasms. They usually arise in the extrem-
ities and retroperitoneum, being very rare in the abdominal area.
Methods: A 75 year old man was admitted to the hospital because of severe
anaemia, with no evidence of bleeding. A 5 cm sized thickening of a jejunal
loop was found in the CT scan, with adenocarcinoma as the first possible
diagnosis and then, lymphoma. A small bowel resection was performed.
Results: We received a 79 cm long small bowel specimen with a 12x6 cm
mural tumour, protruding into the lumen, it was a well defined, non
encapsulated soft mass with a whitish-yellow colour. The microscopy
showed an ulcerated mural neoplasm, its surface having an abrupt tran-
sition with a normal surrounding mucosa. Two cellular components were
found, a sarcomatous background with very frequent bizarre lipoblasts
and intermingled malignant spindle cells. There was a 20% of necrosis
and up to 52 mitosis/40HPF. IHC studies showed intense vimentin and
p53 expression of tumour cell and, focally, with MDM2. There was no
MDM2 amplification with FISH.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Due to the rarity of primary pleomorphic intestinal
liposarcoma with a handful of reported cases, one primary pleomorphic
jejunal liposarcoma is presented, with varied differential diagnosis by
imaging, being very relevant to arrive to the correct diagnosis.
E-PS-06-056
Digital pathology in colorectal cancer: using virtual tissue microar-
rays to determine the minimum number of cores for biomarker
analysis
M. Melnikova*, J. Bramsen, C.L. Andersen, S.J. Dutoit-Hamilton,
I.E. Holm
*Department of Pathology, Randers Regional Hospital, Denmark
Background & objectives: Tissue microarrays (TMAs) are used in bio-
marker studies to increase experimental efficiency. We used virtual
TMAs to determine the minimum number of tissue cores needed to quan-
tify biomarkers with the same precision as when using WTS in colorectal
cancer (CRC).
Methods: Sections from 50 CRCs were stained with H&E, and immu-
nohistochemistry for CD3, CD20, fibroblast activation protein (FAP) and
α-SMA, CD68 and CD163. Digitized H&E WTS were divided into
tumour centre and invasive margin regions. Virtual TMAs were created
by overlaying 8 1mm circles in each region of the H&E WTS. Minimal
number of TMA cores was determined by Bland-Altman plots.
Results: For all the biomarkers, a minimum of 4 TMA cores per region
was necessary for adequate quantification compared with WTS.
However, 3 cores were sufficient for separate analysis of anti-CD3,
anti-CD20 and anti-CD68 in the tumour centre. Anti-CD20 had the most
heterogeneous expression, while anti-FAP with anti-α-SMA and anti-
CD3 were most homogeneously expressed.
Conclusion: The virtual TMA technique is a useful method to establish
the minimum number of cores to be included when constructing tumour
TMAs for biomarker analysis.
Funding: Health Research Fund of Central Denmark Region.
E-PS-06-058
The expression of epithelial-cadherin (e-cadherin) and beta-catenin
(β-catenin) in colorectal neoplasm
U.A. Miskad*, M. Mariana, S. Wahid
*Department of Anatomical Pathology Faculty of medicine Hasanuddin
University, Indonesia
Background & objectives: E-cadherin and β-catenin have been exam-
ined as a potential oncogenic marker in colorectal neoplasm. The aim of
this study is to compare the score of E-cadherin expression (membrane
and cytoplasm) and β-catenin (membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus) in the
colorectal neoplasm.
Methods: One hundred paraffin-embedded colorectal tissue diagnosed as
colorectal adenoma, well-differentiated, moderately differentiated and
poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma were examined by immunohisto-
chemistry. The expression was considered positive for E-cadherin and β-
catenin when a brown colour was found in the membrane, cytoplasm or
nucleus. It was assessed using a score system based on the intensity and
extensity.
Results: The results of the study indicate that there was a significant
difference between the expression of E-cadherin and histological grading
of colorectal neoplasm. Expression of E-cadherin is higher in colorectal
adenomas compared to well-differentiated, moderately differentiated and
poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas. Meanwhile, β-catenin expression
is higher in poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma compared to adenoma
and moderately differentiated and well-differentiated adenocarcinomas.
Conclusion: The results suggest that down regulated of E-cadherin expres-
sion and up regulated β-catenin expression play a role in the development
of colorectal neoplasm. It provides additional information in define prog-
nosis and predicting patient’s outcomes in colorectal neoplasm.
Research funding by Indonesian Government
E-PS-06-059
Prediction of cellular damages to anti-cancer drugs by speed-of-
sound
K. Miura*, Y. Egawa, T. Moriki, Y. Fukushi
*Basic Nursing, Health Science, Hamamatsu Univ School Med, Japan
Background & objectives: Degenerative effects need histological obser-
vation after anti-cancer drugs therapy. Although light microscopy fails to
quantitatively evaluate cellular damage, scanning acoustic microscopy
can assess both histology and mechanical stiffness by speed-of-sound
(SOS). This study aims to estimate the quantitative cellular alteration of
cells after anti-cancer drug incubation by SOS values.
Methods: The samples are clinical cytology specimens and culture cells
in ethanol fixation. SOS images of the cells were followed after incuba-
tion in anti-cancer drugs.
Results: Alteration of SOS values of nuclei after anti-cancer drugs varied
with the kind of medicines and also cancer cells. As a whole, SOS values
decreased after incubation in anti-cancer drugs. Alteration of SOS images
corresponded well to LM images.
Conclusion: Following SOS values of the cells can objectively indicate
cellular damages. This method can predict the effects of anti-cancer drugs.
E-PS-06-060
Evaluation of P53 immunohistochemistry pattern as a biomarker of
dysplasia in Barrett’s oesophagus
D. Mocanu*, C. Popp, L. Nichita, M. Cioplea, L. Sticlaru, G. Micu,
A. Vilaia, M. Frumosu, A. Voiosu, E. Ignat
*Colentina University Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: Loss of heterozygosity of p53 plays an im-
portant role in metaplasia-dysplasia-neoplasia sequence.
We designed a retrospective case-control study in order to explore p53
expression in Barrett’s oesophagus, evaluated in dysplastic and non-
dysplastic epithelium.
Methods: We included 9 patients with dysplasia - 6 with low-grade
dysplasia (LGD - 5 men and 1 woman) and 3 with high-grade dysplasia
(HGD - 2 men and 1 woman). For each patient with dysplasia, we includ-
ed a non-dysplastic patient (matching sex and age). p53 expression was
evaluated as percents of positive epithelial cells.
Results: Cases with dysplasia had a higher expression of p53, in both
types of epithelium (squamous and columnar). However, cases without
dysplasia had a surprising high expression of p53: 12.7% of squamous
cells and 8.1% of columnar cells. HGD cases had the highest average of
p53 (46.7% squamous and 68.3% columnar), while in the LGD group,
the rates were 16% in squamous and only 4.2% in columnar epithelium.
Conclusion: As a consequence of the significant degree of intraobserver
and interobserver variability in the microscopic diagnosis of dysplasia,
p53 staining it’s a precious tool that can be helpful in treatment decision.
E-PS-06-061
Stercoral perforation of the colon related to chronic obstipation in-
duced by antipsychotic treatment
K. Mosna*, L. Danihel Jr., K. Mikus-Kuracinova, P. Babál
*Institute of Pathological Anatomy, Comenius University Bratislava,
Slovakia
Background & objectives: Stercoral perforation (SP) is a rare compli-
cation of chronic obstipation, caused by increased pressure of
intraluminal contents. It represents only 3 % of all intestinal perforations,
with only around 100 cases documented in the literature so far.
Methods: 61-year old obese female patient with chronic obstipation and
history of schizoaffective disorder of depressive type treated with combi-
nation of antipsychotic therapy, was hospitalized for 53 days for bron-
chopneumonia followed by urinary tract infection. A week after success-
ful treatment patient died with elevated CRP (289 mg/l) without apparent
clinical correlation. Autopsy and subsequent histopathological evaluation
of necroptic samples was performed.
Results: Autopsy revealed free air within the peritoneal cavity and con-
siderably dilated large intestine, from 7 cm in diameter in ascending colon
to 12 cm in sigma and rectum, fully filled with hardened intestinal con-
tents. Visceral and parietal peritoneum were diffusely thickened, covered
with grey-brown sheets. Oval perforation was present 40 cm from
anorectal line, on the antimesenteric side of the redundant loop of sigmoid
colon. Histologically, the wall of the intestine neighbouring the perfora-
tion showed mixed inflammatory infiltrate and superficial ulcerations.
Serosa was covered with purulent inflammatory infiltrate with evidence
of swift granulation tissue ingrowth, pointing out older age of the lesion.
Conclusion: Only 11% of SPs are diagnosed prior to surgery or autopsy,
with mortality rate reaching 35%. Patients predisposed to SP are mainly
older immobile patients with chronic therapy leading to obstipation –
including mainly opioids, anticholinergic drugs or NSAIDs. Particularly
prone are psychiatric patients, treated with antipsychotics or tricyclic
antidepressants, which markedly promote constipation and might lead
to attenuation of clinical symptoms, as in our case.
E-PS-06-062
Expression of claudin-1 and claudin-4 in the oesophageal mucosa as
additional criteria for evaluation of efficacy in GERD therapy
S. Mozgovoi*, I. Lapteva, V. Rubtsov, A. Kononov, M. Livzan
*Omsk State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: Pathogenesis of gastroesophageal reflux dis-
ease (GERD) has close association with intercellular contacts. The aim
was to determine the potential of standard morphological changes and
markers of tight junction components as evaluation criteria for the effec-
tiveness of GERD treatment.
Methods: 23 patients with GERD-related symptoms and endoscopic
signs and 15 patients as controls were included. Standard proton pump
inhibitor (control group) and in combination with chondroitin sulfate and
hyaluronic acid on a bioadhesive carrier (study group) were used.
Mucosal biopsies from distal oesophagus were taken for analysis by
histopathology and claudin-1, claudin-4 and Ki-67 expression assessment
by immunohistochemistry.
Results: GERD-specific alterations in the oesophageal mucosa were con-
firmed. Regression of clinical, endoscopic and histopathological param-
eters was noted in both groups after 4 weeks from the onset of treatment
(p < 0,05). In both groups expression levels of claudun-1 were statistically
higher after therapy (p < 0,05) whereas claudin-4 levels weren’t signifi-
cantly affected (p>0,001). Migration of claudin-1 expression towards the
upper layers of oesophageal mucosa was revealed also. The Ki-67 level
was lower after treatment, especially at the margins of the erosions (p <
0,05) . The expression levels of both claudins did not correlate with
clinical features and had a weak correlation with histopathological param-
eters including dilated intercellular spaces.
Conclusion: The absence of significant differences between treatment
options concerning reverse development of morphological parameters
were established.Taken together, the expression of tight junction-related
component claudin-1 and Ki-67 can be used as additional criteria for
evaluation of efficacy in GERD therapy.
E-PS-06-064
Immature teratoma of the greater omentum-case report and litera-
ture review
C. Ngimba*, J. Kitinya, P. Hellmold
*Muhimbili National hospital, Mutokiti Diagnostic Laboratory, Tanzania
Background & objectives: Immature omental teratoma are rare. To best
of my knowledge only three immature omental teratomas have been
reported in literature. We hereby describe the clinical pathological find-
ings of a primary immature teratoma of the omentum and the review of
literature.
Methods: We report a case of a primary immature teratoma of the omen-
tum which clinically was thought to be tuberculosis. Case was attended at
Lugala Lutheran hospital in Singida, Tanzania and histology was reported
at Mutokiti diagnostic laboratory. Demography and clinical information
were recorded. Gross and microscopic photos were taken. Histological
diagnosis was confirmed by the routine Hematoxylin and eosin (H/E stain).
Results: A 20 years old female underwent laparotomy due to a swelling
originating from the greater omentum. Tumour was removed and tissue
sent for histology. Histology showed partly cystic lesion with variable
differentiation including immature endodermal glands, Gut and respira-
tory tract epithelium. Mesodermal were adipose tissue, cartilage and bone
fragments. Ectodermal derivatives characterized by squamous epithelium
with its adnexal. Focally glial tissue was found. Final diagnosis was
Immature teratoma of greater omentum.
Conclusion: Omental teratomas may be difficult to diagnose clinically as
it may present in protean ways due to its malignancy potential as it was in
our case which was suspected to be omental tuberculosis. It is necessary
for pathologist to have high index of suspicion, sample careful and ex-
amine histologically for the evidence of immature elements that are con-
sistent with immature teratomas. Due to malignant potential of omental
teratoma chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy might be needed on addition-
al to surgery.
E-PS-06-065
Schwannoma in gastrointestinal system, a rare entity: report of two
cases
B. Noyan*, N. Dursun, E. Yarıkkaya, M. Cin, H. Dinçer, E.M. Yildiz
*University of Health Sciences, Turkey
Background & objectives: Gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumours are a
group of tumours originated from mesenchymal stem cells of gastroin-
testinal tract, consisting of gastrointestinal stromal tumours(GIST),
leiomyomas, or schwannomas. Schwannomas are seldomly seen gastro-
intestinal mesenchymal tumours, mostly in stomach, rare in lower oe-
sophagus and colon.
Methods: S-100, SOX-10, CD117, SMA(smooth muscle actin), DOG1,
CD34 stains were used.
Results: Our first case, a 59-year-old male submitted to hospital with
upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Endoscopic examination was performed
which showed a round submucosal tumour with a central ulceration and
bleeding over the upper body of the stomach. Microscopic examination
revealed a mass with spindle cells, positive for both S-100 and SOX10, but
nonreactive for CD117. Our second case, 43-year-old male patient had
upper gastrointestinal tract bleeding. A nodular mass lesion 2 cm proximal
to Z line was described by endoscopic examination. Thus, endoscopic US
was additionally performed which revealed subepithelial mass lesion in
distal oesophagus. Microscopically spindle cells were seen which stained
positive for S-100, negative for CD117,SMA, DOG1, CD34.
Conclusion: Two of the cases' immunohistochemistry results supported
diagnosis of schwannoma with spindle cell phenotype in both H&E ex-
Virchows Arch
aminations. Schwannomas are rarely seen, generally benign mesenchy-
mal tumours, which need to be differentiated from GIST as schwannomas
carry a good prognosis compared to GIST, which has malignant potential.
In addition, differential diagnosis should be made with benign tumours
such as leiomyoma.
E-PS-06-067
An unusual case of inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour located in
appendix
H. Pasaoglu*, T.B. Ozcan
*Health Science University, Bagcilar Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour is a
low grade mesenchymal neoplasia which is composed of myofibroblastic
spindle cells accompanied by plasma cell-rich inflammation. The most
common localisations are lung, omentum and mesentery. Inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumour has been reported very rarely in appendix.
Methods: 19-year-old female patient admitted to the emergency room
with right upper quadrant pain. Upon detecting leukocytosis in laboratory
tests, appendectomy was performed with a preliminary diagnosis of acute
appendicitis. The macroscopic examination revealed a round, well-
circumscribed, elastic-hard mass that completely obliterating the lumen
with a diameter of 1.8x1.5x1.3cm in the middle part of the appendix.
Results: The macroscopic examination revealed a round, well-
circumscribed, elastic-hard mass that completely obliterating the lumen
with a diameter of 1.8x1.5x1.3cm in the middle part of appendix. The
tumour composed of spindle cells with vesicular nucleus forming fasci-
cules. Intensive inflammatory infiltration rich in plasma cells was accom-
panied by tumour. Thirteen, not atypical mitoses were seen in 10 HPF.
Leiomyoma, GIST, schwannoma, follicular dendritic cell sarcoma, in-
flammatory myofibroblastic tumour, Ig G4-related appendicitis were in-
cluded in the differential diagnosis.
Immunohistochemical studies showed only SMA positivity. Desmin,
Caldesmon, CD34, CD117, DOG-1, S-100, CD21, CD23, ALK, IgG4
were negative.
The case was evaluated as “Inflammatory Myofibroblastic Tumour” with
morphological and immunohistochemical findings.
Conclusion: Although inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour is very rare
in the appendix, it should be recognized because of the risk of recurrence
and metastasis and the need for follow-up. The possibility of inflamma-
tory myofibroblastic tumour should be kept in mind in the presence of
spindle cell lesions in the appendix.
E-PS-06-068
Two case reports of extragastrointestinal stromal tumours with an
uncommon origin: gastro-colic omentum and great omentum
A. Plopeanu*, A. Dema, S. Olariu, E. Bistrian, A. Tutelca, A. Pascu,
R. Barna, B. Suciu, S. Taban
*Department of Pathology, Clinical County Hospital Timisoara,
Romania
Background & objectives: Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs)
originate from the interstitial cells of Cajal and are the most usual mes-
enchymal neoplasia arising in the gastrointestinal tract. They may arise
outside of the gastrointestinal tract, in which case they become
extragastrointestinal stromal tumours (EGISTs).
Methods: Two cases of EGISTs are described, one originating from the
gastro-colic omentum and one from the great omentum: a 65 years old man
with an abdominal mass of 16cm on MRI, and a 62 years old patient, who
presented to the emergency department for abdominal pain and vomiting,
which the abdominal CT revealed to be an 18cm abdominal tumour.
Results: In the first case, the histological examination revealed a high
mitotic rate, epithelioid EGIST (positive for CD117 and DOG1), IIIB
stage group (AJCC, 2017). In the second case, the histological examina-
tion revealed also a high mitotic rate, mixed-cell EGIST (positive for
CD117 and DOG1), IIIB stage group. Patients were treated with
Imatinib but suffered multiple local relapses in the last two years.
Conclusion: EGISTs seem to have a more aggressive behaviour compared
to the same tumours with a conventional origin. Due to high recurrence
rates, the role of treatment with Imatinib is not clear, so a strict follow-up is
necessary. Our case reports highlight the importance of considering EGIST
in the differential diagnosis of solid tumours of the omentum.
E-PS-06-069
Occurrence of KRAS , NRAS and BRAF mutations in colorectal
carcinoma among the Filipino population
C.R. Poco*, D. Ang, J. Malana, R.A. Fortuno, M.J. Bagsic, K.L. Davila
*Makati Medical Center, Philippines
Background & objectives: Mutations in the EGFR signalling pathway,
including KRAS, NRAS and BRAF, lie at the centre of colorectal cancer
(CRC). CRC patients may benefit from EGFR targeted therapies.
However, cases of chemotherapeutic resistance have been reported, thus,
determining the EGFR mutational status of patients is necessary. This
study aims to determine the occurrence of KRAS, NRAS and BRAF
mutations and to correlate it with certain clinicopathologic parameters
in confirmed CRC among Filipino patients of a tertiary hospital in the
Philippines.
Methods: KRAS (exons 2, 3 and 4), NRAS (exons 2, 3, and 4) and
BRAF (V600) genes were tested using reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (Amoy Diagnostics Co., Ltd., Xiamen, China) in 27 con-
firmed CRC cases among Filipino patients who underwent surgical
resection.
Results: Five (18.5%) have KRAS mutations, two (7.4%) have NRAS
mutations and one (3.7%) has BRAF mutation. Tumour size is signifi-
cantly correlated to the mutations indicating that a larger tumour has a
higher probability of having mutations. KRAS and NRAS positive cases
showed well-to- moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma and are at the
left side of the colon. BRAF positive case has mucinous adenocarcinoma
and is on the right colon near the cecum.
Conclusion: Our results showed a low positivity rate for KRAS, NRAS
and BRAF mutations among the Filipino population, a finding shared
among patients from other Asian and Western countries.
E-PS-06-070
Histopathological prognostic stratication of gastrointestinal stromal
tumours in a cohort of black Africans: a single-centre experience
A. Rahman*, G. Ogun, O. Adegoke
*University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) are
the most common mesenchymal tumours of the gastrointestinal tract. The
aim of this study was to show the histopathological features and prognostic
stratification of cases of GISTs using the AFIP/Miettinen & Lasota's criteria.
Methods: All cases of gastrointestinal tract mesenchymal tumours
(GMTs) diagnosed within the study period (January 2005 - December
2016) were retrieved from the records of the Department of Pathology in
the hospital. Immunohistochemistry was done on the paraffin tissue
blocks using DOG1, Desmin and S100 antibodies. The cases of GIST
identified were stratified into histopathological prognostic groups using
the AFIP criteria.
Results: There were fifty-four cases of GMTs, out of which twenty-four
GISTs (44%) were identified with the aid of immunohistochemistry. The
mean age of occurrence was 56 years and more than 80% of cases oc-
curred after 40 years of age. The modal age group of occurrence was 60-
69 years. The male-to-female ratio was 1.7:1. The tumours were most
commonly located in the stomach (33%). The tumours were relatively
large with an average size of 15cm. 75% of cases were spindle-type
GISTs and approximately 17% and 8% of the tumours were mixed and
epithelioid histologic subtypes respectively. The largest number of cases
(54%) were in the AFIP high-risk prognostic group.
Conclusion: Immunohistochemistry and prognostic risk stratification are
important in the definitive diagnosis and management of GISTs.
Histopathological prognostic risk stratification in this study showed that
majority of cases had a high risk of disease progression, tumour recur-
rence and metastasis.
E-PS-06-071
Signet ring cell carcinocythaemia in an advanced gastric carcinoma
M.T. Rodrigo Calvo*, N. Rakislova, F. Perez, J. Guerrero Pineda,
K. Saez de Gordoa, J. Laguna, M. Rodriguez, A. Molina, A. Merino,
M. Cuatrecasas
*Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, Spain
Background & objectives: A 32-year-old male with severe gastrointes-
tinal symptoms. A gastroscopy showed a tumour of the stomach, histo-
logically diagnosed as poorly cohesive (diffuse) carcinoma with presence
of signet-ring cells. A CT scan revealed an osteolytic/osteoblastic bone
lesions highly suggestive of metastatic cancer.
Methods: Peripheral blood cell morphology was analysed with May
Grünwald-Giemsa staining, then thin-layer preparation method
(ThinPrep) plus Papanicolau stain cytology was performed.
Results: Peripheral blood smear showed ig atypical epithelial-like cells
with prominent nucleoli and occasional signet-ring cells.
Immunocytochemical stains for Cytokeratins (CKAE1/AE3) and Ber-
EP4 antibody confirmed the presence of malignant epithelial cells, and
thus, of carcinocythaemia. Germline analysis revealed the presence of a
CDH1 mutation. There is evidence supporting that patients with gastric
cancer and germline CDH1 mutations have worst prognosis.
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, carcinocythaemia in signet
ring cell gastric carcinoma has not been previously reported. This diag-
nosis, together with the presence of CDH1germline mutation probably
confers a dismal prognosis of this case.
This is the third case of carcinocythaemia in our institution. Peripheral
blood cytology can be used as a minimally invasive diagnostic tool for
metastatic epithelial malignancies.
E-PS-06-072
Incidental discovery of an extensive duodenal amyloidosis
I. Saguem*, S. Graja, M. Mellouli, L. Bouzidi, S. Moussa, I. Bahri,
T. Boudawara, L. Ayadi
*Department of Pathology, Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Gastrointestinal involvement by amyloidosis is
common. While the disease can be associated with inflammatory conditions,
its association with cancer is unusual. We report a case of a duodenal amy-
loidosis revealed by an adenocarcinoma of the common bile duct (CBD).
Methods: A case of an incidental discovery of duodenal amyloidosis
occurring in a patient with adenocarcinoma of the CBD is reported with
a review of the related literature.
Results: A 70-year-old man was operated upon for an adenomatosis of the
CBD. Frozen sections were made and revealed an adenocarcinoma in the
lower part of the CBD. A cephalic duodenopancreatectomy was performed
with resection of the CBD. On macroscopic examination, the duodenal seg-
ment had a thickened wall with friable mucosa and polypoid protrusions.
Paraffin sections confirmed the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the CBD
and showed extensive deposits of an amorphous material in the mucosa,
submucosa and blood-vessel-walls of the duodenum. Polarized light micros-
copy using Congo red staining indicated the presence of amyloid deposits that
exhibited apple-green birefringence. Immunohistochemistry showed negativ-
ity for anti-AA and was inconclusive for lambda-light or kappa-light chain.
Conclusion: Involvement of the small bowel is frequent in systemic amy-
loidosis. Clinical presentation is often not specific (pain, vomiting…). As
far as we know this is the first case of a duodenal amyloidosis discovered
while treating a cancer of the CBD.
E-PS-06-073
Hepatoid adenocarcinoma: rare tumour with diagnostic dilemma
S. Sancheti*
*Homi Bhabha Cancer Hospital, India
Background & objectives: Hepatoid adenocarcinoma (HAC) is a tu-
mour with aberrant hepatocellular differentiation that occurs in extra he-
patic organs. The objective is to study three cases of Hepatoid adenocar-
cinoma from three different sites and ascertain there characteristic fea-
tures and immunoprofile.
Methods: Three cases of Hepatoid adenocarcinoma from Gall bladder,
Lung and stomach were analysed. There clinical, pathological, immuno-
logical and serological correlations were seen.
Results: Histopathology features common to hepatoid adenocarcinoma
at these three sites along with immunoprofile were ascertained. A panel of
immunohistochemistry which helps in diagnosis was concluded.
Conclusion: It was concluded that all the tumours had a characteristic
histomorphology of hepatoid cells which may or may not secrete Alfa-
feto protein(AFP). A characteristic immunoprofile useful in diagnosis
comprised a panel of CK7, CK20, Heppar1, TTF-1, P53, Synaptophysin,
Chromogranin and Calretinin. In conjunction with histomorphology, serol-
ogy and immunoprofile a confident diagnosis can be made.
E-PS-06-074
Gastric GIST tumour in a young female patient with a history of
multiple paragangliomas - a pure coincidence?
O. Sandu*, C. Badiu, V. Herlea, G. Becheanu
*Colentina Clinical Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: GIST may be sporadic or syndromic, some
of which are caused by germline mutation of the SDH subunit-encoding
genes. SDH-deficient GISTs are frequently associated with
paragangliomas (Carney-Stratakis syndrome or in association with pul-
monary chondroma, as part of the Carney triad).
Methods: A 40-year-old woman with a personal history of recurrent
paragangliomas (gastric, retroperitoneal, vertebral localization) since
she was 26, for which she underwent numerous surgical resections, che-
motherapy and radiotherapy is diagnosed with a lesser curvature gastric
tumour during follow up. Elevated normetanephrine and chromogranin
levels were observed, thus the suspicion of another recurrence. The pa-
tient underwent gastrectomy.
Results: Grossly, a nodular, ulcerated, 4 cm in diameter tumour was
found. The histological examination revealed a tumoral proliferation
composed of small-sized epithelioid cells, few fusiforme, with solid ar-
chitecture, low nuclear and cellular pleomorphism. The mucosa was
spared. Tumour cells were positive for DOG1, CD117; NSE and S100
were focally positive; Synaptophysin and Chromogranin were negative.
Ki 67 index was 3% and the mitotic rate was 7/20HPF. SDHB staining is
not available in our service. Following these findings we could disprove
the initial clinical suspicion of a recurrent paraganglioma of the stomach
and the diagnosis was Gastric GIST, category 5.
Conclusion: Based on the clinical history and exclusion of a pulmonary
lesion, we suggested that a Carney-Stratakis syndrome is very likely. The
patient was proposed for genetic counselling, followed by mutational
analysis of the SDH genes, important for the treatment and patient follow
up.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-06-075
Pathologic challenges of a right-sided colon tumour and a gastric
tumour, with emphasis on immunohistochemical particularities and
diagnostic significance: a case series report
O. Sandu*, V. Enache, V. Herlea, C. Pechianu, G. Becheanu
*Colentina Clinical Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: Goblet cell adenocarcinoma is a rare
appendiceal amphicrine neoplasm, composed of goblet-like mucinous
cells, a variable number of endocrine and Paneth-like cells arranged as
tubules resembling intestinal crypts. Rarely, this tumour was described in
the stomach, small bowel and colon.
Methods: First case is a 55 year-old woman admitted for fatigue, abdom-
inal pain and abdominal masses. Colonoscopy with biopsies revealed a
right colon tumour and hemicolectomy was performed.
Second case is a 77 year-old woman with weight loss and intestinal
occlusion. Imaging studies showed a stenosing tumour in the antrum
and duodenum with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Palliative surgery and
biopsies were performed.
Results: The hemicolectomy specimen revealed signed-ring cells invad-
ing the entire colonic wall, vascular emboli, perineural invasion, lymph
node metastasis in 22/23. No appendiceal tumour was found. Tumour
cells were positive for CK20, CDX2, MUC2, Synaptophysin,
Chromogranin, NSE and MMR-proficient.
The second patients' round ligament biopsy showed tumour cells that
were histologically similar to the first case, positive for AE1/AE3, CK7,
CDX2, CEA, Synaptophysin and negative for CK20, MUC5, WT1.
Based on the pattern of invasion, with the colonic mucosa being mostly
spared and the absence of desmoplastic reaction, associated with the
immunohistochemical results, our diagnosis was Goblet Cell
Adenocarcinoma; the differential diagnosis included a mixed neoplasm
(MiNEN).
Conclusion: We highlight the importance of histologic, immunohisto-
chemistry and clinical correlation in tumours that at the microscope might
look familiar, but when looked at closely, have overlapping tumoral ele-
ments. The first patient died 6 weeks following the diagnosis, with met-
astatic complications. The second patient is living 3 months after the
surgery, under palliative care.
E-PS-06-076
The background and precancerous processes in the gastric mucosa
outside of the tumour node
M. Shushval*, L. Volkova, G. Lyashenko, L. Nyzhnik, A. Musatov,
K. Abdujabborov
*Federation Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Kalinigrad,
Russia
Background & objectives: A significant feature of gastric cancer is the
presence of background and precancerous processes associated with car-
cinogenesis. Helicobacter pylori infection, chronic gastritis and intestinal
metaplasia play important role in the formation of intraepithelial neopla-
sia and early gastric cancer.
Methods: Analysis of the background and precancerous processes in the
mucous membrane of 49 patients with gastric carcinoma at a distance of 1
and 2 cm from the tumour node. Morphological features investigation
using a semi-quantitative assessment in scores from 0 to 3 for histological
and cytological structure evaluation carried out. Statistical analysis was
performed using the IBM SPSS Statistics 23.
Results: A group of 49 patients with gastric cancer (m/f-26/23), age 64-
69.5 years, was studied. Carcinoma localization: 1)body-42.86%; 2)car-
dia-14.29%; 3)antrum-28.57%; 4) pyloric department-10.20%.Studying
the mucous membrane at a distance of 1 cm from the tumour node re-
vealed the following background and precancerous processes:1)chronic
gastritis (49),activity grade from I to III (I-14,II-19,III -16); 2) gastric
glands atrophy (42); 3)intestinal metaplasia(33); 4) epithelial
hyperplasia(37); 5) mild dysplasia(12)and severe grade(20),total 32. In
the mucosa at a distance of 2 cm from the tumour: 1)chronic gastritis(49),
activity grade from I to III (I - 23,II-19,III - 7); 2)atrophy of the
glands(40); 3) colonic metaplasia(17); 4) epithelial hyperplasia(33);
5)dysplasia of mild(9) and severe grade(5), in total-14.
Conclusion: The research showed that at a distance from the gastric
cancer node are detected background and precancerous processes such
as chronic gastritis, gland atrophy, intestinal metaplasia, epithelial hyper-
plasia, and mild dysplasia. The severity of these changes decreases with
distancing from the primary tumour node.
E-PS-06-077
Histo-and cytoarchitectonic of the central and peripheral compart-
ments of gastric cancer
M. Shushval*, L. Volkova, G. Lyashenko, L. Nyzhnik, A. Musatov,
K. Abdujabborov
*Federation Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Kalinigrad,
Russia
Background & objectives: Oncological diseases are one of the main
problems of humanity. Malignant neoplasms are one of the most common
causes of morbidity and mortality. More than 10 million new cases are
registered annually in the world, this number is growing every year.
Methods: The main goal of this research work was the analysis of the
histo- and cytoarchitectonics of the central and peripheral parts of gastric
carcinomas to study the heterogeneity of their structure using a semi-
quantitative evaluation score from 0-3 of individual parameters of their
structure. The data analysis was performed using the IBM SPSS
Statistics 23.
Results: A group of 49 patients with gastric cancer (m/f-26/23), age 64-
69.5 years, was studied. The most common localization of malignancies:
1) body-42.86%; 2) cardia-14.29%; 3) antrum-28.57%; 4) pyloric depart-
ment -10.20%. Major part of cases were adenocarcinomas - 42 cases (G3
- 20, G2-17, G1–5). Undifferentiated cancer - 6; signet ring cell carcino-
ma - 1 cases. Studying of histoarchitectonics parameters in the central (c)
and peripheral compartments (p) of adenocarcinomas, did not show sta-
tistically significant differences, however cytoarchitectonics studying re-
vealed significant results (P <0.05 ) according to the following parameters
(C/P; H&Ex400): 1) mitoses -1.73 ± 0.23 / 1.33 ± 0.17; 2) nucleoli -1.43
± 0.07/1.1±0.1; 3) hyperchromasia -1.27±0.23 /1.04 ± 0.04.
Conclusion: Studying had demonstrated central and peripheral heteroge-
neity of cytoarchitectonics of gastric adenocarcinomas. Research results
suggest that the evaluation of such parameters as mitosis, the number of
nucleoli and nuclei hyperchromasia in various parts of carcinomas should
be necessarily made for accurate grade differentiation.
E-PS-06-078
An unusual finding in colon biopsy: metastatic lobular breast
carcinoma
A. Simoulis*, D. Kuznyecov, A. Almorched
*Skåne University Hospital-Pathology Department, Sweden
Background & objectives: We report the case of a lobular breast carci-
noma with metastases to the colon fourteen years after the initial diagno-
sis and mastectomy. We describe the microscopic image and the use of
immunostains.
Methods: An 85 years old lady was under investigation for diarrhoea
episodes and loss of weight. An ileocolonoscopy performed and several
biopsies were taken from terminal ileum and colon. The endoscopist
reported a normal colon and ileum mucosa and the clinical question
was if signs of microscopical colitis were present in the material.
Results: Microscopically the ileum and colon epithelium had a preserved
architecture, with normal villi and crypts without any intraepithelial lym-
phocytosis or any signs of activity such as microabscesses or cryptitis.
The lamina propria in many colon fragments showed a normal population of
inflammatory cells but in few of them an abnormal cell population was
identified. This cell population showed minimal pleomorphism, the cells were
relatively small, the nuclei showed evenly dispersed chromatin and no
nucleoli.
A search in the patient’s medical history revealed that she had a lobular
breast cancer 14 years ago.
The aforementioned cell population was positive with GATA3 and
Oestrogen receptors and negative for progesterone receptors.
Conclusion: Pathologists and endoscopists must be aware of the possi-
bility of the metastases of lobular breast carcinoma to the colon even
many years after the initial diagnosis.
E-PS-06-079
Sclerosing epithelioid gastrointestinal stromal tumour of stomach
mimicking solitary fibrous tumour
A. Szumera-Cieckiewicz*, A. Dansonka-Mieszkowska, O. Kuczkiewicz-
Siemion, K. Sokół, O. Stanowska, M. Prochorec-Sobieszek,
P. Rutkowski
*Institute of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Diagnostic
Haematology Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research
Institute of Oncology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Poland
Background & objectives: Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST)
characterize by a wide clinicopathologic spectrum in most sites.
Microscopical features are site-dependent. The majority of cases present
like spindle cell tumours and epithelioid, mixed or pleomorphic histology
are found infrequently.
Methods: Sclerosing epithelioid variant contains polygonal tumours cells
usually arranged in a syncytial pattern in a variably sclerosing stroma.
Usually, that morphological subtype has a low mitotic rate, only with
focal atypia.
A 65-year-old male after excision of the stomach tumour was admitted.
The initial computed tomography revealed a greater stomach curvature
tumour (diameter 11cm) and hypodense areas of necrosis.
Results: Histologically the tumour consisted of numerous epithelioid syncy-
tial and partially dyscohesive cells, with mild cytological atypia and mitotic
activity 2/50 HPF, with focal necrosis (<5%). In the stroma, massive sclerosis
with numerous staghorn-like vessels was seen. Immunohistochemically, the
tumour cells were: DOG1(+), CD117(-/+), CD34(+), CD31(-), ERG(-),
STAT6(-), CKAE1/AE3(-), SMA(-),Desmin(-),S100(-), Ki67(+) in 1% of
nuclei. Molecularly, a mutation in exon 18 of the PDGFRA gene: C.2525
A>T, p.( Asp842Val) was detected. The diagnosis of epithelioid sclerosing
GIST, pT4, prognostic group 3b (intermediate risk), stage II was established.
The patient was disqualified from adjuvant targeted therapy using a small
molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor while the PDGFRA D842V mutation is
resistant to imatinib.
Conclusion: This is a case of FIST with some features overlapping the
SFT morphology. Immunohistochemical DOG1 positivity together with
STAT6 negative results supported with molecular PDGFRA testing were
useful in achieving the final diagnosis.
"This work has been implemented using the Project infrastructure
POIG.02.03.00-14-111/13"
E-PS-06-082
Analysis of clinical and histopathological findings in lymphocytic
gastritis
G. Topel*, I. Cakir, I. Aydin, A. Akder Sarı, F.H. Dilek
*Izmir Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training and Research Hospital
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Lymphocytic gastritis (LG) is characterized
by large numbers of lymphocytes infiltrating the surface and foveolar
epithelium. It is a rare entity, comprises 1-5% of all chronic gastritis.
According to the definition 25 lymphocytes/100 epithelial cells is re-
quired for the diagnosis.
Methods: Clinical data and histopathological findings including param-
eters of Sydney system such as Helicobacter pylori (HBP), intensity of
neutrophilic, eosinophilic and mononuclear inflammation, activity, intes-
tinal metaplasia, atrophy, dysplasia and associated disease of small and
large bowel were evaluated in 16 LG cases diagnosed between 2012 and
2019. Histochemically Warthin Starry, PAS-AB and immunohistochemically
CD3 were used in case of necessity.
Results: The mean age was 48(24-70) and M/F ratio 8/8. Eight of the
cases were located in the antrum (8/16), seven in the corpus (7/16) and
one in antrum and corpus (1/16). HBP was detected in four cases (4/16)
located in the corpus. One of these HBP positive case was accompanied
by Celiac disease (CD). Four of HBP negative cases had also associated
with CD and all located in the antrum. Two cases showed intestinal
metaplasia and three gastric mucosal atrophy. One of the atrophic oxintic
mucosa also consisted neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia. One of the cases
had tubular adenoma and one had hyperplastic adenoma in simultaneous-
ly sampled ascending colon biopsy.
Conclusion: The most common accompanying disease in LG is CD and
second is HBP infection. CD associated cases are mostly located in an-
trum and HBP in corpus. LG has clinical/pathological significance since
its recognition should prompt further evaluation for other disorders.
E-PS-06-083
Gastric leiomyosarcoma: a rare case report
P. Tziakou*, A. Ieronymaki, E. Papakonstantinou
*Pathology Department, Thriasio General Hospital of Elefsina, Greece
Background & objectives: Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) are
the most common mesenchymal (non-epithelial) malignancies of the gas-
trointestinal (GI) tract. Gastric leiomyosarcoma is a variant of GISTs and
it is an exceptionally rare tumour, representing 1-3% of gastric
malignancies.
Methods: A 41-year-old male patient presented to the Surgery
Department of our hospital with anaemia and black tarry stool. CT scan
revealed a tumour of gastric wall measuring 5,5cm. Peripheral gastrecto-
my was performed.
Results: Histologically, the mass was composed of epithelioid cells with
clear and eosinophilic cytoplasm, moderate atypia, some of them were
multinucleated, with diffuse and nodular architectural pattern and fibrous
septae. The stroma was myxoid, with very few areas of necrosis and 9
mitoses per 10 h.p.f were observed. Immunohistochemically, the neoplas-
tic cells were positive to Vimentin, h-caldesmon, Calponin, SMA, CD34,
BCL-2, CD99 and negative to C-KIT, DOG-1, Desmin, Calretinin,
EMA, Melan A, Synaptophysin, MDM-2 and STAT6. Molecular studies
for KIT and PDGFRA mutations were negative.
Conclusion: Due to positive smooth muscle stains and despite the epi-
thelioid and clear cell morphology, the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma
grade 2 and score 5 according to FNCLCC, was defined. As the facilities
for differentiating leiomyosarcomas are not easily available, gastrointes-
tinal stromal tumours may remain underdiagnosed and undertreated in
resource-limited areas.
E-PS-06-084
A rare case of a young patient with serrated colonic polyposis with
traditional serrated adenomas
A.L. Ursache*, G. Becheanu, C. Nicolae, M. Chivu, F. Andrei, M. Sajin,
A. Curte
*Emergency University Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Serrated colonic polyposis may have any
subtype of serrated polyp, traditional serrated adenoma being the least
Virchows Arch
common subtype. The condition is detected mostly in the sixth decade
and is associated with a high risk of developing colorectal cancer.
Methods: A 28 years old male was hospitalized with a known history of
colonic polyposis, diagnosed in the past 3 years with low and high-grade
dysplastic adenomas. A multidisciplinary team agreed the patient should
undergo total proctocolectomy. On gross examination, we found 57 pe-
dunculated and sessile polyps, located throughout the colon, ranging from
3 cm to 7 cm in diameter.
Results: The large rectal polyps showed microscopically a villous pattern,
areas of hypereosinophilia, slit-like serration and ectopic crypts. Areas of low-
grade conventional dysplasia were common. High-grade dysplasia was seen
focally. Isolated foci of serrated dysplasia were also present. The smaller
polyps showed either a similar pattern or unclassifiable serrated features.
Lymph nodes were negative for malignancy. Immunohistochemically, the
tumour showed microsatellite stability. Genetic tests are pending.
Conclusion: This particular case highlights the importance of timely total
colectomy to avoid colorectal malignancy in patients with serrated colon-
ic polyposis.
E-PS-06-087
A rare case of small bowel obstruction due to melanoma
A. Vilaia*, A. Tanase, C. Socoliuc, S.A. Zurac
*Colentina University Hospital, Pathology Department, Bucharest,
Romania
Background & objectives: The worldwide incidence of melanoma has
increased. Primary melanoma involving the digestive tract accounts for
<1% of gastrointestinal malignancies. Metastatic melanoma to the small
bowel is rare, with a reported incidence of 2-5% and is commonly diag-
nosed late or post-mortem.
Methods: We report a case of a 71 year old male patient, with unremark-
able history and without any suspicious cutaneous lesion, presenting with
nonspecific symptoms suggestive of small bowel obstruction. Routine
laboratory tests revealed a mild ferropenic anaemia. A CT scan was per-
formed showing an occlusive tumour in the ileum and a large left inguinal
lymphadenopathy. The patient underwent segmentary enterectomy.
Results: The excised specimen revealed an ulcerated exophytic 17cm
tumour. The histopathology report showed a multinodular proliferation
of epithelioid cells, some with intracytoplasmic melanin pigments, ex-
tending to the subserosa. The cells were positive for S100, T311 and
HMB45. The inguinal lymph node and other seven mesenteric were also
invaded by the same tumour. Criteria favouring primary melanoma in-
clude absence of other primary site or negative lymph nodes but cases
should be evaluated carefully even in the absence of melanoma history
based on the fact that some of the cutaneous melanomas can regress
spontaneously. The case was signed out as small bowel melanoma
favouring metastasis due to presence of inguinal lymphadenopathy
involvement.
Conclusion: Small bowel obstruction due to melanoma is unusual. Both
primary melanoma and metastatic melanoma of the small bowel are rare
entities. Metastatic melanoma of small bowel has a higher prevalence
than primary tumours. Surgical treatment increases overall survival rate.
E-PS-06-088
Two faces of oesophageal spindle cell carcinoma
E.M. Yildiz*, E. Yarıkkaya, H. Dinçer, B. Noyan, M. Cin, N. Dursun
*University of Health Sciences, Turkey
Background & objectives: Spindle cell carcinoma is a malignant tumour
of oesophagus that is composed of both carcinomatous and sarcomatous
elements. Epithelioid component is usually squamous carcinoma.
Sarcomatoid part usually resembles undifferentiated pleomorphic sarco-
ma, less frequently it can have low grade features.
Methods: First case, a 50-years-old woman was suffering from dyspha-
gia. During endoscopy, at the 23rd cm from the incisors, a pedunculated
polyp with 3.5 cm diameter was found and removed. In second case, a 37-
years old woman had an oesophageal resection. Grossly, the grey-white
coloured polypoid mass, measuring 2x1.5x0.8 cm, was located at 5
centimetres from the gastroesophageal junction.
Results: The first case had in situ squamous cell carcinoma on surface
and moderately cellular spindled cells with collagenized stroma in
subepithelial area. The epithelial part showed positive results for P40,
P63, AE1-3, there was no expression of desmin, vimentin; in stromal
component immunohistochemistry demonstrated expression of vimentin,
AE1-3, p63 in focal isolated cells. These findings led us to oesophageal
carcinosarcoma composed of in situ squamous cell carcinoma and low
grade sarcomatoid component.
Second case, showed undifferentiated tumour which both showed epithe-
lial and sarcomatoid differentiation. Tumour yielded positive results for
AE1-3, p40, vimentin but desmin, S100, synaptophysin, chromogranin
staining were negative. The tumour was defined as spindle cell squamous
cell carcinoma.
Conclusion: Spindle cell carcinoma/carcinosarcoma is a rare type of
malignant tumour that represents 2% of all oesophageal carcinomas.
Histologically these tumours have biphasic growth pattern. Both of the
components can be low grade / in situ or high grade pleomorphic which
can only be distinguished by immunohistochemistry.
E-PS-06-089
Ectopic enterobius vermicularis infestation: an extremely rare cause
of mesenteric lymphadenopathy
S. Zafar*, M.U. Tariq, Z. Ahmed
*Aga Khan University Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Enterobiasis a common helminthic infection
in young children worldwide, presents with pruritis in perianal region.
The worms typically reside in the caecum, appendix and distal ileum.
Involvement of the mesenteric lymph nodes by enterobiasis is an ex-
tremely rare phenomenon.
Methods: Histopathological examination was performed of an ap-
pendectomy specimen along with multiple mesenteric lymph
nodes.
Results: The appendiceal lumen showed cross section of gravid female
worm along with acute inflammation in the muscle layer. One of the
mesenteric lymph nodes showed necrotizing chronic granulomatous in-
flammation around degenerated adult worm.
Conclusion: Ectopic enterobiasis in extremely rare cases can be a
cause of mesenteric lymphadenopathy. Enterobius vermicularis
should be included in the differential diagnosis of cases with
mesenteric lymphadenopathy especially in this region of the world
where Enterobius vermicularis infestation is common. Thus, care-
ful histologic examination of mesenteric lymph nodes suggested.
E-PS-07-001
A very unusual metastisation site of hepatocellular carcinoma: a case
report and review
D. Afonso-João*, M. Shekhovtsova, A. Sanches, A. Furtado, A. Luís,
W. Xiaogang
*Department of Anatomic Pathology, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de
Gaia/Espinho, Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: Hepatocellular carcinoma is a common ma-
lignant primary liver tumour frequently associated with chronic liver
E-PS-07 Digestive Diseases Pathology - Liver
disease. Extrahepatic metastization is relatively rare, even in advanced
cases with intrahepatic metastases. Extrahepatic spreading is most com-
mon to the abdominal lymph nodes, lung and bone.
Methods: We report a case of a 55-year-old male with a clinical history of
chronic alcoholism (80g/day) and hepatic cirrhosis of infectious and al-
coholic origin who was hospitalized because of an involuntary alkaline
corrosive ingestion. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed multi-
ple polyps near the gastroesophageal junction, measuring up to 12 mm,
which were biopsied.
Results: Microscopically, a malignant neoplasm was found within the
lamina propria, lined by a stratified squamous epithelium with focal areas
of ulceration. The malignancy showed a trabecular and solid pattern of cells
with pleomorphic nucleus, prominent nucleolus and an abundant vacuolat-
ed cytoplasm. No signs of atrophy or dysplasia were found in the epitheli-
um. The immunohistochemistry study was positive for CAM5.2, arginase,
glipican3 and CEA. No immunoreaction was found for CK7, CK20, AE1/
AE3, vimentin, HMB45, S100, p63, EMA, CK19 and CDX2. The patient
was diagnosed with an oesophageal metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma.
This and only 13 other cases have been reported in English-published
literature during the last 20 years, which were reviewed.
Conclusion: Unusual metastization sites of hepatocellular carcinoma like the
oesophagus, although very rare, must be taken into account, as they can occur
and resemble the morphology of primary malignancies of those same sites.
E-PS-07-002
A rare case of epithelioid haemangioendothelioma of the liver with a
stationary status
M.A. Bara*, D.I. Enea, V. Enache, F. Vasilescu, F. Neacsu
*Emergency University Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: Epithelioid haemangioendothelioma of the
liver (EHL) is a very rare malignant vascular tumour, with an incidence of
1-2 in 1 million and approximately 200 cases described in the literature.
The liver is the most common localization (21%).
Methods: We present a rare case of EHL which was incidentally found
by abdominal imaging in a female patient with ovarian Brenner tumour.
A 57-year-old woman who underwent abdominal radiologic investiga-
tions for ovarian tumour, was also found to have 14 hepatic nodules, with
maximum diameter of 3 mm, diffusely distributed in the right lobe.
Results: A biopsy was performed and the liver proliferation was initially
misdiagnosed as a mesenchymal hamartoma.
The patient underwent several other radiologic investigations annually for
5 years, which revealed that the nodules were stationary in number and
size. During this period of time, she denied any symptomatology and the
routine haematological investigations were negative.
After 5 years, a new liver biopsy was performed and microscopic findings
showed epithelioid and spindle tumour cells with vacuolated cytoplasm
representing intracellular small vascular lumina. Immunohichemical markers
were positive for CD31, CD 34, ERG and the diagnosis of EHL was made.
Conclusion: Although diagnosing EHL is very difficult to make because
of its non specific radiologic and clinical findings and the high proportion
of asymptomatic cases, the immunohistopathological findings are impor-
tant and facilitates a correct diagnosis.
E-PS-07-003
Prognostic impact of hepatotoxicity in colorectal cancer metastatic to
the liver
O. Belkacem*, F. Limaiem, Y. Gabsi, M.D. Zran, S. Bouraoui
*Department of Pathology, University Hospital Mongi Slim La Marsa,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: The use of systemic chemotherapy and
targeted therapies has improved the therapeutic management of colorectal
liver metastases. However, neoadjuvant chemotherapy is often
responsible for toxic damage to the non-tumour liver. The presence of
chemo-induced liver damage can have a negative impact on the function-
al reserve of the liver. Our study aimed to evaluate the hepatotoxicity
induced by neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with colorectal liver
metastases and to assess its prognostic impact.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 50 cases of colorectal liver me-
tastases treated by different neoadjuvant chemotherapy protocols and
targeted therapies. These cases were diagnosed at the pathology depart-
ment of the university hospital Mongi Slim of La Marsa over a period of
four years and six months (January 2014 - July 2018).
Results: The mean age of the patients was 56 years with a sex ratio (M/F)
of 1.38. Histological examination of the non-tumour liver revealed 28
cases of steatosis, two cases of steatohepatitis, 33 cases of sinusoidal
obstruction syndrome and three cases of regenerative nodular hyperpla-
sia. Median overall survival was 24 months. The prognostic factors were
the number of liver metastases, the neoadjuvant chemotherapy protocol
type and the use of targeted therapies.
Conclusion: Hepatotoxicity of neoadjuvant chemotherapy can lead to a
high risk of postoperative morbidity. However, its impact on postopera-
tive mortality has not been entirely established
E-PS-07-004
An unexpected diagnosis of ectopic pancreas in the liver
O. Belkacem*, F. Limaiem, M.D. Zran, S. Gharbi, R. Ayadi, S. Bouraoui
*Department of Pathology, University Hospital Mongi Slim La Marsa, Tunisia
Background & objectives: The ectopic pancreas is defined by the pres-
ence of pancreatic tissue in an abnormal situation, with no anatomical
relationship to the main gland. We herein report a new case of an inci-
dentally discovered ectopic pancreas in the liver.
Methods: This is the case of a 54-year-old hypertensive patient operated
on two years previously for a sigmoid adenocarcinoma classified as
pT3N1b. The evolution was marked by the installation of multiple me-
tastases, which were predominant in the right hepatic lobe, hence, the
initiation of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (4 FOLFOX - ERBITUX cures).
The patient underwent a right lobectomy.
Results: Histological examination confirmed the presence of colorectal
liver metastasis. There was associated a focus of pancreatic heterotopia
including acini and excretory ducts organized in lobule. There were no
islets. According to the Heinrich classification system, the heterotopic
pancreas was classified as type 2. The postoperative course was unevent-
ful, however, during the follow-up period; the patient developed liver
metastases in the left hepatic lobe.
Conclusion: The diagnosis of heterotopic pancreas prior to surgery
is difficult due to its non-specific clinical signs and symptoms.
Diagnosis can only be established based on histopathological exam-
ination.
E-PS-07-005
An unusual and rare metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma: gingiva
B. Binboga*, F. Oz Puyan, N. Kurt, T. Deniz Yalta, E. Genc Erdogan
*Trakya University Medical Faculty, Turkey
Background & objectives: Hepatocellular carcinoma mostly presents
with multiple intrahepatic occurrence and metastasis. Approximately
one third of the patients develop extrahepatic metastasis-mostly to lung.
Oral cavity, especially gingival metastasis is very rare with less than 20
cases in English literature.
Methods: 60-year-old male patient is presented with diarrhoea, nausea
and fatigue ongoing for 2 months. Patient had spider angiomas on his face
and palmar erythema. Peripheral blood test showed anaemia, increased
AST, ALT, ALP and GGT with HBV DNA 49000 IU/ml. There was no
evidence of acute inflammation. USG revealed 20x19x15 cm heteroge-
neous liver mass on the right lobe.
Virchows Arch
Results: Patient also had an ulcerative oral mucosal nodule of 2 cm
diameter which slightly bleeds and causes pain and discomfort. An initial
oral mucosal biopsy was performed by otolaryngologist before the sched-
uled liver tru-cut biopsy. Biopsy showed a diffuse trabecular infiltration
of polygonal cells which had abundant granular eosinophilic cytoplasm
under the normal stratified squamous epithelium of the gingiva. There
was also focal yellow/light brown pigmentation in the cytoplasm.
Immunohistochemistrically, pancytokeratin was weakly positive while
vimentin was negative. MelanA, HMB45 and S100 was negative and
Ki67 index was high (%60). TTF1 was weakly cytoplasmic positive
while Heppar was diffusely strong positive and pCEA showed canalicular
staining pattern.
Conclusion: Final diagnosis was hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis to
gingiva. Patient history has an essential role on differential diagnosis of
malignant oral mucosal tumours.
E-PS-07-006
Elementary lesions and prognostic correlations in paediatric
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
A. Bordonali*, D. Fanni, G. Cerrone, G. Faa, C. Gerosa
*Department of Medical Science, Division of Pathology, University
Hospital San Giovanni di Dio, University of Cagliari, Italy
Background & objectives: NAFLD is characterized by hepatic fat ac-
cumulation not due to alcohol abuse. Initial simple steatosis could evolve
to NASH and subsequently to end-stage cirrhosis. The aim of this study is
to evaluate the correlation between histology and disease stage.
Methods: We examined 7 liver biopsies from patients, aged from 3 to 18
years, admitted to our Hospital between 2001 and 2013.
Immunohistochemical assessment for Cytokeratin 7, Cytokeratin 19
and Alpha-SMA were performed.
Results: Patients were classified into two groups based on the histological
score: the first group including 5 patients with mild steatohepatitis and 2
patients with moderate steatohepatitis; the second group showed severe
inflammation and diffuse ballooning degeneration with progressive disease.
Conclusion: NAFLD represents one of the most important liver disease.
The prevalence of NAFLD among obese children is rising up to 40-70%.
Liver biopsy is the gold standard for the diagnosis of NAFLD/NASH and
is fundamental for evaluating the degree of necro-inflammatory changes
and fibrosis. Liver biopsy in children with risk factors could allow early
diagnosis, increasing the chances of regression and reducing the progres-
sion of the liver damage in adolescence.
E-PS-07-007
Light chain deposition disease associated to multiple myeloma in
liver: an unusual presentation
E. Cabeza Abati*, E. Cuello Entrena, J. Doña Girón, F.J. Velasco
Albendea
*Hospital Universitario Torrecárdenas, Spain
Background & objectives: Light chain deposition disease (LCDD) is a
monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition disease with similar clinical-
pathological manifestation to amyloidosis. The most frequent chain is
Kappa and it can be associated to neoplastic disorders such as Multiple
Myeloma or lymphoproliferative diseases.
Methods: A 49 years old male with previous diagnosis of Multiple
Myeloma, costal plastocytoma and renal failure facing dialysis since 4
years ago, consulted for a generalised itching and dyspepsia. They just
found out a colestatic pattern with Alcaline Fosphatase and GGT in-
creased levels, without alterations in imaging tests. Autoimmunity and
viral study were negative so they took an hepatic biopsy.
Results: The sample showed preserved hepatic architecture with diffuse
sinusoidal rigidity due to linear deposits of an unknown material in Disse
spaces resembling amyloid deposits. Immunochemistry demonstrated
Kappa deposits that were negative to Congo Red or green in polarised
light. After diagnosis, the patient levels of bilirubin increased and an
hepatic failure caused him death.
Conclusion: LCDD consists in the deposition of monoclonal light chains
in multiple organs. At first glance it is a challenge for histopathological
diagnosis due to its specific characteristics and amyloidosis resemblance.
This case is difficult because it rarely affects liver when amyloidosis
frequently does and clinical manifestations of hepatic failure and chole-
stasis seen are rare in this entity. To add, diffuse hepatic infiltration has
been described essentially as an autopsy finding.
E-PS-07-008
Combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma diagnosis
L. Carvalho*, A.F. Ladeirinha, A. Alarcão, L. Neves, R. Santos,
J. Espírito Santo
*Institute of Anatomical and Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine
of the University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, CIMAGO - Research
Center for Environment, Genetics and Oncobiology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, University Hospital Anatomical
Pathology Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma
(HCC-CC) displays both hepatocyte and biliary phenotypes, likely to de-
rive from same progenitor cell. With poor prognosis, there is lack of stan-
dard criteria for diagnosis and treatment.
Methods: A series of 89 hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) were studied
concerning 54 consecutive patients undergoing resection or liver trans-
plantation. According to 2019 World Health Organization (WHO) histo-
pathological criteria and CK7/CK19, αSMA actin and vimentin immuno-
expression in single or clusters of tumour cells, HCC-CCs were searched
in this group of tumours.
Results: Formerly classified as HCC, 8 cases expressed CK7 and CK19
where 5 cases presented combined trabecular and pseudo-glandular growth
pattern. Vimentin was expressed in 6 cases and one case was αSMA pos-
itive. Microvascular invasion or intrahepatic satellite nodules were not pres-
ent. Within 6 years after curative surgery, 4 cases recurred. Alcoholic liver
disease was the clinical background for all patients and all were male.
Conclusion: Combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma is rare and
frequently under-recognized due to the lack of clearly applied diagnostic
criteria. This small series highlights the utility of histopathological report
based on 2019 WHO classification and routine defined immunohisto-
chemical panel.
E-PS-07-010
Primary hepatic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma presenting as a
carcinoma
S. Pappa, A. Dimitriadi*, D. Grigoropoulou, D. Bouklas, G. Koutsonikas,
E. Gkamatsi, G. Kakiopoulos
*General Hospital of Athens “G. Gennimatas”/Department of Surgical
Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: Among primary hepatic lymphomas consti-
tute about 0,016% of all cases of non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, a primary
hepatic low-grade marginal zone B-cell lymphoma is extremely rare and
often misdiagnosed.
Methods: A 69-year-old man presented to our hospital because of a
solitary mass in the liver, which was identified incidentally by ultraso-
nography. Physical examination showed no palpable splenomegaly or
superficial lymph node swellings. Laboratory results included ALP,
LDH, CEA and AFP levels were within normal ranges. CT imaging
showed a hypodense mass, suspected as an intrahepatic cholangiocarci-
noma and FNB was performed.
Results: Microscopic examination showed diffuse and monotonous in-
filtration of typical monocytoid lymphoid cells and lymphoepithelial
lesions observed on some bile ducts infiltrated with these small- to
medium- sized lymphocytes. Immunohistochemistry findings were posi-
tive for CD20, CD79a and PanB, whereas they were negative for CD3,
CD5, CD10, bcl6, cyclinD1, CD23 and DBA44. Ki67 was estimated 1%.
The patient was diagnosed with primary hepatic MALT lymphoma, spe-
cifically a low-grade malignant extranodal marginal zone B-cell
lymphoma.
Conclusion: According to literature review, the preoperative diagnosis of
this tumour remains a challenge, due to the scarcity of specific clinical
and imaging signs and should be considered in any patient at any age who
presents with a liver mass or infiltration.
E-PS-07-012
Hepatobiliary schistosomiasis, a case report
A. Gamage*, K. Liyanaarachchi, H. Mohanraj, R. Kumar, I. Bagwan
*Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Schistosomiasis is the second commonest
parasitic infestation prevalent in subtropical and tropical regions.
Hepatobiliary schistosomiasis can present with multiple cystic lesions
that may be clinically and radiologically simulate inflammatory pseudo
tumour or malignant liver lesions in appropriate clinical settings.
Methods: 70 year old male with a history of right partial nephrectomy for
clear cell renal cell carcinoma having an uneventful post operative follow
up for 2 years, underwent a surveillance CT scan. Multiple hepatic cystic
lesions were identified and subsequent MRI and PET scan were per-
formed for further evaluation and revealed suspicious for metastasis.
Partial hepatectomy was performed.
Results: Biochemical indices of the liver were within normal.
Macroscopically, there were multiple discrete cystic lesions in the liver
parenchyma. Solid tan nodules were not seen. Histological examination
revealed multiple necrotic hyalinised nodules with granulomatous inflam-
mation within liver and dense neutrophil infiltration with microabscess
formation. Within the central necrotic area are seen non-viable parasites
eggs and part of worm in keeping with parasitic infestation, in keeping
with Schistosomiasis. The eggs, not the worms, initiate the pathophysi-
ology, which give rise to hepatic granulomata formation which is medi-
ated by MHC class 11-restricted CD4+ T cells.
Conclusion: Hepatobiliary schistosomiasis is clinically and radiological-
ly simulate inflammatory pseudo tumour or malignant liver lesions, either
primary or secondary. Hence, proper sampling of these lesions with mul-
tiple deep level examinations along with histochemical stains is recom-
mended for the definitive diagnosis.
E-PS-07-013
Direct analysis of virtual slide scanner data for liver fibrosis is cor-
related with Ishak score
M. Hatori*, S. Moriya, H. Ikota, S. Kobayashi, Y. Nishijima, K. Shirabe,
H. Yokoo, K. Kimura, M. Saio
*Laboratory of Histopathology & Cytopathology Department of
Laboratory Sciences Gunma University Graduate School of Health
Sciences, Japan
Background & objectives: We performed direct analysis of Virtual
Slide Scanner (VSS) data by computer-assisted image analysis (CAIA)
for liver fibrosis. In this report, we report that correlation between Ishak
score (IS) and CAIA data.
Methods: Twenty-seven cases of non-cancer area of primary liver
cancer surgical specimens were examined and IS was determined
with Picrosirius Red (PSR) stained specimens as average of 2 ob-
servers. Detected PSR positive areas in VSS data was divided into
two groups; 5-50 μm^2 area (separated small area: SSA) and 50-
10,000,000μm^2 areas (connected large area: CLA), and their %
was evaluated.
Results: CLA was distributed mainly in Glisson/septal area. While, SSA
was observed in interlobular area and small area not detected as CLA in
CLA-distributed area. CLA and IS showed moderate correlation
(R=0.58986), which was identical to the data in the literature. While,
SSA and IS showed no correlation (R=0.12653). The average of CLA
and SSA was 7.8 % and 2.7 % without no correlated between them
(R=0.15931). Interestingly, SSA+CLA and IS showed moderate correla-
tion (R=0.53112). These results indicated that direct analysis of VSS data
for fibrosis would be useful to evaluate liver fibrosis. That is, this method
gives us a chance to evaluate entire specimen area without selection bias.
Conclusion: Our data indicated that our direct analysis of VSS data
enabled to evaluate not only Glisson/septal fibrosis but also intralobular
fibrosis simultaneously, which would be missed for evaluating liver fi-
brosis in ordinal image analysis by photo-images.
E-PS-07-014
The impact of bacterial translocation on the morphological structure
of extrantestinal organs in rats with strangulated intestinal
obstruction
P. Ivachyov*, M. Tussupbekova, D. Amanova, Y. Turgunov
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: The aim is studying the effect of microbial
translocation on different internal in rat model strangulated intestinal ob-
struction (SIO).
Methods: 52 rats were allocated into 3 groups:I(BT+)20 rats with SIO
model,2(BT-)20rats with SIO-model ,3-12 sham-operated rats. SIO was
made by clamping of small intestine and mesentery vessels for 60min and
reperfusion period for 2hours.As a marker of BT fluorescent E.coli was
used and microbiological analysis .Morphological study of organs exam-
ined by “Leica DM 1000”microscope.The significance results was deter-
mined by Fisher's test
Results: in BT(+) group 80.0%(n=16) in the spleen and kidneys the
capillary stasis, pulp plethora were observed, in liver – the lypodistrophy
changes were seen. In the group with absence of BT histological structure
was saved in all of organ samples and single site of damage were repre-
sented in 3% of rats. Histologic signs were not found in the sham group.
Conclusion: In conclusion, the BT leads up to changes of organ samples.
E-PS-07-015
Survival of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma in correlation
with tumour differentiation, microvascular invasion and Ki67 pro-
liferative index
V. Janevska*, S. Kostadinova-Kunovska, L. Spasevska, V. Chalovska,
D. Nikolova
*Institute of Pathology, Skopje, North Macedonia
Background & objectives: The survival in patients with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is difficult to predict. It is considered that the histolog-
ical grade (G) and microvascular tumour invasion (MVI) influence the
survival of HCC patients. Ki67 immunorepression may be a prognostic
marker in HCC.
Methods: We analysed the influence of G, MVI and Ki67
immunoexpression on the survival in 60 consecutive patients with histo-
logically proven HCC diagnosed and treated at the University Clinic of
Gastroenterohepatology in Skopje.
The biopsy and operative material were analysed at the Institute of
Pathology in Skopje. All patients were followed up from the date of
HCC diagnosis till 24 months.
Results: There were 19 (31.67%) female and 41 (68.33%) male, ranging
in age from 31 to 85 years, median 61.88±10.51,
We found statistically significant difference in survival of patients with
G3 in comparison to G1 (p<0.05) and in patients with and without MVI
(p<0.01)
Virchows Arch
Ki 67 immunoexpression was significantly higher in G3 and G2 HCC in
comparison to G1 tumours (p < 0.01; p< 0.01).
Patients with MVI had higher expression of Ki67 in comparison to pa-
tients without MVI, but not significantly.
Ki 67 immunoexpression did not influence the survival of the patients.
Conclusion: Tumour differentiation and microvascular invasion influ-
enced survival in patients with HCC. Ki67 expression was significantly
higher in HCC with G2 and G3 in comparison to G1 tumours. Ki67 did
not influence survival of HCC patients but was an indicator for worse
differentiation.
E-PS-07-016
Reactive lymphoid hyperplasia of the liver with granuloma forma-
tion: a case report
E. Kolay*, A. Dursun, G. Akyol, N. Ekmen
*Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Reactive lymphoid hyperplasia (RLH), also
known as hepatic pseudolymphoma or nodular lymphoid lesion, is ex-
tremely rare. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case with
granuloma formation.
Methods: We reported a case of RLH showing that granulomas as an
additional microscopic finding and discussed it's imaging and clinical
background.
Results: A 55 years old female was found to have elevated liver enzymes
and anti-mitochondrial antibody (M2). Liver biopsy suggested primary
biliary cholangitis. On follow-up the radiology revealed a mass lesion
suspicious for hepatocellular carcinoma. The lesion of 1.5 cm diameter
was excised Microscopically the lesion consisted of mature lymphocytes,
non-necrotising granulomas and lymphoid follicles with reactive mor-
phology. Nodular lymphoid infiltration, granulomatous diseases,
Castleman disease and extranodal marginal zone lymphoma were ruled
out based on morphological, immunohistochemical and clinical data.
Conclusion: Awareness is necessary for the diagnosis of RLH which can
be coexist with infectious, autoimmune or malignant processes.
E-PS-07-017
A case report of multiple hepatocellular carcinomas in a 56-year-old
bodybuilder – something is growing on
A. Leuca*, G. Verset, V. Lucidi, N. D'Haene, I. Salmon, M. Remmelink
*Erasmus University Hospital, Belgium
Background & objectives: Hepatocellular carcinomas are the most com-
mon primary malignant liver tumours of the adults. Anabolic steroids
consumption has been described in patients diagnosed with hepatocellu-
lar carcinomas, but no relation is established between the intake of these
substances and the tumour development.
Methods: A 56-year-old male referred to our centre for pain in the right
hypochondriac regions. He was a bodybuilder and declared consuming
androgenic anabolic steroids. The enhanced-MRI showed two hepatocel-
lular lesions, on the right lobe (16 cm in diameter) and in the left lobe
(5 cm in diameter). Right hepatectomy combined with left lobe (2 and 3)
subsegmentectomy was performed.
Results: The surgery specimens were consisting of two well-differenti-
ated, non-encapsulated hepatocellular carcinomas, with a pseudoacinar
pattern. Vascular emboli were present. Distant liver parenchyma showed
a discrete macrovesicular steatosis without any cirrhosis. The beta-catenin
immunohistochemistry showed diffuse membranous, cytoplasmic and
focal nuclear positivity. Glypican-3 stained focally positive in the tumour
cells. NGS analysis revealed a D32H hotspot mutation of the CTNNB1
gene. The surgical specimen was staged pT3N0 V1L0P0R0. Follow-up
was decided.
Conclusion: De novo hepatocellular carcinomas have already been de-
scribed in patients with androgenic anabolic steroid consumption. On the
other hand, the presence of beta-catenin hotspot mutations in hepatocel-
lular carcinomas can suggest a possible progression from a hepatocellular
adenoma (via the Wnt/beta-catenin signalling pathway).
E-PS-07-018
Melanoma metastasis in gallbladder - case report and literature
review
J.S. Marrero Afonso*, S. García Hernández, H. Álvarez-Argüelles, C.N.
Hernández León, R. Rodríguez Rodríguez
*Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Spain
Background & objectives: Metastasis in gallbladder are rare events, but
melanoma metastasis are the most frequent with 70 cases reported in
literature, mostly in autopsy examination or in symptomatic patients.
Thus, its rarity and clinicopathological characteristics could justify its
presentation.
Methods: We report a 48 years-old male patient with temple superficial
spreading melanoma with vertical grow phase, 3 mm Breslow index and
positive sentinel node in October 2017. After interferon-dexamethasone
regimen without symptoms, a control CT (may 2019) revealed a 22 mm
soft tissue density mass in gallbladder, suspicious of malignancy.
Therefore, surgical treatment was planned and morphologic description
was performed.
Results: Gross examination revealed two well-defined polypoid blackish
lesions (5x2x1.5cm and 0.9x0.7 cm) with blackish cut surface and mod-
erate consistency. Microscopically, it is formed by cells with wide eosin-
ophilic cytoplasm with eccentric nuclei, sometimes with nucleolus and
nuclear pseudoinclusions and frequent mitotic figures. Abundant blackish
brown pigment. It showed nuclear positivity to HMB45. A final diagnosis
of “Gallbladder with bifocal melanoma metastasis” was made.
Conclusion: Gallbladder metastasis of melanoma are exceptional and we
report a case with clinical, radiological and pathological correlation.
E-PS-07-019
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis: a report of two cases
K. Marwa*, A. Bdioui, Z. Lajmi, N. Abdessaied, A. Ben Abdelkader,
B. Sriha, M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, F. Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis
is an inherited disorder of childhood which presents in the neonatal period
and leads to death from liver failure.
In this study, we correlate morphologic features of the liver with clinical
and biological findings in patients.
Methods: We report two cases of progressive familial intrahepatic cho-
lestasis which have been recently diagnosed in our laboratory . It’s about
two children with average age 3 months, which derived from a consan-
guineous marriage. They presented an icter associated with a hepatomeg-
aly. The laboratory findings included an elevated serum gamma-
glutamyltransferase values with non remitting conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia and moderately elevated liver transaminases.
Results: A Liver biopsy was done for both infants. It showed an
intracanalicular cholestasis with lymphocytic inflammatory elements.
One of those infants presented alsoperiportal fibrosis, a giant cell hepatitis
with proliferation of the bile ducts. The diagnosis of progressive familial
intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) subtype 3 in this case, was retained. For
the second infant, in addition to the intracanalicular cholestasis, a mild
lobular and portal fibrosis with biliary thrombi have been noted conclud-
ing to a progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) subtype 2.
Conclusion: Diagnosis of progressive familial intrahepatic chole-
stasis (PFIC) is a challenging matter that involves the summation
of clinical, laboratory, radiological, and liver histological parame-
ters; in addition to specific investigations to exclude other causes
of neonatal cholestasis.
E-PS-07-020
Primary epithelioid angiomyolipoma of the liver with recurrence
after 16-year follow-up: review of the diagnostic criteria of
malignancy
L.O. Moscoso Miranda*, M. Verdaguer Tremolosa, E. Hidalgo
Llompart, X. Merino Casabiel, L. Salazar Huayna, M.T. Salcedo Allende
*Vall d´Hebron University Hospital, Spain
Background & objectives: Hepatic angiomyolipomas (AML) is a rare
mesenchymal neoplasm occurring most commonly in kidneys, being the
liver the second frequent location. Malignant hepatic presentation is an-
ecdotal, with the existence of 24 cases described in the literature, some-
times misdiagnosed as hepatocellular carcinoma.
Methods: 65-year-old patient, with history of chronic hepatitis C cured in
2002. In 2003 a central hepatectomy was performed due to an 8 cm
tumour with a result of AML. After a follow-up of 16 years, a new
5 cm lesion was detected by ultrasound. A core biopsy was made with
the diagnosis of Pecoma. Right hepatectomy was performed.
Results: Microscopic examination showed varying amounts of epitheli-
oid cells, smooth muscle cells, adipose tissue and vessels. The immuno-
histochemical study was positive for HMB45, cathepsin K, smooth mus-
cle actin and negative for CD34, with a mitotic count of 2 mitosis/50 high
power fields, with presence of multinucleated cells and cellular pleomor-
phism, confirming the diagnosis of non-epithelioid malignant AML ac-
cording to Folpe criteria and tumour of uncertain malignant potential
according to Schoolmeester criteria. The histological review of the first
tumour revealed presence of giant cell or pleomorphism, reclassifying the
tumour as malignant.
Conclusion: Primary malignant hepatic AML is an infrequent tumour.
Extrahepatic metastases and recurrences are common, and exhaustive
follow-up is vital. With reports of metastases after primary surgical re-
section, there is need to review angiomyolipomas and to decide whether
to reclassify them as slow-growing malignant tumours or whether de
novo or metastatic lesions.
E-PS-07-021
Typical and atypical presentation of hepatic sarcoidosis: a case series
with histological confirmation
D. Naranjo-Hans*, J. Gimeno Beltran, M. Puigvehi Badosa, G.M. Parini,
J. Masso Castella, M. Garcia-Retortillo, B. Lloveras Rubio
*Hospital del Mar, Spain
Background & objectives: Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease that most
commonly affects the lungs and lymphoid system. Hepatic involvement
is found in up to 80% of patients. However, evidence of hepatic dysfunc-
tion are infrequent and histological evaluation is only required in atypical
cases.
Methods: We reviewed four cases of sarcoidosis hepatic involvement
with histological confirmation. Two patients presented dissociated cho-
lestasis with concomitant cutaneous, lacrimal and lung involvement. The
other two underwent a percutaneous hepatic biopsy because of a chronic
transaminasemia of unknown aetiology in absence of pulmonary or lym-
phatic disease.
Results: The patients were middle-aged women and a 35-year-old man.
Histological findings were a predominantly portal or periportal-based
non-caseating granulomatous inflammation formed by sarcoid-type gran-
ulomas in different evolutive stages. These compact epithelioid granulo-
mas showed multinucleated giant cells with occasional eosinophils and
characteristically intragranulomatous fibrosis highlighted by reticulin and
collagen fibres special stains. Fungal and acid-alcohol resistant bacilli
infections were ruled out with additional studies. After clinical and sero-
logical correlation, a diagnosis of confirmation was made in two cases
whereas a first diagnosis of suspicious was made in the other two.
Although the clinical management of hepatic sarcoidosis is controversial,
corticosteroid-based therapy was initiated and remission of the hepatic
alterations was achieved.
Conclusion: Hepatic involvement is frequent in systemic sarcoidosis (50-
80% of the cases), and its usually asymptomatic Histological confirma-
tion is required only in cases with atypical clinical presentation, such as
analytical dissociated cholestasis, mass forming lesions in imaging tech-
nics or portal hypertension of unknown origin. On the other hand, isolated
liver sarcoidosis might be the first clinical manifestation of the disease.
E-PS-07-022
Small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of gallbladder: a case report
I. Provatas*, C. Masaoutis, K. Pavlou, H.J. Trihia, G. Kyriakopoulos
*Department of Pathology, Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens,
Greece
Background & objectives: Neuroendocrine carcinomas make approxi-
mately 4% of all malignant neoplasms of the gallbladder, showing a
female predominance and they are most common in the early to mid-
seventh decade of life (age range: 29 - 63 years), being frequently asso-
ciated with gallstones.
Methods: We report the case of a 77-year old male with a gallbladder
tumour, who was subjected to a hepatic wedge resection including the
gallbladder. Also a lymph node from the hepatic hilum was resected. On
gross examination a tumour at the fundus of the gallbladder was revealed,
6,5 cm in greater diameter, extending to the neighbouring hepatic
parenchyma.
Results: Microscopy of the tumour and the lymph node (H-E stains)
revealed a poorly differentiated carcinoma, consisting of round or fusi-
form cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and inconspicuous nucleoli, ar-
ranged in nests or sheets. Less than 7% of the tumour resembled to a
typical Biliary-type adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemically, tumour
cells were positive for CK8/18 (dot-like), Synaptophysin,
Chromogranin, CD56 and p53. Ki-67 was very high (~95%). There
was no expression of Serotonin, Somatostatin, ACTH and SSTR5.
SSTR2a expression score was 1+ according to Volante scoring system.
Based on the morphological and immunohistochemical findings, a diag-
nosis of Small cell Neuroendocrine Carcinoma of the Gallbladder was set.
Conclusion: Gallbladder neuroendocrine carcinomas have a very poor
prognosis. Most of the patients show disseminated disease at diagnosis,
with the median survival time for these carcinomas being < 1 year, and
the 5-year and 10-year survival rates 20% and 0% respectively.
E-PS-07-023
Lipid rich hepatocellular carcinoma: a provisional subtype that
needs to be characterised - report of a new case with literature review
Y. Rodriguez-Gil*, A. Hogeboon, A. Teijo, A. Luznila
*Hospital Universitario 12 Octubre, Surgical Pathology Department,
Spain
Background & objectives: Lipid rich hepatocellular carcinoma has been
described as a provisional subtype. It looks similar to clear cell HCC but
with different prognosis. We report a case to add data in order to define
prognosis and behaviour of this new subtype.
Methods: The patient is a 58-year-old man with previous diagnosis of
chronic viral hepatitis B and long-time risk alcohol consumption. He
came to our hospital from Romania for hypertransaminasemia and a
hyperechoic liver mass 6 cm diameter. After transarterial
chemoembolization it recurred, as surgical resection was not possible
(located at hilum) . Liver transplant was performed.
Results: Explant liver showed a 7cm nodule with ill defined borders and
extensive areas of necrosis and fibrosis. The surrounding liver showed
micronodular cirrhosis with septa and very scarce steatosis. The tumour
was a solid macrotrabecular mass extensively necrotic in central areas.
Virchows Arch
There was a peripheral surviving area composed principally of tumour
cells with abundant clear cytoplasm. On high power examination, tumour
cells showed numerous tiny droplets of fat. Similar to microvesicular
stetatosis and stained with adipophilin antibody. Also there were some
cells intermingled with clear cytoplasms and ill-defined hyaline lumps.
Macrovesicular steatosis was absent. No pericellular fibrosis was found.
Lymphovascular invasion was present although the viable tumour was
small and moderately differentiated.
Conclusion: "Lipid rich HCC" can look similar to clear cell HCC ,
steatohepatitic HCC or even be confused with a steatotic nodule if well-
differentiated. It has been classificated as "provisional subtye" because
more data are needed. We describe a case, presented for first time in
relation to virus B and alcohol, with lymphovascular invasion and poor
prognosis, in order to add knowledge to this new entity with very few
cases previously reported.
E-PS-07-024
Intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct: a case report
M. Samara*, D. Sweed, M. Maschut, D. Elazab
*National Liver Institute, Menoufia University, Egypt
Background & objectives: Intraductal Papillary Neoplasm of the Bile duct
(IPNB) is a rare premalignant neoplasm of bile duct. IPNB is rarely seen in
clinical practice in Egypt. Therefore, it is important that pathologists become
familiar with its histopathological features for accurate diagnosis.
Methods: Herein, we present a case of 59-year-old Egyptian female with
an accidentally-discovered mass. Radiological examination revealed a
partially cystic, partially solid focal lesion involving the whole right lobe.
CA19-9 was elevated. The patient underwent extended right hepatecto-
my. Pathological evaluation and immunohistochemical staining of CK7,
CK20, ER and PR were done.
Results: Grossly, multiple polypoid masses were projecting into the lu-
men of a cystically dilated large bile duct with intracystic haemorrhage.
Microscopically, there were prominent papillary proliferations with deli-
cate fibrovascular stalks that lacked an ovarian-like stroma as evidenced
by negative ER and PR. Epithelium showed multistep progression from
low grade to high grade intraepithelial neoplasia without an invasive
component and CK7/CK20 positivity indicating its pancreatobiliary epi-
thelial origin. Thus excluding mucinous cystic neoplasm and proving the
diagnosis of intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct.
Conclusion: IPNB is a rare premalignant variant of the bile duct neo-
plasms, considered as the biliary counterpart of intraductal papillary mu-
cinous neoplasm (IPMN) of the pancreas. It should be differentiated from
other cystic lesions of the liver and bile duct like mucinous cystic neo-
plasm that has no communication to the bile duct system and has an
ovarian-like stroma, at least focally positive for ER and PR, essential
for its diagnosis.
E-PS-07-025
Undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver: a case report
M. Samara*, S. Elmashad
*National Liver Institute, Menoufia University, Egypt
Background & objectives: Undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the
liver is a rare primary malignant mesenchymal hepatic neoplasm occur-
ring predominantly in children. Diagnosis remains challenging because of
overlapping clinical& radiological characteristics with other liver tu-
mours. Pathological& immunohistochemical assessment are necessary
for an accurate diagnosis.
Methods: Here we present a case of 7-year-old female presenting with
abdominal distension and dyspnoea. Radiological examination revealed a
cystic lesion near totally replacing the right hepatic lobe with clinical
suspicion of mesenchymal hamartoma. The patient underwent extended
right hepatectomy. Pathological evaluation, immunohistochemical study
using CD68, heppar-1 and CD34 and PAS staining were done.
Results: Gross examination revealed a mass measuring 23cm on greatest
dimension replacing most of right hepatic lobe. Cut sectioning showed
alternating glistening greyish-white solid areas and cystic soft gelatinous
areas with areas of haemorrhage and massive necrosis.
Histological examination revealed infiltration by undifferentiated oval to spin-
dle cells and bizarre multinucleated giant cells in a myxoid background with
massive necrosis. Malignant cells exhibited high degree of anaplasia, indistinct
cell borders, cytoplasmic hyaline globules, frequent mitosis.
Immunohistochemical staining was negative for heppar-1, CD34, CD68. The
cytoplasmic hyaline globules were positive for PAS stain thus proving undif-
ferentiated embryonal sarcoma of liver and excluding other liver tumours.
Conclusion: Undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of liver is a rare ma-
lignant neoplasm of paediatric age group that could be unexpected clin-
ically. Clinical and radiological findings are non-specific that's why path-
ological and immunohistochemical evaluation are vital for early diagno-
sis for a favourable outcome.
E-PS-07-026
Drug-induced autoimmune hepatitis secondary to Levofloxacin: re-
port of a case
L. Serrano Munné*, D. Naranjo-Hans, A. Díaz Lorca, J. Gimeno Beltran,
J. Lop Gros, J. Massó Castellà, B. Lloveras Rubio
*Hospital del Mar - Parc de Salut Mar, Spain
Background & objectives: Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a broad
term that encompasses any liver injury caused by medication. It can have
a wide spectrum of manifestations and show different patterns of
hepatic injury. DILI can present as a Drug-induced Autoimmune
Hepatitis (DI-AIH).
Methods: We present the case of a 68-year-old female that consulted
with epigastralgia, itching and choluria. The patient reported having re-
cently taken Levofloxacyn. She had been treated with Levofloxacyn on a
previous occasion with no associated symptomathology. Initial blood-
work revealed hyperbilirubinemia (5,2 mg/dl) and hypertransaminasemia
(AST/ALT: 1320/2091 UI/L). Viral serologies were negative and no
autoantibodies (ANA, AMA, anti-LKM, ASMA) were detected.
Results: Follow-up analysis showed an increase in the level of transam-
inases and subsequently a liver biopsy was performed. The biopsy
showed a pattern of periportal and pericentral necroinflammatory hepati-
tis with abundant plasmatic cells and eosinophils. The findings were
reported as compatible with Autoimmune Hepatitis (AIH).
DILI can present as a DI-AIH, especially in cases of repeated exposition
to a drug. The differential diagnosis between true AIH and DI-AIH can be
challenging as clinical, biochemical, serological and histological patterns
are similar, though patients with DI-AIH respond to immunosuppressants
and do not relapse after treatment. In our case, the patient was treated with
corticosteroids and responded, though in a protracted manner.
Conclusion: We consider that in patients with DILI, especially in cases of
repeated exposition to a drug, an AIH-like process must be considered as
it has implication on both treatment and prognosis.
E-PS-07-027
Frequency of hepatocellular carcinoma in Karachi, Pakistan: eight
years (2010-2018) data from the largest public sector diagnostic &
reference laboratory of Sindh
Y. Shafique*, M.A. Qureshi, S. Khan, S. Syed
*Dow University of Health Sciences, Pakistan
Background & objectives: In Pakistan, incidence and prevalence of
Hepatocellular carcinoma is rising due to en-mass conversion of previ-
ously HCV seropositive patients. In order to document frequency of HCC
we report eight years data detailing frequency of HCC within Pakistan.
Methods: For liver cancer statistics data was retrospectively collected
from 2010-2018 after ethical approval from Dow University of Health
Sciences (Ref no. IRB-459/DUHS/-14). All data were manually coded
using the international classification of diseases (ICD-10, 2016 version)
and indexed in Canreg software provided as a freeware by the
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), MS Excel as well
as SPSS.
Results: A total of 14,759 were diagnosed as cancers. Of these cancer
cases, a total of 317 (2.15%) were diagnosed as primary HCC. Of these
317 HCC cases, 191 (60.25%) were diagnosed in males and 126 (39.8%)
in females. Crude rate of HCC was 2.17. Crude rate was 2.4 in males and
1.8 in females.
Conclusion: We report frequency of liver cancer in Karachi with increas-
ing trends.
E-PS-07-028
Differential immune landscape of hepatocellular carcinoma: poten-
tial role of macrophages in hepatocarcinogenesis
Y. Shafique*, M.A. Qureshi, S. Khan, T. Mirza
*Dow University of Health Sciences, Pakistan
Background & objectives: In Pakistan, incidence and prevalence of
Hepatocellular carcinoma is rising due to en-mass conversion of previ-
ously HCV seropositive patients.
The objectives were to investigate myeloid and lymphoid immune cell
densities in tumour microenvironment of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Methods: A total of 42 patients (cases) diagnosed as hepatocellular car-
cinoma and a total of 10 control tissues (liver donor) were taken. In order
to investigate immune cells densities immunohistochemistry was per-
formed using antibodies for immunecells. Quantification of immune
cells/mm2 was performed as per the College of American Pathologists’
guidelines. A p-value of 0.05 was considered significant at all times.
Results: We report significantly increased infiltration of macrophages
(mean macrophages= 306.57/mm2, p-value<0.05), moderately signifi-
cant infiltration of neutrophils (p-value=0.06) and B-cells (p-value=0.07)
while no significant infiltration of CD4+ T-cells (p- value=0.31), and
CD8+ T-cells (p-value=0.39) in tumour microenvironment of patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma
Conclusion: Our data describe tumour densities of myeloid and innate
lymphoid cells in well characterized human samples of hepatocellular
carcinoma. We provide evidence for increased macrophage infiltration
in liver cancer microenvironment suggesting a potential role of these cells
in hepatocarcinogenesis.
E-PS-07-029
Expression of some stem cell markers in hepatocellular carcinomas
in correlation with clinico-pathological parameters and prognosis
A. Shalaby*, H. Hany, W. El Kashef, W. Kandil, R. Shahin,
M. Albendary, M. Mohamed
*Pathology Department, Sultan Qaboos University, Oman
Background & objectives: The heterogeneity of Hepatocellular carcino-
ma (HCC) can be explained by the presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs).
CD133 and EpCAM are used to identify CSCs. The aim is to assess the
relationship between their expression and clinicopathological parameters
and prognosis.
Methods: This retrospective study was performed on 100 cases of HCC
selected randomly from surgical pathology laboratory at Gastroenterology
Center, Mansoura, Egypt from 2011 to 2014. Immunohistochemical stain-
ing of CD133 and EpCAM was carried out on tissue microarrays.
Results: The results showed high CD133 expression in low grade HCC
than in high grade (P=0.031). The expression of EpCAM showed no
significant relations with the studied clinicopathological findings.
Patients with positive CD133 and EpCAM expressions had better overall
survival (OS) (P=0.000 and P=0.004) respectively. Expression of CD133
expression showed no significant difference in disease survival rate
(DSR) (P=0.350) while patients with positive EpCAM expression
showed a better DSR (P=0.001).
Conclusion: The role of CSC markers expression in the prognosis of
HCC is controversial and our results concluded that there is no unique
liver CSC marker and the combined use of more than one marker is
required for a better efficacy.
E-PS-07-030
Primary hepatic Castleman’s disease related to chronic hepatitis
C virus: a case report
D.M. Sweed, M. Shalan*, N.A. Ehsan, D. Elazab, H.A. Abdelhalim,
S. Kilany, Y. Fayed, T. Helal
*National Liver Institute, Egypt
Background & objectives: Castleman's disease (CD) is a primary lym-
phoproliferative disorder of the lymph node of two clinical and three
histopathological types with rare cases reported in extra-nodal sites.
Here we present a rare case of primary hepatic CD related to HCV.
Methods: An immunohistochemical study was done for primary antibod-
ies CD3, CD20, CD10, BCL2, CD138, CD30 and EGFR
Results: A 62 years old, HCV infected male presented by abdominal
pain. Serum alpha fetoprotein was negative. Triphasic computed to-
mography showed cirrhotic liver with segment II/III hypodense, non-
enhancing, exophytic mass. The mass was whitish, fleshy and mea-
sured 7 cm on greatest dimension. Histopathological examination
showed angiolymphoid hyperplasia formed of lymphoid follicles
exhibiting atrophic germinal centre (GC), variable hyalinization, con-
centric rings of small lymphocytes "onion skin" and peripheral vas-
cularity. Immunohistochemical staining for CD20 and CD3 mim-
icked the normal nodal distribution of B and T lymphocytes, respec-
tively. CD21 showed constant follicular dendritic cells distribution
within the GC.
Conclusion: illustrating the aetiological association of HCV and hepatic
CD could emphasis the use of anti-viral therapy in management of viral
related CD.
E-PS-07-031
Correlation of pathological changes in the liver and spleen in patients
with cirrhosis
I. Stepanyan*, V. Izranov, V. Gordova, U. Palvanova, S. Stepanyan
*Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Russia
Background & objectives: The study objective is to compare changes in
liver stiffness and spleen stiffness in patients with cirrhosis of the viral
aetiology and changes in liver volume and linear dimensions of the
spleen.
Methods: 15 patients with cirrhosis were examined. Ultrasound linear
measurements of the liver and spleen and their stiffness were performed
on the SuperSonic Imagine’s Aixplorer. Liver volume was calculated by
the formula J.T. Childs: 343.71 + 0.84 * (maximum craniocaudal size of
the right lobe * anterior-posterior size of the right lobe * anterior-posterior
size of the left lobe) / 1000).
Results: Study showed that on average the volume of the liver was
2026.47 ± 162.69 ml, while the stiffness of the liver was 34.76 ± 3.35
kPa. The correlation coefficient between the liver volume and its stiffness
was 0.33. The linear dimensions of the spleen were: length 14.43 ± 0.95
cm, thickness 6.52 ± 0.48 cm, while the spleen stiffness was 43.17 ± 1.32
kPa. A correlation between the linear dimensions of the spleen and its
stiffness was not found. The correlation coefficient between the length
and thickness of the spleen was 0.85. No correlation was found between
the stiffness’s of the liver and the spleen.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: The results of the study showed that the stiffness of the
spleen is, on average, higher than that for the liver, which allows us to
recommend paying attention to spleen stiffness when monitoring patients
with cirrhosis. The length and thickness of the spleen increase in direct
proportion in patients with cirrhosis.
E-PS-07-032
The influence of diffuse liver diseases on the size and spleen mass
coefficient, prognostic value of indicators
I. Stepanyan*, V. Izranov, V. Gordova, U. Palvanova, S. Stepanyan
*Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Russia
Background & objectives: Spleen is the largest secondary lymphoid
organ. Spleen sizes vary widely with various pathologies. When Spleen
Mass Coefficient (SMC) exceeds 4 then it is splenomegaly. Goal – find
out the spleen sizes and SMC changes at viral hepatitis and cirrhosis.
Methods: Ultrasound spleen examination was performed on SuperSonic
Imagine’s Aixplorer to 34 healthy volunteers, 30 with chronic HCV and
HBV, 15 with cirrhosis. The formula m = 0.34*l2*t was used to deter-
mine spleen mass (l = length; t = thickness). SMC was calculated by:
spleen mass (g) x 1000 / body weight (g). The average values were
calculated for all groups.
Results: The average spleen length for healthy volunteers, patients with
hepatitis B and C and patients with cirrhosis was 10.76 ± 1.15 cm, 10.35 ±
0.38 cm, 14.43 ± 0.95 (p ≤0.05) cm respectively, the spleen thickness was
– 5.21 ± 0.46 cm, 4.76 ± 0.17 cm, 6.53 ± 0.48 cm (p ≤0.05) respectively.
It turned out that the average SMC in healthy volunteers was 3.93 ± 0.28,
in patients with hepatitis – 2.38 ± 0.14 (p ≤0.05), with cirrhosis – 7.25 ±
1.24 (p ≤0.05).
Conclusion: We found out that there are statistically significant differ-
ences in the spleen linear sizes and SMC with cirrhosis. It is not advisable
to focus on the spleen linear sizes and SMC when assessing the condition
of a patient with chronic viral hepatitis.
E-PS-07-033
Diagnostic significance of liver stiffness and the sizes of the caudate
and left lobes with viral hepatitis and cirrhosis
I. Stepanyan*, V. Izranov, V. Gordova, S. Stepanyan, U. Palvanova
*Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Russia
Background & objectives: The caudate lobe thickness to the left lobe
thickness ratio is normally not more than one third. The goal: find out
how the liver stiffness and the sizes of the caudate and left lobes with
cirrhosis and hepatitis change.
Methods: Liver ultrasound examination was performed on SuperSonic
Imagine’s Aixplorer in 45 healthy volunteers, 30 patients with chronic
HCV and HBV, 15 patients with cirrhosis. Ultrasound measurements of
the caudate lobe (CL) thickness, the left lobe (LL) thickness, liver stiff-
ness were performed. The ratio of the thickness CL / LL was measured.
The average values for all groups were calculated.
Results: It was detected that on average in healthy volunteers the thick-
ness of the CL, the thickness of the LL and their ratio were 22.58 ± 0.55
mm, 69.71 ± 1.99 mm and 0.33 ± 0.01 respectively, in patients with
chronic HCV and HBV 24.56 ± 1.23 and 82.53 ± 3.31 (p≤0.05) and
0.30 ± 0.01 (p≤0.05) and in patients with cirrhosis – 33.60 ± 2, 24
(p≤0.05), 101.40 ± 4.16 (p≤0.05), 0.33 ± 0.03, respectively. At the same
time, liver stiffness in healthy volunteers was 4.71 ± 0.13 kPa, in patients
with hepatitis - 6.75 ± 0.43 kPa (p ≤0.05), with cirrhosis – 34.76 ±
3.35 kPa (p ≤0.05).
Conclusion: When assessing changes in the sizes of the liver with diffuse
liver diseases, one should focus on the thickness of CL and LL, and not on
their ratio, which can be the same among healthy people and for patients
with cirrhosis. The changes in liver stiffness weakly correlate with the
thickness of the LL in patients with cirrhosis (r = 0.35).
E-PS-07-035
Is M30 staining a reliable prognostic marker of fibrosis in protocolar
liver biopsies in post-liver transplant paediatric patients?
S. Szymanska*, M. Markiewicz-Kijewska, M. Michal, P. Kalicinski,
J. Teisseyre, H. Ismail
*The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Poland
Background & objectives: Liver transplantation is currently a treat-
ment of choice in patients with end-stage liver disease. Besides acute
cellular rejection (ACR) and antibody-mediated rejection (AMR),
fibrosis is also a cause of organ’s loose. Apoptosis has been recently
proposed as one of the mechanisms contributing to liver fibrosis in
liver grafts. The aim of this study was to assess the utility of immu-
nohistochemical (IHC) staining M30 (cytokeratin 18), as a prognos-
tic marker of fibrosis in protocolar liver biopsies in post-liver trans-
plant paediatric patients.
Methods: The study enrolled 58 patients aged 1,77 to 18,9 years (mead
13,84) who underwent protocolar liver biopsies taken 1-17 years after
liver transplantation (mead 6,1). Immunohistochemical staining M30
and histochemical staining azan were performed in all specimens. The
following changes were re-evaluated in each specimen: features of ACR
and/or AMR; severity of fibrosis (Ishak scale); presence of cholestasis
and steatosis.
Results: Histopathological changes were assessed in 59 biopsies. At no
biopsy, M30 expression was elevated regardless of the time after trans-
plantation, the treatment used, or the coexistence of other histopatholog-
ical changes. M30 expression also did not correlate with the severity of
fibrosis.
Conclusion: M30 staining, marker of apoptosis, does not correlate with
fibrosis in late protocolar liver biopsies in paediatric liver transplant re-
cipients.
E-PS-07-036
Primary hepatic neuroendocrine carcinoma: a case report; patholog-
ical and immunohistochemical study
T. Talab*, Y. Fayed, A. Agour
*National Liver Institute, Menoufia University, Pathology Department,
Egypt
Background & objectives: Primary hepatic neuroendocrine tumours are
rare. Most cases of hepatic neuroendocrine tumours are actually metasta-
ses from occult primary sites in the gastrointestinal tract or other sites.
Here we discuss a rare case of primary hepatic neuroendocrine
carcinoma.
Methods: Male patient, 31 years old, presented with abdominal pain
,imaging study revealed large hepatic focal lesion measured 20x15 cm ,
CT suggest HCC, MRI suggest fibrolammellar HCC. Virology negative,
AFP within normal range. Surgical resection of the tumour was done.
Pathological H&E and immunohistochemical assessments (Hep-par1,
chromogranin, synaptophysin, CD56, smooth muscle actin, LCA,
CD34,TTF1& Ki67) were done.
Results: Gross examination revealed soft greyish mass measured
13x10x6cm, with haemorrhagic cut surface. Microscopic examination
revealed small to intermediately sized uniform population of tumour cells
demonstrating abundant cytoplasm with round smooth contour nuclei and
vesicular nuclear chromatin arranged around vascular spaces. No
desmoplastic reaction was seen. Immunohistochemical study revealed
that the tumour cells were negative for heppar1, LCA, CD34, TTF1 &
SMA and positive for CD56, synaptophysin & chromogranin, Ki67 index
of 50%. Diagnosis of PHNEC was done after exclusion of all origins by
PET-CT and other investigations to exclude other primary sites. Three
months later the patient developed recurrence tumour in the liver with
metastasis to omentum and the stomach.
Conclusion: Primary hepatic neuroendocrine tumour, despite being rare,
already could be diagnosed after thorough investigations to exclude other
primary sites.
E-PS-07-037
Combined hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma mim-
icking focal nodular hyperplasia – a case report
A.L. Ursache*, G. Becheanu, C. Nicolae, M. Chivu, F. Andrei, M. Sajin,
A. Curte
*Emergency University Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Combined hepatocellular carcinoma and
cholangiocarcinoma (cHCC-CC) is a rare and aggressive tumour, which
accounts for <1-5% of primary liver malignancies, defined by two mor-
phologically distinct neoplastic components. We present a case of cHCC-
CC that clinically mimicked a benign tumoral proliferation.
Methods: A 58 years old female was hospitalized with an expansive
process in segment IV of the liver. Intraoperative echography described
a well-circumscribed tumour, showing a capsule and central hypoechoic
area, which was considered as suggestive for focal nodular hyperplasia.
However, the patient underwent surgery, followed by gross examination
and microscopic analysis.
Results: Microscopy revealed a well-circumscribed malignant prolif-
eration of hepatoid cells with a trabecular pattern (well-moderate
hepatocellular carcinoma), areas of solid and cribriform pattern, with
desmoplastic stroma (cholangiocarcinoma), as well as intricate areas
showing intermediate features. Tumour necrosis was present.
Lesions of portal hepatitis were seen on the background hepatic
parenchyma. Immunochemistry showed positivity for OCH1E5,
Glypican-3 in hepatoid areas and positivity for CK7, CA19.9,
MNF116 in ductal areas, and overall negativity for CK20, CDX2,
TTF1, Chromogranin A, Synaptophysin, NSE. There was a prolifer-
ation index of 10% with Ki-67. All these features were consistent
with a diagnosis of cHCC-CC.
Conclusion: Combined hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcino-
ma is a rare entity and this particular case, mimicking focal nodular
hyperplasia highlights the importance of the pathological examination
and immunohistochemical confirmation, even though the clinical and
imaging context suggests a benign tumour.
E-PS-08-001
Pancreatic insulinoma associated with pancreatic heterotopia: a clin-
icopathologic and immunohistochemical study
R. Barna*, A. Dobrescu, A. Dema, D. Brebu, A. Plopeanu, D. Cipu,
M. Cornianu
*Department of Pathology, Emergency County Hospital "Pius Brinzeu",
Timisoara, Romania
Background & objectives: Insulinoma is a rare form of functional pan-
creatic neuroendocrine tumour (PanNET) that causes inappropriate re-
lease of insulin.
A 71-year-old woman admitted to our hospital complained of frequent
episodes of asthenia, fatigue, visual impairment and spontaneous hypo-
glycemic episodes determined at home.
Methods: During hospitalization she developed multiple symptomatic
episodes of hypoglycemia. Blood samples taken at that time revealed
low glucose levels (51 mg/dl) with corresponding high insulin levels
(27.6 microU/ml). Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography
scan demonstrated a single lesion involving the head of the pancreas,
measuring 15x22 mm, with enhancement during the arterial phase of
contrast bolus.
Results: The patient underwent surgical resection consisting of cephalic
duodenopancreatectomy (Whipple procedure) with anterograde
cholecystectomy.
On gross examination a nodular, well-defined, tan lesion with greatest
dimension of 15 mm involved the head of the pancreas. Histological fea-
tures corresponded to a G1 PanNET with mitotic index less than 2/10 HPF
and proliferation index Ki67 less than 3%. Immunohistochemically, tumour
cells showed a positive and diffuse staining for synaptophysin and
chromogranin A. Pancreatic heterotopia within duodenal wall was noticed.
Shortly after surgical treatment symptoms remitted completely; the glu-
cose and insulin levels returned to normal.
Conclusion: Insulinoma remains a diagnostic challenge to clinicians. An
adequate clinical and imagistic context should raise a high-grade suspi-
cion. It has a favourable prognostic, surgical resection being the preferred
treatment option with immediately remission of symptoms.
E-PS-08-002
Pancreatic mixed neuroendocrine-non-neuroendocrine neoplasm: a
case report
B. Binboga*, F. Oz Puyan, E. Genc Erdogan, F.E. Usturalı Keskin
*Trakya University Medical Faculty, Turkey
Background & objectives: MiNEN’s are composed of morphologically
neuroendocrine and non-neuroendocrine tumour components each con-
stituting ≥30% of the tumour volume. Mixed ductal-neuroendocrine car-
cinomas should be distinguished from ductal adenocarcinomas with
entrapped neuroendocrine islets and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours.
Methods: 59-year-old male patient presented with nausea and vomiting
ongoing for 20 days. Patient developed jaundice after several weeks of
the initial symptoms. On abdominal CT scan, a mass was found at the
pancreatic head. Whipple procedure was performed.
Results: Macroscopically, a solid yellow mass sized 2,5x2x2 cm was
found in the pancreas and mucosal irregularity was observed in the ductus
choledochus. Morphologically the tumour was composed of glandular,
tubular structures within desmoplastic stroma accompanied with round
islets of small uniform cells. PAS-AB, Mucicarmine positive tubular
structures revealed immunohistochemically B72.3 and CEA positivity
whereas the other round cell population was synapthophysin, NSE,
PDX1 positive with a low Ki67 proliferation index.
Conclusion: The final diagnosis was MiNEN composed of ductal and
neuroendocrine carcinoma with well differentiation. Mixed ductal-
neuroendocrine carcinomas account %0.5-2 of all ductal adenocarci-
nomas. The occurrence of well differentiated neuroendocrine component
is relatively rare. In a pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, islets of mor-
phologically uniform round cell component should be further examined
as a component of possible MiNEN.
E-PS-08-004
Pancreatic hamartoma: morphological and immunohistochemical
features
D. Bueno Sacristán*, E. Romio, I. Ruz-Caracuel, J. Molina-Villar,
A. Sanjuanbenito-Dehesa, S. López-Duran, M. Muñoz-Beltran,
M. Martín-Martín, R. Fuentes-Mateos, C. Perna-Monroy, A. Caminoa
*Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, Department of Pathology, Spain
Background & objectives: Hamartomas are benign tumour-like
malformations formed from the disorganized growth of normal cells
and tissues. Pancreatic hamartoma is extremely rare. Malignancy must
be excluded, especially in the pre-operative diagnosis.
Methods: We present the morphological and immunohistochemical fea-
tures of a pancreatic hamartoma in a 41-year-old male diagnosed in a
distal pancreatectomy sample. Hematoxylin-eosin stain and immunohis-
tochemical studies were performed, including synaptophysin,
chromogranin, beta-catenin, actin, CD34 and S100. Previous fine needle
aspiration samples were reviewed.
E-PS-08 Digestive Diseases Pathology - Pancreas
Virchows Arch
Results: Grossly, the lesion was a homogeneous, solid nodule measuring
1.8 x 1.8 cm. Histologically we observe a well-circumscribed lesion com-
posed of disarranged ductal, acinar and neuroendocrine cells embedded in
a hyalinized or fibrocellular stroma. The lesion showed pushing margins
with no infiltration of the surrounding pancreatic parenchyma. Some
areas were composed of fibroblastic elements with non-atypical large
nuclei. Beta-catenin stain was expressed focally in the fibroblastic-like
cells, whereas the remaining were negative. Two previous fine needle
aspiration cytologies were reviewed and diagnosed as mucinous neo-
plasms, based on the presence of scant and non-displastic columnar epi-
thelium and abundant mucin. Diagnosis of pancreatic hamartoma was
made in the surgical specimen.
Conclusion: Pre-operative diagnosis of pancreatic hamartoma is a real
challenge. Differential diagnosis should be made with malignant entities,
mucinous neoplasms, neuroendocrine and desmoid tumours.
Histopathological examination is essential for an accurate diagnosis.
E-PS-08-005
Pancreatic mucoepidermoide carcinoma: the eleventh case in the
literature
N. Abdessayed, D. Chiba*, A. Baccouche, Z. Nfikha, T. Zahmoul,
A. Bchir, M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Mocoepidermoid carcinomas(MEC) of the
pancreas are rare entity. Only ten cases have been reported in literature.
Because of their rarities, preoperative clinical and radiological diagnosis
of these carcinomas continues to be a challenge to differentiate them from
others pancreatic neoplasms.
Methods: The clinical and histo-pathologic features of pancreatic MEC
are poorly defined which motivated us to present this case report and
review the literature.
We describe the case of a male patient who consulted for a left upper
abdominal pain and deterioration of general status, and the diagnoses was
performed in the pathology department of Farhat Hached Hospital-
Sousse
Results: Computed tomography showed a low density tumour in the
head of the pancreas. The preoperative symptoms and imaging were
unspecific and the patient underwent a duodeno-cephalic-
pancreatectomy surgery.
Macroscopically, we found a whitish, indurated and ill-defined tumour
measuring 3.5 cm infiltrating the duodenal wall, the common bile duct
and obstructing the wirsung canal.
Histologically, the tumour consisted of two components, well differenti-
ated adenocarcinoma associated to epidermoid cells and the tumour was
classified pT2N1 according to WHO2019-TNM2017.
Conclusion: As an uncommon entity, preoperative diagnosis of pancre-
atic MEC seems to be difficult in consideration of the rarity of disease and
unspecific manifestations. However, further analysis is still required so as
to establish better regimens and subsequently guide the preoperative di-
agnosis and treatment options of pancreatic MEC.
E-PS-08-006
Paraduodenal pancreatitis mimicking cancer
H. Geddert*, C. Justinger, G. Klöppel, T. Rüdiger
*Institute of Pathology, Municipal Hospital of Karlsruhe, Germany
Background & objectives: A 36-year-old male patient complains about
burning abdominal pain and weight loss (> 10 kg). A 5 cm mass is found
near to the uncinate process with compression of the duodenum and
common bile duct.
Methods: Atypical spindle cells are found in the needle aspiration cytol-
ogy, leading to a diagnosis of sarcoma.
Subsequently, a Whipple procedure is performed. A severe endoluminal
bleeding leads to an urgent revision. Later a bilateral basal pneumonia
prolongs the recovery.
Results: Histologically a dense fibroblastic proliferation with
lymphoplamacellular inflammation is seen. Destructed and/or dilated
ducts show retained dense pancreatic juice. Immunohistologically an au-
toimmune pancreatitis is ruled out.
We diagnose a paraduodenal pancreatitis (groove pancreatitis).
This rare type of pancreatitis mainly occurs in males with a peak inci-
dence in the 4th and 5th decade. The hallmark of disease is the presence of
tumour-forming fibrosis in the pancreaticoduodenal groove. The duode-
num is always involved by a chronic inflammatory process with various
levels of stenosis. Paraduodenal pancreatitis has been suggested to occur
via increased viscosity of the pancreatic juice caused by alcohol, thus
predisposing to stone formation.
Conclusion: The diagnosis of paraduodenal pancreatitis is challenging
on a clinical, radiological and morphological level.
E-PS-08-007
Acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas
M. Hamdani*, A. Baccouche, O. Belkacem, Z. Nfikha, N. Jelidi,
D. Chiba, A. Bdioui, S. Hmissa Belhaj Salah
*Department of Pathology, Sahloul University Hospital of Sousse,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Acinar cell carcinoma (ACC) of the pancreas
is a rare tumour that constitutes 1% of all pancreatic neoplasms. This
tumour remains known poorly. This work aimed to study the clinico-
pathological characteristics, the treatment and the prognosis of the pan-
creatic ACC.
Methods: It is a retrospective study including four cases of pancreatic
ACC identified over a period of 11 years (2006-2017) in The Pathology
Department, Farhet Hached Hospital, Sousse (Tunisia).
Results: Two men and two women with a mean age of 60 years presented
with abdominal pain, asthenia or a cholestatic syndrome. Imagery showed
a well circumscribed, solidocystic tumour of the pancreas with a focus of
necrosis. Macroscopic examination showed a large mass with a mean size
of 10 cm. It was generally well-circumscribed, sometimes multinodular.
Histological examination showed a carcinomatous proliferation, orga-
nized into small glands and cords, made of cubo-cylindrical cells, with
a strongly nucleated monomorphic nucleus. Foci of necrosis were ob-
served. Immunohistochemistry showed diffuse expression of trypsin in
all cases, a positivity of Pan-CytoKeratin. Synaptophysin was focally
positive in 2 cases. Treatment was double bypass, spleno-pancreatecto-
my, or chemotherapy.
Conclusion: Pancreatic ACC is a rare tumour. Data about prognosis are
controversial. Researches about the molecular mechanisms involved in
the onset and progression of ACC are required for a better management.
E-PS-08-008
Solid pseudopapillary neoplasm of pancreas – case series
B. Ilcheva*, A. Fakirova, R. Hristoskova, I. Sotirova
*Military Medical Academy - Sofia, Bulgaria
Background & objectives: Solid pseudopapillary neoplasm (SPN) of
the pancreas is a low-grade malignant pancreatic tumour. It is a rare
primary neoplasm that typically affects young women with mean age of
28 years. It has nonspecific clinical presentation such as abdominal pain
and nausea, and has vague radiological features. Histological features of
this neoplasm are usually specific and there is a good immunohistochem-
ical (IHC) panel, that can prove the diagnosis.
Methods: We present 3 cases of SPN of pancreas with emphasis of mor-
phology and additional IHC stains. Three young women, between 28 and
30 years old, with no prior medical history. One of them presented with
complaints of epigastric pain with sudden onset. The other two patients had
no complaints and were diagnosed on a routine medical check.
Results: In one of the cases the tumour was located in the head of the
pancreas, whereas in the other two - in the tail. The tumour has some
specific histology presentation - solid nests of poorly cohesive cells,
forming pseudopapillary structures, situated in hyalinized stroma with
degeneration features. IHC panel of B-catenin, CD56, PR, Vimentin,
CD10, alfa1-antitrypsin, NSE and Synaptophysin, was used for the final
diagnosis.
Conclusion: It is important for the pathologist to think about this lesion
and it should be highly suspected when young female presents with
pancreatic mass. Surgical excision offers the best chance for cure and
patients have an excellent prognosis after surgical excision.
E-PS-08-010
Multiple pancreatoblastoma, a case report in a 30-year-old man with
familial adenomatous polyposis
V. Suteau*, S. Gimenez de Mestral, F. Paye, P. Afchain, D.I. Enea,
A. Pécriaux, J. Fléjou
*Pathology Department, Saint-Antoine Hospital, Paris, France, Faculty
of Medicine, Hyacinthe-Bastaraud University, Pointe-à-Pitre, France
Background & objectives: Pancreatoblastoma is a rare tumour, which
affects mainly the paediatric population. Only about seventy adult cases
have been reported in the English literature.
Methods: We report a case of a 30-year-old man previously diagnosed
with familial adenomatous polyposis in his adolescence, complaining of
recent abdominal pain and significant weight loss.
Tomodensitometry examination revealed four pancreatic nodules (1.1-
3.8 cm), involving the head and the tail of pancreas. Biopsies of two
lesions diagnosed well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumours.
Consequently, a pancreaticoduodenectomy and a spleen-preserving distal
pancreatectomy were performed.
Results: Macroscopically, the lesions were well circumscribed, white-
brownish, showing solid and cystic features.
Histopathological examination revealed the same aspect in all tumours,
showing lobular pattern, with two different cellular components: one of
solid and acinar architecture composed of midly atypical cells with scarce
cytoplasm and round-ovoid nuclei with small nucleoli, intermixed with
squamoid nests formed by large cells with abundant eosinophilic to clear
cytoplasm and oval-shaped nuclei.
In the solid/acinar component, the cells expressed chromogranin A,
synaptophysin, CD56, Bcl10, with a proliferation index (Ki67) up to
20%. The squamoid nests expressed EMA, chromogranin A,
synaptophysin and beta-catenin (nuclear staining).
Conclusion: Pancreatoblastoma can mimic a neuroendocrine tumour or
an acinar cell carcinoma on biopsies, especially in adults, where this
diagnosis is unexpected. This case report raises concern about its associ-
ation with familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome, advocating for a
careful examination in these patients.
E-PS-08-011
Nuclear protein lamin A and emerin expression is down regulated in
carcinoma originated from intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm
H. Tamaki*, S. Moriya, S. Kobayashi, Y. Nishijima, A. Watanabe,
H. Ikota, K. Shirabe, H. Yokoo, M. Saio
*Laboratory of Histopathology & Cytopathology Department of
Laboratory Sciences Gunma University Graduate School of Health
Sciences, Japan
Background & objectives: Alteration of nuclear lamin and emerin is
known to affect nuclear size and shape. In the present study, we investi-
gated the expression levels of lamin-A and emerin in adenoma or carci-
noma of intraductal mucinous cystic tumour (IPMN) cases.
Methods: Twenty cases of IPMN (13 cases of adenoma: IPMA
and 7 cases of carcinoma: IPMC) were immunohistochemically
stained. Then the expression of lamin-A and emerin were exam-
ined. The expression intensity of the protein was evaluated man-
ually and classified into score 0-3. Then, the highest and lowest
intensity in the specimens were compared. P value less than 0.05
was considered significant.
Results: The maximum value of lamin-A showed no significant differ-
ence between IPMA and IMMC (3.000± 0, and 2.857 ± 0.378, p = 0.173),
respectively. On the other hand, the lowest value of lamin-A was signif-
icantly different between the two groups (3.000 ± 0 and 1.857 ± 1.345, p
= 0.003). Similarly, the maximum value of emerin showed no significant
difference between the two groups, (2.231 ± 0.599 and 2.000 ± 0.816, p =
0.508). On the other hand, the lowest value of emerin was significantly
different in two groups, (1.385 ± 0.506 and 0.714 ± 0.756, p = 0.042).
Conclusion: Our results suggested expression of both proteins, especially
lamin-A was maintained in IPMA, but both proteins were down regulated
during progression to IPMC.
E-PS-09-001
Review and case presentation: the value of tubuloreticular inclusions
(identified with electron microscopy) in the diagnosis and manage-
ment of connective tissue autoimmune diseases
A. Al-Omari*, B. Wagner, A. Takou, E. Toh
*Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHSFT, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Renal involvement in connective tissue dis-
eases (CTDs) is common.
Tubuloreticular inclusions (TRIs) are seen in connective tissue dis-
eases at the ultrastructural level (electron-microscopy), however,
there is no quantifying criteria to assess the significance of TRIs in
the diagnosis of CTDs.
Methods: This case presentation is to highlight the importance of TRIs
identification in a case that lead to diagnosis alteration based on electron
microscopy identification of TRIs; that are different from the ones seen in
other conditions.
We propose creating a method for performing a morphometric analysis of
TRI’s that could be used to more reliably discriminate between different
renal conditions.
Results: We noticed from this case and other cases of CTDs related renal
changes that ultra structuralstudies (electron microscopy) show signifi-
cant numbers of large TRIs. These are different to the ones seen in other
renal conditions.
Conclusion: TRIs are an important clue to the diagnosis of CTDs, par-
ticularly, when significant numbers of large RTIs are seen on electron
microscopy.
We propose creating a method for performing a morphometric analysis of
TRI’s in order to be able to more accurately describe them, and then to
test the hypothesis that this more accurate information could be used to
more reliably discriminate between those renal conditions where they
have been found
E-PS-10-001
Primary thyroid lymphoma simulating anaplastic carcinoma
P. Aguiar Feitosa*, A.L. Pequeno, J. Freitas, A.C. Albuquerque,
M.A. Fernandes, W. Alves Filho, C. Hirth
*Federal University of Ceará, Medical School, Dept. of Pathology, Brazil
E-PS-09 Electron Microscopy
E-PS-10 Endocrine Pathology
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: The thyroid gland is commonly the tar-
get of neoplastic diseases, such as primary thyroid lymphoma
(PTL), a non-Hodgkin lymphoma subtype. PTL is a rare and ag-
gressive neoplasm, the manifestation of which may resemble ana-
plastic carcinoma, requiring microscopic differentiation. The ob-
jective is to describe a case of a patient with PTL mimicking
thyroid cancer that obtained an excellent response to treatment.
Methods: Female, 59 years, reports cervical mass growth associat-
ed with dysphonia a month ago. Cervical tomography revealed
lymph node enlargement and enlarged thyroid, compressing and
deflecting the trachea to the right. Histopathology confirmed high
grade diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Started treatment with six
chemotherapy sessions following the R-CHOP protocol and al-
though the advanced disease, showed a complete response to
treatment.
Results: The main differential diagnosis is anaplastic cancer be-
cause of the rapid evolution, and is the most lethal of thyroid
malignancies, with an average survival of six months. Therefore,
the histological differentiation of the two neoplasm is highly rel-
evant, which is based on the presence of cellular inclusions and
the absence of lymphoglandular bodies to characterize. Such find-
ings do not correspond to the reported patient, allowing differen-
tiation and characterization as LPT.
Conclusion: In patients with rapid mass growth in thyroid topog-
raphy, the hypothesis of lymphoma should be listed, being para-
mount the rapid diagnosis and aggressive conduction.
E-PS-10-002
Medullary thyroid carcinoma: a 14-year retrospective study in a
tertiary hospital
R. Almeida*, V. Almeida, F. Ramalhosa, H. Moreira, A. Lai,
M.B. Pimentão, C. Faria, J. Madeira, J. Gama, M.J. Martins,
M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC)
represents 3-10% of thyroid carcinomas. This study aims contrib-
ute to the knowledge of the correlation between citology and his-
tology, clinicopathological features and prognosis, and between
serum calcitonin (SCa) and tumour dimension.
Methods: Retrospective study, with clinical and pathological data col-
lected and analysed from all patients diagnosed with MTC at our institu-
tion, over 14 years (January/2006 - December 2019). All cases were re-
staged according to the AJCC 8th edition.
We have found 26 cases of MTC diagnosed in this period.
Results: A median age of 46y (6-85) was observed, with predominance
of females (10M:16F) and a median tumoral dimension of 21mm (2-98).
Hereditary MTC represented 11.5% (3 cases), all associated with
MEN2A syndrome.
Cytology have diagnosed 50% of MTC, and in 77% of all cases
the result was suspicious for malignancy (category V of Bethesda
reporting system) or malignant (category VI of Bethesda reporting
system). Regarding staging, 54% of cases were in stage I.
Pre-surgery SCa was elevated in most available cases (77%), without
proportional relationship with tumour size. Serum calcium was normal
in all cases.
Five-year survival rate was 93%.
Conclusion: CMT is an aggressive neoplasm, usually with metas-
tasis at the time of diagnosis. Elevation of SCa is considered a
sensitive and specific tumour marker, and was elevated in most
of our cases. Serum calcium do not seems to be a good tumour
marker, because all cases remained within normal values.
Survival at five years (93%) was slightly higher than the referred in the
literature (86%).
E-PS-10-003
Follicular thyroid carcinoma decreasing tendency among well-
differentiated thyroid carcinomas in a 10-year cohort
V. Almeida*, R. Almeida, C. Faria, F. Ramalhosa, T. Silva, M.J. Martins
*CHUC, IAP-PM, FMUC, Portugal
Background & objectives: Follicular Thyroid Carcinoma (FTC) is a
relatively uncommon malignancy, as increases in thyroid cancer are at-
tributed to Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma (PTC).
We summarize the pathological features of FTCs diagnosed through a 10-
year-period, evaluating its percentage among Well-Differentiated
Thyroid Carcinomas (WDTC).
Methods: Well-Differentiated Thyroid Carcinomas (WDTC) diagnosed
from 2010 to 2019 were identified on laboratory databases, on a total of
544 cases. Tumours were classified according to WHO Classification of
Tumours (4th edition). Data were analysed using IBM SPSS v24.
Results: The FTC´s percentage among WDTC decreased from 5,0%
during 2010–2014 to 2,0% in the 2015–2019 period. Overall percentage
of FTCs was 4,0%, which is significantly lower than 6% usually attrib-
uted to FTC (t(543)=-288, p=0,004).
Relative percentages on Follicular Variant of PTC (FVPTC), a differen-
tial diagnosis to FTC, was not statistically significative between both time
periods (t(459,17)=-1,34, p=0,182).
FTC´s median age at diagnosis was 58 years-old (30–79 years-old); 75,0%
were women. Themeansize ofthetumourswas20,50mm. 55%were pT2and
most developed in a background of benign nodular disease. 75% were mini-
mally invasive, 15% encapsulated angioinvasive and 10% widely invasive.
Conclusion: A progressive reduction of FTCs among WDTC is a global
trending. Accordingly, we report a FTCs percentage of 4%, statistically
lower than published data, with a decreasing tendency. Our remaining
pathological data matched the published literature on FTCs.
E-PS-10-004
Deep into neuroendocrine tumours of the thyroid gland, a discussion
based on a recent case report
D. Argyropoulou*, R. Oliveira, M.J. Brito
*Department of Pathology, Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal
Background & objectives: Thyroid neuroendocrine tumours are rare
and represent a diverse group. The most frequent neuroendocrine carci-
noma of the thyroid gland is medullary carcinoma, representing <2-3% of
all thyroid malignancies.
Methods: A 56-year-old male, prior heavy smoker, with no other rele-
vant clinical history, presented with sporadic dysphonia. Clinical inves-
tigation revealed a solitary left side thyroid nodule, measuring 7,5 cm.
There were no other associated symptoms.
A fine needle-aspiration cytology was performed. The diagnosis was a
Follicular Lesion of Uncertain Significance.
He was submitted to a left-sided thyroid lobectomy.
Results: The surgical specimen consisted of a solid, non-capsulated,
brownish, thyroid nodule.
The tumour had an insular pattern, with medium size cells, coarse nuclear
chromatin and amphophilic cytoplasm.
There was no evidence of necrosis.
The cells were positive for CKs, Cromogranin A, Sinaptophysin,
Somatostatin and CEA and negative for TTF-1, PAX-8, Thyroglobulin,
Calcitonin, CGRP, CDX-2 and S100; Ki-67 3%.
Congo red stain was negative.
CEA/ Calcitonin serum levels were within the normal range.
Conclusion: The final diagnosis was a well-differentiated neuroendo-
crine tumour.
We cannot define with certainty if primary/metastatic.
After a 3-month follow-up, the patient had no complaints or evidence of a
residual/recurrent disease.
We present a peculiar thyroid lesion that reminds us that not all thyroid
neuroendocrine tumours are medullary carcinomas, how important is the
correlation with clinical data and how all these considerations are crucial
for patient management and therapeutic approaches.
E-PS-10-005
Mucinous well-differentiated follicular cell-derived carcinoma of the
thyroid gland: an immunohistochemical and molecular study
M. Berrios-Hernandez*, I. Bescansa-Pous, N. Gonzalez-Ortega,
M. Sanchez-Ares, F.J. Caneiro-Gomez, M. Piso-Neira, V. Pubul-
Nunez, I. Abdulkader-Nallib, J.M. Cameselle-Teijeiro
*Clinical University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela, Spain
Background & objectives: Mucinous thyroid carcinoma (MucTC) is
a rare malignant neoplasm characterised by neoplastic cells
surrounded by extensive extracellular mucin deposition. MucTC
should be distinguished from other primary or metastatic tumours.
We describe a case of mucin-producing well-differentiated follic-
ular cell-derived thyroid carcinoma.
Methods: A 83-year-old euthyroid man presented with a rubbery mass in
the right thyroid lobe. There was a history as an ex-smoker, with high
blood pressure and ischemic heart disease but with no radiation or family
history of thyroid cancer. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy indicated follic-
ular neoplasm (category IV-Bethesda) and a right thyroidectomy was
performed latter followed by a left thyroidectomy.
Results: The tumour measured 52 mm. It was partially encapsulated
showing microfollicular to macrofollicular architecture with extensive
intrafollicular mucin production. Some nuclear characteristics of papillary
carcinoma were occasionally detected. Capsular invasion and
angioinvasion were also detected. Ki-67 index was 3%. Mucicarmine
and Alcian blue stains, TTF1, PAX8, thyroglobulin and thyroperoxidase
were positive; but calcitonin, CEA, CK19, MUC1/MUC2, HBME1 and
galectin-3 were negative. BRAF, NRAS, KRAS and TERT mutations
were not detected.
Conclusion: Our findings confirm the existence of cases of mucinous
well-differentiated follicular cell-derived thyroid carcinomas that must be
distinguished from true MucTC.
Funding: Grant PI19/01316-FEDER, Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities, Spain.
E-PS-10-006
Giant cell medullary thyroid carcinoma - a challenging diagnosis in
cytology
A. Borda*, M. Beleaua, E. Szasz, A. Nechifor-Boila
*Department of Histology, UMFST Targu-Mures, Romania
Background & objectives: Cytological diagnosis of medullary thyroid
carcinoma (MTC) can be difficult and even challenging when associated
with unusual morphological features. We present a case of a rare variant
of MTC which caused diagnosis difficulties on FNA cytology.
Methods: A 59-years-old female presented for bilateral thyroid mass.
Neck ultrasound identified multiple nodules in both thyroid lobes. A high
calcitonin serum level raised the suspicion of MTC. A FNA was per-
formed in a ultrasound suspicious small nodule, situated in upper part
of the right lobe.
Results: The smear was highly cellular with two cell-types: small
plasmacytoid cells with single or double monomorphic nucleus, corre-
sponding to conventional MTC, and clusters and isolated bizarre giant
cells, with highly pleomorphic nuclei, associated with mitotic figures.
These unusual cytological features prompted a differential diagnosis with
anaplastic carcinoma. The gross examination of the surgical specimen
revealed, apart multiple goitrous nodules, an 8mm white-tan nodule with
central calcification. On microscopy, the same two cells-types as in cy-
tology were found: those corresponding to conventional MTC but also
giant, binucleated or multinucleated cells with highly pleomorphic nuclei
and prominent nucleolus. In immunohistochemistry both cell-types
expressed Calcitonin, CEA and Chromogranin and were negative for
Thyroglobulin.
Conclusion: The microscopical features and the immunohistochemical
panel confirmed the diagnosis of giant cell MTC. The presence of giant
cells in MTC is a very unusual situation, and represents a challenge for the
differential diagnosis not only in cytology, but also in histology.
E-PS-10-007
Mixed medullary and papillary carcinoma of the thyroid: a
phaenotypic and molecular study
J.M. Cameselle-Teijeiro*, C. Beiras-Sarasquete, G. Carnero, M. Piso-
Neira, J.M. Cabezas-Agricola, V. Pubul-Nunez, J.A. Punal-Rodriguez,
M. Sobrinho-Simoes
*Clinical University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela, Spain
Background & objectives: We describe a case of mixed medullary and
papillary thyroid carcinoma, a rare primary malignant epithelial neoplasm
of the thyroid gland showing morphological and immunophenotypical
evidence of coexistence of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) cells and
medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) cells.
Methods: A 49-year-old euthyroid man presented with a mass in the left
thyroid lobe and left lymphadenopathy that he had noted one month
before. There was no history of radiation or family history of thyroid
cancer. Serum calcitonin and CEA levels were elevated. Fine-needle as-
piration biopsy indicated MTC; total thyroidectomy and lymphadenecto-
my were performed. No RET germline mutation was detected.
Results: Thyroid tumour showed polygonal cells (positive for calcitonin
and CEA) intermingled with follicular cells (positive for thyroglobulin)
with nuclear features of PTC. This dual cell differentiation was confirmed
by ISH showing mRNA positive for calcitonin and thyroglobulin. Some
metastatic lymph nodes (5/32) also showed MTC and PTC areas.
Immunopositivity for BRAF was limited to the PTC areas. Somatic
BRAF, NRAS, KRAS and TERT mutations were not detected in MTC
component.
Conclusion: Our data confirmed that, at least in some mixed medullary
and papillary thyroid carcinomas, the two tumour components display
distinct molecular pathways.
Funding: Grant PI19/01316-FEDER, Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities, Spain.
E-PS-10-008
Primary thyroid lymphoma: histological features in two unconven-
tionally treated cases
A. Colmenares Lozada*, P. Luís, C. Dellau, M. Oliveira, S. Ortiz
*Hospital Distrital de Santarém, Portugal
Background & objectives: Thyroid primary lymphomas are very rare
neoplasms, representing about 5% of primary thyroid malignancies and
2% of extranodal lymphomas; they are more frequent in women and with
an average diagnostic age of 65 years-old.
Methods: We present two cases. The first is a 72 year-old woman, being
followed for a thyroid nodule.
The second is an 84 year-old woman with a diffuse goiter, with progres-
sive growing that started to cause obstruction symptoms, and that in
consequence needed urgent surgery.
Results: In the first case there was an initial cytological diagnosis of
atypia of unknown significance, but suggestive of a lymphoproliferative
disorder, that after staging is submitted to total thyroidectomy.
Histological examination of both cases revealed a background of lym-
phocytic thyroiditis, and in both a concomitant diffuse lymphoid prolif-
eration, in the first with immunochemistry in favour of a MALT lympho-
ma and in the second with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Virchows Arch
Both patients are free of disease (with a 3-year and 1-year follow-up,
respectively).
Conclusion: Although in the second case the urgency for decompression
rushed into a surgical approach, systemic drug therapy is usually pre-
ferred over total thyroidectomy, and it’s important the roll of an accurate
previous diagnosis for appropriate therapy. In the first case, despite hav-
ing a previous cytology with the suspicion of a lymphoproliferative dis-
ease, it was not taken in account in the decision for performing a thyroid-
ectomy.
E-PS-10-009
Thyroid disease: an exceptionally uncommon association of amyloid
goiter and papillary carcinoma
A. Colmenares Lozada*, C. Albuquerque, P. Luís, M. Oliveira
*Hospital Distrital de Santarém, Portugal
Background & objectives: Amyloid goiter is a rare condition character-
ized by diffuse thyroid enlargement due to amyloid deposition; may be
asymptomatic and can be found in up to 80% of patients with primary or
secondary amyloidosis; association with malignancy is very rare.
Methods: We present a case of a 52 year-old woman with background of
chronic renal failure and multinodular goiter for several years, which
presented to consultation for symptoms of dysphagia and dysphonia with
increased vocal effort. CT scan revealed an enlarged multinodular thyroid
gland, with a dominant nodule with 3 cm and a diffuse infiltration sug-
gestive of adipose or amyloid material.
Results: A fine needle aspiration cytology of the nodule was performed,
and the result was suspicious for a Hürthle cell tumour. Consequently,
and together with progressive obstructive symptoms, patient was submit-
ted to a total thyroidectomy.
Histological examination of the nodule revealed a well circumscribed neo-
plasm composed of follicular cells with nuclear enlargement, elongation
and overlapping, ground glass nuclei, nuclear grooves and nuclear
pseudoinclusions, compatible with a Papillary Carcinoma; within the adja-
cent stroma there was a diffuse deposition of an amorphous eosinophilic
material, that had a bright “apple-green” birefringence with Congo Red
stain, admixed with mature adipocytes, consistent with amyloid goiter.
Conclusion: Association of these entities is extremely rare, and to our
knowledge and after literature review, only 4 cases are reported.
The awareness of this association facilitates the diagnostic accuracy, es-
pecially in cases with a background of multinodular goiter or malignan-
cies, where the deposition of amyloid substance, especially if not as
intense as in our case, can easily be overlooked.
E-PS-10-010
Intrathyroid paraganglioma with loss of SHDA
F. Dolkiras*, G. Kyriakopoulos, S. Pantelakos, D. Sampaziotis,
C. Kouvidou
*Evaggelismos General Hospital Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: Intrathyroid paraganglioma is a rare tumour
which can mimic other more common or metastatic tumours. Recognition
is essential as-well-as immunohistochemical investigation of various pro-
teins, to triage genetic testing as 30% of head and neck paragangliomas
are associated with various syndromes.
Methods: A 41-year-old woman was subjected to total thyroidectomy
due to an asymptomatic mass in the external surface of the right thyroid
lobe, measuring 2.8cm in greatest diameter. Thyroid function tests and
calcitonin levels were within normal range.
Results: Microscopy revealed an encapsulated tumour composed of
round cells with moderate amount of granular cytoplasm and finely gran-
ular nuclear chromatin, arranged mainly in a nesting pattern (zellballen).
The capsule was invaded but no lymphovascular invasion was present.
Immunohistochemistry yielded positivity for chromogranin,
synaptophysin, Gata-3 and Tyrosine Hydroxylase, with S100 and
vimenting staining the sustentacular cells. CK8/18, EMA, pCEA, calci-
tonin, TTF-1, thyrogloblulin and PAX-8 were negative. The above find-
ings were consistent with a diagnosis of a intrathyroidal paraganglioma.
Immunohistochemically somatostatin receptor type 2a (SSTR2a) was
positive (score 3/Volante). Further investigation revealed concurrent im-
munohistochemical loss of SDHB and SDHA. The mitotic count was low
(0.8 mitosis/per 10 high-power-fields) and GAAP-score was 5.
Conclusion: Intrathyroid paragangliomas are rare neoplasms.
In this case immunohistochemical results point to an underlying mutation
in the SDHx genes, particularly in the SDHA-gene.
Due to the immunohistochemical results the patient was referred for ge-
netic testing and was placed under close follow-up.
Germ-line mutations in the SDHA gene are found in less than 5% of
paragangliomas. These mutations are associated with a low-metastatic
potential and as such their recognition is vital.
E-PS-10-012
Morphological and molecular heterogeneity in adrenocortical carci-
noma: about a case
A. Ferrer-Gómez*, P. Garcia-Abellas, T. Caniego-Casas, M.E. Reguero-
Callejas, I. Ruz-Caracuel, J. Palacios-Calvo
*Ramon y Cajal University Hospital, Department of Pathology, Spain
Background & objectives: It has been proved that adrenocortical carci-
noma can be a heterogeneous entity both histologically and for molecular
studies. It has also been linked to Lynch syndrome. We expose a case of
molecular heterogeneity with diagnostic and prognostic relevance.
Methods: We present the case of a 47-year-old man diagnosed by biopsy
and surgical specimen with an adrenal cortical carcinoma with liver me-
tastases. The existence of two intermingled areas in the surgical specimen
both macroscopically and histologically was notory. We studied both
areas by immunohistochemistry and molecular techniques (NGS).
Results: Macroscopic study of the tumour showed an heterogeneous
appearance, distinguishing two intermingled areas of varying colour.
Yellowish area corresponded to a proliferation of large oncocytic cells.
Proliferation index (Ki67) was 3%. p53 was not overexpressed and no
loss of repair proteins was observed. Whitish area corresponded to a high-
grade proliferation of granular eosinophilic cytoplasm cells with
hyperchromatic nuclei. Proliferation rate (Ki67) was 15%. P53 overex-
pression was objectified, in addition to loss of MSH2 and MSH6. Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) was performed in both tumour areas as
well as in normal tissue. Somatic mutations were identified in p53 and
MSH2 in the high-grade tumour area.
Conclusion: A remarkable percentage of adrenocortical carcinomas
show morphological and molecular heterogeneity. This fact must be tak-
en into account when making a correct sampling of the specimen. High-
grade tumour area was related to somatic mutations in p53 and MSH2.
Loss of repair proteins by immunohistochemistry study must be demon-
strated by molecular studies in order to discard a Lynch syndrome.
E-PS-10-013
Papillary thyroid carcinoma with tall cells and features of aggressive
behaviour
N. Gonzalez-Ortega*, M. Sifontes-Dubón, M. Berríos-Hernández,
J. Hereira-Aguilar, M.d.M. del Barrio-Molina, M. Novell,
J.M. Cameselle-Teijeiro
*Mateu Orfila Hospital, IB-Salut, Spain
Background & objectives: Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is the
most common malignancy of the thyroid, usually exhibiting an indolent
course, excellent overall prognosis and long-term survival rate. Some
variants, however, have an increased risk of recurrent disease and aggres-
sive behaviour. Tall cells variant (TCV) of PTC, which is defined by the
WHO-2017 classification as having ≥30% of tall cells, is recognized as an
aggressive neoplasm. Here we describe the pathological findings of a
peculiar thyroid nodule.
Methods: A 43-year-old female, euthyroid, with no relevant pathological
history, presented with a 5-month-old palpable cervical mass. Thyroid
ultrasound showed a 4 cm isoechogenic nodule in the right lobe, TI-
RADS3. Ultrasound-guided FNAC was performed using a 23G needle,
resulting in a diagnosis of malignancy (PTC). Total thyroidectomy was
performed, and the entire gland was included for study.
Results: Specimen of 26g, consisting of right lobe (4×1.5x0.5cm) and left
lobe (3.6×1.7×0.5cm). In the right lobe a 4.2×1.7cm tan tumour with a
poorly-developed thin-capsule and finely granular appearance was found.
Histologically, papillae and typical nuclear changes of conventional PTC
could be seen, with 10-20% of the tumour showing areas of TCV. Twenty
microcarcinomas (<1mm) were found, with bilateral affectation. Vascular
and lymphatic invasion, as well as, lymph-node infiltration were identified.
Conclusion: We describe a PTC with tall cells showing unusually ag-
gressive pathological features. These findings support the idea that the
presence of tall cells regardless of their percentage, should be mentioned
in the pathological report given their potential clinical risk.
Funding: Grant-PI19/01316-FEDER-ISCIII-Spain.
E-PS-10-014
Corticomedullary mixed tumour of the adrenal gland: a case report
V. Herrera Montoro*, P. Montero Pavón, L. Gómez Sánchez, P. Herreros
Fernández-Arroyo, J. González García, C. Ramos Rodríguez
*Department of Pathology, Hospital General Universitario de Ciudad
Real, Spain
Background & objectives: Corticomedullary mixed tumour of the adre-
nal gland is a rare entity with at least 20 cases reported. The aim of this
work is to present a case of this unusual tumour and describe its clinical,
radiological and histological features.
Methods: The patient was a 50 year old woman with high levels of cate-
cholamines and cortisol, as well as related symptoms. An adrenal mass was
discovered on TC scan and it was surgically removed. We received an
adrenalectomy specimen which showed a well defined, 4 cm, uniform
tumour. Representative sections were included for microscopic study.
Results: On microscopic examination we found a well delimited tumour
with nested architecture, composed by two cell populations. One population
consisted on cells with round nuclei and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm,
and they were arranged on the periphery of the nests. The second popula-
tion showed a scarcer and more basophilic cytoplasm, resembling cells of
the adrenal medulla. On the immunohistochemical study, the cells on the
periphery of the nests exhibited positivity for Melan A, inhibin and
calretinin, whereas the cells in the centre, presented positivity for
chromogranin and synaptophysin. Both populations were negative for
CKAE1/AE3 and lack the S-100 sustentacular cells staining pattern.
Conclusion: There is little information on the literature about this entity,
excepting for the case reports published until now. Therefore, it is difficult
for the pathologist to achieve the diagnosis. Moreover, the pathogenesis
and prognosis of it still remain unknown.
E-PS-10-015
Prognostic markers for neuroendocrine neoplasia
S. Kostadinova Kunovska*, B. Krsteska, M. Bogdanovska Todorovska,
V. Stojkovski, S. Stojanoska Godzoska, R. Jovanovic
*Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, UKIM, Skopje, North
Macedonia
Background & objectives: Neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) arise from
various tissues and organs, and have diverse biological behaviour. The aim
of this study was to correlate various morphological parameters of the NETs
from different localisations to the serum Chromogranin A (CgA) levels.
Methods: We analysed immunohistochemical expression of CgA,
Synaptophysin, NSE, CD56 and Ki67 in 72 operative materials from
patients diagnosed with NET of various organs (gastrointestinal, respira-
tory, endometrium, breast and adrenal gland, as well as metastatic cases
with unknown primary). All patients were analysed for CgA levels in the
serum by ELISA before the surgery.
Results: The mean age of the patients was 55 (15-80). 38 were benign
and 34 malignant, out of which 16 were with localized and 18 with
advanced disease (lymphonodal and distant metastases). 11 of the malig-
nant tumours were well differentiated and 23 were moderately to poorly
differentiated. All tumours were positive for at least two neuroendocrine
markers. The proliferative index (Ki67) ranged between 1 and 90%, and
was strongly correlated (p<0,05) to the biological behaviour, grade, stage
and to the expression of CgA and Synaptophysin in tumour cells. The
serum levels of CgA were increased in 43 of the patients, and were
strongly correlated only to the grade of the tumours.
Conclusion: We conclude that the proliferative index (Ki67) is an im-
portant independent prognostic factor for NETs, and that the serum level
of CgA is prognostic marker of lower sensitivity.
E-PS-10-017
Non-invasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear
features (nift-p) of the thyroid gland, a diagnosis challenge
K. Marwa*, S. Mestiri, M. Belakhdher, A. Bdioui, T. Tlili, B. Sriha,
M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, F. Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: The non-invasive follicular thyroid neoplasm
with papillary-like nuclear features (NIFT-P) is a thyroid tumour of un-
certain malignancy potential, with excellent prognosis.
The motivation for this study is to refine diagnostic criteria for NIFT-P,
and raise the main differential diagnoses.
Methods: We report a case of a NIFT-P in a 26-year-old woman who
presented a neck mass. The patient had a family history of thyroid cancer.
An initial ultrasound showed a nodular lesion in the right thyroid lobe. A
right loboisthmectomy were performed.
Results: The macroscopic examination showed a solitary, well demarcated
nodule, whitish colour with focal haemorrhage. An intraoperative pathology
consultation was done, showing an oncocytic-like vesicular lesion. The final
pathological examination showed a well demarcated tumour with follicular
growth pattern without any vascular or capsular invasion images. The vesic-
ular structures are lined by cells with nuclear features of papillary carcinoma.
There was nor tumoral necrosis neither mitosis. However, an immunohisto-
chemistry study was done. The tumour cells express intensely the CD56 and
less intense for CK19. The galectin 3 was focally positive. The peripheral
tumour cells were immunoreactive forHBME-1.
Conclusion: The introduction of NIFTP is a subset of low-risk thyroid
neoplasms that are over treated. Multiple reports showed the excellent
prognosis of this encapsulated/well-delimited tumours without vascular
and capsular invasion after complete resection. The emerging literature
indicates that the adoption of strict inclusion and exclusion criteria is
essential to correctly diagnose NIFTP.
E-PS-10-018
Diffuse sclerosing variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma: a source of
misdiagnosis in the frozen sections
K. Marwa*, A. Bdioui, A. Bchir, N. Abdessaied, Z. Lajmi, T. Tlili,
B. Sriha, M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, F. Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Diffuse sclerosing papillary thyroid carcino-
ma is characterized by tumour islands, diffuse fibrosis, calcifications, and
Virchows Arch
abundant lymphocytic aggregation. An intraoperative diagnosis is chal-
lenging in the absence of nodules.
The aim of this review is to critically analyse the histological features of
this entity.
Methods: We report one case of diffuse sclerosing variant of papillary
thyroid carcinoma diagnosed in our laboratory of pathology. It was about
a 55-year-old woman with a family history of thyroid cancer. She pre-
sented a neck mass with cervical lymph nodes. An initial ultrasound
showed an enlarged thyroid lobes with a suspicious nodular lesion in
the right thyroid lobe and lymph nodes.
Results: A right loboisthmectomy and ipsilateral neck lymph node dis-
section were performed, and an intraoperative pathology consultation was
done. It showed thyroiditis lesions with lymph node metastasis of papil-
lary carcinoma. An additional left lobectomy and left lymph node dissec-
tion were performed. The total thyroid gland and the bilateral neck lymph
nodes were submitted for a pathological examination. Microscopically,
all lobes of the thyroid and twenty among twenty seven lymph nodes
showed tumour with follicular growth pattern. The vesicular structures
were lined by cells with nuclear features of papillary carcinoma. It
showed also diffuse stromal fibrosis, prominent lymphoid follicle, and
numerous psammoma-type calcifications.
Conclusion: Diffuse sclerosing variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma is
a distinct thyroid neoplasm presenting in female patients with signs and
symptoms most suggestive of a thyroiditis, although the lymph node
metastases are a clue to the underlying disease.
E-PS-10-020
The expression of claudin-1 in the thyroid neoplasm
U.A. Miskad*, A. Djaharuddin, S. Wahid
*Department of Anatomical Pathology Faculty of Medicine Hasanuddin
University, Indonesia
Background & objectives: The objective of this study is to evaluate the
difference of Claudin-1 expression in follicular adenoma, follicular car-
cinoma, follicular variant papillary thyroid carcinoma, and papillary thy-
roid carcinoma.
Methods: Seventy five paraffin-embedded specimens divided into four
groups: 20 samples of follicular adenoma, 20 samples of follicular carci-
noma, 15 samples of follicular variant papillary thyroid carcinoma, and
20 samples of papillary thyroid carcinoma. The expression of claudin-1 in
the cytoplasmic membrane was detected by using immunohistochemistry
method with anti claudin-1 polyclonal antibody.
Results: The results of this study indicate that there were significant
differences of claudin-1 expression between follicular adenoma and fol-
licular variant papillary thyroid carcinoma (p=0.0016), between follicular
adenoma and papillary thyroid carcinoma (p=0.001), and between follic-
ular carcinoma and papillary thyroid carcinoma (p=0.002). There were no
significant correlation between follicular adenoma and follicular carcino-
ma (p>0.05), between follicular variant papillary thyroid carcinoma and
papillary thyroid carcinoma (p>0.05).
Conclusion: This result reveals that claudin-1 may play a role in the
progression of thyroid neoplasm and it has a potential ability to become
diagnostic marker for follicular adenoma, follicular carcinoma, follicular
variant papillary thyroid carcinoma, and papillary thyroid carcinoma.
E-PS-10-021
Analysis of pituitary adenoma expression patterns suggests a poten-
tial role for the NEUROD1 transcription factor in neuroendocrine
tumour-targeting therapies
L. Mitrofanova*, O. Vorobeva, A. Gorshkov
*The Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Russia
Background & objectives: NeuroD1’s roles in the pathogenesis of pitu-
itary adenomas and in the biology of the normal adult pituitary gland have
been insufficiently researched. Much of the work investigating its expres-
sion patterns has yielded contradictory results.
Objective: morphological study of NeuroD1 transcription factor expres-
sion in different types of pituitary adenomas and in normal adult human
pituitary glands.
Methods: This study analysed 9 normal pituitary glands and 48 pituitary
adenomas: 7 plurihormonal adenomas, 8 corticotropinomas, 10
mammosomatotropinomas, 8 prolactinomas, 2 somatotropinomas, 5
gonadotropinomas, and 8 null-cell adenomas. We used immunohisto-
chemical study with antibodies to NeuroD1, 6 adenohypophysis hor-
mones, Ki-67, CK7, GH/NeuroD1 and PRL/NeuroD1 cocktails and con-
focal laser scanning microscopy and electron immunocytochemistry with
NeuroD1 and double detection NeuroD1/GH.
Results: NeuroD1 expression was detected in all 57 cases. This transcrip-
tion factor was expressed at significant levels on average in 96% of
tumour cells. The average numbers of NeuroD1 expressing cells in nor-
mal adenohypophysis were significantly lower than in the adenomas
overall (р=0.006). NeuroD1 expression was confirmed by double stain
immunohistochemistry, confocal laser scanning microscopy, and electron
immunocytochemistry.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrates a NeuroD1’s key role in the path-
ogenesis of pituitary tumours, regardless of their hormonal state. These
findings suggest that NeuroD1 should be investigated further as a poten-
tial molecular target in tumour-targeting therapies.
E-PS-10-022
A case report of primary hyperparathyroidism associated with
chronic urticaria
H. Mohanraj*, A. Stacy-Clear, S. Zachariah, S. Cliff, S. Di Palma
*Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: This is a report of the 7th case of Primary
hyperparathyroidism associated with chronic urticaria. A 43year old fe-
male developed unexplained episodes of severe refractory itching.
Similar to the previous 6 reported cases the skin symptoms resolved
completely after parathyroidectomy.
Methods: A 43year old Caucasian female presented with a history of
urticaria. The itching started from the lips but extended over the eyelashes,
the hands, the face and the upper legs. It was persistent and not responsive
to topical treatments. Dermatological assessment suggested possible stress
and prescribed both local and general antihistamine treatments.
Results: Patient had itchy and erythematous lesions. Blood tests revealed
elevated adjusted calcium levels and PTH. Sestamibi(Tc-99m) showed
uptake in right inferior parathyroid consistent with adenoma. Total para-
thyroidectomy performed with frozen and paraffin section diagnosis of
parathyroid adenoma. There was complete resolution of symptoms.
Histology revealed a well-circumscribed, capsulated nodule without in-
filtration. Tumour cells were mostly chief-type, in solid architecture and
small cysts without necrosis or atypia, consistent with parathyroid
adenoma.
Conclusion: Our case confirms the association between parathyroid ad-
enoma & urticaria. Wherein, there was resolution of symptoms within
few hours post surgery. Our aim is to increase awareness among derma-
tology & endocrine specialists to perform further investigation for para-
thyroid function in presence of refractory urticaria.
E-PS-10-023
BRAF V600E mutation negative cases tend to lose lamin A expres-
sion in papillary thyroid carcinoma
S. Moriya*, H. Tamaki, M. Hatori, S. Kobayashi, Y. Nishijima, T. Fujii,
H. Ikota, K. Shirabe, H. Yokoo, M. Saio
*Laboratory of Histopathology & Cytopathology Department of
Laboratory Sciences Gunma University Graduate School of Health
Sciences, Japan
Background & objectives: Here we describe relevance of BRAF muta-
tion to nuclear proteins and nuclear shape in papillary thyroid carcinoma
(PTC).
Methods: Forty PTCs were stained with anti-BRAFV600E antibody and
classified into V600E mutation positive and negative groups. Then, those
were stained with anti-Lamin-A antibody and anti-Emerin antibody. The
staining intensity was evaluated and scored (0-3) by two independent
observers. The average number of intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions
in a high-power field was also examined.
Results: A weak correlation (R = 0.3654) was observed between the
staining intensities of Lamin-A and Emerin. On the other hand, Lamin-
A staining intensity tended to be stronger in the BRAFV600E mutation
positive group than the negative group (p = 0.0688). While, there was no
difference in Emerin staining intensity between 2 groups (p = 0.1490).
The number of intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions was 2.48/HPF in the
BRAF mutation positive group and 1.31/HPF in the negative group,
although there was no statistically significant difference (p = 0.1829).
Our data indicated that Lamin-A expression would be decreased and
intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions would be less frequently appeared
in BRAF mutation negative PTC.
Conclusion: Lower expression of Lamin-A and Emerin results in swell-
ing and elliptical changes of the nuclei. It is possible that lower expression
of Lamin-A in BRAF mutation negative cases results in nuclear swelling
leading to difficulty in changing nuclear shape.
E-PS-10-024
Neuroendocrine tumour of the female genital tract – a case report
S. Petrova*, O. Bogdanova, M. Kamenova
*UMHATEM “N.I. Pirogov”, Department of Pathology, Bulgaria
Background & objectives: Introduction: Neuroendocrine tumours
(NET) arise from the diffuse neuroendocrine cell system and are typically
located in gastroenteropancreatic system. Primary neuroendocrine tu-
mours are rarely seen in the gynaecologic tract comprising 2 % of
gynaecologic cancers creating a clinical and diagnostic challenges.
Methods: Methods: A 81- year-old-female was presented to the
Gynaecology department with a steadily growing swelling in the abdo-
men accompanied by pelvic pain, fever, constipation and bladder disfunc-
tion. Computer tomography was performed showing well-circumscribed,
solid mass (243x177x245mm) with cystic and necrotic zones with uncer-
tain origin – ovary or uterus. As epithelial ovarian cancer was suspected,
ROMA index and percutaneous biopsy were performed.
Results: Results: The histopathology revealed a dense population of
small to medium ovoid cells arranged in solid nests and trabeculae sepa-
rated by connective tissue septa. Tumours cells have abundant pale cyto-
plasm and hyperchomatic nucleus with “salt and pepper” chromatin.
Immunohistochemical stains showed positive reaction for CK AE1/
AE3 and neuroendocrine markers (CD56, Chromogranin and
Synaptophysin). KI67 > 50%. Тhe oncology committee decided to send
the patient for chemotherapy after staging with OctreotideScan.
Conclusion: Conclusion: In summary, we presented a rare case of neu-
roendocrine tumour of the female reproductive system with probable
origin from the ovary or uterus. Accurate diagnosis is essential for both
therapeutic and prognostic purposes.
E-PS-10-026
Thyroid abscess developed within a Hashimoto thyroiditis: a chal-
lenging diagnosis
I. Saguem*, O. Boudaouara, M. Mellouli, A. Sellami, K. Ben Mahfoudh,
T. Boudawara, R. Kallel
*Department of Pathology, Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Thyroid abscesses are a potential-endocrine-
emergency accounting for less than 0,7% of thyroid’s gland surgical
pathology. This report aims to describe clinico-radiological and histo-
pathological features of this entity and emphasizes the pathologist’s role
in establishing the right diagnosis.
Methods: We report a case of thyroid abscess developed within a
Hashimoto thyroiditis diagnosed in oto-rhino laryngology, radiology
and pathology departments of Sfax hospital.
Results: A woman aged 54 years old with a history of type II diabetes and
Hashimoto thyroiditis, presented with an acute-anterior-neck-swelling,
fever, odynophagia and dyspnoea. CT-scan evidenced a well-defined
non-enhanced hypodensity involving both isthmic and right lobe and
extending into the prevertebral-space, suggesting the diagnosis of a com-
plicated-thyroid-cancer. A total-thyroidectomy was then performed.
Grossly, we objectified a 5cm-greyish-necrotic-area on the posterior part
of the right lobe. Histological findings revealed a large ischemic and
suppurated area within a background of a chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis
consistent with a Hashimoto thyroiditis. Operating-site sampling isolated
Klebsiella Pneumoniae. The diagnosis of a thyroid abscess developed
within a Hashimoto thyroiditis was finally retained.
Conclusion: Thyroid abscess is an uncommon form of infectious acute
thyroiditis. Establishing an appropriate diagnosis may be challenging.
Correlating clinical, radiological, microbiological and pathological find-
ings is crucial to avoid diagnostic pitfalls.
E-PS-10-027
Usage of galectin-3, HBME-1, Cytokeratin-19 and CD56 in the
differential diagnosis of thyroid neoplasm
O. Suren*, S. Lkhagvadorj, M. Malchinkhuu, A. Bold-Erdene,
E. Sharkhuu, B. Enkhbat
*Department of Pathology, Mongolian National University of Medical
Sciences, Mongolia
Background & objectives: The thyroid neoplasm has increased signifi-
cantly in Mongolia over the past few years. Nevertheless, with the help of
ancillary tests, such as immunohistochemistry (IHC), differences between
thyroid lesions can be distinguished.
Methods: Total 93 thyroid neoplasm’s cases collected from September
2017 to December 2019 at National Cancer Center of Mongolia. In all
cases, IHC staining was performed using tissue microarrays and CD56,
HBME-1, Galectin-3 and CK19 primary antibodies on paraffin-
embedded thyroid neoplasm sections.
Results: The thyroid neoplasm from 93 patients, 14% males and 86%
females were researched. The mean age was 46.7±14years. The diagnosis
of thyroid nodules was papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) in 66 (71%),
follicular thyroid carcinoma in 3 (3.2%), follicular adenoma in 19
(20.4%), and medullary thyroid carcinoma in 2 (2.2%), respectively.
The difference in expression of Galectin-3, HBME-1, CD56 and CK19
was significantly significant in malignant compared to benign tumours
(p=.000). Out of 66 cases of papillary thyroid carcinoma, Galectin-3 and
CK19 showed positive in 61 (92.4%) cases while expressions of HBME1
was seen in 46 (69.6%) PTC cases. Diffuse CD56 expression was present
in 70.8% of follicular lesions, except PTC.
Conclusion: Galectin 3 is most sensitive (93.8%) and specific (76.1%)
marker for papillary thyroid carcinoma.
E-PS-10-028
Metastasis of a neuroendocrine carcinoma in a non-invasive follicu-
lar thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features: a case
report
E. Szasz*, A. Borda
*Department of Histology, UMFST Targu-Mures, Romania
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Metastases in a pre-existing primary thyroid
tumour are exceedingly rare. We report a case of a patient with pulmonary
cancer who was diagnosed with a thyroid metastasis in a non-invasive
follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features (NIFTP).
Methods: A 61-year-old male diagnosed of symptomatic multinodular
goiter, was referred to the Surgical Department. A total thyroidectomy
was performed. The patient’s medical history was significant for pulmo-
nary cancer.
Results: On macroscopy the surgical specimen revealed in the left thy-
roid lobe a 24 mm thyroid nodule. The microscopical examination
showed a well-defined lesion of microfollicular architecture with
papillary-like nuclei. In the centre of the nodule an area with distinctly
different histologic features was present: cells arranged in islands and
cords with central necrosis. The tumour cells presented abundant eosin-
ophilic cytoplasm, marked nuclear pleomorphism and numerous atypical
mitoses. Immunohistochemically these cells expressed Chromogranin,
Calcitonin, CEA and TTF1. Based on the morphological features and
the immunohistochemical profile the diagnosis of a metastatic NEC in a
NIFTP was set.
Conclusion: Metastatic NEC occurring in a NIFTP has never been re-
ported before. This exceptional case was a diagnostic challenge due to the
fact that the metastasis was identified concurrently to a pre-existing pri-
mary tumour.
E-PS-10-030
Prevalence and prognostic value of PD-L1 expression in medullary
thyroid carcinoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis
E. Torresani*, I. Girolami, C. Colato, P. Brazzarola, R. Castello,
P. Trimboli, M. Bongiovanni, L. Pantanowitz, A. Scarpa, M. Brunelli,
A. Eccher
*Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona,
Italy
Background & objectives: Expression of programmed death-ligand 1
(PD-L1) has shown prognostic value in several tumours. The aim of this
study was to review published evidence on PD-L1 expression in medul-
lary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), for which little is known.
Methods: Pubmed, Embase and Scopus databases were systematically
searched. Studies on PD-L1 expression in MTC and its correlation with
clinicopathological variables and survival were included. A random-
effect meta-analysis was performed for PD-L1 expression, odds ratios
(ORs) for association with clinicopathological variables and hazard ratios
(HRs) and risk ratios (RRs) for overall survival (OS) and disease-free
survival (DFS).
Results: Of 670 records, 5 studies were included. Pooled prevalence of
PD-L1 expression was 12.4% (CI 4.4-23.2%, I2 83%, τ2 0.02). No sig-
nificant association of PD-L1 expression was found with sex, size, TNM
stage, heredity, laterality, multifocality. Weak association was found with
nodal metastasis (OR 1.98, CI 0.96-4.07, I2 0%, τ2 0.001). Pooled RR for
OS for PD-L1 positive was 2.01 (CI 0.53-7.60, I2 22%, τ2 0.27).
Conclusion: Expression of PD-L1 in MTC appears to be low and not
correlated with clinicopathological variables and OS. This is in line with
findings in other neuroendocrine malignancies, but more data are needed
to strengthen the evidence. Given the small number of studies and their
small sample size, further studies will help to refine the estimates of PD-
L1 expression and its prognostic value in MTC.
E-PS-10-031
Concomitant papillary thyroglossal duct carcinoma and papillary
microcarcinoma of thyroid with lymph node metastasis - a case
report and review of literature
S. Venkatesan*, M. Bhattacharjee, W. Elsaify
*South Tees Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Thyroglossal duct cyst is the most com-
mon cervical congenital anomaly. Malignancy arising in
thyroglossal cyst is rare with <1% reported in literature. We hereby
report one such case.
Methods: A 47 year old gentleman presented with neck swelling and an
ultrasound examination identified a 3cm suprahyoid thyroglossal cyst and
normal thyroid gland. A Fine needle aspiration was performed and cyto-
logical analysis raised the possibility of papillary carcinoma. The patient
underwent a Sistrunk procedure that confirmed a 2cm papillary carcinoma
arising in thyroglossal cyst. This was followed by total thyroidectomy.
Results: The denovo origin of papillary carcinoma in thyroglossal cyst
was supported by suprahyoid location, squamous epithelial lining and
presence of ectopic benign thyroid glands. The total thyroidectomy iden-
tified two incidental foci of papillary microcarcinoma (5mm, 2mm) with
no extrathyroidal extension. Metastatic disease was observed in one level
VI lymph node. Whether this is a skip metastasis from thyroglossal duct
carcinoma or metastasis from papillary microcarcinoma of thyroid gland
is unclear.
Conclusion: This case adds to the collection of rare reported numbers of
thyroglossal duct carcinoma published in literature. Histological exami-
nation is necessary as clinical presentation and radiology of thyroglossal
duct carcinoma and benign thyroglossal cyst do not vary greatly. Given
the rarity of thyroglossal duct carcinoma, there are no clear guidance on
the prognosis, especially considering the contemporary appearance of
papillary thyroid carcinoma. Surgery however is the mainstay of treat-
ment.
E-PS-11-001
Endometrial high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma with serous en-
dometrial carcinoma – a case-report
K. Abu Qasida*, R. Ruqaiya Al-Shamsi
*The Royal Hospital, Oman
Background & objectives: Endometrial neuroendocrine tumours are
rare, representing <1% of endometrial cancers (1). Because of their rarity,
endometrial neuroendocrine tumours can create a diagnostic challenge to
the pathologist.
This case report represents the diagnostic difficulty we faced in identify-
ing this tumour.
Methods: A 72-year-old female presented with vaginal bleeding and
found to have uterine mass on radiological studies. Endometrial curettage
biopsy showed endometrial serous carcinoma. The patient then
underwent total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy and full staging.
Results: Microscopic examination of the uterine mass shows a ma-
lignant neoplasm with a component of serous carcinoma composed
of glands and papillae along with a solid component. The solid com-
ponent composed of monotonous , dis-cohesive cells having round to
spindle shaped nuclei, exhibiting frequent mitosis and apoptosis.
This component shows diffuse AE1/AE3 positivity and wild type
P53 positivity. At this stage it was difficult to reach to a diagnosis.
The case was sent abroad for expert opinion, where additional immu-
nohistochemical stains were performed. The neoplasm showed reten-
tion of nuclear immunoreactivity with mismatch proteins, SMARC
A4 and SMARC B (INI 1) and there was wide spread positivity for
synaptophysin and CD 56.
Conclusion: This case represents a combined endometrial serous carci-
noma and high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma. Primary neuroendo-
crine carcinoma of the uterine corpus often arises out of another tumour
type, as in this case.
E-PS-11 Gynaecological Pathology
E-PS-11-002
Synchronous endometrioid tumours of the ovary and endometrium:
a case report
P. Aguiar Feitosa*, D.I. Magno Cavalcante
*Federal University of Ceará, Medical School, Dept. of Pathology, Brazil
Background & objectives: Synchronous primary tumours are rare and
controversial entities in diagnostic and therapeutic point of view what
makes it important to identify and differentiate from primary tumour with
metastasis. The challenge presented makes laboratories holds to strict
histopathological criteria for diagnosis.
Methods: A 46-yo female from Ceara state, in Northeast Brazil,
complained of abnormal vaginal bleeding, weight loss and increased ab-
dominal volume. A right ovary tumour mass and endometrial thickening
(12,0mm) were found in ultrasound examination. Endometrioid adenocar-
cinoma (EA) grade 1 was diagnosed by an hysteroscopic biopsy. This case
was approved by Federal University of Ceará’s Ethical Committee.
Results: A hystero-salpingo-oophorectomy was performed that showed a
concurrent EA grade 2 in the uterus, with deep myometrial invasion and
no parametrial spread. The right ovary showed a low grade EA (30,0cm
to the greatest extent) with ovarian surface and ipsilateral tubal involve-
ment. Linfovascular tumour emboli was detected in the right fallopian
tube. Lymph nodes were negative for tumour cells.
Conclusion: The major diagnostic criteria for synchronous neoplasia
presented in this case was an unilateral high volume ovarian tumour with
low hystologic grade, extensive uterine tumour and lymphovascular em-
boli seen only in right fallopian tube, otherwise none of this is conclusive.
Primary synchronous tumour has a better global disease–free survival
than metastatic tumours. Recognizing this entity has an impact on patient
prognosis, especially for those in low stages. Despite her high stage dis-
ease the patient remains disease-free after chemotherapy.
E-PS-11-005
Perivascular epithelioid cell neoplasm (PEComa) of the uterus – a
case report
H. Alshamli*, R. Alajmi
*OMSB, Oman
Background & objectives: Perivascular Epithelioid Cell tumours
(PEComas) are rare mesenchymal tumours, composed of distinctive
perivascular epithelioid cells that express both melanocytic and smooth
muscle markers. In the female genital tract, uterine PEComas are
commonest with around 78 reported cases to date.
Methods: We present a case of PEComa of the uterus in a 47-years-old
Omani patient came with heavy vaginal bleeding. The ultrasound showed
large uterine hypoechoic mass measuring 8.5 cm in maximum dimension.
MRI pelvis revealed a big oval well delineated intramural solid mass with
necrotic vs. cystic area and with very prominent vascular supply.
Results: In view of uncertain nature of the lesion, the patient underwent total
abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingectomy. Gross examination of
the uterus reveals a large mass that is filling the endometrial cavity, measures
16.0 x 8.0 x 8.0 cm with solid and cystic areas. Microscopic examination
shows sheets of epithelioidcells with clear toeosinophilic cytoplasm, vascular
invasion is present. The tumour cells were smooth muscle actin, oestrogen
and desmin positive (diffuse); HMB-45, Melan A, CD10 & H-caldeson
positive (focal). During follow up period, the patient is free of recurrent
disease after surgery, without receiving any adjuvant treatment.
Conclusion: PEComa of the female gynaecological tract is a rare entity
presenting with variable symptoms and different prognosis for each indi-
vidual case. Distinguishing among mesenchymal neoplasms, including
PEComas, endometrial stromal sarcomas, and leiomyosarcomas, can be
difficult. The diagnosis is based on histopathology and immunohisto-
chemistry reports and the optimal treatment is the surgical resection of
the tumour.
E-PS-11-006
Acute abdomen, an unusual presentation of hydatid cyst
O. Aniume*, O. Okafor, M. Nzegwu
*University of Nigeria Teaching Hospital, Nigeria
Background & objectives: A 20-year old female, presented with in-
creasing abdominal pain over a period of 6 weeks. There was no associ-
ated vomiting, no previous history of sexual encounter, peptic ulcer dis-
ease or abdominal distension. She presented as a case of acute abdomen
Methods: Remarkable investigations carried out include abdominal ul-
trasound scan which showed a hypoechoic mass attached to the right
adnexa. Full blood count showed raised eosinophilia and neutrophilia.
Other investigations were within normal limit.
An emergency exploratory laparatomy was done and a 10cm by 10cm
pelvic cystic mass was excised and sent to histopathology for evaluation.
It was adherent to adjacent structures.
Results: Macroscopic histological examination showed a large cystic
mass containing cloudy, serous fluid.
Microscopic examination showed hydatid cyst with helminthic elements.
Conclusion: The incidence of hydatid cyst is higher in endemic areas.
However, the high rate of transcontinental migration increases the risk in
low endemic areas. The aim of this presentation is to create a high level of
suspicion in surgeons and physicians for better patient care.
E-PS-11-007
Bilateral ovarian gonadoblastoma overgrown by dysgerminoma in a
patient with Swyer’s syndrome
M. Arafa*, M. Al Ryiami, M. Al Shukri, I. Burney
*Pathology Department, College of Medicine and health Sciences, Sultan
Qaboos University, Oman
Background & objectives: Swyer's syndrome“XY gonadal dysgenesis”
is a type of hypogonadism in a person with 46,XY karyotyping. The
patients have normal female external genitalia, with functionless fibrosed
gonads having significant risk of developing malignancy, if left
unremoved surgically.
Methods: A 17-year-old female with Swyer's syndrome showed, during
radiological assessment, mildly enlarged gonads those were removed
laparoscopically (maximum dimensions: Right = 4.5 cm, Left= 1.5 cm).
All the biopsy material was submitted for routine histopathological
examination.
Results: Microscopic evaluation revealed bilateral gonadoblastoma. The
tumours were formed of germ cell and sex cord stroma elements. The germ
cell component shows large cells with abundant cytoplasm, vesicular nuclei
with prominent nucleoli with presence of fibrous septae infiltrated by lym-
phocytes. The sex cord component has smaller cells with darker nuclei.
Hyalinization and calcification are present. By Immunohistochemistry,
germ cell component are positive for CD117 and PLAP. The sex-cord
stromal component is positive for inhibin, calretinin and WT1. The right
sided ovary showed, in addition, overgrowth by dysgerminoma. The patient
was treated with combination chemotherapy (bleomycin, etoposide and
cisplatin), and is in complete remission for two years.
Conclusion: Patients with XY gonadal dysgenesis are at high risk of
developing germ cell tumours. Their ovaries should be, prophylactically,
surgically removed even without the presence of obvious lesions.
E-PS-11-008
Histopathological study of human papilloma virus (HPV) induced
cervical epithelial lesions and their mimics: experience of Sultan
Qaboos University Hospital
M. Arafa*, A. Al Moqbali
*Pathology Department, College of Medicine and health Sciences, Sultan
Qaboos University, Oman
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Carcinoma of the cervix is mainly caused by
HPV. These cancers progress through a pre-noplastic stage characterized
by the presence of well described precursor lesions. However, some of
lesions might have diagnostic difficulties as they mimic other benign
lesions.
Methods: This retrospective study was conducted at Sultan Qaboos
University Hospital (SQUH) including randomly selected 109 women
with pre-neoplastic and neoplastic cervical lesions between 2011 and
2017. Hospital information system (HIS) was used for obtaining the
clinical parameters and pathological characteristics. Analysis of the data
was obtained using SPSS software.
Results: The mean age of the women was 45.95 ± 11.564, S.D ranged
between 25 and 88. Cervical lesions were prevalent more in 40 to 49 age
group. The distribution of the various diagnostic entities was as follows; CIN
I: 26 cases "23.9%", CIN II: 13 cases "11.9%", CIN III: 11 cases "10.1%",
SCC: 17 cases "15.6%", Koilocytic changes: 11 cases "10.1%", adenocarci-
noma: 3 cases "2.8%", cervicitis: 28 cases "25.7%". Immunohistochemical
markers (p16, Ki67 and HPV) were found to be helpful in confirming the
diagnosis and in the exclusion of the benign mimics.
Conclusion: The present study explored cases of pre-neoplastic, neoplas-
tic and non-neoplastic cervical lesions and their relation to HPVamong
women populationin the area served by SQUH.
E-PS-11-009
The cross talk between HPV types and cervical intraepithelial le-
sions: national centre-based analysis
A. Asaturova*, N. Nazarova, M. Nekrasova, E. Sycheva,
O. Burmenskaya, G. Khabas, N. Starodubceva, S. Pavlovich
*FSBI 'National medical research centre for obstetrics, gynaecology and
perinatology named after V.I. Kulakov', Russia
Background & objectives: To study the prevalence of HPV (human
papillomavirus) types in patients with squamous intraepithelial lesions
(SIL) and squamous cervical cancer.
Methods: We recruited 145 women investigated colposcopically, with
multiplex PCR for typing of HPV 21 types, cytologically (liquid-based),
histologically (biopsy). The patients were subdivided based on cytologi-
cal diagnosis: 31 patients (21,3%) with NILM, 30 patients (20,6%) with
chronic cervicitis (histologically confirmed), 37 patients (22,7%) with
LSlL, 31 patients (21,3%) with (group IV) and 14 patients (9,6%) with
cervical cancer.
Results: The most significant risk factors for cervical intraepithelial le-
sions are: early sexual initiation, great number of sexual partners (>4),
sexual transmitted infections (STI) history. The most frequent HPV types
were 16, 31, 33 and 51 types. We demonstrated that HPV type 16 was
significantly more prevalent in the group with HSIL and squamous cer-
vical cancer compared to group II (chronic cervicitis) and group III
(LSIL). HPV31 and 33 types are more prevalent in the group with
HSIL. According to our results, there is the prevalence of the group A9
HPV in women with LSIL, HSIL and cervical cancer compared to group
II (chronic cervicitis).
Conclusion: We demonstrated the key role of A9 HPV group in the
development of intraepithelial and squamous lesions. Moreover, there is
a trend to increase the incidence of HPV groups A7, A10, A5 and A9
HPV group in LSIL patients.
E-PS-11-010
Endometrial stromal nodules may harbour novel genetic alterations
S. Aviel-Ronen*, G. Haran, I. Solar, B. Czernobilsky
*Patho-Lab Diagnostics Ltd / Adelson School of Medicine, Ariel
University, Israel
Background & objectives: Endometrial stromal nodule (ESN) is a rare
benign tumour composed of endometrial stroma-like cells, typically
whorling around arterioles. Most ESNs harbour t(7;17)(p21;q15) which
results in a fusion between JAZF1 and SUZ12. Here we describe an ESN
with yet undescribed genetic alteration with a potential target for biolog-
ical treatment.
Methods: The medical records, imaging tests, pathological findings and
genetic studies of the patient have been studied and are presented.
Results: A 35 years old patient presented with uterine bleeding that lasted
for 6 months following a labour. Ultrasound demonstrated a 1.6 cm uter-
ine mass. Hysteroscopy revealed a 3.5 cm mass bulging into the uterine
cavity. On histological evaluation the resected mass showed a cellular
tumour of bland oval to spindle cells with multiple arterioles. The tumour
cells stained positively for CD10, SMA, desmin, ER and PR (caldesmon,
CD117 and WT1 were negative) and the tumour was diagnosed as an
ESN. Next generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on RNA ex-
tracted from the tumour paraffin block using the Archer FusionPlex
Sarcoma kit. This kit simultaneously detects fusion of 26 genes associated
with soft tissue tumours and allows the identification of novel fusions. No
typical JAZF1 fusion was detected but a yet undescribed LTBP1-ALK
fusion was identified.
Conclusion: The newly detected LTBP1-ALK fusion in the described
ESN carries a potential target for biological treatment. As genetic analysis
becomes more accessible, additional novel alterations are expected to be
found in ESN and may serve as targets for biological treatment.
E-PS-11-011
Ruptured left ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinoma associated with
granulomatous peritonitis, a possible cause of acute surgical
abdomen
A.A. Barbis Vesa*, M. Boros, O. Pop, F. Rosca, F. Szasz, A. El-Kharoubi
*Emergency County Hospital Oradea, Romania
Background & objectives: 125,000 patients die annually due to ovarian
cancer. Ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinoma is a histological variant
that accounts about 10% of ovarian carcinomas, often encountered in
association with endometriosis.
Methods: A 57-year-old patient, second parous, presents at the Emergency
Department from the Maternity of Oradea, accusing severe diffuse abdom-
inal pain and tachycardia that started a few hours ago. Paraclinic investiga-
tions revealed leukocytosis (19,540 / mm3), and the CT examination re-
vealed a pelvic tumour, heterogeneous, 10.5x8.5cm, suspected of malig-
nancy, with the origin most probable located in the ovary.
Results: An exploratory laparotomy was urgently performed, which re-
vealed a giant left adnexal tumour that was ruptured, on the surface
covered by a creamy, amorphous material. Abdominal hysterectomy with
bilateral anexectomy and omentectomy was performed. Definitive histo-
pathological diagnosis: Endometrioid adenocarcinoma with morular
squamous metaplasia, FIGO grade II, with ruptured ovarian capsule and
granulomatous peritonitis (pT1c).
Conclusion: In menopausal patients presenting with severe diffuse ab-
dominal pain, one of the differential diagnoses should be the spontaneous
rupture of an ovarian malignancy.
E-PS-11-012
Primary poorly differentiated neuroendocrine tumour of the breast:
a case report
N. Abdessayed, A. Bchir*, D. Chiba, Z. Nfikha, A. Baccouche,
M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, F. Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Primary Neuroendocrine tumour of the
breast is rare. The diagnosis requires expressing neuroendocrine markers
in more than 50% of the cell, synaptophysin and/or chromogranin.
Here in we describe clinico-pathological and immunohistochemical fea-
tures of primary neuroendocrine tumour of the breast.
Methods: A case of a 50 year-old woman presented with a 7 cm inflam-
matory mass of the left breast with skin infiltration. There is no past
medical history. Clinical examination didn’t reveal axillary lymph nodes.
The mass was classified ACR 4 on mammography. Biopsies were
performed.
Results: The samples showed a trabecular infiltrative growth pattern. The
tumour cells had pleomorphic nuclei with granular chromatin. They pre-
sented a high numbers of mitosis and large areas of necrosis. There was
no in situ component.
The immunohistochemical study revealed a diffuse and strong staining
with synaptophysin and TTF-1 and chromogranin were negative. The
diagnosis of primary poorly differenced neuroendocrine tumour of the
breast was retained. The patient has recently started radio-chemotherapy
with a good response.
Conclusion: Primary Neuroendocrine tumour of the breast is rare. It
accounts for 0.1% of breast cancers and occurs between 43 and 70 year
old. The morphological and immunohistochemical patterns are similar to
its pulmonary counterpart. That’s why a metastatic origin should be firstly
eliminated. The presence of a ductal carcinoma in situ or conventional-
type mammary carcinoma component with negativity of TTF-1 confirms
the primary nature. The prognosis is poor.
E-PS-11-013
Struma ovarii with follicular thyroid-type carcinoma
O. Belkacem*, F. Limaiem, R. Ayadi, M.D. Zran, S. Bouraoui
*Department of Pathology, University Hospital Mongi Slim La Marsa,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Struma ovarii is a monodermal variant of
ovarian teratoma. Thyroid-type carcinoma arising in struma ovarii is rare.
The most common type is papillary carcinoma, followed by typical follic-
ular carcinoma, and the new entity of follicular carcinoma-highly differen-
tiated follicular carcinoma of ovarian origin; other forms occur rarely.
Methods: A 75-year-old hypertensive patient consulted for the sensation
of a painless pelvic mass that has been progressing for 6 months. The
abdominopelvic ultrasound showed a right-lateralized abdominopelvic
mass measuring 14x13x8 cm with a solid and cystic double component.
The patient underwent a unilateral adnexectomy.
Results: On gross examination, the tumour was yellowish-white in col-
our and had cystic cavities with colloid content. On histological exami-
nation, it was an ovarian goiter formed of vesicular structures of variable
size filled with a dense colloid and associated with a malignant tumour
proliferation arranged in sheets, trabeculae and vesicular structures. The
tumour cells were cubic or polyhedral moderately atypical. Tumour cells
showed positive immunostaining with TTF1. Postoperative course was
uneventful.
Conclusion: Thyroid-type carcinoma of struma ovarii is rare. The exact
prognosis of thyroid-type carcinoma arising in struma ovarii is still un-
clear. However, limited case reports and a small-series review demon-
strated a good prognosis.
E-PS-11-014
Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis: an easy clinical misdiagnosis
M. Bercea*, A. Dema
*Emergency County Hospital Timisoara, Romania
Background & objectives: Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis is a
rare, benign condition, with less than 150 cases reported in English liter-
ature; it is characterised by the presence of multiple smooth muscle,
myofibroblastic and fibroblastic nodules disseminated throughout the
peritoneum, omentum and pelvic structures.
Methods: A 45-year-old female with a history of right ovarian cyst,
presented to the emergency room accusing intense pain in the right-
lower quadrant; transvaginal ultrasonography showed a giant cystic
tumour in the right ovary. The patient underwent total hysterectomy,
bilateral salphingo-oophorectomy, as well as omentectomy. The case
was referred to our department with the diagnosis of ovarian neoplasm
with peritoneal carcinomatosis.
Results: In the hysterectomy specimen we identified conventional
leiomyomas, with no other pathological findings. The right ovarian tu-
mour was a multilocular cyst, with papillary projections on both the
internal and the outer surface of the lesion, measuring 18/10/5 cm; histo-
logical sections revealed a serous cystadenoma with focal epithelial pro-
liferation. We found small nodules, with diameters of 2-6 mm, dissemi-
nated throughout the omentum; histopathologic examination exhibited
interlacing bundles of smooth muscle cells with myofibroblasts and fi-
broblasts; the immune profile (positivity for smooth muscle actin, desmin
and progesterone receptors) was supportive for the diagnosis of dissem-
inated peritoneal leiomyomatosis.
Conclusion: Disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis is a rare, benign
entity, which clinically and macroscopically can easily mimic dissemi-
nated intra-abdominal malignancies, especially when associated with an
ovarian tumour. Therefore, an accurate diagnosis of this lesion is essen-
tial, considering the completely different therapeutic management re-
quired for each of them.
E-PS-11-015
Case report: mesonephric adenocarcinoma of cervix
M.I. Cevallos*, B. Aguiar, M. Bronte, A. Larrea, T. Dot Gomara,
R. Guarch
*Department of Pathology, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Mesonephric adenocarcinoma of the cervix
is a rare tumour which originates from the mesonephric duct remnants,
typically occurs in middle-aged women and presents as a cervical mass or
vaginal bleeding. There is scarce evidence regarding its behaviour, prog-
nosis, and management.
Methods: A 42-year old woman was referred from primary care for
findings of atypical glandular cells in routine cervicovaginal cytology.
A curettage was performed which turned insufficient for diagnosis so a
cervical conization was done.
Results: Microscopic study showed an infiltrative lesion constituted by
ductal structures lined by hobnail cells with moderate atypia. Some sites
demonstrated more complex architecture and isolated mitosis. These cells
showed positivity for vimentin, napsin, p16, PAX8 and cytokeratin AE1/
AE3. GATA3, oestrogen, progesterone, WT-1, p53, calretinin were neg-
ative. CD10 reacted against the luminal surface. Ki67 index was <10%. A
central mesonephric duct was found and remnants and hyperplasia in the
periphery.
Conclusion: Mesonephric adenocarcinoma is a diagnostic challenge
since it exhibits a mixture of morphological patterns and has nonspecific
immunohistochemistry. This tumour must be found within a mesonephric
hyperplasia background.
E-PS-11-018
Vulvar squamous cell carcinoma: characteristics, treatment and out-
comes of 77 women
D. Chiba*, N. Abdessayed, A. Baccouche, Z. Nfikha, T. Zahmoul,
A. Bchir, M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Vulvar cancer is rare gynaecologic malig-
nancy accounts for0.6%of all cancer diagnoses and 5%of gynaecologic
cancers. Vulvar squamous cell carcinoma(VSCC)represents more than
90%of the malignant tumours of the vulva. Our aim is to describe
epidemiologic-clinico-pathologic features of VSCC in the centre of
Tunisia.
Virchows Arch
Methods: Sousse registry Cancer centre Database was used to identify
women diagnosed with vulvar SCC from 2010–2019.Patient’s clinical
presentation, operative and pathological details were included in a data-
base. Follow up details regarding recurrence and management and future
outcomes were also noted
Results: We identified a total of 77women with vulvar SCC. The median
age at diagnosis was 66 years(43-90)and more than 85%were more than
60-years.The symptomatology was dominated by tumour sensation in
53%of patients followed by vulvar pruritus in 23%of cases. The most
frequent stage was IV(40%) followed by stage I(34%),stage III(25%)
and stage II(12%).Moderately differentiated SCC was the most frequent
histological grade by 76%of cases. Initial management was surgical for
94%of patients;64% vulvectomy with bilateral inguinal-lymph-nodes as-
sociated to radiotherapy in 48%of cases,23% simple vulvectomy and
5%hemivulvectomy.The median follow up was 5 years.9 cases received
after one-year and 5 patients died in 2-years.
Conclusion: Vulvar SCC is a rare disease, occurs mostly in elderly wom-
en, and is diagnosed at advanced stages. Our findings emphasize that a
greater effort should be made to facilitate early diagnosis and improve the
management of this cancer.
E-PS-11-019
Vulvar melanoma: a rare tumour about two cases
N. Abdessayed, D. Chiba*, A. Baccouche, Z. Nfikha, T. Zahmoul,
A. Bchir, M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Vulvar melanoma is a rare malignant
cancer,representing 7-10%of all malignant vulvar neoplasms and is ex-
tremely aggressive with an overall poor prognosis. Given their rarity, the
treatment paradigm isn’t clearly defined.
Methods: Standardized and systematic documentation of clinical and
histologic findings is needed to advance knowledge, that’s what motivat-
ed our study.
Sousse registry Cancer centre Database was used to identify women
diagnosed with vulvar Melanoma from2005–2019.The main prognostic
factors of vulvar melanoma are represented by American Joint
Commission on Cancer(AJCC) tumour stage(8th edition),Breslow's
thickness and lymph-nodal status and were used in our study.
Results: We identified two women, the first was a postmenopausal-63-
year-old and the second was younger,36-year-old and pregnant at diag-
nosis. Both of them underwent Radical vulvectomy with bilateral
lymphadenectomy. Histopathology of the specimen showed the diagnosis
of nodular melanoma. For the older patient, the lesion measured
0.7cm,Clark’s level III, Breslow’s indice 5mm and no metastasis in 20
lymph-nodes, but the lower right limit was invaded by the tumour. The
second patient had an ulcerated-lesion measured 1cm,Clark’s level III,
Breslow’s indice 6mm,micro-metastasis in one-lymph-node from 17 and
all the limits were tumour-free. Despite complete surgical resection, the
first patient developed urethral metastasis after 6months, and the second
patient was lost to follow up.
Conclusion: Radical vulvectomy with bilateral lymphadenectomy hasn’t
shown to improve overall survival and is becoming a questionable and
obsolete treatment approach. Alternatively, initial management of
vulvovaginal melanomas is complete surgical excision and sentinel-
node lymphadenectomy, which offers the best opportunity for long-
term survival.
So surgery has to reach a balance between quality of life and aggressive-
ness to avoid needless morbidity, which needs a strong collaboration
between health makers.
E-PS-11-021
Uterine perivascular epithelioid cell tumour (PEComa): a case report
and literature review
C. Dahlstedt-Ferreira*, R. Oliveira, M. Lemos, M.J. Brito
*Hospital Garcia de Orta, EPE, Portugal
Background & objectives: Uterine perivascular epithelioid cell tumours
(PEComa) are rare, underrecognized, mesenchymal uterine tumours with
about 100 cases reported in the English literature, so far.
We present a case-report of a uterine PEComa, to raise awareness to the
importance of this entity.
Methods: A 48-year-old woman, without relevant previous medical his-
tory, presented with abdominal pain and distension with 10 days of
evolution.
On physical examination, the patient had a large pelvic mass, with asso-
ciated pain.
Computed Tomography scan showed a large pelvic mass with abdominal
extension, most likely of adnexal origin.
She underwent a total hysterectomy and bilateral adnexectomy.
Results: The surgical specimen was sent to the pathology department for
evaluation.
The macroscopic examination revealed, in the uterine corpus, a tumour
that bulged into the intact serosa; on the cut surface, it measured 34cm, it
was mainly solid, yellowish, with a cystic area with 4cm, elastic and well
circumscribed.
The microscopic examination showed a tumour with fusocellular pattern,
with a clear interface with the adjacent myometrium; necrosis and one
mitosis per fifty high power fields were noted.
The immunohistochemical study was consistent with the diagnosis of
PEComa.
Conclusion: PEComa tumours, though sharing overlapping morpholog-
ical and immunohistochemical features with the much more frequent and
well studied smooth muscle tumours, have unique features and different
management.
We need to study and compile more cases of these rare tumours to try to
define with more accuracy their behaviour and consequently how to best
manage them.
E-PS-11-022
Mixed (endometroid and serous) endometrial carcinoma: histopath-
ologic and immunohistochemical issues for a correct diagnosis - case
report
F.J. Díaz De La Pinta*, F. Idrovo Mora, I. Eraña Tomás, D. Diaz Diaz,
J.E. Garcia Villayzan, F. Rojo Todo
*Pathology Department Hospital Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Spain
Background & objectives: Mixed endometrial carcinomas (MEC) ac-
count for less than 10% of all malignant epithelial tumours of the uterus,
being the endometroid and serous carcinoma the most common combi-
nation. Most of tumours initially diagnosed as MEC have an ambiguous
morphology.
Methods: We present a case from our hospital, which is a 62-years old
woman with uterine bleeding who underwent radical histerectomy.
Personal and familiar medical history was unremarkable.
Results: On cut section there was a 3 cm-mass in upper third of the uterus
body, which presented histologically two well distinguished components.
Morphologically, despite both component showing glandular pattern, se-
rous one showed areas of papillary growth, greater cytologic atypia, and
budding / exfoliation of tumours cells.
With immunohistochemical study (IHQ), serous subtype was negative for
oestrogen receptor (ER) and positive for P16 with aberrant diffusely
positive staining of P53.
Endometroid subtype was positive for ER, negative for P16, with wild-
type P53 and loss of staining for MSH6 (MLH1 and MSH2 demonstrated
normal expression). Microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) was seen by
PCR and germline mutation was later ruled out.
Conclusion: Despite MEC remaining as a common interobserver dis-
agreement, we emphasize the suitability of using a basic panel of IHQ
to help confirm the subtype of each component, also according to its
molecular pathogenesis.
Our case presented a MSH6 loss of expression with MSI-H in the
endometroid part, which is a rare finding in MEC, according to literature.
Finally, we suggest the individual genetic origin of each component, as
previously reported.
E-PS-11-023
Ovarian lymphangioma
F. Antoniadou, S. Pappa, D. Bouklas, N. Poulianitis, G. Theodoropoulou,
A. Dimitriadi*, C. Fragkoulis, T. Choreftaki
*General Hospital of Athens “G. Gennimatas”/Department of Surgical
Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: Lymphangiomas are benign lesions of the
lymphatic system that can arise in any part of the body. They can easily be
confused with a malignant ovarian mass especially in menopausal patients.
Methods: A 55 year- old patient was submitted to the hospital due to lower
abdominal pain. Trans vaginal ultrasound showed multiple cystic and of
mixed consistency lesions on the right ovary and its hilum. Semi radical
hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed.
Results: Macroscopically, in the myometrium multiple leiomyomas of
0,5-6 cm in diameter were present. In the hilum and the cortex of the right
ovary a cystic, bloody- chylous lesion measuring 3x2x1,3 cm was ob-
served. Microscopically, the ovarian lesion was consisted of multiple,
anastomosing and of variable size lymph vessels that were filled with
lymphocytes and eosinophylic material. The surrounding stroma was
haemorrhagic and oedematous. Immunohistochemistry (CD31+,
CD34+, FVIII +, SMA +) confirmed the vascular origin of the lesion.
Conclusion: It is uncertain whether ovarian- hilar lymphangiomas repre-
sent as true neoplasms, hamartomas, or lymphangiectasias. They should
be included in the differential diagnosis of malignant ovarian cystic
masses. Their benign histologic appearance may not indicate their clinical
behaviour. A few cases of recurrence or peritoneal dissemination have
been reported. Complete wide excision and follow- up are suggested.
E-PS-11-024
Ovarian haemangioma in a postmenopausal woman - a case report
F. Dobritoiu*, A. Cohn, G. Terinte-Balcan, A. Baltan, M. Sajin
*Emergency University Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Ovarian haemangiomas are very rare mes-
enchymal tumours frequently of the cavernous haemangioma-type usu-
ally found during imagistic studies. They affect women of any age, rang-
ing from infancy to 81 year-old. We report a case of capillary ovarian
haemangioma with anastomosing features.
Methods: We report the case of a 67year-old woman with a previously
ultrasonographically described right ovarian cyst. The computed tomo-
graphic examination revealed an adnexal tumoral lesion measuring
46x46x42 mm in diameter, with solid and cystic areas, highly iodophilic,
with a small blade of peritoneal free fluid.
Results: A total hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy and perito-
neal washings were performed. The peritoneal lavage was negative
for tumoral cells. Gross examination of the right adnexa revealed an
enlarged ovary, 3,5x3,2x3 cm, with haemorrhagic appearance on cut
surface. Frozen section examination yielded the following result:
benign lesion, with two differential diagnoses: ovarian haemangioma
and adenomatoid tumour. Histological and immunohistochemical
examination established the diagnosis of ovarian haemangioma with
anastomosing features.
Conclusion: Although an uncommon entity, ovarian haemangioma
should be kept in mind whenever an ovarian tumour is incidentally or
clinically discovered. Thorough examination is required because it can
mimic endometriosis or other ovarian neoplasms. When the anastomos-
ing aspect is prominent, attention should be given to exclude an
angiosarcoma. Leydig cell hyperplasia can be encountered. Ancillary
studies can help establish the correct diagnosis. Surgical removal is both
diagnostic and therapeutic.
E-PS-11-026
Mural nodule in a seromucinous borderline tumour of the ovary
J. Filipe*, B. Resende, S. André, A. Felix
*Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, Instituto Português de Oncologia de
Lisboa Francisco Gentil, Lisbon, Portugal
Background & objectives: Although rare, mural nodules occur most-
ly in ovarian mucinous tumours, where an anaplastic carcinoma
component is associated with poor prognosis. The only reported
case of a seromucinous borderline tumour(SMBT) with a mural
anaplastic carcinoma nodule was associated with good prognosis.
Methods: We report a second case of SMBT with a mural anaplastic
carcinoma nodule with an aggressive clinical course.
Results: A 79-year-old patient presented with bilateral ovarian tu-
mours. After surgery, a diagnosis of bilateral pT1c SMBT with
microinvasive carcinoma(<5 mm) and one mural anaplastic carcino-
ma nodule was rendered. The anaplastic carcinoma was composed
of large, clear and anaplastic cells positive for cytokeratins, PAX8,
and p53 “wild-type”. Peritoneal washing was positive for neoplastic
cells. Hotspot KRAS mutations in the mural nodule and tumour
were not found. She underwent adjuvant chemotherapy. Eighteen
months later, disseminated lymphadenopathy was found. FNA of
an axillary lymph node confirmed metastatic adenocarcinoma mor-
phologically and immunohistochemically akin to the anaplastic car-
cinoma nodule. Shortly after, the patient died due to a pulmonary
thromboembolism.
Conclusion: Although SMBT have excellent prognosis, the presence of
an anaplastic carcinoma component in a mural nodule likely renders its
prognosis unpredictable. Advanced age, positive peritoneal washing and
involvement of the ovarian surface might also explain the unexpected
aggressive course of this case.
E-PS-11-027
Association of HEY2 gene rs13328928 polymorphism with the risk of
endometrial hyperplasia
A. Filippova*, R. Gabidullina, E. Valeeva
*Kazan State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: The article presents the prevalence of poly-
morphism rs13328928 gene HEY2 and reveals its association with the
risk of endometrial hyperplasia.
Methods: The study included 180 residents of the Republic of Tatarstan.
The main group - 79 patients with endometrial hyperplasia without
atypia, the control group - 101 women without endometrial pathology.
Determination of rs13328928 gene HEY2 was carried out by the method
of real time polymerase chain reaction. The study performed a χ2 test and
evaluated the odds ratio.
Results: It has been established that the presence of the C allele and
the C/C genotype of the HEY2 rs13328928 are factors that increase
the risk of developing endometrial hyperplasia without atypia in 180
women living in the Republic of Tatarstan. The prevalence of alleles
and genotypes of the HEY2 gene was comparable with the European
one.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: The study revealed a dependence of the risk of developing
endometrial hyperplasia without atypia with the polymorphism
rs13328928 HEY2 gene.
E-PS-11-028
Benign multicystic peritoneal mesothelioma as a rare cause of amen-
orrhea and abdominal pain in a young female: a case report of an
unusual entity
J.I. Franco*, M. Sánchez Lazcano, L. Polo Oliveros, M. Díaz Vega,
L. Pérez Domingo, A. Martínez García, H. Iliev Iliev, E. Mejía Urbáez,
M.J. Cardiel García, M. Moros García
*CUH Lozano Blesa, Spain
Background & objectives: Benign Multicystic Peritoneal Mesothelioma
is an unusual neoplasm that arise from the peritoneum, typically found in
young females, with a high incidence of local recurrence, and less than
200 cases reported. We present a case of this rare cystic lesion.
Methods: We report the case of a 17-year-old patient with history of
long-standing secondary amenorrhea and abdominal pain. Imaging stud-
ies showed a pelvic multicystic mass, composed of fluid-filled translucent
cysts, connected by varying amounts of fibrous tissue. Total resection
was performed.
Results: On gross examination, large multilocular and unilocular cysts
were both observed. On histological evaluation, showed multiple
medium-sized thin-walled cystic lesions containing, with variable propor-
tions of eosinophilic fluid, lined by mesothelial cells without atypia. Foci
of mesothelial hyperplasia were also present. Mesothelial cells showed
immunoreactivity for CK5/6 as well as podoplanin.
Conclusion: Benign multicystic peritoneal mesothelioma, that occurs
most frequently in women of reproductive age, is a very uncommon
tumour not associated with asbestos exposure. Although recurrence is
high after resection, it does not present a tendency to transform into
malignancy.
E-PS-11-029
Uterine carcinosarcomas, a 10-year retrospective study in a tertiary
institution
J. Gama*, J. Madeira, R. Almeida, F. Ramalhosa, V. Almeida, C. Faria,
A. Lai, M.B. Pimentão, H. Moreira, J. Fraga, R. Oliveira, T. Simões
Silva, M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: WHO defines carcinosarcoma as a malignant
biphasic tumour of Müllerian derivation composed of high-grade carci-
nomatous and sarcomatous components. This is a rare, aggressive neo-
plasia and often diagnosed at an advanced stage.
Methods: We conducted a 10-year-retrospective transversal study at
Coimbra University Hospital, a tertiary hospital in Portugal (2009-
2019) and reviewed all uterine sarcomas (n=45). Relevant clinical and
pathological data was extracted from the hospital database.
Results: A total of 22 cases of carcinosarcomas were found, representing
48,9% of uterine and cervical sarcomas. The median age at diagnosis was
74 years (range:55-93 years) and the median survival was 36.2 months
(range:1,2-133,6 months). Tumour size ranged from 1.8 to 28cm.
In our cohort, 2/22 of the cases were diagnosed in a biopsy and 20/22 in
the surgical specimen. The most common location was the uterine corpus,
all cases except one arose in the cervix.
Conclusion: Uterine carcinosarcoma is a rare entity, with high morbidity
and mortality, due to a high rate of relapse and metastases affecting
predominantly postmenopausal women.
E-PS-11-030
Bilateral ovarian haemangiomas: a case report and review of the
literature
Y. Gomez Navarro*, M. García Martos
*HGU Gregorio Marañón, Spain
Background & objectives: Less than 60 cases of ovarian haemangioma
have been well documented. Its coexistence with non-ovarian neoplasm
such as cervical carcinoma and endometrial carcinoma has also been
reported, therefore careful examination of contralateral ovary and endo-
metrium are essential.
Methods: A 47-year-old female with medical history of lung carcinoma
treated with radical surgery in 2012. Six years later, the serum CA-125
level was 49 U/mL(normal <35 U/mL) and CEA was 33,6 ng/mL (nor-
mal <3 ng/mL). CT scan revealed a heterogeneous mass in left ovary that
measured 52 x 40 mm. The patient underwent a radical hysterectomy,
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and appendectomy.
Results: Sections of both ovaries revealed vascular lesions with dilated
thin-walled vessels, containing red blood cells in their lumen, lined by a
single layer of endothelial cells.. Inmunohistochemistry analysis reveals
that vascular endothelial markers (CD31 and CD34) are strongly positive
but the aetiology is unknown and controversial. WT-1 was also positive
in bilateral lesion, which are in favour to a neoplastic roliferation, not an
anatomic malformation. A diagnosis of bilateral ovarian haemangiomas
of cavernous type was made. Diffuse abdominopelvic haemangiomatosis
was ruled out in our patient.
Conclusion: Most of ovarian haemangiomas, are discovered as an inci-
dental finding and tumour is usually unilateral o bilateral, as our case.
Surgical removal of the involved areas is treatment of choice and appears
to be curative.
E-PS-11-031
Implementation of MMR deficient endometrial cancer diagnosis with
IHQ
I. González Villa*, I.J. Expósito Afonso, L.I. Martínez Blanco, J.F. Loro
Ferrer, J.J. Cabrera Galván
*Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Spain
Background & objectives: Lynch syndrome is a predisposition to cancer
due to an autosomal dominant germline heterozygous mutation, in MMR
genes.
We aim to determine an optimal identification of patients with alterations
in the MMR system proteins in endometrial cancer.
Methods: Our study includes all patients diagnosed with endometrial
carcinoma who have undergone hysterectomy from January 2017 to
May 2019.
IHQ study of the PMS2 and MSH6 proteins was performed as primary
screening. If negative, studied MLH1 or MSH2 respectively.
The prediction of germline mutational status is compared for combina-
tions of tumour morphological features, presence of lymphovascular in-
vasion, location and age.
Results: The total amount of patients that took part in our study was 96.
The average age at diagnosis was 63.4 years. 82 cases (84%) was
endometrioid histotype and, of them, 75 cases (78.8%) were grade I. 28
of them (29%) were located in the isthmus-lower uterine segment. The
presence of lymphovascular invasion was noticed in 17 cases (17.7%).
The MMR protein deficit was detected in 10 patients (10.4%). All cases
were due to protein deficit in MLH1.
Conclusion: Propose an universal study of repair proteins in our area.
Identification in patients with endometrial cancer of MMR protein alter-
ation by gradual IHQ tests.
Statistically significant relationship between the presence of dMMR and
the location in isthmus, higher degree in endometrioid subtype and pres-
ence of lymphovascular invasion.
No statistically significant relationship between these two groups (MMR /
dMMR) and the average age, endometrioid - non-endometrioid histotype
and higher pT.
E-PS-11-033
Mature teratoma of the lower uterine segment: a case report of a rare
entity
G. Gupta*, I. Bagwan
*The Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Teratomas arise from primordial germ cells
and are usually found in the gonads with occasional occurrences in extra-
gonadal locations along the migration route of the germ cells. There are
10 documented cases of teratomas in endometrium and cervix.
Methods: A 55-year-old female presented with complaints of irregular
peri-menopausal bleeding. Endometrial curetting showed strips of mucin-
ous epithelium. No significant dysplasia was noted but a low grade mu-
cinous neoplasm could not be ruled out. A hysterectomy was hence
performed and the specimen sent for histopathological analysis and
review.
Results: Macroscopic examination demonstrated a well demarcated
multiloculated, firm, cystic lesion in the lower uterine segment.
Microscopy showed a cyst containing ectodermal, endodermal and me-
sodermal elements comprising mature cartilage, adipose tissue, glands
lined by goblet cells with mucin extravasation along with lymphoid tis-
sue, bowel wall epithelium and gastric mucosa. No malignancy was not-
ed. The myometrium and endometrium was normal. Diagnosis of a ma-
ture teratoma (dermoid cyst) was made.
Conclusion: Mature cystic teratomas of the lower uterine segment are
very rare and presence of only one element such as mucinous epithelium
can lead to a misdiagnosis of a carcinoma on biopsy or curetting.
Although rare, uterine teratoma should be considered in the differential
diagnosis in patients especially when encountering endometrial biopsies
with glandular or squamous elements.
E-PS-11-034
A rare example of a vaginal transitional cell carcinoma occurring
metachronously with a bladder transitional cell carcinoma
C. Hill*, L. Christie, G. Hislop, W. McMullen, E. Murray, G. Nandwani,
R. Oparka, J. Wilson, J. Wilson
*Ninewells Hospital, NHS Tayside, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Vaginal transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) is
extremely rare. Fewer than twenty cases have been reported, most occurring
metachronous to a bladder TCC. We report a case of an exophytic, non-
invasive vaginal TCC occurring 6 years after a non-invasive bladder TCC.
Methods: An anterior pelvic exenteration was required for excision of the
vaginal tumour. The bladder mucosa was inflamed but otherwise unre-
markable. The vaginal tumour comprised a large, exophytic, carpet-like
growth consistent with a non-invasive TCC. When reviewed with the
original non-invasive bladder TCC, the morphology was very similar
with both displaying regions of squamous differentiation.
Results: The pathogenesis of a vaginal TCC can be difficult to determine
but could include a primary lesion, metastatic spread from the bladder,
direct invasion from the bladder and implantation via seeding from the
urinary tract.
To determine the pathogenesis, DNA extracted from the original bladder
TCC and vaginal TCC were analysed by single nucleotide polymorphism
array to assess copy number variation and copy number neutral loss of
heterozygosity (CN-LOH). This demonstrated a match between the
metachronous tumours including gains of 3q, deletion of CDKN2A,
CN-LOH of distal 7q and CN-LOH 9p.
Conclusion: Genetic analysis proved conclusively that this was a bladder
metastasis. The likeliest mechanism of spread was implantation via the
urine. We note that primary vaginal TCC is now no longer recognised
within the WHO classification.
E-PS-11-035
Choriocarcinoma: case report
G. Holanda Maia*, P. Aguiar Feitosa, A. Lobo Ramos, G. Leal De
Carvalho, C.M. Ponte Ribeiro, D.I. Magno Cavalcante, R.M. Lima
Verde Leal, D. da Rocha Filho
*Federal University of Ceará, Medical School, Dept. of Pathology, Brazil
Background & objectives: The choriocarcinoma may occur subsequent
to molar pregnancy (50%), spontaneous pregnancy loss or elective termi-
nation (25%), ectopic pregnancy (2.5%), or normal pregnancy (22.5%),
being the most aggressive form of GTD and characterized by premature
vascular invasion and metastasis.
Methods: A 29-year-old patient who was diagnosed with hydatidiform
mole in 2013, lost follow-up with menometrorrhagia and pelvic pain in
October 2017, being diagnosed with an invasive spring initiating metho-
trexate chemotherapy. The patient had several clinical complications that
led to a change in the therapeutic regimen resulting in fluctuations in the
levels of beta-HCG.
Results: In February 2019, there was another increase in beta-HCG
level, when a hysterectomy and removal of a lump from the bladder
and a margin of the small intestine was performed. Histopathological
examination showed Invasive trophoblastic neoplasm formed by
syncytiotrophoblasts, cytotrophoblasts and intermediate trophoblasts
with marked cytological atypia. Bladder nodule, bladder margin and
small intestine margin also showed invasion. One month after hys-
terectomy the patient presented with pulmonary and cerebral
metastasis.
Conclusion: Even though the patient has been followed in a specialized
DTG centre, the diagnosis of choriocarcinoma was delayed.
Hysterectomy was not planned as the first therapeutic option because
the patient's desire to get pregnant. The knowledge of the diagnostic
criteria of DTG and the clinical follow-up of the patient is critical for both
gynaecologists and pathologists in order to prevent late diagnosis and
advanced stages of the disease.
E-PS-11-036
Histopathological profile of endometrium among perimenopausal
women with abnormal uterine bleeding
S. Jaiswal*, E. Jaiswal
*College of Medical Sciences Bharatpur, Nepal
Background & objectives: Abnormal uterine bleeding is important
symptom of both benign and malignant diseases of endometrium. Until
the underlying pathology is accurately diagnosed, proper therapy is hard-
ly possible. To study histopathological patterns of endometrium among
perimenopausal women with abnormal uterine bleeding and correlate
with the endometrial thickness.
Methods: Hospital based cross sectional study carried out on 75 cases of
hysterectomy and endometrial biopsy specimens of perimenopausal
women with abnormal uterine bleeding, at Department of Pathology in
CMS-TH, Bharatpur from January 2017 to June 2018. The specimens
were grossed, processed and embedded using standard procedures, were
stained with Haematoxylin and Eosin stain and were analysed using light
microscopy.
Results: The mean age of patients was 45 ± 3.4 years and menorrhagia
was the dominant clinical presentation. Histopathology of endometrium
Virchows Arch
revealed 17 (22.7%) proliferative endometrium, 13 (17.33%) secretory
endometrium, 12 (6%) weakly proliferative endometrium, 8 (10.7%) en-
dometrial hyperplasia without atypia, 7 (9.3%) disordered proliferative
endometrium, 5 (6.7%) atrophic endometrium, 4 (5.3%) cases of endo-
metrial carcinoma and both endometrial polyp and chronic endometritis
were seen in 3 (4%) cases each.
Conclusion: Histopathological examination of endometrium can serve as
a mirror for detecting causes of abnormal uterine bleeding. Study of
endometrial histopathology helps in early detection of premalignant and
malignant lesions, leading to early diagnosis and prompt treatment at
appropriate time.
E-PS-11-037
The importance of anamnestic data and the collaboration of
colleagues in the curious case of endometrial cancer
L. Jovanovic*, J. Vrtikapa, M. Perunicic Jovanovic, L. Simic,
L. Mirković, S. Milenkovic
*Clinical Centre of Serbia, Department of Gynaecopathology, Serbia
Background & objectives: Ectopic splenic tissue can pose diagnostic
problems, especially in the form of splenosis which can mimic malignan-
cy. Splenosis is an acquired anomaly related to heterotopic auto-
transplantation of splenic tissue following abdominal trauma or
splenectomy.
Methods: We present a 69-year-old woman with extensive bleeding
after menopause and many exploratory curettages. Last curettage was
in July 2018. with HP diagnosis “high grade” serous endometrial
carcinoma. Tumour markers are normal. The patient's general condi-
tion is good.
Results: Radiological diagnostic examinations show tumour deposits in
omentum, retroperitoneum, intestinal serosa. Colonoscopy examination
shows extraluminal tumour compressions, without mucosal lesions. The
patient is referred to diagnosis: Carcinoma corporis uterii FIGO:IIIC.
Histological analysis of the obtained materials designated as tumour de-
posits shows tissue of the spleen, which is presented as diffuse, multiple
deposits throughout the whole abdomen, imitating disseminated perito-
neal carcinomatosis. We got important data about performed splenectomy
30 years ago, after traumatic splenic rupture, and we conclude the case as
splenosis. The endometrium showed no atypical changes. Regarding the
previous HP diagnosis of serous endometrial cancer, the patient is cer-
tainly advised to further follow up.
Conclusion: Splenosis frequently mimicking abdominal tumours, which
could lead to unnecessary surgery. A correct diagnosis should be ren-
dered, considering the main differential diagnoses, clinicopathological
correlation with the collection of anamnestic data. The current report aims
to raise the awareness of splenosis so that it may be appropriately recog-
nized and differentiated from other pelvic findings.
E-PS-11-038
Sclerosing stromal tumour of the ovary: two cases report
R. Karam*, A. Khoaja, M. Regragui, M. Karkouri
*Department of Pathology, Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Casablanca,
Morocco
Background & objectives: Sclerosing stromal tumour (SST) is an ex-
tremely rare benign subtype of ovarian stromal neoplasm of the sex cord
stromal category, occurring in young adults. We report clinical and his-
topathological features of two cases of SST of the ovary.
Methods: A 18 years old and a 23 years old females presenting pelvic
mass. On gross examination, the neoplasm was solidocystic.
The neoplasm was pseudo-lobular growth pattern composed of both spin-
dle and polyhedral cells charged with lipids and a characteristic
‘hemangiopericytoma-like’ vasculature. Nuclear atypia and mitosis were
not seen.
Immunochemically, tumoral cells were positive to smooth muscular actin
and calretinin.
Results: SST is a rare benign ovarian neoplasm, mostly occurring in
younger women. The clinical symptoms are non-specific.
The gross appearance of SST of ovary ranges from small solid to large
multicystic masses.
Microscopically, the tumour is pseudolobulated with cellular areas and
hypo cellular areas of collagenous or oedematous tissue.
Immunohistochemically, the cells of SST are positive for vimentin, in-
hibin, SMA and CD199 but negative for S-100 and epithelial markers.
These tumours are benign and can be treated successfully by enucleation
or unilateral ovariotomy.
Conclusion: Due to the rarity of this ovarian neoplasm it is difficult to
predict the presence of this tumour preoperatively on the basis of clinical
and sonographic findings.
A possibility of SST should be kept in young patients with ovarian mass.
E-PS-11-039
Unusual form of squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix extending in
situ into the endometrium and the fallopian tube: one case report and
review of literature
R. Karam*, I. Beliamime, M. Regragui, M. Karkouri
*Department of Pathology, Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Casablanca,
Morocco
Background & objectives: Cervical squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
that spreads superficially to the endometrium and the fallopian tube with
carcinoma in situ is a very rare phenomenon.
Our case represents superficial spreading of SCC of the cervix to the
endometrium and fallopian tube.
Methods: 80 years old female, suffering from vaginal bleeding and pel-
vic pain. Gross examination revealed a slightly bulky uterus. The endo-
metrial cavity was dilated and the endometrium was atrophic.
Microscopically, the cervical lesion was SCC, moderately differentiated and
extending up and over the endometrial surface which was totally replaced
with squamous cell carcinoma in situ, right fallopian tube was also involved.
Results: An extensive survey of the literature revealed 31 reported cases of
cervical carcinoma with endometrial surface involvement, 15 cases were of
invasive cervical carcinoma, in six cases, the fallopian tube was also involved.
The molecular mechanism of the superficial spreading of carcinoma cells
is not yet well understood.
As the data are limited, it is still difficult to determine the optimal treat-
ment of this unusual form of superficial spreading SCC.
The prognostic significance is also lacking because of limited data.
Conclusion: Superficial spreading SCC of the cervix is a rare phenome-
non and guidelines for the management of these cases have not been
determined yet.
Since SCC in situ of the endometrium is rare, its diagnostic must induce
to explore the cervix.
E-PS-11-041
Transcription factor E3 overexpressing malignant perivascular
epithelioid cell tumour of the uterus: a case report
S. Kestel Kayik*, M.A. İnan, E. Demirdağ, F. Kazancı, Ö. Erdem
*Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Malignant perivascular epithelioid cell tumour
of the uterus (PEComa) with Transcription Factor E3 (TFE3) overexpression
is an extremely rare entity with less than ten cases in the English literature.
Methods: An 80-year-old female presented with pelvic pain and vaginal
bleeding. Ultrasound examination revealed that there was a mass with the
greatest dimension of 7 cm. A hysterectomy with loss of integrity was
received at the intraoperative examination. The clinicopathologic proper-
ties of the present case were analysed.
Results: Gross examination revealed a bulky tan-brown, solid intrauterine
mass. The cut surface was pink to grey with yellow necrotic areas.
Microscopic examination showed neoplasia with an infiltrative border, resem-
bling a “finger-like” appearance, predominantly composed of spindle cells
with severe nuclear atypia. Accompanying epithelioid cells with oval to round
central nuclei, large eosinophilic to clear granular cytoplasm had a nested
pattern separated by a delicate vascular network. Bizarre giant cells were
observed. There were 10 mitoses in 10 high power fields. Lymphovascular
invasion was evident. Immunohistochemically the tumour cells express HMB-
45, melan-A, SMA, desmin, caldesmon, oestrogen receptor, CD10, p53, and
strong diffuse TFE3. S100, myogenin, Myo-D1, beta-catenin were negative.
Conclusion: It is important to differentiate malignant PEComa from
smooth muscle tumours of the uterus. Additionally, the distinction be-
tween TFE3 translocation associated and Tuberous Sclerosis Complex
(TSC)-related PEComa has a therapeutic value. A further molecular ge-
netic examination should be offered to patients. Resistance to mTOR
inhibitors has been reported in TFE3-translocated PEComas.
E-PS-11-042
Invasive stratified mucin producing carcinoma and usual type
endocervical adenocarcinoma of the cervix: a case report
G. Kir*, E. Cecikoglu
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Invasive stratified mucin-producing
carcinoma(iSMILE) has invasive nests of stratified columnar cells with
peripheral palisading and variable amounts of intracytoplasmic mucin,
resembling its in situ counterpart which has high risk HPV associated
carcinogenesis methods.
Methods: 43 year old female patient presented with intermittent vaginal
bleeding and she underwent cervical biopsy. Biopsy diagnosis was car-
cinoma. She underwent radical hysterectomy. Macroscopically tumour
was 4.5x2.5x2 cm with cream colour and small cystic cavities located
in the exocervix and protruding towards the endocervix. Microscopically
tumour had two components as iSMILE and endocervical adenocarcino-
ma of the usual type.
Results: The tumour cells had spherical nucleus, distinct and sharp
cytoplasmic borders. In iSMILE component the tumour had abun-
dant intracytoplasmic mucin . iSMILE component showed an infil-
trative growth of tumour cell nests with a finger-like pattern of
invasion. Irregularly shaped, angulated or fragmented glands with
an adjacent desmoplastic stromal reaction were present in adenocar-
cinoma component. Immunhistochemically tumour cells were posi-
tive with p16(“block-like”expression pattern),PAX-8,and CK7 and
negative with HNF1beta,NapsinA,GATA3,Calretinin for both
components.
Conclusion: The present data and those obtained from the literature sug-
gest that iSMILE represent a distinct subtype of invasive endocervical
adenocarcinoma, associated with high-risk HPV-infection carcinogenesis
and may be seen together with usual endocervical adenocarcinoma com-
ponent.
E-PS-11-043
Serous adenofibroma of the fallopian tube with coexistent ectopic
tubal pregnancy
K. Kubelka-Sabit*, V. Filipovski, B. Dimova, K. Trajkova, D. Jasar
*Clinical Hospital Acibadem Sistina, Medical faculty, "Goce Delchev"
University, Shtip, North Macedonia
Background & objectives: Serous adenofibromas of the fallopian tube
are rare tumours considered to be analogous to their counterparts in the
ovary. They are usually small and incidental finding during surgery.
We present a 34-year old patient with previous history of uterine
bleeding.
Methods: The patient was misdiagnosed in another institution as miscar-
riage. Due to persistent elevation of the HCG serum levels (from 2350 IU/
L to 5980 IU/L), ultrasound examination was performed, which led to
suspected left ectopic tubal pregnancy. Five days after receiving metho-
trexate, the patient was again admitted to the hospital with abdominal pain
and vomiting. Left fallopian tube was surgically removed.
Results: Histopathologic examination confirmed ruptured ectopic tubal
pregnancy in the isthmic portion. Small, 4 mm firm yellow nodule was
attached to the fimbriae. On microscopic examination, the nodule was
well-demarcated and consisted of intersected fibroblasts and hyalinized
collagen bundles with few slit-like or cystic spaces covered with benign
epithelium. Stromal cells were focally positive for inhibin and CD10,
whereas epithelial cells coexpressed vimentin and cytokeratin 7, as well
as oestrogen receptor.
Conclusion: Ectopic pregnancy in this patient might have potentially
been caused by the presence of tubal adenofibroma. Even though only
few cases of coexistent ectopic tubal pregnancy and serous adenofibroma
of the fallopian tube have been published in the literature, ectopic tubal
pregnancy associated with other benign tumours, such as adenomatoid
tumour, leiomyoma or mature cystic teratoma have been reported. These
tumours might lead to partial obstruction of the fallopian tube or mimic
ectopic pregnancy.
E-PS-11-045
Incidental primary extranodal ovarian diffuse large B-cell lympho-
ma (DLBCL): a case report
N. Poulianitis, A. Dimitriadi, A. Linardou*, F. Antoniadou, E. Gkamatsi,
G. Kakiopoulos
*General Hospital of Athens "G.Gennimatas"/, Department of Surgical
Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: Ovarian lymphomas are usually secondary
and indication of disseminated disease. Primary ovarian lymphomas are
rare and the prognosis is better. We describe a primary ovarian DLBCL
in a 57-years-old woman who underwent surgery for a cyst in the fallopian
tube.
Methods: We received left fallopian tube measuring 6cm long and 0,5cm
in diameter and ovary whose dimensions were 4x1,5x0,3cm. There was a
paratubal cyst measuring 7cm in its greatest dimension. The frozen sections
were negative ( benign paratubal cyst). On permanent sections there were
two lesions in the ovary measuring 0,5 and 1,3 cm respectively.
Results: The first one was a benign transitional (Brenner) tumour. The
second one was composed of a diffuse proliferation of relatively large
pleiomorphic cells with vesicular nuclei and often prominent nucleoli.
The immunohistochemical survey showed: Vimentin(+), LCA(+),
KerAE1/AE3(-), CD20(+), CD3(-), Bcl2(-), Bcl6(+/-), CyclinD1(-),
CD10(-), CD68(-), CD10(-), absence of clonal light chains. The prolifer-
ation index was 60%. The diagnosis was DLBCL,NOS with a further
note for additional tests to prove the origin. A bone marrow trephine
biopsy was performed which was negative, as other diagnostic imaging
techniques. So the final diagnosis was primary DLBCL, NOS. The pa-
tient received 8 circles of RCHOP, and she is free of disease, one year
later.
Conclusion: Primary ovarian lymphomas are rare. Their prognosis is
better than secondary lymphomas which have to be excluded clinically.
In our case the patient is free of disease one year later.
E-PS-11-046
HPV profile of adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix: a 10 year-
histopathological review of 242 cases in a large prevention centre
Y. Machado*, L. Luis Souza Véras, A. da Costa Rendeiro, C. Casella
Amirati, G. Ramos Teixeira, C. Carvalho, I. Rosan, V. Duval da Silva, G.
Macedo Matsushita
*Barretos Cancer Hospital, Brazil
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Adenocarcinoma (AC) comprises 10-25% of
all cervical carcinomas in developed countries, and 94% are associated
with high-risk HPV. This study aimed to determine the epidemiology,
morphology, and HPV profile.
Methods: A retrospective review between January 2008 and January
2019 was performed using the cancer registry database in a single refer-
ence centre for cancer prevention in Brazil.
Results: Two hundred forty-two patients were diagnosed with AC. The
majority of the patients were in their forties (88 patients - 36%). Invasive
cases comprised 47.5%, and 44.6% were “in situ” AC. Of these, 173
patients were treated with surgery. HPV profile was performed in 64
patients using real-time PCR (Cobas 480® platform, Roche, Basel).
Twenty-nine were high-risk HPV positive. The most common phenotype
was HPV 16. The overall mortality rate was 12%.
Conclusion: Unlike the literature, our study identified HPV 16 as the
most common subtype. The age range was composed of younger women
as compared to the literature.
E-PS-11-047
Hyperreactio luteinalis after delivery: a case report of a rare entity
with literature review
S. Makni*, C. Kammoun, S. Moussa, O. Boudaouara, S. Graja,
C. Chaari, T. Sellami, N. Gouiaa
*Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Hyperreactio luteinalis is a rare condition
characterized by bilateral cystic enlargement of the ovaries, mimicking
malignancy, during pregnancy, post partum or ovulation induction .
The aim of this work is to analyse epidemiological, clinical and patho-
logical aspects of this entity.
Methods: We present a case of hyperreactio luteinalis in 31 year old
women collected in our institution in 2019.
Results: A 31 year old woman consults for distension and abdominal
pains, 7 days after delivery of a healthy baby. Ultrasound shows bilateral
cystic ovarian tumours suspect of torsion. A left oophorectomy and a
right cystectomy were performed in an emergency.
Macroscopically , the left ovary was enlarged and replaced by multiple
cysts with brownish content and thickened partitions without solid ele-
ments, the right cystectomy consist of multilocular cyst with translucent
wall and yellowish content.
Histologically, ovarian cysts were lined by luteinized with abundant eo-
sinophilic granular cytoplasm and round nucleus sometimes nucleated ,
resting on an oedematous stroma containing clusters of these cells.
Conclusion: There are only very few case report of Hyperreactio luteinalis
occurring after delivery. This case highlights the confusion between this entity
and ovarian malignancy and the importance of increased clinician awareness
with hyperreactio luteinalis diagnosis to reduce unnecessary surgical proce-
dures and prevent morbidity from surgery.
E-PS-11-048
A rare case of stromal luteoma of ovary: case report and literature review
R. Malima*, F. Zerd
*Muhimbili Medical University, Tanzania
Background & objectives: Steroid cell tumours are rare sub-group of
sex-cord ovarian tumours accounting 0.1% of all primary ovarian tu-
mours. Symptoms differ depending the hormones secreted from the tu-
mour cell. Stromal luteomas presents with hyper-estrogenic symptoms as
irregular menses, mood swing and headache.
Methods: A 26-year-old female, married 4 years ago, presented with
primary infertility, irregular menses, painful on and off left iliac fossa
mass for 3 years. She had several dilate and curettages (D&C) and treated
as hormonal imbalance without improvement. Preoperative transvaginal
ultrasonographic examination revealed a 1.2cm left ovarian tumour, oo-
phorectomy done and histology revealed stromal hyperthecosis.
Results: Steroid cell tumours account for 0.1% of all primary ovarian
tumours, and classified as: stromal luteomas, Leydig cell tumours and
steroid cell tumours not otherwise specified (NOS). A 26-year-old fe-
male, presented with primary infertility, irregular menses, painful left iliac
fossa mass for 3 years.
Preoperative transvaginal ultrasonography revealed a 1.2 cm left ovarian
tumour. Grossly specimen appeared yellow coloured, solid with clear
borders, tumour sized 1.5x1.3 cm. Microscopic examination showed be-
nign stromal hyperthecosis. To exclude Malignant melanomas as
mimickers S100 and HMB-45 stained negative. With clinical and histo-
pathological examination, patient diagnosed with stromal luteoma a be-
nign tumours surgically treated without staging, as these tumours are seen
very rarely.
Conclusion: Ovaries should be carefully examined with transvaginal ul-
trasonography to reveal any ovarian pathology in all age women presenting
with irregular bleeding. Stromal luteomas presents with hyper-estrogenic
symptoms as irregular menses, mood swing and headache. Stromal
luteomas should be considered as one of the reasons though are rare and
are confirmed through endometrial curettage and ovarian histology.
Stromal luteomas are benign tumours surgically treated without staging.
E-PS-11-049
Endometrial carcinoma and Lynch syndrome in Botswana
A. Maoto-Mokote*, L. Kyokunda
*Faculty of Medicine, Botswana
Background & objectives: Endometrial carcinoma is the sixth most
common cancer in women. It is traditionally classified into type I and
II. Type II usually arises in elderly women and carries a worse prognosis
and Type I in younger women with better prognosis.
Methods: All cases of endometrial cancer seen at the National Health
Laboratory, Gaborone, Botswana from 2012-2019 were reviewed. A se-
lect number of cases were screened for Lynch syndrome using the four
immunohistochemical stains (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2).
Results: 38 cases were included in the study. 15/38 (39.5%) of the wom-
en were diagnosed with Type I endometrial carcinoma whilst 23/38
(60.5%) were diagnosed with Type II endometrial carcinoma. 10/38
(26%) of the cases were tested for DNA mismatch repair gene mutations
using the four panel immunohistochemical stains. 7/10 of these cases
showed intact staining for all stains and 3/10 had indeterminate results.
Conclusion: This study shows that the burden of endometrial cancer in
Botswana is largely attributable to Type II endometrial cancers which
varies from the published literature which shows Type I endometrial
cancers to be more common. A myriad of preanalytical factors have been
shown to influence immunohistochemical staining patterns and many of
these factors unfortunately plague our Anatomical Pathology laboratory.
Funding: BDIAP grant
E-PS-11-050
Elevated neurokinin 1-receptor expression in uterine products is
associated with first trimester miscarriages
R. Mehboob*
*University of Lahore, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Miscarriage is a common complication of
early pregnancy, mostly occurring in first trimester. The present study
aimed to clarify the localization and expression for NK-1R in human
retained products of conception, not known previously
Methods: NK-1R expression was assessed in products of conception and
normal placental tissues by immunohistochemistry; protein expression
was evaluated using the nuclear labelling index (%).
Results: Ten human products of conception tissues were studied by im-
munohistochemistry to demonstrate the localization of NK-1R. The ex-
pression of NK-1R protein was high in all the cases of POCs. NK-1R
expression showed no notable differences among different cases of mis-
carriages irrespective of the mother’s age and gestational age at which the
event occurred.
Conclusion: Expression of NK-1R was similar in all the cases. It shows
that dysregulation of NK-1R might be involved in miscarriages, abor-
tions. It will open new avenues to investigate sudden perinatal deaths.
Thus, the present study recommends that SP/NK1R system might, there-
fore, be considered as an emerging and promising diagnostic and thera-
peutic strategy against SIDS, SIUDS and miscarriages. Hence, we report
for the first time, the expression and localization of NK-1R in products of
conception.
E-PS-11-051
The oestrogen plasma level does not relate to fallopian tube epitheli-
um differentiation
K. Mikus Kuracinova*, P. Janega, M. Foltin, J. Zahumensky, I. Varga,
P. Babál
*Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University,
Slovakia
Background & objectives: Non-uterine high-grade serous carcinomas
are believed to arise from precursors in the fallopian tube. The distribution
of epithelial cell types is not uniform and there is not sufficient evidence
supporting hormonal regulation of their differentiation.
Methods: The study material consisted of 14 cases after total hysterecto-
my mostly for myomatosis of the uterus (women age 41 – 56 years). We
evaluated oestrogen levels and compared with the percentage of secretory
cells in the fallopian tubes. Oestrogen receptor (ER) and Bcl-2 protein
expression was assessed immunohistochemically. Secretory/stem cell
outgrowth (SCOUT) represented expansion of at least 20 secretory cells.
Results: Immunohistochemical stain for oestrogen receptor and Bcl-2 vi-
sualized secretory cells, distinct from ciliated epithelial cells with weak ER
and no Bcl-2 expression. In 50% of cases we found SCOUTs regardless of
age, without apparent location prevalence. It showed a positive correlation
with increasing percentage of secretory cells in the mucosa. The histopath-
ological findings did not correlate with oestrogen blood levels.
Conclusion: Despite of no correlation with oestrogen plasma levels, high
expression of ER together with Bcl-2 in the secretory cells might partic-
ipate at the formation of SCOUTs, the increased frequency of which is
linked to serous carcinoma development.
Supported by APVV-18-0499
E-PS-11-052
Uterine mesonephric carcinoma: an uncommon carcinoma that must
be distinguished from mesonephric-like carcinoma of endometrium
L.O. Moscoso Miranda*, L. Salazar Huayna, A. Reques Llanos,
J. Castellvi Vives, S. Ramón y Cajal, A. Garcia Jimenez
*Vall d´Hebron University Hospital, Spain
Background & objectives: Mesonephric carcinomas (MC) of female
genital tract are unusual neoplasms located on the lateral walls of uterine
cervix although have also been reported in other gynaecological loca-
tions. The uterine origin is extremely rare, only few cases have been
reported hitherto.
Methods: We report a 66 year-old woman with a background of vaginal
bleeding. Magnetic Resonance image showed a uterine enlargement of 16
cm, involving all the wall thickness. With a diagnosis of uterine sarcoma,
the patient was undergone a surgical radical hysterectomy. The tumour
involved all entire uterine thickness, yet no intracavitary lesion was
identified.
Results: The histology revealed a series of contorted papillae with non-
stratified nuclei and fine chromatin giving a clear appearance. By immu-
nochemistry (ICH) the cells expressed neither oestrogen nor progesterone
receptors, whereas were positive for GATA-3 and CD10. The Ki 67 was
high; >80%. On the contrary, the immunostain of cytokeratin CK7 only
was patchy.
Conclusion: Myometrial depth involvement, where presumably meso-
nephric remnants can be present, is a requirement for diagnosis MC and
must be distinguished from endometrioid mesonephric-like carcinomas
(EMC) that are more frequent. Morphological and IHC both are indis-
tinct, despite having the same histology and IHC. EMC are intracavitary
tumours and use to be more aggressive. As the true MC is concerned, its
behaviour is still unknown due to few number of cases reported.
E-PS-11-054
Endometrial lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma – a very rare
location
M. Njima*, S. Ben Hammoda, N. Ben Abdeljelil, A. Bellalah, S. Gharbi,
A. Ben Mabrouk, L. Njim, R. Hadhri
*Department of Pathology, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital,
Monastir, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Lymphoepithelioma–like carcinomas
(LELCs) are tumours with histological features similar to those of
lymphoepithelioma of nasopharynx. They have been described in many
organs including female genital tract. However, only few cases have been
described in in the endometrium.
Methods: We hereby report a rare case of a 73-year-old woman,
G4.P3.A1, presented with postmenopausal vaginal bleeding. She
consulted the local doctor and she underwent endometrial curettage
biopsy.
Results: The material from endometrial curettage consisted of small frag-
ments of poorly differentiated carcinoma, showing focal area of necrosis.
The tumour was composed of poorly defined nests of large syncytial
cells. The tumour cells had eosinophilic to amphophilic cytoplasm with
round to oval vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli and high mitotic
index. The tumour nests were surrounded by dense lymphoplasmacytic
infiltrate. Immunohistochemically, the tumour cells were strongly and
diffusely positive for cytokeratins AE1/AE3 and Oestrogen receptors.
Conclusion: LELC arising in endometrium is an extremely rare tumour.
Only seven cases of LELC have been reported in literature to date.
Nevertheless, there are no association with Epstein-Barr virus and
LELC in this location such as in nasopharyngeal lymphoepithelioma.
E-PS-11-055
Uterine adenosarcoma: analysis of 3 cases
M.B. Pimentão*, J. Gama, A. Lai, F. Ramalhosa, J. Madeira, C. Faria,
V. Almeida, R. Almeida, H. Moreira, R. Oliveira, T. Silva, M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Adenosarcoma or Mullerian Adenosarcoma
represents 6% of uterine sarcomas. It is composed by two components,
one benign epithelial and a low grade sarcomatous stromal component.
Uterine corpus is the most common site but cervical cases are described in
about 2%.
Methods: We reviewed all cases of uterine and cervix adenosarcoma
from 2009 to 2019, at Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, an
Universitary and tertiary centre.
Results: We found 3 cases, with a mean age of 53,3- years-old. Two
cases were located in the corpus in patients both with 69 - years-old, and
one in the cervix in a 22 - years-old. One case was an adenosarcoma with
sarcomatous overgrowth, which is a rare variant in which the stromal
component is a high grade sarcoma in at least 25% of the tumour. The
Virchows Arch
clinical presentation were abnormal vaginal bleeding and abdominal pain.
Grossly the cervical adenosarcoma corresponded to a polyp. Our three
cases had an average of 6 years disease-free survival, although
adenosarcomas are known for having poor outcome.
Conclusion: Adenosarcomas are extremely rare, typically found in mid-
dle age women. Cervical adenosarcomas are even rarer usually found in
women of reproductive age and mainly present as cervical polyps and can
be misunderstood as benign lesions as seen in our case.
E-PS-11-056
Uterine leiomyosarcoma: a series of 7 cases
M.B. Pimentão*, J. Gama, A. Lai, J. Madeira, F. Ramalhosa, H. Moreira,
C. Faria, V. Almeida, R. Almeida, R. Oliveira, T. Silva, M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Leiomyosarcoma is the most common uter-
ine sarcoma representing 1-2% of all uterine malignancies. Cervical sar-
comas are extremely rare tumours accounting for 1% of the cases.
Methods: We reviewed all cases of uterine leiomyosarcomas from 2009
to 2019, at Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, an Universitary
and tertiary centre.
Results: We found 7 cases, with a mean age of 59,6 years-old. Four cases
were located in the corpus, one bifocal and three in the cervix. The clinical
presentation was abnormal vaginal bleeding and abdominal pain. All the
cases presented with a mass with a mean diameter of 10,5cm and were
histologically classified as spindle cell leiomyosarcomas. High grade
leiomyosarcomas, with more aggressive histologically behaviour, were
located in the cervix, showed marked cellular atypia and more than 10
mitoses/10 high power fields. Leiomyosarcoma is associated with poor
prognosis and our cases have an average of 5,4 years disease-free
survival.
Conclusion: Although cervical leiomyosarcoma is a rare location in our
series almost half of the cases were found in the cervix. Mores studies are
needed to clear up the prognosis of leiomyosarcomas specially in cervical
location.
E-PS-11-058
Intravenous leiomyomatosis pathology: case report
O. Reshetnikova*, O. Zinchenko, I. Goryanikova, N. Mosyagina,
A. Khoroshevskaya
*Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Russia
Background & objectives: Intravenous leiomyomatosis (IVL) is a rare
benign neoplasm of smooth muscle cells, usually arising from the uterus.
It can develop directly from the smooth muscle wall of large veins, or is
formed during intravascular invasion of the uterine leiomyoma.
Methods: We report the case of giant IVL located in the inferior vena
cava. Female patient,38y.o, had a hysterectomy for a uterine cellular
leiomyoma in her medical history. Now a tumour was removed from
the inferior vena cava, continuing from the pelvis to the right atrium.
Tumour samples were evaluated grossly, and then microscopic examina-
tion of histological slides was carried out.
Results: Gross examination revealed a cylindrical shape rubbery tumour,
50 cm long, 4 cm in diameter. Its surface was smooth, grey-pink in
colour, covered with a thin translucent capsule. In the section, the tumour
was fibrous, with severe oedema and multiple small cysts with a diameter
of up to 0.2 cm. Cysts were filled with a slightly unclear grey liquid.
Histologically neoplasm was represented by elongated spindle-shaped
cells that formed solid fields. It had minimal cell atypia and rare mitotic
figures. The stroma of the tumour was loose and swollen. Based on a
morphological study, the diagnosis IVL with growth in the lumen of the
inferior vena cava was made.
Conclusion: IVL is an uncommon tumour, it may extend intravascularly
and reach the inferior vena cava, right atrium, and pulmonary arteries.
Early diagnosis and complete tumour resection is important in treating the
disease. The tumour material needs further thorough research, including
immunohistochemical and molecular genetic studies to identify the
causes, new diagnostic criteria. Morphological features and the differen-
tial diagnosis of this rare tumour in the light of the literature are discussed.
E-PS-11-059
Atypical papillary mucinous proliferations of the endometrium –
diagnostic difficulties on curettage specimen
M.Â. Rodrigues Oliveira*, A. Lozada, C. Ivanova, P. Luís
*Hospital Distrital de Santarém, E.P.E., Portugal
Background & objectives: WHO Classification categorizes endometrial
mucinous proliferations that display "confluent or cribriform architecture
with even minimal atypia" in sampling specimens as carcinoma, and
other features that aren’t diagnostic of carcinoma as atypical mucinous
glandular proliferations (AMGP).
Methods: We present a case of a 58 year-old woman with no relevant
personal history and not under hormone replacement therapy, referred to
consultation for postmenopausal metrorrhagia.
Ultrasound showed multiple uterine nodules in the myometrium and in-
tracavitary. MRI scan demonstrated endometrial thickening of 11mm.
Hysteroscopy revealed endometrial cavity filled with multiple digitiform
projections with atypical vascularization, and curettage was made.
Results: Histologically there was a papillary glandular proliferation with
complex ramified architecture, with morphologic characteristics resem-
bling mucinous and eosinophilic metaplasia, multiple neutrophilic
microabscesses, moderate pleomorphism, nuclear pseudoestratification
and presence of macronucleolus, but without evidence of cribriform or
confluent pattern.
Hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy was performed.
Macroscopy examination revealed an intracavitary 2,5cm creamy white
tumour that appeared to invade the myometrium superficially.
Histological examination was consistent with mucinous carcinoma.
Conclusion: Although the aspects of the biopsy specimen were suspi-
cious of malignancy, they didn´t fulfil all the morphologic criteria for
carcinoma, mainly due to scarcity and superficiality of the sampling,
and so it wasn’t possible to sign it out as carcinoma.
AMGP of the endometrium are a rare and heterogeneous group that
include lesions ranging from metaplasia to carcinoma. There are no de-
finitive morphologic criteria nor immunohistochemistry to rule out ma-
lignancy.
E-PS-11-060
One of the rarest benign solid tumours of the ovary
M.Â. Rodrigues Oliveira*, A. Lozada, S. Ortiz, C. Ivanova,
A.R. Vicente, R. Vicente Costa
*Hospital Distrital de Santarém, E.P.E., Portugal
Background & objectives: Ovarian leiomyoma (OL) is a very unusual
benign tumour, most often occurring in premenopausal women, and ac-
counts for 0.5-1% of all benign ovarian neoplasia. Since Sangalli first
described OL in 1862, fewer than 100 cases have been reported.
Methods: We present a case of a 50-year-old woman that was referred to
gynaecology department for a mass incidentally found in her pelvic cav-
ity. Computed tomography showed a soft tissue tumour inseparable from
the right ovary. Biochemical tests and tumour markers were within nor-
mal ranges. Total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
was performed.
Results: Ovary measured 5.5x3.5x2.5cm with a solid, firm, oval mass.
Outer surface was smooth and cut section revealed a well-circumscribed,
homogeneous, grey-white solid mass with lobulated appearance, entirely
within the ovary and measured 4.5 cm in diameter. Microscopic exami-
nation revealed interlacing fascicles of smooth muscles cells, without any
evidence of atypia, mitosis or necrosis. The histopathological diagnosis of
OL was made on basis of histologic features.
Conclusion: OL is usually small and asymptomatic, mostly discovered
incidentally during routine examination, surgery or autopsy. Precise his-
togenesis of OL is unknown. Microscopically areas of leiomyosarcoma
should be excluded. Differential diagnosis includes other solid ovarian
tumours such as fibroma, thecoma, low-grade endometrioid stromal sar-
coma, as well as secondary involvement. After complete resection, OL
rarely recurs and the prognosis is excellent.
E-PS-11-061
Unusual clear cell variant of papillary carcinoma in struma ovarii: a
case report
Y. Rogov*, N. Kornev, A. Syantovich, V. Zubovich, S. Petruleva
*Belarusian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Belarus
Background & objectives: Malignancy of ovarian struma is reported in
less than 5% of cases. Papillary carcinoma, as in the thyroid gland, is
more common here. We present a rare case of a clear cell variant of
papillary cancer in struma ovarii.
Methods: A 68-year-old woman has been hospitalized for a painful pal-
pable tumour of the left ovary. After salpingo-oophorectomy, the material
was examined. Macroscopically, the ovary was enlarged as a tumour
node 5.0 cm in diameter. The cut surface was brown, with multiple cysts
filled with jelly-like contents and solid areas. Histological and immuno-
histochemical studies were performed.
Results: Microscopic evaluation of this tumour revealed a conventional type
struma composed of typical small to medium sized follicles lined with cuboi-
dal epithelium and filled with an eosinophilic colloid. In addition to this
tumour there were areas significantly differed in structure. This thyroid-type
tissue showed crowding follicles with irregular contours and papillary struc-
tures. They were composed predominantly of clear cells with optically empty
cytoplasm. The nuclear alterations were close to those of conventional thyroid
papillary carcinoma (oval shape, clearing, ground glass appearance, mem-
brane irregularity, pseudoinclusions). Immunohistochemical staining was
positive for TTF1, PAX8, Thyroglobuline. This tumour was diagnosed as a
struma ovarii with a clear cell variant of papillary carcinoma.
Conclusion: Clear cell variant of malignant struma ovarii is an extremely
rare lesion. The biological nature of this tumour and its behaviour are
unknown. In this case, no metastases were detected. Long-term follow-up
is necessary for developing an adequate treatment and prognosis.
E-PS-11-062
Hereditary leiomyomatosis showing deletion of 1p in multiple lesions:
a case report
N. Sadiq*, G. Hislop, J. Berg, E. Murray, K. Ragupathy, L. Christie
*Ninewells Hospital, NHS Tayside, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: A 40 year old Para1 presented with a 4
month history of abdominal distension. Past history included a large
vulval cutaneous leiomyoma. There was a family history of multiple
leiomyomata in her mother and sister at an early age.
Methods: She underwent total abdominal hysterectomy, myomectomy
and salpingo-oophorectomy for multiple large solid and cystic lesions.
The largest was a smooth muscle tumour of uncertain malignant
potential(STUMP) and the remainder were benign leiomyomata. This
unusual presentation raised suspicion of Hereditary Leiomyomatosis
and Renal Cell Carcinoma (HLRCC) which carries a risk of aggressive
renal cell carcinoma. She was referred to clinical genetics.
Results: Sanger sequencing of the Fumarate Hydratase(FH) gene which
is responsible for HLRCC was carried out which showed no evidence of a
mutation at 1q43. SNP array analysis of 6 tumours including the cutane-
ous lesion and a leiomyoma from the proband’s sister was carried out. No
loss of heterozygosity at the FH locus was detected. However, deletions
of 1p were seen in five of the tumours with retention of the same 1p
haplotype. Deletions of 13q were seen in three. The results indicate the
absence of a germline pathogenic variant in the FH gene which is asso-
ciated with HLRCC. However, deletion of 1p is a recurrent but rare
finding in leiomyomata.
Conclusion: Detection of recurrent 1p deletion with retention of the same
haplotype in multiple lesions in the family is highly unusual and sugges-
tive of a familial variant in a tumour suppressor gene in this region caus-
ing a dominant predisposition to leiomyomata and as yet unknown risk of
renal cancers.
E-PS-11-065
Placental metastases of maternal anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: a
case report
I. Torralba Cloquell*, E. Prados Pérez, M.A. Martínez Ortega, E. Antón
Valentí
*Hospital Universitario Son Espases, Spain
Background & objectives: Metastatic malignancies in placenta are
underreported despite their prevalence (~1:1000 pregnancies). We report
a case of a 44-year-old female with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma with
breast metastases who underwent a caesarean section on gestation week
33 and had placental metastases
Methods: For the microscopic study, we included several sections of the
placental disc, membranes and umbilical cord. CKAE1/AE3, p53, cyclin-
D1, TTF-1, Ki-67 and BRAF immunostains were made in order to iden-
tify and study tumoral cells.
Results: The placenta weighed 444 g and the macroscopic examination
revealed several solid nodules, well delimited and non-capsulated, mea-
suring from 0.4 cm to 1.7 cm. The umbilical cord measured 42 cm and
showed no abnormalities. Microscopically, the tumours were composed
of cells with marked atypia, eosinophil cytoplasm and pleomorphic nuclei
with prominent nucleoli. The infiltrate was confined to the maternal
space, occupying perivillous spaces, but no villous infiltration was iden-
tified. Immunohistochemically, tumoral cells were positive for CKAE1/
AE3, cyclin-D1 and overexpressed p53. TTF-1 was negative. BRAF was
mutated. Ki-67 proliferative index was 75-80%.
Conclusion: It seems that thyroid carcinoma metastases to placenta
are very uncommon, although is highly recommended to do an
exhaustive study of the placenta in cases of maternal cancer given
its prevalence.
E-PS-11-069
A case of coexistence of uterine lipoleiomyoma, leiomyoma, endome-
trial polyp and early clear cell carcinoma of the endometrium, never
described before
H.J. Trihia*, G. Galanopoulos, E. Souka, I. Provatas, L. Karelis
*Department of Pathology, 'Metaxas' Memorial Cancer Hospital,
Department, Greece
Background & objectives: Uterine lipoleiomyoma is a rare variant of
leiomyoma with considerable amount of adipocytes. It may have con-
comitant malignancy and abnormal oestrogen status. We report a case of
coexistent uterine lipoleiomyoma, leiomyoma, endometrial polyp and
clear cell carcinoma of the endometrium.
Methods: A 66-year old woman, was admitted in our hospital for surgical
treatment. She was diagnosed with an endometrial polyp with focal com-
plex atypical endometrial hyperplasia in D&C. She underwent total ab-
dominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.
Results: Macroscopic examination revealed a 2.5cm well-circumscribed
soft mass, with a yellow cut surface, on the anterior surface of the fundus
and one small intramural leiomyoma of 0.5cm. In the endometrial cavity
there was a 2cm endometrial polyp, with an early clear cell carcinoma.
Microscopically, the intramural tumour proved to be a lipoleiomyoma.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Lipoleiomyomas are found incidentally during surgery for
other reasons. They are associated with hyperoestrogenic-related condi-
tions. Our findings are in concordance with the ones referred in the liter-
ature, of concomitant gynaecologic malignancy. In conclusion the pres-
ence of adipocytes in an otherwise normal leiomyoma should lead to
further detailed clinical and pathological evaluation in order not to over-
look a coexistent gynaecologic malignancy. Although lipoleiomyomas
have a favourable prognosis, the pathogenesis and clinical significance
of these rare neoplasms remain to be clarified.
E-PS-11-070
Recurrent struma ovarii with incidental peritoneal inclusion cysts. A
potential pitfall
H.J. Trihia*, L. Karelis, D. Korfias, E. Souka, A. Fotiou, G. Vorgias
*Department of Pathology, 'Metaxas' Memorial Cancer Hospital,
Department, Greece
Background & objectives: Peritoneal inclusion cysts (PICs) is the for-
mation of multicystic abdominal masses. They are associated with previ-
ous abdominal surgery. Struma ovarii can be accompanied by ascites and
raised CA-125. We present a case of recurrent struma ovarii, associated
with incidental PICs.
Methods: A 22 year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with asci-
tes. She was diagnosed with a right ovarian mass and raised CA-125
(2761.3 U/ml). Her surgical history included a prior laparoscopic
cystectomy, for struma ovarii, with preservation of the right ovary. The
association of pelvic mass, ascites and elevated CA-125, was highly
suspicious of malignancy. The woman underwent right salpingo-
oophorectomy.
Results: The ovarian mass was a pure struma ovarii. Pathological exam-
ination of the cystic structures was consistent with IPCs.
Conclusion: IPCs are rare cystic structures that arise from the abdominal
peritoneum and can mimic gynaecologic malignancies. Past histological
diagnosis should always be reviewed. CA-125 can be elevated in both
benign and malignant ovarian tumours, including struma ovarii. The co-
existence of a second pathology, not diagnosed preoperatively, like IPCs
should be borne in mind in cases of ascites after previous surgery.
E-PS-11-071
Microglandular hyperplasia-like mucinous adenocarcinoma of the
endometrium. A very rare entity and a challenging diagnosis in cu-
rettage specimen
H.J. Trihia*, E. Souka, G. Galanopoulos, A. Fotiou, K. Kokkali,
L. Karelis
*Department of Pathology, 'Metaxas' Memorial Cancer Hospital,
Department, Greece
Background & objectives: Microglandular hyperplasia (MGH) is a pro-
liferation of endocervical glands, related to oestrogen stimulation, mainly
occurring in the reproductive age group. The differential diagnosis in-
cludes endometrial adenocarcinoma with MGH-like pattern (MGA), a
distinction that may be particularly problematic in curettage specimen.
Methods: A 57-year old, postmenopausal woman was admitted in our
hospital for surgical treatment. She had been diagnosed with a uterine
leiomyoma, after complaints of irregular vaginal bleeding. She underwent
D&C and subsequent total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy.
Results: D&C were compatible with MGA. Histologically, a prolifera-
tion of small glands, without intervening stroma, with mucin production,
accumulation of neutrophils in the gland lumen and stroma, mild nuclear
atypia and rare mitoses, were seen. In the hysterectomy specimen, the
endometrium was thickened, but without apparent tumour formation. On
microscopic examination, a residual similar adenocarcinoma was seen in
the isthmus and more conventional-of endometrioid type, in the rest of the
endometrium.
Conclusion: MGH-like proliferation with mild cytologic atypia, detected
in the endometrial curettage specimen of a postmenopausal woman,
should alert pathologists for MGA of the endometrium. VIM, p16, ER,
PR, CD10 and CD34 may help in the differential diagnosis.
E-PS-11-072
Squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix associated with
osteoclast-like giant cells: a case report
P. Tziakou*, E. Arkoumani, A. Ieronymaki, G. Galanopoulos, A. Zizi-
Sermpetzoglou
*Pathology Department, Thriasio General Hospital of Elefsina, Greece
Background & objectives: Cervical carcinoma is the most common
malignancy of the female genital tract. Osteoclastic giant cells (OGCs)
have been reported mainly in pancreatic and breast carcinomas. OGCs
squamous cell carcinoma in uterine cervix is an unusual histological
variant.
Methods: We present a case of a 79-year-old woman with a 4-month
history of irregular vaginal bleeding. Colposcopy was performed and a
cauliflower-like mass was identified at the front lip of the uterine cervix.
Biopsy was performed.
Results: Microscopically the tumour was composed of infiltrative nests
of poorly differentiated nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma.
Interspersed in between these tumour cells were numerous osteoclastic
giant cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with devoid of nuclear
atypia. Immunohistochemistry was performed using P63, cytokeratin
(pankeratin-CK), Vimentin, CD68, CD20, and CD3. CK and P63 were
strongly positive in the squamous component and negative in the OGCs,
while Vimentin and CD-68 were strongly positive in the giant cell pop-
ulation and negative in the squamous component. Expression of CD20
and CD3 showed a reactive pattern of the lymphocytic areas.
Conclusion: The presence of OGCs in squamous cell carcinoma of the
uterine cervix appears to be an indicator of poor prognosis. However, the
type of primary tumour appears to be the main determinant of prognosis.
Considering the age of the our patient, radiotherapy was administered.
The patient succumbed due to brain metastasis of the tumour after eight
months of follow-up.
E-PS-11-073
Angioleiomyoma of broad ligament of uterus: a case report
P. Tziakou*, A. Ieronymaki, M. Papazian, E. Papakonstantinou
*Pathology Department, Thriasio General Hospital of Elefsina, Greece
Background & objectives: Uterine angioleiomyoma is an extremely rare
neoplasm, which occurs in middle-aged women who commonly present
with menorrhagia, abdominal pain, or abdominal mass. The lesions are
either single or multiple and manifest as submucosal, intramural, or
subserosal whorled nodules.
Methods: A 47- year- old woman presented to the Gynaecology outpa-
tient department of our hospital with complaints of vaginal bleeding. The
patient underwent total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorecto-
my. Grossly, two circumscribed solid tumours measuring 2 and 5cm were
found at the broad ligament of the uterus which showed worlly appear-
ance after sectioning.
Results: The microscopic examination revealed circumscribed fascicles
of spindled well-differentiated smooth muscle cells, with interspersed
thick walled blood vessels. No hypercellularity, pleomorphism, mitotic
figures, or necrosis was identified. Immunohistochemical study showed
strong positivity to SMA, Desmin, PR, weak staining and focally posi-
tivity to CD10, negativity to HMB-45. The Ki67 labelling index was low
(<1%).
Conclusion: Uterine angioleiomyoma is a rare variant of uterine
leiomyomas. Preoperative diagnosis is extremely difficult because of
the fact that there are no specific imaging findings . The treatment of
choice is surgical excision and the differential diagnosis includes endo-
metrial stromal nodule, angiomyofibroblastoma and perivascular epithe-
lioid cell tumour. Also, it is important to recognize this entity and differ-
entiate it from a malignancy.
E-PS-11-074
Primary strumal carcinoid of the ovary presenting with severe
constipation
S. Umuganwa*, A.B. IGIHOZO Sindikubwabo, E. Karinganire,
A. Izimukwiye, T.Z. Muvunyi, B. Rugwizangoga
*School of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Rwanda, Kigali,
Rwanda
Background & objectives: Strumal carcinoid of the ovary is an uncom-
mon form of ovarian teratoma composed of a mixture of thyroid tissue
and carcinoid. They account for approximately 0.5-1.7% of all carcinoids
which are less than 0.1% of all ovarian malignancies.
Methods: We report a case of a 62 year old female patient who presented
with progressive abdominal pain, distention and severe constipation over
5 years. CT scan showed a large left ovarian cystic mass suggestive of a
cystic teratoma. On explorative laparotomy, there was little ascites and a
total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-ophorectomy was done. The
specimen was sent for histopathology analysis
Results: Grossly, the ovarian mass measured 34x10x5 cm and weighed
634g. It was soft, nodulated and encapsulated. On cut section, it had solid
and cystic areas containing yellowish greasy material. On microscopy,
H&E stained sections showed a neoplasm exhibiting features of both
struma ovarii and carcinoid tumour characterized by solid areas of nests,
trabeculae, cords, ribbon and cribriform patterns of carcinoid cells.
Synaptophysin was diffusely positive in the carcinoid cells.
Conclusion: Strumal carcinoid of the ovary is a rare entity and these
cases have only rarely been reported, although there may be many unre-
ported cases.
E-PS-11-075
Stemness in high grade serous carcinoma of tubo-ovarian origin: a
challenging immunohistochemical pitfall
M.R. Van Bockstal*, D. Augusto
*University Clinics Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium
Background & objectives: Architecturally and/or cytologically diverse
areas in high grade serous carcinoma of tubo-ovarian origin can cause
diagnostic confusion. This case illustrates that clear cells and stemness in
HGSC can cause multiple immunohistochemical pitfalls, thereby mim-
icking a dysgerminoma component.
Methods: A unilateral ovarian neoplasm of a 77-years-old lady was
referred to an academic laboratory for further investigation. The reason
for the referral included the presence of clear cell areas associated with a
bizarre immunohistochemical staining pattern, evoking the diagnosis of a
dysgerminoma. Additional immunohistochemical stainings and targeted
next-generation sequencing were performed to establish the final
diagnosis.
Results: A unilateral ovarian mass with prominent atypia, numerous
mitoses and necrosis showed clear cells with associated CD117 and
PLAP expression, and focal immunoreactivity for glypican-3 and
podoplanin. The tumour showed diffuse expression of EMA, CK-
AE1/AE3, PAX8 and WT1, without immunoreactivity for OCT4
and SALL4. The tumour showed a mutation-type p53 staining pat-
tern and harboured a pathogenic TP53 missense mutation. This pro-
file corresponded with a HGSC, and not with a dysgerminoma.
Conclusion: HGSC of tubo-ovarian origin is a malignant neoplasm with
heterogeneous morphology, comprising various architectural patterns and
diverse cytological aspects, which often coexist within a single tumour.
Clear cell areas may mimic other tumour types, thereby causing diagnos-
tic confusion. The expression of CD117, PLAP, glypican-3 and
podoplanin in HGSC might indicate stemness, i.e. the tumour acquires
pluripotency, probably indicating a more aggressive behaviour. Future
studies should investigate whether stemness in HGSC identifies a patient
subgroup with poor prognosis.
Funding: M.R. Van Bockstal received a grant (2019-089) from the
Foundation Against Cancer (Brussels, Belgium).
E-PS-11-076
Vulvar Paget’s disease – a case report
B. Vukomanovic Djurdjevic*, B. Andrejic Visnjic
*Military Medical Academy Belgrade, Serbia
Background & objectives: Paget’s disease of the vulva is a rare tumour
with the incidence below 2%, often combined with other malignancies.
Methods: Patient, age 77, complained of prolonged itching and redness
of the vulvar skin. Due to resistance to applied therapy, lesion was
biopsied, and a microinvasive Paget’s disease was diagnosed. Complete
excision was performed, and tissue was histologically processed using
hematoxilin&eosin and immunohistochemistry (CK20, CK7, CEA, p16,
survivin, S100, HMB45, Melan A).
Results: Tumour cells were larger than basal and parabasal skin cells,
with large nucleuses and vacuolated cytoplasm due to intracellular mu-
cus. Tumour cells were located in the parabasal area of the skin, but in few
focuses they invaded under the basement membrane (maximal depth of
1mm), as single cells or small clusters. Tumour cells were positive to
CK20, CEA, p16 and survivin, and negative to CK7, HMB45, S100
and Melan A.
Conclusion: Immunohistochemical analyses are valuable in diagnos-
tic process for such a rare tumour like primary vulvar microinvasive
Paget’s disease. It is of great importance not only for proper diagno-
sis, but also for defining the primary site and prognosis. Thorough
clinical examinations led to a diagnosis of colonic villous adenoma
with high grade dysplasia. After 4 years, patient had relapsed, when
immunoprofile of tumour cells was CK20 negative, CK7 positive. At
that time, patient was diagnosed with nonmetastatic lobular breast
carcinoma.
E-PS-12-002
Neurotropic mycosis fungoides causing a cryptic painful neuropathy
A. Abrari*
*The Rotherham NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Neurolymphomatosis (NL) is a rare clinical
entity of nerve infiltration by neurotropic cells in a known or occult
hematologic malignancy. Peripheral nerve infiltration in T-cell malignan-
cies is vanishingly rare. The diagnosis can be elusive in symptomatic
patients without known lymphoma.
Methods: Neuropathic pain prompted a sural nerve biopsy.
Transcompartmental infiltration of nerve fascicles by highly atypical
lymphoid cells, with irregular convoluted nuclear contours.
Immunohistochemistry denoted these to be CD4 expressing T-cells,
clonal on T- cell receptor rearrangement PCR study. Skin biopsy
from the putative eczematous lesions revealed interface centric,
CD4 positive T-cell infiltrate. A diagnosis of Neurotropic Mycosis
Fungoides was rendered.
E-PS-12 Haematopathology
Virchows Arch
Results: A histologic diagnosis of Neurotropic Mycosis Fungoides was
rendered.
Conclusion: This singular case of a patient under dermatologic treatment
for unclassified, eczematous like dermatosis of the back and left flank,
intercurrently developing intense burning pain in bilateral posterior calves
- illustrates that rarely mycosis fungoides, may demonstrate
neurotropism, and neuropathic pain can be an obscure harbinger of a rare
and pernicious proclivity of this lymphoma..
E-PS-12-003
Solitary extra nodal oesophageal recurrence of nodal Hodgkin lym-
phoma a decade after treatment
A. Abrari*
*The Rotherham NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Oesophageal involvement by lymphoma is
distinctly rare , representing only about 1% of the cases of lymphomatous
involvement of the gastrointestinal tract - and Hodgkin lymphoma with
primary oesophageal recurrence is unheard of.
Methods: Dysphagic patient underwent endoscopic oesophageal biopsy,
with histopathology and comprehensive immunohistochemistry.
Results: Histomorphology and immunohistochemistry confirmed classi-
cal, mixed cellularity Hodgkin lymphoma, in the oesophageal biopsy,
with no other local or systemic nodal or splanchnic disease on imaging.
Conclusion: This report of oesophagus as the solitary site of extra nodal
recurrence of Hodgkin lymphoma, after a decade - is the first one in peer
reviewed English literature. We describe this singular manifestation of
recurrent Hodgkin's lymphoma, without concomitant nodal disease - di-
agnosed on an endoscopic mucosal biopsy.
E-PS-12-004
Augmented paradigm of gastric round cell neoplasms – primary
ALK positive gastric anaplastic large cell lymphoma
A. Abrari*
*The Rotherham NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: The stomach is a common site of extra nodal
lymphomas in adults, most of which are of B-cell origin. ALK and CD 30
expressing, primary gastric lymphomas are seldom reported.
Methods: We record here, one such case, in an elderly female, presenting
with haemoptysis. The gastro-endoscopic examination showed mucosal
irregularity and shallow ulceration of the antrum.
Results: Histology of the endoscopic biopsy was that of a quintessential
round cell neoplasm, which was leucocyte common antigen and
cytokeratin negative. Subsequent comprehensive, staggered immunohis-
tochemistry was the cornerstone of analysis, funnelling into the final
diagnosis of ALK + / CD 30 + anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. Radio-
imaging did not reveal any nodal disease or any other site of involvement.
Conclusion: This case illustrates the significance of having a judiciously
divergent pathologic diagnostic differential, when faced with indifferent
morphology, and immunohistochemistry results which is initially equiv-
ocal and noncommital.
E-PS-12-005
Proteomic and genetic aspects in a rare case of primary testicular
lymphoma
M. Aschie*, M. Cristian, M. Deacu, M. Bosoteanu, G. Cozaru, A. Mitroi,
S. Ghitoi, G. Baltatescu, M. Enciu
*Emergency Clinical County Hospital of Constanta, Pathology Department,
Ovidius University of Constanta, CEDMOG Center, Romania
Background & objectives: Testicular lymphoma represents a distinct,
rare and clinically aggressive form, usually being diagnosed in elderly
patients. The aim of this study is to present the immunohistochemical and
genetic assessment of the testicular tumour to establish the primary
character.
Methods: We report a case of a young male patient with left orchiectomy.
Further to the histopathological examination, immunohistochemical test-
ing was mandatory by using the monoclonal antibodies (CD45, CD10,
CD20, Bcl-2, Bcl-6, EBV and Ki67). Complementary, the FISH molec-
ular cytogenetic technique was used to confirm the subtype of lymphoma.
Results: The expression profile of immunohistochemical markers (posi-
tive for CD45, CD10, CD20, and Bcl-6; the lack of both Bcl-2 and EBV
expression) established the diagnosis of Burkitt-like diffuse large B-cell
testicular lymphoma, with a high nuclear proliferation marker (Ki67 more
than 95%).
Conclusion: The proteomic analysis of the presented case has confirmed
the diagnosis and sets the guidelines for the therapeutic management,
main characteristics being in this case both the age and tumour aggres-
siveness potential.
E-PS-12-006
Localised kappa restricted Russell body accumulation within germi-
nal centres in lymph node without gammopathy or haematopoietic
malignancy: a case report
M. Aydemir*, I.E. Zemheri, A.H. Kaya
*Health Sciences University Umraniye Education and Training Hospital,
Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Light chain restriction is very rare in benign
or reactive processes. Until today a few case has been reported, most
frequently in the GI tract of adults and rarely in paediatric age, without
overt gammopathy or hematopoietic malignancy.
Methods: Our case, 33-year-old woman, admitted to hospital because of
enlarged cervical lymph node. On systemic examination, there were no
pathology with plasma cell. Serum immunoglobulin levels were normal.
2,5 cm diameter lymph node was resected doubt of lymphoma.
Results: Histologically, beside of common secondary follicles, limited
accumulation of plasma cells and Russell bodies in the only two germinal
centre was observed. They were positively stained with kappa, IgM,
CD138, and MUM1 and negatively lambda, IgD, IgG, IgA. Russel bod-
ies were positive for PAS in bright pink colour, negative for Congo red
and crystal violet. Because systemic disease was not detected, we report-
ed reactive kappa restricted plasmacytosis with Russell bodies
Conclusion: The real incidence and importance of Russell body accumu-
lation within the germinal centre in lymph node is unknown because of
rarity. So, presence of aggregates of plasma cells with Russell bodies
demonstrating kappa or lambda light chain clonality should not be mis-
takenly interpreted as a tumour, especially with the absence of additional
histopathological and clinical features.
E-PS-12-007
Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease: case report of two teenagers in Brazil
M. Bresler*, N. Ribeiro Roma, M. Lopes Correia Primo, A. Alvarez dos
Santos, M. de França Silva, R. Panno Basilio de Oliveira
*Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Background & objectives: Kikuchi-Fujimoto's disease is characterized
by lymphadenopathy, fever and typical histological features. Japan de-
scribed it in 1972.The disease has been found worldwide, predominantly
in Asia, but remains rare in the United States and Europe. We report two
cases of Kikuchi-Fujimoto's disease.
Methods: The morphologic characteristics associated with immunohis-
tochemical study were evaluated according to scientific literature.
Results: The 14-year-old male patient presented subclavicular mass, fe-
ver, joint pain, prostration and weight loss with the diagnostic hypothesis
of tuberculosis. The 18-year-old female patient presented painful cervical
lymphadenomegaly, a history of contact with pigeons and cats and the
diagnostic hypothesis of toxoplasmosis or lymphoma. Both had histo-
pathological characteristics compatible with the diagnosis of Kikuchi-
Fujimoto's disease, research for alcohol-resistant bacillus and negative
fungi and benign evolution after diagnosis. The histopathological find-
ings included nodal architecture distorted by areas of coagulative necro-
sis, with abundant carioretic debris, surrounded by histiocytes, T lympho-
cytes and plasmacytoid monocytes, in addition to the absence of neutro-
phils and eosinophils.
Conclusion: Differential diagnosis with lymphoma, inflammatory, auto-
immune and infectious conditions is important when facing lymph nodes
with these findings. Therefore, the pathologist's knowledge of this rare
disease in the Western sites is important when correlating clinical and
anatomopathological data for diagnosis.
E-PS-12-008
Rare presentation of Castleman disease – association of unusual
angiolipomatous features in two cases
E. Caranfil*, M.R. Ghigna, D. Lim, E. Fadel, O. Mercier, V. Thomas de
Montpreville
*"Grigore T Popa" Univerisity of Medicine and Pharmacy, Hopital Marie
Lannelongue, Romania
Background & objectives: Castleman disease (CD) or angiofollicular
lymph node hyperplasia is a rare benign lymphoproliferative disorder.
Association of angio-lipomatous hyperplasia has only been reported in a
few single cases, and may add complexity to the diagnosis of CD.
Methods: We present CD occurring in two male patients, aged 36 and 65.
The first presented only with leukocytosis. A CT scan revealed a retro-
peritoneal mass at T12-L1 level.
The second patient presented with cough. A CT scan revealed an anterior
mediastinal mass and multiple mediastinal adenopathies.
Tissue blocks were formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded. For the first pa-
tient immunohistochemistry was performed.
Results: The masses had a biphasic appearance: the centre was represent-
ed by a firm tan-grey tissue, while the periphery resembled adipose tissue.
Microscopically, the tan-grey and reddish areas represented typical CD of
hyaline-vascular type, presenting lymphoid follicles with atrophic germi-
nal centres, occasionally penetrating vessels, a hyperplasic mantle zone
and vascular proliferation of the interfollicular areas. The surrounding
adipose tissue presented prominent blood vessels dispersed among ma-
ture fat cells and areas of fibrosis. The two components were distinct for
the most part with areas of intermingling.
CDK4 and MDM2 stains were negative for the first patient.
Conclusion: The occurrence of typical CD within an angiolipomatous
lesion has rarely been reported.
In this setting, Castleman disease is difficult to diagnose, especially on
needle biopsy, where the adipose tissue may be mistaken for atypical
lipoma or well differentiated liposarcoma.
E-PS-12-009
Pitfalls and perils of immunohistochemistry diagnostics in
haematopathology practice
C. Coulter*, D. Royston, M. Hofer, G. Turner
*Department of Cellular Pathology, The John Radcliffe Hospital Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Lymphoma is often a diagnostic challenge.
At diagnosis a balance between tissue availability and the size of the
initial immunohistochemistry panel can be problematic, especially if the
diagnosis is unexpected. In this context immunohistochemistry stains can
be misleading.
Methods: We present three case studies encountered within the Oxford
Haematopathology Service, illustrating pitfalls with interpreting
immunohistochemistry stains in the setting of lymphoma diagnosis. The
cases are supported by a literature review, on the role of immunohisto-
chemistry in lymphoma diagnosis and known, along with the lesser
known, lymphoma markers (Oct 3/4, Gata-3, Pax-8, CD79a, cyclin
D-1, CD 45 and CD 99).
Results: There are numerous new monoclonal antibodies in use for im-
munohistochemistry diagnoses. They are particularly useful for tumour
lineage distinction. But there are issues of sensitivity and aberrant expres-
sion in differential diagnosis e.g. cancer of unknown primary and as
highlighted by three case studies, primary lymphoma. It is important for
pathologists, especially sub specialists to keep up to date with specific
antibody patterns to be able to appropriately interpret them.
Conclusion: Sensitivity of immunohistochemistry stains means they can-
not be relayed on solely for diagnosis, morphology and clinical context
still remain vital in the diagnostic process.
E-PS-12-011
Case report: small lymphocytic lymphoma/chronic lymphocytic leu-
kaemia (SLL/CLL) coexisting with Langerhans cell histiocytosis
A. Dimitriadi*, S. Pappa, F. Antoniadou, G. Koutsonikas, A. Moussouli,
E. Gkamatsi, G. Kakiopoulos
*General Hospital of Athens “G. Gennimatas”/Department of Surgical
Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: A 81 year-old male patient was admitted to
our hospital due to allergic reaction with clinical history of probable
spondylodiskitis. Fine needle biopsy (FNB) of lumbar spine showed no
pathological findings.
Methods: Blood tests showed prominent eosinophilia, considered as a
side effect of the antibiotic treatment. The antibiotics were changed, how-
ever eosinophilia remained. Further imaging studies revealed a cavity in
the lung, inaccessible for FNB, and inguinal lymphadenopathy. Multiple
testings for tuberculosis (quantiferon and bronchoscopy) were negative.
Results: Biopsy of bone marrow showed 8-9% infiltration by SLL/CLL
(positive for CD20, PanB, CD79a, CD-23, bcl-2, weakly positive for
CD5 and negative for Cyclin-D1, bcl-6 and CD30). Because of the
persisting eosinophilia, a month later we received an inguinal lymph
node, with partially disrupted architecture, diffuse infiltration of lymphoid
cells, similar to those in the bone marrow, and aggregates of histiocytic
cells with elongated nuclei, prominent nuclear grooves and folds and
strongly positive for S-100 and CD-1a. The diagnosis of coexistent
SLL/CLL with histiocytosis X was concluded.
Conclusion: Langerhans cell histiocytosis is usually presented in older
children or young adults and is often coexistent with leukaemia. The age
of the patient and the synchronous presentation of histiocytosis X and low
grade lymphoma render our case extremely rare.
E-PS-12-012
Granulomatous dermatitis associated with chronic mielomonocytic
leukaemia: a challenging diagnosis
B. Fuertes Negro*, M. García, L. Prieto, V. Lezcano, R. Conejero, S.M.
Rodríguez, C. Chamizo, A. Valero, F. Felipo, G. Azaceta, M. Ara
*Pathology Department, Hospital San Jorge, Huesca, Spain
Background & objectives: Neutrophilic granulomatous dermatitis has
been recently described in association with systemic processes, including
hematologic disorders such as Chronic Mielomonocytic Leukaemia
(CMML).
Methods: We present the case of a 58 y/o male with disseminated erythem-
atous papules on the extremities and trunk, appearing over several months
period. A skin biopsy (SB) was performed showing a non-necrotizing gran-
ulomatous dermatitis. A peripheral blood test showed a monocytosis of
23.3% and a bone marrow (BM) aspirate demonstrated slight hypercellularity
with trilineage dysplasia and mild monocytic infiltration.
Virchows Arch
Results: By flow cytometry, monocytes represented 11% of the total
white blood cell count, with expression of CD64, CD13 and CD14.
Although a CMML was suspected, according to the WHO 2017 diagnos-
tic criteria, follow up was necessary. Two more SB showed epithelioid
histiocytes intensely positive for CD68, CD11c, CD15, MNDA and
CD123, partially for CD1a and CD56 and negative for S100, MPO,
CD34 and CD117. NGS in BM identified SRSF2 and IDH2 point muta-
tions. Finally, a mutational analysis by pyrosequencing technique from a
SB resulted with the same IDH2 base change as the one in the BM. Then,
the patient was diagnosed with a MDS/MPN CMML type with secondary
granulomatous dermatitis.
Conclusion: Cutaneous manifestation might be the first symptom of the
CMML and it is mandatory to maintain a high index of suspicion. The
presence of molecular alterations in bone marrow and skin may help to
reach an early diagnosis.
E-PS-12-013
An unusual presentation of plasmablastic lymphoma: case report
and literature review
G. Gerardo*, R. Veiga, M. Murrilo, M. Mafra, A. Catarino
*Hospital da Luz de Lisboa, Portugal
Background & objectives: Plasmablastic lymphoma (PBL) is a rare and
aggressive lymphoma typically located in the oral cavity of HIV-positive
patients. We present a rare clinical case of bladder PBL and a review of
the literature on PBL over the last 5 years.
Methods: A 58-year-old HIV positive male, diagnosed in early 2019,
presented to our hospital with haematuria, abdominal bloating and weight
loss. Physical examination was normal. CT-scan showed a bladder pol-
ypoid and infiltrating lesion and a transurethral resection was performed.
Results: A histologic diagnosis of PBL was made, showing the classical
morphology of this neoplasia. Immunostains revealed positivity for
CD138, CD38 and MUM1, negativity for CD20 and HHV8 and a Ki-
67 of 100%. In situ hybridization test for EBV was positive.
PBL most frequently presents in extranodal locations, in particular the
oral cavity (44%), followed by the gastrointestinal tract (14%). Nodal
involvement is found in < 10% of the cases. In the genitourinary system
there are less than 30 cases reported (4%) none of them in the bladder
(presentation).
Conclusion: PBL is seldomly reported in the genitourinary tract.
Pathologists should be familiar with this diagnosis, even in highly unlike-
ly locations such as the bladder, especially in the context of immuno-
depressed patients with rapidly proliferating tumours.
E-PS-12-014
Evaluation of naked eye single tube red cell osmotic fragility test in
screening and diagnosis of beta thalassaemia trait carriers in a re-
source challenged country
N. Jaffar*, R. Ghani
*Jinnah Sindh Medical University, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Beta thalassemia major is a severe disease
and places a huge economic burden on the health care setup especially in
developing countries like Pakistan. Different screening techniques are
available for detection of Thalassemia but most are expensive. Pakistan
is a resource-poor country and every diagnostic laboratory is not well
equipped to screen this disease. Naked Eye Single Tube Red Cell
Osmotic Fragility Test (NESTROFT) is a reliable & cost effective screen-
ing method. Our study sought to evaluate the efficacy of NESTROFT as a
screening tool for detection of beta thalassemia trait in Pakistani
population.
Methods: All participants requesting a complete blood count were en-
rolled in the study. After obtaining informed consent, NESTROFT was
performed using freshly prepared 0.36% buffered saline. Turbidity in the
tubes indicated that the individual was positive for beta thalassemia trait.
Haemoglobin electrophoresis was performed on all NESTROFT positive
cases to confirm the sensitivity of the screening test NESTROFT.
Results: A total of 812 patients were enrolled in the study between
January 1, 2017 and June 30, 2017. The mean age + SD of participants
was 35.5 + 13.6 years. There were 351 (43.2%) male and 461 (56.7%)
female participants. In the present study, NESTROFT was reported to be
100% sensitive claiming superiority over other evaluated parameters in-
dividually, besides being technically simple and cost-effective.
Conclusion: The present study revealed that NESTROFT is a highly
sensitive, cost-effective, and a rapid screening test for the detection of
carriers of beta thalassemia trait in our population.
E-PS-12-015
Gamma heavy chain disease associated with an Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) positive lymphoproliferation: a case report and review of the
literature
L. Johnston*, D. Gowans, N. Kernohan
*Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, Scotland, United
Kingdom
Background & objectives: Gamma heavy chain disease (γ-HCD) is
rare, usually characterised by a neoplastic proliferation of small B cells
demonstrating plasmacytic differentiation with heterogeneous clinical
and histological features. We present a diagnostically challenging and
very unusual case of EBV positive γ-HCD.
Methods: A right cervical lymph node biopsy from a 78-year-old lady
with generalised lymphadenopathy was submitted to histopathology.
Routine haematoxylin-eosin sections and a broad panel of immunohisto-
chemistry were performed. In view of the histological findings serum
protein electrophoresis and immunofixation was requested. Review of
the clinical record did not identify features of auto-immunity or a cause
for immunocompromise other than age.
Results: Histology showed diffuse effacement of node architecture by a
malignant infiltrate of medium to large cells, many with evidence of
plasmablastic differentiation. The tumour cell population was positive
for CD79a, with very few scattered CD20 positive cells but a significant
number of CD138 positive cells. The neoplastic cells were negative for
CD5 , CD10, CD56, cyclin D1 and EMA. The tumour was positive for
EBV and had a very high proliferation fraction. Serum electrophoresis
revealed a broad monoclonal IgG band without associated light chains.
The findings indicated a diagnosis of γ-HCD, either presenting with an
EBV positive monomorphic morphology or as an EBV positive lympho-
ma with plasmablastic differentiation.
Conclusion: EBV positive lymphoproliferations with high grade
plasmablastic features have not been described in association with γ-
HCD. Previous reports suggest that EBV positive lymphoproliferations
may occur in a distinct subset of patients with γ-HCD who are immuno-
compromised and warrants further investigation.
E-PS-12-018
A very rare case of type V inflammatory pseudo-tumour IGG4-re-
lated lymphadenopathy (IGG4-LAD)
F. Locatelli*, N. Salfi, N. Dessì, P. Rinaldi, M. Valli, M. Ricci,
C. Sagramoso, E. Gerardi, G. Galli, A. Cadioli, A. Palicelli, E. Mataca,
G. Rossi
*Infermi Hospital Rimini, Italy
Background & objectives: IgG4-LAD can be the expression of IgG4-
related disease. Unlike other organs, storiform fibrosis and obliterative
phlebitis are not peculiar; 5 subtypes are described: multicentric
Castleman’s disease-like, reactive follicular hyperplasia-like,
interfollicular expansion and immunoblastosis, progressively trans-
formed germinal centre-type and inflammatory-pseudotumor-like IgG4.
Methods: We report the case of a 75 yrs old man with a painless and
mobile 3 cm inguinal subcutaneous nodule, present for 2 years.
Histologically it was entirely occupied by hyalinized fibrous tissue,
with very few lymphocytes at the periphery and scattered
plasmacells with an IgG4/IgG ratio of 1:1. ALK, S-100, CD34,
Actin, EBV, Treponema and HHV-8 stains were negative.
Results: Our revised diagnosis was of a type V inflammatory
pseudo-tumour IgG4-Related Lymphadenopathy, This is the least
common type of IgG4 LAD, with only two cases reported in liter-
ature to our knowledge. The patient turned out to have elevated
serum IgG4 level (1940 g/L) and monoclonal gammopathy IgMK.
A systemic IgG4-related disease could also be suspected: the year
before he was hospitalized for an acute hepatitis of unknown origin
and many years before he was subjected to Wirsung-jejunostomy
and cholecystectomy for chronic calcific unspecified pancreatitis
with pseudocysts of the pancreatic head and chronic cholecystitis.
A more correct clinical framework could now save costs and im-
prove patient's quality of life.
Conclusion: Type V IgG4-LAD can mimic several benign and malignant
lesions, in primis nodal inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour and other
mesenchymal tumours such as schwannomas and solitary fibrous tumour.
Because of its rarity, the natural course and prognosis are uncertain. An
improper diagnosis can preclude the detection of a IgG4-related disease,
leading to fibrous progression, mechanical obstruction or organ dysfunc-
tion and to delay in prompt treatment with glucocorticoid, immunosup-
pressive agents or other.
E-PS-12-019
A case study of prolonged febrile illness, diagnosed with a rare form
of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma
(AITL), after CT-PET scan and lymph node biopsy
A.G. Marathonitis*, C. Bethani, R. Zakopoulou, E. Venetis,
E. Moschona, G. Georgakopoulos, A. Kokas, G. Marathonitis
*Internal Medicine Department, General Hospital of Athens Amalia
Flemig, Greece
Background & objectives: A 64-year-old Caucasian male with a history
of prostate cancer 8 years ago, presented with reported fever >38 οC and
night sweats, which had started one month ago. Splenomegaly and pal-
pable lymph nodes were not found.
Methods: During the hospitalization, the patient continued to have
episodes of fever. Anaemia (hypochromic, microcellular) and a
three-digit erythrocyte sedimentation rate were found.Laboratory
tests for infectious,viral and autoimmune diseases,abdominal
Ultrasound, thoracic and abdominal Computed tomography(CT),
bone scan, endoscopic examination of the upper and lower gastro-
intestinal tract, biopsies of the temporal artery, liver and bone mar-
row were performed without abnormal findings.
Results: Finally, Positron Emission Tomography-Computed
Tomography(PET-CT) scan was performed, which showed mild hy-
permetabolism in the axillary lymph nodes. Subsequently, based on
the above finding, we proceeded to axillary lymph node biopsy,
which revealed a Non-Hodgkin AITL. The patient received
chemotherapy(cyclophosphamide, vincristine and mitoxantrone)
and lymphoma was sent into remission. After 42 months, a relapse
of the disease occurred and the patient died due to septic shock, as a
result of an infection in the respiratory tract.
Conclusion: We point out the contribution of PET-CT scan to the diag-
nosis of prolonged febrile of unknown origin. This case is of particular
interest, because of the rarity of the disease (accounting for only 2-4% of
all lymphomas) and its atypical manifestation(non-palpable lymph nodes,
without splenomegaly and without rash). We also underline the patient's
survival beyond 19 months, which is the average life expectancy for this
type of lymphoma.
E-PS-12-020
Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma with abundant lgG4-positive plas-
ma cells arising in a lymph node near salivary gland mimicking lgG4-
related lymphadenopathy
S. Nagase*, K. Ogura, K. Ashizawa, A. Sakaguchi, T. Matsumoto
*Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Juntendo University Nerima
Hospital, Japan
Background & objectives: Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma (FDCS) is a
rare neoplasm arising in lymph nodes. Increased IgG4-positive plasma
cells mimicking IgG4-related disease is reported in inflammatory
pseudotumour (IPT)-like FDCS, a variant associated with Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV), but not in a conventional FDCS.
Methods: The patient is a 73 year-old male with a one-week history of
soft and non-tender mass in the left cervical region. Fine needle aspiration
cytology and core needle biopsy were suggestive of sarcoidosis and
lymphadenitis respectively, so the patient was followed-up. However,
as the mass kept enlarging slowly, the mass was excised one year later.
Results: Macroscopically, the mass was 70-mm in size, well-
circumscribed, and displayed yellow-white cut surface with focal haem-
orrhage. Histologically, neoplastic cells had round to ovoid vesicular
nuclei with small conspicuous nucleoli aggregating in several foci and
forming a multinodular mass. Lymphoplasmacytic infiltration was noted
within the nodules but it was prominent especially between the nodules.
In immunohistochemistry, neoplastic cells were positive for several fol-
licular dendritic cell (FDC) markers such as CD21 and podoplanin. EBV
was not detected in both neoplastic cells and lymphocytes by chromo-
genic in situ hybridization. The mass was diagnosed with FDCS. Despite
the increase of IgG4-positive plasma cells, postoperative study showed
no evidence of IgG4-related disease.
Conclusion: We report a case of FDCS with abundant IgG4-positive
plasma cells involving a lymph node near salivary gland. Raising a sus-
picion for FDCS and applying several FDC markers are necessary even if
the morphology fulfils the criteria for IgG4-related disease.
E-PS-12-021
Unusual presentation of a follicular lymphoma as two distinct
tumours located in the mediastinum and retroperitoneum
F. Neacsu*, C. Dobrea, I. Cordos, A. Afetelor, M.A. Bara, E. Magheran
*Emergency University Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: Follicular lymphoma is typically a slow-
growing or indolent form of non- Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma. It is char-
acterized by diffuse lymphadenopathy, bone marrow involvement,
splenomegaly and less commonly other extranodal sites of involvement.
Methods: We present the case of a 65-years-old female patient showing
reduced appetite and weight loss (10kg in 6 months).
Abdominal CT-scan showed an extended retroperitoneal mass with bilat-
eral paravertebral involvement and extension in the posterior mediasti-
num, enclosing the large vessel, extending into the mesentery, the head of
the pancreas, the left adrenal gland and the left ureter with secondary
hydronephrosis.
Results: The thoracic CT-scan showed a 10 cm tumour in the antero-
superior left mediastinum, closely related to the big vessels. A mediasti-
noscopy was performed and biopsies were taken.
The tumour biopsies showed a lymphoproliferation with big, uniform,
closely packed follicles containing small cleaved cells without nucleoli
(centrocytes) and few (<15/HPF) larger noncleaved cells with open chro-
matin and multiple nucleoli (centroblasts). The mantle zone was marked-
ly attenuated and the germinal centres lacked tangible bodies.
On immunohistochemistry the tumour is CD20(+), Bcl2(+), Bcl6(+) and
CD5(-) showing the centrofollicular origin of the B cell proliferation. Ki-
67 index is low (10-15%). Final diagnosis was Follicular type non-
Hodgkin lymphoma, Grade 1-2.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: This is an exceedingly rare way of presentation of a follic-
ular lymphoma as two separate lesions and this case highlights the need
for the differential diagnosis and shows the importance of multidisciplin-
ary communication.
E-PS-12-022
Involvement of cervix uteri by non-Hodgkin lymphoma: a case
report
H. Gunel, G. Kir, Z.C. Olgun*, B. Cobanoglu Simsek
*Istanbul Medeniyet University Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Involvement of female genital tract with
lymphoma is a rare phenomenon. It can be seen in female genital tract
during advanced stage of systemic disease.
Methods: 50-year-old female patient applied to the hospital with
complaints of vaginal bleeding and abdominal swelling for a month.
She underwent excisional biopsy with a suspicion of cervical carci-
noma. Histopathologically, discohesive malignant cells with large,
vesicular nucleus and one prominent nucleoli were present in solid
pattern.
Results: Immunohistochemically, epithelial, mesenchymal and
melanocytic markers were negative. The immunoprofile of the tu-
mour showed positive staining for CD45, CD20 and Bcl-6, negative
staining for CD10 and MUM1. These morphological findings and
immunohistochemistry results supported a diagnosis of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma of germinal centre origin. Accompanied by these
findings, PET-CT imaging identified multiple extensive lymph
nodes throughout the body and intense hypermetabolic lesions in
the colon, rectum, bladder and vagina.
Conclusion: Hematopoietic malignancies involving the cervix are com-
monly suspected to be epithelial neoplasms. Secondary cervical involve-
ment of lymphoma, should be kept in mind for patients with systemic
lymphoma.
E-PS-12-023
IgG4 related ophthalmic disease
E. Cecikoglu, Z.C. Olgun*, B. Cobanoglu Simsek
*Istanbul Medeniyet University Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: IgG4-related diseases are immune-mediated,
fibroinflammatory conditions that are characterised by affected organ
enlargement, plasma cell infiltration (determined with IgG4-positive plas-
ma cells) and serum IgG4 level elevation.
Methods: A 53 year-old man presented with right eye proptosis. He
had painless swellings for both eyes for 20 years, and proptosis of
right eye for 12 years. We received right orbital mass which had a
feature of lenfoid tissue. A hyalinized-collagen ground is observed
in nodulated focal areas starting from the capsule to make towards
the centre of the lymph node.
Results: There are numerous reactive follicules with distinct germinal
centres. A large number of plasma cells, histiocytes and sparse eosino-
phils with lymphocytes was observed. Because of the presence of colla-
gen bands and mixed cellular population on the ground, we considered
Hodgkin’s Lymphoma as differential diagnosis, however there were no
typical Reed-Steinberg cells or variant. Orbital mass showed local infil-
tration around neural tissue. There were large number of plasma cells in
the ground and the lesion was accompanied by significant fibrosis.
IgG4/IgG immunohistochemical staining showed a significant increase
in favour of IgG4. The patient diagnosed as IgG4-related ophthalmic
disease(IgG4-ROD).
Conclusion: Ocular adnexial tissues, such as the lacrimal gland,
extraocular muscles, trigeminal nerve branches (cranial nerve V) and
orbital fat, effected collectively in IgG4-RODs. Although diseases related
to IgG4 are rare, ophthalmic localization should be kept in mind.
E-PS-12-024
A case of Erdheim-Chester disease
S. Pattle*, J. McLaren, J. Serhan, V. Campbell, M. Rahilly
*NHS Lothian, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Erdheim-Chester Disease (ECD) is a rare
histiocytic neoplasm. BRAF mutations have emerged as potential molec-
ular markers of ECD, but diagnosis hinges on histological identification
of infiltrative histiocytic proliferations in the appropriate clinical and ra-
diological context of disseminated mass lesions.
Methods: Retrospective review of histology, immunohistochemistry and
molecular results was undertaken, with correlation to ehealth records and
radiology. The importance of clinical and radiological context in inter-
pretation of cytology and histology, and the critical role molecular testing
played in establishing the diagnosis of ECD are discussed.
Results: We present a 56yo female with clinical and radiological features of
malignancy of unknown origin with mediastinal (including pericardial effu-
sion), skeletal, abdominal and retroperitoneal disease. Two diagnostic sam-
ples were available: pericardial fluid, containing abundant large CD68-
positive histiocytes in an otherwise inflammatory background, and retroper-
itoneal biopsies, containing a predominantly fibroinflammatory lesion with
dispersed large histiocytes, initially interpreted as reactive. Clinical correlation
raised the possibility of ECD, and both samples were re-examined revealing
occasional atypical histiocytes and a single Touton giant cell within the peri-
cardial fluid, and dispersed, single foamy histiocytes within the biopsy.
Mutationtestingdemonstrated analogousBRAFmutations inboth pericardial
and retroperitoneal samples, supporting a diagnosis of ECD.
Conclusion: While a fibroinflammatory ‘background’ is frequently cited
within prevailing histological descriptions, in this case our observation is
of a predominant fibroinflammatory lesion with only dispersed, mildly
atypical histiocytes that lacked the foamy cytoplasm or Touton giant cell
forms reported to exemplify ECD. Our case highlights the necessity for
appropriate clinical and radiological context, and the potential value of
BRAF testing in diagnosis of ECD.
E-PS-12-025
Primary effusion lymphoma involving intrasinusoidal’s liver and
spleen
L. Pérez Domingo*, H. Iliev Iliev, A. Martínez García, M. Sánchez
Lazcano, J.I. Hijazo Conejos, L. Tardin, M.J. Viso Soriano, F. Felipo,
J. Soria Navarro, M. García
*CUH Lozano Blesa, Spain
Background & objectives: Primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) is one of
the rarest subtypes of large B-cell neoplasm usually presenting as serous
effusions in the setting of immunosuppression. It is associated with the
human herpesvirus 8 (HHV 8).
Methods: A 52-year-old man HIV-positive with two-month history of
fever, asthenia, hiporexia and liquid stools. An infection disease was ruled
out. He underwent worsening of symptoms and a PET scan was done
showing an hepatomegaly and a splenic pathologic increase in captation
suspicious for lymphoproliferative disease. Due to the hepatomegaly a
hepatic biopsy was performed while he was waiting for splenectomy.
Results: The hepatic biopsy showed mild changes in lobular space. Atipical
cells were present in sinusoids being positive for CD30 and EBER. No
additional stains were performed in this sample. The spleen weighed 560
grams. Microscopically, white pulp was preserved while red pulp did show
large pleomorphic lymphoid cells, with irregular nuclei and prominent nucle-
olis and abundant basophilic cytoplasms. By immunohistochemistry, these
cells show positivity for CD30, MUM1, HHV8 and EBER, as well as neg-
ativity for the rest of the panel performed (CD138, CD45, CD79a, CD20,
PAX5, EMA, Bcl2, Bcl6, CD15, CD3, light chains and ALK).
Conclusion: PEL usually involves the pleural, pericardial and peritoneal
cavities. Here we describe a unique case of PEL in an HIV-positive
patient involving intrasinusoidal’s liver and spleen.
E-PS-12-026
Experience and perception of patients, health professionals and
health administrators regarding the management of acute leukaemia
in Rwanda
B. Rugwizangoga*, N. Niyikora, A. Musabyimana, A. Izimukwiye,
J. Aurelius, A. Martner, A. Umubyeyi
*Sahlgrenska Cancer Center at Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Sweden
Background & objectives: Recent studies reported a lower incidence of
acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
(ALL) in Rwanda, than expected. The aim of this study was to explore
barriers to timely diagnosis, therapy and prognosis of acute leukaemia in
Rwanda.
Methods: We performed a qualitative study using a phenomenological
approach that involved 41 participants including patients, patients’ guard-
ians and key-informants, such as physicians from district hospitals and
specialists in from referral hospitals, as well as directors from Rwanda
Biomedical Center (RBC). In-depth interviews were conducted and the-
matic analysis was employed to interpret results.
Results: We identified barriers to seeking healthcare such as (i) insuffi-
cient knowledge, occasionally making patients and their care-takers to
first consult traditional healers and (ii) financial constraints that preclude
payment of healthcare fees and transport costs to diagnosis and treatment
sites. Barriers to timely diagnosis and therapy include (i) tedious referral
system; (ii) primary diagnostic facilities which don’t sufficiently capture
the results of laboratory tests that would indicate the diagnosis of acute
leukaemia. Chemotherapy is the only available for ALL in Rwanda, while
palliation is the only available treatment for the vast majority of Rwandan
AML patients.
Conclusion: ALL and AML are likely under-reported in Rwanda and
diagnosis delayed, as explained by patient-related factors (poor knowl-
edge, financial constraints), tedious referral system and suboptimal diag-
nostic resources.
E-PS-12-027
Synchronous chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and metastatic squa-
mous cell carcinoma in a cervical lymph node
C. Cantero González, A. Sabio Gonzalez*, L. Roldán Mateo, M.Á. Gentil
Jiménez, L. Molina Jiménez, J.F. González Sánchez, C. Martínez de
Carvajal Rodríguez, M. Martos, F. Elosegui Martínez, R.J. Luque
*Complejo Hospitalario de Jaén, Spain
Background & objectives: As the population of cancer survivors grows,
is becoming more frequent the diagnosis of second primary malignancies
(SPMs), specially for primary malignancies where patient outcomes are
relatively good, like chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL).
Methods: We report the case of a 76 year-old male, with a previous
diagnosis of CLL, currently in remission, presenting with a newly
noticed right laterocervical mass. The patient underwent PAAF,
whose smear showed atypical keratinized squamous cells, suggesting
a metastatic carcinoma as the first diagnostic possibility. The patient
underwent parotidectomy and homolateral lymphadenectomy.
Results: The histopathological evaluation revealed multiple metasta-
sis of keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma and a diffuse mature
lymphoid infiltrate whose immunophenotype was CD79a, CD20,
CD5, CD23, CD43, BCL-2 positive and CD10, BCL6, Cyclin D1
negative (consistent with CLL). A more in-depth evaluation of clin-
ical history revealed a previous preauricular squamous cell carcino-
ma three years earlier.
There is a significantly high rate of SPMs in patients with CLL. Solid-
organ cancers like lung/bronchus carcinoma and melanoma are the more
frequent, but skin cancers as SCC are also reported. The aetiol-
ogies are not clarified and appear to be multifactorial, including
prior chemotherapy, a dysregulated immune system, shared envi-
ronmental and genetic risk factors.
Conclusion: In conclusion, although the coexistence of metastatic carci-
noma and CLL/SLL in a lymph node is a rare event, the possibility of
SPM must always be considered. For early detection of SPM, screening
procedures like PAAF are useful to improve the outcome of those pa-
tients.
E-PS-12-028
Follicular lymphoma with prominent mott cell formation
M. Shintaku*
*Department of Pathology, Shiga General Hospital, Japan
Background & objectives: The appearance of abundant Mott cells
(hypersecretory, large plasma cells containing many Russell bodies) has
been occasionally reported in low-grade B-cell lymphomas, but its asso-
ciation with follicular lymphoma (FL) is very rare.
Methods: Case Report
Results: The patient, a 77-year-old woman developed swelling of ab-
dominal lymph nodes. Excisional biopsy of the lymph nodes demonstrat-
ed F, Grade 1-2, associated with a large number of Mott cells predomi-
nantly in the inter-follicular zones. The cytoplasm of Mott cells was
immunoreactive for IgG and lambda chain but not for kappa chain.
Cytogenetic studies demonstrated complex karyotypic abnormalities in-
cluding trisomy 3, in addition to the characteristic translocation
t(14;18)(q32;q21).
Conclusion: In the present case, the unusual and complex chromosomal
abnormalities may have produced an accumulation of aberrant, non-
degradable immunoglobulin within cisterns of rough-surfaced endoplas-
mic reticulum, which could have caused the transformation of FL cells
into Mott cells.
E-PS-12-029
Mast cell sarcoma in a patient with a previous mediastinal mixed
germ cell tumour: a case report
T. Oliveira*, C. Quadros, D. López-Presa, C. Ferreira
*Department of Pathology, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, Portugal
Background & objectives: Mast cell sarcoma (MCS) is an extraor-
dinarily rare form of mastocytosis characterized by destructive pro-
liferation of mast cells and poor prognosis. Herein, we present a
case of MCS in a patient previously diagnosed with a mediastinal
germ cell tumour (GCT).
Methods: A 32 year old male with a diagnosis of mediastinal mixed GCT
7 years prior, treated with chemotherapy and subsequent surgery, present-
ed with an expansive lesion on the right iliac bone on a follow-up CT-
scan and with multiple other bone lesions suspicious of metastasis on
PET scan. A biopsy of the iliac lesion was performed.
Results: Histologically, the bone marrow showed infiltration by eosino-
phils, plasma cells, lymphocytes and large cells with abundant clear cy-
toplasm, one or two irregular nuclei and inconspicuous nucleoli. These
cells showed immunoreactivity for vimentin, CD117, mast-cell-tryptase
and CD30. The diagnosis of MCS was made. The molecular analysis of
the seminomatous component of the prior GCT disclosed the variant
c.2459A>G p.(Asp820Gly) in the exon 17 of the Kit gene, whereas no
pathologic mutations were unveiled on the same genetic region in the
MCS. The patient has since started protein kinase inhibitor and remains
clinically stable.
Conclusion: There are about 25 cases of MCS reported, with a single
mention of another case with an associated mediastinal GCT, making this
an extremely rare combination. The study of these cases might provide
new insights on the molecular pathways and on the improved manage-
ment of this type of disease.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-12-030
Low CD30 expression and negative for EBER detection in Hodgkin
lymphoma patient associated with complete response therapy of
ABVD regimen
B. Suryawathy*, E. Primastari, A. Aryanti, Z. Nurusshofa
*Pathology Anatomy Departement, Padjadjaran University, Bandung,
Indonesia, Hasan Sadikin General Hospital, Bandung, Indonesia
Background & objectives: More than 40% patient of Hodgkin lympho-
ma (HL) are chemoresistance. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) associated with
poor prognosis and CD30 associated with advanced disease stagesd in
HL.
Objectives: Find association between CD30 and EBER1 in HL with
ABVD regimen response therapy.
Methods: Cross-sectional study that was conducted at 3 hospitals in
Bandung, Indonesia. Our study composed of 60 cases histopathologically
diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma. Therapy response were evaluated
by RECIL criteria. Detection of EBER1 by real-time PCR and CD30
expression was immunohistochemical semi-quantitative evaluated were
performed to all samples. All data were analysed using Chi-Square test
with p-value <0.05 of significant level.
Results: There were 28 patients with complete response and 32 patients
with no response to ABVD regimen. EBV present in 21 cases (35%), 6
cases from the complete response group and 15 cases from no response
group. Low CD30 expression distribution (≤25%) dominate complete
response group (68%), whereas high CD30 distribution (>25%) dominate
nonresponse group (67,7%). The result showed a statistically significant
of EBV infection (p=0.03) and CD30 expression (p=0.004) between
complete response and nonresponse group.
Conclusion: In conclusion, the ABVD chemotherapy response of HL
associated with CD30 expression and EBV Infection.
Funding: Ministry of Research and Technology of Republic of Indonesia
(Kementrian Riset dan Teknologi)
E-PS-12-031
Plasmablastic lymphoma of duodenum – metachronous malignancy
with plasma cell myeloma
A. Szumera-Cieckiewicz*, J. Barankiewicz, A. Kołkowska-Leśniak,
K. Sokół, O. Kuczkiewicz-Siemion, M. Prochorec-Sobieszek
*Institute of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Diagnostic
Haematology Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research
Institute of Oncology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Poland
Background & objectives: Plasmablastic lymphoma (PBL) is a very
aggressive lymphoma that represents less than 1% of that category.
Usually, PBL is immunodeficiency-associated lymphoma localized in
the oral cavity/gastrointestinal tract.
The 33-year-old woman was diagnosed with multiple myeloma in 2011
(Durie-Salmon 1, ISS-1).
Methods: The first line of treatment was CTD consolidated with high
dose melphalan, followed by steam cells autotransplantation and a com-
plete response (CR) was obtained. In 2015 multiple myeloma relapsed
and the patient started 2nd line of treatment with 8 cycles of DVd – CR
was achieved again. The patient has been receiving maintenance treat-
ment with daratumumab every 4 weeks.
Results: In August 2019 the patient was admitted to the hospital due to
severe anaemia (HGB 6,5 g/dl) without a history of bleeding. All staging
results confirmed the complete response of multiple myeloma. The pa-
tient underwent gastroscopy/colonoscopy – isolated, pathological mass in
the duodenum was detected.
The microscopical examination revealed infiltration with immunoblastic
cells, a "starry-sky" appearance, focal necrosis, and a high mitotic rate.
Immunophenotype of neoplastic cells was: pan-B markers(-),T-cell
markers(-), pan-CK markers(-), MUM-1/IRF-4(+), VS38C(+),
CD138(+), c-MYC(+), BCL-2 (+), BCL-6(-), CD30(-), CD56(-),
CD10(-), EBV-LMP1(-), EBER-ISH(-), Ki-67(+) in nearly 100% of
cells. The diagnosis of plasmablastic lymphoma was established. The
clinical investigation excluded HIV, EBV and CMV active infections.
Conclusion: We present a rare case of PBL after multiple myeloma
treatment. The patient was characterized by iatrogenic immunodeficiency
following transplantation but was not related to EBV infection. The dif-
ferential diagnosis required exclusion of gastrointestinal tract cancer (ra-
diological imaging suggestion) or multiple myeloma progression (absent
monoclonal protein, normal FLC ratio, negative serum, and urine
immunofixation, no bone lytic lesions, immunohistochemistry of trephine
biopsy revealed no infiltration of CD138+ cells).
"This work has been implemented using the Project infrastructure
POIG.02.03.00-14-111/13"
E-PS-12-033
Paediatric-type follicular lymphoma: a rare case report with
cytohistopathological correlation and review of literature
D. Vedant*, R. Sharma, D. Gupta, B. Varshney, V. Vishwajeet,
P. Elhence, K. Soni
*Assistant Professor, Department of Pathology, AIIMS Jodhpur, India
Background & objectives: The revised 4th edition of WHO
Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues
has described Paediatric-type follicular lymphoma (PTFL) as a distinct
clinicopathological entity. Here we report, a rare case of PTFL with
cytohistopathological correlation and review of literature.
Methods: A 17-year old male patient presented with right submandibular
region swelling for 3 months. Computerized tomography (CT) scan of the
neck showed multiple bilateral necrotic lymph nodes. FNAC was done
followed by surgical excision of the largest node.
Results: FNAC shows features of Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Biopsy
showed effaced architecture with irregularly shaped lymphoid follicles
having numerous large sized atypical lymphoid cells having round nucle-
us, vesicular chromatin, prominent nucleoli and moderate amounts of
cytoplasm. Many tingible body macrophages noted. No Reed Sternberg
cells seen. On IHC follicular cells were positive for CD20, CD 10, and
BCL6 and negative for CD 30, CD 15, CD 3, CD 5. Ki 67 labelling index
was approximately 70-80% in the follicles.
Conclusion: Based on morphological and immunohistochemistry find-
ings, the case was diagnosed as PTFL. Very little literature is available
about the patients with advanced stage of the disease. Due to the rarity of
the disease, more detailed studies are required.
E-PS-12-034
A case of CLL/SLL with transdifferentiation to dendritic cell tumour
and possibly a hybrid lymphodendritic cell neoplasm: the missing
link?
Y. Chen, J. Lu, J. Wang, C. Xu*, G. Chen
*Fujian Cancer Hospital, China
Background & objectives: Recent studies have shown evidence of
cross-lineage transdifferentiation of B-cell lymphomas, such as low-
grade follicular lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia/small
lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL) to histiocytic and dendritic cell sar-
comas, but the clonal relationship between the 2 neoplasms is still
unclear.
Methods: Here, we report the morphologic, molecular and cytogenetic
analysis of a unique case of CLL/SLL associated with indeterminate
dendritic cell tumour and possibly a hybrid lymphodendritic cell neo-
plasm , using immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, in situ hybrid-
ization and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
Results: A 48-year-old Chinese woman presented with left upper neck
swelling. Blood examination revealed lymphocytosis. Microscopic
examinations showed the lymph node has effaced architecture, and has a
very complicated, variegated appearance with three distinct components.
Electron microscopy revealed the cells in the third component had short
and thick bulges like dendritic cell. FISH analysis using CLL probes
showed identical deletion TP53, ATM, and deletion 13q14.3 in all 3
components.
Conclusion: Our study provides evidence for transdifferentiation of
CLL/SLL to dendritic cell tumour possibly via the intermediate
linklymplymphodendritic cell neoplasm and suggests that EBV may play
a role in this phenomenon.
E-PS-13-001
Tumour microenvironment, p16 staining and tumour budding in
oral squamous cell carcinoma: a prospective study of 12 cases in a
resource poor setting
K. Adoke*, A. Rafindadi, A. Olusegun, M. Shehu, S. Ahmed, Y. Iliyasu
*Department of Pathology, FMC KEBBI, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Oral SCC is associated with HPV infection
in our setting. The TME is well documented in oral cancer which leads to
immunosuppression in favour of proliferation. Tumour budding at the
invasive front has been reported as a promising prognosticator in SCC,
Methods: The clinical details, sex, age, site distribution, social habits and
sexual partners were collected by means of a structured proforma.
Sections were cut at 3μm and mounted on glass slides processed with
haematoxylin and eosin (H&E). TME was accessed using CD3, CD20,
CD45 and CD68. p16 IHC stain was used for HPV infection while AE1/
AE3 was used for tumour budding.
Results: The age range of occurrence of oral SCC was 31-80±21.8 years.
The buccal mucosa, palate and tongue were the commonest site for SCC.
Six (50%) of the 12 cases of squamous cell carcinoma were positive for
p16 IHC stain. CD3+ T cells and CD68+ were strongly expressed in p16
positive oral SCC. There is significant association between tumour bud-
ding and SCC with those with tumour buds associated with poor
prognosis.
Conclusion: HPV 16 is one of the most common causes of oral SCC in
our environment with tendency to affect young adults. Those with tumour
buds tend to have poor overall survival. TME should be potential bio-
markers in the future for immunotherapy.
E-PS-13-002
Analysis of lymphatic vessel and capillary vessel microdensities and
mast cell density in lip squamous cell carcinoma and actinic cheilitis
A.C. Alves Sisti*, T. Santana, M. Trierveiler
*University of São Paulo, Brazil
Background & objectives: The aim of this study was to evaluate capil-
lary vessel and lymphatic vessel microdensities and their relation to the
number of mast cells in cases of lip squamous cell carcinoma and actinic
cheilitis.
Methods: Thirty cases of each lesion were included. The immunomarkers
CD34 and Podoplanin (D2-40) were used to identify capillary and lym-
phatic vessels, respectively. Mast cells were identified with toluidine blue
histochemistry. In addition, actinic cheilitis cases were analysed morpho-
logically and divided into degrees, according to the criteria suggested by the
WHO. The data obtained were compared using statistical analysis.
Results: Lip squamous cell carcinoma cases showed an average of 4.8
capillary vessels/mm2 and 1.98 lymphatic vessels/mm2, while in actinic
cheilitis cases these averages were 4.29 and 1.69; however, this difference
was not statistically significant. Regarding mast cell count, lip carcinoma
cases had an average of 2.4 mast cells/mm2. For actinic cheilitis this
average was 1.93 (p=0.02). Both microvascular densities and mast cell
density were similar between degrees of epithelial dysplasia.
Conclusion: We observed that mast cell density is increased in cases of
lip squamous cell carcinoma. This suggests that mast cells are involved in
the progression of actinic cheilitis to lip squamous cell carcinoma and
possibly in the regulation of neovascularization.
Funding: Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological
Development (Cnpq) - Brazil
E-PS-13-003
Adamantinoma-like Ewing sarcoma of the parotid gland, report of
two cases and review of literature
M. Alzahrani*, H. Alnuaim, S. Ghanodour, M. Dababo
*McGill University, Saudi Arabia
Background & objectives: Adamantinoma-like Ewing sarcoma is rare
but has been increasingly reported in the head and neck. Morphologically,
these tumours show nested proliferation of monotonous-cells with
desmoplastic fibrous stroma. These tumours are immunoreactive to
CD99,cytokeratins,p40, p63,neuroendocrine markers and consistently
show EWSR1 gene-rearrangement.
Methods: We reported clinical, radiological and histopathological fea-
tures of two unique cases of Adamantinoma-like Ewing sarcoma of the
parotid gland.
Results: Microscopically, the tumour of both cases was composed of
solid nests of monomorphic small round blue cells with a separating
dense fibrous stroma. Both cases show CD99 positivity in addition to
the expression of cytokeratins and neuroendocrine markers. EWSR1-
FLI1 rearrangement was detected and confirming the diagnosis of
ALES. The second case showed focal squamous differentiation which
is not commonly encountered in this tumour.
Conclusion: In conclusion, although Adamantinoma-like Ewing sarco-
ma is rare and a recently described entity, this tumour carries a peculiar
combination of epithelial and neuroendocrine differentiation, the recog-
nition of this entity is important to guide appropriate management for
those cases.
E-PS-13-005
Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma: a rare case report
C. Bilkan Öge*, G. Esendagli
*Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Turkey
Background & objectives: Ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma (GCOC)
is a rare and aggressive malignant epithelial tumour with increased risk of
local recurrence. Approximately, only 50 cases have been reported in the
English literature to date. Herein, we report a new case of GCOC.
Methods: A 19-year-old male patient with complaint of a painless right
maxillar giant mass which was present for 2 years but showed a rapid
recent growth. Computed tomography scan showed a 123x98x96 mm ill-
defined mass that has multilocular cystic and solid components
destructing the maxillary bone, extending into the oral cavity and infil-
trating the nearby subcutaneous fatty and muscular tissues.
Results: Histopathological examination of the incisional biopsy revealed
neoplastic nests and sheets demonstrating the characteristic features of
odontogenic epithelium, including an epithelial lining composed of a
basal layer of columnar cells arranged in a palisading pattern and an
overlying layer of stratified cells resembling stellate reticulum. The cells
were uniform, small basaloid cells with round dark nuclei some with
mitotic figures. Characteristic anucleated eosinophilic ghost cell clusters
were seen in the hyalinized stroma. Immunohistochemical staining
showed the tumour cells were strongly positive for p63, focally positive
for p53 and negative for calretinin and cytokeratin 7. Ki67 proliferation
index was %80. In ghost cell keratinization areas cytokeratin 5/6 and
EMA were positive.
E-PS-13 Head and Neck Pathology
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: GCOC is a rare odontogenic tumour with aggressive rapid
growth and destructive behaviour. The most probable mechanism in its
development is suggested to be a malignant transformation from a pre-
existing calcifying odontogenic cyst or a dentinogenic ghost cell tumour.
As it is an extremely rare tumour stil with controversial therapeutic mo-
dalities and prognostic data, we decided to share this new case.
E-PS-13-006
Use of GFAP, B-catenin and DOG-1 in the differential diagnosis of
benign biphasic basaloid salivary gland tumours
L. Blasco*, J. Suárez-Gómez, C. Cabañuz Rocatallada, V. Baena
Romero, E. Ruiz-Bravo
*Pathology Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain
Background & objectives: Cellular pleomorphic adenoma (PA) and
basal cell adenoma (BCA) are benign biphasic basaloid salivary gland
tumours that can pose differential diagnostic problems. We review the
utility of GFAP, B-catenin and DOG-1 in this differential diagnosis.
Methods: We searched in our centre database cases of salivary gland
tumours with a fine needle aspiration cytology diagnosis of “primary
salivary gland tumour of the family PA/BCA”. Histological diagnosis
made on surgical pieces were reviewed and GFAP, B-catenin and
DOG-1 immunohistochemistry (IHC) were performed on all retrieved
cases.
Results: In our series of 20 cases, all PA showed a immunoprofile
GPAF+/B-catenin-/DOG1-, and all BCA were GPAF-/B-catenin+/
DOG1+. GFAP positive cases showed focal or diffuse cytoplasmic stain-
ing. Cases with focal staining tended to be in mesenchyme-like cells
adjacent to epithelial nests. B-catenin positive cases had at least 3% pos-
itive nuclear staining. DOG-1 positive cases showed cytoplasmic staining
in the basal cell component.
Conclusion: In our experience this IHC panel is useful in this differential
diagnosis where even though both entities are benign, PA has a higher
recurrence and malignancy rate, so a correct diagnosis has important
prognostic implications. Besides, although some literature reports com-
ment on the expression of these markers in different salivary gland tu-
mours, to the best of our knowledge, there are no reports comparing its
expression in PA and BCA.
E-PS-13-007
HPV related multiphaenotypic sinonasal carcinoma
M. Bundele*, Y.L. Tang
*Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore
Background & objectives: HPV related multiphenotypic sinonasal car-
cinoma (HMSC) is recently described entity in the sinonasal region. A
43-year-old female with right sinonasal mass showing typical histological
features of this entity is presented.
Methods: CT scan showed a heterogenous enhancing soft tissue mass in
the right anterior nasal cavity infiltrating the nasal septum as well as the
medial wall of right maxillary sinus.
Biopsies from the mass showed a tumour exhibiting predominantly solid
areas with cribriform architecture. The tumour surrounded myxoid to
hyalinized stromal material and true ductal spaces were seen.
Results: The cells contain round to oval irregular hyperchromatic nuclei,
inconspicuous to discernable nucleoli and scant amounts of lightly eosin-
ophilic cytoplasm. Scattered large markedly pleomorphic hyperchromatic
nuclei were seen. Frequent mitoses were present with occasional atypical
mitoses. Overlying stratified squamous epithelium showed atypia with
enlarged nuclei and prominent nucleoli. CD117 was positive in the solid
areas with focal luminal accentuation. P63 and p40 highlighted the pre-
dominant abluminal/myoepithelial component. S100 was negative.
Conclusion: Immunostaining for p16 showed positive nuclear and cyto-
plasmic staining of >80-90% tumour cells including the surface
epithelium. Further testing for Human Papilloma Virus [HPV E6/E7]
RNA in Situ Hybridisation (ISH) studies was positive.
HMSC should be considered in the differential diagnosis of sinonasal
tumours with morphology resembling adenoid cystic carcinoma.
Limited follow up with these apparent high grade cases show favourable
behaviour.
E-PS-13-008
Teratocarcinosarcoma of the sinonasal tract: a case report with
review of literature
O. Casiraghi*, C. Ngo, S. Asmandar, C. Adam, M. Classe
*Gustave Roussy, Paris-Saclay University, Biopathology Department,
Villejuif, France
Background & objectives: Sinonasal teratocarcinosarcoma is a highly
aggressive malignant neoplasm with combined histological features of
teratoma and carcinosarcoma, but lacking malignant germ cell compo-
nents. We report a new case of this very rare entity, almost exclusively
observed in adults, around 60 years.
Methods: A 51 year-old woman presented a rapidly progressive recur-
rence of a sinonasal tumour, of doubtful histological initial diagnosis. CT-
scan and MRI showed a 60mm tumour invading the nasal fossa, maxil-
lary, ethmoidal and sphenoidal sinuses, the cribriform plate, coming in
contact with the meninges. Pet Scan showed no metastases. After
debulking of the tumour, chemotherapy, endoscopic resection and radio-
chemotherapy were performed.
Results: The histological material came from the debulking performed
before chemotherapy. The tumour was necrotic and showed heteroge-
neous features: a predominant round blue small cell component with
numerous mitoses, some pseudo-rosettes and true rosettes; spindle cells
on a myxoid matrix and a nest of cartilage; an epithelial component,
glandular, and squamous with a "foetal" appearance.
The small round cells were positive for Synaptophysin, CD56 and
Chromogranin A. PS100 was negative, but highlighted in some areas a
network of sustentacular cells. A few cells were desmine and myogenin
positive. Cytokeratin AE1/AE3 was positive in the epithelial component
and in dispersed small round cells. Proliferative Index (Ki67) was 70%,
with hotspots of 100%.
Conclusion: Sinonasal teratocarcinosarcoma is a very rare tumour,
thought do develop from somatic pluripotent stem cells of the olfactory
neuroepithelium. Although challenging, it's important to perform the di-
agnosis of this tumour, because of its highly aggressive behaviour and
poor prognosis.
E-PS-13-009
High-grade transformation of adenoid cystic carcinoma with
retained morphologic features of conventional adenoid cystic
carcinoma
N. Chia*, F. Petersson, J.H.Y. Lum
*Department of Pathology, National University Hospital, Singapore
Background & objectives: High-grade transformation of adenoid cystic
carcinoma (AdCC-HGT) confers poorer prognosis than conventional
AdCC, with frequent early metastases and significantly shorter median
survival time. Due to the significantly increased proliferation, AdCC-
HGT may be receptive to systemic chemotherapy. The high-grade com-
ponent is reported to morphologically resemble poorly differentiated ad-
enocarcinoma, undifferentiated carcinoma and only rarely high-grade
myoepithelial carcinoma. We report a case of AdCC-HGT where the
transformed area retains some architectural features of conventional
AdCC, potentially mimicking conventional high-grade AdCC.
Methods: A 67-year-old woman presented with right-sided paraesthesia
of the anterior mandible and poor fitting dentures. Radiological imaging
showed an ill-defined mass extending from the right sublingual gland to
the midline of the mandible with destruction of the alveolar bone.
Anterior mandibular resection confirmed a widely infiltrative mass of
the right sublingual gland with bone invasion.
Results: Histopathologic findings showed a 4.6 cm mass predominantly
composed of irregular, frequently cribriform tumour islands containing
basaloid cells with marked nuclear atypia, limited cytoplasm and brisk
mitotic and apoptotic activity. Several foci of necrosis were identified. A
distinct transition zone and a minor component of conventional low-grade
AdCC was present. Immunohistochemistry revealed loss of the biphasic
(luminal/abluminal; CD117/p63) pattern, diffuse CD117 expression and
approximately 70% nuclear labelling with Ki-67.
Conclusion: AdCC-HGT may be composed of cribriform islands of
basaloid cells; features allowing separation from conventional AdCC
include marked nuclear atypia, loss of biphasic pattern, necrosis and
increased proliferative activity. High proliferative activity of AdCC-
HGT may influence response to systemic chemotherapy.
E-PS-13-010
IDH2 mutations in sinonasal tumours: are they restricted to SNUCs?
A case report and review of the literature
M. Classe*, C. Castain, S. Asmandar, O. Casiraghi, C. Ngo, M. Wassef
*Gustave Roussy, Paris-Saclay University, Biopathology Department,
Villejuif, France
Background & objectives: IDH2 mutations have been described in dif-
ferent types of poorly differentiated sinonasal tumours but the nosology is
still unclear. We report a case of poorly differentiated sinonasal tumour
with IDH2 R172G mutation and areas of high grade Olfactory
Neuroblastoma (ONB).
Methods: A 52 years old man presented with a skull base tumour involv-
ing the ethmoid sinus and the lamina papyracea. Biopsies were per-
formed, allowing an extensive pathological and molecular investigation.
Results: Biopsies highlighted a heterogeneous tumour made of lobules
and nests of atypical cells with a moderately abundant cytoplasm, round
to ovoid nuclei and a clear chromatin. In some areas atypia were more
severe. Immunohistochemistry showed quite a diffuse expression of ker-
atins, a focal expression of 3 neuroendocrine markers and the presence of
focal sustentacular S100 positive cells. A targeted DNA sequencing panel
showed an IDH2 R172G mutation.
IDH2 mutations have initially been described in Sinonasal
Undifferentiated Carcinoma (SNUC). They were then reported in tu-
mours displaying frank neuroendocrine immunophenotype, i.e. LCNEC
or ONB. This case brings new arguments to the presence of IDH2 muta-
tions in tumours other than SNUCs.
Conclusion: IDH2 mutations are not restricted to SNUC. They can occur
in poorly differentiated sinonasal tumours showing some degree of neu-
roendocrine differentiation and notably Large Cell Neuroendocrine
Carcinoma or high grade ONB. To clarify the nosology of those sinonasal
tumours, IDH2 mutation should consistently be evaluated in poorly dif-
ferentiated sinonasal tumours, LCNECs and high grade ONBs.
E-PS-13-011
A pulsatile mass behind tympanic membrane
A. Colmenares Lozada*, M. Oliveira, S. Ortiz, P. Luís
*Hospital Distrital de Santarém, Portugal
Background & objectives: Glomuvenous malformation or glomangioma
(GVM) are rare lesions accounting for approximately 0.5-1.5% of soft
tissue neoplasms, can rarely be found in head and neck region and present
in two forms: sporadic (solitary lesion) or familial (multifocal lesions).
Methods: We report an exceptionally rare case of a GVM stemming from
the middle ear space in a 69 year-old woman that was referred to consul-
tation for bilateral otalgia and progressive hearing loss. Otoscopic exam-
ination revealed a reddish pulsatile mass behind tympanic membrane. Ear
computed tomography showed a 4 mm lesion in the middle portion of the
right tympanic membrane.
Results: Patient underwent surgical resection via postauricular approach.
The tympanic membrane was reconstructed with temporalis tissue.
Histological examination revealed a neoplasm composed of thin-walled
dilated vascular structures surrounded by round cells, with sharply de-
fined cell borders, eosinophilic cytoplasm and centrally placed nucleus
without atypia; immunohistochemistry studies revealed positivity of the
tumour cell for smooth muscle actin and CD34. A GVM was diagnosed,
with free resection margins.
Conclusion: GVM are slow-growing benign vascular lesions representing
the most common primary neoplasms of the middle ear. Pathologically,
they may be misinterpreted as haemangiomas or venous/arteriovenous
malformations depending on the degree of vascular proliferation.
Complete surgical excision is the treatment of choice; they’re usually en-
capsulated and may show irregular borders leading to the possibility of
recurrence if the nodule is not completely excised. Our patient had a full
recovery.
E-PS-13-012
Malignant extrapleural solitary fibrous tumour of the parotid gland:
an uncommon condition worth surveilling
C. Dahlstedt-Ferreira*, P. Sequeira, J. Oliveira, M.J. Brito
*Hospital Garcia de Orta, EPE, Portugal
Background & objectives: Extrapleural solitary fibrous tumours repre-
sent a rare type of mesenchymal neoplasms that can arise in any location,
including the head and neck. Some of these lesions have malignant po-
tential, hence the importance of accurate diagnosis and surveillance.
Methods: We present a case-report of a 77 year old woman who present-
ed with a 10cm mass on her left parotid gland. Aspiration cytology spec-
imens were evaluated, being diagnosed with undetermined significance
moderate atypia. Magnetic resonance imaging was consistent with a pos-
sibly malignant lesion. Surgical resection was performed.
Results: The surgical specimen was sent to the pathology department for
evaluation. The macroscopic examination revealed an encapsulated,
white and homogeneous lesion, with calcifications and necrosis, measur-
ing 6,5cm.
The microscopic examination showed an encapsulated tumour with epi-
thelioid, atypical cells, counting fifty-six mitosis per ten high power
fields, within a collagenous stroma with staghorn vessels, perivascular
hyalinization. The morphology and immunohistochemical study were
consistent with an extrapleural malignant solitary fibrous tumour.
The clinical behaviour of these neoplasms can be unpredictable.
Although most are benign, 10% behave aggressively, with local our dis-
tant recurrence. The criteria for aggressiveness vary, but malignant his-
tology, such as high mitotic rate, remains the best indicator of poor
outcome.
Conclusion: This case-report highlights the importance of careful evalu-
ation of this type of lesions, since it may require different clinical ap-
proaches. Hence, it is important to correctly diagnosing this group of
tumours in order to give patients the best possible follow-up.
E-PS-13-014
Analysis of the casuistry of small round and blue cell tumours of
nasal cavity in the pathology department at the Clínico
Universitario Lozano Blesa Hospital 2015-2020
E. Mejía Urbáez, J.I. Franco*, G. Muñoz González, C.B. Marta
Casanova, M.J. Cardiel García, M.T. Ramírez Gasca, L. Pérez
Domingo, M. Sánchez Lazcano
*CUH Lozano Blesa, Spain
Background & objectives: Malignant sinonasal tract tumours comprise
less than 1% of all neoplasms. Small and blue round cell tumours are rare,
Virchows Arch
representing 2-3% of all sinonasal tumours. We report the number of
cases in the last 5 years in our hospital
Methods: A review in the PATWIN computer program database of
CULBH January 2015- January 2020 in which we identified three cases;
two of which correspond to olfactory neuroblastomas (ON) and one to
small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (SCNC). We present the morpho-
logical and clinical characteristics of the cases identified
Results: We found three cases, two male and one female between 49 and
67 years of age. In all cases, biopsy were made. Morphologically an
important fibrovacular component and cell nest with hyperchromatic,
small and monotonous nuclei. Frequent mitosis in neuroendocrine carci-
noma and scant in olfactory neuroblastoma. In none of the cases were
rosettes or pseudo- rosettes observed. Immunohistochemically they
showed expression for CD56, synaptophysin, BCL2, B-catenin, elevated
ki67 and s100 positive sustentacular cells, in ON. A variable stain for
CKAE1-AE3 were observed. CD45, CD99, EMA were negative. ON
patients has had a torpid evolution with early relapse and aggressive local
behaviour. SCNC patient died a month after diagnosis
Conclusion: The morphological similarity and the uncommon of these
lesions represents real difficulties of diagnosis. The late presentation
makes the tumours locally advanced at the time of diagnosis. In ON the
correlation between morphological grade and patient evolution is not
clear
E-PS-13-015
Parotid oncocytosis, FNA findings with histology correlation
A. Gamage*, L. Moneghini, K. Liyanaarachchi, S. Di Palma
*Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Diffuse oncocytosis of parotid gland is rare
with <20 cases reported since its first description in 1982. FNA is a real
challenge for cytopathologists as oncocytic cells are common. Our aim is
to present FNA finding & histological correlation of one case.
Methods: A 73 years old female with a painless mass in right parotid
dating 2 years treated as sialolithyasis. Parotid CT with contrast showed
some nodularity but no stones. FNA and total parotidectomy performed
intra-operative assessment of superficial and deep lobe involvement. One
year after surgery the patient has no signs of recurrences or metastases.
Results: The FNA showed cohesive clusters of oncocytic cells with
abundant, granular & eosinophilic & round nuclei with prominent nucle-
oli. Background was poorly cellular with occasional lymphocytes.
Cytology report was: Warthin tumour. Histology showed deep and su-
perficial parotid lobe totally replaced by oncocytic cells in all acini &
ducts without intervening normal acini. There were no, fibrosis, capsule
formation or papillae to confirm Warthin tumour. The histological diag-
nosis was: diffuse oncocytosis.
Conclusion: Our case confirms the challenges of FNA diagnosis and the
rarity of oncocytosis. In 1982, an extensive review of 7000 cases from the
salivary gland tumour registry in Hamburg found 2 cases only (2/7000).
In 2002 Capone at al. in a review of oncocytic lesions of salivary glands
over 16 year period found 28.5% of both multifocal and diffuse
oncocytosis. In all published cases diffuse oncocytosis was “discovered”
on parotidectomy specimens
E-PS-13-016
Hemangiosarcoma of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses – a
diagnostic challenge
H. Geddert*, T. Rüdiger
*Institute of Pathology, Municipal Hospital of Karlsruhe, Germany
Background & objectives: We present two cases of hemangiosarcoma
with misleading initial morphology.
Methods: Case 1: A 67-year-old male patient presents with pain of the
right face. A polypoid mass is detected in his paranasal sinuses. Due to his
history of melanoma it is suspected for metastasis. An excisional biopsy is
interpreted an organized hematoma.
After surgical removal of the whole mass diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma
with lymph node metastasis was conducted.
Results: Case 2: A 73 years old patients presents with an ulcerated
multinodular mass of the nose. The first biopsy is interpreted as an ulcer-
ated haemangioma. The clinically suspected diagnosis of a squamous
carcinoma is given histopathologically the second excision.
Finally, an hemangiosarcoma in the ablatio nasi specimen is diagnosed.
The patient dies three weeks later, most likely due to his atrial fibrillation.
Conclusion: The morphological diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma of the
nasal cavity and paranasal sinus may be challenging.
Massive haemorrhage and siderosis masked the tumour cells in Case 1. In
Case 2 the pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia was misinterpreted as
squamous cell carcinoma. Mild atypia of the vascular tumour resulted
in the erroneous assessment of malignancy.
E-PS-13-017
Sclerosing polycystic adenosis of the minor salivary gland: case
report
G. Gupta*, S. Di Palma
*The Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Sclerosing Polycystic Adenosis (SPA) is a
relatively new entity. It is a rare entity mostly seen in the parotid &
submandibular glands, rarely in minor salivary glands. It histologically
resembles breast fibrocystic disorders and is a clonal process hence
neoplastic.
Methods: A 59 year old male presented with a mass in the buccal mucosa
which had been present for 40 years. An incisional biopsy was hence
performed and sent for histopathology analysis and specialist review.
Results: Histopathology showed a well circumscribed lesion with vary-
ing sized tubules surrounded by fibrosis and showing dilatation. A few of
the tubules contained eosinophilic and amorphous secretions. There was
focal ductular proliferation with apocrine metaplasia. No atypia was
noted.
Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for CK7, S100, mammaglobin
and androgen receptor whilst the cells were negative for CK20, CK5/6,
DOG1 and calponin.
Conclusion: A diagnosis of SPA was made and as the lesion was seen
reaching the margin, an excision was advised. SPA is a difficult diagnosis
to make and although it is a rare entity it should be considered in the
differential diagnosis even in minor salivary glands.
E-PS-13-018
Thyroid cancer in children: about 6 cases
M. Hamdani*, A. Baccouche, O. Belkacem, Z. Nfikha, D. Chiba,
N. Jelidi, A. Bdioui, S. Hmissa Belhaj Salah
*Department of Pathology, Sahloul University Hospital of Sousse,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Thyroid cancers are rare malignant tumours
in children. They are dominated by well-differentiated tumours: papillary
and vesicular. The prognosis is generally favourable. Herein, we report
the clinicopathological particularities of thyroid cancer in children.
Methods: It is a retrospective study on paediatric thyroid cancer diag-
nosed in the Pathology Department, Farhet Hached Hospital, Sousse
(Tunisia), during 2005-2014.
Results: Two girls and four boys were included. The mean age was 12.5
years. Hypothyroidism was found in one case. Ultrasound and thyroid
scintigraphy showed nodules whose structure was hypoechoic in 5 cases,
and heterogeneous in one case. Lymph node aspiration was positive in 3
cases. Surgical treatment was performed in all patients. Extemporaneous
examination was in favour of malignancy in 4 cases. The final
histopathological examination concluded in papillary carcinoma (4 cases)
with nodal metastasis and in vesicular carcinoma with minimal invasion
without nodal metastasis (2 cases). They all had adjuvant therapy with
radioactive iodine and hormone therapy. The evolution was favourable
for all patients
Conclusion: Thyroid cancers are rare tumours in children with a gener-
ally favourable prognosis, even in cases of initial extension or after local
relapse. Therapies targeting angiogenesis and the mutations frequently
encountered in this type of cancer constitute a new tool aimed at eradi-
cating the disease and minimizing morbidity especially among young
patients.
E-PS-13-019
Mucoacinar carcinoma – a putative variant of mucoepidermoid
carcinoma
M. Hyrcza*
*University of Calgary, Canada
Background & objectives: A rare variant of mucoepidermoid carcinoma
displaying acinic differentiation was first reported in a case series of five
cases presented in an USCAP abstract in 2017 (Mod Pathol 2017 vol.30
p.322 abstract #1294). We present another instance of this entity.
Methods: MAML2 Fluorescence In-Situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis
was performed using break-apart probes (Empire Genomics,
Williamsville, New York).
Results: A 52-year-old man presented with a two year history of slowly
growing, asymptomatic, superficial left parotid tumour with no lymph-
adenopathy. CT appearance was benign and a local excision was per-
formed. The tumour was composed of goblet cells, clear epidermoid cells,
and scattered cells with basophilic, granular cytoplasm containing multi-
ple PAS+ granules. Tumour cells were positive for p63, keratin 5, keratin
19, vimentin, CD117, and Sox10, and negative for DOG1, actin, SMMS
and mammaglobin. MAML2 break apart FISH showed complex rear-
rangement pattern with 66% of cells showing one copy of rearranged
MAML2 with a deletion of its 5' segment. The diagnosis of
mucoepidermoid carcinoma with acinic differentiation (mucoacinar car-
cinoma) was made.
Conclusion: We present a new case of a rare variant of mucoepidermoid
carcinoma with acinic differentiation, previously termed mucoacinar car-
cinoma. Our case adds to the five previously reported cases of this rare
entity.
E-PS-13-020
Significance of cytomorphological studies in the diagnosis of salivary
gland diseases
M. Irfan*
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Adenomas comprise from 70 to 80% of all
epithelial tumours of the salivary glands. The most common are pleomor-
phic adenomas, Adenolymphoma, oncocytomas, basal cell adenomas.
Adenolymphoma makes up 1.7–10.1% of all benign tumours of the sal-
ivary glands and takes the second place in frequency of occurrence after
pleomorphic adenomas. Histological examination of the tumour is cur-
rently the most accurate method of differential diagnosis to compare the
data of the macroscopic picture with the histological types of
Adenolymphoma of the parotid glands.
Methods: Retrograde results of examinations and treatment of 19 patients
with a clinical diagnosis of Adenolymphoma from 2015 to 2018. An
analysis of the description of macro drugs and data of postoperative
histological diagnosis is carried out.
Results: In 9 cases, the formation was described as having a thin shell,
having a lobed structure. Histologically corresponded to 2 subtypes.6
patients had a cystic mass. Histologically, this corresponded to subtypes
3 and 4. In 2 cases, there was a cystic formation with liquid contents and a
soft tissue component, and in 3 cases, soft tissue content with a cavity
component. Histologically, this corresponded to subtypes 1 and 2.
Conclusion: There is a direct relationship between the macroscopic struc-
ture of the tumour and its histological structure.
E-PS-13-023
Proliferative activity of recurrent inverted papilloma cells
V. Popadyuk, A. Chernolev, I. Kastyro*
*Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University), Russia
Background & objectives: In 8-10% of inverted papillomas IP in situ,
papillomavirus DNA(HPV) is detected. Aim. Identification of immuno-
histochemical criteria for pathological transformation of cells of the mu-
cous membrane of the nasal cavity(NC) in case of recurrent IP using
expression of Ki-67 .
Methods: Ki-67 & HPV-positive cells were determined in the mucosa of
NC. As an indicator of proliferative activity, the Ki-67 proliferation index
was used, which was determined in each row of cells by fractions of
stained nuclei, expressed in %.
Results: Most immunopositive cells were localized in the second row of
cells, with recurring IP Ki-67-positive cells were found in the basal and
parabasal layers. HPV-positive immunostaining was detected in individ-
ual nuclei of infected cells of the basal and parabasal layers. HPV ele-
ments were detected in actively proliferating basal and parabasal IP layers
and their relapses.
Conclusion: HPV elements in IP and their relapses were identified. This
indicates their role in the formation and relapses of nasal cavity IP. In all
studied preparations, pronounced Ki-67 expression was observed in the
nuclei of proliferating cells.
E-PS-13-024
A rare variant: adenomatoid ameloblastoma with dentinoid
B. Keskin*, M. Soluk Tekkeşin, B. Saçak, Z.L. Cinel
*Marmara University, Turkey
Background & objectives: The ameloblastoma in the epithelioid group
of odontogenic tumours is classified according to its radiological, histo-
logical and behavioural characteristics. However, some types of
ameloblastoma that may contain several of these definitions outside the
classification as hybrids are also described in the literature.
Methods: A 58-year-old male patient presented with a complaint of mass
in the left lower jaw and gingival region, which has been around for 6
months. A 40x25 mm sized lesion was observed in the anterior left half of
the mandible, which thinned the bone cortex. With these findings, the
patient underwent a curettage biopsy for diagnosis.
Results: Excisional material's total size was 1.5x1.5x0.4 cm. In histopath-
ological examination, the lesion was observed as solid in places and
forming adenoid/duct-like areas. Basophilic mucoid material, stellate re-
ticulum cells and mesenchymal elements are seen in these spaces.
Peripheral cells exhibiting prominent palisading of the basal cells nuclei
with reverse polarity with ameloblast-like pattern.
The immunohistochemical findings;CK19,CK14,PanCK focally and
strongly positive,CK7 negative,p16 focally cytoplasmic and nuclear pos-
itive, P53 focal positive, Ki-67 was found about %15-20.
Conclusion: Adenomatoid odontogenic tumour(AOT) and adenoid
ameloblastoma with dentinoid distinction can be problematic. Adenoid
ameloblastoma with dentinoid has duct-like structures without palisading
cells, ameloblastomatous areas, stellate reticulum-like cells.
The most important feature of this lesion is its local recurrence when
compare with AOT. Evans et al. and Ide et al. had described their cases
of a recurrent lesion that was initially diagnosed as adenomatoid
odontogenic tumour after the recurrence and after reviewing all histologic
findings, they named it adenoid ameloblastoma with dentinoid.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-13-025
Schneiderian type papilloma of the middle ear
B. Keskin*, Z.L. Cinel
*Marmara University, Turkey
Background & objectives: Schneiderian type papillomas are benign
neoplasms that develop from the sinonasal tract mucosa. Due to embry-
ological and anatomical closeness, it can develop in different localiza-
tions: pharynx, lacrimal sac, middle ear.
Methods: 63 year old female patient. She applied with unilateral hearing
loss, otorrhea and otalgia. The lesion was excised in the patient whose
lesions were detected in the middle ear.
Results: Excisional material with a total size of 1.5x1x0.4 cm was sent
for histopathological examination. Hematoxylin and eosin stained slides
examined. When we looked at the microscopic findings; lesion has a
papillomatous appearance. The surface of this lesion has columnar cells
and also included goblet cells. Chronic inflammatory cells and oedema
were observed in the submucosa.
Conclusion: Schneiderian type papilloma of the middle ear is a rare
tumour. The first case was described by Stone et al.in 1987.
The excision of the lesion is sufficient in the treatment of these cases,
there is no clear information in terms of recurrence or malign transforma-
tion since the total number of reported cases is around 30. In this respect,
it is necessary to follow up the cases. This case is in second month of
follow-up.
E-PS-13-026
Oral focal mucinosis of tongue
B. Keskin*, Z.L. Cinel
*Marmara University, Turkey
Background & objectives: Oral focal mucinosis is the name given to the
oral form of cutaneous focal mucinosis. This lesion generally appears
smooth round asymptomatic elevation from around. This lesion's
aetiology is unknown but probably cause is overexpression of hyaluronic
acid by fibroblasts.
Methods: A 64 year old female patient presented with a lesion on the tip
of tongue. The lesion was approximately 7mm in diameter and round in
shape, firm and sessile. The mucosal surface of the lesion was smooth, not
ulcerated and showed no colour change. Excisional biopsy was
performed.
Results: Macroscopically, the diameter of the lesion was 0.6 cm.
Hematoxylin&Eosin and Alcian blue & Periodic acid–Schiff(PAS)
stained microscopic slides are examined. On H&E slide, lesion surface
was stratified squamous non-keratinized epithelium and the underlying
connective tissue stroma was composed of loose fibro-myxoid stroma
with fibroblasts. Alcian blue and periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining of
the mucinous part of the tissue demonstrated a positive reaction with
Alcian blue and a negative reaction with PAS.
Conclusion: Oral focal mucinosis is a very rare case on tongue; reported
cases are less than 10. Histopathological distinction is necessary from diseases
with a myxomatous stroma: Myxoma, mucocele, nerve sheath myxoma,
focal myxedema, and mucoid degeneration of fibrotic lesions. Clinically,
these lesions cannot be distinguished, so excision is recommended.
E-PS-13-027
Solitary fibrous tumour of the thyroid
K. Kon*, Y. Yamamoto, M. Hirokawa, M. Shintaku, H. Haga
*Department of Pathology, Shiga General Hospital, Japan
Background & objectives: Solitary fibrous tumour (SFT) rarely arises in
the thyroid. We report a case of SFT of the thyroid which showed usually
infiltrative growth pattern with entrapment of many thyroid follicles with-
in it and simulated desmoid-type fibromatosis.
Methods: Case report
Results: The patient was a 61 year-old man, who presented with a pain-
less mass of about 4 cm in the right lobe. The resected mass was grossly
yellowish white, and microscopically consisted of a diffuse growth of
fibroblast-like, bland spindle cells which were embedded in a large
amount of collagen fibres. The mass was relatively well-circumscribed
but contained many thyroid follicles within it. Tumour cells were immu-
noreactive for STAT6 and CD34.
Conclusion: In our case, SFT of the thyroid showed production of abun-
dant extracellular collagenous matrix and an infiltrative growth with en-
trapment of follicles, thus closely stimulating desmoid-type fibromatosis.
Immunohistochemistry for STAT6 and CD34 was effective for the dif-
ferentiation from desmoid-type fibromatosis.
E-PS-13-028
The effect of sodium thiopental and fentanyl on mast cell degranula-
tion in the mesentery in rats when modelling septaplasty
M. Kostyaeva*, I. Kastyro, E. Korovyakova
*Peoples' Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University), Russia
Background & objectives: Surgical lesion leads to general inflammatory
reactions. The role of anaesthesia in septoplasty in these reactions remains
unstudied. Objective.to study the effect of sodium thiopental and fentanyl
on mast cell (MC) degranulation in the mesentery in rats when modelling
septaplasty.
Methods: Wistar rats were simulated with septoplasty using fentanyl
(1group, 5 rats) and sodium thiopental (2 group, 5 rats). 5 rats were a
control group (CG). After surgery, rats were sacrificed on 2nd day and the
mesentery was stained with toluidine blue. MC with varying degrees of
degranulation (0-3) were counted in 20 fields of view.
Results: In 1&2groups, type0 MC number was significantly less(22.267
±2.45&29.5±6.73, respectively)than in the CG(40.45±6.2)(p<0.001).In
1group, type0 MC number &type1(22.31±3.48) prevailed, over
2types(2.04±0.33)& 3(1.18±0.24) (p<0.001), but type2 TC was greater
than 3rd(p<0.01).In 2group, there was an increased content of 1type
TC(43.76±7.99), compared with other types of TC degranulation in
2group(p<0.001). 2type(1.22±0.22)as well as in the 1group prevailed
over 3type(0.67 ± 0.13)(p <0.001). Comparing the groups, a higher de-
gree of TC degranulation was revealed in 1group.
Conclusion: Modelling of septoplasty under general anaesthesia with
fentanyl causes more pronounced phenomena of general inflammation
and higher mast cell degranulation activity in the mesentery in rats than
with sodium thiopental. Also, septoplasty itself provokes not only local
inflammatory reactions, but also a systemic inflammatory response
E-PS-13-029
Nasal septum histological changes in modelling septoplasty at rats
I. Kastyro, M. Kostyaeva*
*Peoples' Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University), Russia
Background & objectives: Modelling of septoplasty in rats leads to
changes in behaviour in the autonomic nervous system and the appear-
ance of dark neurons in the hippocampus. Purpose: to study the local
effect of septoplasty modelling in rats during nasal septum scarification.
Methods: In 10 male rats of the Wistar strain of the experimental group
(ExpG), the mucous-perichondrium layer of the nasal septum was scari-
fied. The control group consisted of 5 male rats. Animals were
slaughtered 3 days after surgery. After decalcification of the facial skel-
eton of rats, histological sections were stained with H&E. For statistical
analysis of the results, the Mann-Whitney test was used.
Results: In ExpG, at the sites of nasal septum scarification, the leukocyte
shaft was 45.43±1.07 μm. The average values of this indicator for each rat
in ExpG did not differ (p<0.001). There was oedema, hyperaemia and
diapedetic haemorrhage in the submucosa. Focal periductal mononuclear
infiltrates in the gland. A narrowing of the common nasal passages was
noted due to oedema, which covered the nasal septum adjacent to the
damage zone.
Conclusion: Scarification of NS in rats is accompanied by characteristic
inflammatory phenomena, both in areas of direct damage and in areas
close to them. This method of damage to the nasal mucous simulates
inflammation after septoplasty in humans.
E-PS-13-031
Carcinoma showing thymus-like element (castle) of the submandib-
ular gland: report of an extremely rare case
K. Kusafuka*, A. Muramatsu, M. Suzuki, K. Arai
*Shizuoka General Hospital, Japan
Background & objectives: CASTLE is rare but a well-established thy-
roidal tumour as “intrathyroidal thymic carcinoma”. Recently, one case of
CASTLE arising in the parotid gland was reported (Head Neck 2017: 40:
E1-E4). We reported herein one extremely rare case of salivary CASTLE.
Methods: We collected “basaloid/myoepithelial carcinoma” from a pa-
thology file during 2009-2020. We re-estimated it, histologically, and
immunohistochemically. The patient was 47 years-old female, involving
the sense of incongruity at her left neck. MRI indicated an ill-defined
mass in the left submandibular gland. The submandilectomy was per-
formed. Sequentially, the late lymph node metastasis was found. After
3 years, distant metastases were found.
Results: Histologically, the tumour showed the nest-like or sheet-like
pattern of short-spindle or basaloid atypical cells with hyalinous stroma.
Stromal lymphoid cell infiltration was scanty. The tumour cells showed
clear nuclei with short spindle-shaped cytoplasm and one swollen nucle-
olus, and focally squamous metaplasia. Immunohistochemically, the tu-
mour cells were positive for CK5/6, p63, CD5, c-kit and EGFR, whereas
they were negative for CK14, aSMA, NCAM, and synaptophysin. Ki-67
labelling index is 52%.
Conclusion: We finally diagnosed it as salivary CASTLE, due to CD5
positivity and negativity for both neuroendocrine markers and
myoepithelial markers, except for p63/p40 and CK5/6. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first case of CASTLE arising in the subman-
dibular gland. The origin of salivary CASTLE remains unknown. We
discuss the differential diagnosis of salivary CASTLE from myoepithelial
carcinoma, lymphoepithelial carcinoma or basaloid carcinoma of the sal-
ivary glands.
Funding: A Grant-in-Aid for Medical Research Support Project of
Shizuoka Prefectural Hospital Organization in 2019 of Japan (to KK).
E-PS-13-033
Aggressive neoplasia in the maxillary sinus in women in the eighth
decade of life - case report and literature review
F. Leiva Cepas*, M. Sánchez Frías, A. Sanz Zorrilla, I. Ruíz-Núñez
*Pathology Unit, Universitary Hospital "Reina Sofia", Cordoba, Spain
Background & objectives: The sinu-nasal tract is an infrequent site of
primary malignancy. Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is the most com-
mon salivary gland tumour in the sinus tract. The aim of this case is to
identify the clinical-pathological features of sinus-nasal ACC.
Methods: Patient (60years) who debuted with left periorbital asymmetric
facial tumour, with decreased visual acuity associated. In CT a tumour
with a greater diameter of 47 mm was found with intense heterogeneous
enhancement in the left maxillary sinus extending anteriorly to the sub-
cutaneous cellular tissue and posterolaterally to the buccal space, eroding
the walls of the sinus and without adenopathies.
Results: Under the optical microscope, this tumour is characterized by
the presence of small, round cells of uniform appearance that are grouped
into cylindrical structures, in which several lights containing hyaline or
mucous material can be observed. The immunohistochemical: CK19, c-
kit, CK5/6, EMA (luminal), p40 and p63 (basal) positive. ACC is a
malignant tumour with a poor prognosis, very rare in the maxillary sinus
with respect to other head and neck locations, but with a high recurrence
rate. In contrast, the rate of metastasis appears to be lower than that
observed for tumours of the salivary glands.
Conclusion: Predictors of survival in SNACC include age, comorbidity
status, grade, and stage. Surgery is associated with improved survival and
remains the mainstay of therapy, whereas the roles of radiation therapy
and chemotherapy require future investigation, where pathology has the
main perspective.
E-PS-13-034
A rare case of metastasis of breast carcinoma to buccal mucosa mim-
icking acinic cell carcinoma
K. Liyanaarachchi*, A. Gamage, M. Bater, S. Di Palma
*Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Metastatic lesions to the oral cavity from
distant tumours are rare, amounting to only 1% of all oral cavity malig-
nancies and only occasional cases of metastasis to the buccal mucosa has
been reported. A case is presented here.
Methods: A PubMed search was carried out for previous cases, using the
reference terms “buccal mucosa”, “breast metastasis” and “acinic cell car-
cinoma”. A 62-year-old woman was referred to oral-maxillo-facial outpa-
tient department for evaluation of an ulcerated left buccal mucosal lesion.
Results: The biopsy from the ulcerated lesion of the buccal mucosa
revealed a tumour arranged in acinar/cribriform pattern with papillary like
structures and some glandular structures. The features are reminiscent of
acinic cell carcinoma. However, with DOG1 negativity, ER/PR positivity
with QS of 8/8 for ER and 4/8 for PR and past medical history of ypT2
yN1 invasive ductal carcinoma, the diagnosis of metastatic breast carci-
noma was made.
Conclusion: Diagnosis of a metastatic lesion in buccal mucosa is chal-
lenging histologically since it can mimic primary salivary gland tumours.
Our case is complicated by the long interval of time (6 years) from pri-
mary breast tumour detection. Most of the reported cases have an interval
of 2 years. The combination of medical history and a panel of immuno-
histochemical stains and interest in both breast and salivary gland pathol-
ogy are key to achieve the correct diagnosis as shown in our case.
E-PS-13-035
Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus – an extremely rare diagnosis of the
oral cavity
H. Mahmood*, A. Smith, S.A. Khurram
*Academic Unit of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry,
University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus (LSA) is an
uncommon inflammatory dermatosis predominantly affecting the
anogenital region. Extragenital manifestation is uncommon and LSA af-
fecting the oral tissues in isolation is exceedingly rare, with only a few
reported cases in the English literature.
Methods: We present the clinical and histological findings of a rare case
of oral LSA with discussion of the management.
Results: A healthy Asian male presented with 15mm heterogenous ul-
cerative lesions in the left buccal mucosa and the gingivae above the
upper right premolar teeth. There were no identifiable causes of ulceration
and no extra-oral involvement. Clinical suspicion of syphilis was raised
due to the resemblance with snail-track ulcers.
Incisional biopsies demonstrated atrophic epithelium, significant basal
cell loss and prominently hyalinised connective tissue showing sclerosis;
consistent with a diagnosis of LSA.
Conclusion: This case highlights a rare and interesting case of LSA
affecting the oral mucosa. The aetiology and pathogenesis of LSA
Virchows Arch
remains largely unknown, although it is thought to be multifactorial with
evidence to implicate genetic, hormonal, infective, traumatic and
autoimmune-related factors.
E-PS-13-036
Radiation-induced osteosarcoma involving the mandible – report of
a rare diagnosis
H. Mahmood*, D. Andrew, S.A. Khurram
*Academic Unit of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry,
University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Irradiation can have adverse effects on bone.
Late complications include osteoradionecrosis, radiation-induced osteitis
and osteosarcoma. The latter are malignant tumours of undifferentiated
connective tissue of bone and exceedingly rare in the jaw (incidence 0.7
per million) with only 10% radiation-induced.
Methods: We report the rare case of a radiation-induced jaw
osteosarcoma.
Results: A Caucasian male patient presented with severe trismus and
marked left lingual alveolus expansion which had caused deviation of
the tongue. Four years previously he had radical radiotherapy (70Gy)
and chemotherapy for a p16 positive T1N2cM0 squamous cell carcinoma
of the left tonsil with a positive left level II node.
The patient had extractions in the lower left quadrant one year previously,
with delayed healing. Initial bone biopsies of the left mandible showed a
bony sequestrum suggestive of osteoradionecrosis with presence of ab-
normal osteoid suspicious for an osteosarcoma. Imaging demonstrated an
abnormal exophytic bone forming lesion in the left body of mandible and
parasymphysis and ruled out a metastatic lesion.
Conclusion: Following local and national multidisciplinary discussions,
the patient underwent a bilateral neck dissection, left mandibulectomy
with fibula flap reconstruction and full thickness skin graft. Due to the
rarity of this lesion in the jaws and its slow-growing and painless nature, it
is often diagnosed late. A diagnosis should be considered if changes are
seen in previously stable irradiated bone with bony destruction and a soft
tissue mass.
E-PS-13-037
Laryngeal basaloid squamous cell carcinoma with sarcomatous com-
ponent and osteosarcomatous differentiation: an unusual histologic
variant
S. Makni*, M. Zghal, L. Ayadi, M. Triki, S. Graja, I. Bahri, T. Sellami,
R. Kallel
*Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC)
with spindle cell component is an uncommon aggressive variety of squa-
mous cell carcinoma. Only few cases are reported in the larynx. The aim
is to analyse epidemiological and clinic-pathological aspects of this rare
entity.
Methods: We present a case of laryngeal BSCC with sarcomatous com-
ponent and osteosarcomatous differentiation in 66-year old man. To our
knowledge, it’s the second case reported in the literature.
Results: A 66-year-old man, with a 40 pack-year smoking history,
presented dysphonia and dysphagia. Laryngoscopy showed a glottis
exophytic tumour. Diagnosis given on biopsy was moderately differ-
entiated squamous cell carcinoma with sarcomatous component. The
patient underwent partial laryngectomy with bilateral neck dissec-
tion. Macroscopically, it was an ulceroproliferative tumour involving
the right vocal cord. Histologically, it presented several components:
basaloid region, of which tumour cells have hyperchromatic nuclei,
scanty basophilic cytoplasm and showed peripheral palisading, com-
edo necrosis and hyalinized stroma; conventional keratinizing squa-
mous component and highly undifferentiated sarcoma; there were
focal osteosarcomatous differentiation. All margins were negative.
Multiple ipsilateral lymph nodes were metastatic. An adjuvant radio-
therapy was preconised.
Conclusion: Overall, given the rarity of this diagnosis, few conclusions
can yet be drawn about its risk factors, treatment approach or prognostic
significance.
E-PS-13-038
Cervical ganglioneuroma - case report and literature review
J.S. Marrero Afonso*, A. Vega Falcón, R. Méndez Medina
*Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Spain
Background & objectives: Ganglioneuromas can appear anywhere but
only 28 cervical ganglioneuromas have been reported. Because of non-
specific radiological findings and wide differential diagnosis, pathologi-
cal examination may be the only way to diagnose them. Its rarity and
clinicopathological characteristics could justify its presentation.
Methods: We report a 41 years-old female patient with pain, tumour and
redness in paramandibular region with clinical diagnosis of cellulitis.
Through physical examination, an ovoid ipsilateral cervical mass was
detected and radiology revealed a 5.1x3.5x2.1 cm homogeneous
hypointense lesion. Fine-needle aspiration was performed but was insuf-
ficient for diagnosis. Therefore, surgical treatment was planned and mor-
phologic description was performed.
Results: Grossly, it is a well-defined nodular-oval brownish white tissue
fragment with whitish cut surface and elastic consistency. Microscopically,
it is a circumscribed lesion with schwannian stroma and large dispersed
cells with small eccentric nuclei and wide granular cytoplasm. It showed
positivity for S100, neurofilament and synaptophysin. A final diagnosis of
“Cervical ganglioneuroma” was made.
Conclusion: Although cervical ganglioneuroma is a rare entity, it should
be taken into account in differential diagnosis of cervical soft tissue neo-
plasms.
E-PS-13-039
Rare case of a neuroendocrine carcinoma of the tongue
K. Mikus Kuracinova*, S. Horak, D. Kobzova, P. Janega
*Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University,
Slovakia
Background & objectives: Neuroendocrine tumours are a heteroge-
neous group of tumours. The tongue is an extremely rare site for neuro-
endocrine carcinomas. Due to the paucity of studies, satisfactory classi-
fication and treatment protocols have been established for these tumours
in the oral cavity.
Methods: A 69-year-old male was admitted to hospital with a tumorous
mass on the left edge of the tongue, with a palpable resistance on the left
side of the neck along sternocleidomastoid muscle. CT examination re-
vealed lymphadenopathy in neck region and liver metastases. The patient
underwent resection of the affected tongue area, cervical lymphatic nodes
and a salivary gland.
Results: Macroscopically there was a sharply demarcated, superficially
ulcerated nodule on the tongue surface with the size of 32x22x20mm,
composed of multiple lumps, pale yellow to whitish colour, solid consis-
tency. Microscopically the tumour had trabecular growth pattern with
solid nests, oval to polygonal cells with nuclear chromatin of “salt and
pepper” appearance, with multiple mitoses. Immunohistochemistry dem-
onstrated expression of neuroendocrine markers (chromogranin,
synapthophysin, CD56), positivity for AE1/3, negativity for CK17,
strong proliferative index (Ki-67 ˃80%).
Conclusion: Neuroendocrine carcinoma of the tongue is a rare tumour,
with an aggressive behaviour according to the published cases. The con-
clusion of the case was a primary, poorly differentiated G3 neuroendo-
crine carcinoma of the tongue with multiple metastases.
E-PS-13-040
Lymphadenoma of salivary gland - cytological and histological
challenges
H. Mohanraj*, G. Gupta, J. Lai, S. Di Palma
*Royal Surrey County Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Sebaceous&non-sebaceous lymphadenomas
of salivary glands are rare. The clinical, histological&cytological charac-
teristics are obscure. In the largest review of 33tumours, a pre-operative
diagnosis was impossible. We present 3cases of lymphadenoma from
parotid gland where the pre-operative diagnosis didn’t reflect the
histology.
Methods: Patient1: A 72yr female presented with right parotid lump.
FNA was consistent with cyst.
Patient2: A 49yr female with lump in the lower pole of parotid had a
cytology diagnosis of intraparotid lymph node.
Patient3: A 57yr male with a lump in the left parotid underwent core
biopsy. Following a diagnosis of malignancy surgery was performed.
Results: Subsequent surgical specimens showed similar features. A well
circumscribed cystic and solid lesion surrounded by lymphoid tissue. The
cyst was lined by squamous and oncocytic type of cells and multiple
islands of non-keratinising squamous epithelium were identified within
the lymphoid tissue. A second opinion was sought for patient one. The
other two cases were assessed by a pathologist with an interest for sali-
vary gland disease.
Conclusion: Our cases confirm:
a)The clinical-cytological and pathological difficulties in reporting
lymphadenoma of salivary glands,
b)Possibility of misdiagnosis on FNA&core biopsy as there are no re-
markable features that distinguish lymphadenoma from other parotid tu-
mours. -Pathologists, to consider lymphadenoma in the differentials.
E-PS-13-042
The rare oncocytic variant of mucoepidermoid carcinoma (OMEC):
a case report with clinical, immunohistochemical and morphological
features
M. Nisar*, S. Siddique, S. Fatima
*Aga Khan University Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Recognition of OMEC is important because
most other salivary gland lesions with oncocytic features are benign. Here
we report a case of OMEC of right soft palate, which is considered as a
rare site compared to other major salivary glands.
Methods: An excisional biopsy of the right soft palate was performed at
one of the tertiary care hospital. The specimen was submitted for histol-
ogy. After fixation in formalin solution, and inclusion in paraffin, 3–5 μm
sections were stained with H&E for conventional evaluation.
Morphologic features such as presence of mucin containing cells, and
>60% population of the oncocytic cells were assessed.
Results: Permanent sections stained with H&E revealed a neoplasm that
had replaced a wide area of the right soft palate. Morphological features
included nests, trabeculae and aggregates of polygonal shaped cells.
These cells had moderately pleomorphic nuclei, focally prominent nucle-
oli, and abundant amount of granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. OMEC
must accounts for >60% of the oncocytic cell population. Occasional cells
containing intracytoplasmic mucin which were highlighted by special
stain mucin.
Immunohistochemical stains were performed and demonstrated
cytokeratin-7 strong positivity. There was patchy positivity of p63 and
p40 in the neoplastic cells. Thus, the final diagnosis was that of salivary
gland neoplasm with extensive oncocytic change and admixed mucocytes
favouring oncocytic mucoepidermoid carcinoma.
Conclusion: Mucoepidermoid carcinoma composed of exclusive
oncocytes and rare mucocytes is a rare morphologic variant. Oncocytes
are large epithelial cells that contain bright eosinophilic, granular
cytoplasm & can potentially be confused with oncocytoma or oncocytic
carcinoma. Diagnosis of all oncocytic lesions is important for correct
treatment. A pathologist must remain aware of the rare diagnosis of
OMEC of the palate which has a good prognosis according to the recent
studies.
E-PS-13-043
Eosinophilic ulcer of the tongue: a case and confusing clinical entity
M. Njima*, C. Chebaane, N. Ben Abdeljelil, S. Gharbi, S. Ben
Hammoda, A. Moussa, R. Hadhri
*Department of Pathology, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital,
Monastir, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Eosinophilic ulcer of the tongue is a rare self-
limiting chronic and benign ulcerative lesion often misdiagnosed as oral
malignancy. Its etiopathogenesis is not clear, but trauma plays an impor-
tant role in the development.
Methods: Here we report a case of eosinophilic ulcer in 74- year old woman,
which presented with a symptomatic ulcer on the right lateral border of the
tongue. Clinically, the lesion manifests as an isolated ulcer with indurated
borders and a yellow fibrinous floor. A biopsy is indicated to rule out
malignancy.
Results: We received a fragment measuring 1.4x0.7cm. Histopathological
examination showed an ulcerated surface of the lingual mucosa. The back-
ground of this ulceration is characterized by the presence of fibrino-
leucocytic exudate associated with a dense and pleomorphic inflammatory
infiltrate with several eosinophils with sheets of lymphocytes, plasma cells
and neutrophils extending deep into the mucosa and submucosa, underlying
muscle. No cellular atypia was observed. The diagnosis of eosinophilic
ulcer of the tongue was retained.
Conclusion: Eosinophilic ulcer of the tongue is a rare chronic benign
ulcerative lesion often misdiagnosed as oral malignancy. Its histogenesis
remains controversial. Generally surgical excision resolves it spontane-
ously within few weeks. Histopathological evaluation is essential for its
definite diagnosis.
E-PS-13-044
Plasmatocytoma of the right tonsil. A case report with a short review
of the current literature
I. Theodossiou, A. Nomikos*, M. Manitsopoulou, D. Mpeka,
E. Papageorgiou-Mariglis, S. Chranioti
*Department of Pathology, Asklipieion Voulas, Greece
Background & objectives: Extramedullary plasmacytoma (EMP) is a rare
neoplasm that occurs outside of the bone marrow. EMP usually occurs in
the head and neck region (80%), with the nasopharynx and sinonasal cav-
ities being the most common. Involvement of the tonsil is unusual.
Methods: A 58-year-old man presented with a history of discomfort
during swallowing of 10 days duration. On clinical examination there
was a firm swelling in the right tonsillar area. His medical history was
unremarkable. A biopsy of the right tonsil was performed.
Results: Histologic examination showed a monotonous infiltrate com-
posed of discohesive plasma cells characterized by eccentrically placed
round nuclei. Immunohistochemical staining revealed reactivity for
CD138, CD56, CD79a, ΕΜΑ, bcl-2. Tumour cells were CD20, CD30,
bcl-6, CD5, CD 10, CD15, AE1/AE3 negative. A diagnosis of
extramedullary plasmacytoma was made.
Conclusion: The exact incidence of EMP is unknown, but they are rare,
accounting for only 3%-4% of all plasma cell malignancies. The diagnosis of
tonsillar EMP is important not only because it is a rare neoplasm but also
because it mimics many reactive lesions and malignant neoplasms at this site.
FNA may provide inconclusive results. Immunohistochemistry played a cru-
cial role in differentiating it from other conditions involving plasma cells.
Solitary EMP is managed with radiotherapy, surgery, or both.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-13-046
Primary malignant melanoma of the mandible: a rare entity
E. Papagianni*, N. Stavrinou, A. Roidou, D. Sampaziotis, C. Masaoutis,
C. Magkou
*Department of Pathology, Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: Primary malignant melanoma of the jaw is a
rare neoplasm and it occurs more frequently in the oral mucosa of the
maxilla. We present a case of a thirty-six year old woman diagnosed with
melanoma in the mucosa of mandible.
Methods: A specimen of partial mandipulectomy 10.5x8x5.7 cm
with four teeth and the surrounding soft tissue, was received. On
macroscopic observation, a non-circumscribed dark-coloured lesion
covering a surface area of 3x2.7cm at the retromollar fossa was
described. All margins were coloured with various inks. The tissue
was fixed in 10% buffered formalin, routinely processed, 2–4 μm
sections were stained with H-E.
Results: Invasive oral melanoma composed of sheets of epithelioid
pleomorphic cells with distinct nucleoli and geographical necrotic
areas was observed. Atypical giant cells, melanin pigment and ul-
ceration of the mucosa were also identified. The neoplastic cells
invaded the submandibular bone and the soft tissue of the oral cav-
ity. The excisional margins were negative. Mitotic rate was estimat-
ed 11 mitoses/mm2. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the diagnosis
of malignant melanoma: S100 (+), MelanA (+), ΗΜΒ-45 (+), p16
(+), C-KIT (+).
Conclusion: Based on the fact that no melanoma was reported either in
patient’s medical history or during clinical examination, all findings
favoured the diagnosis of Primary Malignant Melanoma of the jaw.
E-PS-13-047
Adenoid cystic carcinoma in unusual sites: case reports
T. Pasupati Meenakshi*, S. Merilyn George, B. Karikalan, D. Shalini
*Clinipath Malaysia Sdn Bhd, Malaysia
Background & objectives: Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is a rare
form of adenocarcinoma that commonly arises in the major and minor
salivary glands of the head and neck. It can also occur in the breast,
Bartholin gland or other locations in the body.
Methods: Three cases of adenoid cystic carcinoma, arising from the
breast, Bartholin gland and external auditory canal were studied . Based
on H&E features, further IHC studies, comprising AE1/AE3, p63, S100,
CK7 and CD117 were carried out. Additional IHC markers, ER, PR and
HER2/NEU were performed for the breast lesion. All the cases were
reported digitally using Aperio Image Scope.
Results: The tumour element was seen arranged around cyst-like spaces,
containing basophilic mucinous content and lined by uniform, monoto-
nous appearing cells, with centrally placed nuclei. Focal areas of cribri-
form pattern and tubular differentiation streaming through a fibro collag-
enous framework were noticed in all the three lesions. Very occasional
mitotic figures were observed.
Epithelial cells were strongly positive for AE1/AE3 and CK7. S100
and p63 highlighted the myoepithelial element. CD117 showed
strong positivity for both the cribriform and the tubular component.
ER, PR and HER2/NEU were negative for the tumour cells in the
breast lesion.
Conclusion: It has to be stated that though rare in occurrence, a
primary adenoid cystic carcinoma arising in unusual sites like the
vagina, originating from Bartholin gland or from the breast or from
the external auditory canal have been documented in literature. This
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of malignant le-
sions of vagina, breast and external ear canal for proper manage-
ment protocols.
E-PS-13-048
P16 positive basaloid carcinoma of tonsil: a case report
T. Pasupati Meenakshi*, S. Merilyn George, B. Karikalan
*Clinipath Malaysia Sdn Bhd, Malaysia
Background & objectives: Basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC) is
an uncommon, aggressive variant of squamous cell carcinoma. Tonsils are
an uncommon site of occurrence of BSCC. p16 positive basaloid carcinoma
of tonsils is rare and not many cases have been documented in literature.
Methods: A 38- year old male presented with a 2-month history of
enlarged, fungating right tonsil along with right cervical lymphadenopa-
thy. Multiple biopsy bits of the tonsil, measuring 9mm in aggregate was
received. Based on H&E features, further IHC studies, comprising
34βE12, p63, p16, CK5, BCL-2, and Ki-67 were carried out and the
slides were reported digitally using Aperio Image Scope.
Results: A severe degree of erosion of the surface, along with prominent
malignant basaloid element arising from the stratified epithelium was
noted. Individual basaloid cells with enlarged nuclei, dense in nature
without prominent nucleoli were observed, along with scattered mitotic
figures. Underlying lymphoid tissue shows evidence of lymphoid hyper-
plasia with formation of germinal centres in many foci. IHC showed
intense positivity for p16, 34βE12, CK 5, BCl-2 and p63 for the basaloid
cells in the epithelium and subepithelial tissue. Ki-67 showed a high
proliferative index of 60%.
Conclusion: Expression of p16 in basaloid variant of tonsillar carcinoma
is very rare and denotes an aggressive behaviour due to HPV association.
The prevalence and association of p16 has been well documented in oral
squamous cell carcinoma. HPV serology in such cases can throw further
insight to the type of HPV involved.
p16 analysis of tonsillar carcinoma is warranted in all cases for effective
management.
E-PS-13-049
Myositis ossificans of masseter muscle: a rare case report
A. Rai*, S. Sahu, M. Hoogar
*MGM Medical College, Navi Mumbai, India
Background & objectives: Myositis Ossificans is non-neoplastic, dys-
trophic calcification followed by heterotopic ossification of an intramus-
cular connective tissue, predominantly associated with trauma. Its in-
volvement of the masticatory muscles is rare. The present case elaborates
the histopathology of myositis ossificans and its clinical correlation.
Methods: This study is about a 32-year-old-male presenting with trismus
and past history of trauma. Clinical examination revealed a well-defined,
tender, hard swelling over the right cheek. Contrast enhanced CT scan
suggested ossified right masseter muscle.
Results: Gross examination showed multiple grey-white, firm to hard
tissue bits. Histopathological study revealed residual degenerated muscle
fibres undergoing diffuse fibrosis surrounded by spicules of woven bone,
along with focal areas of lamellated, uncalcified bone. Spicules of lamel-
lar bone with well-formed medullary cavity containing haematopoietic
elements were also noted. The diagnosis was given as myositis ossificans
of masseter muscle.
Conclusion: Myositis ossificans of masseter is a rare entity causing tris-
mus and reduced oral hygiene, leading into reduced quality of life. A
detailed histopathological examination can confirm the diagnosis and
improve prognosis.
E-PS-13-050
Analysis of P16, CDK4 and PTEN immunoexpression in oral
melanocytic nevi and melanomas
T. Santana*, A. Queiroz, M. Trierveiler
*School of Dentistry, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil
Background & objectives: This study aimed to investigate the immuno-
histochemical expression of p16, CDK4 and PTEN proteins in oral
melanocytic nevi and oral melanomas.
Methods: Immunohistochemistry studies for the proteins p16, CDK4 and
PTEN were conducted in 42 samples of oral melanocytic nevi and five
cases of oral melanoma. Immunoexpression was evaluated semi-
quantitatively and stratified into scores: 0 (negative expression), 1 (<5%
positive cells), 2 (6-50% positive cells), 3 (>50% positive cells). To com-
pare variables, appropriate statistical tests were used (p <0.05 was con-
sidered significant).
Results: CDK4 exhibited nuclear expression score 2 in 20 (47.6%) cases
of oral melanocytic nevi and score 3 (> 50%) in 22 (52.4%) cases. In oral
melanomas, this expression was categorized as score 3 (> 50%) in all
cases. p16 showed low nuclear immunohistochemical expression in cases
of oral melanocytic nevi, with 2 cases (4.8%) being completely negative
and 40 cases (95.2%) showing score 1. In the cases of melanoma, the
immunohistochemical expression of p16 was notably higher, with all
cases showing a score of 2. PTEN showed high cytoplasmic expression
(score 3) in 41 (97.6%) of cases of oral melanocytic nevi. All cases of oral
melanoma showed PTEN score 3.
Conclusion: In conclusion, CDK4 and PTEN proteins show high immu-
nohistochemical expression in melanocytic nevi and oral melanomas.
Whereas p16 protein shows low immunohistochemical expression in oral
melanocytic nevi and moderate expression in oral melanomas.
E-PS-13-051
Combined squamous and small cell carcinoma of the larynx
J. Santos*, R. Machado-Neves, T. Amaro, M. Honavar
*Unidade Local de Saúde de Matosinhos, Portugal
Background & objectives: We report a case of a combined squamous
and small cell carcinoma (CSCC) of the larynx, which is extremely rare
and a diagnostic challenge.
Methods: Clinical history, radiological exams, macroscopic and histo-
logical features have been reviewed.
Results: 69-year-old man, heavy smoker, presenting with 6-month his-
tory of hoarseness/haemoptysis. Laryngeal mass biopsy revealed a
basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Endoscopic resections were
performed. Pathological examination showed a tumour composed of
small round cells containing finely granular, hyperchromatic nuclei, in-
conspicuous nucleoli and scant cytoplasm, distributed in nests/sheets;
mitotic count was high. These cells expressed neuroendocrine markers
(synaptophysin and NSE); Ki67 >80%. Additionally there was in situ and
invasive SCC (p63 and cytokeratin 5/6 positive). The diagnosis of com-
bined squamous and small cell carcinoma was rendered. Neck dissection
revealed one metastatic lymph node with both components. No distant
metastasis was found. The patient underwent radiotherapy.
Conclusion: Laryngeal CSCC has been rarely reported. Diagnosis de-
pends on pathological and immunohistochemistry markers. Should be
distinguished from atypical carcinoid, basaloid squamous cell carcinoma,
amongst others. Accurate diagnosis of the histological nature of these
tumours is imperative to ensure optimal therapy.
E-PS-13-052
Molecular profiling of salivary duct carcinoma (SDC) reveals a novel
HMGA2 – SMR3B fusion – a case report
O. Stanowska*, K. Seliga, A. Tysarowski, M. Prochorec-Sobieszek,
M. Durzynska, A. Skalova, M. Wagrodzki
*Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research Institute of Oncology,
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Poland
Background & objectives: SDC is a rare salivary gland malignancy of
dismal prognosis without effective systemic therapy or predictive biomarkers.
SMR3B encodes saliva-isolated opiorphin involved in pathogenesis of
triple-negative breast cancer.
We present a case of SDC ex pleomorphic adenoma harbouring
HMGA2-SMR3B fusion.
Methods: 54-year old male presented with palpable submandibular nod-
ule for 4 weeks. MRI revealed polycyclic tumour of 55mm, adjacent to
deep lobe of parotid gland. Lung metastases where detected by PET-CT.
The patient underwent parotidectomy and surgical biopsy of a lung
nodule.
FFPE tissue was used for targeted NGS using FusionPlex Comprehensive
Thyroid&Lung(CTL) Kit and FusionPlex Sarcoma Kit sequenced on
MiniSeq(Illumina).
Results: Macroscopic examination revealed partially encapsulated tumour
of the parotid with calcification and necrosis. Microscopically, peripherally
located ductal structures embedded in a hyalinized parenchyma
corresponded to pleomorphic adenoma histology with focally atypical fea-
tures (carcinoma in situ). Centrally, classic SDC morphology with
comedonecrosis and highly atypical apocrine cells could be observed.
Abrupt spindling of carcinomatous component and gradual transformation
to sarcoma were histologically and immunohistochemically apparent.
Metastatic focus in the lung corresponded to the sarcomatous component.
A novel fusion HMGA2[3]–SMR3B[3] was detected using panel
FusionPlex® Sarcoma Kit. The presence of HMGA2 genetic alteration
confirmed pleomorphic adenoma origin. Analysis with panel FusionPlex
CTL Kit didn’t reveal any potentially targetable genomic abnormalities.
Conclusion: Dedifferentiated SDC should not be confused with
sarcomatoid SDC or carcinosarcoma for treatment purposes.
The significance of SMR3B rearrangement in salivary gland malignan-
cies warrants further investigation to determine its possible role as a
potential prognostic biomarker of dedifferentiation and/or poor outcome.
Due to molecular similarities between SDC and predominantly triple-
negative apocrine breast carcinoma, investigation of the latter might gen-
erate useful hypothesis for the former.
E-PS-13-053
Giant laterocervical sialolipoma: an unusual case of a very rare be-
nign tumour
D. Tapoi*, A. Dumitru, M. Costache, M. Sajin, A. Ciongariu, I. Dandu -
Colceriu, S. Gradinaru
*University Emergency Hospital Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Sialolipoma is a recently described be-
nign tumour of the salivary glands composed of a proliferation of
mature adipocytes within normal salivary parenchyma. It a rare var-
iant of salivary lipoma as there are just around 60 cases reported to
date.
Methods: Sialolipoma can affect both major and minor salivary glands
and is more frequently reported in older male patients. The aim of our
study is to gain further insight into this very rare entity by evaluating
localization, histopathological characteristics and differential diagnosis
with other head and neck tumours.
Results: We report the case of a 62 year old male with a a giant
laterocervical lipomatose mass. The ultrasound suggested a benign
fatty tissue tumour which was then surgically removed. However,
on histopathological examination, the diagnosis of sialolipoma was
established.
Conclusion: Sialolipoma is usually located in the parotid gland, followed
by the palate for minor salivary glands. Major gland sialolipoma occurs
more frequently in males while minor gland sialolipoma is more frequent
in females and is usually less than 2 cm in diameter. Therefore a male
with 8x5x3 cm laterocervical sialolipoma probably arising from a minor
salivary gland is extremely unusual for a tumour that is particularly rare
anyway. Histopathology remains the only means of establishing the di-
agnosis in such cases.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-13-054
Primary sinonasal malignant melanoma: a case report
P. Tziakou*, A. Ieronymaki, A. Oikonomou, E. Papakonstantinou
*Pathology Department, Thriasio General Hospital of Elefsina, Greece
Background & objectives: Malignant melanoma of the sinonasal muco-
sa is a rare tumour, and is more aggressive than its cutaneous counterpart.
Primary malignant melanoma of nasal cavity arise from melanocytes
located in the mucous membrane and only 0.5% arises in nasal cavity.
Methods: A 65 year-old female patient presented with epistaxis at the
ENT Department of our hospital. The CT scan revealed a polypoid mass
in the left nasal cavity extending to the nasopharynx. The mass was
excised surgically.
Results: Gross findings consist of multiple brown-black soft tissue
pieces together measuring 5,7x1,7 cm. Histologically, the epitheli-
oid, variable sized tumour cells were arranged in nests and
pseudopapillae, had prominent nucleoili, intracytoplasmic granules
of melanin and high mitotic activity. Areas of necrosis were also
recognized. Immunohistochemically the tumour cells showed posi-
tivity to S100p, Melan A, SOX10, MITF and negativity to HMB45,
BRAF, AE1/AE3, CD34, GFAP and Synaptophysin. Postoperative
radio-therapy was given to the patient but some months later liver
metastases were found.
Conclusion: Rarity of this lesion warrants its mention and emphasizes the
importance of considering malignant melanoma among the differential
diagnosis of tumours of nose and paranasal sinuses. The prognosis is
extremely poor and nodal and distant metastases are common, so early
diagnosis and surgical treatment offer the only possible hope of survival
and therefore, attention must be paid to the minor nasal symptoms at the
earliest.
E-PS-13-055
Neuroendocrine carcinoma of tonsil-case report
B. Vukomanovic Djurdjevic*, J. Trifunovic, J. Sotirovic, M. Milojevic,
A. Peric
* Military Medical Academy Belgrade, Serbia
Background & objectives: The diffuse neuroendocrine system (DNES)
is composed of cells with neuroendocrine secretory granules. Members of
the DNES commonly express neuroendocrine markers by immunohisto-
chemistry and may express a variety of peptide hormones.
Methods: The small cell variant of poorly differentiated neuroendocrine
carcinoma, WHO grade 3 of the tonsil is extremely rare. The prognosis is
poor. We present a 67-year-old male with symptoms of swallowing dif-
ficulty and pain in the right tonsil. After clinical examination right-sided
tonsillectomy was performed.
Results: Pathohistological examination showed the presence of high
grade malignant cells and with positive immunohistochemical markers
related to neuroendocrine differentiation. The final diagnosis was small
cell variant of poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma WHO
grade 3 of the tonsil.
Conclusion: Although rare, neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC) of the ton-
sil may occur with respect to the distribution of DNES. Poorly differen-
tiated carcinoma with high nucleus to cytoplasm ratio suggest importance
for immunohistochemistry analysis for neuroendocrine markers for final
diagnosis.
E-PS-13-056
An unusual finding in a pleomorphic adenoma – a case report
H. Walsh*, I. Robinson, S.A. Khurram
*Unit of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Clinical Dentistry,
University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: A 49 year old female without any significant
medical history presented with a 1cm nodular lesion in the right upper lip.
Following excision, the lesion was sent for histopathological examination.
Methods: Histology showed lobules of bland plasmacytoid cells with a
hyalinised and amorphous background in keeping with amyloid. Focally,
muco-myxoid stroma, myoepithelial cells, and bilayered ductal structures
in keeping with a pleomorphic adenoma appearance were seen.
Results: Immunohistochemistry showed diffused staining for AE1/AE3
and variable positivity for CK7 and CK5/6. SMA and p40 highlighted
myoepithelial cells in this region. S100 was diffusely positive in the
plasmacytoid cells but restricted to the abluminal cells within the
bilayered areas. The hyalinised and amorphous background stained pos-
itive with Congo red and showed strong and diffuse birefringence under
polarised light. The Ki67 proliferation index was less than 5%.
Conclusion: A definitive diagnosis of a pleomorphic adenoma with am-
yloid deposition was made. Only a few cases have been reported in the
literature. Our case highlights this rare diagnosis and the importance of
clinicopathological correlation to rule out systemic amyloidosis.
E-PS-13-057
A case of pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland in a patient of
nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin lymphoma
S. Zafar*, S.U. Siddiqui, S. Fatima
*Aga Khan University Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Hodgkin lymphomas are group of lymphoid
tumours where as pleomorphic adenomas are benign mixed salivary
gland tumours. Malignant lymphomas have a frequent appearance in
the head and neck region, however malignant lymphomas of the parotid
region is relatively rare.
Methods: Representative specimens were sent from Neck mass/parotid
swelling and enlarged neck nodes from right and left side of neck. Gross
sectioning and subsequent microscopic examination was performed.
Results: Sections examined from Parotid gland( left side primary tumour)
shows a neoplastic lesion composed of epithelial component in a
myxoidy background consistent with pleomorphic adenoma. Sections
examined from Left Neck level lymph nodes' reveal lymph nodes
exhibiting effaced architecture. The lymphoid population is predominant-
ly composed of lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells and occasional
eosinophils and neutrophils. Scattered large atypical mononuclear cells
and few Reed Sternburg like cells are also seen. Areas of sclerosis and
occasional fibrous septae are also present. These cells were positive for
immunohistochemical stains CD30 and CD15. These findings were con-
sistent with Nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin lymphoma.
Conclusion: We report a rare case of Pleomorphic adenoma in a patient
of Nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin lymphoma; Large scale surveil-
lance studies are suggested to truly establish and quantify the risk for
development of Pleomorphic adenoma in patients suffering from
Nodular sclerosis classical Hodgkin Lymphoma.
E-PS-14-001
Gusman Bella Solomonovna - the founder of the school of childhood
infectious pathology in Russia
T. Bezuglova*, M. Mnikhovich, E. Nepomnyashchaya, D. Kushch
*Research Institute of Human Morphology, Russia
Background & objectives: Gusman Bella Solomonovna (12/11/1921–
08/01/1983)-leading pathologist of the Soviet Union. Head, Laboratory
E-PS-14 History of Pathology
of Pathanatomy of Childhood Diseases, Institute of Human Morphology,
USSR Academy of Medical Sciences (1976–83). Under the guidance of
Academician A.I.Strukov, she defended her doctoral dissertation on the
topic “Immunomorphology of some childhood infections”(1970).
Methods: In our research we used historical data and student memories.
Results: B.S. Gusman demonstrated for the first time that the reaction to
the development of a tumour in the central nervous system proceeds in
two phases: in phase 1,activation of the thymus, lymph nodes and spleen;
subsequently, during blastomogenesis in the central nervous system,
there is an inhibition of the reaction of immunogenesis organs. She stud-
ied the issues of paediatric pathology, experimental pathomorphology of
some infectious diseases (ornithosis, infection with L-forms of bacteria:
mycoplasmosis). B.S. Gusman is the author of more than 120 scientific
papers, including two monographs, several chapters in the manual
“Pathological anatomy of diseases of the foetus and child” and guidelines
for the diagnosis of acute respiratory infections in children.
Conclusion: Under the direction of B.S. Gusman defended 4 doctoral
and 15 master's theses. A distinctive feature of B.S. Gusman was a com-
bination of a thoughtful erudite researcher and scientist, a charming wom-
an and a friendly teacher.
E-PS-14-002
Diagnostic re-evaluation of wet and dry specimens of aneurysms
from the pathology museum of Turin
L. Ferrari*
*ASL AT Asti, Italy
Background & objectives: The Pathology Museum of Turin houses dry
and wet specimens of vascular pathology dating back to the end of XIX
century and the beginning of the XX century. A study of these cases was
carried out to re-evaluated the diagnosis.
Methods: Among the wet specimens of the Pathology Museum of Turin
there are 9 cases of aneurysms, most of them of aorta. Among the 23 dry
specimens of the collection two recently restored cases of aortic aneurysm
were selected. The macroscopic study of wet specimen was carried out.
Histological study was also performed in selected cases. Dry specimens
were studied radiologically.
Results: The original diagnosis of wet specimens was confirmed in all
cases. One of the dry specimen was confirmed to be a case of tuberculous
abscess instead of an aneurysm, as hypothesized in a previous study.
Conclusion: These cases show particularly severe old aneurysms, now
no longer observable for medical advances. Therefore these specimens
are a
historical heritage important to preserve for didactical purpose.
E-PS-14-003
Activity of the soviet pathologist Vladimir Gerasimovich Molotkov
during the Great Patriotic War
R. Ukrainets, Y. Korneva*
*Smolensk Regional Institute of Pathology, Smolensk State Medical
University, Russia
Background & objectives: This work is dedicated to one of the most
outstanding pathologists of the Smolensk region (USSR) - Vladimir
Gerasimovich Molotkov.
He was born on 28/06/1903 in Vitebsk province.
Methods: After graduation from the Medical faculty of Smolensk
University he worked at the Department of Pathological Anatomy.
MolotkovV.G. headed laboratory No.3776 in the Western front in
1941-1944 as the Chief Pathologist of the front. Then in 1944-1945 he
performed the same duties in the 3rd Belorussian front. V.G.Molotkov
participated in the exhumation and post-mortem examination of
Lieutenant General M.G.Efremov.
Results: He performed autopsy of the 3rd Belorussian front Commander
General I.D. Chernyakhovsky. V.G.Molotkov was engaged in identify-
ing of self-harming soldiers, who intentionally damaged their hands to
leave the front. The study of a combat hand injury with rejection of the
stereotype that a victim with a similar injury is a potential self-harmer has
significantly improved the quality of medical care provided to them and
reduced the percentage of subsequent disability.
Conclusion: V.G.Molotkov is the author of the Chapter “Pathological
anatomy and pathogenesis of nephritis” in the 22nd volume of the book
“the Experience of Soviet Medicine in the Great Patriotic War of 1941-
1945”.
V.G.Molotkov was dismissed from the armed forces as a Lieutenant
Colonel of the medical service. For services to the Fatherland he got many
significant military awards. Since 1946 he became the Head of the
Department of Pathological Anatomy of Smolensk State Medical
Institution till his death on 14/02/1976.
E-PS-14-004
Contribution of N. I. Pirogov in the development of pathological
anatomy
M. Mnikhovich*, T. Bezuglova, N. Maluygin, V. Balayants,
A. Romanov, P. Bliganov, G. Ushanov, D. Kushch
*Research Institute of Human Morphology, Russia
Background & objectives: Nikolai Ivanovich Pirogov - the great
Russian doctor of the XIX century, was multilaterally developed special-
ist: surgeon, anatomist, teacher, public figure. He made an equally great
contribution to the development of pathological anatomy.
Methods: Study of data from various Russian medical and histor-
ical archives.
Results: In Derpt in 1828-1833 N.I. Pirogov during experimental studies and
autopsies drew attention to the variety of pathological processes in the body.
In 1829, Pirogov published a work devoted to the anatomical and patholog-
ical description of the femoral-inguinal region, in this work a description of
clinical and pathological disorders resulting from ligation of the abdominal
aorta is given. During a business trip to Berlin and Göttingen(1833-1835) N.I.
Pirogov produces a large number of autopsies, while he believed that German
doctors and surgeons of that time were little acquainted and not sufficiently
interested in the most basic pathological processes. In 1852, N.I. Pirogov in
his "Anatomical and Pathological Lecture" notes the existence of various
forms of tuberculosis and the presence of multinucleated cells.
Conclusion: In the Anatomical and Pathological Lecture (1852), Pirogov
told about shock, bleeding, purulent processes, the consequences of gun-
shot injuries.
N.I. Pirogov attached great importance to the study of biopsies. These his
judgments were given in the works of 1849-1855, before the cellular
pathology of R. Virkhov. Literally every clinical work of N.I. Pirogov
is inlaid with morphological data in order to create a complete picture of
the pathological process and reveal its pathogenesis.
E-PS-14-005
The history of development of histochemistry and electron micro-
scope in the world in USSR and RF
T. Pavlova*, V. Kulikovsky, D. Besmetrny, I. Pavlov, I. Bashuk,
A. Nesterov
*Belgorod State University, Russia
Background & objectives: Histochemistry and electron microscopy oc-
cupy a worthy place among doctors and biologists for diagnostics and
solving fundamental problems.
Methods: Work with archive, materials, textbooks and monographs.
Results: The development of histochemistry in USSR (Bukhvalov I.,
Korzhevsky D.) and Russian Federation (Petrov S. and Raikhlin N.,
Virchows Arch
Frank G., Atyakshin D.) has a specific value. First Russian electron
microscope was created in 1942 in Leningrad, USSR. The laboratory of
electron microscopy of Blokhin's Oncological centre (Raikhlin N.,
Bukhvalov I.) made an important contribution in development of this
direction. Now the laboratories are working at Kazan Federal
University, Belgorod State University and a number of others.
Conclusion: The histochemistry and electron microscopy can solve prob-
lems in oncology, virology and bacteriology, transplantology and in some
other directions.
E-PS-14-006
The questionnaire portraits of four Russian pathologists
A. Zubritsky*
*Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: This work has the purpose to collect and
systematize the biographical data for Academician Innokentiy
Vasilievich Toroptsev, Academician Alexey Ivanovich Abrikosov,
Professor Mikhail Mikhaylovich Averbakh and Professor Vsevolod
Dmitrievich Tsinzerling.
Methods: According to the questionnaires prepared by me.
Questionnaire portrait of the Russian pathologist, scientist and educator,
academician of the Academy of Medical Sciences of the USSR, Professor
Innokentiy Vasilievich Toroptsev (14.09.1907–22.10.1985)
Results: Born at the station Slyudyanka of the Krugobaikalskaya
Railway in the family of a railroad employee. After the Civil war
he studied in the Soviet labor school and graduated in 1926; grad-
uated from the Tomsk Medical Institute (TMI) (1931). Since the 4th
course became interested in the issues of pathological anatomy and
in their free time actively involved in practical work of pathologist.
Conclusion: Defense of the master's thesis on “Sclero-pigmentary
nodules in the spleen” under the leadership of Prof.
V.P.Mirolubov (1937), doctoral defense – on the topic “Materials
to the problem of bactericides of plant origin (phytoncides)” (1947).
Assistant (1932–40), associate Professor (1940–47), Head (1947–
84), Department of Pathological Anatomy, TMI; Rector, TMI
(1958–1974); Head, Tomsk regional pathoanatomical Bureau; re-
tirement (1984). The first time he had been given the morphological
characteristics of magnetobiological effects identified serious struc-
tural changes and functional changes in various body systems under
the action of constant, variable and pulse magnetic fields of varying
intensity. Research interests: Oncopathology, the study of the bio-
logical actions of magnetic fields of different intensity, the morpho-
logical characteristics of magnetobiological effects, etc. The author
of more than 134 works, including 5 monographs and 60 inventions.
Distinctive trait: Possessed impeccable technique of post-mortem
autopsies, wide erudition, demanding to himself and his employees.
Hobbies: Music, painting, literature, hunting. Died in Tomsk at the
79th year of his life.
Alexey Ivanovich Abrikosov - outstanding Russian pathologist, scientist
and educator (18.01.1875– 09.04.1955)
Results: He was born in Moscow in a family of large entrepreneurs.
Married for the second time. Wife: Abrikosova (Wulf), Faina
Davidovna. Children: Alexey (academician of the Academy of
Sciences of the USSR; winner of the Nobel prize in physics; died
March 29, 2017 in the USA), Maria; Ivan and Andrey from the 1st
marriage. He graduated from a private gymnasium, with honours
from the Medical Faculty of Moscow University and continued his
studies in clinics in Europe.
Conclusion: The defense of his doctoral dissertation on topic “On the
first anatomical changes in lungs at the onset of pulmonary tubercu-
losis” brought him world fame. Head of Pathology Department of 1st
Moscow State University, etc. Professor, academician of the
Academy of Sciences of the USSR, Hero of Socialist Labor and
was awarded various domestic and foreign awards. He participated
in autopsy of body of V.I. Lenin, as well as other high-ranking fig-
ures of country. Scientific interests: Issues of morphology of pulmo-
nary tuberculosis, allergies, wound infections, diseases of the oral
cavity and teeth, military and oncopathology, etc. He is author of
more than 100 scientific papers, including a number of monographs,
manuals and textbook. Distinctive feature: Exceptional culture, sim-
plicity, personal charm, benevolence, excellent technique of micro-
photography, as well as the production of histological and museum
preparations. He died in the 81st year of his life and was buried at
Novodevichy cemetery in Moscow.
Mikhail Mikhaylovich Averbakh – known Russian phthisiopathologist
(14.02.1925–06.01.1995)
Results: He was born in Moscow in a family of hereditary doctors on
the paternal line. His grandfather, M.I.Averbakh was an outstanding
Russian ophthalmologist, academician of the Academy of Sciences
of the USSR, founder of the Central Ophthalmological Institute of the
Ministry of Health of the RSFSR. Married. Spouse: Ringel-
Sementsova Evgeniya Nikolaevna. Children: Mikhail, Andrey. He
graduated from high school, the Medical Faculty of 2nd the
Moscow Medical Institute with a specialty in “medical business”
with honours and full-time postgraduate study at Pathology
Department.
Conclusion: Defense of the candidate's dissertation on topic “On the
issue of breast cancer in the light of its the hormone therapy” (1953),
doctoral dissertation on topic “Pathological anatomy, pathogenesis
and classification of pulmonary tuberculomas (based on resection
materials)”. Junior, Senior Researcher, Head of Laboratory of
Experimental Surgery and Pathology, Deputy Director for Scientific
Work of Central Research Institute of Tuberculosis of Academy of
Medical Sciences of USSR. Professor, Honoured Worker of Science
of the RSFSR. Scientific interests: Study of pathogenesis,
immunomorphology, immunology and immunogenetics of both tu-
berculosis and other lung diseases. He is author of more than 350
scientific publications, including 10 monographs. Member of the
Board of All-Union Scientific Medical Societies of Pathologists and
Phthisiatrists, etc. Distinctive feature: Kindness, politeness, and de-
cency. He died at age of 70th year of life from exacerbation of cor-
onary heart disease and was buried at Vvedenskoye cemetery in
Moscow.
Vsevolod Dmitrievich Tsinzerling – well-known Russian pathologist, sci-
entist, and educator (20.09.1891-16.02.1960)
Results: Born in St. Petersburg. Studying at the Military Medical
Academy (MMA), during which he showed great interest in scientific
work, actively engaged in the circle at the Pathology Department,
where performed 2 scientific works, one of which was awarded the
Academy Gold Medal. The award allowed him to set up a histolog-
ical laboratory at home. Expelled from the IV course due to the
temporary closure of the MMA after a student riot. During a short
vacation passed the tests at Tartu University and received a senior
doctor with honours.
Conclusion: Awarded the degree of Doctor of Medical Sciences with-
out defending a dissertation. Drafted into the army as a Junior resi-
dent of the 1st infirmary of the 23rd infantry division. Dismissed "in
the primitive state" and worked only as a pathologist, combining
activities in both medical and research institutions. Arrested as a
"socially dangerous element" and sentenced to exile, but thanks to
vigorous petitions to various instances of colleagues, the sentence
was cancelled. Chief Pathologist of the Northwest and Leningrad
Fronts. Head, Pathology Department, II Leningrad Medical
Institute. Research interests: Alimentary dystrophy, atherosclerosis,
pneumonia, infectious diseases and wartime pathology. He died in
Leningrad at the 69th year of his life from lung cancer.
E-PS-15-001
Immunocompetent sphenoid mucormycosis
P. Aguiar Feitosa*, C. Rêgo Muniz, V. Carvalho Da Silva, A.A. Araripe
Nunes, A. Lobo, G. Leal De Carvalho, G. Holanda Maia, C. Hirth
*Federal University of Ceará, Medical School, Dept. of Pathology, Brazil
Background & objectives: The infections caused by fungi, like a
mucormycosis, are uncommon, but are significant due to their ag-
gressive nature, for the challenge of diagnosis and high mortality
(40 - 100%), despite the antifungals and medical therapy currently
available. It should be considered a differential diagnosis of syno-
vial diseases in immunocompromised patients and an appropriate
histopathological investigation should be performed. The article
aims to describe and discuss case of sphenoid mucormycosis in
immunocompetent patient.
Methods: Male, 62 years old, shows frontal, pulsatile and daily
headache. Cranial tomography (CT) suggests inflammatory sphe-
noid sinusopathy associated with fungi. Unspecified clinical treat-
ment was performed. Five years later, headache returns. CT shows
continuous expansive infiltrative formation at the base of the skull.
Transsphenoidal surgery was performed, using the chordoma hy-
pothesis. Anatomopathological: fungal colonization, suspected
mucormycosis. After investigation, immunocompetence was
confirmed.
Results: Mucormycosis is an invasive, rare and severe fungal infec-
tion. Acquired with inhalation of microorganisms of the order
Mucorales present in the decomposing organic material. It presents
with invasion of paranasal sinuses, common jaw, sphenoid changes,
cavernous sinus, orbits and cranial cavity. Uncommon in the immu-
nocompetent. As signs and symptoms can be observed: fever, nasal
ulcer, periorbital or facial oedema, decreased visual acuity,
ophthalmoplegia and headache.
Conclusion: Mucormycosis has an atypical presentation in individuals
without immune compromise. Requires early diagnosis and immediate
treatment due to high mortality. Association between surgical and clinical
therapy is decisive for the prognosis.
E-PS-15-002
Rare case of mucosal leishmaniasis simulating peritraqueous recur-
rence of squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx
P. Aguiar Feitosa*, T.N. Nogueira, M. Pompeu, I. Nogueira, C. Praciano,
A. Sousa
*Federal University of Ceará, Medical School, Dept. of Pathology, Brazil
Background & objectives: Mucosal leishmaniasis(ML) appears after the
healing of cutaneous leishmaniasis. We report a case with ulcero-
infiltrative lesion in the tracheostoma area 10 years after laryngectomy
due to laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), whose biopsy was
negative for neoplasia and amastigotes were identified.
Methods: A 59-year-old man from Manaus (North of Brazil)
underwent laryngectomy and tracheostomy for glottic SCC in
2007.In 2017, he presented an ulcero-infiltrative lesion, bleeding in
the peritraqueostoma region adjacent to the tracheoesophageal pros-
thesis. Incisional and endoscopic biopsy was performed, which
showed subacute inflammation and absence of neoplasia. Due to
suspected recurrence, the tracheoesophageal prosthesis was removed
and a new biopsy was performed.
Results: ML in North of Brazil is caused by Leishmania braziliensis and
represents the reactivation of a parasitized macrophage metastasized to
the cartilage during primary infection. Differential diagnosis includes
neoplasm and granulomatous diseases. Tumour recurrence in the
tracheostoma area after resection of SCC of the larynx is a serious com-
plication. The analysis of the histological preparations obtained from the
biopsy showed pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia, sections of ulceration
with formation of granulation tissue and, in the chorion, the presence of
isolated or aggregated Leishmania amastigote forms within some macro-
phages. Thus, the diagnostic conclusion was ML. The samples were
negative for neoplasia. Patient was treated with liposomal amphotericin
and is well, with no evidence of disease.
Conclusion: Rare case of ML simulating tumour recurrence demon-
strates the need for the clinical-epidemiological diagnosis and labo-
ratory confirmation of the disease in order to establish the diagnosis
and enable adequate treatment of the patient, as demonstrated in the
reported case.
E-PS-15-003
Gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis in a young adult patient: a case
report
A. Al Ghafri*, K. Al Yahyaee, Z. Al Hajri, A. Al Shehhi
*Oman Medical Specialty Board, Oman
Background & objectives: Basidiobolomycosis is a rare infection
caused by the fungus Basidiobolus ranarum. It usually affects the subcu-
taneous tissue. Gastrointestinal involvement is rare with few reported
cases. It typically affects immunocompetent patients. Diagnosis may be
delayed due to non-specific clinical presentation.
Methods: The disease may mimic malignancy with mass formation,
intestinal mural thickening or ulceration. Disseminated angioinvasion is
extremely rare and is usually fatal. We report here a case of an
angioinvasive gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis in a 20-year-old male
who had fatal outcome. Increased awareness of this entity will help to
enhance early diagnosis and treatment.
E-PS-15-004
Tubal schistosomiasis in a sub-Saharan female: an incidental and
unusual finding
E. Cabeza Abati*, E. Cuello Entrena, E. Medina Estévez, J. Doña Girón,
F.J. Velasco Albendea
*Hospital Universitario Torrecárdenas, Spain
Background & objectives: Schistosomiasis is the second in endemic
parasitic diseases in the world and as cause of death after paludism
in tropical countries, but numbers are increasing. It also affects
travellers and infection of the female genital tract is less frequently
described.
Methods: A 25-year-old Malian female desiring a tubal ligation
underwent bilateral salpingectomy making use of a caesarean delivery
due to a risk of loss of foetal well-being. She lives in Spain since 2015
and she had another caesarean section in 2015 and later she had an eutocic
delivery in 2018.
Results: One of the fallopian tubes showed cystic and basophilic oval
structures, occasionally calcified, with small nodular formations inside.
There was a granulomatous reaction with multinucleated giant cells in the
periphery of these structures.
She had no symptoms neither laboratory findings. She denied any
suspectful clinical symptoms before, but they treated her anyway with
Praziquantel and they discharged her.
Conclusion: Schistosomiasis is a pathogenic helmintiasis that can be
contracted by contact with fresh water containing larvae which pen-
etrate human skin. It can prompt infertility or ectopic pregnancies
due to the granulomatous reaction leading to mechanical obstruction
or tubal fibrosis caused by occlusion of the blood vessels by the
eggs of the parasite. Histopathologic examination has shown that
eggs can be found most commonly in cervix and vagina but rarely
tubal.
E-PS-15 Infectious Diseases Pathology
Virchows Arch
E-PS-15-006
Splenic leishmaniasis
B. Fuertes Negro*, H. Iliev Iliev, G. Muñiz, F.J. Queipo, C. Gómez-
González, L. Torres, V. Marco, M. García, P. Colsa
*Pathology Department, Hospital San Jorge, Huesca, Spain
Background & objectives: Leishmaniasis is an infectious disease caused
by protozoa that live inside macrophages in mammals. Visceral leishman-
iasis (VL) is the severest form of leishmaniasis and fatal if left untreated.
In Mediterranean countries, like Spain, it usually occurs in rural areas.
Methods: We present the case of a 71-year-old man from a village in the
mountains, who presented with hepatosplenomegaly and pancytopenia.
In clinical and radiological examination no other adenopathies were
found. Initially, a bone marrow biopsy and aspirate were performed,
which showed plasmacytosis with no light chain restriction and absence
of parasites, respectively. Flow cytometry showed no monoclonal peak.
Results: Due to the worsening of hypersplenism syndrome, constant
fever and progressive weight loss an urgent splenectomy was performed.
histological examination of the spleen showed a loss of the normal archi-
tecture: disrupted lymphoid follicles sometimes replaced by hyaline de-
posits, white pulp atrophy, not feasible distinction between red and white
pulp and presence of numerous plasma cell aggregates in the red pulp.
Intracytoplasmic Leishmania amastigotes were observed with
Hematoxilin-Eosin and Giemsa stains, and a polymerase chain reaction
confirmed the diagnosis. The patient was treated with amphotericin B
showing continuous improvement.
Conclusion: It is important to keep in mind that a negative result in bone
marrow aspirate is not definitive to exclude a diagnosis of VL, in fact
some studies conclude that splenic aspiration in experienced hands has
higher sensitivity compared to bone marrow aspiration. Also, some re-
ports suggest that splenectomy may contribute to the cure of patients with
chronic relapsing VL.
E-PS-15-007
An unexpected passenger in a hemithyroidectomy
K. Kinch*, D. McLellan, W. Stewart
*Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital,
Glasgow, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Human muscular sarcocystosis is rare, with
fewer than 100 cases reported, a majority from Southeast Asia. Here we
report muscular sarcocystosis as an incidental observation in a thyroidec-
tomy specimen in an asymptomatic patient from the United Kingdom.
Methods: A 37-year-old female was referred to the Ear Nose and Throat
service with a new right-sided neck lump. She was otherwise asymptom-
atic. Ultrasound investigation identified a 3.5 x 2.5cm, well-
circumscribed nodule in the right lobe of the thyroid, which on fine-
needle aspiration cytology revealed features consistent with a follicular
neoplasm. The patient went on to have a hemithyroidectomy.
Results: Histopathological examination confirmed a diagnosis of follic-
ular thyroid carcinoma but also identified several sarcocysts in skeletal
muscle fibres adjacent to the pyramidal lobe. The patient’s travel history
was reviewed, which revealed she had visited Tioman Island, Malaysia,
in 2010, where the largest outbreak of muscular sarcocystosis reported to
date occurred between 2011-2012. Review of 502 muscle biopsy speci-
mens in the Department of Neuropathology, Glasgow, did not identify
any additional cases.
Conclusion: Confirmed cases of muscular sarcocystosis are rare.
Prevalence in western countries is low and infection in this case was
probably acquired in Tioman Island. Symptoms may include myalgia,
muscle weakness, fever, and headache, but infection can be asymptom-
atic. Definitive diagnosis relies on identifying sarcocysts in a muscle
biopsy, which should prompt a detailed travel history, if encountered
incidentally. There is no vaccine or proven antiparasitic therapy, but
anti-inflammatory drugs may offer symptomatic relief.
E-PS-15-008
Visceral leishmaniasis with bladder extension: a human case report
A. Martínez García*, C.B. Marta Casanova, J. Alfaro, L. Pérez Domingo,
H. Iliev Iliev, M. Sánchez Lazcano, M.R. Oncins Torres, C. Piqueras
Serrano
*HCU Lozano Blesa (Zaragoza), Spain
Background & objectives: Leishmaniasis is a tropical disease caused by
an intracellular parasite transmitted to humans by the bite of a sandfly,
mainly Phlebotomus and Lutzomyia. It is endemic in circumscribed geo-
graphic areas and represents a health problem with a potentially fatal
outcome.
Methods: We report the case of an Spanish 49 y/o female, affected by
multiple sclerosis and homozygous thrombophilia, that had been diag-
nosed of systemic leishmaniasis in August 2019, after an insidious clin-
ical picture of fever and anaemia. CT-scan imaging revealed an slightly
enlarged liver, moderate splenomegaly and a blurry focal thickening in
anterior bladder wall. Cystoscopy and biopsy were highly recommended.
Results: Histologic examination showed groups of transitional cells
organized in trabeculae and glandular spaces, with an accompanying
chronic inflammatory infiltrate arranged around. There were also
frequent intracellular particles that suggested the presence of leish-
mania in bladder mucosa. The biopsy was referred to the Spanish
National Microbiology Center, that confirmed the infection by
Leishmania infantum.
Conclusion: Human bladder affectation in systemic leishmaniasis is an
extremely rare condition, with few cases described worldwide in the
literature. In visceral forms, the diagnosis is usually performed with high
sensitivity by observing protozoans through the microscope.
E-PS-15-009
Coinfection of pasteurella multocida and Chikungunya: an autopsy
report
J. Carneiro Melo*, F. Samuel Marcelino Silva, F. José Sales de Siqueira,
R. Beserra Landim, J. Boechat de Morais Júnior, S. Samuel Feitosa
Machado, C. Gleidiston Lima da Silva
*University of Fortaleza, Brazil
Background & objectives: Pasteurella multocida is a very common
pathogen in animals, it has rarely been recognized as an infection of
man. Chikungunya fever regarded as a benign disease with infrequent
severe manifestations. Report a coinfection by Pasteurella multocida and
Chikungunya fever.
Methods: A 32-year-old man, farmer with previously contact with birds
on his family farm one year before the symptoms, when there was a
massive death of about 150 birds .He started with frontal headache
,retroorbital pain and high fever with eight hours of evolution. He pre-
sents rapid clinical worsening, with dyspnoea, hypersecretive airways,
hyposaturation, hypotesion and death Autopsy was made.
Results: At the autopsy, cloudy-looking cerebrospinal liquor, bilat-
eral pleural effusion, pulmonary oedema, congestion, and heart with
thin echinotic stippling on the surface. Microscopy, lumen of the
alveoli with bacteria, macrophages and fibrin, some lymphocitis in
septum, hyaline membrane in some alveolis and vessels with throm-
bus. The pathogen was identified as P. multocida by the culture
from liquor. Immunohistochemistry, positivity for Chikungunya
vírus. The diagnosis was septic shock with focus of infection,
pneumonia.
Conclusion: In summary, P. multocida is an important pathogen in
humans, where it can cause serious life-threatening infections and
obtaining a detailed patient history about animal exposure is of par-
amount importance for the diagnosis of infections due to Pasteurella
spp. Coinfection between P multocida and Chikungunya may been a
determining factor for the severerity of the disease. It´s important to
carry out studies to better elucidate this mechanism of interaction.
E-PS-15-010
Infective endocarditis due to actinomyces odontolyticus and penicil-
lium chrysogenum: case report and review of the literature
J.P. Olano*, J. Nickels, E.R. Ashley, R.L. Seymour
*University of Texas Medical Branch, United States
Background & objectives: The objective of this report is to present an
extremely rare case of tricuspid valve Infective Endocarditis (IE) with a
background of perimembranous ventricular septal defect (VSD).
Actinomyces odontolyticus and Penicillium chrysogenum were cultured
from the valvular vegetations.
Methods: 55-year-old male with hematemesis. Emergency Medical
Services was called. The patient lost consciousness and went into
asystole. He was taken to the ER where he was pronounced dead. Past
medical history remarkable for VSD in 2002. An autopsy was performed
and samples from the vegetations were sent for bacterial and fungal cul-
tures. Special stains were performed on tissue sections.
Results: Examination of the heart revealed a large perimembranous VSD
and two smaller adjacent VSD’s. Multifocal vegetations were present on
the chordae tendinae of the tricuspid valve, extending to the papillary mus-
cle. Samples of the vegetations were sent to the microbiology laboratory.
Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization-Time of Flight (MALDI-
TOF) analysis identified the bacterium as A. odontolyticus. Fungal cultures
were positive for P. chrysogenum. Special stains (Gram, PAS-D, Silver
stains and AFB) revealed bacterial and fungal organisms consistent with
the morphology of the reported isolates. Additional findings included pul-
monary arterial hypertension, acute and organizing bronchopneumonia,
chronic pericarditis with a large effusion and congestive heart failure.
Conclusion: This is the first case reported in the medical literature of IE
due to two extremely unusual bacterial and fungal organisms,
A. odontolyticus and P. chrysogenum, respectively. The most important
risk factor for IE in this case is VSD. Complications of IE included acute
and organizing bronchopneumonia and chronic pericarditis with a large
effusion that eventually led to cardiac tamponade and the patient's de-
mise.
E-PS-15-011
Histological diagnosis of opisthorchiasis: an accidental finding
A. Sapargaliyeva*, B. Alibekov, V. Grinberg
*Pathology Bureau of the City of Almaty, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: A diagnosis of opisthorchiasis represents a
clinical problem due to the absence of pathognomonic signs of disease
and not informative duodenal juice microscopy (MAb-ELISA).
Histological diagnosis allows objectifying clinical diagnosis, even in
cases when parasite detection is a morphological finding.
Methods: We report a case of acute opisthorchiasis in a man (age 65).
The diagnosis was established during a histological examination of a
colon biopsy in a patient with an alleged clinical diagnosis of
opisthorchiasis. The patient complained about discomfort in the upper
left quadrant of the abdomen and diarrhoea. The pain was regulated by
painkillers.
Results: The patient underwent a full examination, but the results of the
physical examination were normal. All stool samples were negative.
However, the results of the MAb-ELISA test were positive (May 15), so
the patient was treated with anti-parasitic drugs (May 23-25). Two weeks
after a colonoscopy was performed, and the doctor took tissue samples for
biopsy (June 5). Histological examination of a colon revealed fragments of
adult flukes, which confirmed the diagnosis of opisthorchiasis. An analysis
of the clinical manifestations of opisthorchiasis and the results of laboratory
tests indicated acute opisthorchiasis, caused by O. viverrini. The features of
this case included moderate pain, diarrhoea, and weight loss of 20 kg.
Conclusion: The infection proceeded according to the type of acute en-
teritis and colitis, although usually acute opisthorchiasis caused by O.
viverrini is asymptomatic or reminds of acute cholecystitis. Fragments
of adult flukes were found in the colon mucosa. The foci of reactive
inflammation of the mucosa during endoscopic examination reminded a
polyp.
E-PS-15-013
Chronic Q fever - a rare disease diagnosed by molecular methods
M. Zacharias*, R. Krause, G. Gorkiewicz
*Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Austria
Background & objectives: Chronic Q fever is a rare disease caused by
Coxiella burnetii and develops months or years following initial Q fever
infection. C. burnetii is a fastidious pathogen which cannot be routinely
cultivated, thus microbiological diagnosis is challenging.
Methods: Specimens from fistula secretions were evaluated via cytology
and culture-independent, panbacterial PCR resolved with next-generation
sequencing (16S rRNA gene sequencing).
Results: We report on a case of a 9-year-old female operated because of a
valvopathy with pulmonary stenosis in her first year of life. Heart surgery
required the use of prosthetic material and the procedure was performed
in Kazakhstan. Since the surgery a chronic fistulating mediastinitis was
present which did not respond to any therapy and no infectious agent
could be identified. However, 16S rRNA gene analysis of specimens
from the purulent secretions of the fistulas showed high loads of C.
burnetii DNA. This was confirmed by C. burnetii specific PCR from
the serum of the patient and C. burnetti specific serology.
Conclusion: We identified a rare case of chronic Q fever in association
with prosthetic material after cardiac surgery. C. burnetii has a tropism to
thoracic organs (lungs, heart) and normally infection occurs via inhalation
of infectious dust or direct contact with C. burnetii carrying animals (goat,
sheep). In our case, however, the pathogen was most probably acquired
during surgery. Noteworthy, accurate microbiological diagnosis could
only be achieved via molecular methods.
E-PS-15-014
Histologic and molecular manifestations of cardiac failure due to
Puumala virus infection - an autopsy study
M. Zacharias*, S.E. Wrighton, M.S. Skreiner, S. Aberle, G. Gorkiewicz
*Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Austria
Background & objectives: Puumala virus is the causing agent of
nephropathia epidemica (NE) and has a tropism to endothelial cells.
Although acute cardiac failure has been described in Puumala virus
infection, a histologic and/or molecular proof of heart infection is
lacking so far.
Methods: We report on 2 autopsy cases which were performed because
of acute cardiac failure in the setting of Puumala virus infections.
Histologic and molecular (RT-PCR) studies from tissues including the
heart were performed.
Results: Histology showed the typical interstitial haemorrhages in the
medulla of kidneys, a hallmark lesion in Puumala virus infection. In
addition, a prominent perivascular lymphomononuclear inflammatory in-
filtrate was seen surrounding small vessels and capillaries in the myocar-
dium, as well as in the lungs and kidneys. Endothelial cells showed
prominent attenuation suspicious of virus mediated endothelial cytotox-
icity. No histologic changes of myocarditis, such as immune mediated
myocyte damage, were evident. Semiquantitative analysis via RT-PCR
showed the highest viral load in the myocardium compared to kidneys
and lungs. Interestingly, also multifocal ischemic changes of the myocar-
dium were evident on histology.
Conclusion: Our findings suggest that Puumala virus infects also myo-
cardial vessels (endothelia) to a large extend. The corresponding promi-
nent immune response directed against the infected endothelia might lead
to multifocal ischemic damages of the myocardium, thereby leading to
the clinically seen sudden cardiac failure.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-16-001
A survey on digital pathology and safe workplace station awareness
amongst histopathology registrars in the West Midlands Deanery -
England
L. Ahmed*, B. Tanchel
*University Hospitals of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, United
Kingdom
Background & objectives: A badly set up workstation can lead to
Computer and visual display terminals syndrome. Histopathology
trainees across the west midlands deanery were asked if they were aware
of the ergonomics of the digital workstation to prevent repetitive stress
injury.
Methods: A survey was sent to west Midlands histopathology registrars,
who have been in training for at least 1 year (ST2 till ST6), via google
form. ST1 were excluded from the survey as they would not have had
enough time to be exposed to digital pathology.
Results: There was a 50 % response rate with the majority 63.6%
being uncertain or unaware of the ergonomics of the digital work-
station. 54.5% felt they would need support with the workstation
set up. A similar percentage of trainees were unsure whether reg-
ular occupational health checks would help them to embrace digital
pathology.
Conclusion: Workstation setup can be explained during local in-
duction to increase awareness of the risks of repetitive stress inju-
ry. Standard operating procedures on workstation set up should be
made available to trainees. Regular audits or surveys can help
monitor whether trainees are working at a properly set up work-
station.
E-PS-16-002
Macro and microscopic image collections as diagnostic aid tool in
pathology, based on pattern recognition
L. Alfaro*, R. Dolz, C. Pascual, M.J. Roca
*Hospital Vithas 9 de Octubre, Valencia, Spain
Background & objectives: Digital pathology has raised new opportuni-
ties to assist pathology diagnosis. Artificial intelligence offers different
approaches in pathology diagnosis based on pattern recognition of lesions
or entities. The source of machine learning procedures should be a well-
documented collection of images.
Methods: Over the last ten years we have progressively collected images
macro and microscopic in .jpg format of all the cases studied in our
hospital, currently reaching a total around 800.000. Microscopic images
are taken by pathologists at the moment of diagnosis selecting the most
representative areas that lead to the diagnosis and allow by themselves to
identify the lesional categories.
Results: To retrieve the image information we initially designed a search
engine based on a MySQL database, presenting collections of thumbnails
of the images linked to the diagnosis, introduced from the queries typed in
a web form. Later the IT team in our hospital developed, based in a open
source algorithm (Phase Stretch Transform ) for image recognition, a
solution to identify images among our collection, of similar features as
those selected by the pathologist in the same way through a web form.
The concordance is not yet perfect, but similarities to the original image
bring in most instances an answer with a thumbnail collection of cases
with the same diagnosis.
Conclusion: Daily practice in pathology allows to collect a huge number
of images of the diagnosed cases. They can be used later to help diagnosis
of complex cases or in the training of young pathologists. Nowadays
recovery algorithms improve continuously.
E-PS-16-004
Digital pathology & artificial intelligence – developing a survey of
ethical, governance and legal considerations
C. Coulter*, L. Browning, R. Colling, P. Macklin, C. Verrill
*Department of Cellular Pathology, The John Radcliffe Hospital Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Digital pathology (DP) presents challenges
for handling, storage and use of data/information, which must be imple-
mented securely, ethically, and legally. In this study, we aimed to develop
a pilot questionnaire, to understand potential ethical, governance and
legal challenges.
Methods: We developed a pilot questionnaire focusing on gauging the cur-
rent understanding of 3 consultant histopathologists and 1 academic clinical
fellow of the legal, governance and ethical aspects of DP, specifically within
the research setting. The questionnaire comprised of 10 questions, using open
and closed format, developed following a literature review.
Results: All respondents were experienced with DP in research and clin-
ical settings. The questionnaire comprised of 3 sections; background,
knowledge and understanding the law. Pathologists describe key issues
being data sharing with industry, patient understanding of the potential
use of data and pathologists not necessarily understanding with confi-
dence the ethical and legal frameworks governing use of scanned slide
images in research (1/4 felt not at all confident and 3/4 felt only somewhat
confident).
Conclusion: The DP community needs to be mindful of the legal and
ethical considerations of this fast-growing field, not only to be legally
compliant but ensuring transparency and protecting the trust of the public.
Pathology specific resources and training may help.
E-PS-16-005
Automated classification of cancer from fine needle aspiration cyto-
logical image use neural networks: a meta-analysis
J. Huang, D. Wang, J. Da*
*National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/
Cancer Hospital & Shenzhen Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, China
Background & objectives: The role of retrospective analysis has been
evolved greatly in cancer research. We undertook this meta-analysis to
evaluate retrospectively the diagnostic value of Neural networks (NNs) in
Fine needle aspiration cytological image (FNAC) of cancer.
Methods: Cytologicdiagnosis of 396 publications from Cochrane,
PubMed and EMBASE related to NNs was retrieved. After screening, a
total of 7 literatures were included in Meta-analysis. Data was compre-
hensively analysed by RevMan and Meta-Disc software.
Results: A total of 1660 cases were extracted from 7 literatures. Among
them, 698 cases were in the cancer/abnormal group and 962 cases in the
benign/normal group. The pooled estimates for the NNs cytology diag-
nosis were Area under ROC curve(AUC): 0.99, Sensitivity: 0.87(95%
CI:0.84-0.90), Specificity: 0.97(95% CI:0.96-0.98), Positive Likelihood
Ratio(LR): 24.23(95% CI: 9.20-63.38), Negative Likelihood Ratio(LR):
0.05(95% CI:0.00-0.50), and Diagnostic odds ratio (DOR):546.30
(57.46-5194.34).
Conclusion: To some extent, NNs Automated Classification algorithm can
facilitate the diagnosis of FNCA in cancer confirmed by Meta-analysis.
E-PS-16-006
Utilisation of a diagnostic digital pathology platform for sharing of
educational cases - opinions and attitudes of histopathology trainees
A. Ghosh*, J. Brown, K. Gaitskell, D. Jayasinghe, A. Julai, N. McEntyre,
R. Pell, D. Saif, A. Srinivasan, R. Colling, C. Verrill, L. Browning
*Department of Cellular Pathology, The John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
E-PS-16 IT in Pathology
Background & objectives: Use of digital pathology (DP) in the diag-
nostic setting offers opportunity for histopathology trainees and educators
to share educationally valuable cases. We present a pilot study assessing
attitudes to sharing of educational cases on the digital platform in this
manner.
Methods: Educational cases on the diagnostic DP platform were identi-
fied by a consultant histopathologist, and links circulated by email. Cases
included ‘spot diagnoses’ and more complex exam-type cases. Trainees
were invited to submit an ‘answer’ by email to the educator or through an
anonymous online survey. Educational comments were subsequently cir-
culated by email to all. Trainee feedback was collected using
SurveyMonkey(R).
Results: Feedback was provided by 7/9 participants. All had prior
diagnostic exposure to the digital platform. All agreed that this
teaching format was appealing, and that remote educator feedback
enhances educational value. However, trainees also noted that sim-
ple signposting of cases by an educator without additional feed-
back could be helpful. Specific comments included that multiple
trainees could access the digital cases simultaneously, that it of-
fered provision of easy access to teaching cases without potential-
ly making them unavailable for multidisciplinary team meetings,
and that it offered useful exposure to cases across specialties.
Potential collation of educational comments alongside cases was
suggested to be of value longer term.
Conclusion: Diagnostic digital images are a promising resource for
facilitating and enhancing histopathology education, allowing
cases to be shared in a timely manner with multiple trainees.
Educational experience is enhanced by educator feedback which
can be specific to trainee needs, but simple signposting of cases is
also valuable. It allows regular exposure across specialties in spe-
cialist centres and provides opportunity for educators to teach in a
more time-flexible manner.
E-PS-16-007
International PathArt Photomicrography Contest: artistic reflec-
tions of pathologists’ colourful daily lives through the microscope
and introducing pathology to the public
E. Gun*, P. Oltulu, H. Olger Uzuner, I. Cinar, S. Caliskan, S. Kucuk,
U. Cobanoglu, U. Aykutlu, A. Usubutun
*Izmir Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: As pathologists, we play an important role in
the patient management which creates a stressful daily life and usually we
are not fully understood nor appreciated. We aimed to bring together the
artwork of the pathologists from all around the world.
Methods: In collaboration of Turkish Journal of Pathology and The
Federation of Turkish Pathology Societies, we have started a science
and art activity initiative in 2017.It has now become a tradition for the
last 3 years. The contest was announced and voted online and the contest
jury which consisted of members of the social media commission made
the final decision.
Results: During the 3 years of the contest the participation has increased
noticeably. There were 27 participants from 7 countries with 49 photos in
2017, 40 participants from 11 countries with 53 photos in 2018 and 50
participants from 16 countries with 103 photos in 2019. The winners of
the competition were announced on the journal’s website and their photos
appeared on the cover page of the journal’s next issue. Selected artwork
was printed and exhibited at that year’s national congress and there was
also a public art gallery exhibition not only for doctors but also for all of
the art lovers.
Conclusion: What started as an attempt to describe our profession through
art has attracted much attention, inspired other pathology communities
internationally, helped increasing the publicity of pathology and made ev-
eryone else be able to look at our profession from a different angle.
E-PS-16-008
The implementation and application of a fully digital pathology
workflow in combination with ai tools in large general hospitals
L. Kong*, A. Hu, L. Shi
*Henan Provincial People's Hospital, China
Background & objectives: Digital imaging associated with artificial
intelligence applications for effective diagnosis are not yet rou-
tinely incorporated in practice, especially in large general hospi-
tals. We have done a lot of practical work about digital pathology
workflow in combination with AI tools.
Methods: Slides were digitized by three high-throughput scan-
ners(250/360/1000) every day. In order to increase the efficiency
of digital scan, we optimized the process from section to scan. We
also designed a storage scheme to store and manage whole slides.
We also investigated and researched how the AI systems assist
pathologists work efficiently in cervical liquid-based cytology test
and Ki67 quantification.
Results: The establishment of digital pathology diagnosis platform
was completed, AI systems had been integrated the workflow into
the digital pathology diagnosis platform, then making it easy to
use for pathologists. The efficiency of digital scan was optimized
in many ways, for example, auto-identifying labels. Digital whole
slides were stored in the private cloud that we built. Hologic TIS
system combines with AI system improved the efficiency and
quality of cytology screening. The performance of the Ki67 AI
assisted system is more objective and repeatable. With help of
the Ki67 AI assisted system, pathologists corrected 2 mistakes in
200 checks timely.
Conclusion: Digital pathology diagnosis platform can be used for
creating high quality pathology database and embedding AI tools
for effective and accurate diagnosis. With the help of AI tools,
digital workflow becomes practical and convenient and solves
the shortage of pathologists.
E-PS-16-009
Hibiscus sabdariffa natural stain: an alternative to haematoxylin for
human breast cancer diagnosis
F. Mundim*, C. Mendes, F. Freire, J. Santana, W. Rodrigues,
A. Mendonca, M.G. Souza, P. Maia, R. Grande, J.D. Neto, R. Pereira,
P. Mundim
*UNIVAS, UNIFENAS, Brazil
Background & objectives: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease.
Considering the environmental aggression of hematoxylin, this
research introduces an alternative natural dye, derived from
Hibiscus sabdariffa as a substitute for hematoxylin in the histolog-
ical technique.
Methods: 58 blocks from breast samples were previously diagnosed for
breast cancer 29 cases of positive and 29 were negative ones. For testing,
histological sections were stained with H. sabdariffa and eosin. All sam-
ples were also stained in H&E for controlling.
Results: In order to compare possible ecotoxicity effects of stains, an
antiproliferative assay was carried out in Allium cepa experimental mod-
el. Onion roots were exposed to H&E and H.sabdariffa stain for 48 hours
at 10%, 1%, and 0.1%. Root tip was prepared, and 1000 cells were
counted for mitosis in each concentration. H.sabdariffa stain promoted a
high affinity to nuclear structures, such as conventional H&E. Comparing
diagnosis, it was revealed a high concordance (κ=0.613) of results from
both stains. Mitotic indices of onion root tips were lower for exposition to
H&E than H.sabdariffa in all tested concentrations. This reveals than the
alternative stain should present a lower ecotoxicological effect than
hematoxylin.
Conclusion: It was concluded that the staining with H. sabdariffa pre-
sented a significant result for nuclear staining, being an efficient substitute
Virchows Arch
for hematoxylin in the conventional H&E staining technique for diagno-
sis of breast cancer.
E-PS-16-010
Adapting the Gail model to breast cancer risk for the Brazilian
reality
F. Mundim*, J. Paiva, M.J. Rocha, J.P. Paula, E. Carvalho, M. Barbosa,
P. Mundim
*UNIVAS, UNIFENAS, Brazil
Background & objectives: Breast cancer is the second most frequent
neoplasm in female Brazilian patients, then becoming an important public
health issue. To translate, culturally adapt, validate breast cancer risk
assessment tool, and make an application to calculate the risk of devel-
oping breast cancer.
Methods: A prospective observational study conducted through an inter-
view using a standard form of the questionnaire made available on NCI-
USA. Patients with a previous history of Lobular or Ductal Carcinoma in
situ were interviewed, as well as those with a mutation in the BRCA1 and
BRCA2 suppressor genes and other hereditary syndromes associated
with an increased risk of breast cancer.
Results: The risk calculated through the tool in the eligible patients was
1.3% in the next five years (Standard Deviation ± 0.86) and 12.41
(Standard Deviation ± 8.72), with no difference compared to the general
population. The application for Android platform is in the testing phase.
Conclusion: The tool has been translated, culturally adapted and validat-
ed according to international protocols for tool validation. Based on reli-
able epidemiological data, which reflect the reality of miscegenation,
public resources initiatives and individualized actions of the professionals
in possession of this new tool lead to the best use of available resources
and adequate intervention at the individual level.
E-PS-16-012
Digital pathology reporting in Malaysia: an overview
T. Pasupati Meenakshi*
*Clinipath Malaysia Sdn Bhd, Malaysia
Background & objectives: Digital pathology reporting has become a
reality in many countries. One of its main advantages against traditional
microscopy, is distance reporting. In an era of increased workload, case
complexity, and staffing shortages, digital pathology in the laboratory is a
necessity.
Methods: Clinipath Pathology, Malaysia acquired the much advanced
Aperio AT2 slide scanner in 2018 and incorporated routine digital pa-
thology reporting. An initial validation study was carried out for a three-
month duration. More than 5000 surgical cases including Non- gynae
cytology have been reported so far. An average of 40 histological sam-
ples, including big resected specimens are reported every day.
Results: Digital pathology reporting is as accurate as conventional mi-
croscope reporting, and in a few instances more advantageous. With an
integrated lab setup, all types of surgical specimens and EUS FNA have
been reported without resorting to the conventional microscope for a
review. The response and acceptance from the clinical faculty has been
over whelming. Measurements of extremely small malignant lesions
coupled with digital photography has made the system more rewarding.
Due to constant practice, the system has become more dependable, robust
and accurate than conventional microscope reporting. IHC analysis with
comparison of various IHC markers in a single view is a prolific outcome
of digital reporting.
Conclusion: Digital pathology reporting should be incorporated as a
regular diagnostic procedure in all institutions. The accuracy and effec-
tiveness are very advantageous for the current demand of histopathology
in many laboratories. A constant practice of digital images makes the
system very robust and the images can be shared for expert second
opinion in complex cases. This is the future of diagnostic pathology
and artificial intelligence (AI).
E-PS-16-013
Assessing the biochemical features of breast cancer using Raman
spectroscopy
L.P. Queiroz Rei*, A. Mamede, I. Santos, M. Marques, L. Batista de
Carvalho, M. Silva, P. Figueiredo
*Pathology Department, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Coimbra,
Portugal
Background & objectives: Raman spectroscopy (RS) offers real-time,
non-destructive, optical identification of tissue components through mo-
lecular vibrations, not requiring dyes. It was already proved effective in
evaluating early melanocytic lesions. Raman Microspectroscopy may
detect and identify breast cancer on surgical margins.
Methods: The analysis of three sets of human breast tissue samples
collected through breast conserving surgery and classified by control
histopathology as containing (1) invasive carcinoma, (2) in situ carcino-
ma, or (3) “healthy” breast tissue. RMS probing of 10 μm thick, digitally
dewaxed tissue sections to detect and identify the composition and dis-
tribution of molecular biomarkers specific to each tissue set.
Results: According to a Principal Component Analysis, Raman
Microspectroscopy probing successfully distinguished the three sets of
samples, and further identified biochemical traits specific to each tissue
set, namely its distinct content and distribution of proteins, lipids, and
nucleic acids.
Conclusion: Improving clinical outcomes for breast cancer patients re-
quires faster, more objective diagnostic tools, particularly within the op-
erating room. One promising approach is in loco tissue analysis for bio-
chemical differences, potentially much faster and more specific than con-
ventional histopathology. Spectral histopathology, as an adjunct to con-
ventional histopathology, may provide non-invasive, real-time, highly
accurate information about the presence of malignant tissue on surgical
margins, even for highly heterogeneous biospecimens.
E-PS-17-001
Aberrant expression of neuroendocrine markers in mucosal malig-
nant melanoma of the nasal cavity; case report highlighting a poten-
tial diagnostic pitfall
O. Ajetunmobi*, A. Torres-Rendon
*Department of Cellular Pathology, University Hospitals Coventry and
Warwickshire, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Melanomas show morphological het-
erogeneity and are thus challenging to diagnose on H&E.
Melanocytic markers are effective in their identification. However
aberrant expression of non-melanoma markers remains a pitfall. The
authors document the expression of neuroendocrine markers in a
mucosal melanoma
Methods: A right maxillary antral mass in a 77yr old male showed
on microscopy sheets of malignant epithelioid and spindle cells with
enlarged, pleomorphic nuclei and basophilic cytoplasm. Differential
diagnoses were sinonasal neuroendocrine carcinoma, and olfactory
neuroblastoma. Immunostaining was performed with a panel includ-
ing but not restricted to epithelial [AE1/AE3, EMA], neuroendo-
crine [ synaptophysin, NSE] and melanocytic [S100,melanA and
HMB-45] markers.
Results: The tumour cells were positive for all three melanoma markers
and negative for cytokeratins, hence excluding a neuroendocrine
E-PS-17 Molecular Pathology
carcinoma. The characteristic lobularity and sustentacular cells of an ol-
factory neuroblastoma were absent, hence ruling out this entity. In the
light of the aforementioned positive expression of melanocytic antibod-
ies, a diagnosis of a sinonasal melanoma was made. However, expression
of synaptophysin and NSE was observed in up to 50% of the tumour
cells.
Conclusion: With regard to cancers of unknown origin/primary, mela-
nomas should be included in the differential diagnosis of tumours ex-
pressing neuroendocrine markers. The co-expression of both melanocytic
and neuroendocrine markers, as well as the loss of melanocytic markers
are possible and seemingly frequent scenarios in melanomas and should
be considered to avoid diagnostic and hence management errors.
E-PS-17-002
Development of an expanded microsatellite instability panel with
automated data analysis
C. Baudo*, A. Gerstner, H. Leong, J. Wong, C. Bornarth, K. Varma
*Thermo-Fisher Scientific, United States
Background & objectives: Microsatellite instability testing has
been used to study Lynch Syndrome and in immuno-oncology re-
search. However, clinical researchers have indicated that current
solutions to detect MSI have limitations, including insufficient
markers for applications across multiple tumour types and cumber-
some data analysis.
Methods: To facilitate further clinical research on MSI, Thermo
Fisher Scientific has developed the Applied Biosystems™
TrueMark™MSI assay. This multiplex fluorescent PCR panel con-
sists of eight markers used historically in Lynch syndrome and MSI
identification as well as five novel quasi-monomorphic homopoly-
mers. Two human identification satellite tandem repeats are includ-
ed for sample traceability.
Results: Fourteen of the 15 amplicons are less than 180 base pairs in
length to maximize robustness in degraded FFPE samples. This 15-plex
fluorescent PCR fragment analysis assay is performed via a standard
capillary electrophoresis workflow and requires low input DNA (2ng).
The included software automatically detects unstable microsatellite
markers and sample contamination or mix-up. To demonstrate the utility
of the expanded panel and software solution, we performed a retrospec-
tive study using FFPE research samples derived from colon, gastric, and
endometrial cancers. This assay produced high concordance with immu-
nohistochemistry and fewer ambiguous results relative to the Promega
MSI assay due to the expanded marker set.
Conclusion: The combination of our expanded marker set and automated
data analysis software constitutes an important tool for studying micro-
satellite instability. For research use only. Not for use in diagnostic pro-
cedures.
E-PS-17-003
Inhabitual presentation of sex cord ovarian tumour with
rhabdomyosarcomatous component in the setting of xeroderma
pigmentosum
A. Bchir*, A. Bdioui, Z. Lajmi, S. Mestiri, K. Marwa, A. Ben
Abdelkader, M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, F. Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Ovarian cancer is frequent but it pathogene-
sis remains unclear. The association xeroderma pigmentosum and sex
cord ovarian tumour has been reported once.
We report a case of sex stromal-cord tumour with rhabdomyosarcomatous
contingent in 27 year-old woman with xeroderma pigmentosum.
Methods: A 27-year-old woman presented with pelvic pain lasting
for one mouth. The personal history revealed a xeroderma
pigmentosum diagnosed at the age of 6 months. Physical exam
found a right pelvic mass. The ultrasound exam concluded to a 20
cm, solid, ovarian tumour with ascites. The patient had laparotomy.
Results: In gross, we received 21 cm white mass with haemorrhagic
and necrosis areas. The pathologic exam reported a poor differenti-
ated sex-cord tumour with dominantly rhabdomysarcomatous com-
ponent. This component was dense and arranged in diffuse sheets.
There was mild atypia and few mitosis. Immunohistochemistry
showed positive staining for desmin in rhabdomysarcomatous cells
and for cytokeratin and inhibin-α in other tumour cell. The patient
had got adjuvant chemotherapy. No recurrence was noted.
Conclusion: Xeroderma pigmentosum is a genetic disorder in which
there is by a decreased ability to repair DNA damage. It is caused
by mutations in nine different genes (XP). Ovarian tumours are
exceptionally associated with this disorder. Some studies have ex-
plained this association to genomic instability. But this theory isn’t
confirmed yet. Others cases with a molecular study should be re-
ported to better understand the physiopathology of this entity.
E-PS-17-004
Estimation of expression of KISS1 oncomarker in non-specific breast
cancer
T. Bezuglova*, M. Mnikhovich, A. Romanov, N. Maluygin,
V. Balayants, D. Kushch, P. Bliganov, G. Ushanov, S. Snegur,
Y. Pavlova, I. Vasin
*Research Institute of Human Morphology, Russia
Background & objectives: The KISS1/KISS1R signalling system is a
regulator of tumour metastasis. It is also a potential prognostic marker of
tumour processes. The aim of investigation is to study the features of the
expression of the tumour marker KISS1 in non-specific breast carcinoma.
Methods: We explored surgical material, which was obtained from 30
women at the age of 28-63 years with a confirmed diagnosis: ductal
carcinoma of the breast with distant (liver, lungs, bones) and regional
(lymph nodes) metastases and without them. Metastin (Abcam) used as
primary antibodies. KISS1 protein expression was detected as a homoge-
neous staining of tumour cell cytoplasm.
Results: The intensity of the reaction was evaluated by the semi-
quantitative method:(-) negative reaction, (+) - weak focal reaction,
(++) – medium, (+++) - intensively with spread throughout the cyto-
plasm. Intense response (+++) was determined in 85% of the control
tissue. In tissue samples with confirmed metastases, 9 out of 30 showed
a weak (+) focal reaction. In the remaining 21 samples, expression was as
follows: intense (+++) in 4.4% (1 of 21), average intensity (++) was found
in 82.6% (18 of 21), weak (+) in 13, 0% (2 of 21).
Conclusion: The level of KISS1 expression can be used as a molecular
marker predicting the quality of the tumour therapy response, especially
in postmenopausal women.
E-PS-17-005
A new, modern, and timely way to detect NUT midline carcinomas
and their differentials by a single molecular profiling method
S. Haefliger*, A. Tzankov, S. Frank, M. Bihl, J. Hench
*Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland
Background & objectives: NUT midline carcinoma (NMC) is an ag-
gressive neoplasm, which is classically diagnosed by morphology, im-
munohistochemistry, and FISH-Analysis. Here, we present a new strate-
gy to detect this rare tumour through a standard DNA methylation array
analysis.
Methods: The DNA methylation profile obtained on an Infinium
Human Methylation EPIC BeadChip array (Illumina, USA). The
data were compared to a given dataset against more than 15'500
reference datasets mostly derived from The Cancer Genome Atlas
and Gene Expression Omnibus. The analysis considers both the
Virchows Arch
DNA methylation profile and the copy number variations, extracted
by conumee.
Results: Indicated a high similarity of NUT midline carcinoma to
squamous carcinomas of the lung (NSCLC_SC) when compared by
dimension reduction (UMAP). As opposed to NSCLC_SC, NMC
has a flat genome and a circumscribed loss of heterozygosity on
chromosome 15q, adjacent to the NUTM1 locus. Besides, dimen-
sion reduction discriminates the tumour from other morphological
differentials.
Conclusion: In summary, we present an alternative, modern and timely
way to detect a rare tumour - NUT midline carcinoma - by simultaneous
methylation and CNV profiling through a single microarray. Specifically,
NMC should be considered in tumours identified by methylomics to
represent squamous cell carcinomas that lack significant CNV and show
aberrations around the NUTM1 locus.
E-PS-17-006
A prospective study of EGFR, KRAS and ALK gene mutations in
Macedonian patients with non-small-cell lung cancer
V. Janevska*, R. Jovanovic, M. Bogdanovska Todorovska, A. Eftimov,
G. Petrusevska
*Institute of Pathology, Skopje, North Macedonia
Background & objectives: Testing gene mutations in clinical practice
leads to the development of genome-based personalized medicine.
Modern equipment in pathology laboratories enables benefits to patients.
We aimed to analyse lung carcinoma for EGFR and KRAS gene muta-
tions and ALK rearrangements.
Methods: We analysed 190 consecutive patients with non small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded NSCLC
tissue sections from lung biopsies were analysed using Cobas
4800 EGFRv2 IVD and KRAS IVD gene mutations kit analysed
on Cobas Z480 IVD Real-Time PCR. For ALK rearrangements we
used ALK IQFISH, dual colour Break-Apart Probe IVD, (Agilent
Technologies).
Results: There were 33 (17.36%) female and 157 (82.63%) male patients,
ranging in age from 43 to 81 years.
Forty fore (23.15%) cases were diagnosed as NSCLS and for other cases
more precise diagnosis was established as follows: 4 (2.10%) Large cell
lung carcinoma, 23 (12.10%) Squamous cell carcinoma, 1 (0.52%)
Adenosquamous carcinoma and 118 (62.10%) Adenocarcinomas.
EGFR mutations in exon 18-22 were found in 5 (2.63%) patients with
NSCLC. KRAS mutations in codons 12, 13 and 61 were found in 7
(3.68%) and ALK rearrangements were found in another 7 (3.68%) pa-
tients with NSCLC. All of them were diagnosed as well and moderately
differentiated adenocarcinomas.
Conclusion: This study is the first prospective study of EGFR,
KRAS and ALK gene mutations in lung neoplasms from North
Macedonia population. Although in low frequency mutations of
analysed genes are found, and mutation testing should be considered
for all patients with NSCLC.
E-PS-17-007
A case of metastatic melanoma – BRAF molecular testing as a diag-
nostic tool
Z. Mikola*, E. Tóth, A. Szekely, N. Konyhas, Z. Szollosi
*BAZ County Hospital, Hungary
Background & objectives: The objective of this case report is to high-
light the importance of molecular testing in challenging cases where the
histological appearances and immunohistochemistry are not sufficient to
establish the correct diagnosis.
Methods: A middle aged man with a previously diagnosed glioblastoma
presented with a skin lesion and enlarged axillary nodes.
H&E-stained slides from each samples were reviewed, and tumour tissue
was identified for analysis. Total DNA extracted from 5μm thick sections
using the Cobas DNA Extraction Kit (Roche Molecular Diagnostics).
V600E mutations were detected using the Cobas 4800 BRAF V600
Mutation Test.
Results: The skin excision revealed no obvious malignancy. The previ-
ous brain tumour and the axillary lymph node lesion showed a poorly
differentiated tumour which was negative for S100, melan-A, and
HMB45 immunostains. At molecular analysis both lesions revealed
BRAF V600E mutation. The case was diagnosed as metastatic
dedifferentiated melanoma.
Conclusion: In practice, the result of molecular analysis is used to direct
treatment decisions, however in selected cases it can also serve as an
important diagnostic tool in particular when immunohistochemical anal-
ysis is unhelpful.
E-PS-17-009
Whole exome sequencing vs. targeted panel sequencing – influence
on diagnostic assessment for precision medicine in oncology
N. Pfarr*, Y. Beil, S. Kreutzfeldt, C. Albig, K. Beck, S. Fröhling,
W. Weichert
*Institute of Pathology, TUM School of Medicine, Technical University
of Munich, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site
Munich, Germany
Background & objectives: Targeted sequencing approaches by whole
exome sequencing approaches are implemented in specialized diagnos-
tics allowing a broader spectrum of therapeutic options for patient treat-
ment. Using more focused techniques such as gene panels might have an
impact on clinical decision making.
Methods: DNA/RNA pairs from 32 lung cancer patients from NCT
MASTER previously undergone WES were analysed: Sequencing using
the nNGM-lung cancer hotspot panel and DNAs and corresponding
RNAs were sequenced using the pan cancer TSO500/TST170 panel
(Illumina). We wanted to evaluate the efficiency of panel-based sequenc-
ing vs WES to detect therapy-relevant alterations and to investigate their
impact on therapy decision.
Results: Sequencing of all samples applying both approaches is
finished and data analysis is ongoing. 1. nNGM panel: Nine from
32 patients did not reveal any alterations. All except for four sam-
ples revealed the same relevant alterations identified by WES.
Discrepancies might be due to the used hotspot gene panel design
not covering the complete genes. Therapy relevant alterations in
EGFR, BRAF, among others were identified. 2. TSO500/TST170:
Data analysis is still ongoing, TMB assessment and MSI status is
additionally collected. Finally, results will be sent blinded to NCT
MASTER for clinical annotation. Recommendations based on the
different sequencing approaches will be compared to the original
decisions based on WES data.
Conclusion: Using different approaches for recommendations for
therapy in oncology might have an impact on decision making.
We therefore evaluated results from three different sequencing ap-
proaches, WES, nNGM hotspot gene panel sequencing and
TSO500/TST170 hybrid-capture based sequencing and compared
their putative influence on decision making. As expected, known
therapy-relevant variants such as EGFR or BRAF mutations were
detected applying all assays.
E-PS-17-010
Risk factors and characterisation of the mutations in exon one of
vimentin gene (VIM) among Sudanese breast cancer women in
Khartoum state, Sudan
A. Salman*, H.A. Khairalseed
*Alneelain University, Sudan
Background & objectives: Breast cancer is the most common cancer in
Sudanese women. VIM gene was described as a marker for several ma-
lignant tumours. The aim of this study was to determine the mutations in
exon one of VIM gene among those women.
Methods: This is a case control study involving 90 patients with breast
cancer and controls. The study was conducted a cross Three hospitals in
Khartoum State. The data collected through a well-structured question-
naire. DNA was extracted. PCR was conducted to amplify the exon one
using specific primer. products were sent to detect the mutation in exon
one of VIM gene
Results: The study showed the significant risk factors were age, family
history, marriage, menopause, pregnancy, nulli-parou parous women,
breast feeding, use of contraceptive drugs and grade of the disease.
Samples were successfully amplified, the product size was 12 bp. DNA
sequences alignment of exon one of VIM gene (Query) for two samples
of exon one of VIM gene (Subject) from NCBI database, showed 100%
identity. There were no mutation detected in exon one of VIM gene
associated with breast cancer in Sudanese women in Khartoum State.
Conclusion: The study demonstrated family history with first degree
relative, unmarried women, age at menarche, marriage, pregnancy,
nulliparous women and breast feeding were significant risk factors
associated with breast cancer. No mutation was detected in exon one
of VIM gene in Sudanese women with breast cancer in Khartoum
state.
E-PS-17-011
Establishing and validating multiple glioma markers on a single mo-
lecular platform
S. Borchert, T. Herold, K. Köhler, H. Schildhaus*
*Essen University Hospital, Institute of Pathology, Germany
Background & objectives: Molecular-based classification of brain tu-
mours has become routine practice since the WHO classification has been
updated in 2016. Biomarkers with specific clinical relevance include
IDH1 and IDH2 point mutations, 1p/19q co-deletion, ATRX gene/protein
expression loss and MGMT promotor methylation.
Methods: Here, we aim to integrate these four modalities in one single
simultaneous analysis on the Modaplex™platform. We have established
a glioma panel for simultaneous detection of different genetic aberrations.
For each marker a respective quantitative or qualitative assay was
established to amplify and detect the target sequences.
Results: We demonstrate that the simple assay-development workflow of
Modaplex technology enables the rapid integration of multiple genetic
aberrations of different modalities onto a single platform. The IDH1 and
IDH2 point mutations, 1p/19q co-deletion, reduced ATRX gene expres-
sion and MGMT promotor methylation results corresponded to the inde-
pendent evaluation.
Conclusion: Currently, due to the different biological nature of these
glioma-specific aberrations, several testing methods need to be applied
in a stepwise procedure. The Modaplex technology enables simultaneous
analysis of the molecular glioma marker and allows the molecular-based
classification, further differentiation, and stratification of the therapy rec-
ommendation with temozolomide in gliomas in a time effective and
tissue-sparing manner.
This study was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education
and Research - BMBF- and conducted in collaboration with Biotype, Inc.
E-PS-17-012
KRAS/NRAS mutations deserves report in non – surgical pulmonary
adenocarcinomas early molecular characterisation
V. Sousa*, A.F. Ladeirinha, A. Alarcão, M. Reis Silva, T. Ferreira,
A. Rodrigues, C. Vilasboas, R. Almeida, V. Almeida, A. Figueiredo,
F. Barata, L. Carvalho
*CHUC, IAP-PM, FMUC, Portugal
Background & objectives: KRAS mutations occur in 20-40% of
pulmonary adenocarcinomas (codons 12 and 13 mainly). Liquid
biopsy subscripted to NGS raises the question of the print 1 first
level for KRAS determination in non-surgical staged patients.
Methods: Blood of 16 patients carrying advanced adenocarcinoma
recurring after targeted therapy/immunotherapy analysed by NGS
after Streck tube blood collecting and DNA-extraction was done
with DNA MagMAX™Cell‑Free DNA Isolation Kit.
Oncomine™Lung cfDNA Assay (11 genes) (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was performed according to man-
ufacturer’s instruction by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) in
Ion S5™System.
Results: In the 16 samples, 5 cases had KRAS/NRAS mutations where
two KRAS mutations were concomitant with TP53 and EGFR or NRAS.
The remaining 3 cases presented isolated KRAS or NRAS mutations. All
KRAS mutations occurred in 12 or 13 codons. KRAS became a predic-
tive biomarker of response to either target/chemotherapy and early pre-
clinical data showed that the presence of KRAS mutation induced greater
sensitivity in pemetrexed models.
Conclusion: The role of KRAS/NRAS deserves early inclusion in liquid
biopsy of non-surgical adenocarcinomas to follow up therapy in ad-
vanced pulmonary carcinomas once immunotherapy seems to benefit
from these molecular alterations.
E-PS-17-013
EGFR L858R and PIK3CA H1047R mutations in pulmonary ade-
nocarcinoma – diagnosis in liquid biopsy
V. Sousa*, A. Alarcão, A.F. Ladeirinha, M. Reis Silva, T. Ferreira,
A. Rodrigues, C. Vilasboas, A. Figueiredo, F. Barata, R. Almeida,
V. Almeida, L. Carvalho
*CHUC, IAP-PM, FMUC, Portugal
Background & objectives: PI3K/Akt mutations signalling downstream
EGFR pathway drive oncogenesis/progression and frequently coexist
with others, relating with not yet understood resistance to EGFR TKIs
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma where PIK3CA mutation ranges from
1.5% to 7.7%.
Methods: Hepatic metastasis of a 65-years-old non-smoker female stage
IVb pulmonary adenocarcinoma (CK7/TTF1/vimentine positivity and
CK20/mammaglobin negativity) was macrodissected for EGFR by
IdyllaTM EGFR Mutation Test. Blood was collected in Streck tube.
DNA-extraction performed with DNA MagMAX™Cell-Free DNA
Isolation-Kit.
Oncomine™Lung cfDNA Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) panel
was performed by NGS in Ion S5™System for genomic analysis of
cfDNA.
Results: EGFR presented wild-type in the hepatic metastasis cells while in
liquid biopsy EGFR and PIK3CA were detected c.2573T>G;p.(Leu858Arg)
and c.3140A>G;p.(His1047Arg), respectively.
The EGFR c.2573T>G;p.(Leu858Arg) mutation and PIK3CA
c.3140A>G;p.(His1047Arg) mutation are associated with response to
EGFR TKIs and response with PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway inhibitors,
respectively.
Conclusion: Interactions between PIK3CA/EGFR mutations are not yet
clearly interpreted in pulmonary carcinomas and clinical outcome un-
known, deserving more data for treatment definition.
E-PS-17-014
Pulmonary adenocarcinoma EGFR exon 20 insertion determined in
liquid biopsy – case report
V. Sousa*, A. Alarcão, A.F. Ladeirinha, M. Reis Silva, T. Ferreira,
A. Rodrigues, C. Vilasboas, A. Figueiredo, F. Barata, R. Almeida,
V. Almeida, L. Carvalho
*CHUC, IAP-PM, FMUC, Portugal
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: EGFRexon20 insertion, the most
prevalent of uncommon EGFR mutations, found in 1.5–2.5% pul-
monary adenocarcinomas/female gender/Asian ethnicity/never-
smoking patients, has 100 cases reported in the catalog of somatic
mutations in cancer-COSMIC. Given rarity, mutations and respec-
tive clinical outcomes are not fully established.
Methods: Non-smoker 61-years-old female lung biopsy correlated with
clinical T2bN0M1c–IVB pulmonary adenocarcinoma (CK7/TTF1/
napsin positivity and CK20/ vimentine/ CD10/ oestrogen receptors/
CCR/CD10 negativity).
FFPE macrodissected tumoral tissue was analysed for EGFR mu-
tations IdyllaTM EGFR Mutation Test. Blood was collected in
Streck tube and DNA-extraction done with DNA MagMAX™
Cell-Free DNA Isolation Kit.
Oncomine™Lung cfDNA Assay panel was performed by Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) Ion S5™System.
Results: In both samples, biopsy (Idylla) and liquid biopsy (NGS), EGFR
exon 20 insertion c.2319_2320insCAC;p.(His773_Val774insHis) was
detected with one year in between; after afatinib, osimertinib was intro-
duced due to left kidney metastasis detection. Exon 20 insertion mutation
is associated with lack of sensitivity to first-generation EGFR TKIs (er-
lotinib/gefitinib) and a partial response to second-generation (afatinib)
and third generation (osimertinib/rociletinib); promising results for
nazartinib and poziotinib are online.
Follow up has been done for 21/2 years.
Conclusion: Studies showed that different exon 20 insertions lead to
different response to EGFR TKIs depending on the location in the kinase
domain that they affect. Therefore, it is important to report the mutation
and make the follow up.
Key words: EGFR; exon 20 insertion; liquid biopsy
E-PS-17-015
A novel SOS1-ALK fusion variant in a metastatic lung adenocarci-
noma patient with remarkable response to crizotinib
C. Xu*, W. Wang, L. Lei, H. Chen, L. Huang, X. Li, G. Lan, Z. Zhai,
Y. Zhu, J. Wang, G. Chen
*Fujian Cancer Hospital, China
Background & objectives: Transforming ALK (anaplastic lym-
phoma kinase) gene rearrangements are well known as one unique
subset of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) other than EGFR
mutations. Currently, crizotinib is the standard first-line treatment
for ALK-positive NSCLC.
Methods: With the advances of detection methods, more and more un-
common ALK fusion partners are found. Herein, we presented a novel
SOS1-ALK fusion and the efficacy of crizotinib to an advanced NSCLC
patient who harbouring this type of fusion.
Results: A 52-year-old Chinese man with left upper lobe primary
NSCLC and synchronous multiple lung metastases. The EUS-
FNA of palpable left supraclavicular lymph nodes and results of
immunohistochemistry staining supported lung adenocarcinoma
metastasis. By using NGS assay, we found the tumour had
SOS1-ALK fusion rather than other actionable mutations. In that
case, the patient took the first line crizotinib and experienced a
remarkable tumour response to it and tolerance well until written.
Conclusion: Considering this rare SOS1-ALK fusion and remark-
able response to ALK-inhibitor, it is worthful to aware of the
presence of SOS1-ALK fusion in NSCLC to guide target therapy.
NGS for oncogenic alterations detection should also be encour-
aged in clinical practice.
Funding: The Medical Scientific Research Foundation of Zhejiang
Province of China (2019RC027), Scientific Research Foundation
of Zhejiang Medical Association (2019ZYC-A76) and Xisike-
Hanson Cancer Research Foundation (Y-HS2019-20).
E-PS-18-001
C3 glomerulopathy associated monoclonal gammopathy and atypi-
cal HUS: a case report
F. Dolkiras*, S. Pantelakos, N. Stavrinou, C. Masaoutis, C. Vourlakou
*Evaggelismos General Hospital Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: A 68-year old man presented with
haematuria, thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic haemolytic anae-
mia and renal dysfunction with Cr 1.3mg/dl. A diagnosis of aHUS
was suspected. Result of immunofixation-electrophoresis in blood/
urine showed monoclonal fraction of IgG-k, bone marrow and renal
biopsies were requested.
Methods: Light and immunofluorescence microscopy along with histo-
chemical stains were used.
Results: Thrombotic-thrombocytopenic-purpura was excluded be-
cause ADAMTS-13 activity was normal Bone marrow biopsy re-
sulted in a diagnosis of sMM/MGRS was given with a percentage of
clonal plasma cells of 12% Renal biopsy revealed findings consis-
tent with a membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis with global
mesangial matrix expansion, mesangial hypercellularity and capil-
lary wall thickening with double contours, among others findings.
Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed diffuse positive (3+)
staining for C3 in the mesangium and along the capillary wall
whereas IgG, IgM, IgA, C1q, C4, κ and λ light chains were all
negative. A differential diagnosis between dense-deposit-disease
(DDD) and C3-glomerulonephritis was given with a recommenda-
tion for further evaluation with electronic microscopy.
Conclusion: Abnormal activation of the alternative complement
pathway may be associated with several conditions that result in
dysregulation of the pathway such as infection and monoclonal
gammopathy. It is possible that the abnormal monoclonal immuno-
globulin produced acts as such a trigger factor that leads to abnor-
mal activation of the alternative-complement pathway and contrib-
utes to the development of C3G and aHUS.
E-PS-18-002
IgA nephropathy with thrombotic microangiopathy in the context of
visceral leishmaniasis with renal involvement
H. Gakiopoulou*, D. Lygerou, E. Dermitzaki, A. Stofas, S. Maragkou,
E. Drosataki, E. Daphnis, K. Stylianou
*1st Department of Pathology, The National and Kapodistrian University
of Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: Renal involvement in visceral leishmaniasis
is rare and is most often reported in immunocompromised patients. We
present a rare case of a patient initially diagnosed as IgA nephropathy
with thrombotic microangiopathy which subsequently was diagnosed
with visceral leishmaniasis.
Methods: Light microscope, immunofluorescence, electron microscope
and real time PCR
Results: A male patient aged 43, presented with acute renal failure,
nephrotic range proteinuria and microscopic haematuria. His immu-
nologic control demonstrated ANA1:1280, positive lupus anticoag-
ulant and positive anti-SSA and anti-SSB. Clinically, the patient
was suspected for an autoimmune disorder. The renal biopsy
showed an IgA nephropathy (M0E0S1T0-C0 according to the
Oxford Classification) accompanied by severe thrombotic microan-
giopathy, acute and chronic. The subsequent clinical and laboratory
investigation revealed visceral leishmaniasis. The frozen stored
E-PS-18 Nephropathology
segment of the renal biopsy was then undergoing a PCR analysis
that was positive for leishmania. The patient received anti-
leishmania therapy which resulted in decline of his proteinuria and
stabilization of his renal function. Immunologic control returned to
normal.
Conclusion: The association of IgA nephropathy and thrombotic
microangiopathy in the context of visceral leishmaniasis with renal
involvement, is reported for the first time. Although thrombotic
microangiopathy is not infrequently associated with IgA nephropa-
thy, it is not known whether either IgA nephropathy or thrombotic
microangiopathy might have any causal relation with leishmaniasis
or it’s just a coincidence of frequent and rare events.
E-PS-18-003
The natural history of renal pathology in LCAT deficiency through a
repeated renal biopsy 10 years after the initial one
H. Gakiopoulou*, E. Dermitzaki, D. Lygerou, A. Stofas, S. Maragkou,
E. Drosataki, E. Daphnis, K. Stylianou
*1st Department of Pathology, The National and Kapodistrian University
of Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: To present the evolution of the kidney le-
sions in a patient with LCAT deficiency undergoing a repeated renal
biopsy 10 years after the initial one.
Methods: Light microscope, immunofluorescence and electron mi-
croscope. In the first biopsy the patient aged22years and present-
ed proteinuria, microscopic haematuria and creatinine 1.2mg/dl.
Light microscope showed a morphologic pattern of FSGS with
some intracapillary hyaline pseudothrombi without global
glomerulosclerosis, interstitial fibrosis/tubular atrophy (IFTA), in-
flammation or arterial intimal thickening.
Results: Ten years later, a second biopsy was performed due to
appearance of nephrotic syndrome and increase of creatinine
(2.2mg/dl). Apart from FSGS and intracapillary pseudothrombi,
the biopsy showed global glomerulosclerosis, significant glomerular
basement membrane (GBM)thickening with segmental duplications
and foamy material into the duplicated GBMs, the capillary lumens
and the arterial walls. IFTA progressed from absent to 50% of the
cortex area. Interstitial inflammation was superimposed as well as
arterial lesions. Immunofluorescence in both biopsies showed C3
deposition.
Conclusion: In the second biopsy, EM showed lipid vacuoles mas-
sively accumulated in mesangial, subendothelial, intramembranous
and subepithelial locations, forming huge hump and fingerprint-like
lipid accumulations. Moreover, lipid accumulation was noticed in
the interstitial tissue, tubular basement membranes and arterial
walls. Accumulation and expansion of lipid material, triggering
IFTA and global glomerulosclerosis, seems to be the underlying
cause of progressive renal damage and nephrotic proteinuria in pa-
tients with LCAT deficiency.
E-PS-18-005
Primary hyperoxaluria diagnosed on bone marrow biopsy in a renal
transplant patient
Á. Nagy*, J. Csomor, A. Fintha, M. Kardos
*Poundbury Cancer Institute, Dorchester, UK, 1st Department of
Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary
Background & objectives: Primary Hyperoxaluria is a rare autosomal
recessive disorder. The most severe form is caused by deficiency of a
liver-peroxisomal enzyme. Its defect leads to the conversation of
glyoxylate to oxalate. Oxalate forms insoluble crystals with calcium ac-
cumulating in multiple organs.
Methods: 58-year-old woman had renal transplantation two years ago.
Since infancy she had recurrent chronic pyelonephritis and nephrolithiasis
resulting in end stage kidney disease. Few month after transplantation ele-
vated paraproteins were detected. On serum electrophoresis gamma fraction
showed a peak of monoclonal IgG kappa. Pathologic vertebral fracture was
also revealed. Therefore, bone marrow biopsy was performed to exclude
plasma cell myeloma.
Results: Bone marrow biopsy showed trilineage haematopoiesis with mat-
uration. There were also areas rich in needle-shaped, birefringent calcium-
oxalate crystals arranged in rosettes, surrounded by a foreign body giant cell
reaction. Abnormal plasma cell proliferation was not detected. The diagno-
sis was oxalosis with secondary granulomatous reaction.
The patient received a renal transplant. Six months after renal transplan-
tation, the renal function progressively decreased. Biopsies of the
transplanted kidney showed extensive calcium-oxalate deposition in the
tubules.
Secondary causes of hyperoxalosis were excluded, therefore we presume
that this represents primary hyperoxaluria although genetic testing has not
been performed.
In the literature we could only find three cases of primary oxalosis report-
ed on bone marrow biopsy.
Conclusion: It is likely that changes of oxalosis are also present in native
kidneys and consideration should be given to obtain a biopsy of these at
the time of transplantation to screen for conditions that may affect the
transplanted kidney.
E-PS-18-006
Repeat renal biopsy in a systemic lupus erythematosus patient with
podocytic infolding glomerulopathy
M. Otani*, K. Ono, H. Hayashi, T. Inoue, E. Ashikaga, S. Iwasaki
*Div. Diagnostic Pathology, Yokohama City University Medical Center,
Japan
Background & objectives: Podocytic infolding glomerulopathy (PIG) is
characterized by infolding of the podocytes into the basement membrane.
The precise aetiology is not known, however, the condition is found
mainly in patients with collagen diseases, such as systemic lupus erythe-
matosus (SLE).
Methods: The 43-year-old woman first presented to us 5 years earlier
with abdominal symptoms, and serum tests for ANA and anti-Sm anti-
body became positive. The first renal biopsy was performed when she
developed haematuria and proteinuria. The second renal biopsy was per-
formed 2 years later because of increased proteinuria despite the patient
receiving treatment for SLE.
Results: The first renal biopsy revealed most glomeruli showed a bubbly
appearance of the basement membrane with focal mesangial expansion
histologically. IF analysis showed positivity only for IgM in the
mesangial area, and there was no immune deposits by EM, but we found
slight podocytic infolding into the basement membrane. The second renal
biopsy showed podocytic infolding was still apparent and more evident
than before by EM.
Conclusion: Most of PIG cases have underlying autoimmune disease.
The condition affects women more frequently, and the average age of
patients is 37.5 years. These clinical aspects seem to correspond to those
of collagen diseases. It remains under debate as to whether this entity is a
new disease of the podocytes of represents a non-specific reaction of the
podocytes. We think that a relationship exists between PIG and autoim-
mune diseases or autoimmune disease-like condition.
E-PS-18-007
Light chain renal disease, in a stepwise process: a case report
R. Radi*, W. Ismail
*Cairo University, Egypt
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Kidney is affected in multiple myeloma
through deposition of abnormal light chain within various structures of
the kidney.
A 43-year-old woman presented to an outside medical centre with hyper-
tension and renal insufficiency. Initial renal biopsy diagnosed as acute
tubular injury.
Methods: She was transferred to our institution for slides revision. Congo
red staining and Immunohistochemistry were performed against immu-
noglobulins, C3, C1q, Kappa and Lambda antibodies.
Bone marrow biopsy was done then referred to the haematology depart-
ment and treated for multiple myeloma. kidney functions improved.
Seven months later, her creatinine raised to 7 mg/dL with proteinuria.
A renal biopsy was ordered again.
Results: First renal biopsy, tubules showed marked injury with frequent
fractured PAS weakly stained hyaline casts, surrounded by cellular reac-
tion. Congo red staining revealed no amyloid deposits. Casts were strong-
ly positive for Kappa and weakly stained for Lambda. No glomerular or
tubular basement membrane deposits. She was diagnosed as light chain
cast nephropathy.
Bone marrow biopsy showed 15% monoclonal kappa plasma cells. The
patient was diagnosed with multiple myeloma.
The second renal biopsy showed residual light chain casts, glomerular
capillary and tubular basement membrane thickening, islands of intersti-
tium PAS positive deposits, and granular material in arteries, with stain-
ing for only kappa (3+) in glomerular, tubular basement membrane, in-
terstitium and arteries
Conclusion: Final pathology diagnoses included cast nephropathy and
light chain deposition disease (LCDD), Kappa type. This case describes
cast nephropathy and LCDD occurring in the same individual in a step-
wise process.
E-PS-19-001
Histopathology of pilocytic astrocytoma and a rare case of
haemorrhagic onset
D. Anestakis*, E. Papatolia, P. Konstantinidou, E. Chatzifotiou,
R. Leontari
*Department of Autopsy Histopathology, Laboratory of Forensic
Medicine & Toxicology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
Background & objectives: Pilocytic Astrocytoma (PA) is a low-grade
glioma which occurs predominantly in children. It usually presents signs
of intracranial pressure, but haemorrhage is rare. We present this case
because of its rarity and we review the relevant literature.
Methods: Here we report a case of haemorrhagic onset of cerebellar PA
in a forty-year-old female who presented with a week-long history of
headache and gait instability. Computed tomography and magnetic reso-
nance imaging revealed a haemorrhagic tumour located in the right cer-
ebellar hemisphere and total resection was performed.
Results: Histological examination revealed compact and microcystic
areas. Rosenthal fibres and eosinophilic granular bodies (EGBs) were
found. Haemorrhagic infiltration, hemosiderin deposition and focal in-
flamed aggregations of phagocytes were also observed. Microvascular
proliferation and malformation was also observed, including sclerotic-
thick walled and ectatic-thin walled vessels which lack elastic fibres,
implying the possibility that they might be more prone to rupture under
certain hemodynamic conditions.
Conclusion: Review of the literature revealed that age distribution of
patients with haemorrhagic PAs tends to be older than that of patients
with general PAs. These findings imply a possibility that degenerative
changes in blood vessels in long-standing PAs.
E-PS-19-002
Case report: glioblastoma multiforme with metastasis in pancreas
D. Anestakis*, A. Orfanidis, M. Charalampidou, P. Konstantinidou,
E. Kalyva, N. Raikos
*Department of Autopsy Histopathology, Laboratory of Forensic
Medicine & Toxicology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
Background & objectives: Glioblastoma multiforme-GBM, a
grade IV tumour of the central nervous system-CNS has an an-
nual incidence of 5.26 per 100,000 population. GBM seldom me-
tastasizes outside the CNS. The main objective of this case-report
is to present a rare clinical case.
Methods: Histopathological examination was performed at brain and
pancreas tissue samples.
Results: Brain tissue sample with extensive oedema, zones of
cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and thickened nucleus, some
cells with degenerative corruptions, necrosis sources, saturated
with blood and among them congested vessels with extravasation
of red blood cells. Pancreas tissue sample with groups of irregu-
larly big islands, fibrotic tissue, medium liparoid infiltration and
vascular hyperplasia. Although GBM cure has remained elusive,
progress has been made. Mouse glioma models can reveal possi-
ble molecular targets for personalized therapy. In addition, the
immune system constitutes an ideal target since it penetrates the
brain-blood-barrier. Therefore, immunotherapy can maximize “on-
tumour” and minimize “off-tumour” effects.
Conclusion: MiRNAs’ expression can help identify the cancerous stage.
Finally, optune an electric device that is applied directly to the scalp and
disrupts mitosis, as well as Bevacizumab, an antiangiogenesis agent, are
also being tested.
E-PS-19-003
What about the adult cerebellar glioblastoma?
D. Argyropoulou*, G. Oliveira, A. Oliveira
*Department of Pathology, Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal
Background & objectives: Adult glioblastoma of the cerebellum
is a highly unusual entity. We hereby present two cases of Adult
Cerebellar Glioblastoma within a period of 1-month difference
each, at our institution.
Methods: The clinical data and histology reports were reviewed.
Results: Two young adults, age ≤45, a female and a male, with
gait ataxia at presentation. The female patient had a history of
Neurofibromatosis type I. On the MRI imaging, a solitary, infil-
trative, cerebellar lesion, with diffuse gadolinium-enhancement af-
ter contrast, was observed.
Both tumours were right-sided, one with brainstem moulding and
the other with contralateral extension. The median size was
45mm.
In both there were typical findings of a high-grade glial neoplasia. Both
were p53 negative and had a low Ki-67 index (5%;10%).
Both tumours were IDH1/22 negative (wild-type), 1p/19q deletion nega-
tive and MGMT non-methylated.
The patients are alive, passed 9- and 11-months post brain surgery and
radiotherapy.
Conclusion: The posterior fossa is the site of many types of
tumours. Brain metastases are the most common adult malignan-
cies of the posterior fossa and Hemangioblastoma the most com-
mon primary adult, intra-axial tumour, of this location.
Glioblastomas of the cerebellum account for <1% of all intracra-
nial Glioblastomas. In a brief period of one month we reported
two cerebellar glioblastomas of the adult.
E-PS-19 Neuropathology
E-PS-19-004
A clinico-pathological risk score for prediction of recurrence in pa-
tients with atypical meningioma
A. Fioravanzo, M. Caffo, M.P. Gardiman, C. Ghimenton, V. Maffeis,
M. Martini, E. Pegolo, V. Barresi*
*Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, Section of Pathology,
University of Verona, Italy
Background & objectives: Patients with atypical meningioma
have 5-year recurrence free-survival (RFS) of 50%. For this rea-
son, the post-surgical treatment after gross total resection is
controversial.
In this study we aimed to analyse which clinical-pathological
features could be helpful to predict the recurrence risk of patients
with atypical meningioma and to identify high-risk ones who
could benefit from adjuvant treatment.
Methods: From five different centres, we collected 200 primary atypical
meningiomas treated with GTR, but with no adjuvant radiotherapy and
reviewed their clinical and pathological features.
Results: Logistic multivariate regression analyses identified male
sex, parasagittal site, Simpson grade 3, mitotic index ≥6/10 HPF
and sheeting as significant and independent factors associated with
recurrence risk. We formulated a risk score assigning 1 point in the
presence, and 0 points in the absence, of each of those parameters.
A score ≥2 was associated with 4.7 risk of shorter DFS (P <00001)
and was the most significant predictor of recurrence.
Conclusion: The presence of at least two clinico-pathological high-
risk factors, among male sex, parasagittal site, Simpson grade 3,
mitotic index ≥6/10 HPF and sheeting, predicts recurrence of
totally resected primary atypical meningiomas and could be used
to identify patients who could benefit from adjuvant radiotherapy.
E-PS-19-005
Adult supratentorial extraventricular anaplastic ependymoma: a
rare case
B. Binboga*, F. Oz Puyan, N. Kurt, N. Can
*Trakya University Medical Faculty, Turkey
Background & objectives: Intracranial ependymomas in adult
patients are relatively rare. Most of the ependymomas develop
in the ventricles however it can occur at any site in the central
nervous system and extraventricular ependymomas are quite
uncommon.
Methods: A 68-year-old female patient presented with having speaking
problems and stutter. On physical examination there was no evidence of
paresis, neural deficitis or cranial nerve abnormalities. Cranial MRI dem-
onstrated a left temporal T1 hypointense, T2 hyperintense cystic lesion
with solid components. There was contrast enhancement in solid compo-
nent. In diffusion weighted imaging, there was no diffusion attenuation in
cystic areas.
Results: Histologically, a cystic tumour infiltration consisting of
small round cells with epithelioid arrangement which shows sharp
demarcation with brain parenchyma was observed. There was also
microvascular proliferation, perivascular pseudorosette formation
and necrosis. GFAP, vimentin and EMA was positive and Ki67
index was high (%60-70). Olig2 and IDH-1 showed no
immunreactivity and there was no loss of ATRX expression.
Final diagnosis was extraventricular anaplastic ependymoma.
Conclusion: It is theorized that extraventricular ependymomas can
develop from intraparenchymal or subarachnoid ependymal cysts.
Although it is rare appearance, ependymomas should be consid-
ered as a differential diagnosis of a glioblastoma in adult patients
presented with extraventricular intracranial mass. Considering the
occurrence of EMA positive glioblastomas, this diagnosis was
given with the support of radiologic characteristics of the lesion.
E-PS-19-006
Persistent and chemoresistant brain metastases of choriocarcinoma
in a young female
E. Cabeza Abati*, E. Cuello Entrena, J. Doña Girón, F.J. Velasco
Albendea
*Hospital Universitario Torrecárdenas, Spain
Background & objectives: Choriocarcinoma is a rare and invasive type
of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia that rapidly metastasizes and has
propensity to cause haemorrhage, making this diagnosis a medical emer-
gency. It can develop from any gestational trophoblastic tissue.
Methods: A 22-year-old Venezuelan female visiting her auntie in Spain,
presented to the Emergency Department with an epileptic seizure in 2017.
TC showed an hyperdense mass of 26 mm with frontoparietal location in
the left brain and a pulmonary mass in the left inferior lobe. They
suspected glioma and practised a surgical excision of the brain mass.
Results: The diagnosis was choriocarcinoma metastasis with necro-
haemorrhagic changes. When they asked her she told that she had a
delivery in 2014 and a molar pregnancy treated with curettage in 2015.
The gynaecological exam revealed nothing abnormal. She underwent
long-term follow-up by oncologists evaluating her chorionic gonadotro-
pin levels and treating her with chemotherapy. Nonetheless, a new pari-
etal right mass appeared in 2018, undergoing radiosurgery. They finally
had to remove it surgically in March 2019 but in October TC showed a
lesion in the same location that was surgically treated in 2020 and diag-
nosed as a choriocarcinoma recidive.
Conclusion: Most women who are found to have choriocarcinoma can
be cured but delayed diagnosis may increase the risk of metastasis and
chemotherapy resistance, affecting its prognosis. Following molar preg-
nancy, women should be followed-up and our patient wasn´t followed-up
for various reasons so brain metastases were already present at time of
diagnosis. We reiterate the importance of early diagnosis and treatment
resulting in improved prognosis and outcome for patients.
E-PS-19-008
Capillary hemangioblastoma presenting as cerebellopontine angle
tumour: a case report
R.M. Mendenilla, G.A. Espiritu*
*Batangas Medical Center, Philippines
Background & objectives: In the Philippines, primary adult brain tu-
mours are predominantly meningiomas and glial tumours. Metastatic
tumours (3.2%) and hemangioblastomas (2.2%) comprise the minority
of adult brain tumours. There is no reported incidence of brain tumours in
the cerebellopontine angle (CPA) in the Philippines but one local study
showed incidence of 10.7% in the cerebellum or brain stem.
Given the predominance of slow-growing tumours in the Philippines,
surgery alone is commonly favoured. In this study, capillary
hemangioblastoma occurring in the CPA is presented.
Methods: A 41-year-old, Filipino female presented with diffuse
headache gradually progressing for 1 month. MRI showed an en-
hancing mass lesion measuring 3.8 x 3.0 x 2.6 cm located at the left
CPA with significant oedema and mass effect with compression of
the left ventricle. She underwent suboccipital craniectomy.
Intraoperative findings showed a very vascular tumour, which pro-
fusely bled upon biopsy.
Results: Submitted were multiple light brown to dark brown soft to
friable tissue fragments aggregately measuring 0.4 x 0.3 x 0.2 cm. This
was composed of spindle cells forming anastomosing vascular channels
with slightly foamy stromal cells with plump, hyperchromatic nuclei.
Immunohistochemical studies showed reactivity for Vimentin and
Inhibin and negative staining for S-100. The immunohistophenotypic
profile supported the diagnosis of hemangioblastoma.
Conclusion: Vascular brain tumours may pose a problem in surgical
therapy alone because profuse bleeding may hinder the procedure.
Virchows Arch
Identifying uncommon tumours in certain brain areas should be consid-
ered as this may help in the management of such cases.
E-PS-19-009
A retrospective study of neuropathological features and clinical
correlations in high-grade gliomas
M. Frumosu*, C. Socoliuc, G. Micu, D. Mocanu, A.I. Savin, A. Bastian
*Colentina University Clinical Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: High-grade gliomas are the most ag-
gressive primary malignant brain tumours of controversial origin,
occurring at all ages, with low survival rates and increasing inci-
dence. Our study aimed to examine the epidemiological and path-
ological characteristics of high-grade-gliomas from a clinical
perspective.
Methods: We performed a retrospective research at Colentina University
Clinical Hospital over a period of 5 years (2015-2019) and selected the
cases morphologically diagnosed as high-grade gliomas, including the
ones diagnosed after a former WHO Classification of Tumours. Data
collected included sex, age, morphology, location, tumour recurrence
and main presenting symptoms.
Results: Our study included 143 patients, age between 8y and 86y, 84
men and 59 women. Glioblastoma NOS was the most frequent tumour
type diagnosed (78%), followed by anaplastic astrocytoma (4.8%), ana-
plastic mixed glioma (4.8%), giant cell glioblastoma (4.1%), anaplastic
oligodendroglioma (2.7%), glioblastoma with oligodendroglial compo-
nent (2.7%) and glioblastoma with primitive neuronal component (2%).
Most common tumour locations were in frontal lobe (35%), temporal
lobe (25%), parietal lobe (13%), whilst uncommon sites were thalamus
(3.6%), cerebellum (1.8%). There were 25 cases of recurrences (24 GBM
and one anaplastic oligodendroglioma), earliest recurrence-4 months and
the latest one-4 years. The main onset symptoms: seizures, followed by
speech difficulties, motor changes and visual disturbances.
Conclusion: The most frequent high-grade gliomas diagnosed in the last
five years in our department were NOS glioblastomas, with a sex ratio
M/F – 1.42/1 and median age 54y, predominantly located in frontal lobe,
associated with maximum recurrence rate. Directions for future research
are to investigate the molecular features and their correlation with neuro-
pathological features, while the last one are essential, especially when
molecular studies are not within reach.
E-PS-19-010
Morphological and genetic studies of gliomas to develop new
approaches to targeted therapy
B. Galkovsky*, L. Mitrofanova, I. Lakhina, D. Gulyaev, V. Chirkin
*The Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Russia
Background & objectives: The objective is to study the expression and
variants of coexpression of transcription factors NeuroD1, Prox1,
FoxM1, somatostatin receptors of the 2nd and 5th type, CD38 and
CXCR4 receptors in glioblastoma.
Methods: The methods included an immunohistochemical study with
antibodies to NeuroD1, Prox1, FoxM1, somatostatin receptors of the
2nd and 5th type, CD38 and CXCR4 receptors and moAn analysis of
the protein coexpression in various glioblastomasrphometric analysis of
glioblastoma fragments from 21 patients (surgical material).
Results: Results: glioblastoma cells expressed NeuroD1 in 100%,
FoxM1 in 86%, CXCR4 in 76%, Prox1 in 57%, CD38 in 10%, SSTR2
and STR5 in 100% cases. The average number of cells with expression of
NeuroD1, FoxM1, CXCR4, Prox1, CD38, SSTR2 and SSTR5 was 95
±1%, 83±6%, 76±6%, 58±7%, 11±3%, 2±1%, 7±%1 respectively. Six
variants of the protein coexpression were revealed. The FoxM1+/
NeuroD1+/Prox1-/CXCR4+/CD38- immunophenotype was found most
frequently (in 38% of cases).
Conclusion: Conclusion: the expression of CD38 was detected in
glioblastoma cells. According to the data obtained, a new person-
alized approach to treatment is required with definition of targets
for exposure and the corresponding spectrum of drugs in each
individual case.
E-PS-19-011
Morphological and molecular spectrum of glioma according to
WHO classification
N. Jaffar*, J. Khan
*Jinnah Sindh Medical University, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Updated WHO classification for glio-
ma includes histopathological & molecular patterns of glial tu-
mours for grading. The aim of the study was to determine the
frequency of Glial tumours & to perform its grading according to
modified WHO classification 2016.
Methods: This retrospective study was conducted in the Oncology de-
partment, Jinnah Post Graduate Medical centre (JPMC), Karachi,
Pakistan. Diagnosed cases of Glioma registered between January 2017
to December 2019 in the oncology ward were included in the study.
Grading was performed according to WHO classification 2016. Data
analysis was carried out by SPSS version 25.0.
Results: Among 115 patients male to female ratio was 2.1:1. Mean
age was 38.41. Oligodendroglioma was the most common morpho-
logical type (53.5%). High-grade tumours including Grade 3 and 4
constituted 54.2% of cases, followed by grade 2 (40.2%). The most
common presenting complaint was headache (42.2%). GFAP ex-
pression was positive in 80.5% of cases, followed by 6.1% cases
of 1P\19q codeletion, triple positive and Ki67 positivity in 1.2%
each.
Conclusion: Oligodendroglioma (grade 2) was the most common
individual histological type, however, grade 3 and 4 tumours to-
gether constituted majority of cases. Temporoparietal lobe was the
most common site of the tumour followed by the frontal lobe.
Headache was the most frequent presenting complaint. Most tu-
mours expressed GFAP, followed by 1p/19q codeletion, Triple
positive and ki67 expression, respectively.
E-PS-19-012
Uncommon finding in a common tumour - a medulloblastoma with
loss of mismatch repair protein expression in a young child
A. Kan*, D. Ku, S.T. Wong
*Division of Anatomical Pathology, Department of Pathology, Hong
Kong Children's Hospital, Hong Kong
Background & objectives: Microsatellite instability is an uncommon event
in brain tumours. We describe a medulloblastoma with loss of mismatch
repair protein expression by immunohistochemistry in a 31-month-old girl.
Methods: The young girl with mild developmental delay, multiple café
au lait spots and suspected hearing impairment since birth, was worked up
for possible Neurofibromatosis 1. Brain imaging revealed a cerebellar
tumour. Resection was performed.
Results: The tumour was histologically a medulloblastoma of classic
morphology and molecularly subgroup 3 without MYC amplification.
Further mismatch repair protein immunohistochemistry was performed.
Results showed loss of MSH6 staining while staining of MLH1, PMS2
and MSH2 was preserved.
Conclusion: Microsatellite instability (MSI) is an uncommon
event in brain tumour. MSI testing is not reflex testing nor rec-
ommendation under the current WHO classification. However, de-
tection of MSI is important in clinical management and prognosis
of the tumour. Detection requires high index of suspicion and a
multidisciplinary approach.
E-PS-19-013
The effect of destruction of the mucous membrane of the olfactory
zone of the nasal septum on the cytoarchitectonics of the pyramidal
layer of the hippocampus
V. Torshin, I. Kastyro*, M. Kostyaeva, V. Popadyuk, N. Ermakova,
V. Surovtsev, Y. Gushchina, A. Kovalenko
*Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University), Russia
Background & objectives: Injury of smell in rats provokes changes
in the hippocampus and complex behavioural responses in response
to odor irritation. Objective. to study the effect of destruction of
nasal septum olfactory zone mucous on hippocampal pyramidal lay-
er cytoarchitectonics
Methods: Injury to the nasal septum mucosa in the olfactory zone
was performed under anaesthesia with tiletamine hydrochloride and
zolazepam hydrochloride. 10 rats were control group (CG). The
experimental group included 30 rats. The serial sections of the brain
were stained with toluidine blue. Dark nerons (DN) were studied in
the subfields of the hippocampus 2, 4&6 days after surgery.
Results: In the subfields CA1,CA2,CA3&DG on 2nd day after the oper-
ation, the number of DN was greater than in CG(p<0.001). On 4th day,
the amount of DN increased in CA1&CA2 zones, compared with 2nd
day&CG(p<0.01). On 4th day in CA3&DG, there were no differences
with CG. On 6th day, in CA1, the amount of DN decreased, compared
with 2nd day(p<0.001),but was greater than in CG (p<0.01). In
CA2,CA3&DG there were no differences with CG.
Conclusion: The dysfunction of the peripheral part of the analytic analyser
leads to the appearance of dark nerons in various subfields of the hippo-
campus. It may also indicate impaired behaviour and memory with this
injury.
This work was supported by a grant from the Medical Institute of RUDN
University No. 031823-0-000.
E-PS-19-014
Evaluation of squash smear technique in rapid diagnosis of neoplas-
tic and non-neoplastic lesions of the central nervous system & spinal
cord
S. Khera*, A. Ghoshkar
*AIIMS, Jodhpur, India
Background & objectives: Intraoperative consultation of CNS le-
sions is considered to be an important preliminary diagnostic tool to
distinguish neoplastic lesions from non-neoplastic conditions at sur-
gery. In intraoperative setting goal is not to diagnose and grade
every case definitively, rather to provide sufficient preliminary in-
formation to optimize the surgery. The aim of this study was to
assess the utility of intraoperative squash smear cytology of lesions
of Central Nervous System (CNS) & spinal cord and correlate with
the final histopathological diagnosis.
Methods: A total of 109 cases of CNS & spinal cord lesions were
included in the prospective study from January 2011 to
March 2012 at Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi. Intraoperative specimens were used for
crush/squash smears and correlated with the final histopathological
diagnosis.
Results: The patients presented in the age range of 2.5–70 years with the
median age of 31.5 years. Of 106 patients, 66 patients were males & 40
patents were females with male predominance. The diagnostic accuracy
was found to be 88.67% (including partially correlated cases) whereas it
was calculated as 85.90% excluding partial correlated cases. The sensi-
tivity and specificity were 99.09% and 87.5% respectively.
Conclusion: In conclusion, squash preparations provide fairly accu-
rate diagnoses on cytological evaluation of CNS & spinal cord le-
sions.
E-PS-19-015
Meningeal perineurioma – a case report
X. Grammatoglou, G. Theodoropoulou, D. Grigoropoulou,
A. Kostopoulou*, E. Gkamatsi, T. Choreftaki
*General Hospital of Athens G.N.A. G.Gennimatas, Department of
Surgical Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: Perineurioma is an uncommon, usually be-
nign, spindle cell tumour of peripheral nerve sheath origin with a predi-
lection for the soft tissues. Only one intracerebral example has been
described.
Methods: A 56 years-old woman with an epileptic status, has been inci-
dentally discovered with a parietal (right) tumour of 3 cm diameter while
undergoing computer tomography, on the assumption of it being a me-
ningioma. Total surgical resection was performed.
Results: The surgical specimen was white to tan measuring 2x2x1,5 cm.
Histologically, the tumour composed of anastomosing cords of fusiform
cells. Nuclear atypia was mild and mitotic activity undetectable. Tumour
cells coexpressed EMA (focally) and Vimentin. No staining for S100,
GFAP, HHF-35, Desmin, SMA, CD34, CD57, Ker AE1/AE3 was de-
tected. The MIB-1 labelling index averaged 1,5%.
Conclusion: A diagnosis of perineurioma was performed, in the differ-
ential diagnostic context of which it is apt to being misconstrued as either
meningioma, solitary fibrous tumour, or neurofibroma.
E-PS-19-016
The relationship between clinical factors with meningioma histopath-
ologic grade in Siloam Hospital Lippo Village 2014-2018
E. Kristiani*, M. Angelica
*Universitas Pelita Harapan, Siloam Hospital, Lippo Village, Tangerang,
Indonesia
Background & objectives: Meningioma are the most common intracra-
nial tumour of central nervous system tumours. Although the prevalence
is lower, the WHO grade II and III meningioma are more aggressive, with
higher rates of mitosis, are more likely to recur after surgery and have
lower survival rates. The ability to differentiate between WHO I and
WHO II/III meningioma before surgery can contribute to a large clinical
benefit in helping the neurosurgeon making the best management
planning.
Methods: This is an observational analytic study using cross-sectional
design. Sample will be recruited using consecutive sampling. A retro-
spective chart review of meningioma patients in Siloam Hospital Lippo
Village, Tangerang, Indonesia between 2014 - 2018 will be performed.
Relationship between analysed variables and meningioma grade investi-
gated using Chi-square and Fisher-exact.
Results: Total 98 (69%) people suffered meningioma from low grade and
44 (31%) people suffered from high grade. Clinical factors (tumour loca-
tion, tumour size, oedema, necrosis, age, gender) had significant results p
≤0.05 with Chi Square and Fisher-exact statistical tests. Multivariate
results also show that all 6 variables have a close relationship between
each other.
Conclusion: There is a relationship between clinical factors with histo-
pathological meningioma grade in patients at Siloam Hospital Lippo
Village, Tangerang in 2014-2018.
E-PS-19-017
Papillary tumour of the pineal region – a case report of a rare entity
and review of the literature
N.J. Lamas*, M.M. Pinto, R. Taipa, M.M. Pires
*Anatomical Pathology Service, Department of Pathology, Hospital and
University Center of Porto, Portugal
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: The papillary tumour of the pineal region
(PTPR) is an extremely rare neuroepithelial tumour occurring in the pi-
neal region and is characterized by a combination of papillary and solid
areas, with epithelial-like cells. It occurs both in children and adults.
Methods: We report the case of a 55-year-old male with headache and
ataxia lasting for a few months. The brain MRI showed an ill-defined
pineal region space occupying lesion, with solid and cystic components,
associated with hydrocephalus. The patient underwent surgery to remove
the tumour.
Results: The neuropathological analysis showed a neoplasia of epithelial
morphology, with both papillary areas and areas of high cellular density
where rosettes and pseudo-rosettes could be observed. In the papillary
areas, some blood vessels were lined by tall columnar cells with pale
cytoplasm. There were no mitoses or necrotic areas. The immunohisto-
chemistry study using antibodies against the cytokeratin AE1/AE3
(CKAE1/AE3), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), glial fibrillary acid-
ic protein (GFAP), neuron specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin and
neurofilament proteins was only positive for CKAE1/AE3 and NSE.
The proliferative index (% Ki-67) was low.
Conclusion: This case illustrates the main features of this rare pineal
tumour, whose precise histological grading criteria remains to be defined,
although its biological behaviour might correspond to WHO grade II or
III. The overall 10-year survival is around 70%.
E-PS-19-019
Diffuse midline glioma with histone H3 K27M mutation: a report of 3
cases in adults
H. Lee*, C.S. Ding, K. Chuah, T.C. Lim, W. Yu, X. Lin
*Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore
Background & objectives: Diffuse midline glioma, H3 K27M-mutant,
recently codified in the 2016 World Health Organisation classification of
central nervous system tumours, is an infiltrative high grade predominant-
ly astrocytic glioma, usually occurring in children. In IDH-wildtype dif-
fusely infiltrative gliomas centred in midline structures, a H3 K27M mu-
tation confers a worse prognosis; the biologic behaviour corresponds to
WHO grade IV, regardless of the histologic grade. We describe 3 cases
from our adult neuropathology practice, encountered over 18 months.
Methods: A 55-year-old male, on follow-up after radiotherapy for naso-
pharyngeal carcinoma, presented with hoarseness. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) showed a right cerebellomedullary angle cistern tumour.
A 48-year-old male presented with right-sided facial numbness. MRI
showed a heterogeneously enhancing tumour in the right hemipons and
middle cerebellar peduncle.
A 25-year-old male presented with blurred vision. MRI showed a
suprasellar / hypothalamic-optic chiasmatic tumour.
Results: Biopsy in each case showed a diffuse astrocytic tumour. Histological
high-grade features were identified in Cases 2 and 3. On immunohistochem-
istry, the tumour cells showed strong nuclear staining for K27M-mutant H3,
and no staining for the IDH1 R132H mutant protein. The first patient is on
follow-up 4 months post-diagnosis. The second and third patients died of
disease 5 months and 2 months post-biopsy, respectively.
Conclusion: Although less common in adults, the diagnosis of diffuse
midline glioma, H3 K27M-mutant is readily made with the antibody to
K27M-mutant H3 and enables better prognostication in adult patients.
E-PS-19-024
Uncommon case of synchronic tumours, a case review
A.P. Martínez Aracil*, I. Gorostiaga Altuna, A. Perez Rodriguez,
N. Santiago, E. Iglesias, M.J. De Diego Rivas, R. Ruiz Onandi
*Clinical Department Unit of Pathological Anatomy, OSI Araba, Araba
University Hospital. Bioaraba Health Research Institute, Vitoria-Gasteiz,
Alava, Spain
Background & objectives: Multiple primary malignant tumours are a
relevant issue because of the importance of their prompt diagnosis for
adequate management. We aim to describe the case of a 53-year-old male
who was found unconscious and his histological findings.
Methods: Upon arrival, a CT scan was performed, suggesting the possi-
bility of a primary brain tumour in the right temporal space. He was
urgently operated, and an intraoperative biopsy was obtained, informed
as high-grade tumour. The tumour was excised.
One month after the brain surgery, during follow-up, his general practi-
tioner identified some lumps in the neck, which were biopsied.
Results: The histological analysis of the brain tumour revealed the pres-
ence of a rhabdoid meningioma. Histologically it presents abundant eo-
sinophilic cytoplasm, cytoplasmic inclusion with eccentrically placed ve-
sicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli.
The study of the biopsy of the lumps identified in the neck, revealed a
follicular lymphoma grade 3B, indicating that the patient presented two
synchronous tumours of different lineages, one meningothelial and the
other lymphoid.
Conclusion: As the prevalence of synchronic multiple primary malignant
tumours is growing-up, it is essential to establish robust protocols for the
best follow-up of the patients, so we can improve their prognosis and
quality of life. Fortunately, the standardized, rapid performance and the
targeted management of the present case allow our patient to stay alive,
even though the poor outcome that this tumour normally presents.
E-PS-19-025
Diffuse midline glioma in a 4-year-old girl: a case report
A.P. Martínez Aracil*, I. Gorostiaga Altuna, N. Barriobero, A. Perez
Rodriguez, N. Santiago, E. Iglesias, M.T. Ruiz Diaz, A. Hernandez
Lain, R. Ruiz Onandi
*Clinical Department Unit of Pathological Anatomy, OSI Araba, Araba
University Hospital. Bioaraba Health Research Institute, Vitoria-Gasteiz,
Alava, Spain
Background & objectives: We report the case of a very young girl with a
glial tumour. Diffuse midline gliomas a rare subtype of glial tumours
characterized by infiltrative midline high-grade tumours with astrocytic
differentiation diagnosed at an average age of 7 years.
Methods: Due to right facial paralysis which did not respond to cortico-
steroid therapy, a magnetic resonance was carried out, and the diagnosis
of a low-grade glioma was suggested. Therefore, the patient was operated
in the Donostia University Hospital and biopsy was handed to the
Pathology Service. The patient died 21 months after the surgery and an
autopsy was performed.
Results: Histological studies of the biopsy revealed glial proliferation
with low-moderate cellularity, without mitotic figures, microvascular pro-
liferation or necrosis, however, Ki67 >10% and H3-K27M mutation were
detected at 12 de Octubre Hospital, suggestive of diffuse midline glioma
of the pons.
The autopsy performed at Araba University Hospital revealed a distortion
of the brain stem, by a white, jelly-like lesion that totally involved the
brain stem.
Conclusion: We report the histological and autopsy findings in a girl
without any remarkable personal history, diagnosed of a diffuse midline
glioma of the pons 55 months earlier than the average expected age. Even
if the prognosis is poor, it is even worst in the presence of the H3-K27M
mutation which leads to more than 90% of patients deceasing before 2
years after diagnosis, as the present case.
E-PS-19-026
Schwannoma with neuroblastoma-like rosettes
K. Mikus Kuracinova*, V. Poorova, M. Sekeresova
*Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University,
Slovakia
Background & objectives: Schwannoma is typically benign nerve
sheath tumour arising from differentiated Schwann cells. This tumour is
encapsulated with solitary growth in 90% of all cases, however some
morphologically diverse variants have been reported, which may cause
diagnostic confusion.
Methods: A 41-year-old male presented with a history of chronic pain in
the cervical region, lasting from 2011. MRI revealed an extensive
extraaxial tumour of the craniocervical junction. The intradural
extramedullary tumour was well encapsulated, measured 25x25mm and
was dislocating the spinal cord to the left. The patient was admitted to the
neurosurgery department, where the tumour was subtotally resected.
Results: Macroscopically the tumour was fragmented, pale and solid,
with hard consistency. Microscopically we found irregular bone trabecu-
lae admixed with tumorous proliferation with large rosette-like structures
with homogeneous material in the centre and small, round to oval palisad-
ing cells at the periphery with scarce cytoplasm, without any atypia or
increased mitotic activity. Beside rosettes, the tumour consisted of bland
looking, spindle-shaped cells with corrugated nuclei. The density of this
population was variable, with signs of degenerative atypia in the more
cellular areas. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated expression of S100,
CD99, D2-40, negativity for MUC4, GFAP, PR, CD56, synaptophysin,
chromogranine, bcl-2 and AE1/3, with low level of Ki-67 (< 1%) prolif-
erative index.
Conclusion: The diagnosis according to clinical, histopathological and
immunohistochemical results was schwannoma with neuroblastoma-like
rosettes. Low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma (hyalinizing spindle cell tu-
mour with giant rosettes) was considered in the differential diagnosis,
but MUC4 negativity excluded this diagnosis.
E-PS-19-027
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy associated with
Ibrutinib treatment
K. Mosna*, M. Ladicka, M. Vranovska, P. Babál
*Institute of Pathological Anatomy, Comenius University Bratislava,
Slovakia
Background & objectives: Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
(PML) is rare, but highly fatal demyelinating disorder of the central ner-
vous system, caused by reactivation of John Cunningham poliomavirus
(JCV), affecting almost exclusively patients with compromised immune
system. Hereby we present a drug-associated case of PML.
Methods: 62-year old female patient was diagnosed with a small cell variant
of mantle cell lymphoma of the conjunctiva treated with rituximab-based
chemotherapy, leading to complete remission. Disease relapsed 7 years later,
followed by Ibrutinib treatment. Three weeks after treatment initiation patient
started to develop neurological symptoms, and MRI showed newly devel-
oped multiple hyperintense lesions in white matter on FLAIR sequence.
Results: In spite of discontinuation of Ibrutinib treatment patient died due
to neurologic deterioration and subsequent bronchopneumonia. Autopsy
did not reveal any visible changes of brain tissue, however, histological
examination of brain showed subcortical areas of demyelination.
Oligodendrocytes and astrocytes around the lesions showed discrete cy-
tological and nuclear atypia, with sparse large hyperchromatic nuclear
inclusions in astrocytes. Surrounding brain parenchyma displayed signs
of microglial activation and small amount of T cells (CD3+, CD8+).
Real-time PCR test performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
brain tissue from areas of evident demyelination detected DNA of JCV.
Clinical symptomatology, with MRI and histological changes followed
by detection of JCV DNA has led to final diagnosis of PML.
Conclusion: PML development has been initially associated with intrin-
sic disorders of the immune system; however, with the implementation of
new immunomodulatory medications, the drug associated PML has be-
come more frequent. This case report presents a possible severe adverse
effect of the immunomodulatory drug Ibrutinib, and the importance of
multidisciplinary approach in the diagnosis of PML.
E-PS-19-028
Embryonal tumour with multilayered rosettes (ETMR)
M. Nisar*, M.U. Tariq, N. Uddin, Z. Ahmed
*Aga Khan University Hospital, Pakistan
Background & objectives: The 2016 update of the WHO Classification
of Tumours of the CNS has redefined a number of tumours. Embryonal
Tumour With Multilayered Rosettes is a recently described pathological
entity. They are rare tumour affecting young children. Prognosis is ex-
tremely poor.
Methods: We retrieved and reviewed H&E stained microscopy glass
slides of 13 ETMR cases with history of headache, vomiting and pain.
These cases were treated at different institutes and diagnosed at our insti-
tute between March 2008 and July 2019. Morphologic features such as
presence of papillary/tubular-trabecular architecture, surface blebs, exter-
nal blebs, primitive cell component, neuronal, glial and mesenchymal
differentiation were assessed.
Results: Patients’ age ranged from 8 months to 10 years with median of
3.63 years. Female to Male ratio was 3:2. Brain was the most commonly
involved site.
Most of the tumours were received in multiple pieces. All the cases
showed features of malignancy. Follow-up of 6 patients could be
attained and 3 were found to have expired due to some undiagnosed
disease rest were all healthy with a 2 weeks follow up history.
Treatment of all patients was excision alone with few patients who
received radiotherapy.
Microscopically, as presence of papillary/tubular-trabecular architecture,
surface blebs, external blebs, primitive cell component, neuronal, glial
and mesenchymal differentiation was observed in all cases.
Conclusion: ETMR are a distinct entity with majority of them be-
having aggressively even after being treated by local excision.
Although the WHO currently recognizes 3 distinct histopathological
entities-embryonal tumour with abundant neuropil and true rosettes,
ependymoblastoma and medulloepithelioma. Recent studies indicate
that these tumours have a common molecular profile and clinical
course and that they are now classified as a single entity.
E-PS-19-029
Immunohistochemical characterisation and histopathology of astro-
cytic neoplasms at a tertiary Nigerian hospital
M. Nweke*, G. Ogun, C. Okolo
*University of Medical Sciences Teaching Hospital, Ondo State, Nigeria
Background & objectives: To describe the histologic features and pat-
tern of expression of selected molecular markers of tumour biology in-
cluding epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR), mutant p53 and mutant
isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 (IDH-1R132H) among astrocytic neoplasms
at the University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Methods: Retrospective study involving 81 histologically diagnosed
CNS neoplasms between January 2004 and December 2015. Ethical
clearance was obtained. Immunohistochemistry was done using IDH-1
R132H, p53 and EGFR monoclonal antibodies. Cases were reviewed
using the WHO Classification (2016). Membranous and cytoplasmic
staining of EGFR and IDH-1R132H monoclonal antibodies respectively
were regarded positive, nuclear staining of p53 mouse antibody was
regarded positive.
Results: Males constituted a majority of cases, 50 (61.7%). Male -
Female ratio was 1.6:1. Mean age was 30.6 years. There was a ten-
dency for tumours to be of higher WHO grades with increasing age,
albeit glioblastoma cases tended to present at younger ages. The
higher WHO grades were more likely to be located supratentorially.
Glioblastomas accounted for most of the diagnosis 39 (48.1%),
followed by pilocytic astrocytomas at 23 (28.4%). There was a low
positive cytoplasmic expression of IDH-1 with only 3 (3.7%) being
positive, 8 (9.9%) showed a positive nuclear expression for mutant
Virchows Arch
p53 while 17 (21%) showed membranous positivity for EGFR
expression.
Conclusion: Glioblastomas in this study presented in younger patients.
Optimal stratification for astrocytomas can be achieved using a combina-
tion of IDH-1/EGFR immunohistochemistry.
E-PS-19-031
Glioblastoma with epithelial metaplasia: diagnostic pitfalls and the
importance of adequate sampling
D. Pasov*, M.-G. Lisievici, C. Cocosila, F.-M. Brehar, M. Gorgan
*Bagdasar - Arseni Emergency Clinical Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: Glioblastoma is one of the most common
brain tumours. However, few other neoplasms match its heterogeneity.
While the name "glioblastoma multiforme" is no longer in use, it perfectly
encompasses the variable histology of this tumour.
Methods: The glial nature of most glioblastomas becomes apparent dur-
ing microscopic evaluation but, with the increase of stereotaxic needle
biopsies, new difficulties arise.
We present the case of a 65 years old man, admitted to our hospital with
seizures and left crural paresis. Neuroimaging revealed a small
parasagittal, cortical-subcortical mass in the right parietal lobe, with im-
portant peritumoral oedema.
Results: A needle biopsy was performed.
Microscopic examination of the resulted tissue revealed a poorly differ-
entiated epithelial proliferation with focal gland formation. Our diagnosis
was of metastatic adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemical positivity for CK7 and TTF1, suggested a pulmo-
nary origin. However, detailed lung scans and subsequent clinical inves-
tigations failed to find the primary tumour. Complete ablation of the brain
lesion was decided, providing a 20/15/6 mm sample.
New microscopic features became apparent.
Conclusion: The epithelial aspects, consisting of both poorly differenti-
ated gland structures and squamous morules, were surrounded by a fibril-
lary glial stroma with an important gemistocytic component and frequent
mitoses.
While both a tumour association as well as reactive gliosis were taken into
consideration, these are less likely than glioblastoma with epithelial meta-
plasia, especially in the current clinical setting. Ancillary tests are of
limited use since such glioblastomas can express a variety of epithelial
markers and often don't stain for glial ones.
E-PS-19-032
Calcifying pseudoneoplasm of the neuraxis: a rare but reassuring
cause of generalised tonic clonic seizures
S. Rashid*, A. Haider
*Hamad General Hospital, Qatar
Background & objectives: Calcifying pseudoneoplasm of the neuraxis
is a rare benign lesion with around 60 reported cases. It is predominantly
found in young adults without gender predilection. It carries good prog-
nosis unlike the other common calcifying lesions of the brain.
Methods: A 30-year-old male with no known co-morbidities was
brought by ambulance, reported to be convulsing for a few minutes by
his roommate after which he became sleepy but was fully conscious when
the paramedics arrived. An MRI head with contrast showed a well-
defined lesion in left parietal lobe with areas of curvilinear enhancement
along with calcification.
Results: Possibility of a long-standing vascular malformation with calci-
fication was raised. Craniotomy with complete resection of the lesion was
done. Histopathological analysis showed a calcified lesion composed of
chondromyxoid matrix in a nodular pattern exhibiting radial fibrillarity at
the periphery focally covered by palisading spindled to epithelioid cells
with little fibrous stroma, calcification and osseous metaplasia. Adjacent
brain parenchyma showed Rosenthal fibres.
Upon immunohistochemistry, the spindle cells stained positive for
Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), Vimentin and Progesterone recep-
tor (PR). It stained negative for Glial Fibrillary protein (GFAP).
Diagnosis of Calcifying pseudoneoplasm of neuroxis (CAPNON) was
rendered.
Conclusion: Calcifying pseudoneoplasm of the neuraxis (CAPNON) are
rare benign brain lesions that present incidentally or with neurological
symptoms like seizures. Since many CNS lesions are associated with
calcifications, both metastatic, neoplastic and non-neoplastic, it is impor-
tant to recognize this lesion as it carries good prognosis.
E-PS-19-033
A rare ossified retroperitoneal schwannoma associated with clear cell
renal cell carcinoma: a case report
Y. Rogov*, N. Kornev, A. Syantovich, S. Petruleva
*Belarusian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Belarus
Background & objectives: An “ancient” schwannoma is characterized
by various degenerative changes, but ossification is uncommon and only
a few descriptions can be found in the world literature. We report a case of
ossified retroperitoneal schwannoma which was detected simultaneously
with kidney cancer.
Methods: A 52-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with a tumour
of the left kidney 3.7 cm in diameter. The examination revealed an addi-
tional tumour of the retroperitoneal space 12.0 cm in diameter. The kid-
ney tumour was resected, and the retroperitoneal tumour was removed.
The connection between them was not revealed. Histological and immu-
nohistochemical studies of these tumours were performed.
Results: Microscopically the kidney tumour was a clear cell renal cell
carcinoma, G1. The second tumour had a different structure. It was com-
posed of closely packed, hyperchromatic spindle-shaped cells, in some
places mitotically active with Ki-67 up to 20%. There were areas of
sclerosis, hyalinization, xanthomatous and inflammatory cell infiltration,
irregularly spaced vessels, and foci of ossification of various sizes.
Immunohistochemically, cellular cites arranged in bundles or interlacing
fascicles were S-100, SOX10 and NSE strongly positive. This tumour
was diagnosed as a benign schwannoma with severe degenerative chang-
es including ossification (“ancient” schwannoma) and cellular areas
(Antoni A).
Conclusion: Ossification in schwannomas is a very rare process and may
complicate the diagnosis. Correct assessment of the whole tumour struc-
ture and the use of immunohistochemical markers help to avoid diagnos-
tical mistakes. Connection of this unusual schwannoma ossification with
kidney cancer remained unclear.
E-PS-19-034
Single neuroimagistically described brain lesion resulted in two
different primary brain tumours
R. Soana*, M.-G. Lisievici, C. Cocosila, F.-M. Brehar, A.-M. Vrancianu,
D. Pasov
*Colentina University Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: Glioblastomas are the most frequent malig-
nant brain tumours in adults, accounting for 45-50% of all primary malig-
nant brain neoplasms. Schwannomas are benign, representing 8% of all
intracranial tumours, but the coexistence of these lesions is extremely rare.
Methods: We report the case of a 59 years old female who was admitted
to the ‘Bagdasar-Arseni Clinical Emergency Hospital’ accusing
neurocognitive changes and receptive aphasia which progressively devel-
oped within the last two months. She had left hypoacusis for 10 years.
Neuroimaging described an irregular, heterogeneously contrast-
enhancing mass with surrounding oedema and hemosiderin deposits in
the temporal-cerebellar region.
Results: The intraoperative consultation surprisingly revealed two different
lesions. The temporoparietal mass showed typical features of glioblastoma
while the one in the cerebellopontine angle revealed a schwannoma with a
predominant Antoni A pattern. Total ablation of the temporoparietal tumour
and subtotal ablation of the one in the cerebellopontine angle were per-
formed. The follow-up of the patient revealed recurrence of the
temporoparietal glioblastoma after two months.
Conclusion: Multiple primary brain tumours with different histology
occurring in the same patient is a very rare finding and the pathogenesis
of this condition is still unclear. When a high-grade glioma is associated
the prognosis is very poor. While the neuroimaging suggested a single
lesion, the intraoperative consultation revealed two different tumours.
When the lesions develop adjacent to each other, the case can represent
a diagnostic challenge for the pathologist.
E-PS-19-035
Ganglioglioma with atypical localisation in a toddler
L. Tomescu*, I. Parlica, L. Luca, A. Tita, M. Bosa, D. Arsene, M. Ceausu
*University Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Ganglioglioma is a rare slowly growing pri-
mary benign tumour of the central nervous system (CNS), that preferen-
tially presents in the temporal lobe of children and young adults. It is a
well-differentiated neuroepithelial tumour, but some of them may be
aggressive.
Methods: We present the case of a 3-year-old male child, with a medical
history of a brain stem tumour, which was discovered during an imagistic
investigation and diagnosed as a glioma. The tissue samples were proc-
essed and examined with standard H&E technique, special stains for
nervous tissue such as Nissl and Bielschowsky silver stain and
immunohistochemistry.
Results: Grossly, the brain stem tumour was nodular, quite well-
circumscribed, partially encapsulated, with firm consistency, measuring
approx. 2 cm in maximum diameter. Microscopically, the tumour showed
a biphasic proliferation consisting of moderate differentiated ganglion
cells, evidenced by Nissl and Bielschowsky silver stains and neoplastic
astrocytic type glial cells arranged in a fascicular and solid pattern with
areas of moderate anaplastic features and abundant intermixed glial fibres
with focal microcystic degeneration. The histological aspects correlated
with IHC tests were suggestive of ganglioglioma. The aforementioned
immunohistochemical markers GFAP, S-100, NFT were positive, PCNA
expressed in 1-2% tumour cells and IDH1 was negative.
Conclusion: The histopathological investigation and immunohistochem-
ical tests confirmed the diagnosis of ganglioglioma, a rare primary benign
tumour of the CNS, with atypical localization.
E-PS-19-036
The wide spectrum of brain secondary tumours – a retrospective
study of pathological findings
A.-M. Vrancianu*, R. Soana, M. Dinca, D. Costache, C. Socoliuc,
A. Bastian
*Colentina University Hospital, Romania
Background & objectives: Metastases are the most common brain tu-
mours in adults. Cancer databases, often incomplete, lead to underesti-
mation of their incidence, which appears to be increasing. This study
evaluates the origin, histological types of brain metastasis, illustrating
the challenging diagnostic algorithm implied.
Methods: We reviewed 107 consecutive cases of cerebral secondary
tumours recorded between 2015-2019 in our department, including
60% men and 40% women, aged 29-79 (median age 58 years), most of
them diagnosed between 50-69 years, both intraparenchymal and
meningeal.
Usual and special stains and immunohistochemical assays were per-
formed for an accurate diagnosis, correlated with clinical and neuroim-
aging data.
Results: Primaries were mainly represented by lung carcinomas-43%,
melanoma-19% and breast cancers-16%, while digestive tract-6%, kid-
ney-3% and salivary glands-3% cancers were less frequent origins.
Some were unusual primary neoplasms (one carcinosarcoma of salivary
glands, one basaloid pulmonary squamous-cell carcinoma). 10% of the
tumours had rare primary locations: pancreas, uterus, ovary, soft tissue,
testis, thyroid, urothelium. In few cases-2%, origin remained undeter-
mined despite extensive immunohistochemical workout.
Most carcinomas were poorly differentiated (62%), only one well differ-
entiated thyroid tumour. 60% of the pulmonary tumours were adenocar-
cinomas (63% moderately differentiated). All the breast tumours were
poorly differentiated invasive carcinomas of no-special-type.
The number of brain metastases increased over five years from 9 to 47.
Conclusion: The features of brain metastases are those of high-grade,
aggressive tumours, mostly pulmonary adenocarcinoma, melanoma,
and breast invasive carcinoma. Although exceptional, other primaries
should be considered, and sometimes, even the differential diagnosis
with a primary tumour can be a difficult task for the pathologist.
Of all the cases, adenocarcinoma, melanoma, squamous-cell carcinoma
are the predominant histological types.
Incidence of secondary brain tumours has constantly increased in recent
years.
E-PS-20-002
Endocrine mucin-producing sweat gland carcinoma of the eyelid and
its progression to mucinous carcinoma – two case reports
I. Hristov*, O. Bogdanova
*“Fifth MHAT – Sofia”, Bulgaria
Background & objectives: Endocrine mucin-producing sweat gland
carcinoma (EMPSGC) is a rare neuroendocrine appendageal skin tumour
that may be a precursor of mucinous carcinoma. This study aims to
establish the diagnostic challenges and to emphasize the possibility of
coexistence of both entities.
Methods: We present two separate cases of a 54- and a 74- years-
old females with excisional biopsies of small cystic lesions of the
lower eyelids. After routine tissue processing and microscopic anal-
ysis, further examination was performed, including histochemistry
(PAS staining) and immunohistochemistry (CK7, neuroendocrine,
myoepithelial markers, Ki 67 and others). Comparison of both cases
led to our conclusions.
Results: In both cases, the examination revealed a similar mucin-
secreting neuroendocrine neoplasm with morphological and immunohis-
tochemical features corresponding to EMPSGC. Elaboration of a
myoepithelial layer by immunohistochemistry confirms primary cutane-
ous origin and excludes metastatic adenocarcinoma. By contrast, in the
case of the 74- years-old female, the focal presence of larger extracellular
pools of stromal mucin, containing floating nests of tumour cells, indi-
cates the progression to mucinous adenocarcinoma.
Conclusion: Endocrine mucin producing sweat gland carcinoma
(EMPSGC) and cutaneous mucinous adenocarcinoma are two separate
entities with primary origin and similar histopathological characteristics.
Hybrid lesions containing components of both entities exist and such
cases should be diagnosed as cutaneous mucinous adenocarcinoma
(WHO classification of tumours, 4th edition).
E-PS-20 Ophthalmic Pathology
Virchows Arch
E-PS-20-003
Extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lym-
phoid tissue (MALT) of the conjunctiva: a case report and review
of the literature
N.J. Lamas*, J.R. Brandão, J.R. Alves, J.R. Vizcaíno
*Anatomical Pathology Service, Department of Pathology, Hospital and
University Center of Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: Conjunctival lymphoma accounts for nearly
25% cases of ocular adnexal lymphomas, and normally occurs unilater-
ally in middle-aged and elderly individuals. The most frequent are
extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tis-
sue (MALT) and follicular lymphoma, both generally low-grade.
Methods: We report the case of a 54-year-old male with a one-year
history of a salmon patch lesion in the right eye. The lesion was biopsied
and submitted to both flow cytometry and histopathological analysis. The
left eye was unremarkable.
Results: We received three 2mm-6mm biopsy fragments, whose histo-
logical analysis showed connective tissue extensively occupied by mo-
notonous sheets of small lymphocytes. The immunohistochemical study
carried out showed universal and intense immunoreactivity in the de-
scribed cells for CD20, as well as BCL2 and CD43 expression in more
than 30% of those cells. CD3 and CD5 marked reactive T lymphocytes
present in the background. Cyclin D1, CD10, BCL6 and CD23 were all
negative in the neoplastic lymphocytes. A diagnosis of extranodal mar-
ginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
was made, which was corroborated by the flow cytometry results. The
ensuing bone marrow and CT scan studies were negative for systemic
disease involvement.
Conclusion: This case illustrates the main immunophenotypical features
of MALT conjunctival lymphoma, which was confined to the right eye.
After a dismal response to aggressive chemotherapy, radiation therapy
yielded positive results and the patient is currently disease-free under
continuous follow-up.
E-PS-20-004
A case of hybrid neurofibroma/schwannoma of the orbit
L.E. Salazar Huayna*, L. Naranjo, O. Moscoso Miranda, C. Romagosa,
S. Ramón y Cajal, C. Dinarès
*Vall d´Hebron University Hospital, Spain
Background & objectives: Hybrid Neurofibroma/Schwannoma is a rare
tumour that was first described in 1998 by Feany et al. It is part of Hybrid
peripheral nerve sheath tumours (HPNSTs) which involve combined
morphologies of neurofibroma, schwannoma and perineuroma.
Methods: We report a 78-year-old male, who had exophthalmos of the
left eye. He had a past ocular history of post-surgical left facial paralysis
after preauricular parotid tumour exeresis and left ocular hypertension. At
the exploration, he had left eye ptosis. An orbital computed tomography
scan showed a 20x18mm left intra-conal orbital expansive process.
Results: The clinic-radiologic diagnosis was a left intraconal cavernous
angioma. After that, a left orbitotomy was performed. The gross examina-
tion showed an 18 x 16 x 11 mm whitish and solid mass. Microscopically, it
revealed two different types of morphologies consistent with hybrid
neurofibroma/schwannoma tumour. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated
positivity for S100 protein in Schwann cells and CD34 in the
neurofibromatous component.
Neurogenic lesions of the orbit, specifically, peripheral nerve tumours are
uncommon. Furthermore, HPNSTs are even less frequent. All the four
cases reported in the orbit, included our case, concur with the same type
of HPNST. Nevertheless, it is not known what the triggers to develop it
are.
Conclusion: In other body locations, Neurofibroma/Schwannoma has
been described in association with neurofibromatosis or schwannomatosis
and local recurrence has been reported. Since that, it is important to take into
consideration as a differential diagnosis of orbital peripheral nerve sheath
tumours.
E-PS-20-005
A case of eosinophilic angiocentric fibrosis with concurrent granulo-
ma faciale
E. Sunnetcioglu*, S. Tuncer, C. Leblebici, N. Buyukbabani, S. Ozturk
Sari
*Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Eosinophilic angiocentric fibrosis (EAF) is
an uncommon, chronic, idiopathic disorder mostly occurs in sinonasal
cavity. There are isolated reports of orbital lesions. Granuloma faciale
(GF) which is considered as a cutaneous variant of EAF, coexist in a
quarter of patients.
Methods: Here we present clinical, histopathological and immuno-
histochemical findings of a patient with orbital EAF and GF.
Results: A 62-year-old male presented with right retro-orbital pain.
Histopathologic examination of the mass which was hard in consis-
tency revealed an inflammatory infiltrate in a background of sclero-
sis with conspicuous concentric pattern around small-calibre arteri-
oles. Inflammatory infiltrate was rich in eosinophils, accompanied
by lymphocytes and plasma cells. Immunohistochemistry was per-
formed to rule out IgG4-related disease. Staining for CD34 was
present on endothelial cells in sclerotic nodules. The history of
bilateral telangiectatic, erythematous, slightly depressed forehead
lesion and histopathologic diagnosis of GF was obtained from the
patient through personal communication. The clinical history and
distinctive morphology were the key features for diagnosis of EAF.
Conclusion: EAF should be kept in mind in orbital biopsies with idio-
pathic orbital inflammation which was formerly known as orbital
pseudotumor. It has been proposed that EAF and GF are a part of IgG4
spectrum of disease. Further investigations are needed in order to clarify
the relationship between these two entities and IgG4-related disease.
Eosinophil-rich inflammation and perivascular concentric fibrosis in his-
topathologic examination and accompanying skin lesions are clues for
diagnosis.
E-PS-21-001
Ultrastructural changes of the liver parenchyma in the experiment
K. Abdikadirova*, S. Zhautikova, F. Abikenova, B. Chergizova,
Y. Talaspekova
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: The increased intake of copper has an ad-
verse effect on organism, lead to parenchymal organs damage, including
liver tissue.
To study the ultrastructural changes in the liver parenchyma after the
exposure by copper-containing (Cu-10%) polymetallic dust.
Methods: The experiment included outbred white male rats weighing
120-170 g for 30 days. The dust was injected intratracheally simulta-
neously (50 mg/1.0 ml of physiological saline). Ultrastructural changes
were evaluated using electron microscopy. The material was rats liver
tissue. Manipulations were fulfilled according to «Rules for biomedical
experiments conducting» of MH RK (12.11. 2009 №697). General mor-
phological research methods were used.
Results: Ultrastructural study of liver hepatocytes revealed cell signs
oedema. The GER tubules and Golgi complex were expanded and
fragmented. Hepatocyte nuclei had scalloped outlines. Tightly packed
E-PS-21 Other Topics
ribonucleotides granules were unevenly arranged near nuclear membrane.
Fine-grained osmiophil material was located in nuclear membrane zone.
Mitochondria were polymorphic, partially destroyed, swollen, with in-
creased sizes and small cristae amount. Glycogen granules had reduced
osmiophilism, blurred contours; membrane osmiophil formations were
located near plasmalemma.
Conclusion: The initial mechanism of liver damage development is the
expressed toxic effect of polymetallic copper-containing (Cu-10%) dust
on the hepatocytes ultrastructure. Mitochondrial dysfunction, destruction
of the GER tubules, the Golgi complex and blurring of the contours of the
glycogen granule were observed.
E-PS-21-002
Gingival oxalosis a very rare location of hyperoxaluria
A. Bellalah*, C. Chebaane, N. Ben Abdeljelil, M. Njima, A. Ben
Mabrouk, S. Ben Hammoda, R. Hadhri
*Department of Pathology, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital,
Monastir, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Hyperoxaluria is a metabolic disease with
excessive urinary calcium oxalate excretion which can be primary or
secondary. Inability to excrete oxalate through the kidneys leads to its
deposition in various organs. Oral manifestations of hyperoxaluria are
very rare.
Methods: The aim of this study is to report a rare case of gingival
oxalosis in a 35-year old male patient with a history of chronic renal
and hepatic failure, diagnosed in the department of pathology of
Monastir of Tunisia with a review of the literature.
Results: This patient presented with a dental mobility. Panoramic dental
radiography showed a generalized bone lysis and root resorption.
Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis was suspected. A gingival biopsy was
performed. It revealed a huge granulomatous inflammation with foreign
body reaction surrounding many crystalline deposits. In polarized light,
these deposits were green and presented a birefringent aspect. These
deposits were interpreted as calcium oxalate crystals. The patient was
diagnosed with gingival oxalosis.
Conclusion: Oral manifestations of hyperoxaluria are of particular inter-
est because of the unusual location of the oxalate crystal deposition,
resulting in aggressive tooth resorption and alveolar bone loss, which
may be misdiagnosed.
E-PS-21-003
Case report of familial chylomicronemia syndrome, the most rare
type of dyslipidemia (type I)
C. Bethani*, A.G. Marathonitis, M. Karadima, G. Georgakopoulos,
G. Marathonitis
*Internal Medicine Department, General Hospital of Athens Amalia
Flemig, Greece
Background & objectives: Familial chylomicronemia is a rare primary
dyslipidaemia(1/1.000.000 in the general population)with excessively
high triglycerides(TG)>2000mg/dl. We present a case with familial
chylomicronemia, who reported abdominal pain and discuss its diagnosis
and treatment.
Methods: Our patient is a 50 year old female with known history of diabetes
mellitus T2(DM)and chronic recurrent abdominal pain, smoker, with a BMI
of 31.2kg/m2,social drinker. No family history of DM, with family history of
premature death. Macroscopically showed xanthelasmas in right eyelid.
Abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly(22cm)with diffuse hepatic
steatosis. The patient's serum was severely lipemic(emulsified),in such a level
that it was impossible to calculate biochemical parameters.
Results: After 24-hour fasting: Triglycerides(TGs):11.389mg/dl,(LDL):88mg/
dl,(HDL):63mg/dl,pseudoponatriemia(Na):120mmol/L,ApoA1:129(normal
values:115-220), ApoB:130(n.v.: 60-160),VLDL: 311.0mg/dl(n.v.:0-30).During
her hospitalization, she refused plasmapheresis and was given instructions for
fasting, intravenous hydration and antilipidemic treatment with atorvastatin,
fenofibrate, and niacin. Gradually there was a decrease in triglycerides. The
patient was given instructions for strict diet and drug treatment. A re-audit was
sheduled after two weeks, two months and one year. Specifically, after one year
we had the following results: triglycerides:1128mg/dl, (LDL):60mg/
dl,(HDL):16mg/ldl, cholesterol:279mg/dl,Na131mg/dl. Furthermore, carotid ul-
trasound, as well as ultrasonography of the lower extremity veins and arteries
showed not significant stenosis. and depth of eye in nature. Fundoscopy showed
noabnormalfindings.Genetictestingandcheckingofthe lipidemicprofile ofthe
offspring of the patient was recommended.
Conclusion: Dyslipidemia, both familial and acquired, is a silent risk for
the patient's health. The diagnosis in this case was based on an excessive
increase in triglycerides >2000mg/dl,in lipemic serum, in
pseudoponatriemia (2-4mEq/L for every1000TG),in chronic recurrent
abdominal pain and hepatomegaly (due to mucosal deposition).Other
complications include acute pancreatitis(the most common)without ele-
vated serum amylase(!), due to inflammation of the pancreatic tissue,
splenomegaly and lipaemia retinalis. There is no cure and a strict diet
for lifetime is required.
E-PS-21-004
Endobronchial paraganglioma: a rare paraganglioma location
M. Bresler*, N. Ribeiro Roma, M. Lopes Correia Primo, A. Alvarez dos
Santos, R. Panno Basilio de Oliveira
*Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Background & objectives: Paragangliomas are tumours arising from the
extra-adrenal paraganglion system. The first case of endobronchial
paraganglioma, corroborated by immunohistochemistry, was reported in
2001, followed by four other well documented cases. We present a spe-
cific one in a 27-year-old woman.
Methods: The morphologic characteristics associated with immunohis-
tochemical study were evaluated according to scientific literature.
Results: The microscopic examination revealed that the tumour consisted
of cells organized in clusters with organoid pattern, showing round to
oval nuclei, conspicuous nucleoli and slightly granular cytoplasm, beside
hyalinized beams, calcification foci, and vascular invasion. It was found
metastatic involvement of one local lymph node. Immunohistochemical
staining for chromogranin, synaptophysin and CD56 were positive, and
negative for pankeratin AE1/AE3 and TTF-1. In addition, S-100 protein
was positive in sustentacular cells.
Conclusion: The immunohistochemical study is an important enlighten-
ment to microscopic features. In this circumstance, it corroborated to the
diagnosis of this rare case of endobronchial paraganglioma, a differential
diagnosis to carcinoid tumours in pulmonary area.
E-PS-21-005
Russell-body-containing lymphoid cells as one of the indications of
transplantation immunity
M. Bobrovskikh, A. Bobrovskikh, A. Filin*, V. Danilenko, D. Bugrimov,
E. Ulitina, E. Chupandina, I. De-George, P. Markin
*Voronezh State Medical University named after N.N. Burdenko, Dept.
of Pathological Anatomy, Russia
Background & objectives: Lymphoid cells that contain aggregated im-
munoglobulins (Russel bodies) are found in tissues of patients with var-
ious diseases. The aim of the current research is to add data on participa-
tion of the Russel body-containing cells in transplantation immunity.
Methods: The current study is the result of histopathological changes’
evaluation in an experiment on 30 WISTAR rats with auto-, iso- and
allotransplantation of skin flaps.
Results: During the study, on the third day of the experiment, in the group of
animals with allotransplantation, a significant number of cells with Russel
Virchows Arch
bodies (including Mott cells) in the form of a “demarcation shaft” was de-
tected between the skin flap and the surrounding graft bed. The intensity of
this cellular reaction persisted until the twelfth day of the experiment.
Conclusion: The research data expands the current knowledge on cells
with Russell bodies in transplantation immunity of the human body to
represent them as one of the key factors contributing to the foreign tissue
rejection.
E-PS-21-006
Three-in-one: an unusual case report of triple primary malignant
neoplasms
S. Merilyn George*, R.R. Md Zin, N. Masir
*Clinipath Pathology Sdn Bhd, Malaysia
Background & objectives: Multiple primary malignant neoplasms
(MPMN) are rare. In this case report, we present a case with three prima-
ry, metachronous malignant tumours which developed over a period of
four years involving the breast, bladder, and the gynaecological tract.
Methods: A 48 year old woman with no prior medical conditions pre-
sented with a right breast mass with axillary lymphadenopathy diagnosed
as triple negative, invasive breast carcinoma. A year later she was diag-
nosed with endocervical adenocarcinoma. After treatment, 8 months later
she developed, bladder and retroperitoneal masses with pelvic lymphade-
nopathy with histology distinct from the breast and genital tract tumours.
Results: The breast malignancy was diagnosed as triple negative invasive
ductal carcinoma with nodal metastasis. She was treated with surgery and
chemotherapy and subsequently developed per vaginal bleeding. Pap
smear revealed an adenocarcinoma. A Wertheims' hysterectomy was per-
formed and revealed a submucosal uterine tumour with histology and
immunoprofile of endocervical adenocarcinoma. She completed her che-
motherapy, and 8 months later presented with symptoms of acute renal
failure and deep vein thrombosis. Imaging revealed a retroperitoneal and
bladder base tumour with pelvic and paraaortic lymphadenopathy with
lung metastases. The liver, bones and adrenal were not involved.
Histology of the bladder base tumour revealed a hepatoid adenocarcino-
ma, distinct from the breast and uterine tumours.
Conclusion: Multiple primary malignancies in a single patient are rare.
This case exhibited three different primary malignancies over a course of
four years. Judicious application of antibodies is critical to diagnose and
exclude recurrent/ metastatic tumours for appropriate chemotherapy.
E-PS-21-007
Aspects of mutul relations: clinic and prosecture
M. Irfan*
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: Historically, due to the development of spe-
cialization in medicine, the competencies of clinicians and autopsy doc-
tors have been fragmented and at different poles relative to one formally
common goal - to protect the patient’s health.To establish the existence of
facts confirming the objective existence of social groups of pathologists
and doctors of clinical specialties, to identify the prerequisites for the
occurrence of intergroup conflicts between them. Significant differences,
both practical and psychological, arose in the organization and conditions
of their work
Methods: Anonymous questionnaire, including closed questions. For
each of the questions in the questionnaire, an analysis was made of the
frequency and structure of responses; identification and analysis of cor-
relations between specific answers to various questions in groups of sub-
jects was carried out, comparison and analysis of the answers of pathol-
ogists and clinicians to general questions of the questionnaire.
Results: the study showed the reasonable existence of social groups of
pathologists, and clinicians confirmed the presence of some prerequisites
for the occurrence of intergroup conflict; Clinicians showed a tendency to
underestimate the role of the pathoanatomical service in clinical work and
to misunderstand the problems arising from its interaction. In addition,
areas for further research were identified.
Conclusion: The interaction of the pathologist and clinician in identify-
ing and discussing medical errors is binary: it is both professional
(medical) and social.
Today, the creative potential of collaboration between clinicians and pa-
thologists is weakening.
E-PS-21-008
Occupational hazards among pathologists: results from a nationwide
online questionnaire in Morocco
R. Karam*, I. Beliamime, M. Regragui, S. Benayad, N. Bennani,
F. Marnissi, M. Karkouri
*Department of Pathology, Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Casablanca,
Morocco
Background & objectives: The profession of pathologist exposes to
various occupational risks at each stage of the sample processing. This
study aimed to provide the first comprehensive assessment of the health
situation of pathologists using a questionnaire sent to all pathologists in
our country.
Methods: A questionnaire, to be completed online and anonymously, was
developed, and sent by email to all Moroccan pathologists. It included 52
questions with single or multiple-choice answers, related to the epidemio-
logical characteristics of pathologists, seniority in the profession, modes of
exercise, working conditions, pathologies that they presented, and feelings
towards their profession. Free comments were possible.
Results: 102 pathologists responded to the survey.
72% worked full time, with 28% of liberal practitioners.
86% reported musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs), predominantly in the
neck (64%).
Visual disturbances affected 72,5% of the respondents, mainly of myopia
type (67% of them).
62% of pathologists had injured themselves or had splashes in the mucous
membranes during gross sections.
33% suffers from psychological disorders such as burnout (24%).
Despite the described health risks, Moroccan pathologists seemed happy
at work for more than 50% of them. They had a good lifestyle with only
35% of respondents who were overweight, 8% of smokers and 36% who
did sports at least once a week.
Conclusion: This online questionnaire study is the first comprehensive
occupational health assessment of a nationwide cohort of pathologists in
Morocco.
Emphasis should be placed on primary prevention, focusing on ergonom-
ic workplace optimisation and reduction of work overload.
E-PS-21-009
The role of the surgical incision method for injury regeneration
I. Kastyro*, P. Pryanikov, A. Sinelnikova, V. Popadyuk, Y. Gushchina,
A. Kovalenko, M. Kostyaeva
*Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University), Russia
Background & objectives: Modern methods of electrosurgery are nec-
essary for conducting surgeries, especially in emergency conditions, such
as when tracheostomy is performed in patients with tumour laryngeal
stenosis. Aim: to compare the effects of radio-wave(RW)& molecular
resonance (MR) surgery on rat neck skin regeneration.
Methods: Cuts were made with a microsurgical RW-
generator(1group)&MR-generator(2group) on neck skin of
10rat's.Cytological study of preparations obtained using the superficial bi-
opsy method(May-Grünwald stain). Cytograms were determined for 5
types. After surgery at 1,2,4,6,8,10&12days rats were scored 2 from each
group and a histological study of postoperative wounds (H&E, toluidine
blue stain).In assessing morphological changes we evaluated necrosis, the
severity of inflammatory changes, oedema, proliferative changes,
epithelization.
Results: Cytological examination showed that from day 2 the number of
neutrophils decreased in gr.1 (p<0.01), and from day 5 the number of
fibroblasts increased, compared with gr.2 (p<0.005). In gr.1, the thickness
of the necrosis is less than in gr.2 (87.5+8.1vs 112±6.5), from 3day,
oedema p<0.005), the mast cells number (p<0.005) and neutrophilic in-
filtration of the wound edges were more in gr.2(p<0.005), proliferative
changes and epithelialization were better in gr.1(p<0.001).
Conclusion: RW exposure is a more effective way of transforming elec-
tric energy in the vibration of tissue molecules, which allows to achieve
the dissection at lower power output, as compared to the MR method.
These studies have revealed that the inflammatory response and the
healing time for wounds are significantly less after RW exposure com-
pared to MR method
E-PS-21-010
Carcinogenesis after a nuclear power plant accident in Fukushima
Y. Kimula*
*Namie Clinic, Fukushima, Japan
Background & objectives: An earthquake in Japan occurred in
March 2011 was causing melting down of nuclear power plant in
Fukushima. For 6 years there had no people, in 2017 people came back
and lived for 3 years up to 825 populations.
Methods: 20,298 people lived before the earthquake, and 4% of
them were returned. The spatial radiation dose of Namie in
January 2020 is 0.3 micro Sievert, which is one tenth of the radia-
tion dose 10 years ago. Among them the frequency of malignancies
was investigated.
Results: Occurrence of thyroid cancer isn't admitted in 22 children who
returned. The malignant tumours of 22 examples among 825 repatriates
appeared after an earthquake disaster. It is higher frequency compared
with the number of malignant tumours of Japan (P<0.01). The kinds of
cancer are 4 gastric cancers, 4 prostate, 4 colon, 3 lung, 2 oesophagus, 2
liver, a duodenal papilla Vater cancer, a urinary bladder, and a pancreas
cancer.
Conclusion: Even in low dose radiation exposure, carcinogenesis will be
main factor to threaten the elderly person. We need not disaster like
Fukushima. No more Fukushima.
E-PS-21-011
The effect of the naphthalan oil emulsion on skin regeneration by the
example of a rat dermatitis model
M. Kostyaeva*, I. Kastyro, E. Korovyakova
*Peoples' Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University), Russia
Background & objectives: Optimization of the healing of injuries re-
mains an urgent scientific and practical task. The aim was to study the
effect of an emulsion of naphthalan oil on the skin of rats in which a
dermatitis model was previously reproduced.
Methods: A model of dermatitis was reproduced on the skin of the back
of 30sexually female Wistar rats, which were bathed in a bathtub with a
0.0003% Naftalan oil emulsion for 10min.(1 roup,10rats), 15
min.(2group,10rats)&20min.(3group,10rats) for 5days. 8days after the
start of bathing, the rats were sacrificed, and the damaged areas of the
skin were stained with H&E and the intensity of inflammation.
Results: In 1 group of 5rats, intraepidermal infiltration, hyperaemia &
leukocyte infiltrates in the dermis were observed, in 2 rats-acantholysis.
In 2group in 8rats, there were no signs of dermatitis, and in 2 rats there
were manifestations of polymorphic cell infiltrates in the papillary dermis.
In 3 group 6 rats also had intraepidermal infiltration, oedema, hyperaemia
in the dermis, and the remaining rats of this group showed less signs of
dermatitis.
Conclusion: Naftalan oil can reduce the signs of skin inflammation in
rats in a dermatitis model with a 15 minute exposure for 5 days. Naftalan
oil has a sebostatic, anti-inflammatory, antipruritic effect. We have devel-
oped a treatment regimen for dermatitis in a previously recreated model
that showed a good therapeutic effect.
E-PS-21-012
Unexpected adulthood mesenteric cystic lymphangioma
Z. Lajmi*, A. Bdioui, K. Marwa, S. Chaieb, A. Bchir, B. Sriha, M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, F. Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Lymphangiomas are rare benign tumours.
Lymphangiomas in the peritoneal cavity are extremely rare, particularly
in adults, representing less than 1% of all lymphangiomas. We report a
case of mesenteric cystic lymphangioma to show its epidemiologic, clin-
ical, and pathological features.
Methods: A single 37-year-old woman, with no history, presented an
abdominal pain that had lasted for 3 months. Abdominal examination
revealed distension and tenderness during palpation of the central quad-
rant. Abdominal and pelvis scan revealed a giant uterine mass.
Laparotomy was performed.
Results: During the operation, numerous mesenteric cysts were found.
They had a varying size. The cystic walls were generally thin, but some
walls were relatively thick. Microscopic examination revealed that the
cystic walls comprised of smooth muscle were lined with flat endothelial
cells. The stroma showed various sizes of small lymphatic spaces lined by
a flat endothelium and containing small lymphoid cells. The stroma also
contained smooth-muscle bands and scattered lymphoid infiltrates. Few
subendothelial lymphoid follicles were observed. A mesenteric cystic
lymphangioma was finally retained. The main differential diagnosis is
benign multicystic mesothelioma. The uterine mass was a leiomyoma.
Conclusion: Lymphangioma of the mesentery is rare. Preoperative diag-
nosis is often difficult due to the frequent silent clinical course. the defin-
itive diagnosis is confirmed by histopathology after a complete surgical
resection.
E-PS-21-013
Memory game: the use of a playful approach for learning pathology
J. Carneiro Melo*, H. Suellen de Oliveira Silveira, L. Amauri Alexandre,
V. Maria Maia Amorim de Morais, D. Nunes Oliveira, R. Lopes Gama
*University of Fortaleza, Brazil
Background & objectives: Medical Education is moving towards a more
innovative path in order to facilitate learning. The use of games is character-
ized as a playful practice increasingly used. The aim is evaluating the appli-
cability of memory games in the teaching-learning process of Pathology.
Methods: A memory game was created using both radiographic and
pathologic images of glomerulopathies and chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease. The game was applied through PowerPoint after two weeks
of practical classes on these subjects. The students of the sixth semester
were divided into groups and after the game, they answered an opinion
survey on the Google Forms platform.
Results: Of the 50 students who participated, most 36 (72%) were be-
tween 18 and 22 years old and 34 (68%) were female and 16 (32%), male.
49 (98%) students considered that the memory game helped to memorize
the content given in class and considers the use of playful approaches a
good option to review the content. Finally, 47 (94%) students would like
the memory game to be applied again
Conclusion: In conclusion, playful activities stimulate and facilitate the
students' learning about the pathology slides and content, since it makes
the learning environment more interactive and dynamic.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-21-014
3D digital copies of macroscopic pieces: an innovative methodology
in the pathology teaching
J. Carneiro Melo*, S. Capelo Barroso Garcia, G. Guerra Moita, V. Maria
Maia Amorim de Morais, D. Nunes Oliveira, M. Luiz Balancin
*University of Fortaleza, Brazil
Background & objectives: The use of macroscopic pieces in the
teaching of pathology is essential for learning and accurate diag-
nosis. The integration of 3D copies as a study tool is an innova-
tive approach that should benefit the assessed learning process.
Methods: A total of 3 models of anatomical structures were generated
using the Qlone app on a cell phone. The models were a heart with
cardiomegaly, a pregnant uterus and a liver with steatosis. After being
shown to third semester medicine students, they answered an opinion
survey on the Google Forms platform.
Results: Of the 51 students who participated, 50 (98%) students
confirmed that the use of the images helped in the learning pro-
cess and 50 (98%) that the images were useful for the study at
home. The quality of the images was good to 50 (98%) of them
and 42 (82,4%) said that they were able to have clinical reasoning
and complete diagnosis through them. It is possible to consider
the decrease in positive responses to this last question, the fact
that these students are starting the pathology course.
Conclusion: The scores demonstrated a better understanding of study
content and the possibility of implementing a new approach in pathology
teaching.
E-PS-21-015
Commonest cancers in Karachi, Pakistan: second report (2016-2019)
from the largest public sector pathology-based cancer registry of
Karachi
M.A. Qureshi*, S. Syed, M.A. Qureshi, A. Qureshi, S. Sharafat
*Dow University of Health Sciences, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Nationally representative cancer data have
never been published from Pakistan since independence (1947). It is
therefore highly relevant to report high quality regional data. This report
details 2016-2019 cancer data representing all districts of Karachi,
Pakistan.
Methods: A Pathology-based-cancer-registry was established at the larg-
est government-run diagnostic and reference-centre of Karachi (Ref no.
IRB-459/DUHS/-14) in 2014. First report detailing 2010-2015 cancer
data from the registry was published in 2016. This is the second report
from the registry reporting a total of 9350 cancers diagnosed during 2016-
2019. Our data are high-quality regional data representing all districts of
Karachi, Pakistan.
Results: During 2016-2019, a total of 9,350 cancers (including 392
non-melanoma-skin-cancers) were diagnosed. Of these, 3447
(36.8%) were in males while 5,903 (63.1%) were in females.
Incidence rates for all cancers (excluding NMSC) were 37.01-per-
100,000 for males and 73.2-per-100,000 for females. In males, can-
cer of lip-and-oral-cavity was the most common (36.03%,
ASR13.3), followed by oesophagus (6.7%, ASR2.5) and colorectum
(6.6%, ASR2.4). In females, breast cancer was most frequent(56%,
ASR41.1), followed by cancers of lip-and-oral-cavity (9.1%,
ASR6.6) and oesophagus (4.7%, ASR3.4). Alarmingly, incidence
of tumours associated with tobacco usage is very high in Karachi,
demanding for urgent measures by relevant authorities to cease the
use of tobacco in the city.
Conclusion: We report high quality regional cancer data representing all
districts of Karachi, Pakistan. Being the largest public sector stake holder
in cancer diagnostics, our data strengthen regional, national, and interna-
tional cancer statistics from Pakistan.
E-PS-21-016
Congo red negative amyloid-like deposits: diagnostic challenge and
logical approach
F. Rosa*, A.R. Barreira, R. Theias Manso, M. Rito
*Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil, Portugal
Background & objectives: Amyloid is an extracellular fibrillar deposit
with β-pleated sheet conformation with a typical H&E and Congo red
appearance. We present a series of Congo red negative amyloid-like
deposits (CRNALD), highlighting its diagnostic challenge and need of
awareness for the entity.
Methods: Three cases of rare CRNALD are described, drawing attention to
the needof clinical correlationand/orfurther testingtoreach acorrect diagnosis.
The literature was reviewed, emphasizing in the logical approach to the
differential diagnosis and importance of correctly assessing these deposits
due to the specific clinical and therapeutic implications.
Results: Patient #1 presented with skin, pharynx, and oral cavity
CRNALD. It was later recognised as with an history of lipoid proteinosis.
Patient #2 presented with renal CRNALD that immunofluorescence and
electron microscopy identified as a light-chain deposition disease in the
context of multiple myeloma. Patient #3 presented with respiratory tract
and skin CRNALD, later confirmed PAS-positive, of probable IgM na-
ture in context of a lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.
Conclusion: CRNALD must be identified and separated from amyloid.
Its rare occurrence limits the awareness of the entity. Congo red stain has
limitations in sensitivity and specificity further increasing the diagnostic
difficulties. Complementing traditional histological findings with clinical
history and use of other methods, such as electron microscopy or immu-
nofluorescence, is essential to avoid delays in diagnosis and treatment.
Proper specimen collection and preservation for these latter techniques
should be guaranteed.
E-PS-21-017
Well differentiated papillary mesothelioma: an unusual entity to
must keep in mind with literature review
B. Tristán Martín*, L. López Brasal, G. Sosa Rotundo, I. Alemany
Benitez
*Hospital Universitario Fundacion Alcorcon, Spain
Background & objectives: Well Differentiated Papillary Mesothelioma
(WDPM) is a rare neoplasm of mesothelial origin which occurs in women
of reproductive age, and occasionally in adult, predominantly in the ab-
dominal cavity. The clinical course is indolent, and the diagnosis is
incidental.
Methods: We present three cases of WDPM in our centre: Two men and
one woman, all middle-aged, with an excresent pelvic peritoneal lesion
found during surgery for other causes. None have suffered exposure to
asbestos or have other at-risk personal history, and the lesions had not
been observed in previous imaging studies.
Results: A histological study reveals surface papillary structures with
fibrovascular axes coated by a monolayer epithelium of cuboidal cells,
without cytological atypia or mitosis. No stromal or adjacent organ inva-
sion was identified. The epithelial component tested positive for
Calretinin, WT1 and CK 5-6 and negative for MOC 31. The cell prolif-
eration rate (Ki-67) was 5 – 10 %. More specific WDPM markers such as
BAP1 and L1CAM have recently been described, which are negative in
Malignant Mesothelioma (MM). Mutations in the TRAF7 and CDC42
genes, which are not found in MM, have also been identified, confirming
their specific molecular origin.
Conclusion: The differential diagnoses include MM, carcinomas of
gynaecological or peritoneal origin and reactive mesothelial hyper-
plasia. WDPM tend to have a favourable clinical course but some
cases can recur and have malignant potential by the presence of
microinvasion.
E-PS-22-001
Alveolar soft part sarcoma: a misleading benign neoplasm
R. Almeida*, M.B. Pimentão, A. Lai, H. Moreira, C. Faria, V. Sousa,
T. Simões Silva, M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Alveolar soft tissue sarcoma (ASPS) is a rare
malignant neoplasm, more common in children and young adults, pre-
dominantly in females. Typically appears on the head, neck and limbs.
Clinically, it seems an indolent intramuscular lesion.
Methods: A 14-year-old female, with a tumefaction in her left forearm,
accompanied by pain and impotence. Ultrasound revealed a 24mm
hypoechogenic nodular lesion, suggestive of a vascular malformation in
ultrasound doppler. After clinical discussion, vigilance was decided.
Two-years later, imaging control revealed lesion growth, reaching
35mm. Surgical excision was performed.
Results: Through gross examination, a 35mm well circumscribed nodu-
lar lesion was observed, whitish, lobulated and of elastic consistency.
Microscopically, it was of expansive growth, with nested and
pseudoalveolar pattern. Cells were polygonal, with abundant eosinophilic
cytoplasm, and mildly pleomorphic nucleus. PAS-D technique revealed
the presence of intracytoplasmic crystals. Immunohistochemistry was
negative for vimentin, S100 protein, AE1/AE3, α-actin, desmin, neuro-
endocrine markers and HMB-45; positivity for MyoD1 and TFE3.
ASPL-TFE3 fusion gene was identified.
Conclusion: ASPS is an aggressive malignancy, with 50% of patients
presenting metastasis at the time of diagnosis. It has unknown histogen-
esis, possibly with striated muscle origin. Radiologic features may be
misleading, frequently suggesting a vascular malformation, leading to
diagnosis delay, and even prevent a potentially curative intervention.
Doctors should be aware of this entity, particularly in young females,
since early core biopsy may be lifesaving.
E-PS-22-002
Plexiform fibrohistiocytic tumour: reporting a challenging diagnosis
R. Almeida*, J. Fraga, J. Gama, J. Madeira, F. Ramalhosa, V. Almeida,
M.J. Julião, M.A. Cipriano
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Plexiform fibrohistiocytic tumour (PFHT) is
a rare mesenchymal neoplasia typically affecting children and young
adults. It is a subcutaneous lesion, mostly in limbs and trunk. The histo-
logic features may be doubtful, and differential diagnosis is particularly
difficult with inflammatory processes.
Methods: Report of case of a 6-year-old female child with no relevant
medical history, presenting with a single infiltrative cutaneous lesion
located in the left arm, with 1.5cm, rounded and reddish.
The diagnosis was rendered in a biopsy sample.
Results: Microscopic examination showed an infiltrative lesion at the inter-
face of deep dermis to subcutaneous tissue. It was composed by bundles of
monotonous spindle cells, and nodular aggregates of histiocytic cells, with
rare multinucleated giant cells. There was a background of diffuse or nodular
lymphplasmocytic infiltrate. Immunohistochemistry showed α-actin expres-
sion in the fusiform component and CD68 in histiocytic aggregates, with
negativity for: S100, EMA, desmin, CD34, MITF and NSE.
Patient underwent surgical excision.
Conclusion: PFHT is a neoplasia of intermediate malignancy, rarely
metastasizing, locally aggressive with highly infiltrative borders.
Morphology may be variable, and three distinct growth patterns are con-
sidered, depending on the predominant cell, fibrohistiocytic, fibroblastic
and mixed.
Since cellular atypia is usually absent, and mitosis are scarce, the diagno-
sis can be quite challenging.
Complete surgical excision is crucial, since local recurrence is common,
occuring in around 40% of the cases.
E-PS-22-003
The histopathological landscape in placenta accreta spectrum – a
case report series
R.A. Balan*, I.D. Caruntu, S. Giusca, T.A. Balan, A. Grigoraș,
L. Lozneanu, R. Avădanei, C. Amălinei
*U.M.F. "Grigore T. Popa", Romania
Background & objectives: Placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) includes
clinicomorphological conditions, often requiring emergency hysterecto-
my. Usually, the histopathology parallels the etiopathogeny and risk fac-
tors of this condition. Our short case series present the morphological
aspects of PAS, correlated with pathophysiological and clinical
background.
Methods: We present five cases with different degrees of PAS, diag-
nosed between 2009-2019, at the “Elena Doamna” Obstetrics and
Gynaecology University Hospital of Iasi. The postpartum hysterectomy
specimens have been histologically assessed by routine, trichrome, and
CD146 immunohistochemical techniques. Maternal age, gestational age,
degree of adherence/invasion, implantation site intermediate trophoblast,
villous trophoblast, decidua, basal plate myometrial fibres have been
evaluated.
Results: Three cases presented direct adherence of chorionic villi to the
myometrium (placenta accreta), one case presented implantation site in-
termediate trophoblast (ISIT) between myometrium and villous tissue
(placenta accreta), and one case presented the penetration of placental
villi through the uterine wall (placenta percreta), all cases with partial
(one case) and complete (four cases) absence of the decidua basalis.
Two cases of placenta accreta presented myometrial fibres in the basal
plate. The characteristic excessive ISIT invasion as well as maternal vas-
cular changes were highlighted through immunostaining with CD146.
The most unexpected case was of the patient of 17 years, in which the
degree of myometrial invasion was the most advanced.
Conclusion: Immunohistochemistry represents a useful tool for avoiding
diagnosis pitfalls in placenta accreta. The presented cases support the
pathogenesis involved in PAS disorders, the extension of the study being
able to shed new light on other possible theories of the disease.
E-PS-22-004
The extreme case of lethal multiple pterygium syndrome
A. Baysa*, G. Turowski
*Oslo University Hospital, Norway
Background & objectives: Multiple pterygium syndrome is an uncom-
mon disorder encompassing skin webbing, cystic hygroma, and joint
contractures. We present the case of lethal multiple pterygium syndrome
with extreme morphological changes, clinically manifested as intrauterine
foetal death at 25th gestational week.
Methods: Conventional foetal autopsy, placenta histomorphology, post-
mortem foetal radiography, array-based comparative genome hybridiza-
tion as well as whole-exome sequencing of foetus and parents (Agilent
SureSelect Human All Exon) followed by bioinformatical gene filtration
analysis were employed.
Results: Postmortal foetal radiography was unremarkable. We found a
male foetus with a dorsal multilocular cyst contacting 300 ml of serous
liquid, muscular atrophy and pronounced skin webbing around neck and
all peripheral joints with very limited passive flexion and extension. The
face was deformed with open and luxated mandibula and open eyes.
There was no sign of lip cleft. The internal examination demonstrated
partial diaphragm agenesis with intrathoracic herniation of spleen and
E-PS-22 Paediatric and Perinatal Pathology
Virchows Arch
colon, cardiac dislocation, and pulmonary hypoplasia. Foetal histology
revealed calcified thrombus in renal vessels. The placenta was
macrosomic with the histopathological findings of foetal vascular
malperfusion. Surprisingly, no mutations usually associated with the con-
dition were detected.
Conclusion: This case of multiple pterygium syndrome is featured by the
prominent neck and joint webbing, muscular atrophy, cystic hygroma as
well as some secondary changes. The normal cervical vertebra and male
sex exclude Turner, Noonan, and Klippel-Feil syndromes. Whole-exome
sequencing was unexpectedly negative for the known associated muta-
tions. The condition is usually linked to gene mutations in embryonic
acetylcholine receptors, actin-binding receptor, and skeletal muscle cal-
cium release channel.
E-PS-22-005
Nasal glial heterotopia: a case report
N. Abdessayed, A. Bchir*, A. Baccouche, D. Chiba, Z. Nfikha,
M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, F. Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: The nasal glial heterotopia is a rare and
benign disease. Nose and nasopharynx are the most common sites in-
volved. Histopathological examination with immunochemistry is the di-
agnosis key.
The aim of the study is to discuss clinicopathological features of this
disease.
Methods: A one year-old female child was presented with a 2 cm, rapidly
growing, nasal, painless mass. There is no familiar or personal history. An
excision of the mass was practiced.
Results: We received three, white, solid fragments measuring between 1
and 2,5 cm.
The histological examination revealed mature astrocytes with fibrillary
glial processes and connective tissue. There are no neural cells. The
immunoreactivity for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) confirmed
the diagnosis.
Conclusion: The rarity of nasal glial heterotopy makes clinical diagnosis
very difficult. It occurs commonly in female under 2 year-old.
Histological examination with immunohistochemistry ensures correct di-
agnosis. The mean differential diagnosis is encephalocele. Biopsy or fine
needle aspiration is contraindicated because of the increased risk of men-
ingitis or perhaps the removal of functional brain material from an
encephalocele. The treatment of choice is complete surgical excision.
The recurrence is rare.
E-PS-22-006
The role of placental examination in reducing the incidence of intra-
uterine and neonatal deaths: a retrospective analysis
M. Boros*, E.M. Popescu, O. Pop, A. Pascalau, A. Judea, A.A. Barbis
Vesa
*Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
University of Oradea, Romania
Background & objectives: Post-mortem examination of the foetus
along with microscopic evaluation of the placenta is performed in
order to elucidate the causes of death. Our objective was to analyse
how many of the perinatal deaths find their morphological changes
in the placenta.
Methods: The post-mortem examination of 39 consecutive perinatal
deaths that occurred during December 2018 to June 2019 performed in
our Maternity Unit, plus the histopathological analysis of the correspond-
ing placentas were re-analysed. We compared the proportion of cases in
which the diagnosis was established following the autopsy results with
the proportion of cases elucidated after the additional examination of the
placenta.
Results: From the 39 autopsies, we excluded 17 cases that had no pla-
centa available. 10 (45.45%) of them were intrauterine deaths and 12
(54.54%) were neonatal deaths. After the autopsy, the causes of death
could be determined in 10 of 22 cases (45.45%); placentas showed mod-
ifications that could explain foetal death in 19 out of 22 cases (86.36%).
Most common changes were: infections (63.63%), placental abruption
(40.9%) and placental abnormalities (59.09%).
Conclusion: Our study highlights the importance of further histopatho-
logical examination of the placenta in all cases of perinatal death.
E-PS-22-008
Oncocytic adrenocortical tumours in paediatric age: what score sys-
tem for malignancy?
G. Broggi*, G.M. Vecchio, R. Garro, B. Morante, A. Di Cataldo,
L. Puzzo, L. Salvatorelli, G. Magro
*Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Advanced
Technologies, G.F. Ingrassia, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria
"Policlinico Vittorio Emanuele", Anatomic Pathology, School of
Medicine, University of Catania, Italy
Background & objectives: The aim is to report the pathological features
of two rare cases of oncocytic adrenocortical tumours (ACTs) classified
as “malignant adrenocortical carcinomas” in paediatric age and to estab-
lish the correlation between pathological features and clinical behaviour
Methods: We herein report on two rare cases of oncocytic ACTs, respec-
tively in a 7-year-old boy and in a 4-month-old girl. The Lin–Weiss–
Bisceglia scoring system, used for the adult counterpart tumours, was
applied: if an oncocytic tumour shows at least one or more major criteri-
ons, it is classified as “malignant”.
Results: A 7-year-old boy and a 6-months-old girl presented a mass,
respectively, weighed g 80 and g 65, and measuring cm 6x5x3.5 and
cm 5x4x2.5. Both tumours were composed almost entirely of cells
exhibiting oncocytic morphology. In the first case a unique atypical mi-
tosis, >5 mitoses per 50 high-power fields, as well as a focal sinusoidal
invasion of tumour capsule were identified. In the second case a high
mitotic index, rare, atypical mitoses, foci of necrosis and sinusoidal inva-
sion were seen. Both tumours were classified as “oncocytic adrenocorti-
cal carcinomas”. The patients are well after a follow-up period of 69 and
21 months, respectively.
Conclusion: The rarity of paediatric oncocytic ACTs makes difficult
the identification of pathological criteria useful for prognostic pur-
poses. We report on two cases of oncocytic adrenocortical carcino-
mas without evidence of adverse events after a follow-up period of 69
and 21 months, respectively. Although we admit that follow-up is
relatively short, our results raise the question of the reliability of
the Lin-Weiss-Bisceglia score system in predicting clinical behaviour
in paediatric patients.
E-PS-22-009
A rare cause of precocious puberty in male children
A. Coulomb*, R. Ramirez, F. Campoy, S. Boudjemaa, M. Gerard,
M. Houang, P. Clermidi, G. Audry, E. Blondiaux
*Hôpital Armand Trousseau, France
Background & objectives: Male precocious puberty (MPP) is rare, may
be central related to brain/spinal cord anomalies (tumours, radiation, in-
jury, hydrocephalus), congenital adrenal hyperplasia, hypothyroidism.
Peripheral MPP may result from adrenal and testicular tumours,
McCune-Albright and Peutz Jegerhs syndromes, testosterone exposure,
genetic disorders.
Methods: Two 7 and 9 year-old boys presented isolated precocious pu-
berty characterized by growth acceleration and secondary sex character-
istics. Ultrasounds showed left 0.8 cm testicular nodule of the upper pole
in one case and a central right 0,5cm testicular nodule in the second case.
Hormonal testing showed increased testosterone levels. Partial orchiecto-
my under ultrasound removing 1/3 of testicular volume was performed.
Results: Grossly, specimens weighted 1g each and consisted in 1cm
testicular parenchyma containing respectively 0,5 and 0.6 cm tan-brown,
unencapsulated, completely resected nodules. They were composed of
thin vascularized septa containing polyhedral eosinophilic Leydig cells
with excentred regular nuclei containing a small central nucleoli.
Seminiferous tubes with active spermatogenesis were entrapped within
the nodules.
Tumour cells expressed calretinin, inhibin, MelanA. We concluded to
benign sex cord tumours corresponding to prepubertal Leydig cell tu-
mours. No LH receptor activating mutation was identified on genetic
testing.
Conclusion: Leydig cell tumours are rare in male children and usually
benign. Despite their very small size, they locally induce spermatogenesis
and peripheral precocious puberty.
E-PS-22-010
Metachronous occurrence of neuroblastic tumour and pancreatic
exocrine adenocarcinoma
A. Coulomb*, S. Boudjemaa, M. Tabone, S. Asmandar, T. Denize,
H. Ducou-Le-Pointe, S. Irtan
*Hôpital Armand Trousseau, France
Background & objectives: Paediatric pancreatic carcinomas are exceed-
ingly rare. Syndromic association of neuroblastomas with other embryo-
nal tumours is already known, but association of neuroblastomas with
pancreatic carcinomas has not yet been reported.
Methods: This 17 year-old girl presented at the age of 2, stage 4 thoraco-
abdominal neuroblastic tumour. She received chemotherapy and MIBG
targeted radiotherapy. At the age of 14, she underwent debulking surgery
for compressive exudative enteropathy. Pathological examination
showed incompletely resected intermixed ganglioneuroblastoma with
lymph node metastasis. She underwent complementary surgery
consisting in partial pancreatectomy.
Results: Tumorectomy measuring 11x10x4.5cm and weighting 177g had
2 components: multinodular myxoid and necrotic. Interestingly, myxoid
component corresponding to ganglioneuroblastoma was admixed with
sheets of cohesive epithelial atypical cells exhibiting glandular differen-
tiation with comedo-necrosis and perineural invasions. Residual pancre-
atic ducts and Langerhans islets were entrapped. Neoplastic cells
expressed strongly pankeratins, focally CK7 and weakly P53.
Neuroendocrine markers, BCL10, PHOX2B, WT1, ALK and betacatenin
were negative. MMR protein expression was retained. In summary, this
tumour exhibited features of pancreatic exocrine adenocarcinoma adja-
cent to ganglioneuroblastoma. KRAS activating mutation was further
identified on FFPE tumoral tissue. The patient has progressive liver me-
tastasis, under genticitabin and MEK inhibitors, waiting for KRAS
targeted therapy.
Conclusion: This is the first report of pancreatic exocrine adenocarcino-
ma associated with neuroblastic tumour suggesting a second cancer relat-
ed to MIBG targeted radiotherapy.
E-PS-22-016
Renal mesenchymal tumours of childhood: a 40 year experience in a
tertiary hospital
E. Garcia Fernandez*, A. Pelaez-Garcia, P. González-Peramato
*Hospital Universitario La Paz, Spain
Background & objectives: The majority of renal tumours in children are
Wilms tumours. All other paediatric tumours are less than 15% and are
considered rare malignancies of childhood. These include Clear Cell
Sarcoma (CCSK), rhabdoid tumour (RT) and congenital mesoblastic
nephroma (CMN).
Methods: Approximately 1000 nephrectomies were performed in chil-
dren (0-18 years old) between 1980-2020. We reviewed the histological
diagnoses in our database. 18% of the cases were tumoral. The majority
of them were nephroblastomas, 6 cases carcinomas and 20 cases mesen-
chymal tumours (35% sarcomas, 50% CMN, and 15% RT).
Results: We reviewed the histology, immunohistochemistry, and
molecular findings in the 20 cases. Eleven were in boys and 9 in
girls, ages between 8 months and 18 years. Most of the cases were
CMN (10 cases), 3 rhabdoid tumours were diagnosed in small pa-
tients (8 months-2 years) and 7 cases were sarcomas (CCSK and
synovial sarcoma). In the sarcoma group, the age gap was between 2
and12 years. The CCSK had all been treated with chemotherapy
before surgery and had low tumoral necrosis. Synovial sarcoma
had monophasic pattern and molecular confirmation (X;18
traslocation). All the cases were graded according to the SIOP
protocol.
Conclusion: According to our review, renal mesenchymal tumours were
13% of the tumoral cases. CMN being the most common, and CCSK
second. The clinical presentation, and evolution followed what is de-
scribed in the literature. The most difficult diagnosis was in the sarcoma
group, were ancillary molecular studies were performed.
E-PS-22-017
Uncommon kidney tumour association in children – case report
S. Giusca*, P. Plamadeala, C. Terinte, D. Mihaila, M. Plamadeala,
M.F. Trandafirescu, E. Cojocaru
*U.M.F.” Grigore T. Popa” Iași, Romania
Background & objectives: Coexistence of nephroblastoma and papil-
lary renal cell carcinoma is an extremely rare paediatric renal malignancy
with only few cases described in the literature. Clinico-pathological fea-
tures and prognosis related to this association are uncertain, and no stan-
dard treatment is available.
Methods: We present a case of a 6-year old girl admitted in 2019 for a
kidney mass at the Children's Emergency Hospital "St. Mary" Iasi,
Romania. A surgical intervention was performed. The excised specimen
was specifically processed through paraffin embedding technique for
standard histological and immunohistochemical exams.
Results: The microscopic assessment revealed two different tumour as-
pects: a three-phase proliferation represented by small, mitotic active,
undifferentiated cells associated with epithelial and stromal components,
and a papillary proliferation with connective-vascular axes lined by single
layers of large, eosinophilic cells, with hyperchromatic nuclei.
Immunohistochemistry revealed caldesmon positive in stromal compo-
nent, CD56 focally positive in blastemal cells, WT1 positive in blastemal
cells and negative in papillary component, EMA positive in papillary
component.
Conclusion: The histopathological aspects correlated to the immunohis-
tochemical profile led to the diagnosis of nephroblastoma associated with
papillary renal cell carcinoma, type 1. The key element of this case con-
sists in the rarity of this diagnostic entity, in children. Therefore, each
reported case can contribute to a better understanding of the pathogenesis
and a more accurate clinico-pathological characterization.
E-PS-22-018
A case of inguinal nephrogenic rests in an 11-month-old boy
J. Kobos*, D. Mlynarski, B. Dobrowolska-Glazar, D. Grazyna
*Medical University od Lodz, Poland
Background & objectives: Ectopic nephrogenic rests(ENRs) are very
rare lesions that may be located in several different sites including
the inguinal canal. They are mostly found incidentally and should
be differentiated with extrarenal Wilms tumour which is also a very
rare entity.
Virchows Arch
Methods: This study reports a case of an ENR located in the inguinal
canal in 11-month-old male patient. The clinical diagnosis was right
cryptorchidism and the boy was admitted at the hospital for the surgical
removal of the inguinal mass.
Results: During the surgery a tissue mass was excised and the histopath-
ological diagnosis confirmed the ENR.
Conclusion: Nephrogenic rests should be properly diagnose even in very
unusual sites.
E-PS-22-019
Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation – presentation of 11
cases
J. Kobos*, D. Mlynarski
*Medical University od Lodz, Poland
Background & objectives: The purpose of this study was to present
cases of CCAM in terms of pathohistological features, gender and site
distribution as well as to compare the results with Stocker’s classification.
Methods: A retrospective review was performed on eleven cases of
CCAM obtained in four years period (2015-2019) in University
Children’s Hospital in Cracow, Poland.
Results: The cases for this study were 7 boys and 4 girls (64% vs 36%),
patients age at operation ranged from 4 days to 10 months. 6 cases in-
volved the left lung (55%) whereas the right lung was involved in 5 cases
(45%). Histopathological examination showed congenital cystic
adenomatoid malformation type I in 7 cases (64%), type II in 3 cases
(27%) and type III in 1 case (9%). No congenital cystic adenomatoid
malformation type 0 and IV was diagnosed.
Conclusion: Data obtained from this study fell into Stocker’s classifica-
tion proving its usefulness.
E-PS-22-021
Parvovirus B19 as a foetal pathogen: correlation with apoptosis and
inflammation mechanisms
M. Lambropoulou*, S. Tologkos, V. Papadatou, T. Deftereou,
C. Alexiadi, M. Simopoulou, S. Farsaraki, X. Anthoulaki,
V. Balomenos, P. Dimitrova, G. Malliou, O. Pagonopoulou
*Histology-Embryology Lab., Medical Department, Democritus
University of Thrace, Greece
Background & objectives: This specific research paper aimed to corre-
late the presence of B19 virus with inflammation and apoptosis levels in
placentas as well as with spontaneous abortions.
Methods: We used 152 placental samples from spontaneous abortions
and 42 samples from women who choose to terminate their pregnancy as
controls. We performed immunohistochemistry to evaluate IL-6, IL-1a,
TNF-a, M30, TUNEL, B19 and NF-κΒ expression and also H&E stain-
ing to look for characteristic morphological changes in the tissue due to
viral presence. The statistical analysis was performed using SPSS.
Results: Higher expression of all inflammation and apoptosis markers
was found in the study group with statistical significance (p<0,001).
Then, higher expression of IL-6, IL-1a, M30, TUNEL and NF-κΒ was
correlated with higher age of the mother while higher expression levels of
IL-6, TNF-a και NF-κΒ was correlated with higher trimester of the preg-
nancy (p<0,001). Moreover, B19 presence was correlated with higher
levels of all apoptosis and inflammation markers with statistical signifi-
cance (p<0,001). Last but not least, when multivariate logistic regression
was performed the presence of B19 remained an independent risk factor
for high expression of all markers (p<0,001).
Conclusion: This research seems to consolidate a relationship of cause
and effect between B19 presence and higher inflammation and apoptosis
levels, which have been known to be able to cause spontaneous abortions.
However, more studies are needed in order to be able to confirm these
results.
E-PS-22-022
Investigation of the involvement of inflammation and apoptosis in
foetal pathogenesis due to EBV infection
M. Lambropoulou*, V. Papadatou, S. Tologkos, T. Deftereou,
G. Malliou, T. Alexiadis, K. Georgiadi, X. Anthoulaki, S. Farsaraki,
T. Hadjineophytou, M. Simopoulou, O. Pagonopoulou
*Histology-Embryology Lab., Medical Department, Democritus
University of Thrace, Greece
Background & objectives: This research paper aimed to evaluate the
expression of apoptotic, and inflammatory markers in relation to EBV
presence in spontaneous abortions in Thrace population.
Methods: We used 152 placental samples from spontaneous abortions
and 42 from normal pregnancies as controls. We studied the expression
levels of TNF-a, IL-6, IL-1a NF-κB, M30 and TUNEL and EBV pres-
ence via immunohistochemistry. The biomarkers' expression was evalu-
ated using a semi-quantitative system while viral presence was evaluated
with a binary system and then statistical analysis was performed using
SPSS.
Results: Higher expression of all the biomarkers was found in the
study group (p<0,001), as well as all positive EBV cases. We also
found that higher age of the mother correlated with higher expres-
sion of IL-6, IL-1a, TUNEL, M30 and NF-kB with statistical sig-
nificance, while higher pregnancy stage was correlated also with
higher expression levels of NF-kB (p=0,011), TNF-a (p=0,016)
and IL-6 (p=0,003). Moreover, viral presence was found in correla-
tion with higher expression of all markers (p<0,001). Moreover,
multiple logistic regression showed that EBV remained an indepen-
dent risk factor for high expression of all markers.
Conclusion: In conclusion, this research seems to establish a caus-
ative relationship between the presence of EBV virus and higher
levels of apoptosis and inflammation. Moreover, we know from
the literature that higher levels of these processes have been corre-
lated with spontaneous abortions. However, more research is needed
to establish these results.
E-PS-22-023
Audit of clinical indications for the histopathological assessment of
placentas in a single tertiary referral centre
S.H. Lee*, J. Gregory, A. Murphy
*Ninewells Hospital, NHS Tayside, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: There is a considerable delay of reporting
placenta specimens which calls for an urgent review of current practice.
The aim is to assess which indications are associated with normal mor-
phology and to evaluate areas to focus on for workload savings.
Methods: Data on clinical indications (D code) and morphology infor-
mation (M code) for all placentas received between 31/8/17 and 2/5/18
were collected and examined. Likelihood of each indication to result in a
normal or abnormal outcome was determined using odds ratios.
Results: 86 placentas (7.34%) out of a total of 1172 placentas received
were reported as normal. Prematurity was the most frequently cited indi-
cation for submission in histologically normal placentas (39.5% of all
normal placentas). The majority of preterm placentas reported as normal
were from >32 weeks gestation. <32 weeks gestation was twice more
likely to be associated with abnormal report than >32 weeks gestation.
On further analysis of preterm cases, an indication of admission to the
Neonatal Unit (NNU) was 16.87 and an indication of maternal diabetes
was 6.77 times more likely to result in a diagnosis of a normal placenta
compared to a histological abnormality.
Conclusion: These data taken together would suggest that exami-
nation of the following subgroups to gather more evidence could
result in additional workload savings: indication cited as (i) either
admission to NNU or maternal diabetes and (ii) gestation <32
weeks.
E-PS-22-025
Congenital disorder of glycosylation type IIL of a child 7 months old
O. Mishnev*, A. Talalaev, L. Leonova, Y. Semina, A. Kislyakov,
N. Zhurkova
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University (RNRMU),
Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: CDG2L is a rare multisystem genetic disor-
der with autosomal recessive inheritance. The disease is clinically mani-
fested by gastrointestinal, liver, hematologic abnormalities, impaired psy-
chomotor development. The goal is to show the importance of genetic
expertise for successful final diagnosis of CDG2L
Methods: The research oversaw a premature child, who died at the age of
7 months. Intravital molecular-genetic examination has revealed a muta-
tion in the COG 6 gene (606977), which describes patients with congen-
ital disorders of glycosylation type IIL (OMIM 614576). The autopsy
material research has used basic histological methods with Masson’s
trichrome stain and immunohistochemically reactions (CK7, CK19 and
CD 31).
Results: A premature boy was from the fifth pregnancy, the third prema-
ture surgical birth at 33 weeks of gestation. Since birth the child is in a
hard condition. He repeatedly had a surgical intervention for ulcerative-
necrotic enterocolitis, perforation of the small intestine and development
of adhesive disease. The clinical symptoms of the disease: toxicity, jaun-
dice, liver failure, coagulopathy, anaemia, and metabolic encephalopathy.
Death was caused by addition of a bacterial infection.
Conclusion: The autopsy examination has revealed characteristic changes
for CDG2: microcephaly with internal hydrocephalus; common
haemorrhages in the lungs, stomach and intestines; necrosis in the spleen;
hepatic degeneration and fibrosis, proliferation of bile ductus, cholestasis;
cortical dysplasia of the kidneys. Diagnosis of congenital disorders of glyco-
sylation (CDG2L) is based on typical clinical and morphological picture of
the disease. Molecular-genetic examination has revealed a mutation in the
gene COG6; it was crucial to the successful final diagnosis of the CDG2L.
E-PS-22-026
Clinical and morphological diagnosis of secondary haematophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis associated with Epstein-Barr viral infection of a
child 14 years old
O. Mishnev*, A. Talalaev, L. Leonova, Y. Semina, A. Kislyakov
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University (RNRMU),
Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: Secondary postinfectious haematophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a rare clinical syndrome, caused most often
by viral infection. HLH is characterized by excessive immune activation of
cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, organ infiltration by activated macrophages;
manifested by cytopenia, hyperferritinemia, hepatosplenomegaly, SIRS,
sepsis, multiorgan failure.
Methods: Clinical, laboratory, morphological diagnosis of HLH was per-
formed of a child 14 years old, who had an EBV-infection and died as a
result of multiorgan failure. EBV intravital diagnosis is based on PCR tests.
The autopsy material research has used basic histological methods with
Masson’s trichrome, PAS-reaction, Perl's method, immunohistochemically
reactions (CD 68, EBV), detection of EBV encoded RNA (EBER).
Results: A 14 year old girl has experienced jaundice in two weeks after
suffering from infectious mononucleosis. She has hepatosplenomegaly,
lymphadenopathy, ascites, hydrothorax, cholecystitis, haemorrhagic rash
on body and limbs, common haemorrhages in the stomach, small and
large intestine, haemolytic anaemia. Lately generalized bacterial and fun-
gal infections were developed. Death occurred in one and half months
after the onset of the disease due to bacterial infection, severe pneumonia,
SIRS, multiorgan failure.
Conclusion: The autopsy research has revealed characteristic HLH asso-
ciated with EBV-infection: lymphohistiocytosis infiltration with
hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow, lymph nodes, liver, spleen, pan-
creas and kidneys with development of active interstitial hepatitis, pan-
creatitis, nephritis, severe bacterial-fungal pneumonia. Clinical and mor-
phological diagnosis of secondary HLH after infectious mononucleosis is
based on a typical clinical, laboratory (thrombocytopenia, anaemia,
hyperferritinemia) and morphological picture of the disease using modern
research methods: PCR tests, immunohistochemically methods and de-
tection of EBV encoded RNA (EBER).
E-PS-22-027
Post-mortem MRI and CT at autopsy of new-born with
intrapericardial teratoma: a case report
O. Mishnev*, U. Tumanova, V. Lyapin, V. Bychenko, A. Shchegolev
*Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University (RNRMU),
Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: We present the case of new-born boy who
was born by caesarean section due to foetal heart failure at the gestational
age of 32 weeks to evaluate the effectiveness of post-mortem MRI and
CT for the new-born with intrapericardial teratoma.
Methods: CT and 3TMRI of the deceased new-born body were performed
13 hours after death before the autopsy. The analysis of tomograms and 3D-
reconstructions were performed. Virtopsy data were compared with the
results of conventional autopsy. With Virtopsy of the body, signs of non-
immune hydrops fetalis as anasarca, bilateral hydrothorax, ascites,
hydropericardium, as well as lung hypoplasia were detected.
Results: An inhomogeneous soft tissue tumour of irregular round shape,
which is closely adjacent to the wall of the right heart atrium and pulmo-
nary trunk, volume of 29 cm³, was detected in the pericardial cavity.
Multiple cysts, 1-6 mm in diameter, filled with liquid contents, were
determined in the tumour structure. The pronounced vascularization of
the tumour tissue due to vessels emanating from the heart wall in the area
was detected.
Conclusion: Microscopic examination revealed a picture of mature tera-
toma with elements of dense and loose fibrous connective, adipose and
muscle tissue; cartilage, salivary glands, neuroglia, as well as cysts lined
with intestinal, bronchial, single-layer cubic and multi-row epithelium.
Post-mortem CT and MRI allowed to identify the growth source and
structural features of the tumour, and severity of non-immune hydrops
fetalis and lung hypoplasia. Virtopsy increases the efficiency of patho-
logical study, which demonstrates the feasibility of post-mortem CT and
MRI dead new-borns.
E-PS-22-028
Presentation of a primarily genetically diagnosed Fuhrmann syndrome
H. Göbel, J. Brandt, F. Körber, A.M. Müller*
*University Clinic of Cologne, Medical Center of Paediatric Pathology,
Germany
Background & objectives: Fuhrmann syndrome ( fibular a-/hypoplasia,
femoral bowing, poly-, syn-/oligodactyly) and Al-Awadi/Raas-Rothschild
(AARR) syndrome (phocomelia syndrome with limb/pelvic hypoplasia/
aplasia, renal anomalies, cleft palate, hypertelorism and micro-retrognatia)
are both caused by mutation of WNT7A- gene at locus 3p25.1.
Methods: A Fetus of gestational week 15 of consanguine parents ( moth-
er: G5/P1) was examined macroscopically, radiologically and histologi-
cally. Of interest: after a live born child that died 2 days post-partum in the
2 following pregnancies Fuhrman syndrome was genetically diagnosed
and pregnancies terminated without autopsy. The foetus examinated now
was again prenatally genetically diagnosis as Fuhrmann syndrome.
Results: Phokomelia of the lower limbs was the dominant feature, further-
more signs were micro-retrognatia and hypertelorism. Radiology confirmed
missing ulnae, oligo- and syndactyly, highly hypoplastic pelvis and aplasia
resp. shortening of the lower limbs. Internal autopsy revealed as additional
Virchows Arch
malformations a split uvula, left sided diaphragmal defect, consecutive herni-
ation of the left liver lobe, the spleen and stomach into the thorax, a two-part
pancreas and a lung sequester on the left side. Histology, though slightly
hampered by autolysis, displayed organs’ development according to gesta-
tional age. Likewise, brain was developed according to gestational age.
Conclusion: Our case presents malformations typical for AARR syn-
drome. As mutation of WNT7A- gene at locus 3p25.1 is responsible both
for AARR and Fuhrmann syndrome. Hence, the exact diagnosis might be
missed when based only on genetics and autopsy is omitted.
E-PS-22-029
Holoprosencephaly: case report
F. Mundim*, M. Engelman, R. Grande, M. Paula, C. Santos, I. Ferreira,
V. Junior, J.P. Paula, P. Mundim
*UNIVAS, UNIFENAS, Brazil
Background & objectives: Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a structural
anomaly that compromises the development of the anterior brain. Such
changes cause several neurological impacts and dysmorphisms on the
brain and face, which can be incompatible with life.
Methods: L.R.G., 21 years old, female. The patient underwent routine
ultrasonography (US) in Brazil, in which a single, longitudinal and ce-
phalic foetus, placenta with anterior insertion, heterogeneous texture with
multiple cystic areas, the largest with 3.9 cm of diameter absence of
cardiofoetal beats (BFC), foetal movements and muscle tone was noted.
Results: The macroscopic anatomopathological report indicates a foetus
weighing 140g, measuring 13cm in head-buttock length, 2.5cm in foot
length and undetermined sex. The material also presents cyanosis in ex-
tremities and head, elongation of the skullcap, oedema, detachment of the
skin, proboscis, cyclopia and low implantation of the ears. At the opening,
organs with signs of diffuse maceration were noted. The microscopic
report indicates a gestational age of approximately 4 to 5 lunar months,
organs in universal autolysis - a fact that prevented the classification of
the HPE type of the conceptus - and evident signs of holoprosencephaly.
Conclusion: Therefore, new research must be carried out to find out if
there are changes in the epidemiological data and to further develop ways
of preventing the disease.
E-PS-22-031
Long segment jejuno-ileal duplication with extensive gastric
heterotopia: a rare case report
H. Seneldir, G. Kir, S. Ozkanli*, T. Soylemez, K. Ozel
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Duplications of the gastrointestinal tract are
rare congenital anomalies that generally occur in the small intestine.
Enteric duplications produce complications such as intestinal obstruction
or haemorrhage.
Methods: A 20 months old girl patient presented with anaemia and recurrent
episodes of bleeding from rectum since 4 months old. Clinical examination,
endoscopy and colonoscopy revealed no abnormality. Suspecting a Meckel's
diverticulum, a dynamic abdominal scintigraphy was performed. The ultra-
sonographic and MRI feature suggestive of duplication cyst.
Results: Accompanied by intraoperative consultation with frozen sec-
tions, exploratory laparotomy was performed and a 75 cm long tubular
jejuno-ileal duplication cyst communicating with the ileal lumen was
excised. Macroscopic examination of the surgical specimen showed dou-
ble lumen with the septum containing the muscularis propria. On micro-
scopic examination duplication segment was revealed entirely with het-
erotrophic gastric mucosa. There was 1 cm diameter of ulcer found in the
normal portion of the small intestine.
Conclusion: The diagnosis of an enteric duplication is difficult to make
clinically because the wide spectrum of symptoms and unspecific signs
frequently simulate other diseases.
E-PS-22-032
An oxymoron: a desmoplastic small round cell tumour with spindle
cells and without desmoplastic stroma
E. Piombino*, G. Magro, G.M. Vecchio, A. Zin, R. Alaggio, V. Di
Benedetto, L. Salvatorelli
*Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Advanced
Technologies, G.F. Ingrassia, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria
"Policlinico Vittorio Emanuele", Anatomic Pathology, School of
Medicine, University of Catania, Italy
Background & objectives: We report a rare variant of intra-abdominal
desmoplastic small round cell tumour (DSRCT) with unusual spindle cell
morphology and without desmoplastic stromal reaction. Diagnostic clues
and differential diagnosis are emphasized.
Methods: A 12-year-old boy with autoimmune lymphoproliferative syn-
drome (ALPS) suffered of vague abdominal pain. TC examination re-
vealed an abdominal mass, as well as multiple nodules. Patient underwent
laparotomy showing multiple omental nodules. Partial omentectomy with
numerous nodules, ranging from 4 to 40 mm, was performed for histo-
logical examination.
Results: Histologically, nodules were composed of relatively bland-
looking spindle cells arranged in a fascicular growth pattern with focal
whorling. Mitoses were rare (2mitoses/10HPF) and focal areas of necro-
sis was seen. Desmoplastic stromal reaction was absent. Tumour was
reminiscent of an infantile fibrosarsoma. Immunohostochemically neo-
plastic cells were positive for vimentin, desmin, WT-1 (nuclear staining-
C-terminus) and EMA. The clinical presentation and the polyphenotypic
immunoprofile suggested the diagnosis of DSRCT with unusual mor-
phology, which was supported by the detection of EWSR1-WT1 fusion
gene (PCR). The patient was treated according to the protocol EpSSG-
2005 with reduction of the masses, but he died after ten months for
disease progression.
Conclusion: The present case widens the morphological spectrum of
DSRCT. Only rare cases of DSRCT with spindle cell morphology and
without desmoplastic stromal reaction are reported in the literature so far.
Molecular studies are mandatory in confirming the diagnosis.
E-PS-22-033
Bardet Biedl syndrome in a foetus
F. Auld, A. Mahendru, J. Eason, C. Platt*
*Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Bardet Biedl Syndrome is reported at post-
mortem of a 23 week foetus. In older children phenotypic traits include
renal anomalies, obesity, dysmorphic extremities, retinitis pigmentosa,
hypogonadism and intellectual disabilities. In our case we observed
post-axial polydactyly and renal cysts.
Methods: A 23 week foetus was referred for post mortem following a
finding of enlarged cystic kidneys and subsequent management.
Post-mortem examination was performed according to Royal College
guidelines including histology of the kidneys.
Genetic analysis included microarray of amniotic fluid and exome
sequence.
Results: Examination showed a 591 g male baby of foot length 38
mm. There was post-axial polydactyly of both feet and left hand,
talipes of the left foot, enlarged cystic kidneys (Right kidney 13.9 g
and Left kidney 13.4 g) and a small urinary bladder. No
encephalocoele was seen.
Histology of kidneys revealed incomplete nephrogenic zones. Glomeruli
and tubules were seen. There were cystic spaces lined by epithelial cells;
larger centrally than peripherally. Some cystic glomeruli were seen.
Features of a ductal plate malformation were not seen in the liver.
Microarray was reported as arr(1-22)x2,(X,Y)x1
Exome sequence revealed compound heterozygous mutations in MKKS
consistent with Bardet Biedl syndrome type 6.
Conclusion: Bardet Biedl Syndrome is an autosomal recessive ciliopathy
with broad clinical manifestations. More than 20 genes have been impli-
cated to date, relating to the development and function of cilia. There is
heterogeneity but severe renal disease has been described with dysfunc-
tion of BBS6 more so than in other genes.
In a foetus with polydactyly and renal cysts Bardet Biedl Syndrome
should be considered in the differential diagnosis.
E-PS-22-034
Hydrocephalus in foetuses revealing a spectrum of Walker-Warburg
syndrome (type II lissencephaly): a foetal neuropathological study of
5 cases
M.T. Yacoubi*, C. Fallet-Bianco
*University Hospital of Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Walker Warburg Syndrome (WWS) is a
lethal, genetically heterogeneous autosomal recessive disorder character-
ized by a spectrum of lesions including, a type II lissencephaly
(Cobblestone lissencephaly), retinal malformation, cerebellar malforma-
tion, and congenital muscular dystrophy.
Methods: We report the autopsy findings of 5 cases, two of them are a
siblings with hydrocephalus on ultrasound between 20 and 22 gestational
weeks in 3 cases and at 37 Weeks for two others. Hydrocephalus was
associated with occipital encephalocele in one case and 4th ventricle cyst
suggesting a Dandy-Walker malformation in the other case.
Results: Pathology findings in all cases showed lissencephaly, hydro-
cephalus, diffuse and severe cerebral and cerebellar cortical dysplasia
with glial and neuronal displacement into the leptomeninges, consistent
with diagnosis of Walker Warburg syndrome.
Conclusion: Foetal hydrocephalus was the major manifestation leading
to the prenatal detection of this syndrome. Our cases are highlighting the
necessity to look for associated anomalies in foetuses or new-born infants
with hydrocephalus in order to establish a better prenatal diagnosis and an
effective family genetic counselling
E-PS-23-001
Analysis of turnaround time of surgical pathology specimens at a
tertiary care hospital, Lahore
F. Latif, S. Shahid, F. Ali*, S. Mahmood, F. Rehman
*King Edward Medical University, Lahore, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Turnaround time is an important parameter
of customer satisfaction. The laboratories located in our tertiary care
hospitals face many challenges including equipment breakdown, power
failure, unavailability of reagents and absence of adequate information
system which hinder the routine processing and require analysis.
Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted at the
Department of Pathology, King Edward Medical University, Lahore from
September,2016 to January,2017 in which turnaround time of 241 surgical
pathology specimens were included. Turnaround time was analysed by using
a pre designed time log sheet covering all the steps during slide preparation.
Results: Major causes of delay in turnaround time included re-cuts, intra
and extra departmental consultation and re-gross of the surgical speci-
mens after initial grossing. Maximum number of delays were observed in
benign neoplasms (87) and inflammatory lesions; mainly because of
intradepartmental consultations to determine the exact category of the
lesion.
Conclusion: Using turnaround time to benchmark specimen workflow in
anatomical pathology is an important quality tool that helps in identifying
potential areas resulting in delayed reporting of laboratory tests.
E-PS-23-002
Cystic fibrosis of the lung: diagnostic challenges in a resource limited
setting - a case report
M. Mbezi*, E. Moshi
*MUHAS, Tanzania
Background & objectives: Cystic Fibrosis is an autosomal recessive
disorder due to mutation in cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator, char-
acterized by viscid mucous secretions in all exocrine glands.
Objective: Reporting a suspected case of Cystic Fibrosis and its diagnos-
tic challenges in resource limited setting.
Methods: A retrospective review of the patient following clinical and
radiological diagnosis. The case was sent for histological evaluation at
Muhimbili National Hospital-Tanzania. Histopathological diagnosis was
reached after gross examination and evaluation of hematoxylin and eosin
stained sections which revealed characteristics pointing out to the differ-
ential diagnosis of cystic Fibrosis
Results: A 21 years old African male with history of several admissions at
Muhimbili National Hospital complaining of Productive Cough for more
than 17 years, Difficult in breathing and fever. He had no history of
Tuberculosis infection. He never smoked cigarette or drank alcohol. No
familial history of similar disease. Radiological review revealed
fibrocavitatory disease. He underwent left Lobectomy and specimen was
sent for histopathology. Grossly, the tissue appeared grey in colour, mea-
sured 10*6.5*7.5cm. On its cut section-multiple cavities lined by thick grey
bands. Microscopically, Distorted lung architecture replaced by Glandular
hyperplasia and cysts which are filled by mucin and separated by thick
fibrous septa, Bronchoectasia and inflammation were noted.
Conclusion: Literature demonstrates low incidence of Cystic Fibrosis in
African population which leads to physician not to consider it as possible
diagnosis. However, absence of genetic screening programs for Cystic
Fibrosis in low resource settings which may result in missed or under
diagnosis. Other diagnostic tests like sweat chloride test has also been a
challenge. Limited facility and expertise coupled to delayed reporting
limits treatment options which could be possible elsewhere.
E-PS-23-003
Implementation of the Paris system for reporting urinary cytology on
voided urine samples in a resource-limited setting
S. Rai*
*College of Medical Sciences, Nepal
Background & objectives: Urine cytology has wide variability in reporting
terminologies and rates resulting in apathy among clinicians towards it. This
study was undertaken torestore the significance of urine cytology by applying
recently introduced 'Paris System' and to evaluate its diagnostic yield.
Methods: A descriptive study was conducted over one and a half year
(January 2016 to June 2017). A total of 100 single voided urine speci-
mens from 100 patients were processed using cytocentrifuge.
Conventional smears were studied and reported according to 'The Paris
System.' Results were correlated with histopathology where available
considering it as gold standard to evaluate the diagnostic yield.
Results: The cytologic diagnoses were Negative for High-Grade Urothelial
Carcinoma in 60%, Unsatisfactory/Non-diagnostic in 29%, High-Grade
Urothelial Carcinoma in 6%, Atypical Urothelial Cells in 3%, and
Suspicious for High-Grade Urothelial Carcinoma in 2% cases. Follow up
histopathology results were retrieved from 25 cases. A sensitivity of
71.42%, specificity of 88.88%, positive predictive value of 83.33%, nega-
tive predictive value of 80% and accuracy of 81.25% was calculated.
Conclusion: The main objective of this study was diagnostic categoriza-
tion of urine cytology. Statistical analysis shows that urine cytology is a
useful test for diagnosing urothelial carcinoma. Adoption of universal
reporting system, understanding of diagnostic categories and their clinical
implications, accepting the limitations of cytology, minimizing sampling
and interpretation errors, and judicious clinical use are all necessary to
E-PS-23 Pathology in Favour of Developing Countries
Virchows Arch
extract maximum benefit of urinary cytology. 'The Paris System' as such
provides a common groundwork for effective use of urine cytology.
E-PS-24-001
Integrated radio-pathological diagnosis of pulmonary MALT lym-
phomas, a series of 14 cases
I. Amat Villegas*, M. Bronte, Á. Panizo Santos, H. Gómez, C. Cerezo
Aguirre, L.M. Nova, Y. Rodriguez
*Hospital de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Pulmonary MALT lymphomas
(pMALTomas) are rare and there are limited studies on imaging features.
Given the current trend in clinical practice to increase diagnostic efficacy
through joint radio-pathological assessment, we evaluate possible corre-
lations between CT manifestations and histological characteristics.
Methods: We reviewed clinicoradiological information from the medical
records of 14 patients aged from 50 to 84 years with pathologic diagnosis
of pMALTomas between 2001 and 2019. Lesion characteristics, distribution
and laterality within the lungs were analysed on CT. Treatment and follow up
were also assessed.
Results: Lesions manifested as consolidation (n5), nodule (n5) or mass
(n4). 5 cases were bilateral; 8 out of 9 unilateral cases were identified as
solitary lesions. Most cases had random lung distribution. 7/14 cases
radiologists considered the possibility of neoplasm.
Histologic findings were common in all cases, a dense heterogeneous
lymphoid population that distorted the architecture of the bronchi and
pulmonary parenchyma. Thirteen received chemotherapy and there have
been no recurrences.
Conclusion: It is difficult to establish a correlation between the radiolog-
ical pattern and the pathological diagnosis of pMALTomas. Although it
can present various patterns on CT, it is an entity that must be taken into
account when making a differential diagnosis of a pulmonary process.
Histologically, it shares features with other MALT lymphomas arising in
different sites.
Pulmonary MALT lymphomas are low grade tumours with a low recur-
rence rate after surgical and chemotherapeutic treatment.
E-PS-24-002
The expression of p40 in lung carcinomas
D. Anestakis*, E. Chatzifotiou, M. Givannakis, C. Charalampidis,
M. Charalampidou, C. Tsompanidou
*Department of Autopsy Histopathology, Laboratory of Forensic
Medicine & Toxicology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
Background & objectives: Specific subclassification of lung carcinomas
is necessary for the therapeutic management. P40 is very promising mark-
er in cancer research. The purpose of this study was to determine the
significance of P40 expression in various types of lung carcinomas.
Methods: We examined 54 cases, including 28 adenocarcinomas, 14
squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and 12 small cell carcinomas. P40
positive staining (+) was based on nuclear staining of the tumour cells.
Attention was given to the approximate percentage of tumour cells
stained and the intensity of staining (weak, moderate, strong).
Results: Extensive P40(+) was noted in 13/54 (24,07%) of the lung carcino-
mas: 3/28 (10,71%) adenocarcinomas and 10/14 (71,42%) SCC but was
negative in 12/12 small cell carcinomas. The mean percentage of SCC
P40(+) was 73,6%, 7 with strong, 2 with moderate and 1 with weak intensity.
The 3 cases of adenocarcinomas that reacted with P40 stained 1 moderately
and 2 weakly with the mean percentage of the positive cells 27,4%.
Conclusion: P40, that is a useful immunohistochemical marker of sub-
classification of lung cancer, could provide guidance for personalized
therapy.
E-PS-24-004
Pulmonary aspergilloma due to aspergillus flavus associated with
oxalosis
O. Belkacem*, F. Limaiem, H. Blibech, B. Louzir, S. Bouraoui
*Department of Pathology, University Hospital Mongi Slim La Marsa,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Oxalosis (calcium oxalate deposition) is as-
sociated with several conditions, including aspergillosis. Some
Aspergillus species produce oxalic acid, which reacts with tissue calcium
or blood to precipitate calcium oxalate.
Methods: A 47-year-old man with no particular past medical history,
presented with a one-month history of haemoptysis. Chest computed
tomography showed a cavity in the right upper lobe measuring 46x73
mm, with surrounding infiltration, and an intracavitary nodular lesion.
Bronchoscopy revealed an inflammatory mucosa in the right upper lobe
bronchus with white lesions that were biopsied.
Results: Histological examination of the biopsy specimen highlighted the
birefringent calcium oxalate crystals by polarization associated with
branching septate hyphae and severe erosions in the bronchial epithelium.
The culture of bronchoalveolar lavage specimens yielded Aspergillus flavus.
These findings have confirmed the diagnosis of pulmonary aspergilloma due
to Aspergillus flavus associated with oxalosis. After an initial treatment with
Voriconazole, the patient was planned for right upper lobectomy.
Conclusion: The presence of associated oxalosis in a given Aspergillus
infection should be stated in the pathology report not only for its potential
clinical significance but also for its diagnostic value.
E-PS-24-005
Primary pulmonary synovial sarcoma: a very rare presentation
A. Bhandari Thapa*
*Bir Hospital, Nepal
Background & objectives: Synovial sarcoma of lung is a very rare
aggressive tumour accounting for 0.5% of all primary lung malignancy.
Only a few cases of synovial sarcoma involving the thoracic region have
been reported in the literature.
Methods: we report a case of 32-year old male, who presented with chest
pain, dry cough and shortness of breath for one month. The computer
tomography scan showed well defined mass measuring 6x6x4.8 cm in
right infra hilar region along with pleural effusion. The thoracotomic
biopsy was performed.
Results: Histologically, tumour cells were round to spindle shaped arranged
in sheets and fascicles having moderate amount of cytoplasm with indistinct
cell border. The nuclei are round to oval having irregular nuclear membrane
with hyperchromatism and inconspicuous nucleoli. Myxoid changes along
with pericytoma like branching blood vessels were also noted. Necrosis and
mitotic figures(6/10HPF) were also seen. Immunohistochemically, neoplastic
cells were positive for EMA, CD99 and TLE-1 and negative for CK, CD 34
and STAT 6. So, the final pathological diagnosis was primary pulmonary
biphasic synovial sarcoma.
Conclusion: In conclusion, we demonstrate a rare case of primary pul-
monary synovial sarcoma. It is a rare tumour so histopathology is required
to establish the diagnosis and immunohistochemistry is preferable for
detection of the tumour subtype of this rare tumour entity.
Abbreviation: CD99- Cluster of differentiation, CK- Cytokeratin, EMA-
Epithelial Membrane Antigen, STAT 6- Signal transducer and activator
of transcription 6,TLE 1- Transduction like enhancer of split 1.
E-PS-24-006
Diagnostic concordance in pulmonary tumours
H. Brunnström*
*Department of Pathology, Lund University and Laboratory Medicine
Region Skåne, Sweden
E-PS-24 Pulmonary Pathology
Background & objectives: International diagnostic guidelines recom-
mend immunohistochemical staining with p40 and TTF-1 (the more spe-
cific clone 8G7G3/1, not the commonly used more sensitive SPT24) in
non-small cell carcinoma without clear morphological features.
Neuroendocrine markers are recommended only in cases with neuroen-
docrine morphology.
Methods: In total, 52 unselective real-world bronchial and transthoracic
lung biopsies from suspected pulmonary tumours were included in the
study. For all cases, sections stained with hematoxylin-eosin, p40 and
TTF-1 (clone SPT24) were scanned at x40.
Results: Almost 30 pathology consultants that sign out at least one
lung cancer case per year have received the digitalized cases in
February 2020 and will individually diagnose them as primarily
lung cancer (specified as adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcino-
ma, small cell carcinoma, non-small cell carcinoma not otherwise
specified etc.), metastasis to the lung, suspicion of malignant tu-
mour, atypia of unclear significance, benign/non-neoplastic lesion.
Also, for each case, the pathologist shall state if further diagnostic
immunohistochemical markers are needed. The diagnostic concor-
dance, any misclassifications relating to TTF-1 clone SPT24, and
recognition of neuroendocrine morphology will be evaluated. Data
will be presented at the ECP.
Conclusion: The study may provide insight into how current diagnostic
guidelines work in practice, if there may be need for revision of guide-
lines, and/or need for e.g. education or quality assurance in diagnostics of
pulmonary tumours.
E-PS-24-007
FISH and protein expression of ALK rearrangement in cell-block
may be different – case report
L. Carvalho*, M.R. Silva, A. Alarcão, A.F. Ladeirinha, T. Ferreira,
A. Rodrigues, C. Vilasboas, V. Sousa
*Institute of Anatomical and Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine
of the University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, CIMAGO - Research
Center for Environment, Genetics and Oncobiology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Portugal, University Hospital
Anatomical Pathology Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Mutations in EGFR, HER2 and BRAF, trans-
locations of ALK, ROS1 and RET became determinant targets. FISH keeps
being the leading test to identify ALK gene rearrangement. We report a case
of ALK-rearrangement where tumoral cells were ALK IHC negative.
Methods: A 58-year-old woman presented a RUL adenocarcinoma di-
agnosed after a FNA-cell block CK7/VIM/TTF1 positive, classified as
stage IIIb. Mutational status was asked to the Molecular Pathology Lab.
Results: Close association between a positive FISH test and modestly elevat-
ed ALK protein in tumour cells allows ALK IHC to be used, either to select
cases for confirmatory FISH testing and as the primary therapy-determining
test. EGFR and ROS1 were wild type and ALK IHC analysis (clone 5A4;
1:25; Leica) was negative. FISH was prepared manually as recommended by
ZytoVision, probe used was ZytoLight ® SPEC ALK Dual Colour Break
Apart Probe. This case presented single 3´signals in 76% tumour cells. This
case was ALK rearranged FISH positive and negative for ALK IHC.
Conclusion: This case highlighted the belief that both IHC and FISH
analyses should be carried out together to avoid ALK misdiagnosis,
allowing either knowledge and technology attention in cell-block.
Being aware of these particular cases, avoids missing patients in IHC-
based screening.
E-PS-24-008
Comparison of different HNF4α clones for invasive mucinous ade-
nocarcinoma of the lung
Y. Hsia, H. Huang, W. Chang*
*MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taiwan
Background & objectives: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α (HNF4α) is a
marker for invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (IMA). However, studies
using different HNF4α clones showed variable results. We aim to inves-
tigate the expression of HNF4α in IMA and non-mucinous adenocarci-
noma (NMA) using different HNF4α clones.
Methods: Two commercially available HNF4α antibodies (clones H9
and H1415) were used to examine HNF4α expression in 30 IMA and
40 NMA cases. The intensity and proportion were separately evaluated
by three pathologists, and an average Histoscore (range, 0-300) was cal-
culated. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used to de-
termine the optimal cut-off value, sensitivity and specificity of each clone.
Results: The IMA group showed a significantly higher mean Histoscore
than the NMA group for both H1415 (136.1 vs. 6.3) and H9 (60.3 vs. 2.7)
(p<0.001 for both comparisons). Using ROC curve to determine the
Histoscore cut-off value at 27.65 (clone H1415) and 14.85 (clone H9),
H1415 showed a higher sensitivity (83.3% vs. 70.0%) with similar spec-
ificity (95.0% vs 95.0%) compared to H9.
Conclusion: Our results demonstrates that HNF4α expression is signif-
icantly higher in IMA compared to NMA and is a reliable marker for
distinguishing IMA from NMA. Although both clones show high speci-
ficity for IMA, clone H1415 is more sensitive compared to H9, and the
stronger staining intensity of clone H1415 also makes it more suitable for
usage in clinical practice.
E-PS-24-011
Alveolar adenoma of the lung
T. Demura*, E. Kogan, E. Zarubin
*Sechenov University, Russia
Background & objectives: Alveolar adenoma of the lung is a rare benign
tumour. About 40 cases were reported in English medical literature.
Histogenesis weren’t confirmed. Alveolar adenoma often resembles normal
lung parenchyma. We present a clinical case of alveolar adenoma of the lung.
Methods: A 38 years old female patient was examined with chest x-ray
which showed a small 2 cm in diameter nodule in the lower lobe of the
left lung. This lesion was surgically removed then histological and im-
munohistochemical analyses were provided.
Results: Histological re-examination showed that tumour consisted of
alveolar-like network spaced lined by cuboidal cells with hyperchromic
nuclei. Thin stroma contains spindle-like cells, matrix and lymphocytes.
Immunohistochemistry analysis showed that epithelial cells were diffusely
positive for TTF-1, CD34 was expressed only by endothelial cells of blood
vessels. Stromal cells were positive for vimentin. Ki-67 had very low ex-
pression both in the epithelium and stroma. Alveolar adenoma was diag-
nosed based on these findings. After 19 month in March 2018 on the
computed tomography a new 13 mm tumour was noted near surgical su-
ture. Morphological verification wasn’t made due to patient’s health status.
Conclusion: This patient had alveolar adenoma of the lung but radical
surgical treatment was not performed. Key moment of this case is a
potential relapse of this rare tumour.
E-PS-24-012
New clinical context in lung adenocarcinoma
I. Díaz De Lezcano Manrique De Lara*, L.A. Ramos Navas, I. Betancor
Fernández, E. Salido Ruiz
*University Hospital of Cruces, Spain
Background & objectives: To establish the prevalence of KRAS G12C
mutation in lung adenocarcinoma as well as its possible coexistence or
not with mutations in EGFR, ALK and BRAF.
Also studying a possible morphological correlation with mutations in
KRAS.
Methods: Retrospective study of codons 12 and 13 of KRAS by pyrose-
quencing (Pyromark Q24 Advanced) in 301 patients with pulmonary
Virchows Arch
adenocarcinoma and conventional molecular panel (EGFR, ALK, BRAF,
ROS1) diagnosed at University Hospital of the Canary Islands between
November 2017 and January 2020.
Correlation of molecular findings with morphological characteristics in
paraffin sections stained with HE.
Results: KRAS was mutated in 34,88% of cases, being KRAS G12C the
most frequent mutation (15,95%).
Eight KRAS mutated adenocarcinomas (7,76%) coexist with EGFR mu-
tations, and two others (1,94%) coexist with BRAF V600. Therefore, the
coexistence of this alterations is possible (p=0,025). None was associated
to ALK.
There is no statistically significant association between morphology and
mutations in KRAS, even after studied the mucinous phenotype which
seemed to be associated (p=0,57).
Conclusion: KRAS activating mutations are the most frequent drivers in
human cancer, among these mutations, KRAS G12C is the most preva-
lent in lung adenocarcinoma.
The published series that address the prevalence of KRAS G12C in lung
adenocarcinoma are few and controversial, further in our knowledge, ours
is the first studied by pyrosequencing.
Due to development of KRAS inhibitors during last year, it seems nec-
essary to prepare for the new clinical context.
E-PS-24-015
A tricky lesion for the untrained eye: pulmonary hydatid disease
Z. Gahramanli*, H. Özakıncı, S. Yüksel, S. Dizbay Sak
*Ankara University, School of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Turkey
Background & objectives: Hydatid disease, caused by the larvae of
Echinococcus granulosus can mimic lung tumour clinically. Identification
of typical scolex provides the histological diagnosis, but it is not observed in
most cases. In this study, we re-evaluated clinico-pathological features of
this disease.
Methods: Records/slides of 184 pulmonary cases, diagnosed between
2005-2020 were reviewed, and clinico-pathological features (age, gender,
clinical diagnosis, surgical procedure, and microscopic features) were re-
evaluated.
Results: Median age was 46 years (6-89), and female/male ratio was 103/
81. Clinical diagnosis was straightforward in most cases, only 5 cases had
clinical/radiological suspicion of malignancy. Cystectomy was performed
in the majority (89.5%); wedge resections (7%), lobectomies (3%) and
chest wall resections (0.5%) requiring loss of pulmonary parenchyma
were relatively rare. Microscopically, laminated basophilic cuticle, was
the most consistent finding, and germinal layer and/or scolex were visible
in a minority of cases.
Conclusion: Echinococcosis, is a common zoonotic disease in some parts
of the world and diagnosis is usually easy for experienced clinician/pa-
thologist. However, in the present era due to increased travel and immi-
gration, the disease may be seen practically all over the world and can be
tricky for the untrained eye. Variable microscopic features should be kept
in mind, when evaluating an unusual pulmonary mass.
E-PS-24-016
Late metastases from endometrial carcinoma – a potential mimic for
primary lung adenocarcinoma
K. Gardner*, D.F. Roberts
*Queen Elizabeth University Hospital Pathology Department, Glasgow,
United Kingdom
Background & objectives: The lungs are a common site for solid organ
tumour metastases. However, metastases from endometrial carcinoma to
the lung are uncommon. Late metastases, particularly from endometrioid
endometrial adenocarcinoma, therefore, have the potential to mimic
primary lung adenocarcinoma. We describe four cases of late metastases
from endometrioid endometrial carcinoma to the lung.
Methods: Following an index case, cases of late (>5 years) metastatic
endometrioid endometrial adenocarcinoma to lung were identified from
the pathology database. The original hysterectomy slides as well as the
pulmonary metastases slides were reviewed. A unified panel of immuno-
histochemistry was performed on representative uterine and pulmonary
tumour blocks consisting of: Oestrogen receptor (ER), Progesterone re-
ceptor, PAX8, p16, p53 and CDX2.
Results: Four cases of late metastases from endometrioid endome-
trial adenocarcinoma to the lung were identified, of which two were
isolated. The recurrence interval ranged from 7.3 years to 14.5 years
with a mean time to recurrence of 9 years. All cases involved low
grade (grade 1 or 2) endometrioid endometrial primaries. The me-
tastases all had similar morphological appearances to their respec-
tive primary tumours. All primary and metastatic tumours showed
ER positivity.
Conclusion: Whilst rare, metastases from endometrial carcinomas to the
lung should be considered in patients with a relevant history, regardless of
timeframe. If morphological appearances are not typical of lung adeno-
carcinoma, additional history should be sought. ER immunohistochemis-
try can be helpful.
E-PS-24-017
Primary pulmonary enteric adenocarcinoma: a study of six cases
E. Gerakova*, S. Genova
* University Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment Sveti Georgi,
Bulgaria
Background & objectives: Primary Pulmonary Enteric Adenocarcinoma
(PEAC) is an extremely rare type of pulmonary adenocarcinoma divided
into adenocarcinomas with enteric morphology and with enteric differenti-
ation. We present six cases of PEACs with their histological, immunohis-
tochemical and genetic features.
Methods: Clinical examination, routine pathohistological examination
with hematoxylin/eosin staining accompanied by immunohistochemical
examination and genetic testing.
Results: Histologically, out of the six cases reported only 2 were
pure enteric type. The rest of them were colloid with enteric com-
ponent and one was enteric with papillary and mucinous sections.
Immunohistochemical examination showed 5/6 tumours to be
cytokeratin (CK)7 positive. CK20 was positive in 2/6 of the cases
and all were CDX2 negative. Napsin A was diffusely positive in all
of the cases. Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) was positive in
five out of the six cases. EGFR and ALK testing showed all of the
tumours to be negative. A colonoscopy was performed on all of the
patients and proved no tumour formation in the colon.
Conclusion: PEACs are predominantly ones with enteric morphology
and in fewer cases with enteric differentiation. Both of these are suggested
to be a coherent group of tumours defined by the lack of EGFR and ALK
mutations, typical histological and immunohistochemical patterns.
E-PS-24-018
Squamous cell carcinoma developing from solitary bronchial
papilloma
D. Gumurdulu*, E. Kilic Bagir, A. Acikalin, A. Aydogdu
*Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine Pathology Department,
Turkey
Background & objectives: Bronchial papillomas accompany upper re-
spiratory papillomatosis. Tumour development from these lesions is rare
and appears in long-term lesions. We present a case of squamous cell
carcinoma developing on the background of solitary papilloma, which is
human papilloma virus PCR positive.
Methods: A 65-year-old male patient has respiratory distress with effort,
and in the examinations a mass lesion obstructing atelectasis and lumen in
the right upper lobe is detected. The patient is diagnosed non-small cell
lung carcinoma by intraoperative consultation and the right lower lobec-
tomy is performed.
Results: In macroscopic examination of lobectomy material; A lesion
filling the right main bronchus which size 2.9x2 cm and infiltrating
the bronchus in a focal area was observed. The microscopic sections
of the lesion ,tumour cells are eosinophilic cytoplasm with nucleolar
prominence, mitotic activities are frequent. The lesion had a squa-
mous papilloma feature in large areas and the fibrovascular core and
squamoid morules are seen in these areas. In a focal area, squamous
cell carcinoma infiltrating the bronchial wall and cartilage was ob-
served. Immunohistochemically pansitokeratin, p63 and p16 applied
and all were positive. Human papilloma virus positivity was deter-
mined by PCR. Laryngeal papillomas were not observed in the pa-
tient's subsequent controls.
Conclusion: Although bronchial papilomas are benign lesions, these pa-
tients are known in the literature of tumoral development in the long term.
Careful examination is important as these cases can cause diagnostic
problems during intraoperative consultation.
E-PS-24-019
Intra-bronchial mucoepidermoid carcinoma in a 9-years-old girl: a
case report and literature review
S. Hamid*, M. Abdalla
*Omdurman Islamic University, Sudan
Background & objectives: Bronchial tumours are very rare in pae-
diatric age group. Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is a rare tumour of the
lung comprising <1% of all lung tumours. We report a case of
Mucoepidermoid carcinoma in a 9-year-old girl who presented with
chronic cough.
Methods: A nine -year-old girl presented with one year history of chronic
cough diagnosed initially as tuberculosis. Her CT chest showed left lung
collapse, clear right lung with compensatory emphysema. Microscopic of
bronchoscopic biopsy revealed a low-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma.
She underwent total left lung pneumoectomy.
Results: MEC is the commonest salivary gland malignancy in
childhood. Bronchial Mucoepidermoid carcinoma presents primarily
with symptoms bronchial irritation and obstruction. They are clas-
sified as high or low grade mucoepidermoid based on their histo-
logic appearance. Radical surgery is the treatment of choice, pa-
tients with low-grade Mucoepidermoid carcinomas have a generally
good prognosis.
Conclusion: Bronchial tumours are rare in childhood and are often
overlooked owing to its nonspecific presentation Patients with low-
grade Mucoepidermoid carcinoma s generally have a good prognosis
after primary surgical resection. When a child presents with persistent
respiratory symptoms needs further workup to rule out an obstructive
process.
E-PS-24-020
Diffuse idiopathic neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia, tumourlets and
multifocal typical carcinoid tumours of the lung: present of a case
Á. Ilyés*, O. Iurcsuk, B. Nagy, E. Deé, K. Straub, T. Kálmán, A. Burszán
Barabas, A.C. Dobrică
*Emergency County Hospital Miercurea Ciuc, Romania
Background & objectives: Diffuse intrapulmonary neuroendocrine
cell hyperplasia (DIPNECH) is a rare condition, presented as a gen-
eralised proliferation of neuroendocrine cells of the lung, considered
by the WHO a potential preinvasive lesion of typical pulmonary
carcinoid tumours.
Methods: We present a case of a 62 years old, asthmatic female patient,
admitted to the Thoracic Surgery Department with dry cough and dys-
pnoea. On thoracic CT scan a 13x16 mm dominant nodule was described
in the left lower lobe, associated with numerous disseminated nodules in
both pulmonary fields. Multiple tumour nodules from left inferior lobe
were resected by axillary thoracotomy.
Results: The histopathological examination revealed multiple nod-
ules in the lung parenchyma, the largest one with 7 mm diameter,
with organoid architecture, consisting of polygonal, medium sized,
monomorphic neuroendocrine type cells with eosinophilic cyto-
plasm, finely granular nuclear chromatin, some of them with con-
spicuous nucleoli and 1 mitotic figure/2 mm2. Tumour emboli and
intratumoral necrosis was not observed. The background stroma was
hyalinised and highly vascularised. The tumour cells expressed
TTF-1, Chromogranin, Synaptophysin and CD56. The Ki-67 prolif-
eration index was <2%. In the bronchial walls multiple foci of neu-
roendocrine cell hyperplasia was noted.
Conclusion: A final diagnosis of diffuse idiopathic neuroendocrine cell
hyperplasia (DIPNECH) associated with multifocal typical peripheric
carcinoid tumour of the lung was made. In the setting of DIPNECH
multiple carcinoid tumours can develop and according to the new
AJCC staging this should not be regarded as intrapulmonary metastases,
but as separate primaries.
E-PS-24-021
Neuroendocrine tumour of the breast with pulmonary metastasis 30
years after mastectomy
T. Kawasaki*, R. Taguchi, Y. Ichinose, A. Nukui, K. Matsuura,
T. Hasebe, T. Hojo, Y. Nakamura, T. Kondo, K. Hashimoto,
O. Yamaguchi, K. Kaira, H. Kagamu, T. Saeki
*Saitama Medical University, Japan
Background & objectives: We describe an uncommon case with a mam-
mary neuroendocrine tumour (NET) showing metastasis to the lung 30
years after mastectomy with axillary lymph node dissection.
Methods: A 77-year-old postmenopausal Japanese woman diagnosed
with urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder, and a past history of
Stage I right breast cancer at the age of 43, underwent transurethral re-
section of the bladder tumour. During examination and follow-up for this
urothelial tumour, CT revealed a left pulmonary nodule in the upper lobe
that showed a tendency to grow.
Results: The cut surface of the partially resected lung specimen contained
a relatively well-circumscribed, grey-whitish, solid tumour, measuring
17.5x17x11 mm in size. This lesion was histopathologically composed
of solid growth of invasive polygonal cells with finely granular, slightly
eosinophilic cytoplasm and a highly vascular stroma. Their nuclei had
ovoid or irregular shapes, a finely granular chromatin pattern, and small
nucleoli. Twenty-seven mitotic figures were observed per 10 HPFs.
V a s c u l a r i n v o l v e m e n t w a s o c c a s i o n a l l y d e t e c t e d .
Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells were positive for
synaptophysin, mammaglobin and GATA3, and negative for TTF-1.
Cell reactive rates for the oestrogen receptor and the progesterone recep-
tor were 90% and 5%. The HER2 score was estimated to be 1+.
Conclusion: It has recently been demonstrated that neuroendocrine mam-
mary neoplasms follow a more aggressive clinical course, even though
most immuno-express ER and/or PgR with negativity for HER2, than
invasive carcinomas of no special type, with poorer local and distant
recurrence-free survivals as well as overall survival. Intriguingly, the
present breast NET of histological and nuclear grade 3 with a high
MIB-1 index (71.2%) showed rather indolent biological behaviour with-
out adjuvant therapy.
Funding: Grants‐in‐Aid for Scientific Research (No. 16K08654 & No.
16H00668) from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology National Hospital Organization Grant (H29‐
NHO‐01)
Virchows Arch
E-PS-24-022
Value of immunohistochemistry for detection of BRAF V600E
mutation
I. Kern*, G. Vlacic
*University Clinic Golnik, Slovenia
Background & objectives: BRAF-V600E mutation is identified in many
malignancies. Detection is usually performed by PCR or NGS, with lon-
ger turnaround times (TAT) and higher costs than immunohistochemistry
(IHC). Our goal was to compare detection of BRAF-V600E mutation by
PCR and IHC.
Methods: We tested 46 archival cases for BRAF-V600E mutation. We
performed parallel PCR and IHC testing on 5 melanomas (MM), 5 pap-
illary thyroid carcinomas (PTC), 5 colorectal adenocarcinomas (CRC), 12
cases of pulmonary Langerhans cell histocytosis (PLCH), one Erdheim-
Chester disease. Additionally, we performed IHC on 8 BRAF-V600E
mutated lung adenocarcinomas (LADC) and 10 BRAF-V600E wild type
lung adenocarcinomas (PCR).
Results: All 8 cases of PCR-detected BRAF-V600E mutated lung ade-
nocarcinomas showed a positive staining by IHC. The 10 BRAF-V600E
wild type lung adenocarcinomas did not stain. One case of CRC, one
PLCH, 3 MM, and 2 PTC were positive both by PCR and IHC, while
all cases that were negative by PCR were also negative by IHC, which
indicates a 100% concordance rate between the two methods.
Conclusion: Comparison of PCR detected BRAF-V600E mutation with
ICH showed a 100% concordance in the results, which indicates that IHC
can be used with confidence instead of PCR to detect BRAF-V600E
mutation in a variety of malignancies and other disease which can harbour
this mutation, thus shortening TAT and costs.
E-PS-24-024
A significant discordance between PANAMutyper™and targeted
deep sequencing for detecting EGFR mutation in non-small cell lung
cancer
J. Lee*, S.K. Lee, Y.B. Han, H.J. Kwon, H. Kim, J. Chung
*Department of Pathology and Translational Medicine, Seoul National
University Bundang Hospital, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: EGFR mutations are predictive biomarkers
for targeted therapy in lung cancer. This study aimed to screen EGFR
mutations by PNA clamping-assisted fluorescence melting curve analy-
sis, and to evaluate the feasibility of targeted deep sequencing for detect-
ing the mutations.
Methods: We examined EGFR mutations in exons 18, 19, 20, and 21
using PNA clamping-assisted fluorescence melting curve analysis
(PANAMutyper™) for consecutive 2,135 non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) tissues from August 2017 to September 2019. Of these,
targeted deep sequencing was performed in 82 patients.
Results: EGFR mutations were identified in 46.0% of the tumours (933/
2030); 442(47.4%) had mutations at exon 19, 404(43.3%) at exon 21,
156(16.7%) at exon 20 (including 90 cases with T790M), and 38(4.1%)
at exon 18. 11.1% (10/90) of T790M mutations was identified in TKI-
naïve patients. Interestingly, 30.0% (3/10) of the primary T790M existed
alone without L858R or exon 19 deletions. We observed a significant
discordance (24.4%: 20/82) of the EGFR mutation between
PANAMutyper™and targeted deep sequencing. Targeted deep sequenc-
ing revealed eleven nonsynonymous single‐nucleotide variations, eleven
insertion‐deletion variations and two amplifications in EGFR, which were
not detectable by the PANAMutyper™. In two cases, EGFR mutations
were detected only in PANAMutyper™.
Conclusion: Taken together, our study demonstrates that primary EGFR
T790M alone exists and there is a significant discordance between
PANAMutyper™and targeted deep sequencing. The significance of
these discrepancies should be carefully interpreted for the patient's treat-
ment and clinical outcome.
E-PS-24-025
The diagnosis of pleural tumour other than mesothelioma in a wom-
an in the second decade of life - a case report
F. Leiva Cepas*, T. Caro Cuenca, A. Sanz Zorrilla, T. Sánchez
Medianero
*Pathology Unit, Universitary Hospital "Reina Sofia", Cordoba, Spain
Background & objectives: Epithelioid haemangioendothelioma (EH) is
a low-grade vascular tumour in multiple locations, but as a primary neo-
plasm in the pleura it is extremely rare. Pleural EH is a sporadic tumour
whose etiopathogenesis is not well defined.
Methods: We present the case of a patient in the second decade of life
who debuted with a left pleural effusion, bilateral pleural and pulmonary
nodules in the context of a left lower lobar pulmonary mass confirmed by
thoracic CT and body PET. Cultures and PCR for negative mycobacteria.
Results: Under the optical microscope, nests of abnormal endothelial
cells, consisting of epithelioid or histiocytoid cells, were seen. The nuclei
of the cells are eccentric, vacuolated and similar to the cells in the signet
ring. The cytoplasm is eosinophilic, with vacuoles of different sizes in the
cytoplasm of some tumour cells. Immunohistochemistry was positive for
CD31, D2-40 and focally for calretinin, HMB-45 and CEA, being nega-
tive for CD-34, CK7, napsin A, TTF-1, pancytokeratin, common leuko-
cyte antigen, WT-1 and e-cadherin. The proliferation index was less than
10%. Based on the exceptional clinical and radiological and histopatho-
logic findings, it was concluded an HEP.
Conclusion: HEP is an infrequent tumour, derived from vascular endo-
thelial cells with unclear pathogenesis and a variety of clinical manifes-
tations, with similarities to other thoracic diseases and a complex differ-
ential diagnosis. The diagnosis depends mainly on the histopathological
examination and additional immunohistochemistry to confirm that the
tumour originated in the endothelium. The improvement in the knowl-
edge of HEP histopathology is important to increase the rate of early
diagnosis and improve prognosis.
E-PS-24-026
Primary pulmonary high-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma in 31-
year-old pregnant woman
A. Lukac*, T. Pikivaca, I. Maric, S. Smojver-Jezek, L. Batelja Vuletić
*Clinical Department of Pathology and Cytology, University Hospital
Centre Zagreb, Croatia
Background & objectives: Primary pulmonary mucoepidermoid carci-
noma (MEC) is a rare entity (0.1-0.2% of all lung cancers). MECs are
characterized by mucus secreting, squamous and intermediate-type cells,
subclassified as low or high-grade tumours. More than 50% of MECs
affect population under 30 years.
Methods: A 31-year-old woman in 36th week of gestation was admitted
due to haemoptysis. Bronchoscopy revealed bronchial intraluminal mass,
obstructing the orifice of the right lower lobe. Transbronchial needle
aspiration and biopsy were performed. Prior to surgical treatment, caesar-
ean section was carried out with good neonatal outcome. Afterwards,
video-assisted thoracoscopic right lower lobectomy with mediastinal
lymph node dissection was done.
Results: On transbronchial biopsy the diagnosis of MEC was obtained.
Immunohistochemistry showed p40 positivity, TTF-1 negativity and Ki67
up to 15% in hot spots. On surgical specimen the diagnosis of high-grade
MEC was confirmed with single peribronchial lymph node involvement.
Despite recommendation, patient refused adjuvant treatment. During the
follow up period of 7 months there is no evidence of disease progression.
Conclusion: It is important to distinguish MECs from MEC-like pulmo-
nary, usually adenosquamous, cancers. And it is important to distinguish
low-grade MECs from high-grade MECs. Low-grade MECs are usually
considered being cured by optimal surgical treatment, having excellent 5-
year survival rate. In contrast, high-grade counterparts are more aggres-
sive and harbour prognosis similar to other non small cell lung cancers.
E-PS-24-027
PD-L1 expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in non-small cell
lung carcinoma (NSCLC): experience of two lung cancer referral
centres in Dublin
V. Malone*, J. McKim, J. McFadden, J. O'Neill, S. Nicholson, A. Fabre
*St Vincent's University Hospital, Ireland
Background & objectives: Assessment of PDL1 expression in
NSCLC is essential when anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy is considered.
This study aimed to evaluate sample quantity, referral source, spec-
imen site, specimen type, NSCLC subtype, insufficient samples and
rate of positive, low positive and negative PD-L1 expression.
Methods: Information on PD-L1 IHC tests was obtained from the
Laboratory Information System in two university Hospitals lung can-
cer centres., from January 2018 – August 2019. PD-L1 IHC was
performed using the SP263 antibody kit on the Ventana Benchmark
Ultra on cases from 18 different institutions (of which 46% were
referred cases).
Results: 583 tests performed on samples from were identified (male 53%).
Sites known for 92%; lung (66%), lymph node (16%), bone/soft tissue
(7%), pleural fluid (3.5%), others (<3%); Biopsies 72%, resections 10%,
cytology 18%, adenocarcinoma (58%), squamous cell carcinoma (32%),
NOS (9%), others (<1%).
95% adequate samples:
<1%
1-49%
>50%
Overall
52%
16%
32%
Adenocarcinoma
50%
18%
32%
Squamous cell carcinoma
59%
20%
21%
Insufficient samples were 5% of the cohort.
Conclusion: Testing for PD-L1 by IHC in both referral centres has
been successful, benefitting 18 institutions nationwide. The rates of
positive, low positive and negative results in this cohort is in line
with international published data. The results were similar in both
referral centres.
E-PS-24-029
Neuroendocrine marker expression in malignant pleural solitary
fibrous tumours: a case report
F. Pezzuto*, G. Pasello, E. De Carlo, M. Mammana, F. Rea, F. Calabrese
*University of Padova, Italy
Background & objectives: Neuroendocrine(NE) markers have been
exceptionally reported in malignant pleural solitary fibrous tumours
(PSFTs).These markers are often used in cytological samples in
presence of small/medium size cells with high mitotic rate. This
could lead to pitfalls especially if clinical information is lacking/
incomplete
Methods: We describe the case of a middle age woman that was
admitted to our hospital for a paratracheal mass for a 4R lymph-
node enlargement, with a pathologic uptake at 68Ga-DOTATOC.
Transbronchial needle aspiration was performed.
Results: The microscopic examination of the cytological specimen
showed solid nests, weakly positive for cytokeratines, synaptophysin
and high proliferative index (Ki67) thus a metastasis of a NE tumour
was suspected. During multidisciplinary discussion physicians re-
ported a previous large thoracic mass, surgically resected two years
before, diagnosed as malignant PSFT. Based on this information,
STAT6 was additionally performed in cytological sample, revealing
a diffuse and strong expression, thus leading to a more appropriate
diagnosis of PSFT metastasis.
Conclusion: Reporting this unusual case, we would like to point out
the rare occurrence of NE markers in malignant PSFTs in order to
avoid potential diagnostic pitfalls, especially in small biopsy/
cytological samples.
E-PS-24-031
Endobronchial lipoma: an extremely rare benign mesenchymal lung
neoplasm
C. Rivero Colmenarez*, S. Palomo Cousido, D. Luján Rodriguez,
J. Castelao Naval, J. Fernandez Frances
*Guadalajara University Hospital, Spain
Background & objectives: Endothoracic lipomas are categorized into 5
groups: endobronchial, parenchymatous, pleural, mediastinal, and cardi-
ac. Benign neoplasms of the tracheobronchial tree are rare, and lipomas
are one of the most uncommon. Endobronchial lipomas (EL) represent
0.1–0.5% of all lung neoplasms.
Methods: We present the case of a 73-year-old man with a clinical his-
tory of lung adenocarcinoma with a contralateral pedunculated, white,
“polyplike” lesion founded during a follow-up flexible bronchoscopy.
The mass was endoscopically resected and the histology revealed a well
circumscribed mass composed of a collection of mature fat cells without
atypia and an intact overlying squamous epithelium.
Results: EL affect adults in their 5th-6th decade of life with a size range
from 1-5 cm, they are more common in men, obesity and smoking are
considered risk factors although there are no conclusive studies. Patients
could be asymptomatic or present with cough, haemoptysis, recurrent
pneumonia, wheeze, or dyspnoea that may have been present for years.
EL could be also found incidentally on a radiograph or during bronchos-
copy performed for a different indication, as in our case. The radiographic
suggestion of endobronchial lipomas is usually made by CT scan show-
ing an intrabronchial lesion of fat attenuation with no enhancing contrast.
The lesion is characterized by mature adipose tissue without atypia.
Conclusion: Most published cases are located in the first 3 subdivisions
of the tracheobronchial tree. EL is more common on the right side as in
our case. Early surgical excision is essential to avoid permanent pulmo-
nary damage due to obstruction.
E-PS-24-032
Ectopic intra-pulmonary thyroid tissue: a case report
A. Shalaby*, S. Gamal
*Pathology Department, Sultan Qaboos University, Oman
Background & objectives: The presence of ectopic intrapulmonary
thyroid is extremely rare, with few cases reported in the literature.
We report a case of ectopic intrapulmonary thyroid presented as a
pulmonary nodule in a patient with history of thyroidectomy for a
benign condition.
Methods: A 75-years-old woman presented with chronic cough with
dyspnoea and wheezes for last one year. There is a history of
hemithyroidectomy for a benign condition for more than 20 years with
thyroxine replacement. Examination showed a prolonged expiration and
few crackles in posterior chest. Laboratory results show normal inflam-
matory markers with normal thyroid functions.
Results: Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a right rounded lung
nodule. The initial diagnosis was considering carcinoid tumour and a
frozen section was arranged. On surgery, the nodule was found to be
located in the fissure between upper and lower lung lobes and was
enclosed in a thin fibrous capsule. The nodule measured 2.5 X 2.0 X
1.5 cm with a tan brown cut surface. Frozen section showed a capsulated
mass formed of thyroid follicles without evidence or malignancy or
teratomatous elements and was reported as ectopic thyroid tissue. The
subsequent histopathology report confirmed the diagnosis.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Ectopic intrapulmonary thyroid is extremely rare but can be
confused with primary or metastatic pulmonary tumours from other sites.
This case report denotes the importance of considering intrapulmonary
heterotrophic thyroid tissue in the differential diagnoses of a pulmonary
nodule.
E-PS-24-033
CD68 as a marker of pulmonary sarcoidosis in differential diagnosis
K. Sharafutdinova*, M. Tussupbekova, L. Stabayeva, G. Imanbayeva,
O. Kostyleva, R. Nygyzbaeva, Y. Garsiyeva
*Karaganda Medical University, Kazakhstan
Background & objectives: A great number of clinical manifestations of
pulmonary sarcoidosis determines diagnostic difficulties.
Objective: to study the diagnostic significance of the method of
CD68 immunophenotyping of biopsy material in the differential
diagnosis of sarcoidosis with the other disseminated lung diseases
(DLD).
Methods: 153 medical records of patients with X-ray morpholog-
ical indices of disseminated lung affection (44 cases of which
were with sarcoidosis).
Results: The clinical diagnosis in patients with DLD from the disease
onset until the time of adequate therapy appointment ranges from 3-4
weeks to several years. After a histological examination, pulmonary sar-
coidosis was morphologically verified in 42% cases, while in the initial
clinical diagnosis it was detected in 9%. A comparative immunohisto-
chemical study of lung tissue in heterogeneous groups by histological
phenotype was carried out. It was established that the expression of
CD68 in the alveolar lumen was not statistically significant in the studied
groups, whereas in stroma of lung tissue in patients, in groups with lung
sarcoidosis, the expression of CD68 was high 10.5±1.1.
Conclusion: High expression of CD68 in the stroma of the lung tissue
can be used as a diagnostic marker of pulmonary sarcoidosis in
thoracobiopsy materials and to be the differential diagnosis criterion for
morphological verification of clinical diagnosis.
E-PS-24-034
The role of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species in reprogramming
of mesothelioma cell line
S. Sikirić*, M. Cindrić, A. Sepac, F. Seiwerth, M. Milavić, L. Batelja
Vuletić, F. Sedlić, A. Mataić, S. Seiwerth
*University of Zagreb, School of Medicine, Croatia
Background & objectives: We investigated whether human malignant
mesothelioma cell line Mero-14 expresses pluripotency genes (such as
OCT4, NANOG and SOX2) and whether their expression is affected by
reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced by mitochondria.
Methods: Expression of OCT4, NANOG and SOX2, and control
genes found in mesothelial cells, vimentin and cytokeratin 7 was
analysed by DAB immunohistochemistry. ROS generation was
identified using CM-H2DCFDA fluorescence indicator and quan-
tified using the EVOS imaging system. Complex III inhibitor
antimycin A was used to stimulate mitochondrial ROS generation,
while mitoTEMPO was used to scavenge ROS generated by
mitochondria.
Results: Mero-14 cells exhibited NANOG and SOX2 expression and no
expression of OCT4. Complex III inhibitor antimycin A dose-
dependently increased mitochondrial ROS generation. At lower, but not
higher concentrations antimycin A enhanced NANOG expression.
Although SOX2, vimentin and cytokeratin 7 were expressed in Mero-
14 cells the use of antimycin A did not affect their expression levels.
mitoTEMPO abrogated antimycin A-induced increase in NANOG
expression.
Conclusion: Mero-14 cells express pluripotency genes NANOG and SOX2.
ROS generated by mitochondria induce NANOG expression and may trigger
reprogramming of mesothelioma cells toward more malignant phenotypes.
This research is supported by the Croatian Science Foundation.
E-PS-24-035
Lung carcinoma with synchronous gastric metastasis at presentation–
a case report
M. Souto Moura*, C. Pinto, A.L. Cunha, M. Afonso
*Department of Pathology, IPO-Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: Gastrointestinal metastasis from primary
lung cancer are rare (incidence of 0.5-10%-the latter in autopsy evalua-
tions) and their presence indicates advanced stage and poor prognosis.
Small intestine is the most frequent location and the estimated incidence
in the stomach is 0.2-0.5%.
Methods: A 58-year-old woman, heavy smoker, with haemoptysis
underwent a CT-scan. A 75x35mm superior right lung lobe nodule was
detected with chest wall extension and supraclavicular, axillary, medias-
tinal and ipsilateral hilar lymphadenopathies. Due to a gastric PET-scan
hypermetabolism focus she was submitted to an upper endoscopy that
revealed two polypoid lesions in the gastric body. Lung and gastric biop-
sies were performed.
Results: Lung biopsy: high grade solid malignant neoplasm with marked
pleomorphism and numerous mitosis. Immunohistochemistry showed mul-
tifocal positivity for Cam5.2 and focal for CK7; CK20, TTF-1, napsinA,
p63, calretinin, neuroendocrine markers and CDX2 were negative.
Gastric biopsies: normal epithelium with infiltration of the lamina propria
by a malignant neoplasm with similar characteristics.
A poorly differentiated lung carcinoma with synchronous gastric metas-
tasis at presentation was favoured. No molecular alteration was found.
Conclusion: Gastric metastasis from lung cancer are exceptional but pos-
sible events, usually associated with late-stage disease. Therefore, patholo-
gists must be aware of this rare occurrence, even with an unusual
immunoprofile. Their presence should be considered in these patients’
work-up.
E-PS-24-036
YAP1 and RB loss of expression in TTF-1 negative small cell lung
carcinoma (SCLC)
A. Sykaras*, D. Sampaziotis, A. Roidou, N. Stavrinou, S. Pantelakos,
C. Kouvidou
*Evangelismos General Hospital, Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: 25% of SCLC are Thyroid Transcription
Factor-1 (TTF-1) negative and challenging to diagnose if neuroendocrine
markers are absent. Inactivation of retinoblastoma protein (RB) drives
SCLC therefore we assessed RB and its downstream target Yes-
associated protein-1 (YAP1) expression in these tumours.
Methods: Our cohort included from 10 patients (9 men, 1woman
aged 58-78). Tissue samples were obtained from transbronchial
biopsies (6/10), lymph nodes (3/10) and pericardium (1/10).
Diagnosis of SCLC was established based on morphological and
immunophenotypical (routine stains for CK8/18, TTF-1,
chromogranin, synaptophysin, CD56 and Ki-67). Additional, im-
munohistochemistry was performed on formalin-fixed paraffin em-
bedded sections with antibodies against YAP1 and RB.
Results: All the cases were TTF-1 negative. 9/10 were CK8/18 positive
(1 focally) with a dot-like pattern, 5/10 were chromogranin A positive (all
focally), 7/10 were synaptophysin positive (3 focally) and 7/10 were
CD56 positive (1 focally). Proliferation marker Κi-67 was above 90%
in all cases. One case was neuroendocrine marker negative, one showed
only focal positivity for chromogranin and synaptophysin whereas two
cases showed positivity only for CD56. YAP1 expression was abolished
in all cases (0/10) and RB expression was lost in 9/10 cases. The only
specimen with intact RB expression was the neuroendocrine-negative.
Conclusion: YAP1 loss is a robust marker of SCLC, even in TTF-1 negative
and neuroendocrine negative cases. RB expression is also abolished except
from the neuroendocrine negative case. YAP1 and RB immunohistochemis-
try helps to establish diagnosis of SCLC in challenging cases.
E-PS-24-038
A rare and benign tumour of lung which acts as a malignant tumour
S.S. Yurdaor*, F. Zonüzi, E.H. Zeren
*Bursa City Hospital, Turkey
Background & objectives: Sclerosing haemangioma is a rare and gen-
erally benign lung tumour. Yet, difficulties of discriminating the charac-
teristic features of the tumour, either benign or malignant, increases the
clinical importance of this tumour. Therefore, immunohistochemical
staining is significant for a definitive diagnosis.
Methods: We would like to discuss our case of a 66 year-old woman who
presented with complaints of cough, pain in left side of her chest and
weight loss for the last six months.
Results: A surgical operation was performed due to existing of a
3 cm mass in the left hilus area. According to the frozen exam-
ination and tru-cut biopsy results, the mass was seemed as a
benign tumour. However, they had not been sufficient to rule
out malignancy, then the patient was diagnosed with sclerosing
haemangioma accompanied by high Ki-67 rate (%6-7) based on
the staining results. After a successful operation and a postopera-
tive care, the patient was discharged to continue follow-up at
outpatient clinic. On her follow-ups, any pathology has not been
reported yet.
Conclusion: Although sclerosing haemangioma is known as benign, the
tumour had some malignancy features such as high Ki-67 rate (Ki-67:
%6-7) and high SUVmax (SUVmax: 5) value in our case.
E-PS-24-039
PD-L1 status in patients of the Moscow region with non-small cell
lung cancer
M. Byakhova, L. Zavalishina*, Y. Andreeva, I. Tsimafeyeu, N. Savelov,
S. Tjulandin, G. Frank
*Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional Education,
Moscow, Russia
Background & objectives: Today to determine the treatment tactics for
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the doctor needs to know, in addi-
tion to histology and the presence of activating mutations in the tumour,
the level of PD-L1 expression.
Methods: In 2018, as part of the program of RUSSCO, 125 patients of
the Moscow Region with NSCLC were examined to determine the status
of PD-L1. The average age was 60.7 years. The expression of PD-L1 was
determined by the immunohistochemical method (IHC) using the kit -
PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx (DAKO). Patients with more than 1% stained
cells were positive.
Results: In the studied group, men predominated (107/125 people). The
majority of patients smoked - 56 people, 33 people did not smoke, and 36
people were with unknown smoking status. 46 patients had a histological
diagnosis lung adenocarcinoma (AC) with absence of driver mutations,
75 people - squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and 4 people - undifferenti-
ated lung cancer (UDLC). The total number of patients with NSCLC with
a positive status of PD-L1 was 46.8% (59 people). Patients with SCC
prevailed in positive group (42 patients), in negative group number of
patients with AC and SCC was approximately equal (30 people and 28
people, respectively).
Conclusion: Thus, in the cohort of patients with NSCLC in the Moscow
region, prevailed men who smoke, and the number of positive cases was
46.8%.
E-PS-25-002
Neonatal osteofibrous dysplasia with novel genetic mutation by next
generation sequencing: case report and literature review
A. AlOdaini*, A. Awadalla, A. Alomran, T. Hegazi, A. Abusultan,
N. Altarooti, A. Aldossary
*Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Saudi Arabia
Background & objectives: Osteofibrous dysplasia (OFD) is a rare be-
nign paediatric fibro-osseous neoplasm exclusively affecting lower limbs.
Rare familial OFDs showed MET gene mutation, however, the majority
of OFD genetics remain unknown. Here, we present a rare neonatal OFD
case with novel mutations.
Methods: This is a case report for a female infant with lower
limb bone mass. Ancillary tests for the mass included: immuno-
histochemistry, florescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and next
generation sequencing (NGS) for DNA sequence variants, copy
number variation and fusion.
Results: A 4-month-old female presented with a clinically
alarming leg swelling noticed shortly after birth with reduced
limb movement. Radiologically, a heterogeneous lobulated
corticomedullary lesion at the tibial diaphysis was noted. A biop-
sy revealed a fibro-osseous lesion with osteoid trabeculae rimmed
with reactive osteoblasts within bland fibroblastic proliferation.
ETV6 gene rearrangement was negative ruling out congenital fi-
brosarcoma. NGS was performed to identify if the lesion harbours
GNAS or MET mutations. GNAS gene was intact. Combined
with the histologic features, a diagnosis of OFD was favoured.
Alongside the intact MET gene, mutations in DDR2 and CDK12
genes were detected. The patient was managed conservatively and
showed tumour size reduction with preserved function.
Conclusion: We reported a rare neonatal presentation for OFD with
novel DDR2 and CDK12 gene mutations. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first reported OFD with these gene mutations.
E-PS-25-003
Heterotopic mesenteric ossification, a distinctive pseudosarcomatous
feature
M. Aydemir*, I.E. Zemheri
*Health Sciences University Umraniye Education and Training Hospital,
Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Heterotopic mesenteric ossification is a rare
and benign form of ossification, usually related with previous abdominal
surgery or trauma and may be histologically confused with malignancy,
especially extraskeletal osteosarcoma. 52 cases have been reported in the
literature until today.
Methods: We presented a 76-year-old male patient who developed ileus
due to small bowel perforation, after abdominal surgery because of ade-
nocarcinoma of colon. Macroscopic examination revealed perforation on
bowel wall and 2 cm diameter, white, hard, irregularly limited mass on
mesenteric area of the ileum.
Results: Microscopically, there was an irregularly limited nodular lesion
in the mesentery consist of (myo)fibroblastic spindle cells, proliferative
osteoblastic cells producing osteoid lace-like, fat necrosis and haemor-
rhage. There was no bone formation. The proliferating (myo)fibroblasts
and osteoblasts were mitotically active but cytologically bland and there
were no necrosis and atypical mitosis. Immunohistochemically, osteo-
blastic cells were positively stained with SATB2, negatively with
cytokeratin.
Conclusion: This is a very rare pathology and awareness on this reactive
process will prevent pathologist to misdiagnosis this lesions as sarcomatous
E-PS-25 Soft Tissue and Bone Pathology
Virchows Arch
E-PS-25-004
Ossifying fibromyxoid tumour: a case report with a review of the
literature
A. Bellalah*, S. Gharbi, M. Njima, S. Mabrouk, C. Chebaane,
A. Zakhama, R. Hadhri
*Department of Pathology, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital,
Monastir, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Ossifying fibromyxoid tumour (OFMT) of
soft tissue is an extremely rare mesenchymal tumour of intermediate
malignancy and uncertain line of differentiation. It most commonly arises
in extremities. The aim of our work is to recall its anatomo-clinical
features.
Methods: We report the case of a 57-year-old man who presented with a
three-year-history of painless, subcutaneous mass that involved the scap-
ular region.
Results: Macroscopically, the excised tumour measured 10 cm in size
and was well circumscribed. On a cut section, it was tan-white coloured
and had a firm texture. It was centred by an ulceration and contained
calcifications. Microscopically, the tumour was composed of uniform
round or spindle cells arranged in nests and cords and deposited in a
variably myxoid and collagenous stroma. The cells had a pale nuclei with
small amounts of eosinophilic cytoplasm. There was an incomplete shell
of lamellar bone found at the periphery of the tumour.
Immunohistochemically, tumour cells expressed strongly vimentin and
S-100 protein. The patient was diagnosed with ossifying fibromyxoid
tumour of the scapula.
Conclusion: The OFMT is a rare tumour with a variable behaviour. The
majority of these tumours are histologically benign. However, recurrence
and metastasis are reported in rare cases.
E-PS-25-005
Desmoplastic small round cell tumour: report of two cases
A. Bellalah*, A. Ben Mabrouk, M. Njima, N. Ben Abdeljelil,
S. Mabrouk, C. Chebaane, L. Njim, R. Hadhri
*Department of Pathology, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital,
Monastir, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Desmoplastic small round cell tumour
(DSRCT) is a rare malignant tumour that typically involves the
abdominal or pelvic peritoneum of young males and pursues an
aggressive clinical course. Herein, we spotlight the clinical, mor-
phological and immunohistochemical features of this disease.
Methods: We report two cases of DSRCT diagnosed in our department.
It was a 30-year-old men and a 10-year-old boy. Both cases showed
typical DSRCT findings in terms of localization of the lesions and
histopathology.
Results: The two patients presented an atypical abdominal pain.
Imaging revealed large intra-abdominal masses with multiple peri-
toneal nodules. Biopsy was performed and showed, in both cases,
a proliferation of small round cells arranged in nests separated by
a slightly cellular fibrous tissue. These cells have a scanty, poorly
delimited cytoplasm and monomorphic hyperchromatic nuclei.
Mitoses are rare. Some cells had a rhabdoid appearance. An im-
munohistochemical study showed an intense and diffuse positivity
of tumour cells with dot-like staining with desmin and negativity
with myogenin. Based on the histological and immunochemical
features of the tumour, the diagnosis of DSRCT was made.
Conclusion: DSRCT is highly aggressive neoplasm, characterized
by a specific t(11;22) (p13;q12).This tumour must be differentiat-
ed from other small round cell tumours. The treatment is based
polychemotherapy, aggressive surgery and radiation therapy.
E-PS-25-006
C h o n d r o b l a s t i c o s t e o s a r c o m a w i t h h e t e r o l o g o u s
rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation
B. Bikowska-Opalach*, K.A. Seliga, A. Tysarowski, M. Prochorec-
Sobieszek, M. Wagrodzki
*Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Maria Sklodowska-
Curie National Research Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland
Background & objectives: Malignant mesenchymoma describes a tu-
mour composed of two or more unrelated malignant mesenchymal com-
ponents. Its prevalence depends on the location and is much more com-
mon in soft tissue than bones. Herein we report a rare case of bone
malignant mesenchymoma.
Methods: A 72-year-old male patient with a history of myasthenia gravis
was admitted to the hospital with symptoms of progression of the disease.
A thoracic computer tomography was conducted and revealed large tu-
mour of the right eighth rib. Core needle biopsy followed by standard
pathological evaluation and ancillary genetic tests were performed.
Results: The biopsy showed pleomorphic neoplasm with complex mor-
phological pattern. Foci of chondroblastic (S100 and SOX9 positive),
osteoblastic (SATB2 positive) and rhabdomyoblastic (desmin and
myogenin positive) differentiation were present. Due to the fact that all
three components showed malignant features and no IDH1 and IDH2
mutations were detected, final diagnosis of chondroblastic osteosarcoma
with heterologous rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation was made.
Next generation sequencing (NGS) using FusionPlex Kit did not reveal
any genomic abnormalities.
Conclusion: Although malignant mesenchymoma of bone is a very rare
tumour, such entity should be kept in mind in case of complex bone
neoplasm. It is also important to underscore that chondroblastic osteosar-
coma undergoing heterologous differentiation is a different entity than a
dedifferentiated chondrosarcoma. In keeping with complex genomic al-
terations reported in osteosarcomas with absence of common genetic
lesions our NGS analysis has not revealed any potentially targetable mo-
lecular alterations.
E-PS-25-007
A perivascular epithelioid cell tumour (PEComa) in the
retroperitoneum, with a pattern recalling lymphangioleiomyomatosis
of the lung – a case report
J.R. Brandão*, N. Jorge Lamas, A. Coelho, J.R. Vizcaíno
*Anatomic Pathology, Hospital de Santo António, Centro Hospitalar do
Porto (CHP), Portugal
Background & objectives: PEComas encompass a wide group of rare
neoplasms, more so in the retroperitoneum. May be related with congen-
ital syndromes and may even progress. They can have many morpholog-
ical patterns but have a perivascular arrangement throughout. Also, have a
characteristic immunophenotype.
Methods: We describe a case of a 38-year-old woman, admitted to the
hospital with a spontaneous pneumothorax. During work-up, TC revealed
a retroperitoneal, solid mass and an endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-
needle aspiration cytology (EUS-FNAC) was performed. Afterwards, she
underwent excisional surgery.
Results: EUS-FNAC revealed groups of monotonous spindle cells. The
pathology specimen with a lacerated surface, measured 42mm in greatest
dimension. On histology, we observed a mesenchymal neoplasm, com-
prised of spindle cells with granular, light eosinophilic cytoplasm, oval
nuclei and small nucleoli, organized in fascicular pattern and intercon-
nected with vascular channels. These were immunorreactive for
Podoplanin and the spindle cells marked for smooth muscle and
melanocytic antibodies, confirming the diagnosis of a PEComa with
lymphangioleiomyoma pattern. We counted 2 mitosis per 50 HPF, with-
out other high grade features. Due to an incomplete surgical margin,
invasion and neoplasm's complete size were not assessable, thus lacking
features to apply the Folpe criteria for malignancy.
Conclusion: PEComas with lymphangioleiomyoma pattern can
arise in the retroperitoneum, even without clear context of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Careful follow-up should be per-
formed due to potential progression to the lung.
E-PS-25-008
Vancomycin soaking of anterior cruciate ligament autograft recon-
struction enhances elastic fibres
L. Carvalho*, J.P. Oliveira, F. Fonseca, C. Quintas
*Institute of Anatomical and Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine
of the University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, CIMAGO - Research
Center for Environment, Genetics and Oncobiology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Portugal, University Hospital
Anatomical Pathology Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: ACL rupture a frequent injury in sports
and infection is rare (0.14-1.8%); coagulase-negative staphylococci
accounts90% of cases associated to contamination by commensal
bacteria of patient's skin during graft preparation. Intravenous anti-
biotic prophylaxis impregnation of autografts with vancomycin have
been applied.
Methods: A prospective case-control study was carried out to pre-
view histopathological changes that plasty can undergo after ACL
vancomycin impregnation. Tendons collected during surgery were
used and surplus segments were submitted to histopathological study
and elastin impregnation. Two samples from each tendon of nine
patients were analysed, with and without vancomycin impregnation.
Results: The normally kept ACL segment presented HE hyaline sub-
stance with delicate wavy elastic impregnation compared with vancomy-
cin impregnated ACL where considerable reinforcement of elastin
waving and apparent retraction were seen.
Conclusion: Vancomycin as bactericidal against skin commensal
bacteria has shown evidence of low toxicity on chondrocytes and
osteoclasts with releasing rate into tissues over time. Although
post-ACL reconstruction infection is a rare complication, it can have
catastrophic effects, plasty failure and joint function compromise.
Studies are needed to clarify vancomycin effects on graft integrity
beyond infection concern. Without considering patients age, the ob-
served elastic waving might be concurrent to ACL after-surgery pre-
served function.
E-PS-25-009
Unusual intraneural tumour harbouring EWSR1-NFATC2 fusion: a
case report
S. De Noon*, R. Tirabosco, P. O'Donnell, A. Flanagan, F. Amary
*UCL Cancer Institute, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: The EWSR1-NFATc2 fusion character-
izes a rare subset of Ewing-like sarcomas with a unique morpholo-
gy, occurring predominantly in bone. We present an unusual case of
an intraneural EWSR1-NFATc2 associated sarcoma highlighting
clinical, histological and molecular features and potential diagnostic
pitfalls.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the histology, radiological and
molecular findings of a patient diagnosed with an intraneural EWSR1-
NFATc2 associated sarcoma at our institution, and review the recent
literature on EWSR1-NFATc2 associated tumours. DNA was extracted
from fresh frozen tumour and matched normal tissue for whole genome
sequencing (WGS) under the 100,000 Genomes Project, and the data
analysed using standard bioinformatics pipelines.
Results: A 35-year-old female presented with a 6-month history of a
painful lump on the left forearm, arising from the radial nerve on MRI.
Initial biopsy showed a round cell tumour with no distinguishing features.
On further open biopsy, tissue was submitted for histopathology and
WGS as part of the 100,000 Genomes Project. Histopathology revealed
an epithelioid to spindle cell lesion with scattered EMA and S100 expres-
sion. FISH studies demonstrated a deletion of the 3’ of the EWSR1 locus.
The tumour was classed as an unusual epithelioid tumour possibly
representing a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour with perineural
differentiation. WGS analysis subsequently revealed an EWSR1-
NFATc2 fusion, refining the diagnosis.
Conclusion: This case expands the spectrum of morphological and clin-
ical features associated with sarcomas harbouring an EWSR1-NFATc2
fusion and highlights the role of molecular and genomic studies in the
workup of Ewing-like sarcomas.
E-PS-25-010
Synovial sarcoma of the hand with osteoid and bone formation: a
case report and therapeutic implications
K. Diamantopoulou*, C. Eftychiadis, G. Karamanis, E. Mortakis,
K. Hatjivassilis, I. Liakopoulos, P. Kanellos, S. Spyridonos
*General Hospital of Attica KAT, Greece
Background & objectives: Synovial sarcoma (SS) is a rare soft tissue
sarcoma of uncertain differentiation, affecting mostly young patients.
It displays a specific chromosomal translocation t(X;18)(p11;q11)
that provokes a SS18-SSX fusion gene. SS of the hand has distinct
clinical behaviour and treatment opportunities.
Methods: Man, aged 29, presented with a swelling of the right
palmar aspect of his hand. Radiologically, a soft tissue palm mass
was detected without any relationship or erosion to adjacent bones.
CT of thorax, CNS and abdomen (-). After surgery: multinodular,
compact, centrally cystic, whitish/grey tumour, measuring 5,5X5cm.
Paraffin-embedded tissue was stained with hematoxylin-eosin and
immunohistochemistry. Molecular analysis was performed.
Results: Microscopically, a neoplasm, composed of spindle cells
arranged in a fascicular or “herring-bone” pattern, was revealed.
The cells were ovoid, fairly uniform with hyperchromatic nuclei
and inconspicuous nucleoli. Mitoses: 19/HPF(X40). Necrosis: (+
in <50% of tumour). Focally, calcification, osteoid and woven bone
formation was present, resembling osteosarcoma, osteogenic or
extraskeletal. The differential diagnosis comprised mainly osteosar-
coma, clear cell sarcoma of soft parts, malignant solitary fibrous
tumour, MPNST and synovial sarcoma. Immunohistochemistry:
Vimentin(+), EMA(+/-), CKAE1/AE3(+ in single cells), bcl2(+),
CD99(+), TLE-1(+), S100(+), MelanA(-), HMB45(-), CD34(-),
Desmin(-), Ki67(8-10%). Molecular findings: formation of a SS18-
SSX fusion gene. Diagnosis: Monophasic synovial sarcoma with
osteoid and bone formation, grade 3 according to FNCLCC.
Conclusion: Adequate margins of excision are necessary to reduce
the risk of local recurrence. Limb-sparing surgery is possible in
most patients, as in our case. Adjuvant radiotherapy can improve
local control of high-grade SS of the limbs, but not survival.
E-PS-25-011
Malignancy in giant cell tumour of bone: a case of rapid transforma-
tion in an unprecedented site
O. Elaiwy*, A. Ammar
*Hamad Medical Corporation, Qatar
Background & objectives: Giant cell tumour of bone (GCTB) is a be-
nign, locally aggressive neoplastic process taking place in the bone.
Malignancy in giant cell tumour of bone "MGCTB” is rare and has never
been reported in small bones of extremities.
Virchows Arch
Methods: We presented a case of a 43-years old male who was admitted
initially with right big toe swelling. Radiology at that time showed an
expansile multiloculated intramedullary lesion in the proximal and distal
phalances.
Results: First biopsy result was giant cell tumour of bone. 6 weeks
later the patient presented with swelling and pain of same toe and
radiology showed significant increase in size of the lesion as well as
soft tissue involvement. Amputation was done and histological ex-
amination yielded a diagnosis of malignancy in giant cell tumour of
bone (MGCTB). Up to our knowledge this entity was not reported
in this anatomical site before.
Conclusion: Although malignant transformation of giant cell tumour of
bone is rare, however it can occur in a rapid manner. Thorough follow-up
surgically and radiologically are needed, as well as pathologist’s vigilance
especially in recurrent cases.
E-PS-25-015
Primary undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma of the left ventricle
Y. Gomez Navarro*, F. Almeida, P. Nuñez, P. Navas, C. Ortiz, M. Ruíz
Fernández, C. Mata, C. Agra, F. Díaz-Crespo
*HGU Gregorio Marañón, Spain
Background & objectives: Primary cardiac tumours are rare, with au-
topsy incidence up to 0.3%. Depending on the tumour location, can
present a variety of cardiopulmonary symptoms, the left sided ones are
the most common including pulmonary congestion, mitral stenosis and
pulmonary vein obstruction.
Methods: A 15 year old female without any cardiological or family
background of interest, with palpitations and pre-syncope consults the
emergency department. In Transthoracic echocardiography presents a
35 mm mass in right ventricle, which depends on the interventricular
septum, obliterating the cavity with extension to right ventricular outflow
tract, with left ventricule collapsed and minor pericardial effusion.
Results: The tumour’s biopsy and the following cardiectomy specimen
obtained after a cardiac transplant procedure, shows in the histologic
analysis a poorly-differentiated hypercellular mesenchymal neoplasm,
with spindle cell predominant population with pleomorphic nuclei show-
ing fine chromatin and prominent nucleolus, amphophylic cytoplasm,
infiltrating the right ventricle myocardium with a messy arrangement in
a storiform collagen stroma, with a minority myxoid component. No het-
erologous or epithelial differentiation is observed. Immunohistochemistry
staining shows positive immunoreactivity for S100 (focal), SMA (focal)
and MDM2; FISH study shows MDM2 gene amplification. The final histo-
logical diagnosis was a primary cardiac undifferentiated pleomorphic sarco-
ma Grade 3 FNLCC, with pathologic stage pT1b N0 M1 (cerebral metastasis
with no histological confirmation).
Conclusion: Primary cardiac undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma is an
extremely rare condition. With no gender predilection and a mean
age of presentation around 45 years. Cases in paediatric age are
uncommon. Cardiac sarcomas tend to be clinically aggressive with
a poor prognosis.
E-PS-25-016
Childhood primary mediastinal leiomyoma
S. Kepuladze*, T. Muzashvili, G. Burkadze
*Tbilisi State Medical University, Georgia
Background & objectives: Benign mesenchymal tumours of the medi-
astinum are rare, representing only 1- 6% of all mediastinal masses.
Primary mediastinal leiomyomas are extremely rare, its aetiology still
remains unknown. Up to the present approximately 15 cases of
leiomyoma that developed from spindle cells in the wall of small vessels
in the soft tissue of the mediastinum wall has only been described in the
English literature.
Methods: In this case report, we will be describing a 12-year-old
child having a primary tumour of mediastinum, suspicious for ma-
lignancy. Chest computed tomography demonstrated a giant solid
mass in the anterior mediastinum with cystic-liquid content. He
underwent a complete surgical tumour resection. Gross pathologic
examination of the mass revealed a whorlled, tan- white, homoge-
nous, rubbery soft tissue mass surrounded by a thin membranous
capsule. Histologically, the lesion consisted of monomorphic spin-
dle cells with blunt-ended nuclei, with mild nuclear atypia and
mitoses.
Results: Immunohistochemical examination was used including these
antibodies: CD117 (-); DOG1 (-); CD34 (-), S100 (-); HMB45(-);
MelanA (-), Ki 67(4%), sma(+), desmin(+) and PLAP(+).
Histological and immunohistochemical findings represented benign me-
diastinal leiomyoma.
Conclusion: PML is extremely rare and has only been described in a few
cases in the English literature up to the present. In children these findings
are even less common. Here, we report case of the PML occurring in a
child, which serves as a supplement to the spectrum. Although its quite
rare, PML should be considered as one of the differential diagnoses of an
unexplained mediastinal mass.
E-PS-25-017
Lipoblastoma of the temporal-occipital region: an uncommon pre-
sentation in an older African child
A.A. Liman*, M. Abubakar, B. Kabir, Y. Iliyasu, Z.A. Adamu
*Department of Pathology, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Lipoblastoma is a rare, benign, adipocytic
tumour encountered almost exclusively in infancy and early childhood;
usually noted during the first three years of life. Presentation after the first
decade of life is very rare.
Methods: The most common locations for this tumour are the limbs and
the trunk. Occurrence in the head and neck region is uncommon. Not
many cases in the temporal-occipital site have been reported. Surgical
excision is considered curative and prognosis is excellent. Yet, recurrence
rates of up to a quarter of cases have been reported, especially with the
diffuse variety.
Results: We present a case of a 12-year old boy admitted into our hospital
with a painless slow-growing mass in the left temporal-occipital region. A
similar mass at the same site as the present one was said to have been
surgically excised - not subjected to histologic evaluation though - two
years prior to the emergence of the current mass. The child had no other
comorbidities, nor any significant past medical history. Routine laborato-
ry investigations were essentially normal. Surgical resection of the tu-
mour was done. Histopathologic examination findings on the lesion were
consistent with lipoblastoma. The possibility of a recurrent disease was
entertained. The child recovered well; post-operative course was
uneventful.
Conclusion: Although rare, lipoblastoma should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of benign head and neck soft tissue tumours in
African children and early adolescents.
E-PS-25-018
First description of lipomatous ganglioneuroma in precoccygeal
location
A. Luebke*, W. Wilczak, M. Priemel
*University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany
Background & objectives: Lipomatous ganglioneuromas are exceed-
ingly rare benign tumours of neural crest origin. The reported tumours
were located mediastinal, retroperitoneal, or paravertebral (1). Although a
few cases of presacral ganglioneuromas have been published (2), a
precoccygeal lipomatous ganglioneuroma has not been reported.
Methods: A 26-year-old man presented with sacral pain. MRI displayed
a precoccygeal mass (52 x 48 x 49mm) with inhomogeneous and partial
lipomatous signal. Differential diagnoses included neurogenic tumours
like schwannoma, neurofibroma and malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumour (MPNST). Due to the lipomatous appearance on MRI also lipo-
ma, liposarcoma and spindle cell lipoma were considered. An open biop-
sy was taken.
Results: Histology revealed a ganglioneuroma accompanied by var-
ious proportions of mature adipocytes without any atypia. The neu-
rogenic component displayed mature Schwann cells arranged in a
fascicular architecture and a background of a collagenous stroma.
The Schwann cells were spindle-shaped with serpentine nuclei and a
pale eosinophilic cytoplasm. Palisading or a myxoid stroma remi-
niscent of schwannoma was not present. Nuclear atypia, mitoses,
necrosis, or vascular invasion were absent. Scattered mature gangli-
on cells with large nuclei, a prominent nucleolus, and abundant
granular cytoplasm were present.
The schwannian cells were immunohistochemically positive for S100,
GFAP and nuclear positive for SOX10.
The tumour was not resected, and the patient will be followed up.
Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, less than 10 lipomatous
ganglioneuromas have been reported in the literature. Herewith, we de-
scribe the first neoplasm of this entity in precoccygeal location.
References
1 Meng QD, Ma XN, Wei H, Pan RH, Jiang W, Chen FS. Lipomatous
ganglioneuroma of the retroperitoneum. Asian J Surg. 2016
Apr;39(2):116-9.
2 Lee D, Choe WJ, Lim SD. Ganglioneuroma of the Sacrum. Korean J
Spine. 2017 Sep;14(3):106-108.
E-PS-25-019
Foamy-cell cutaneous angiosarcoma with aberrant S100 expression
B. Machado*, D. Menezes, M. Afonso
*Portuguese Oncology Institute of Porto (IPO-P), Pathology Department,
Portugal
Background & objectives: Cutaneous angiosarcoma (CA) represents
0.1% of all head&neck malignancies, is more prevalent in elderly males
and has a poor prognosis. Less than 10 cases of foamy-cell variant of CA
are described in the literature; none with aberrant S100
immunoexpression.
Methods: 28-year-old female with a painful scalp nodule, suspicious of
epidermoid cyst. Surgical specimen revealed a elastic, rose-white, well-
circumscribed nodule. Morphologically it was composed by intradermal
proliferation of plump, rounded cells with vesicular nuclei, small nucleoli
and clear/foamy cytoplasm, growing in cohesive sheets/nests with focal
irregular shaped vascular channels. Pleomorphism was scarce, mitotic
figures were present and no necrosis was found.
Results: Immunohistochemistry showed diffuse positivity for ERG1,
FLI1 and focal positivity for CD31. Multifocal intense positivity for
S100 was seen. CD34, MelanA, HMB45, SMA, CKs and CD68 were
negative. The presence of conventional vasoformative areas, some lined
by foamy cells, and immunoreactivity for vascular markers allowed the
diagnosis of foamy-cell CA. Wide excision and lymph node dissection
was performed. The patient is currently alive with residual disease and
lymph node metastases.
Conclusion: Angiosarcoma accounts for less than 2% of sarcomas and
has a wide range of morphological variants. Foamy-cell CA is extremely
rare, with only a few cases described in the literature. Due to a deceptively
bland appearance, differential diagnosis encompasses both benign and
malignant neoplasms, specially when vasoformative areas are not imme-
diately apparent.
An unusual immunohistochemical profile adds difficulty to the diagnosis.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of foamy-cell CA with
aberrant expression of S100.
E-PS-25-020
Posterior mediastinum PEComa with aggressive histological fea-
tures: a case report
F. Moreira*, J. Pacheco, E. Rios, J. Pinheiro
*Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Portugal
Background & objectives: PEComas are a growing family of tu-
mours composed of histologically and immunohistochemically dis-
tinctive perivascular epithelioid cells, showing melanocytic and
smooth-muscle markers. Herein we report a case of a PEComa in
posterior mediastinum, displaying aggressive histological features.
Methods: A 36-year-old male patient, locksmith, without previous rele-
vant medical history, was admitted in hospital due to a “heavy” chest
sensation and dyspnoea, with nocturnal worsening. MRI revealed a well
circumscribed posterior mediastinum mass, 9,5cm of largest diameter
without contrast enhancement. Surgery was performed.
Results: Grossly, a 221g solid yellow mass with 9,5cm of greatest
dimension. Microscopically the neoplasm consisted of polygonal,
epithelioid or spindle shaped cells with large granular eosinophilic
cytoplasm and prominent nuclear atypia. Multinucleated and bizarre
cells were identified, frequently featuring lipidic vacuoles.
Occasional atypical mitotic figures were identified and tumoral ne-
crosis was also present. Immunohistochemistry revealed multifocal
expression of the melanocytic markers Melan-A and HMB45 and
the myogenic marker desmin. No expression of cytokeratins,
smooth muscle actin, S100 protein or SOX10 was observed. Our
diagnosis was PEComa with aggressive histological features.
Adjuvant local radiotherapy was performed. At follow-up, the pa-
tient is alive and free of disease 7 months after surgery.
Conclusion: We report a rare case of a posterior mediastinum
PEComa, displaying aggressive histological features, according to
the criteria proposed by Folpe et al. So far only 15 cases of PEComa
were reported in the English literature, all displaying a benign be-
haviour.
E-PS-25-021
Atypical presentation of tenosynovial giant cell tumour: a challeng-
ing diagnosis especially on biopsy
S. Makni*, L. Bouzidi, C. Kammoun, M. Mellouli, M. Zghal, T. Sellami,
L. Ayadi
*Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Tenosynovial Giant Cell Tumour (TSGCT)
is a locally aggressive tumour mainly affecting the knee and hip joints.
The present study highlights detailed cytomorphological features, differ-
ential diagnosis and diagnostic pitfalls of an unusual presentation of
TSGCT, mimicking sarcoma.
Methods: We present a case of foot TSGCT in 33-year-old man diag-
nosed in our department.
Results: A33-year-old man presented with foot swelling. MRI sug-
gested synovialosarcoma. On biopsy specimen, the tumour grows as
diffuse, expansile sheats. The tumour was composed of large cells
with pale to eosinophile abundant cytoplasm. Nuclei were reniform,
with prominent nucleoli. Excision was performed. Histologically,
the lesion was well-demarcated without infiltrative growth. There
were two types of regular mononuclear cells: small in size
histiocyte-like and larger epithelioid cells. There were extremely
rare multinucleated osteoclast-like giant cells. Focal necrosis was
seen. Peripheral soft tissue and chirurgical limits were normal.
There was neither pleomorphism nor infiltrative character nor mito-
sis. A large panel of antibodies was done showing positivity with
CD68. Final diagnosis was TSGCT.
Conclusion: the occasional predominance of large cells may obscure the
typical features of a TSGCT and lead to a diagnosis of sarcoma.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-25-022
Multiple intra-peritoneal liposarcoma: a challenging diagnosis
S. Makni*, M. Mellouli, M. Triki, M. Bouhamed, T. Sellami,
O. Boudaouara
*Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Multiple intra-peritoneal liposarcoma
(MIPL) is an extremely rare entity. We present a case of MIPL which
was difficult to diagnose pre‑operatively and discuss several differential
diagnosis.
Methods: We report the case of 67-year-old women who presented with
multiple abdominal hard masses. A CT-scan of the abdomen revealed
numerous masses in the abdomino-pelvic cavity, which was characterized
by two components, a fatty density and a non-adipose solid portion. It
showed also thickening of the antro-pyloric, duodenum and colonic wall.
Results: Digestive endoscopy revealed submucosal masses protruding in
the gastric and colic lumen. Endoscopic and CT-guided biopsies were
realized and several diagnoses were suggested: inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumour and desmoid fibromatosis. A laparotomy was per-
formed to obtain a definitive diagnosis. Numerous fatty nodules and masses
were identified within the greater omentum, the mesentery and the meso-
colon. The complete resection was impossible to perform due to the large
number of nodular lesions and the involvement of the gastro-intestinal wall.
Histological analysis of an omentum mass revealed mature adipocytes and
scattered hyperchromatic pleomorphic cells. Immunohistochemically, tu-
mour cells were positive for MDM2. FISH demonstrated MDM2 gene
amplification. The final diagnosis was of a MIPL.
Conclusion: A pre-operative diagnosis of a MIPL may be challenging
due to the rarity and lack of awareness of the tumour. The location and the
multiplicity of these tumours in the present case make it unique. Although
uncommon, liposarcoma should be considered in the differential diagno-
sis for masses involving the gastrointestinal tract, particularly if there is
significant or unusual involvement of the surrounding adipose tissue.
E-PS-25-023
Pulmonary artery intimal sarcoma: a case report
F. Malta*, W. Merchant
*St James's University Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Intimal sarcoma (IS) is an uncommon, poor-
ly differentiated malignant mesenchymal neoplasm, typically affecting
larger vessels. Symptoms and imaging of pulmonary IS mimic pulmo-
nary thromboembolism (PE). We report a case of IS of the right main
pulmonary artery.
Methods: A 59 year old female presented to the primary care with chest
pain and shortness of breath. She was thought to have possible central
right PE but imaging was not typical. Repeat CT scan and EBUS revealed
a high-grade sarcoma. Subsequent right pneumonectomy showed a solid
mass within the main pulmonary artery.
Results: Histology demonstrated a cellular neoplasm originating from the
arterial wall and occluding the lumen. The morphology was of a poorly
differentiated, mainly patternless, neoplasm, with areas of necrosis, and easily
identifiable mitoses. Focally intersecting bundles of spindle cells, as well as
more epithelioid and multinucleated giant cell forms were noted. Nuclear
pleomorphism was prominent. On immunohistochemistry the tumour was
positive for desmin, SMA, focally for EMA. It was negative for AE1/3,
caldesmon, CD31, CD34, S100, Melan A, HMB45, CD117 and DOG1.
EGFR polysomy was identified. MDM2 was not amplified. The diagnosis
of intimal sarcoma was made. The lesion was excised by a narrow margin.
The patient underwent post-operative radiotherapy.
Conclusion: The pulmonary artery IS is a rare aggressive tumour, often
mimicking PE. Rapid recognition is paramount in order to proceed
promptly with the initiation of therapy. Unfortunately, prognosis is poor,
although our patient remains clear of tumour thirteen months post-
surgery.
E-PS-25-024
Malignant solitary fibrous tumour of thorax presenting with distant
metastasis: report of a case and literature review
N. Mamoon*, U. Rehman, A. Haroon, I. Nazir Ahmad
*Shifa International Hospital, Islamabad, Pakistan
Background & objectives: Solitary fibrous tumour (SFT) of the pleura is
a rare neoplasm. SFTs are generally benign and asymptomatic with 10-
year survival of up to 98%. Approximately 10% of these have a malignant
potential, leading to local recurrence or metastatic spread.
Methods: A 56 year old man presented with a left hemithorax mass in
March 2017.The resection revealed a spindle cell neoplasm of 15.0 cm
consistent with SFT with poor prognostic features. These included size >
10 cm, numerous (08/10 HPFs) mitoses, cellular atypia and involved
margins. The patient was lost to follow up after surgery.
Results: In October 2019 the patient presented with bone pains.
Radiology revealed iliac bone, pancreatic, liver, bilateral lung and brain
metastasis. Core biopsy from iliac bone revealed SFT metastasis. On
immunohistochemistry the STAT6 and CD34 were positive. Two months
later the patient developed a soft tissue swelling in ring finger of right
hand. Fine needle aspiration was performed. The cytomorphological fea-
tures revealed metastasis of malignant SFT
Conclusion: SFTs can rarely behave in a malignant fashion.
Identification of poor prognostic features on gross examination and mi-
croscopy is important as these lesions need aggressive management ac-
cordingly.
E-PS-25-026
Primary leiomyosarcoma of femur: a rare entity- case report and
review of literature
M. Njima*, N. Ben Abdeljelil, A. Ben Mabrouk, A. Bellalah,
S. Mabrouk, A. Zakhama, R. Hadhri
*Department of Pathology, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital,
Monastir, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Primary osseous leiomyosarcoma (POL) is a
very rare sarcoma, accounting for <0.7% of all primary malignant bone
tumours. It shows histological and immunohistochemical smooth muscle
differentiation. We report this case to highlight clinical and pathological
features of this rare entity.
Methods: We report the case of a 48 year-old women presented a thigh
tumefaction evolving for a year. Imaging showed an osteolytic lesion of
the lower extremity of the left femur.
Results: A biopsy of the lesion showed densely cellular malignant mes-
enchymal proliferation focally necrotic. It was made by bundles of
smooth muscle cells with hyperchromatic nuclei of moderate to severe
atypia with fairly numerous figures of mitosis. The immunohistochemical
study showed an intense and diffuse cytoplasmic positivity of tumour
cells with the smooth anti-muscle. Desmin was focal positive. The diag-
nosis of POL was made. The patient received neo-adjuvant chemotherapy
and had a knee block resection. Macroscopically, the tumour measured
10 cm in size and was located in the distal part of the femur.
Histologically, tumour showed chemotherapy effects estimated at 20%.
The bone and muscle surgical limits were unscathed.
Conclusion: POL affects long bones mainly at the knee region. The
treatment of choice is surgical resection. The role of chemotherapy and
radiotherapy has not yet been established. Although the tumour stage and
histological grade have an impact in disease-free survivals.
E-PS-25-027
Metastatic lung adenocarcinoma histologically mimicking primary
osteosarcoma
D. O'Dwyer*, A. Young, E. MacDuff, F. Roberts
*Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Osteosarcomatous differentiation of lung
adenocarcinoma is rare and usually related to prior therapy. We report
two cases of solitary bone tumours morphologically mimicking osteosar-
coma but with the immunoprofile of lung adenocarcinoma arising in
patients without evidence of a primary elsewhere.
Methods: Both cases occurred in patients >75 presenting with radiolog-
ically non-specific solitary bone lesions. Biopsies showed malignant
bone-forming tumours morphologically identical to conventional osteo-
sarcoma. Immunohistochemistry showed strong diffuse positivity for
markers characteristic of lung adenocarcinoma. Subsequent staging did
not identify a primary lesion. Both tumours underwent molecular testing
to determine systemic treatment options.
Results: Cytokeratin expression is rare in osteosarcomas and should not
show strong diffuse positivity of all broad spectrum CK’s, EMA as well as
site specific markers as reported here. Furthermore, in this age group there is a
high incidence of carcinoma whilst osteosarcoma is rare. We favour these
tumours represent metastatic carcinoma presenting as solitary bone lesions.
To our knowledge this is the first report in the literature to describe
carcinoma with complete osteosarcomatous differentiation morphologi-
cally, and the immunoprofile of a lung primary.
Conclusion: We suggest that in this age group immunohistochemical
testing of bone-forming malignancies should be undertaken routinely to
avoid missing these cases and thus the patients missing out on systemic
therapies that may be potentially available to them.
E-PS-25-028
Clinicopathologic features of intraabdominal inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumour with transformation to sarcoma
S. Poletaeva*, T. Fedorina, V. Plohova, Y. Yunusova, Y. Zotova,
E. Kiseleva
*Samara State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: The aim of study is determining the relation
between pathological features of and clinical outcomes of IMT.
Methods: A review of pathohistological and FISH dates, ICH-stainings
(ALK D5F3, SMA, PanCytokeratin AE1\AE3, Calponin, Desmin, EMA
CD117, DOG1, CD34, SOX10, Melan A, HMB45, MITF, CD34, GFAP,
Myogenin, Ki67) from 31 years old man was carried. FISH: A split signal
indicates pericentric inversion (2)(p23q13), showing ALK/RANBP2 gene
rearrangement. The primary 5 cm tumour grew into the wall of the colon.
Results: Right hemicolonectomy was performed. Histologically: fascicular
type of growth from spindle-shaped and ovoid myofibroblast-like cells, with
cells with macronucleols, 12 mitoses in 10 hpf, haemorrhages, necrosis, cal-
cifications, a pronounced inflammatory component with a predominance of
lymphocytes and plasmocytes. IHC revealed cytoplasmic type of expression
of ALK, focal positive expression of SMA, PanCytokeratin AE1\AE3.
Others reactions were negative. 3 months after on CT scans: in the small
pelvis neoplasm 59x44mm is determined, associated with loops of the ileum,
expansion and thickening of the ileum wall. Recurrent tumour and 3 foci up
to 4 cm on the peritoneum were resected. Macro: node 11x9x6cm, grey tan
mass with fleshy cut surface, with necrosis.
Conclusion: Variable of histologic patterns in primary intraabdominal
inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour was found (resembling nodular
fasciitis , loose myxoid stroma and densely hyalinized stroma) and in
recurrent tumour and peritoneum implants epithelioid myofibroblast-
like cells types were prevailed highly atypical polygonal cells with oval
nuclei, prominent nucleoli, Reed-Sternberg like cells, atypical mitotic
figures up to 20 in 10 hpf, associated with aggressive clinical course.
E-PS-25-032
Unusual bone presentation of clear cell sarcoma with immunohisto-
chemistry and molecular confirmation
B. Simona*, M. Dragomir, D. Pop, F. Pop
*Emergency University Hospital Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Clear cell sarcoma occurs in the soft tissue in
association with tendons and aponeuroses. The neoplastic cells express a
variety of melanocytic markers. The differential diagnosis from a con-
ventional cutaneous melanoma is made by molecular findings: EWSR1-
ATF1 fusion transcript.
Methods: We report the case of an 11-year-old boy with a lytic bone lesion
located in the distal femur epiphysis, simulating a chondroblastoma. The
biopsy revealed a malignant tumour with sarcomatous features probably
metastatic. The pathologic material was sent to us in consultation for ancil-
lary studies.
Results: Immunohistochemistry was positive for all melanocytic
markers: HMB45, S-100, Melan A, SOX10, Tyrosinase, MiTF. It was
suspicious of malignant melanoma metastasized to bone, but no other
primary tumour could be found by complex imagery. Molecular analysis
was performed in another laboratory and it was positive for gene rear-
rangement: EWSR1-ATF1 t(12;22)(q13;q12). The revised diagnosis was
primary clear cell sarcoma of bone.
Conclusion: Clear cell sarcoma of bone is rarely reported, almost never
in this age group and in this location. The ancillary methods, immuno-
histochemistry and molecular findings were essential for the final diag-
nosis excluding metastatic melanoma.
E-PS-25-033
Intraosseous schwannoma of the mandible: a rare case report and
review of the literature
B. Simona*, D. Pop, A.C. Lisievici, T. Georgescu, F. Pop
*Emergency University Hospital Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Schwannomas are slow-growing nerve sheath
tumoursderivedfromSchwanncells.Intraosseousschwannomaisarare entity.
In the current medical literature, there are 44acceptable cases of intraosseous
schwannoma of the jaws, 39 of the mandible and 5 in the maxilla.
Methods: In this case report we report a case of a schwannoma of the
mandible in a 51-year-old female, who presented with swelling involving
the mandible. Radiographs revealed a well-defined expansion. The lesion
was treated by resection.
Results: Microscopic examination revealed compact hypercellular areas
with spindle cells and nuclear palisading. The stroma showed myxoid fea-
tures with thickened hyalinized vessels. There was no mitotic activity.
Immunohistochemically schwannomas show positive diffuse staining for
S100, SOX 10, SMA, and focal forCD 34 with Ki-67 proliferation index
around 1% at the highest level. In the presence of these findings, histopath-
ologic diagnosis of the patient was reported as intraosseous schwannoma.
Conclusion: The clinical and radiographic features of schwannomas
mimic benign odontogenic tumours, which can be misleading. The opti-
mal treatment is surgical resection with follow-up examinations.
Recurrence was reported only in five cases in mandible, which was at-
tributed mainly to malignant cases.
E-PS-25-034
Vaginal undifferentiated sarcoma giant cell rich with lung metastasis
K. Sokół*, P. Wiśniewski, J. Barańska, M. Prochorec-Sobieszek
*Institute of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Diagnostic
Haematology Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research
Institute of Oncology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Poland
Background & objectives: We would like to present our case of rare
neoplasm in unusual localisation.
In 07.10.2019 73-year old patient was administrated to Oncological Center
due to vaginal bleeding and subabdominal pain since few weeks priory.
Methods: Gynaecological examination showed a tumour on anterior wall
of vagina with 30 mm ulceration that narrows canal. Also, imaging tech-
niques (CT and PET scan) showed a tumour in lung.
Virchows Arch
That part of the tumour from vagina and the tumour resected from lung
were fixated in formalin and examined in hematoxylin & eosin sating and
other diagnostic techniques were used.
Results: Samples from both tumours (vaginal and pulmonary) showed
epithelioid neoplasm with necrosis and execs of multi nuclear osteoclast-
like giant cells and over 50 mitotic figures per 10 high power fields.
Immunohistochemical stains showed: vimentin(+), CKAE1/AE3(-), Ck5/
6(-), CD68(+) in multinuclear cells, p63(+) focaly, desmin (-), ER(-),
Myogenin(-), SMA(+), EMA(-), s100(-), CD34 (-).
Sanger sequencing for H3F3A mutation was negative.
Diagnosis of undifferentiated sarcoma giant cell rich was made in both
samples.
Conclusion: Sarcomas constitute less than 3% of all vaginal malignan-
cies, rhabdomyosarcomas represent the most commonly reported sarco-
ma at this location. Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma with giant cells
is diagnosis from exclusion. Our case is rear entity situated in unusual
localisation.
E-PS-25-035
Squamous cell carcinoma of the lung presenting as soft tissue mass:
case report and literature review
S. Stasinopoulou*, E. Kavadas, E. Stamatogianni, D. Pinialidis,
A. Karameris
*Department of Pathology, NIMTS 417 Veterans Administration
Hospital, Greece
Background & objectives: Soft-tissue (ST)-metastases in patients who
die from metastatic-carcinomas are rare (0.75-9%). Reported overall
prevalence of ST and muscle metastases among lung-cancer-patients is
2.3% and 0-0.8% respectively. Lung, kidney and colon are the most
common primary carcinoma sites leading to ST metastases.
Methods: 68-year-old-Caucasian-smoker-male with type-II-diabetes,
with painful, gradually enlarging gluteal mass for 3-months. Otherwise
asymptomatic.
Macroscopic evaluation: solid/poorly demarcated/nodular mass attached
to adipose and skeletal muscle tissue, 8.7cm in maximum diameter.
Microscopic-examination: adipose tissue and striated muscle diffusely
infiltrated by poorly-differentiated-neoplasm with areas of keratinization
and necrosis.
Differential-diagnosis: metastatic poorly-differentiated squamous-cell-
carcinoma-(SCC)-vs-ST sarcomas (e.g.synovial-sarcoma with squamous
differentiation).
Immunohistochemistry: positive for CK5/6-p63-EMA-AE1/AE3-a1
antitrypsin. Negative for Vimentin-Desmin-CD99-TLE1-SMA-MDM2-
CDK4-CD34-s100.
Results: Morphological and immunohistochemical findings were indic-
ative of poorly differentiated SCC of unknown primary.
Following the histological diagnosis, the patient underwent brain,
chest and abdomen CT scans, as well as bone scan, that revealed
a lesion at the upper lobe of the left lung measuring 5.7cm in max-
imum diameter, ipsilateral lymphadenopathy, pericardial effusion
and bone metastases.
Further immunohistochemical testing showed the tumour to be PD-L1
negative, while molecular analysis showed absence of EML4-ALK and
NPM1-ALK inversions and of EGFR mutation.
The patient is currently being treated with Carboplatin/Paclitaxel and
Pembrolizumab.
Conclusion: Most common symptoms of ST-metastases are pain and
palpable mass.ST sarcomas are usually painless.ST metastases are asso-
ciated to poor prognosis and advanced stage of disease. Any painful ST
mass should raise suspicion for metastatic disease even in otherwise
asymptomatic patients.
E-PS-25-036
Myxoid liposarcoma with cartilaginous heterologous component – a
rare differentiation phenomenon
A. Szumera-Cieckiewicz*, K. Sokół, O. Kuczkiewicz-Siemion,
O. Stanowska, M. Dudzisz-Śledź, K. Olszewska, M. Spałek,
M. Prochorec-Sobieszek, P. Rutkowski
*Institute of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Diagnostic
Haematology Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie National Research
Institute of Oncology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Poland
Background & objectives: Myxoid liposarcoma (MLS) is the most
frequent liposarcoma molecularly defined with DNA damage-
inducible transcript 3 (DDIT3) gene rearrangement. MLS shows a
typical mixture of lipoblasts, uniform round-cell mesenchymal cells
and myxoid stroma with characteristic arborizing “chicken-wire”
capillary vessels.
Methods: A 46-year-old male with a tumour localized in the poste-
rior compartment of the right thigh, 16 cm in the largest dimension,
without skin infiltration was admitted to Maria Sklodowska-Curie
National Research Institute of Oncology for diagnostics and
treatment.
Results: Initial biopsy revealed high-grade MLS with round cell compo-
nent above 10% and DDIT3 rearranged in 87% of tumour cells. The
patient received 3 cycles of chemotherapy [doxorubicin and ifosfamid]
and preoperative radiotherapy. The surgically resected tumour presented
response score C according to EORTC-STBSG protocol with abundant
chondroid differentiation areas. The fluorescence in situ hybridization
confirmed the FUS-DDIT3signature. The diagnosis of MLS with a carti-
laginous component was established. After 6 months patient remains with
no evidence of disease (NED).
Conclusion: Up-to-date only 8 cases with cartilaginous differentia-
tion and 2 cases with rhabdoid features were described. Previously
described MLSs were found among males, with median age 43 years,
thigh involvement and median size 11cm. Moreover, the NED was
from 6 to 45 months indicating that cartilaginous differentiation may
be a good prognostic factor. Microscopically, in the differential di-
agnosis the chondroid lipoma, extraskeletal chondroma, and
extraskeletal myxoid liposarcoma should be included.
"This work has been implemented using the Project infrastructure
POIG.02.03.00-14-111/13"
E-PS-25-038
A perivascular epithelioid cell tumour – rare and unique, posing a
great diagnostic challenge: case report of male patient with pelvic
mass
A. Vlahova*, M. Genadieva-Yordanova, I. Taneva, A. Ionkov, A. Timev,
K. Yanev
*Aleksandrovska University Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Bulgaria
Background & objectives: The aim of this work is to demonstrate
the challenges in diagnosis of pelvic lesions in males. A wide range
of tumours should be kept in mind to achieve correct preoperative
diagnosis of PEComa (perivascular epithelioid cell tumour).
Methods: We present a case of 69 years old man admitted in the
hospital with a tumour mass bulging into the rectal lumen, suspicious
for GIST. MRI scan revealed tumour measuring 65/65/88 mm, locat-
ed between prostate and front rectal wall.
A preoperative biopsy was performed, followed by surgical excision. The
biopsies were routinely fixed, processed and stained with immunohisto-
chemical /IHC/ analysis.
Results: The diagnosis of malignant PEComa was made on the preoper-
ative tru cut biopsy - fragments from 3 to 9 mm. The routine histology
revealed spindle cell with pale cytoplasm and nuclear polymorphism, foci
of necrosis. IHC showed negative reaction for CD 34, CD 117, PSMA,
CK AE1-AE3, S-100 protein, SOX 10 and DOG1 and positive reaction
for SMA, HMB 45 and Melan A.
The surgical material was firm, fleshy appearance. Histology revealed
perivascular arrangement with a lot of necrosis and high mitotic count
(16/10 HPF).
6 months later the patient died of metastasis in the retroperitoneal and
pelvic lymph nodes and peritoneal dissemination.
Conclusion: Prognosis of the PEComa depends on the size of the lesion
and the risk category. Histopathology and immunohistochemistry are
mandatory for proper diagnosis.
E-PS-26-001
Large mediastinal teratoma, a differential for chronic chest pain
O. Aniume*, A. Eni, M. Nzegwu
*University of Nigeria Teaching Hospital, Nigeria
Background & objectives: A case of a large mediastinal teratoma in an
18-year old girl who presented with an 8-month history of recurrent
stabbing chest pain which radiated to the back and left upper limb.
Methods: The remarkable investigations that were carried out include
chest x-ray, chest ultrasound scan, chest computed tomography scan.
Other investigations were unremarkable. A thoracotomy was done and
a 10cm circumscribed mass was excised and sent to the histopathology
laboratory for examination and diagnosis.
Results: Chest computed tomography scan revealed an oval, heteroge-
neously enhancing mass extending from the anterior mediastinum to the
left middle zone of the lung field.
Gross histopathologic examination revealed a multicystic mass contain-
ing greasy, pale material. Microscopic examination revealed mature
structures derived from the three germ layers.
Conclusion: The clinical presentation of mediastinal tumours varies from
asymptomatic to life threatening symptoms. A high index of suspicion for
mediastinal tumours in patients presenting with cardiothoracic symptoms
is needed in early diagnosis and treatment.
E-PS-27-001
A rare case of renal carcinosarcoma associated with nephrolithiasis
K. Abrham*
*St. Paul's Hospital MMC, Ethiopia
Background & objectives: Introduction – Carcinosarcomas are biphasic
tumours comprising of epithelial and mesenchymal components. Primary
carcinosarcoma of the kidney/upper urinary tract is extremely
uncommon.
Case presentation – An 50 year old female patient presented to urology
clinic with a chief complaint of right upper quadrant pain. CT scan reported
right renal severe hydronephrosis secondary to proximal ureteric stone. On
U/S right kidney has multicystic mass seen. During surgical exploration,
hard mass was found attached to the liver and upper pole of kidney
Methods: On pathology gross examination, Nephrectomy specimen re-
ceived measuring 15x8.5x6.5cm overall and there is a multinodular mass
on the upper pole of the kidney parenchyma with grossly breached cap-
sule. On cut section, the mass is 8.5x6x5.5cm grey white solid with
central focus of haemorrhage and necrosis. Three dark coloured stones
were identified in the dilated pelvicalyceal system largest measuring
3.5x2.8x2.6cm. cont..
Results: There was a small papillary excrescence on the mucosa of the
dilated calyx measuring 1x1cm. On histopathology, infiltrative nests and
tongues of malignant squamoid cells with well-formed keratin pearls
admixed with sarcomatoid stroma of intersecting fascicular and undiffer-
entiated pleomorphic cells with heterologous chondroid differentiation
was seen along with areas of necrosis. Histologic sections from papillary
excrescences showed papillary projections of metaplastic and dysplastic
squamous epithelium.
Conclusion: Conclusion - Carcinosarcoma of the kidney is a rare tumour
of which little is known about. Current literature is almost exclusively a
case report.
E-PS-27-002
Facial skin lesion as first manifestation of renal carcinoma
M. Givannakis, I. Dimitriadis, E. Chatzifotiou, E. Zagelidou,
C. Charalampidis, D. Anestakis*
*Department of Autopsy Histopathology, Laboratory of Forensic
Medicine & Toxicology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
Background & objectives: In rare cases, skin metastatic lesions may be the
first manifestation of a visceral neoplasm. Renal carcinoma is one of these
neoplasms, although renal carcinoma metastasis on the skin is not usual.
Methods: We present the case of a patient with renal carcinoma, diag-
nosed, after the investigation of a frontal skin lesion. The patient, a 63
years old female, presented with a skin nodule on the face.
Results: She underwent surgical excision of the lesion, followed by his-
topathological examination that, established the diagnosis of a clear cell
renal cell carcinoma metastasis. The imaging investigation revealed the
presence of a tumour in the right kidney and the patient underwent a
nephrectomy. Histopathological examination confirmed the presence of
a clear cell renal cell carcinoma of the right kidney. Although skin me-
tastases from renal carcinoma are considered to be advanced manifesta-
tion of the disease, it is possible that the skin metastatic lesions occur
before renal neoplasm is diagnosed.
Conclusion: Even in these cases however, the involvement of the skin is
an indication that the disease has spread and the prognosis of such patients
is poor. We present this case because of its rarity and we review the
relevant literature.
E-PS-27-003
Another brick in the wall: one case of renal anastomosing
haemangioma with immunohistochemical and clinical correlation
R. Barna*, A. Dema, B. Suciu, A. Muresan, B.R. Nataras, A. Muresan,
D. Herman
*Department of Pathology, Emergency County Hospital "Pius Brinzeu",
Timisoara, Romania
Background & objectives: Anastomosing haemangioma (AH) of the
kidney is a rare benign vascular tumour with histological features mim-
icking angiosarcoma.
A 64-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes mellitus and no history of
kidney disease or renal malignancy presented for routine examination.
Methods: Physical examination and blood tests showed no abnormalities.
Ultrasonography and CT scan revealed a 4x4 cm, well-defined, hypoechoic
mass occupying the upper pole of right kidney, which enhances in arterial
phase and has fast wash-out in the delayed phase.
Patient underwent surgical resection of the renal mass. Shortly after, she had a
haemorrhagic episode corrected with resuspended red cell concentrate.
Results: Grossly, the partial nephrectomy showed a round mass, well-
circumscribed, encapsulated, measuring 3.5 cm in diameter, with a red-
brown cut surface.
E-PS-26 Thymic and Mediastinal Pathology
E-PS-27 Uropathology
Virchows Arch
At low magnification, the tumour is well-defined, partially encapsulated,
with lobular architecture, invading the tumour capsule, but without infil-
tration of the adjacent renal parenchyma. At higher magnification, tumour
consisted of anastomosing capillary-sized vascular spaces, lined by en-
dothelial cells with mild focal atypia and uniform nuclei, without mitoses,
resembling splenic parenchyma.
Immunohistochemistry was negative for PanCK, HMB45, D2-40 and
PAX8. Endothelial cells were positive for CD31 and CD34.
Conclusion: Becoming aware of the existence of renal AH and recog-
nizing its histological characteristics is essential for the accurate diagnosis
in order to avoid overtreatment. Renal AH has a favourable prognosis and
the preferred treatment option is tumorectomy with long-term follow-up.
E-PS-27-004
Inhabitual presentation of retroperitoneal angiomyolipoma simulat-
ing ovarian tumour
A. Bchir*, A. Bdioui, K. Marwa, S. Chaieb, Z. Lajmi, B. Sriha, M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, F. Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Extrarenal retroperitoneal angiomyolipoma
(AMLs) are rare lesions which may mimic other retroperitoneal tumours
and thus pose a diagnostic problem to the clinician. The aim is to describe
a case of retroperitoneal angiomyolipoma misdiagnosed as ovarian
tumour.
Methods: A 50 year old woman presented with a right, pelvic and pain-
less mass. There was no familiar or personal history. The physical exam-
ination was clean. An abdominal ultrasonography was revealed an ovar-
ian mass with large haemorrhagic and necrotic areas. Torsion of
fibrothecoma was clinically suspected.
Results: Macroscopically, it was an 18 cm, encapsulated and dark brown-
ish mass with large foci of necrosis and haemorrhage. The microscopic
examination concluded to retroperitoneal angiomyolipoma, as tumour
was composed of variable proportions of adipose tissue, spindle cells,
epithelioid smooth muscle cells and abnormal thick-walled blood vessels.
Large foci of haemorrhagic necrosis were seeing and a foreign body type
inflammatory reaction was noticed too.
Conclusion: The retroperitoneal angiomyolipoma is a rare disease that
belongs to family perivascular epithelioid cell tumours (PEComas). This
tumour occurs sporadically or in patients with tuberous sclerosis. It is
reported more in women aged between 22 and 80 year-old. The incidence
of haemorrhagic shock and necrotic feature is higher than renal
angiomyolipomas. For that reason, they may be sometimes misdiagnosed
as ovarian disease. Only histology examination can lead to the diagnostic.
E-PS-27-005
Xp11;2 translocation renal cell carcinoma: pathological study of 6
cases
A. Bellalah*, S. Ben Khalifa, S. Gharbi, M. Njima, N. Ben Abdeljelil,
L. Njim, A. Moussa
*Department of Pathology, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital,
Monastir, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Xp11;2 translocation renal cell carcinoma
(TRCC) is a recent and rare entity. It belongs to the groups of Mit
(Microphthalmia Transcription factor) family (TRCC). The aim of our
work is to recall its anatomo-clinical features and to discuss the differen-
tial diagnoses.
Methods: A total of six cases of Xp11.2 (TRCC), diagnosed over a
period of 12 years, were evaluated. A review
of clinical records and histopathological reports as well as additional
immunohistochemical study were performed in all cases.
Results: These were six female patients, with an average age of 18 years.
The average diagnosis time was 11.2 months. The main symptomatology
was low back pain. The physical examination found a palpable mass in
one patient. The average size of the tumour was 4.6 cm. Surgical treat-
ment was performed in 5 cases. In one case, the tumour was locally
advanced and inoperable. No adjuvant treatment was indicated. The mac-
roscopic appearance was variable. Histologically, tumours had a mixed
architecture. The tumour cells had a clear and eosinophilic cytoplasm.
Psammomas were found in three cases. Immunohistochemically tumour
expressed TFE3, CD10 and PAX8 in all cases and P504S in 5 cases.
Conclusion: Papillary architecture with clear or eosinophilic cells and
psammoma is evocative of Xp11.2(TRCC). The nuclear staining of the
tumour cells with (anti-TFE3) confirms the diagnostic. Ideally, we com-
plete by a molecular study which highlights the presence of the TFE3
rearrangement.
E-PS-27-006
TFE3 expression in papillary renal cell carcinomas and renal cell
carcinomas with papillary component, in patients under 45 years-old
J. Boavida*, T. Oliveira, L. Correia
*Department of Pathology, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, Portugal
Background & objectives: Xp11 translocation renal cell carcinoma(RCC)
is a tumour defined by translocations involving the X chromosome(Xp11),
which produces fusion genes that involve transcription factor E3(TFE3).
We reviewed papillary RCC(PRCC) and RCC with papillary component
cases, using TFE3 immunomarker and reclassifying them.
Methods: Out of 76 cases with a previous diagnosis of RCC made be-
tween 2000-2019 in a tertiary healthcare institution, in patients under 45
years-old, 10 were selected based on its classification as either PRCC or
RCC with papillary component. All cases were submitted to an immuno-
histochemistry panel to confirm the tumours’ primary renal origin and
also TFE3 immunomarker.
Results: Immunohistochemistry studies showed positivity for TFE3 in 4
cases out of the 10 previously selected. There was a male predominance
(3:1) and the mean age at diagnosis was 28 years old, with a mean tumour
size of 9 cm.
Conclusion: Immunostaining for fusion products detectable in Xp11
translocation RCC only became available recently, demanding a high
index of suspicion and awareness for this diagnosis. Increased availability
of novel TFE3 immunomarkers are expected to improve diagnostic ac-
curacy in the future.
E-PS-27-007
An unusual site for a prostatic adenocarcinoma metastasis
B. Suciu*, A. Dema, C. Lazureanu, D. Herman, A. Muresan, R. Barna,
A. Plopeanu
*Department of Pathology, Emergency Clinical County Hospital “Pius
Brinzeu” Timisoara, Romania
Background & objectives: Calvarium metastases of prostatic adenocar-
cinoma are an uncommon finding. This study presents the case of a 69YO
male who was admitted to the neurosurgery clinic 2 weeks after the onset
of a left hemiparesis, mimicking the symptoms of a stroke.
Methods: Physical examination revealed a parieto-temporal, subcutane-
ous, immobile, mass. Cranial CT examination has revealed a iodine ab-
sorbing mass in the right cerebral hemisphere that dislodged the brain and
invaded the superjacent bones. Further CT examination of the full body
revealed a prostatic mass and multiple destructive lytic lesions in the axial
skeleton and ribs. Bloodwork did not reveal anything unusual.
Results: The tumour was surgically removed and sent to Pathology.
Based on the histopathological features in concordance with IHC reac-
tions (positive for CKAE1/AE3, NKX3.1, EMA and negative for CK7,
Synaptophysin, GATA3, CDX2, TTF-1, HER2neu and CK HMW), the
diagnosis of prostatic adenocarcinoma metastasis was established. A
mention must be made that there were no urological symptoms present
prior to the examination.
Conclusion: After the removal of the tumour, the patient’s health status
improved and he was sent to a hospice with no follow-up available. Axial
skeleton metastases from a prostatic adenocarcinoma are somewhat a com-
mon finding, whereas the calvarium is an unusual location for such entities.
Calvarium metastasis that precede the primary tumour diagnosis of prostate
cancer are rare, and unfortunately, a sign of an end stage disease.
E-PS-27-008
Molecular and immunohistochemical evaluation of BAP-1 in bladder
and comparison with luminal-basal subtyping
B. Calim Gurbuz*, M. Aydemir, I. Guvendir, I.E. Zemheri
*Health Sciences University Umraniye Education and Training Hospital,
Turkey
Background & objectives: Molecular subtyping has become increasing-
ly important in bladder tumours. There are very few molecular and im-
munohistochemical studies about BRCA1-associated protein-1(BAP-1)
in bladder. We aimed to evaluate BAP-1 expression molecularly and
immunohistochemically and determine subtypes with GATA-3 and
Cytokeratin5/6 immunohistochemical stains.
Methods: Tumour and normal tissues of 11 patients with known primary
bladder tumours were taken freshly during the operation. We applied
BAP-1 antibody with reverse transcription-PCR and Western Blot meth-
od. In addition,150 non-invasive and 150 invasive tumour paraffin blocks
were selected from transurethral resection materials. GATA-3,
Cytokeratin5/6 and BAP-1 immunohistochemical stains were applied
and evaluated in total 300 cases.
Results: BAP-1 protein expression levels were increased in tumour tis-
sues compared to normal tissues in Western Blot (9 of 11). In the immu-
nohistochemical evaluation of BAP-1, the muscle invasive group (solid
morphology) showed statistically significant severe expression. GATA-3
expression severity and percentage, showing luminal subtype, was statis-
tically significantly higher in the non-invasive group. The expression
severity of Cytokeratin5/6, showing basal subtype, was statistically sig-
nificantly higher in the muscle invasive group.
Conclusion: In this study, molecular BAP-1 protein expression levels,
which have not been studied in bladder before, were found to be higher in
the tumour tissues than the normal tissues. It was concluded that immu-
nohistochemical BAP-1 evaluation may also vary according to tumour
grade and papillary morphology. Also, it was determined that GATA-3
and Cytokeratin5/6 immunohistochemical stains can be used for basal
and luminal subtyping of bladder tumours and especially the degree of
invasion is compatible with this subtyping.
E-PS-27-009
Tubulo-villous adenoma with invasive adenocarcinoma component
of the female urinary meatus
I.D. Caruntu*, D. Ferariu, M. Dieaconu, A. Rusu, R. Bobeica, S. Giusca
*UMF "Grigore T. Popa" Iasi, Romania
Background & objectives: Villous adenoma of the urinary tract is a very
rare tumour; sometimes, may present a malignant component, either ad-
enocarcinoma or urothelial carcinoma. We describe a case of villous
adenoma associated with invasive adenocarcinoma developed in female
external urethral orifice.
Methods: A 69‐year‐old woman was admitted at the Urology Department.
Physical examination showed an exophytic lesion circumferentially an-
chored at the upper part of the urinary meatus. The patient had no signifi-
cant past medical history. Gynaecological and gastroenterological exams
were normal. Tumour resection was performed. The excised specimen was
specifically processed through paraffin embedding technique for standard
histological and immunohistochemical exams.
Results: Gross examination showed a polypoid, fleshy mass, of 1.2 cm
diameter. Histopathology revealed an epithelial tubulo-papillary prolifer-
ation lined by normal and pseudostratified columnar epithelium showing
nuclear crowding, hyperchromasia, and goblet cells, with focal areas of
low- and high-grade dysplasia. Several zones of invasive adenocarcinoma
were identified in lamina propria. The epithelial proliferation was CK 20
and CDX2 positive, CK7 negative; Ki67 varied from 30% (adenoma) to
90% (malignant component).
Conclusion: The final diagnosis was tubulo-villous adenoma associated
with invasive adenocarcinoma, originating in the urinary meatus. The
main differential diagnosis of villous adenoma of the urinary tract is a
possible metastatic adenocarcinoma from adjacent anatomical sites (par-
ticularly from colon). The key elements of this case consist in the very
rare location - the external urethral orifice, and the evidences for the
malignant transformation.
E-PS-27-010
Immunohistochemical findings in vasitis nodosa - case report
M.I. Cevallos*, L.M. Nova, I. Fernandez, C. Cerezo Aguirre, T. Dot
Gomara, Á. Panizo Santos, M. Gómez-Dorronsoro, R. Guarch
*Department of Pathology, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Vasitis nodosa is a benign condition charac-
terized by proliferation of ductules in the vas deferens’ wall, most often
after injury. Since these ductules occasionally show features resembling
malignancy, they may be confused with an adenocarcinoma originating
from the adjacent organs.
Methods: We report the case of a 50 year old male with post-vasectomy
recanalization that was reintervened. The resected fragments of both vas
deferens were submitted for examination.
Results: Small-sized ducts proliferated within the vas deferens’ mus-
cular wall around nerves and blood vessels. These ducts were lined
by a single layer of cuboidal to columnar epithelium with clear to
eosinophilic cytoplasm and round to spindle shaped nuclei with
hyperchromasia and coarse granular chromatin. Glandular cells
showed positivity for cytokeratins 7 and AE1/AE3, and PAX8.
CD10 and AMACR reacted against the luminal surface. PSA,
GATA3 and p63 were negative.
Conclusion: Although diagnosis of vasitis nodosa is straightforward with
hematoxylin and eosin examination, immunohistochemistry may be use-
ful in differentiating vasitis nodosa from adenocarcinoma from adjacent
organs. Proliferating glands show a prostate cancer-like AMACR and p63
staining pattern, but PAX8 positivity and PSA negativity aid in
distinguishing this entity from prostate cancer.
E-PS-27-011
Vasitis nodosa: a report of 5 cases
M.I. Cevallos*, I. Fernandez, L.M. Nova, Y. Rodriguez, A. Larrea,
M. Bronte, C. Cerezo Aguirre, M. Gómez-Dorronsoro, Á. Panizo
Santos, R. Guarch
*Department of Pathology, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Spain
Background & objectives: Vasitis nodosa is a benign proliferation of
the vas deferens’ ductular epithelium within the muscle coat and
adventitia as a reaction to injury. Many pathologists are not familiar
with this condition, confusing it with an adenocarcinoma from near-
by organs.
Methods: We reviewed our institution’s archives and found 5 cases of
vasitis nodosa diagnosed between 2003 and 2020. Ages ranged from 41
to 52 years and had undergone vasectomy 9 months to 23 years before
present surgery. Serial sections were stained routinely with haematoxylin
and eosin.
Results: Two cases had vas deferens’ segments removed for post-
vasectomy recanalization and three cases had painful testes. At micro-
scopic examination, all cases showed varying degree of ductular prolif-
eration lined by cubic epithelium with focal and mild atypia in one of
them. One case showed luminal spermatozoa. In all cases this ductular
Virchows Arch
proliferation spread around nerves and blood vessels and showed sperm
extravasation.
Conclusion: Although vasitis nodosa is a benign condition, its mor-
phology may be confused with malignant neoplasms. Nevertheless, a
closer look to its features in patients with history of previous vasec-
tomy may help to recognize this entity with routine haematoxylin and
eosin stains.
E-PS-27-012
Urachal adenocarcinoma: about two cases
D. Chiba*, S. El Arem, A. Baccouche, Z. Nfikha, O. Belkacem,
M. Hamdani, A. Bdioui, M. Ben Othmen, W. Hmida, M. Jaidane,
S. Hmissa Belhaj Salah
*Department of Pathology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: Urachal carcinomas are rare, representing
only 0.01%of adult cancers and 0.17-0.34% of bladder cancers. These
are very aggressive tumours with poor prognosis. These tumours are
usually adenocarcinomas and occur at the dome or anterior wall of the
bladder.
Methods: Our purpose is to analyse clinical, radiological and patholog-
ical characteristics of these tumours in two patients.
We reviewed the data of Urachal carcinomas diagnosed in the Urology
Department of Sahloul University Hospital of Sousse (Tunisia) during
2015-2020.
There were two patients, a49YO man and a57YO woman. Both of them
presented haematuria; isolated for him, associated with hypogastral pain
for her.
Results: Uroscan showed a median tumour process of the bladder
dome limited to the bladder wall for him, associated with lymph-
adenopathy for her. The extension assessment objectified a pulmo-
nary metastasis for her. He underwent a partial cystectomy and the
specimen showed histologically an urachal adenocarcinoma infiltrat-
ing all the parietal layers with tumour-free boundaries. Adjuvant
Chemotherapy (CT) wasn’t recommended behind the lack of stan-
dardized guides. Unfortunately, he recurred two years later and de-
veloped pulmonary metastasis for what he took CT but without
response. The lady had an endoscopy-guided-biopsy which
confronted to clinical and radiological data, the histological conclu-
sion was in favour of urachal adenocarcinoma and palliative treat-
ment was proposed for her.
Conclusion: Although it is effortless to distinguish urachal from non-
urachal adenocarcinoma in cystectomy specimens, it is challenging to
differentiate them on small biopsy specimens which requires a compari-
son with clinical, cystoscopic and CT data. Until now, surgery is the only
effective treatment, and its results depend essentially on the stage of the
tumour.
E-PS-27-013
Primary kidney angiosarcoma – a rare case report and review of
literature
D. Costache*, R. Buzulica, G. Pitik, G. Gorun, H. Muresan
*Pathology Department, Colentina University Clinical Hospital,
Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Primary angiosarcoma of the kidney is ex-
tremely rare, with less than 40 cases reported in the literature up to date.
Most reports described the origin of angiosarcoma in a normal kidney, but
it has been reported also in multicystic kidney.
Methods: We present the case of a 51-year-old male with right lumbar
pain and macroscopic haematuria. CT examination revealed a poorly
circumscribed, hypodense mass (5,8/3,6 cm) in the right renal pelvis, with
invasion of the parenchyma, without disruption of the renal capsule, with
hydronephrosis and a mass of 4,2/4,3 cm in the left adrenal gland (pos-
sible metastatic). Radical nephrectomy was performed.
Results: At grossing, we found a flashy, soft, red tumour, with an
extensive area of central necrosis and haemorrhage. Microscopically
the renal parenchyma was replaced by a malignant vascular prolifer-
ation with mitotically active (>10 and <19 mitoses/10HPF) pleomor-
phic endothelial cells, with spindled and epithelioid morphology and
large hyperchromatic nuclei, prominent nucleoli, with extensive
areas of necrosis (over 50% of the tumour). Immunohistochemical
stains showed strong and diffuse positivity for vimentin, CD31,
CD34, ERG, FLI1, actin, with a Ki67 index of 35% and negative
for CK7, HMB45, S100, indicating that the tumour was
angiosarcoma of the kidney.
Conclusion: Primary angiosarcoma of the kidney is a rare and aggressive
neoplasm with poor patient outcome. Little is known about its prognostic
features or response to treatment. Tumours under 5 cm in size appear to
be associated with an improved outcome.
E-PS-27-014
A rare and interesting case of sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma with
heterologous elements of osteosarcoma
D. Costache*, M. Driu, H. Muresan
*Pathology Department, Colentina University Clinical Hospital,
Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Urothelial carcinoma is the most common
type of urinary cancer. However, sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma is
highly malignant and rare. In the urinary bladder, it only accounts for
0.1 to 0.3% of carcinomas
Methods: We present the case of a 68-year-old male with a history of
prostatic transurethral resection for benign prostatic hyperplasia, who
presented with macroscopic haematuria. Cystoscopy revealed blood
cloths in the bladder and a tumour on la left-lateral wall of the urinary
bladder, which was resected transurethral. The resected tissue was em-
bedded in paraffin and examined on H&E.
Results: Microscopically the urothelial architecture was replaced by a
malignant biphasic proliferation of high-grade urothelial carcinoma with
papillary or nonpapillary pattern and spindle cell sarcoma with areas of
heterologous differentiation of osteosarcoma, with filigree/lace-like dis-
organized woven bone (intimately associated with neoplastic cells) and
many multinucleated osteoclast-like giant cells, with invasion in the
muscularis propria and areas of necrosis. Immunohistochemical stains
showed strong and diffuse positivity for GATA3 and CK7 in the
urothelial carcinoma component; vimentin and SATB2 in the areas with
heterologous differentiation of osteosarcoma; Ki67 index was positive in
90% of the tumoral cells.
Conclusion: Sarcomatoid urothelial carcinomas are biphasic malignant
neoplasms exhibiting morphological/immunohistochemical evidence of
epithelial and mesenchymal differentiation with the presence or absence
of heterologous elements (osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma and spindle
cell sarcoma).
E-PS-27-015
Adult cystic nephroma – a rare member of the MEST family
R. Cruz*, C. Quadros, I. Alves
*Department of Pathology, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, Instituto
de Histologia e Biologia do Desenvolvimento, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
Background & objectives: Adult cystic nephroma is a rare tumour with
a prevalence of <1%, included in the mixed epithelial and stromal tu-
mours (MEST) family, predominantly cystic to variably solid, usually
benign. Herein, we present a renal cystic tumour from our routine
practice.
Methods: A 41-year old woman, without relevant clinical history, started
with intermittent low back pain with three weeks of duration. Abdominal-
pelvic computed tomography revealed the existence of a renal
multilocular cystic lesion, with thick septations, and consequently was
submitted to radical nephroureterectomy.
Results: Macroscopically, there was a well-circumscribed capsulated
cystic multiloculated tumour with 8 cm, with non-communicating cysts
with variable sizes and thick septa with translucent content, and focal
spongy microcystic areas. Histologically, the cysts were lined by flat to
columnar epithelium sometimes with hobnail features and eosinophilic to
amphophilic cytoplasm, without atypia; the stromal component ranges
from hypocellular and collagenous to hypercellular spindled areas, often
with an ovarian stroma-like appearance, without atypia and mitoses; the
stromal cells were immunoreactive for smooth muscle actin, desmin,
CD10, oestrogen and progesterone receptors. These features were consis-
tent with the diagnosis of adult cystic nephroma.
Conclusion: Adult cystic nephroma is a rare renal biphasic tumour with
epithelial and stromal components, mainly benign. Rarely, it can have an
aggressive behaviour, especially in malignant transformation cases. This
tumour typically occurs in perimenopausal women with a mean age of 52
years, in contrast to our younger patient. The hormonal imbalance is an
important etiological factor in the histopathogenesis of this tumour.
E-PS-27-017
Papillary prostate ductal adenocarcinoma mimicking papillary
urothelial carcinoma in bladder transurethral resection
S. Demir*, D. Unal Kocabey, F.H. Dilek, Y. Yılmaz, A. Akder Sarı
*Izmir Katip Celebi University Ataturk Training and Research Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Prostatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is
uncommon form of prostatic carcinoma histologically characterized pre-
dominantly by papillary and cribriform architecture. It can be diagnosti-
cally challenging when encountered in organs other than prostate. Here
we present a papillary PDA mimicking papillary bladder neoplasm.
Methods: This case is about an 80-year old man who presented with
nocturia and urgency. Computer tomography showed diffuse thickening
of the bladder wall and polypoid structures projecting to luminal space.
Therefore, he underwent transurethral resection (TUR) of the urinary
bladder.
Results: Microscopic examination showed a tumour composed of focal
cribriform and mostly of papillary structures with fibrovascular cores
lined by tall, pseudostratified columnar epithelium with high-grade nuclei
in keeping with the initial clinical diagnosis of papillary urothelial carci-
noma. There was extensive crush artefact. In some areas papillary fronds
were lined by single layer of cuboidal or hobnail cells with crowded,
round-to-ovoid hyperchromatic nuclei reminiscent of a nephrogenic ade-
noma with papillary architecture. The tumour was negative for
cytokeratin-7, GATA3, p63 and PAX8. Past disease history revealed high
grade prostate acinar adenocarcinoma with ductal component. The addi-
tional immunostains showed tumour to be positive with NKX3.1, PSAP
and PSA.
Conclusion: PDA should be always kept in mind when evaluating met-
astatic carcinomas showing papillary or cribriform architecture in elderly
male patients. Unusual histological findings such as hobnail cells or tall
columnar cells with high grade nuclei should raise the possibility of PDA
when encountered in urinary bladder papillary neoplasms.
E-PS-27-018
Low-grade oncocytic tumour of the kidney, an emerging entity: a
report of two cases and review of the literature
M. Di Capite*, M.A.H. Ahmed
*Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Low-grade oncocytic tumour (LOT) of the
kidney is a recently described entity, which has well-defined
histomorphological and immunohistochemical features. With established
classifications, it does not neatly match definitions for either oncocytoma
or eosinophilic chromophobe renal cell carcinoma.
Methods: We report two such cases which arrived at our institution in
short succession; our objective is to increase awareness of this evolving
lesion, and to summarise the recent literature. We describe the character-
istic features of these oncocytic tumours and their immunohistochemical
profile. A search of the literature using PubMed including the terms
‘LOT’, ‘oncocytic tumour’, ‘hybrid tumour’ is performed.
Results: Our first case is from a 50 year old male who had nephrectomy
for an 18 cm unilocular cystic mass. The second case is from a 76 year old
male, who underwent a partial nephrectomy. Microscopically, both tu-
mours included clearly demarcated loose oedematous areas with
microcystic spaces, as well as nests of oncocytic cells which lacked
raisinoid nuclei. Immunohistochemistry showed both cases were strongly
positive for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and negative for cluster of differentia-
tion 117 (CD117), consistent with previous published findings. In the
literature, the tumours have been shown to have an indolent behaviour.
Conclusion: We have demonstrated the typical histological and immu-
nohistochemical features of LOT. We hope through presenting these two
cases, we will raise awareness of this entity and provide an aid in assess-
ment of the ‘unusual’ oncocytic tumour.
E-PS-27-019
Systemic metastasis of signet ring cell carcinoma of the prostate - an
autopsy outcome
M. Dieaconu*, S. Giusca, D.G. Ciobanu Apostol, I. Tomac, I.D. Caruntu
*"Sf. Spiridon" Emergency County Hospital Iasi, University Hospital
"Dr. C. I. Parhon" Iasi, Romania
Background & objectives: Signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) of the
prostate is a rare histological variant (2.5% of cases), firstly reported in
1979. We present an aggressive case of SRCC, with systemic metastasis
and rapid fatal outcome.
Methods: A 60-year-old man diagnosed in 2018 with congenital
hydronephrosis and prostatic adenoma associated with chronic urinary
retention was admitted at the Urology Department for bilateral
ureterohydronephrosis, staghorn calculi, acute urinary infection and
PSA<0.1 ng/ml. Prostatic fine needle biopsy revealed benign prostatic
hyperplasia with rich polymorphous inflammatory infiltrate in the glan-
dular component. He died 27 days later; the autopsy was performed.
Results: The autopsy revealed multiple nodules in lungs, pericardium,
liver, pancreas, small gastric curvature, peritoneum, bladder and prostate.
The prostate and the involved organs contained typical signet-ring cells
(SRC) characterized by abundant clear cytoplasmic vacuoles displacing
and compressing the nuclei, that infiltrate as single cells or small clusters.
SRC were diffuse and intense/moderately positive for PSA and negative
for CK7 and CK20. p63 was negative in the tumour (internal control
present).
Conclusion: The case particularity consists in the discrepancies between
the morphological findings in biopsy specimen, the PSA low level and
final histopathological diagnosis, the rarity of SRCC variant, the presence
of systemic metastases, and the silent course of disease with rapid, fatal
outcome.
E-PS-27-020
Renal leiomyoma
F. Antoniadou, A. Dimitriadi*, N. Poulianitis, C. Fragkoulis,
E. Gkamatsi, T. Choreftaki
*General Hospital of Athens “G. Gennimatas”/Department of Surgical
Pathology, Greece
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Renal leiomyoma is a rare benign tumour, (0,
3% of all primary renal cell neoplasms) with smooth muscle cell differ-
entiation. It represents in most instances as an incidental finding.
Methods: Α 56 year old female patient, was admitted to the hospital due
to prolapse of the uterus. MRI revealed a compact exophytic lesion mea-
suring 2,6x 2,5x 2 on the left kidney. On cut sections the later lesion was
white, elastic, firm and well circumscribed with an oedematous central
area of 1cm.
Results: On microscopic examination, the tumour was consisted of me-
dium sized cells with mild nuclear atypia with no necrosis, arranged in a
fascicular pattern. Mitoses were rare, <1/10 HPF. Perivascular
hyalinization of the stroma and cystic degeneration were also observed.
The immunohistochemical results showed positivity for smooth muscle
markers (SMA, Vimentin, Desmin, H-Caldesmon, HHF-35) and negativ-
ity for the following: HMB-45, Mart-1, Synaptophysin, AE1/AE3 and
Congo Red. The mitotic index Ki67 (Mib 1) was 1%. Surgical excision
was the therapeutical approach.
Conclusion: Renal leiomyoma is a rare entity with indolent clinical be-
haviour. It should not be confused with angiomyolipoma (predominantly
leiomyomatous type) which is positive for melanocytic markers, although
capsular leiomyoma frequently contains a population of cells, strongly
positive for melanocytic markers.
E-PS-27-021
The importance of the evaluation of non-neoplastic kidney in tumour
nephrectomy specimens: a case report
M.N. Dogruyol*, A.A. Ozagari, F. Kabukcuoglu
*University of Health Sciences, Sisli Hamidiye Etfal Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey
Background & objectives: Non-neoplastic changes are often identified in
renal parenchyma of the nephrectomy specimens for renal neoplasms. They
are often overlooked. However, they may be prognostic or therapeutic im-
portance. The accurate pathologic evaluation of the non-neoplastic renal
parenchymais important for subsequent patient management.
Methods: A 62-year-old male patient presented with right flank pain with
a history of hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Computerized tomography revealed a 6cm mass in the right kidney
Results: After evaluation of the nephrectomy specimen the tumour was
diagnosed as clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Diffuse and nodular
mesangial glomerulosclerosis and arteriolar hyalinosis in the afferent
and efferent hilar arterioles were seen in the non-neoplastic renal paren-
chyma. After the comment about the possibility of diabetic glomerulop-
athy in the pathology report the patient’s diabetes mellitus was diagnosed.
Conclusion: Considering that the evaluation of nephrectomy specimens
primarily focuses on the diagnosis, grading, staging etc. of the tumour in
question, non-neoplastic lesions might be overlooked during the routine
pathologic evaluation. Non-neoplastic lesions is an important tool in rec-
ognizing patients at risk for progressive renal disease after nephrectomy
and could be an important step in providing early preventive and treat-
ment measures, better medical care of patients undergoing nephrectomy
for neoplastic processes.
E-PS-27-022
A case report of urinary bladder IMT as late complication of bone
marrow alotransplantation
G. Dordevic*, S. Stifter
*Department of Pathology Medial Faculty, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Background & objectives: An inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour
(IMT) is composed of myofibroblastic spindle cells and inflammatory
cells that infiltrate stroma. IMT is rare tumour being important because
of dd of malignant spindle cell tumours and as a late complication of bone
marrow transplantation.
Methods: Here we report a case of a young patient (born 2000) after bone
marrow alotransplantation (2006). due to lymphatic leukaemia (2002.)
and with radiologic endovesical polypoid lesion (2014).
Results: Patient underwent twice to the transurethral resection of the livid
fleshy bladder tumour and, at a later date, partial cystectomy because of
relapse. Histology revealed highly vascularized, mesenchymal tumour
with pronounced myxoid stroma and spindle cell proliferation with slight-
ly enlarged and sparsely hyperchromatic cell nuclei without mitotic ac-
tivity, scarce lymphoplasmacytic infiltration and expansive growth to-
ward the muscle wall. Tumour cells show a diffusely positive immuno-
reaction reaction for vimentin and SM-actin, focally for pancytokeratin
and CAM 5.2, but negative for ALK. Differentially diagnostic IMT,
polypoid cystitis, myxoid and spindle cell neoplasms of the bladder were
considered, without criteria for malignancy.
Conclusion: IMT should be considered in differential diagnosis for young
patients presenting with bleeding bladder tumours and significant anaemia,
especially after bone marrow alotransplantation as a late complication.
IMTs of the urinary bladder mostly has benign disease course, and good
prognosis can be achieved after surgical resection as in our patient.
E-PS-27-023
A case of mixed and unclassified sex-cord-stromal tumour with an-
nular tubules
G. Dordevic*, S. Stifter
*Department of Pathology Medial Faculty, University of Rijeka, Croatia
Background & objectives: Sex cord-stromal tumours of the testis are
rare and more commonly seen in the paediatric age group. Mixed and
unclassified testicular stromal tumours are neoplasms of undetermined
differentiation and contain mixed Leydig, Sertoli, and granulosa cells or
merely entrapped germ cells.
Methods: We present a testicular tumour of a ten-month-old infant. At 3
months of age, the mother noticed swelling and enlargement of the right
testis. Ultrasound examinations discovered a cystic and solid appearing
mass. First, we received an intraoperative biopsy and after our diagnosis
of a tumour, the orchidectomy was performed.
Results: Histology revealed lobular structures with cystic formations
coated with proliferating Sertoli-like cells. Clusters of these immature
cells were mostly surrounded by the basement membrane and the cells
within the formation surround the hyaline, PAS-positive material forming
annular tubules. The stroma was oedematous, immature, cells were fusi-
form and mostly PAS-positive. In cystic spaces, there was sparse mucin.
Immunohistochemistry showed diffuse positivity for inhibin, vimentin,
WT1, focally for CD99 and nuclear reaction for S100. Stroma was dif-
fusely, strongly positive for SMA.
Conclusion: The final* diagnosis was a mixed and unclassified sex-cord-
stromal tumour. However, this tumour also had some features of an ovar-
ian sex-cord tumour with annular tubules which made it special and more
interesting.
E-PS-27-025
Primitive neuroectodermal tumour: a case report of malignant trans-
formation of teratoma of the testis
C. Faria*, V. Almeida, R. Almeida, M.B. Pimentão, H. Moreira, A. Lai,
J. Gama, J. Madeira, F. Ramalhosa, V. Sousa
*Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Portugal
Background & objectives: Teratomas can be differentiated into somatic
elements and malignant transformation. Primitive neuroectodermal tu-
mour is a rare entity that results from the malignant transformation along
the ectodermal lines; its prognosis is extremely poor with highly aggres-
sive clinical course.
Methods: We report the case of a 65 year old man with multiple bone
lytic lesions and a 9cm mass in the left testis. The patient was submitted to
orchidectomy.
Results: Gross examination showed a testis with a solid nodule consti-
tuted by a firm and white tissue with various cystic spaces, with 9x8x7cm.
Histopathological examination revealed a well delimited neoplasia com-
posed of mature teratoma predominantly with cartilaginous differentia-
tion but also of immature teratoma with blastema-like areas and glandular
structures without atypia. Glial differentiation was present. In the centre
of this neoplasm, there was an irregular nodule constituted by cells with
scant cytoplasm and hyperchromatic to granular nuclei.
Immunohistochemistry study showed positivity for synaptophysin,
chromogranin A, NSE, CD56, vimentin, MAP 2 and focally for desmin,
S100 protein, GFAP and CD99.
EMA, CK, SALL4, OCT4, GLypican-3, WT1, CD30, CD34, Fli-1, ERG
were negative.
Conclusion: The diagnosis was testicular teratoma with malignant transfor-
mation into primitive neuroectodermal tumour with glial differentiation.
Surgical resection is the recommended therapy for localized disease, because
this neoplasia is resistant to radiation and chemotherapy. However, our patient
died due to advanced disease at the time of the diagnosis with bone involve-
ment leading to an unfavourable clinical outcome.
E-PS-27-026
Alpha-d-galactose-binding lectin (native frutalin) as diagnostic
marker of prostate cancer in humans
M.d.F. Figueiredo*, R.d.A. Moreira, F.D. Rocha Filho, R.W. Bezerra de
Araújo, J. Carneiro Melo, A.C.d.O. Monteiro Moreira
*University of Fortaleza, Brazil
Background & objectives: Plant lectins are often used in structural and
functional investigations of complex carbohydrates due to their ability to
detect cellular changes in glycosylation patterns induced by pathological
processes. Biological markers have a promising potential as diagnostic
tools in cancer.
Methods: Biotinylated frutalin was tested as a histochemical probe and pro-
tein marker for the detection of human prostate cancer. The semi-quantitative
determination of positivity was based on the following criteria: Weak (+,
<10% positive cells), Moderate (++, 10-50% moderately or strongly positive
cells), and Strong (+++, >50% moderately or strongly positive cells).
Results: To assess the ability of frutalin to recognize tissue prostate
cancer cells and hyperplasia, twenty cases were selected by the histopath-
ological findings. The 100% positivity in cases of Pca the negativity in
cases of BPH. The images captured by professional use Axion Vision 4.5
software were analysed and the data on the optical density of marking,
were treated statistically by the non-parametric Mann-Whitney test and
showed statistically significant (p <0.0001) in differentiating between
cancer and benign prostatic hyperplasia. This use of biotinylated frutalin,
as probes in histochemistry provides a specific recognition of cells in the
tumour tissue. This fact differentiates the lectin staining technique using
frutalin, the measurement of PSA-st.
Conclusion: In this study, biotinylated native frutalin proved to be an attrac-
tive alternative diagnostic tool for research on human prostate cancer, capable
of differentiating benign prostatic hyperplasia from prostate cancer. The
marker has potential for use in the diagnosis of prostate cancer in humans.
E-PS-27-027
A primary extrarenal renal cell carcinoma
N. Foerster-Massey*, L. Vlatkovic, B. Katz Li
*Oslo University Hospital, Norway
Background & objectives: We present a rare case of a renal cell carci-
noma in the retroperitoneum in the vicinity of the left kidney, where both
morphology and origin of the tumour were challenging to define.
Methods: The patient was a middle-aged man. Gross examination
showed that the tumour measuring 10 cm in diameter, was connected to
the left kidney through a branch of the renal vein. No connection to ureter
was identified. The tumour was without any normal kidney tissue. No
tumour was detected either in the left kidney, adrenal gland or in the right
kidney.
Results: Histologically, tumour was heterogeneous both with tubular and
papillary areas with clear and eosinophilic cells with some atypical cells
with nucleolar ISUP grade 3/4. More solid parts with eosinophilic and
oncocytic-like cells were seen. Tumour was positive for Pax-8 and
showed heterogeneous staining for CK7, AMACR, CD10 and vimentin
by immunohistochemistry. FH was retained. CK20, CD117 and cathep-
sin K were negative.
Based on these features tumour was diagnosed as an extrarenal renal cell
carcinoma (RCC), unclassified. We consider this tumour to be an exam-
ple of a primary extrarenal renal cell carcinoma, likely arising from me-
sonephric remnants.
Conclusion: This is to the best of our knowledge, the first case of an
unclassified extrarenal RCC.
We would like to thank Dr. Argani at Johns Hopkins Hospital USA, for
his support with this case.
E-PS-27-028
Urethral prostatic ectopic tissue with eosinophilic epithelial metapla-
sia: a case report
E. Gerakova*, M. Koleva, V. Belovezhdov, D. Dikov
*University Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment Sveti Georgi,
Bulgaria
Background & objectives: Prostatic ectopic tissue is rare in urethra.
Eosinophilic metaplasia (EM) is a characteristic lesion for the benign
prostatic epithelium. We present clinicopathological and immunohisto-
chemical features of a case of prostatic urethral cyst in association with
EM in ectopic prostatic epithelium.
Methods: We report a case of 20-year-old male with a history of circum-
cision and nocturnal enuresis up to the age of 13 years who is currently
presented with pollakiuria and cystic formation at the level of urethral
meatus.
Results: Histological investigation of the specimen shows microcystic
lesion, lined by a prostatic epithelium. There are areas with prostatic
epithelial EM. Both normal ectopic prostatic epithelium and epithelium
with EM show PSA and NKX3.1 positive staining. Only epithelium with
EM shows PAS and MUC1 positive staining.
Conclusion: We report for the first time the presence of EM in an ectopic
prostatic tissue. Ectopic prostatic EM cells save their histochemical
(PAS+) and immunohistochemical (MUC1+) features. Presence of EM
may serve as additional proof of benign character of lesion.
E-PS-27-029
Merkel cell carcinoma metastatic to the testis: report of a rare diag-
nosis and review of the literature
D. Gigliano*, J. Lobo, P. Lopes, R. Henrique, Â. Rodrigues
*Portuguese Institute of Oncology - Porto, Department of Pathology,
Portugal
Background & objectives: Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is an uncom-
mon, aggressive cutaneous neuroendocrine neoplasm, with high recurrence
rates. MCC metastases to the testis are an exceptional occurrence, with only
eight cases reported to date in literature. We hereby report the ninth.
Methods: We report the case of a 58-year-old man with history of MCC
of the wrist and multiple recurrences. Thirty-seven months after the initial
diagnosis, the patient started complaining of scrotal oedema. Further in-
spections disclosed a solitary, indurated, moderately echogenic nodule
within the left testis. Laboratory workup was unremarkable, including
Virchows Arch
normal serum AFP, β-HCG and LDH. The patient underwent radical
orchiectomy.
Results: Macroscopic examination revealed a 60×49×40mm white to tan,
ovoid, solid, centrally necrotic mass, almost completely replacing the
testicular parenchyma. On light microscopy, the mass corresponded to a
highly cellular, monotonous proliferation of small, blue, round cells,
exhibiting a solid growth pattern, extensively infiltrating the seminiferous
tubules. Lymphovascular invasion was easily identified. On higher mag-
nification, tumour cells were often arranged in an organoid/trabecular
fashion, displaying scant eosinophilic cytoplasm, hyperchromatic en-
larged nuclei, coarse chromatin, visible nucleoli and brisk mitotic activity.
Immunohistochemistry revealed strong diffuse immunoexpression of
neuroendocrine markers; dot-like paranuclear immunostaining for
CK20 and CK8/18; negativity for CK7, CD45, PLAP, OCT 3/4, TTF-1
and PS100. A diagnosis of metastatic MCC was made.
Conclusion: Metastatic dissemination of MCC to the testis is a rare event.
Clinical suspicion and accurate histopathological assessment, including
immunohistochemistry, are necessary for correctly diagnosing this entity.
Clinicians must be aware of this unusual pattern of dissemination, since
orchiectomy can be curative.
E-PS-27-030
Periureteral amyloidosis that mimics neoplasm: a case report with
review of literature
M.T. Gonzalez-Serrano*, H. Fuentes-Saavedra, J.J. Salamanca Bustos,
F. Leiva Cepas, R. Ortega-Salas
*Dept. of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Spain
Background & objectives: Amyloidosis is a group of disorders associ-
ated with extracellular amyloid deposit. Urinary tract amyloidosis is very
rare and is of interest to physicians because it mimics urothelial cell
carcinoma clinically, cystoscopically, and radiologically. We report a
case of this disease.
Methods: A 76-years-old man presented with haematuria for 6
months. Subsequent Computed Tomography (CT) revealed a homo-
geneous soft tissue periureteral density mass as well as
hydronephrosis. Ureteral carcinoma was suspected and
nephroureterectomy was performed.
Results: Grossly, the segment of the ureter was surrounded by a lightly
orange and firm tissue that extended to renal sinus fat. Ureteral wall was
lightly thickened. Urothelial carcinoma was not identified.
Histology of the cross-section revealed markedly thickened soft tissue
due to amorphous, pale eosinophilic, extracellular deposits extending to
renal sinus fat and ureteric wall. The amorphous material exhibited apple-
green birefringence on Congo-red staining. No follow-up information
was available for this patient.
Conclusion: Despite the rarity of localized amyloidosis, urologists, radi-
ologists and pathologists should be aware of this entity to avoid misinter-
pretation and overtreatment. Histological examination is a requirement
for definitive diagnosis and proper management. When diagnosis of AL
amyloidosis is made, it is important to pursue further work-up to evaluate
for systemic amyloidosis. Primary localized amyloidosis has a benign
clinical course and usually is cured by with complete resection.
E-PS-27-031
Ductal type of prostate adenocarcinoma is not always high grade
D. Goutas*, N. Katsoulas, A.C. Lazaris, G. Liapis
*First Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, The National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens - "Laikon" General Hospital of
Athens, Greece
Background & objectives: PIN-like ductal adenocarcinoma represents a
rare entity of prostate ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) which, in contrast to
the other ductal variants, behaves similar to Gleason's score 6 (3+3).
Methods: We describe the case of a 67 year old male who was hospital-
ized due to obstructive urinary symptoms. His clinical examination re-
vealed a slightly elevated serum prostate specific antigen, while the digital
rectum examination was negative. A simple suprapubic prostatectomy
was performed. A focus of limited “prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia
(PIN)-like” ductal adenocarcinoma of Gleason’s pattern 3 was detected.
Results: Histologically, several crowded, basophilic glands were ob-
served in an area of 10mm, lined by more than 2 layers of cells, with
hyperchromatic, cylindrical nuclei. Immunohistochemical analysis was
negative for high molecular weight cytokeratin (CK903/34BE12) in these
glands, thus confirming the absence of basal cells and differentiating it
from high grade PIN (HGPIN). Contrary to the other, poorly differenti-
ated variants of prostatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) (cribriform, solid,
single-cell), the “PIN-like” pattern behaves similar to Gleason’s score 6
(3+3) (Grade Group 1) acinar prostate adenocarcinoma, lacking therefore
of substantial metastatic ability.
Conclusion: It is important to recognize “PIN-like ductal adenocarcino-
ma” as a separate entity from the other ductal adenocarcinoma variants
and from HGPIN due to major differences in clinical behaviour. In fact,
the term “ductal” has been proposed to be omitted from this type of
cancer. In conclusion, the option of active surveillance with close clinical
follow-up, serial biomarker evaluation, imaging and biopsy can be con-
sidered as a safe management option.
E-PS-27-032
Renal hydatid cyst misdiagnosed and treated as a cystic renal
tumour: a diagnostic pitfall
M. Hamdani*, A. Baccouche, O. Belkacem, N. Jelidi, D. Chiba,
Z. Nfikha, A. Bdioui, S. Hmissa Belhaj Salah
*Department of Pathology, Sahloul University Hospital of Sousse,
Tunisia
Background & objectives: The hydatid disease is a parasitic infestation
caused by the larval stage of Echinococcus granulosus. The renal hydatid
cyst is uncommon compared to those hepatic or pulmonary. Most patients
remain asymptomatic for years and hydatiduria is the only pathognomon-
ic symptom.
Methods: We report a rare case of renal hydatid cyst misdiagnosed and
treated as a renal tumour.
Results: A 45-year-old woman with no significant medical history pre-
sented with left lumber pain with haematuria. Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) displayed a left renal mass with cystic and solid compo-
nents, showing discreet enhancement. The mass was classified as
Bosniak-IV. The diagnosis of renal malignant tumour was made. The
patient underwent a lumbotomy. The mass was adherent to the perirenal
fat. A nephrectomy with surrenalectomy was performed. The gross spec-
imen showed a renal cyst (9x7x6cm). The cyst contained multiple internal
smaller cysts recalling the appearance of the hydatid cyst. The microscop-
ic study showed an acellular eosinophilic laminated membrane lined by a
germinal layer. The diagnosis of renal hydatic cyst was made.
Conclusion: Although the renal hydatid cyst is relatively rare, this diag-
nosis must be considered in patients with renal cystic masses.
Preoperative diagnosis is challenging, especially in type IV cysts which
can mimic a renal tumour and lead to overtreatment.
E-PS-27-033
Bilateral synchronous testicular germ cell tumours with discordant
histology: a case report
N. Herlihy*, A. Haider
*UCLH, United Kingdom
Background & objectives: Synchronous bilateral testicular cancer
(SBTC) is a rare occurrence, accounting for only 0.5-1% of new testicular
cancers; most BTC develop metachronously. In most published case
series of SBTC, bilateral seminomas comprise the majority; discordant
histology has been reported in 15-70%.
Methods: Discordant histology in SBTC can be challenging from the
perspective of staging and management and is associated with poorer
survival outcomes compared to patients with concordant histology.
Here we present a case report of a 34-year-old patient who presented with
a large left sided testicular mass.
Results: The patient was found to have bilateral testicular tumours on
ultrasound, accompanied by elevated alpha-fetoprotein (946 kIU/L), hu-
man chorionic gonadotropin (59.8 iU/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (555
iU/L). He had no risk factors for testicular cancer, including cryptorchi-
dism. He underwent a bilateral radical inguinal orchidectomy.
Microscopically, Stage pT3 embryonal carcinoma was diagnosed in the
left testicle and Stage pT1 classical seminoma in the right testicle, neither
of which had any other germ cell component. The patient proceeded to
adjuvant bleomycin, etoposide and platinum chemotherapy.
Conclusion: Nonseminomatous components in SBTC are often reported
as a broad category; the occurrence of synchronous seminoma and em-
bryonal carcinoma has rarely been described. We discuss the histological
appearances, possible pathophysiology, and staging of this unusual pre-
sentation of bilateral testicular cancer.
E-PS-27-034
Desmoplastic small round cell tumour of paratesticular region
P. Hurník*, D. Ziak, P. Vazan, L. Kucerova, B. Miculkova, M. Uvirova,
V. Zidlik
*Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Ostrava, Department
of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava,
Czech Republic
Background & objectives: Desmoplastic small round cell tumour
(DSRCT) is a rare, aggressive, and frequently fatal tumour, which is most
often seen in adolescent and young adult patients. It has characteristic
morphology, and the fusion of the EWSR1-WT1 genes is diagnostic for it.
Methods: We report a case of 27-year-old man with tumour swelling of
right testical, who underwent unilateral orchiectomy.
Results: Histologically was the tumour composed of nests and anastomosing
cords of small blue cells with scant eosinophilic cytoplasm, oval nuclei,
prominent nucleoli and frequent mitoses. Comedonecrosis and monocellular
necrosis with massive lymphangioinvasion were observed. A remarkable
desmoplastic stromal reaction was a part of the tumour.
Immunohistochemical examination with positivity of CK AE1/AE3, EMA,
desmin, NSE, PLAP and negativity of WT1, Syn, Chrom, Trombomoduline,
S100, HMB45, GFAP, CD117, CK5/6, CK7, CK20, AFP, CEA, BerEP4,
CD30 and CD99 was also performed. The characteristic EWSR1-WT1 gene
fusion was detected by the genetic examination.
Conclusion: Paratesticular localization of DSRCT is very rare and it can
be present with an isolated mass or with metastatic disease. Orchiectomy
and local surgery is preferred method of local control. Patients with
DSRCT have very poor survival rate, but patients with DRSCT of
paratesticular localization have better outcomes. However, our patient
could not undergo full follow-up therapy due to numerous comorbidities.
He died after fourteen months of reduced therapy.
E-PS-27-035
Low-grade oncocytic renal cell carcinoma: one case report
C. Tolba, R. Karam*, M. Regragui, F. Marnissi, M. Karkouri
*Department of Pathology, Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Casablanca,
Morocco
Background & objectives: Low-grade oncocytic renal cell carcinoma
(LORCC) is a rare entity, not yet recognized by the WHO classification.
Its main differential diagnosis is renal oncocytoma. We report here a case
of this tumour.
Methods: 56 year old woman who consults for right low back pain. The
CT-scan shows a rounded, 48 mm tissue renal process. Macroscopic
examination showed a lower polar renal neoplasm. Histological exami-
nation revealed a carcinomatous tubulo-alveolar architecture with solid
foci. The tumour cells are oncocytic, with slightly atypical nuclei present-
ing mitotic figures.
Tumour cells expressed cytokeratin7 and did not express CKit.
Results: LORCC is an emerging renal neoplasm. The main differential
diagnoses are oncocytoma and chromophobic renal cell carcinoma
(RCC). The LORCC shows a solid architecture or similar to the
oncocytoma with more marked nuclear atypia and mitosis. In the pres-
ence of nuclear atypia and mitoses without the irregular appearance of
nuclear contours and peri-nuclear halots of chromophobic RCC, the
LORCC is strongly suspected. The LORCC shows an IHC profile
Ckit-/CK7+ against an IHC profile Ckit+/CK7+ in the eosinophilic var-
iant chromophobic RCC and the onocytoma.
Conclusion: LORCC is an oncocytic renal neoplasm which has a specific
morphology and immunohistochemical profile (CD117-/CK7+), not yet
recognized by the WHO, but represents an emerging entity. Its main
differential diagnosis is oncocytoma and considered indolent.
E-PS-27-036
Mucin production in atypical small acinar proliferation with prostat-
ic intraepithelial neoplasia and in adenocarcinomas of the prostate
E. Kazachkov*, A. Dub, I. Cheter, E. Kazachkova
*South Ural State Medical University, Russia
Background & objectives: The combination of ASAP and PIN worsens
the prognosis for carcinoma. Therefore, there is a need to clarify the
morphogenetic relationship between PIN, ASAP and prostate carcinomas
of various grades, which may be done by studying mucin production.
Methods: We evaluated prostate biopsy samples of 90 patients divided
into 6 groups according to the morphological diagnosis: the combination
of ASAP and PIN and the carcinomas of Grade Groups 1-5. Normal
prostate tissue samples served as controls. We performed Pas-reaction,
alcyan blue staining (pH 1,0; 2,5), and immunohistochemical staining
with 34betaE12, D2-40, and P504S antibodies. We applied non-
parametric statistical methods.
Results: The prevailing ASAP phenotype was D2-40 (−), 34betaE12 (−),
and P504S (+). In ASAP with PIN, neutral mucins were detected in
greater numbers than in adenocarcinomas. Acid mucins were detected
in all 6 groups. The highest level of their expression was recorded in
Grade group 1 adenocarcinoma [Me = 68 (23-75) and the lowest level
was in Grade group 5 [Me = 50 (32-80)]. In combination of ASAP and
PIN, acidic mucins were scarce, and their expression was the lowest in
comparison with other groups [Me = 28 (16-34)] (p = 0.0001). Sulphated
mucins were detected only in PIN foci. Sulphated mucins were absent in
ASAP foci and in adenocarcinomas.
Conclusion: In PIN foci, sulphated mucins are characteristic components
of the secretion localized in the apical part of the cytoplasm of the luminal
epithelium. They are not typical of ASAP foci and adenocarcinomas of all
grade groups.
E-PS-27-037
Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH)-deficient renal cell carcinoma
(RCC): a case report of a rare subtype
S. Kestel Kayik*, A. Olgun, S. Çetin, A. Atan, F. Polat, İ. Işık Gönül,
Ö. Ekinci
*Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: SDH is the key enzyme that connects the
tricarboxylic acid cycle and mitochondrial electron transport chain and
inherited in an autosomal fashion in contrast to other mitochondrial com-
plexes. SDH-deficient RCC is a newly described rare entity.
Virchows Arch
Methods: A-24-year old male who presented with haematuria was inves-
tigated. A mass lesion was detected in the left kidney by radiologic ex-
amination. The subsequent nephrectomy revealed an exophytic mass lo-
cated at the superior part of the left kidney. The tumour was well-
circumscribed and had a tan-brown-red cut surface. Haemorrhage and
partial cystic change were noted.
Results: Microscopically, the tumour had a pushing border,
entrapping benign tubules at the periphery. The neoplastic cells
demonstrated a variably solid or nested architecture, had eosinophil-
ic to clear wispy cytoplasmic vacuoles or inclusions that represented
the large mitochondria. The nuclei had homogenous chromatin with
inconspicuous nucleoli. The tumour stroma showed areas of
hyalinization. The differential diagnosis primarily included eosino-
philic variant of clear cell carcinoma, eosinophilic solid and cystic
RCC and SDH-deficient RCC. Immunohistochemically the tumour
cells express kidney-specific cadherin, SDH-A. Diffuse loss of ex-
pression for SDH-B was noticed in tumour cells. There was no
concomitant TFE3 or cytokeratin 20 expression. Post-surgery PET-
CT screening was negative for a residual or metastatic tumour.
Conclusion: The defining abnormality of SDH-deficient RCCs is
double-hit inactivation of the SDH-related genes. Long term follow-up
is recommended for syndromic manifestations such as pheochromocyto-
ma/paraganglioma, GIST, pulmonary chondroma, or pituitary adenoma.
Early surgical intervention is recommended. Targeted therapies for
VEGF, mTOR and tyrosine kinase may be administered in cases with
metastatic disease.
E-PS-27-039
Large nested variant urothelial carcinoma: a case report
E. Cecikoglu, G. Kir*
*Istanbul Medeniyet University / Pathology Department, Turkey
Background & objectives: Large nested urothelial carcinoma (UC) is a
rare histologic variant of UC, characterized by an unusual, bland mor-
phology resembling von Brunn’s nests but infiltrating lamina propria and
muscularis propria.
Methods: 75 year-old male patient who was diagnosed as Ta Low
Grade UC and papillary urothelial hyperplasia in previous transure-
thral resection (TUR) materials. PET scan examination performed
and revealed metastatic nodular lesions in the left internal iliac re-
gion and in the upper posterior portion of the bladder. During con-
trol cytoscopy, clinicians revealed multiple tumours on the base,
opposite wall and dome.
Results: They completely re-resected the tumours by TUR. On micro-
scopic examination of re-TUR specimen there were large round shaped
nests/tubules in lamina propria and muscularis propria. Tumour cells had
bland morphologic features with uniform, vesicular nuclei, small indis-
tinct nucleoli. Focal mild cytologic atypia and rare mitotic figures
were present in deeper tissues. Immunohistochemically tumour
cells were negative with CK20 and wild type with p53. Ki-67
proliferating index was 6%.
Conclusion: The case was diagnosed as large nested variant urothelial
carcinoma which lead to underdiagnosis on previous TUR specimen due
to bland cytologic features. It has a clinical behaviour of high-grade
conventional urothelial carcinomas. Because of histologic features, which
can be mistaken for a benign neoplasm or non invasive UC with endo-
phytic growth pattern.
E-PS-27-040
Primary testicular squamous cell carcinoma
D. Grigoropoulou, S. Pappa, F. Antoniadou, E. Gkamatsi,
A. Kostopoulou*, K. Ntoumas, T. Choreftaki
*General Hospital of Athens G.N.A. G.Gennimatas, Department of
Surgical Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: We present a case of primary testicular squa-
mous carcinoma (SCC). Primary testicular SCC is extremely rare, except
for metastasis from other primary lesions.
Methods: The patient, 71 years old, presented with enlargement of the
left testis and a clinical diagnosis of scrotal inflammatory disorder was
considered.
Ultrasound of scrotum was performed, and the left testis measured 14cm
in diameter. Blood examination revealed aFP and βHCG within normal
range.
Results: We received a left radical orchiectomy. In cut sections the testis
was occupied by a cystic neoplastic tumour with an outer smooth surface,
filled with brownish watery fluid and whitish compact material, while
testicular parenchyma remained only in the periphery. The whole tumour
was embedded in paraffin blocks. Microscopically, the cyst was lined by
multilayered squamous cell epithelium with a granular cell layer.
Cutaneous appendages, bone or cartilage were not present.
Immunohistochemical staining for PLAP and CD117 did not reveal germ
cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS).
The absence of GCNIS and of tissues of all three germ cell layers sup-
ported the diagnosis of SCC arising in an epidermal cyst.
Conclusion: In such cases, it is important to take into consideration all
clinical information in addition to the histological results, in order to
exclude distant metastasis and reach a correct diagnosis.
E-PS-27-043
Sertoli cell tumour of testis: a case report
Z. Lajmi*, A. Bdioui, A. Bchir, A. Ben Abdelkader, K. Marwa, B. Sriha,
M. Mokni
*Department of Pathology, F. Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia
Background & objectives: Sertoli cell tumour is a sex cord-stromal
tumour. They comprise less than 1% of testicular tumours.
We report a case of a Sertoli cell tumour of the testis to show its epide-
miologic, clinical, pathological and prognostic features.
Methods: A 40-year-old men presented with a painless progressive
swelling of the right testis. Orchidectomy was performed
Results: The macroscopic examination revealed a well-circumscribed,
homogenous, solid firm and white mass measuring 2,5 cm.
Histopathological evaluation revealed a nodular growth of tubules and
occasional clusters and cords of tumour cells which are round, with eo-
sinophilic cytoplasm and elongated nuclei. A mild nuclear atypia was
found without mitoses. The stroma was fibrous. No necrosis or embols
were detected. On immunohistochemistry, tumour cells were positive for
inhibin, calretinin and were negative for PLAP, AFP and CD30. The final
diagnosis was Sertoli cell tumour of the testis, NOS. Sertoli cell tumours
must be distinguished from other rare tumours of the testis especially
seminoma which is the main differential diagnosis.
Conclusion: Sertoli cell tumours of the testis are an uncommon entity
with most of the cases being benign. The malignant forms are too rare.
They may involve any age with an average of 45 years. Orchidectomy is
the hallmark treatment. Microscopy and immunohistochemistry are def-
inite ways of diagnosis.
E-PS-27-044
Spermatocytic tumour in a middle-aged adult: a case report of a rare
testicular neoplasia and review of the literature
N.J. Lamas*, J.R. Brandão, F.E. Costa, J.R. Vizcaíno
*Anatomical Pathology Service, Department of Pathology, Hospital and
University Center of Porto, Portugal
Background & objectives: The spermatocytic tumour is an extremely
rare testicular neoplasm that presents as painless testicular swelling and
mass with a size ranging from 1,5cm to 28cm and negative serum tumour
markers. It occurs predominantly in adults in the fifth decade.
Methods: We report the case of a 57-year-old male with a history of right
scrotal enlargement in the last month. The ultrasonography study showed
a large heterogeneous nodule replacing most of the right testicle paren-
chyma. Serum tumour markers were negative. The patient underwent
radical orchidectomy. We received a 16g surgical specimen comprising
a 7x5,5x4,5cm testicle.
Results: Upon section, a 4,6x4,2x4,2cm solid testicular-confined neo-
plasm was observed, well-circumscribed, with whitish pseudocapsule
and greyish-fleshy and vaguely mucoid cut surface. The histological
analysis revealed a solid pattern neoplasia, with an oedematous stroma,
scant fibrovascular septa, composed predominantly of intermediate sized
cells, with giant cells and small lymphocyte-like cells. The neoplasia was
permeated by a scarce lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, there were images of
intratubular extension and no signs of lymphovascular invasion. The
neoplastic cells were immunoreactive for SALL4 and CD117, focally
positive for CKAE1/AE3, Glipican-3, CD10 and PLAP and negative
for the expression of OCT4, CD30, α-Fetoprotein, Podoplanin,
Vimentin, CAM5.2, CK7, CK19, CK20, CDX2 and NSE. There were
no diastase-resistant PAS+ globules.
Conclusion: This case illustrates the main immunophenotypical features
of this extremely rare testicular neoplasia, which is generally cured by
radical inguinal orchidectomy and, consequently, has an excellent prog-
nosis.
E-PS-27-046
Cavernous haemangioma of the verumontanum: an unusual cause of
haematospermia in an African man
A.A. Liman*, A. Mohammed, S. Abdullahi, M. Abubakar, Y. Iliyasu
*Department of Pathology, Nigeria
Background & objectives: Haematospermia is a relatively uncommon
symptom in urologic practice. Varied aetiologies have been ascribed to it
especially inflammatory, traumatic and iatrogenic causes. It is usually
benign and self-limiting but may indicate more serious underlying organ-
ic pathological changes.
Methods: Although a haemangioma is one of the most common soft
tissue tumours, most of them are superficial lesions, with a predilection
for the head and neck region. The incidence of tumours in the
verumontanum is low and studies reporting such diseases are scarce.
Here, we report a case cavernous haemangioma of the verumontanum
presenting with haematospermia.
Results: Patient
A 44-year old man without any known comorbidity with a complaint of
blood in his semen (ejaculate) and occasional initial haematuria over the
preceding three years. Symptoms were initially intermittent but became
more frequent and persistent.
He had no lower urinary tract symptoms, constitutional symptoms or
history of childhood haematuria.
Physical examination was essentially normal. Routine investigations were
within normal limits. Diagnostic urethrocystoscopy showed a polypoid
growth at the summit of the verumontanum. He was treated by transurethral
electro-surgical resection of the verumontanum. Histologic findings were
those of cavernous haemangioma. He had an uneventful post-operative re-
covery and remained symptom free in the in over 1-year of follow up.
Conclusion: Haemangioma should be considered in the differential di-
agnosis of haematospermia, and although rare in this location, clinical
behaviour may not be different from those in other sites.
E-PS-27-047
Xanthogranulomatous prostatitis: a case report
N. Poulianitis, G. Theodoropoulou, S. Pappa, G. Koutsonikas,
F. Antoniadou, E. Gkamatsi, A. Linardou*
*General Hospital of Athens "G.Gennimatas", Department of Surgical
Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: Xanthogranulomatous prostatitis con-
stitutes a rare subtype of granulomatous prostatitis, which can
mimic carcinoma clinically and rarely histologically, especially
for the inexperienced eye. We report a case of a 59-years-old
male who underwent transurethral resection of the prostate
(TURP) .
Methods: A 59-years-old man underwent TURP for urinary
obstraction. Medical history included hypothyroidism, hyperten-
sion, chronic viral hepatitis B. The prostatic volume was 76cc.
Prior transrectal biopsy (TRUS-b) performed in another centre
showed high prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HG-PIN). PSA
level was not available. We received multiple pieces of prostatic
tissue weighting 15 grams. The tissue was processed in 6 blocks.
Results: Microscopic examination revealed nodular prostatic hyper-
plasia, glandular predominant. In three slides there were four lesions,
measuring 0,1-0,2 cm in diameter composed of nodular collection of
foamy cells, admixed with other inflammatory cells, mainly eosino-
phils. Atypia was not present. Immunohistochemistry revealed
KerAE1/AE3(-), PSA(-), PGM-1(+), CD68(+). There was also
patchy, non-specific inflammation of the prostate stroma and areas
of squamous metaplasia. The diagnosis was xanthogranulomatous
prostatitis.
Conclusion: Xanthogranulomatous prostatitis is a rare type of
granulomatous prostatitis which can confuse the inexperienced
eye. The other types of granoulomatous prostatitis are infectious
(caused by mycobacteria) and non-specific granulomatous prosta-
titis. The nodular appearance and the presence of other inflamma-
tory cells are clue to the diagnosis. Immunohistochemistry can be
helpful.
E-PS-27-048
Schistosomiasis of the urinary bladder in combination with the pres-
ence of a prostatic polyp: a case report
A. Linardou*, G. Koutsonikas, G. Theodoropoulou, D. Bouklas,
E. Gkamatsi, G. Kakiopoulos, T. Choreftaki
*General Hospital of Athens "G.Gennimatas", Department of Surgical
Pathology, Greece
Background & objectives: Human Schistosomiasis is a parasitic disease
caused by trematodes of the genous Schistosoma. S.haematobium which
is endemic to Africa and the Middle East, is the species that infects the
genitourinary system. People acquire the disease though contact with
water containing infected snails.
Methods: We present a case of a 54 year old immigrant who came to our
hospital with haematuria and was subjected to biopsy because of cystic
changes observed at the posterolateral wall of the bladder during
cysteoscopy.
Results: Microscopically we observed urinary bladder fragments covered
by urothelium, containing in the lamina propria and the muscularis
propria calcified eggs of the S.haematobium which are highly immuno-
genic, surrounded by dense collagene. The deposition of the eggs of
S.haematobiumin the bladder may induce an intense granulomatous host
immune response but may also elicit a network of dense concentric cal-
cifications as in our case.
A prostatic polyp containing benign glands within loose stroma, covered
by columnar epithelium was also recognized. The glandular epithelium
was PSA immunoreactive, confirming the prostatic nature of the polyp.
The pathogenesis of such a polyp is related to chronic irritation. The
origin of the polyp from the prostatic urethra or urinary bladder couldn't
be determined.
Conclusion: The diagnosis of urinary bladder Schistosomiasis can
be made by tissue biopsy as the histologic findings are pathogno-
monic. The diagnosis should be considered in patients with
haematuria who have immigrated from or travelled to areas where
this disease is endemic.
Virchows Arch
E-PS-27-049
Urinary bladder, a rare metastatic site for breast carcinoma: case
report
A. Loghin*, C. Chibelean, M. Sincu, A. Borda
*Department of Histology, UMFST G.E. Palade, Targu-Mures, Romania
Background & objectives: Given the high prevalence of breast cancer
and the mortality associated with metastatic disease, it is important to be
aware of rare metastatic sites, such as the urinary bladder, with only 66
cases previously reported in the literature.
Methods: We present the case of a 72 years old woman admitted to the
Urology Department for urinary symptoms occurring four years after a
diagnosis of breast cancer. Cystoscopy revealed a suspicious growing
mass in the bladder wall and TURB was performed. The specimen was
sent to the Pathology Department.
Results: Microscopical examination revealed a normal urothelium on
surface and an infiltrative tumour in the lamina propria and muscular
layer. Tumoral cells were either arranged in cords, nests or isolated,
showing abundant basophilic cytoplasm, sometimes with signet ring cells
features. These findings were suggestive for a tumour infiltrating the
bladder from outside. In immunohistochemistry tumour cells were posi-
tive for CTK7 and GATA 3, ER, Mammaglobin, and negative for
GCDFP-15, E-Cadherin, PR, WT1, p63, HER-2. Gastro-intestinal origin
of the tumour was excluded due to negativity for CTK20 and CDX2. The
morphological aspect and the immunohistochemical profile lead to a
diagnostic of a metastasis of breast cancer in the bladder.
Conclusion: Even though bladder metastasis from breast cancer are un-
common, this possibility must be taken into consideration in patients with
a history of breast cancer. Clinical data and immunohistochemistry are
mandatory for establishing a correct diagnosis.
E-PS-27-050
Case report: primary urinary bladder adenocarcinoma
R. Malima*, A. Ngaiza
*Muhimbili Medical University, Tanzania
Background & objectives: Primary Urinary bladder adenocarcinoma is
a scarce histological variant accounting 0.5-2% of all urinary bladder
cancers, reported higher in males at 60year and Schistosoma infection
populations. Haematuria, dysuria, bladder tenesmus, suprapubic pain
and urinary urgency are some of the nonspecific symptoms.
Methods: We present 57years female with haematuria, lower ab-
domen pain treated as recurrent schistosomiasis for 6months.
Abdominal ultrasound and cystoscopy revealed 10mm tumour
right lateral wall of the bladder. Patient underwent transurethral
resection, tumour confirmed as adenocarcinomas by Pathologist.
Gastrointestinal tumours were eliminated through tumour markers
CA 19-9, CA 125, alpha-fetoprotein, CEA and gastroscope, colo-
noscopy as were all within normal ranges.
Results: Urinalysis were positive for red blood cells, abdominal ultra-
sound and cystoscopy revealed a 10mm tumour right lateral wall of the
bladder and the CT-scan of abdomen showed an extensive bladder wall
thickened by the tumours. Patient underwent transurethral resection and
tumour confirmed as Primary adenocarcinomas by Pathologist.
Gastrointestinal tumours were eliminated through tumour markers CA
19-9, CA 125, alpha-fetoprotein, CEA and gastroscope, colonoscopy as
were all within normal ranges. Immunohistochemical stains were done
with the following makers: EMA, PAS and vimentin. Appropriate posi-
tive and negative controls were used. The tumour cells were positive for
EMA and were negative for PSA and vimentin.
Conclusion: Adenocarcinomas account 2% of malignancies of the uri-
nary bladder. Common in elder males but females should be considered.
Most presents with haematuria, irritative symptoms and diagnosed by
histopathology. Diseases is characterized by high degree of malignancy,
invasion and difficulty in diagnosis.
E-PS-27-051
A rare case of testicular adrenal rest tumours in an adult
L. Mohamad-Rus*, M. Vlad, A. Cumpanas, M. Georgescu, O. Popa,
S. Teoran, A. Dema
*Department of Pathology, Emergency Clinical County Hospital “Pius
Brinzeu” Timisoara, Romania
Background & objectives: Testicular adrenal rest tumours (TART) is an
important complication of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), now a
rarely encountered pathology due to hormonal treatment. We herein re-
port an unusual and challenging case of TART and discuss its clinical and
histological particularities.
Methods: A 37-year-old patient with bilateral testicular masses
underwent surgical resection of the left testicle and after three years of
the right testicle and left spermatic cord, due to suspicion of malignant
recurrence based on the clinical and imaging features. For the histological
diagnosis we used HE and IHC stained slides (CD56, Vim, Inhibin-α,
Calretinin, Syn, Melan A, AR, CD10, Ki67).
Results: Both lesions consisted of solid islands and trabecules of
Leydig-like, polygonal cells with some nuclear pleomorphism, re-
duced mitotic activity, granular eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm,
with areas of inflammatory-type necrosis and fibrosis which sep-
arate the tumoral islands, characteristics which in a adrenal tu-
mour would represent aggressive features. The remaining paren-
chyma presented atrophic features. Based on family history, clin-
ical and morpho-immunohistochemical features, we reached the
final diagnosis of TART.
Conclusion: TART is a very rare lesion, the only one diagnosed in the last
20 years in our department. Having the particularity of a diagnosis at such
an old age, we want to underline the importance of a differential diagnosis
with a malignant Leydig cell tumour, because of the histological similari-
ties of these two lesions, but different evolution and treatment options.
E-PS-27-053
Role of ureteroscopic biopsy in diagnosis of upper tract urothelial
carcinoma
K.L.W. Myint*, J.M. Salmond
*Department of Pathology, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, United
Kingdom
Background & objectives: Most upper urinary tract urothelial carcino-
mas are invasive at the time of diagnosis, being associated with a poor
prognosis. Accurate diagnosis is essential for management.
Our objective was to determine the performance parameters of
ureteroscopic biopsy in our tertiary centre.
Methods: We retrospectively identified and reviewed relevant docu-
ments of patients who underwent endoscopic examination for a suspected
upper tract malignancy from January 2012 to August 2017. Biopsy and
resection pathology reports were analysed for the histological diagnosis,
grade and stage. False negative samples were reviewed by an experienced
uropathologist.
Results: Of 115 biopsies, all 68 biopsies reported as malignant were
true positives (100%specificity). Of the 47 benign or non-diagnostic
biopsy reports, 32 were true negatives and 15 were considered false
negatives (82.3%sensitivity). Review of false negative cases found
no diagnostic errors. Grade concordance was 52.6% for WHO1973
and 65% for WHO2004. Grade 1 and 3 biopsy results predicted 24%
and 67% chances of having subsequent muscle invasive disease
respectively.
Conclusion: In our centre, endoscopic biopsy of the upper urinary tract
showed high diagnostic accuracy and specificity. The sensitivity was also
reasonably high. False negative cases did occur, presumably due to sam-
pling error. Although the grade concordance was marginally lower than
other studies, it appeared to have no impact on the strong predictive value
for pathological stage. Overall, pathological assessment of ureteroscopic
biopsies is a useful tool in the investigation and management of suspected
upper urinary tract tumours.
E-PS-27-054
Histopathological study of five cases of sex cord stromal tumours of
testis, with a short review of the current literature
A. Nomikos*, A. Fildisis, E. Serafetinidis, L. Abou-Asabeh, S. Chranioti,
D. Delakas
*Department of Pathology, Asklipieion Voulas, Greece
Background & objectives: Sex cord stromal tumours (SCSTs) comprise
approximately 5% of all testicular tumours. Most of them resemble or
recapitulate normal testicular components such as Leydig cells, Sertoli
cells, and nonspecific stromal cells. They are divided as pure or mixed.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective clinicopathological study of five
patients who were initially diagnosed with sex-cord stromal tumours at
General Hospital Asklipieion Voulas from 2010 to 2019.
Results: There were two Sertoli cell tumours, two Leydig cell tumours
and one malignant Leydig cell tumour.
Conclusion: Leydig cell tumour is the most common pure testicular sex
cord stromal neoplasm. Malignant Leydig cell tumours are associated
with older age. Sertoli cell tumour represents ≤1% of all testicular neo-
plasms and are rare in children. Most of (SCSTs) are biologically benign,
but about 10 % may show malignant behaviour. The mainstay of treat-
ment for SCST is orchiectomy. Malignant SCST generally are not sensi-
tive to chemotherapy or radiotherapy.
E-PS-27-057
Schwannoma of the kidney: a case report
A.A. Ozagari*, S. Gokcenoglu, A.H. Yavuzsan, S.L. Kirecci,
F. Kabukcuoglu
*University of Health Sciences, Sisli Hamidiye Etfal Hospital,
Department of Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey
Background & objectives: Schwannomas are tumours of the nerve
sheath and are most commonly seen in the head and neck region, extrem-
ities and posterior mediastinum. Involvement of retroperitoneal parenchy-
mal organs is extremely rare.
Methods: A 54-year-old man presented with left flank pain of four weeks
duration. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a renal tumour which is
primarily located in the hilum of the left kidney. The patient underwent
nephroureterectomy since the radiologic findings were suspicious for
urothelial carcinoma of the renal pelvis.
Results: Macroscopically, the tumour was well circumscribed and
lobulated, 7,5x7x5,5 cm in size, and located in the renal sinus with a
light yellow cut surface. Microscopically, the tumour consisted of a
solid proliferation of interlacing bundles of spindle cells without
nuclear atypia, mitotic figures and necrosis. A peripheral cuff of
lymphoid aggregates was seen. Small clusters of xanthomatous cells
intermixed with the spindle cells were also observed. The tumour
cells showed diffuse strong positivity for S-100 protein. CD68 was
positive in xanthomatous cells. Pan-cytokeratin, CK7, CK8/18,
SMA and desmin were negative.
Conclusion: Renal schwannomas are rare neoplasms which occur in the
renal hilum in majority. Morphology of the tumour is similar to those seen
elsewhere in the body. Recognition and awareness of these rare benign
tumours would aid in the differential diagnosis of spindle cell tumours of
the kidney and prevent their misdiagnosis as sarcomatoid carcinomas or
primary renal sarcomas.
E-PS-27-059
Malignant kidney epithelioid angiomyolipoma: a case report
J. Pacheco*, F. Moreira, J. Pinheiro
*Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Portugal
Background & objectives: Epithelioid angiomyolipoma is defined as a
“rare variant of angiomyolipoma that consists of at least 80% epithelioid
cells” (WHO2016). Malignant behaviour has been reported but prognos-
tic factors are largely undetermined. Herein we report a case of a malig-
nant epithelioid angiomyolipoma.
Methods: A 40-year-old female patient without previous relevant
medical history was admitted to hospital due to asthenia, anorexia,
weight loss and periods of fever and night sweats. CT revealed a
contrast-enhancing 17cm solid mass in the left kidney.
Nephrectomy was performed.
Results: Grossly, a solid 17cm yellow mass in the kidney was observed
infiltrating the perirenal adipose tissue. Histological examination revealed
a tumour mainly composed of epithelioid cells with large granular
amphophilic cytoplasm and prominent nuclear atypia, arranged in
discohesive nests. Areas of spindle cells with frequent bizarre features
and multinucleate giant cells with occasional lipidic vacuoles were ob-
served. Frequent atypical mitotic figures, extensive necrosis and venous
vascular invasion were identified. By immunohistochemistry, Melan-A
and HMB45 expression was observed. Our diagnosis was epithelioid
angiomyolipoma with aggressive features. At follow-up, lung metastasis
was identified at 6 months post-surgery and vertebral metastasis at 10
months. Despite sirolimus treatment, death occurred 13 months after
surgery.
Conclusion: Despite unequivocal evidence of malignant potential, the
prevalence of aggressive behaviour in epithelioid angiomyolipomas is
extremely variable across studies and prognostic factors are still in debate.
The case herein presented is exceptional by its highly aggressive histo-
logical features and clinical course.
E-PS-27-060
Primary urethral adenocarcinoma in women: a single centre
experience
C. Padilla Ansala*, E. Garcia Fernandez, P. González-Peramato
*La Paz University Hospital, Pathology Department, Spain
Background & objectives: Primary urethral adenocarcinoma can dis-
play a variety of morphological patterns. Different origins have been
suggested, but with exception of the cribriform variant, no clear source
has been determined. Our aim was to study the differences between these
tumours.
Methods: We retrieved and reviewed the histological preparations of all
primary urethral adenocarcinomas diagnosed at our institution in the time
period between 1965 and 2019. Immunohistochemical techniques were
made on the paraffin embedded samples. The cases were then classified
according to their histological and immunohistochemical characteristics.
Results: We found five cases of primary urethral adenocarcinoma in
women. The first represents an example of the cribriform variant, with
expression of prostatic specific antigen (PSA) and prostatic acid phospha-
tase (PAP). Two cases were classified as columnar-mucinous variants.
Another case was a typical clear cell adenocarcinoma arising from a
urethral diverticulum. The fifth case was similar to the latter but was
located within periurethral glands and expressed PAP.
Conclusion: Urethral adenocarcinoma can display multiple mor-
phologic patterns. Each subtype has distinct immunohistochemical
features. A careful examination of the anatomical relations of the
tumour remains the best way to evaluate the most probable origin
in each case.
E-PS-27-061
Cellular angiofibroma on corpus cavernosum
E. Papagianni*, N. Stavrinou, C. Magkou, A. Sykaras, S. Pantelakos,
A. Grigorakis
*Department of Pathology, Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens,
Greece
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: A 60 year old male, previously with prostate
adenocarcinoma, presented with a lesion on right corpus cavernosum.
Methods: A well-circumscribed encapsulated whitish mass dimensioned
4.2x2.5x0.5cm was received. The specimen was fixed in 10% buffered
formalin. Multiple sections were obtained, routinely processed and em-
bedded in paraffin; 2–4 μm thick sections were stained with hematoxylin
and eosin and immunohistochemical markers
Results: On microscopy, a well circumscribed encapsulated
hypercellular neoplasm probably of mesenchymatic origin, was observed.
The neoplasm was composed of uniform, small, spindle cells (fibroblasts/
myofibroblasts) with minimal atypia. Mitotic activity was absent. The
stroma was mainly collagenous-fibrotic and in some areas myxoid or
oedematous. Dilated vessels with hyalinized wall surrounded by
hypercellular areas were notable. No obvious extravasation of red blood
cells was found.
Immunochemistry revealed positivity for the following markers:
Vimentin, ER PR, CD34, FXIIIa .INI-1 expression was retained. All
other markers (AE1/AE3, S-100, SMA, EMA, desmin, NF, MBP,
SOX-10, C-KIT, CD31, MUC4, STAT-6, Calponin, Caldesmon,
CD68, ALK, β-catenin, p16, RB1) were negative. Ki-67 was estimated
~7%.
Conclusion: Taking into consideration the morphological features
and the immunochemical results as well as the location of the neo-
plasm, we favoured the diagnosis of cellular angiofibroma / male
angiomyofibroblastoma like tumour, ICD-O code 9160/0 according
WHO/2016.
E-PS-27-062
Proteasic profile of a mast cell population in kidney cancer
T. Pavlova*, D. Atyashkin, L. Pavlova, D. Bessmertniy, I. Pavlov
*Belgorod State University, Russia
Background & objectives: Approximately 250 thousand people
become ill and 100 thousand people die from kidney cancer
annually
Methods: The expression of tryptase and chymase in mast cells, associ-
ated with kidney cancer, was analysed. Five patients composed the group
of patients with kidney cancer (6 patients was control group). Slices were
studied on microscope ZEISS Axio Imager.А2 with system of image
documentation, which included colour digital camera Camera Axiocam
506 colour and a monochrome camera Camera Axiocam 503 mono.
Results: The received data testify that development of cancer is accom-
panied by increasing of tryptase- and chymase- positive mast cells in
kidney parenchyma. In case of detection of protease profile the significant
increasing of chymase expression in population of mast cells takes place
with the highest intensity in the peritumor region, where the number of
mast cells with simultaneous expression of proteases increased.
Conclusion: The development of kidney cancer is accompanied by in-
creasing of population of tryptase- and chymase- positive mast cells in
organ. The assessment of expression level of tryptase and chymase re-
flects invasive ability of tumour tissue and may be presented as
pathomorphological criteria of aggressiveness of kidney cancer.
E-PS-27-063
Eosinophilic solid and cystic renal cell carcinoma in a Li-Fraumeni
syndrome setting
D. Pereira de Melo*, F. Moreira, H. Barroca
*Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Portugal
Background & objectives: We report a case of a 10 year-old female with
previous history of high grade glial neoplasia (2015), treated with RT/QT
(temozolomide). Renal ultrasounds were performed (risk of therapeutic
renal nephrotoxicity); multiple bilateral renal cysts (2018) and a cyst
(upper-pole right kidney-2019) were detected.
Methods: Fine needle biopsy was performed, with the proposed cytolog-
ical diagnosis of oncocytic papillary tumour with TFE3 nuclear expres-
sion. A partial nephrectomy was decided for treatment and diagnostic
confirmation.
Macroscopically a subcapsular neoplasia was identified, with 14 mm,
encapsulated, solid and tanned; multiple cortical cysts with less than
1cm were identified.
Results: Histologically the lesion had variable morphological patterns-
predominance of solid pattern, focal cystic and papillary, with epithelial
cells with ample, eosinophilic and granular cytoplasm, foci of cytoplas-
mic vacuolization or granular basophilic stippling, irregular nuclei, with
small conspicuous nucleoli. These characteristics were also present in
epithelial cells of the adjacent cysts.
Immunostains were performed, both neoplastic and cystic cells
displaying diffuse expression of CD10, racemase,CK20 and Cathepsin
K; focal expression of EMA and TFE3.To exclude the possibility of MIT-
family translocations, FISH was performed(neither TFE3 nor TFEB gene
rearrangements were identified)-rendering a diagnosis of eosinophilic
solid and cystic renal cell carcinoma (ESCRCC).
Liquid biopsy for NGS reported only a pathological missense mutation in
exon 7 of P53(c.733G>A).
Conclusion: To our knowledge it's the first case in literature of ESCRCC
in Li-Fraumeni Syndrome.P53 mutation is not a frequent driver-mutation
in epithelial kidney tumours, however, it was described in patients fol-
lowing QT/RT, raising controversy in interpreting the malignant potential
of adjacent cysts.
E-PS-27-064
Primary renal schwannoma: a common tumour in an uncommon
location
M. Sánchez Lazcano, G. Muñoz González, P. Sota Ochoa, L. Pérez
Domingo*, H. Iliev Iliev, A. Martínez García, J.I. Hijazo Conejos,
M.T. Ramírez Gasca
*CUH Lozano Blesa, Spain
Background & objectives: Schwannoma is usually a benign tumour,
which arises from Schwann cells in nerve sheaths. The most frequent
locations are the head, neck and limbs. It is uncommon in the urinary
tract.
Methods: We present the case of a 47 year old man, without medical
history of interest. A computer tomography detected a left kidney mass,
suggestive of papillary renal carcinoma. A partial nephrectomy was
performed.
Results: The surgical specimen was a 3.5 cm firm nodular lesion with a
solid yellowish cut surface. Histological examination revealed a prolifer-
ation of spindle cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, normochromatic nu-
clei without atypia and virtually no mitotic figures. The cells adopted a
fascicular pattern with alternating hyper and paucicellular areas (Antoni A
and Antoni B areas), with occasional palisading of nuclei (Verocay bod-
ies). Dilated vessels with hyalinized walls were noted. A strong and
diffuse expression of S-100 protein was observed by immunohistochem-
istry. The final diagnosis was a primary renal schwannoma.
Conclusion: Primary renal schwannoma is an extremely rare tumour with
35 cases described up to date. It is a slowly growing mass and usually an
incidental finding. A high index of suspicion should be maintained when
dealing with mesenchymal renal lesions.
E-PS-27-065
Small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas of the urothelial tract: a ret-
rospective study
I. Provatas*, F. Dolkiras, A. Sykaras, K. Christofidis, E. Papagianni,
C. Vourlakou
*Department of Pathology, Evangelismos General Hospital of Athens,
Greece
Background & objectives: Small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas of the
urothelial tract are rare tumours resembling their counterparts in lung and
elsewhere. The aim of this presentation is to perform a retrospective
evaluation of small cell carcinomas diagnosed in our Department.
Methods: Consecutive cases of small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas of
the urothelial tract diagnosed during 2015-2020 in our Department of
Pathology were evaluated retrospectively. There were 8 cases diagnosed
in 5 years. Diagnosis was set with Hematoxylin – Eosin stains and sup-
ported by immunohistochemical assays (Synaptophysin, Chromogranin,
CD56). Cell proliferation rate was extremely high (> 90%) for all cases.
Results: The mean age was 74,6 years and Male:Female ratio 6:2.
The predominant site was the urinary bladder (75%) followed by the
ureter (12,5%) and renal pelvis (12,5%). Six urothelial tract small
cell neuroendocrine carcinomas (n=6) were infiltrating muscularis
propria and two (n=2) were extending beyond. Also, in two cases
(in the ureter and the urinary bladder) (n=2), several heterologous
characteristics were observed, such as squamous cell carcinoma,
poorly differentiated urothelial carcinoma NOS, chondrosarcoma
and osteosarcoma In six cases (n=6) there was evidence of in situ
and infiltrative urothelial cell carcinoma, whereas in two cases (n=2)
the small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma coexisted as component of
an otherwise typical urothelial carcinoma.
Conclusion: Most of small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas of the
Urothelial Tract were localized in the urinary bladder and they extended
into muscularis propria at the time diagnosis. Although high response rate
to chemotherapy is observed for this type of tumours, overall prognosis is
still poor (5- year survival rate of 8 to 16%). The presence of distant
metastases may be the most important prognostic factor,
E-PS-27-066
A case of melanoma metastatic to urinary bladder
M. Puchinskaya*, T. Liatkouskaya, V. Liabetsky, I. Masansky,
A. Smalensky
*Minsk City Clinical Oncologic Dispensary, Belarus
Background & objectives: Melanoma is an aggressive malignancy
known to widely metastasize to different sites. Metastases to mucosa
are rare and such cases are often difficult to differentiate from primary
melanomas or primary cancers of the corresponding organ.
Methods: Patient A., male, born 1945, was treated four times for cuta-
neous lesions (1996 – keratopapilloma, 1999 and 2004 – basal cell can-
cer, 2009 – trichoepithelioma). In 2010 a skin lesion clinically suspicious
of melanoma was seen in the coronal region but after histological exam-
ination of the resected tumour sebaceous glands adenoma was diagnosed.
Results: In June 2011 the patient was admitted to oncourology depart-
ment with macrohaematuria and bladder tumour was removed, histolog-
ically urothelial carcinoma grade III. In July 2012 right humerus bone
metastasis was diagnosed. A subcutaneous lesion of the neck was found
with malignant cells suspicious of melanoma on cytological examination.
In core needle biopsy in December 2012 from supraclavicular lymph
node urothelial carcinoma was diagnosed. As clinical data (one and
lymph node metastases, non-muscular invasive bladder cancer) and his-
tological data were controversial, histologic preparations were re-evalu-
ated. Solid clear cell tumour with brown pigment in some cells, positive
for vimentin and S100, was seen in skin, bladder and neck lesions, con-
sistent with melanoma.
Conclusion: The presented case shows that melanoma metastases to
urinary bladder are very difficult to diagnose due to rarity of such lesions.
E-PS-27-067
Ratio of membranous and cytoplasmic vimentin expression in pros-
tate cancer
M. Puchinskaya*
*Minsk City Clinical Oncologic Dispensary, Belarus
Background & objectives: Vimentin is a marker of epithelial-
mesenchymal transition (EMT) in various cancers. Cell surface vimentin
was shown to mark cells with features of cancer stem cells (CSCs) irre-
spective of other CSC markers. We assessed ratio of Vim cytoplasmic
and membranous expression.
Methods: 36 samples of prostate cancer (PCa) were stained
immunohistochemically with rabbit polyclonal antibodies to Vim
(ThermoFischer Scientific, 1:1000). Staining was assessed semiquantita-
tively using a light microscope, x200 magnification. Weighed staining
index (WSI), taking into account the percentage of stained cells and the
relative amounts of weak, moderate and strong staining, was used for
separate membranous and cytoplasmic staining evaluation.
Results: 23 (63.9%) cases were stage pT3, 14 (38.9%) Gleason score 7
(4+3) or 8-10. Membranous vimentin staining was present in 29 (80.6%)
cases, cytoplasmic – in 35 (97.2%). Among them in 0 and 3 (8.3%) cases
membranous staining was more prevalent than cytoplasmic according to
percentage of stained cells (in 5 (13.9%) cases equal scores) and WSI,
respectively. In most cases the percentage of cells with membranous
staining was much lower, but staining intensities were higher, than for
cytoplasmic staining. No statistically significant correlations were found
between prevalence of membranous staining and disease pT category,
Gleason score or previous neoadjuvant hormonal therapy, this may be
due to a small sample size.
Conclusion: Vimentin is mostly expressed in cytoplasm, but membra-
nous staining can also be seen in practically all cases, mostly in a small
proportion of cells. These cells with membranous expression may corre-
spond to cells with CSC features, but this hypothesis needs further eval-
uation using conventional CSC markers or functional assays. Anyway,
neoexpression of vimentin shows EMT in most PCa cases.
E-PS-27-068
Two cases of Wilm’s tumour in adult patients
M. Puchinskaya*, I. Masansky, V. Liabetsky, A. Smalensky
*Minsk City Clinical Oncologic Dispensary, Belarus
Background & objectives: Nephroblastoma (Wilm’s tumour, WT) is the
most common renal malignancy in children. Sometimes it may be diag-
nosed in adulthood, mostly in younger patients. It is appreciated that the
course and prognosis of WT in adults is worse than in children.
Methods: We present 2 cases of WT in adult patients, that were treated in
Minsk City Clinical Oncological Dispensary (MCCOD).
Results: In a patient K., 28 years, a tumour of the right kidney,
160*65*113 mm was found, reaching the right lobe of liver. Surgery
was performed, histological examination verified WT with
lymphovascular invasion and spread outside the kidney. Synchronous
metastases to abdominal and retroperitoneal lymph nodes, peritoneum,
right lung and liver capsule were seen on additional examination. The
patient died 3 months later.
Patient S., 35 years, was first admitted with papillary thyroid cancer
(diffuse sclerotic variant) with bilateral metastases to cervical lymph
nodes. In October 2013 tumour of the right kidney was seen, WT (mostly
blastema and epithelial components) was diagnosed after nephrectomy.
No signs of WT progression are seen.
Conclusion: These two cases show different patterns of WT course with
quick lethal outcome in case of late diagnosis and long disease-free period
in case of early radical treatment. This once more emphasizes the neces-
sity of early diagnosis and different diagnostic procedures to differentiate
WT from renal cell carcinoma.
E-PS-27-069
Renal carcinoma with angioleiomyoma-like stroma
P. Ramos*, I. Alemany Benitez, G. Sosa Rotundo, M. Trujillo Coronado,
B. Tristán Martín, S. Galeano Reyes, R. Stanescu, E. Jimenez Alcaide
*Hospital Universitario Fundacion Alcorcon, Spain
Virchows Arch
Background & objectives: Renal carcinoma with angioleiomyoma-
like stroma represents one of the emerging/provisional entities in the
2016 WHO classification. The following case helps review, discuss
and provides further insight into the diagnosis of this type of cancer.
Methods: A 77-year old lady, with a history of total left nephrec-
tomy due to an angiomyolipoma, presented a solid tumour on her
right kidney. The sample of the partial right nephrectomy, measur-
ing 5.5 x 4.7 x 2.7 cm, showed a well-defined neoplastic lesion,
with a white-reddish, heterogeneous coloration, measuring 3.5 x 3.4
x 2.7 cm.
Results: Histologically it`s constituted by atypical glandular struc-
tures immersed in a muscular-like stroma, accompanied by thick-
walled vessels. Neoplastic epithelial cell cytoplasm was abundant,
varying from light to pale, microvacuolated or eosinophilic.
Immunohistochemical markers CK7, CK34βE-12 and vimentin
were intensely and diffusely positive in the epithelium, with focal
CD10+, demonstrating muscle differentiation in the stroma (actins
HHF-35 and 1A4, caldesmon, desmine were positive), while
HMB45 and Melan-A were negative. These types of tumours may
be variants of clear cell carcinomas, or papillary clear cell renal cell
carcinomas, but they may also represent a specific sub-group.
Although their low malignant potential, when associated with tuber-
ous sclerosis, they may present with affected lymph nodes.
Conclusion: The few cases reported, have not demonstrated the
characteristic chromosome abnormalities such as (3p) deletion, (7)
or (17) trisomies, therefore the relationship with the morphological
spectrum of renal carcinoma with mutated TCEB1 cannot be
established. Data is still limited.
E-PS-27-071
Divergent differentiation in invasive urothelial carcinoma - frequen-
cy in current practice and association with muscle invasive disease
S. Santana*, M. Ferreira De Souza, M. Estela Pompeu Do Amaral,
D. Abensur Athanazio
*Federal University of Bahia, Brazil
Background & objectives: Invasive urothelial carcinoma common-
ly shows divergent differentiation. Some of them may be clinically
relevant. We evaluated the frequency of muscle invasive bladder
cancer in our experience and its association with variant
morphology.
Methods: All consecutive cases of invasive urothelial carcinoma from
Imagepat Laboratory (Salvador, Bahia, Brazil) were included. All cases
from January 2017 to October 2019 were reviewed. Overall, 45 cases had
no divergent differentiation while 46 showed some form of variant
morphology.
Results: The most common divergent differentiation was squamous
which was present in 18/46 cases (39%) ranging from 5-95% of
tumour area. The second most common was micropapillary – seen
in 13/46 (28%), (range:<5-80%). Third, plasmacytoid was observed
in 9/46 (20%) (range: 30-90%). These were followed by poorly
differentiated 8/46 (17%) (range: 20-100%), glandular 5/46 (11%)
(range: 10-50%), giant cell 3/46 (7%) (range: 30-100%), and
sarcomatoid 2/46 (4%) (range: 30-90%). The frequency of
muscularis propria invasion was 18/36 (50%) in patients with
urothelial carcinoma with no divergent differentiation. This rate
was lower than the rate seen in patients harbouring urothelial carci-
nomas with squamous component 12/14 (86%).
Conclusion: The rate of muscle invasive carcinoma did not differ be-
tween tumours without divergent differentiation and those with
micropapillary, plasmacytoid and poorly differentiated morphology.
Although common, squamous differentiation should be still recognized
as a feature of aggressive disease.
E-PS-27-072
Effect of heavy metals on microstructural and microelemental
changes in the rats urinary bladder
V. Sikora*, M. Lyndin, N. Hyriavenko, Y. Lyndina, R. Moskalenko,
A. Piddubnyi, K. Sikora, V. Kust, A. Romaniuk
*Sumy State University, Ukraine
Background & objectives: Global environmental pollution leads to the
distribution of heavy metal salts (HMS) in the ecosystem and their impact
on the organism.
To study the influence of the heavy metals (HM) accumulation on the
ultrastructural changes in rat’s urinary bladder (UB).
Methods: The rats were randomly divided into three groups: I–control, II
– rats received a mixture of HMS (Zn, Cu, Fe, Mn, Pb, Cr) for 30 days, III
– animals received HMS during 90 days. The UB structure and tissue
chemical composition were studied using Scanning-electron microscopy
with elemental analysis and atomic absorption spectrometer.
Results: The dystrophic, destructive, inflammatory and atrophic changes
were founded in the UB wall during the experiment. The indicators of
HMS accumulation were significantly (р<0.01) higher in several times on
the 30th and 90th days (Zn–1.24/1.35, Cu–1.46/1.73, Fe–1.72/2.08, Mn–
1.33/1.58, Pb–1.63/1.95, Cr–1.44/1.64) compared to control.
Furthermore, the local accumulation of inorganic ions occurred in stromal
and parenchymal components (their predominance in subepithelial and
perivascular areas).
Conclusion: The long-term HMS intake has a negative influence on
the UB (urothelium disorders (desquamation, epithelium thinning,
nuclei architectonics changes, cytoplasmic contours loss); swelling
of parenchymal and stromal components; disorganization and thick-
ening of collagen, elastic and muscle fibres) which accompanied by
increasing their concentration levels in the tissue. The study prolon-
gation leads to decreasing accumulation intensity and compensatory
mechanisms activation.
E-PS-27-073
Isolated granulomatous vasculitis of the epididymis
B. Simona*, A.C. Lisievici, T. Georgescu, F. Pop
*Emergency University H. Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Testicular vasculitis is defined as inflam-
mation and destruction of the blood vessels in the testis, which can
be seen in either systemic or isolated diseases. Most commonly
affected sites are a single testicle, followed by the epididymis and
spermatic cord.
Methods: We report the case of a 66-year-old male presenting with
pain in the left groin, extending to the upper scrotum and exacer-
bated with movement and coughing. Ultrasound examination re-
vealed an abnormal mass in the left inguinal canal, interpreted as
incarcerated inguinal hernia. Upon surgical exploration, the epidid-
ymis and tunica vaginalis appeared thickened and firm. A left
orhiectomy was performed.
Results: Macroscopically, tunica vaginalis of the left orhiectomy
specimen was tan-brown and diffusely thickened, as well as the
epididymis. The spermatic cord appeared grossly normal.
Histological studies showed the presence of multiple foci of granu-
lomatous vasculitis, affecting medium-sized and small-sized arteries
of the testicle, epididymis and tunica vaginalis, with fibrinoid ne-
crosis and surrounding mixed inflammation including macrophages,
small lymphocytes, plasma cells. Testicular parenchyma showed no
histological alteration.
Conclusion: Testicular vasculitis is a rare entity, which can be easily
overlooked. There is no consensus regarding the treatment of testicular
vasculitis, although it is postulated that the excision of the affected organ
is curative.
E-PS-27-074
Recurrent bladder schwannoma - a case report
A. Simoulis*, M. Lindström, S. Dubois, A. Almorched
*Skåne University Hospital-Pathology Department, Sweden
Background & objectives: We report a case of recurrent bladder
schwannoma, two years after the initial TUR-B and diagnosis.
Bladder schwannoma is a rare entity with only a few reported cases in the
literature.
Methods: A 69 year old gentleman was under active surveillance since
two years subsequent to a diagnosis of bladder schwannoma in our
hospital.
Transurethral resection of the same area was performed, and the material
submitted for histological evaluation.
Results: Histology showed cellular schwannoma, identical to the previ-
ous trans-urethral resected material: richly cellular fascicles of spindle
cells with a tendency to palisading. Antoni-A areas were recognized,
but no "Verocay bodies" or Antoni B areas were identified. Mitotic ac-
tivity was very low.
The tumour cells were positive for vimentin, caldesmon, SOX10, S-100
and p16, whilst EGFR, ACT, ACTSM, ALK1, CD34, CD31, NF,
DESMIN, CKAE1/3, p63, CK34B, MELANA, EMA, PAX8, CD99,
CD117, COLL4, NSE were negative.
This panel of immunostains help exclude, but also other soft tissue tu-
mours, such as neurofibroma and malignant peripheral nerve-sheath tu-
mour, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour (inflammatory
pseudotumor), leiomyoma or low-grade leiomyosarcoma, or primitive
neuroectodermal tumour.
Conclusion: Bladder schwannoma is a very rare tumour. Transurethral
resection is the usual therapeutic approach, but the patient must remain
under active surveillance. A panel of immunostains can be used to help tin
the differential diagnosis.
E-PS-27-075
Mucinous metaplasia and plasma cell balanitis of the corona of glans
penis
A. Simoulis*
*Skåne University Hospital-Pathology Department, Sweden
Background & objectives: We report the case of mucinous metaplasia
of the squamous epithelium of the corona of glans penis associated with
plasma cell balanitis.
A few cases of the same entity are being described in the medical
literature.
Methods: A 72 years old gentleman with a medical history of plasma cell
balanitis, presented with an erythematous lesion at the corona of the glans
penis. A biopsy performed.
Results: Microscopically the squamous epithelium showed mild reactive
changes, with areas of atrophy, parakeratosis, and spongiosis. A small
area with mucinous producing cells was identified in the superficial layers
of the squamous epithelium.
In the dermis, a band-like infiltrate of plasma cells and hemosiderin
pigment-laden macrophages were presented, a picture of plasma cell
balanitis.
The mucin-producing cells had a benign histological picture and they
were CK7 and CKCAM , PAS and PAS-D positive while they were
GATA3, GCDFP15, CK20, CDX2 and NKX3.1 negative.
This phenotype supports the metaplastic origin of these cells against the
possibility of an extramammary Paget's disease or metastasis.
Conclusion: Pathologists should be aware of this entity in penile materi-
al, especially when there is a history of plasma cell balanitis in the back-
ground. Histology and a panel of immunostains can help pathologists to
make the diagnosis.
E-PS-27-076
Diagnostic conundrum of patient with synchronous colorectal and
renal tumours
I.A. Spiridon*, D.G. Apostol Ciobanu, B.L. Ungureanu, M. Danciu
*"Grigore T. Popa" University of, Romania
Background & objectives: Mucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinoma
(MTSCC) is a renal carcinoma of low malignant potential with charac-
teristic mixture of tubular and spindle structures amidst mucinous stroma.
Its rarity and morphological overlap with adenocarcinoma of various
origins can be a diagnostic challenge.
Methods: We present the case of a 63-year-old patient admitted to the
surgical department for left flank pain and malabsorption. Imaging stud-
ies revealed synchronous colorectal and left renal tumours, raising the
suspicion of metastatic colorectal carcinoma. Radical resection was sub-
sequently performed. Multiple sections from the surgical specimens were
routinely processed. Hematoxylin and eosin staining, histochemical and
immunohistochemical tests were performed.
Results: On gross evaluation, two distinct tumoral masses were identified
in the superior rectum and left kidney. The histological examination of the
rectal tumour revealed a low-grade adenocarcinoma NOS, while the renal
tumour presented a particular morphology, with tubular architecture, fo-
cal spindle cell areas and stroma with fibrous and mucinous appearance.
The tumour cells were positive for CK7, cytokeratin 34βE12, EMA and
Vimentin and negative for RCC, CD10, CK20 and CDX-2. The Ki-67
proliferation index was 5%. A diagnosis of mucinous tubular and spindle
cell carcinoma was made.
Conclusion: This is, to our knowledge, the first reported case of synchro-
nous colorectal carcinoma and MTSCC of the kidney. The latter is a rare
renal neoplasm, accounting for less than 1% of renal cell carcinomas.
While the occurrence of multiple primary cancers is an increasing phe-
nomenon, patient management remains challenging. Morphological and
immunohistochemical profiling are essential in differentiating MTSCC
from secondary tumours, particularly in patients with relevant clinical and
genetic background.
E-PS-27-077
Primary prostatic leiomyosarcoma: case report and literature review
S. Stasinopoulou*, E. Kavadas, N. Brattis, A. Karameris
*Department of Pathology, NIMTS 417 Veterans Administration
Hospital, Greece
Background & objectives: Sarcomas of the prostate are rare, accounting
for <0.1% of prostate malignancies. Leiomyosarcoma is the most com-
mon sarcoma of the prostate (38%-50%). Less than 200 cases have been
reported worldwide.
Methods: 75-year-old-Caucasian-male with bladder-obstruction-
symptoms for 6-months.
On-treatment for benign-prostatic-hyperplasia (BPH) for 2-years.
Preoperative serum-PSA=0.534ng/ml.
Microscopic-examination of transurethral-biopsy-material-(TURP): infil-
tration of prostatic tissue by interlacing bundles-and-fascicles of spindle-
shaped cells with elongated/pleomorphic/highly atypical/bizarre nuclei,
brisk-mitotic-activity-and-necrosis.
Differential diagnosis: stromal tumours of prostate, specifically sarcomas.
Immunohistochemistry: positive for SMA/desmin/HHF35, weakly positive
for vimentin, and negative for AE1/AE3/CD34/AR/PR. ki67 cell prolifera-
tion index was high, approximately up to 70% of the neoplastic nuclei.
Results: Morphological and immunohistochemical findings were highly
supportive for primary leiomyosarcoma of the prostate gland.
Following the histological diagnosis, the patient was referred to a hospital
in his hometown where he was programmed to perform an MRI scan and
be treated with radical prostatectomy and chemotherapy.
Virchows Arch
Conclusion: Leiomyosarcoma-of-the-prostate is an aggressive neoplasm.
Hard to be diagnosed clinically, as the presenting symptoms can be attributed
to other benign-and-malignant conditions.
Combining surgery/radiation/and chemotherapy is considered to be the
optimum therapeutic approach, although standardized guidelines do not
currently exist.
E-PS-27-078
Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the prostate: case report and
literature review
S. Stasinopoulou*, E. Kavadas, N. Brattis, E. Stamatogianni,
A. Karameris
*Department of Pathology, NIMTS 417 Veterans Administration
Hospital, Greece
Background & objectives: Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
(LCNEC) of the prostate is exceedingly rare and associated with poor
prognosis and widespread metastases. However, because of the rarity of
the disease, its course and optimal treatment are yet to be determined.
Methods: 85-year-old-Caucasian-male with urinary-retention-
symptoms and history of prostate-cancer-Gleason-Score-7,on an-
drogen-deprivation-therapy-(ADT) for 4-years.Preoperative-serum-
PSA=0.03ng/ml.
Microscopic-examination of transurethral-biopsy-material-(TURP):
infiltration-of-prostatic-tissue by highly cellular/poorly-differentiated-neo-
plasm with nested-and-glandular-pattern-of-growth and necrosis. Neoplastic
cells have abundant-cytoplasm/large-nuclei/prominent-nucleoli, and brisk-
mitotic-activity. Small-foci of conventional-prostatic-adenocarcinoma-
Gleason-Score-9 are recognized, in-less-than 1% of the-examined-tissue.
Differential diagnosis: high-grade (Gleason-Score-10) conventional-ade-
nocarcinoma-of-prostate, high-grade-urothelial-carcinoma, and neuroen-
docrine-tumour.
Immunohistochemistry for poorly-differentiated-neoplasm: positive for
chromogranin/synaptophysin/CD56/TTF1/CDX2/p53.Negative for PSA/
PSAP/ prostein/ PSMA/ GATA3/ p63/ CK7/ CK20/ b-catenin. ki67 was-
expressed-in 40% of the neoplastic-nuclei. Immunohistochemistry for con-
ventional prostatic adenocarcinoma: positive for PSAP/PSA (weak and focal
staining)/p53.Negative for CDX2.
Results: Morphological and immunohistochemical findings were indic-
ative of large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. Taking into account the
presence of conventional adenocarcinoma of the prostate and the patient’s
history, the prostate is the most possible primary site of the neoplasm.
However, strong and diffuse CDX2 expression by the neoplastic cells
renders the suspicion of a gastrointestinal tract primary.
Following the histological diagnosis, the patient was referred for further
examination, not yet performed at the time writing this report.
Conclusion: LCNEC-of-the-prostate is a rare entity, which more fre-
quently occurs in patients formerly diagnosed with prostatic-
adenocarcinoma and treated with long-standing-hormonal-therapy.
Further research is needed to determine if neuroendocrine-
differentiation-of-prostate-cancer is a natural-outcome of the disease or
a resistance mechanism to current therapies.
E-PS-27-079
Primary mixed adenocarcinoma and large cell neuroendocrine car-
cinoma in ureter: a case report
J.H. Suh*, E. Jung, K.C. Moon, J. Park, H.S. Kim, W. Na
*Department of Pathology, Republic of Korea
Background & objectives: Primary adenocarcinoma (ADC) and prima-
ry large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) are both rarely diag-
nosed in ureter with few cases reported in literature. We present a recent
case report from our institution illustrating the unique characteristics of
the disease.
Methods: We report a case of primary mixed ADC and LCNEC that
arose in proximal ureter and renal pelvis of a 55-year-old Korean man.
This patient has a history of simple nephrectomy of left kidney, ileocecal
cystoplasty and augmentation cystoplasty with uretero-ileal implantation,
that was undergone 30 years ago due to tuberculosis.
Results: After cystoplasty, the patient has percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN)
on right ureter because of hydronephrosis and the accompanied end stage
renal failure. Under the haemodialysis, contrasted abdominal and pelvic com-
puted tomography (CT) was done and revealed a hypoattenuated mass in
ureteral area. Radical nephrectomy of right kidney was undergone and the
severe adhesion in Gerota’s fascia was found in the operation.
Histopathologic diagnosis finally revealed as mixed ADC and LCNEC by
immunohistochemical (IHC) study. The ADC components showed mucin-
ous features (positive for CK20 and CDX-2) and transited to LCNEC com-
ponents (positive for chromogranin A and synaptophysin).
Conclusion: In summary, this case study showed that mixed ADC and
LCNEC can develop in the upper genitourinary tract including ureter,
renal pelvis and calyces, especially in the case of the patient who under-
gone ileocecal cystoplasty with ureter-ileal implantation.
E-PS-27-081
Metanephric adenosarcoma – a rare malignant tumour in a young
male
L. Tomescu*, A. Petrescu, G. Berdan, H. Muresan
*University Emergency Hospital, Bucharest, Romania
Background & objectives: Metanephric neoplasms encompass a spectrum
of uncommon benign renal tumours including metanephric adenoma, meta-
nephric stromal tumour and metanephric adenofibroma. There are few cases
described in literature as metanephric adenosarcoma, with benign epithelial
component and malignant stroma.
Methods: We present the case of a 20-year-old male with acute left
lumbar pain after a trauma having imagistic characteristics suggestive
of perirenal hematoma. After surgery, the left nephrectomy specimen
was processed and examined by standard H&E technique and immuno-
histochemistry. Gross examination identified a subcapsular hematoma
and a poorly circumscribed greyish white area localized in the renal
parenchyma, measuring 2.5x2cm.
Results: Microscopically, the tumour showed a biphasic proliferation
consisting predominantly of spindle cells, with high nuclear pleomorphism
and high mitotic rate with atypical mitoses, large areas of tumour necrosis,
associated with hypercellular epithelial component, with uniform tubular ar-
chitecture. The stromal component resembled high grade sarcomatous tu-
mour, which infiltrated the renal parenchyma, and the epithelial component
was identical to metanephric adenoma. The histological aspects were sugges-
tive of metanephric adenosarcoma. The epithelial component was positive for
AE1/AE3, EMA and negative for WT1, CD10, CD34. The stromal spindle
cells were positive for Vimentin, WT1, Desmin, Actin, P53, with high Ki-67
index (85%) and negative for Caldesmon, CD10, CD99, S-100, MYF4 and
NSE.
Conclusion: We believe that the macroscopic aspect, histopathologic features
and immunohistochemical profile of our case resemble the metanephric
adenosarcoma. The particularity of this case is the incidental finding and
the atypical presentation of an extremely rare malignant renal tumour in a
young male who was initially evaluated for a post-traumatic perirenal
hematoma.
E-PS-27-082
Bilateral multifocal papillary renal cell carcinoma, type 1: a case
report
M.M. Ustaioglu*, S. Aydin Mungan, I. Saygin, E. Cakir
*Karadeniz Technical University Faculty of Medicine Department of
Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Papillary renal cell carcinomas (PRCCs) are
the second most common renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) subtype and
occurs in sporadic and hereditary forms, accounting for 10-15% carcino-
mas of the renal tubular epithelium.
Methods: The surgical specimens were bilateral nephrectomy materials
formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded. The sections were stained with
routinary H&E. Immunohistochemistry was performed.
Results: A 77-year-old male patient who applied with abdominal pain
and prostatism symptoms. Laboratory tests revealed no significant abnor-
malities. By abdominal computed tomography revealed multifocal, solid
masses with the largest size of 49 x46mm in bilateral kidneys. The patient
underwent transperitoneal bilateral nephrectomy. In macroscopic exami-
nations, the tumour was well circumscribed, grey-white, necrotic, solid
and multiple, measuring 0.3-5.3cm. Microscopically neoplasm was
formed small cuboidal cells arranged on single layer at papillary cores.
Neoplastic cells were uniform, had scant pale cytoplasm, hyperchromatic
nuclei. Papillary cores contained foamy macrophages. Many Psammom
bodies and papillary adenomas were detected. Immunohistochemical re-
actions were as follows; tumour cells were positive for AMACR, CK7,
Pax 8, EMA, Vimentin.
Conclusion: PRCC is a malignant tumour, with a tendency to present at a
lower stage, but with a distinct potential for progression and aggressive.
Type 1 variants are slow-growing neoplasm with a relatively favourable
prognosis. Although generally correlated with familial cancer syndromes,
bilateral RCCs are rare (3-5 %) in the epidemiology of the disease. For all
these reasons, this rare entity should be kept in mind in differential diag-
nosis
E-PS-27-083
Seminoma presenting as a polypoid bladder mass: a case report
M.M. Ustaioglu*, S. Aydin Mungan, E. Cakir, I. Saygin
*Karadeniz Technical University Faculty of Medicine Department of
Pathology, Turkey
Background & objectives: Germ cell tumours (GCTs) are uncommon in
elderly males, and male GCTs arise predominantly in the testes.
However, 2-5% of GCTs are of extragonadal origin. Extragonadal germ
cell tumours (EGCTs) in adults are uncommon and are mostly encoun-
tered in male.
Methods: The surgical specimens were formalin-fixed and paraffin em-
bedded tissues from transurethral resection material. The sections were
stained with routinary H&E and immunohistochemistry was performed.
Results: A 55-year-old male patient who applied with urinary retention,
dysuria and haematuria. Patient’s physical examination did not reveal any
significant abnormality. Laboratory tests revealed no significant abnor-
malities. A computed tomography showed a polypoid enhancing mass
measuring 143x90mm arising from the right posterior basal aspect of the
urinary bladder. A scrotal ultrasonography evaluation did not reveal any
significant abnormality. The patient underwent cystoscopic biopsy. In
macroscopic examination, measuring 2cm, white, fragmented tissues
were detected. In microscopic evaluation, the tumour composed of uni-
form, round to polygonal cells with moderate to abundant partly clear
cytoplasm, large nuclei with prominent nucleoli. Immunohistochemical
examination showed diffuse positivity in the tumour cells with CD117,
PLAP, SALL-4.
Conclusion: EGCTs are representing 2-5% of germ cell tumours.
Mediastinum is the most common site of these tumours followed by
retroperitoneum and central nervous system. We hereby present rare case
of extragonadal seminoma which presented with a large polypoid
intravesical mass.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Virchows Arch
