Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
Available online 26 February 2025
0169-409X/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Beyond the EPR effect: Intravital microscopy analysis of nanoparticle drug 
delivery to tumors☆
Iaroslav B. Belyaev a,b, Olga Yu. Griaznova a, Alexey V. Yaremenko c, Sergey M. Deyev a,  
Ivan V. Zelepukin a,d,*
a Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
b Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven 5600 MB, the Netherlands
c Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124, Greece
d Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala 75123, Sweden
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Nanoparticle delivery
EPR effect
Endothelial extravasation
Intravital microscopy
EPR alternatives
A B S T R A C T
Delivery of nanoparticles (NPs) to solid tumors has long relied on enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) 
effect, involving permeation of NPs through a leaky vasculature with prolonged retention by reduced lymphatic 
drainage in tumor. Recent research studies and clinical data challenge EPR concept, revealing alternative 
pathways and approaches of NP delivery. The area was significantly impacted by the implementation of intra­
vital optical microscopy, unraveling delivery mechanisms at cellular level in vivo. This review presents analysis of 
the reasons for EPR heterogeneity in tumors and describes non-EPR based concepts for drug delivery, which can 
supplement the current paradigm. One of the approaches is targeting tumor endothelium by NPs with subsequent 
intravascular drug release and gradient-driven drug transport to tumor interstitium. Others exploit various 
Abbreviations: CAM, cell adhesion molecule; CD, cluster of differentiation; ECM, extracellular matrix; EPR, enhanced permeability and retention; ESL, E-selectin 
ligand; EV, extravascular space; FlaRE, flash release in endothelium; FLIM, fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy; FRET, F¨orster resonance energy transfer; HSA, 
human serum albumin; IFP, interstitial fluid pressure; IL, interleukin; IVM, intravital microscopy; MDN, membrane-derived nanovesicle; MMP, matrix metal­
loproteinase; MPO, myeloperoxidase; MPS, mononuclear phagocyte system; NIR, near-infrared; NP, nanoparticle; N-TEC, nanoparticle transport endothelial cell; 
PEG, polyethylene glycol; PLGA, poly lactic-co-glycolic acid; PLVAP, plasmalemma vesicle-associated protein; PSMA, prostate-specific membrane antigen; RBC, red 
blood cell; TAM, tumor-associated macrophage; TEM, tumor endothelial marker; TGF, transforming growth factor; TLR, toll-like receptor; TLs, thermoresponsive 
liposomes; TME, tumor microenvironment; VE, vascular endothelial; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; VL, vessel lumen; VVOs, vesiculo-vacuolar organelles.
☆This article is part of a special issue entitled: ‘Optical Monitoring’ published in Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews.
* Corresponding author at: Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
E-mail address: ivan.zelepukin@igp.uu.se (I.V. Zelepukin). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/adr
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2025.115550
Received 31 October 2024; Received in revised form 18 February 2025; Accepted 18 February 2025  
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
2
immune cells for tumor infiltration and breaking endothelial barriers. Finally, we discuss the involvement of 
active transcytosis through endothelial cells in NP delivery. This review aims to inspire further understanding of 
the process of NP extravasation in tumors and provide insights for developing next-generation nanomedicines 
with improved delivery.
1. Introduction
Nanoparticles (NPs) have emerged as a versatile tool for targeted 
drug delivery and bright imaging of malignant tissues. NPs can serve as 
carriers for both molecular chemotherapeutics and larger biomolecules, 
protecting the payload from degradation and increasing its bioavail­
ability [1]. They can be engineered to respond to specific stimuli in the 
tumor microenvironment, such as acidic pH, hypoxia, or certain en­
zymes, to perform selective and localized drug release [2]. Decoration of 
NPs with targeting ligands, recognizing receptors overexpressed on 
tumor cells, improves precision of therapeutics and minimizes toxicity to 
healthy tissues [3,4].
The performance of NPs in vivo largely depends on their delivery to 
tumor tissue, which, for several decades, was believed to occur solely 
through the “enhanced permeability and retention” (EPR) effect. The 
EPR effect, first observed by Matsumura and Maeda in 1986, refers to 
the enhanced accumulation of NPs via the abnormal leaky vasculature of 
tumors and the subsequent retention due to impaired lymphatic 
drainage [5–7]. NPs with a size from 10 to 500 nm have been shown to 
traverse the intercellular gaps and accumulate in tumors, imposing 
constraints on the design of drug carriers [8,9]. Transport via the EPR 
effect generally belongs to passive delivery routes, meaning it does not 
require binding to receptors or energy-dependent internalization. In 
contrast, active delivery routes involve receptors or cells in the process 
of NP extravasation. Passive transport is an attractive concept for tumor 
treatment, since it has the potential to be universal for broad classes of 
nanomedicines, including drug carriers, mRNA vesicles and oncolytic 
viruses.
However, the clinical translation of EPR-based nanomedicines faced 
substantial challenges. Despite promising preclinical outcomes, many 
NPs have failed to demonstrate consistent therapeutic efficacy in human 
cancers [10]. One of the reasons for this is the significant heterogeneity 
of the EPR effect, which varies between different types of tumors, be­
tween patients, and even within different regions of the same tumor. 
This variability can be attributed to factors such as the tumor’s vascular 
density, number and size of intercellular gaps, thrombogenesis, differ­
ences in tumor’s interstitial fluid pressure, and functional state of the 
lymphatic system [11,12]. Such heterogeneity is lower for artificial 
human xenografts than for patient-derived tumors in murine models 
[13]. Moreover, the EPR effect is typically more uniform in small, 
rapidly growing tumors, similar to preclinical models [11]. This led to a 
re-evaluation of the reliance of drug delivery on the EPR concept, 
prompting researchers to explore complementary mechanisms for 
enhanced NP accumulation in tumors, particularly as the understanding 
of tumor biology and nanoparticle interactions expands [14].
Intravital microscopy (IVM) has emerged as a powerful tool to 
discover and refine strategies for enhanced NP delivery in tumors. IVM is 
an optical imaging technique that enables real-time visualization of NP 
behavior in live animals at the cellular level [15]. Starting from the early 
years after discovery of the EPR effect, fluorescence microscopy was 
used to analyze influence of the size and coating of liposomes on the 
microvascular permeability in tumors [16,17]. Over the past decade, 
IVM revealed additional processes involved in the delivery of nano­
materials [18]. For instance, polymeric NPs, dendrimers, and liposomes 
with cationic charge were shown to induce adsorptive-mediated trans­
cytosis in tumor blood vessels. Similarly, IVM revealed a special subtype 
of tumor endothelial cells, participating in NP transport [19]. These 
transendothelial mechanisms may provide a more consistent pathway 
for NP delivery, especially in tumors with limited EPR-based 
accumulation [20].
IVM led to the exploration of other passive and active mechanisms of 
transport by focusing on microvascular dynamics of NPs and their 
permeation through the tumor vessels. For instance, IVM data demon­
strates potential of targeting NPs to the features of tumor vasculature. 
The reduced blood flow rate in solid tumors enables adhesion and pas­
sive accumulation of sub-micrometer drug vesicles [21]. Functionali­
zation of NPs with ligands that bind to receptors overexpressed on tumor 
endothelial cells (e.g., pro-angiogenic factors or cell adhesion molecules) 
enables active targeting and retention at the tumor site [22]. For 
instance, NPs recognizing vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
have been shown to remain in C6 glioma for one day [23]. Membrane- 
derived nanoghosts or membrane-coated NPs can exploit the natural 
ability of certain cell types to home to the tumor or to the inflamed 
tumor endothelium [24,25]. Subsequent localized drug release in blood 
vessels can improve cancer therapy even without NPs permeation [26].
Intravital fluorescence tracking of single cells shows the involvement 
of cell-mediated active delivery of NPs in overcoming endothelial bar­
riers. Immune cells, including monocytes, neutrophils and lymphocytes 
naturally home to tumors and can be engineered to carry NPs [27]. 
Macrophages have shown the ability to transport NPs across the 
blood–brain barrier, and into challenging tumor regions far from blood 
vessel wall [28,29]. Circulating leukocytes and marginated neutrophils 
normally uptake part of intravenously injected nanomaterials and can 
significantly alter their biodistribution [30,31]. In addition, leukocyte 
trafficking creates leakiness in basement membrane, enabling NPs to use 
this route for entrance into the tumor [32]. Red blood cells (RBCs) lack 
cancer-targeting characteristics but are capable of vascular organ- 
specific targeting. RBCs have been shown to deliver NPs to the lungs 
and brain [33] and to perform specific treatment of pulmonary metas­
tases [26]. By leveraging the natural migratory, tumor-homing proper­
ties and prolonged circulation of cells, cell-mediated NP delivery 
bypasses the limitations of EPR-dependent accumulation.
This review provides a comprehensive analysis of the diverse path­
ways which are utilized by NPs to enter tumors and deliver drugs to 
cancer cells. We present the EPR effect as a cornerstone principle gov­
erning the design of NPs for drug delivery, while also discussing the 
reasons behind the heterogeneity of this effect in clinical settings. In 
view of this, we emphasize the role of non-EPR-based transport mech­
anisms in overcoming heterogeneity of tumor biology. We focus on in­
sights gained from IVM methods for real-time analysis of NP behavior 
within the tumor microenvironment. Non-EPR-based delivery mecha­
nisms, such as targeting of tumor endothelium, transcytosis, and cell- 
mediated delivery, offer new perspectives to drive NP design for can­
cer therapy. These mechanisms are complementary to the EPR concept 
and all of them may coexist within a single tumor. The review aims to 
shape the development of next-generation nanomedicines that move 
beyond the constraints of EPR-dependent uptake, paving the way for 
personalized, effective, and adaptable delivery strategies for patients 
with variable tumor profiles.
2. EPR effect in preclinical and clinical studies
2.1. The phenomenon of EPR effect in nanoparticle delivery
Discovery of the EPR effect undoubtedly boosted design of nano­
materials with more than 60 nanomedicines that have been approved for 
clinical use [34]. The EPR-based accumulation for now remains the 
fundamental principle underlying passive targeting for imaging and 
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
3
therapy of solid tumors. The enhanced accumulation of NPs in tumors in 
comparison to healthy tissues was observed in rodents, rabbits, dogs and 
other vertebrate animals [16,35,36]. In clinical settings, the EPR effect 
has been shown in human cancers such as those of the colon, rectum, 
breast, stomach, and ovaries [37]. However, not all tumors exhibited a 
strong EPR effect. For example, human pancreatic tumors are known for 
poor vascularization and a dense microenvironment, which limits tissue 
permeability [38,39].
EPR mechanism involves the enhanced accumulation of macromol­
ecules through a leaky tumor vasculature and retention via restricted 
blood and lymphatic elimination pathways (Fig. 1A) [6]. In the pio­
neering study of Matsumura and Maeda, this was supported by post- 
mortem optical visualization of delivery of albumin-Evans blue com­
plexes to Sarcoma 180 tumor [5]. Modern IVM techniques allow real- 
time and high-resolution imaging in living animals, enabling both 
whole-body cancer screening and microscopic visualization of the tumor 
vessels (Fig. 1B). For instance, Qi et al. utilized short-wave infrared 
imaging to observe the dynamics of EPR-based delivery of 33-nm fluo­
rescent dots in prostate xenografts, with minimal interference from 
endogenous fluorescence of tissues [40].
The EPR-based accumulation of NPs is primarily driven by patho­
logical openings between endothelial cells in the tumor vasculature. 
Immunohistochemistry of blood vessels in MCa-IV murine mammary 
carcinomas has shown that 14 % of the vessel surface is lined by 
defective and poorly connected cells. Electron microscopy study of these 
vessels revealed that endothelium has intercellular openings with a 
median size of 1.5 µm (ranging from 0.3 to 4.7 µm) and transcellular 
holes with a median size of 0.6 µm (ranging from 0.2 to 0.9 µm) [41]. A 
series of studies showed size-dependent accumulation of liposomes in 
subcutaneous tumor models, where most tumors exhibited a vascular 
cut-off pore size ranging from 380 nm to 780 nm [9,16,42]. The leaky 
tumor vasculature facilitates the deposition of drug-loaded nano­
particles, leading to enhanced delivery to tumors compared to normal 
tissues.
A second key component of the EPR effect is the prolonged retention 
of NPs within the tumor tissue. This retention has largely been attributed 
to impaired lymphatic drainage, due to the collapse of lymphatic vessels 
or the absence of functional lymphatics far from the tumor margin 
[7,43]. However, lymphatics functionality is usually accessed by 
monitoring the interstitial drainage of labeled macromolecules [7,44]. A 
recent study by Nguyen et al. examined the lymphatic drainage of NPs in 
common murine tumor models (B16-F10, 4 T1, MMTV-PyVT) [45]. All 
studied tumor lymphatic vessels were not fully collapsed and had a 
lumen size larger than 286 nm, which is sufficient for NP exit. Optical 
imaging confirmed that both peritumoral and intratumoral lymphatic 
vessels participate in NP elimination, while clearance enhances with the 
decrease of NP size. Large 100-nm particles experienced only minimal 
clearance, with just 2.1 % elimination of injected dose. This study pro­
vides evidence of lymphatic drainage of NPs in tumors, while also sup­
porting the general concept of NP retention, which can be attributed to 
NP interactions with both cellular and acellular components of tumors 
[45,46].
The described EPR concept has set restrictions on NP design to 
maximize tumor accumulation. All the current cancer nanomedicines 
are designed with a size lower than the endothelial openings cut-off. In 
addition, NPs should be larger than 6 nm to avoid renal clearance [47]
and preferably smaller than 200 nm to reduce uptake by tissue-resident 
macrophages [48,49]. Consequently, it is generally accepted that NPs 
within the 10–200 nm range are ideal for passive accumulation in solid 
tumors [50]. Beyond NP size, surface chemistry has been modified to 
diminish the uptake by circulating cells, macrophages, and endothelial 
cells. Surface of NPs is modified with stealth polymers like polyethylene 
glycol (PEG), shielding interaction with biomolecules, in the vast ma­
jority of clinical liposomal and polymeric cancer pharmaceuticals [51]. 
Recent data, reinforced by IVM observations, suggest multiple alterna­
tive mechanisms to the EPR-based permeation of NPs through static 
pores in endothelium [19,32,52]. If the role of the EPR effect as the 
primary route of NP delivery to tumor is compromised, restrictions on 
NP engineering can be reduced.
2.2. Challenges of EPR effect in clinical translation
Over several decades of the pre-clinical development of anti-cancer 
nanomedicines, numerous NPs demonstrated efficiency in treating 
solid tumors in animals. Clinical studies showed limited success. For 
instance, liposomal formulations of doxorubicin significantly reduced 
cardiotoxic effects for patients compared to free drug administration 
[53]. However, the clinical assessment of liposomal doxorubicin has 
shown only modest or no improvement in objective response rates when 
compared to standard chemotherapy, with no effect on progression-free 
Fig. 1. The enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect in nanoparticle delivery. (A) Principle of the EPR effect: circulating NPs passively enter tumors through 
the pores in abnormal tumor vasculature and retain in tissue due to low lymphatic drainage. The EPR principle restrains NP design. To enhance passive accumulation, 
the size of NPs should be lower than pore size in endothelium, while surface is shielded from the uptake by any non-target cells. Created with BioRender.com (B) 
Visualization of the EPR effect in tumor site with the short-wave infrared fluorescence imaging. Whole-body biodistribution (top) and NPs spread near the tumor 
vessel (bottom) were accessed 5 min and 24 h after intravenous injection of fluorescent NPs. Adapted with permission from ref. [40].
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
4
survival [54]. Other NP-based drug delivery systems have encountered 
clinical setbacks. BIND-014 docetaxel-loaded polymeric NPs targeting 
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) in metastatic prostate 
cancer failed to demonstrate significant therapy improvement over 
standard docetaxel therapy in a phase II clinical trial [55]. While NPs in 
general offer favorable blood circulation, their therapeutic effects in 
humans have often been underwhelming, highlighting the challenges in 
translating preclinical successes to clinics.
These challenges can be largely attributed to the differences in 
structure of murine tumor models and clinical samples (Fig. 2). Human 
tumors are typically larger and exhibit more heterogeneous and diverse 
genetic patterns compared to animal models [56]. This heterogeneity, in 
particular, is reflected in the non-uniform vascularization and vessel 
fenestration, and variations in the parenchymal microenvironment 
[57,58]. Furthermore, blood flow in human tumors is frequently sup­
pressed and vessels are blocked due to the formation of thrombi and 
occlusions, which can hinder sufficient NP accumulation in the peritu­
moral vasculature [11]. Tumor size is another aspect influencing the 
EPR status. The analysis of clinical trials by Natfji et al. concluded that 
large tumors (140 cm2 > area > 25 cm2) generally exhibit greater 
nanomedicine accumulation compared to medium-sized (area ≤25 
cm2) or very large tumors (area ≥140 cm2). However, the enhanced 
permeation was observed in only about half of the patients with large 
tumors, whereas for medium-sized tumors it occurred in most cases 
[37]. This contradicts murine models, where the tumor concentration of 
NPs tends to decrease with the increase of tumor size [59,60].
Active proliferation of cancer cells and deposition of extracellular 
matrix (ECM) create solid stresses, which compress blood and lymphatic 
vessels and induce hypoxia [43,61]. This compression, along with high 
vascular permeability and reduced lymphatic drainage, results in 
elevated IFP, creating a diffusion barrier that impedes the penetration of 
macromolecules and NPs into deep regions of the tumor [62]. Conse­
quently, even when NPs successfully extravasate into the extravascular 
space, they may not be able to distribute evenly through the tumor 
volume, which is important for achieving therapeutic efficacy [63]. 
Moreover, tumor cells tend to populate more densely the space near the 
blood vessels [64]. These dense perivascular layers may impede the 
permeation of NPs, which is similar to the effect of limited diffusion of 
molecular drugs through multicellular layers [65].
Other components of tumor microenvironment (TME) play a critical 
role in EPR-based NP delivery. The TME includes a network of stromal 
cells, including fibroblasts, pericytes, smooth muscle cells, and various 
immune cells, embedded within a rigid ECM primarily composed of 
collagen [66]. This high-density matrix acts as a significant physical 
barrier, impeding the diffusion of NPs and macromolecules within the 
tumor [67]. Moreover, stromal cells contribute to the solid stress and 
compress blood vessels [61]. TME generally features a highly hypoxic 
and acidic extracellular environment due to irregular blood flow and 
oxygen deprivation. However, the levels of acidity and oxygenation are 
not uniform within the tissue [68], which results in different NP 
behavior in interstitial regions [69,70]. These variability factors 
severely compromise the uniform distribution of nanomedicines within 
solid tumors, particularly in areas distant from blood vessels [71,72].
IVM can be an informative tool to report physical parameters of the 
TME, which is important for any drug delivery concept. Intraoperative 
IVM of patient tumor vessels in clinics has shown that they are disor­
ganized, tortuous, and half of them do not support blood flow [73]. 
Wang et al. presented a novel hypoxia probe and intravitally examined 
the activity and extravasation of hypoxic and normoxic cell phenotypes 
near the blood vessels. Zhang et al. recently established the method to 
evaluate the progression of intratumoral solid stress over time at single- 
cell resolution, achieved by probing the deformation of polyacrylamide 
particles with intravital fluorescence microscopy [74]. Cell migration, 
pH, enzyme activity and other functional and anatomical features of 
tumor can be accessed using fluorescent probes to provide valuable in­
sights about TME in clinical samples [75].
Challenges in the translation of EPR-based nanomedicines can be 
partially overcome by implementation of personalized medicine 
concept. The TME characteristics and EPR-based accumulation should 
be analyzed before therapy with nanomedicines. IVM with the ability to 
Fig. 2. Barriers preventing the efficient extravasation of NPs via the EPR effect. In normal blood vessels, cells are connected by tight junctions and lack 
intercellular pores, which limits the permeation of NPs larger than 5 nm. In tumor blood vessels, NPs extravasate from the lumen through the pathological inter­
endothelial pores via convection. Pericyte coverage and basement membrane impede NP leakage into the tumor interstitium. Tumors build a dense microenvi­
ronment consisting of rapidly proliferating cancer cells, infiltrating immune cells, and fibroblasts. Combined with a dense extracellular matrix (ECM), the solid stress 
created by disorganized and compact cell arrangement establishes a diffusion barrier for NPs. Permeation and diffusion are further hindered by elevated interstitial 
fluid pressure (IFP) due to the imbalance between liquid influx and lymphatic outflow. Finally, the flow of NPs from tumor vessels can be blocked by vascular 
occlusions, such as thrombi. Created with BioRender.com.
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
5
monitor NP behavior in real-time remains attractive for investigations of 
the correlation between vascularization properties and particle delivery 
[76]. Miller et al. demonstrated that some magnetic and fluorescent NPs 
can be used as companion imaging agents during nanomedicine trials to 
predict drug accumulation and treatment response in solid tumors [77]. 
Alternatively, animal avatars with patient-derived tumors can be used 
for clinical analysis of EPR status of tissue and its heterogeneity [78]. 
Jeon et al. applied near-infrared fluorescent imaging to analyze tumor- 
targeting efficiency of NPs in cellular pancreatic tumor model, xeno­
grafts from patient-derived cells and patient-derived tissues [13]. Tar­
geting of malignant tissue was closely related to the characteristics of 
TME, including blood vessel density and ECM content. The model from 
patient-derived tissues better displays TME of clinical tumors and shows 
faithful heterogeneity of NP accumulation in tissue.
3. Non-EPR based mechanisms of nanoparticle delivery
The enhanced accumulation of nanoparticles, observed in certain 
tumor types or specific tumor regions, drives investigation into the 
reasons behind this phenomenon. The passive accumulation of NPs 
through the tumor’s leaky vasculature is likely not the sole mechanism 
of NP delivery. IVM reveals that immune and endothelial cells actively 
participate in the delivery and retention of NPs. Multiple mechanisms 
are involved in NP transport and the dominant pathways in specific 
tumor types or microenvironments have yet to be determined.
3.1. Approaches for intravascular targeting and drug release
3.1.1. Drug release in the tumor vasculature
The high heterogeneity and instability of NP delivery to tumors raise 
the question: “Is the NP extravasation across tumor vasculature even 
necessary for cancer treatment?” In certain cases, the answer might be 
“No.” Delivering NPs “as close as possible” to the tumor can still be 
effective for cancer diagnostics and therapy. IVM reveals that dense 
collagen matrix in tumors hinders the penetration of most nano­
medicines deep into malignant tissue [46,79]. As a result, in most cases, 
tumor imaging with NPs represents only visualization of the tumor 
margin. On the other hand, Miller et al. reported a multispectral IVM 
analysis of biodistribution of NPs and their therapeutic cargo within 
tissue. Although the NPs did not cross the blood vessel wall, their 
released payload permeated tumor tissue within 30 min after particle 
injection (Fig. 3A) [80].
In consistency with this fact, a novel drug delivery concept was 
recently proposed that does not require extravasation of NPs through the 
endothelium. This approach, termed Flash Release in Endothelium 
(FlaRE)-based drug delivery, involves the rapid delivery and enhanced 
accumulation of drug-loaded NPs in the tumor vasculature, followed by 
their fast degradation within the vessels. The flash release of the cargo in 
the tumor vasculature creates high concentration of the drug in blood 
vessel and drives its diffusion along the gradient from the endothelium 
into the interstitium. Thus, the released payload can reach distant cancer 
cells, with ensuing therapeutic effects (Fig. 3B) [26].
According to the EPR-based drug delivery paradigm, slow and 
gradual release is expected to induce better treatment outcomes, since 
NPs require time to reach the interstitium. Under this rationale, most 
drug delivery systems developed over the past decades have been 
designed for controlled and prolonged drug release over hours or days 
[82]. Novel NPs were engineered to release payload under external 
stimuli specific for TME, such as acidic pH, increased oxygenation or 
high redox potential [82]. The therapeutic efficiency of anti-cancer 
drugs can be predicted by the peak drug concentration at the affected 
site [83]. A theoretical comparison of drug delivery using NPs with slow 
(3 h) and rapid (3 min) drug release, has shown the advantages of NPs 
with rapid drug release mode. After fast intravascular drug release, the 
highest peak concentration of drug was achieved in the distant malig­
nant cells (Fig. 3C), which further allowed to perform treatment of 
pulmonary metastases in mice [26].
The feasibility of the FlaRE drug delivery principle existed 
Fig. 3. Drug release in tumor vasculature as an alternative to EPR-based extravasation. (A) Time-lapse intravital images of NPs (blue) and their payload (yellow) 
accumulation in a xenograft tumor model. Scale bar is 50 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. [80]. (B) Schematic diagram of FlaRE drug delivery concept: NPs 
bind to tumor vasculature and rapidly release encapsulated drug (green). The high intravascular concentration of drug drives diffusion to the distant tumor 
interstitium. Adapted with permission from ref. [26]. (C) Theoretical modeling of drug concentration at the 50-μm distance from the endothelial wall for different 
drug delivery modes: delivery with NPs degrading within 3 min (rapid release) and 3 h (slow release). Adapted with permission from ref. [26]. (D) Doxorubicin 
delivery via triggering of intravascular release from thermoresponsive liposomes (TLs). Blood vessels are stained with fluorescein-labeled dextran (green) or 
fluorescein-labeled liposomes (green) in corresponding columns, while doxorubicin permeation is marked with red. Scale bar is 100 μm. Adapted with permission 
from ref. [81].
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
6
throughout the literature for nanomaterials activated by external stim­
uli. Manzoor et al. reported triggering of rapid intravascular drug release 
from thermally activated liposomes. Real-time confocal imaging of 
doxorubicin illustrates that intravascular drug release increases both the 
drug permeation distance and the duration of cancer cell exposure 
(Fig. 3D) [81]. Li et al. used thermosensitive liposome, which released 
95 % of doxorubicin upon mild heating from 37 ◦C to 42 ◦C to treat 
human melanoma xenografts and significantly improved the survival of 
mice [84]. Modification of clinically used liposomes with temperature- 
sensitive polymers can transform NPs from slow to rapid drug release 
systems [85].
Other external stimuli such as light, X-ray, and ultrasound, can be 
used to trigger drug release in blood vessels. Luo et al. developed lipo­
somes activated under near-infrared light by incorporating porphyr­
in–phospholipids in the NP structure. Light irradiation induced singlet 
oxygen-mediated oxidization of unsaturated lipids, leading to a drug 
release [86]. The FlaRE strategy can be further enhanced by triggering 
drug release with ultrasound. Ho and Yeh demonstrated that acoustic 
vaporization of nanodroplets induces intravascular release of doxoru­
bicin, but also disrupts tumor vessels smaller than 30 µm [87]. Acoustic 
cluster therapy utilized sound-activated large microbubbles to exert 
intense mechanical effects on endothelial cells, further improving drug 
delivery [88]. Real-time multiphoton IVM has shown the potential of 
ultrasound to increase extravasation of large macromolecules, such as 
dextran, at distances of up to 46 µm from the vessel. This covers most 
tumor regions, since the intercapillary distances in cancer tissues are 
lower than 100–150 μm [89]. Ultrasound has also shown potential as 
cancer monotherapy. Ultrasound irradiation at specific wavelengths can 
damage rapidly dividing cancer cells during mitosis, thereby slowing 
down tumor growth [90,91]. Combining ultrasound-mediated nano­
particle delivery with passive ultrasound-induced damage to cancer cells 
could result in synergistic therapeutic effects.
Liposomes with intravascular drug release are currently undergoing 
clinical studies. A phase I trial of ThermoDox demonstrated the safety of 
using focused ultrasound to trigger drug release from thermosensitive 
liposomes. Drug transport in clinical solid tumors mirrored results from 
murine studies, showing significant permeation of malignant tissue with 
doxorubicin after liposome activation. The non-invasive thermal drug 
release was precise and safe for patients [92,93].
IVM is one of the few methods that may be used for real-time 
experimental validation of different intravascular drug delivery ap­
proaches. For instance, ten Hagen et al. developed a theoretical model 
for drug transport after different drug release modes and validated it 
through the IVM data in mice [94]. This study underscores the impor­
tance of identifying materials that exhibit first-pass accumulation in 
tumor vessels and rapid drug release within minutes.
3.1.2. Active targeting to receptors of tumor vasculature
Drug delivery concepts with flash intravascular release of payload 
may benefit from rapid binding of drug-loaded NPs to tumor endothelial 
cells. Active targeting receptors overexpressed on the surface of these 
cells is a straightforward method to enhance specific NP accumulation 
near the malignant tissue. To ensure specific delivery, molecular targets 
should be limited to those found only on pathological endothelial cells 
rather than normal ones [95]. Tumor endothelial cells express various 
tumor endothelial markers (TEM), some of which encode membrane 
proteins available for targeting [96]. Molecular targets commonly used 
for vascular targeting are listed in Table 1. However, not all such pro­
teins are endothelial-specific and may be present on other cell types. 
Non-specific targeting of tumor endothelial cells induces high accumu­
lation of drug-loaded NPs in inflamed tissues, such as joints, which is not 
beneficial for treatment of elderly patients [97]. In addition, expression 
of receptor can be upregulated on endothelium during several cardio­
vascular diseases, such as atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease, 
myocardial infarction, and ischemic stroke. Certain receptors can be also 
overexpressed in different tumor cells (Table 1). However, in the context 
of low efficiency of EPR-based permeation of nanomedicines, other cells 
except endothelial are unlikely to be accessible for targeting with FlaRE 
delivery concept.
B7-H3, also known as CD276, is a transmembrane protein from the 
B7 family of immune checkpoint proteins that regulates the adaptive 
immune response [117]. CD276 was found to be overexpressed on 
endothelial cells during pathological, but not physiological, angiogen­
esis. For example, expression level of CD276 was upregulated in the 
vasculature of clear cell renal cell carcinoma in 95 % of patient samples 
[118] and in adrenocortical carcinoma in 91 % of samples [119]. This 
receptor is also overexpressed in a wide range of tumor types, including 
cancers of bladder, breast, colorectal, ovarian, prostate, and melanoma, 
among others [98,99]. A meta-analysis of RNA sequencing data and 
clinical data shows that CD276 is overexpressed in most malignant tis­
sues, and high receptor expression is correlated with low survival 
probability [98]. CD276 can be a target for NPs and drug conjugates. 
CD276-positive endothelial cells promoted tumor delivery of gold NPs in 
mature vessels with proper pericyte coverage [120]. This study con­
tradicts the EPR concept and indicates that CD276 tumor endothelial 
cells can participate not only in binding targeted NPs in vasculature, but 
in their further transport toward tumor cells. Seaman et al. applied anti- 
CD276 drug conjugates for the treatment of several models of breast, 
lung and colon cancer xenografts [99]. They demonstrate that CD276 is 
expressed on both newly formed and established vasculature, co-opted 
by the tumor during growth. The treatment shows complete eradica­
tion of lesions for lung and colon carcinomas and potent anti-tumor and 
Table 1 
Endothelial markers for tumor vasculature targeting.
Target
Presence on vasculature
Presence on 
tumor cells
Reference
B7-H3, 
CD276
Tumor endothelial cells
Expressed, not 
specific
[98,99]
4-1BB, 
CD137
Tumor endothelial cells
Expressed, not 
specific
[100]
TEM1, 
CD248
Fibroblasts and a subset of pericytes 
associated with tumor blood vessels
No
[101,102]
TEM5, 
Gpr124
Tumor endothelial cells
No
[96,103]
TEM7
Tumor endothelial cells
No
[96,103]
TEM8
Tumor endothelial cells
No
[96,103]
MMP-2
Tumor endothelial cells
Expressed, not 
specific
[104,105]
MMP-9
Tumor endothelial cells
Expressed, not 
specific
[105]
MMP-11
Tumor endothelial cells
Expressed, not 
specific
[106]
PV1, 
PLVAP
Tumor endothelial cells and 
endothelial cells during 
cardiovascular diseases
No
[107,108]
VCAM-1, 
CD106
Ubiquitous. Upregulated in 
inflamed endothelium, tumor 
endothelial cells and endothelial 
cells during cardiovascular diseases
No
[109]
ICAM-1, 
CD54
Ubiquitous. Upregulated in 
inflamed endothelium, tumor 
endothelial cells and endothelial 
cells during cardiovascular diseases
No
[109]
E-selectin, 
CD62E
Inflamed endothelium, tumor 
endothelial cells and endothelial 
cells during cardiovascular diseases
Expressed, not 
specific
[110]
P-selectin, 
CD62P
Inflamed endothelium, tumor 
endothelial cells and endothelial 
cells during cardiovascular diseases
Expressed, not 
specific
[110,111]
APN, CD13
Tumor endothelial cells and 
angiogenic vasculature
Expressed, not 
specific
[112]
Integrin 
αvβ3
Tumor endothelial cells and 
angiogenic vasculature
Expressed, not 
specific
[113,114]
Integrin 
αvβ5
Tumor endothelial cells and 
angiogenic vasculature
Expressed, not 
specific
[113]
Integrin 
α5β1
Tumor endothelial cells and 
angiogenic vasculature
Expressed, not 
specific
[115,116]
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
7
anti-metastatic activity for other cancer models [99]. Another study 
demonstrated precise accumulation of anti-CD-276 targeted gold 
nanocages in small lung carcinoma and destruction of B7-H3-positive 
tumor cells and tumor-associated vasculature through synergistic 
chemo- and photothermal therapy [121].
4-1BB or CD137 belongs to the tumor necrosis factor receptor family. 
It is a membrane surface protein expressed on activated T-cells, B-cells, 
natural killers, and other immune cells. The use of CD137 agonists in 
cancer treatment promotes tumor shrinkage by enhancing the cytotox­
icity of T-cells [122]. CD137 is expressed on tumor endothelial cells, 
does not present on normal endothelium, and is minimally expressed on 
tumor cells or in inflamed tissues, as observed in human tissue samples. 
Positive staining to CD137 was observed in the vessels of 32 % of ma­
lignant tumor tissue samples [100]. Analysis of human melanoma brain 
metastases showed the expression of CD137 on both cancer and endo­
thelial cells [123]. Expression of CD137 at the protein level can be 
increased under hypoxic conditions [124]. The presence of CD137 on 
pathological endothelium is not specific to a particular tumor type and 
can be found in colon and breast tumors, both in transplanted and 
spontaneous models [124]. Anti-CD137 nanomedicines were not yet 
used for chemotherapy but promoted immunotherapy through receptor 
activation and increasing trafficking of T-cells to the tumor site [124]. 
Liposomes decorated with anti-CD137 and interleukin-2 have shown 
higher NP accumulation in tumor and anti-cancer activity without sys­
tematic toxic effects [125]. However, CD137 is also found in inflamed 
atherosclerotic lesions, suggesting that future therapies targeting CD137 
should consider the potential for mistargeting tumors and side effects on 
the cardiovascular system [126]. Utilizing NPs decorated with CD137 
agonists may not only enhance NP delivery to tumor blood vessels but 
also improve the cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy by stimulating im­
mune cells.
Serial analysis of gene expression in normal and tumor endothelial 
cells identified several genes that are upregulated in tumor vasculature. 
Some of these TEMs encode cell surface proteins available for NP tar­
geting, such as TEM1, TEM5, TEM7 and TEM8 [96]. Recent studies 
indicate that TEM1 (CD248) is expressed on the surface of fibroblasts 
and a subset of pericytes associated with tumor blood vessels, but not on 
the tumor endothelial cells [102]. TEM5, or the endothelial G-protein- 
coupled receptor (Gpr124), plays a role in embryonic development of 
brain blood vessels and function of blood–brain barrier [127]. Although 
TEMs are general markers of angiogenesis, they are not specific to tu­
mors and can be found during embryonic development. However, in 
adults, cell surface TEMs are largely restricted to tumor endothelial cells 
and are absent in the blood vessels of healthy tissues [103]. Therefore, 
TEM5, TEM7 and TEM8 are potential targets for selective delivery to 
tumor vasculature. To the best of our knowledge, anti-TEMs NPs are not 
yet have been studied for targeted delivery of drugs to the tumor vessels 
and cancer treatment.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of both soluble and 
membrane-anchored enzymes, whose primary function is the cleavage 
of the extracellular matrix. MMPs are associated with angiogenesis, both 
normal and pathological, as well as with the metastatic processes [128]. 
MMP-2, MMP-9, and MMP-11 are overexpressed on the surface of tumor 
vasculature and play a crucial role in tumor angiogenesis [96,104,106]. 
Modification of the NP surface with MMP-sensitive polymers or encap­
sulating drugs within MMP-cleavable polymers enhances drug delivery 
to tumors through the activity of enzymes. These MMP-sensitive NP 
delivery systems improve the treatment of both primary tumors and 
metastases [129,130]. High efforts have been made to create anti-MMP- 
2 antibodies [131,132], which could be used to modify the NP surface 
for active targeting of MMP-2-positive endothelial cells.
Plasmalemma vesicle-associated protein (PLVAP) is specifically 
expressed on the cell surface of endothelium and participates in cardiac 
development in embryos. PLVAP is not found in the heart of adult mice. 
However, PLVAP is upregulated in abnormal endothelial cells in cancer, 
heart injuries, traumatic spinal cord injury and several other diseases 
[107,108]. Anti-PLVAP treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma admin­
istrated through tumor-feeding artery resulted in thrombosis, blockade 
of tumor vasculature, reduced blood flow and tumor necrosis [133]. 
Conjugation of anti-PLVAP antibodies to NP surface may provide suffi­
cient carrier accumulation in tumor vessels.
Other receptors are less specific to the tumor neo-vasculature and are 
also present on endothelial cells in inflamed tissues. However, several 
studies demonstrated the potential of using these molecular targets to 
improve cancer treatment with controlled and manageable side effects 
[134–136]. Cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) are a family of cell–cell 
recognition proteins found on the membranes of endothelial and im­
mune cells [137]. Expression of several CAMs is upregulated in tumor 
vessels making them viable molecular targets: vascular cell adhesion 
molecule 1 (VCAM-1), intracellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), 
selectins, and integrins [134,136,138]. For instance, liposomes func­
tionalized with anti-VCAM-1 antibodies showed preferential accumu­
lation and retention in tumor vessels, while non-modified liposomes 
were able to diffuse into the tumor interstitium [136]. P-selectin is an 
intracellular CAM that can become extracellular after activation of 
endothelial cells. Shamay et al. reported the induction of P-selectin 
expression in tumor vessels after X-ray radiation, followed by localized 
chemotherapy with fucoidan-based NPs [139].
Numerous nanomedicine cancer treatments were demonstrated with 
targeting by RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) peptides, a minimal motif binding 
integrins [135]. RGD-decorated NPs accumulate highly in tumors, for 
example, in breast cancer [140] and glioma [141] models. Thermo­
sensitive liposomes modified with the RGD motif showed high accu­
mulation in tumor vasculature in melanoma, enhancing drug 
penetration into the tumor interstitium after triggered intravascular 
release [142]. Moreover, integrin activation with RGD motif can pro­
mote endocytosis and transport of nanoparticles. Modification of drug- 
loaded dendrimers with RGD-based peptides resulted in a 3-fold 
improvement of nanocarrier permeation in a spheroid cancer model. 
After systemic administration, the modified dendrimers demonstrated 
increased tumor vascular permeability of doxorubicin, with significant 
prolongation of mice survival [143].
3.1.3. Design of nanoparticles for passive targeting of tumor vasculature
Along with active targeting receptors of endothelial tumor cells, NPs 
can be designed to have passive accumulation at the vasculature without 
subsequent extravasation into malignant tissue. Tumor blood vessels 
have elevated viscous and geometrical resistance, which reduces blood 
flow compared to normal tissue [144,145]. Therefore, NPs of submicron 
size are delivered and retained in tumor endothelium due to enhanced 
shear stress. This is beneficial for the concept of drug delivery via 
intravascular flash drug release [21,146]. Other characteristics of NPs 
and blood vessels can influence NP retention in vasculature and can be 
used for passive tumor targeting [147].
To adhere to endothelial cells, NPs should marginate from the blood 
flow towards the vessel wall. Numerous experimental and theoretical 
studies have shown that the shape and size of NPs significantly influence 
their margination behavior [148]. Once injected, NPs collide with each 
other and with cells present in the blood, primarily erythrocytes. RBCs 
tend to move toward the center of blood flow, influencing the distri­
bution of NPs within the bloodstream. Vahidkhah and Bagchi theoreti­
cally analyzed the shape-dependent behavior of submicron-sized 
particles (spherical, cylindrical, and discoidal) in the presence of RBCs. 
Discoidal particles align with the shear flow plane, leading to more 
frequent collisions and greater lateral drift than microspheres. Cylin­
drical particles align with the vorticity axis and have fewer collisions 
and reduced lateral drift. Once marginated, cylindrical particles are 
more likely to contact the wall due to their alignment and large angular 
fluctuations. Simulations indicate that disk-like particles have the 
highest probability of firm adhesion to the vessel wall, followed by 
elongated particles and microspheres [149].
Dynamic analysis with IVM highlights the margination-adhesion 
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
8
behavior exhibited by individual particles with different shapes within 
the tumor vasculature [146]. Among spherical, hemispherical, and 
discoidal particles, the latter demonstrated a higher tendency to adhere 
to the blood vessel wall and exhibited longer circulation times [150]. 
Another study optically visualized the movement of spherical NPs with 
sizes from 10 to 1000 nm in vivo. Particles smaller than 100 nm moved 
uniformly with RBCs and showed limited near-wall accumulation, 
whereas larger particles tended to accumulate preferentially along 
vessel walls, with approximately 70 % of 1000-nm particles found near 
the endothelium [151]. Further in vivo tracking of discoidal and cylin­
drical silicon NPs using IVM revealed that discoidal particles preferen­
tially accumulated within the tumor vasculature. Discoidal particles 
with 1000 × 400 nm size showed the highest tumor-to-liver accumu­
lation ratio among the studied particles [146]. Thus, discoidal particles 
of submicron size are preferred for enhanced margination and adher­
ence to the tumor vasculature.
Mechanical properties of NPs can significantly influence the 
margination and adherence to endothelium [152]. From theoretical 
calculations, stiff particles, i.e. those featuring higher Young’s elastic 
moduli, have a higher probability to marginate towards the blood vessel 
wall than soft analogs [153]. Nevertheless, adhesion of microparticles 
can greatly depend on the wall shear rate in blood vessels. Fish et al. 
investigated adhesion of ICAM-1-targeted soft and stiff microgels on 
human endothelial monolayers under different blood flow conditions. 
Soft microgels demonstrated better adhesion at low wall shear rate (200 
s−1), while stiff microgels better bound to the endothelium at high shear 
rate (1000 s−1) [154]. This finding led to the development of a multistep 
delivery system, where deformable micro-sized particles are used to 
deliver smaller NPs to the tumor vasculature. This system enhanced the 
delivery of 50-nm polystyrene NPs 30-fold in comparison to the freely 
injected NPs [154]. For active methods of NPs targeting, soft NPs tend to 
demonstrate longer interaction with endothelial cells via enhanced 
avidity of particles after flow-stress deformation [155].
In addition to longer retention in tumor vessels, soft nanoparticles 
have lower interaction with immune cells and macrophages. As a 
consequence, soft nanomaterials usually have longer blood circulation 
time than hard counterparts [156,157]. Key et al. compared the bio­
distribution of 1000 × 400 nm discoidal polymeric NPs with Young’s 
modulus of 1.3 and 15 kPa [158]. Stiffer NPs showed higher deposition 
in Kupffer cells and along vascular walls of liver. Soft counterparts were 
distributed with 6-fold higher area density in vasculature of B16-F1 
melanoma model [158]. Similar results were obtained by comparing 
biodistribution of polymeric nanogels, where liver uptake increased 
with the increase of Young’s modulus of NPs from 80 kPa to 420 kPa 
[157]. Uptake by tumor cells is also lower for soft NPs. Guo et al. 
analyzed uptake of NPs with moduli varied from 45 kPa to 19 MPa and 
found up to a five-fold in vitro cellular uptake and 2.6-fold higher in vivo 
tumor uptake for soft NPs [159]. However, small soft nanoparticles were 
shown to permeate tumor due to lower interaction with extracellular 
stroma and deformability [160,161].
One of the most effective ways to target a specific site is to mimic 
natural solutions already existing in the body. Exosomes or extracellular 
vesicles are enclosed compartments with sizes up to 200 nm, produced 
by various cell types and used for cell–cell communication through the 
transport of biological molecules [162]. While exosomes can naturally 
recognize specific cell types, their isolation in high quantity is compli­
cated. Thus, artificially engineered membrane-derived nanovesicles 
(MDNs), or cell nanoghosts, were proposed for tumor homing. These 
MDNs combine targeting moiety from the surface molecules of the 
parent cell, incorporation of cytotoxic component for cancer treatment, 
and reproducibility of nanovesicles production [163]. As MDNs preserve 
the biological function of the cell membrane, their biodistribution and 
blood circulation depend on the parent cell type [24]. A comparison of 
biodistributions of neutrophil- and erythrocyte-derived nanovesicles by 
means of IVM revealed that only neutrophil-derived MDNs exhibited 
specific accumulation in inflamed endothelium, whereas RBC-derived 
did not [164]. Several other cell types can target human tumors. For 
instance, MDNs derived from mesenchymal stem cells demonstrated 
specific targeting of cancer tissue with no accumulation in human pri­
mary benign cells, owing to the natural ability of parental cells for 
chemotaxis and surface interactions with susceptible tumors [165]. 
Nanoghosts derived from cancer cell membranes have been shown to 
self-recognize homotypic tumors, which can be utilized for drug delivery 
[166].
Alongside their application as drug carriers, MDNs can be used for 
camouflaging NPs of different nature, including polymeric and inor­
ganic materials [167]. Platelet membrane-coated nanogels have shown 
a higher accumulation at tumor site compared to non-modified NPs, 
with a 4-fold reduced tumor volume 16 days after the treatment. 
Additionally, platelet-coated NPs significantly reduced the number of 
metastatic nodules in lungs, while bare NPs did not show any anti- 
metastatic activity [168]. Cancer cell-membrane coated PLGA NPs 
recognized homologous tumors in vivo [169]. This recognition is specific 
to homologous pair of membrane-camouflaged NPs and cancer cells 
type. For instance, coating magnetic iron oxide NPs with cancer cell 
membranes, provided 3-fold increase in doxorubicin tumor-specific 
delivery by homotypic NPs, compared to heterotypic ones [170].
To increase NP accumulation in tumor vasculature their surface can 
be modified with neutrophil or leukocyte membranes [25,171]. 
Neutrophil membrane-coated polymeric PEG-PLGA NPs have shown 
enhanced internalization by inflamed endothelial cells in vitro and 
improved retention in both orthotopic and ectopic pancreatic tumor 
models. Site-specific release of celastrol from NPs significantly inhibited 
primary tumor growth, prolonged mice survival and minimized liver 
metastases [172]. In another study, decoration of discoidal silicon NPs 
with leukocyte membrane increased NP attachment to tumor endothe­
lium. Modified NPs mimicked leukocytes and had longer blood circu­
lation time and higher accumulation in inflamed tumor endothelium, as 
confirmed by IVM [173,174]. Incorporation of leukocyte membrane 
proteins into liposomes increased accumulation of NPs in breast and 
melanoma tumors [175,176]. Quantification from IVM images showed a 
4.5-fold increase in liposomes concentration in vessel lumens and a 14- 
fold increased presence in vessel walls after modification. This delivery 
can be reduced or prevented by blocking the surface of liposomes with 
antibodies against LFA-1 and CD45 proteins [175]. Further progress in 
membrane-modified NPs could come from using hybrid cell membranes 
[25]. For instance, camouflaging NPs with mixed membranes from RBCs 
and immune cells can improve blood circulation by inhibiting phago­
cytosis via CD47-signal regulatory protein alpha (SIRPα) pathway, while 
maintaining endothelial targeting. However, the targeting of inflamed 
tissues can result in off-target accumulation in conditions such as 
atherosclerosis, stenosed vessels, and other vascular diseases [177,178]. 
Therefore, a thorough evaluation of the risks and benefits is essential 
before clinical implementation of vascular-targeted nanomedicines.
3.2. Cell-mediated nanoparticle delivery
In the EPR paradigm, many stealth NPs were designed to avoid non- 
target interactions during circulation. Nevertheless, various types of 
blood-circulating cells can enhance NP delivery to tumors [32,179]. 
Neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes naturally migrate to inflamed 
tissues through chemotaxis, while infiltrating macrophages form up to 
half of the tumor mass at advanced stages of cancer [180]. NPs can 
utilize the natural routes of these cells to cross endothelial barriers, 
either by anchoring to their surface or via internal uptake. In addition, 
immune cell permeation through vascular barriers can promote delivery 
of non-bonded NPs by inducing microleakages.
Other cell-targeting strategies focus on delivering NPs to affected 
organs. T-cells can transport drug-loaded NPs to lymphoid organs, 
which are difficult to access from circulation [181]. RBCs can enhance 
NP delivery to organs with high number of small capillaries, such as 
lungs and brain [33]. These approaches can increase the specificity of 
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
9
metastasis treatment in selected organs. The cell-mediated “hitchhiking” 
of NPs can be achieved through ex vivo loading but can also occur 
through in situ interactions within the bloodstream, influencing delivery 
of non-stealth nanomaterials (Fig. 4A) [30,182]. The approaches pro­
moting assembly of NPs with cells are summarized in Fig. 4B, C.
IVM has become a valuable tool to study interactions of NPs with 
circulating blood cells and their subsequent transport [32,179,183]. 
With IVM, the insights on the uptake of NPs by phagocytes in circulation 
and at the endothelial interface were provided, in particular for neu­
trophils [32] and monocytes [183]. IVM proved feasibility for tracking 
the dynamics of the NP transport bound to neutrophils via diapedesis. 
This mechanism has emerged as critical for permeation of a wide variety 
of nanomaterials into tumor [184,185]. Methods of intravital fluores­
cence imaging are evolving to address the migration of phagocytes in 
challenging environments, such as respiratory system, where motion 
artifacts can hinder clear imaging [186]. As a result, IVM currently 
emerges as a main method unlocking the potential of cell-mediated NP 
delivery for improved cancer therapies.
3.2.1. Delivery with neutrophils
Neutrophils are the major population of circulating leukocytes 
(50–70 %) and are the first responders to inflammation or injury. About 
1011 neutrophils are produced in bone marrow daily and then cleared 
with a short lifespan of 7 –20 h primarily by the bone marrow and liver 
[188]. In certain tumor types, neutrophils are a major infiltrating im­
mune cell population, playing a key role in acute inflammation. Their 
recruitment is driven by the expression of CXC chemokines (e.g., CXCL5, 
CXCL2, CXCL6), which mediate neutrophil migration through a process 
known as the extravasation cascade (Fig. 4E) [189]. This begins when 
circulating neutrophils are captured by endothelial E- and P-selectins, 
which interact with glycoprotein ligands on the neutrophil surface (e.g., 
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1, CD44, E-selectin ligand-1). Neutrophils 
then roll along the endothelial wall until activated β2 integrins on their 
surface form stable bonds with ICAM-1 glycoproteins on the endothe­
lium, leading to deceleration and strong adhesion. Once adhered, neu­
trophils extravasate into the interstitial space either by rearranging their 
filamentous actin to form protrusions or by crossing the endothelium via 
diapedesis. These protrusions respond to chemotactic gradients, allow­
ing neutrophils to navigate through the endothelium, pericytes, and 
basement membrane to reach the interstitium [190].
Building on their role in inflammation and tumor infiltration, neu­
trophils demonstrated the ability to enhance NP delivery. They can 
induce leakages in the endothelial wall during transvascular migration, 
facilitating the exit of NPs from circulation. This mechanism has been 
shown across different human and murine tumor models, with treatment 
efficiency positively correlated to neutrophil quantity in the peritumoral 
vasculature [32]. Migrating neutrophils are also capable of breaching 
the tumor vascular basement membrane surrounding the endothelium, 
enabling deeper NP permeation into tumors [184].
Neutrophils can sequester any systemically administered nano­
materials, as was shown with 500-nm polystyrene particles, polylactic- 
co-glycolic acid (PLGA) NPs of 100 and 260 nm sizes, 150-nm PEGy­
lated liposomes, and 35-nm magnetic NPs [185,191–193]. This associ­
ation alters the pharmacokinetic properties of both neutrophils and NPs 
and works as a double-edged sword. First, it reduces the adhesion of 
neutrophils to the endothelium and reroutes part of NPs to the liver 
[191,194]. This feature was applied to mitigate fast infiltration of neu­
trophils and therefore prevent acute inflammation in tissues [194]. On 
the other hand, neutrophils and other marginating leukocytes can act as 
reservoirs transporting NPs from vasculature to tumor interstitium. The 
example of NP uptake and extravasation to tumor in vivo is shown in 
Fig. 4F. Targeting activated neutrophils with anti-CD11b antibodies 35- 
fold increased tumor delivery of gold nanorods compared to PEGylated 
nanorods [195]. Targeting neutrophils can promote their activation, 
where the antitumor N1 phenotype is advantageous for cancer treat­
ment, as it enhances the release of primary granules with 
myeloperoxidase (MPO). MPO release remained unchanged when neu­
trophils were loaded with anti-CD11b-functionalized 240-nm spheric 
polymeric NPs [196], but increased significantly when larger disk- 
shaped microparticles were attached (6 µm diameter, 625 nm thick­
ness). The mechanism of activation is mediated by providing cells with 
surface for adhesion and for fragment antigen-binding region (Fab) 
mediated cross-linking of neutrophil’s receptors.
Attachment of NPs onto neutrophils ex vivo remains an attractive 
idea but presents challenges due to their short lifespan, potential 
changes of their adhesion and activation, and adverse effects associated 
with their transfusion. Large-scale neutrophil extraction can lead to 
neutropenia syndrome in donor, characterized by a cytokine storm and 
increased susceptibility to lung infections, while transfusion may cause 
hypoxia [197]. Nevertheless, cancer treatment with chemotherapeutic 
NPs (silica [198] and liposomes [199]) loaded into neutrophils was 
shown to be significantly improved compared to standard neutrophil 
infusion or NP administration in mice. In these studies, neutrophils 
released NPs within the tumor interstitium. This process was concomi­
tant with the release of neutrophil extracellular traps, an anti-microbial 
extracellular fiber composed primarily of DNA and globular proteins.
3.2.2. Delivery with monocytes and macrophages
Monocytes circulating in the blood are key players of the innate 
immune system, differentiating into macrophages and dendritic cells. 
Their transport presents both‘ challenges and opportunities for NP-based 
drug delivery. Monocyte-derived macrophages rapidly sequester NPs 
from the bloodstream into tissues of the mononuclear phagocyte system 
(MPS). To address this, strategies such as stealth coating of NPs or MPS 
blockade have been developed to improve NP delivery in tumors 
[49,200]. Nevertheless, monocytes can also be recruited to sites of 
inflammation in tumor, where they differentiate into TAMs. This opens a 
pathway for NPs to reach tumor tissues by “hitchhiking” on these cells 
[201].
Deprez et al. reported that myeloid-cell-mediated transport accounts 
for 50–60 % of the delivery of lipid nanocarriers to inflamed tissue. 
Importantly, PEGylation of liposomes decreased the uptake by MPS 
cells, but the longer blood circulation time favored the uptake by 
myeloid cells [193]. Another study by Garanina et al. showed that 
liposomal and polymeric NPs were found in 80 % of circulating mono­
cytes, highlighting the importance of these cells in interaction with NPs. 
Huang et al. advanced monocyte targeting via the design of a series of 
monocyte-binding aptamers anchored at lipid-based nanocarriers. The 
aptamer functionalization significantly improved NP delivery in an 
orthotopic pancreatic cancer model, characterized by high monocyte 
infiltration [202]. Kuang et al. developed MMP-2 peptide-liposomes 
loaded with doxorubicin and modified with lipoteichoic acid, a molecule 
recognized by CD14 and toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) on monocytes. These 
NPs successfully reached glioblastomas after systemic administration by 
hitchhiking on monocytes [203].
Monocyte differentiation into TAMs presents another target for drug 
delivery. Miller et al. conducted high-resolution microscopic imaging in 
tumor-bearing mice with dorsal window chamber to show that TAMs 
can act as long-term drug reservoirs in tumors [80]. They separately 
monitored NPs, carrying platinum payload, and DNA damage at the 
single-cell level and observed TAMs sequestration of the Pt followed by 
its release into neighboring tumor cells. TAMs depletion significantly 
reduced both NP accumulation within tumor and their effectiveness 
[80]. The in vivo microscopic visualization of TAMs in this study was 
achieved by using Cx3cr1GFP/+ reporter mice, where expression of GFP- 
labeled fractalkine receptor (CX3CR1) indicated the population of the 
host leukocytes on site [204]. Since TAMs could not be identified from 
other CX3CR1-positive cells, these conclusions were made by synergiz­
ing the IVM data with immunofluorescence histology and flow cytom­
etry for macrophage-specific markers.
IVM also demonstrated that TAMs can actively transport NPs from 
stromal cells into the tumor interstitium (Fig. 4G, H) [29]. Lin et al. 
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
10
(caption on next page)
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
11
observed that passive diffusion of NPs is limited due to interaction with 
extracellular matrix and stromal cells. Nevertheless, NPs can be engulfed 
by TAMs and redistributed at 2–5 farther distances away from tumor 
vessels, compared to passive diffusion [29]. TAMs-associated transport 
was size-dependent and enhanced with an increase of NP size from 15 to 
100 nm. It is likely that tumor-associated monocytes demonstrate 
similar mechanisms of intratumoral transport during the infiltration 
process, as they have higher mobility than differentiated macrophages 
[205].
Monocyte- and macrophage-mediated NP delivery is a promising 
approach for boosting efficiency of targeted cancer nanotherapy. How­
ever, these strategies depend on tumor’s ability to recruit myeloid cells 
and the viability of transport cells. After uptake of NPs by macrophages, 
they are processed into endosomes and subsequently into lysosomes for 
degradation, where the payload can be released and may damage host 
cells, limiting their movement. Therefore, these transport methods are 
more appropriate for delivering pro-drugs or NPs activable by external 
stimuli.
3.2.3. Delivery with lymphocytes
The high heterogeneity of the EPR effect makes the treatment of 
highly disseminated diseases and tumors with poor angiogenesis chal­
lenging. One such tumor type is lymphoma, which spreads to numerous 
tissues through the lymphatic system. Lymphocytes demonstrate a 
physically optimized amoeboid migration that enables flexible trans­
port, and a homing process regulated by adhesion molecules and che­
mokines [206]. Therefore, healthy lymphocytes, such as T-cells, can 
serve as vehicles for NPs targeting lymphoma tumors, mimicking the 
behavior of cancer cells. Huang et al. expanded autologous polyclonal T- 
cells ex vivo under conditions that promoted their homing to lymphoid 
organs and attached NPs to their surface. This resulted in a 100-fold 
increase in the concentration of NPs in lymph nodes compared to stan­
dard intravenous administration [181]. The anti-lymphoma drug SN-38, 
loaded into these NPs, accumulated in the lymph nodes 90-fold more 
efficiently than the free drug, even when the latter was administered at a 
10-fold higher dose. This significant increase in drug transport was also 
observed in other lymphoid organs, such as spleen and bone marrow, 
providing better targeting of disseminated lymphoma sites [181].
T-cells have shown promise in delivering nanotherapeutics to a va­
riety of other tumor types. Lipid NPs loaded with an interleukin-15 
super-agonist complex (IL-15Sa) and interleukin-21 (IL-21) were con­
jugated to CD8 + T-cells, improving drug delivery to melanoma in mice 
[187]. This strategy resulted not only in the transport of NPs to tumors 
but also in a 10-fold increase in T-cell expansion and enhanced tumor 
eradication triggered by the release of bioactive cytokines. Notably, the 
attachment of NPs to the cells did not affect their proliferation or other 
key cellular functions, preserving therapeutic potential of the T-cells 
[187]. Tang et al. advanced this strategy by attaching nanogels to T-cells 
through the CD45 receptor [207]. These nanogels selectively released 
their drug cargo in response to T-cell receptor (TCR) activation, which 
occurs when the T-cells recognize antigens in the TME. This method 
allowed for at least 8-fold higher cytokine doses to be delivered in tu­
mors without toxicity. IL-15Sa drug release from nanogels induced 16- 
fold greater expansion of T-cells compared to systemic administration 
of free cytokine, and improved therapy of murine melanoma allografts 
and human glioblastoma xenografts. Considering advances of chimeric 
antigen receptor T-cell (CAR-T) therapy in humans [208], NP transport 
with T-cells presents an innovative approach capable of synergizing 
different modes for cancer treatment.
3.2.4. Delivery by red blood cells
RBCs are flexible vehicles with a long circulation time (~120 days in 
humans), which have long been used for improving pharmacokinetics of 
drugs, biomolecules and NPs [209]. Unlike immune cells, RBCs do not 
typically extravasate through endothelial walls or adhere to them. 
However, the high deformability of RBCs enables them to pass through 
capillaries smaller than their own diameter (~ 6–7 µm). This gives an 
opportunity to transport NPs to endothelial walls in certain organs by 
detachment of particles under shear stress during erythrocyte movement 
(Fig. 4I) [210].
The feasibility of erythrocytes as shuttles to the endothelium was 
first demonstrated by groups of Mitragotri and Muzykantov, where 
intravenous infusion of RBCs with non-covalently anchored polystyrene 
NPs led to more than a 7-fold increase in NP delivery to lungs [211]. A 
40-fold enhancement in lung delivery was further observed for lipo­
somes after optimization of the loading protocols on RBCs [33]. Notably, 
Brenner et al. revealed that adsorption of nanogels onto RBCs facilitates 
the delivery of these particles to both endothelial cells and lymphocytes 
in inflamed lungs (Fig. 4J, K) [33]. The enhanced accumulation of NPs 
in lungs is also physiologically favored by large cardiac output, exten­
sive endothelial surface area (25 % – 30 % of the total endothelial sur­
face in the body), and a slow blood flow relative to systemic circulation 
[210].
This delivery concept is promising for treating pulmonary metasta­
ses, where cancer cells arrest and disseminate near the endothelium. 
Triggering rapid payload release from NPs can induce diffusion-driven 
drug permeation through the endothelium. Two different groups 
demonstrated treatment or prevention of multiple melanoma metastases 
in lungs via RBC-hitchhiking [212,213]. Erythrocyte-mediated delivery 
of 100-nm chitosan-coated particles loaded with doxorubicin increased 
lung accumulation of NPs up to 41 % of the injected dose. Doxorubicin 
release induces a 3-fold decrease in the total number of pulmonary 
metastatic nodes and a significant decrease in the average size of the 
metastases [212]. Similarly, doxorubicin-loaded polymeric NPs assem­
bled on the surface of RBCs demonstrated prolonged blood circulation 
time and 10-fold higher drug accumulation in the lungs compared to 
injection of non-bound nanoparticles. RBC-mediated delivery substan­
tially inhibited tumor growth and improved survival outcomes in both 
early- and late-stage melanoma models of pulmonary metastases [213].
Erythrocytes can interact with certain NPs inside the blood vessel 
and transport them to non-lung tumor types. Zhao et al. designed a li­
brary of zwitterionic liposomes containing tertiary amine oxides. These 
liposomes showed reversible binding to circulating RBCs through in­
teractions with hydrophilic heads of membrane phospholipids and 
detachment near the tumor site [214]. Two types of these carriers 
demonstrated the infiltration of tumor via transcytosis through rapid 
micropinocytosis and endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi-involved exocytosis 
of NPs. The delivery of anticancer drugs in zwitterionic micelles 
Fig. 4. Blood cells and immune cells transport nanoparticles. (A) NPs can be attached to specific isolated cells in vitro or can interact with them during circulation in 
blood. (B) The main types of interactions of NPs with the cell membrane. (C,D) NPs can be anchored to the surface of blood cells and hitchhike on them (C) or can be 
transported inside cells after the uptake (D). Bottom: optical imaging of both transport modes on immune blood cells, adapted with permission from ref. [187] and 
ref. [185]. (E) Mechanism of extravascular transport of captured NPs by circulating leukocytes. (F) Interaction of 100 nm PLGA NPs (red) with neutrophils (Ly6G, 
blue) inside the blood vessel (dotted line) and transport of NPs to the tumor microenvironment (TME). Scale bars are 20 µm. Adapted with permission from ref. [185]. 
(G) Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) capture NPs in tumor stroma and redistribute them in microenvironment. (H) IVM images showing the uptake and 
migration of NPs (grey) captured by macrophages (blue) from the blood vessel (red) into the tumor over time. Scale bars are 10 µm. Adapted with permission from 
ref. [29]. (I) NPs, hitchhiked on RBCs, can detach at the endothelial wall of capillaries due to shear stress and be endocytosed by endothelial cells. Also, NPs can be 
transferred from RBC to marginated leukocytes. (J) Electron microscopy image of nanogel adsorption on RBCs. Scale bar is 1 µm. (K) Micrographs of lungs after 
treatment with nanogel-loaded RBCs. Nanogels (red) are absorbed by pulmonary capillary endothelial cells (VE-cadherin, blue) and resident leukocytes (NIMP, 
green). Scale bars are 100 µm. Images from (J) and (K) are adapted with permission from ref. [33]. Graphic schemes are created with BioRender.com.
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
12
improves treatment of both human orthotopic HepG2 xenografts and 
patient-derived tumors in mice [215]. This strategy illustrates how RBC 
hitchhiking can be adapted to target a broader range of cancers beyond 
pulmonary metastases.
3.3. Transendothelial permeation of nanoparticles
3.3.1. Vascular eruptions
Disorganization of peritumoral vessels with the formation of static 
gaps between endothelial cells with incomplete pericyte coverage was 
considered the primary route for NP transport in the classical EPR 
paradigm. One of the key oversights in this early understanding of the 
EPR mechanism was the failure to account for its dynamic nature. This 
aspect was highlighted in 2016 when Matsumoto et al. demonstrated 
that, alongside static pores, some endothelial openings exhibit a sto­
chastic and transient behavior (Fig. 5A) [52]. These time-limited dy­
namic pores can randomly open across tumor vessels, allowing NPs to 
erupt deeply into the tumor interstitium, driven by pressure gradient. 
The escape of NPs through these pores creates a plume-shaped front in 
the perivascular space, which then spreads over the interstitial space as 
the pore closes. Using IVM, the progression of these eruptions was 
visualized, showing bright single events in sub-micrometer endothelial 
openings that later diffused across areas larger than 1000 µm2 (Fig. 5B) 
[216]. These vascular eruptions were observed in mice bearing 
pancreatic human BxPC3 adenocarcinoma xenografts and 4 T1 mam­
mary carcinoma allografts [217–219].
The effect of dynamic pores on NP extravasation becomes more 
pronounced with the increase of particle size. Fluorescent NPs of 70-nm 
diameter generated larger and longer-lived eruption plumes compared 
to 30-nm NPs [52]. Through a combination of mathematical modeling 
and in vivo imaging of breast cancer tumors, it was concluded that these 
dynamic pores can reach diameters of at least 625 nm, allowing the 
effective passage of sub-300 nm particles and even platelets [218]. 
Dynamic pores coexist with static pores in the tumor-surrounding 
vasculature, but vascular eruptions were identified as the primary 
mechanism responsible for the extravasation of clinically approved 
liposomal nanomedicine Doxil (85 nm) [52]. This highlights the need to 
rethink and refine NP design strategies that have traditionally been 
based on the static EPR model.
Studies on murine breast cancer models have confirmed that dy­
namic pores occur more frequently in vessels located within or adjacent 
to tumor tissues compared to distant healthy regions. Moreover, for­
mation of dynamic pores can be stimulated by damaging endothelium 
(Fig. 5C). Naumenko et al. described two patterns of NP extravasation 
through the dynamic pores [32], classified by the degree of NP leakage 
(Fig. 5D-F). Microleakage, or local deposition of NPs in perivascular 
space, was found in both cancer and healthy tissues. On the other hand, 
macroleakages were observed in malignant tissues, characterized by 
deep penetration of NPs in tissue through the basement membrane. The 
distribution of leakages was heterogeneous between different tumor 
types. Few eruptions were observed for human prostate cancer 22Rv1, 
while an increase of macroleakages was found for orthotopic breast 4 T1 
Fig. 5. Dynamic vascular openings participate in NP transport. (A) Illustration of the NP extravasation through static and dynamic pores to the tumor interstitium. 
Static pores are constantly open for NP transport. Dynamic pores are short-living wide openings in the endothelium, allowing the extravasation of large quantities of 
nanoparticles. (B) Time-lapse images of vascular burst (red circle) generated by 70-nm polymeric micelles (grey) in BxPC3 human xenografts. Scale bars are 100 μm. 
Adapted with permission from ref. [216]. (C) Approaches for stimulation of vascular bursts. Local radiation therapy promotes the recruitment of myeloid cells, such 
as monocytes and neutrophils, to the tumor site. The extravascular migration of cells is associated with NP eruptions. Endothelial cell–cell junctions can be breached 
by local hyperthermia, while the detachment of pericytes can be achieved by inhibiting growth factors. (D) Illustration of micro- and macro-leakages of NPs promoted 
by the extravasation of immune cells. Agglomerates of NPs are distributed along the vessel wall in intraendothelial pores and cannot diffuse deeply into tumor due to 
basement membrane barrier. In microleakage, phagocytes cross NP pools but remain in the perivascular zone. Macroleakages occur when extravasating leukocytes 
break the basement membrane, promoting NP release into the interstitium. (E,F) The time-lapse images of phagocyte-mediated leakages of liposomes (red) in mouse 
tumor after neutrophil extravasation (Ly6G, green). Scale bars are 50 μm. Arrow points to migrating neutrophils. Adapted with permission from ref. [32]. Partially 
created with BioRender.com.
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
13
cancer, compared to ectopic model. Moreover, even different blood 
vessels within one tumor demonstrated heterogeneous extravasation of 
NPs.
Several studies closely linked dynamic pore formation with the 
damage in the basement membrane and the recruitment of immune cells 
to the tumor site. The infiltration of neutrophils and monocytes into the 
tumor has been shown to drive NP leakage, as these cells induce tem­
porary disruptions in the vasculature [32,217]. Miller et al. demon­
strated that low-dose radiation therapy, known to promote macrophage 
recruitment, can trigger vascular bursts and enhance tumor uptake of 
NPs ranging from 5 to 110 nm [219]. Moreover, the frequency and the 
area of transient openings can be further increased by inhibiting TGFβ, 
which disrupts intercellular junctions between endothelial cells and 
pericytes, facilitating nanoparticle extravasation [216]. Wang et al. 
demonstrated that NP eruptions could result from the release of accu­
mulated pools in the space between endothelial cells and the basement 
membrane. By inducing local hyperthermia in the tumor, they disrupted 
vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin junctions, leading to accumulation 
of NPs at the basement membrane. The following eruptions were asso­
ciated with neutrophil migration through the endothelial wall [184]. 
Nevertheless, some reports did not identify a clear correlation between 
immune cell presence in vasculature and NP eruption. For instance, 
Hoechst staining of neutrophils in BxPC3 pancreatic cancer model has 
revealed that NP eruptions can occur without cells nearby [52].
3.3.2. Transcytosis through tumor blood vessels
Transcytosis, an active and dynamic cellular process, enables the 
transport of NPs across the endothelium. This mechanism involves the 
internalization of NPs at the apical side, followed by their transport 
across the cell and their eventual release into the tumor interstitium via 
exocytosis or diffusion [220]. Unlike passive delivery mechanisms like 
the EPR effect, transcytosis leverages cellular machinery, allowing NPs 
to navigate through various endothelial features, such as intracellular 
vesicles, vesicular-vacuolar organelles and thin fenestrae (Fig. 6A) [20]. 
Sindhwani et al. quantified the density of intracellular and intercellular 
gaps, and fenestrae across blood vessel perimeters in U87-MG glioblas­
toma xenografts. They found that gaps were relatively rare events, with 
only 1.1 gaps detected per millimeter of vessel length, and that only 27 
% of them were classical intercellular channels typically associated with 
the EPR effect. Vacuoles and fenestrae were observed at densities of 111 
and 24 per millimeter, respectively. The frequency of different endo­
thelial features was similar in mouse models and in clinical samples of 
human cancer (Fig. 6B), while tumor vessels of cancer patients express 
proteins associated with transcytosis [19]. This study highlights the 
significant role of transcytosis in NP transport.
IVM allows the capture of the dynamic aspect of NP extravasation by 
analyzing NP signal colocalization with endothelial cells. Bright fluo­
rescent spots from gold NPs were observed by microscopy in vicinity of 
endothelial cells, described as different stages of transcytosis [19]. A 
similar IVM pattern was observed for tumor permeation of albumin- 
coated NPs [221] and single-walled carbon nanotubes [222]. Trans­
cytosis can account for a substantial portion of NP transport. Sindhwani 
et al. developed “Zombie” animal model obtained through whole-body 
paraformaldehyde fixation of blood vessels. The accumulation of NPs 
in this model can be only due to passive pathways, such as gaps, and 
accounts for only 3–25 % of NP accumulation, dependent on NP size. 
However, rational criticism exists regarding potential overestimation of 
transcytosis contribution in “Zombie” model due to unexamined impacts 
on pore structure by fixation methods [223]. Nevertheless, 3D micro­
scopy demonstrated that gold NPs remained localized in the fixated 
tumor vessels, while clear active extravasation of NPs was observed in 
naïve mice.
Fig. 6. Transcytosis through the endothelium in NP delivery. (A) Main pathways for transcellular transport of NPs through tumor endothelial cells: (i) recycling of 
captured NPs from endosomes to the extracellular environment, (ii) migration within vesiculo-vacuolar organelles (VVOs), and (iii) permeation through fenestrae. 
(B) Relative fraction of permeation-determining features of tumor endothelium (tight junctions, fenestrae, intercellular and intracellular gaps) in murine tumor 
models and clinical tumor samples. Data reexamined from ref. [224]. (C) Main vesicular uptake pathways mediating transcytosis of NPs. Formation of vesicles is 
triggered by specific receptors on the cell surface. (D-F) Special nanoparticle transport endothelial cells (N-TECs) responsible for NP transport: scheme of NP delivery 
(D) and corresponding transmission electron micrographs of a tumor blood vessel (E,F). N-TECs are marked in green, endothelial cells in red, basement membrane in 
blue. A solid black arrow indicates NP clusters in vacuoles of N-TECs, an open arrow shows NPs in the extravascular space at basolateral side. Scale bars are 5 μm (E) 
and 1 μm (F). (G) IVM imaging of gold NP transport through N-TECs. Tumor blood vessels are pseudocolored in green, NPs in red. VL −
vessel lumen. EV −
extravascular space. The NP-associated plum moves toward the EV space with time. Scale bars are 50 μm (top) and 10 μm (bottom). Images in (D-G) adapted with 
permission from ref. [224]. Partially created with BioRender.com.
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
14
Several mechanisms can induce transcytosis of NPs (Fig. 6C). 
Caveolae-mediated uptake is considered one of the primary transcytosis 
initiators for macromolecules. This pathway is particularly active for 
NPs presenting albumin on their surface, as albumin binds with caveolar 
glycoprotein receptors (gp60 and gp90) on endothelial cells, facilitating 
their transport toward the basolateral side [225–227]. Nevertheless, 
caveolar-mediated endocytosis is also reported to take place for poly­
styrene and metal NPs [227,228], as well as for PEGylated liposomes 
[229]. Despite the estimated upper physical diameter of caveolae vesi­
cles is 80 nm, NPs even larger than 200 nm have been reported to follow 
caveolae-dependent uptake [230]. Clathrin-mediated endocytosis has 
been identified responsible for the uptake of certain NP types, especially 
particles functionalized with ligands for transferrin or leptin receptors 
[231–233]. Liposomes functionalized with antibody against transferrin 
receptor allow transport of NPs across the blood–brain barrier [231]. 
The vesicles formed in clathrin-mediated uptake are typically 80–100  
nm in diameter, but there is a variability in their size since polystyrene 
particles larger 500 nm have been reported to internalize through a 
clathrin-dependent mechanism [234]. Other receptor-dependent and 
independent endocytosis mechanisms can also play a role in vascular 
transcytosis. PEGylated liposomes with engineered transcytosis-targeted 
peptide underwent transfer through monolayers of brain-derived 
endothelial cells via lipid raft-mediated endocytosis [235]. Endocy­
tosis modulated by ICAM-1 was reported in vascular endothelial cells for 
targeted NPs [236]. Lin et al. reported that NPs can interact with 
increased concentrations of platelet factor 4 in injured blood vessels to 
induce uptake into endothelial cells [237]. Further studies required to 
link transcytosis in tumor endothelial cells with certain uptake 
mechanisms.
Transendothelial transport of NPs in vivo predominantly occurs 
within a specialized subpopulation of endothelial cells in tumor vessels, 
known as NP transport endothelial cells (N-TECs) (Fig. 6D) [224]. These 
N-TECs present only 21 % of tumor endothelial cells located on a small 
number of vessels. They exhibit elevated levels of caveolin-1 and 
clathrin-related gene expression, which are associated with the 
enhanced accumulation of nanoparticles. Their involvement in NP 
transcytosis was confirmed both by transmission electron microscopy 
(Fig. 6E, F) and IVM (Fig. 6G).
An alternative transcytosis pathway involves trafficking NPs through 
the network of vesiculo-vacuolar organelles (VVOs) of tumor endothe­
lial cells [20]. VVOs appear as cytoplasmic grape-like clusters, which 
can form a connection between luminal and abluminal cell sides. VVOs 
have been observed at least in the ovarian (MOT) and mammary (TA3/ 
St) murine cancer models [238], as well as in patient-derived pancreatic 
cancer xenografts [239]. Dvorak and colleagues accounted the VVOs as 
the primary promoters of hyperpermeability of tumor vessels, although 
their findings of VVO presence in endothelium were reported only in 
limited solid and ascites tumor models in mice and guinea pigs [240]. 
Liu et al. demonstrated that stimulating tumor endothelial cells with the 
iRGD (CRGD[K/R]GP[D/E]C) peptide led to a significant increase in 
VVO formation within 1 day in human pancreatic cancer models in mice 
[239]. This peptide indirectly targeted the NRP-1 receptor via C-termi­
nal CendR motif, resulting from iRGD cleavage upon binding to the 
integrins on the tumor capillary endothelial surface, and eventually 
triggered 
transcytosis 
through 
VVOs 
[241]. 
Moreover, 
co- 
administration of iRGD with 130-nm lipid-coated silica NPs resulted in 
a 4-fold increase in NP uptake in tumors [239]. This highlights the 
critical role that VVO-mediated transcytosis may play in enhancing NP 
delivery.
Modification of surface properties of NPs can improve their trans­
cytosis. Zhou et al. demonstrated that presentation of cationic moieties 
on zwitterionic micelles enhanced caveolae-mediated endocytosis by 
promoting interactions with endothelial cells [215,242]. Poly(2-(N- 
oxide-N,N-diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) (OPDEA) micelles, conju­
gated to the anticancer drug SN38, showed tumor accumulation driven 
by transcytosis. IVM revealed that micellar OPDEA-SN38 formulation 
exhibited faster systemic clearance than PEGylated micelles, but rapidly 
extravasated in the vascular endothelium and accumulated 2-fold 
greater in tumor tissue [215]. Similarly, Wang et al. demonstrated that 
cationic lipid NPs exhibited the greatest ability to traverse matrix gels, as 
observed in endothelial (HUVEC) and breast cancer (MDA-MB-231) cell 
models, compared to neutral and anionic analogs. This enhanced 
translocation of NPs correlated with their better therapeutic outcomes in 
models of hyperpermeable, poorly permeable, and metastatic tumors 
[243]. Another strategy to improve delivery by transcytosis is to provide 
albumin moieties on the surface of NPs. Wei et al. observed that micelles 
coated with human serum albumin (HSA) achieved 7.2-fold higher 
intratumoral delivery compared to uncoated micelles [221]. IVM 
demonstrated that HSA-mediated transport was accompanied by pres­
ence of multiple focal spots in the tumor interstitium, suggesting that 
NPs are delivered by transcytosis route.
Another strategy to improve transcytosis is through the regulation of 
angiogenesis. Yamamoto et al. provided unexpected evidence that 
silencing the vascular endothelial cell growth factor receptor 2 
(VEGFR2) in hypervascular tumors significantly enhanced the uptake of 
100-nm liposomes [244–246]. These findings were counter-intuitive 
because VEGF is a key protein in cancer angiogenesis, and its knock­
down is accompanied with the maturation of the tumor vasculature, 
including increased pericyte coverage and increased endothelial cell 
adhesion [246]. Nevertheless, such treatment increased the expression 
of caveolin-1 protein in tumor endothelial cells, while knocking down 
the caveolin-1 alongside with VEGFR2 abolished the enhanced accu­
mulation of liposomes [245]. This supports the dominant role of 
caveolae-mediated transcytosis in NP transport through mature vascu­
lature. However, the approach of VEGFR2 silencing for transcytosis 
improvement might be effective only in specific types of “vessel-rich” 
cancers, while tumors with a stromal vessel type, such as colorectal and 
breast cancer, may not respond to this therapy [247].
4. IVM development for nanoparticle transport analysis
A broad toolkit of optical microscopy techniques is available to 
analyze the TME, visualize NP transport, and study their interactions 
with various cells in the living body. A detailed discussion of these 
techniques is beyond the scope of this review, as they have been 
extensively reviewed elsewhere [15,248]. However, in this section, we 
will survey the main achievements in the development of IVM, which 
boosted progress in the field of NP delivery, and highlight further steps 
required for the development of this area.
In the pioneering paper describing the EPR effect, one of the proofs 
was optical analysis of accumulation of Evans blue-albumin complex in 
intradermal tumor compared to skin in mice [5]. Post-mortem analysis 
provides limited information about processes involved in NP delivery. In 
contrast, IVM methods enable the capture dynamics of the accumulation 
and assess its heterogeneity by analyzing different tumor regions. In 
1993, IVM was used to observe higher extravascular accumulation of 80- 
nm PEGylated liposomes compared to conventional liposomes in rat 
mammary adenocarcinoma [17]. Yuan et al. established a 400-nm cut- 
off size for effective extravasation of liposomes in LS174T human xe­
nografts [9]. Over the past decade, IVM has demonstrated its feasibility 
for multiplex monitoring of the transport of NPs and their molecular 
payloads in relation to various cell populations present in the TME [15].
Despite this potential, high optical scattering and absorption of 
biological tissues limit the IVM technique to visualizing only the surface 
tumor vasculature. Multiphoton microscopy provides greater penetra­
tion depth by relying on non-linear optical effects and pulsed near- 
infrared (NIR) excitation (700 – 1300 nm). NIR light has reduced scat­
tering and absorption in biological tissues compared to light with shorter 
wavelengths, while non-linear absorption enables narrow localization of 
emission at the focal plane [249]. A multiphoton microscope excites 
fluorophores only within the focus volume, reducing photodamage and 
allowing for the acquisition of optical slices without the use of confocal 
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
15
pinholes. The combination of multiphoton microscopy and NPs that 
absorb and emit light in the short-wave infrared region can further in­
crease imaging depth to almost 1 mm [40,250,251]. Such nanomaterials 
in most cases cannot be used as drug carriers by themselves but can serve 
as companions to access tumor permeability.
IVM analysis of deep-seated tumors benefits from introduction of 
imaging windows. The dorsal window chamber technique involves 
surgically implanting a titanium frame to support a transparent window 
for microscopic probing of subcutaneous tumors and internal organs 
[252]. This technology enables high-resolution analysis of NP transport 
from the same vessels over extended periods but can be impractical for 
accommodating growing tumors and may obstruct perfusion of the tis­
sues. Moreover, the mechanotransductive effects of the window inter­
face can influence tumorigenesis in these models [253]. The substitution 
of the glass interface with flexible silicon membranes has recently been 
proposed to perform microscopy of rapidly growing soft tissues [254]. 
Perfusion window chambers incorporate microchannels for drug injec­
tion and enable IVM studies of drug transport after local administration 
in tumor surroundings [255]. Alternatively, optical tissue clearing 
techniques offer an attractive pathway for microscopic imaging without 
mechanical perturbation. Recently, it was demonstrated that the injec­
tion of tartrazine dye can significantly reduce light scattering of lipids, 
allowing the observation of abdominal organs without the need for 
imaging chambers [256]. This and other tissue clearing techniques 
[257] hold promise to improve analysis of NP transport in a minimally 
disturbed microenvironment.
The challenge posed to IVM as a pre-clinical cancer imaging modality 
is the extension of its applicability to probing orthotopic tumors. IVM- 
aided cancer research is predominantly focused on subcutaneous tu­
mors, as their superficial localization facilitates clear imaging with 
conventional single-photon microscopy systems and imaging chambers. 
Orthotopic models provide a more reliable landscape for pre-clinical NP 
delivery evaluation, as their microenvironment is native in vascularity, 
cellular network and extracellular matrix structure. Some orthotopic 
tumors can be accessed by developing organ-specific imaging windows 
[258] and improving the signal-to-noise ratio of microscopy [259]. For 
example, intravital two-photon microscopy with a transparent cranial 
window has been used to analyze NP delivery in brain gliomas after TME 
remodeling [260]. To name a few, pancreatic, liver, and breast tumors 
can be accessed orthotopically using IVM and mechanisms of NP de­
livery can differ significantly from those observed in ectopic tumors.
Complex dynamics of NP interaction with cells in vivo can be eluci­
dated by advanced fluorescence imaging tools. Standard fluorescence 
imaging can be enhanced by fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy 
(FLIM). FLIM provides information on the interaction of fluorophores 
with surrounding environment based on the changes in their fluores­
cence lifetime [261]. A fluorophore’s lifetime can be significantly 
affected by F¨orster resonance energy transfer (FRET), where the lifetime 
of an energy donor is shortened in proximity to an acceptor. For 
example, intravital FRET-assisted FLIM allowed longitudinal imaging of 
doxorubicin intercalation into GFP-tagged chromatin of cancer cells in 
tumor nodules in mouse peritoneum [262]. Similarly, FLIM can indicate 
localization of NPs and their payloads at subcellular level. Furthermore, 
FLIM can distinguish between released and encapsulated payloads in 
tumors. For instance, the fluorescence lifetime of free porphyrazine 
molecules is approximately four times shorter than that of NP-loaded 
ones, reflecting differences in intramolecular rotation and local viscos­
ity [21].
However, detailed analysis of mechanisms of NP delivery requires 
the integration of additional imaging techniques to overcome limita­
tions of IVM. While IVM allows for high-magnification observations at 
the cellular level, it is less suited for capturing accumulation at the organ 
level. The same fluorescent NPs used for IVM can often be adapted for 
whole-body fluorescence imaging, establishing a full landscape of NP 
delivery in animal models [40]. Another challenge with IVM is quanti­
fication of NPs via fluorescence, as the signal can be significantly 
influenced by the microenvironment. Reliable biodistribution mea­
surement can be achieved through nuclear imaging techniques, partic­
ularly single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and 
positron emission tomography (PET). These methods need the incor­
poration of suitable tracer probes into NPs for accurate assessment of 
their delivery in tissues.
Looking ahead, a more precise analysis of NP behavior may be 
facilitated by the application of artificial intelligence tools. Deep 
leaning-based image restoration can play an important role in improving 
the signal-to-noise ratio in deep tissue layers [259]. Furthermore, ma­
chine learning algorithms can process various types of medical data to 
perfume large-scale quantification of NP transport mechanisms, critical 
step in addressing heterogeneity of nanomedicine accumulation in 
clinical samples [263].
The final challenge in the convergence of IVM with nanomedicine 
will be validating different NP transport mechanisms in clinical settings. 
The rapid dynamics and complexity of the processes require the use of 
advanced microscopy techniques. In the current state, intraoperative 
IVM technology enables visualization of tumor vasculature and mea­
surement of blood flow [73,264]. To minimize invasiveness of obser­
vations, confocal laser endomicroscopy can be employed during 
laparoscopic procedures [265]. Enhancing the spatial resolution of these 
techniques in clinical trials could potentially guide clinical decisions 
regarding tumor stratification and treatment options.
5. Conclusion
Exploiting IVM techniques evolved the understanding of NP trans­
port from belief in EPR-based accumulation through static pores to 
involvement of multiple diverse pathways for tumor entry. Among the 
most significant discoveries are the dynamic nature of the EPR effect, the 
involvement of immune blood cells in NP transport, and the recognition 
of active transcytosis of NPs via N-TECs. However, these mechanisms 
have only been observed in animal xenograft models, which poorly 
reflect the architecture of human tumors. Monocellular xenografts 
exhibit low heterogeneity and limited genetic diversity. Employing 
patient-derived xenografts or tumors grown from patient-derived cells 
could improve the relevance of preclinical studies [13]. Development of 
multicellular heterogenous tumors could benefit from the application of 
IVM to assess the accuracy of these models. The use of advanced fluo­
rescent cellular sensors for measuring acidity (pH), oxygenation (pO2), 
solid stress and other parameters can precisely assess tissue heteroge­
neity [74,266].
Second, the accumulation of EPR-designed nanomaterials in clinic 
was highly heterogeneous both in different regions of tumor and be­
tween patients. The newly discovered routes of active NP transport are 
likely subject to the same heterogeneity, which needs to be measured. 
For now, immune cell infiltration levels vary significantly among pa­
tients with the same tumor type [267,268]. Endothelial cells capable for 
transcytosis of NPs are also distributed unevenly along the tumor 
vasculature [224]. Therefore, it is crucial to evaluate the contributions 
of different mechanisms to the overall transport of NPs and to develop 
the capability to predict tumor response to various treatment options. 
Companion diagnostic nanoagents have been proposed to assess the 
passive accumulation of therapeutic nanocarriers in tumors via the EPR 
effect [77,269]. Similar selective tracers should be developed to target 
active NP transport mechanisms.
Finally, if the EPR effect is not the sole mechanism, the constraints it 
imposes on nanomedicine design need to be reassessed. For example, 
stealth coatings of NPs have been developed to prolong circulation time 
and reduce non-specific interactions with other cells, primarily of the 
MPS [270]. However, these coatings can significantly affect interactions 
with endothelial cells, neutrophils, and blood monocytes, potentially 
limiting active transport of NPs to tumors. Recent studies have shown 
that prolonged circulation time can be achieved even without stealth 
coatings by injecting high doses of NPs [271] or by pre-blocking the MPS 
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
16
[200,272]. In addition, a small NP size below 100 nm is beneficial for 
both the EPR concept and for delivery via clathrin- or caveolin-mediated 
transcytosis, due to the size limit of the endocytic vesicles. Nanoparticles 
with larger sizes may exhibit better margination near tumor vasculature 
and greater interaction with blood immune cells, facilitating 
chemotaxis-mediated delivery. Therefore, the optimal size of NPs should 
depend on the relative contributions of different pathways involved in 
NP transport. It is essential to investigate the influence of other physi­
cochemical properties of NPs, such as shape, rigidity, and functional 
modifications, on the efficiency of different delivery mechanisms in 
tumors.
Funding.
The work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Ed­
ucation of the Russian Federation, Agreement No. 075–15-2024–536. I. 
V.Z. is supported by the Wenner-Gren Foundations, Sweden (grant No. 
UPD2024-0182) .
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.addr.2025.115550.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1] M.J. Mitchell, M.M. Billingsley, R.M. Haley, M.E. Wechsler, N.A. Peppas, 
R. Langer, Engineering precision nanoparticles for drug delivery, Nat. Rev. Drug 
Discov. 20 (2021) 101–124, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41573-020-0090-8.
[2] L. Sun, H. Liu, Y. Ye, Y. Lei, R. Islam, S. Tan, R. Tong, Y.-B. Miao, L. Cai, Smart 
nanoparticles for cancer therapy, Sig Transduct Target Ther 8 (2023) 1–28, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-023-01642-x.
[3] A.C. Marques, P.J. Costa, S. Velho, M.H. Amaral, Functionalizing nanoparticles 
with cancer-targeting antibodies: A comparison of strategies, J. Control. Release 
320 (2020) 180–200, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2020.01.035.
[4] F. Mahmoudian, A. Ahmari, S. Shabani, B. Sadeghi, S. Fahimirad, F. Fattahi, 
Aptamers as an approach to targeted cancer therapy, Cancer Cell Int 24 (2024) 
1–22, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12935-024-03295-4.
[5] Y. Matsumura, H. Maeda, A new concept for macromolecular therapeutics in 
cancer chemotherapy: mechanism of tumoritropic accumulation of proteins and 
the antitumor agent smancs, Cancer Res. 46 (1986).
[6] H. Maeda, J. Wu, T. Sawa, Y. Matsumura, K. Hori, Tumor vascular permeability 
and the EPR effect in macromolecular therapeutics: a review, J. Control. Release 
65 (2000), https://doi.org/10.1016/s0168-3659(99)00248-5.
[7] T.P. Padera, A. Kadambi, T.E. di, C.M. Carreira, E.B. Brown, Y. Boucher, N.C. 
Choi, D. Mathisen, J. Wain, E.J. Mark, L.L. Munn, R.K. Jain, Lymphatic metastasis 
in the absence of functional intratumor lymphatics, Science (New York, N.Y.) 296 
(2002). Doi: 10.1126/science.1071420.
[8] T. Stylianopoulos, EPR-effect: Utilizing size-dependent Nanoparticle Delivery to 
Solid Tumors, Ther. Deliv. 4 (2013) 421–423, https://doi.org/10.4155/tde.13.8.
[9] F. Yuan, M. Dellian, D. Fukumura, M. Leunig, D.A. Berk, V.P. Torchilin, R.K. Jain, 
Vascular permeability in a human tumor xenograft: molecular size dependence 
and cutoff size, Cancer Res. 55 (1995).
[10] F. Tong, Y. Wang, H. Gao, Progress and challenges in the translation of cancer 
nanomedicines, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 85 (2024) 103045, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.copbio.2023.103045.
[11] J. Fang, W. Islam, H. Maeda, Exploiting the dynamics of the EPR effect and 
strategies to improve the therapeutic effects of nanomedicines by using EPR effect 
enhancers, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 157 (2020) 142–160, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.addr.2020.06.005.
[12] H. Maeda, Toward a full understanding of the EPR effect in primary and 
metastatic tumors as well as issues related to its heterogeneity, Adv. Drug Deliv. 
Rev. 91 (2015) 3–6, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2015.01.002.
[13] S. Jeon, E. Jun, H. Chang, J.Y. Yhee, E.-Y. Koh, Y. Kim, J.Y. Jung, E.J. Jeong, J. 
W. Lee, M.K. Shim, H.Y. Yoon, S. Chang, K. Kim, S.C. Kim, Prediction the clinical 
EPR effect of nanoparticles in patient-derived xenograft models, J. Control. 
Release 351 (2022) 37–49, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2022.09.007.
[14] L.N.M. Nguyen, W. Ngo, Z.P. Lin, S. Sindhwani, P. MacMillan, S.M. Mladjenovic, 
W.C.W. Chan, The mechanisms of nanoparticle delivery to solid tumours, Nat Rev 
Bioeng 2 (2024) 201–213, https://doi.org/10.1038/s44222-024-00154-9.
[15] J. Momoh, D. Kapsokalyvas, M. Vogt, S. Hak, F. Kiessling, M. van Zandvoort, 
T. Lammers, A.M. Sofias, Intravital microscopy for real-time monitoring of drug 
delivery and nanobiological processes, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 189 (2022) 114528, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2022.114528.
[16] F. Yuan, M. Leunig, S.K. Huang, D.A. Berk, D. Papahadjopoulos, R.K. Jain, 
Microvascular permeability and interstitial penetration of sterically stabilized 
(stealth) liposomes in a human tumor xenograft, Cancer Res. 54 (1994).
[17] N.Z. Wu, D. Da, T.L. Rudoll, D. Needham, A.R. Whorton, M.W. Dewhirst, 
Increased microvascular permeability contributes to preferential accumulation of 
Stealth liposomes in tumor tissue, Cancer Res. 53 (1993).
[18] Q. Lin, P. Fathi, X. Chen, Nanoparticle delivery in vivo: A fresh look from 
intravital imaging, eBioMedicine 59 (2020) 102958. Doi: 10.1016/j. 
ebiom.2020.102958.
[19] S. Sindhwani, A.M. Syed, J. Ngai, B.R. Kingston, L. Maiorino, J. Rothschild, 
P. MacMillan, Y. Zhang, N.U. Rajesh, T. Hoang, J.L.Y. Wu, S. Wilhelm, A. Zilman, 
S. Gadde, A. Sulaiman, B. Ouyang, Z. Lin, L. Wang, M. Egeblad, W.C.W. Chan, The 
entry of nanoparticles into solid tumours, Nat. Mater. 19 (2020) 566–575, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-019-0566-2.
[20] Q. Zhou, J. Li, J. Xiang, S. Shao, Z. Zhou, J. Tang, Y. Shen, Transcytosis-enabled 
active extravasation of tumor nanomedicine, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 189 (2022) 
114480, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2022.114480.
[21] B.V. Parakhonskiy, N.Y. Shilyagina, O.I. Gusliakova, A.B. Volovetskiy, A. 
B. Kostyuk, I.V. Balalaeva, L.G. Klapshina, S.A. Lermontova, V. Tolmachev, 
A. Orlova, D.A. Gorin, G.B. Sukhorukov, A.V. Zvyagin, A method of drug delivery 
to tumors based on rapidly biodegradable drug-loaded containers, Appl. Mater. 
Today 25 (2021) 101199, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmt.2021.101199.
[22] T.D. Clemons, R. Singh, A. Sorolla, N. Chaudhari, A. Hubbard, K.S. Iyer, 
Distinction Between Active and Passive Targeting of Nanoparticles Dictate Their 
Overall Therapeutic Efficacy, Langmuir 34 (2018) 15343–15349, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.8b02946.
[23] M.A. Abakumov, N.V. Nukolova, M. Sokolsky-Papkov, S.A. Shein, T.O. Sandalova, 
H.M. Vishwasrao, N.F. Grinenko, I.L. Gubsky, A.M. Abakumov, A.V. Kabanov, V. 
P. Chekhonin, VEGF-targeted magnetic nanoparticles for MRI visualization of 
brain tumor, Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine 11 (2015) 
825–833, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2014.12.011.
[24] M.Y.N. Thanuja, C.N. Anupama, S.H. Ranganath, Bioengineered cellular and cell 
membrane-derived vehicles for actively targeted drug delivery: So near and yet so 
far, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 132 (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
addr.2018.06.012.
[25] Y. Zhao, A. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Gu, J. Liu, Hybrid Membrane-Coated Biomimetic 
Nanoparticles (HM@BNPs): A Multifunctional Nanomaterial for Biomedical 
Applications, Biomacromolecules 22 (2021) 3149–3167, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.biomac.1c00440.
[26] I.V. Zelepukin, O.Y. Griaznova, K.G. Shevchenko, A.V. Ivanov, E.V. Baidyuk, N. 
B. Serejnikova, A.B. Volovetskiy, S.M. Deyev, A.V. Zvyagin, Flash drug release 
from nanoparticles accumulated in the targeted blood vessels facilitates the 
tumour treatment, Nat. Commun. 13 (2022) 6910, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41467-022-34718-3.
[27] A.C. Anselmo, S. Mitragotri, Cell-mediated delivery of nanoparticles: Taking 
advantage of circulatory cells to target nanoparticles, J. Control. Release 190 
(2014) 531–541, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.03.050.
[28] L. An, Y. Wang, J. Lin, Q. Tian, Y. Xie, J. Hu, S. Yang, Macrophages-Mediated 
Delivery of Small Gold Nanorods for Tumor Hypoxia Photoacoustic Imaging and 
Enhanced Photothermal Therapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11 (2019) 
15251–15261, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b00495.
[29] Z.P. Lin, L.N.M. Nguyen, B. Ouyang, P. MacMillan, J. Ngai, B.R. Kingston, S. 
M. Mladjenovic, W.C.W. Chan, Macrophages Actively Transport Nanoparticles in 
Tumors After Extravasation, ACS Nano 16 (2022) 6080–6092, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsnano.1c11578.
[30] J.L. Betker, D. Jones, C.R. Childs, K.M. Helm, K. Terrell, M.A. Nagel, T. 
J. Anchordoquy, Nanoparticle uptake by circulating leukocytes: A major barrier 
to tumor delivery, J. Control. Release 286 (2018) 85–93, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jconrel.2018.07.031.
[31] M.E. Zamora, E.-O. Essien, K. Bhamidipati, A. Murthy, J. Liu, H. Kim, M.N. Patel, 
J. Nong, Z. Wang, C. Espy, F.N. Chaudhry, L.T. Ferguson, S. Tiwari, E.D. Hood, O. 
A. Marcos-Contreras, S. Omo-Lamai, T. Shuvaeva, E. Arguiri, J. Wu, L. Rauova, 
M. Poncz, M.C. Basil, E. Cantu, J.D. Planer, K. Spiller, J. Zepp, V.R. Muzykantov, 
J.W. Myerson, J.S. Brenner, Marginated Neutrophils in the Lungs Effectively 
Compete for Nanoparticles Targeted to the Endothelium, Serving as a Part of the 
Reticuloendothelial System, ACS Nano 18 (2024) 22275–22297, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsnano.4c06286.
[32] V.A. Naumenko, K.Y. Vlasova, A.S. Garanina, P.A. Melnikov, D.M. Potashnikova, 
D.A. Vishnevskiy, S.S. Vodopyanov, V.P. Chekhonin, M.A. Abakumov, A. 
G. Majouga, Extravasating Neutrophils Open Vascular Barrier and Improve 
Liposomes Delivery to Tumors, ACS Nano 13 (2019) 12599–12612, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acsnano.9b03848.
[33] J.S. Brenner, D.C. Pan, J.W. Myerson, O.A. Marcos-Contreras, C.H. Villa, P. Patel, 
H. Hekierski, S. Chatterjee, J.-Q. Tao, H. Parhiz, K. Bhamidipati, T.G. Uhler, E. 
D. Hood, R.Y. Kiseleva, V.S. Shuvaev, T. Shuvaeva, M. Khoshnejad, I. Johnston, J. 
V. Gregory, J. Lahann, T. Wang, E. Cantu, W.M. Armstead, S. Mitragotri, 
V. Muzykantov, Red blood cell-hitchhiking boosts delivery of nanocarriers to 
chosen organs by orders of magnitude, Nat Commun 9 (2018) 1–14, https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41467-018-05079-7.
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
17
[34] M.A. Younis, H.M. Tawfeek, A.A.H. Abdellatif, J.A. Abdel-Aleem, H. Harashima, 
Clinical translation of nanomedicines: Challenges, opportunities, and keys, Adv. 
Drug Deliv. Rev. 181 (2022), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2021.114083.
[35] A. Nagamitsu, T. Konno, T. Oda, K. Tabaru, Y. Ishimaru, N. Kitamura, Targeted 
cancer chemotherapy for VX2 tumour implanted in the colon with lipiodol as a 
carrier, European journal of cancer (Oxford, England 1990) 34 (1998). Doi: 
10.1016/s0959-8049(98)00153-1.
[36] A.E. Hansen, A.L. Petersen, J.R. Henriksen, B. Boerresen, P. Rasmussen, D.R. 
Elema, P.M. af Rosensch¨old, A.T. Kristensen, A. Kjær, T.L. Andresen, Positron 
Emission Tomography Based Elucidation of the Enhanced Permeability and 
Retention Effect in Dogs with Cancer Using Copper-64 Liposomes, ACS Nano 9 
(2015) 6985–6995. Doi: 10.1021/acsnano.5b01324.
[37] A.A. Natfji, D. Ravishankar, H.M.I. Osborn, F. Greco, Parameters Affecting the 
Enhanced Permeability and Retention Effect: The Need for Patient Selection, 
J. Pharm. Sci. 106 (2017) 3179–3187, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
xphs.2017.06.019.
[38] D.P. Berger, L. Herbstritt, W.A. Dengler, D. Marm´e, R. Mertelsmann, H.H. Fiebig, 
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) mRNA expression in human tumor 
models of different histologies, Annals of Oncology Official Journal of the 
European Society for Medical Oncology 6 (1995), https://doi.org/10.1093/ 
oxfordjournals.annonc.a059322.
[39] Y. Xie, Y. Hang, Y. Wang, R. Sleightholm, D.R. Prajapati, J. Bader, A. Yu, W. Tang, 
L. Jaramillo, J. Li, R.K. Singh, D. Oupický, Stromal Modulation and Treatment of 
Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer with Local Intraperitoneal Triple miRNA/siRNA 
Nanotherapy, ACS Nano 14 (2020) 255–271, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.9b03978.
[40] J. Qi, C. Sun, A. Zebibula, H. Zhang, R.T.K. Kwok, X. Zhao, W. Xi, J.W.Y. Lam, 
J. Qian, B.Z. Tang, Real-Time and High-Resolution Bioimaging with Bright 
Aggregation-Induced Emission Dots in Short-Wave Infrared Region, Advanced 
materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.) 30 (2018) e1706856, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201706856.
[41] H. Hashizume, P. Baluk, S. Morikawa, J.W. McLean, G. Thurston, S. Roberge, R. 
K. Jain, D.M. McDonald, Openings between Defective Endothelial Cells Explain 
Tumor Vessel Leakiness, Am. J. Pathol. 156 (2000) 1363–1380, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S0002-9440(10)65006-7.
[42] S.K. Hobbs, W.L. Monsky, F. Yuan, W.G. Roberts, L. Griffith, V.P. Torchilin, R. 
K. Jain, Regulation of transport pathways in tumor vessels: Role of tumor type 
and microenvironment, in: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 95, 
1998, pp. 4607–4612, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.8.4607.
[43] T.P. Padera, B.R. Stoll, J.B. Tooredman, D. Capen, E. Di Tomaso, R.K. Jain, Cancer 
cells compress intratumour vessels, Nature 427 (2004) 695, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/427695a.
[44] A.J. Leu, D.A. Berk, A. Lymboussaki, K. Alitalo, R.K. Jain, Absence of Functional 
Lymphatics within a Murine Sarcoma: A Molecular and Functional Evaluation, 
Cancer Res 60 (2000) 4324–4327.
[45] L.N.M. Nguyen, Z.P. Lin, S. Sindhwani, P. MacMillan, S.M. Mladjenovic, 
B. Stordy, W. Ngo, W.C.W. Chan, The exit of nanoparticles from solid tumours, 
Nat. Mater. 22 (2023) 1261–1272, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-023-01630- 
0.
[46] C. Wong, T. Stylianopoulos, J. Cui, J. Martin, V.P. Chauhan, W. Jiang, Z. Popovi´c, 
R.K. Jain, M.G. Bawendi, D. Fukumura, Multistage nanoparticle delivery system 
for deep penetration into tumor tissue, in: Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences 108, 2011, pp. 2426–2431, https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
pnas.1018382108.
[47] H. Soo Choi, W. Liu, P. Misra, E. Tanaka, J.P. Zimmer, B. Itty Ipe, M.G. Bawendi, 
J.V. Frangioni, Renal clearance of quantum dots, Nat Biotechnol 25 (2007) 
1165–1170, https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt1340.
[48] I.V. Zelepukin, A.V. Yaremenko, M.V. Yuryev, A.B. Mirkasymov, I.L. Sokolov, S. 
M. Deyev, P.I. Nikitin, M.P. Nikitin, Fast processes of nanoparticle blood 
clearance: Comprehensive study, J. Control. Release 326 (2020) 181–191, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2020.07.014.
[49] E. Blanco, H. Shen, M. Ferrari, Principles of nanoparticle design for overcoming 
biological barriers to drug delivery, Nat Biotechnol 33 (2015) 941–951, https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3330.
[50] M. Longmire, P.L. Choyke, H. Kobayashi, Clearance properties of nano-sized 
particles and molecules as imaging agents: considerations and caveats, 
Nanomedicine (lond) 3 (2008) 703–717, https://doi.org/10.2217/ 
17435889.3.5.703.
[51] D. Shi, D. Beasock, A. Fessler, J. Szebeni, J.Y. Ljubimova, K.A. Afonin, M. 
A. Dobrovolskaia, To PEGylate or not to PEGylate: Immunological properties of 
nanomedicine’s most popular component, polyethylene glycol and its 
alternatives, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 180 (2022) 114079, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.addr.2021.114079.
[52] Y. Matsumoto, J.W. Nichols, K. Toh, T. Nomoto, H. Cabral, Y. Miura, R.J. Christie, 
N. Yamada, T. Ogura, M.R. Kano, Y. Matsumura, N. Nishiyama, T. Yamasoba, Y. 
H. Bae, K. Kataoka, Vascular bursts enhance permeability of tumour blood vessels 
and improve nanoparticle delivery, Nature Nanotech 11 (2016) 533–538, https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2015.342.
[53] M.E.R. O’Brien, N. Wigler, M. Inbar, R. Rosso, E. Grischke, A. Santoro, R. Catane, 
D.G. Kieback, P. Tomczak, S.P. Ackland, F. Orlandi, L. Mellars, L. Alland, 
C. Tendler, Reduced cardiotoxicity and comparable efficacy in a phase IIItrial of 
pegylated liposomal doxorubicin HCl(CAELYX™/Doxil®) versus conventional 
doxorubicin forfirst-line treatment of metastatic breast cancer, Ann. Oncol. 15 
(2004) 440–449, https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdh097.
[54] G.H. Petersen, S.K. Alzghari, W. Chee, S.S. Sankari, N.M. La-Beck, Meta-analysis 
of clinical and preclinical studies comparing the anticancer efficacy of liposomal 
versus conventional non-liposomal doxorubicin, J. Control. Release 232 (2016) 
255–264, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.04.028.
[55] K.A. Autio, R. Dreicer, J. Anderson, J.A. Garcia, A. Alva, L.L. Hart, M.I. Milowsky, 
E.M. Posadas, C.J. Ryan, R.P. Graf, R. Dittamore, N.A. Schreiber, J.M. Summa, 
H. Youssoufian, M.J. Morris, H.I. Scher, Safety and Efficacy of BIND-014, a 
Docetaxel Nanoparticle Targeting Prostate-Specific Membrane Antigen for 
Patients With Metastatic Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer: A Phase 2 Clinical 
Trial, JAMA Oncol. 4 (2018) 1344–1351, https://doi.org/10.1001/ 
jamaoncol.2018.2168.
[56] A. Marusyk, K. Polyak, Tumor heterogeneity: Causes and consequences, 
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Reviews on, Cancer 1805 (2010) 105–117, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbcan.2009.11.002.
[57] M. Sharifi, W.C. Cho, A. Ansariesfahani, R. Tarharoudi, H. Malekisarvar, S. Sari, 
S.H. Bloukh, Z. Edis, M. Amin, J.P. Gleghorn, Hagen, Timo L. M. ten, M. Falahati, 
An Updated Review on EPR-Based Solid Tumor Targeting Nanocarriers for Cancer 
Treatment, Cancers 14 (2022) 2868. Doi: 10.3390/cancers14122868.
[58] F. Danhier, To exploit the tumor microenvironment: Since the EPR effect fails in 
the clinic, what is the future of nanomedicine? J. Control. Release 244 (2016) 
108–121, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.11.015.
[59] R. Duncan, Y.-N. Sat-Klopsch, A.M. Burger, M.C. Bibby, H.H. Fiebig, E. 
A. Sausville, Validation of tumour models for use in anticancer nanomedicine 
evaluation: the EPR effect and cathepsin B-mediated drug release rate, Cancer 
Chemother Pharmacol 72 (2013) 417–427, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00280- 
013-2209-7.
[60] K.J. Harrington, G. Rowlinson-Busza, K.N. Syrigos, R.M. Abra, P.S. Uster, A. 
M. Peters, J.S.W. Stewart, Influence of tumour size on uptake of111In-DTPA- 
labelled pegylated liposomes in a human tumour xenograft model, Br J Cancer 83 
(2000) 684–688, https://doi.org/10.1054/bjoc.2000.1320.
[61] H.T. Nia, L.L. Munn, R.K. Jain, Physical traits of cancer, Science 370 (2020), 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaz0868.
[62] S. Torosean, B. Flynn, J. Axelsson, J. Gunn, K.S. Samkoe, T. Hasan, M.M. Doyley, 
B.W. Pogue, Nanoparticle uptake in tumors is mediated by the interplay of 
vascular and collagen density with interstitial pressure, Nanomedicine: 
Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine 9 (2013) 151–158, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.nano.2012.07.002.
[63] Q. Zhou, C. Dong, W. Fan, H. Jiang, J. Xiang, N. Qiu, Y. Piao, T. Xie, Y. Luo, Z. Li, 
F. Liu, Y. Shen, Tumor extravasation and infiltration as barriers of nanomedicine 
for high efficacy: The current status and transcytosis strategy, Biomaterials 240 
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2020.119902.
[64] I.F. Tannock, G. Gordon Steel, Cell proliferation, drug distribution and 
therapeutic effects in relation to the vascular system of solid tumours, Br J Cancer 
128 (2023) 413–418, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-022-02109-6.
[65] I.F. Tannock, C.M. Lee, J.K. Tunggal, D.S.M. Cowan, M.J. Egorin, Limited 
Penetration of Anticancer Drugs through Tumor TissueA Potential Cause of 
Resistance of Solid Tumors to Chemotherapy, Clin Cancer Res 8 (2002) 878–884.
[66] R. Baghban, L. Roshangar, R. Jahanban-Esfahlan, K. Seidi, A. Ebrahimi-Kalan, 
M. Jaymand, S. Kolahian, T. Javaheri, P. Zare, Tumor microenvironment 
complexity and therapeutic implications at a glance, Cell Commun Signal 18 
(2020) 1–19, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12964-020-0530-4.
[67] X. He, Y. Yang, Y. Han, C. Cao, Z. Zhang, L. Li, C. Xiao, H. Guo, L. Wang, L. Han, 
Qu. Zhiguo, Na. Liu, S. Han, Xu. Feng, Extracellular matrix physical properties 
govern the diffusion of nanoparticles in tumor microenvironment, Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. u. s. a. 120 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2209260120.
[68] G. Helmlinger, F. Yuan, M. Dellian, R.K. Jain, Interstitial pH and pO2 gradients in 
solid tumors in vivo: high-resolution measurements reveal a lack of correlation, 
Nat. Med. 3 (1997), https://doi.org/10.1038/nm0297-177.
[69] F.J. Voskuil, P.J. Steinkamp, T. Zhao, B. van der Vegt, M. Koller, J.J. Doff, 
Y. Jayalakshmi, J.P. Hartung, J. Gao, B.D. Sumer, M.J.H. Witjes, G.M. van Dam, 
Exploiting metabolic acidosis in solid cancers using a tumor-agnostic pH- 
activatable nanoprobe for fluorescence-guided surgery, Nat. Commun. 11 (2020) 
3257, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-16814-4.
[70] S. Maritim, D. Coman, Y. Huang, J.U. Rao, J.J. Walsh, F. Hyder, Mapping 
Extracellular pH of Gliomas in Presence of Superparamagnetic Nanoparticles: 
Towards Imaging the Distribution of Drug-Containing Nanoparticles and Their 
Curative Effect on the Tumor Microenvironment, Contrast Media Mol. Imaging 
2017 (2017), https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/3849373.
[71] A. Pluen, Y. Boucher, S. Ramanujan, T.D. McKee, T. Gohongi, E. Di Tomaso, E. 
B. Brown, Y. Izumi, R.B. Campbell, D.A. Berk, R.K. Jain, Role of tumor-host 
interactions in interstitial diffusion of macromolecules: cranial vs. subcutaneous 
tumors, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. u. s. a. 98 (2001) 4628–4633, https://doi.org/ 
10.1073/pnas.081626898.
[72] H.S. Abyaneh, M. Regenold, T.D. McKee, C. Allen, M.A. Gauthier, Towards 
extracellular matrix normalization for improved treatment of solid tumors, 
Theranostics 10 (2020) 1960–1980, https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.39995.
[73] D.T. Fisher, J.B. Muhitch, M. Kim, K.C. Doyen, P.N. Bogner, S.S. Evans, J. 
J. Skitzki, Intraoperative intravital microscopy permits the study of human 
tumour vessels, Nat Commun 7 (2016) 1–9, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
ncomms10684.
[74] S. Zhang, G. Grifno, R. Passaro, K. Regan, S. Zheng, M. Hadzipasic, R. Banerji, 
L. O’Connor, V. Chu, S.Y. Kim, J. Yang, L. Shi, K. Karrobi, D. Roblyer, M. 
W. Grinstaff, H.T. Nia, Intravital measurements of solid stresses in tumours reveal 
length-scale and microenvironmentally dependent force transmission, Nat. 
Biomed. Eng 7 (2023) 1473–1492, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-023-01080- 
8.
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
18
[75] R.K. Jain, L.L. Munn, D. Fukumura, Dissecting tumour pathophysiology using 
intravital microscopy, Nat Rev Cancer 2 (2002) 266–276, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/nrc778.
[76] Y. Wang, H. Wang, J. Li, D. Entenberg, A. Xue, W. Wang, J. Condeelis, Direct 
visualization of the phenotype of hypoxic tumor cells at single cell resolution in 
vivo using a new hypoxia probe, IntraVital 5 (2016) e1187803, https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/21659087.2016.1187803.
[77] M.A. Miller, S. Gadde, C. Pfirschke, C. Engblom, M.M. Sprachman, R.H. Kohler, K. 
S. Yang, A.M. Laughney, G. Wojtkiewicz, N. Kamaly, S. Bhonagiri, M.J. Pittet, O. 
C. Farokhzad, R. Weissleder, Predicting therapeutic nanomedicine efficacy using 
a companion magnetic resonance imaging nanoparticle, Science Translational 
Medicine 7 (2015) 314ra183, https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aac6522.
[78] P. Malaney, S.V. Nicosia, V. Dav´e, One mouse, one patient paradigm: New avatars 
of personalized cancer therapy, Cancer Lett. 344 (2014) 1–12, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.canlet.2013.10.010.
[79] H.-J. Li, J.-Z. Du, X.-J. Du, C.-F. Xu, C.-Y. Sun, H.-X. Wang, Z.-T. Cao, X.-Z. Yang, 
Y.-H. Zhu, S. Nie, J. Wang, Stimuli-responsive clustered nanoparticles for 
improved tumor penetration and therapeutic efficacy, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. u. s. 
a. 113 (2016) 4164–4169, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1522080113.
[80] M.A. Miller, Y.-R. Zheng, S. Gadde, C. Pfirschke, H. Zope, C. Engblom, R. 
H. Kohler, Y. Iwamoto, K.S. Yang, B. Askevold, N. Kolishetti, M. Pittet, S. 
J. Lippard, O.C. Farokhzad, R. Weissleder, Tumour-associated macrophages act as 
a slow-release reservoir of nano-therapeutic Pt(IV) pro-drug, Nat Commun 6 
(2015) 1–13, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9692.
[81] A.A. Manzoor, L.H. Lindner, C.D. Landon, J.-Y. Park, A.J. Simnick, M.R. Dreher, 
S. Das, G. Hanna, W. Park, A. Chilkoti, G.A. Koning, T.L.M. ten Hagen, 
D. Needham, M.W. Dewhirst, Overcoming Limitations in Nanoparticle Drug 
Delivery: Triggered, Intravascular Release to Improve Drug Penetration into 
Tumors, Cancer Res 72 (2012) 5566–5575, https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472. 
CAN-12-1683.
[82] N. Kamaly, B. Yameen, J. Wu, O.C. Farokhzad, Degradable Controlled-Release 
Polymers and Polymeric Nanoparticles: Mechanisms of Controlling Drug Release, 
Chem. Rev. 116 (2016) 2602–2663, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
chemrev.5b00346.
[83] S. Eikenberry, A tumor cord model for Doxorubicin delivery and dose 
optimization in solid tumors, Theor Biol Med Model 6 (2009) 1–20, https://doi. 
org/10.1186/1742-4682-6-16.
[84] L. Li, T.L.M. ten Hagen, M. Hossann, R. Süss, G.C. van Rhoon, A.M.M. Eggermont, 
D. Haemmerich, G.A. Koning, Mild hyperthermia triggered doxorubicin release 
from optimized stealth thermosensitive liposomes improves intratumoral drug 
delivery and efficacy, J. Control. Release 168 (2013) 142–150, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.03.011.
[85] M. Amin, T. Lammers, T.L.M. ten Hagen, Temperature-sensitive polymers to 
promote heat-triggered drug release from liposomes: Towards bypassing EPR, 
Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 189 (2022) 114503, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
addr.2022.114503.
[86] D. Luo, N. Li, K.A. Carter, C. Lin, J. Geng, S. Shao, W.-C. Huang, Y. Qin, G. 
E. Atilla-Gokcumen, J.F. Lovell, Rapid Light-Triggered Drug Release in Liposomes 
Containing Small Amounts of Unsaturated and Porphyrin-Phospholipids, Small 
12 (2016) 3039–3047, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201503966.
[87] Y.-J. Ho, C.-K. Yeh, Concurrent anti-vascular therapy and chemotherapy in solid 
tumors using drug-loaded acoustic nanodroplet vaporization, Acta Biomater. 49 
(2017) 472–485, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2016.11.018.
[88] J.L. Fernandez, S. Snipstad, A. Bjørkøy, C.d.L. Davies, Real-time multiphoton 
intravital microscopy of drug extravasation in tumours during acoustic cluster 
therapy, Cells 13 (2024) 349, https://doi.org/10.3390/cells13040349.
[89] M. Welter, H. Rieger, Physical determinants of vascular network remodeling 
during tumor growth, Eur. Phys. J. E 33 (2010) 149–163, https://doi.org/ 
10.1140/epje/i2010-10611-6.
[90] N. Buaron, A. Mangraviti, Y. Wang, A. Liu, M. Pedone, E. Sankey, I. Adar, 
A. Nyska, R. Goldbart, T. Traitel, H. Brem, B. Tyler, J. Kost, Ultrasound inhibits 
tumor growth and selectively eliminates malignant brain tumor in vivo, Bioeng. 
Transl. Med. 9 (2024) e10660, https://doi.org/10.1002/btm2.10660.
[91] A. Azagury, E. Amar-Lewis, Y. Yudilevitch, C. Isaacson, B. Laster, J. Kost, 
Ultrasound Effect on Cancerous versus Non-Cancerous Cells, Ultrasound Med. 
Biol. 42 (2016) 1560–1567, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ultrasmedbio.2016.02.005.
[92] P.C. Lyon, M.D. Gray, C. Mannaris, L.K. Folkes, M. Stratford, L. Campo, D.Y. 
F. Chung, S. Scott, M. Anderson, R. Goldin, R. Carlisle, F. Wu, F.V. Middleton, C. 
C.C. Gleeson, Safety and feasibility of ultrasound-triggered targeted drug delivery 
of doxorubicin from thermosensitive liposomes in liver tumours (TARDOX): a 
single-centre, open-label, phase 1 trial, Lancet Oncol. 19 (2018), https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30332-2.
[93] M.D. Gray, P.C. Lyon, C. Mannaris, L.K. Folkes, M. Stratford, L. Campo, D.Y. 
F. Chung, S. Scott, M. Anderson, R. Goldin, R. Carlisle, F. Wu, F.V. Middleton, C. 
C.C. Gleeson, Focused Ultrasound Hyperthermia for Targeted Drug Release from 
Thermosensitive Liposomes: Results from a Phase I Trial, Radiology 291 (2019), 
https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2018181445.
[94] T.L.M. ten Hagen, M.R. Dreher, S. Zalba, A.L.B. Seynhaeve, M. Amin, L. Li, 
D. Haemmerich, Drug transport kinetics of intravascular triggered drug delivery 
systems, Commun. Biol. 4 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02428-z.
[95] M. Howard, B.J. Zern, A.C. Anselmo, V.V. Shuvaev, S. Mitragotri, V. Muzykantov, 
Vascular targeting of nanocarriers: perplexing aspects of the seemingly 
straightforward paradigm, ACS Nano 8 (2014) 4100–4132, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/nn500136z.
[96] B. St Croix, C. Rago, V. Velculescu, G. Traverso, K.E. Romans, E. Montgomery, A. 
Lal, G.J. Riggins, C. Lengauer, B. Vogelstein, K.W. Kinzler, Genes expressed in 
human tumor endothelium, Science (New York, N.Y.) 289 (2000) 1197–1202. 
Doi: 10.1126/science.289.5482.1197.
[97] A. Daiber, S. Steven, A. Weber, V.V. Shuvaev, V.R. Muzykantov, I. Laher, H. Li, 
S. Lamas, T. Münzel, Targeting vascular (endothelial) dysfunction, Br. J. 
Pharmacol. 174 (2017) 1591–1619, https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.13517.
[98] S. Liu, J. Liang, Z. Liu, C. Zhang, Y. Wang, A.H. Watson, C. Zhou, F. Zhang, K. Wu, 
Y. Lu, X. Wang, The Role of CD276 in Cancers, Front. Oncol. 11 (2021), https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2021.654684.
[99] S. Seaman, Z. Zhu, S. Saha, X.M. Zhang, M.Y. Yang, M.B. Hilton, K. Morris, 
C. Szot, H. Morris, D.A. Swing, L. Tessarollo, S.W. Smith, S. Degrado, D. Borkin, 
N. Jain, J. Scheiermann, Y. Feng, Y. Wang, J. Li, D. Welsch, G. DeCrescenzo, 
A. Chaudhary, E. Zudaire, K.D. Klarmann, J.R. Keller, D.S. Dimitrov, B. St, Croix, 
Eradication of Tumors through Simultaneous Ablation of CD276/B7-H3-Positive 
Tumor Cells and Tumor Vasculature, Cancer Cell 31 (2017) 501–515.e8, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2017.03.005.
[100] K. Broll, G. Richter, S. Pauly, F. Hofstaedter, H. Schwarz, CD137 Expression in 
Tumor Vessel Walls: High Correlation With Malignant Tumors, Am J Clin Pathol 
115 (2001) 543–549, https://doi.org/10.1309/E343-KMYX-W3Y2-10KY.
[101] R.G. Bagley, N. Honma, W. Weber, P. Boutin, C. Rouleau, S. Shankara, S. Kataoka, 
I. Ishida, B.L. Roberts, B.A. Teicher, Endosialin/TEM 1/CD248 is a pericyte 
marker of embryonic and tumor neovascularization, Microvasc. Res. 76 (2008), 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mvr.2008.07.008.
[102] J.R. MacFadyen, O. Haworth, D. Roberston, D. Hardie, M.-T. Webster, H. 
R. Morris, M. Panico, M. Sutton-Smith, A. Dell, P. van der Geer, D. Wienke, C. 
D. Buckley, C.M. Isacke, Endosialin (TEM1, CD248) is a marker of stromal 
fibroblasts and is not selectively expressed on tumour endothelium, FEBS Lett. 
579 (2005) 2569–2575, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2005.03.071.
[103] E.B. Carson-Walter, D.N. Watkins, A. Nanda, B. Vogelstein, K.W. Kinzler, B. St, 
Croix, Cell Surface Tumor Endothelial Markers Are Conserved in Mice and 
Humans, Cancer Res 61 (2001) 6649–6655.
[104] E.I. Deryugina, J.P. Quigley, Tumor angiogenesis: MMP-mediated induction of 
intravasation- and metastasis-sustaining neovasculature, Matrix Biol. 44–46 
(2015) 94–112, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2015.04.004.
[105] X. Zhang, S. Huang, J. Guo, L. Zhou, L. You, T. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Insights into the 
distinct roles of MMP-11 in tumor biology and future therapeutics (Review), Int. 
J. Oncol. 48 (2016), https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo.2016.3400.
[106] P.C. Brooks, S. Str¨omblad, L.C. Sanders, T.L. von Schalscha, R.T. Aimes, W. 
G. Stetler-Stevenson, J.P. Quigley, D.A. Cheresh, Localization of Matrix 
Metalloproteinase MMP-2 to the Surface of Invasive Cells by Interaction with 
Integrin αvβ3, Cell 85 (1996) 683–693, https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00) 
81235-0.
[107] L. Denzer, W. Muranyi, H. Schroten, C. Schwerk, The role of PLVAP in endothelial 
cells, Cell Tissue Res 392 (2023) 393–412, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00441-023- 
03741-1.
[108] Y. Sui, S. Kou, K. Ge, J. Cao, C. Liu, H. Zhang, Expression analysis of plvap in 
mouse heart development, homeostasis and injury, Gene Expr. Patterns 50 (2023) 
119343, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gep.2023.119343.
[109] V. Singh, R. Kaur, P. Kumari, C. Pasricha, R. Singh, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1: 
Gatekeepers in various inflammatory and cardiovascular disorders, Clinica 
chimica acta; international journal of clinical chemistry 548 (2023). Doi: 
10.1016/j.cca.2023.117487.
[110] S.R. Barthel, J.D. Gavino, L. Descheny, C.J. Dimitroff, Targeting selectins and 
selectin ligands in inflammation and cancer, Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 11 
(2007), https://doi.org/10.1517/14728222.11.11.1473.
[111] R.J. Ludwig, M.P. Sch¨on, W.H. Boehncke, P-selectin: a common therapeutic target 
for cardiovascular disorders, inflammation and tumour metastasis, Expert Opin. 
Ther. Targets 11 (2007), https://doi.org/10.1517/14728222.11.8.1103.
[112] M. Wickstr¨om, R. Larsson, P. Nygren, J. Gullbo, Aminopeptidase N (CD13) as a 
target for cancer chemotherapy, Cancer Sci. 102 (2011), https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01826.x.
[113] A. Vogetseder, S. Thies, B. Ingold, P. Roth, M. Weller, P. Schraml, S.L. Goodman, 
H. Moch, αv-Integrin isoform expression in primary human tumors and brain 
metastases, Int. J. Cancer 133 (2013) 2362–2371-2371, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
ijc.28267.
[114] A.J. Beer, M. Schwaiger, Imaging of integrin alphavbeta3 expression, Cancer 
Metastasis Rev. 27 (2008), https://doi.org/10.1007/s10555-008-9158-3.
[115] E.M. Fabricius, G.P. Wildner, U. Kruse-Boitschenko, B. Hoffmeister, S. 
L. Goodman, J.D. Raguse, Immunohistochemical analysis of integrins αvβ3, αvβ5 
and α5β1, and their ligands, fibrinogen, fibronectin, osteopontin and vitronectin, 
in frozen sections of human oral head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, Exp. 
Ther. Med. 2 (2011), https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2010.171.
[116] J. Hou, D. Yan, Y. Liu, P. Huang, H. Cui, The Roles of Integrin α5β1 in Human 
Cancer, OncoTargets and Therapy 13 (2020), https://doi.org/10.2147/OTT. 
S273803.
[117] K. Flem-Karlsen, Ø. Fodstad, C.E. Nunes-Xavier, B7-H3 Immune Checkpoint 
Protein in Human Cancer, Curr. Med. Chem. 27 (2020) 4062–4086, https://doi. 
org/10.2174/0929867326666190517115515.
[118] P.L. Crispen, Y. Sheinin, T.J. Roth, C.M. Lohse, S.M. Kuntz, X. Frigola, R. 
H. Thompson, S.A. Boorjian, H. Dong, B.C. Leibovich, M.L. Blute, E.D. Kwon, 
Tumor cell and tumor vasculature expression of B7-H3 predict survival in clear 
cell renal cell carcinoma, Clin. Cancer Res. 14 (2008), https://doi.org/10.1158/ 
1078-0432.CCR-08-0536.
[119] J. Liang, Z. Liu, T. Pei, Y. Xiao, L. Zhou, Y. Tang, C. Zhou, K. Wu, F. Zhang, X. Yin, 
N. Chen, X. Wei, Y. Lu, Y. Zhu, Clinicopathological and Prognostic Characteristics 
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
19
of CD276 (B7-H3) Expression in Adrenocortical Carcinoma, Dis. Markers 2020 
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/5354825.
[120] M. Izci, C. Maksoudian, F. Gonçalves, L. Aversa, R. Salembier, A. Sargsian, I. P´erez 
Gilabert, T. Chu, C. Rios Luci, E. Bolea-Fernandez, D. Nittner, F. Vanhaecke, B. 
B. Manshian, S.J. Soenen, Gold nanoparticle delivery to solid tumors: a 
multiparametric study on particle size and the tumor microenvironment, 
J Nanobiotechnol 20 (2022) 1–20, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-022-01727- 
9.
[121] B. Chen, K. Zheng, S. Fang, K. Huang, C. Chu, J. Zhuang, J. Lin, S. Li, H. Yao, 
A. Liu, G. Liu, J. Lin, X. Lin, B7H3 targeting gold nanocage pH-sensitive 
conjugates for precise and synergistic chemo-photothermal therapy against 
NSCLC, J Nanobiotechnol 21 (2023) 1–19, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-023- 
02078-9.
[122] L. Liu, F. Chen, S. Li, T. Yang, S. Chen, Y. Zhou, Z. Lin, G. Zeng, P. Feng, H.B. Shu, 
Q. Zhou, K. Ding, L. Chen, Human/mouse CD137 agonist, JNU-0921, effectively 
shrinks tumors through enhancing the cytotoxicity of CD8+ T cells in cis and in 
trans, Sci. Adv. 10 (2024), https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adp8647.
[123] M. Mittelbronn, M. Ronellenfitsch, H. Schwarz, B. Weide, P. Baumgarten, 
S. Bernatz, R. Beschorner, A.-E. Blank, A. Braczynski, P. Harter, E. Hattingen, 
Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 9 is upregulated in the 
endothelium and tumor cells in melanoma brain metastasis, Neuroimmunol 
Neuroinflammation 1 (2014) 135, https://doi.org/10.4103/2347-8659.143670.
[124] A. Palaz´on, A. Teijeira, I. Martínez-Forero, S. Herv´as-Stubbs, C. Roncal, 
I. Pe˜nuelas, J. Dubrot, A. Morales-Kastresana, J.L. P´erez-Gracia, M.C. Ochoa, 
L. Ochoa-Callejero, A. Martínez, A. Luque, J. Dinchuk, A. Rouzaut, M. Jure- 
Kunkel, I. Melero, Agonist Anti-CD137 mAb Act on Tumor Endothelial Cells to 
Enhance Recruitment of Activated T Lymphocytes, Cancer Res 71 (2011) 
801–811, https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1733.
[125] Y. Zhang, N. Li, H. Suh, D.J. Irvine, Nanoparticle anchoring targets immune 
agonists to tumors enabling anti-cancer immunity without systemic toxicity, Nat 
Commun 9 (2018) 1–15, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02251-3.
[126] P.S. Olofsson, L.A. S¨oderstr¨om, D. Wågs¨ater, Y. Sheikine, P. Ocaya, F. Lang, 
C. Rabu, L. Chen, M. Rudling, P. Aukrust, U. Hedin, G. Paulsson-Berne, A. Sirsj¨o, 
G.K. Hansson, CD137 is expressed in human atherosclerosis and promotes 
development of plaque inflammation in hypercholesterolemic mice, Circulation 
117 (2008) 1292–1301, https://doi.org/10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.699173.
[127] M. Cullen, M.K. Elzarrad, S. Seaman, E. Zudaire, J. Stevens, M.Y. Yang, X. Li, A. 
Chaudhary, L. Xu, M.B. Hilton, D. Logsdon, E. Hsiao, E.V. Stein, F. Cuttitta, D.C. 
Haines, K. Nagashima, L. Tessarollo, B. St Croix, GPR124, an orphan G protein- 
coupled receptor, is required for CNS-specific vascularization and establishment 
of the blood-brain barrier, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108 (2011) 5759–5764. 
Doi: 10.1073/pnas.1017192108.
[128] A. John, G. Tuszynski, The role of matrix metalloproteinases in tumor 
angiogenesis and tumor metastasis, Pathol. Oncol. Res. 7 (2001) 14–23, https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/BF03032599.
[129] S. Li, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, T. Ji, X. Zhao, Y. Ding, X. Zhao, R. Zhao, F. Li, 
X. Yang, S. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Lai, A.K. Whittaker, G.J. Anderson, J. Wei, G. Nie, 
Nanoparticle-mediated local depletion of tumour-associated platelets disrupts 
vascular barriers and augments drug accumulation in tumours, Nat Biomed Eng 1 
(2017) 667–679, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-017-0115-8.
[130] W. Hou, F. Xia, C.S. Alves, X. Qian, Y. Yang, D. Cui, MMP2-Targeting and Redox- 
Responsive PEGylated Chlorin e6 Nanoparticles for Cancer Near-Infrared Imaging 
and Photodynamic Therapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8 (2016) 1447–1457, 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.5b10772.
[131] A. Marturano, M.L.V. Hendrickx, E. Falcinelli, M. Sebastiano, G. Guglielmini, 
G. Hassanzadeh-Ghassabeh, S. Muyldermans, P.J. Declerck, P. Gresele, 
Development of anti-matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) nanobodies as 
potential therapeutic and diagnostic tools, Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, 
Biology and Medicine 24 (2020) 102103, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nano.2019.102103.
[132] K.M. Panth, T. van den Beucken, R. Biemans, N.G. Lieuwes, M. Weber, M. Losen, 
A. Yaromina, L.J. Dubois, P. Lambin, In vivo optical imaging of MMP2 immuno 
protein antibody: tumor uptake is associated with MMP2 activity, Sci Rep 6 
(2016) 1–10, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep22198.
[133] Y.-H. Wang, T.-Y. Cheng, T.-Y. Chen, K.-M. Chang, V.P. Chuang, K.-J. Kao, 
Plasmalemmal Vesicle Associated Protein (PLVAP) as a therapeutic target for 
treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma, BMC Cancer 14 (2014) 1–12, https://doi. 
org/10.1186/1471-2407-14-815.
[134] P. Guo, J. Huang, L. Wang, Di Jia, J. Yang, D.A. Dillon, D. Zurakowski, H. Mao, M. 
A. Moses, D.T. Auguste, ICAM-1 as a molecular target for triple negative breast 
cancer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111 (2014) 14710–14715. Doi: 10.1073/ 
pnas.1408556111.
[135] F. Danhier, B. Vroman, N. Lecouturier, N. Crokart, V. Pourcelle, H. Freichels, 
C. J´erˆome, J. Marchand-Brynaert, O. Feron, V. Pr´eat, Targeting of tumor 
endothelium by RGD-grafted PLGA-nanoparticles loaded with paclitaxel, 
J. Control. Release 140 (2009) 166–173, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jconrel.2009.08.011.
[136] S. Gosk, T. Moos, C. Gottstein, G. Bendas, VCAM-1 directed immunoliposomes 
selectively target tumor vasculature in vivo, Biochim. Biophys. Acta Biomembr. 
(1778 (2008)) 854–863, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamem.2007.12.021.
[137] G.M. Edelman, Cell Adhesion Molecules, Science 219 (1983) 450–457, https:// 
doi.org/10.1126/science.6823544.
[138] D. Arosio, C. Casagrande, Advancement in integrin facilitated drug delivery, Adv. 
Drug Deliv. Rev. 97 (2016) 111–143, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
addr.2015.12.001.
[139] Y. Shamay, M. Elkabets, H. Li, J. Shah, S. Brook, F. Wang, K. Adler, E. Baut, 
M. Scaltriti, P.V. Jena, E.E. Gardner, J.T. Poirier, C.M. Rudin, J. Baselga, 
A. Haimovitz-Friedman, D.A. Heller, P-selectin is a nanotherapeutic delivery 
target in the tumor microenvironment, Sci. Transl. Med. 8 (2016), https://doi. 
org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf7374.
[140] R.-Y. Lin, K. Dayananda, T.-J. Chen, C.-Y. Chen, G.-C. Liu, K.-L. Lin, Y.-M. Wang, 
Targeted RGD nanoparticles for highly sensitive in vivo integrin receptor imaging, 
Contrast Media Mol. Imaging 7 (2012) 7–18, https://doi.org/10.1002/cmmi.457.
[141] Z. Zhen, W. Tang, H. Chen, X. Lin, T. Todd, G. Wang, T. Cowger, X. Chen, J. Xie, 
RGD-modified apoferritin nanoparticles for efficient drug delivery to tumors, ACS 
Nano 7 (2013) 4830–4837, https://doi.org/10.1021/nn305791q.
[142] B.M. Dicheva, T.L.M. ten Hagen, A.L.B. Seynhaeve, M. Amin, A.M.M. Eggermont, 
G.A. Koning, Enhanced Specificity and Drug Delivery in Tumors by cRGD - 
Anchoring Thermosensitive Liposomes, Pharm Res 32 (2015) 3862–3876, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095-015-1746-7.
[143] K. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Liu, B. Jiang, Y. Jiang, Tumor penetrability and anti- 
angiogenesis using iRGD-mediated delivery of doxorubicin-polymer conjugates, 
Biomaterials 35 (2014) 8735–8747, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2014.06.042.
[144] R.K. Jain, Determinants of Tumor Blood Flow: A Review, Cancer Res 48 (1988) 
2641–2658.
[145] W.S. Kamoun, S.-S. Chae, D.A. Lacorre, J.A. Tyrrell, M. Mitre, M.A. Gillissen, 
D. Fukumura, R.K. Jain, L.L. Munn, Simultaneous measurement of RBC velocity, 
flux, hematocrit and shear rate in vascular networks, Nat Methods 7 (2010) 
655–660, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1475.
[146] A.L. van de Ven, P. Kim, O. Haley, J.R. Fakhoury, G. Adriani, J. Schmulen, 
P. Moloney, F. Hussain, M. Ferrari, X. Liu, S.H. Yun, P. Decuzzi, Rapid 
tumoritropic accumulation of systemically injected plateloid particles and their 
biodistribution, J. Control. Release 158 (2012), https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jconrel.2011.10.021.
[147] J.W. Myerson, A.C. Anselmo, Y. Liu, S. Mitragotri, D.M. Eckmann, V. 
R. Muzykantov, Non-affinity factors modulating vascular targeting of nano- and 
microcarriers, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 99 (2016) 97–112, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.addr.2015.10.011.
[148] K. Müller, D.A. Fedosov, G. Gompper, Margination of micro- and nano-particles in 
blood flow and its effect on drug delivery, Sci Rep 4 (2014) 1–8, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/srep04871.
[149] K. Vahidkhah, P. Bagchi, Microparticle shape effects on margination, near-wall 
dynamics and adhesion in a three-dimensional simulation of red blood cell 
suspension, Soft Matter 11 (2015) 2097–2109, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C4SM02686A.
[150] P. Decuzzi, B. Godin, T. Tanaka, S.-Y. Lee, C. Chiappini, X. Liu, M. Ferrari, Size 
and shape effects in the biodistribution of intravascularly injected particles, 
J. Control. Release 141 (2010) 320–327, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jconrel.2009.10.014.
[151] T.-R. Lee, M. Choi, A.M. Kopacz, S.-H. Yun, W.K. Liu, P. Decuzzi, On the near-wall 
accumulation of injectable particles in the microcirculation: smaller is not better, 
Sci Rep 3 (2013) 1–8, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep02079.
[152] A.C. Anselmo, S. Mitragotri, Impact of particle elasticity on particle-based drug 
delivery systems, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 108 (2017) 51–67, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.addr.2016.01.007.
[153] A. Kumar, M.D. Graham, Segregation by membrane rigidity in flowing binary 
suspensions of elastic capsules, Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin. Soft Matter Phys. 84 
(2011), https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.84.066316.
[154] M.B. Fish, A.L. Banka, M. Braunreuther, C.A. Fromen, W.J. Kelley, J. Lee, R. Adili, 
M. Holinstat, O. Eniola-Adefeso, Deformable microparticles for shuttling 
nanoparticles to the vascular wall, Sci. Adv. 7 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
sciadv.abe0143.
[155] X. Chen, S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Huang, H. Ye, X. Qiao, Z. Xue, W. Yang, T. Wang, 
Influence of Elasticity of Hydrogel Nanoparticles on Their Tumor Delivery, 
Advanced science (Weinheim, Baden-Wurttemberg, Germany) 9 (2022). Doi: 
10.1002/advs.202202644.
[156] A.C. Anselmo, M. Zhang, S. Kumar, D.R. Vogus, S. Menegatti, M.E. Helgeson, 
S. Mitragotri, Elasticity of nanoparticles influences their blood circulation, 
phagocytosis, endocytosis, and targeting, ACS Nano 9 (2015) 3169–3177, https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5b00147.
[157] Z. Li, Y. Zhu, H. Zeng, C. Wang, C. Xu, Q. Wang, H. Wang, S. Li, J. Chen, C. Xiao, 
X. Yang, Z. Li, Mechano-boosting nanomedicine antitumour efficacy by blocking 
the reticuloendothelial system with stiff nanogels, Nat Commun 14 (2023) 1–18, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37150-3.
[158] J. Key, A.L. Palange, F. Gentile, S. Aryal, C. Stigliano, D. Di Mascolo, E. de Rosa, 
M. Cho, Y. Lee, J. Singh, P. Decuzzi, Soft Discoidal Polymeric Nanoconstructs 
Resist Macrophage Uptake and Enhance Vascular Targeting in Tumors, ACS Nano 
9 (2015) 11628–11641, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5b04866.
[159] P. Guo, D. Liu, K. Subramanyam, B. Wang, J. Yang, J. Huang, D.T. Auguste, M. 
A. Moses, Nanoparticle elasticity directs tumor uptake, Nat Commun 9 (2018) 
1–9, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02588-9.
[160] Y. Hui, D. Wibowo, Y. Liu, R. Ran, H.F. Wang, A. Seth, A.P.J. Middelberg, C. 
X. Zhao, Understanding the Effects of Nanocapsular Mechanical Property on 
Passive and Active Tumor Targeting, ACS Nano 12 (2018), https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsnano.8b00242.
[161] Q. Liang, N. Bie, T. Yong, K. Tang, X. Shi, Z. Wei, H. Jia, X. Zhang, H. Zhao, 
W. Huang, L. Gan, B. Huang, X. Yang, The softness of tumour-cell-derived 
microparticles regulates their drug-delivery efficiency, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3 
(2019), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-019-0405-4.
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
20
[162] A.M. Yashchenok, V.S. Chernyshev, E.V. Konovalova, R. Kholodenko, 
E. Tsydenzhapova, V.O. Shipunova, A.A. Schulga, S.M. Deyev, D.A. Gorin, Anti- 
CD63-Oligonucleotide Functionalized Magnetic Beads for the Rapid Isolation of 
Small Extracellular Vesicles and Detection of EpCAM and HER2 Membrane 
Receptors using DARPin Probes, Anal. Sens. 3 (2023) e202200059, https://doi. 
org/10.1002/anse.202200059.
[163] W. Jo, J. Kim, J. Yoon, D. Jeong, S. Cho, H. Jeong, Y.J. Yoon, S.C. Kim, Y.S. Gho, 
J. Park, Large-scale generation of cell-derived nanovesicles, Nanoscale 6 (2014) 
12056–12064, https://doi.org/10.1039/c4nr02391a.
[164] J. Gao, D. Chu, Z. Wang, Cell membrane-formed nanovesicles for disease-targeted 
delivery, J. Control. Release 224 (2016), https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jconrel.2016.01.024.
[165] F.N.E. Toledano, Y. Lupu-Haber, T. Bronshtein, L. Kaneti, N. Letko, E. Weinstein, 
L. Baruch, M. Machluf, Reconstructed stem cell nanoghosts: a natural tumor 
targeting platform, Nano Lett. 13 (2013), https://doi.org/10.1021/nl401376w.
[166] R. Prasad, K. Prerna, M. Temgire, P. Banerjee, R. Kumari, G.C. Kundu, D. Hattila, 
C.V. Mangannavar, A.S. Meena, M. Gorain, J. Bellare, P. Chandra, V.K. Dubey, 
Molecular Engineering of Ultrabright Biomimetic NanoGhost for Site-Selective 
Tumor Imaging and Biodistribution, Adv. Healthc. Mater. (2024), https://doi. 
org/10.1002/adhm.202401233.
[167] S.T. Yurkin, Z. Wang, Cell membrane-derived nanoparticles: emerging clinical 
opportunities for targeted drug delivery, Nanomedicine (lond) 12 (2017), https:// 
doi.org/10.2217/nnm-2017-0100.
[168] Q. Hu, W. Sun, C. Qian, C. Wang, H.N. Bomba, Z. Gu, Anticancer Platelet- 
Mimicking Nanovehicles, Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.) 27 (2015), 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201503323.
[169] R.H. Fang, C.M. Hu, B.T. Luk, W. Gao, J.A. Copp, Y. Tai, O’, D.E. Connor, L. 
Zhang, Cancer cell membrane-coated nanoparticles for anticancer vaccination 
and drug delivery, Nano letters 14 (2014). Doi: 10.1021/nl500618u.
[170] J.Y. Zhu, D.W. Zheng, M.K. Zhang, W.Y. Yu, W.X. Qiu, J.J. Hu, J. Feng, X. 
Z. Zhang, Preferential Cancer Cell Self-Recognition and Tumor Self-Targeting by 
Coating Nanoparticles with Homotypic Cancer Cell Membranes, Nano Lett. 16 
(2016), https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b02786.
[171] A. Parodi, D. Kostyushev, S. Brezgin, A. Kostyusheva, T. Borodina, R. Akasov, 
A. Frolova, V. Chulanov, A.A. Zamyatnin, Biomimetic approaches for targeting 
tumor-promoting inflammation, Semin. Cancer Biol. 86 (2022) 555–567, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2022.04.007.
[172] X. Cao, Y. Hu, S. Luo, Y. Wang, T. Gong, X. Sun, Y. Fu, Z. Zhang, Neutrophil- 
mimicking therapeutic nanoparticles for targeted chemotherapy of pancreatic 
carcinoma, Acta Pharm. Sin. B 9 (2019) 575–589, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apsb.2018.12.009.
[173] A. Parodi, N. Quattrocchi, A.L. van de Ven, C. Chiappini, M. Evangelopoulos, J. 
O. Martinez, B.S. Brown, S.Z. Khaled, I.K. Yazdi, M.V. Enzo, L. Isenhart, 
M. Ferrari, E. Tasciotti, Synthetic nanoparticles functionalized with biomimetic 
leukocyte membranes possess cell-like functions, Nature Nanotech 8 (2013) 
61–68, https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2012.212.
[174] R. Palomba, A. Parodi, M. Evangelopoulos, S. Acciardo, C. Corbo, E. de Rosa, I. 
K. Yazdi, S. Scaria, R. Molinaro, N.E.T. Furman, J. You, M. Ferrari, F. Salvatore, 
E. Tasciotti, Biomimetic carriers mimicking leukocyte plasma membrane to 
increase tumor vasculature permeability, Sci Rep 6 (2016) 1–11, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/srep34422.
[175] J.O. Martinez, R. Molinaro, K.A. Hartman, C. Boada, R. Sukhovershin, E. de Rosa, 
D. Kirui, S. Zhang, M. Evangelopoulos, A.M. Carter, J.A. Bibb, J.P. Cooke, 
E. Tasciotti, Biomimetic nanoparticles with enhanced affinity towards activated 
endothelium as versatile tools for theranostic drug delivery, Theranostics 8 
(2018) 1131–1145, https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.22078.
[176] R. Molinaro, J.O. Martinez, A. Zinger, V.A. De, G. Storci, N. Arrighetti, R.E. De, K. 
A. Hartman, N. Basu, N. Taghipour, C. Corbo, E. Tasciotti, Leukocyte-mimicking 
nanovesicles for effective doxorubicin delivery to treat breast cancer and 
melanoma, Biomater. Sci. 8 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1039/c9bm01766f.
[177] T. Saxer, A. Zumbuehl, B. Müller, The use of shear stress for targeted drug 
delivery, Cardiovasc Res 99 (2013) 328–333, https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/ 
cvt102.
[178] W. Shi, A.R.M. Fuad, Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Huang, R. Du, G. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Yin, 
Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles increase risk of cardiovascular diseases by 
inducing endothelium dysfunction and inflammation, J Nanobiotechnol 21 
(2023) 1–16, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-023-01808-3.
[179] A.M. Sofias, Y.C. Toner, A.E. Meerwaldt, M.M.T. van Leent, G. Soultanidis, M. 
Elschot, H. Gonai, K. Grendstad, Å. Flobak, U. Neckmann, C. Wolowczyk, E.L. 
Fisher, T. Reiner, C.d.L. Davies, G. Bjørkøy, A.J.P. Teunissen, J. Ochando, C. 
P´erez-Medina, W.J.M. Mulder, S. Hak, Tumor Targeting by αvβ3-Integrin-Specific 
Lipid Nanoparticles Occurs via Phagocyte Hitchhiking, ACS Nano 14 (2020) 
7832–7846. Doi: 10.1021/acsnano.9b08693.
[180] G. Solinas, G. Germano, A. Mantovani, P. Allavena, Tumor-associated 
macrophages (TAM) as major players of the cancer-related inflammation, 
J Leukoc Biol. 86 (2009) 1065–1073, https://doi.org/10.1189/jlb.0609385.
[181] B. Huang, W.D. Abraham, Y. Zheng, L.S.C. Bustamante, S.S. Luo, D.J. Irvine, 
Active targeting of chemotherapy to disseminated tumors using nanoparticle- 
carrying T cells, Sci. Transl. Med. 7 (2015), https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
scitranslmed.aaa5447.
[182] E. Udofa, Z. Zhao, In situ cellular hitchhiking of nanoparticles for drug delivery, 
Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 204 (2024) 115143, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
addr.2023.115143.
[183] B.R. Smith, E.E.B. Ghosn, H. Rallapalli, J.A. Prescher, T. Larson, L.A. Herzenberg, 
S.S. Gambhir, Selective uptake of single-walled carbon nanotubes by circulating 
monocytes for enhanced tumour delivery, Nature Nanotech 9 (2014) 481–487, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2014.62.
[184] Q. Wang, Q. Liang, J. Dou, H. Zhou, C. Zeng, H. Pan, Y. Shen, Q. Li, Y. Liu, D. 
T. Leong, W. Jiang, Y. Wang, Breaking through the basement membrane barrier to 
improve nanotherapeutic delivery to tumours, Nat. Nanotechnol. 19 (2024) 
95–105, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-023-01498-w.
[185] A.S. Garanina, D.A. Vishnevskiy, A.A. Chernysheva, M.P. Valikhov, J. 
A. Malinovskaya, P.A. Lazareva, A.S. Semkina, M.A. Abakumov, V.A. Naumenko, 
Neutrophil as a Carrier for Cancer Nanotherapeutics: A Comparative Study of 
Liposome, PLGA, and Magnetic Nanoparticles Delivery to Tumors, 
Pharmaceuticals 16 (2023) 1564, https://doi.org/10.3390/ph16111564.
[186] A.J. McFarlane, F. Fercoq, S.B. Coffelt, L.M. Carlin, Neutrophil dynamics in the 
tumor microenvironment, J. Clin. Invest. 131 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1172/ 
JCI143759.
[187] M.T. Stephan, J.J. Moon, S.H. Um, A. Bershteyn, D.J. Irvine, Therapeutic cell 
engineering with surface-conjugated synthetic nanoparticles, Nat Med 16 (2010) 
1035–1041, https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2198.
[188] L. Koenderman, K. Tesselaar, N. Vrisekoop, Human neutrophil kinetics: a call to 
revisit old evidence, Trends Immunol. 43 (2022) 868–876, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.it.2022.09.008.
[189] L. Wu, S. Saxena, R.K. Singh, Neutrophils in the Tumor Microenvironment, 
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 1224 (2020) 1–20, https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-030-35723-8_1.
[190] M.D. Filippi, Mechanism of Diapedesis: Importance of the Transcellular Route, 
Adv. Immunol. 129 (2016), https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.ai.2015.09.001.
[191] C.A. Fromen, W.J. Kelley, M.B. Fish, R. Adili, J. Noble, M.J. Hoenerhoff, 
M. Holinstat, O. Eniola-Adefeso, Neutrophil–Particle Interactions in Blood 
Circulation Drive Particle Clearance and Alter Neutrophil Responses in Acute 
Inflammation, ACS Nano 11 (2017) 10797–10807, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.7b03190.
[192] J. Hao, J. Chen, M. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Li, H. Tang, Neutrophils, 
as “Trojan horses”, participate in the delivery of therapeutical PLGA nanoparticles 
into a tumor based on the chemotactic effect, Drug Deliv. 27 (2020) 1–14, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10717544.2019.1701141.
[193] J. Deprez, R. Verbeke, S. Meulewaeter, I. Aernout, H. Dewitte, T. Decruy, 
J. Coudenys, J. van Duyse, G. van Isterdael, D. Peer, R. van der Meel, S.C. de 
Smedt, P. Jacques, D. Elewaut, I. Lentacker, Transport by circulating myeloid cells 
drives liposomal accumulation in inflamed synovium, Nat. Nanotechnol. 18 
(2023) 1341–1350, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-023-01444-w.
[194] Z. Wang, J. Li, J. Cho, A.B. Malik, Prevention of vascular inflammation by 
nanoparticle targeting of adherent neutrophils, Nat. Nanotechnol. 9 (2014), 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2014.17.
[195] D. Chu, X. Dong, Q. Zhao, J. Gu, Z. Wang, Photosensitization Priming of Tumor 
Microenvironments Improves Delivery of Nanotherapeutics via Neutrophil 
Infiltration, Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.) 29 (2017), https://doi. 
org/10.1002/adma.201701021.
[196] N. Kumbhojkar, S. Prakash, T. Fukuta, K. Adu-Berchie, N. Kapate, R. An, S. Darko, 
V. Chandran Suja, K.S. Park, A.P. Gottlieb, M.G. Bibbey, M. Mukherji, L.-L.- 
W. Wang, D.J. Mooney, S. Mitragotri, Neutrophils bearing adhesive polymer 
micropatches as a drug-free cancer immunotherapy, Nat. Biomed. Eng 8 (2024) 
579–592, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-024-01180-z.
[197] L.J. Estcourt, S.J. Stanworth, S. Hopewell, C. Doree, M. Trivella, E. Massey, 
Granulocyte transfusions for treating infections in people with neutropenia or 
neutrophil dysfunction, Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 4 (2016) CD005339, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD005339.pub2.
[198] M. Wu, H. Zhang, C. Tie, C. Yan, Z. Deng, Q. Wan, X. Liu, F. Yan, H. Zheng, MR 
imaging tracking of inflammation-activatable engineered neutrophils for targeted 
therapy of surgically treated glioma, Nat Commun 9 (2018) 1–13, https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41467-018-07250-6.
[199] J. Xue, Z. Zhao, L. Zhang, L. Xue, S. Shen, Y. Wen, Z. Wei, L. Wang, L. Kong, 
H. Sun, Q. Ping, R. Mo, C. Zhang, Neutrophil-mediated anticancer drug delivery 
for suppression of postoperative malignant glioma recurrence, Nature Nanotech 
12 (2017) 692–700, https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2017.54.
[200] I.V. Zelepukin, K.G. Shevchenko, S.M. Deyev, Rediscovery of mononuclear 
phagocyte system blockade for nanoparticle drug delivery, Nat Commun 15 
(2024) 1–14, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48838-5.
[201] L. Zheng, X. Hu, H. Wu, L. Mo, S. Xie, J. Li, C. Peng, S. Xu, L. Qiu, W. Tan, In Vivo 
Monocyte/Macrophage-Hitchhiked Intratumoral Accumulation of Nanomedicines 
for Enhanced Tumor Therapy, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142 (2019) 382–391, https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/jacs.9b11046.
[202] S.-S. Huang, K.-J. Lee, H.-C. Chen, R.P. Prajnamitra, C.-H. Hsu, C.-B. Jian, X.- 
E. Yu, D.-Y. Chueh, C.W. Kuo, T.-C. Chiang, O.K. Choong, S.-C. Huang, C.Y. Beh, 
L.-L. Chen, J.J. Lai, P. Chen, T.J. Kamp, Y.-W. Tien, H.-M. Lee, P.-C.-H. Hsieh, 
Immune cell shuttle for precise delivery of nanotherapeutics for heart disease and 
cancer, Sci. Adv. 7 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abf2400.
[203] J. Kuang, Z.-Y. Rao, D.-W. Zheng, D. Kuang, Q.-X. Huang, T. Pan, H. Li, X. Zeng, 
X.-Z. Zhang, Nanoparticles Hitchhike on Monocytes for Glioblastoma Treatment 
after Low-Dose Radiotherapy, ACS Nano 17 (2023) 13333–13347, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01428.
[204] S. Jung, J. Aliberti, P. Graemmel, M.J. Sunshine, G.W. Kreutzberg, A. Sher, 
Littman, Analysis of fractalkine receptor CX(3)CR1 function by targeted deletion 
and green fluorescent protein reporter gene insertion, Mol. Cell. Biol. 20 (2000), 
https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.11.4106-4114.2000.
[205] W. Du, B. Zhou, A. Forjaz, S.M. Shin, F. Wu, A.J. Crawford, P.R. Nair, A.C. 
Johnston, H. West-Foyle, A. Tang, D. Kim, R. Fan, A.L. Kiemen, P.H. Wu, J.M. 
Phillip, W.J. Ho, D.E. Sanin, D. Wirtz, High-motility pro-tumorigenic monocytes 
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
21
drive macrophage enrichment in the tumor microenvironment, bioRxiv the 
preprint server for biology (2024). Doi: 10.1101/2024.07.16.603739.
[206] S.T. Pals, D.J.J. de Gorter, M. Spaargaren, Lymphoma dissemination: the other 
face of lymphocyte homing, Blood 110 (2007) 3102–3111, https://doi.org/ 
10.1182/blood-2007-05-075176.
[207] L. Tang, Y. Zheng, M.B. Melo, L. Mabardi, A.P. Casta˜no, Y.-Q. Xie, N. Li, S. 
B. Kudchodkar, H.C. Wong, E.K. Jeng, M.V. Maus, D.J. Irvine, Enhancing T cell 
therapy through TCR-signaling-responsive nanoparticle drug delivery, Nat 
Biotechnol 36 (2018) 707–716, https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.4181.
[208] C.H. June, R.S. O’Connor, O.U. Kawalekar, S. Ghassemi, M.C. Milone, CAR T cell 
immunotherapy for human cancer, Science (New York, N.Y.) 359 (2018) 
1361–1365. Doi: 10.1126/science.aar6711.
[209] C.H. Villa, A.C. Anselmo, S. Mitragotri, V. Muzykantov, Red blood cells: 
Supercarriers for drugs, biologicals, and nanoparticles and inspiration for 
advanced delivery systems, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 106 (2016) 88–103, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2016.02.007.
[210] J.S. Brenner, S. Mitragotri, V.R. Muzykantov, Red Blood Cell Hitchhiking: A Novel 
Approach for Vascular Delivery of Nanocarriers, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 23 
(2021), https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-bioeng-121219-024239.
[211] A.C. Anselmo, V. Gupta, B.J. Zern, D. Pan, M. Zakrewsky, V. Muzykantov, 
S. Mitragotri, Delivering nanoparticles to lungs while avoiding liver and spleen 
through adsorption on red blood cells, ACS Nano 7 (2013) 11129–11137, https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/nn404853z.
[212] A.V. Zelepukin IV, V.O. Yaremenko, A.V.B. Shipunova, P.I. Balalaeva IV, S. 
M. Nikitin, M.P.N. Deyev, Nanoparticle-based drug delivery via RBC-hitchhiking 
for the inhibition of lung metastases growth, Nanoscale 11 (2019), https://doi. 
org/10.1039/c8nr07730d.
[213] Z. Zhao, A. Ukidve, Y. Gao, J. Kim, S. Mitragotri, Erythrocyte leveraged 
chemotherapy (ELeCt): Nanoparticle assembly on erythrocyte surface to combat 
lung metastasis, Sci. Adv. 5 (2019) eaax9250, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv. 
aax9250.
[214] Z. Zhao, Y. Feng, J. Xiang, J. Liu, Y. Piao, S. Shao, J. Tang, Z. Zhou, Y. Shen, 
Screening of Zwitterionic Liposomes with Red Blood Cell-Hitchhiking and Tumor 
Cell-Active Transporting Capability for Efficient Tumor Entrance, Adv Funct 
Materials 33 (2023) 2214369, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202214369.
[215] S. Chen, Y. Zhong, W. Fan, J. Xiang, G. Wang, Q. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Geng, R. Sun, 
Z. Zhang, Y. Piao, J. Wang, J. Zhuo, H. Cong, H. Jiang, J. Ling, Z. Li, D. Yang, 
X. Yao, X. Xu, Z. Zhou, J. Tang, Y. Shen, Enhanced tumour penetration and 
prolonged circulation in blood of polyzwitterion–drug conjugates with cell- 
membrane affinity, Nat Biomed Eng 5 (2021) 1019–1037, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41551-021-00701-4.
[216] Y. Inoue, Y. Matsumoto, K. Toh, K. Miyano, H. Cabral, K. Igarashi, S. Iwasaki, 
K. Kataoka, T. Yamasoba, Manipulating dynamic tumor vessel permeability to 
enhance polymeric micelle accumulation, J. Control. Release 329 (2021) 63–75, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2020.11.063.
[217] J. Liu, L. Guo, Z. Mi, Z. Liu, P. Rong, W. Zhou, Vascular bursts-mediated tumor 
accumulation and deep penetration of spherical nucleic acids for synergistic 
radio-immunotherapy, J. Control. Release 348 (2022) 1050–1065, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2022.06.030.
[218] K. Igarashi, H. Cabral, T. Hong, Y. Anraku, F. Mpekris, T. Stylianopoulos, T. Khan, 
A. Matsumoto, K. Kataoka, Y. Matsumoto, T. Yamasoba, Vascular Bursts Act as a 
Versatile Tumor Vessel Permeation Route for Blood-Borne Particles and Cells, 
Small 17 (2021) e2103751, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202103751.
[219] M.A. Miller, R. Chandra, M.F. Cuccarese, C. Pfirschke, C. Engblom, S. Stapleton, 
U. Adhikary, R.H. Kohler, J.F. Mohan, M.J. Pittet, R. Weissleder, Radiation 
therapy primes tumors for nanotherapeutic delivery via macrophage-mediated 
vascular bursts, Sci. Transl. Med. 9 (2017), https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
scitranslmed.aal0225.
[220] K.Y.Y. Fung, G.D. Fairn, W.L. Lee, Transcellular vesicular transport in epithelial 
and endothelial cells: Challenges and opportunities, Traffic (copenhagen, 
Denmark) 19 (2018), https://doi.org/10.1111/tra.12533.
[221] G. Wei, S. Zhang, S. Yu, W. Lu, Intravital Microscopy Reveals Endothelial 
Transcytosis Contributing to Significant Tumor Accumulation of Albumin 
Nanoparticles, Pharmaceutics 15 (2023) 519, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
pharmaceutics15020519.
[222] B.R. Smith, C. Zavaleta, J. Rosenberg, R. Tong, J. Ramunas, Z. Liu, H. Dai, S. 
S. Gambhir, High-resolution, serial intravital microscopic imaging of nanoparticle 
delivery and targeting in a small animal tumor model, Nano Today 8 (2013) 
126–137, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2013.02.004.
[223] T. Skotland, K. Sandvig, Transport of nanoparticles across the endothelial cell 
layer, Nano Today 36 (2021) 101029, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nantod.2020.101029.
[224] B.R. Kingston, Z.P. Lin, B. Ouyang, P. MacMillan, J. Ngai, A.M. Syed, 
S. Sindhwani, W.C.W. Chan, Specific Endothelial Cells Govern Nanoparticle Entry 
into Solid Tumors, ACS Nano 15 (2021) 14080–14094, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.1c04510.
[225] J.E. Schnitzer, gp60 is an albumin-binding glycoprotein expressed by continuous 
endothelium involved in albumin transcytosis, Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 262 
(1992), https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1992.262.1.H246.
[226] R.D. Minshall, C. Tiruppathi, S.M. Vogel, W.D. Niles, A. Gilchrist, H.E. Hamm, A. 
B. Malik, Endothelial cell-surface gp60 activates vesicle formation and trafficking 
via G(i)-coupled Src kinase signaling pathway, J. Cell Biol. 150 (2000), https:// 
doi.org/10.1083/jcb.150.5.1057.
[227] Z. Wang, C. Tiruppathi, R.D. Minshall, A.B. Malik, Size and Dynamics of Caveolae 
Studied Using Nanoparticles in Living Endothelial Cells, ACS Nano 3 (2009) 
4110–4116, https://doi.org/10.1021/nn9012274.
[228] X. Hao, J. Wu, Y. Shan, M. Cai, X. Shang, J. Jiang, H. Wang, Caveolae-mediated 
endocytosis of biocompatible gold nanoparticles in living Hela cells, Journal of 
physics, Condensed Matter an Institute of Physics Journal 24 (2012), https://doi. 
org/10.1088/0953-8984/24/16/164207.
[229] Z.S. Al-Ahmady, D. Jasim, S.S. Ahmad, R. Wong, M. Haley, G. Coutts, I. Schiessl, 
S.M. Allan, K. Kostarelos, Selective Liposomal Transport through Blood Brain 
Barrier Disruption in Ischemic Stroke Reveals Two Distinct Therapeutic 
Opportunities, ACS Nano 13 (2019) 12470–12486, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.9b01808.
[230] J.J. Rennick, A.P.R. Johnston, R.G. Parton, Key principles and methods for 
studying the endocytosis of biological and nanoparticle therapeutics, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 16 (2021) 266–276, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-021-00858-8.
[231] M.S. Thomsen, K.B. Johnsen, K. Kucharz, M. Lauritzen, T. Moos, Blood–Brain 
Barrier Transport of Transferrin Receptor-Targeted Nanoparticles, Pharmaceutics 
14 (2022) 2237, https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14102237.
[232] G. Tosi, L. Badiali, B. Ruozi, A.V. Vergoni, L. Bondioli, A. Ferrari, F. Rivasi, 
F. Forni, M.A. Vandelli, Can Leptin-Derived Sequence-Modified Nanoparticles Be 
Suitable Tools for Brain Delivery? Nanomedicine 7 (2012) 365–382, https://doi. 
org/10.2217/nnm.11.98.
[233] S. Santiwarangkool, H. Akita, I.A. Khalil, M.M. Abd Elwakil, Y. Sato, K. Kusumoto, 
H. Harashima, A study of the endocytosis mechanism and transendothelial 
activity of lung-targeted GALA-modified liposomes, Journal of Controlled Release 
307 (2019) 55–63, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2019.06.009.
[234] T. Tsuji, H. Yoshitomi, J. Usukura, Endocytic mechanism of transferrin- 
conjugated nanoparticles and the effects of their size and ligand number on the 
efficiency of drug delivery, J Electron Microsc (tokyo) 62 (2013) 341–352, 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jmicro/dfs080.
[235] H. Akita, T. Fujiwara, S. Santiwarangkool, N. Hossen, K. Kajimoto, A. El-Sayed, 
Y. Tabata, H. Harashima, Transcytosis-Targeting Peptide: A Conductor of 
Liposomal Nanoparticles through the Endothelial Cell Barrier, Small 12 (2015) 
1212–1221, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201500909.
[236] S. Muro, C. Garnacho, J.A. Champion, J. Leferovich, C. Gajewski, E. 
H. Schuchman, S. Mitragotri, V.R. Muzykantov, Control of Endothelial Targeting 
and Intracellular Delivery of Therapeutic Enzymes by Modulating the Size and 
Shape of ICAM-1-targeted Carriers, Mol. Ther. 16 (2008) 1450–1458, https://doi. 
org/10.1038/mt.2008.127.
[237] Z.P. Lin, W. Ngo, S.M. Mladjenovic, J.L.Y. Wu, W.C.W. Chan, Nanoparticles Bind 
to Endothelial Cells in Injured Blood Vessels via a Transient Protein Corona, Nano 
Lett. 23 (2023) 1003–1009, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.2c04501.
[238] D. Feng, J.A. Nagy, A.M. Dvorak, H.F. Dvorak, Different Pathways of 
Macromolecule Extravasation from Hyperpermeable Tumor Vessels, Microvasc. 
Res. 59 (2000) 24–37, https://doi.org/10.1006/mvre.1999.2207.
[239] X. Liu, P. Lin, I. Perrett, J. Lin, Y.-P. Liao, C.H. Chang, J. Jiang, N. Wu, 
T. Donahue, Z. Wainberg, A.E. Nel, H. Meng, Tumor-penetrating peptide 
enhances transcytosis of silicasome-based chemotherapy for pancreatic cancer, 
J. Clin. Investig. 127 (2017) 2007–2018, https://doi.org/10.1172/jci92284.
[240] A.M. Dvorak, D. Feng, The vesiculo-vacuolar organelle (VVO). A new endothelial 
cell permeability organelle, J. Histochem. Cytochem. 49 (2001) 419–432, https:// 
doi.org/10.1177/002215540104900401.
[241] X. Liu, J. Jiang, H. Meng, Transcytosis - An effective targeting strategy that is 
complementary to “EPR effect” for pancreatic cancer nano drug delivery, 
Theranostics 9 (2019) 8018–8025, https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.38587.
[242] Q. Zhou, S. Shao, J. Wang, C. Xu, J. Xiang, Y. Piao, Z. Zhou, Q. Yu, J. Tang, X. Liu, 
Z. Gan, R. Mo, Z. Gu, Y. Shen, Enzyme-activatable polymer–drug conjugate 
augments tumour penetration and treatment efficacy, Nat. Nanotechnol. 14 
(2019) 799–809, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-019-0485-z.
[243] H.-X. Wang, Z.-Q. Zuo, J.-Z. Du, Y.-C. Wang, R. Sun, Z.-T. Cao, X.-D. Ye, J.- 
L. Wang, K.W. Leong, J. Wang, Surface charge critically affects tumor penetration 
and therapeutic efficacy of cancer nanomedicines, Nano Today 11 (2016) 
133–144, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2016.04.008.
[244] S. Yamamoto, A. Kato, Y. Sakurai, T. Hada, H. Harashima, Modality of tumor 
endothelial VEGFR2 silencing-mediated improvement in intratumoral 
distribution of lipid nanoparticles, J. Control. Release 251 (2017) 1–10, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.02.010.
[245] Y. Sakurai, A. Kato, H. Harashima, Involvement of Caveolin-1-mediated 
transcytosis in the intratumoral accumulation of liposomes, Biochem. Biophys. 
Res. Commun. 525 (2020) 313–318, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbrc.2020.02.086.
[246] Y. Sakurai, T. Hada, S. Yamamoto, A. Kato, W. Mizumura, H. Harashima, 
Remodeling of the Extracellular Matrix by Endothelial Cell-Targeting siRNA 
Improves the EPR-Based Delivery of 100 nm Particles, Mol. Ther. 24 (2016) 
2090–2099, https://doi.org/10.1038/mt.2016.178.
[247] N.R. Smith, D. Baker, M. Farren, A. Pommier, R. Swann, X. Wang, S. Mistry, 
K. McDaid, J. Kendrew, C. Womack, S.R. Wedge, S.T. Barry, Tumor stromal 
architecture can define the intrinsic tumor response to VEGF-targeted therapy, 
Clin. Cancer Res. 19 (2013) 6943–6956, https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432. 
CCR-13-1637.
[248] M.A. Miller, R. Weissleder, Imaging the pharmacology of nanomaterials by 
intravital microscopy: Toward understanding their biological behavior, Adv. Drug 
Deliv. Rev. 113 (2017) 61–86, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2016.05.023.
[249] C. Scheele, D. Herrmann, E. Yamashita, C.L. Celso, C.N. Jenne, M.H. Oktay, D. 
Entenberg, P. Friedl, R. Weigert, F.L.B. Meijboom, M. Ishii, P. Timpson, R.J. van, 
Multiphoton intravital microscopy of rodents, Nature reviews. Methods primers 2 
(2022). Doi: 10.1038/s43586-022-00168-w.
[250] H. Zhang, P. Fu, Y. Liu, Z. Zheng, L. Zhu, M. Wang, M. Abdellah, M. He, J. Qian, 
A.W. Roe, W. Xi, Large-depth three-photon fluorescence microscopy imaging of 
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 219 (2025) 115550
22
cortical microvasculature on nonhuman primates with bright AIE probe In vivo, 
Biomaterials 289 (2022) 121809, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2022.121809.
[251] O.T. Bruns, T.S. Bischof, D.K. Harris, D. Franke, Y. Shi, L. Riedemann, A. Bartelt, 
F.B. Jaworski, J.A. Carr, C.J. Rowlands, M.W.B. Wilson, O. Chen, H. Wei, G. 
W. Hwang, D.M. Montana, I. Coropceanu, O.B. Achorn, J. Kloepper, J. Heeren, P. 
T.C. So, D. Fukumura, K.F. Jensen, R.K. Jain, M.G. Bawendi, Next-generation in 
vivo optical imaging with short-wave infrared quantum dots, Nat Biomed Eng 1 
(2017) 1–11, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-017-0056.
[252] M. Alieva, L. Ritsma, R.J. Giedt, R. Weissleder, R.J. van, Imaging windows for 
long-term intravital imaging: General overview and technical insights, IntraVital 
3 (2014), https://doi.org/10.4161/intv.29917.
[253] M.E. Fernandez-Sanchez, T. Brunet, J.C. R¨oper, E. Farge, Mechanotransduction’s 
impact on animal development, evolution, and tumorigenesis, Annu. Rev. Cell 
Dev. Biol. 31 (2015), https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-cellbio-102314-112441.
[254] G. Jacquemin, M. Benavente-Diaz, S. Djaber, A. Bore, V. Dangles-Marie, 
D. Surdez, S. Tajbakhsh, S. Fre, B. Lloyd-Lewis, Longitudinal high-resolution 
imaging through a flexible intravital imaging window, Sci. Adv. 7 (2021), https:// 
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abg7663.
[255] A. Korolj, R.H. Kohler, E. Scott, E.A. Halabi, K. Lucas, J.C.T. Carlson, R. 
Weissleder, Perfusion Window Chambers Enable Interventional Analyses of 
Tumor Microenvironments, Advanced science (Weinheim, Baden-Wurttemberg, 
Germany) 10 (2023). Doi: 10.1002/advs.202304886.
[256] Z. Ou, Y.-s. Duh, N.J. Rommelfanger, C.H.C. Keck, S. Jiang, K. Brinson, S. Zhao, E. 
L. Schmidt, X. Wu, F. Yang, B. Cai, H. Cui, W. Qi, S. Wu, A. Tantry, R. Roth, J. 
Ding, X. Chen, J.A. Kaltschmidt, M.L. Brongersma, G. Hong, Achieving optical 
transparency in live animals with absorbing molecules, Science (New York, N.Y.) 
385 (2024) eadm6869. Doi: 10.1126/science.adm6869.
[257] D. Zhu, V. Tuchin, Tissue Optical Clearing Imaging from Ex vivo toward In vivo, 
BME Front. 5 (2024) 58, https://doi.org/10.34133/bmef.0058.
[258] T. Samuel, S. Rapic, O’, C. Brien, M. Edson, Y. Zhong, R.S. DaCosta, Quantitative 
intravital imaging for real-time monitoring of pancreatic tumor cell hypoxia and 
stroma in an orthotopic mouse model, Sci. Adv. 9 (2023). Doi: 10.1126/sciadv. 
ade8672.
[259] M.C. Schubert, S.J. Soyka, A. Tamimi, E. Maus, J. Schroers, N. Wißmann, 
E. Reyhan, S.K. Tetzlaff, Y. Yang, R. Denninger, R. Peretzke, C. Beretta, 
M. Drumm, A. Heuer, V. Buchert, A. Steffens, J. Walshon, K. McCortney, 
S. Heiland, M. Bendszus, P. Neher, A. Golebiewska, W. Wick, F. Winkler, M. 
O. Breckwoldt, A. Kreshuk, T. Kuner, C. Horbinski, F.T. Kurz, R. Prevedel, 
V. Venkataramani, Deep intravital brain tumor imaging enabled by tailored three- 
photon microscopy and analysis, Nat Commun 15 (2024) 1–21, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41467-024-51432-4.
[260] Y. Chen, X. Liu, H. Yuan, Z. Yang, R.C.A. von, Y. Qie, H. Zhao, Y. Wang, W. Jiang, 
B.Y.S. Kim, Therapeutic Remodeling of the Tumor Microenvironment Enhances 
Nanoparticle Delivery, Advanced science (Weinheim, Baden-Wurttemberg, 
Germany) 6 (2019). Doi: 10.1002/advs.201802070.
[261] Y. Lu, P. Jabbari, A. Mukhamedshin, A.V. Zvyagin, Fluorescence lifetime imaging 
in drug delivery research, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. (2025) 115521, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.addr.2025.115521.
[262] H. Sparks, H. Kondo, S. Hooper, I. Munro, G. Kennedy, C. Dunsby, P. French, 
E. Sahai, Heterogeneity in tumor chromatin-doxorubicin binding revealed by in 
vivo fluorescence lifetime imaging confocal endomicroscopy, Nat Commun 9 
(2018) 1–14, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-04820-6.
[263] J.-N. May, J.I. Moss, F. Mueller, S.K. Golombek, I. Biancacci, L. Rizzo, A. 
S. Elshafei, F. Gremse, R. Pola, M. Pechar, T. Etrych, S. Becker, C. Trautwein, R. 
D. Bülow, P. Boor, R. Knuechel, S. von Stillfried, G. Storm, S. Puri, S.T. Barry, 
V. Schulz, F. Kiessling, M.B. Ashford, T. Lammers, Histopathological biomarkers 
for predicting the tumour accumulation of nanomedicines, Nat. Biomed. Eng 
(2024) 1–13, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-024-01197-4.
[264] E.M. Gabriel, K. Sukniam, K. Popp, S.P. Bagaria, Human intravital microscopy in 
the study of sarcomas: an early trial of feasibility, Front. Oncol. 13 (2023) 
1151255, https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1151255.
[265] E.M. Gabriel, M. Kim, D.T. Fisher, C. Mangum, K. Attwood, W. Ji, 
D. Mukhopadhyay, S.P. Bagaria, M.W. Robertson, T.A. Dinh, K.L. Knutson, J. 
J. Skitzki, M.B. Wallace, A pilot trial of intravital microscopy in the study of the 
tumor vasculature of patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis, Sci Rep 11 (2021) 
1–13, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-84430-3.
[266] Q. Xin, H. Ma, H. Wang, X.-D. Zhang, Tracking tumor heterogeneity and 
progression with near-infrared II fluorophores, Exploration (beijing) 3 (2023) 
20220011, https://doi.org/10.1002/EXP.20220011.
[267] Q. Zhou, C. Xue, J. Man, P. Zhang, X. Ke, J. Zhao, B. Zhang, J. Zhou, Correlation 
of tumor-associated macrophage infiltration in glioblastoma with magnetic 
resonance imaging characteristics: a retrospective cross-sectional study, Quant. 
Imaging Med. Surg. 13 (2023) 5958–5973, https://doi.org/10.21037/qims-23- 
126.
[268] G. Erdag, J.T. Schaefer, M.E. Smolkin, D.H. Deacon, S.M. Shea, L.T. Dengel, J. 
W. Patterson, C.L. Slingluff, Immunotype and immunohistologic characteristics of 
tumor-infiltrating immune cells are associated with clinical outcome in metastatic 
melanoma, Cancer Res. 72 (2012) 1070–1080, https://doi.org/10.1158/0008- 
5472.CAN-11-3218.
[269] V. Beckford, S.D. Fontaine, H.F. VanBrocklin, B.R. Hearn, R. Reid, G.W. Ashley, D. 
V. Santi, PET Imaging of the EPR Effect in Tumor Xenografts Using Small 15 nm 
Diameter Polyethylene Glycols Labeled with Zirconium-89, Mol. Cancer Ther. 19 
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-19-0709.
[270] H.H. Gustafson, D. Holt-Casper, D.W. Grainger, H. Ghandehari, Nanoparticle 
uptake: The phagocyte problem, Nano Today 10 (2015) 487–510, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.nantod.2015.06.006.
[271] B. Ouyang, W. Poon, Y.-N. Zhang, Z.P. Lin, B.R. Kingston, A.J. Tavares, Y. Zhang, 
J. Chen, M.S. Valic, A.M. Syed, P. MacMillan, J. Couture-Sen´ecal, G. Zheng, W.C. 
W. Chan, The dose threshold for nanoparticle tumour delivery, Nat. Mater. 19 
(2020) 1362–1371, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-020-0755-z.
[272] I.B. Belyaev, A.B. Mirkasymov, V.I. Rodionov, J.S. Babkova, P.I. Nikitin, S. 
M. Deyev, I.V. Zelepukin, MPS blockade with liposomes controls 
pharmacokinetics of nanoparticles in a size-dependent manner, Biomed. Mater. 
19 (2024), https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-605X/ad7e6f.
I.B. Belyaev et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
