ARTICLE
OPEN
Chemokine-derived oncolytic peptide induces immunogenic
cancer cell death and signiﬁcantly suppresses tumor growth
Natsuki Furukawa
1✉, Wendy Yang1, Alex R. Chao1, Akash Patil
1, Adam C. Mirando
1, Niranjan B. Pandey1 and
Aleksander S. Popel1,2
© The Author(s) 2024
Chemokinostatin-1 (CKS1) is a 24-mer peptide originally discovered as an anti-angiogenic peptide derived from the CXCL1
chemokine. Here, we demonstrate that CKS1 acts not only as an anti-angiogenic peptide but also as an oncolytic peptide due to its
structural and physical properties. CKS1 induced both necrotic and apoptotic cell death speciﬁcally in cancer cells while showing
minimal toxicity in non-cancerous cells. Mechanistically, CKS1 disrupted the cell membrane of cancer cells quickly after treatment
and activated the apoptotic pathway at later time points. Furthermore, immunogenic molecules were released from CKS1-treated
cells, indicating that CKS1 induces immunogenic cell death. CKS1 effectively suppressed tumor growth in vivo. Collectively, these
data demonstrate that CKS1 functions as an oncolytic peptide and has a therapeutic potential to treat cancer.
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41420-024-01932-5
INTRODUCTION
Currently, most drugs used for cancer treatment are small
molecules or antibodies [1]. In general, small molecules show
low afﬁnity and low speciﬁcity towards their targets which causes
undesired side effects. Although therapeutic antibodies are well
suited to interfere with protein–protein interactions, poor tissue
penetration due to their large size is a prominent drawback. High
production costs also limit their availability to patients [2].
Peptides possess unique properties that can overcome the
disadvantages of these therapies [3, 4]. Similar to antibodies,
peptides can bind to their target protein with high afﬁnity and
high speciﬁcity. Moreover, peptides are small and can penetrate
tissues better than antibodies. Peptides are synthesized by
chemical reactions which makes the production costs signiﬁcantly
lower than antibodies that require the usage of biological
materials and protein puriﬁcation. Therefore, peptide therapeutics
have the potential to be effective and low-cost cancer treatments.
Chemokinostatin-1
(CKS1)
is
a
24-mer
peptide
originally
discovered as an anti-angiogenic peptide. Karagiannis and Popel
developed a computational method to identify anti-angiogenic
sequences contained in the human proteome and discovered
common sequences conserved within protein domains contained
in angiogenesis-related proteins [5]. CKS1 is derived from a
sequence shared in the CXC chemokine family. The anti-
angiogenic property of CKS1 was veriﬁed experimentally [6], and
its efﬁcacy in suppressing tumor growth was demonstrated in
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) [7] and glioma [8] models.
Oncolytic peptides selectively induce cell death in cancer cells.
They typically have an amphipathic structure and a net positive
charge [9]. Oncolytic peptides interact with the negatively charged
molecules on the cell membrane, such as phosphatidylserine and
glycosylated proteins, via electrostatic interactions. Once the
concentration of the peptide on the surface of the cancer cells
exceeds a threshold, the peptides disrupt the cell membrane and
eventually induce cell death. Three major models have been
proposed to explain the cell penetration step [10]. In the barrel
pore model, the peptides span through the membrane to form a
pore. The toroidal pore model proposes that the peptides interact
with the lipids in the cell membrane to form a pore composed of
peptides and lipids. In the carpet model, the peptides cover the
surface of the cell membrane and carve out the lipids by forming
micelle-like particles.
The speciﬁcity of oncolytic peptides for cancer cells over non-
cancerous cells is explained by the differences in the components
of the cell membrane. In healthy cells, ﬂippases and ﬂoppases
function to maintain the asymmetric distribution of phospholipids.
Neutral phospholipids such as sphingomyelin and phosphatidyl-
choline are mostly located in the outer layer of the cell membrane,
while negatively charged phospholipids such as phosphatidylser-
ine and phosphatidylinositol are sequestered in the inner layer of
the cell membrane. Due to this asymmetric distribution of
phospholipids, the cell surface of healthy cells is neutral [11].
However, the machinery to maintain the asymmetric distribution
is frequently impaired in cancer cells, leading to the exposure of
negatively charged phospholipids. Accordingly, the cell surface of
cancer cells is commonly more negatively charged compared to
healthy cells [12]. A high level of lactate production due to the
propensity of cancer cells to upregulate glycolysis also contributes
to the negative charge of the cancer cell membrane [13].
Since oncolytic peptides are positively charged, they preferen-
tially bind to the cell surface of cancer cells [14]. As a proof of
concept, Iwasaki et al. demonstrated that cell lines with higher
expression of phosphatidylserine were more sensitive to oncolytic
peptides [15]. Moreover, the ﬂuidity of the cell membrane also
Received: 19 September 2023 Revised: 21 March 2024 Accepted: 25 March 2024
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. 2The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. ✉email: nfurukawa@jhmi.edu
www.nature.com/cddiscovery
Ofﬁcial journal of CDDpress
1234567890();,:
determines the sensitivity to oncolytic peptides. Cholesterol in the
cell membrane decreases the ﬂuidity of the cell membrane and
makes it difﬁcult for the oncolytic peptides to insert into the lipid
bilayer [14]. Some cancer cell types exhibit higher membrane
ﬂuidity due to the decreased amount of cholesterol in the
membrane, which leads to higher sensitivity to oncolytic peptides
[12].
In addition to the disruption of the cell membrane, disruption of
the organelles may also be important for the activity of oncolytic
peptides. LTX-315, a 9-mer oncolytic peptide, has been shown to
accumulate in the mitochondria and cause mitochondrial outer
membrane permeabilization [16, 17]. Treatment with LTX-315
leads to the release of cytochrome c and the generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Importantly, inhibition of mito-
chondrial activity with a high concentration of carbonyl cyanide
m-chlorophenyl hydrazone, an inhibitor of oxidative phosphoryla-
tion, decreased the cytotoxicity of LTX-315. Another oncolytic
peptide, LTX-401, accumulates in the Golgi membranes and
destroys the Golgi apparatus [18]. Although the molecular
mechanism of how the disruption of the Golgi apparatus leads
to cell death remains unclear, inhibition of protein transport into
the Golgi apparatus using Brefeldin A, led to decreased cytotoxic
activity of LTX-401. Despite LTX-315 and LTX-401 both being
amphipathic peptides with membrane-disrupting capability, LTX-
315 accumulates in the mitochondria but not in the Golgi
apparatus,
whereas
LTX-401
localizes
mostly
in
the
Golgi
apparatus and the cytosol, and not in the mitochondria [18].
Wodlej et al. compared the localization of R-DIM-P-LF11-322,
which is an oncolytic peptide that interacts speciﬁcally with cancer
cells, and DIM-LF11-318, which is an oncolytic peptide that also
induces cell death of non-cancerous cells [19]. R-DIM-P-LF11-322
accumulated in the Golgi apparatus and induced swelling of the
mitochondria and eventually apoptosis. On the other hand, the
type of cell death caused by DIM-LF11-318 was mainly necrosis
caused by the rupturing of the cell membrane. These data indicate
that
each
oncolytic
peptide
exhibits
a
unique
subcellular
localization which may affect the mechanism of cell death caused
by each peptide.
Cell death caused by oncolytic peptides has been reported to
induce the release of immunogenic molecules from the cells
[20–22]. Oncolytic peptides contribute to the treatment of cancer
not only by killing cancer cells but also by stimulating anti-tumoral
immunity. LTX-315 has been shown to synergize with anti-CTLA4
antibodies in a mouse sarcoma model [23]. In a small clinical trial,
LTX-315 treatment led to increased expression of immune-related
genes, increased T-cell clone expansion in blood, and increased
inﬁltration of immune cells into tumors in melanoma, sarcoma,
and breast cancer [24]. Currently, several clinical trials evaluating
the efﬁcacy of LTX-315 monotherapy and combinations of LTX-
315 with immunotherapies are being conducted.
Although CKS1 was originally identiﬁed as an anti-angiogenic
peptide, its predicted structural properties indicated potential
oncolytic activity. Here we use several biochemical and imaging
assays to conﬁrm cancer-speciﬁc membrane disruption and
subsequent apoptosis while minimally impacting normal cells.
This mechanism of cell death was also found to release the
immunogenic
molecules,
suggesting
possible
synergy
with
immune modulation. Finally, anti-tumor activity was demon-
strated in two mouse models. Together with the previously
discovered anti-angiogenic properties, the oncolytic activities
uncovered in these studies emphasize the potential of CKS1 as
a promising cancer therapeutic.
RESULTS
CKS1 has a suitable structure to be an oncolytic peptide
To examine the structure of CKS1 (NGRKACLNPASPIVKKIIEKMLNS),
we predicted the structure using ColabFold [25]. CKS1 was
predicted to contain an unstructured N-terminal region and a
C-terminal α-helix (Fig. 1A). Importantly, CKS1 contains several
basic amino acids that make the net charge positive (Fig. 1B). The
charged amino acids are concentrated on one side of the helix,
and the other side of the helix is formed by hydrophobic amino
acids (Fig. 1C). The cationic amphipathic helical structure of CKS1
is consistent with that of oncolytic peptides such as LTX-315 and
LTX-401 [26, 27]. We further predicted whether CKS1 would be an
oncolytic peptide using ACPred, a support vector machine-based
machine-learning model [28]. As a result, CKS1 was predicted to
be an oncolytic peptide with a probability of 94.9%. These ﬁndings
indicated that CKS1 could function as an oncolytic peptide.
CKS1 induces rapid cell death of cancer cells
To determine whether CKS1 functions as an oncolytic peptide, we
monitored the cell viability of 4T1 murine TNBC cells after CKS1
treatment using an xCELLigence real-time cell analyzer (RTCA)
(Agilent). In this method, the binding of cells to gold electrodes is
detected as electrical impedance and displayed as arbitrary units
of cell index in real time. Cell death, as suggested by a reduction in
cell index, was observed within 1 h of treatment and was dose-
dependent (Fig. 2A). We further evaluated the cytotoxic effect of
CKS1 by cell viability assay and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
assay. Cell viability assay was conducted using alamarBlue, which
is a blue dye that turns red in response to cellular metabolic
reduction. LDH is a cytosolic enzyme that is released outside the
cells when the cell membrane is damaged. Cell viability of 4T1
cells decreased in a dose-dependent manner and the half-
maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) was 71 µM ± 5.3 µM (Fig.
2B). Cells treated with CKS1 released signiﬁcant amounts of LDH
showing that CKS1 induces damage in the cell membrane of
4T1 cells. The cytotoxicity of CKS1 was not limited to 4T1 cells, and
CKS1 was found to be effective in several murine and human
cancer cell lines: CT26 murine colon carcinoma cells with an IC50
of 53 µM ± 9.9 µM (Fig. 2C), human osteosarcoma U2OS cells, and
murine ﬁbrosarcoma MCA205 cells (Fig. S1A, B). Importantly, CKS1
induced cell death of NIH/3T3 normal ﬁbroblasts and human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) when the concentration
was signiﬁcantly higher than the concentration needed to induce
cell death in cancer cells (Fig. 2D, E). At a concentration in which
CKS1 did not induce LDH release, CKS1 signiﬁcantly attenuated
cell proliferation of HUVECs as demonstrated by the inhibition of
Fig. 1
The structure and physical properties of CKS1. A The
structure of CKS1 predicted by AlphaFold 2. B The electrostatic
potential of the surface of CKS1 was predicted by the APBS
electrostatics plugin in Pymol. Blue regions are the positively
charged regions and red regions are the negatively charged regions.
C The hydrophobic regions of CKS1 are visualized as red and the
hydrophilic regions are visualized as white.
N. Furukawa et al.
2
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 
BrdU incorporation (Fig. S1C). These results indicate that the
reported anti-angiogenic property is separate from the cell death-
inducing capacity of CKS1.
CKS1 rapidly disrupts the cell membrane of cancer cells
To identify the mechanism of cell death caused by CKS1, we
observed the morphology of the cells after CKS1 treatment using
electron microscopy. The cell membrane—but not the nuclear
membrane—of 4T1 cells treated with CKS1 was ruptured after
30 min (Fig. 3A). We attempted to clarify whether the cell
membrane damage was induced by intrinsic cellular machinery
or by physical damage caused by the peptides. Pretreatment with
the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD, RIPK1 inhibitor necrostatin-1
stable (Nec-1s), or ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) did not inhibit the release of
LDH, indicating that the release of LDH by CKS1 does not require
these programmed cell death pathways (Fig. S2A, B).
To observe the interactions between the peptide and cancer
cells, we produced CKS1 tagged with ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate
Fig. 2
CKS1 induces rapid cell death in multiple cancer cell lines but not in non-cancerous cell lines. A Cell viability of 4T1 cells after CKS1
treatment was measured by a real-time cell analyzer (RTCA). The vertical, dotted line indicates the time of peptide addition, and solid lines and
the shaded areas show the mean and the standard error of the technical replicates, respectively. Representative of N = 3. B–E The cell viability
and the release of LDH were measured after the cells were treated with the indicated concentration of CKS1 for 6 h. The blue data points and
the red data points show the cell viability and the release of LDH, respectively. The release of LDH in the supernatant was measured by the
CyQUANT LDH cytotoxicity assay and was normalized to the amount of LDH released from cells treated with lysis buffer. The curves show the
dose-response curves ﬁtted to the observed data. Each data point shows the technical replicate of each experiment. Representative of N = 3
independent experiments.
N. Furukawa et al.
3
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 
(FITC) and observed its movement after adding it to the cells (Fig.
3B and Supplemental Video 1 and 2). FITC-CKS1 ﬁrst accumulated
on the cell surface which is seen as a ring around the cell. Next,
the peptides entered the cells. A similar phenomenon was
observed when CT26 cells were treated with FITC-CKS1 (Supple-
mental Video 3). To further clarify the events leading to cell death,
we stained the cytosol of 4T1 cells using calcein-AM and treated
them with CKS1 (Fig. 3C and Supplemental Video 4 and 5). After
CKS1 treatment, there was an inﬂux of the surrounding media into
the cells. The inﬂux caused swelling of the cells and blebbing to
occur. The blebbing eventually bursts, leading to the release of
cytosolic components into the extracellular space. By quantifying
the fraction of cells containing calcein after CKS1 treatment, we
found that the cytosol of cells treated with CKS1 was released
within 15–30 min of CKS1 treatment and that the cell membrane
of nearly all cells was eventually damaged (Fig. 3D). Consistent
with the ﬁndings from above, pretreatment with Z-VAD did not
inhibit nor slow down the release of calcein (Fig. S2C).
CKS1 diminishes mitochondrial membrane potential and
activates the apoptotic pathway at later time points
When 4T1 cells were treated with CKS1 for 6 h, we observed cells
with apoptotic morphology (Fig. 4A). The volume of the cells
shrank, the nucleus collapsed, the chromatin condensed, and
apoptotic blebbing occurred. These observations indicate that
CKS1
induces
caspase-independent
necrotic
cell
death
by
disrupting the cell membrane at early time points and induces
apoptosis at later time points after CKS1 treatment.
We hypothesized that CKS1 ﬁrst ruptures the cell membrane
then enters the cells, disrupts the function of the mitochondria,
and activates the apoptotic pathway. To test this hypothesis, we
stained 4T1 cells with JC-1. JC-1 is a cationic dye that accumulates
in the mitochondria. In intact mitochondria, when the mitochon-
drial membrane potential is high, JC-1 forms aggregates that emit
red ﬂuorescence. When the mitochondrial membrane potential is
low, JC-1 exists as monomers that emit green ﬂuorescence.
Therefore, the ratio of green and red ﬂuorescence emitted by the
two forms of JC-1 functions as an indicator of the mitochondrial
membrane potential. We observed a rapid switch of JC-1 emitted
ﬂuorescence from red to green when 4T1 cells were treated with
CKS1 (Fig. 4B, C and Supplemental Video 6 and 7).
We next quantiﬁed the activity of caspase-3 in the lysate of
cells treated with CKS1. Caspase-3 was not activated after 30 min
of CKS1 but was activated after 4 h of CKS1 treatment (Fig. S3A).
This indicates that the activation of the apoptotic pathway is a
secondary phenomenon that happens after the cell membrane is
ruptured. To observe the fraction of cells with active caspases, we
conducted live cell imaging using CellEvent Caspase-3/7 detec-
tion reagent, which is a dye that stains the nucleus when caspase-
3 or caspase-7 is activated. The fraction of cells with activated
caspases increased over time (Fig. 4D and Fig S3B). Note that
since cancer cells detach after cell death, it was impossible to
accurately assess the number of cells with activated caspases. Our
data indicate that there are at least two fates of the cells treated
with CKS1; cells that undergo severe damage and detach from
the dish and cells that stay attached to the dish and undergo
apoptosis.
These data collectively suggest that in addition to cell death
caused by the rupturing of the cell membrane, disruption of the
mitochondrial activity and the subsequent activation of the
Fig. 3
CKS1 rapidly disrupts the cell membrane of cancer cells. A 4T1 cells were treated with water or 100 µM CKS1 for 30 min and the
detailed structure of the cell was observed using transmission electron microscopy. The cell membrane of 4T1 cells was disrupted after 30 min
of CKS1-treatment. B 4T1 cells were treated with 100 µM FITC-CKS1 (green) and monitored by ﬂuorescence live cell imaging. The timestamp
indicates the minutes after cells were treated with the peptide. Representative of N = 3. C 4T1 cells were stained with calcein-AM (green) and
were treated with 100 µM CKS1. The timestamp indicates the minutes after cells were treated with the peptides. D The ratio of cells
maintaining calcein in the cytosol at each time point was calculated based on the live cell imaging. Representative of N = 3.
N. Furukawa et al.
4
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 
apoptotic pathway may contribute to the cell death caused
by CKS1.
The helical region of CKS1 drives the oncolytic activity
Our motivation to test the oncolytic activity of CKS1 was the
observation that CKS1 possesses the characteristic amphipathic,
positively charged α-helix. To examine whether these features are
responsible for the oncolytic activity, we produced a peptide that
only contains the C-terminal helical region (IVKKIIEKMLNS) and a
peptide that contains the N-terminal loop region (NGRKACLN-
PASP). Furthermore, we produced two mutant peptides, NC1 and
NC2 (Fig. 5A). In NC1, the three lysines that form the hydrophilic
side of CKS1 were replaced with glutamic acids. Since lysines are
positively charged and glutamic acids are negatively charged,
these mutations make the peptide anionic rather than cationic. In
NC2, a single proline was inserted in the middle of the α-helix of
CKS1. Since prolines destabilize α-helices, the helical structure of
CKS1 would be expected to be disrupted in NC2. As expected, the
peptide with just the helical region of CKS1 induced LDH release
from 4T1 cells, while the peptide with only the loop region of
CKS1 did not (Fig. 5B). Although the loop region was not directly
involved in the oncolytic activity, it may enhance the oncolytic
activity of CKS1 by stabilizing the structure or increasing the
solubility. For example, the peptide with only the helical region
was poorly soluble in water, while CKS1 showed high solubility in
water (data not shown). NC1 and NC2 did not show oncolytic
Fig. 4
CKS1 diminishes mitochondrial membrane potential and activates the apoptotic pathway. A 4T1 cells were treated with water or
100 µM CKS1 for 6 h and the detailed structure of the cell was observed using transmission electron microscopy. Overall shrinkage of the cell,
collapse of the nucleus, chromatin condensation (arrow), and apoptotic blebbing (triangle) indicate that the cells underwent apoptosis.
B Fluorescence live cell imaging of 4T1 cells stained with JC-1 and treated with 100 µM CKS1. The timestamp indicates the minutes after CKS1
treatment (negative value indicates pre-treatment). Green indicates the monomer form of JC-1, and red indicates the polymer form of JC-1.
C Twenty-ﬁve cells were randomly selected from the video of ﬁgure A (supplemental video 5) and the ratio between the green intensity and
the red intensity was calculated. Means ± SEM, representative of N = 3 independent experiments, Dunnett’s test (*p < 0.05, ***p < 0.005). D At
least ten ﬁelds of view were acquired for each time point and the fraction of cells with red intensity in the nucleus (cells with active caspase
activity) was calculated. Means ± SEM, representative of N = 3 independent experiments, Dunnett’s test (*p < 0.05, ***p < 0.005).
N. Furukawa et al.
5
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 
activity, demonstrating that the cationic property and the helical
property are both essential for the oncolytic activity of CKS1 (Fig.
5C).
CKS1 induces immunogenic cell death
The release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs)
such as ATP and HMGB-1 is a representative characteristic of
immunogenic cell death [29]. To determine whether cell death
caused by CKS1 is immunogenic, we evaluated the amount of ATP
and HMGB-1 released in the culture media upon CKS1 treatment
of 4T1 and CT26 cancer cells. During the process of immunogenic
cell death, ATP is released before cell death, while HMGB-1 is
released after cell death [30]. Therefore, we observed the release
of ATP 30 min after CKS1 treatment, and the release of HMGB-1
6 h after treatment. We observed a signiﬁcant release of ATP from
both cell lines (Fig. 6A, B). Although the release of HMGB-1 from
4T1 cells treated with CKS1 was weak, CT26 cells treated with
CKS1 showed a signiﬁcant release of HMGB-1 (Fig. 6C, D).
We further evaluated the immunogenicity of CKS1 by testing
whether the molecules released by 4T1 cells during CKS1
treatment can activate DC2.4 murine dendritic cells. In this
experiment, 4T1 cells were treated with CKS1, and the conditioned
media
was
collected.
DC2.4
cells
were
treated
with
the
conditioned media for 2 h and the expression level of three
proinﬂammatory cytokines, TNF, IL-6, and IL-12b was measured.
Since the conditioned media also contains CKS1 and molecules
released from live cells, we tested appropriate control conditions
to
test
the
contribution
of
these
factors.
Treatment
with
conditioned media from CKS1-treated 4T1 cells signiﬁcantly
increased the expression level of the cytokines, while treatment
of CKS1 nor the treatment with the conditioned media from live
4T1 cells did not (Fig. 6E). These data indicate that CKS1 induces
immunogenic cell death.
CKS1 induces necrosis and inhibits tumor growth in vivo
To evaluate whether CKS1 can induce cancer cell death in vivo, we
injected CKS1 intratumorally into established 4T1 tumors. The
intratumoral injection was chosen to ensure the delivery of
peptides to the tumors. Necrosis was observed in tumors 24 h
after CKS1 treatment (Fig. 7A). Furthermore, the growth of both
4T1 tumors and CT26 tumors was inhibited by CKS1 treatment
(Fig. 7B, C).
DISCUSSION
Our data demonstrate that CKS1 induces cell death in cancer cells
with low cytotoxicity to healthy cells. We observed that the cell
membrane of cancer cells is ruptured by CKS1 within 30 min of
peptide treatment. When the CKS1 concentration was signiﬁcantly
higher than the IC50 value, the cell membrane of nearly 100% of
the cancer cells was damaged. At later time points, we observed
cells with activated caspases that underwent apoptosis. The
majority of the cells detached after cell death, however, a fraction
of the cells were attached to the dish with an apoptotic
morphology. Based on these observations, our model of CKS1-
induced cell death is summarized in Fig. S4. First, the peptides
accumulate on the cell surface of the cancer cells and create pores
in the cell membrane. If the cell membrane damage is severe, the
cells are lysed. These cells die before the activation of the
apoptotic pathway and detach from the dish. If the cell membrane
damage is moderate, cells somehow survive potentially via the
activation of the membrane repair mechanisms [31]. However,
Fig. 5
The cationic helical structure of CKS1 is important for its activity. A The structure of CKS1, NC1, and NC2. B, C The release of LDH in
the supernatant was measured after treating 4T1 cells with 100 µM of the indicated peptides for 6 h. Data were normalized to cells treated
with lysis buffer. Means ± SEM, N = 3, Dunnett’s test (***p < 0.005).
N. Furukawa et al.
6
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 
Fig. 6
CKS1 induces the release of immunogenic molecules. A, B Cells were treated with 20 µM or 100 µM CKS1 for 30 min and the amount
of ATP released in the culture media was quantiﬁed. Means ± SEM, N = 3, Dunnet’s test (*p < 0.05, ***p < 0.005). C, D Cells were treated with
100 µM CKS1 for 6 h and the amount of HMGB-1 released in the culture media was quantiﬁed. Means ± SEM, N = 3, Welch’s t-test (*p < 0.05).
E DC2.4 cells were treated with either complete media (control), conditioned media from 4T1 cells, 100 µM CKS1, or conditioned media from
4T1 cells treated with 100 µM CKS1. The relative expression level normalized to the expression level in the control condition is shown.
Means ± SEM, N = 4, Dunnet’s test (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).
N. Furukawa et al.
7
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 
CKS1 enters the cells via the pores formed and targets the
mitochondria to activate the apoptotic pathway. These cells
eventually undergo apoptosis.
Although membrane rupture is a common phenomenon
caused by oncolytic peptides, the induction of apoptosis is only
seen in a few oncolytic peptides. For example, LTX-315 failed to
stimulate caspase-3 activity, while inducing a necrotic cell death
[20]. The factors that determine whether a peptide induces
apoptosis or not are not fully known. Our data indicate that the
mitochondrial
membrane
potential
rapidly
diminishes
after
peptide treatment. Although the mechanism of how CKS1
treatment affects the mitochondria remains unanswered, the
malfunctioning of mitochondria caused by CKS1 may be the
trigger of apoptotic cell death.
Our data showed that cells treated with CKS1 released
immunogenic molecules. Anti-angiogenic agents improve the
quality of the vasculature in the tumor (vascular normalization),
leading to the alleviation of an immunosuppressive environment
caused by hypoxia and acidosis and inﬁltration of immune effector
cells [32]. Therefore, CKS1 may induce anti-cancer immunity by
two means: release of immunogenic molecules and vascular
normalization. The synergy between oncolytic peptides and
cancer immunotherapy has been demonstrated for LTX-315
[23, 24, 33]. The potential of CKS1 as an immunotherapy has not
been discussed in this study and further work would be required
to determine the impact of CKS1 on anti-cancer immunity.
Our data show that CT26 tumors were highly sensitive to CKS1,
while 4T1 tumors showed a relatively modest response to CKS1.
The cell viability assay and LDH assay demonstrated that CT26
cells are more sensitive to CKS1, which may explain the difference
of CKS1 efﬁcacy in these models.
The obstacles to translating CKS1 to the clinic are the
expected poor stability in vivo because of its all-natural amino
acid composition and the need for a drug delivery system. To
avoid these problems, we utilized intratumoral injection in the
current study. Intratumoral injection can ensure the accurate
delivery of the drug to the tumor and can limit the risk of
systemic side effects since it is a local administration method.
Because of these beneﬁts, intratumoral injection is adopted in
multiple immunotherapies, such as immune receptor agonists
and oncolytic viral therapies. Currently, more than 20 neoadju-
vant clinical trials using these intratumoral immune stimulatory
agents and their combinations are ongoing [34]. Intratumoral
injection is typically employed for solid tumors exposed on the
surface of the body such as breast cancer and melanoma.
Therefore, these cancer types may be good indications for
treatment with CKS1.
In summary, CKS1 is a unique peptide that exerts anti-
angiogenic and oncolytic activity to suppress tumor growth. Our
experimental data indicate that cell membrane rupture and
induction of the apoptotic pathway contribute to cell death. Since
the oncolytic activity is not dependent on speciﬁc markers in
Fig. 7
CKS1 induces necrosis and suppresses tumor growth in vivo. A CKS1 was injected intratumorally in established 4T1 tumors. After
24 h, tumors were excised and were stained with H&E stain. The white area indicates necrosis caused by CKS1. Representative of N = 3.
B, C The tumor volume of 4T1 tumors and CT26 tumors were recorded. Fourty milligram/kg CKS1 was applied daily starting on day 7.
Means ± SEM, 4T1 control N = 15, 4T1 CKS1 treatment N = 15, CT26 control N = 10, CT26 CKS1 treatment N = 10. Two-way repeated-measures
ANOVA was performed to determine the signiﬁcance of CKS1 treatment (***p < 0.005).
N. Furukawa et al.
8
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 
cancer cells, CKS1 has the potential to be applied to a wide range
of cancer types.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Peptides
CKS1 (NGRKACLNPASPIVKKIIEKMLNS), FITC-CKS1 (CKS1 with FITC tagged at
the N-terminus), the helical region of CKS1 (IVKKIIEKMLNS), the loop region
of CKS1 (NGRKACLNPASP), NC1 (NGRKACLNPASPIVEEIIEEMLNS), and NC2
(NGRKACLNPASPIVKKIIPEKMLNS) were synthesized by Genscript (Piscat-
away, NJ) using a solid-phase peptide synthesis method. There is a free
amine at the N-termini of all these peptides while they were all amidated
at the C-terminus. The purity was >90% as veriﬁed by HPLC and MS
analyses. CKS1, the fragments of CKS1, and FITC-CKS1 were solubilized in
water. NC1 and NC2 were solubilized in DMSO.
Cell culture
4T1 murine mammary carcinoma cells (CRL-2539), CT26 murine colon
carcinoma cells (CRL-2638), U2OS human osteosarcoma cells (HTB-96), and
NIH/3T3 normal murine ﬁbroblast cells (CRL-1658) were purchased from
the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). MCA205 murine
ﬁbrosarcoma cells (SCC173) and DC2.4 murine dendritic cells (SCC142)
were purchased from MilliporeSigma (Burlington, MA). Cell lines were
mycoplasma-tested before being used. 4T1 cells, MCA205 cells, and DC2.4
cells were propagated in RPMI 1640 (Corning, Corning, NY) supplemented
with 10% FBS (MilliporeSigma). NIH/3T3 cells and U2OS cells were
propagated in DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA) supple-
mented with 10% FBS. HUVECs were propagated in the EGM-2 bulletkit
(LONZA, Basel, Switzerland). All cell lines were grown in T75 tissue culture
ﬂasks (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) under standard culture conditions
of 37 °C and 5% CO2.
Prediction of the peptide structures
The structures of the peptides were predicted by the protein structure
prediction software AlphaFold 2 [35]. The prediction of the protein
structure was done using the ColabFold platform [25] with the default
parameters and was visualized by Pymol [36]. The electrostatic property of
the peptides was calculated using the APBS plugin in Pymol.
Prediction of oncolytic peptide
Prediction of whether CKS1 functions as an oncolytic peptide was done
using ACPred (http://codes.bio/acpred/) [28]. The sequence of CKS1 was
used as the input and the default parameter was used for the prediction.
Animal models
The protocols used in this study were approved by the Institutional Care
and Use Committee at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. Four- to eight-
week-old female Balb/c mice were obtained from Charles River (Wilming-
ton, MA). For the 4T1 triple breast cancer model, 2.5 × 104 4T1 cells were
injected into the ﬁrst mammary fat pad of each mouse. For the CT26 colon
carcinoma model, 1.0 × 106 CT26 cells were injected subcutaneously in the
left ﬂank. The sample size was determined so that the ﬁnal distribution
would be close to normal distribution. After 1 week, the animals were
randomized into control and CKS1 treatment. During the randomization,
the mice were kept in a cage covered with cloth so that the investigator
could not see the tumor size. We started daily intratumoral treatment with
40 mg/kg CKS1. For the control group, the matching volume of water was
treated intratumorally. The tumor size was measured by using a caliper, and
the volume was calculated by using the formula 0.52 × (length) × (width)2.
Real-time cell viability assay
Three thousand cells were seeded in the wells of an xCELLigence RTCA
E-plate 16 (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). After the cells adhered to the plate,
the media was replaced with serum-free media, and the cells were treated
with CKS1 at the indicated concentrations. The viability of the cells was
monitored using the xCELLigence RTCA analyzer (Agilent).
LDH assay
Ten thousand cells were seeded in a 96-well plate and incubated
overnight. The cells were washed once, and the medium was replaced
with serum-free media. Cells were treated with CKS1 for the indicated time
and concentration. CyQUANT LDH cytotoxicity assay (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc) was used following the manufacturer’s instructions to measure
the release of LDH. LDH release was normalized to the amount of LDH
released from cells treated with lysis buffer.
Cell viability assay
Ten thousand cells were seeded in a 96-well plate and incubated
overnight. The cells were washed once, and the media was replaced with
serum-free media. After peptide treatment for the indicated time and
concentration, the cells were washed once and 90 µL of fresh serum-free
media was added to each well. Ten microliter of alamarBlue (Bio-Rad
Laboratories, Hercules, CA, BUF012A) was added and the cells were
incubated for 3 h. After a 1:5 dilution of the supernatant, the ﬂuorescence
(excitation/emission = 570 nm/610 nm)
was
measured
using
a
plate
reader. Finally, the cell viability was calculated by the following formula:
cell viability (%) = (ﬂuorescence from each sample – ﬂuorescence from lysis
buffer treated cells)/(ﬂuorescence from non-treated cells – ﬂuorescence
from lysis buffer treated cells).
BrdU assay
One thousands cells were seeded in wells of a 96-well plate. The cells were
treated with the indicated concentration of CKS1 immediately after
seeding. Forty-eight hours later, 5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU) was
added to each well. Twenty four hours later, BrdU incorporation was
quantiﬁed using the BrdU cell proliferation assay kit (Cell Signaling
Technology, Danvers, MA) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Electron microscopy
Samples were ﬁxed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, 3 mM MgCl2 in 0.1 M sodium
cacodylate buffer, pH 7.2 overnight at 4 °C. After buffer rinse, samples were
postﬁxed in 2% osmium tetroxide in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate for at least
1 h (no more than two) on ice in the dark. After osmium, samples were
rinsed in 0.1 M Maleate buffer (pH 6.2), followed by uranyl acetate in 0.1 M
Maleate (0.22 µm ﬁltered, 1 h, dark), dehydrated in a graded series of
ethanol and embedded in Epon (PolySci) resin. Samples were polymerized
at 60 °C overnight. Thin sections, 60–90 nm, were cut with a diamond knife
on a Leica UCT ultramicrotome and picked up with 2 × 1 mm Formvar
copper slot grids. Grids were stained with 2% uranyl acetate (aq.) followed
by lead citrate and observed with a Hitachi 7600 TEM at 80 kV. Images
were captured with an AMT CCD XR80 (8-megapixel camera—side mount
AMT XR80—high-resolution high-speed camera).
Fluorescence labeling
Fluorescence labeling of cells was performed by seeding 5.0 × 104 4T1 cells
in a 35 mm dish on a collagen-coated No. 1.5 coverslip with a 14 mm glass
diameter (MatTek, Ashland, MA). After overnight incubation, the cells were
washed once with serum-free media and replaced with fresh serum-free
media. For cell cytosol labeling, Calcein-AM (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,
C1430) was added at a ﬁnal concentration of 5 µg/mL and incubated for
10 min. For mitochondrial membrane labeling, JC-1 (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, T3168) was added at a ﬁnal concentration of 10 µg/mL and
incubated for 10 min. To monitor the activity of caspases, CellEvent
Caspase-3/7 Red detection reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, C10423)
were used following the manufacturer’s instructions. For nuclear staining,
Hoechst 33342 (Cell Signaling Technology, #4082) was added at a ﬁnal
concentration of 5 µg/mL and incubated for 10 min.
Fluorescence microscopy
Cells were imaged on either a Zeiss LSM 700 or a 3i spinning disk confocal
microscope. Samples were imaged with optimized microscope settings. Z-
stack, time-lapse, or multi-channel acquisition settings were adjusted
based on the experimental requirements. Images were then acquired
with the appropriate excitation and emission wavelengths for each
ﬂuorophore.
Image processing/analysis
Image processing was performed using Fiji software. For each image/video,
the brightness and the contrast were adjusted. The time stamp and the
scale bar were added. For quantiﬁcation, CellProﬁler was used. After cell
segmentation based on the nucleus, the intensity of the signal of interest
was quantiﬁed for each cell. Based on the intensity, each cells were labeled
as positive or negative and the fraction of positive cells was calculated.
N. Furukawa et al.
9
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 
Caspase-3 activity assay
Ten thousand 4T1 cells were seeded in 96-well plates and incubated
overnight. After CKS1 treatment, the cells were lysed using a lysis buffer
(Cell Signaling Technology, #7018). The activity of caspase-3 in the cell
lysate was quantiﬁed using the caspase-3 activity assay kit (Cell Signaling
Technology, #5723) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Brieﬂy, the
cell lysate was incubated with a substrate of caspase-3 which was designed
to emit ﬂuorescence when cleaved. After incubation, the ﬂuorescence was
measured using a plate reader. The protein concentration of the cell lysate
was quantiﬁed using the DC protein assay kit (Bio-Rad). The caspase-3
activity was divided by the protein concentration to obtain the caspase-3
activity per µg/mL protein in the cell lysate.
Quantiﬁcation of ATP release
Two-lakh cells of 4T1 cells or CT26 cells in growth media were seeded in
wells of a 96-well plate. After 12 h, the media was replaced with serum-free
media, and the cells were treated with the corresponding concentration of
CKS1. The cells were treated with CKS1 for 6 h and the supernatant was
collected from each well. After ﬁltering the supernatant with a 0.2 µm pore
ﬁlter (Corning, 431229), the amount of ATP in the supernatant was
quantiﬁed using the ENLITEN ATP assay system (Promega Corporation,
Madison, WI, FF2000). We followed the instructions from the manufacturer
when using the ENLITEN ATP assay system.
Quantiﬁcation of HMGB-1 release
Fifteen thousand cells of 4T1 cells or CT26 cells in growth media were
seeded in wells of a 96-well plate. After 12 h, the media was replaced with
serum-free media, and the cells were treated with the corresponding
concentration of CKS1. The cells were treated with CKS1 for 6 h and the
supernatant was collected from each well. After ﬁltering the supernatant
with a 0.2 µm pore ﬁlter (Corning, 431229), the amount of HMGB-1 in the
supernatant was quantiﬁed using the Mouse/Rat HMGB1 ELISA kit (arigo
biolaboratories, ARG81310).
Immunogenicity experiments using DC2.4 cells
Two-lakh cells of 4T1 cells were seeded in wells of a 6-well plate. After
overnight incubation, the media was replaced with 500 µL of fresh media,
and 4T1 cells were treated with either 100 µM CKS1 or water for 2 h. In a
separate well, 500 µL of fresh media was added and 100 µM CKS1 was
incubated for 2 h. After the 2 h of incubation, all the supernatant was
collected, ﬁltered with 0.22 µm syringe ﬁlter, and was stored at −80 °C. Five
lakh cells of DC2.4 cells were seeded in wells of a 24-well plate. After
overnight incubation, the media was replaced with fresh media, super-
natant from 4T1 cells treated with water, supernatant from 4T1 cells
treated with 100 µM CKS1, or media containing 100 µM CKS1. DC2.4 cells
were incubated for 2 h before RNA extraction.
RNA extraction/reverse transcription
RNA extraction was conducted using QIAwave RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen,
Germany, 74535) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse
transcription
was
conducted
using
a
high-capacity
cDNA
reverse
transcription
kit
(Thermo
Fisher
Scientiﬁc,
4368814)
following
the
manufacturer’s instructions.
Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR)
Real-time qPCR was conducted using PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix for
qPCR (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, A25741) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. The following oligomers were produced by Genscript and
were used as primers. GAPDH (GGACTTACAGAGGTCCGCTT and CTA-
TAGGGCCTGGGTCAGTG), TNF (CTCATGCACCACCATCAAGG and ACCTGAC-
CACTCTCCCTTTG),
IL-6
(CTCTGGCGGAGCTATTGAGA
and
AAGTCTCCTGCGTGGAGAAA),
IL-12b
(GCACCAGCTTCTTCATCAGG
and
GGCAGACATCGTCTTTGCTT). QuantStudio 12 K Flex Real-Time PCR System
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) was used to conduct real-time qPCR. The relative
quantity of TNF, IL-6, and IL-12b was normalized to the relative quantity of
GAPDH. Finally, the expression level of the cytokines was normalized to the
control sample and the fold change was calculated.
H&E staining
Tumors were ﬁxed by immersion in 10% neutral buffered formalin
(Millipore Sigma) for 48 h and subsequently dehydrated by immersion in
70%, 90%, and 100% ethanol followed by xylene for two changes of 30 min
each. Tissues were embedded in parafﬁn blocks at 58 °C and sectioned at
4 μm using a microtome. Sections were ﬂoated in a water bath at 56 °C,
embedded onto glass slides, and dried overnight. Next, sections were
rehydrated by immersion in xylene, followed by 100%, 95%, 70% ethanol,
and ﬁnally water for two changes of 5 min each. For staining, slides were
immersed in Gill’s Hematoxylin #2 (Millipore Sigma) for 1 min, immediately
rinsed in tap water to prevent overstaining, and immersed in Eosin Y
(Millipore Sigma) for 1 min and rinsed. Finally, slides were again
dehydrated, mounted with Citramount, coverslipped, and scanned at
40× with a NanoZoomer slide scanner.
Statistics
All statistics analyses were performed using R. Differences between the
two groups were determined using unpaired two-tailed Welch’s t-test and
were considered statistically signiﬁcant when p < 0.05. To determine the
difference between the control group and the treatment groups, we used
Dunnett’s test. We used two-way repeated-measures ANOVA to determine
the signiﬁcance of the treatment in the in vivo experiment monitoring
tumor growth. All data were replicated in at least three independent
experiments and the results are expressed as mean ± standard error from
the mean (SEM). For experiments with small sample sizes, the results of
each experiment were plotted. For experiments with signiﬁcant variability
between experiments, the representative data was shown with technical
replicates plotted if applicable.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.
REFERENCES
1. Wu Q, Qian W, Sun X, Jiang S. Small-molecule inhibitors, immune checkpoint
inhibitors, and more: FDA-approved novel therapeutic drugs for solid tumors
from 1991 to 2021. J Hematol Oncol. 2022;15:143.
2. Chames P, Van Regenmortel M, Weiss E, Baty D. Therapeutic antibodies: suc-
cesses, limitations and hopes for the future. Br J Pharmacol. 2009;157:220–33.
3. Furukawa N, Popel AS. Peptides that immunoactivate the tumor microenviron-
ment. Biochim Biophys Acta, Rev Cancer. 2021;1875:188486.
4. Rosca EV, Koskimaki JE, Rivera CG, Pandey NB, Tamiz AP, Popel AS. Anti-
angiogenic
peptides
for
cancer
therapeutics.
Curr
Pharm
Biotechnol.
2011;12:1101–16.
5. Karagiannis ED, Popel AS. A systematic methodology for proteome-wide identi-
ﬁcation of peptides inhibiting the proliferation and migration of endothelial cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;105:13775–80.
6. Karagiannis ED, Popel AS. Novel anti-angiogenic peptides derived from ELR-
containing CXC chemokines. J Cell Biochem. 2008;104:1356–63.
7. Koskimaki JE, Karagiannis ED, Rosca EV, Vesuna F, Winnard PT, Raman V, et al.
Peptides derived from type IV collagen, CXC chemokines, and thrombospondin-1
domain-containing proteins inhibit neovascularization and suppress tumor
growth in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer xenografts. Neoplasia. 2009;11:1285–91.
8. Rosca EV, Lal B, Koskimaki JE, Popel AS, Laterra J. Collagen IV and CXC
chemokine-derived antiangiogenic peptides suppress glioma xenograft growth.
Anticancer Drugs. 2012;23:706–12.
9. Yang QZ, Wang C, Lang L, Zhou Y, Wang H, Shang DJ. Design of potent, non-toxic
anticancer peptides based on the structure of the antimicrobial peptide,
temporin-1CEa. Arch Pharm Res. 2013;36:1302–10.
10. Lin L, Chi J, Yan Y, Luo R, Feng X, Zheng Y, et al. Membrane-disruptive peptides/
peptidomimetics-based therapeutics: promising systems to combat bacteria and
cancer in the drug-resistant era. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2021;11:2609–44.
11. Marquardt D, Geier B, Pabst G. Asymmetric lipid membranes: towards more
realistic model systems. Membranes (Basel). 2015;5:180–96.
12. Alves AC, Ribeiro D, Nunes C, Reis S. Biophysics in cancer: the relevance of drug-
membrane
interaction
studies.
Biochim
Biophys
Acta
Biomembr.
2016;1858:2231–44.
13. Chen B, Le W, Wang Y, Li Z, Wang D, Lin L, et al. Targeting negative surface charges
of cancer cells by multifunctional nanoprobes. Theranostics. 2016;6:1887–98.
14. Chiangjong W, Chutipongtanate S, Hongeng S. Anticancer peptide: physico-
chemical property, functional aspect and trend in clinical application (Review). Int
J Oncol. 2020;57:678–96.
15. Iwasaki T, Ishibashi J, Tanaka H, Sato M, Asaoka A, Taylor DM, et al. Selective
cancer cell cytotoxicity of enantiomeric 9-mer peptides derived from beetle
defensins depends on negatively charged phosphatidylserine on the cell surface.
Peptides (NY). 2009;30:660–8.
N. Furukawa et al.
10
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 
16. Zhou H, Forveille S, Sauvat A, Sica V, Izzo V, Durand S, et al. The oncolytic peptide
LTX-315 kills cancer cells through Bax/Bak-regulated mitochondrial membrane
permeabilization. Oncotarget. 2015;6:26599–614.
17. Eike LM, Yang N, Rekdal O, Sveinbjornsson B. The oncolytic peptide LTX-315
induces cell death and DAMP release by mitochondria distortion in human
melanoma cells. Oncotarget. 2015;6:34910–23.
18. Zhou H, Sauvat A, Gomes-Da-Silva LC, Durand S, Forveille S, Iribarren K, et al. The
oncolytic compound LTX-401 targets the Golgi apparatus. Cell Death Differ.
2016;23:2031–41.
19. Wodlej C, Riedl S, Rinner B, Leber R, Drechsler C, Voelker DR, et al. Interaction of
two antitumor peptides with membrane lipids—inﬂuence of phosphatidylserine
and cholesterol on speciﬁcity for melanoma cells. PLoS ONE. 2019;14:1–37.
20. Zhou H, Forveille S, Sauvat A, Yamazaki T, Senovilla L, Ma Y, et al. The oncolytic
peptide LTX-315 triggers immunogenic cell death. Cell Death Dis. 2016;7:1–11.
21. Xie W, Mondragón L, Mauseth B, Wang Y, Pol J, Lévesque S, et al. Tumor lysis with
LTX-401 creates anticancer immunity. Oncoimmunology. 2019;8:1–8.
22. Pasquereau-Kotula E, Habault J, Kroemer G, Poyet JL. The anticancer peptide
RT53 induces immunogenic cell death. PLoS One. 2018;13:1–17.
23. Yamazaki, Pitt T, Vétizou JM, Marabelle M, Flores A, Rekdal C, et al. The oncolytic
peptide LTX-315 overcomes resistance of cancers to immunotherapy with CTLA4
checkpoint blockade. Cell Death Differ. 2016;23:1004–15.
24. Spicer J, Marabelle A, Baurain JF, Jebsen NL, Jøssang DE, Awada A, et al. Safety,
antitumor activity, and T-cell responses in a dose-ranging phase I trial of the
oncolytic peptide LTX-315 in patients with solid tumors. Clin Cancer Res.
2021;27:2755–63.
25. Mirdita M, Schütze K, Moriwaki Y, Heo L, Ovchinnikov S, Steinegger M. ColabFold:
making protein folding accessible to all. Nat Methods. 2022;19:679–82.
26. Haug BE, Camilio KA, Eliassen LT, Stensen W, Svendsen JS, Berg K, et al. Discovery
of a 9-mer cationic peptide (LTX-315) as a potential ﬁrst in class oncolytic pep-
tide. J Med Chem. 2016;59:2918–27.
27. Mauseth B, Camilio KA, Shi J, Hammarström CL, Rekdal Ø, Sveinbjørnsson B, et al.
The novel oncolytic compound LTX-401 induces antitumor immune responses in
experimental hepatocellular carcinoma. Mol Ther Oncolytics. 2019;14:139–48.
28. Schaduangrat N, Nantasenamat C, Prachayasittikul V, Shoombuatong W. ACPred:
a computational tool for the prediction and analysis of anticancer peptides.
Molecules. 2019;24:1973.
29. Galluzzi L, Buqué A, Kepp O, Zitvogel L, Kroemer G. Immunogenic cell death in
cancer and infectious disease. Nat Rev Immunol. 2017;17:97–111.
30. Martins I, Wang Y, Michaud M, Ma Y, Sukkurwala AQ, Shen S, et al. Molecular
mechanisms of ATP secretion during immunogenic cell death. Cell Death Differ.
2014;21:79–91.
31. Stefani C, Bruchez AM, Rosasco MG, Yoshida AE, Fasano KJ, Levan PF, et al. LITAF
protects against pore-forming protein-induced cell death by promoting mem-
brane repair. Sci Immunol. 2024;9:eabq6541.
32. Huang Y, Goel S, Duda DG, Fukumura D, Jain RK. Vascular normalization as an
emerging strategy to enhance cancer immunotherapy. Cancer Res. 2013;73:2943–8.
33. Spicer JF, Marabelle A, Baurain JF, Awada A, Kristeleit RS, Jossang DE, et al. A
phase I/II study of the oncolytic peptide LTX-315 combined with checkpoint
inhibition generates de novo T-cell responses and clinical beneﬁt in patients with
advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36:3094.
34. Yuan J, Khilnani A, Brody J, Andtbacka RHI, Hu-Lieskovan S, Luke JJ, et al. Current
strategies for intratumoural immunotherapy—beyond immune checkpoint
inhibition. Eur J Cancer. 2021;157:493–510.
35. Jumper J, Evans R, Pritzel A, Green T, Figurnov M, Ronneberger O, et al. Highly
accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature. 2021;596:583–9.
36. Schrödinger LLC, DeLano W Pymol.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by NIH grant R01CA138264 and a graduate fellowship from
the Takenaka Scholarship Foundation (NF). Imaging data were acquired at the Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine microscope facility supported by the Ofﬁce of the
Director of the NIH under award number S10OD016374. Histology data were
acquired at the Johns Hopkins University Cancer Center Core supported by the grant
number P30 CA006973.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
NF conceived the presented idea and designed the experiments. NF, WY, ARC, and
AP carried out the experiments. NF took the lead in writing the manuscript. ACM,
NBP, and ASP participated in designing the study and participated in data
interpretation. ASP supervised the project.
COMPETING INTERESTS
NBP is the VP of R&D and ACM is a Senior Scientist at AsclepiX Therapeutics, Inc., ASP
is a consultant to AsclepiX. Their work with AsclepiX focuses on unrelated peptides
with no overlap with the current project. ASP is also a consultant to J&J/Janssen and
Incyte. Other authors declare no competing interests. The terms of these
arrangements are being managed by Johns Hopkins University in accordance with
its conﬂict-of-interest policies.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41420-024-01932-5.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Natsuki Furukawa.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from
the
copyright
holder.
To
view
a
copy
of
this
licence,
visit
http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
N. Furukawa et al.
11
Cell Death Discovery  (2024) 10:161 
