REVIEW
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights
into targets and therapeutics
Bikashita Kalita1
& Mohane Selvaraj Coumar1
Received: 8 August 2020 /Accepted: 19 April 2021
# Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
Abstract
Background The transition of a primary tumour to metastatic progression is driven by dynamic molecular changes, including
genetic and epigenetic alterations. The metastatic cascade involves bidirectional interactions among extracellular and intracellular
components leading to disintegration of cellular junctions, cytoskeleton reorganization and epithelial to mesenchymal transition.
These events promote metastasis by reprogramming the primary cancer cell’s molecular framework, enabling them to cause local
invasion, anchorage-independent survival, cell death and immune resistance, extravasation and colonization of distant organs.
Metastasis follows a site-specific pattern that is still poorly understood at the molecular level. Although various drugs have been
tested clinically across different metastatic cancer types, it has remained difficult to develop efficacious therapeutics due to
complex molecular layers involved in metastasis as well as experimental limitations.
Conclusions In this review, a systemic evaluation of the molecular mechanisms of metastasis is outlined and the potential
molecular components and their status as therapeutic targets and the associated pre-clinical and clinical agents available or under
investigations are discussed. Integrative methods like pan-cancer data analysis, which can provide clinical insights into both
targets and treatment decisions and help in the identification of crucial components driving metastasis such as mutational profiles,
gene signatures, associated pathways, site specificities and disease-gene phenotypes, are discussed. A multi-level data integration
of the metastasis signatures across multiple primary and metastatic cancer types may facilitate the development of precision
medicine and open up new opportunities for future therapies.
Keywords Metastasis . Epithelial‐mesenchymal transition . Circulating tumour cells . Secondary tumour . Pan‐cancer analysis .
Precision medicine
1 Introduction
Metastasis is a characteristic of malignant tumours driven by
the interplay of molecular and physiological processes under-
lying cellular growth, differentiation and survival. Cancer me-
tastasis is accompanied by an accumulation of somatic muta-
tions, epigenetic changes and signals arising from the tumour
microenvironment that alter cell shape and integrity, and pro-
mote its aggressive phenotype [1, 2]. It is a highly malicious
condition that is initiated by a subpopulation of genetically
unstable cells within the primary tumour mass which are com-
pelled towards colonizing the body through dissociation from
the tumour followed by invasion to neighbouring tissues and
transition through the circulatory and lymphatic system to
populate distant organs. Metastasis is the most fatal trait of a
malignant cancer, which has presented itself as the biggest
clinical hurdle by conferring drug-resistance and recurrence
characteristics despite breakthroughs that have been made in
drug discovery. It has challenged cancer treatment for many
years and is the major cause of cancer fatality. Why tumour
cells attain a vagrant nature is not known. However, it is not
erroneous to note from the context of tumour progression that
metastasis is a survival strategy adopted by cancer cells to
escape death signals and immune surveillance. It is also a
mechanism to retain their population despite a deficiency of
resources and spaces induced by hypoxic conditions, nutri-
tional depletion and mutational aberrations causing over-
crowding of cells in the primary tumour site [3]. Metastatic
cancer cells develop invasion and motility properties with an
advantageous plasticity trait to switch between different
* Mohane Selvaraj Coumar
mohane@bicpu.edu.in
1
Centre for Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Pondicherry
University, Kalapet, Pondicherry 605014, India
Cellular Oncology
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13402-021-00611-2
phenotypes and molecular patterns. In addition, they have the
ability to modulate primary and secondary tumour microenvi-
ronments by withstanding dynamic biochemical changes and
traversing across faltering organs to form micro-metastases
and, eventually, colonize them [4].
In 1976, Peter Nowell proposed the clonal evolution of
tumour cell populations. The same theory turned out to be
evident through the advent of the next-generation single-cell
sequencing technology showing that primary tumours do not
comprise a population of genetically identical cells but rather
subgroups of cells discerned by mutations and somatic varia-
tions [5]. However, whether metastatic property arises from a
single cell from a pool of genetically diverse subsets of cells,
or a cluster of genetically diverse subsets of cells is not clear.
When explored deeper for the generation of every subset of
cancer cells based on molecular phylogenetics, gene expres-
sion patterns and protein interactions that regulate various
signalling pathways and mutations, the clonal evolution theo-
ry may provide relevant information on metastasis-driving
factors. The identification of massive metastasis causing fac-
tors, however, remains a hurdle. Since the clinical presentation
of metastatic traits is noted only after subsequent generations
of tumour cell formation, studying it at the clinically observed
stage does not allow the understanding of metastasis at its
origin, making it a complicated process to master.
Increasing evidence indicates that metastasis employs in-
trinsic cell motility mechanisms like chemokine signalling,
metabolic and immune pathways. These mechanisms are well
studied in bone metastasis of breast and prostate cancer
(RANKL/RANK/OPG) [6, 7]. On the other hand, the estab-
lishment of metastatic colonies is mediated by employing phe-
notypic switching between epithelial and mesenchymal cell
types, similar to what is observed during embryogenesis.
However, this is just one aspect and a much more complex
molecular interplay is involved. Anderson et al. stated that
irrespective of the route of migration, the subset of cells that
colonize the secondary site is molecularly and behaviourally
distinct from the primary tumour cells, and acquires the ability
to localize, adapt and proliferate within a new tissue microen-
vironment [8]. This notion opens up the scope for interrogat-
ing the detailed biological and mechanical aspects of molecu-
lar diversity and phenotypic heterogeneity of the many steps
involved in the metastatic cascade.
In 1889 Paget proposed the “Seed and Soil” hypothesis
while investigating autopsy reports of 735 women with breast
cancer. He observed that metastatic cells follow a specific
affinity towards the organ to which they migrate. As breast
cancer is, for example, commonly observed to metastasize to
the bone, in addition to exploring how breast cancer cells
adapt to the bone microenvironment, the question of precisely
how the bone microenvironment contemplates the growth of
breast cancer cells still awaits to be answered [9]. The “Seed
and Soil” hypothesis remains one of the most promising
blueprints for revealing the mechanisms underlying the organ
specificity of metastasis. The physical viability, vascular sup-
port and stromal constitution of every organ set the criteria for
the migrating cancer cells to inhabit. Indeed, the biological
pathways and genes associated with the establishment of the
bone microenvironment reveal much about a cancer cell’s
bone specificity. Moreover, the multiple steps involved in
the metastatic process demand to decipher and trace every step
of the cascade holistically to comprehensively understand the
biology of tumour outgrowth and progression.
There are two modes of targeting metastasis. One is halting
the metastatic cascade from occurring at the primary tumour
site and preventing dissemination to other sites. The other is to
sabotage the already established metastatic colonies. A new
class of drugs, referred to as migrastatics, prefers to target the
distinct mechanisms liable for cell invasion, motility and mi-
gration [10]. Current cancer treatments mainly focus on
targeting the primary tumour mass and often include kinase
inhibitors and immunotherapies. These treatment modalities
mostly elicit cytotoxic effects on cancer cells and block im-
mune checkpoints, respectively, but fail to explicitly attack the
dispersal of cells, tumour circulation and dormancy. Early
detection of metastasis is also a clinical shortcoming, which
is mostly due to limitations in implementing acquired knowl-
edge into metastasis diagnostics. Unfolding molecular knowl-
edge on invasion, migration and signalling pathways involved
in specificity and colonization will help the identification of
druggable metastasis-related targets and enhance the therapeu-
tic effectiveness. Amply available data linked to genetic mu-
tations, pathway anomalies, transcriptional irregularities and
protein structures involved in metastasis are being explored to
understand their functional roles in cancer cell environments.
Additionally, several inhibitors targeting these molecules are
being studied by various methods (in vitro, in vivo and in
silico) to understand their biological significance. In the fol-
lowing sections we will discuss in detail the interplay of mol-
ecules driving the metastatic cascade and their therapeutic
status. We will also lay emphasis on insights from pan-
cancer analyses and how multi-level data integration can
guide metastasis treatment decision making and overcome
the limitations of current therapies.
2 The metastatic cascade
The process of metastasis involves a series of dynamic steps
occurring in parallel. The primary tumour associated with its
tumour microenvironment comprises T cells, cancer-
associated fibroblasts (CAFs), mesenchymal stem cells and
tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) embedded in a rich
collagenous extracellular matrix. The microenvironment is
triggered by nutrient deprivation, hypoxia, accumulation of
mutations and transcriptional alterations. Once a cancer cell
Kalita and Selvaraj
attains the intrinsic metastatic genotype, it is further enhanced
to progress by multiple intracellular and extracellular changes.
Upon receiving the appropriate molecular signals, the cell
starts to attain a more fibrillar and spindle-shaped motile na-
ture with a mesenchymal phenotype, pushing through the en-
dothelial layer and the basement membrane and generating
paths to surrounding blood vessels for escape. This process
is called intravasation. Some tumour cells are limited to local
invasive properties while others are capable of distant migra-
tion and invasion, which is deterministic for metastasis [11,
12]. Next, the tumour cells start to flow through the blood
system and are referred to as circulating tumour
cells (CTCs). Subsequently, they start scanning for a compat-
ible niche (landscape) to establish a metastatic colony (sec-
ondary tumour) by passing through the basement membrane,
invading the extracellular matrix and establishing a suitable
microenvironment, a process called extravasation (Fig. 1).
2.1 Molecular interplay in the tumour
microenvironment leading to intravasation
2.1.1 Remodelling the cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton components - actin, microtubules and inter-
mediate filaments - are tightly associated with maintaining
cellular shape and integrity. Metastasis requires dynamic re-
modelling of the cytoskeleton to facilitate invasion and motil-
ity. Cell migration is a complex biological process that begins
with the protrusion of small actin-rich outward projected
Fig. 1 The metastatic cascade: (1) Intravasation: The tumour cells break
out through the basement membrane and tumour stroma to the surround-
ing blood vessels and lymph nodes. (2) CTC: The tumour cells then enter
the circulation system and are called circulating tumour cells; they scan
across the body for suitable secondary niches. (3) Extravasation: Upon
reaching the secondary organ, the tumour cells colonize by pushing
through the capillary bed, establishing angiogenesis, and a new tumour
microenvironment
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
structures called filopodia, lamellipodia, invadopodia or
podosomes (Fig. 2c). The process of actin polymerization ini-
tiates the formation of these cellular projections. The molecu-
lar regulators of actin remodelling and cell migration are Rho
GTPases, RAC and CDC42, and Rho-associated protein ki-
nase (ROCK) [13]. The initiation of invasion represents a
composite phase of signals arising from the extracellular ma-
trix (ECM) passed to cytoskeleton components and vice versa.
Growth factor receptors, cytokine receptors, cadherins and
integrins lead to downstream activation of RhoA, RAC and
CDC42. RhoA recruits ROCK which phosphorylates LIM
kinase, myosin light chain (MLC) and MLC phosphatase,
thereby generating actin stress fibres and contractile force
[14, 15]. CDC42 and CDC42-interacting protein (CIP4) lead
to activation of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP),
N-WASP and the Arp2/3 complex to form filopodia and
invadopodia [16]. RAC1 induces a cascade that governs the
formation of lamellipodia and branched actin structures. There
is another class of proteins called WAVE1 and WAVE2 that
mediates a pathway downstream of the GTPases and leads to
the formation of lamellipodia by association with the Arp2/3
complex in the same way as WASP [17–20] (Fig. 3). Arp2
also physically interacts with PIK-4, causing phosphorylation
at the Arp2 T237/T238 activation site and mediating PIK-4
driven cell movement [21].
CDC42 and RAC1 activate LIMK via phosphorylation,
and LIMK inhibits cofilin while Phospholipase C (PLC) acti-
vates cofilin. This type of cofilin regulation is useful for
Fig. 2 Molecular rearrangements leading to phenotypic changes during
intravasation. a Cells undergo EMT by switching off the gene encoding
E-cadherin, CDH1 and other junctional proteins, and upregulating the
expression of N-cadherin causing a shift to a mesenchymal phenotype
with enhanced motility. b Cell-matrix remodelling is mediated by
integrins, DDR-2, TAM, CAF, LOX and MMPs to reorganize a stiffer
tumour stroma and generate paths for escape to nearby tissues. c Rapid
polymerization of actin filaments in the cytoskeleton results in leading
edges, called lamellipodia and filopodia, to generate contractile force and
push the cells through the different migration modes
Kalita and Selvaraj
initiating actin depolymerization causing an increase in actin
filaments, so that they can be recycled for another round of
polymerization to form cell protrusions in response to chemo-
taxis [22, 23]. Amyloid precursor-like protein 2 (APLP2) is
involved in pancreatic cancer cell migration and invasion. It
interacts with cytoskeleton components through the mamma-
lian homolog of the Drosophila Enabled gene (Mena or Enah),
which directs actin arrangement [24, 25]. Actin remodelling
also ensures escape from immune recognition. A group inva-
sion of cancer cells is often observed in cancer caused by
epithelial cells such as e.g. in breast cancer, melanoma and
colorectal cancer. In this type of cell migration, the cell-cell
junctions remain intact. A cumulative cellular polarity and
cytoskeletal reassembly maintain the cell’s response to trajec-
tory force, after which degradation of the basement membrane
takes place. The leading cell in this type of migration exhibits
a mesenchymal phenotype. It establishes sharp extended
edges by Rho-mediated actin polymerization forming the
invadosomes and filopodia, whereas the rest of the cells in
the mass still maintain their epithelial connections. A major
connection between the ECM and the cytoskeleton is
established through a structure called Focal adhesion
(FA) made up of bundles of F-actin tethered to myosin. It
mediates several extracellular stimuli and can perceive me-
chanical forces experienced by a migrating cell.
Syndecans constitute another class of transmembrane re-
ceptors that can interact with various growth factors to even-
tually activate the PI3K pathway and RhoA to modulate cell
motility. Syndecan-1 is expressed in head and neck cancer,
ovarian cancer and breast cancer, and syndecan‐4 is expressed
in breast cancer. It interacts with growth factor receptors
(GFRs; EGFR, IGF‐IR, HER2) and integrins (α3β1, α6β4,
ανβ3, ανβ5, α5β1). It is crucial for mediating cellular func-
tions such as proliferation, adhesion, angiogenesis and surviv-
al [26, 27]. Integrins (α1β1, α2β1, α10β1, α11β1),
representing a class of cell surface receptors, bind to specific
Fig. 3 Molecular mechanism of metastasis. Interplay between several factors in the tumour microenvironment responsible for causing stromal
disintegration, cytoskeleton reorganization and cell migration, along with pathways regulating cellular growth and proliferation, are depicted
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
motifs in a wide range of collagens and transduce bidirectional
signals. Binding of collagen I, III, IV, IX, XIII and XVI to
integrin α1β1 and collagen I, III, IV, V and XI to integrin
α2β1 leads to activation of focal adhesion kinases
(FAK) followed by downstream activation of ERK, which
induces phosphorylation of the myosin light chain (MLC)
by myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) leading to F-actin stress
fibre formation and cytoskeleton reorganization [28, 29].
Additionally, it activates PI3K, RAS and AKT signalling,
leading to cellular proliferation, transcription, apoptosis and
metastasis [28]. As collagens bind to the extracellular domains
of integrins, cytosolic proteins like Talin and Kindlin are re-
cruited to the cytoplasmic tail of integrins, which directs in-
teractions between actin in the cytoskeleton and integrins in
the membrane leading to the trading of proteins associated
with cell-cell junctions and cell-matrix junctions called
Vinculin, Paxillin and FAK [30] (Fig. 3). These molecular
events again highlight activation of GTPases (RhoA, RAC
and CDC42), modulating cytoskeletal activity [31]. FAK ac-
tivation is also key to actomyosin contractility and invasion of
cells in collagen 3D matrices. Suppression of FAK
reduces transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)-mediated tu-
mour cell migration and invasion [32].
2.1.2 Transforming the extracellular matrix
Tumour cells are embedded in a dense network of extracellu-
lar matrix made up of collagen, laminin, fibronectin, elastin
and glycoproteins (hyaluronan and proteoglycans). These
molecules are proteolytically degraded and remodelled during
metastasis by enzymes like hepsin, cathepsin, heparanase and
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) [33]. Collagen, a major
component of the extracellular matrix known for tissue sup-
port and structural stability, is degraded by MMPs during
metastasis. A major class of MMPs, encompassing MMP-1,
MMP-8 and MMP-13 are referred to as collagenases, is in-
volved in proteolytic cleavage of a group of collagens
(Collagen-I, II, III, VII, VIII, X) and laminins, which induces
remodelling of the ECM during induction of the metastatic
cascade [34]. MMPs in the tumour microenvironment serve
as predictive biomarkers of tumour progression and metasta-
sis. Another enzyme called lysyl oxidase (LOX) mediates
cross-linking of fibrillar collagen with fibronectin and elastin
and induces tumour stroma stiffening through proteolytic
cleavage. This creates a path that regulates a directional
movement of tumour cells through the tumour stroma to
extravasate to the nearest vasculature. LOX is an impor-
tant contributor to tumour invasion, migration and stro-
ma coordination [35, 36] (Fig. 2).
Discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1), a membrane-bound
receptor tyrosine kinase associated with communication with
the stroma, is highly involved in remodelling the ECM.
Collagens, upon binding with DDR1, activate the extracellular
regulated kinase PI3K, as well as NOTCH and STAT3. This
promotes reactivation of dormant cancer cells at metastatic
sites and further downstream by inducing cell division and
migration, respectively [37]. DDR1 has been reported to be
an essential contributing factor to breast cancer metastasis
[38]. Interaction between cancer cells and their new stromal
environment is a critical factor determining metastatic fate.
Vascular adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM1) is expressed in
breast cancer and interacts with integrins (α4β1) and
tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs) to activate the
PI3K pathway, thereby promoting cancer cell survival, growth
and angiogenesis [39, 40]. It is regarded as a potential thera-
peutic target of metastasis.
The interstitial spaces of cancerous tissues contain an array
of cells, including cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) which
often represent dysregulated fibroblasts or myofibroblasts,
tumour-associated macrophages
(TAMs) and tumour-
associated neutrophils (TANs) [41, 42]. A desmoplastic con-
dition of a tumour activates CAFs. It is a condition of contin-
uously receiving inflammatory signals from interleukins (ILs),
TGF-β, hypoxia and reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
leads to changes in the ECM and disturbs homeostasis. CAFs
actively produce collagen and proteases that remodel the
ECM. TAMs accumulate in abundance in the tumour micro-
environmental edges. It is evident that TAMs are linked with
TGF-β signalling and confer immune resistance and epithelial
to mesenchymal transition (EMT) properties [43]. Vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) expressing macro-
phages confer intravasation properties to tumour cells through
vascular permeability. TAMs reduce CD8+ T cell cytotoxic
effects by expressing inhibitors like PDL-1, B7-H4 and
indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase [44]. The decreasing level of
CD8+ T cells and natural killer (NK) cells increases breast
cancer metastasis without affecting primary tumour growth.
It produces a higher number of proteolytic enzymes such as
MMPs (MMP-2, MMP-7, and MMP-9), cathepsins that me-
diate ECM degradation and cell-ECM biochemical interac-
tions. TAMs produce a metastatically important protein called
SPARC that regulates ECM decomposition and produces a
traction force by allowing interactions between fibronectin
and vitronectin. This eventually pulls the cancer cells through
the stroma to the nearest vasculature. They are also associated
with chemoresistance [45–48]. Together, TAMs, tumour cells
and endothelial cells have been referred to as tumour micro-
environment of metastasis (TMEM) and found to be associat-
ed with a poor breast cancer prognosis [49].
Chemokine signalling is one of the most important factors
carrying tumour cells across to their metastatic sites. CCR7
released from breast tumour cells signals its migration and
metastasis through a CCL19 or CCL21 stimulus [50].
CXCR5 and CXCL13 support bone metastases in prostate
cancer. In several tumours, CXCR4 expression allows tumour
cells to metastasize into organs secreting high levels of
Kalita and Selvaraj
CXCL12. It is also specifically associated with the metastasis
of cancer cells to lymph nodes, lung and bone. Lung metasta-
sis in breast cancer is associated with metastasis-associated
macrophages (MAMs). Various cytokines and chemokines
have been reported to regulate the recruitment of MAMs to
the lungs. In prostate cancer, CXCR6-CXCL16 interactions
lead to Ezrin and integrin activation, causing leading-edge
extension through FAK/PI3K/PKC, thereby increasing cyto-
skeletal dynamics and invasion [51].
2.1.3 Loss of cell adherence and EMT
For a cancer cell to migrate to distant organs, it should dissociate
itself from the mass of clumped cells in a tumour microenviron-
ment consisting of a rich ECM network of collagen and dense
blood supply. One way by which a cancer cell accomplishes this
is by undergoing a biochemically driven phenotypic shift called
EMT. Cells make contact with each other through tight junctions,
adherens junctions, desmosomes and gap junctions. EMT affects
these structures due to loss of cadherin, causing decreased con-
tacts, loose associations and attainment of migratory properties
resulting in anchorage-independent survival. E-cadherin binds to
beta-catenin, alpha-catenin and p120-catenin in these junctions,
mediates intracellular signalling and establishes a tight integration
of intercellular junctions as well as a firm link with the ECM [52].
However, upon the advent of EMT, E-cadherin expression is lost
and mesenchymal markers such as N-cadherin and vimentin are
expressed [53, 54]. EMT is activated by several redundantly
occurring biochemical pathways, but the most proficient one
noted so far is the TGF-β signalling pathway (Fig. 2a).
Binding of TGF-β to the tetrameric type II TGF-β receptor
leads to phosphorylation of the type-I TGF-β receptor, which
phosphorylates the C-termini of a downstream protein complex,
SMAD. The receptor activates SMAD2 after which SMAD3 re-
cruits SMAD4. This SMAD complex translocates to the nucleus
where it, in conjunction with other transcription factors such as
TWIST, SNAIL and ZEB, regulates EMT. SNAIL1 and
SNAIL2, also known as SLUG, are the major regulators of
EMT during cancer progression [55]. They represses expression
of the gene encoding E-cadherin, CDH-1, by binding to its E-box
through a ZINC finger domain. Upon binding to the E-cadherin
gene promoter, SNAIL1 recruits Polycomb repressive complex-
2 (PRC-2), which mediates histone modification, mainly methyl-
ation and acetylation, thereby silencing the CDH1 gene. While
downregulating the epithelial gene signature, SNAIL upregulates
mesenchymal genes such as those encoding Fibronectin and N-
cadherin. TWIST, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is
also involved in downregulating E-cadherin expression. HIF1α,
under hypoxic conditions, induces TWIST expression and thereby
EMT. Another class of transcription factors that mediates EMT is
ZEB. Activation of ZEB is often brought about through SNAIL
[55]. TWIST interacts with SNAIL which leads to ZEB expres-
sion (Fig. 3). ZEB expression has been found to be high in breast
and lung cancer. It represses the E-cadherin gene by binding to the
carboxyl-terminal binding protein (CTBP) co-repressor [56].
Additionally, EMT may be induced by several other signalling
molecules such as PI3K, PDGF, FGF and HGF. EMT is a revers-
ible process. When a cancer cell undergoes EMT and detaches
from the tumour mass, it travels across the body to other organs
and establishes a secondary tumour by undergoing mesenchymal
to epithelial transition (MET). During MET, previous cellular
events are reversed in order to establish secondary tumours.
EMT mostly facilitates cell invasion. It is a common feature ex-
hibited by fibroblasts and stem cells during wound healing and is
commonly observed in glioblastoma and melanoma.
Amoeboid cell invasion has been described as the fastest mi-
gration pattern with a velocity of up to 20 mm/min. This type of
migration mostly develops after treatment of cancer cells with
integrin-blocking antibodies or protease inhibitors. Blocking β1
integrin in cancer cells results in loss of cell-cell adhesion, after
which the cells transit from a collective to an amoeboid mode.
Collapsin response mediator protein-1 (CRMP1) has been found
to attribute to a reduced transition of the epithelial to mesenchy-
mal phenotype and to stabilized F-actin in an in vitro prostate
cancer model by associating with SNAIL and WAVE1, respec-
tively [57]. Disruptor of telomeric silencing 1 like
(DOT1L) interacts with the c-Myc-p300 complex and causes
methylation and acetylation of histone H3 at lysine residue 79
(H3K79). This, in turn, leads to the upregulation of SNAIL,
ZEB1 and ZEB2, and induces cancer stem cell (CSC) properties
in breast cancer cells and metastasis initiation. Gain of epithelial
markers and loss of mesenchymal markers has been observed
when psammaplin A analog (PsA-3091) was used to inhibit the
DOT1L protein [58, 59]. A recent study has suggested that there
may be a single switch between EMT and MET. YAP, Wilms
Tumour-1-YAP (WT1-YAP) and YAP-TRIO-Merlin were
found to cause loose cell adhesion and to downregulate E-
cadherin, and to regulate Rho GTPases involved in cytoskeleton
arrangement and migration, respectively. At the same time, WT1
is known as a regulator of MET [60]. Currently, there are several
ongoing clinical trials (Table 1) evaluating whether EMT and its
associated molecular characteristics can be used as a diagnostic
biomarker for cancer progression, metastasis and treatment
response.
2.2 Circulating tumour cells (CTCs)
Cells detached from the primary tumour mass that enter into
blood vessels and travel along the body through the circulato-
ry system are called circulating tumour cells (CTCs). They are
a hallmark of metastatic progression and may be used for
diagnostic purposes [61]. CTCs have been shown to express
EPCAM (epithelial cell adhesion molecule), a biomarker of
distant metastasis and tumour recurrence [62]. Several
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
techniques are employed at the clinical level to detect metas-
tasis, including X-ray, radiography, computed tomography
scan (CT scan), nuclear imaging including PET and SPECT,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), lymphadenectomy and
lymphangiogram. However, these techniques show accuracy
only in detecting local metastases that most commonly present
themselves by spreading across nearby lymph nodes. CTCs
provide a scope for metastasis diagnosis using a simple non-
invasive technique, i.e., isolation from blood. Techniques are
emerging to accurately detect cancer by isolating CTCs and
circulating tumour DNA (CtDNA) from blood, the so-called
“Liquid biopsy” approach, which is readily feasible for down-
stream ‘omics’ analyses serving the purpose of understanding
cancer biology and clinical interpretation [63].
In the bloodstream, cancer cells are exposed to adverse con-
ditions like oxidative stress, immune attack, shear forces, anoikis,
and lack of growth factors and cytokines. Thus, many CTCs are
likely to die. However, growing evidence suggests that tumour
cells may associate with platelets to withstand varying degrees of
oxidative stress and to undergo reversible biochemical modifica-
tions to withstand the adverse conditions and to shield them-
selves from shear forces. The association between CTCs and
platelets allows the secretion of platelet granules that provide
resistance to apoptosis. Platelets release TGF-β and induce the
TGF-β pathway, which helps CTCs to maintain mesenchymal
characteristics [64]. CTCs associated with platelets facilitate ex-
travasation by allowing the cells to arrest in the capillary bed.
HER2/EGFR/HPSE/NOTCH represent gene signatures identi-
fied in CTCs of breast cancer patients that potentially metastasize
to the brain [65]. CTCs expressing CD44 and CD47 in breast
cancer patients serve as markers of the metastasis-initiating pop-
ulation of CTCs [66]. CTCs may also withstand death signals by
producing various anti-apoptotic factors such as BCL-2.
Clusters of CTCs, called circulating tumour micro-emboli
(CTM), are assumed to be the harbingers of metastasis. Cell
enrichment analysis has provided insight into the genomic and
transcriptomic profiles of CTCs, thereby opening up the scope to
understand relationships between primary and secondary tu-
mours. CTCs provide clinical utility like target discovery, patient
monitoring, drug responses and screening. The immune system
plays a dual role in cancer [61]. In the early stages of tumour
development, the immune system kills and rejects cancer cells.
However, after initiation of the metastatic cascade, the immune
system plays an immunosuppressive role. CTCs adopt numerous
complex mechanisms to escape from immune attack. They read-
ily recruit macrophages and NK cells by secreting cytokines and
chemokines, such as IL-6 and IL-8, and undergo genetic alter-
ations to lower their immunogenicity [67].
2.3 Extravasation
The final stage of metastasis is called extravasation or also
referred to as colonization. Metastatic cells begin colonizing
Table 1
Clinical trials evaluating EMT as a biomarker of cancer progression and metastasis
Clinical trial number
Study goal
Start date and status
NCT04021394
Dynamic Influence of the Epithelial-to-mesenchymal Transition (EMT) on Circulating
Tumour Cell (CTC) Generation, Phenotype, and Disease Progression in Prostate Cancer
Started: June 5, 2019, Ongoing
NCT04323813
High Levels of EMT-TFs for the Diagnosis of Colorectal Cancer (CRC)
Started: September 1, 2017, Ongoing
NCT04137406
Role of SIRT1 in the regulation of EMT in Breast Cancer Lymph Nodes Metastasis for Luminal A Subtype
Started: January 1, 2019, Ongoing
NCT04323917
Detection of High Expression Levels of EMT-TFs mRNAs in Patients with Pancreatic Cancer and Their Diagnostic Potential
Started: November 2, 2017, Ongoing
NCT03381326
Biomarkers Study: Circulating Tumour Cells (CTC), Free DNA, Stem Cells, and EMT Related Antigens as
Biomarkers of Activity of Cabazitaxel in Castration-resistant Prostate Cancer (CRPC): a Proof of Concept.
Started: December 15, 2014, Ongoing
NCT03509779
EMT, Reactivation of Embryonic Transcription Factors and Alteration
of the miR Signaling Network as Prognostic and Predictive Markers in Lung Cancer
Started: October 20, 2014, Ongoing
Kalita and Selvaraj
at distant sites way before they actually arrive at the desired
location. They do so by forming a pre-metastatic
niche (PMN). Tumour cells shed vesicles or exosomes that
are involved in establishing the PMN. PMNs have been found
to be very organ-specific. In case of the liver, for example,
tissue inhibitors of metallopeptidase (TIMP1), stromal cell-
derived factor-1 (SDF1) and macrophage inhibitory factor
(MIF) serve as PMN biomarkers, whereas bone morphogenet-
ic protein (BMP), WNT, fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and
insulin-like growth factor (IGF1) serve as bone PMN bio-
markers. The PMN recruits CTCs and creates a home for
metastatic cells by altering and modifying its microenviron-
ment [68]. The extravasated cells must adapt well to the mi-
croenvironment of the newly encountered organ to be able to
colonize it. Various molecular factors as well as the biological
topography of the secondary organ microenvironment affect
local tumour cell growth. Mesenchymal to epithelial transition
(MET) is one factor associated with colonization of the second
site. Significant effectors of MET include c-Met, Frizzled-7,
Frizzled-2 and FGFR2b [69, 70]. Although primary tu-
mours have a certain specificity towards the site of me-
tastasis (organotropism), it is ultimately defined by the
primary tumour type, the secondary site microenviron-
ment and the preferred biological interactions between
them [71].
3 Site specificity of metastasis and its clinical
management
The dynamic process of metastasis with its multiple interde-
pendent as well as independent biological mechanisms and
organotropic properties demands a distinct treatment strategy
for each type of metastasis. So far, metastasis is mainly man-
aged by medicines, without reaching ultimate cure. Tracking
metastatic progression at the systemic level is a big hurdle, as
major experiments are being carried out in murine models with
a relatively short life span. In humans, however, secondary
metastatic tumours are encountered even after more than two
years. Recent 3D culture systems are equipped to study static
primary tumour parameters, but cannot replicate dynamic
events leading to distant metastasis. Although in vivo models
may provide a better scope to investigate these processes, it still
needs to be determined which experimental techniques and
in vivo models accurately reflect the actual clinical situation.
There are also several challenges associated with designing
clinical trials for metastasis and for deciding the endpoint.
Current anti-metastatic drugs mostly target the cell migration
and colonization phenomena. Hence, they do not yield a clas-
sical clinical outcome like complete response (CR) or partial
response (PR). Therefore, stable disease is the commonly used
criterion to measure outcome. Most trials dealing with metas-
tasis rely on surrogate endpoints.
A well curated resource called MetMap (metastasis map)
launched by the Broad Institute enables real time revelation of
organ-specific patterns of metastasis. The investigators
injected a pool of barcoded cell lines into immunocompro-
mised mice after which the ability to metastasize was studied
by bioluminescence imaging. This method was performed
across 500 cell lines across 21 types of solid tumours,
Quantification of barcoded breast cancer cells in brain metas-
tases using RNA-sequencing revealed interesting specific sig-
natures such as expression of PI3K and ERBB2, which en-
ables breast cancer cells to metastasize to the brain and other
organs for comparative purposes [72]. On a pre-clinical ac-
count of metastasis, several compounds have been validated
through detailed experimental studies carried out in vitro and
in vivo, but they are yet to be implemented in rationally de-
signed clinical trials and authentication through it in order to
be incorporated in standard of care (SOC) therapeutic proto-
cols for metastatic cancer [73]. Clinical reports of breast can-
cer cohorts suggest that there is no linear relation between
tumour size, lymph node status and distant metastases. This
essentially evokes a question for the conventional practice of
tumour - nearby nodes - metastasis (TNM) staging, that as the
tumour enlarges it is more prone to invasion/metastasis [74].
In fact, a tumour may already have metastasized by the time it
is diagnosed. The major initiating contributions of the ECM,
cytoskeleton modulating factors and angiogenic drivers in the
metastatic cascade has placed them in the frontline of potential
targets. In addition, there are strategies in practice to directly
target CTCs as well. However, since the number of detectable
CTCs may be low, the use of kinase and immune checkpoint
inhibitors is considered as an efficient strategy in medical
oncology. Although several inhibitors have already passed
FDA approval to be used in trials for recently discovered
targets, so far the outcomes of trials specifically for mitigating
metastasis are still hazy. Figure 4 provides information on
various tumours and their metastatic sites and highlights the
drugs available for the respective metastatic conditions.
3.1 Brain metastasis
Common cancers that metastasize to the brain are lung, breast
and kidney cancer. Access to the brain through the vascular
system is tightly regulated by the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
In metastatic colonization to the brain, the BBB is squandered,
allowing the cancer cells to interact with the brain parenchyma
and with glial cells to colonize it. Associations of transport
systems with the BBB mediates selective transport of mole-
cules. Due to this barrier, the application of conventional
drugs for e.g. lung cancer and melanoma brain metastases
have shown very little pharmacodynamic effects due to their
low penetration [75]. HR−/HER2+ (HER2-enriched) breast
cancer has a relatively high chance of forming brain metasta-
ses, which is at least partly due to its molecular features
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
including the expression of L1CAM, COX-2, IL-8, CK-5,
CXCR4, VEGF and CD44 [71]. Melanoma to brain metasta-
sis is led by activation of STAT3, which dysregulates the
expression of bFGF, VEGF and MMP-2 [76]. A number of
microRNAs regulating crucial metastasis-associated genes
across several lung cancer types to brain metastasis has been
found to be dysregulated, such as downregulated miR-768-3p,
miR-95-3p and miR-146a, and upregulated miR-378, miR-
197 and miRNA-184 [77]. Combination therapy of
carmustine with methotrexate or radiation therapy has been
found to be effective in managing breast cancer to brain me-
tastasis [78, 79].
A small scale clinical trial on the combination of
dacarbazine (BOLD) and intermittent Granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor (G-CSF) revealed that a majority of patients
reached complete response (CR) for stage 4 melanoma to
brain metastasis [80]. The DNA repair enzyme MGMT
(O[6]-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase) causes tumour
cell resistance to alkylating agent-induced damage.
Temozolomide (TMZ) and lomustine (CCNU) are the two
most used alkylating agents to treat glioblastoma and brain
metastasis. A phase III study was conducted with the combi-
nation of TMZ and CCNU, and TMZ alone in patients with
glioblastoma, and a better overall survival rate was observed
[81, 82]. Recently, clinical trials have been initiated to study
BRAF inhibitors in combination with ipilimumab, and the
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (EGFR2) inhibitor
lapatinib for melanoma to brain and breast to brain metastasis
[83] (Fig. 4).
3.2 Bone metastasis
Tumours that metastasize to bone may provide insight into
reciprocal molecular adaptations that occur between cancer
cells and the host stroma. The most common cancers that
metastasize to the bone are breast and prostate cancer.
Metastasis in the bone microenvironment is regulated through
osteoclastic or osteoblastic mechanisms. Breast cancer metas-
tasis to bone is induced by hyperactivation of bone-resorbing
osteoclasts, which clinically present with painful fractures.
Fig. 4 Representation of the site-specific metastasis of different types of
primary tumours and the drugs available for each of the metastatic cancer
types. The images within the grey boxes represent the major metastasis
sites. The green nodes represent the primary malignant tumours, and the
grey coloured rectangles represent the therapeutic drugs available. Green
lines represent drugs available for the particular cancer treatment, and
pink lines show the primary tumour’s major metastatic sites
Kalita and Selvaraj
Osteolytic breast cancer cells inhibit osteoblastic pathways
like the BMP and Wnt pathways, and overexpress
osteoclast-inducing factors such as Parathyroid hormone-
related protein (PTHrP), IL-8, IL-11, CTGF and RUNX2.
They also secrete a protease that cleaves Receptor activator
of nuclear factor kappa-Β ligand (RANKL) into an active
form, thereby activating osteoclast activity. On the other hand,
prostate cancer cells secrete a high amount of osteoprotegerin,
a RANKL inhibitor that prevents osteolytic reactions.
Prostate cancer metastasizes to the bone by stimulating
osteoblasts, which leads to increased bone density and, even-
tually, bone marrow displacement [84, 85]. Forkhead box
F2 (FOXF2) functions as the major transcription factor for
conferring bone colonizing properties to breast cancer cells
(osteomimicry) by activating BMP and SMAD1 signalling
and expressing bone differentiation-associated genes [86].
Bisphosphonates are the standard of care for bone lesions.
Clodronate (clodronate disodium, Bonefos) is a non-
nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate used in breast to bone
metastasis and blocks bone resorption and osteoclast activity
[87]. The administration of another bisphosphonate,
pamidronic acid, to breast cancer to bone metastasis patients
showed reduced levels of platelet endothelial cell adhesion
molecule-1 (PECAM-1) and angiogenesis factors [88].
Administration of ibandronate and zoledronic acid has
been the most common practice for skeletal event manage-
ment in breast cancer, multiple myeloma and prostate cancer
patients [89, 90], whereas Samarium Sm 153 Lexidronam
(Quadramet) may provide relief from pain associated with
bone metastasis from prostate cancer [91]. Denosumab is a
monoclonal antibody directed against RANKL that prevents
bone resorption and has shown to be effective against bone
metastasis [92]. It provides metastasis-free and disease-free
survival in cases of prostate cancer and breast cancer to bone
metastasis. A small molecule inhibitor of RANKL,
AS2676293, has been found to markedly inhibit the metasta-
sis of human breast cancer MDA-MB-231-5a-D-Luc2
cells to the bone and to reduce RANKL-mediated tu-
mour migration of B16F10 melanoma cells to the bone
in a mouse model [93] (Fig. 4).
3.3 Lung metastasis
Metastasis to lungs is relatively common as the lungs provide
a large surface for tumour cell growth and survival. It starts at
the small pulmonary arterioles where the cells burst through
the endothelial cells and the underlying basement membrane.
Metastatic extravasation can be halted for a while by
inhibiting the expression of the cytoskeletal anchoring protein
Erzinin in osteosarcoma cells that metastasize to lungs [94].
Extraordinary lung metastasis cases detected from renal cell
carcinoma after 37 years of nephrectomy have been reported,
suggesting an extremely dormant metastatic phase, yet
intangible to scientific understanding [95]. A diverse array
of gene signatures has been found, like those associated with
breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs) that regulate breast cancer
metastasis to the lungs, and other factors like interactions be-
tween CXCL12 and CXCR4, and interactions among α4β1
integrin and VCAM1 [96]. Also upregulation of miR-374a,
miR-18a, miR-115 and miR-9, and downregulation of miR-
22, miR-26a, miR-320a and miR-302a along with the expres-
sion of metastasis enhancing factors such as secreted protein,
acidic, cysteine-rich/osteonectin (SPARC) and colony-
stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1) have been associated with breast
to lung metastasis [97].
The genes observed to be affected in lung metastasis are
distinct from those observed in bone metastasis. This under-
scores the distinct architecture, as well as genomic and meta-
bolic profiles of the secondary site mediating organ specificity
and demanding new therapeutic targets [98]. Alectinib and
Ceritinib are the most widely used drugs for ALK-positive
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and its metas-
tasis to the brain [99]. Atezolizumab, a PD-L1 inhibitor com-
bined with kinase and angiogenesis inhibitors, is currently
being studied in several clinical trials for brain or CNS metas-
tasis and first-line therapy treatment of metastatic non-
squamous NSCLC and cisplatin-ineligible urothelial carcino-
ma [100, 101]. Experimental results suggest that
Atezolizumab exerts its inhibitory effects on metastasis by
downregulating cell invasion and EMT-associated genes
CXCR4, METTL7A, ICAM3, LPPR3, S100A8, SUSD3,
HVCN1, MMP9, MMP19, GLIPR1L2, N4BP2L1, CDHR2,
IL11RA, CSRP2, FOXQ1, KLF8, FGF11, CLDN1 and
CLDN24, and upregulating the KISS1 metastasis suppressor
gene in MDA-MB-231 cells [102].
Clinical trial evidence shows that the PD-1 inhibitors
Nivolumab and Pembrolizumab have become important
players in the treatment of metastatic lung and renal cell car-
cinomas and melanomas. They enable the inhibition of these
cells to from a tumour microenvironment and help to maintain
immune system-mediated cancer cell killing. The emergence
of the anti-angiogenic drugs as being anti-metastatic resulted
in the development of several vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) inhibitors. Bevacizumab, as an example, has
potentially minimized the problem of metastasis in clinical
settings. It has shown beneficial results for non-squamous
NSCLC with brain metastasis as concluded after multiple clin-
ical trials. Bevacizumab in combination with Paclitaxel/
Fluorouracil/Leucovorin/Oxaliplatin has shown efficient
anti-metastatic activity in breast and colorectal cancer cases
[103] (Fig. 4).
3.4 Liver metastasis
Supplied by both systemic and portal circulation, the liver is
the metastatic destiny of most gastrointestinal cancers. The
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
discontinuous lining of the endothelial cells in the liver makes
it highly porous, allowing entrapment of CTCs. Other primary
tumours like breast, melanoma and lung cancer metastasize to
the liver through systemic vasculature. In colorectal cancer,
increased serum levels of HSP60 and IGFBP‑2 are indicative
of liver metastasis [104]. Increased LOX mRNA and LOX
nuclear localization in CRC tumour tissues are associated with
liver metastasis. The tyrosine-phosphatases PRL-3 and
PIAS2, a protein inhibitor of activated STAT2, are significant
biomarkers for CRC to liver metastasis. Claudin-2 is associ-
ated with breast to liver metastasis by inducing c-Met (specific
tyrosine kinase receptor), allowing matrix and adhesion re-
modelling. IL-6, IL-8 and TNFA are specific drivers of pros-
tate to liver metastasis [105].
Floxuridine (FUDR), targeting thymidylate synthase, is the
most commonly administered drug in the case of gastrointestinal
metastasis to the liver [106]. Also, new strategies are being de-
veloped for treating metastatic conditions. In particular TGF-β
has attained interest due to its known role in cancer metastasis.
Next to its involvement in EMT and cell proliferation, TGF-β is
involved in mediating cell dormancy and autophagy, biological
processes that are closely associated with tumour progression
and metastasis. In clinical trials, the small molecule inhibitor of
TGF-β type I receptor (ALK5) Galunisertib, combined with
Gemcitabine, has shown potential anti-tumour/anti-metastatic ef-
fects in pancreatic cancer [107]. An improved anti-tumour activ-
ity was seen in a phase I clinical trial that was carried out in
patients with advanced solid tumours with M7824
(MSB0011359C), a bifunctional fusion protein composed of a
mAb directed against programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) fused
to TGF-β [107, 108]. The study showed better efficacy and
safety than administration of PD-L1or TGF-β inhibitors alone
in advanced solid tumours. Palbociclib is a recently approved
CDK4/CDK6 inhibitor employed to treat HR-positive, HER2-
negative advanced or metastatic breast cancer (Fig. 4). CDK4
and CDK6 play prime roles in the transition of G1 to S phase
during cell division. Palbociclib arrests cells in the G1 phase of
the cell cycle and, thereby, prohibits their entry into the S phase.
It inhibits phosphorylation of CDK4/6 kinase by ATP, causing
hypo-phosphorylation of pRb thereby suppressing activation of
several transcription factors required for cell cycle progression. It
has recently been implemented in clinical trials for cancers with
metastatic potential to brain and bone [109]. A drug targeting the
perinuclear compartment called Metarrestin is currently under
investigation and shows potency to suppress metastasis in a pan-
creatic cancer xenograft model [110, 111].
4 Targeting metastasis: insights from pre‐
clinical investigations
The composite protein-protein interaction networks associat-
ed with the various metastasis-associated genes illustrate their
complex modes of action and the difficulty to identify suitable
targets (Fig. 5). Efforts that are put in pre-clinical metastasis
studies do not reciprocate in the clinical end, resulting in a gap
between pre-clinical output and clinical implementation. The
emerging approach of systems biology in understanding me-
tastasis using integrated data across different levels of tumour
biology holds promise in interpreting the multidimensionality
of the metastatic cascade by touching upon its genetic and
physiological conditions from the single cell up to the clinical
state. The quest for metastasis targets and therapeutics may be
fulfilled by an integrated network of computational and ex-
perimental models scaled up to a clinical understanding. In the
context of drug discovery, several target complexes and their
inhibitors are available, but a holistic understanding is still a
requisite. Several proteins known to be involved in metastasis
interact with each other, but how exactly their dynamics, in-
teractions and functionalities change after drug administration
and how this affects the metastatic cascade warrants further
understanding [112].
EMT is one characteristic associated with metastasis and sev-
eral transcription factors are involved in carrying out metastasis-
related EMT. Dysregulated EMT-inducing transcription factors
may form a unique class of drug targets that mediate the epithelial
to mesenchymal switch. TWIST, an EMT-inducing transcription
factor, appears to be a potential target in reversing EMT and,
hence, metastasis. Harmine, a harmala alkaloid, has been found
to inhibit multiple properties of TWIST1 and to potentially show
marked anti-tumour activity in oncogene-driven NSCLC, includ-
ing EGFR, KRAS and MET mutant NSCLC [113]. Another
important transcription factor driving EMT is SNAIL. CoIII-
Ebox has been found to proficiently inhibit SNAIL activity in
SKBR3 and MCF7 breast cancer cells by inhibiting the decrease
in epithelial markers such as E-cadherin and cytokeratin and by
inhibiting the increase in mesenchymal markers such as
Fibronectin and MMP-9. It could also effectively delay a gain
in invasive phenotype [114]. ZEB1, yet another transcription
factor, may upon inhibition reverse paclitaxel resistance in ovar-
ian carcinoma cells and reduce their metastatic properties [115].
Drug repurposing revealed an EMT inhibitory effect by
downregulating miR-21 expression when MCF7 breast cancer
cells were treated with propofol [116]. Also, many potential
MEK inhibitors have been investigated. One of the most wide-
ly studied is selumetinib (AZD6244; ARRY-142,886;
AstraZeneca), a highly selective allosteric inhibitor of
MEK1/2. Upon administering selumetinib to TNBC cells in
a xenograft mouse model, EMT was reversed, as indicated by
a reduced mesenchymal phenotype with stem cell-like char-
acteristics and a CD44+/CD24−expression pattern, to an epi-
thelial phenotype and reduced lung metastasis [117]. In anoth-
er study, combinatorial treatment with a Src inhibitor
(AZD0530) and a MEK1/2 inhibitor (AZD6244) in a breast
cancer model induced apoptosis in a large fraction of the dor-
mant cells and delayed metastatic outgrowth [118]. Recently,
Kalita and Selvaraj
it has become evident that miRNAs may play important roles
in regulating cancer progression and metastasis. In renal cell
carcinoma, miR-193b has been found to inhibit growth and
metastasis by decreasing insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor
(IGF1R) expression, providing new insight on targeting me-
tastasis [119].
Multiple efforts on developing small molecules and anti-
bodies as inhibitors of TGF-β have been flourishing recently
and studied well across various cancer cell lines. All of it
supports the very idea of reduced cell proliferation and inva-
sion, indicating that TGF-β may serve as one of the potential
targets of metastasis and supporting the reason that it is in-
volved in mediating several downstream reactions of cell mo-
tility and invasion. LY2109761, a small molecule kinase in-
hibitor selective for TGF-β RI/II (TGF-β receptors I/II), has
been found to suppress the metastasis of pancreatic cancer to
the liver and other abdominal sites in a murine model [120]. A
highly metastatic type of human breast cancer, MDA-MB-
435, has shown reduced metastasis to lung and bone when
treated with [3-(pyridine-2yl)-4-(4-quinonyl)]-1 H pyrazole,
an ATP-competitive inhibitor of the TGF-β receptor I kinase
[121]. SD-208, another TGF-β inhibitor, reduced primary tu-
mour growth as well as metastasis in syngeneic R3T or 4T1
mammary carcinoma-bearing mice [122]. An anti-TGF-β an-
tibody has also been shown to be effective and to prevent bone
loss and bone metastasis of breast cancer in mice [123]. Novel
ALK5 inhibitors, EW-7203 and EW-7195, have been found
to inhibit TGF-β induced Smad signalling, EMT and breast
tumour metastasis to the lung in another mouse model [124,
125]. TGF-β inhibition has shown impressive anti-metastatic
effects across a multitude of cancer types. It underscores ex-
tending TGF-β as a valid target in clinical trials and in mon-
itoring metastatic profiles. Several natural products such as
Biemamides A-E, a group of marine natural products, and
ZL170 have also been found to inhibit the TGF-β pathway,
and several plant-based compounds have come a long way to
treat cancer and manage metastasis by modulating EMT [126,
127]. A subtle metabolic regulation is observed in EMT and
some metabolism inhibiting drugs have shown EMT
inhibiting features. For example Simvastatin, targeting
Fig. 5 Protein-protein interaction network among metastasis-associated factors and inhibitors marked with their respective protein data bank IDs
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
HMG-CoA, is FDA approved for hypolipidemia and is cur-
rently under clinical trial for brain metastasis and small cell
lung cancer [128].
Also, major emphasis has been put on designing potential
anti-metastatic agents by inhibiting the action of chemokines.
It has been discovered that the stromal cell-derived factor 1
(SDF-1)-CXCR4 axis plays a critical role in determining the
metastatic destination of tumour cells. AMD3100, a small
molecule inhibitor has been found to effectively block the
SDF-1/CXCR4 axis and to significantly slow down lung to
brain metastasis [129]. It also blocks EMT and liver and lung
metastasis in prostate cancer [130]. SB225002, a pharmaco-
logical inhibitor of chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 2
(CXCR2) in combination with sorafenib when introduced in
an in vivo model of ovarian cancer exhibited stabilization of
tumour progression [131].
Based on the redundant nature of the various signalling
pathways converging towards initiating the metastatic cas-
cade, it has been suggested that target selection should be
made on the most downstream effectors that cannot be
bypassed to swamp the trouble of developing drug resistance
[10]. In this context, cells migrate through the development of
actin-rich extensions, invadopodia and lamellipodia, which is
mainly enabled by cytoskeletal component remodelling, acto-
myosin contractility and actin polymerization. The major sig-
nalling molecule that activates these phenomena is the Rho-
associated protein kinase (ROCK). Therefore, several inhibi-
tors have been passed through various experimental models to
check their impact on decreasing metastasis and cell invasion.
Fasudil is one of the ROCK inhibitors that has shown marked
reductions in breast cancer cell migration and invasion prop-
erties. It also reduces the contractility and invasion potential of
cancer stem cells, those with metastatic potential [132, 133].
Another ROCK inhibitor (Y27632) also showed a reduced
bone metastasis of breast cancer in a mouse model [134,
135]. Netarsudil, Ripasudil and Fostamitinib are among the
already FDA approved ROCK inhibitors, but they are yet to
be validated in the context of metastasis. Silencing of the gene
encoding Cofilin induces invasion in carcinoma cells.
Decreasing levels of PRPF4B, UD31 and BPTF cause down-
regulation of genes involved in focal adhesion and ECM-
interaction pathways. PRPF4B has been found to be an essen-
tial component for TNBC metastasis formation in vivo, turn-
ing it in a candidate for drug development [136]. FAK is
activated in several types of cancer and involved in activating
an intracellular adaptor protein called Paxillin for cytoskeletal
rearrangement during metastasis. Several of its inhibitors have
been designed as pyrimidine-based (NVP-TAE-226, PF-
573,228, PF-562,271 and GSK2256098) or pyridine-based
(VS-6063, VS-4718, and VS-5095) inhibitors and checked
across several cancers in pre-clinical models [137, 138]. The
crystal structure of FAK revealed that it can bind to methane-
sulfonamide diaminopyrimidine inhibitor, and bis-anilino
pyrimidine inhibitor (PDB ID: 3BZ3 and 4D58), providing a
potential blueprint to trace key inhibitory residues and their
functional impacts in metastasis.
A vast number of inhibitors has been developed against
MMPs by focusing on extracellular matrix (ECM) disintegra-
tion during the initiation phase of metastasis. MMP-2, -9 and -
14 also enable extravasation by degrading blood capillary
basal lamina [9]. An effective decrease in MMP activity and
metastasis in the lung was observed when SD-7300, an oral
inhibitor of MMP-2, -9 and -13, was administered in an ag-
gressive mammary carcinoma 4T1 mouse model [139].
Liposome-based delivery of a MMP inhibitor, marimastat, to
the tumour microenvironment of breast cancer showed a re-
duction in metastatic lung nodules and in angiogenesis [140].
Another MMP inhibitor, SB-3CT, has been found to selec-
tively inhibit prostate cancer to bone metastasis [141]. WRG-
28, an extracellular small molecule inhibitor of DDR, inhibits
the receptor-ligand interaction in an allosteric manner. It does
so by disrupting DDR receptor clustering. A potential reduc-
tion in breast cancer cell invasion and migration to the lung
was observed. However, it did not inhibit the growth of the
primary tumour and, hence, adding it as adjuvant therapy in
clinical practice may serve as a potential anti-metastatic regi-
men [142]. An anti-fibrosis drug called silibinin induced de-
creased LOX mRNA levels and inhibition of NSCLC cell
migration [143]. LOX2, another member of the LOX family,
is known for its role in solid tumour progression. PXS-S1A
has been found to show dual inhibition of LOX2 and LOX,
whereas PXS-S2A acts as a highly selective LOX2 inhibitor.
These compounds show reduced cell migration and invasion
when administered to the MDA-MB-231 triple-negative hu-
man breast cancer model. They also show decreased angio-
genesis and CAF activation [144]. Administration of the LOX
inhibitor beta-aminopropionitrile (BAPN) to MDA-MB-231-
Luc2 injected mice showed that the activity of LOX is re-
quired during the phase of metastasis initiation, as treatment
started the day before or at the same day of tumour cell injec-
tion elicited a more prominent decrease in metastasis foci
[145]. Integrins are attractive targets due to their role in medi-
ation of cell migration and angiogenesis. Cilengitide, a small
molecule inhibitor of integrins αvβ3, αvβ5 and α5β1 has
been under the clinical investigation for sarcoma, glioma, mel-
anoma and lung cancer [146–149] and has been found to
reduce breast cancer metastasis in in vivo mouse models.
Next to the advent of small molecule inhibitors, the thera-
peutic strategy for metastasis has recently turned into the di-
rection of generating antibodies directed against metastasis-
associated proteins. Several antibodies have already been test-
ed in preclinical models and have shown potential anti-
metastatic properties (Table 2). It has also turned to targeting
small RNA molecules as they have emerged as core compo-
nents acting as oncogenes, tumour suppressors and metastatic
switchers. In a breast cancer model in mice, miR-96/miR-182
Kalita and Selvaraj
has been found to downregulate the level of paladin, thereby
reducing migration and invasion properties. This microRNA-
based therapy was successfully established by supplementing
a hydrogel embedded gold-nanoparticle-based delivery sys-
tem that provided specific and sustained microRNA release
into the breast cancer mouse model, abated the metastatic
properties and caused tumour shrinkage. MicroRNA-based
therapies have been combined with chemotherapeutic drugs
such as cisplatin, and proven to have anti-metastatic potential
[150]. Expression knockdown of miR-21 suppressed the
growth, invasion and metastatic properties of breast cancer
cells [151], whereas a miR-655-3p mimic, when administered
with oxaliplatin in a colorectal cancer model, reduced the oc-
currence of liver metastases [152]. Administration of an anti-
miR-214, R97/R98, to melanoma and breast cancer cells elic-
ited reduced levels of trans-endothelial migration [153].
5 Precision medicine as solution
for metastasis treatment?
The design of targeted approaches has many shortcomings
for diseases like metastasis. How to understand the dy-
namic and simultaneously occurring processes of cancer
cells leading to metastasis? How to recruit a large pool
of diverse biological data and identify common metastasis-
gene associations for developing therapies? How can it
reveal the state, stage and specificity of metastasis and/or
facilitate its diagnosis? Precision medicine is based on
unfolding the raw components of metastatic conditions in
tumours. It basically assesses the variability in genes, tran-
scripts, metabolites, non-coding counterparts, disease bio-
markers, epigenomic marks, environmental factors and
lifestyle. It requires a holistic way of multilevel data inte-
gration to understand each component and its influence or
autonomy on the other. These criteria, if holistically trans-
lated into clinical components, may provide a scope for a
better evaluation of patient cohorts with respect to disease
susceptibility, treatment response and prognosis.
The stages before actual metastasis can be classified into
a pre-metastatic niche phase, a microvascular phase, a pre-
angiogenic phase, an angiogenic phase and a growth phase.
Each of these phases show a unique genotypic profile.
Therapeutic exploration of pan-cancer studies of each of
these phases and of CTCs may offer serious clues for a
precision medicine approach for metastasis treatment.
Some preliminary studies have already found such clues. It
has been found, for example, that the dopamine agonist
apomorphine can restrict brain metastasis formation from
lung cancer by targeting the pre-metastasis-associated genes
KIF16B, SEPW1 and TESK2 [162, 163]. However, insights
at the genome-wide level may offer more large-scale hints.
In this light, we discuss breast cancer and the progress that
Table 2
Antibodies in pre-clinical stages with anti-metastatic effects
Antibody
Target
Anti-metastatic effect
38 M and 64R mAb
LYVE-1
Suppresses the migration of HEK293F cells in vitro by inhibiting lymph-angiogenesis [154]
Anti-AXL antibody 20G7-D9
AXL
Inhibits EMT, tumour growth and metastasis in TNBC cell xenograft and Patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
[155]
Tocilizumab (anti-IL-6 receptor
antibody)
IL-6 and CCL5 signalling
Reduces tumour growth and thoracic metastasis of TNBC [156]
Anti-MACRO mAb
Pattern recognition scavenger
receptor (MACRO) a subtype of TAM
Inhibits metastasis in breast cancer, colon cancer and melanoma models [157]
211−12 and 211−14
A disintegrin and metalloproteinase
28 (ADAM28)
Anti-metastatic effect seen in PC-9 cells [158]
chLpMab-7
Podoplanin (hPDPN)
Suppress metastasis of hPDPN expressing tumours via ADCC and CDC in LN319
(glioblastoma cell line) and PC-10 (lung cancer cell line) [159]
6B12 antibody
S100A4 Protein
Reduces attraction of T cells to the pre-metastatic niche in CSML100 cell line [160].
Anti-TGF-β antibody
TGF-β
Reduces breast metastasis to bone [161]
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
has been made in understanding metastasis. Breast tumours
are extremely heterogeneous. The intra-tumoral heterogene-
ity is reflected by the variability of genetic mutations and
mutations induced by chemotherapies. On the other side,
various types of cells and molecular subtypes occurring in
the tumour microenvironment and during tumour progres-
sion and metastasis reflect the inter-tumoral heterogeneity
[164]. Due to this heterogeneity different patients respond
differently to the same treatment. Implementation of molec-
ular profiling and genomic subtyping in triple negative
breast cancer (TNBC) clinical trials was used to evaluate
the efficacy of targets under an umbrella trial and can be
considered a potential future trial design for precision med-
icine [165]. Breast cancer has been classified into several
types, including ER positive, triple negative and HER2 pos-
itive. The commonly prevailing treatment modalities include
chemotherapy, hormone therapy, immunotherapy and nano-
particle therapies. Genomic data acquisition has evolved
from single gene mutation studies to genome wide associa-
tion studies (GWAS) and next generation sequencing (NGS)
studies. These high throughput technologies and emerging
big data analysis tools are pushing us towards the clinical
setting of tailored precision/personalized medicine and slow-
ly leaving the paradigm of “one model fits all”.
GWAS started accumulating big data through collabora-
tive projects across different countries and ethnic groups.
The Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC) and
the Asia Breast Cancer Consortium were built to assess as-
sociations of common genetic variations with breast cancer.
GWAS still poses a challenge in uncovering rare variants
and to this problem NGS has enabled sequencing millions
of DNA fragments. Many of the studies consistently found
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations to confer a moderate to high
risk of breast cancer, whereas rare mutations are found in
TP53, ATM, RAD51C, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, MRE11A,
RAD50, NBS1, CDH1, BARD1, NBN, BRIP1, MUTYH,
MLH1 and CDKN2A. Several other frequently mutated
genes in breast cancer are PIK3CA, TP53, GATA3,
PTEN, AKT1, CDH1, ARID1B, CASP8, BRCA1, RB1,
MLL3, MAP3K1, MAP3K13, NCOR1, SMARCD1,
CDKN1B, TBX3, RUNX1, CBFB, AFF2, PIK3R1,
PTPN22, PTPRD, NF1, SF3B1 and CCND3. Copy number
alterations in the PIK3CA, ERBB2, TP53, MAP2K4,
MLL3, CDKN2A, PTEN and RB1 genes have also been
observed [166]. Parallel and comparative analyses across
tumour genetic, phenotypic, metabolic, epigenetic and
transcriptomic profiles may offer insights into the genetic
signatures determining site specificity of metastasis to cer-
tain organs, stages of metastasis, mutational and methylation
profiles, non-coding RNA mutations and disease associa-
tions, novel signalling pathways and networks, drug-
disease-gene networks, novel biomarkers, targets and, ulti-
mately, treatment decisions.
5.1 Insights from pan‐cancer metastasis studies
Recent pan-cancer studies have enabled a deeper, comprehen-
sive and integrative analysis of primary tumour gene and met-
astatic tumour gene architectures across several cancer types.
It facilitates the identification of cancer drivers and mutation
hotspots and infers the importance of all types of variants
including large-scale genomic rearrangements (via fusions
and copy number alterations) which are commonly found in
many key oncogenes. In case of lung adenocarcinoma, a com-
parative whole exome sequencing of both primary and meta-
static tumour tissues of stage IV from four patients with chest
wall metastasis was performed. It turned out that with the
enormous heterogeneity within individual samples, metastatic
events occurred simultaneously with those of primary tumour
progression. After a global comparison across primary and
metastatic samples, TAS2R31 and UMODL1 were identified
as genes that may drive metastatic lung adenocarcinoma
[167]. Pan-cancer analysis of the numerous complex process-
es in the tumour microenvironment regulated by matrisome
genes revealed mutational landscapes of several genes across
several clinical samples of different cancer types. This throws
light onto novel cancer therapeutic aspect for targeting the
cancer ECM matrisome. It turns out that copy number alter-
ation and mutations of matrisome genes are more frequent
than those in the rest of the genome and that the mutated genes
have a greater functional impact on ECM proteins such as
collagens and proteoglycans. The mutational burdens of
matrisome genes like COL6A1 and MUC5B are associated
with overall survival. Among the most mutated matrisome
genes across 14 cancer types are MUC16, FLG and
HMCN1 [168].
The benefit of pan-cancer studies is that they provide an
overall detailed insight into the commonalities and differ-
ences, which in case of understanding metastasis from a ther-
apeutic perspective, is of utmost importance. Two recent stud-
ies on whole genome pan-cancer analysis of solid tumours and
pan-cancer analysis across the cancer genome atlas (TCGA)
has shown the mutational loads on each tumour type due to
single nucleotide variants, multiple nucleotide variants, indels,
structural variants, copy number alterations and mutational
hotspots. This kind of information may be crucial in assessing
the stages of propagation of metastasis. For example, a signif-
icantly mutated gene from metastatic breast cancer, ZFPM1, a
zinc finger transcription factor without previous links to can-
cer, was identified this way. Similarly, FHIT and DMD were
found to be deleted across 4 to 5 % of the samples and report-
ed to cause localized genomic instability. In the latter study,
different molecular signatures for metastasis across different
cancer types were observed suggesting distinct molecular
pathways leading to metastasis in different cancer types. In
contrast, other studies revealed common metastasis causing
genes across different cancer types. Also, significantly
Kalita and Selvaraj
different expression patterns of DNA methylation genes,
miRNAs and protein coding genes were observed in primary
versus metastatic samples. For example, AGER, LRP2 and
PIGR were found to be highly expressed in metastatic samples
of esophageal carcinoma (ESCA), sarcoma (SARC) and skin
cutaneous melanoma (SKCM) compared to their respective
primary tumour samples. This information derived from large
datasets highlights molecular patterns of metastatic progres-
sion guided by common genes versus distinct genes and can
be correlated with the pathological stages of metastasis and
quantified to delineate the time of progression from the pri-
mary tumour state [169, 170].
The pan-cancer studies have also been expanded towards
investigation of protein expression data across cancer types
acquired from the The Cancer Proteome Atlas (TCPA) and
led to the identification of differentially expressed proteins in
different cancer types. These studies have clinical potential
through the identification of patients for treatment monitoring,
cancer stage determination and personalised therapy prescrip-
tion. Pan-cancer studies of whole proteomes of primary and
metastatic samples across different cancer types hold promise
for identifying potential biomarkers. As yet, however, the
prime limitation is the availability of enough protein expres-
sion data [171].
A newly evolving field in precision medicine is radio-ge-
nomics. Through this approach, voluminous data are extracted
from digital images and, together with the amalgamation of
genomic, transcriptomic, epigenomic and metabolomic data
integration, it allows to quantitatively stratify a patient’s dis-
ease condition. It has the potential to generate image bio-
markers and to correlate them with the underlying genotypic
and phenotypic state of the tumour and its metastases [172].
With respect to treatment, it may help to stratify patient groups
to be radiosensitive or radio-resistant based on correlations of
gene signatures and radiosensitivity indexes. A pan-cancer
genomic signature revealed 10 gene signatures associated
with intrinsic radiosensitivity (AR, cJun, STAT1, PKC,
RelA, cABL, SUMO1, CDK1, HDAC1 and IRF1). These
10 genes are associated with cell cycle progression, DNA
damage response, histone deacetylation, proliferation and
Fig. 6 Multilevel data integration
for comprehensively
understanding metastasis and
developing precision medicine
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
apoptosis. These results were used to create a radiosensitivity
index (RSI), whereby a lower RSI correlates with a higher
radiosensitivity [173, 174].
6 Conclusions and perspectives
Despite fundamental and translational research in the field of
metastasis, it has been difficult to combat. Fundamental sci-
entific evidence suggests that metastatic cells use native mi-
gration mechanisms such as chemokine-mediated signalling,
growth factor-mediated signalling and well-studied mecha-
nisms of organogenesis such as EMT, to attain the properties
of migration, invasion, survival and growth. There are also
molecular mechanisms underlying site-specific distant metas-
tasis as, for example, RANKL-mediated bone metastasis. It is
worthy to note that several levels of biochemical changes,
molecular changes, metabolic changes and physiological fac-
tors may drive this process, signifying its demand to be un-
derstood in a holistic manner. The dynamic nature of the met-
astatic cascade is the reason why developing precision medi-
cine for this phenomenon remains a predicament. Metastases
originate from a primary tumour but may pass through several
years of latency (dormant state), micro-metastasis or macro-
metastasis before actual colonization and secondary tumour
formation occurs. This phenomenon is a major drawback in
replicating metastasis in in vitro or in vivo models.
Additionally, animal models generally have a shorter lifespan
compared to humans. Some patients may, however, show me-
tastasis at early stages of tumour detection.
Various genes, proteins and signalling pathways related to
different aspects of metastasis have been widely studied. Some
of them have been discussed in this review. This information
facilitates the selection of metastasis-specific targets, but in a
reductionist way, which only helps to halt or reduce the extent
of metastasis. However, a more holistic approach entailing in-
tegration of several layers of metastatic data versus primary
tumour data across different cancer types may aid, not only in
identifying novel targets or biomarkers, but also in understand-
ing the complete tumour and metastatic landscapes across dif-
ferent cancer types including the commonalities and differ-
ences between them. Such an integrated approaches may also
help in identifying molecular markers determining site speci-
ficity and metastatic stage, as well as mutational landscapes and
hotspots which can be implemented in the clinical stratification
of patients according to genotypic, transcriptomic and epige-
netic profiles and classifying them for precision treatment. It
can also be used for treatment monitoring.
Profiling of migration, adhesion and invasion in enhanced
experimental models in vivo and in vitro that represent real
metastatic scenarios like xenograft models, genetically
engineered models, 3D organoids or microfluidic-on-chip
models can aid in understanding the basic biochemistry of
metastatic transformation and its characteristics. Some im-
portant revelations of these techniques have been discussed
above in relation to molecular pathways and targets during
the metastasis cascade. Integration of such information with
3D imaging and real time metastasis tracing using biolumi-
nescence may provide a basic metastatic framework.
However, there are limitations to these models as they still
fail to represent the actual metastatic scenario in humans.
Single cell RNA-sequencing and protein expression analyses
of primary and metastatic lesions across different cancer
types can shed light on tumour heterogeneity and interac-
tome profiles, including their role in various molecular and
functional aspects. Incorporation of mega-metastasis integra-
tive analyses of genome, proteome, transcriptome, exome,
secretome, epigenome, metabolome, non-coding RNA and
drug-ligand interaction data using deep learning across sev-
eral primary and metastatic tumour types by employing pan-
cancer studies, GWAS, differentially expressed gene (DEG)
studies, expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) studies,
computer-assisted drug development (CADD) studies and
their integration with imaging (radio-genomics), protein
and drug structural data (structural bioinformatics), gene,
protein and non-coding RNA interaction networks as well
as drug-related pathways may aid in the identification of
global metastatic gene expression signatures and mutational
profiles which will help in finding metastatic biomarkers,
targets and therapies (Fig. 6). In-depth profiling of RNA-
sequencing and pan-cancer data from every step of the met-
astatic cascade including the tumour secretome, microbiome
as well as the microenvironment of primary and secondary
tumours, CTCs and studying ctDNA characteristics may be
helpful. Essentially, polytherapy and adjuvant therapies can
be employed, but only until scientific enrichment helps to
explore the several layers involved in metastasis and its
main causes. As yet, it is a highly complex phenomenon
that demands drug cocktails. Precision medicine can help
us to pick the unambiguous combinations for patient-
tailored approaches.
Acknowledgements BK is supported by a doctoral fellowship provided
by Pondicherry University, India. The authors acknowledge the Centre
for Bioinformatics, Pondicherry University, India for providing the com-
putational facility.
Declarations
Ethics approval
Not applicable.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.
Kalita and Selvaraj
References
1.
A. Chatterjee, E.J. Rodger, M.R. Eccles, Epigenetic drivers of
tumourigenesis and cancer metastasis. Semin. Cancer Biol. 51,
149–159 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2017.08.
004
2.
D.F. Quail, J.A. Joyce, Microenvironmental regulation of tumor
progression and metastasis. Nat. Med. 19, 1423–1437 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3394
3.
D.R. Welch, D.R. Hurst, Defining the hallmarks of metastasis.
Cancer Res. 79, 3011–3027 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1158/
0008-5472.can-19-0458
4.
M. Teeuwssen, R. Fodde, Cell heterogeneity and phenotypic plas-
ticity in metastasis formation: The case of colon cancer. Cancers
11, 1368 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers11091368
5.
D.A. Lawson, K. Kessenbrock, R.T. Davis, N. Pervolarakis, Z.
Werb, Tumour heterogeneity and metastasis at single-cell resolu-
tion. Nat. Cell Biol. 20, 1349–1360 (2018). https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41556-018-0236-7
6.
L.J. Brylka, T. Schinke, Chemokines in physiological and patho-
logical bone remodeling. Front. Immunol. 10, 2182 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2019.02182
7.
A.C. Obenauf, J. Massagué, Surviving at a distance: Organ-
specific metastasis. Trends Cancer 1, 76–91 (2015). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.trecan.2015.07.009
8.
R.L. Anderson, T. Balasas, J. Callaghan, R.C. Coombes, J. Evans,
J.A. Hall, S. Kinrade, D. Jones, P.S. Jones, R. Jones, J.F. Marshall,
M.B. Panico, J.A. Shaw, P.S. Steeg, M. Sullivan, W. Tong, A.D.
Westwell, J.W.A. Ritchie, Cancer Research UK and Cancer
Therapeutics CRC Australia Metastasis Working Group, A frame-
work for the development of effective anti-metastatic agents. Nat.
Rev. Clin. Oncol. 16, 185–204 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41571-018-0134-8
9.
S. Paget, The distribution of secondary growths in cancer of the
breast. Lancet. 133, 571–573 (1989). https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(00)49915-0
10.
A. Gandalovičová, D. Rosel, M. Fernandes, P. Veselý, P.
Heneberg, V. Čermák, L. Petruželka, S. Kumar, V. Sanz-
Moreno, J. Brábek, Migrastatics-anti-metastatic and anti-
invasion drugs: Promises and challenges. Trends Cancer Res. 3,
391–406 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trecan.2017.04.008
11.
A.W. Lambert, D.R. Pattabiraman, R.A. Weinberg, Emerging bi-
ological principles of metastasis. Cell 168, 670–691 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.037
12.
S. Valastyan, R.A. Weinberg, Tumor metastasis: molecular in-
sights and evolving paradigms. Cell 147, 275–292 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.024
13.
I. Rodriguez-Hernandez, G. Cantelli, F. Bruce, V. Sanz-Moreno,
Rho, ROCK and actomyosin contractility in metastasis as drug
targets. F1000Res. 5, 783 (2016). https://doi.org/10.12688/
f1000research.7909.1
14.
T. Alkasalias, A. Alexeyenko, K. Hennig, F. Danielsson, R.J.
Lebbink, M. Fielden, S.P. Turunen, K. Lehti, V. Kashuba, H.S.
Madapura, B. Bozoky, E. Lundberg, M. Balland, H. Guvén, G.
Klein, A.K.B. Gad, T. Pavlova, RhoA knockout fibroblasts lose
tumor-inhibitory capacity in vitro and promote tumor growth
in vivo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114, E1413–E1421
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1621161114
15.
M. Morgan-Fisher, U.M. Wewer, A. Yoneda, Regulation of
ROCK activity in cancer. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 61, 185–198
(2013). https://doi.org/10.1369/0022155412470834
16.
D.-F. Meng, P. Xie, L.-X. Peng, R. Sun, D.-H. Luo, Q.-Y. Chen,
X. Lv, L. Wang, M.-Y. Chen, H.-Q. Mai, L. Guo, X. Guo, L.-S.
Zheng, L. Cao, J.-P. Yang, M.-Y. Wang, Y. Mei, Y.-Y. Qiang, Z.-
M. Zhang, J.-P. Yun, B.-J. Huang, C.-N. Qian, Erratum to:
CDC42-interacting protein 4 promotes metastasis of nasopharyn-
geal carcinoma by mediating invadopodia formation and activat-
ing EGFR signaling. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 36, 33 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13046-017-0503-7
17.
S. Jansen, R. Gosens, T. Wieland, M. Schmidt, Paving the Rho in
cancer metastasis: Rho GTPases and beyond. Pharmacol. Ther.
183, 1–21 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2017.09.
002
18.
C.X. Sun, M.A.O. Magalhães, M. Glogauer, Rac1 and Rac2 dif-
ferentially regulate actin free barbed end formation downstream of
the fMLP receptor. J. Cell Biol. 179, 239–245 (2007). https://doi.
org/10.1083/jcb.200705122
19.
M. Schaks, H. Döring, F. Kage, A. Steffen, T. Klünemann, W.
Blankenfeldt, T. Stradal, K. Rottner, RhoG and Cdc42 can con-
tribute to Rac-dependent lamellipodia formation through WAVE
regulatory complex-binding. Small GTPases 2, 122–132 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1080/21541248.2019.1657755
20.
B. Frugtniet, W.G. Jiang, T.A. Martin, Role of the WASP and
WAVE family proteins in breast cancer invasion and metastasis.
Breast Cancer 7, 99–109 (2015). https://doi.org/10.2147/BCTT.
S59006
21.
K. Kazazian, C. Go, H. Wu, O. Brashavitskaya, R. Xu, J.W.
Dennis, A.-C. Gingras, C.J. Swallow, Plk4 promotes cancer inva-
sion and metastasis through Arp2/3 complex regulation of the
actin cytoskeleton. Cancer Res. 77, 434–447 (2017). https://doi.
org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2060
22.
G. Mouneimne, V. DesMarais, M. Sidani, E. Scemes, W. Wang,
X. Song, R. Eddy, J. Condeelis, Spatial and temporal control of
cofilin activity is required for directional sensing during chemo-
taxis. Curr. Biol. 16, 2193–2205 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cub.2006.09.016
23.
C.M. Fife, J.A. McCarroll, M. Kavallaris, Movers and shakers:
cell cytoskeleton in cancer metastasis. Br. J. Pharmacol. 171,
5507–5523 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.12704
24.
F. Gertler, J. Condeelis, Metastasis: tumor cells becoming
MENAcing. Trends Cell Biol. 21, 81–90 (2011). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tcb.2010.10.001
25.
P. Pandey, S. Rachagani, S. Das, P. Seshacharyulu, Y. Sheinin, N.
Naslavsky, Z. Pan, B.L. Smith, H.L. Peters, P. Radhakrishnan,
N.R. McKenna, S.S.P. Giridharan, D. Haridas, S. Kaur, M.A.
Hollingsworth, R.G. MacDonald, J.L. Meza, S. Caplan, S.K.
Batra, J.C. Solheim, Amyloid precursor-like protein 2 (APLP2)
affects the actin cytoskeleton and increases pancreatic cancer
growth and metastasis. Oncotarget 6, 2064–2075 (2015). https://
doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.2990
26.
N.A. Afratis, D. Nikitovic, H.A.B. Multhaupt, A.D. Theocharis,
J.R. Couchman, N.K. Karamanos, Syndecans – key regulators of
cell signaling and biological functions. FEBS J. 284, 27–41
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.13940
27.
S. Gopal, H.A.B. Multhaupt, R. Pocock, J.R. Couchman, Cell-
extracellular matrix and cell-cell adhesion are linked by
syndecan-4. Matrix Biol. 60–61, 57–69 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.matbio.2016.10.006
28.
Y.-L. Tai, L.-C. Chen, T.-L. Shen, Emerging roles of focal adhe-
sion kinase in cancer. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015, 690690 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/690690
29.
R. Peláez, A. Pariente, Á Pérez-Sala, I.M. Larrayoz, Integrins:
Moonlighting proteins in invadosome formation. Cancers 11,
615 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers11050615
30.
A.M. López-Colomé, I. Lee-Rivera, R. Benavides-Hidalgo, E.
López, Paxillin: a crossroad in pathological cell migration. J
Hematol Oncol 10, 50 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13045-
017-0418-y
31.
P. Moreno-Layseca, C.H. Streuli, Signalling pathways linking
integrins with cell cycle progression. Matrix Biol. 34, 144–153
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2013.10.011
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
32.
D.-B. Kong, F. Chen, N. Sima, Focal adhesion kinases crucially
regulate TGFβ-induced migration and invasion of bladder cancer
cells via Src kinase and E-cadherin. Onco. Targets Ther. 10,
1783–1792 (2017). https://doi.org/10.2147/ott.s122463
33.
J.N. Skhinas, T.R. Cox, The interplay between extracellular ma-
trix remodelling and kinase signalling in cancer progression and
metastasis. Cell Adh. Migr. 12, 529–537 (2018). https://doi.org/
10.1080/19336918.2017.1405208
34.
G. Gonzalez-Avila, B. Sommer, D.A. Mendoza-Posada, C.
Ramos, A.A. Garcia-Hernandez, R. Falfan-Valencia,
Corrigendum to “Matrix metalloproteinases participation in the
metastatic process and their diagnostic and therapeutic applica-
tions in cancer”. Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol. 137, 57–83, Crit.
Rev. Oncol. Hematol. 138, 172 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
critrevonc.2019.04.017
35.
Q. Xiao, G. Ge, Lysyl oxidase, extracellular matrix remodeling
and cancer metastasis. Cancer Microenviron. 5, 261–273 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12307-012-0105-z
36.
B. Fogelgren, N. Polgár, K.M. Szauter, Z. Ujfaludi, R. Laczkó,
K.S.K. Fong, K. Csiszar, Cellular fibronectin binds to lysyl oxi-
dase with high affinity and is critical for its proteolytic activation.
J. Biol. Chem. 280, 24690–24697 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1074/
jbc.M412979200
37.
M. Gadiya, G. Chakraborty, Signaling by discoidin domain recep-
tor 1 in cancer metastasis. Cell Adh. Migr. 12, 315–323 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1080/19336918.2018.1520556
38.
C.A.S. Corsa, A. Brenot, W.R. Grither, S. Van Hove, A.J. Loza,
K. Zhang, S.M. Ponik, Y. Liu, D.G. DeNardo, K.W. Eliceiri, P.J.
Keely, G.D. Longmore, The action of discoidin domain receptor 2
in basal tumor cells and stromal cancer-associated fibroblasts is
critical for breast cancer metastasis. Cell Rep. 15, 2510–2523
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.05.033
39.
Q. Chen, J. Massagué, Molecular pathways: VCAM-1 as a poten-
tial therapeutic target in metastasis, Clin. Cancer Res. 18, 5520–
5525 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2904
40.
R. Sharma, R. Sharma, T.P. Khaket, C. Dutta, B. Chakraborty,
T.K. Mukherjee, Breast cancer metastasis: Putative therapeutic
role of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1. Cell. Oncol. 40, 199–
208 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13402-017-0324-x
41.
T. Liu, C. Han, S. Wang, P. Fang, Z. Ma, L. Xu, R. Yin, Cancer-
associated fibroblasts: an emerging target of anti-cancer immuno-
therapy. J. Hematol. Oncol. 12, 86 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13045-019-0770-1
42.
J. Kim, J.-S. Bae, Tumor-associated macrophages and neutrophils
in tumor microenvironment. Mediat. Inflamm. 2016, 6058147
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/6058147
43.
A. Gratchev, TGF-β signalling in tumour associated macro-
phages. Immunobiology 222, 75–81 (2017). https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.imbio.2015.11.016
44.
A. Mantovani, F. Marchesi, A. Malesci, L. Laghi, P. Allavena,
Tumour-associated macrophages as treatment targets in oncology.
Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 14, 399–416 (2017). https://doi.org/10.
1038/nrclinonc.2016.217
45.
I. Jang, K.A. Beningo, Integrins, CAFs and mechanical forces in
the progression of cancer. Cancers 11, 721 (2019). https://doi.org/
10.3390/cancers11050721
46.
L.V. Ireland, A. Mielgo, Macrophages and fibroblasts, key players
in cancer chemoresistance. Front. Cell. Dev. Biol. 6, 131 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2018.00131
47.
Y. Lin, J. Xu, H. Lan, Tumor-associated macrophages in tumor
metastasis: biological roles and clinical therapeutic applications. J.
Hematol. Oncol. 12, 76 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13045-
019-0760-3
48.
C. Bonnans, J. Chou, Z. Werb, Remodelling the extracellular ma-
trix in development and disease. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 15,
786–801 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3904
49.
B.D. Robinson, G.L. Sica, Y.-F. Liu, T.E. Rohan, F.B. Gertler,
J.S. Condeelis, J.G. Jones, Tumor microenvironment of metastasis
in human breast carcinoma: a potential prognostic marker linked
to hematogenous dissemination. Clin. Cancer Res. 15, 2433–2441
(2009). https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2179
50.
B. Rizeq, M.I. Malki, The role of CCL21/CCR7 chemokine axis
in breast cancer progression. Cancers 12, 1036 (2020). https://doi.
org/10.3390/cancers12041036
51.
R. Singh, N. Kapur, H. Mir, N. Singh, J.W. Lillard Jr., S. Singh,
CXCR6-CXCL16 axis promotes prostate cancer by mediating cy-
toskeleton rearrangement via Ezrin activation and αvβ3 integrin
clustering. Oncotarget 7, 7343–7353 (2016). https://doi.org/10.
18632/oncotarget.6944
52.
R.B. Troyanovsky, J. Klingelhöfer, S.M. Troyanovsky, α-Catenin
contributes to the strength of E-cadherin-p120 interactions. Mol.
Biol. Cell 22, 4247–4255 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.
E11-03-0250
53.
N.A. Gloushankova, S.N. Rubtsova, I.Y. Zhitnyak, Cadherin-
mediated cell-cell interactions in normal and cancer cells. Tissue
Barriers 5, e1356900 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1080/21688370.
2017.1356900
54.
V. Gkretsi, T. Stylianopoulos, Cell adhesion and matrix stiffness:
Coordinating cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Front. Oncol. 8,
145 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2018.00145
55.
S. Lamouille, J. Xu, R. Derynck, Molecular mechanisms of
epithelial–mesenchymal transition. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol.
15, 178–196 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3758
56.
M. Grooteclaes, Q. Deveraux, J. Hildebrand, Q. Zhang, R.H.
Goodman, S.M. Frisch, C-terminal-binding protein corepresses
epithelial and proapoptotic gene expression programs. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 4568–4573 (2003). https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.0830998100
57.
G. Cai, D. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Xu, K.-B. Wong, C.-F. Ng, F.L.
Chan, S. Yu, Collapsin response mediator protein-1 (CRMP1)
acts as an invasion and metastasis suppressor of prostate cancer
via its suppression of epithelial–mesenchymal transition and re-
modeling of actin cytoskeleton organization. Oncogene 36, 546–
558 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2016.227
58.
W.S. Byun, W.K. Kim, H.J. Han, H.-J. Chung, K. Jang, H.S. Kim,
S. Kim, D. Kim, E.S. Bae, S. Park, J. Lee, H.-G. Park, S.K. Lee,
Targeting histone methyltransferase DOT1L by a novel
psammaplin A analog inhibits growth and metastasis of triple-
negative breast cancer. Mol. Ther. Oncolytics 15, 140–152
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omto.2019.09.005
59.
M.-H. Cho, J.-H. Park, H.-J. Choi, M.-K. Park, H.-Y. Won, Y.-J.
Park, C.H. Lee, S.-H. Oh, Y.-S. Song, H.S. Kim, Y.-H. Oh, J.-Y.
Lee, G. Kong, DOT1L cooperates with the c-Myc-p300 complex
to epigenetically derepress CDH1 transcription factors in breast
cancer progression. Nat. Commun. 6, 7821 (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1038/ncomms8821
60.
J. Park, D.-H. Kim, S.R. Shah, H.-N. Kim, P. Kshitiz, A. Kim, A.
Quiñones-Hinojosa, Levchenko, Switch-like enhancement of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by YAP through feedback reg-
ulation of WT1 and Rho-family GTPases. Nat. Commun. 10,
2797 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10729-5
61.
P. Potdar, N. Lotey, Role of circulating tumor cells in future diag-
nosis and therapy of cancer. J. Cancer Metast. Treat. 1, 44 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.4103/2394-4722.158803
62.
C. Agnoletto, L. Minotti, L. Brulle-Soumare, L. Pasquali, M.
Galasso, F. Corrà, F. Baldassari, J.-G. Judde, S. Cairo, S.
Volinia, Heterogeneous expression of EPCAM in human circulat-
ing tumour cells from patient-derived xenografts. Biomark Res. 6,
31 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40364-018-0145-8
63.
J.C.M. Wan, C. Massie, J. Garcia-Corbacho, F. Mouliere, J.D.
Brenton, C. Caldas, S. Pacey, R. Baird, N. Rosenfeld, Liquid
biopsies come of age: towards implementation of circulating
Kalita and Selvaraj
tumour DNA. Nat. Rev. Cancer 17, 223–238 (2017). https://doi.
org/10.1038/nrc.2017.7
64.
X.-L. Lou, J. Sun, S.-Q. Gong, X.-F. Yu, R. Gong, H. Deng,
Interaction between circulating cancer cells and platelets: clinical
implication. Chin. J. Cancer Res. 27, 450–460 (2015). https://doi.
org/10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2015.04.10
65.
L. Zhang, L.D. Ridgway, M.D. Wetzel, J. Ngo, W. Yin, D.
Kumar, J.C. Goodman, M.D. Groves, D. Marchetti, The identifi-
cation and characterization of breast cancer CTCs competent for
brain metastasis. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 180ra48 (2013). https://doi.
org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3005109
66.
H. Wang, N.H. Stoecklein, P.P. Lin, O. Gires, Circulating and
disseminated tumor cells: diagnostic tools and therapeutic targets
in motion. Oncotarget 8, 1884–1912 (2017). https://doi.org/10.
18632/oncotarget.12242
67.
W.-C. Wang, X.-F. Zhang, J. Peng, X.-F. Li, A.-L. Wang, Y.-Q.
Bie, L.-H. Shi, M.-B. Lin, X.-F. Zhang, Survival mechanisms and
influence factors of circulating tumor cells. Biomed. Res. Int.
2018, 6304701 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/6304701
68.
H. Peinado, H. Zhang, I.R. Matei, B. Costa-Silva, A. Hoshino, G.
Rodrigues, B. Psaila, R.N. Kaplan, J.F. Bromberg, Y. Kang, M.J.
Bissell, T.R. Cox, A.J. Giaccia, J.T. Erler, S. Hiratsuka, C.M.
Ghajar, D. Lyden, Pre-metastatic niches: organ-specific homes
for metastases. Nat. Rev. Cancer 17, 302–317 (2017). https://doi.
org/10.1038/nrc.2017.6
69.
C.-M. Zeng, Z. Chen, L. Fu, Frizzled receptors as potential ther-
apeutic targets in human cancers. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19, 1543 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19051543
70.
Y. Zhang, M. Xia, K. Jin, S. Wang, H. Wei, C. Fan, Y. Wu, X. Li,
X. Li, G. Li, Z. Zeng, W. Xiong, Function of the c-Met receptor
tyrosine kinase in carcinogenesis and associated therapeutic op-
portunities. Mol. Cancer 17, 45 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12943-018-0796-y
71.
W. Chen, A.D. Hoffmann, H. Liu, X. Liu, Organotropism: new
insights into molecular mechanisms of breast cancer metastasis.
NPJ Precis. Oncol. 2, 4 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41698-
018-0047-0
72.
X. Jin, Z. Demere, K. Nair, A. Ali, G.B. Ferraro, T. Natoli, A.
Deik, L. Petronio, A.A. Tang, C. Zhu, L. Wang, D. Rosenberg, V.
Mangena, J. Roth, K. Chung, R.K. Jain, C.B. Clish, M.G. Vander
Heiden, T.R. Golub, A metastasis map of human cancer cell lines.
Nature 588, 331–336 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-
2969-2
73.
P.S. Steeg, Targeting metastasis. Nat. Rev. Cancer 16, 201–218
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc.2016.25
74.
V. Sopik, S.A. Narod, The relationship between tumour size, nod-
al status and distant metastases: on the origins of breast cancer.
Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 170, 647–656 (2018). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10549-018-4796-9
75.
M. Kim, S.H. Kizilbash, J.K. Laramy, G. Gampa, K.E. Parrish,
J.N. Sarkaria, W.F. Elmquist, Barriers to effective drug treatment
for brain metastases: A multifactorial problem in the delivery of
precision medicine. Pharm. Res. 35, 177 (2018). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11095-018-2455-9
76.
T.-X. Xie, F.-J. Huang, K.D. Aldape, S.-H. Kang, M. Liu, J.E.
Gershenwald, K. Xie, R. Sawaya, S. Huang, Activation of stat3 in
human melanoma promotes brain metastasis. Cancer Res. 66,
3188–3196 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-
2674
77.
M. Yousefi, T. Bahrami, A. Salmaninejad, R. Nosrati, P. Ghaffari,
S.H. Ghaffari, Lung cancer-associated brain metastasis: Molecular
mechanisms and therapeutic options. Cell. Oncol. 40, 419–441
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13402-017-0345-5
78.
W. Jacot, M.-C. Gerlotto-Borne, S. Thezenas, S. Pouderoux, S.
Poujol, M. About, G. Romieu, Carmustine and methotrexate in
combination after whole brain radiation therapy in breast cancer
patients presenting with brain metastases: a retrospective study.
BMC Cancer 10, 257 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
2407-10-257
79.
M.G. Ewend, S. Brem, M. Gilbert, R. Goodkin, P.L. Penar, M.
Varia, S. Cush, L.A. Carey, Treatment of single brain metastasis
with resection, intracavity carmustine polymer wafers, and radia-
tion therapy is safe and provides excellent local control. Clin.
Cancer Res. 13, 3637–3641 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1158/
1078-0432.CCR-06-2095
80.
U. Bottoni, P. Bonaccorsi, V. Devirgiliis, V. Panasiti, R.G.
Borroni, G. Trasimeni, R. Clerico, S. Calvieri, Complete remis-
sion of brain metastases in three patients with stage IV melanoma
treated with BOLD and G-CSF. Jpn. J. Clin. Oncol. 35, 507–513
(2005). https://doi.org/10.1093/jjco/hyi141
81.
U. Herrlinger, T. Tzaridis, F. Mack, J.P. Steinbach, U. Schlegel,
M. Sabel, P. Hau, R.-D. Kortmann, D. Krex, O. Grauer, R.
Goldbrunner, O. Schnell, O. Bähr, M. Uhl, C. Seidel, G.
Tabatabai, T. Kowalski, F. Ringel, F. Schmidt-Graf, B.
Suchorska, S. Brehmer, A. Weyerbrock, M. Renovanz, L.
Bullinger, N. Galldiks, P. Vajkoczy, M. Misch, H. Vatter, M.
Stuplich, N. Schäfer, S. Kebir, J. Weller, C. Schaub, W.
Stummer, J.-C. Tonn, M. Simon, V.C. Keil, M. Nelles, H.
Urbach, M. Coenen, W. Wick, M. Weller, R. Fimmers, M.
Schmid, E. Hattingen, T. Pietsch, C. Coch, M. Glas,
Neurooncology Working Group of the German Cancer Society,
Lomustine-temozolomide combination therapy versus standard
temozolomide therapy in patients with newly diagnosed glioblas-
toma with methylated MGMT promoter (CeTeG/NOA-09): a
randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet 393, 678–688
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31791-4
82.
L. Abrey, Temozolomide for treating brain metastases. Sem.
Oncol. 28, 34–42 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1016/s0093-
7754(01)90069-7
83.
M. Preusser, A.S. Berghoff, D. Schadendorf, N.U. Lin, R. Stupp,
Brain metastasis: opportunity for drug development? Curr. Opin.
Neurol. 25, 786–794 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1097/WCO.
0b013e328359320d
84.
M. Esposito, T. Guise, Y. Kang, The biology of bone metastasis.
Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 8, a031252 (2018). https://doi.
org/10.1101/cshperspect.a031252
85.
L.A. Kingsley, P.G.J. Fournier, J.M. Chirgwin, T.A. Guise,
Molecular biology of bone metastasis. Mol. Cancer Ther. 6,
2609–2617 (2007). https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-
0234
86.
S. Wang, G.-X. Li, C.-C. Tan, R. He, L.-J. Kang, J.-T. Lu, X.-Q.
Li, Q.-S. Wang, P.-F. Liu, Q.-L. Zhai, Y.-M. Feng, FOXF2 repro-
grams breast cancer cells into bone metastasis seeds. Nat.
Commun. 10, 2707 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-
10379-7
87.
T.M. Dando, L.R. Wiseman, Clodronate: a review of its use in the
prevention of bone metastases and the management of skeletal
complications associated with bone metastases in patients with
breast cancer. Drugs Aging 21, 949–962 (2004). https://doi.org/
10.2165/00002512-200421140-00005
88.
Z. Wang, L. Lei, X.-J. Cai, L.Y. Chen, M. Yuan, G. Yang, P.
Huang, X. Wang, A preliminary study of pamidronic acid down-
regulation of angiogenic factors IGF-1/PECAM-1 expression in
circulating level in bone metastatic breast cancer patients. Onco.
Targets. Ther. 9, 3147–3152 (2016). https://doi.org/10.2147/OTT.
S103624
89.
B. Devitt, S.-A. McLachlan, Use of ibandronate in the prevention
of skeletal events in metastatic breast cancer. Ther. Clin. Risk
Manag. 4, 453–458 (2008). https://doi.org/10.2147/tcrm.s1966
90.
P.-H. Chiang, H.-C. Wang, Y.-L. Lai, S.-C. Chen, W. Yen-Hwa,
C.-K. Kok, Y.-C. Ou, J.-S. Huang, T.-C. Huang, T.-Y. Chao,
Zoledronic acid treatment for cancerous bone metastases: a phase
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
IV study in Taiwan. J. Cancer Res. Ther. 9, 653–659 (2013).
https://doi.org/10.4103/0973-1482.126471
91.
O. Sartor, Overview of samarium sm 153 lexidronam in the treat-
ment of painful metastatic bone disease. Rev. Urol. 6 (Suppl 10),
S3–S12 (2004). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
16985930. Accessed 23 Apr 2021
92.
W.C. Dougall, I. Holen, E. González Suárez, Targeting RANKL
in metastasis. Bonekey Rep. 3, 519 (2014). https://doi.org/10.
1038/bonekey.2014.14
93.
Y. Nakai, K. Okamoto, A. Terashima, S. Ehata, J. Nishida, T.
Imamura, T. Ono, H. Takayanagi, Efficacy of an orally active
small-molecule inhibitor of RANKL in bone metastasis. Bone
Res. 7, 1 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41413-018-0036-5
94.
C. Khanna, X. Wan, S. Bose, R. Cassaday, O. Olomu, A.
Mendoza, C. Yeung, R. Gorlick, S.M. Hewitt, L.J. Helman, The
membrane-cytoskeleton linker ezrin is necessary for osteosarco-
ma metastasis. Nat. Med. 10, 182–186 (2004). https://doi.org/10.
1038/nm982
95.
A. Tamburrini, A. Majorino, S. Duggan, S. Jogai, A. Alzetani, A
record-breaking lung metastasis from renal cell carcinoma 37
years after nephrectomy. J. Surg. Case Rep. 2017, rjx205
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1093/jscr/rjx205
96.
L. Jin, B. Han, E. Siegel, Y. Cui, A. Giuliano, X. Cui, Breast
cancer lung metastasis: Molecular biology and therapeutic impli-
cations. Cancer Biol. Ther. 19, 858–868 (2018). https://doi.org/10.
1080/15384047.2018.1456599
97.
M. Yousefi, R. Nosrati, A. Salmaninejad, S. Dehghani, A.
Shahryari, A. Saberi, Organ-specific metastasis of breast cancer:
molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying lung metastasis.
Cell. Oncol. 41, 123–140 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13402-018-0376-6
98.
G.P. Gupta, J. Massagué, Cancer metastasis: building a frame-
work. Cell 127, 679–695 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2006.11.001
99.
P. Tomasini, J. Egea, M. Souquet-Bressand, L. Greillier, F.
Barlesi, Alectinib in the treatment of ALK-positive metastatic
non-small cell lung cancer: clinical trial evidence and experience
with a focus on brain metastases, Ther. Adv. Respir. Dis. 13,
1753466619831906 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1177/
1753466619831906
100.
M.A. Socinski, R.M. Jotte, F. Cappuzzo, F. Orlandi, D.
Stroyakovskiy, N. Nogami, D. Rodríguez-Abreu, D. Moro-
Sibilot, C.A. Thomas, F. Barlesi, G. Finley, C. Kelsch, A. Lee,
S. Coleman, Y. Deng, Y. Shen, M. Kowanetz, A. Lopez-Chavez,
A. Sandler, M. Reck, IMpower150 Study Group, Atezolizumab
for first-line treatment of metastatic nonsquamous NSCLC. N.
Engl. J. Med. 378, 2288–2301 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMoa1716948
101.
A.V. Balar, M.D. Galsky, J.E. Rosenberg, T. Powles, D.P.
Petrylak, J. Bellmunt, Y. Loriot, A. Necchi, J. Hoffman-Censits,
J.L. Perez-Gracia, N.A. Dawson, M.S. van der Heijden, R.
Dreicer, S. Srinivas, M.M. Retz, R.W. Joseph, A. Drakaki, U.N.
Vaishampayan, S.S. Sridhar, D.I. Quinn, I. Durán, D.R. Shaffer,
B.J. Eigl, P.D. Grivas, E.Y. Yu, S. Li, E.E. Kadel III, Z. Boyd, R.
Bourgon, P.S. Hegde, S. Mariathasan, A. Thåström, O.O.
Abidoye, G.D. Fine, D.F. Bajorin, IMvigor210 Study Group,
Atezolizumab as first-line treatment in cisplatin-ineligible patients
with locally advanced and metastatic urothelial carcinoma: a sin-
gle-arm, multicentre, phase 2 trial. Lancet 389, 67–76 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32455-2
102.
R. Saleh, R.Z. Taha, V. Sasidharan Nair, N.M. Alajez, E. Elkord,
PD-L1 Blockade by atezolizumab downregulates signaling path-
ways associated with tumor growth, metastasis, and hypoxia in
human triple negative breast cancer. Cancers 11, (2019). https://
doi.org/10.3390/cancers11081050
103.
J. Ma, D.J. Waxman, Combination of antiangiogenesis with che-
motherapy for more effective cancer treatment. Mol. Cancer Ther.
7, 3670–3684 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.mct-08-
0715
104.
M. Vocka, D. Langer, V. Fryba, J. Petrtyl, T. Hanus, M.
Kalousova, T. Zima, L. Petruzelka, Novel serum markers
HSP60, CHI3L1, and IGFBP-2 in metastatic colorectal cancer.
Oncol. Lett. 18, 6284–6292 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3892/ol.
2019.10925
105.
O. Golubnitschaja, K.C. Sridhar, Liver metastatic disease: new
concepts and biomarker panels to improve individual outcomes.
Clin. Exp. Metastasis 33, 743–755 (2016). https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10585-016-9816-8
106.
D.G. Power, N.E. Kemeny, The role of floxuridine in metastatic
liver disease. Mol. Cancer Ther. 8, 1015–1025 (2009). https://doi.
org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0709
107.
D. Melisi, R. Garcia-Carbonero, T. Macarulla, D. Pezet, G.
Deplanque, M. Fuchs, J. Trojan, H. Oettle, M. Kozloff, A.
Cleverly, C. Smith, S.T. Estrem, I. Gueorguieva, M.M.F. Lahn,
A. Blunt, K.A. Benhadji, J. Tabernero, Galunisertib plus
gemcitabine vs. gemcitabine for first-line treatment of patients
with unresectable pancreatic cancer. Br. J. Cancer 119, 1208–
1214 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-018-0246-z
108.
J. Strauss, C.R. Heery, J. Schlom, R.A. Madan, L. Cao, Z. Kang,
E. Lamping, J.L. Marté, R.N. Donahue, I. Grenga, L. Cordes, O.
Christensen, L. Mahnke, C. Helwig, J.L. Gulley, Phase I Trial of
M7824 (MSB0011359C), a bifunctional fusion protein targeting
PD-L1 and TGFβ, in advanced solid tumors. Clin. Cancer Res.
24, 1287–1295 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-
17-2653
109.
M. Elbaz, M. Ehab, Profile of palbociclib in the treatment of met-
astatic breast cancer. Breast Cancer Target Ther. 8, 83–91 (2016).
https://doi.org/10.2147/bctt.s83146
110.
K.J. Frankowski, C. Wang, S. Patnaik, F.J. Schoenen, N. Southall,
D. Li, Y. Teper, W. Sun, I. Kandela, D. Hu, C. Dextras, Z. Knotts,
Y. Bian, J. Norton, S. Titus, M.A. Lewandowska, Y. Wen, K.I.
Farley, L.M. Griner, J. Sultan, Z. Meng, M. Zhou, T. Vilimas, A.S.
Powers, S. Kozlov, K. Nagashima, H.S. Quadri, M. Fang, C.
Long, O. Khanolkar, W. Chen, J. Kang, H. Huang, E. Chow, E.
Goldberg, C. Feldman, R. Xi, H.R. Kim, G. Sahagian, S.J.
Baserga, A. Mazar, M. Ferrer, W. Zheng, A. Shilatifard, J.
Aubé, U. Rudloff, J.J. Marugan, S. Huang, Metarrestin, a
perinucleolar compartment inhibitor, effectively suppresses me-
tastasis. Sci. Transl. Med. 10, 441 (2018). https://doi.org/10.
1126/scitranslmed.aap8307
111.
L. Malorni, G. Curigliano, A.M. Minisini, S. Cinieri, C.A.
Tondini, K. D’Hollander, G. Arpino, A. Bernardo, A.
Martignetti, C. Criscitiello, F. Puglisi, M. Pestrin, G. Sanna, E.
Moretti, E. Risi, C. Biagioni, A. McCartney, L. Boni, M. Buyse, I.
Migliaccio, L. Biganzoli, A. Di Leo, Palbociclib as single agent or
in combination with the endocrine therapy received before disease
progression for estrogen receptor-positive, HER2-negative meta-
static breast cancer: TREnd trial. Ann. Oncol. 29, 1748–1754
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdy214
112.
Y. Suhail, M.P. Cain, K. Vanaja, P.A. Kurywchak, A. Levchenko,
R. Kalluri, Kshitiz, Systems biology of cancer metastasis. Cell
Systems 9, 109–127 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2019.
07.003
113.
Z.A. Yochum, J. Cades, L. Mazzacurati, N.M. Neumann, S.K.
Khetarpal, S. Chatterjee, H. Wang, M.A. Attar, E.H.-B. Huang,
S.N. Chatley, K. Nugent, A. Somasundaram, J.A. Engh, A.J.
Ewald, Y.-J. Cho, C.M. Rudin, P.T. Tran, T.F. Burns, A first-in-
class TWIST1 inhibitor with activity in oncogene-driven lung
cancer, Mol. Cancer Res. 15, 1764–1776 (2017). https://doi.org/
10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-17-0298
Kalita and Selvaraj
114.
L.F. Vistain, N. Yamamoto, R. Rathore, P. Cha, T.J. Meade,
Targeted inhibition of snail activity in breast cancer cells by using
a Co(III)-Ebox conjugate. Chem. Biochem. 16, 2065–2072
(2015). https://doi.org/10.1002/cbic.201500289
115.
J. Sakata, F. Utsumi, S. Suzuki, K. Niimi, E. Yamamoto, K.
Shibata, T. Senga, F. Kikkawa, H. Kajiyama, Inhibition of
ZEB1 leads to inversion of metastatic characteristics and restora-
tion of paclitaxel sensitivity of chronic chemoresistant ovarian
carcinoma cells. Oncotarget 8, 99482–99494 (2017). https://doi.
org/10.18632/oncotarget.20107
116.
Q. Du, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. Wei, H. Xu, S. Wang, Propofol
inhibits proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition of
MCF-7 cells by suppressing miR-21 expression, Artif. Cells
Nanomed. Biotechnol. 47, 1265–1271 (2019). https://doi.org/10.
1080/21691401.2019.1594000
117.
C. Bartholomeusz, X. Xie, M.K. Pitner, K. Kondo, A. Dadbin, J.
Lee, H. Saso, P.D. Smith, K.N. Dalby, N.T. Ueno, MEK inhibitor
Selumetinib (AZD6244; ARRY-142886) prevents lung metastasis
in a triple-negative breast cancer xenograft model. Mol. Cancer
Therap. 14, 2773–2781 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-
7163.mct-15-0243
118.
L.H. El Touny, A. Vieira, A. Mendoza, C. Khanna, M.J.
Hoenerhoff, J.E. Green, Combined SFK/MEK inhibition prevents
metastatic outgrowth of dormant tumor cells. J. Clin. Invest. 124,
156–168 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI70259
119.
J. Chen, T. Deng, X. Li, W. Cai, MiR-193b inhibits the growth
and metastasis of renal cell carcinoma by targeting IGF1R, Artif.
Cells Nanomed. Biotechnol. 47, 2058–2064 (2019). https://doi.
org/10.1080/21691401.2019.1620251
120.
D. Melisi, S. Ishiyama, G.M. Sclabas, J.B. Fleming, Q. Xia, G.
Tortora, J.L. Abbruzzese, P.J. Chiao, LY2109761, a novel
transforming growth factor beta receptor type I and type II dual
inhibitor, as a therapeutic approach to suppressing pancreatic can-
cer metastasis. Mol. Cancer Ther. 7, 829–840 (2008). https://doi.
org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-0337
121.
A. Bandyopadhyay, J.K. Agyin, L. Wang, Y. Tang, X. Lei, B.M.
Story, J.E. Cornell, B.H. Pollock, G.R. Mundy, L.-Z. Sun,
Inhibition of pulmonary and skeletal metastasis by a transforming
growth factor-β type I receptor kinase inhibitor. Cancer Res. 66,
6714–6721 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.can-05-
3565
122.
R. Ge, V. Rajeev, P. Ray, E. Lattime, S. Rittling, S. Medicherla, A.
Protter, A. Murphy, J. Chakravarty, S. Dugar, G. Schreiner, N.
Barnard, M. Reiss, Inhibition of growth and metastasis of mouse
mammary carcinoma by selective inhibitor of transforming
growth factor-beta type I receptor kinase in vivo, Clin. Cancer
Res. 12, 4315–4330 (2006). https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.
CCR-06-0162
123.
S. Biswas, J.S. Nyman, J. Alvarez, A. Chakrabarti, A. Ayres, J.
Sterling, J. Edwards, T. Rana, R. Johnson, D.S. Perrien, S.
Lonning, Y. Shyr, L.M. Matrisian, G.R. Mundy, Anti-
transforming growth factor ß antibody treatment rescues bone loss
and prevents breast cancer metastasis to bone. PLoS One 6,
e27090 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0027090
124.
C.-Y. Park, D.-K. Kim, Y.Y. Sheen, EW-7203, a novel small
molecule inhibitor of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) type
I receptor/activin receptor-like kinase-5, blocks TGF-β1-mediated
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in mammary epithelial cells.
Cancer Sci. 102, 1889–1896 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1349-7006.2011.02014.x
125.
C.-Y. Park, J.-Y. Son, C.H. Jin, J.-S. Nam, D.-K. Kim, Y.Y.
Sheen, EW-7195, a novel inhibitor of ALK5 kinase inhibits
EMT and breast cancer metastasis to lung. Eur. J. Cancer 47,
2642–2653 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2011.07.007
126.
F. Zhang, D.R. Braun, G.E. Ananiev, F. Michael Hoffmann, I.-W.
Tsai, S.R. Rajski, T.S. Bugni, Biemamides A–E, inhibitors of the
TGF-β pathway that block the epithelial to mesenchymal transi-
tion. Org. Lett. 20, 5529–5532 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.orglett.8b01871
127.
L. Di, L.-J. Liu, Y.-M. Yan, R. Fu, Y. Li, Y. Xu, Y.-X. Cheng, Z.-
Q. Wu, Discovery of a natural small-molecule compound that
suppresses tumor EMT, stemness and metastasis by inhibiting
TGFβ/BMP signaling in triple-negative breast cancer. J. Exp.
Clin. Cancer Res. 38, 134 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13046-019-1130-2
128.
V. Ramesh, T. Brabletz, P. Ceppi, Targeting EMT in cancer with
repurposed metabolic inhibitors. Trends Cancer Res. 6, 942–950
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trecan.2020.06.005
129.
H. Li, Y. Chen, N. Xu, M. Yu, X. Tu, Z. Chen, M. Lin, B. Xie, J.
Fu, L. Han, AMD3100 inhibits brain-specific metastasis in lung
cancer via suppressing the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis and protecting
blood-brain barrier. Am. J. Transl. Res. 9, 5259–5274
(2017). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29312481.
Accessed 23 Apr 2021
130.
W.-B. Zhu, Z.-F. Zhao, X. Zhou, AMD3100 inhibits epithelial-
mesenchymal transition, cell invasion, and metastasis in the liver
and the lung through blocking the SDF-1α/CXCR4 signaling
pathway in prostate cancer. J. Cell. Physiol. 234, 11746–11759
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.27831
131.
B. Devapatla, A. Sharma, S. Woo, CXCR2 inhibition combined
with Sorafenib improved antitumor and antiangiogenic response
in preclinical models of ovarian cancer. PLoS One 10, e0139237
(2015). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139237
132.
X. Yang, J. Di, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Lu, J. Liu, W. Shi, The
Rho-kinase inhibitor inhibits proliferation and metastasis of small
cell lung cancer. Biomed. Pharmacother. 66, 221–227 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2011.11.011
133.
H. Ying, S.L. Biroc, W.-W. Li, B. Alicke, J.-A. Xuan, R. Pagila,
Y. Ohashi, T. Okada, Y. Kamata, H. Dinter, The Rho kinase
inhibitor fasudil inhibits tumor progression in human and rat tu-
mor models. Mol. Cancer Ther. 5, 2158–2164 (2006). https://doi.
org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-05-0440
134.
T.F. Borin, A.S. Arbab, G.B. Gelaleti, L.C. Ferreira, M.G.
Moschetta, B.V. Jardim-Perassi, A.S.M. Iskander, N.R.S.
Varma, A. Shankar, V.B. Coimbra, V.A. Fabri, J.G. de Oliveira,
D.A.P. de CZuccari, Melatonin decreases breast cancer metastasis
by modulating Rho-associated kinase protein-1 expression. J.
Pineal Res. 60, 3–15 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1111/jpi.12270
135.
S. Liu, R.H. Goldstein, E.M. Scepansky, M. Rosenblatt, Inhibition
of rho-associated kinase signaling prevents breast cancer metasta-
sis to human bone. Cancer Res. 69, 8742–8751 (2009). https://doi.
org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1541
136.
E. Koedoot, M. Fokkelman, V.-M. Rogkoti, M. Smid, I. van de
Sandt, H. de Bont, C. Pont, J.E. Klip, S. Wink, M.A.
Timmermans, E.A.C. Wiemer, P. Stoilov, J.A. Foekens, S.E. Le
Dévédec, J.W.M. Martens, B. van de Water, Uncovering the sig-
naling landscape controlling breast cancer cell migration identifies
novel metastasis driver genes. Nat. Commun. 10, 2983 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-11020-3
137.
R. Kanteti, S.K. Batra, F.E. Lennon, R. Salgia, FAK and paxillin,
two potential targets in pancreatic cancer. Oncotarget 7, 31586–
31601 (2016). https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.8040
138.
B.Y. Lee, P. Timpson, L.G. Horvath, R.J. Daly, FAK signaling in
human cancer as a target for therapeutics. Pharmacol. Therapeut.
146, 132–149 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2014.
10.001
139.
A. Winer, M. Janosky, B. Harrison, J. Zhong, D. Moussai, P.
Siyah, N. Schatz-Siemers, J. Zeng, S. Adams, P. Mignatti,
Inhibition of breast cancer metastasis by presurgical treatment
with an oral matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor: A preclinical
proof-of-principle study. Mol. Cancer Ther. 15, 2370–2377
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-16-0194
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
140.
Y. Lyu, Q. Xiao, L. Yin, L. Yang, W. He, Potent delivery of an
MMP inhibitor to the tumor microenvironment with
thermosensitive liposomes for the suppression of metastasis and
angiogenesis, Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 4, 26 (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41392-019-0054-9
141.
R.D. Bonfil, A. Sabbota, S. Nabha, M.M. Bernardo, Z. Dong, H.
Meng, H. Yamamoto, S.R. Chinni, I.T. Lim, M. Chang, L.C.
Filetti, S. Mobashery, M.L. Cher, R. Fridman, Inhibition of human
prostate cancer growth, osteolysis and angiogenesis in a bone
metastasis model by a novel mechanism-based selective gelatinase
inhibitor. Int. J. Cancer. 118, 2721–2726 (2006). https://doi.org/
10.1002/ijc.21645
142.
W.R. Grither, G.D. Longmore, Inhibition of tumor–
microenvironment interaction and tumor invasion by small-
molecule allosteric inhibitor of DDR2 extracellular domain.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115, E7786–E7794 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1805020115
143.
X. Hou, H. Du, X. Quan, L. Shi, Q. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Xiao,
Y. Li, L. Lu, X. Ai, M. Zhan, S. Yuan, L. Sun, Silibinin inhibits
NSCLC metastasis by targeting the EGFR/LOX pathway. Front.
Pharmacol. 9, 21 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2018.
00021
144.
J. Chang, M.C. Lucas, L.E. Leonte, M. Garcia-Montolio, L.B.
Singh, A.D. Findlay, M. Deodhar, J.S. Foot, W. Jarolimek, P.
Timpson, J.T. Erler, T.R. Cox, Pre-clinical evaluation of small
molecule LOXL2 inhibitors in breast cancer. Oncotarget 8,
26066–26078 (2017). https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.15257
145.
A. Bondareva, C.M. Downey, F. Ayres, W. Liu, S.K. Boyd, B.
Hallgrimsson, F.R. Jirik, The lysyl oxidase inhibitor, β-
aminopropionitrile, diminishes the metastatic colonization poten-
tial of circulating breast cancer cells. PLoS One 4, e5620 (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0005620
146.
T.L.M. Ten Hagen, A.L.B. Seynhaeve, G.A. de Wiel-
Ambagtsheer, E.A. de Bruijn, S.T. van Tiel, C. Ruegg, M.
Meyring, M. Grell, S.L. Goodman, A.M.M. Eggermont, The
αVβ3/αVβ5 integrin inhibitor cilengitide augments tumor re-
sponse to melphalan isolated limb perfusion in a sarcoma model.
Int. J. Cancer. 132, 2694–2704 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1002/
ijc.27940
147.
K.B. Kim, V. Prieto, R.W. Joseph, A.H. Diwan, G.E. Gallick,
N.E. Papadopoulos, A.Y. Bedikian, L.H. Camacho, P. Hwu,
C.S. Ng, W. Wei, M.M. Johnson, S.M. Wittemer, A. Vardeleon,
A. Reckeweg, A.D. Colevas, A randomized phase II study of
cilengitide (EMD 121974) in patients with metastatic melanoma.
Melanoma Res. 22, 294–301 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1097/
CMR.0b013e32835312e4
148.
J. Vansteenkiste, F. Barlesi, C.F. Waller, J. Bennouna, C. Gridelli,
E. Goekkurt, D. Verhoeven, A. Szczesna, M. Feurer, J.
Milanowski, P. Germonpre, H. Lena, D. Atanackovic, M.
Krzakowski, C. Hicking, J. Straub, M. Picard, W. Schuette, K.
O’Byrne, Cilengitide combined with cetuximab and platinum-
based chemotherapy as first-line treatment in advanced non-
small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients: results of an open-label,
randomized, controlled phase II study (CERTO). Ann. Oncol. 26,
1734–1740 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdv219
149.
C. Scaringi, G. Minniti, P. Caporello, R.M. Enrici, Integrin inhib-
itor cilengitide for the treatment of glioblastoma: a brief overview
of current clinical results. Anticancer Res. 32, 4213–4223
(2012). https://ar.iiarjournals.org/content/32/10/4213.long
150.
A. Gilam, J. Conde, D. Weissglas-Volkov, N. Oliva, E. Friedman,
N. Artzi, N. Shomron, Local microRNA delivery targets Palladin
and prevents metastatic breast cancer. Nat. Commun. 7, 12868
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms12868
151.
L.-X. Yan, Y.-H. Liu, J.-W. Xiang, Q.-N. Wu, L.-B. Xu, X.-L.
Luo, X.-L. Zhu, C. Liu, F.-P. Xu, D.-L. Luo, P. Mei, J. Xu, K.-P.
Zhang, J. Chen, PIK3R1 targeting by miR-21 suppresses tumor
cell migration and invasion by reducing PI3K/AKT signaling and
reversing EMT, and predicts clinical outcome of breast cancer. Int.
J. Oncol. 48, 471–484 (2016). https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo.2015.
3287
152.
G. Oshima, N. Guo, C. He, M.E. Stack, C. Poon, A. Uppal, S.C.
Wightman, A. Parekh, K.B. Skowron, M.C. Posner, W. Lin, N.N.
Khodarev, R.R. Weichselbaum, In vivo delivery and therapeutic
effects of a microRNA on colorectal liver metastases. Mol. Ther.
25, 1588–1595 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2017.04.
005
153.
D. Dettori, F. Orso, E. Penna, D. Baruffaldi, S. Brundu, F. Maione,
E. Turco, E. Giraudo, D. Taverna, Therapeutic silencing of miR-
214 inhibits tumor progression in multiple mouse models. Mol.
Ther. 26, 2008–2018 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.
2018.05.020
154.
Y. Hara, R. Torii, S. Ueda, E. Kurimoto, E. Ueda, H. Okura, Y.
Tatano, H. Yagi, Y. Ohno, T. Tanaka, K. Masuko, T. Masuko,
Inhibition of tumor formation and metastasis by a monoclonal
antibody against lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor
1. Cancer Sci. 109, 3171–3182 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1111/
cas.13755
155.
W. Leconet, M. Chentouf, S. du Manoir, C. Chevalier, A. Sirvent,
I. Aït-Arsa, M. Busson, M. Jarlier, N. Radosevic-Robin, C.
Theillet, D. Chalbos, J.-M. Pasquet, A. Pèlegrin, C. Larbouret,
B. Robert, Therapeutic activity of anti-AXL antibody against
triple-negative breast cancer patient-derived xenografts and metas-
tasis, Clin. Cancer Res. 23, 2806–2816 (2017). https://doi.org/10.
1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-1316
156.
K. Jin, N.B. Pandey, A.S. Popel, Simultaneous blockade of IL-6
and CCL5 signaling for synergistic inhibition of triple-negative
breast cancer growth and metastasis. Breast Cancer Res. 20, 54
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13058-018-0981-3
157.
A.-M. Georgoudaki, K.E. Prokopec, V.F. Boura, E. Hellqvist, S.
Sohn, J. Östling, R. Dahan, R.A. Harris, M. Rantalainen, D.
Klevebring, M. Sund, S.E. Brage, J. Fuxe, C. Rolny, F. Li, J.V.
Ravetch, M.C.I. Karlsson, Reprogramming tumor-associated
macrophages by antibody targeting inhibits cancer progression
and metastasis. Cell Rep. 15, 2000–2011 (2016). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.celrep.2016.04.084
158.
S. Mochizuki, M. Shimoda, H. Abe, Y. Miyamae, J. Kuramoto, N.
Aramaki-Hattori, K. Ishii, H. Ueno, A. Miyakoshi, K. Kojoh, Y.
Okada, Selective inhibition of ADAM28 suppresses lung carcino-
ma cell growth and metastasis. Mol. Cancer Ther. 17, 2427–2438
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-1198
159.
Y. Kato, A. Kunita, S. Abe, S. Ogasawara, Y. Fujii, H. Oki, M.
Fukayama, Y. Nishioka, M.K. Kaneko, The chimeric antibody
chLpMab-7 targeting human podoplanin suppresses pulmonary
metastasis via ADCC and CDC rather than via its neutralizing
activity. Oncotarget 6, 36003–36018 (2015). https://doi.org/10.
18632/oncotarget.5339
160.
J. Klingelhöfer, B. Grum-Schwensen, M.K. Beck, R.S.P.
Knudsen, M. Grigorian, E. Lukanidin, N. Ambartsumian, Anti-
S100A4 antibody suppresses metastasis formation by blocking
stroma cell invasion. Neoplasia 14, 1260–1268 (2012). https://
doi.org/10.1593/neo.121554
161.
A. Chiechi, D.L. Waning, K.R. Stayrook, J.T. Buijs, T.A. Guise,
K.S. Mohammad, Role of TGF- in breast cancer bone metastases.
Adv. Biosci. Biotechnol. 4, 15–30 (2013). https://doi.org/10.4236/
abb.2013.410A4003
162.
S. Milette, J.K. Sicklick, A.M. Lowy, P. Brodt, Molecular path-
ways: targeting the microenvironment of liver metastases. Clin.
Cancer Res. 23, 6390–6399 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1158/
1078-0432.CCR-15-1636
163.
M. Singh, C. Venugopal, T. Tokar, N. McFarlane, M.K.
Subapanditha, M. Qazi, D. Bakhshinyan, P. Vora, N.K. Murty,
I. Jurisica, S.K. Singh, Therapeutic targeting of the premetastatic
Kalita and Selvaraj
stage in human lung-to-brain metastasis. Cancer Res. 78, 5124–
5134 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-18-1022
164.
A. Bettaieb, C. Paul, S. Plenchette, J. Shan, L. Chouchane, F.
Ghiringhelli, Precision medicine in breast cancer: reality or uto-
pia? J. Transl. Med. 15, 139 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12967-017-1239-z
165.
Y.-Z. Jiang, Y. Liu, Y. Xiao, X. Hu, L. Jiang, W.-J. Zuo, D. Ma, J.
Ding, X. Zhu, J. Zou, C. Verschraegen, D.G. Stover, V.
Kaklamani, Z.-H. Wang, Z.-M. Shao, Molecular subtyping and
genomic profiling expand precision medicine in refractory meta-
static triple-negative breast cancer: the FUTURE trial. Cell Res.
31, 178–186 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-020-0375-9
166.
J. Verigos, A. Magklara, Revealing the complexity of breast can-
cer by next generation sequencing. Cancers 7, 2183–2200 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers7040885
167.
Q. Tan, J. Cui, J. Huang, Z. Ding, H. Lin, X. Niu, Z. Li, G. Wang,
Q. Luo, S. Lu, Genomic alteration during metastasis of lung ade-
nocarcinoma. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 38, 469–486 (2016). https://
doi.org/10.1159/000438644
168.
V. Izzi, M.N. Davis, A. Naba, Pan-cancer analysis of the genomic
alterations and mutations of the matrisome. Cancers 12, 2046
(2020). https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers12082046
169.
F. Chen, Y. Zhang, S. Varambally, C.J. Creighton, Molecular
correlates of metastasis by systematic pan- cancer analysis across
The Cancer Genome Atlas, Mol. Cancer Res. 17, 476–487 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-18-0601
170.
P. Priestley, J. Baber, M.P. Lolkema, N. Steeghs, E. de Bruijn, C.
Shale, K. Duyvesteyn, S. Haidari, A. van Hoeck, W. Onstenk, P.
Roepman, M. Voda, H.J. Bloemendal, V.C.G. Tjan-Heijnen,
C.M.L. van Herpen, M. Labots, P.O. Witteveen, E.F. Smit, S.
Sleijfer, E.E. Voest, E. Cuppen, Pan-cancer whole-genome anal-
yses of metastatic solid tumours. Nature 575, 210–216 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1689-y
171.
S. Mishra, C.D. Kaddi, M.D. Wang, Pan-cancer analysis for
studying cancer stage using protein and gene expression data.
Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2016, 2440–2443
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC.2016.7591223
172.
K. Pinker, J. Chin, A.N. Melsaether, E.A. Morris, L. Moy,
Precision medicine and radiogenomics in breast cancer: New ap-
proaches toward diagnosis and treatment. Radiology 287, 732–
747 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2018172171
173.
S.A. Eschrich, J. Pramana, H. Zhang, H. Zhao, D. Boulware, J.-H.
Lee, G. Bloom, C. Rocha-Lima, S. Kelley, D.P. Calvin, T.J.
Yeatman, A.C. Begg, J.F. Torres-Roca, A gene expression model
of intrinsic tumor radiosensitivity: prediction of response and
prognosis after chemoradiation. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys.
75, 489–496 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.06.014
174.
J. Meehan, M. Gray, C. Martínez-Pérez, C. Kay, L.Y. Pang, J.A.
Fraser, A.V. Poole, I.H. Kunkler, S.P. Langdon, D. Argyle, A.K.
Turnbull, Precision medicine and the role of biomarkers of radio-
therapy response in breastcCancer. Front. Oncol. 10, 628 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2020.00628
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Deciphering molecular mechanisms of metastasis: novel insights into targets and therapeutics
