Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
Available online 14 September 2023
1043-6618/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/4.0/).
Enhancing personalized immune checkpoint therapy by immune 
archetyping and pharmacological targeting 
Claudia Cerella a, Mario Dicato a, Marc Diederich b,* 
a Laboratoire de Biologie Mol´eculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer (LBMCC), Fondation Recherche sur le Cancer et les Maladies du Sang, Pavillon 2, 6A rue Barbl´e, L-1210 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg 
b Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, Korea   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Cancer immunity 
Immune checkpoints 
Tumor microenvironment 
Cell heterogeneity 
Predictive markers 
T-cells 
A B S T R A C T   
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) are an expanding class of immunotherapeutic agents with the potential to 
cure cancer. Despite the outstanding clinical response in patient subsets, most individuals become refractory or 
develop resistance. Patient stratification and personalized immunotherapies are limited by the absence of pre­
dictive response markers. Recent findings show that dominant patterns of immune cell composition, T-cell status 
and heterogeneity, and spatiotemporal distribution of immune cells within the tumor microenvironment (TME) 
are becoming essential determinants of prognosis and therapeutic response. In this context, ICIs also function as 
investigational tools and proof of concept, allowing the validation of the identified mechanisms. After reviewing 
the current state of ICIs, this article will explore new comprehensive predictive markers for ICIs based on recent 
discoveries. We will discuss the recent establishment of a classification of TMEs into immune archetypes as a tool 
for personalized immune profiling, allowing patient stratification before ICI treatment. We will discuss the 
Abbreviations: ADC, antibody-drug conjugates; ADME, absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; APC, antigen-pre­
senting cell; BCC, metastatic basal cell carcinoma; BRAF, B-Raf proto-oncogene; BMS, Bristol-Myers Squibb; BTC, biliary tract cancer; CAF, cancer-associated 
fibroblast; CAR-T, chimeric antigen receptor T-cells; cDC, conventional DC; CDKN2A, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2 A; COX-2, cyclooxygenase-2; CRC, 
colorectal cancer; CSCC, cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma; CCL2/5, chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2/5; CSF-1R, colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor; CTLA-4, 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4; CXCL10/12, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 10/12; CXCR4, chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 4; DC, dendritic cell; 
dMMR, mismatch-repair deficient; ECM, extracellular matrix; EGFR, epithelial growth factor receptor; ESCC, esophageal squamous cell carcinoma; EMT, epithelial- 
mesenchymal transition; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; FGL1, fibrinogen-like protein 1; FLT3L, Fms-like tyrosine kinase ligand 3; GAL-3, galectin-3; GEJ, 
gastroesophageal junction; GITR, glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; HIP1R, huntingtin interacting protein 1 related; HLA, human 
leukocyte antigen; HMGB1, high-mobility group box 1; HNC, head and neck cancer; HNSCC, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma; HTRF, homogeneous time- 
resolved fluorescence; ICB, immune checkpoint blockade; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; IFNγ, interferon γ; IgG, immunoglobulin; IL-1α/1β/6/10, interleukin 
1α/1β/6/10; IHC, immunohistochemistry; ITAM, tyrosine-based activation motif; ITIM, tyrosine-based inhibitory motif; KIRs, killer cell immunoglobulin-like re­
ceptors; LAG-3, lymphocyte activation gene 3; LCMV, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus; LLC, lung Lewis carcinoma; LRRC15, leucine-rich repeat containing 15; 
LSECtin, liver sinusoidal endothelial cell lectin; LYTAC, lysosome-targeting chimera; M6PR, mannose 6-phosphate receptor; MB, megabase; MCC, Merkel cell car­
cinoma; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; MDSC, myeloid-derived suppressor cell; MEK, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase; MHC-II, molecular histocompat­
ibility complex class II; MMP-2/9, metalloproteinase-2/9; MSI-H, microsatellite instability-high; NK, natural killer; NKG2A, NK group 2 member A; NMIBC, non- 
muscle invasive bladder cancer; NSCLC, non-small cell lung cancer; OCR, open chromatin region; ORR, overall response rate; OS, overall survival; PC, prostate 
cancer; PD-1, programmed death 1; PDAC, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; PD-L1/2, programmed death-ligand 1/2; PFS, progression-free survival; PMBCL, 
primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma; PS, phosphatidylserine; PROTAC, proteolysis-targeting chimera; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog; RAR, retinoic 
acid receptor; RCC, renal cell carcinoma; RFS, recurrence-free survival; SCLC, small cell lung cancer; Siglec, sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin-like lectin; SMARC4, 
SWI/SNF Related, Matrix Associated, Actin Dependent Regulator of Chromatin, Subfamily A, Member 4; SPR, surface plasmon receptor; STK11/LKB1, serine/ 
threonine kinase 11/liver kinase B1; TAM, tumor-associated macrophage; TCR, T-cell receptor; TCR-seq, T-cell receptor sequencing; TEAD, TEA domain; Teff, 
effector T-cell; Tex, exhausted T-cell; TGFβ, tumor growth factor β; Tfh, T follicular helper; Th, T helper; TIGIT, T-cell immunoreceptor with IG and ITIM domains; 
TIL, tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte; TIM-3, T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 3; TMB, tumor mutational burden; TME, tumor microenvironment; Tmem, 
memory T-cell; Tn, naïve T-cell; TNBC, triple-negative breast cancer; TNFα, tumor necrosis alpha; TOX, thymocyte selection associated high mobility group box; Treg, 
regulatory T-cell; TSTR, T-cell response stress state; UC, urothelial cancer; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; VISTA, V-domain Ig suppressor of T-cell acti­
vation; VSIG, V-set and immunoglobulin domain-containing protein; VSIR, V-set immunoregulatory receptor; VSTM, V-set and transmembrane domain-containing 
protein; WUCAM, Washington University cell adhesion molecule; XCL1, X-C motif chemokine ligand 1. 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: marcdiederich@snu.ac.kr (M. Diederich).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Pharmacological Research 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yphrs 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2023.106914 
Received 22 April 2023; Received in revised form 4 September 2023; Accepted 6 September 2023   
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
2
developing comprehension of T-cell diversity and its role in shaping the immune profile of patients. We describe 
the potential of strategies that score the mutual spatiotemporal modulation between T-cells and other cellular 
components of the TME. Additionally, we will provide an overview of a range of synthetic and naturally 
occurring or derived small molecules. We will compare compounds that were recently identified by in silico 
prediction to wet lab-validated drug candidates with the potential to function as ICIs and/or modulators of the 
cellular components of the TME.   
1. Introduction 
Immunotherapy is an innovative and fast-expanding anticancer 
treatment approach. Recent research has aimed to initiate or rein­
vigorate the immune system’s reaction against cancer cells. The recent 
clinical approval of immunomodulators belonging to the immune 
checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) class has profoundly affected cancer patients’ 
therapeutic outcomes. Ipilimumab, the first-in-class ICI targeting cyto­
toxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4), induced complete and long- 
lasting tumor regression in a subset of patients affected by metastatic 
melanoma [1,2]. Similarly, complete tumor resorption was achieved in 
patients treated with pembrolizumab or nivolumab. These two 
first-generation antibodies block programmed death 1 (PD-1) and its 
ligands 1 and 2 (PD-L1 and PD-L2) [1,3]. These remarkable therapeutic 
achievements have led to the development of additional ICIs that 
improved the treatment of multiple types of cancer. Immunotherapeutic 
approaches have recently included neoantigen vaccines and adoptive 
cell therapies based on chimeric antigen receptor T-cells (CAR-T). All 
these therapeutic approaches have generated durable (> 10 years) and 
curative effects in sensitive patients. However, these exciting outcomes 
are counterbalanced by low response rates and ineffective predictive 
biomarkers. A significant number of patients are indeed refractory to 
immunotherapies. In addition, initial responders may acquire resistance 
and eventually progress, as observed in chemotherapy or targeted 
therapies. Much attention is focused on understanding why certain pa­
tients respond well to immunotherapy while others do not. The goal is to 
identify the reasons behind this distinction and find ways to convert 
non-responders into responders. 
Cancer immunity involves multiple cellular components interacting 
and mutually modulating each other. Changes in any of the steps can 
impede the anticancer immune response. Modulatory signals occur 
within the tumor tissue and other areas of the body. Recent findings 
have identified critical onco-immunological regulatory mechanisms, 
providing the rationale for cutting-edge personalized approaches. 
Considering the current advancements, we provide an overview of the 
anticancer immune response and discuss therapeutic strategies to 
overcome resistance using synthetic and natural immune checkpoint 
modulators. 
2. Development and rationale behind utilizing ICIs as a curative 
treatment for cancer 
The anticancer activity of ICIs was initially predicted on a theoretical 
basis. Later, experimental approaches that involved the development of 
neutralizing antibodies validated their anticancer potential. In the early 
1990s, researchers discovered that in addition to the T-cell receptor 
(TCR), T-cells needed costimulatory signals for full activation after 
interacting with antigen-presenting dendritic cells (DCs). It has been 
discovered that the CD28 receptor on T-cells binds with the B7 family 
proteins situated on the surface of DCs. [4]. Following engagement, the 
inhibitory receptor CTLA-4 moves from the endoplasmic reticulum to 
the plasma membrane and takes the place of CD28 in its interaction with 
B7 proteins. The higher binding affinity of CTLA-4 eventually turns off 
T-cell stimulation. Such an evolutionary process is a safety mechanism 
to avoid uncontrolled and deleterious immune responses. The hypoth­
esis suggested that by neutralizing CTLA-4, T-cells can be (re)activated, 
resulting in enhanced anticancer immunity [5]. This approach 
represented a shift in the philosophy of cancer treatment: the primary 
therapeutic targets were no longer cancer cells but the patient’s immune 
system. The anti-CLTA-4 ICI ipilimumab was the first-in-class immu­
notherapy to be used in clinical practice for treating metastatic mela­
noma. After conducting clinical trials and 5-year survival studies, 
certain patients experienced complete tumor resorption, as seen in their 
follow-up results spanning over a decade. [1,2]. Ipilimumab is now 
being used clinically for advanced stages of other solid tumors. (i.e., 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)). The adverse side effects of pro­
longed T-cell activation appeared manageable with steroids. Although 
several follow-up studies were conducted, they all indicated that the 
treatment provided a cure for only about 20% of patients. Most of the 
enrolled patients did not show any initial objective response. This 
challenging outcome led to the theory that there may be more check­
points. The identification of the PD-1 receptor on T-cells [6] and its 
corresponding ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2 [7], on cancer cells marked a 
significant milestone in comprehending the role of T-cell-mediated 
anticancer immunity and has had a profound impact on therapy. 
PD-1/PD-L1 is a late-occurring checkpoint blockade that prevents acti­
vated T-cells from killing cancer cells. In cancer cells, PD-L1 upregula­
tion can be caused by oncogenic signaling pathways. PD-L1 is also under 
the control of interferon-gamma (IFNγ) or tumor necrosis alpha (TNFα) 
released in the tumor microenvironment (TME) [8]. In addition, 
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and T lymphocytes also upre­
gulate PD-L1/PD-L2. The mechanism of action for this checkpoint 
blockade differs from that of CTLA-4 blockade, as it corresponds to a 
resistance mechanism developed by cancer cells. Cancer co-opts a 
physiological, protective mechanism used by healthy tissues or embry­
onal/fetal cells to prevent an attack from the maternal immune system. 
This discovery led to the development of pharmacological agents 
neutralizing PD-1 (nivolumab, pembrolizumab, cemiplimab) or its 
cognate receptors PD-L1 and PD-L2 (atezolizumab, durvalumab, ave­
lumab). These antibody drugs are now approved for treating solid tu­
mors with a well-tolerated profile (Table 1, and Fig. 1). Other 
PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors are under advanced investigation. However, 
cancer patients can also become refractory/resistant to PD-1/PD-L1 in­
hibitors (approximately 50% of responders). Combinatorial strategies 
were assessed because the CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoints 
have distinct, non-redundant mechanisms and timing of action. Com­
binations improved tumor rejection rates in murine melanoma models. 
In addition, specific therapeutic schemes appeared to be more effective. 
The administration of nivolumab followed by ipilimumab showed an 
overall response rate (ORR) of approximately 56%, despite increased 
adverse effects. On the other hand, the opposite approach resulted in a 
31% ORR. [9]. A 5-year survival study on melanoma patients treated 
with ipilimumab or nivolumab administered alone or in combination 
showed superior overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival 
(PFS) in patients receiving nivolumab alone (44% OS; 36% PFS) or 
nivolumab plus ipilimumab (52% OS; 29% PFS) compared to ipilimu­
mab alone (26% OS; 8% PFS), with a similar safety profile [1]. Addi­
tional combinatorial strategies involving agents besides immune 
modulators are used in advanced clinical trials or clinics. These trials 
involve triplet-combined therapies with anti-PD-1 pembrolizumab, in­
hibitors of B-Raf proto-oncogene (BRAF) and mitogen-activated protein 
kinase kinase (MEK) [10,11]. The anti-PD-1 spartalizumab was com­
bined with dabrafenib and trametinib in BRAFV600-mutated metastatic 
melanoma patients [12]. Another trial tested the combination of 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
3
PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
or tyrosine kinase inhibitors in endometrial and/or renal cell carcinoma 
(RCC). ICIs combined with chemotherapy have been clinically approved 
for treating certain types of cancer (e.g., NSCLC). Additional clinical 
trials investigate the efficacy of the combination of PD-1/PD-L1 with 
chemotherapeutic agents and/or additional investigational drugs in 
NSCLC (NCT05555732; NCT5687266; NCT03322566), triple-negative 
breast cancer (TNBC; NCT02685059 [13]; NCT02622074; [14]; 
NCT05402722; NCT05556200; NCT05088057), and head and neck 
cancers 
(HNC; 
NCT05758389, 
NCT04429542; 
NCT04954599; 
NCT05777824). These studies are aimed at investigating survival ad­
vantages and improving patient stratification. Furthermore, there is 
evidence suggesting that the combination of ICIs and radiation therapy 
may have a synergistic effect. Nevertheless, the extent of their thera­
peutic benefits in certain cases remains a topic of debate. 
Studies on primary or acquired resistance against the two central 
immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) pathways contributed to identifying 
compensatory mechanisms, in most cases arising from alternative IC 
modulators (Fig. 2). We will provide a brief overview of inhibitory and 
stimulatory immune checkpoints (ICs), with a primary emphasis on ICIs 
that have been approved for therapeutic use or are nearing approval. We 
suggest some reviews for a detailed description of inhibitory and stim­
ulatory checkpoints [15,16]. 
2.1. Inhibitory checkpoints 
VISTA (V-domain Ig suppressor of T-cell activation, also known as V- 
set immunoregulatory receptor, VISR) is an instructive example of 
experimental validation of acquired resistance to first-generation ICIs. 
Prostate cancer (PC) is refractory to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors and is 
characterized by low T-cell infiltration (see Section 3). The adminis­
tration of the anti-CTLA-4 ipilimumab to PC patients promotes T-cell 
infiltration. The PC patients who participated in the clinical trials did not 
experience any advantages from taking ipilimumab as a standalone 
treatment or in combination with hormonal therapy. VISTA (in addition 
to PD-L1) was upregulated on CD8 T-cells, CD4 T-cells, and CD68+
TAMs in tumor tissue [17]. 
LAG-3 (lymphocyte activation gene 3, also known as CD223) is a 
receptor expressed on the surface of effector T-cells after progressive 
exposure to (neo)antigens. Natural killer (NK)-activated B cells, regu­
latory T-cells (Tregs), and plasmacytoid DCs also express LAG-3. LAG-3 
is transcriptionally upregulated downstream of TCR activation and 
cytokine production [18]. The primary ligand on APCs is the molecular 
histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) [19]. Additional ligands 
include galectin-3 (GAL-3), liver sinusoidal endothelial cell lectin 
(LSECtin), fibrinogen-like protein 1 (FGL1), and α-synuclein. When 
oligomeric LAG-3 binds to the MCH-II, its cytosolic domain can inhibit 
the TCR intracellular signaling pathway, thereby blocking the activation 
of transcription factors and cytokine production [18]. To prevent 
autoimmunity, the self-induced expression of LAG-3 is associated with a 
dysfunctional exhausted phenotype of T-cells [20]. However, LAG-3 
upregulation can occur in parallel or following PD-1 upregulation in 
tumor-infiltrating 
lymphocytes, 
neutralizing 
the 
activity 
of 
anti-PD1/PD-L1 agents [21]. Relatlimab (BMS-986016) is a humanized 
immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) anti-LAG3 monoclonal blocking antibody. In 
stage III/IV metastatic melanoma patients, a relatlimab-nivolumab 
combination improved OS and PFS. No additional adverse effects were 
observed compared to nivolumab alone [22]. Based on these results, the 
FDA (Food and Drug Administration) recently approved relatlimab in 
combination with nivolumab against pediatric and adult forms of 
advanced unresectable or metastatic melanoma. The combination of 
experimental LAG-3 inhibitors and anti-PD-1/PD-L1 agents is under 
investigation [23]. The monoclonal humanized IgG4 antibody ier­
amilimab (LAG-525) blocks the interactions between LAG-3 and the li­
gands MHC-II and FGL1. In a phase I/II study, an unselected patient 
population with various forms of cancer experienced only a modest 
improvement when ieramilimab was combined with spartalizumab 
(PDR001), a humanized IgG4 anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody [24]. 
Favezelimab (MK-4280) is a LAG-3 antibody investigated in combina­
tion with the PD-1 neutralizing agent pembrolizumab in colorectal 
Table 1 
FDA-approved ICIs.  
Target 
Name 
Mechanism of action; effect 
Indication 
CTLA- 
4 
Ipilimumab 
humanized IgG1 anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal antibody; 
disruption of CTLA-4/B7.1 or B7.2 interaction 
monotherapy (melanoma, MSI-H, and dMMR CRC); with anti-PD-1 nivolumab 
(melanoma, HCC, NSCLC, mesothelioma, RCC, ESCC) 
PD-1 
Nivolumab 
humanized anti-PD-1 IgG4 monoclonal antibody; disruption 
of PD-1/PD-L1 interaction 
monotherapy (NSCLC, ESCC); with the anti-CTLA4 ipilimumab (melanoma, HCC, 
NSCLC, mesothelioma, RCC, ESCC), with the anti-LAG-3 relatlimab (melanoma), 
with chemotherapy-based regimens (NSCLC, RCC, esophageal, GEJ, and gastric 
cancer); adjuvant (UC) 
PD-1 
Pembrolizumab 
humanized anti-PD-1 IgG4k monoclonal antibody; disruption 
of PD-1/PD-L1 interaction 
monotherapy (advanced cervical cancer, CSCC, MCC, MSI-H, and dMMR CRC and 
advanced endometrial carcinoma, NMIBC, HNSCC, PMBCL, SCLC, TMB-H solid 
tumors); with anti-angiogenic bevacizumab (cervical cancer); with tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (axitinib and lenvatinib for RCC); with chemotherapy-based 
regimens (esophageal and GEJ carcinoma, NSCLC, TNBC); adjuvant (melanoma, 
RCC, TNBC) 
PD-1 
Cemiplimab 
humanized hinge-stabilized anti-PD-1 IgG4 monoclonal 
antibody; disruption of PD-1/PD-L1 interaction 
monotherapy (locally advanced or metastatic BCC, untreatable CSCC, NSCLC); with 
chemotherapy-based regimens (NSCLC) 
PD-L1 
Atezolizumab 
humanized anti-PD-L1 IgG1 monoclonal antibody; disruption 
of PD-1/PD-L1 interaction 
monotherapy (NSCLC, UC); with anti-angiogenic bevacizumab (HCC, NSCLC); with 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (cobimetinib for metastatic melanoma); BRAF inhibitor 
(vemurafenib for metastatic melanoma); with chemotherapy-based regimens 
(NSCLC, SCLC, TNBC); adjuvant (NSCLC) 
PD-L1 
Durvalumab 
human anti-PD-L1 IgG1k monoclonal antibody; disruption of 
PD-1/PD-L1 interaction 
with anti-CTLA4 tremelimumab (HCC, NSCLC); with chemotherapy-based 
regimens (BTC, NSCLC, SCLC) 
PD-L1 
Avelumab 
human anti-PD-L1 IgG1 monoclonal antibody; disruption of 
PD-L1/PD-1 interaction and antibody-dependent mediated 
cytotoxicity 
monotherapy (MCC); with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (axitinib for RCC); 
maintenance therapy (UC) 
LAG-3 
Relatlimab 
human anti-LAG-3 IgG4 monoclonal antibody; disruption of 
LAG-3/MHC-II or FGL1 interaction 
with anti-PD-1 nivolumab (melanoma) 
Abbreviations: BCC: basal cell carcinoma; BTC: biliary tract cancer; CRC: colorectal cancer; CSCC: cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma; dMMR: mismatch repair 
deficient; ESCC: esophageal squamous cell carcinoma; GEJ: gastroesophageal junction GEJ; HCC: hepatocellular carcinoma; HNSCC: head and neck squamous car­
cinoma MCC: Merkel cell carcinoma; MSI-H: microsatellite instability-high; NMIBC: nonmuscle invasive bladder cancer; NSCLC: non-small cell lung cancer; PMBCL: 
primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma; RCC: renal cell carcinoma; SCLC: small cell lung cancer; TMB: tumor mutational burden; TNBC: triple-negative breast 
cancer; UC: urothelial cancer. 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
4
cancer (CRC), showing promising increased antitumor activity in some 
patient subsets [25]. 
Similar to CD28, CD226 is a costimulatory receptor that is necessary 
for complete T-cell activation. Like CD28, CD226 activity is time-limited 
by TIGIT (T-cell immunoreceptor with IG and ITIM domains, also known 
as Washington University cell adhesion molecule, WUCAM; V-set and 
immunoglobulin domain-containing protein 9, VSIG9; and V-set and 
transmembrane domain-containing protein 3, VSTM3). TIGIT competes 
with the costimulatory receptor CD226 to bind nectin/nectin-like (PVR) 
family receptors. These receptors include CD155 (PVR) or CD112 
(PVRL2 or nectin-2), which can be expressed on both tumor cells and 
APCs, thereby inhibiting T-cell priming. TIGIT is broadly expressed in 
different immune cell types and plays differential immunosuppressive 
roles. Not only does it affect the priming and differentiation of T-cells, 
but it also obstructs the ability of T-cells and NK cells to destroy cancer 
cells. TIGIT also induces immunosuppressive DCs [26]. Currently, 
combination strategies of inhibitors of TIGIT and the PD-1/PD-L1 
pathway are expected to provide a clinical benefit. The TIGIT inhibi­
tor tiragolumab has been investigated in combination with the anti-PD-1 
agent atezolizumab as a first-line treatment for unresectable, chemo­
therapy-naïve, PD-L1-positive NSCLC (phase II Cityscape study). The 
results indicate that patients who received the combination treatment 
had a longer survival period compared to those who only received ate­
zolizumab [27]. 
Nectin/nectin-like family Ca2+-independent immunoglobulins are 
ubiquitously expressed on the plasma membrane of immune cells. They 
are involved in multiple cellular processes, including cell-cell adhesion, 
cell polarization, and tissue reorganization. Several family members, 
such as TIGIT and CD226, possess immunomodulatory functions by 
acting as ligands for specific immune receptors (recently reviewed by 
Johnston and colleagues [28]). Other family members are aberrantly 
expressed in cancer and promote oncogenic signals. Elevated levels of 
CD155 were reported in many solid tumors, where its expression cor­
relates with poor prognosis and cancer progression [29]. Furthermore, 
CD155 overexpression increased cancer cell proliferation and metastasis 
spreading. Loss of CD112 and CD115 correlated with resistance to NK 
cell-mediated cytotoxicity in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) [30]. NK 
cell-mediated cytotoxicity was inhibited following the binding of CD112 
to TIGIT. The oncogenic role of other nectin/nectin-like molecules has 
emerged in several tumors. Nectin-4 (PVRL4) is overexpressed in uro­
thelial carcinoma [31]. The antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) enfortumab 
vedotin is a human anti-nectin-4 antibody linked to the cytotoxic 
microtubule-disrupting agent monomethyl auristatin E. It received 
accelerated approval from the FDA in 2021 to treat advanced/metastatic 
urothelial carcinoma [32]. Similarly, the combination of enfortumab 
vedotin with pembrolizumab was approved for advanced/metastatic 
urothelial carcinoma patients ineligible for cisplatin treatment [33]. 
The TIM-3 (T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 3) receptor is 
expressed by different immune cells including T-cells, NK cells, and 
myeloid cells. It inhibits T-cell-mediated antitumor immunity through 
mechanisms that remain to be understood [34]. Interestingly, both the 
ligand and the cell context may be crucial factors in determining the 
outcome. In chronic infections and cancer, exhausted T-cells co-express 
TIM-3 and PD-1. The ligand galectin-9 (LSGAL9) can bind to TIM-3 and 
induces programmed cell death of exhausted T-cells. In tumors, these 
exhausted T-cells persist. PD-1 can also bind galectin-9, forming 
PD-1/galectin-9/TIM-3 complexes. As a result, cell death is inhibited, 
and the exhausted PD-1+ TIM-3+ T-cell population survives [35]. 
Accordingly, galectin-9 may become a promising target to enhance 
anticancer immunity. TIM-3 senses phosphatidylserine (PS) and the 
danger signal high-mobility group Box 1 (HMGB1) released by dying 
cells [36]. Tumor-infiltrating activated PD-1+ TIM-3+ CD8 T-cells 
upregulate PS and interact with TIM-3 expressed on the surface of 
tumor-infiltrating myeloid APCs. As a result of this interaction, mem­
brane fragments from the APCs are acquired by PD-1+ TIM-3+ CD8 
T-cells, a phenomenon called trogocytosis [37]. These myeloid mem­
brane fragments also contain MHC-II complexes. As a result, PD-1+
TIM-3+ CD8 T-cells are targeted by PD-1+ TIM-3- CD8 T-cells, causing 
Fig. 1. ICI-based regimens by cancer type. Abbreviations: dMMR: mismatch repair deficient; MSI-H: microsatellite instability-high.  
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
5
their death. Blocking antibodies against TIM-3 prevents trogocytosis and 
the subsequent elimination of PD-1+ TIM-3+ CD8+ T-cells. Despite their 
exhausted phenotype, these T-cells maintain higher cytolytic functions 
than PD-1+ TIM-3- CD8+ T-cells [37]. 
Of note, TIM-3 suppresses antitumor immunity by directly modu­
lating DCs. The loss of TIM-3 on DCs (but not on CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells) 
promoted the anticancer effect by enhancing antigen-specific immunity 
and inflammasome activation [38]. Furthermore, TIM-3 restricts 
HMGB1-dependent endocytosis of extracellular DNA and limits the 
activation of the cGAS-STING pathway in intratumoral conventional 
DCs (cDCs) [39]. This modulation may contribute to chemotherapy 
resistance (i.e., in mammary carcinoma). In summary, these discoveries 
suggest implementing strategies to block TIM-3 during treatment. 
Clinical trials are currently investigating the effectiveness of various 
anti-TIM-3 antibodies alone or in combination with PD-1 neutralizing 
agents for the treatment of solid tumors. They include cobolimab 
(TSR-022) tested in combination with anti-PD-1 inhibitors (e.g., dos­
tarlimab, TSR-042) on PD-L1-positive PD-1 NSCLC and liver cancer. 
Sabatolimab (MBG453) is combined with the anti-PD-1 spartalizumab. 
LY3321367 is combined with the anti-PD-L1 LY3300054, and 
BMS986258 is co-administered with nivolumab. 
Sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin-like lectin (Siglec) receptors are 
expressed by various immune cells. They interact and bind to sialic acid- 
containing glycans (sialoglycans). The interaction may occur between 
ligands and receptors on different (in trans) or the same T-cells (in cis). 
Numerous receptors belong to this family (recently reviewed by Mur­
ugesan and colleagues [40] and Stanczak and Laubli [41]). Most Siglec 
receptors display inhibitory functions, avoiding forms of immune 
autoreactivity against the self. The intracellular domain of inhibitory 
Siglecs contains a tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM) and ITIM-like 
motifs interacting with SHP1/SHP2 phosphatases. A few members, 
such as Siglec-1 and Siglec-4, exert stimulatory activity. In this instance, 
the interaction and binding of sialoglycans trigger the recruitment of 
DAP12 (alias TYROBP), which contains a tyrosine-based activation 
motif (ITAM). 
The TME shows elevated glycosylation; cancer cells exhibit hyper­
sialylation [42]. Increased sialylation characterizes many solid tumors 
(i.e., pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), melanoma, CRC, HCC, 
NSCLC, breast, and cervical cancer [42]) and hematological malig­
nancies (i.e., multiple myeloma [43]). Increased sialylation of specific 
receptors (i.e., CD43 in CML K562 cells [44]; CD24 in ovarian and breast 
cancer [45]) correlates with phenomena of immune evasion by inhib­
iting the functions of various immune cell types expressing Siglec re­
ceptors, including NK cells [46] and T-cells [47]. Furthermore, 
sialoglycans induce the tumor-associated macrophage phenotype [45, 
48]. In addition, hyperglycosylation was shown to impair the efficacy of 
CAR T-cells targeting CD19 [49]. ADCs against Siglec receptors are 
being developed to disrupt the sialoglycan-Siglec interaction in the TME. 
Inotuzumab ozogamicin targeting Siglec-2 (CD22) showed efficacy in 
relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia [50]. The anti-CD33 (Siglec-3) 
gemtuzumab ozogamicin is currently approved for AML therapy. Ge­
netic ablation or antibody blockade of Siglec-15 amplified the 
antigen-specific T-cell response in the TME of mouse cancer models 
[47]. A phase 1/2 trial initiated in 2021 is investigating the first-in-class 
Fig. 2. Molecular and cellular mechanisms 
of ICI resistance. Mechanisms avoiding the 
prolonged activation of T-cells are exploited by 
cancer cells to elude the immune system and 
inhibit anti-cancer immunity. Molecular and 
cellular determinants in the TME promote 
immunosuppression. 
CTLA-4 
neutralization 
promotes T-cell tumor infiltration; however, the 
interaction between L1 and PD-1 in the tumor 
microenvironment (TME) hinders the cytotoxic 
activity of infiltrated T-cells. The targeting of 
PD-1/PD-L1 interaction is frequently insuffi­
cient to restore anti-cancer immunity due to 
compensatory mechanisms activated down­
stream of TCR/CD28 activation (i.e., LAG-3 and 
TIM-3) and interacting with upregulated con­
jugate ligands overexpressed by cancer cells (i. 
e., GAL-3 and FGL1 for LAG-3; GAL-9 for TIM- 
3). This interaction promotes the accumula­
tion of exhausted T-cells in the TME, associated 
with specific epigenetic profiles, which deter­
mine ICI resistance. Cancer cells may over­
express additional surface molecules promoting 
ICI resistance, including 
nectins, protein 
hypersialylation, HLA-E, which may modulate 
other immune cell types (i.e., NK cells). Various 
cellular components contribute to ICI refracto­
riness in a direct and indirect manner. The 
figure depicts several mechanisms that have 
been discussed in the text. Tumor-recruited 
monocytes are converted in TAMs by activated T-cells (upregulation of MHC-II, CD80/86), which in turn promote T-cell exhaustion by upregulating TOX, PD-1 
and CD38 in the hypoxic tumor core. TAMs and stromal components (i.e., CAFs) prevent T-cell migration to the tumor center and restrain them into the stroma. 
CAFs alter the migration and the accumulation of various immunosuppressive immune cell types (i.e., MDSCs by e.g., CCL2 secretion; and Tregs by e.g., CXCL12 
secretion). Tregs control a subtype of conventional DCs inducing the migration of Th1 CD4+ T-cells promoting anti-tumor immunity. These abnormal cellular 
characteristics can predict how a patient will respond to immunotherapy-based treatments. Their targeting restores the therapeutic efficacy of the investigated ICIs. 
Abbreviations: CAF: cancer-associated fibroblast; CDKN2A: cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A; CCL2: chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2; CTLA-4: cytotoxic T- 
lymphocyte-associated protein 4; CXCL12: chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12; DC: dendritic cells; FGL1: fibrinogen-like protein 1; GAL-3/9: galectin-3/9; HLA: 
human leukocyte antigen; GITR: glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related; LAG-3: lymphocyte activation gene 3; MHC: molecular histocompatibility complex; MDSC: 
myeloid-derived suppressor cell; NK: natural killer; PD-1: programmed death 1; PD-L1/2: programmed death-ligand 1/2; TAM: tumor-associated macrophage; TCR: 
T-cell receptor; Tex: exhausted T-cell; Th: T helper; TIGIT: T-cell immunoreceptor with IG and ITIM domains; TIM-3: T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 3; 
TOX: thymocyte selection associated high mobility group box; VISTA: V-domain Ig suppressor of T-cell activation.   
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
6
humanized IgGκ monoclonal antibody NC318 against Siglec-15. NC318 
is assessed alone or in combination with the anti-PD-1 pembrolizumab 
in Siglec-15-positive solid tumors (NCT04699123). Preclinical studies 
used Fc-engineered blocking antibodies against Siglec-7 and Siglec-9 
that reduced the tumor burden in mouse models [51]. Blocking sialo­
glycans is an alternative strategy currently being investigated. Genetic 
and therapeutic desialylation with an antibody-sialidase conjugate 
enhanced antitumor immunity by repolarizing TAMs. The loss of 
Siglec-E, the main receptor for sialylation, enhanced ICB efficacy [52]. 
Antibodies blocking the interaction between the disialoganglioside GD2 
and Siglec-7 on macrophages synergized with anti-CD47 therapy in 
syngeneic and xenograft mouse neuroblastoma models [53]. Alterna­
tively, the inhibition of glycosylation by deoxy-2-glucose or bacterial 
sialidases aims to enhance the therapeutic response to CAR T-cells [54] 
or approved therapeutic agents [55]. 
NK cells are involved in the first-line innate immune defense against 
infections and cancer cells. Their activation and cytotoxic activity are 
controlled by the sophisticated and balanced activity of inhibitory and 
activating surface receptors to avoid immunoreactivity [56,57]. NK cells 
express inhibitory receptors that recognize human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA)-class I (killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors, KIRs) and 
HLA-E class Ib (the heterodimer CD94/NKG2A (NK Group 2 member A)) 
in addition to the inhibitory checkpoints PD-1, TIGIT, TIM-3, and CD96. 
Cognate ligands of these receptors are overexpressed in cancer cells, 
preventing NK activation. Cancer cells may circumvent NK activation by 
inducing the downregulation of activating NK receptors or modulating 
the expression of their cognate ligands in the TME. 
Recently, the C-type lectin-like NKG2A receptor has emerged as a 
critical checkpoint for NK and T-cell activation, and its blockade could 
potentially be utilized for cancer therapy [58]. HLA-E, a nonclassical 
MHC class I molecule, inhibits NK cell functions upon binding to 
NKG2A. Many tumors overexpress HLA-E, inducing NK cell dysfunction. 
HLA-E was overexpressed in circulating tumor cells from PDAC patients 
who are generally refractory to immunotherapy [59]. Genetic ablation 
of HLA-E or NKG2A blockade with the humanized monoclonal antibody 
monalizumab limited liver metastasis formation, suggesting the poten­
tial of NKG2A blockade as neoadjuvant therapy in combination with 
standard treatments. Monalizumab was tested alone or combined with 
other antibodies (i.e., cetuximab [60], anti-PD1/PD-L1 [61]) or cancer 
vaccines [62] in various tumor models. Its administration restored NK 
and CD8+ T-cell functions [59]. In advanced bladder cancer, NKG2A 
expression was associated with improved survival upon anti-PD-L1 
treatment. HLA-E-expressing bladder tumors, however, restrict 
NKG2A+ CD8+ T-cell function, which was restored upon NKG2A 
blockade with monalizumab [63]. The adoptive transfer of 
NGK2A-lacking NK cells refractory to the inhibitory effects of HLA-E 
overcame HLA-E tumor resistance in mouse models, thus representing 
a potential alternative approach to NGK2A blockade to circumvent the 
inhibitory role of the NGK2A/HLA-E axis [64]. 
2.2. Stimulatory checkpoints 
OX40 (also known as TNFRSF4 or CD134) is a receptor belonging to 
the TNF family. It is expressed on T-cell subsets, including Tregs and NK 
cells. It binds to OX40L which is expressed on the surface of APCs, such 
as DCs. This interaction improves their maturation and overall function. 
OX40 expression promotes T-cell survival and proliferation. It elicits 
cytokine secretion and contributes to Treg depletion from the TME. 
OX40 emerged as a critical factor regulating the expansion of CD4+ T- 
cells and the subsequent establishment of memory T-cells upon activa­
tion. These properties of OX40 make it a promising candidate for the 
development of agonistic antibodies that can elicit antitumor immunity. 
Humanized antibodies are under investigation in phase I dose-escalation 
studies on adults with advanced solid tumors. Patients with advanced or 
metastatic refractory solid tumors were involved in a monotherapy trial, 
which utilized the OX40 agonist MOXR0916 (NCT02219724) [65]. 
Another recent phase I dose-escalation study of the OX40 agonist hu­
manized monoclonal antibody MEDI0562 was conducted on adults with 
advanced solid tumors (NCT02318394) [66]. The favorable safety pro­
file and the observed immune activation suggest future combinations 
with PD-1/PD-L1 antagonists, despite the low general objective 
response to agonist monotherapy. 
Glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related (GITR, also known as TNFS18 
or CD257) is an OX-40-like protein. Its expression promotes Teff cell 
proliferation and cytokine production. Additionally, it impairs Treg 
tumor infiltration. This dual activity makes GITR a potential candidate 
for agonist antibodies. GITR agonists have shown efficacy as mono­
therapies and in combination with other ICIs [67–70]. In a 
dose-escalation study, the anti-GITR antibody TRX-518 was found to be 
safe for patients with advanced malignancies (NCT01239134) [71]. 
4–1BB (CD137 or TNFRS9) is another TNFR family member 
expressed on various immune cell types, including several T cell subsets, 
NK cells, Tregs, and monocytes. Its ligand, 4–1BBL, is expressed on the 
surface of DCs. 4–1BB promotes T-cell survival and anti-tumor immunity 
by triggering NF-κB-dependent mechanisms [72,73]. Combining 
anti-4–1BB agonists (urelumab and PF-582566) with anti-PD-1 anti­
bodies induced tumor regression in different cancer models. Studies are 
currently in progress to confirm the safety profile of these agents. 
CD40 is a TNFR family member expressed by B cells, DCs, and 
macrophages. Its ligand (CD40L) is expressed on the surface of CD4+ T- 
cells. CD40 promotes MHCII upregulation on APCs and cytokine secre­
tion, leading to CD8+ T-cell priming. CD40 agonism promotes immune 
cell infiltration in different tumor models. CD40 agonism alone or 
combined with other agents promotes priming or reprogramming and 
infiltration of immune cells in the TME of solid tumors [74–77]. This 
finding shows that activating CD40 can change a non-responsive cold 
tumor into a responsive hot one, and it could be effective when used 
together with anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies. 
3. TME determinants of ICI resistance 
3.1. PD-L1 as an ICI biomarker 
The therapeutic use of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies is subordinated to 
testing PD-L1 positivity in cancer patients with an approved companion 
or complementary diagnostics. At present, the FDA has approved four 
distinct assays for using immunohistochemistry (IHC) to monitor PD-L1 
levels in order to make therapy decisions: Dako 22C3 for pem­
brolizumab administration in several solid tumors; Ventana SP142 for 
administrating atezolizumab in patients with urothelial carcinoma, 
TNBC, and NSCLC; Dako 28–8 for ipilimumab and nivolumab combi­
nation in patients with NSCLC; and Ventana SP263 as a complementary 
diagnostic for nivolumab in patients with advanced NSCLC and durva­
lumab in patients with advanced urothelial carcinoma [78]. 
Through clinical trials involving patients receiving ICI treatment, 
researchers were able to determine the level of PD-L1 expression that 
could accurately predict the clinical benefits of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 treat­
ments. The authors of the phase 1b KEYNOTE-028 multicohort study 
(patients with advanced solid tumors receiving pembrolizumab) used 
the 22C3 assay to define PD-L1 positivity when ≥1% of tumor, in­
flammatory, or stromal cells were stained. With this cutoff, 48% of 
advanced or metastatic endometrial cancer patients were classified as 
PD-L1 positive; among the positive patients further enrolled in the ef­
ficacy analysis, the ORR was 13% [79]. The ORR was 17% in the cohort 
of 24 PD-L1 patients with advanced cervical cancer [80], 33% in the 
cohort of advanced small cell lung cancer (SCLC) patients [81], and 
17.4% in the cohort of advanced prostate carcinoma patients [82] 
included in this multicohort study. Based on the results from all the 
cohorts included in the KEYNOTE-028 open-label study, pembrolizumab 
was considered promising in treating PD-L1-expressing solid tumors. 
The KEYNOTE-001 study assessed the efficacy of the anti-PD-1 pem­
brolizumab and validated the PD-L1 expression level to indicate clinical 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
7
benefit in advanced NSCLC patients. Patients with a proportion score 
≥50% (percentage of neoplastic cells with membranous staining for 
PD-L1 using the 22C3 assay), which represents a quarter of patients with 
advanced or metastatic disease, were associated with a higher response 
rate and longer PFS and OS [83]. This study accelerated FDA approval of 
pembrolizumab for advanced NSCLC and the companion diagnostic 
22C3 assay [84]. More recently, the phase II KEYNOTE-158 study 
confirmed the durable response of pembrolizumab in advanced cervical 
cancer. This has led to an accelerated FDA approval of this treatment in 
PD-L1-positive patients experiencing progression during or after 
chemotherapy. PD-L1 positivity was assessed by determining the per­
centage of PD-L1-positive cells (including tumor cells, lymphocytes, and 
macrophages) in relation to the total number of tumor cells. This was 
done through the 22C3 assay and PD-L1 positivity was defined as ≥1% 
of this combined positive score [85]. Monitoring of PD-L1 positivity with 
SP142 and 22C3 IHC assays confirmed that PD-L1-positive tumors 
showed the most significant response to atezolizumab treatment, despite 
variations in the sensitivity levels of the assay [86]. However, other 
studies showed durable responses to pembrolizumab in PD-L1-negative 
melanoma [87]. NSCLC cancer patients were treated with atezolizumab 
regardless of their PD-L1 expression level [88]. Furthermore, the effec­
tiveness of clinically-used IHC assays is restricted by tumor heteroge­
neity and assay sensitivity, as discussed in the review by Doroshow et al. 
[78]. As a result, these assays are only suitable for certain therapeutic 
situations. In one instance, research conducted to compare the PD-L1 
positivity in TNBC for determining the eligibility of atezolizumab 
revealed a disparity in the scores obtained from the Ventana SP142 and 
Ventana SP263 assays [89]. Altogether, there is a considerable risk of 
selecting the wrong patients for treatment due to these discrepancies. 
3.2. Tumor mutational burden, mismatch repair deficiency, and 
microsatellite instability 
Tumors with a high mutational burden (TMB) are generally the most 
responsive to immunotherapy. Similarly, melanoma, lung, colorectal, 
bladder, and kidney cancer exhibit a high frequency of somatic muta­
tions [90]. Responsiveness is directly linked to the intrinsic ability of 
these tumors to generate multiple neoantigens, essential for T-cell 
priming and activation. A notable correlation exists between the 
response rate to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition and TMB [91]. It is interesting to 
note that certain previously identified outliers have since been explained 
due to advancements in technology. These have allowed the detection of 
new types of mutations, such as insertion-and-deletion and fusion pro­
teins, which serve as additional sources of neoantigens [92]). In addi­
tion, cancer patients with mismatch repair-deficient (dMMR) solid 
tumors are also favorable candidates for immunotherapy. A recent study 
explored the effectiveness of pembrolizumab, an anti-PD-1 medication, 
on patients with 12 different types of solid tumors. The study found that 
53% of patients experienced objective radiographic responses, with 21% 
achieving a complete response. Deep sequencing of T-cell receptor CDR3 
regions (TCR-seq) was used to evaluate T-cell clonal representation in 
tumors and blood from responders. After administering pembrolizumab, 
tumor neoantigen-specific T-cell clones were rapidly expanded in the 
patient’s peripheral blood [93]. Similarly, cancer with microsatellite 
instability (MSI) can create more neoantigens. Anti-PD-1 strategies are 
approved against adult, and pediatric MSI-high (MSI-H) advanced solid 
tumors. Phase III studies have shown that MSI-H patients respond much 
better to ICIs than chemotherapy, whether they receive them as first-line 
treatments or as previously treated patients [94,95]. 
Despite the association with improved response rates, not all tumors 
presenting these alterations respond to current immunotherapies. 
Consequently, TMB, dMMR, and MSI-H do not represent specific pre­
dictive markers of response to ICIs. The discovery of multiple ICB 
pathways is just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to understanding 
the complex immune cancer landscape. The cellular heterogeneity of the 
TME plays a crucial role in determining the efficacy of these pathways. 
3.3. Diversified TME immune profiles as determinants of ICI response 
The histological observation of tumor tissues allows to define 
different TME immune profiles. The cellular composition of the TME 
indicates the progression of the cancer-immunity cycle and the diagnosis 
of the response to a specific class of ICIs. The complete absence of 
cytotoxic CD8-positive T-cell infiltration defines an immune desert TME. 
This histological pattern reflects early alterations in the anticancer im­
mune response. Specifically, it suggests that T-cells are not being 
properly primed to recognize and attack tumor neoantigens. Tumors 
exhibiting this phenotype are generally refractory to PD-1/PD-L1 in­
hibitors, with the PD-1/PD-L1 axis being a late-occurring checkpoint in 
the cancer-immunity cycle. 
The spatial distribution of infiltrated T-cells and the abundance of 
stromal cells in the TME further distinguish an immune-excluded TME 
from an inflamed TME. The excluded TME is enriched in stromal cells. 
PD-1/PD-L1-resistant forms of pancreatic and bladder cancer are para­
digmatic examples. Stromal cells caused resistance to the PD-L1 in­
hibitors nivolumab and atezolizumab in large cohorts of urothelial 
cancer (UC) patients. Earlier research using real-time fibronectin and 
CD3 staining on viable slices of human lung tumors allowed to track the 
movement of individual T-cells within the tumor microenvironment 
(TME). This study established a relationship between the density and 
orientation of the stromal extracellular matrix (ECM) and T-cell 
migration [96]. A dense ECM may therefore contribute to the lack of 
response to ICIs, as it can limit T-cells from interacting with cancer cells 
by trapping them in stromal regions. Transforming growth factor β 
(TGFβ) can be released from cancer cells or other cellular components to 
activate fibroblasts to produce ECM. Increasing layers of ECM drive 
T-cell entrapment in the stromal region. The TGFβ-related gene signa­
ture was associated with a lower response and inferior OS to the PD-L1 
inhibitor atezolizumab [97]. In line with these findings, an ECM tran­
scriptional signature was upregulated and associated with TGFβ 
signaling and resistance to ICIs across various tumor types [98]. Other 
cellular components of the TME may also promote T-cell entrapment. 
They include cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and subsets of 
myeloid cells (see Section 4; Fig. 2). 
An inflamed TME is characterized by low stromal cell abundance and 
infiltrating T-cells. This tumor phenotype is well adapted for the ther­
apeutic use of ICIs. The TMB further subclassifies this TME. A study 
analyzing the association between the PD-L1 expression level and the 
TMB was analyzed across a large panel of ICI-responsive cancer patients. 
Four recurrent immunologic TME patterns could be established based on 
the TMB and PD-L1 status, which improves the prediction of the patient 
response to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors [99]: 1) hypermutated and 
inflamed, displaying high TMB (≥10 mutations/megabase (MB)) and 
high PD-L1 expression (such as melanoma and smoking-induced lung 
cancer); 2) inflamed with a consistent presence of tumor infiltration 
lymphocytes (TILs), with low TMB (< 10 mutations/MB, likely due to 
undetected insertion-and-deletion alterations or fusion proteins) and 
high PD-L1 levels (i.e., renal cancer), typically responsive to 
anti-PD-1/PD-L1 agents; 3) hypermutated, with high TMB but no PD-L1 
expression, which mirrors the absence of T-cells in the TME and may 
benefit of ICIs to attract TILs; and 4) not hypermutated and not inflamed, 
presenting low TMB and no PD-L1 expression, which include 
immune-resistant malignancies such as pancreatic and prostate cancer. 
These studies emphasize that the cellular heterogeneity of the TME 
plays a crucial role in determining a patient’s response to immuno­
therapy. This underscores the importance of considering the TME itself 
as a biomarker. Based on published literature, an integrated tran­
scriptomic and genomic analysis of the TME led to the elaboration of a 
gene expression signature with 29 genes discriminating four types of 
TMEs. The authors subdivided malignant and nonmalignant cellular 
components (immune-enriched, fibrotic; immune-enriched, nonfibrotic; 
fibrotic; and depleted), which are conserved across different tumor types 
[100]. Notably, the four identified TME subtypes predict ICI response. 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
8
For example, the percentage of responders to anti-CTLA-4 ipilimumab 
was higher in melanoma patients exhibiting an immune-enriched, 
nonfibrotic TME phenotype than those with the fibrotic phenotype 
(82% vs. 10%). Similar results were observed in patient cohorts affected 
by bladder, lung, and gastric cancer treated with anti-PD-1/PD-L1 reg­
imens, confirming the fibrotic phenotype associated with inferior 
response and survival. 
3.4. Novel TME categorization by immune archetypes 
Recent findings refined the classification of TMEs. Cancers do not 
engage in infinite immunological patterns. Instead, they fall into a 
limited number of tumor immune archetypes, corresponding to 
conserved collections of immune cells involving both myeloid and T-cell 
subsets. These cells exhibit specific gene expression patterns, work 
together in a coordinated manner, and interact with other TME cell 
components, including cancer and stromal cells [101]. Twelve arche­
types have been recently defined based on three hierarchical analyses of 
the frequency of 10 different cell types: first, T-cells, myeloid cells, and 
stromal cells; then, regulatory T-cells (Tregs), CD8 T-cells, and CD4 
T-cells; and eventually, type 1 and 2 cDCs (cDC1 and cDC2), monocytes, 
and macrophages [102]. Based on the analysis of fresh biopsies taken 
from 304 patients with 12 different types of solid tumors, it has been 
found that these archetypes are independent of the tissue they originate 
from. Instead, they are associated with tumor proliferation, OS, and 
enriched gene signatures for inflammatory (i.e., chemokines), functional 
(i.e., senescence, damage, fibrosis), and additional cell type abundance 
(i.e., NK cells). Identifying the prevailing immune archetypes in cancer 
can define novel cancer targets and the development of personalized 
treatments for patients. For example, the profiling of biopsies from 
melanoma patients before anti-PD-1 treatment showed that responders 
tended to fall into two predominant phenotypes. In one instance, tumor 
tissues exhibit high cDC1 and NK cells and CD8 TILs (Antiviral Class I). 
Otherwise, an increased presence of CD4 T-cells was observed together 
with high cDC2 and few Tregs (Antiviral Class II) [103]. Such pheno­
types provide mechanistic insights into ICB responsiveness and identify 
vulnerabilities that may generate resistance. In Class I, NK cells stimu­
late CD103+ cDC1 cells in the TME (via the release of Fms-like tyrosine 
kinase ligand 3 (FLT3L), chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 5 (CCL5), and 
X-C motif chemokine ligand 1 (XCL1)). cDC1s migrate to the 
tumor-draining lymph node, where they prime CD8 T-cells. When acti­
vated T-cells migrate toward the tumor, they develop the ability to 
trigger tumor rejection upon interaction with cDC1 cells. This anticancer 
immune response is CD8-associated and relies on the functional ability 
of NK cells to harness CD8 T-cells. In Class II, CD11b+ cDC2s can migrate 
into the lymph node, activating CD4 T-cells (T helper1-like CD4+
T-cells) and promoting tumor rejection once infiltrating the TME. 
CD11b+ cDC2 cells thus play the same role as CD103+ cDC1 cells; 
however, they can be blocked by Tregs. Interestingly, cDC2+/CD4+ is a 
common profile in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). 
Nevertheless, in this instance, an enrichment of Tregs in the TME is 
frequently observed [104], which may predict the requirement of 
anti-Treg strategies to overcome intrinsic ICB resistance. 
4. Mechanisms contributing to T-cell dysfunction and ICI 
resistance 
4.1. The stromal compartment 
The stromal compartment contributes to tumor tissue heterogeneity 
and determines clinical outcomes. Immune-resistant PDAC contains 
10–40% of cancer cells dispersed as islets in a stromal scaffold. At least 
four different cancer subtypes can be classified by single-cell analyses 
(proliferating Ki-67-positive, undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal tran­
sition (EMT), dual positive or negative to these two parameters), which 
gave rise to 8 different types of tumor glands [105]. The common 
phenotype found in distant liver metastasis is the dual-positive pheno­
type that is linked with high stromal CAF content. Additionally, patients 
presenting double-positive phenotypes with high or medium stroma 
content surrounding the cells before treatment more frequently devel­
oped resistance against the standard of care FOLFIRINOX [105]. In line 
with these results, the enrichment of a TGFβ-driven high leucine-rich 
repeat containing 15 (LRRC15) CAF lineage predicted resistance to 
anti-PD-1 atezolizumab [106]. Several mechanisms contribute to the 
role of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in promoting tumor growth 
(Fig. 2). CAFs release C-C motif chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) to recruit 
and differentiate myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) [35]. By 
activating cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)-dependent signaling, CAFs hinder 
the efficiency of antigen presentation by DCs [107]. Via the production 
of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12 (CXCL12), a specific CAF subset 
(CAF-S1) promotes Treg differentiation and accumulation [108]. All 
these mechanisms were linked to forms of resistance toward ICIs or 
antigen vaccination therapies. These findings indicate that CAFs stage 
cancer aggressiveness and differential sensitivity to chemotherapy and 
immunotherapy. However, identifying and targeting relevant CAF sub­
sets is challenging. It was found that the removal of CAFs in mouse 
models of PDAC did not result in beneficial outcomes; instead, their 
depletion accelerated tumor progression and was associated with a 
lower survival [109,110]. An alternative to CAF depletion is to target 
CAF-mediated signals. The combination of TGFβ-targeting approaches 
with anti-PD-L1 antibodies in an immune-excluded mouse model of 
breast cancer triggered tumor regression. The response was associated 
with a higher penetration of T-cells into the center of the tumors [97]. 
The inhibition of chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 4 (CXCR4), the 
CXCL12 receptor, potentiated the effects of anti-PD-1 strategies in mu­
rine models and clinical trials [111–114]. The CXCR4/CXCL12 axis 
correlates with poor intratumoral T-cell infiltration. In PDAC and CRC, it 
has been shown that CAF-derived CXCL12 coats cancer cells. Its inter­
action with CXCR4 expressed by most immune cells impairs the 
migration and accumulation of immune cells within tumors [115]. 
CXCR4 expression could potentially serve as a predictive marker of 
therapy response in patients undergoing anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy. 
There are ongoing efforts to develop inhibitors of CXCR4. 
Potential curative approaches based on CAF targeting will require a 
deeper classification of CAF heterogeneity as a first step to clarify their 
functions. CAFs have been divided into TGFβ-driven myofibroblastic 
myCAFs, IL-1β-dependent inflammatory iCAFs, and antigen-presenting 
apCAFs; their relative abundance varies depending on the type of can­
cer 
[116]. 
Very 
recently, 
an 
additional 
single-cell 
RNA 
sequencing-based study suggested the existence of at least four main 
types of CAFs, two of which promote T-cell exclusion from the TME by 
the deposition of distinct ECM molecules [117]. Of note, these two 
subpopulations characterize different phases of tumor progression and 
give rise to differential ECM scaffolds. Whereas MYH11+ αSMA+ CAFs 
are predominant in early carcinogenesis, FAP+ αSMA+ CAFs are abun­
dant in more advanced tumor stages. The observed spatiotemporal 
modulation could inspire novel methods to target specific subsets of 
CAFs in different ways. 
4.2. The role of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) 
TAMs promote T-cell dysfunction through different spatiotemporal 
mechanisms (Fig. 2). Similar to ECM fibers and fibroblasts, TAMs can 
also confine T-cell mobility into the stromal regions. The analysis of cell 
type distributions in lung squamous cell carcinoma tissue revealed that 
CD206+/CD163+ macrophages are enriched in the stroma compart­
ment. The real-time 3D tracking of T-cell trajectories in tissue sections 
documented that T-cells immobilize in macrophage-enriched stromal 
areas [118]. Inhibition of the colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor 
(CSF-1R) leads to TAM depletion, promotes T-cell accumulation, and 
reinvigorates intratumoral T-cell motility. CSF-1R inhibition per se has 
no relevant effects but strongly potentiates tumor regression when 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
9
combined with anti-PD-1 antibodies. This sensitization was associated 
with T-cell tumor-stroma redistribution, accompanied by prolonged 
contact of T-cells with tumor cells [118]. 
Tumor-infiltrated T-cells become dysfunctional due to chronic 
exposure to neoantigens and inflammatory conditions in the TME. This 
status is frequently associated with the upregulation of T-cell exhaustion 
markers PD-1, CD38, and TOX, thymocyte selection-associated high 
mobility group box. Mechanistically, there is a mutual modulation be­
tween T-cells and TAMs. On the one hand, exhausted T-cells show a 
superior ability to attract monocytes compared to naïve T-cells or in­
termediate progenitors; once recruited, exhausted T-cells facilitate the 
differentiation of these monocytes toward antigen-presenting macro­
phages in vitro/ex vivo conditions. On the other hand, differentiated 
TAMs form synapses with T-cells; instead of activating and proliferating 
T-cells, this interaction acts as a barrier as the TAM subsets are inef­
fective in priming them. Instead, their prolonged interaction exhausts T- 
cells characterized by PD-1 upregulation [119]. In line with this mech­
anistic model, TAM depletion with anti-CSFR1 attenuates the expression 
of T-cell exhaustion markers PD-1, CD38, and TOX. There is an increase 
in the production of inflammatory cytokines TNFα or IFNγ, which are 
usually secreted by effector T-cells (Teff). Of note, this dual modulation 
is spatiotemporally regulated. We can distinguish an outer/intermediate 
and an inner tumor area. As the T-cells move into the inner part of the 
tumor, they progressively acquire an exhausted phenotype, exhibiting 
an increased glycolytic metabolism due to hypoxic conditions. As 
monocytes move inward, they undergo terminal differentiation and 
become macrophages. Their antigen presentation activity is down­
regulated during this process while T-cell exhaustion increases in par­
allel [119,120]. 
4.3. Atlas of T-cell heterogeneity and epigenetic features of exhausted T- 
cells 
T-cells play a relevant role when deciphering the complexity of the 
TME and the determinants of the ICI response. Here, we discuss 
emerging aspects of CD8 T-cell biology mainly associated with the 
exhausted phenotype. Although the definition of exhausted CD8 T-cells 
(Tex) is far from being definitive, there is consensus that reduced 
functions characterize Tex compared to effector T-cells (Teff). Major 
changes include cytokine/chemokine production, reduced proliferation, 
and increased expression of PD-1, TOX, LAG-3, TIGIT, or TIM-3 [121]. 
The inhibition of inhibitory receptors reinvigorates T-cell functions and 
restores an effector-like phenotype [20,122,123]. 
Similar to other TME cellular components, Tex are organized into 
different subsets with distinct transcriptional programs and a unique 
epigenetic landscape. The use of mice infected with chronic lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) allowed investigators to define a four- 
cell-stage hierarchical development framework for Tex based on tran­
scriptional and epigenetic analyses. These results were confirmed in 
murine and human tumors. These analyses identified quiescent and 
blood inaccessible (Texprog1) and cycling and blood circulating (and 
Texprog2) early progenitor Tex subpopulations. Texprog2 gives rise to the 
third intermediate Tex subset with high T-bet expression (Texint) that 
has yet to reacquire Teff features. Eventually, Texint may terminally 
differentiate into a definitive dysfunctional state, driven by TOX 
expression and characterized by a permanent exit from cell cycling, loss 
of Bet1, and gain of EOMES expression (Texterm) [124]. Of note, PD-L1 
blockade amplified Texprog2 and Texint, thus suggesting a cell redistri­
bution favoring Texprog2/Texint vs. Texterm subsets. This phenomenon 
supports the clonal replacement of tumor-specific T-cells detected with 
paired single-cell RNA and T-cell sequencing analyses applied to 
site-matched tumors from patients with basal or squamous cell carci­
noma before and after anti-PD-1 therapy [125]. 
Tex subsets show a unique epigenetic landscape. The comparative 
analysis of the open chromatin landscape by assay for transposase- 
accessible chromatin sequencing (ATAC-seq) between naïve T-cells 
(Tn), Teff, memory T-cells (Tmem), and Tex from murine models 
documented a distinct and divergent state for Tex, with approximately 
6000 open chromatin region (OCR) changes unique to Tex. Treatment 
with anti-PD-L1 strategies can reinvigorate Tex cells but does not 
reprogram their epigenetic landscape [126]. CRISPR engineering of Tex 
to delete enhancers did not abolish the expression of PD-1. Instead, it 
restored the PD-1 expression levels to those observed in Teff, suggesting 
the presence of Tex-specific regulatory elements supporting PD-1 
expression. These critical regions are indeed associated with distinct 
transcription factor patterns, e.g., Sox-3, T-bet (Tbx21), and retinoic 
acid receptor (RAR) [127]. These results suggest the editing of 
exhaustion-specific enhancers as a potential therapeutic approach. Such 
a strategy would require a functional map of Tex-specific enhancers. 
Accordingly, a transcriptomic and open chromatin landscape atlas of 
T-cells has been established. Using a cohort of 24 healthy donors, 
14 T-cell subsets were identified and clustered by the global relationship 
between the chromatin landscape and gene expression. RNA-seq and 
ATAC-seq data comparisons discriminated Tex from the other T-cell 
subsets. The application of this framework to anti-PD-1 melanoma and 
basal cell carcinoma (BCC) datasets identified the predominant infil­
trating T-cell subsets [128]. Furthermore, this approach is helping to 
uncover additional novel Tex subsets, anticipating a higher level of 
complexity and heterogeneity of the Tex clones [129,130]. 
By combining single-cell RNA-seq, TCR-seq analyses, and computa­
tional methods, a high-resolution pan-cancer tumor-infiltrating T-cell 
atlas was built for 316 cancer patients across 21 different cancer types. A 
systematic T-cell immune-typing approach has been established for both 
prognostic and diagnostic purposes [131]. The study identified multiple 
potentially tumor-reactive T-cell clones, highlighting similarities and 
divergences in the TME of different cancers. A more recent single-cell 
transcriptomic atlas of tumor-infiltrating cells across 16 cancer types 
defined up to 32 T-cell states in the TME by integrating in-house and 
publicly available datasets [132]. Besides further dissecting known 
T-cell subsets (e.g., Treg and T follicular helper, Tfh), the authors 
discovered a novel T-cell response stress state (TSTR), characterized by 
upregulated heat shock gene expression. Different spatial profiling ap­
proaches can be used to track this TSTR in situ which emerged as a 
distinct feature associated with immunotherapy resistance. Mechanisms 
triggering TSTR are still under investigation. 
4.4. Genomic alterations contributing to immunosuppressive signals 
Several genomic alterations sustain immunosuppressive TME sig­
nals. The absence of T-cell recognition by cancer cells is caused by the 
mechanisms that hinder or prevent the exposure of tumor antigens. 
Mutation or reduced expression of proteins of the antigen-presenting 
machinery or the MHC complex promote cancer cell immune evasion 
[133,134]. 
Specifically, 
the 
MHC 
machinery 
component 
beta-2-microglobulin (B2M) is essential for HLA class I folding and 
transport to the cell surface. Alterations leading to B2M loss-of-function, 
e.g., truncating mutations or homozygous genetic loss, impair (neo)an­
tigen processing and presentation [134] and contribute to primary or 
acquired resistance to ICIs [135,136]. Notably, MHC class I and II 
expression predicts ICI susceptibility. The loss of the MHC I complex in 
melanoma was associated with the transcriptional repression of HLA-A, 
HLA-B, HLA-C, and B2M and predicted resistance to anti-CTLA-4 but not 
to 
anti-PD-1. 
MHC 
II 
complex 
expression 
correlates 
with 
interferon-gamma (IFNγ)-mediated gene signatures and the anti-PD-1 
response in melanoma [137]. Truncating mutations in Janus kinase 
1/2 (JAK1/2) determine a lack of response to IFNγ [136]. Consecutive 
B2M loss and impaired JAK1 signaling can lead to pan-T immune cell 
escape [138]. These findings further explain the improved clinical 
response rates observed with the anti-CTLA-4/anti-PD-1 combination 
and identify potential resistance mechanisms to this regimen. 
Loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in the STK11/LKB1 (serine/threo­
nine kinase 11/liver kinase B1), KEAP1 (kelch-like ECH-associated 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
10
protein 1), CDKN2A (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A), SMARC4 
(SWI/SNF Related, Matrix Associated, Actin Dependent Regulator of 
Chromatin, Subfamily A, Member 4), and PTEN (phosphatase and tensin 
homolog) genes are associated with cancer immune evasion and ICI 
resistance. Longitudinal and retrospective studies of cancer patients 
profiled by next-generation sequencing (NGS) document that these al­
terations correlate with reduced T and NK cell infiltration in the TME 
(cold tumors). In addition, modulation of PD-L1 expression levels is 
frequently observed. Mechanisms involving mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) and phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K) pathways 
contribute to the immunosuppressive effects. 
STK11/LKB1 is a tumor suppressor gene encoding a serine-threonine 
kinase involved in cell growth, polarity, and metabolism by interacting 
with 
multiple 
downstream 
effectors 
including 
the 
adenosine 
monophosphate-activated protein kinase, AMPK. KEAP1 negatively 
regulates nuclear factor erythroid-2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), a redox- 
sensitive transcription factor activated in response to oxidative stress. 
STK11/LKB1 and KEAP1 LOF worsen prognosis and predict ICI resis­
tance when cooccurring with KRAS mutations in lung adenocarcinoma 
(LUAD) patients [139]. The immunosuppressive effects of STK11/LKB1 
deficiency include the downregulation of MHC genes [139], activation 
of AMPK-downstream mediators, such as mTOR [140], altered cytoki­
ne/chemokine balance [141], metabolic restriction of T-cells [142], and 
decreased PD-L1 expression and anti-PD-L1 response [139]. The nega­
tive impact of STK11/LKB1 LOF on the PD-1/PD-L1 blockade axis also 
occurred in PD-L1-positive lung cancer subtypes. These observations 
suggest that the immunosuppressive impact of STK11/LKB1 LOF is not 
solely dependent on low levels of PD-L1 expression to mediate ICI 
resistance [65]. KEAP1-mutated tumors show increased glutamine 
addiction and rely on glutaminolysis [143]. The cooccurrence of 
STK11B/LKB1 and KEAP1 mutations in LUAD patients promotes meta­
bolic reprogramming toward glutamine dependency [144]. In addition, 
KEAP1/NRF2 upregulates PD-L1 after IFNγ stimulation [145]. NRF2 
depletion prevented PD-L1 upregulation and promoted CD4/CD8 T and 
NK cell infiltration in melanoma; additionally, NRF2 inhibition poten­
tiated the effects of anti-PD-1 treatment [146]. Of note, NRF2 is an 
important modulator of the innate immune response by directly or 
indirectly modulating innate immune mediators, the IFNγ, and NF-κB 
pathways (recently reviewed by van der Host and colleagues [147]). The 
identified mechanisms pave the way for the clinical trial validation of 
specific therapeutic interventions. Currently, mTOR and glutaminase 
inhibitors are under therapeutic investigation to resume immuno­
therapy sensitivity. Interesting therapeutic results have also been 
observed after the systemic inhibition of AXL, a receptor tyrosine kinase 
regulating APC activation. The authors used a murine LUAD model that 
had a Stk11/Lkb1 mutation, Kras, and Tp53 loss. These alterations 
recapitulate the lack of TCF1+PD1+CD8 T-cells observed in human 
STK11/LKB1 mutant NSCLCs [148]. AXL inhibition increased type I IFN 
secretion from DCs with subsequent expansion of tumor-associated 
TCF1+PD1+CD8 T-cells. These modulations restored the therapeutic 
response to anti-PD-1 treatment in mutated mice. Furthermore, clinical 
trials involving patients with LUAD who received a combination of the 
AXL inhibitor bemcentinib and the anti-PD-1 pembrolizumab have 
shown an objective clinical response [148]. STK11/KEAP1-mutated 
tumors have a poor prognosis regardless of KRAS status. It is inter­
esting to note that genes protecting against ferroptosis may be a po­
tential weakness that could be used in therapy [149]. Despite these 
promising results, the pharmacological targeting of specific alterations 
still requires further investigation and validation. Recent research has 
shown that inhibitors of glutaminase can affect the dependency on 
glutamine of anti-PD-1-activated cytotoxic CD8 T-cells. These inhibitors 
impair clonal expansion and the immunotherapy response in 
STK11/LKB1- and KEAP1-mutated lung cancer [150]. 
Several studies have correlated CDKN2A LOF with ICI resistance in 
different solid tumors [151]. Recent NGS profiling of LUAD patients 
confirmed a significant correlation between CDKN2A LOF and poor 
response to ICB in lung cancer. In addition, genetic deficiency of 
CDKN2A is associated with a twofold increased rate of disease pro­
gression and lower OS [152]. Retrospective studies of NSCLC patient 
cohorts have shown that CDKN2A gene alterations can negatively affect 
long-term outcomes when treated with a combination of ICIs and 
chemotherapy [153]. Mechanistically, it has been observed that active 
CDK4/CDK6, which are inhibited by functional CDKN2A, can cause 
resistance to anti-PD-1 treatment. In melanoma, this resistance is 
concomitant with T-cell exclusion and immune evasion. In line with 
these observations, CDK4/CDK6 inhibitors sensitize melanoma xeno­
grafts to immunotherapy [154]. Furthermore, CDKN2A-mutated tumors 
show increased CTLA-4 and PD-1 expression [155]. When both CDKN2A 
and JAK2 are lost, melanoma cells become resistant to IFNγ, which then 
impairs their response to ICB treatment using anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 
antibodies [156]. 
PTEN plays a crucial role in regulating the innate immune response 
through various mechanisms. It dephosphorylates the interferon regu­
latory transcription factor 3 (IRF3) at Ser97 and subsequently promotes 
its activation and nuclear translocation [157]; furthermore, a variant of 
PTEN (PTEN-L) promotes the nuclear import of subunit p65 of NF-κB 
[158]. Both of these events are involved in the transcription of type I 
IFN-response genes. Consequently, the loss of PTEN impairs the acti­
vation of type I IFN and NF-κB pathways. In addition, tumors with PTEN 
loss increase PI3K signaling [159]. They are associated with increased 
indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO-1) [160] and PD-L1 expression and 
resistance to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapies [159]. The loss of PTEN is 
linked to changes in the cellular composition of the TME. Increased 
densities of TAMs [161], Tregs [160], and MDSCs [162] have been 
documented. Additionally, PTEN loss correlated with reduced CD8+
T-cell density and activation in the TME of melanoma, sarcoma, lung 
cancer, and breast cancer [163–165]. 
Mutated KRASG12D promotes mechanisms that contribute to tumor 
growth, including metabolic changes, excessive cell division, and tumor 
stroma formation. Immunosuppressive mechanisms involve MDSC dif­
ferentiation by GM-CSF and TAM attraction to the TME by ICAMs. The 
stromal compartment is coopted to secrete additional immunosuppres­
sive cytokines via an IL-6/Sonic Hedgehog-mediated pathway. Beyond 
RAS, TP53 and BRAF mutations also shape the tumor immune land­
scape. Loss of TP53 in the tumor stroma induces the conversion of M1 
macrophages to the T-cell-immunosuppressive M2 status. BRAFV600E- 
mutated cells express interleukin 1α (IL-1α) and interleukin 1β (IL-1β) 
that promote CAF differentiation. Mutated cells also secrete interleukin 
10 (IL-10), VEGF, and interleukin 6 (IL-6), which promote tolerogenic 
dendritic cells [166]. 
4.5. Spatiotemporal T-cell distribution as a prognostic index 
TILs are an essential and favorable predictor of the anti-PD-1/PD-L1 
therapy response. T-cell entrapment and inhibition by TME components 
within specific areas of the tumor tissue indicate that intratumoral 
patterns of TIL distribution should also be considered. Recently, spatial 
computational analyses have been developed to meet this need and 
allow to establish a score. Several patient cohorts show that a better 
prognosis and longer overall survival are associated with higher den­
sities of CD3 and CD8 T-cells in the center of CRC and PDAC tumors 
compared to the margins [167,168]. T-cell density-based analyses are 
currently integrated into patient stratification and personalized therapy 
decisions, for example, in CRC stage I-III [167,169]. Furthermore, there 
have been advancements in machine-learning TIL algorithms that are 
automated or optimized to correlate TIL with OS and recurrence-free 
survival (RFS), which aim to enhance the prognostication of mela­
noma patients [65,170]. 
Besides quantifying TILs, novel methods are emerging to evaluate 
the colocalization of T-cells and cancer cells, specifically through T-cell 
proximity scoring. To obtain a T-cell proximity score, authors combined 
CD3/CD8 immunohistochemistry positivity with a 20 µm radius 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
11
distance cutoff between each cancer cell and immune cells in the sur­
rounding area. This threshold determined the likelihood of effective 
interaction. A strong correlation between an elevated T-cell proximity 
score and favorable clinical outcomes could be documented in CRC 
patients. Importantly, this score was a robust and independent tumor- 
immune marker [171]. Similarly, the spatial distribution of cytotoxic 
T-cells near cancer cells is significantly associated with longer OS in 
PDAC [172]. 
The spatial sublocalization of TILs also provides important infor­
mation about specific interactions within the TME. The combination of 
transparent tissue tomography (T3), 3D imaging cytometry, and ma­
chine learning allows optimization of a 3D view of the TME architecture. 
This approach allowed to colocalize CD3/CD8 T-cells and tumor 
microvasculature in epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR)-positive 
parenchyma in HNC patients [173]. Imaging mass cytometry allowed 
the monitoring of stromal, immune, and cancer cells in lung tumor 
samples. The authors used 26 cell-type specific and immune markers 
including CD3, CD8, or CD8, FoxP3 for T-cell subsets; CD45RO for the 
myeloid compartment; CD68 for macrophages, CD206 and CD163 to 
monitor M2-macrophages; CD20 for B cells; TCF1 and CD103 for addi­
tional T-cell clustering; PD-1, PD-L1 granzyme B, and CD95. The 
resulting spatial variant immune infiltration score (SpatialVizScore) 
allows patient stratification based on multicellular immune profiling 
with improved information about the presence of immunoinhibitory vs. 
immunostimulatory 
proteins 
[174]. 
Similarly, 
multiplex 
high-dimensional tissue imaging that quantifies cell-to-cell interactions 
and spatial cellular organization has a prognostic potential in TNBC 
[175]. In addition, the spatial immune profiling of intratumoral and 
peritumoral tissues of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients showed that 
T-cell exhaustion and poor OS were associated with elevated levels of 
peritumoral CD45RO+ T-cells [176]. 
Overall, TIL quantity and quality scoring have the potential to 
become robust integrated predictive markers of response to immuno­
therapy [177,178]. Furthermore, the sophisticated imaging analysis 
required for this approach may help dissect mechanisms of cell-to-cell 
interaction within the TME, which is essential for a better understand­
ing of anticancer immunity. 
5. Natural or hemisynthetic modulators of ICIs and TME cellular 
components 
Natural compounds possess anticancer potential and have been 
investigated in multiple preclinical settings alone or in combination 
with anticancer therapies. Many classes of natural compounds exhibit 
anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties, thus predicting the 
modulation of immunomodulatory mediators as targets. In addition, a 
diet enriched in fibers and polyphenols exerts beneficial effects on the 
microbiota, emerging as an essential actor of anticancer immunity 
[179]. Recent comprehensive reviews described the direct and indirect 
immunomodulatory activities of natural compounds, subclassified into 
different chemical classes [180–182]. This review focuses on recent 
experimental evidence supporting the targeting of ICB and TME cellular 
heterogeneity by naturally occurring or hemi-synthetic modulators 
(Table 2 and Fig. 3). Our overview includes molecules recently identi­
fied as potential ICI candidates by in silico and in vitro approaches, 
which still require wet-lab validation. We also added molecules that 
were validated by using in cellulo and in vivo experimental models. This 
information is provided in the text and Table 2. 
5.1. Predicting new ICIs by in silico and binding affinity approaches 
In silico methodologies offer the advantage of screening thousands of 
compounds against one target of interest. After screening a library of 
over 50,000 marine natural compounds and creating a structure-based 
pharmacophore model using chemical properties and docking studies, 
a limited selection of 12 compounds was identified. One of these 
compounds showed potential as a small molecular inhibitor of PD-L1 
with favorable ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and 
excretion) 
properties 
[183]. 
Future 
functional 
assays 
and 
dose-dependent studies will be required to validate these screening 
methods and progress toward the pre-clinical evaluation of the identi­
fied naturally occurring molecules as direct PD-L1/PD-1 inhibitors. 
VISTA represents a promising therapeutic target to prevent cancer- 
mediated immunosuppression; however, its ligands remain unknown, 
challenging the development of effective targeting strategies. A collec­
tion of phytochemicals was screened for their ability to inhibit VISTA in 
silico. Paratocarpin K (1), 3-(1 H-indol-3-yl)−2-(trimethylazaniumyl) 
propanoate 
(2), 
and 
2-[(5-benzyl-4-ethyl-1,2,4-triazol-3-yl) 
sulfanylmethyl]−5-methyl-1,3,4-oxadiazole (3) were found to establish 
two interactions with residues of the active site of VISTA, with (1) and 
(3) showing higher binding stability and encouraging further wet-lab 
validation [184]. 
Several studies are currently attempting to identify new classes of 
ICIs in addition to antibodies by predicting the binding affinities of 
specific classes of natural compounds based on their chemical scaffolds. 
These studies aim to offer improved and complementary properties to 
antibodies regarding half-life, cell penetration, and low production 
costs. The hydrophobic and flat nature of the binding interface between 
PD-L1 and PD-1 might generate false positive hits during the screening 
processes. Some compounds may have the ability to bind to PD-L1/PD-1 
but may not be effective at inhibiting their interaction. The combination 
of a PD-1/PD-L1 blockade assay (ELISA) with a PD-1/PD-L1 binding 
assay (surface plasmon resonance, SPR) was used to confirm the PD-1/ 
PD-L1 binding activity of a panel of natural compounds, including 
kaempferol [185], cosmosiin [186], tannic acid, pentagalloyl glucose, 
ellagic acid, resveratrol [187], urolithin A, and rifabutin [188]. This 
approach allowed for distinguishing genuine PD-1 and/or PD-L1 
binders. (e.g., kaempferol, tannic acid, resveratrol, and cosmosiin). 
Furthermore, the authors identified binders without blockade capacity 
(pentagalloyl glucose and ellagic acid) [189]. Further validation by 
functional and cellulo/in vivo assays of the ICI candidates identified by 
these studies is warranted. 
5.2. Potential ICIs with in cellulo/in vivo validated activities 
A widely researched strategy involves disrupting the interaction 
between PD-L1 and PD-1 to restore the functions of T-cells. The hy­
drophobic and tunnel-shaped binding pocket of PD-L1 inspired several 
hydrophobic molecules capable of docking in the tunnel and interacting 
with critical residues (i.e., Tyr56, Ala121, Asp122, Ile54, Tyr123). The 
biphenyl-based molecules, originally designed from Bristol-Myers 
Squibb (BMS compounds), represent a common backbone to discover 
and develop more effective biphenyl-based PD-L1 inhibitors with 
different chemical scaffolds (recently reviewed by Sasmal and col­
leagues [190]). Homogeneous time-resolved fluorescence (HTRF) 
binding assays have shown that biphenyl-based compounds can sup­
press PD-L1 activity. These molecules can act through different mech­
anisms. They may promote PD-L1 dimerization, internalization, and 
degradation [191]. Additionally, the BMS-1166 small molecule abro­
gates PD-L1 glycosylation and maturation, thus inhibiting its export 
from the ER to the Golgi apparatus and subsequently to the plasma 
membrane [192]. 
The design, synthesis, and evaluation of o-(biphenyl-3-ylmethoxy) 
nitrophenyl derivatives showed significant inhibitory activity against 
PD-1/PD-L1 in vitro (IC50 values between 2.7 and 87.4 nM), accompa­
nied by in cellulo and in vivo anticancer validation using immunohis­
tochemistry and flow cytometry assays [193,194]. Through molecular 
docking studies, it was discovered that the B2 compounds have the 
greatest effectiveness in localizing into the hydrophobic cavity formed 
by the PD-L1 dimer. Furthermore, these compounds form specific 
hydrogen bonding networks. These results may explain the higher 
inhibitory activity compared with the reference compound BMS-202. B2 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
12
Table 2 
Natural and hemisynthetic compounds with immunomodulatory activities.  
Compound 
PubChem 
ID 
Chemical structure 
Target 
Methodology 
Experimental model 
Mechanism of action 
Doses 
Refs 
51320 
NA 
PD-L1 
Structure-based pharmacophore model, 
virtual screening, molecular docking, 
ADME, molecular dynamics simulation 
In silico 
Predicted interaction with 
Ala121, Asp122, Ile54, Tyr123 
of PD-L1 
NA 
[183] 
2-[(5-Benzyl-4-ethyl-1,2,4- 
triazol-3-yl) 
sulfanylmethyl]−5- 
methyl-1,3,4-oxadiazole 
6494266 
VISTA 
Virtual screening, molecular docking, 
molecular dynamics simulation, free energy 
estimation, ADME 
In silico 
Interaction with Arg54 and 
Arg127 in the active site of 
VISTA 
NA 
[184] 
3-(1 H-indol-3-yl)−2- 
(trimethylazaniumyl) 
propanoate 
3861164 
VISTA 
Virtual screening, molecular docking, 
molecular dynamics simulation, free energy 
estimation, ADME 
In silico 
Interaction with Arg54 and 
Arg127 in the active site of 
VISTA 
NA 
[184] 
Paratocarpin K 
14187087 
VISTA 
Virtual screening, molecular docking, 
molecular dynamics simulation, free energy 
estimation, ADME 
In silico 
Interaction with Arg54 and 
Arg127 in the active site of 
VISTA 
NA 
[184] 
Cosmosiin 
5280704 
PD-L1 
Pair ELISA assay 
SPR binding assay 
Molecular docking and dynamics 
simulation 
Molecular interaction studies 
In vitro assays, 
no cellular or animal models 
PD-L1 binding with molecular 
displacement in the dimer 
interface (hydrogen bond 
interactions with polar 
residues, e.g., Tyr56) 
10–100 µM (Elisa) 
1.56–25 µM (SPR); 
binding affinity to PD- 
L1: KD 3.32 × 10-6M 
[189] 
Tannic acid 
16129778 
PD-1 
PD-L1 
Pair ELISA assay SPR binding assay 
Molecular interaction studies 
In vitro assays, 
no cellular or animal models 
Non-selective binding to PD-1/ 
PD-L1 with higher affinity for 
PD-1, resulting in PD-1/PD-L1 
interaction block 
10–100 µM (Elisa) 
0.06–0.5 µM (SPR); 
binding affinity: PD-1: 
KD1.46 × 10-6M; PD-L1: 
KD 1.21 × 10-6M 
[189] 
Kaempferol 
5280863 
PD-1 
PD-L1 
Pair ELISA assay 
SPR binding assay 
Molecular interaction studies 
In vitro assays, 
no cellular or animal models 
Non-selective binding to PD-1/ 
PD-L1 with higher affinity to 
PD-1 
10–100 µM (Elisa) 
1.56–25 µM (SPR) 
Binding affinity to PD-1: 
KD 3.04 × 10-7M); PD- 
L1: KD = 3.3 × 10-5M) 
[189] 
Monotherpene indole- 
alkaloid-like compounds 
NA 
CTLA-4 
Diversity-enhanced extracts, flow 
cytometric analysis of CTLA-4 expression 
Human HTLV-I-infected CD4+
T-cell leukemia MT2 cells; 
THP-1 
Inhibition of 
CTLA-4 expression 
10–20 µM 
[199] 
[200] 
o-(Biphenyl-ylmethoxy) 
nitrophenyl derivatives 
(PD-1/PD-L1-IN-10) 
156807419 
PD-1 
Time-resolved fluorescence binding assay, 
molecular docking, and dynamics 
simulation; 
in vitro and in vivo (xenografts) assays 
Murine 
LLC cells and LLC allograft 
C57BL/6 mice 
PD-L1 binding and block of PD- 
1/PD-L1 interaction by 
potential PD-L1 dimerization; 
IFNγ secretion; in vivo anti- 
cancer activity 
IC50 values: 
2.7 (B2) −87.4 nM 
In vivo: 5 mg/kg i.g. 
[193] 
(continued on next page) 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
13
Table 2 (continued) 
Compound 
PubChem 
ID 
Chemical structure 
Target 
Methodology 
Experimental model 
Mechanism of action 
Doses 
Refs 
Benzo[c][1,2,5] oxadiazole 
derivatives 
NA 
PD-L1 
Time-resolved fluorescence binding assay, 
SPR assay, molecular docking, cell-based 
assays, co-culture assays and in vivo 
(xenografts) assays 
PD-1+/NFAT-luc/Jurkat; 
PD-L1+: aAPC/ CHO-K1 
cocultures; 
pharmacokinetic (Sprague- 
Dawley rats) syngeneic/PD-L1 
humanized C57BL/6 mice 
(MC38; B16-F10); immune cell 
profiling 
Inhibition of 
PD-1/PD-L1 interaction by 
potential PD-L1 dimerization; 
EC50: ≈375 nM 
(co-culture assays) 
In vivo: range from 15 to 
300 mg/kg 
acute toxicity: up to 
2000 mg/kg (oral 
gavage) 
Binding affinity to PD- 
L1: KD: 3.34 (SPR) 
[194] 
TPFS-201 (amide analogue 
of brefelamide) 
155195802 
PD-L1 
Analysis of PD-L1 expression (mRNA 
expression, PCR; immunophenotyping, 
FACS; luminescence-reporter assays); 
co-culture assays (Jurkat T-cells/ A549)  
Prostate PC-3; NSCLC A549 
with luciferase reporter 
vectors (WT/mutated PD-L1 
promoter) 
Monocytic AML THP-1 
Murine B16F10 (melanoma) 
and RAW.264.7 (macrophage) 
Transcriptional PD-L1 
inhibition with potential 
involvement of the TEAD/TAZ 
binding site on the PD-L1 
promoter (Hippo pathway) 
Human cell models: 
0.5–3 µM 
Murine cell models: 
2–8 µM 
[201] 
TPFS-202 (amide analogue 
of brefelamide) 
155195813 
CTLA-4 
Diversity-enhanced extracts, flow 
cytometric analysis of CTLA-4 expression 
Human HTLV-I-infected CD4+
T-cell leukemia MT2 cells; 
THP-1 
Inhibition of 
CTLA-4 expression 
10–20 µM 
[201] 
Resveratrol 
445154 
PD-L1 
Pair ELISA assay SPR binding assay 
Molecular interaction studies 
In vitro assays, 
no cellular or animal models 
Selective binding to PD-L1 
10–100 µM (Elisa) 
1.56–25 µM (SPR); 
Binding affinity to PD- 
L1: KD = 3.79 × 10-5M 
[189] 
CAFs 
In vivo assays 
(tumour mass weight, angiogenesis, cell 
proliferation/death, autophagy, infiltrating 
macrophages/CAFs) 
C57BL/6 J bearing murine 
Lung Lewis carcinoma (LLC) 
cell line 
Infiltrating immune cell 
decrease CAF maturation 
inhibition potentially mediated 
by autophagy 
25 mg/kg/day (orally) 
for four weeks 
[202] 
TAMs 
Macrophage differentiation and 
polarization; cytokine assay (Elisa); in vivo 
(xenografts) combinations 
MDA-MB-231, T-47D, and 
THP-1 cells; NOD/SCID 
xenograft mice 
M1 macrophage polarization 
via IL6 production inhibition 
Cell Lines: 25 µM 
Mice: 40 mg/kg (oral 
gavage) 
[205] 
Resorcinol diphenyl ether- 
based molecules 
PROTAC-like 
146673162 
PD-L1 
PD-L1 cell surface detection 
Coculture assays 
IFNγ release (ELISA) 
MDA-MB-231, anti-CD3 single 
chain variable fragment/PD- 
L1 Hep3B cells 
PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition, 
lysosome-dependent moderate 
PD-L1 decrease; IFNγ secretion 
1–10 µM 
[222] 
(continued on next page) 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
14
Table 2 (continued) 
Compound 
PubChem 
ID 
Chemical structure 
Target 
Methodology 
Experimental model 
Mechanism of action 
Doses 
Refs 
CA-170 
NA 
PD-L1 
VISTA 
PD-L1/L2 functional assays 
Syngeneic mice models 
CKO/CKO-K1/PD-L1, PBMCs 
Syngeneic Balb/c, C57B6 mice 
(CT26, MC38, B16F10) 
In clinical trial 
Binding to PD-L1/VISTA active 
site with formation of a 
defective ternary complex CA- 
170/PD-L1/PD-L1. 
Range of concentrations 
between 10 and 
1000 nM depending on 
the assay 
[198] 
5,6,7-trimethoxy-4-methyl- 
2 H-chromen-2-one 
AK087 
156807419 
PD-L1 
Engineered human melanoma cells 
Coculture assays (M238R:H358 cells:Jurkat 
T-cells 
Subcutaneous syngeneic melanoma tumor 
models (mass cytometry of murine tissues) 
H293T, M238R 
H358, MDA-MB-231, 
YUMM1.7ER, NILER1–4, mSK- 
Mel254, KPC, CT26 in C57BL/ 
6, BALB/c, NSG mice 
Downregulation of tumor cell- 
surface PD-L1/L2 via 
ubiquitin-directed lysosomal 
degradation and suppression of 
MAPKi resistance in vivo 
Cell lines: 20–80 µM 
Mice: 10 mg/kg/day 
[197] 
BMS-1166 
118434635 
PD-L1 
Coculture assays (PC9/PD-L1:Jurkat/PD-1) 
PD-L1 glycosylation analysis 
PC-9, Jurkat T, A375 (WT and 
PD-L1 stably expressing) cells; 
SW116-RFP; H1975; 293 cells 
PD-L1 glycosylation inhibition 
leading to PD-L1 accumulation 
into the ER and preventing PD- 
L1 cell surface exposure 
Range of concentrations 
between 0.01 and 50 µM 
depending on the assay 
[192] 
Emodin 
3220 
TAMs 
Co-culture assays (breast EO771 or 4T1 
cancer cells/mouse peritoneal 
macrophages); cell culture in macrophage- 
conditioned medium; tumor mammosfere 
(EO771, 4T1, MCF7, or MDA-MB-231); 
migration/invasion assays; in vivo studies 
Breast EO771, 4T1, MCF7, and 
MDA-MB-231 cancer cells 
C57BL/6, BALB/c and NOD- 
SCID mice 
Inhibition of macrophage 
migration, invasion and 
macrophage-induced EMT 
formation via inhibition of 
both canonical and non- 
canonical pathways of TGF-β1 
Cell lines: 25 µM 
Mice: 40 mg/kg i.p. 
injected daily when 
tumor was palpable 
[206] 
4,4’-Dyhydroxystilbene 
5282363 
CAFs 
In vivo assays 
(tumour mass weight, angiogenesis, cell 
proliferation and death, autophagy, 
infiltrating macrophages and CAFs) 
C57BL/6 J bearing murine 
Lung Lewis carcinoma (LLC) 
cell line 
Infiltrating immune cell 
decrease CAF maturation 
inhibition potentially mediated 
by autophagy 
25 mg/kg/day (oral) for 
four weeks 
[202] 
Ginsenosides 
44593678 
TAMs 
Macrophage culture and polarization co- 
culture assays (NSCLC A549 or H1299 cells/ 
macrophages); LLC-bearing allograft female 
C57BL/6 
Murine RAW264.7 cells and 
human THP-1 differentiated in 
M1/M2 macrophages; NSCLC 
A549 or H1299 
VEGF, MMP2, and MMP9 
expression in vivo with 
conversion of M2 to M1 
macrophages 
Co-culture assays: 
100 μM. Mice: 40 mg/kg 
i.p. daily for 21 days. 
[212] 
DNA transfection and luciferase reporter 
assays (pNF-AT-Luc and pNF-κB-Luc) 
EL-4 T-cells 
T-cell function modulation via 
NF-AT-mediated IL-2 
production 
2.5–10 µM 
[223] 
(continued on next page) 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
15
Table 2 (continued) 
Compound 
PubChem 
ID 
Chemical structure 
Target 
Methodology 
Experimental model 
Mechanism of action 
Doses 
Refs 
β-glucans 
46173706 
M- 
MDSCs 
Ex vivo mono/co-culture assays (M-MDSCs/ 
CD4+ T-cells and CD8+ T-cells from wild- 
type C57BL/6 mice spleens); 
immunophenotyping 
C57BL/6 J bearing LLC cells 
and MDSCs from the spleens of 
LLC tumor-bearing mice 
Differentiation and maturation 
of 
M-MDSCs 
via NF-kB/dectin-1 pathway 
M-MDSCs suppression activity 
10 µg/ml of particulate 
b-glucans 
[207] 
C57BL/6 WT/dectin-1 KO mice bearing 
murine LLC or mammary cell carcinoma 
E0771 
Co-culture assays (CD14+/- cells from the 
PBMC of NSCLC patients treated with b- 
glucans/ CD3+ T-cells from healthy donors 
Trials on NSCLC patients 
PMN-MDSC apoptosis; 
M-MDSC differentiation to 
APCs via dectin-1 and ERK1/2 
pathways 
Mice: daily oral gavage 
of 100 μl particulate 
β-glucan 
Humans: 500 mg 
particulate β-glucan, 
daily, for 10/14 days 
[208] 
Sap-derivatives 
extracellular vesicles 
from Dendropanax 
morbifera 
NA 
NA 
CAFs 
3D microfluidic cancer metastasis model 
CAF differentiated from 
HUVECs cells in presence of 
melanoma-derived exosomes 
and 
sap-derived extracellular 
vesicles 
CAF decrease associated with 
growth factors and ECM- 
related proteins integrins and 
collagens potentially 
promoting ECM stiffness 
1–10 µg/ml of EVs 
[203] 
Triptolide 
107985 
CAFs 
Chip-Seq, superenhancer analysis, whole 
transcriptome RNA-Seq on cell models; in 
vivo studies 
PDAC (MIA PaCa-2, PANC-1, 
P4057, PSN1, AsPC1, Capan-1, 
BxPC-3, PA-TU8902, PA- 
TU8988S) cells; CAFs from 
PDAC patient tumor transgenic 
mice; 
PDAC PDX 
CAF epigenetic 
reprogramming by targeting of 
super-enhancers 
Sensitization to chemotherapy 
in combinational regimens 
0.42 mg/kg daily for 7 
days of the triptolide 
pro-drug minnelide (i. 
p.) 
[204] 
Abbreviations: ADME: absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion; APC: antigen-presenting cell; CAF: cancer-associated fibroblast; MDSC: myeloid-derived suppressor cell; SPR: surface plasmon receptor; TAM: 
tumor-associated macrophage; TME: tumor microenvironment. 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
16
compounds also promoted IFNγ secretion and suppressed cancer cell 
growth and viability in vivo in a dose-dependent manner. Similarly, 
benzo-oxadiazole derivatives were characterized as PD-L1 inhibitors 
[194]. The compound L7 that was chosen had 20 times more potency in 
binding to PD-L1 compared to the reference compound BMS-1016 
(1.8 nM IC50 value in the HTRF assay); Consistently, it was found to 
be more effective than BMS-1016 in blocking the interaction between 
PD-L1 and PD-1 in cell-based co-culture assays, with an EC50 value of 
375 nM vs. 2075 nM. The induction of PD-L1 dimerization is hypothe­
sized as the main mechanism of action. Of note, L24, the orally available 
ester prodrug of L7, showed significant anti-cancer effects in syngeneic 
and PD-L1 humanized tumor models. This effect was significant at low 
and medium dosages but not at high dosages (300 mg/kg or 50 mg/kg, 
respectively, in the MC38 and the PD-L1 humanized mouse models). 
Further studies will allow to understand this discrepancy between the 
dose and the expected results. The bioavailability of hydrophobic 
biphenyl compounds remains an Achille’s heel for the translation of 
these compounds to therapy. Based on their overall safety profile and 
improved bioavailability, further testing of these novel compounds in 
preclinical trials is encouraged. 
The hydrophobic nature of molecules with PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitory 
activity leads to poor pharmacokinetics, low solubility, and off-side 
target effects. This characteristic limited the design of clinical trials 
and the rapid translation into clinical practice for several small mole­
cules inhibiting PD-1/PD-L1. Alternative approaches to overcome these 
limitations are based on PD-L1 internalization and degradation via the 
proteasome/lysosome pathway. The proteolysis-targeting chimera 
(PROTAC)-like molecules rely on the conjugation of a putative PD-L1 
binder (the protein of interest) to an E3 ubiquitin ligase with a linker 
to promote the ubiquitination and degradation of the target [195]. The 
lysosome-targeting chimera (LYTAC)-like molecules conjugate the pu­
tative PD-L1 binder to a warhead recognizing another surface molecule 
(for example, the mannose 6-phosphate receptors, M6PR) to promote 
clathrin-dependent endocytosis and subsequent lysosome-dependent 
degradation [196]. Additional molecules promoting PD-L1 internal­
ization/degradation are the PD-LYSO HIP1R (huntingtin interacting 
protein 1 related)-mimics [191] and the E3 ligase ITCH inhibitor AK087 
[197]. These recent methods show potential for being translated into 
clinical use, but further studies are needed to validate their effectiveness 
in the near future. 
The orally available small molecule CA-170 was created to target the 
PD-L1/PD-1 interface. This molecule can selectively inhibit both PD-L1 
and VISTA. [198]. CA-170 binding does not prevent PD-L1/PD-1 inter­
action but leads to the formation of a defective ternary complex that 
blocks the PD-L1 pathway. The inhibitory effect is dose-dependent in 
PD-L1-overexpressing cells. The authors hypothesized that the minimum 
pharmacophore of CA-170 allows its interaction with other conserved 
sites on proteins belonging to the same immunoglobulin superfamily, 
like VISTA. CA-170 is currently being evaluated in clinical trials for its 
effectiveness in treating advanced solid tumors and lymphomas 
(NCT02812875). 
As alternatives to ICB, some classes of compounds show potential as 
IC expression inhibitors (recently reviewed in [181]). The screening of a 
library of synthetic indole-alkaloid-type compounds produced by 
Fig. 3. Indirect and direct targeting of ICB by naturally occurring or synthetic modulators. This is a visualization of the molecular mechanisms that are 
hypothesized or proven to be involved in the modulatory effects of naturally occurring or derived compounds, as well as selected synthetic compounds, on ICIs, as 
discussed in Section 5). Abbreviations: BMS: biphenyl-derived molecules; CTLA-4: cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4; HIP1R: huntingtin interacting 
protein 1 related; LYTAC: lysosome-targeting chimera; M6PR: mannose 6-phosphate receptors; MDSC: myeloid-derived suppressor cell; PD-1: programmed death 1; 
PD-L1/2: programmed death-ligand 1/2; PROTAC: proteolysis-targeting chimera; TAM: tumor-associated macrophage; TGFβ: tumor growth factor β; VISTA: V- 
domain Ig suppressor of T-cell activation. 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
17
diversity-enhanced extracts of Japanese cornelian cherry identified a 
pentacyclic compound as a CLTA-4 expression inhibitor [199]. The 
chemical modification of this compound generated several derivatives 
with increased inhibitory potency at the mRNA and protein levels, 
acting as dual CTLA-4 and PD-1 inhibitors [200]. These modulatory 
effects are not selective and have been tested using a limited range of 
concentrations (between 10 and 20 µM), requiring further experimental 
validation to test the relevance of the dual inhibitory activity of 
CTLA-4/PD-L1 expression. 
Analogs of brefelamide downregulate PD-L1 expression by modu­
lating the human-specific transcriptional coactivator TAZ [201]. The 
lead compound TPFS-202 inhibits dose-dependently PD-L1 expression; 
the disruption of the putative TAZ/TEA domain (TEAD)-binding motif 
robustly but not fully abrogated this modulation, suggesting the 
involvement of additional mechanisms. This effect is species-specific as 
mice lack PD-L1 modulation by TAZ. 
5.3. Natural derivatives with modulatory activities on TME cellular 
components 
Several natural compounds destabilize the TME, limiting CAF infil­
tration and maturation. Resveratrol and its analog 4,4’-dihydrox­
ystilbene counteracted the stromal component in xenografted mice 
bearing lung Lewis carcinoma (LLC) [202]. The extracellular vesicles 
derived from sap of Dendropanax morbifera affected CAFs. They 
modulated the expression level of ECM-related genes, including integ­
rins and collagens, in a 3D microfluidic system mimicking the TME 
[203]. The natural compound triptolide acts as an anti-CAF agent by 
promoting epigenetic reprogramming in PDAC. The mechanism of ac­
tion involved disrupts the function of superenhancer elements [204]. 
Several compounds are also able to revert TAM polarization and M2 
differentiation. Breast cancer models showed a particular propensity for 
this type of modulation. Resveratrol inhibits IL-6 production and STAT3 
activation while increasing the levels of M1 macrophage chemokine (C- 
X-C motif) ligand 10 (CXCL10). These modulations were accompanied 
by tumor regression in vivo [205]. Emodin reduced breast cancer 
metastasis by suppressing TAM-induced EMT by suppressing canonical 
and noncanonical TGFβ1 signaling pathways [206]. The reprogramming 
and differentiation of TAMs toward immunosuppressive phenotypes is a 
critical factor in lung cancer. The transcription factor c-Maf is a crucial 
modulator of immunosuppressive macrophage polarization. β-glucans 
show reprogramming and modulatory activities on different myeloid 
subsets, including macrophages, MDSCs, and dendritic cells [207–209]. 
The yeast-derived natural compound β-glucan downregulates c-Maf 
expression and macrophages, thereby increasing anticancer immunity in 
murine models [210]. Of note, a clinical trial on a cohort of NSCLC 
patients taking β-glucan daily for 10–14 days increased nonclassical 
monocytes (CD14dimCD16+), a finding compatible with an increased 
patrolling of nonclassical monocytes, which control tumor metastasis 
[210,211]. The glycosylated triterpene ginsenoside Rh2, a compound 
extracted from Panax ginseng, decreased the expression of factors asso­
ciated with M2 TAM differentiation (VEGF and metalloproteinase-2 and 
−9 (MMP2 and MMP9)). The authors used different cytokine combi­
nations to achieve M1/M2 polarization of murine and human macro­
phages. The results were further confirmed in NSCLC xenografts [212]. 
6. Conclusions and perspectives 
Immunotherapy holds great potential as a curative therapy for can­
cer. However, several challenges remain in the search for a cure for 
cancer. The next decade will be essential to overcome limitations and 
offer new perspectives. 
First, we need effective predictive biomarkers allowing patient 
stratification and therapy response. TMB, MSI, DNA damage, TIL infil­
tration, and the expression of specific checkpoints, i.e., PD-1, are not, 
per se, good indicators. The fast-growing knowledge about TME cellular 
heterogeneity is expected to suggest innovative holistic biomarkers, 
which need to integrate consolidated features with emerging charac­
teristics of tumor immunity. The stratification of the patient’s immune 
landscape into archetypes or through TME and/or immune cell classi­
fication will allow the future personalization of immunotherapies. An 
atlas mapping the diversified T-cell profiles will identify the predomi­
nant infiltrating T-cell subsets and predict ICI response [132]. Scoring 
the spatiotemporal distribution of T-cells within the tumor tissue will 
inspire new therapeutic schemes. Approved agents might be adminis­
tered in a specific sequential way, potentially resulting in more efficient 
TME targeting. 
Second, we need to elucidate further the multiple checkpoints 
(redundant and not) co-opted by cancer cells to understand resistance 
better. Innovative combinatorial approaches are being tested to target 
corrupted modulators of the different steps of the cancer-immunity 
cycle. One strategy involves triggering the formation of neoantigens 
and an immune response through neoantigen vaccines or CAR-T 
methods. Then, administering ICIs to prevent T-cell exhaustion 
[213–215]. Another exciting approach aims to increase immunogenicity 
within the TME by combining immunogenic cell death inducers and ICIs 
to facilitate TIL recruitment [216]. 
Third, we expect to develop noninvasive, sensitive, and large-scale 
applicable diagnostic methods, further helping TME classification and 
patient stratification. Digital and machine learning methods will allow 
the tracking of spatiotemporal patterns within the TME. Liquid biopsies 
will enable the analysis of cell-free DNA in patients affected by glio­
blastoma [217,218], one of the most immune-refractory cancer types. 
The current studies testing similarities and differences in immune cells 
within the tumor vs. circulating in the peripheral blood might provide 
information about immune system activity and the predominant type of 
immune cell infiltration into the tumor. Furthermore, this approach may 
offer a kinetic analysis during therapy to timely monitor patient 
responses. 
Fourth, we must find a way to extend immunotherapy to hemato­
logical malignancies. This review focuses on solid tumors, the most 
suitable candidates for ICIs. Leukemias are generally considered poor 
candidates as tumors with low TMB and scarce ability to generate 
neoantigens. Nevertheless, checkpoints such as TIM-3 and VISTA are 
also crucial for the prognosis [219,220]. The anti-CD47 magrolimab, 
approved against myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and AML, target 
don’t eat me signals, promoting recognition and engulfment of cancer 
cells by macrophages [221]. This approach is being investigated with 
azacytidine and venetoclax, showing favorable response rates in 
TP53-mutated 
AML 
(NCT04435691, 
NCT04778397, 
and 
NCT05079230). 
Excluding gentuzumab ozogamicin, modern anticancer immuno­
therapy started its journey just a decade ago. Along the way, we are 
learning the translational challenges of this new approach. The great 
wave of discoveries and technological advancements in recent years 
encourages us to look at destinations with promising perspectives. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Claudia Cerella and Marc Diederich wrote and edited the manu­
script. Mario Dicato edited the manuscript. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
None. 
Acknowledgments 
LBMCC is supported by the "Recherche Cancer et Sang” foundation, 
the “Recherches Scientifiques Luxembourg” association, the “Een H¨aerz 
fir kriibskrank Kanner” association, the Action LIONS “Vaincre le Can­
cer” association and by T´el´evie Luxembourg. Research at Seoul National 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
18
University (SNU) was supported by the National Research Foundation 
(NRF) by the MEST of Korea for Tumor Microenvironment Global Core 
Research Center (GCRC) grant (grant number NRF 2011–0030001). This 
work was also supported by the SNU Research Grant (Funding number: 
800–20160150) and by the Creative-Pioneering Researchers Program 
through SNU (Funding number: 370C-20160062). Research at SNU is 
supported by the NRF Grant Number 2022R1A2C101314111. Support 
from the BrainKorea21 FOUR program is acknowledged. 
Figures were created with BioRender.com. 
Appendix A. Supporting information 
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the 
online version at doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2023.106914. 
References 
[1] J. Larkin, V. Chiarion-Sileni, R. Gonzalez, J.J. Grob, P. Rutkowski, C.D. Lao, C. 
L. Cowey, D. Schadendorf, J. Wagstaff, R. Dummer, P.F. Ferrucci, M. Smylie, 
D. Hogg, A. Hill, I. Marquez-Rodas, J. Haanen, M. Guidoboni, M. Maio, 
P. Schoffski, M.S. Carlino, C. Lebbe, G. McArthur, P.A. Ascierto, G.A. Daniels, G. 
V. Long, L. Bastholt, J.I. Rizzo, A. Balogh, A. Moshyk, F.S. Hodi, J.D. Wolchok, 
Five-year survival with combined nivolumab and ipilimumab in advanced 
melanoma, N. Engl. J. Med. 381 (16) (2019) 1535–1546. 
[2] F.S. Hodi, S.J. O’Day, D.F. McDermott, R.W. Weber, J.A. Sosman, J.B. Haanen, 
R. Gonzalez, C. Robert, D. Schadendorf, J.C. Hassel, W. Akerley, A.J. van den 
Eertwegh, J. Lutzky, P. Lorigan, J.M. Vaubel, G.P. Linette, D. Hogg, C. 
H. Ottensmeier, C. Lebbe, C. Peschel, I. Quirt, J.I. Clark, J.D. Wolchok, J. 
S. Weber, J. Tian, M.J. Yellin, G.M. Nichol, A. Hoos, W.J. Urba, Improved survival 
with ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma, N. Engl. J. Med. 363 (8) 
(2010) 711–723. 
[3] C. Robert, J. Schachter, G.V. Long, A. Arance, J.J. Grob, L. Mortier, A. Daud, M. 
S. Carlino, C. McNeil, M. Lotem, J. Larkin, P. Lorigan, B. Neyns, C.U. Blank, 
O. Hamid, C. Mateus, R. Shapira-Frommer, M. Kosh, H. Zhou, N. Ibrahim, 
S. Ebbinghaus, A. Ribas, K.-. investigators, Pembrolizumab versus ipilimumab in 
advanced melanoma, N. Engl. J. Med. 372 (26) (2015) 2521–2532. 
[4] P.J. Martin, J.A. Ledbetter, Y. Morishita, C.H. June, P.G. Beatty, J.A. Hansen, 
A 44 kilodalton cell surface homodimer regulates interleukin 2 production by 
activated human T lymphocytes, J. Immunol. 136 (9) (1986) 3282–3287. 
[5] D.R. Leach, M.F. Krummel, J.P. Allison, Enhancement of antitumor immunity by 
CTLA-4 blockade, Science 271 (5256) (1996) 1734–1736. 
[6] Y. Ishida, Y. Agata, K. Shibahara, T. Honjo, Induced expression of PD-1, a novel 
member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, upon programmed cell death, 
EMBO J. 11 (11) (1992) 3887–3895. 
[7] G.J. Freeman, A.J. Long, Y. Iwai, K. Bourque, T. Chernova, H. Nishimura, L. 
J. Fitz, N. Malenkovich, T. Okazaki, M.C. Byrne, H.F. Horton, L. Fouser, L. Carter, 
V. Ling, M.R. Bowman, B.M. Carreno, M. Collins, C.R. Wood, T. Honjo, 
Engagement of the PD-1 immunoinhibitory receptor by a novel B7 family 
member leads to negative regulation of lymphocyte activation, J. Exp. Med. 192 
(7) (2000) 1027–1034. 
[8] P. Sharma, S. Hu-Lieskovan, J.A. Wargo, A. Ribas, Primary, adaptive, and 
acquired resistance to cancer immunotherapy, Cell 168 (4) (2017) 707–723. 
[9] J.S. Weber, G. Gibney, R.J. Sullivan, J.A. Sosman, C.L. Slingluff Jr, D. 
P. Lawrence, T.F. Logan, L.M. Schuchter, S. Nair, L. Fecher, E.I. Buchbinder, 
E. Berghorn, M. Ruisi, G. Kong, J. Jiang, C. Horak, F.S. Hodi, Sequential 
administration of nivolumab and ipilimumab with a planned switch in patients 
with advanced melanoma (CheckMate 064): an open-label, randomised, phase 2 
trial, Lancet Oncol. 17 (7) (2016) 943–955. 
[10] A. Ribas, D. Lawrence, V. Atkinson, S. Agarwal, W.H. Miller Jr., M.S. Carlino, 
R. Fisher, G.V. Long, F.S. Hodi, J. Tsoi, C.S. Grasso, B. Mookerjee, Q. Zhao, 
R. Ghori, B.H. Moreno, N. Ibrahim, O. Hamid, Combined BRAF and MEK 
inhibition with PD-1 blockade immunotherapy in BRAF-mutant melanoma, Nat. 
Med 25 (6) (2019) 936–940. 
[11] P.A. Ascierto, P.F. Ferrucci, R. Fisher, M. Del Vecchio, V. Atkinson, H. Schmidt, 
J. Schachter, P. Queirolo, G.V. Long, A.M. Di Giacomo, I.M. Svane, M. Lotem, 
G. Bar-Sela, F. Couture, B. Mookerjee, R. Ghori, N. Ibrahim, B.H. Moreno, 
A. Ribas, Dabrafenib, trametinib and pembrolizumab or placebo in BRAF-mutant 
melanoma, Nat. Med 25 (6) (2019) 941–946. 
[12] R. Dummer, G.V. Long, C. Robert, H.A. Tawbi, K.T. Flaherty, P.A. Ascierto, P. 
D. Nathan, P. Rutkowski, O. Leonov, C. Dutriaux, M. Mandala, P. Lorigan, P. 
F. Ferrucci, J.J. Grob, N. Meyer, H. Gogas, D. Stroyakovskiy, A. Arance, J. 
C. Brase, S. Green, T. Haas, A. Masood, E. Gasal, A. Ribas, D. Schadendorf, 
Randomized phase III trial evaluating spartalizumab plus dabrafenib and 
trametinib for BRAF V600-mutant unresectable or metastatic melanoma, J. Clin. 
Oncol. 40 (13) (2022) 1428–1438. 
[13] S. Loibl, A. Schneeweiss, J. Huober, M. Braun, J. Rey, J.U. Blohmer, J. Furlanetto, 
D.M. Zahm, C. Hanusch, J. Thomalla, C. Jackisch, P. Staib, T. Link, K. Rhiem, 
C. Solbach, P.A. Fasching, V. Nekljudova, C. Denkert, M. Untch, Gbg, B. Ago, 
Neoadjuvant durvalumab improves survival in early triple-negative breast cancer 
independent of pathological complete response, Ann. Oncol. 33 (11) (2022) 
1149–1158. 
[14] P. Schmid, R. Salgado, Y.H. Park, E. Munoz-Couselo, S.B. Kim, J. Sohn, S.A. Im, 
T. Foukakis, S. Kuemmel, R. Dent, L. Yin, A. Wang, K. Tryfonidis, V. Karantza, 
J. Cortes, S. Loi, Pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy as neoadjuvant treatment of 
high-risk, early-stage triple-negative breast cancer: results from the phase 1b 
open-label, multicohort KEYNOTE-173 study, Ann. Oncol. 31 (5) (2020) 
569–581. 
[15] A. Popovic, E.M. Jaffee, N. Zaidi, Emerging strategies for combination checkpoint 
modulators in cancer immunotherapy, J. Clin. Invest 128 (8) (2018) 3209–3218. 
[16] S.C. Wei, C.R. Duffy, J.P. Allison, Fundamental mechanisms of immune 
checkpoint blockade therapy, Cancer Discov. 8 (9) (2018) 1069–1086. 
[17] J. Gao, J.F. Ward, C.A. Pettaway, L.Z. Shi, S.K. Subudhi, L.M. Vence, H. Zhao, 
J. Chen, H. Chen, E. Efstathiou, P. Troncoso, J.P. Allison, C.J. Logothetis, I. 
I. Wistuba, M.A. Sepulveda, J. Sun, J. Wargo, J. Blando, P. Sharma, VISTA is an 
inhibitory immune checkpoint that is increased after ipilimumab therapy in 
patients with prostate cancer, Nat. Med 23 (5) (2017) 551–555. 
[18] C.G. Graydon, S. Mohideen, K.R. Fowke, LAG3’s enigmatic mechanism of action, 
Front Immunol. 11 (2020), 615317. 
[19] B.J. MacLachlan, G.H. Mason, A. Greenshields-Watson, F. Triebel, A. Gallimore, 
D.K. Cole, A. Godkin, Molecular characterization of HLA class II binding to the 
LAG-3 T cell co-inhibitory receptor, Eur. J. Immunol. 51 (2) (2021) 331–341. 
[20] S. Grebinoski, Q. Zhang, A.R. Cillo, S. Manne, H. Xiao, E.A. Brunazzi, T. Tabib, 
C. Cardello, C.G. Lian, G.F. Murphy, R. Lafyatis, E.J. Wherry, J. Das, C. 
J. Workman, D.A.A. Vignali, Autoreactive CD8(+) T cells are restrained by an 
exhaustion-like program that is maintained by LAG3, Nat. Immunol. 23 (6) 
(2022) 868–877. 
[21] L.T. Nguyen, P.S. Ohashi, Clinical blockade of PD1 and LAG3–potential 
mechanisms of action, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15 (1) (2015) 45–56. 
[22] H.A. Tawbi, D. Schadendorf, E.J. Lipson, P.A. Ascierto, L. Matamala, E. Castillo 
Gutierrez, P. Rutkowski, H.J. Gogas, C.D. Lao, J.J. De Menezes, S. Dalle, 
A. Arance, J.J. Grob, S. Srivastava, M. Abaskharoun, M. Hamilton, S. Keidel, K. 
L. Simonsen, A.M. Sobiesk, B. Li, F.S. Hodi, G.V. Long, R.-. Investigators, 
Relatlimab and Nivolumab versus Nivolumab in Untreated Advanced Melanoma, 
N. Engl. J. Med 386 (1) (2022) 24–34. 
[23] M. Zettl, M. Wurm, O. Schaaf, S. Mostbock, I. Tirapu, I. Apfler, I.C. Lorenz, 
L. Frego, C. Kenny, M. Thibodeau, E. Oquendo Cifuentes, M. Reschke, J. Moll, 
N. Kraut, A. Vogt, J.D. Sedgwick, I.C. Waizenegger, Combination of two novel 
blocking antibodies, anti-PD-1 antibody ezabenlimab (BI 754091) and anti-LAG-3 
antibody BI 754111, leads to increased immune cell responses, Oncoimmunology 
11 (1) (2022), 2080328. 
[24] P. Schoffski, D.S.W. Tan, M. Martin, M. Ochoa-de-Olza, J. Sarantopoulos, R. 
D. Carvajal, C. Kyi, T. Esaki, A. Prawira, W. Akerley, F. De Braud, R. Hui, 
T. Zhang, R.A. Soo, M. Maur, A. Weickhardt, J. Krauss, B. Deschler-Baier, A. Lau, 
T.S. Samant, T. Longmire, N.R. Chowdhury, C.A. Sabatos-Peyton, N. Patel, 
R. Ramesh, T. Hu, A. Carion, D. Gusenleitner, P. Yerramilli-Rao, V. Askoxylakis, 
E.L. Kwak, D.S. Hong, Phase I/II study of the LAG-3 inhibitor ieramilimab 
(LAG525) +/- anti-PD-1 spartalizumab (PDR001) in patients with advanced 
malignancies, J. Immunother. Cancer 10 (2) (2022). 
[25] E. Garralda, A. Sukari, N. Lakhani, A. Patnaik, Y. Lou, S. Im, T. Golan, R. Geva, 
M. Wermke, M. De Miguel, J. Palcza, S. Jha, M. Chaney, J. Healy, G. Falchook, 
A phase 1 first-in-human study of the anti-LAG-3 antibody MK4280 (favezelimab) 
plus pembrolizumab in previously treated, advanced microsatellite stable 
colorectal cancer, J. Clin. Invest 39 (2021) 3584. -3584. 
[26] T. Annese, R. Tamma, D. Ribatti, Update in TIGIT immune-checkpoint role in 
cancer, Front Oncol. 12 (2022), 871085. 
[27] B.C. Cho, D.R. Abreu, M. Hussein, M. Cobo, A.J. Patel, N. Secen, K.H. Lee, 
B. Massuti, S. Hiret, J.C.H. Yang, F. Barlesi, D.H. Lee, L.P. Ares, R.W. Hsieh, N. 
S. Patil, P. Twomey, X. Yang, R. Meng, M.L. Johnson, Tiragolumab plus 
atezolizumab versus placebo plus atezolizumab as a first-line treatment for PD- 
L1-selected non-small-cell lung cancer (CITYSCAPE): primary and follow-up 
analyses of a randomised, double-blind, phase 2 study, Lancet Oncol. 23 (6) 
(2022) 781–792. 
[28] R.J. Johnston, P.S. Lee, P. Strop, M.J. Smyth, Cancer Immunotherapy and the 
Nectin Family, Annu. Rev. Cancer Biol. 5 (1) (2021) 203–219. 
[29] M. Zhan, Z. Zhang, X. Zhao, Y. Zhang, T. Liu, L. Lu, X.Y. Li, CD155 in tumor 
progression and targeted therapy, Cancer Lett. 545 (2022), 215830. 
[30] C.J. Kearney, K.M. Ramsbottom, I. Voskoboinik, P.K. Darcy, J. Oliaro, Loss of 
DNAM-1 ligand expression by acute myeloid leukemia cells renders them 
resistant to NK cell killing, Oncoimmunology 5 (8) (2016), e1196308. 
[31] E.I. Heath, J.E. Rosenberg, The biology and rationale of targeting nectin-4 in 
urothelial carcinoma, Nat. Rev. Urol. 18 (2) (2021) 93–103. 
[32] T. Powles, J.E. Rosenberg, G.P. Sonpavde, Y. Loriot, I. Duran, J.L. Lee, 
N. Matsubara, C. Vulsteke, D. Castellano, C. Wu, M. Campbell, M. Matsangou, D. 
P. Petrylak, Enfortumab vedotin in previously treated advanced urothelial 
carcinoma, N. Engl. J. Med. 384 (12) (2021) 1125–1135. 
[33] C.J. Hoimes, T.W. Flaig, M.I. Milowsky, T.W. Friedlander, M.A. Bilen, S. Gupta, 
S. Srinivas, J.R. Merchan, R.R. McKay, D.P. Petrylak, C. Sasse, B.H. Moreno, 
Y. Yu, A.S. Carret, J.E. Rosenberg, Enfortumab vedotin plus pembrolizumab in 
previously untreated advanced urothelial cancer, J. Clin. Oncol. 41 (1) (2023) 
22–31. 
[34] Y. Wolf, A.C. Anderson, V.K. Kuchroo, TIM3 comes of age as an inhibitory 
receptor, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 20 (3) (2020) 173–185. 
[35] X. Yang, Y. Lin, Y. Shi, B. Li, W. Liu, W. Yin, Y. Dang, Y. Chu, J. Fan, R. He, FAP 
Promotes Immunosuppression by Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts in the Tumor 
Microenvironment via STAT3-CCL2 Signaling, Cancer Res 76 (14) (2016) 
4124–4135. 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
19
[36] L.P. Kane, Regulation of Tim-3 function by binding to phosphatidylserine, 
Biochem J. 478 (22) (2021) 3999–4004. 
[37] O. Pagliano, R.M. Morrison, J.M. Chauvin, H. Banerjee, D. Davar, Q. Ding, 
T. Tanegashima, W. Gao, S.R. Chakka, R. DeBlasio, A. Lowin, K. Kara, M. Ka, 
B. Zidi, R. Amin, I. Raphael, S. Zhang, S.C. Watkins, C. Sander, J.M. Kirkwood, 
M. Bosenberg, A.C. Anderson, V.K. Kuchroo, L.P. Kane, A.J. Korman, A. Rajpal, S. 
M. West, M. Han, C. Bee, X. Deng, X.M. Schebye, P. Strop, H.M. Zarour, Tim-3 
mediates T cell trogocytosis to limit antitumor immunity, J. Clin. Invest 132 (9) 
(2022). 
[38] K.O. Dixon, M. Tabaka, M.A. Schramm, S. Xiao, R. Tang, D. Dionne, A. 
C. Anderson, O. Rozenblatt-Rosen, A. Regev, V.K. Kuchroo, TIM-3 restrains anti- 
tumour immunity by regulating inflammasome activation, Nature 595 (7865) 
(2021) 101–106. 
[39] A. de Mingo Pulido, K. Hanggi, D.P. Celias, A. Gardner, J. Li, B. Batista- 
Bittencourt, E. Mohamed, J. Trillo-Tinoco, O. Osunmakinde, R. Pena, A. Onimus, 
T. Kaisho, J. Kaufmann, K. McEachern, H. Soliman, V.C. Luca, P.C. Rodriguez, 
X. Yu, B. Ruffell, The inhibitory receptor TIM-3 limits activation of the cGAS- 
STING pathway in intra-tumoral dendritic cells by suppressing extracellular DNA 
uptake, Immunity 54 (6) (2021) 1154–1167, e7. 
[40] G. Murugesan, B. Weigle, P.R. Crocker, Siglec and anti-Siglec therapies, Curr. 
Opin. Chem. Biol. 62 (2021) 34–42. 
[41] M.A. Stanczak, H. Laubli, Siglec receptors as new immune checkpoints in cancer, 
Mol. Asp. Med. 90 (2023), 101112. 
[42] E. Rodrigues, M.S. Macauley, Hypersialylation in cancer: modulation of 
inflammation and therapeutic opportunities, Cancers (Basel) 10 (6) (2018). 
[43] J. Daly, S. Sarkar, A. Natoni, J.C. Stark, N.M. Riley, C.R. Bertozzi, M. Carlsten, M. 
E. O’Dwyer, Targeting hypersialylation in multiple myeloma represents a novel 
approach to enhance NK cell-mediated tumor responses, Blood Adv. 6 (11) (2022) 
3352–3366. 
[44] A. Yoshimura, Y. Asahina, L.Y. Chang, T. Angata, H. Tanaka, K. Kitajima, C. Sato, 
Identification and functional characterization of a Siglec-7 counter-receptor on 
K562 cells, J. Biol. Chem. 296 (2021), 100477. 
[45] A.A. Barkal, R.E. Brewer, M. Markovic, M. Kowarsky, S.A. Barkal, B.W. Zaro, 
V. Krishnan, J. Hatakeyama, O. Dorigo, L.J. Barkal, I.L. Weissman, CD24 
signalling through macrophage Siglec-10 is a target for cancer immunotherapy, 
Nature 572 (7769) (2019) 392–396. 
[46] C. Jandus, K.F. Boligan, O. Chijioke, H. Liu, M. Dahlhaus, T. Demoulins, 
C. Schneider, M. Wehrli, R.E. Hunger, G.M. Baerlocher, H.U. Simon, P. Romero, 
C. Munz, S. von Gunten, Interactions between Siglec-7/9 receptors and ligands 
influence NK cell-dependent tumor immunosurveillance, J. Clin. Invest 124 (4) 
(2014) 1810–1820. 
[47] J. Wang, J. Sun, L.N. Liu, D.B. Flies, X. Nie, M. Toki, J. Zhang, C. Song, M. Zarr, 
X. Zhou, X. Han, K.A. Archer, T. O’Neill, R.S. Herbst, A.N. Boto, M.F. Sanmamed, 
S. Langermann, D.L. Rimm, L. Chen, Siglec-15 as an immune suppressor and 
potential target for normalization cancer immunotherapy, Nat. Med 25 (4) (2019) 
656–666. 
[48] A. Rodriguez-Pla, P. Patel, H.T. Maecker, J. Rossello-Urgell, N. Baldwin, 
L. Bennett, V. Cantrell, J. Baisch, M. Punaro, A. Gotte, L. Nassi, T. Wright, A. 
K. Palucka, J. Banchereau, V. Pascual, IFN priming is necessary but not sufficient 
to turn on a migratory dendritic cell program in lupus monocytes, J. Immunol. 
192 (12) (2014) 5586–5598. 
[49] A. Heard, J.H. Landmann, A.R. Hansen, A. Papadopolou, Y.S. Hsu, M.E. Selli, J. 
M. Warrington, J. Lattin, J. Chang, H. Ha, M. Haug-Kroeper, B. Doray, S. Gill, 
M. Ruella, K.E. Hayer, M.D. Weitzman, A.M. Green, R. Fluhrer, N. Singh, Antigen 
glycosylation regulates efficacy of CAR T cells targeting CD19, Nat. Commun. 13 
(1) (2022), 3367. 
[50] H.M. Kantarjian, D.J. DeAngelo, M. Stelljes, G. Martinelli, M. Liedtke, W. Stock, 
N. Gokbuget, S. O’Brien, K. Wang, T. Wang, M.L. Paccagnella, B. Sleight, 
E. Vandendries, A.S. Advani, Inotuzumab Ozogamicin versus Standard Therapy 
for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia, N. Engl. J. Med. 375 (8) (2016) 740–753. 
[51] I. Ibarlucea-Benitez, P. Weitzenfeld, P. Smith, J.V. Ravetch, Siglecs-7/9 function 
as inhibitory immune checkpoints in vivo and can be targeted to enhance 
therapeutic antitumor immunity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118 (26) (2021). 
[52] M.A. Stanczak, N. Rodrigues Mantuano, N. Kirchhammer, D.E. Sanin, F. Jacob, 
R. Coelho, A.V. Everest-Dass, J. Wang, M.P. Trefny, G. Monaco, A. Barenwaldt, M. 
A. Gray, A. Petrone, A.S. Kashyap, K. Glatz, B. Kasenda, K. Normington, 
J. Broderick, L. Peng, O.M.T. Pearce, E.L. Pearce, C.R. Bertozzi, A. Zippelius, 
H. Laubli, Targeting cancer glycosylation repolarizes tumor-associated 
macrophages allowing effective immune checkpoint blockade, Sci. Transl. Med 
14 (669) (2022), eabj1270. 
[53] J. Theruvath, M. Menard, B.A.H. Smith, M.H. Linde, G.L. Coles, G.N. Dalton, 
W. Wu, L. Kiru, A. Delaidelli, E. Sotillo, J.L. Silberstein, A.C. Geraghty, 
A. Banuelos, M.T. Radosevich, S. Dhingra, S. Heitzeneder, A. Tousley, J. Lattin, 
P. Xu, J. Huang, N. Nasholm, A. He, T.C. Kuo, E.R.B. Sangalang, J. Pons, 
A. Barkal, R.E. Brewer, K.D. Marjon, J.G. Vilches-Moure, P.L. Marshall, 
R. Fernandes, M. Monje, J.R. Cochran, P.H. Sorensen, H.E. Daldrup-Link, I. 
L. Weissman, J. Sage, R. Majeti, C.R. Bertozzi, W.A. Weiss, C.L. Mackall, R. 
G. Majzner, Anti-GD2 synergizes with CD47 blockade to mediate tumor 
eradication, Nat. Med. 28 (2) (2022) 333–344. 
[54] B. Greco, V. Malacarne, F. De Girardi, G.M. Scotti, F. Manfredi, E. Angelino, 
C. Sirini, B. Camisa, L. Falcone, M.A. Moresco, K. Paolella, M. Di Bono, R. Norata, 
F. Sanvito, S. Arcangeli, C. Doglioni, F. Ciceri, C. Bonini, A. Graziani, 
A. Bondanza, M. Casucci, Disrupting N-glycan expression on tumor cells boosts 
chimeric antigen receptor T cell efficacy against solid malignancies, Sci. Transl. 
Med. 14 (628) (2022), eabg3072. 
[55] M.A. Gray, M.A. Stanczak, N.R. Mantuano, H. Xiao, J.F.A. Pijnenborg, S. 
A. Malaker, C.L. Miller, P.A. Weidenbacher, J.T. Tanzo, G. Ahn, E.C. Woods, 
H. Laubli, C.R. Bertozzi, Targeted glycan degradation potentiates the anticancer 
immune response in vivo, Nat. Chem. Biol. 16 (12) (2020) 1376–1384. 
[56] S. Sivori, P. Vacca, G. Del Zotto, E. Munari, M.C. Mingari, L. Moretta, Human NK 
cells: surface receptors, inhibitory checkpoints, and translational applications, 
Cell Mol. Immunol. 16 (5) (2019) 430–441. 
[57] A. Poggi, M.R. Zocchi, Natural killer cells and immune-checkpoint inhibitor 
therapy: current knowledge and new challenges, Mol. Ther. Oncolytics 24 (2022) 
26–42. 
[58] P. Andre, C. Denis, C. Soulas, C. Bourbon-Caillet, J. Lopez, T. Arnoux, M. Blery, 
C. Bonnafous, L. Gauthier, A. Morel, B. Rossi, R. Remark, V. Breso, E. Bonnet, 
G. Habif, S. Guia, A.I. Lalanne, C. Hoffmann, O. Lantz, J. Fayette, A. Boyer- 
Chammard, R. Zerbib, P. Dodion, H. Ghadially, M. Jure-Kunkel, Y. Morel, 
R. Herbst, E. Narni-Mancinelli, R.B. Cohen, E. Vivier, Anti-NKG2A mAb Is a 
Checkpoint Inhibitor that Promotes Anti-tumor Immunity by Unleashing Both T 
and NK Cells, Cell 175 (7) (2018) 1731–1743, e13. 
[59] X. Liu, J. Song, H. Zhang, X. Liu, F. Zuo, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, X. Yin, X. Guo, X. Wu, 
H. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Hu, J. Jing, X. Ma, H. Shi, Immune checkpoint HLA-E:CD94- 
NKG2A mediates evasion of circulating tumor cells from NK cell surveillance, 
Cancer Cell 41 (2) (2023) 272–287, e9. 
[60] J. Lee, B. Keam, H.R. Park, J.E. Park, S. Kim, M. Kim, T.M. Kim, D.W. Kim, D. 
S. Heo, Monalizumab efficacy correlates with HLA-E surface expression and NK 
cell activity in head and neck squamous carcinoma cell lines, J. Cancer Res Clin. 
Oncol. (2022). 
[61] V. Cazzetta, D. Depierreux, F. Colucci, J. Mikulak, D. Mavilio, NKG2A Immune 
Checkpoint in Vdelta2 T Cells: Emerging Application in Cancer Immunotherapy, 
Cancers (Basel) 15 (4) (2023). 
[62] N. van Montfoort, L. Borst, M.J. Korrer, M. Sluijter, K.A. Marijt, S.J. Santegoets, V. 
J. van Ham, I. Ehsan, P. Charoentong, P. Andre, N. Wagtmann, M.J.P. Welters, Y. 
J. Kim, S.J. Piersma, S.H. van der Burg, T. van Hall, NKG2A Blockade Potentiates 
CD8 T Cell Immunity Induced by Cancer Vaccines, Cell 175 (7) (2018) 
1744–1755, e15. 
[63] B. Salome, J.P. Sfakianos, D. Ranti, J. Daza, C. Bieber, A. Charap, C. Hammer, 
R. Banchereau, A.M. Farkas, D.F. Ruan, S. Izadmehr, D. Geanon, G. Kelly, R.M. de 
Real, B. Lee, K.G. Beaumont, S. Shroff, Y.A. Wang, Y.C. Wang, T.H. Thin, 
M. Garcia-Barros, E. Hegewisch-Solloa, E.M. Mace, L. Wang, T. O’Donnell, 
D. Chowell, R. Fernandez-Rodriguez, M. Skobe, N. Taylor, S. Kim-Schulze, R. 
P. Sebra, D. Palmer, E. Clancy-Thompson, S. Hammond, A.O. Kamphorst, K. 
J. Malmberg, E. Marcenaro, P. Romero, R. Brody, M. Viard, Y. Yuki, M. Martin, 
M. Carrington, R. Mehrazin, P. Wiklund, I. Mellman, S. Mariathasan, J. Zhu, M. 
D. Galsky, N. Bhardwaj, A. Horowitz, NKG2A and HLA-E define an alternative 
immune checkpoint axis in bladder cancer, Cancer Cell 40 (9) (2022) 1027–1043, 
e9. 
[64] T. Kamiya, S.V. Seow, D. Wong, M. Robinson, D. Campana, Blocking expression of 
inhibitory receptor NKG2A overcomes tumor resistance to NK cells, J. Clin. Invest 
129 (5) (2019) 2094–2106. 
[65] B. Acs, F.S. Ahmed, S. Gupta, P.F. Wong, R.D. Gartrell, J. Sarin Pradhan, E. 
M. Rizk, B. Gould Rothberg, Y.M. Saenger, D.L. Rimm, An open source automated 
tumor infiltrating lymphocyte algorithm for prognosis in melanoma, Nat. 
Commun. 10 (1) (2019), 5440. 
[66] T.W. Kim, H.A. Burris, M.J. de Miguel Luken, M.J. Pishvaian, Y.J. Bang, 
M. Gordon, A. Awada, D.R. Camidge, F.S. Hodi, G.A. McArthur, W.H. Miller, 
A. Cervantes, L.Q. Chow, A.M. Lesokhin, A. Rutten, M. Sznol, D. Rishipathak, S. 
C. Chen, E. Stefanich, T. Pourmohamad, M. Anderson, J. Kim, M. Huseni, I. Rhee, 
L.L. Siu, First-In-Human Phase I Study of the OX40 Agonist MOXR0916 in 
Patients with Advanced Solid Tumors, Clin. Cancer Res 28 (16) (2022) 
3452–3463. 
[67] K.P. Papadopoulos, K. Autio, T. Golan, K. Dobrenkov, E. Chartash, Q. Chen, 
R. Wnek, G.V. Long, Phase I Study of MK-4166, an Anti-human Glucocorticoid- 
Induced TNF Receptor Antibody, Alone or with Pembrolizumab in Advanced 
Solid Tumors, Clin. Cancer Res 27 (7) (2021) 1904–1911. 
[68] K.N. Wiles, L.E. Tsikretsis, C.M. Alioto, P.A. Hermida de Viveiros, V.M. Villaflor, 
M.P. Tetreault, GITR agonistic stimulation enhances the anti-tumor immune 
response in a mouse model of ESCC, Carcinogenesis 43 (9) (2022) 908–918. 
[69] S. Chan, N. Belmar, S. Ho, B. Rogers, M. Stickler, M. Graham, E. Lee, N. Tran, 
D. Zhang, P. Gupta, M. Sho, T. MacDonough, A. Woolley, H. Kim, H. Zhang, 
W. Liu, P. Zheng, Z. Dezso, K. Halliwill, M. Ceccarelli, S. Rhodes, A. Thakur, C. 
M. Forsyth, M. Xiong, S.S. Tan, R. Iyer, M. Lake, E. Digiammarino, L. Zhou, 
L. Bigelow, K. Longenecker, R.A. Judge, C. Liu, M. Trumble, J.P. Remis, M. Fox, 
B. Cairns, Y. Akamatsu, D. Hollenbaugh, F. Harding, H.M. Alvarez, An anti-PD-1- 
GITR-L bispecific agonist induces GITR clustering-mediated T cell activation for 
cancer immunotherapy, Nat. Cancer 3 (3) (2022) 337–354. 
[70] Y.S. Rakke, L. Campos Carrascosa, A.A. van Beek, V. de Ruiter, R.S. van 
Gemerden, M. Doukas, P.G. Doornebosch, M. Vermaas, S. Ter Borg, E. van der 
Harst, P. Coene, M. Kliffen, D.J. Grunhagen, C. Verhoef, I.J. JNM, 
J. Kwekkeboom, D. Sprengers, GITR Ligation Improves Anti-PD1-Mediated 
Restoration of Human MMR-Proficient Colorectal Carcinoma Tumor-Derived T 
Cells, Cell Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 15 (1) (2023) 77–97. 
[71] R. Zappasodi, C. Sirard, Y. Li, S. Budhu, M. Abu-Akeel, C. Liu, X. Yang, H. Zhong, 
W. Newman, J. Qi, P. Wong, D. Schaer, H. Koon, V. Velcheti, M.D. Hellmann, M. 
A. Postow, M.K. Callahan, J.D. Wolchok, T. Merghoub, Rational design of anti- 
GITR-based combination immunotherapy, Nat. Med 25 (5) (2019) 759–766. 
[72] B.I. Philipson, R.S. O’Connor, M.J. May, C.H. June, S.M. Albelda, M.C. Milone, 4- 
1BB costimulation promotes CAR T cell survival through noncanonical NF- 
kappaB signaling, Sci. Signal 13 (625) (2020). 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
20
[73] H. Kotanides, R.M. Sattler, M.B. Lebron, C. Carpenito, J. Shen, J. Li, 
D. Surguladze, J.N. Haidar, C. Burns, L. Shen, I. Inigo, A.L. Pennello, A. Forest, 
X. Chen, D. Chin, A. Sonyi, M. Topper, L. Boucher, P. Sharma, Y. Zhang, 
D. Burtrum, R.D. Novosiadly, D.L. Ludwig, G.D. Plowman, M. Kalos, 
Characterization of 7A5: a human CD137 (4-1BB) receptor binding monoclonal 
antibody with differential agonist properties that promotes antitumor immunity, 
Mol. Cancer Ther. 19 (4) (2020) 988–998. 
[74] H.S. Ma, B. Poudel, E.R. Torres, J.W. Sidhom, T.M. Robinson, B. Christmas, 
B. Scott, K. Cruz, S. Woolman, V.Z. Wall, T. Armstrong, E.M. Jaffee, A CD40 
agonist and PD-1 antagonist antibody reprogram the microenvironment of 
nonimmunogenic tumors to allow t-cell-mediated anticancer activity, Cancer 
Immunol. Res 7 (3) (2019) 428–442. 
[75] C.Y. Lim, J.H. Chang, W.S. Lee, J. Kim, I.Y. Park, CD40 agonists alter the 
pancreatic cancer microenvironment by shifting the macrophage phenotype 
toward M1 and suppress human pancreatic cancer in organotypic slice cultures, 
Gut Liver 16 (4) (2022) 645–659. 
[76] L. Zhang, Z. Li, K.M. Skrzypczynska, Q. Fang, W. Zhang, S.A. O’Brien, Y. He, 
L. Wang, Q. Zhang, A. Kim, R. Gao, J. Orf, T. Wang, D. Sawant, J. Kang, D. Bhatt, 
D. Lu, C.M. Li, A.S. Rapaport, K. Perez, Y. Ye, S. Wang, X. Hu, X. Ren, W. Ouyang, 
Z. Shen, J.G. Egen, Z. Zhang, X. Yu, Single-cell analyses inform mechanisms of 
myeloid-targeted therapies in colon cancer, Cell 181 (2) (2020) 442–459, e29. 
[77] G.L. Beatty, R. Winograd, R.A. Evans, K.B. Long, S.L. Luque, J.W. Lee, 
C. Clendenin, W.L. Gladney, D.M. Knoblock, P.D. Guirnalda, R.H. Vonderheide, 
exclusion of T cells from pancreatic carcinomas in mice is regulated by Ly6C(low) 
F4/80(+) extratumoral macrophages, Gastroenterology 149 (1) (2015) 201–210. 
[78] D.B. Doroshow, S. Bhalla, M.B. Beasley, L.M. Sholl, K.M. Kerr, S. Gnjatic, I. 
I. Wistuba, D.L. Rimm, M.S. Tsao, F.R. Hirsch, PD-L1 as a biomarker of response 
to immune-checkpoint inhibitors, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 18 (6) (2021) 345–362. 
[79] P.A. Ott, Y.J. Bang, D. Berton-Rigaud, E. Elez, M.J. Pishvaian, H.S. Rugo, 
I. Puzanov, J.M. Mehnert, K.L. Aung, J. Lopez, M. Carrigan, S. Saraf, M. Chen, J. 
C. Soria, Safety and antitumor activity of pembrolizumab in advanced 
programmed death ligand 1-positive endometrial cancer: results from the 
KEYNOTE-028 study, J. Clin. Oncol. 35 (22) (2017) 2535–2541. 
[80] J.S. Frenel, C. Le Tourneau, B. O’Neil, P.A. Ott, S.A. Piha-Paul, C. Gomez-Roca, E. 
M.J. van Brummelen, H.S. Rugo, S. Thomas, S. Saraf, R. Rangwala, A. Varga, 
Safety and Efficacy of Pembrolizumab in Advanced, Programmed Death Ligand 1- 
Positive Cervical Cancer: Results From the Phase Ib KEYNOTE-028 Trial, J. Clin. 
Oncol. 35 (36) (2017) 4035–4041. 
[81] P.A. Ott, E. Elez, S. Hiret, D.W. Kim, A. Morosky, S. Saraf, B. Piperdi, J. 
M. Mehnert, Pembrolizumab in Patients With Extensive-Stage Small-Cell Lung 
Cancer: Results From the Phase Ib KEYNOTE-028 Study, J. Clin. Oncol. 35 (34) 
(2017) 3823–3829. 
[82] A.R. Hansen, C. Massard, P.A. Ott, N.B. Haas, J.S. Lopez, S. Ejadi, J.M. Wallmark, 
B. Keam, J.P. Delord, R. Aggarwal, M. Gould, P. Yang, S.M. Keefe, S.A. Piha-Paul, 
Pembrolizumab for advanced prostate adenocarcinoma: findings of the 
KEYNOTE-028 study, Ann. Oncol. 29 (8) (2018) 1807–1813. 
[83] E.B. Garon, N.A. Rizvi, R. Hui, N. Leighl, A.S. Balmanoukian, J.P. Eder, 
A. Patnaik, C. Aggarwal, M. Gubens, L. Horn, E. Carcereny, M.J. Ahn, E. Felip, J. 
S. Lee, M.D. Hellmann, O. Hamid, J.W. Goldman, J.C. Soria, M. Dolled-Filhart, R. 
Z. Rutledge, J. Zhang, J.K. Lunceford, R. Rangwala, G.M. Lubiniecki, C. Roach, 
K. Emancipator, L. Gandhi, K.-. Investigators, Pembrolizumab for the treatment of 
non-small-cell lung cancer, N. Engl. J. Med 372 (21) (2015) 2018–2028. 
[84] S.P. Kang, K. Gergich, G.M. Lubiniecki, D.P. de Alwis, C. Chen, M.A.B. Tice, E. 
H. Rubin, Pembrolizumab KEYNOTE-001: an adaptive study leading to 
accelerated approval for two indications and a companion diagnostic, Ann. 
Oncol. 28 (6) (2017) 1388–1398. 
[85] H.C. Chung, W. Ros, J.P. Delord, R. Perets, A. Italiano, R. Shapira-Frommer, 
L. Manzuk, S.A. Piha-Paul, L. Xu, S. Zeigenfuss, S.K. Pruitt, A. Leary, Efficacy and 
Safety of Pembrolizumab in Previously Treated Advanced Cervical Cancer: 
Results From the Phase II KEYNOTE-158 Study, J. Clin. Oncol. 37 (17) (2019) 
1470–1478. 
[86] S. Gadgeel, F.R. Hirsch, K. Kerr, F. Barlesi, K. Park, A. Rittmeyer, W. Zou, 
N. Bhatia, H. Koeppen, S.M. Paul, D. Shames, J. Yi, C. Matheny, M. Ballinger, 
M. McCleland, D.R. Gandara, Comparison of SP142 and 22C3 
Immunohistochemistry PD-L1 Assays for Clinical Efficacy of Atezolizumab in 
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: Results From the Randomized OAK Trial, Clin. Lung 
Cancer 23 (1) (2022) 21–33. 
[87] A.I. Daud, J.D. Wolchok, C. Robert, W.J. Hwu, J.S. Weber, A. Ribas, F.S. Hodi, A. 
M. Joshua, R. Kefford, P. Hersey, R. Joseph, T.C. Gangadhar, R. Dronca, 
A. Patnaik, H. Zarour, C. Roach, G. Toland, J.K. Lunceford, X.N. Li, 
K. Emancipator, M. Dolled-Filhart, S.P. Kang, S. Ebbinghaus, O. Hamid, 
Programmed death-ligand 1 expression and response to the anti-programmed 
death 1 antibody pembrolizumab in melanoma, J. Clin. Oncol. 34 (34) (2016) 
4102–4109. 
[88] J. Mazieres, A. Rittmeyer, S. Gadgeel, T. Hida, D.R. Gandara, D.L. Cortinovis, 
F. Barlesi, W. Yu, C. Matheny, M. Ballinger, K. Park, Atezolizumab Versus 
Docetaxel in Pretreated Patients With NSCLC: Final Results From the Randomized 
Phase 2 POPLAR and Phase 3 OAK Clinical Trials, J. Thorac. Oncol. 16 (1) (2021) 
140–150. 
[89] E.S. Reisenbichler, G. Han, A. Bellizzi, V. Bossuyt, J. Brock, K. Cole, O. Fadare, 
O. Hameed, K. Hanley, B.T. Harrison, M.G. Kuba, A. Ly, D. Miller, M. Podoll, A. 
C. Roden, K. Singh, M.A. Sanders, S. Wei, H. Wen, V. Pelekanou, V. Yaghoobi, 
F. Ahmed, L. Pusztai, D.L. Rimm, Prospective multi-institutional evaluation of 
pathologist assessment of PD-L1 assays for patient selection in triple negative 
breast cancer, Mod. Pathol. 33 (9) (2020) 1746–1752. 
[90] T.N. Schumacher, R.D. Schreiber, Neoantigens in cancer immunotherapy, Science 
348 (6230) (2015) 69–74. 
[91] M. Yarchoan, A. Hopkins, E.M. Jaffee, Tumor Mutational Burden and Response 
Rate to PD-1 Inhibition, N. Engl. J. Med. 377 (25) (2017) 2500–2501. 
[92] S. Turajlic, K. Litchfield, H. Xu, R. Rosenthal, N. McGranahan, J.L. Reading, Y.N. 
S. Wong, A. Rowan, N. Kanu, M. Al Bakir, T. Chambers, R. Salgado, P. Savas, 
S. Loi, N.J. Birkbak, L. Sansregret, M. Gore, J. Larkin, S.A. Quezada, C. Swanton, 
Insertion-and-deletion-derived tumour-specific neoantigens and the 
immunogenic phenotype: a pan-cancer analysis, Lancet Oncol. 18 (8) (2017) 
1009–1021. 
[93] D.T. Le, J.N. Durham, K.N. Smith, H. Wang, B.R. Bartlett, L.K. Aulakh, S. Lu, 
H. Kemberling, C. Wilt, B.S. Luber, F. Wong, N.S. Azad, A.A. Rucki, D. Laheru, 
R. Donehower, A. Zaheer, G.A. Fisher, T.S. Crocenzi, J.J. Lee, T.F. Greten, A. 
G. Duffy, K.K. Ciombor, A.D. Eyring, B.H. Lam, A. Joe, S.P. Kang, M. Holdhoff, 
L. Danilova, L. Cope, C. Meyer, S. Zhou, R.M. Goldberg, D.K. Armstrong, K. 
M. Bever, A.N. Fader, J. Taube, F. Housseau, D. Spetzler, N. Xiao, D.M. Pardoll, 
N. Papadopoulos, K.W. Kinzler, J.R. Eshleman, B. Vogelstein, R.A. Anders, L. 
A. Diaz Jr., Mismatch repair deficiency predicts response of solid tumors to PD-1 
blockade, Science 357 (6349) (2017) 409–413. 
[94] T. Andre, K.K. Shiu, T.W. Kim, B.V. Jensen, L.H. Jensen, C. Punt, D. Smith, 
R. Garcia-Carbonero, M. Benavides, P. Gibbs, C. de la Fouchardiere, F. Rivera, 
E. Elez, J. Bendell, D.T. Le, T. Yoshino, E. Van Cutsem, P. Yang, M.Z.H. Farooqui, 
P. Marinello, L.A. Diaz Jr., K.-. Investigators, Pembrolizumab in Microsatellite- 
Instability-High Advanced Colorectal Cancer, N. Engl. J. Med 383 (23) (2020) 
2207–2218. 
[95] M. Maio, P.A. Ascierto, L. Manzyuk, D. Motola-Kuba, N. Penel, P.A. Cassier, G. 
M. Bariani, A. De Jesus Acosta, T. Doi, F. Longo, W.H. Miller, D.Y. Oh, 
M. Gottfried, L. Xu, F. Jin, K. Norwood, A. Marabelle, Pembrolizumab in 
microsatellite instability high or mismatch repair deficient cancers: updated 
analysis from the phase II KEYNOTE-158 study, Ann. Oncol. 33 (9) (2022) 
929–938. 
[96] H. Salmon, K. Franciszkiewicz, D. Damotte, M.C. Dieu-Nosjean, P. Validire, 
A. Trautmann, F. Mami-Chouaib, E. Donnadieu, Matrix architecture defines the 
preferential localization and migration of T cells into the stroma of human lung 
tumors, J. Clin. Invest 122 (3) (2012) 899–910. 
[97] S. Mariathasan, S.J. Turley, D. Nickles, A. Castiglioni, K. Yuen, Y. Wang, E. 
E. Kadel III, H. Koeppen, J.L. Astarita, R. Cubas, S. Jhunjhunwala, R. Banchereau, 
Y. Yang, Y. Guan, C. Chalouni, J. Ziai, Y. Senbabaoglu, S. Santoro, D. Sheinson, 
J. Hung, J.M. Giltnane, A.A. Pierce, K. Mesh, S. Lianoglou, J. Riegler, R.A. 
D. Carano, P. Eriksson, M. Hoglund, L. Somarriba, D.L. Halligan, M.S. van der 
Heijden, Y. Loriot, J.E. Rosenberg, L. Fong, I. Mellman, D.S. Chen, M. Green, 
C. Derleth, G.D. Fine, P.S. Hegde, R. Bourgon, T. Powles, TGFbeta attenuates 
tumour response to PD-L1 blockade by contributing to exclusion of T cells, Nature 
554 (7693) (2018) 544–548. 
[98] A. Chakravarthy, L. Khan, N.P. Bensler, P. Bose, D.D. De Carvalho, TGF-beta- 
associated extracellular matrix genes link cancer-associated fibroblasts to 
immune evasion and immunotherapy failure, Nat. Commun. 9 (1) (2018) 4692. 
[99] M. Yarchoan, L.A. Albacker, A.C. Hopkins, M. Montesion, K. Murugesan, T. 
T. Vithayathil, N. Zaidi, N.S. Azad, D.A. Laheru, G.M. Frampton, E.M. Jaffee, PD- 
L1 expression and tumor mutational burden are independent biomarkers in most 
cancers, JCI Insight 4 (6) (2019). 
[100] A. Bagaev, N. Kotlov, K. Nomie, V. Svekolkin, A. Gafurov, O. Isaeva, N. Osokin, 
I. Kozlov, F. Frenkel, O. Gancharova, N. Almog, M. Tsiper, R. Ataullakhanov, 
N. Fowler, Conserved pan-cancer microenvironment subtypes predict response to 
immunotherapy, Cancer Cell 39 (6) (2021) 845–865, e7. 
[101] A.J. Combes, B. Samad, M.F. Krummel, Defining and using immune archetypes to 
classify and treat cancer, Nat. Rev. Cancer 23 (7) (2023) 491–505. 
[102] A.J. Combes, B. Samad, J. Tsui, N.W. Chew, P. Yan, G.C. Reeder, D. Kushnoor, 
A. Shen, B. Davidson, A.J. Barczak, M. Adkisson, A. Edwards, M. Naser, K. 
C. Barry, T. Courau, T. Hammoudi, R.J. Arguello, A.A. Rao, A.B. Olshen, 
C. Immunoprofiler, C. Cai, J. Zhan, K.C. Davis, R.K. Kelley, J.S. Chapman, C. 
E. Atreya, A. Patel, A.I. Daud, P. Ha, A.A. Diaz, J.R. Kratz, E.A. Collisson, G. 
K. Fragiadakis, D.J. Erle, A. Boissonnas, S. Asthana, V. Chan, M.F. Krummel, 
Discovering dominant tumor immune archetypes in a pan-cancer census, Cell 185 
(1) (2022) 184–203, e19. 
[103] K. Im, A.J. Combes, M.H. Spitzer, A.T. Satpathy, M.F. Krummel, Archetypes of 
checkpoint-responsive immunity, Trends Immunol. 42 (11) (2021) 960–974. 
[104] M. Binnewies, A.M. Mujal, J.L. Pollack, A.J. Combes, E.A. Hardison, K.C. Barry, 
J. Tsui, M.K. Ruhland, K. Kersten, M.A. Abushawish, M. Spasic, J.P. Giurintano, 
V. Chan, A.I. Daud, P. Ha, C.J. Ye, E.W. Roberts, M.F. Krummel, Unleashing Type- 
2 Dendritic Cells to Drive Protective Antitumor CD4(+) T Cell Immunity, Cell 177 
(3) (2019) 556–571, e16. 
[105] M. Ligorio, S. Sil, J. Malagon-Lopez, L.T. Nieman, S. Misale, M. Di Pilato, R. 
Y. Ebright, M.N. Karabacak, A.S. Kulkarni, A. Liu, N. Vincent Jordan, J. 
W. Franses, J. Philipp, J. Kreuzer, N. Desai, K.S. Arora, M. Rajurkar, E. Horwitz, 
A. Neyaz, E. Tai, N.K.C. Magnus, K.D. Vo, C.N. Yashaswini, F. Marangoni, 
M. Boukhali, J.P. Fatherree, L.J. Damon, K. Xega, R. Desai, M. Choz, F. Bersani, 
A. Langenbucher, V. Thapar, R. Morris, U.F. Wellner, O. Schilling, M.S. Lawrence, 
A.S. Liss, M.N. Rivera, V. Deshpande, C.H. Benes, S. Maheswaran, D.A. Haber, 
C. Fernandez-Del-Castillo, C.R. Ferrone, W. Haas, M.J. Aryee, D.T. Ting, Stromal 
microenvironment shapes the intratumoral architecture of pancreatic cancer, Cell 
178 (1) (2019) 160–175, e27. 
[106] C.X. Dominguez, S. Muller, S. Keerthivasan, H. Koeppen, J. Hung, S. Gierke, 
B. Breart, O. Foreman, T.W. Bainbridge, A. Castiglioni, Y. Senbabaoglu, 
Z. Modrusan, Y. Liang, M.R. Junttila, C. Klijn, R. Bourgon, S.J. Turley, Single-Cell 
RNA Sequencing Reveals Stromal Evolution into LRRC15(+) Myofibroblasts as a 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
21
Determinant of Patient Response to Cancer Immunotherapy, Cancer Discov. 10 
(2) (2020) 232–253. 
[107] Z. Gong, Q. Li, J. Shi, J. Wei, P. Li, C.H. Chang, L.D. Shultz, G. Ren, Lung 
fibroblasts facilitate pre-metastatic niche formation by remodeling the local 
immune microenvironment, Immunity 55 (8) (2022) 1483–1500, e9. 
[108] A. Costa, Y. Kieffer, A. Scholer-Dahirel, F. Pelon, B. Bourachot, M. Cardon, 
P. Sirven, I. Magagna, L. Fuhrmann, C. Bernard, C. Bonneau, M. Kondratova, 
I. Kuperstein, A. Zinovyev, A.M. Givel, M.C. Parrini, V. Soumelis, A. Vincent- 
Salomon, F. Mechta-Grigoriou, Fibroblast Heterogeneity and Immunosuppressive 
Environment in Human Breast Cancer, Cancer Cell 33 (3) (2018) 463–479, e10. 
[109] B.C. Ozdemir, T. Pentcheva-Hoang, J.L. Carstens, X. Zheng, C.C. Wu, T. 
R. Simpson, H. Laklai, H. Sugimoto, C. Kahlert, S.V. Novitskiy, A. De Jesus-Acosta, 
P. Sharma, P. Heidari, U. Mahmood, L. Chin, H.L. Moses, V.M. Weaver, A. Maitra, 
J.P. Allison, V.S. LeBleu, R. Kalluri, Depletion of carcinoma-associated fibroblasts 
and fibrosis induces immunosuppression and accelerates pancreas cancer with 
reduced survival, Cancer Cell 25 (6) (2014) 719–734. 
[110] A.D. Rhim, P.E. Oberstein, D.H. Thomas, E.T. Mirek, C.F. Palermo, S.A. Sastra, E. 
N. Dekleva, T. Saunders, C.P. Becerra, I.W. Tattersall, C.B. Westphalen, 
J. Kitajewski, M.G. Fernandez-Barrena, M.E. Fernandez-Zapico, C. Iacobuzio- 
Donahue, K.P. Olive, B.Z. Stanger, Stromal elements act to restrain, rather than 
support, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Cancer Cell 25 (6) (2014) 735–747. 
[111] C. Feig, J.O. Jones, M. Kraman, R.J. Wells, A. Deonarine, D.S. Chan, C.M. Connell, 
E.W. Roberts, Q. Zhao, O.L. Caballero, S.A. Teichmann, T. Janowitz, D.I. Jodrell, 
D.A. Tuveson, D.T. Fearon, Targeting CXCL12 from FAP-expressing carcinoma- 
associated fibroblasts synergizes with anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy in pancreatic 
cancer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110 (50) (2013) 20212–20217. 
[112] Y.D. Seo, X. Jiang, K.M. Sullivan, F.G. Jalikis, K.S. Smythe, A. Abbasi, M. Vignali, 
J.O. Park, S.K. Daniel, S.M. Pollack, T.S. Kim, R. Yeung, I.N. Crispe, R.H. Pierce, 
H. Robins, V.G. Pillarisetty, Mobilization of CD8(+) T Cells via CXCR4 Blockade 
Facilitates PD-1 Checkpoint Therapy in Human Pancreatic Cancer, Clin. Cancer 
Res 25 (13) (2019) 3934–3945. 
[113] B. Bockorny, V. Semenisty, T. Macarulla, E. Borazanci, B.M. Wolpin, S. 
M. Stemmer, T. Golan, R. Geva, M.J. Borad, K.S. Pedersen, J.O. Park, R. 
A. Ramirez, D.G. Abad, J. Feliu, A. Munoz, M. Ponz-Sarvise, A. Peled, T.M. Lustig, 
O. Bohana-Kashtan, S.M. Shaw, E. Sorani, M. Chaney, S. Kadosh, A. Vainstein 
Haras, D.D. Von Hoff, M. Hidalgo, BL-8040, a CXCR4 antagonist, in combination 
with pembrolizumab and chemotherapy for pancreatic cancer: the COMBAT trial, 
Nat. Med 26 (6) (2020) 878–885. 
[114] T.K. Choueiri, M.B. Atkins, T.L. Rose, R.S. Alter, Y. Ju, K. Niland, Y. Wang, 
R. Arbeit, S. Parasuraman, L. Gan, D.F. McDermott, A phase 1b trial of the CXCR4 
inhibitor mavorixafor and nivolumab in advanced renal cell carcinoma patients 
with no prior response to nivolumab monotherapy, Invest N. Drugs 39 (4) (2021) 
1019–1027. 
[115] D. Biasci, M. Smoragiewicz, C.M. Connell, Z. Wang, Y. Gao, J.E.D. Thaventhiran, 
B. Basu, L. Magiera, T.I. Johnson, L. Bax, A. Gopinathan, C. Isherwood, F. 
A. Gallagher, M. Pawula, I. Hudecova, D. Gale, N. Rosenfeld, P. Barmpounakis, E. 
C. Popa, R. Brais, E. Godfrey, F. Mir, F.M. Richards, D.T. Fearon, T. Janowitz, D. 
I. Jodrell, CXCR4 inhibition in human pancreatic and colorectal cancers induces 
an integrated immune response, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117 (46) (2020) 
28960–28970. 
[116] R.L. Barrett, E. Pure, Cancer-associated fibroblasts and their influence on tumor 
immunity and immunotherapy, Elife 9 (2020). 
[117] J.A. Grout, P. Sirven, A.M. Leader, S. Maskey, E. Hector, I. Puisieux, F. Steffan, 
E. Cheng, N. Tung, M. Maurin, R. Vaineau, L. Karpf, M. Plaud, A.L. Begue, 
K. Ganesh, J. Mesple, M. Casanova-Acebes, A. Tabachnikova, S. Keerthivasan, 
A. Lansky, J.L. Berichel, L. Walker, A.H. Rahman, S. Gnjatic, N. Girard, 
M. Lefevre, D. Damotte, J. Adam, J.C. Martin, A. Wolf, R.M. Flores, M.B. Beasley, 
R. Pradhan, S. Muller, T.U. Marron, S.J. Turley, M. Merad, E. Kenigsberg, 
H. Salmon, Spatial Positioning and Matrix Programs of Cancer-Associated 
Fibroblasts Promote T-cell Exclusion in Human Lung Tumors, Cancer Discov. 12 
(11) (2022) 2606–2625. 
[118] E. Peranzoni, J. Lemoine, L. Vimeux, V. Feuillet, S. Barrin, C. Kantari-Mimoun, 
N. Bercovici, M. Guerin, J. Biton, H. Ouakrim, F. Regnier, A. Lupo, M. Alifano, 
D. Damotte, E. Donnadieu, Macrophages impede CD8 T cells from reaching tumor 
cells and limit the efficacy of anti-PD-1 treatment, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115 
(17) (2018) E4041–E4050. 
[119] K. Kersten, K.H. Hu, A.J. Combes, B. Samad, T. Harwin, A. Ray, A.A. Rao, E. Cai, 
K. Marchuk, J. Artichoker, T. Courau, Q. Shi, J. Belk, A.T. Satpathy, M. 
F. Krummel, Spatiotemporal co-dependency between macrophages and exhausted 
CD8(+) T cells in cancer, Cancer Cell 40 (6) (2022) 624–638, e9. 
[120] K.H. Hu, J.P. Eichorst, C.S. McGinnis, D.M. Patterson, E.D. Chow, K. Kersten, S. 
C. Jameson, Z.J. Gartner, A.A. Rao, M.F. Krummel, ZipSeq: barcoding for real- 
time mapping of single cell transcriptomes, Nat. Methods 17 (8) (2020) 833–843. 
[121] C.U. Blank, W.N. Haining, W. Held, P.G. Hogan, A. Kallies, E. Lugli, R.C. Lynn, 
M. Philip, A. Rao, N.P. Restifo, A. Schietinger, T.N. Schumacher, P. 
L. Schwartzberg, A.H. Sharpe, D.E. Speiser, E.J. Wherry, B.A. Youngblood, 
D. Zehn, Defining ’T cell exhaustion, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 19 (11) (2019) 665–674. 
[122] A.C. Huang, M.A. Postow, R.J. Orlowski, R. Mick, B. Bengsch, S. Manne, W. Xu, 
S. Harmon, J.R. Giles, B. Wenz, M. Adamow, D. Kuk, K.S. Panageas, C. Carrera, 
P. Wong, F. Quagliarello, B. Wubbenhorst, K. D’Andrea, K.E. Pauken, R.S. Herati, 
R.P. Staupe, J.M. Schenkel, S. McGettigan, S. Kothari, S.M. George, R. 
H. Vonderheide, R.K. Amaravadi, G.C. Karakousis, L.M. Schuchter, X. Xu, K. 
L. Nathanson, J.D. Wolchok, T.C. Gangadhar, E.J. Wherry, T-cell invigoration to 
tumour burden ratio associated with anti-PD-1 response, Nature 545 (7652) 
(2017) 60–65. 
[123] O. Khan, J.R. Giles, S. McDonald, S. Manne, S.F. Ngiow, K.P. Patel, M.T. Werner, 
A.C. Huang, K.A. Alexander, J.E. Wu, J. Attanasio, P. Yan, S.M. George, 
B. Bengsch, R.P. Staupe, G. Donahue, W. Xu, R.K. Amaravadi, X. Xu, G. 
C. Karakousis, T.C. Mitchell, L.M. Schuchter, J. Kaye, S.L. Berger, E.J. Wherry, 
TOX transcriptionally and epigenetically programs CD8(+) T cell exhaustion, 
Nature 571 (7764) (2019) 211–218. 
[124] J.C. Beltra, S. Manne, M.S. Abdel-Hakeem, M. Kurachi, J.R. Giles, Z. Chen, 
V. Casella, S.F. Ngiow, O. Khan, Y.J. Huang, P. Yan, K. Nzingha, W. Xu, R. 
K. Amaravadi, X. Xu, G.C. Karakousis, T.C. Mitchell, L.M. Schuchter, A.C. Huang, 
E.J. Wherry, Developmental Relationships of Four Exhausted CD8(+) T Cell 
Subsets Reveals Underlying Transcriptional and Epigenetic Landscape Control 
Mechanisms, Immunity 52 (5) (2020) 825–841, e8. 
[125] K.E. Yost, A.T. Satpathy, D.K. Wells, Y. Qi, C. Wang, R. Kageyama, K. 
L. McNamara, J.M. Granja, K.Y. Sarin, R.A. Brown, R.K. Gupta, C. Curtis, S. 
L. Bucktrout, M.M. Davis, A.L.S. Chang, H.Y. Chang, Clonal replacement of tumor- 
specific T cells following PD-1 blockade, Nat. Med 25 (8) (2019) 1251–1259. 
[126] K.E. Pauken, M.A. Sammons, P.M. Odorizzi, S. Manne, J. Godec, O. Khan, A. 
M. Drake, Z. Chen, D.R. Sen, M. Kurachi, R.A. Barnitz, C. Bartman, B. Bengsch, A. 
C. Huang, J.M. Schenkel, G. Vahedi, W.N. Haining, S.L. Berger, E.J. Wherry, 
Epigenetic stability of exhausted T cells limits durability of reinvigoration by PD-1 
blockade, Science 354 (6316) (2016) 1160–1165. 
[127] D.R. Sen, J. Kaminski, R.A. Barnitz, M. Kurachi, U. Gerdemann, K.B. Yates, H. 
W. Tsao, J. Godec, M.W. LaFleur, F.D. Brown, P. Tonnerre, R.T. Chung, D.C. Tully, 
T.M. Allen, N. Frahm, G.M. Lauer, E.J. Wherry, N. Yosef, W.N. Haining, The 
epigenetic landscape of T cell exhaustion, Science 354 (6316) (2016) 1165–1169. 
[128] J.R. Giles, S. Manne, E. Freilich, D.A. Oldridge, A.E. Baxter, S. George, Z. Chen, 
H. Huang, L. Chilukuri, M. Carberry, L. Giles, N.P. Weng, R.M. Young, C.H. June, 
L.M. Schuchter, R.K. Amaravadi, X. Xu, G.C. Karakousis, T.C. Mitchell, A. 
C. Huang, J. Shi, E.J. Wherry, Human epigenetic and transcriptional T cell 
differentiation atlas for identifying functional T cell-specific enhancers, Immunity 
55 (3) (2022) 557–574, e7. 
[129] B. Daniel, K.E. Yost, S. Hsiung, K. Sandor, Y. Xia, Y. Qi, K.J. Hiam-Galvez, 
M. Black, J.R. C, Q. Shi, S.L. Meier, J.A. Belk, J.R. Giles, E.J. Wherry, H.Y. Chang, 
T. Egawa, A.T. Satpathy, Divergent clonal differentiation trajectories of T cell 
exhaustion, Nat. Immunol. 23 (11) (2022) 1614–1627. 
[130] J.R. Giles, S.F. Ngiow, S. Manne, A.E. Baxter, O. Khan, P. Wang, R. Staupe, M. 
S. Abdel-Hakeem, H. Huang, D. Mathew, M.M. Painter, J.E. Wu, Y.J. Huang, R. 
R. Goel, P.K. Yan, G.C. Karakousis, X. Xu, T.C. Mitchell, A.C. Huang, E.J. Wherry, 
Shared and distinct biological circuits in effector, memory and exhausted CD8(+) 
T cells revealed by temporal single-cell transcriptomics and epigenetics, Nat. 
Immunol. 23 (11) (2022) 1600–1613. 
[131] L. Zheng, S. Qin, W. Si, A. Wang, B. Xing, R. Gao, X. Ren, L. Wang, X. Wu, 
J. Zhang, N. Wu, N. Zhang, H. Zheng, H. Ouyang, K. Chen, Z. Bu, X. Hu, J. Ji, 
Z. Zhang, Pan-cancer single-cell landscape of tumor-infiltrating T cells, Science 
374 (6574) (2021) abe6474. 
[132] Y. Chu, E. Dai, Y. Li, G. Han, G. Pei, D.R. Ingram, K. Thakkar, J.J. Qin, M. Dang, 
X. Le, C. Hu, Q. Deng, A. Sinjab, P. Gupta, R. Wang, D. Hao, F. Peng, X. Yan, 
Y. Liu, S. Song, S. Zhang, J.V. Heymach, A. Reuben, Y.Y. Elamin, M.P. Pizzi, Y. Lu, 
R. Lazcano, J. Hu, M. Li, M. Curran, A. Futreal, A. Maitra, A.A. Jazaeri, J.A. Ajani, 
C. Swanton, X.D. Cheng, H.A. Abbas, M. Gillison, K. Bhat, A.J. Lazar, M. Green, 
K. Litchfield, H. Kadara, C. Yee, L. Wang, Pan-cancer T cell atlas links a cellular 
stress response state to immunotherapy resistance, Nat. Med 29 (6) (2023) 
1550–1562. 
[133] K. Dhatchinamoorthy, J.D. Colbert, K.L. Rock, Cancer Immune Evasion Through 
Loss of MHC Class I Antigen Presentation, Front Immunol. 12 (2021), 636568. 
[134] A. Sucker, F. Zhao, B. Real, C. Heeke, N. Bielefeld, S. Mabetaen, S. Horn, I. Moll, 
R. Maltaner, P.A. Horn, B. Schilling, F. Sabbatino, V. Lennerz, M. Kloor, 
S. Ferrone, D. Schadendorf, C.S. Falk, K. Griewank, A. Paschen, Genetic evolution 
of T-cell resistance in the course of melanoma progression, Clin. Cancer Res 20 
(24) (2014) 6593–6604. 
[135] S. Gettinger, J. Choi, K. Hastings, A. Truini, I. Datar, R. Sowell, A. Wurtz, 
W. Dong, G. Cai, M.A. Melnick, V.Y. Du, J. Schlessinger, S.B. Goldberg, A. Chiang, 
M.F. Sanmamed, I. Melero, J. Agorreta, L.M. Montuenga, R. Lifton, S. Ferrone, 
P. Kavathas, D.L. Rimm, S.M. Kaech, K. Schalper, R.S. Herbst, K. Politi, Impaired 
HLA Class I Antigen Processing and Presentation as a Mechanism of Acquired 
Resistance to Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors in Lung Cancer, Cancer Discov. 7 
(12) (2017) 1420–1435. 
[136] J.M. Zaretsky, A. Garcia-Diaz, D.S. Shin, H. Escuin-Ordinas, W. Hugo, S. Hu- 
Lieskovan, D.Y. Torrejon, G. Abril-Rodriguez, S. Sandoval, L. Barthly, J. Saco, 
B. Homet Moreno, R. Mezzadra, B. Chmielowski, K. Ruchalski, I.P. Shintaku, P. 
J. Sanchez, C. Puig-Saus, G. Cherry, E. Seja, X. Kong, J. Pang, B. Berent-Maoz, 
B. Comin-Anduix, T.G. Graeber, P.C. Tumeh, T.N. Schumacher, R.S. Lo, A. Ribas, 
Mutations Associated with Acquired Resistance to PD-1 Blockade in Melanoma, 
N. Engl. J. Med 375 (9) (2016) 819–829. 
[137] S.J. Rodig, D. Gusenleitner, D.G. Jackson, E. Gjini, A. Giobbie-Hurder, C. Jin, 
H. Chang, S.B. Lovitch, C. Horak, J.S. Weber, J.L. Weirather, J.D. Wolchok, M. 
A. Postow, A.C. Pavlick, J. Chesney, F.S. Hodi, MHC proteins confer differential 
sensitivity to CTLA-4 and PD-1 blockade in untreated metastatic melanoma, Sci. 
Transl. Med 10 (450) (2018). 
[138] M. Nielsen, M. Presti, Z. Sztupinszki, A.W.P. Jensen, A. Draghi, C.A. Chamberlain, 
A. Schina, C.W. Yde, J. Wojcik, Z. Szallasi, M.D. Crowther, I.M. Svane, M. Donia, 
Coexisting Alterations of MHC Class I Antigen Presentation and IFNgamma 
Signaling Mediate Acquired Resistance of Melanoma to Post-PD-1 
Immunotherapy, Cancer Immunol. Res 10 (10) (2022) 1254–1262. 
[139] B. Ricciuti, K.C. Arbour, J.J. Lin, A. Vajdi, N. Vokes, L. Hong, J. Zhang, M. 
Y. Tolstorukov, Y.Y. Li, L.F. Spurr, A.D. Cherniack, G. Recondo, G. Lamberti, 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
22
X. Wang, D. Venkatraman, J.V. Alessi, V.R. Vaz, H. Rizvi, J. Egger, A. 
J. Plodkowski, S. Khosrowjerdi, S. Digumarthy, H. Park, N. Vaz, M. Nishino, L. 
M. Sholl, D. Barbie, M. Altan, J.V. Heymach, F. Skoulidis, J.F. Gainor, M. 
D. Hellmann, M.M. Awad, Diminished Efficacy of Programmed Death-(Ligand)1 
Inhibition in STK11- and KEAP1-Mutant Lung Adenocarcinoma Is Affected by 
KRAS Mutation Status, J. Thorac. Oncol. 17 (3) (2022) 399–410. 
[140] Y. Zhang, P. Kwok-Shing Ng, M. Kucherlapati, F. Chen, Y. Liu, Y.H. Tsang, G. de 
Velasco, K.J. Jeong, R. Akbani, A. Hadjipanayis, A. Pantazi, C.A. Bristow, E. Lee, 
H.S. Mahadeshwar, J. Tang, J. Zhang, L. Yang, S. Seth, S. Lee, X. Ren, X. Song, 
H. Sun, J. Seidman, L.J. Luquette, R. Xi, L. Chin, A. Protopopov, T.F. Westbrook, 
C.S. Shelley, T.K. Choueiri, M. Ittmann, C. Van Waes, J.N. Weinstein, H. Liang, E. 
P. Henske, A.K. Godwin, P.J. Park, R. Kucherlapati, K.L. Scott, G.B. Mills, D. 
J. Kwiatkowski, C.J. Creighton, A Pan-Cancer Proteogenomic Atlas of PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR Pathway Alterations, Cancer Cell 31 (6) (2017) 820–832, e3. 
[141] S. Koyama, E.A. Akbay, Y.Y. Li, A.R. Aref, F. Skoulidis, G.S. Herter-Sprie, K. 
A. Buczkowski, Y. Liu, M.M. Awad, W.L. Denning, L. Diao, J. Wang, E.R. Parra- 
Cuentas, I.I. Wistuba, M. Soucheray, T. Thai, H. Asahina, S. Kitajima, A. Altabef, 
J.D. Cavanaugh, K. Rhee, P. Gao, H. Zhang, P.E. Fecci, T. Shimamura, M. 
D. Hellmann, J.V. Heymach, F.S. Hodi, G.J. Freeman, D.A. Barbie, G. Dranoff, P. 
S. Hammerman, K.K. Wong, STK11/LKB1 Deficiency Promotes Neutrophil 
Recruitment and Proinflammatory Cytokine Production to Suppress T-cell 
Activity in the Lung Tumor Microenvironment, Cancer Res 76 (5) (2016) 
999–1008. 
[142] C.H. Chang, J. Qiu, D. O’Sullivan, M.D. Buck, T. Noguchi, J.D. Curtis, Q. Chen, 
M. Gindin, M.M. Gubin, G.J. van der Windt, E. Tonc, R.D. Schreiber, E.J. Pearce, 
E.L. Pearce, Metabolic Competition in the Tumor Microenvironment Is a Driver of 
Cancer Progression, Cell 162 (6) (2015) 1229–1241. 
[143] R. Romero, V.I. Sayin, S.M. Davidson, M.R. Bauer, S.X. Singh, S.E. LeBoeuf, T. 
R. Karakousi, D.C. Ellis, A. Bhutkar, F.J. Sanchez-Rivera, L. Subbaraj, B. Martinez, 
R.T. Bronson, J.R. Prigge, E.E. Schmidt, C.J. Thomas, C. Goparaju, A. Davies, 
I. Dolgalev, A. Heguy, V. Allaj, J.T. Poirier, A.L. Moreira, C.M. Rudin, H.I. Pass, M. 
G. Vander Heiden, T. Jacks, T. Papagiannakopoulos, Keap1 loss promotes Kras- 
driven lung cancer and results in dependence on glutaminolysis, Nat. Med. 23 
(11) (2017) 1362–1368. 
[144] A. Galan-Cobo, P. Sitthideatphaiboon, X. Qu, A. Poteete, M.A. Pisegna, P. Tong, P. 
H. Chen, L.K. Boroughs, M.L.M. Rodriguez, W. Zhang, F. Parlati, J. Wang, 
V. Gandhi, F. Skoulidis, R.J. DeBerardinis, J.D. Minna, J.V. Heymach, LKB1 and 
KEAP1/NRF2 Pathways Cooperatively Promote Metabolic Reprogramming with 
Enhanced Glutamine Dependence in KRAS-Mutant Lung Adenocarcinoma, Cancer 
Res 79 (13) (2019) 3251–3267. 
[145] E. Papalexi, E.P. Mimitou, A.W. Butler, S. Foster, B. Bracken, W.M. Mauck 3rd, H. 
H. Wessels, Y. Hao, B.Z. Yeung, P. Smibert, R. Satija, Characterizing the molecular 
regulation of inhibitory immune checkpoints with multimodal single-cell screens, 
Nat. Genet 53 (3) (2021) 322–331. 
[146] B. Zhu, L. Tang, S. Chen, C. Yin, S. Peng, X. Li, T. Liu, W. Liu, C. Han, L. Stawski, 
Z.X. Xu, G. Zhou, X. Chen, X. Gao, C.R. Goding, N. Xu, R. Cui, P. Cao, Targeting 
the upstream transcriptional activator of PD-L1 as an alternative strategy in 
melanoma therapy, Oncogene 37 (36) (2018) 4941–4954. 
[147] D. van der Horst, M.E. Carter-Timofte, J. van Grevenynghe, N. Laguette, A. 
T. Dinkova-Kostova, D. Olagnier, Regulation of innate immunity by Nrf2, Curr. 
Opin. Immunol. 78 (2022), 102247. 
[148] H. Li, Z. Liu, L. Liu, H. Zhang, C. Han, L. Girard, H. Park, A. Zhang, C. Dong, J. Ye, 
A. Rayford, M. Peyton, X. Li, K. Avila, X. Cao, S. Hu, M.M. Alam, E.A. Akbay, L. 
M. Solis, C. Behrens, S. Hernandez-Ruiz, W. Lu, I. Wistuba, J.V. Heymach, 
M. Chisamore, D. Micklem, H. Gabra, G. Gausdal, J.B. Lorens, B. Li, Y.X. Fu, J. 
D. Minna, R.A. Brekken, AXL targeting restores PD-1 blockade sensitivity of 
STK11/LKB1 mutant NSCLC through expansion of TCF1(+) CD8 T cells, Cell Rep. 
Med 3 (3) (2022), 100554. 
[149] C.A. Wohlhieter, A.L. Richards, F. Uddin, C.H. Hulton, A. Quintanal-Villalonga, 
A. Martin, E. de Stanchina, U. Bhanot, M. Asher, N.S. Shah, O. Hayatt, D. 
J. Buonocore, N. Rekhtman, R. Shen, K.C. Arbour, M. Donoghue, J.T. Poirier, 
T. Sen, C.M. Rudin, Concurrent Mutations in STK11 and KEAP1 Promote 
Ferroptosis Protection and SCD1 Dependence in Lung Cancer, Cell Rep. 33 (9) 
(2020), 108444. 
[150] S.A. Best, P.M. Gubser, S. Sethumadhavan, A. Kersbergen, Y.L. Negron Abril, 
J. Goldford, K. Sellers, W. Abeysekera, A.L. Garnham, J.A. McDonald, C. 
E. Weeden, D. Anderson, D. Pirman, T.P. Roddy, D.J. Creek, A. Kallies, 
G. Kingsbury, K.D. Sutherland, Glutaminase inhibition impairs CD8 T cell 
activation in STK11-/Lkb1-deficient lung cancer, Cell Metab. 34 (6) (2022) 
874–887, e6. 
[151] E. Adib, A.H. Nassar, E.W. Akl, S. Abou Alaiwi, P.V. Nuzzo, T.H. Mouhieddine, 
G. Sonpavde, R.I. Haddad, K.W. Mouw, M. Giannakis, F.S. Hodi, S.A. Shukla, 
A. Gusev, D.A. Braun, T.K. Choueiri, D.J. Kwiatkowski, CDKN2A Alterations and 
Response to Immunotherapy in Solid Tumors, Clin. Cancer Res 27 (14) (2021) 
4025–4035. 
[152] S.I. Gutiontov, W.T. Turchan, L.F. Spurr, S.J. Rouhani, C.S. Chervin, 
G. Steinhardt, A.M. Lager, P. Wanjari, R. Malik, P.P. Connell, S.J. Chmura, 
A. Juloori, P.C. Hoffman, M.K. Ferguson, J.S. Donington, J.D. Patel, E.E. Vokes, R. 
R. Weichselbaum, C.M. Bestvina, J.P. Segal, S.P. Pitroda, CDKN2A loss-of- 
function predicts immunotherapy resistance in non-small cell lung cancer, Sci. 
Rep. 11 (1) (2021), 20059. 
[153] L. Hong, M. Aminu, S. Li, X. Lu, M. Petranovic, M.B. Saad, P. Chen, K. Qin, 
S. Varghese, W. Rinsurongkawong, V. Rinsurongkawong, A. Spelman, Y. 
Y. Elamin, M.V. Negrao, F. Skoulidis, C.M. Gay, T. Cascone, S.J. Gandhi, S.H. Lin, 
P.P. Lee, B.W. Carter, C.C. Wu, M.B. Antonoff, B. Sepesi, J. Lewis, D.L. Gibbons, A. 
A. Vaporciyan, X. Le, J. Jack Lee, S. Roy-Chowdhuri, M.J. Routbort, J.F. Gainor, J. 
V. Heymach, Y. Lou, J. Wu, J. Zhang, N.I. Vokes, Efficacy and clinicogenomic 
correlates of response to immune checkpoint inhibitors alone or with 
chemotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer, Nat. Commun. 14 (1) (2023) 695. 
[154] L. Jerby-Arnon, P. Shah, M.S. Cuoco, C. Rodman, M.J. Su, J.C. Melms, R. Leeson, 
A. Kanodia, S. Mei, J.R. Lin, S. Wang, B. Rabasha, D. Liu, G. Zhang, C. Margolais, 
O. Ashenberg, P.A. Ott, E.I. Buchbinder, R. Haq, F.S. Hodi, G.M. Boland, R. 
J. Sullivan, D.T. Frederick, B. Miao, T. Moll, K.T. Flaherty, M. Herlyn, R. 
W. Jenkins, R. Thummalapalli, M.S. Kowalczyk, I. Canadas, B. Schilling, A.N. 
R. Cartwright, A.M. Luoma, S. Malu, P. Hwu, C. Bernatchez, M.A. Forget, D. 
A. Barbie, A.K. Shalek, I. Tirosh, P.K. Sorger, K. Wucherpfennig, E.M. Van Allen, 
D. Schadendorf, B.E. Johnson, A. Rotem, O. Rozenblatt-Rosen, L.A. Garraway, C. 
H. Yoon, B. Izar, A. Regev, A Cancer Cell Program Promotes T Cell Exclusion and 
Resistance to Checkpoint Blockade, Cell 175 (4) (2018) 984–997, e24. 
[155] C.W. Szeto, R. Kurzrock, S. Kato, A. Goloubev, S. Veerapaneni, A. Preble, S. 
K. Reddy, J.J. Adashek, Association of differential expression of 
immunoregulatory molecules and presence of targetable mutations may inform 
rational design of clinical trials, ESMO Open 7 (1) (2022), 100396. 
[156] S. Horn, S. Leonardelli, A. Sucker, D. Schadendorf, K.G. Griewank, A. Paschen, 
Tumor CDKN2A-Associated JAK2 Loss and Susceptibility to Immunotherapy 
Resistance, J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 110 (6) (2018) 677–681. 
[157] S. Li, M. Zhu, R. Pan, T. Fang, Y.Y. Cao, S. Chen, X. Zhao, C.Q. Lei, L. Guo, 
Y. Chen, C.M. Li, E. Jokitalo, Y. Yin, H.B. Shu, D. Guo, The tumor suppressor 
PTEN has a critical role in antiviral innate immunity, Nat. Immunol. 17 (3) (2016) 
241–249. 
[158] Y. Cao, H. Wang, L. Yang, Z. Zhang, C. Li, X. Yuan, L. Bu, L. Chen, Y. Chen, C. 
M. Li, D. Guo, PTEN-L promotes type I interferon responses and antiviral 
immunity, Cell Mol. Immunol. 15 (1) (2018) 48–57. 
[159] T. Vidotto, C.M. Melo, E. Castelli, M. Koti, R.B. Dos Reis, J.A. Squire, Emerging 
role of PTEN loss in evasion of the immune response to tumours, Br. J. Cancer 122 
(12) (2020) 1732–1743. 
[160] T. Vidotto, F.P. Saggioro, T. Jamaspishvili, D.L. Chesca, C.G. Picanco de 
Albuquerque, R.B. Reis, C.H. Graham, D.M. Berman, D.R. Siemens, J.A. Squire, 
M. Koti, PTEN-deficient prostate cancer is associated with an immunosuppressive 
tumor microenvironment mediated by increased expression of IDO1 and 
infiltrating FoxP3+ T regulatory cells, Prostate 79 (9) (2019) 969–979. 
[161] C.W. Armstrong, P.J. Maxwell, C.W. Ong, K.M. Redmond, C. McCann, J. Neisen, 
G.A. Ward, G. Chessari, C. Johnson, N.T. Crawford, M.J. LaBonte, K.M. Prise, 
T. Robson, M. Salto-Tellez, D.B. Longley, D.J. Waugh, PTEN deficiency promotes 
macrophage infiltration and hypersensitivity of prostate cancer to IAP antagonist/ 
radiation combination therapy, Oncotarget 7 (7) (2016) 7885–7898. 
[162] A.J. Garcia, M. Ruscetti, T.L. Arenzana, L.M. Tran, D. Bianci-Frias, E. Sybert, S. 
J. Priceman, L. Wu, P.S. Nelson, S.T. Smale, H. Wu, Pten null prostate epithelium 
promotes localized myeloid-derived suppressor cell expansion and immune 
suppression during tumor initiation and progression, Mol. Cell Biol. 34 (11) 
(2014) 2017–2028. 
[163] W. Peng, J.Q. Chen, C. Liu, S. Malu, C. Creasy, M.T. Tetzlaff, C. Xu, J.A. McKenzie, 
C. Zhang, X. Liang, L.J. Williams, W. Deng, G. Chen, R. Mbofung, A.J. Lazar, C. 
A. Torres-Cabala, Z.A. Cooper, P.L. Chen, T.N. Tieu, S. Spranger, X. Yu, 
C. Bernatchez, M.A. Forget, C. Haymaker, R. Amaria, J.L. McQuade, I.C. Glitza, 
T. Cascone, H.S. Li, L.N. Kwong, T.P. Heffernan, J. Hu, R.L. Bassett Jr, M. 
W. Bosenberg, S.E. Woodman, W.W. Overwijk, G. Lizee, J. Roszik, T.F. Gajewski, 
J.A. Wargo, J.E. Gershenwald, L. Radvanyi, M.A. Davies, P. Hwu, Loss of PTEN 
Promotes Resistance to T Cell-Mediated Immunotherapy, Cancer Discov. 6 (2) 
(2016) 202–216. 
[164] Z. Lin, L. Huang, S.L. Li, J. Gu, X. Cui, Y. Zhou, PTEN loss correlates with T cell 
exclusion across human cancers, BMC Cancer 21 (1) (2021) 429. 
[165] S. George, D. Miao, G.D. Demetri, D. Adeegbe, S.J. Rodig, S. Shukla, M. Lipschitz, 
A. Amin-Mansour, C.P. Raut, S.L. Carter, P. Hammerman, G.J. Freeman, C.J. Wu, 
P.A. Ott, K.K. Wong, E.M. Van Allen, Loss of PTEN Is Associated with Resistance 
to Anti-PD-1 Checkpoint Blockade Therapy in Metastatic Uterine 
Leiomyosarcoma, Immunity 46 (2) (2017) 197–204. 
[166] M. Binnewies, E.W. Roberts, K. Kersten, V. Chan, D.F. Fearon, M. Merad, L. 
M. Coussens, D.I. Gabrilovich, S. Ostrand-Rosenberg, C.C. Hedrick, R. 
H. Vonderheide, M.J. Pittet, R.K. Jain, W. Zou, T.K. Howcroft, E.C. Woodhouse, R. 
A. Weinberg, M.F. Krummel, Understanding the tumor immune 
microenvironment (TIME) for effective therapy, Nat. Med 24 (5) (2018) 541–550. 
[167] F. Pages, B. Mlecnik, F. Marliot, G. Bindea, F.S. Ou, C. Bifulco, A. Lugli, I. Zlobec, 
T.T. Rau, M.D. Berger, I.D. Nagtegaal, E. Vink-Borger, A. Hartmann, C. Geppert, 
J. Kolwelter, S. Merkel, R. Grutzmann, M. Van den Eynde, A. Jouret-Mourin, 
A. Kartheuser, D. Leonard, C. Remue, J.Y. Wang, P. Bavi, M.H.A. Roehrl, P. 
S. Ohashi, L.T. Nguyen, S. Han, H.L. MacGregor, S. Hafezi-Bakhtiari, B. 
G. Wouters, G.V. Masucci, E.K. Andersson, E. Zavadova, M. Vocka, J. Spacek, 
L. Petruzelka, B. Konopasek, P. Dundr, H. Skalova, K. Nemejcova, G. Botti, 
F. Tatangelo, P. Delrio, G. Ciliberto, M. Maio, L. Laghi, F. Grizzi, T. Fredriksen, 
B. Buttard, M. Angelova, A. Vasaturo, P. Maby, S.E. Church, H.K. Angell, 
L. Lafontaine, D. Bruni, C. El Sissy, N. Haicheur, A. Kirilovsky, A. Berger, 
C. Lagorce, J.P. Meyers, C. Paustian, Z. Feng, C. Ballesteros-Merino, J. Dijkstra, 
C. van de Water, S. van Lent-van Vliet, N. Knijn, A.M. Musina, D.V. Scripcariu, 
B. Popivanova, M. Xu, T. Fujita, S. Hazama, N. Suzuki, H. Nagano, K. Okuno, 
T. Torigoe, N. Sato, T. Furuhata, I. Takemasa, K. Itoh, P.S. Patel, H.H. Vora, 
B. Shah, J.B. Patel, K.N. Rajvik, S.J. Pandya, S.N. Shukla, Y. Wang, G. Zhang, 
Y. Kawakami, F.M. Marincola, P.A. Ascierto, D.J. Sargent, B.A. Fox, J. Galon, 
International validation of the consensus Immunoscore for the classification of 
colon cancer: a prognostic and accuracy study, Lancet 391 (10135) (2018) 
2128–2139. 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
23
[168] Y. Masugi, T. Abe, A. Ueno, Y. Fujii-Nishimura, H. Ojima, Y. Endo, Y. Fujita, 
M. Kitago, M. Shinoda, Y. Kitagawa, M. Sakamoto, Characterization of spatial 
distribution of tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells refines their prognostic utility for 
pancreatic cancer survival, Mod. Pathol. 32 (10) (2019) 1495–1507. 
[169] J. Galon, B. Mlecnik, G. Bindea, H.K. Angell, A. Berger, C. Lagorce, A. Lugli, 
I. Zlobec, A. Hartmann, C. Bifulco, I.D. Nagtegaal, R. Palmqvist, G.V. Masucci, 
G. Botti, F. Tatangelo, P. Delrio, M. Maio, L. Laghi, F. Grizzi, M. Asslaber, 
C. D’Arrigo, F. Vidal-Vanaclocha, E. Zavadova, L. Chouchane, P.S. Ohashi, 
S. Hafezi-Bakhtiari, B.G. Wouters, M. Roehrl, L. Nguyen, Y. Kawakami, 
S. Hazama, K. Okuno, S. Ogino, P. Gibbs, P. Waring, N. Sato, T. Torigoe, K. Itoh, P. 
S. Patel, S.N. Shukla, Y. Wang, S. Kopetz, F.A. Sinicrope, V. Scripcariu, P. 
A. Ascierto, F.M. Marincola, B.A. Fox, F. Pages, Towards the introduction of the 
’Immunoscore’ in the classification of malignant tumours, J. Pathol. 232 (2) 
(2014) 199–209. 
[170] M. Chou, I. Illa-Bochaca, B. Minxi, F. Darvishian, P. Johannet, U. Moran, R. 
L. Shapiro, R.S. Berman, I. Osman, G. Jour, H. Zhong, Optimization of an 
automated tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte algorithm for improved prognostication 
in primary melanoma, Mod. Pathol. 34 (3) (2021) 562–571. 
[171] H. Elomaa, M. Ahtiainen, S.A. Vayrynen, S. Ogino, J.A. Nowak, M. Friman, 
O. Helminen, E.V. Wirta, T.T. Seppala, J. Bohm, M.J. Makinen, J.P. Mecklin, 
T. Kuopio, J.P. Vayrynen, Prognostic significance of spatial and density analysis 
of T lymphocytes in colorectal cancer, Br. J. Cancer 127 (3) (2022) 514–523. 
[172] J.L. Carstens, P. Correa de Sampaio, D. Yang, S. Barua, H. Wang, A. Rao, J. 
P. Allison, V.S. LeBleu, R. Kalluri, Spatial computation of intratumoral T cells 
correlates with survival of patients with pancreatic cancer, Nat. Commun. 8 
(2017) 15095. 
[173] S.S. Lee, V.P. Bindokas, M.W. Lingen, S.J. Kron, Nondestructive, multiplex three- 
dimensional mapping of immune infiltrates in core needle biopsy, Lab Invest 99 
(9) (2019) 1400–1413. 
[174] M. Allam, T. Hu, J. Lee, J. Aldrich, S.S. Badve, Y. Gokmen-Polar, M. Bhave, S. 
S. Ramalingam, F. Schneider, A.F. Coskun, Spatially variant immune infiltration 
scoring in human cancer tissues, NPJ Precis Oncol. 6 (1) (2022) 60. 
[175] A. Patwa, R. Yamashita, J. Long, T. Risom, M. Angelo, L. Keren, D.L. Rubin, 
Multiplexed imaging analysis of the tumor-immune microenvironment reveals 
predictors of outcome in triple-negative breast cancer, Commun. Biol. 4 (1) 
(2021) 852. 
[176] O. Bruck, M.H. Lee, R. Turkki, I. Uski, P. Penttila, L. Paavolainen, P. Kovanen, 
P. Jarvinen, P. Bono, T. Pellinen, S. Mustjoki, A. Kreutzman, Spatial 
immunoprofiling of the intratumoral and peritumoral tissue of renal cell 
carcinoma patients, Mod. Pathol. 34 (12) (2021) 2229–2241. 
[177] M. Amgad, E.S. Stovgaard, E. Balslev, J. Thagaard, W. Chen, S. Dudgeon, 
A. Sharma, J.K. Kerner, C. Denkert, Y. Yuan, K. AbdulJabbar, S. Wienert, P. Savas, 
L. Voorwerk, A.H. Beck, A. Madabhushi, J. Hartman, M.M. Sebastian, H. 
M. Horlings, J. Hudecek, F. Ciompi, D.A. Moore, R. Singh, E. Roblin, M. 
L. Balancin, M.C. Mathieu, J.K. Lennerz, P. Kirtani, I.C. Chen, J.P. Braybrooke, 
G. Pruneri, S. Demaria, S. Adams, S.J. Schnitt, S.R. Lakhani, F. Rojo, L. Comerma, 
S.S. Badve, M. Khojasteh, W.F. Symmans, C. Sotiriou, P. Gonzalez-Ericsson, K. 
L. Pogue-Geile, R.S. Kim, D.L. Rimm, G. Viale, S.M. Hewitt, J.M.S. Bartlett, 
F. Penault-Llorca, S. Goel, H.C. Lien, S. Loibl, Z. Kos, S. Loi, M.G. Hanna, 
S. Michiels, M. Kok, T.O. Nielsen, A.J. Lazar, Z. Bago-Horvath, L.F.S. Kooreman, 
J. van der Laak, J. Saltz, B.D. Gallas, U. Kurkure, M. Barnes, R. Salgado, L.A. 
D. Cooper, G. International Immuno-Oncology Biomarker Working, Report on 
computational assessment of Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocytes from the 
International Immuno-Oncology Biomarker Working Group, NPJ Breast Cancer 6 
(2020) 16. 
[178] T. Turan, S. Kongpachith, K. Halliwill, J. Roelands, W. Hendrickx, F. 
M. Marincola, T.J. Hudson, H.J. Jacob, D. Bedognetti, J. Samayoa, M. Ceccarelli, 
A balance score between immune stimulatory and suppressive 
microenvironments identifies mediators of tumour immunity and predicts pan- 
cancer survival, Br. J. Cancer 124 (4) (2021) 760–769. 
[179] M. Messaoudene, R. Pidgeon, C. Richard, M. Ponce, K. Diop, M. Benlaifaoui, 
A. Nolin-Lapalme, F. Cauchois, J. Malo, W. Belkaid, S. Isnard, Y. Fradet, L. Dridi, 
D. Velin, P. Oster, D. Raoult, F. Ghiringhelli, R. Boidot, S. Chevrier, D.T. Kysela, Y. 
V. Brun, E.L. Falcone, G. Pilon, F.P. Onate, O. Gitton-Quent, E. Le Chatelier, 
S. Durand, G. Kroemer, A. Elkrief, A. Marette, B. Castagner, B. Routy, A Natural 
Polyphenol Exerts Antitumor Activity and Circumvents Anti-PD-1 Resistance 
through Effects on the Gut Microbiota, Cancer Discov. 12 (4) (2022) 1070–1087. 
[180] J. Lee, Y. Han, W. Wang, H. Jo, H. Kim, S. Kim, K.M. Yang, S.J. Kim, D. 
N. Dhanasekaran, Y.S. Song, Phytochemicals in Cancer Immune Checkpoint 
Inhibitor Therapy, Biomolecules 11 (8) (2021). 
[181] K.S. Chun, D.H. Kim, P.K. Raut, Y.J. Surh, Anticancer natural products targeting 
immune checkpoint protein network, Semin Cancer Biol. 86 (Pt 3) (2022) 
1008–1032. 
[182] L. Yu, Y. Jin, M. Song, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, When Natural Compounds Meet 
Nanotechnology: Nature-Inspired Nanomedicines for Cancer Immunotherapy, 
Pharmaceutics 14 (8) (2022). 
[183] L. Luo, A. Zhong, Q. Wang, T. Zheng, Structure-Based Pharmacophore Modeling, 
Virtual Screening, Molecular Docking, ADMET, and Molecular Dynamics (MD) 
Simulation of Potential Inhibitors of PD-L1 from the Library of Marine Natural 
Products, Mar. Drugs 20 (1) (2021). 
[184] I. Muneer, S. Ahmad, A. Naz, S.W. Abbasi, A. Alblihy, A.A. Aloliqi, F.F. Aba 
Alkhayl, F. Alrumaihi, S. Ahmad, Y. El Bakri, M. Tahir Ul Qamar, Discovery of 
Novel Inhibitors From Medicinal Plants for V-Domain Ig Suppressor of T-Cell 
Activation, Front Mol. Biosci. 8 (2021), 716735. 
[185] J.H. Kim, Y.S. Kim, J.G. Choi, W. Li, E.J. Lee, J.W. Park, J. Song, H.S. Chung, 
Kaempferol and Its Glycoside, Kaempferol 7-O-Rhamnoside, Inhibit PD-1/PD-L1 
Interaction In Vitro, Int J. Mol. Sci. 21 (9) (2020). 
[186] J.G. Choi, Y.S. Kim, J.H. Kim, T.I. Kim, W. Li, T.W. Oh, C.H. Jeon, S.J. Kim, H. 
S. Chung, Anticancer effect of salvia plebeia and its active compound by 
improving T-cell activity via blockade of PD-1/PD-L1 interaction in humanized 
PD-1 mouse model, Front Immunol. 11 (2020), 598556. 
[187] S. Verdura, E. Cuyas, E. Cortada, J. Brunet, E. Lopez-Bonet, B. Martin-Castillo, 
J. Bosch-Barrera, J.A. Encinar, J.A. Menendez, Resveratrol targets PD-L1 
glycosylation and dimerization to enhance antitumor T-cell immunity, Aging 
(Albany NY) 12 (1) (2020) 8–34. 
[188] S.P. Patil, S.C. Yoon, A.G. Aradhya, J. Hofer, M.A. Fink, E.S. Enley, J.E. Fisher, M. 
C. Herb, A. Klingos, J.T. Proulx, M.T. Fedorky, Macrocyclic Compounds from 
Ansamycin Antibiotic Class as Inhibitors of PD1-PDL1 Protein-Protein Interaction, 
Chem. Pharm. Bull. 66 (8) (2018) 773–778. 
[189] H. Li, N.P. Seeram, C. Liu, H. Ma, Further investigation of blockade effects and 
binding affinities of selected natural compounds to immune checkpoint PD-1/PD- 
L1, Front Oncol. 12 (2022), 995461. 
[190] P. Sasmal, S. Kumar Babasahib, B.R. Prashantha Kumar, N. Manjunathaiah 
Raghavendra, Biphenyl-based small molecule inhibitors: novel cancer 
immunotherapeutic agents targeting PD-1/PD-L1 interaction, Bioorg. Med Chem. 
73 (2022), 117001. 
[191] T. Wang, S. Cai, Y. Cheng, W. Zhang, M. Wang, H. Sun, B. Guo, Z. Li, Y. Xiao, 
S. Jiang, Discovery of Small-Molecule Inhibitors of the PD-1/PD-L1 Axis That 
Promote PD-L1 Internalization and Degradation, J. Med Chem. 65 (5) (2022) 
3879–3893. 
[192] F.F. Chen, Z. Li, D. Ma, Q. Yu, Small-molecule PD-L1 inhibitor BMS1166 
abrogates the function of PD-L1 by blocking its ER export, Oncoimmunology 9 (1) 
(2020), 1831153. 
[193] Y. OuYang, J. Gao, L. Zhao, J. Lu, H. Zhong, H. Tang, S. Jin, L. Yue, Y. Li, W. Guo, 
Q. Xu, Y. Lai, Design, Synthesis, and Evaluation of o-(Biphenyl-3-ylmethoxy) 
nitrophenyl Derivatives as PD-1/PD-L1 Inhibitors with Potent Anticancer Efficacy 
In Vivo, J. Med Chem. 64 (11) (2021) 7646–7666. 
[194] L. Liu, Z. Yao, S. Wang, T. Xie, G. Wu, H. Zhang, P. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. Yuan, H. Sun, 
Syntheses, Biological Evaluations, and Mechanistic Studies of Benzo[c][1,2,5] 
oxadiazole Derivatives as Potent PD-L1 Inhibitors with In Vivo Antitumor 
Activity, J. Med Chem. 64 (12) (2021) 8391–8409. 
[195] S. Li, T. Chen, J. Liu, H. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Wang, G. Shang, PROTACs: Novel tools for 
improving immunotherapy in cancer, Cancer Lett. 560 (2023), 216128. 
[196] S.M. Banik, K. Pedram, S. Wisnovsky, G. Ahn, N.M. Riley, C.R. Bertozzi, 
Lysosome-targeting chimaeras for degradation of extracellular proteins, Nature 
584 (7820) (2020) 291–297. 
[197] Z. Yang, Y. Wang, S. Liu, W. Deng, S.H. Lomeli, G. Moriceau, J. Wohlschlegel, 
M. Piva, R.S. Lo, Enhancing PD-L1 Degradation by ITCH during MAPK Inhibitor 
Therapy Suppresses Acquired Resistance, Cancer Discov. 12 (8) (2022) 
1942–1959. 
[198] P.G. Sasikumar, N.S. Sudarshan, S. Adurthi, R.K. Ramachandra, D.S. Samiulla, 
A. Lakshminarasimhan, A. Ramanathan, T. Chandrasekhar, A.A. Dhudashiya, S. 
R. Talapati, N. Gowda, S. Palakolanu, J. Mani, B. Srinivasrao, D. Joseph, 
N. Kumar, R. Nair, H.S. Atreya, N. Gowda, M. Ramachandra, PD-1 derived CA- 
170 is an oral immune checkpoint inhibitor that exhibits preclinical anti-tumor 
efficacy, Commun. Biol. 4 (1) (2021) 699. 
[199] H. Kikuchi, K. Ichinohe, S. Kida, S. Murase, O. Yamada, Y. Oshima, Monoterpene 
indole alkaloid-like compounds based on diversity-enhanced extracts of iridoid- 
containing plants and their immune checkpoint inhibitory activity, Org. Lett. 18 
(22) (2016) 5948–5951. 
[200] Y. Suzuki, K. Ichinohe, A. Sugawara, S. Kida, S. Murase, J. Zhang, O. Yamada, 
T. Hattori, Y. Oshima, H. Kikuchi, Development of Indole Alkaloid-Type Dual 
Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors Against CTLA-4 and PD-L1 Based on Diversity- 
Enhanced Extracts, Front Chem. 9 (2021), 766107. 
[201] J. Zhang, O. Yamada, S. Kida, S. Murase, T. Hattori, Y. Oshima, H. Kikuchi, 
Downregulation of PD-L1 via amide analogues of brefelamide: Alternatives to 
antibody-based cancer immunotherapy, Exp. Ther. Med 19 (4) (2020) 
3150–3158. 
[202] M. Savio, A. Ferraresi, C. Corpina, S. Vandenberghe, C. Scarlata, V. Sottile, 
L. Morini, B. Garavaglia, C. Isidoro, L.A. Stivala, Resveratrol and Its Analogue 
4,4’-Dihydroxy-trans-stilbene Inhibit Lewis Lung Carcinoma Growth In Vivo 
through Apoptosis, Autophagy and Modulation of the Tumour Microenvironment 
in a Murine Model, Biomedicines 10 (8) (2022). 
[203] K. Kim, J.H. Jung, H.J. Yoo, J.K. Hyun, J.H. Park, D. Na, J.H. Yeon, Anti- 
metastatic effects of plant sap-derived extracellular vesicles in a 3D microfluidic 
cancer metastasis model, J. Funct. Biomater. 11 (3) (2020). 
[204] P. Noel, S. Hussein, S. Ng, C.E. Antal, W. Lin, E. Rodela, P. Delgado, S. Naveed, 
M. Downes, Y. Lin, R.M. Evans, D.D. Von Hoff, H. Han, Triptolide targets super- 
enhancer networks in pancreatic cancer cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts, 
Oncogenesis 9 (11) (2020) 100. 
[205] I.W. Cheuk, J. Chen, M. Siu, J.C. Ho, S.S. Lam, V.Y. Shin, A. Kwong, Resveratrol 
enhanced chemosensitivity by reversing macrophage polarization in breast 
cancer, Clin. Transl. Oncol. 24 (5) (2022) 854–863. 
[206] Q. Liu, J. Hodge, J. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Wang, U. Singh, Y. Li, Y. Yao, D. Wang, 
W. Ai, P. Nagarkatti, H. Chen, P. Xu, E.A. Murphy, D. Fan, Emodin reduces Breast 
Cancer Lung Metastasis by suppressing Macrophage-induced Breast Cancer Cell 
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and Cancer Stem Cell formation, Theranostics 
10 (18) (2020) 8365–8381. 
[207] J. Tian, J. Ma, K. Ma, H. Guo, S.E. Baidoo, Y. Zhang, J. Yan, L. Lu, H. Xu, S. Wang, 
beta-Glucan enhances antitumor immune responses by regulating differentiation 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Pharmacological Research 196 (2023) 106914
24
and function of monocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells, Eur. J. Immunol. 43 
(5) (2013) 1220–1230. 
[208] S.H. Albeituni, C. Ding, M. Liu, X. Hu, F. Luo, G. Kloecker, M. Bousamra 2nd, H. 
G. Zhang, J. Yan, Yeast-Derived Particulate beta-Glucan Treatment Subverts the 
Suppression of Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells (MDSC) by Inducing 
Polymorphonuclear MDSC Apoptosis and Monocytic MDSC Differentiation to APC 
in Cancer, J. Immunol. 196 (5) (2016) 2167–2180. 
[209] E. De Marco Castro, P.C. Calder, H.M. Roche, beta-1,3/1,6-Glucans and 
Immunity: State of the Art and Future Directions, Mol. Nutr. Food Res 65 (1) 
(2021) e1901071. 
[210] M. Liu, Z. Tong, C. Ding, F. Luo, S. Wu, C. Wu, S. Albeituni, L. He, X. Hu, D. Tieri, 
E.C. Rouchka, M. Hamada, S. Takahashi, A.A. Gibb, G. Kloecker, H.G. Zhang, 
M. Bousamra 2nd, B.G. Hill, X. Zhang, J. Yan, Transcription factor c-Maf is a 
checkpoint that programs macrophages in lung cancer, J. Clin. Invest 130 (4) 
(2020) 2081–2096. 
[211] R.N. Hanna, C. Cekic, D. Sag, R. Tacke, G.D. Thomas, H. Nowyhed, E. Herrley, 
N. Rasquinha, S. McArdle, R. Wu, E. Peluso, D. Metzger, H. Ichinose, I. Shaked, 
G. Chodaczek, S.K. Biswas, C.C. Hedrick, Patrolling monocytes control tumor 
metastasis to the lung, Science 350 (6263) (2015) 985–990. 
[212] H. Li, N. Huang, W. Zhu, J. Wu, X. Yang, W. Teng, J. Tian, Z. Fang, Y. Luo, 
M. Chen, Y. Li, Modulation the crosstalk between tumor-associated macrophages 
and non-small cell lung cancer to inhibit tumor migration and invasion by 
ginsenoside Rh2, BMC Cancer 18 (1) (2018) 579. 
[213] A. Rosewell Shaw, C.E. Porter, N. Watanabe, K. Tanoue, A. Sikora, S. Gottschalk, 
M.K. Brenner, M. Suzuki, Adenovirotherapy Delivering Cytokine and Checkpoint 
Inhibitor Augments CAR T Cells against Metastatic Head and Neck Cancer, Mol. 
Ther. 25 (11) (2017) 2440–2451. 
[214] P.S. Adusumilli, M.G. Zauderer, I. Riviere, S.B. Solomon, V.W. Rusch, R. 
E. O’Cearbhaill, A. Zhu, W. Cheema, N.K. Chintala, E. Halton, J. Pineda, R. Perez- 
Johnston, K.S. Tan, B. Daly, J.A. Araujo Filho, D. Ngai, E. McGee, A. Vincent, 
C. Diamonte, J.L. Sauter, S. Modi, D. Sikder, B. Senechal, X. Wang, W.D. Travis, 
M. Gonen, C.M. Rudin, R.J. Brentjens, D.R. Jones, M. Sadelain, A Phase I Trial of 
Regional Mesothelin-Targeted CAR T-cell Therapy in Patients with Malignant 
Pleural Disease, in Combination with the Anti-PD-1 Agent Pembrolizumab, 
Cancer Discov. 11 (11) (2021) 2748–2763. 
[215] E. Salvatori, L. Lione, M. Compagnone, E. Pinto, A. Conforti, G. Ciliberto, 
L. Aurisicchio, F. Palombo, Neoantigen cancer vaccine augments anti-CTLA-4 
efficacy, NPJ Vaccin. 7 (1) (2022) 15. 
[216] M.Z. Jin, X.P. Wang, Immunogenic Cell Death-Based Cancer Vaccines, Front 
Immunol. 12 (2021), 697964. 
[217] D.S. Noroxe, O. Ostrup, C.W. Yde, L.B. Ahlborn, F.C. Nielsen, S.R. Michaelsen, V. 
A. Larsen, J. Skjoth-Rasmussen, J. Brennum, P. Hamerlik, H.S. Poulsen, U. Lassen, 
Cell-free DNA in newly diagnosed patients with glioblastoma - a clinical 
prospective feasibility study, Oncotarget 10 (43) (2019) 4397–4406. 
[218] J. Wadden, K. Ravi, V. John, C.M. Babila, C. Koschmann, Cell-Free Tumor DNA 
(cf-tDNA) Liquid Biopsy: Current Methods and Use in Brain Tumor 
Immunotherapy, Front Immunol. 13 (2022), 882452. 
[219] J. Rakova, I. Truxova, P. Holicek, C. Salek, M. Hensler, L. Kasikova, J. Pasulka, 
M. Holubova, M. Kovar, D. Lysak, J.P. Kline, Z. Racil, L. Galluzzi, R. Spisek, 
J. Fucikova, TIM-3 levels correlate with enhanced NK cell cytotoxicity and 
improved clinical outcome in AML patients, Oncoimmunology 10 (1) (2021), 
1889822. 
[220] L. Wang, B. Jia, D.F. Claxton, W.C. Ehmann, W.B. Rybka, S. Mineishi, S. Naik, M. 
R. Khawaja, J. Sivik, J. Han, R.J. Hohl, H. Zheng, VISTA is highly expressed on 
MDSCs and mediates an inhibition of T cell response in patients with AML, 
Oncoimmunology 7 (9) (2018) e1469594. 
[221] C. Wang, D.A. Sallman, Targeting the cluster of differentiation 47/signal-regula­
tory protein alpha axis in myeloid malignancies, Curr. Opin. Hematol. 29 (1) 
(2022) 44–52. 
[222] B. Cheng, Y. Ren, H. Cao, J. Chen, Discovery of novel resorcinol diphenyl ether- 
based PROTAC-like molecules as dual inhibitors and degraders of PD-L1, Eur. J. 
Med Chem. 199 (2020), 112377. 
[223] L.B. Vinh, J.U. Park, L.X. Duy, N.T.M. Nguyet, S.Y. Yang, Y.R. Kim, Y.H. Kim, 
Ginsenosides from Korean red ginseng modulate T cell function via the regulation 
of NF-AT-mediated IL-2 production, Food Sci. Biotechnol. 28 (1) (2019) 237–242. 
C. Cerella et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
