Physica Medica 79 (2020) 103–112
Available online 19 November 2020
1120-1797/© 2020 Associazione Italiana di Fisica Medica. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Review paper 
External beam radiation therapy with kilovoltage x-rays 
Dylan Y Breitkreutz a, Michael D Weil b, Magdalena Bazalova-Carter c,* 
a Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA 
b Sirius Medicine LLC, Half Moon Bay, CA, USA 
c Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Radiotherapy 
Kilovoltage x-rays 
Microbeam therapy 
FLASH 
A B S T R A C T   
Kilovoltage (kV) x-rays are most commonly used for diagnostic imaging due to their sensitivity to tissue 
composition. In radiation therapy (RT), due to their fast attenuation, kV x-rays are typically only used for su­
perficial irradiation of skin cancer and for intra-operative RT (IORT). Recently, however, a number of kV RT 
techniques have emerged. In this review article, we provide a brief overview of the use of kV x-rays for RT. 
Various kV x-ray source technologies suitable for RT, such as conventional x-ray tubes as well as novel x-ray 
sources, are first described. This x-ray source section is then followed by a section on their implementation in 
terms of clinical, veterinary and preclinical applications. Specifically, IORT, superficial RT and dose enhance­
ment with iodine and gold nanoparticles, as well as microbeam RT and FLASH RT are discussed in this context. 
Then, a number of kV x-ray RT applications in modeling and proof-of-principle stages, such as breast external 
beam RT with rotational sources, kilovoltage arc therapy and the BriXS Compton pulsed x-ray sources, are 
reviewed. Finally, some clinical and economic considerations for the development of kV RT techniques are 
discussed.   
1. Introduction 
1.1. History of kilovoltage x-ray beam radiotherapy 
Wilhelm Roentgen discovered x-rays in 1895. Within months of the 
discovery, x-rays were being applied to medical problems, primarily for 
imaging. The first radiation treatment of cancer using x-rays was 
recorded in 1896 when Victor Despeignes treated a patient with stomach 
cancer. Despite this first application of x-rays for stomach cancer, the 
primary therapeutic use of x-rays in these early days was only for su­
perficial lesions. Early x-ray tube technology was only capable of 
generating x-rays in the kilovoltage (kV) energy range and the treatment 
of deep-seated lesions was limited by radiation-induced skin damage. In 
1909, Alban Kohler, in an attempt to reduce the skin toxicity of kV x-rays 
and enable their use for the treatment of deep-seated lesions, devised the 
method of grid therapy [1]. By passing the x-rays through a metal grid, 
the dose to skin was spatially fractionated thereby reducing the 
magnitude of skin toxicity. The basic technology of the x-ray tube 
remained relatively unchanged in the century following the discovery of 
x-rays. 
Today, 20–150 kVp x-rays are primarily used for diagnostic imaging. 
Higher-energy 100–500 kVp x-rays are used for superficial therapy, and 
in some cases, intraoperative radiation therapy. In this review article, 
we will summarize applications of kV radiotherapy with x-rays of en­
ergies between 50 and 320 kVp, typically referred to as superficial and 
orthovoltage x-rays. While the most common clinical applications of kV 
x-rays to superficial RT and intraoperative RT are briefly mentioned, this 
review focuses on ‘exotic’ applications of kV x-rays designed to treat 
deep-seated tumors either by combining kilovoltage RT with either 
contrast material injection or by designing non-standard x-ray sources. 
Various applications of kV RT, mostly in the treatment planning stage 
but also in pre-clinical or clinical trials are summarized here. 
1.2. Why use kV radiotherapy? 
Medical applications of x-ray beams in RT have been strictly 
segmented according to the energy employed by the radiation machines. 
High-energy (megavoltage, MV) systems are used for cancer therapy 
because their beams spare the skin and readily penetrate tissue. On the 
other hand, low-energy kV devices are mainly used for imaging, e.g. in 
computed tomography (CT), mammography and chest/bone x-ray im­
aging. These kV x-ray beams are more sensitive to tissue composition 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: bazalova@uvic.ca (M. Bazalova-Carter).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Physica Medica 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ejmp 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2020.11.001 
Received 29 July 2020; Received in revised form 3 October 2020; Accepted 1 November 2020   
Physica Medica 79 (2020) 103–112
104
and less penetrating and their use for treatment is conventionally limited 
to skin cancer. While it is challenging to treat deep-seated tumors with 
kV x-rays, benefits of radiation treatment with kV x-rays exist. 
First, the generation of kV x-rays (see section 2) is much less complex 
than generation of MV x-rays. Conventional MV linear accelerators 
(linacs) used for clinical MV RT are sophisticated in their design and 
contain many components including an accelerating waveguide with a 
high manufacturing cost. The power and space requirements for oper­
ating linacs are greater than for operating kV x-ray devices. In addition, 
linacs require housing with 2-meter thick concrete walls to protect 
personnel; kV x-ray units only require ~ 2-millimeter lead shielding. In 
light of the considerable cost reduction possible with kV RT, it could 
become a suitable cancer treatment modality in the limited-resource 
settings of developing countries. 
Despite advancing healthcare technology, world-wide annual cancer 
mortality exceeds deaths from HIV-AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria 
combined. In part, this is the result of a significant and disturbing 
inequality in global delivery of cancer treatment; 70% of new cases are 
in the developing world where cases go undiagnosed and untreated 
because of cost [2]. 
X-ray treatment is effective as a single or combined modality for 
local–regional tumor control. It is also one of the most precisely planned 
and delivered therapeutic options. MV linacs and the infrastructure 
needed for treatment cost ~ US$5M and carry significant operating 
expenses in terms of personnel, supporting devices and services. The 
unit’s housing, requiring concrete bunkers, costs ~$1.5 M to build. 
There has been little challenge to the present strategy restricting MV 
linear accelerators to treat most cancers, while consigning kV x-rays to 
imaging. Though kV x-ray systems have not been optimal for therapy 
within the body, they offer the potential for simultaneous high-quality 
imaging during treatment and are undoubtedly much less costly than 
MV systems. 
2. X-ray beam generation 
2.1. Conventional x-ray tubes 
The technology currently used to produce kV x-rays has not funda­
mentally changed from the original vacuum tube design used in 
Roentgen’s experiments. An x-ray tube consists of an evacuated glass 
tube containing an anode and a cathode. High voltage is applied across 
the vacuum tube and thermionic emission is used to liberate electrons 
from the cathode. The electrons are accelerated across the tube and 
strike the anode. The anode is made of a high atomic number (Z) metal 
and the rapid deceleration of the electrons incident on the anode pro­
duces photons by bremsstrahlung radiation. Anode design varies among 
x-ray tubes based on their application. X-ray tubes used for imaging 
employ a rotating anode which allows for smaller electron focal spots 
with high instantaneous current without exceeding the heat load spec­
ifications of the anode. X-ray tubes for therapy use larger electron focal 
spots along with lower currents over longer periods and use a large 
stationary anode [3]. 
X-ray tube potential and added filtration are the main factors 
affecting the beam quality typically quoted in either mean energy or the 
half-value layer (HVL). For radiation therapy of deep-seated tumors, 
more filtration with higher tube potential, resulting in higher beam 
energy associated with deeper tissue penetration, is typically desirable. 
However, higher beam energy results in more heat-loading of the anode 
that can lead to anode melting. In addition, increased beam filtration 
decreases x-ray output, which in turn increases treatment time. A 
compromise between x-ray beam energy and beam filtration has to be 
identified for each radiotherapy application. 
2.2. Novel technology 
Apart from conventional x-ray tubes, a number of other x-ray sources 
that could be considered for the delivery of radiotherapy have been 
developed and will be discussed here. 
2.2.1. Scanning electron sources 
Since electrons are light charged particles, they can be easily steered 
electromagnetically with magnetic fields on the order of only 10–20 
Gauss. There are two existing examples of diagnostic x-ray sources 
generated by scanned electron beam: the electron-beam computed to­
mography (EBCT) system [4] and the scanning beam digital x-ray 
(SBDX) source. A modified design of the SBDX system has been simu­
lated for the delivery of kilovoltage x-ray beam arc therapy (KVAT) 
discussed in section 3.4.2. 
The SBDX source consists of a large (23 × 23) cm2 tungsten anode 
and an electron beam scanning the anode in an array of 100 × 100 spots. 
The resulting x-ray beams from the transmission target are then shaped 
into 1.5-mm diameter beamlets directed towards the (5.5 × 5.5) 
cm2 detector by an ~ 2-cm-thick brass collimator [5]. The source was 
designed for the use in interventional and diagnostic radiography with 
lower radiation exposure to an interventionalist [6]. 
2.2.2. Miniature x-ray tubes 
Small-size x-ray sources can be conveniently used for interstitial 
treatment of tumors in intraoperative treatments or for brachytherapy. 
In 1996, a novel miniature x-ray tube, the primary component of a 
Photon Radiosurgery System (PRS), was presented [7]. The electron gun 
was a conventional miniature gun with a barium oxide thermoionic 
cathode. Three anodes were used to extract, focus and accelerate the 
electron beam that impinged on a gold target to produce x-rays. The 
portable low-power 3-mm diameter 100-mm long x-ray source was 
capable of operating at 40 kV tube voltage and 40 µA tube current 
generating a beam with mean energy of 16 keV. 
The more commonly used miniature Xoft Axxent x-ray tube consists 
of a disposable microminiature x-ray tube with a < 1-mm anode inte­
grated into a cooled, flexible, disposable sheath of 5.3 mm in diameter. 
The Axxent x-ray source operates at tube voltages of 20 to 50 kV and 
tube currents of 1–300 µA producing air kerma strength of up to 1600 
Gy.cm2.h−1 and it is designed for a lifetime of 2.5 h [8]. Another com­
mercial system which uses a small form (7 cm × 11 cm × 17 cm) x-ray 
tube is the INTRABEAM (Carl Zeiss Surgical, Oberkochen, Germany) 
intraoperative radiotherapy system. This system is capable of using 
various applicators which are inserted directly inside the surgical cavity 
which is then irradiated with 50 kV photons [62]. 
2.2.3. Carbon nanotubes 
In most commercial x-ray sources, the properties of the electrons 
striking an anode drive many of the properties of the resulting x-ray 
beam, such as its spatial and temporal distribution. Conventional x-ray 
sources take advantage of thermionic emission (TE) for the generation of 
the electron beam, which poses challenges in terms of temporal (long 
beam ramp-up and cool-down times, up to ~ 1 s) and spatial (large ~ 1 
mm beam size) x-ray beam characteristics. However, in field emission 
(FE), electrons tunnel through the narrowed potential barrier caused by 
an application of a high electric field. As a result, a very fast x-ray 
emission with response times on the order of 50 µs can be achieved [9]. 
In addition, due to the high-spatial resolution fabrication of carbon 
nanotubes (CNTs), FE-based CNT x-ray sources of 5 µm in size have been 
manufactured [10]. 
CNTs x-ray sources have been designed with imaging tasks in mind. 
They are typically capable of producing microfocus x-ray beams with 
anode voltages up to 70 kV, albeit with typically low ~ mA currents 
[11]. Thanks to their small focal spot on the order of µm, CNTs have 
been studied for the use in spatially-fractionated microbeam radio­
therapy (MRT) discussed in section 3.3.2. 
A miniaturized CNT has been developed by KAIST University in 
Korea for the use in intra-cavitary radiotherapy [12]. The 7-mm diam­
eter 47-mm long x-ray tube operates at tube voltages of up to 60 kV 
D.Y. Breitkreutz et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Physica Medica 79 (2020) 103–112
105
producing dose rates of 100 Gy/min in permanent operation. The 
advantage of a CNT-based miniature x-ray tube compared to conven­
tional miniature x-ray tubes described in section 2.2.2 is their longer 
lifetime and cold emission radiation not requiring additional cooling. 
2.2.4. Synchrotron sources 
When electrons are accelerated on a curved path, they lose some of 
their energy by emission of x-rays termed synchrotron radiation. Syn­
chrotron radiation is typically extracted in bending magnets of a ~ GeV 
electron beam circulating in a storage ring. Similar to x-ray tube beams, 
synchrotron radiation has a broad energy spectrum, but it is distinctive 
in a number of aspects compared to x-ray sources featuring an electron 
beam striking an anode. Synchrotron x-ray beams are of high flux, high 
brilliance, pulsed with short ~ picosecond-long pulses and polarized. 
Three synchrotron beamlines were used in radiation therapy exper­
iments discussed in this article: the ID17 beamline at the European 
Synchrotron Research Facility (ESRF), the x17B beamline at Brookhaven 
National Laboratory (BNL) and the Imaging and Medical Beamline 
(IMBL) at the Australian Synchrotron. All beamlines are similar in their 
beam characteristics and only the ID17 ESRF beamline, with the most 
RT publications, will be briefly described. The high-brilliance low- 
divergence ID17 x-ray beam of 1–3 mm in height and ~ 40 mm in width 
can deliver dose rates of 8,000 to 16,000 Gy/ s [13,14]. The x-ray beam 
contains 30–600 keV x-rays with a mean energy of ~ 105 keV [15]. 
2.2.5. Compton sources 
Compton x-ray sources work on the principle of inverse Compton 
scattering (ICS). In 1998, Huang and Ruth proposed a compact laser- 
electron storage ring (LESR) for electron beam cooling or x-ray gener­
ation [16]. When a laser beam interacted with an electron bunch, a high- 
brilliance x-ray beam is generated. In the LESR source operated in 
transient mode, a 2-J power laser with 3-mm long pulses is scattered off 
100 MeV electron bunches with 1.3 × 1010 electrons and a 200 keV 
photon beam is generated with a flux of 2.6 × 1020 photons/s. A com­
mercial example of such a source, the Compact Light Source (CLS) 
manufactured by Lyncean Technologies Inc, was operated at 13.5 keV 
with 3% energy spread to image a moth placed at 10 m from the x-ray 
source using phase-contrast x-ray imaging [17]. The BriXS (Bright and 
compact X-ray Source), used for an RT study presented in section 3.4.3, 
is a twin Compton x-ray source. The operation of the BriXS source is 
based on superconductive cavities technology for the electron beam 
with energy recirculation and on a laser system in Fabry-P´erot cavity at a 
repetition rate of 100 MHz, producing 20–180 keV x-ray beam [18]. 
3. Applications of kV radiotherapy 
3.1. Clinical applications 
3.1.1. Intraoperative radiotherapy 
Intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT) is a method by which a large 
dose of radiation is delivered directly to the tumor site. This technique is 
possible due to direct access to the tumor site during a surgical pro­
cedure. Since there is no overlying tissue during IORT, and therefore no 
need for skin-sparing, kV x-rays are preferred over higher energy pho­
tons due to their reduced penetration, which reduces dose to normal 
tissues beyond the tumor site. IORT was first introduced in the 1960 s 
and consisted primarily of x-ray tube systems installed in surgery suites 
[19]. While not a common method of radiotherapy, due to the surgical 
requirements, the ability to deliver a large dose directly to the tumor 
site, as well as the potential for physically spacing surrounding normal 
tissue from the irradiated area, results in an enhanced therapeutic ratio. 
However, the increased attenuation of the kV x-rays in bone due to a 
higher photoelectric cross-section is a disadvantage. Alternatives to kV 
x-ray IORT include MeV electron therapy, which has the advantage of 
reduced dose past the tumor site in comparison to kV x-rays. In recent 
years, advances in technology have resulted in mobile kV x-ray IORT 
platforms which can provide advanced beam shaping and require less 
room shielding. 
One novel technology which is well suited to IORT is the miniature x- 
ray tube. The small size of miniature x-ray tubes allows them to be 
placed directly within a patient and directly at the site requiring irra­
diation. The Xoft Axxent miniature x-ray tube has been extensively used 
for intraoperative treatment of early stage breast cancer [20]. CNT- 
based miniature x-ray tubes in combination with endoscopic interven­
tional technology have also been considered to treat the oral cavity and 
larynx [21,22]. IORT technology is an expansive field and dedicated 
reviews on IORT exist and should be consulted by the reader for further 
information [19]. 
3.1.2. Superficial radiotherapy 
Kilovoltage x-rays are also used for treatment of superficial cancers 
[23]. The energy spectrum of x-rays for this application ranges from 50 
to 150 kVp. Since the cancer is superficial, skin-sparing is not generally a 
restrictive concern in these treatments. Due to the capability of many 
linacs to generate MeV electrons, it is common for superficial cancers to 
be treated with MeV electrons rather than kV x-rays which would 
require additional technology. Further reasons for the use of MeV 
electrons over kV x-rays are the finite range of electrons, higher dose 
rates and ease of modelling in modern treatment planning systems. 
3.1.3. Dose enhancement with iodine 
Due to the increased probability of photo-electric interactions, kV x- 
ray beams have the potential to increase radiation dose to a target 
loaded with x-ray contrast agents of high atomic number (Z), such as 
iodine. The increased photo-electric effect occurring in the high-Z ma­
terial results in the emission of short-range Meitner electrons, more 
commonly referred to as Auger-electrons first discovered by Lise Meitner 
in 1922 [24]. Such electrons deposit their energy locally in the vicinity 
of the high-Z material and damage cells loaded with the contrast agent, 
causing the so-called “radiosensitization.” 
In 1999, two publications investigating the treatment of brain tu­
mors with a modified CT scanner were published [25,26]. Termed CTRx, 
the CT scanner with a modified pencil-beam collimator was able to 
function as both a diagnostic and therapeutic system. Mesa et al. used 
Monte Carlo dose calculations to investigate the dosimetric properties of 
the CTRx system when used to treat brain tumors injected with iodine 
contrast for tumor dose enhancement. The energy spectrum used in the 
simulations was taken from the 140 kVp setting of a GE CT scanner. 
Skull dose reduction was explored both by means of increasing the 
concentration of iodine (up to 20 mg/ml) in the tumor as well as the use 
of three non-coplanar (20◦, 0◦and −20◦) treatment arcs by tilting the 
gantry. The CTRx treatments were compared to simulated treatments 
with 10 MV photons. The primary factor in achieving desired dose dis­
tributions within the tumor, as well as skull dose reduction, was found to 
be the concentration of iodine. Higher concentrations resulted in more 
tumor dose and less skull dose. The highest skull dose was 80% of the 
maximum dose delivered with 0 mg/ml of iodine and 20% of the 
maximum dose with 15 mg/ml of iodine contrast. It should be noted that 
in clinical practice only concentrations of up to 5 mg/ml are routinely 
achieved using standard intravenous injection techniques. Iodine con­
centrations above 15 mg/ml were found to result in less homogenous 
dose distributions within the tumor. The 10 MV treatment was more 
uniform than the CTRx treatment and also had a smaller skull dose. 
Rose et al. later published the results of a phase I clinical trial in 
which 8 patients with metastatic brain lesions smaller than 2.5 cm in 
diameter were treated with a modified CT scanner [26]. The CT scanner 
was set to 140 kVp for treatment. The patients were injected with iodine 
contrast and received 3 to 5 weekly fractions of 5 Gy. Each patient had at 
least one other metastatic brain lesion which did not receive CTRx and 
served as a control. The patients also received conventional whole brain 
radiotherapy either before, during or after their CTRx treatment. The 
authors reported that no patients demonstrated any side effects from the 
D.Y. Breitkreutz et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Physica Medica 79 (2020) 103–112
106
CTRx. Of the eight patients, the irradiated tumors shrank in six cases, 
remained constant in one case and grew in one case. The control tumors 
shrank in four cases, grew in two cases and remained constant in one 
case. The control tumor data for one patient was not available. The 
authors conclude that CTRx treatment is safe and that an advanced 
version of the CTRx system could provide diagnostic and therapeutic 
treatment for select patients. 
Between 1997 and 1999, Weil et al. explored the safety of kV 
radiotherapy with dose enhancement using mostly directly injected 
iodine contrast for palliation of advanced cancers of different histologies 
in a Phase I/II human trial (unpublished data). The study was conducted 
in a university setting under IRB oversight. Eleven patients with recur­
rent disease in a variety of sites ranging from extremities to brain and 
liver were treated via CT-guided intralesional injection of 0.5–4.5 ml of 
iopromide with 37% w/v iodine using a 120 kVp beam of a radiotherapy 
simulator (Fig. 1a). The spatial distribution and concentration of iodine 
contrast in the tumors was derived from the Hounsfield numbers of the 
CT image in near real time. Thereby, the dose enhancement and 
dosimetry of the kV beam was optimized for each treatment. Several 
significant responses were noted with no skin reaction or sequelae 
attributable to RT. For example, a patient with multiply recurrent non- 
Hodgkin’s lymphoma on the forehead completely responded to a single 
1.5-Gy treatment fraction delivered with contrast-enhanced RT (CERT) 
and underwent successful reconstructive surgery to cover a skull defect 
as the tumor had previously penetrated the bone (Fig. 1b-c). 
3.2. Veterinary applications 
Radiation therapy options for companion animals include the use of 
kV x-rays. In 1997, Norman et al. performed a study in which canines 
diagnosed with brain tumors were treated with the CTRx system 
mentioned above [27]. The study involved 47 dogs from private 
households. The modified CT scanner was equipped with two separate 
collimators, the standard imaging collimator and a custom collimator 
for treatment. The dogs were treated with weekly fractions of 5.6 Gy 
using 140 kVp x-rays on the CTRx after anesthetization and intravenous 
injection of iodinated contrast (280 mg/ml). The iodine-based contrast 
was used both for improved localization of the tumor and a dose 
enhancement effect. The tumor was located using the diagnostic imag­
ing function of the CTRx after which the lesion was positioned at iso­
center. The tumors were treated with the therapy collimator set to a 
rectangular aperture of 1 cm by 3 cm. The scanner delivered the radi­
ation using a scan speed of 4 s per rotation with a total of 60 rotations per 
fraction. The gantry was tilted at −20, 0 and 20 degrees for 20 rotations 
each to deliver non-coplanar beams. The median survival for all treated 
canines was 133 days. However, the authors note that many owners 
decided to euthanize their animals early during treatment which 
decreased the median survival. The median survival of animals that 
completed treatment (defined as 6 or more fractions) was 231 days. 
Furthermore, the median survival of the canines who completed treat­
ment was similar to previously published data of canines treated with 
cobalt therapy and orthovoltage therapy for brain tumors. In compari­
son, historical studies of the survival of canines with brain tumors sug­
gest a median survival of 6 – 13 days. Autopsies of canines who received 
CTRx treatment indicated no damage to healthy brain tissue, bone or 
skin. The authors concluded that CTRx treatment of brain tumors in 
canines was a safe and effective method. 
Radiotherapy treatment options for companion animals are some­
what limited as linear accelerators are too costly for most veterinary 
hospitals to own. kV x-ray systems may be more suitable for companion 
animal radiation therapy due to their lower cost and, in addition, 
companion animals are smaller than humans and therefore involve 
much shallower treatment depths, which makes them ideal for lower 
energy kV x-ray treatment. 
In 2018, Seo et al. published an article investigating the treatment of 
cancer in companion animals (canines) with 300 and 450 kV x-rays [28]. 
The authors used numerical methods to calculate dose distributions 
using 300 kV, 450 kV and 6 MV photons for brain, nasal cavity, forefoot 
and abdomen cancers in companion animals. Dose distributions were 
evaluated by means of DVH, homogeneity index and conformity index. 
DVH analysis indicated that all three x-ray beam energies yielded 
comparable dose distributions for brain and nasal tumors. The metrics of 
homogeneity and conformity index were optimal for the 6 MV x-rays for 
the nasal, forefoot and abdominal tumors. The authors noted that in 
general dose to at-risk organs was less for the 6 MV x-rays but was not 
significantly higher for the kV x-rays. 
3.3. Preclinical applications 
3.3.1. Dose enhancement with gold nanoparticles 
Due to their biocompatibility, gold nanoparticles (AuNP) have been 
most commonly investigated for RT dose enhancement. Hainfeld et al. in 
2004 irradiated tumors of mice with subcutaneous EMT-6 mammary 
carcinomas after an injection of AuNP with 250 kVp x-rays [29]. One- 
year survival of 86% was significantly higher than the 20% survival 
after radiation alone and 0% with AuNP alone. 
Many following computational, in vitro and in vivo studies demon­
strated the NP radiosensitization effect with kV x-ray beams and an 
overview of the topic can be found in [30]. As expected, computational 
Monte Carlo dose calculation studies clearly show that NP dose 
enhancement in kV x-ray beams is in the order of 30–40% and it is 
negligible in the more penetrating clinically relevant MV photon beams. 
However, Jain et al. demonstrated a 41% and 29% dose enhancement in 
a 160 kVp and 6 MV x-ray beam for breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells 
[31]. The same study presented no dose enhancement in normal L132, 
prostate cancer DU145 cells at kV or MV energies, suggesting that 
Fig. 1. Iodine contrast in a metastatic ovarian adenocarcinoma to an axillary lymph node after an intratumoral injection of iopromide (a). Patient with a recurrent 
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma penetrating skull before (b) and 9 months after (c) single-fraction 1.5-Gy treatment delivered with a 120 kVp beam after an intratumoral 
iopromide injection. 
D.Y. Breitkreutz et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Physica Medica 79 (2020) 103–112
107
radiosensitization even with kV x-ray beams is cell specific. Regardless, 
kV x-ray beams are most suitable for dose enhancement in combination 
with NP therapy. Thanks to their shallow tissue penetration, kV x-ray 
beams in the arrangement of rotational therapy described in section 3.4 
might be best suited for optimal results of NP radiosensitization. 
3.3.2. Microbeam radiation therapy (MRT) 
In MRT, radiation is not delivered in the conventional broad-beam 
pattern, but it is delivered with an array of parallel 100–300 µm wide 
beams separated by 100–300 µm. Compared to MV beams, kV x-ray 
beams are better suited for MRT delivery. Due to the short range of 
secondary electrons, the spatial fractionation of the beam can be pre­
served in tissue. MRT has been mostly delivered with high-brilliance 
synchrotron beams at dose rates of > 100 Gy/s and has shown to 
improve normal tissue sparing while maintaining tumor control [32]. 
For example, Dilmanian et al. irradiated rat intracranial 9L gliosarcoma 
with various arrangements of microbeam size and spacing on the BNL 
synchrotron beamline with a mean x-ray beam energy of 70 keV. The 
median survival of a subset of rats was 170 days compared to the pre­
viously reported 34-day survival of similar models irradiated with a 
broad beam [33]. In 2003, subcutaneous mouse models of ENT-6 murine 
mammary carcinoma were irradiated with microbeams and a broad 
beam on the same beamline using x-ray beams with mean energy of 100 
or 118 keV [34]. Tumor ablation rates were higher and normal-tissue 
toxicity, acute (moist desquamation and epilation) and delayed (fail­
ure of hair regrowth), was lower for MRT compared to the broad beam 
irradiation. 
Hadsell et al. investigated whether high dose-rate MRT can be 
delivered using a 50 kV anode voltage and 0.5 mA beam current CNT x- 
ray source [35]. Based on their experimental pilot study they concluded 
that the required MRT pattern could be achieved with a CNT x-ray 
source, however, their setup only allowed for a dose rate of 1.54 mGy/s. 
The authors predicted that a CNT x-ray source with a 160 kV anode 
voltage and 1 A beam current would be required for a 100 Gy/s dose rate 
delivery of MRT. In their follow-up work, the group at University of 
North Carolina has built a compact prototype MRT system with 160 kV 
anode voltage and 30 mA beam current and delivered 2–3-beam MRT to 
mouse models of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) with a skin dose rate 
of 1.2 Gy/min [36]. The evidence of DNA double-strand breaks in the 
path of the microbeams was demonstrated via γ-H2AX staining. Yuan 
et al. irradiated mouse GBM models reaching 48 Gy and 72 Gy dose 
levels with MRT (Fig. 2) versus 10 Gy with broad beam and found 
similar survival when employing 72-Gy irradiation or 10 Gy broad beam 
irradiation [37]. A review of the group’s MRT work with CNTs can be 
found in [38]. 
In 2011, Le Duc et al. presented a study combining the delivery of 
gadolinium-based nanoparticles (GBN) with MRT performed at the ID17 
ESRF beamline for the treatment of a rats bearing intracerebral 9L 
gliosarcoma [39]. When MRT irradiation using cross-fired 25-µm mi­
crobeams separated by 200 µm gaps was delivered 20 min post GBN 
injection, median survival increased to 90 days compared to 19 days and 
47 days for no treatment and MRT treatment without GBN, respectively. 
Interestingly, the median survival decreased to 34 days when MRT was 
delivered only 5 min after the injection of GBN. The authors concluded 
that the ratio of GBN concentration in the tumor to GBN concentration in 
normal tissue is a critical radiosensitization parameter rather than GBN 
concentration in the tumor itself. 
3.3.3. FLASH therapy 
Possibly the most recent application of kV x-rays in RT is the delivery 
of > 40 Gy/s ultrahigh dose-rate (FLASH) RT. After initial studies in the 
late 1960 s [40,41], ultrahigh dose-rate RT was rediscovered in 2014 by 
Favaudon et al. [42]. In their study, the authors irradiated thoraxes of 
mice with a 4.5 MeV electron beam with a dose rate of 40 Gy/s and 
reported a significant decrease in radiation-induced lung fibrosis when 
compared to conventional irradiations at a dose rate of 0.03 Gy/s per­
formed with a 137Cs gamma ray source. Most clinical RT is performed 
with x-ray beams and there was interest to investigate whether the 
FLASH effect can be also triggered with an x-ray beam. Due to engi­
neering challenges of accelerator-based megavoltage x-ray beam gen­
eration at high dose rates, a synchrotron source was chosen for this 
purpose. 
In 2018, mouse whole brain irradiations (WBI) were performed with 
the ID17 ESRF beamline using a thin 50-µm wide synchrotron x-ray 
beam scanned across the mouse brain at an in-slice dose rate of 12,000 
Gy/s and a mean brain dose rate of 37 Gy/s [43]. The conventional low- 
dose rate WBI was delivered with the 225 kVp beam on the image- 
guided small animal radiation research platform (SARRP). After a 10- 
Gy brain dose, unlike after the conventional SARRP irradiation, no in­
duction in memory deficit was observed after FLASH irradiation and the 
case for normal tissue sparing of x-ray FLASH was therefore 
strengthened. 
More recently, Bazalova-Carter and Esplen have proposed that it 
might be possible to use conventional x-ray tubes to deliver ultrahigh 
Fig. 2. Microbeam profiles using Gafchromic films and γ-H2AX staining on irradiated brain. The beam width (FWHM) was 280 µm at the entrance plane on the top of 
the mouse brain (panel A) and 380 µm at the exit plane at the bottom of the head (panel B). Normal brain tissue section (panel C) and tumor-bearing mouse brain 
(panel D) were stained with anti-γ-H2AX antibody at 1 h after microbeam irradiation. Red fluorescence signal indicates the positive expression of γ-H2AX signal. 
Staining of γ-H2AX demonstrated the microbeam radiation track. The average FWHM of the γ-H2AX staining was 343 µm. (Reprinted with permission from Yuan 
et al., 2015, © 2020 Radiation Research Society.) (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of 
this article.) 
D.Y. Breitkreutz et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Physica Medica 79 (2020) 103–112
108
dose-rate RT [44]. Dose rates of > 40 Gy/s can be achieved for an 
unfiltered x-ray beam at shallow < 1 mm depth in a sample placed at the 
x-ray tube surface. The FLASH effect, however, has not yet been inves­
tigated with this continuous x-ray source. A comprehensive review of 
FLASH therapy can be found in [63]. 
3.4. Proof-of-principle and computational models 
3.4.1. Kilovoltage external beam radiotherapy (kV-EBRT) 
Dedicated breast CT (bCT) platforms were first developed in 2008 in 
order to improve the diagnosis of breast cancer [45]. In 2012, Prionas 
et al. published work investigating rotational kilovoltage external beam 
radiation therapy (kV-EBRT) of breast cancer with 320 kVp x-rays using 
a bCT system [46]. kV-EBRT was simulated using Monte Carlo methods 
for both cylindrical phantoms and breast CT data. The beam was 
simulated and 2D and 3D dose distributions were generated with a range 
of collimation settings. The smallest diameter was 1 cm and the largest 
was 14 cm in the XY plane. Z collimation was 0.1 cm for 2D profiles and 
2 cm for 3D dose distribution. Smaller XY collimation settings demon­
strated centrally peaked dose deposition with the 1 cm setting depos­
iting as little as 7% dose at the periphery of the cylindrical phantom. The 
14 cm collimation setting resulting in a centrally cupped dose 
distribution. 
Experimental validation was performed using a CT scanner operating 
at a tube voltage of 120 kV. Dose measurements of the radial dose dis­
tributions in a 14-cm diameter polyethylene cylinder were made using 
an ionization chamber. These measurements were compared to Monte 
Carlo simulated radial dose distributions with a matched energy spec­
trum. The mean percentage of difference between the simulated and 
measured dose distributions was 10.5% +- 7.7% for the 1-cm collimated 
beam and 2.8% +- 2.3% for the 14-cm collimated beam. 
The authors also investigated whole breast irradiation using phan­
toms, dose “painting” and the treatment of patients with Monte Carlo 
simulations. Of particular note are the simulations of a breast cancer 
patient imaged with iodine contrast (Fig. 3). Using a 2 cm collimated 
beam, the calculated dose distribution shows that the lesion was con­
tained within the 90% isodose line and that the skin received 10% of the 
maximum dose. 
A number of follow-up studies on breast kV-EBRT were published by 
a group at the University of Naples. In 2019, Buonano et al. published a 
similar study to the one by Prionas et al., in which they investigated 
breast phantom dose distributions achieved by 150, 300, and 320 kVp x- 
ray beams generated by an x-ray tube by means of MC simulations and 
experiments [47]. Rotational kV-EBRT permitted a periphery-to-center 
dose ratio from 13% to 9% in homogeneous breast phantoms of 14-cm 
in diameter for beams of ~ 1 cm in size. Earlier the group investigated 
breast EBRT with a synchrotron beam termed synchrotron radiation 
rotational radiotherapy (SR3T) by means of MC simulations and exper­
iments with the same 14-cm diameter phantom [48,49]. They performed 
Geant4 simulations and measurements with Gafchromic films, ioniza­
tion chambers and TLD of phantom dose delivered with monoenergetic 
60–175 keV synchrotron x-ray beams at the Australian Synchrotron 
Fig. 3. Contrast-enhanced breast computed tomography image containing enhancing invasive mammary carcinoma used to simulate rotational kilovoltage external 
beam radiotherapy with 2-cm x–y collimation centered at lesion (a). Resulting dose distribution (b) and fusion image (c). (Reprinted with permission from Prionas 
et al., 2012.) 
Fig. 4. A schematic drawing of the proposed KVAT x-ray source (a). The x-ray source was designed to treat a 4-cm diameter at 10-cm depth in a 40-cm diameter 
cylinder using arc therapy (b). (Reprinted with permission from Bazalova-Carter et al., 2017.) 
D.Y. Breitkreutz et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Physica Medica 79 (2020) 103–112
109
IMBL. They calculated and measured a tumor-to-skin absorbed dose 
ratio ranging from about 7:1 (at 60 keV photon energy) to about 10:1 (at 
175 keV) for a 1.5-cm wide beam, which was deemed sufficient for skin 
sparing during radiotherapy. 
3.4.2. Kilovoltage x-ray beam arc therapy 
In the EBCT and SBDX x-ray sources electron beam energies of 
80–140 keV are used, resulting in an x-ray beam with shallow dose 
deposition and not suitable for radiotherapy. To overcome this short­
coming, a design of a stationary-anode source was modeled for the de­
livery of kilovoltage arc therapy (KVAT) to deep-seated tumors 
employing non-coplanar kV beams (Fig. 4). First, a source design study 
was performed to optimize the delivery of conformal radiation to a 4-cm 
diameter, 10-cm deep lesion by varying beam energy, x-ray beam 
filtration, target thickness and collimator design [50]. Several follow-up 
studies published by Breitkreutz et al. are described briefly below. 
The first publication by Breitkreutz et al. involved Monte Carlo 
simulations of a novel geometry, scanning electron-beam x-ray tube 
design which produces a non-coplanar linear array of x-ray beamlets 
with an energy of 200 kV. The system was designed with a gantry to 
allow 360◦rotation around the patient. The scanning nature of the x-ray 
tube allows for adjustment of beamlet dwell times to produce true in­
tensity modulated therapy. Proof-of-principle simulations were first 
used with a transmission anode design. These simulations for cylindrical 
water phantoms indicated that a skin sparing effect could be produced 
while delivering a dose rate up to 345 cGy/min for a 1-cm diameter 
spherical target, with dose rates decreasing at greater target size and 
depth [51]. 
Further work employed Monte Carlo simulations to investigate the 
treatment of lung, breast and prostate cancer using inversely optimized 
treatment planning [52]. These simulated kV treatments were compared 
to MV photon treatments for reference. Dose constraints taken from 
RTOG reports were used to evaluate the breast, lung and prostate KVAT 
plans and were met in all cases. However, the KVAT prostate plan likely 
was untreatable due to lengthy delivery times and suboptimal dosimetry 
for healthy tissues. This was due primarily to the size of the patient, the 
less penetrating radiation and avoidance of bony anatomy. One limita­
tion of this study was the use of idealized, spherical lesions as tumor 
targets. 
Lastly, Breitkreutz et al. simulated KVAT of lung tumors with realistic 
lung lesions based on CT scan data from three lung cancer patients [53]. 
In this study, the KVAT model was modified to a reflection anode. The 
location of the lung tumors varied in each patient. It was found that for a 
patient with a tumor directly next to the chest wall that the rib dose may 
exceed dose constraints. All other dose constraints were met for each 
patient. 
In summary, the KVAT x-ray source has been developed to address 
kV shortcomings by rapidly distributing multiple kV beams via elec­
tronic manipulation rather than with conventional mechanical control. 
It focuses dose deposition while dispersing entrance dose and overrides 
attenuation constraints of lower energy x-rays and thereby enables less 
expensive kV x-ray technology for radiotherapy treatment. 
The KVAT system is the main component of the linear converging 
radiotherapy system (LCRS) under development by PrecisionRT (Las 
Vegas, NV, USA). The LCRS will be capable of simultaneous tomosyn­
thesis imaging of real-time tumor motion and radiation therapy delivery 
[54]. Thanks to the addition of a detector, the source can create CT scans 
and image in real-time during therapy without a separate CT unit. 
Simulations have demonstrated the design can plan and complete 
effective therapy within one hour. Most of these models demonstrated 
equivalent performance to MV volumetric modulated arc therapy 
(VMAT) at 10% of the cost per system and likely reducing cost per pa­
tient to US$100 or less. 
It will be possible to house the LCRS in a conventional 3.2-mm thick, 
lead-lined room found in most clinics or in a mobile trailer. The treat­
ment planning software currently under development will be capable of 
optimizing a radiosurgical treatment prescription. The patient will be 
immobilized and aligned per conventional techniques. Thanks to ma­
chine learning (ML), treatment planning and delivery will be performed 
in a matter of minutes, slightly more time than it takes to do a diagnostic 
scan [55]. 
3.4.3. BriXS source for rotational breast radiotherapy 
In 2019, Sarno et al. published work investigating the use of a BriXS 
twin Compton pulsed x-ray source as an alternative source for the 
treatment of breast cancer [56]. The BriXS source has a physical foot­
print of 40 m by 20 m and produces an x-ray spectrum with a mean 
energy of 88 keV with a high photon flux suitable for radiation therapy. 
The Geant4 Monte Carlo software was used to simulate rotational 
radiotherapy of breast cancer using the BriXS source. The breast was 
modelled as a 14 cm diameter cylinder with a 1 cm circular lesion at the 
center and off-axis. The modeled beam was rotated 360◦around the 
cylinder to simulate a prone breast geometry. The main metric used to 
evaluate the simulated dose distributions was skin-to-tumor dose ratio. 
The skin-to-tumor dose ratio was 7% for the central lesion and 36% for 
the off-axis lesion. 
3.4.4. Kilovoltage intensity modulated radiotherapy 
In 2019, a group at Wayne State University presented a MC computer 
model and a proof-of-principle experiment for a kilovoltage intensity 
modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) for the treatment of GBM by means of 
CERT with iodine [57]. They used Geant4 to simulate dose deposition in 
a 15-cm diameter spherical water phantom with a 1.4-cm thick spherical 
shell mimicking the skull and a target of 1.8-cm in diameter filled with 
10 mg/mL of iodine. A CERT IMRT treatment with 17 heavily tungsten- 
filtered 120 kVp coplanar beams, the dose to the target was by a factor of 
3–4 higher than dose to the skull. The proof-of-principle experiment was 
performed with an in-house multi-rod collimator using a set of deliveries 
and phantoms with radiochromic films. A good agreement between a 3D 
conformal radiotherapy plan delivery and its MC dose calculation was 
found. The main limitation of the proof-of-principle system was found in 
the delivery time, that was from 3 to 20 h long for the IMRT plans. 
4. Benefits and drawbacks of kV radiotherapy 
While there are benefits of kV radiotherapy listed in section 1.2, 
there are also practical drawbacks to the use of kV x-rays for the treat­
ment of deep-seated tumors. The benefits and drawbacks are briefly 
summarized in qualitative and quantitative terms in Table 1. 
The first consideration is the limitation of kV x-ray beam penetration. 
Kilovoltage x-ray beams are characterized by no build-up and therefore 
maximum dose deposition Dmax occurs in a patient’s skin. This is prob­
lematic as any dose delivered to a target below the surface will neces­
sitate a larger dose to the tissue above it, which can be problematic 
unless beams from multiple directions intersecting at the target are used. 
Secondary electrons produced by kV x-rays have less energy and a 
shorter range than those created by MV x-rays resulting in a smaller 
percentage of the maximum dose being delivered at larger depths. This 
fact compounds the problem of delivering dose to a lesion below the 
surface. On the other hand, the shorter range of secondary electrons is 
Table 1 
Summary of benefits and drawbacks of kV RT compared to MV RT.   
kV RT (200 kV) 
MV RT (6 MV) 
Skin dose 
high 
(~100% of Dmax) 
low 
(40% of Dmax) 
Dose fall off 
fast 
(20% of Dmax at 10 
cm depth) 
slow 
(70% of Dmax at 10 
cm depth) 
Range of 
secondary e- 
short 
(1–2 mm) 
long 
(~1–2 cm) 
Treatment time 
long 
(~20 min) 
short 
(~2 min) 
Shielding 
thin 
(~2 mm lead) 
thick 
(~2 m concrete) 
Machine cost 
low 
(US$200,000) 
high 
(US$3,000,000)  
D.Y. Breitkreutz et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Physica Medica 79 (2020) 103–112
110
responsible for the sharper beam penumbra in kV x-ray beams compared 
to MV x-rays. When compared to MV x-rays the faster fall-off of kV x-ray 
beam dose results in lower exit dose. The lack of penetration of kV x-rays 
is the primary reason why novel kV-based technologies use more com­
plex source geometry and delivery techniques to reduce surface dose. 
Treatment times of kV x-ray sources for deep-seated lesions can also 
be problematic. Due to the physics of the bremsstrahlung process, a 
lower percentage of the kV electrons incident on the bremsstrahlung 
target is converted into photons compared to MV electrons resulting in 
the generation of a large amount of heat. Ultimately, there is a practical 
limit to the electron current at which an x-ray tube may be safely 
operated, which limits its achievable dose rate. This causes problems for 
patient treatment as delivery times will be longer than systems using MV 
x-rays. Longer treatment times will result in less patient comfort and 
problems associated with patient motion during treatment, if not 
addressed by real-time imaging. 
5. Other considerations 
Kilovoltage x-rays have been used for the treatment of cancer 
alongside MV x-rays for decades. For treatments of deep-seated tumors, 
a number of challenges for kV therapy compared to MV therapy exist, 
such as the increased treatment time, dose calculation complexity, po­
tential differences in radiobiology between kV and MV beams. Some of 
these topics for external beam kV RT are discussed here. 
5.1. Clinical consideration 
Consideration of normal tissue and tumor control probability can be 
derived from the hypo-fractionated protocols conventionally employed 
in the clinic [58]. For example, the presence of a higher cross-section of 
cortical bone to kV x-rays might limit use of certain beam angles when 
planned per accepted tolerances. Even though it is mostly accepted that 
cell killing potential for kV and MV x-rays is similar [59], some literature 
suggests differences in the radiobiology of kV and MV beams exist [60]. 
There is no compelling support in the literature for significant differ­
ences in the radiobiology of the respective beam energies. Therefore, the 
dose effects are considered similar, except for the significant enhance­
ment possible in the presence of high-Z contrast agents described in 
sections 3.1.3 and 3.3.1. 
5.2. Economic considerations 
There are three macro trends in healthcare that could affect use of a 
kV treatment system. First, cancer therapy is a growing concern as the 
populations in developing countries age. Longer life spans and changes 
with economic advances are associated with increased incidence of 
cancer, e.g., lung cancer is rising dramatically in Asia due to high to­
bacco consumption. At the same time, since standard treatment is costly 
and complex, the additional population burdens on advanced care could 
make it more inaccessible in the majority of developing economies 
where finances and infrastructure are limited. Second, the consolidation 
and squeezing of hospitals and third-party payers (insurers, businesses 
and government) caused by the 2020 pandemic has decreased cases and 
income for technical and professional oncology billing. If this trend 
continues, it will put pressure on a portion of the market and some fa­
cilities may have to forgo high-end construction and equipment. Finally, 
the successful introduction of immuno-oncologic and targeted drug 
therapies is making significant inroads in cancer care, and is also of 
import in delivering palliative care. Given their improved prospects to 
slow a tumor’s growth, a patient might live with a protracted malig­
nancy, which requires additional loco-regional control. Thus, if a new 
cancer therapy induces chronic or stable disease, such disease status can 
potentially lead to more treatments with kV radiotherapy for adjuvant or 
palliative care. 
Of note, some predictions can be made in terms of the number of 
patients treated by converging kV teletherapy, e.g. the LCRS source, in 
the USA thanks to data collected by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) 
[61]. Previous in silico studies have demonstrated that lung and breast 
are suitable sites for the effective application of converging kV tele­
therapy due to their reduced attenuation of the beams [52]. In addition, 
though the increased dose to bone might limit dose escalation for most 
treatment sites, it can be exploited for the focused kV treatments of bone 
metastases. Under the assumption that approximately 50% of cancer 
patients receive conventional radiotherapy for local control, and an 
estimated 50–90% likelihood of referrals, it can be predicted that in the 
USA alone, about 460,000 patients with bone, breast and lung cancer 
might be treated annually (Table 2). 
6. Conclusions 
In this review article, we have provided a brief overview of a number 
of radiotherapy techniques employing kilovoltage x-rays for treatments 
of cancer. We summarized the potential benefits and drawbacks of the 
currently investigated treatment modalities and discussed the impor­
tance of developing low-cost radiotherapy. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the Canada 
Research Chairs program and the Natural Sciences and Engineering 
Research Council (NSERC). 
References 
[1] Laissue JA, Blattmann H, Slatkin DN. Alban K¨ohler (1874-1947): Erfinder der 
Gittertherapie. Zeitschrift für Medizinische Physik 2012;22(2):90–9. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.zemedi.2011.07.002. 
[2] Kerr DJ, Midgley R. Can We Treat Cancer for a Dollar a Day? Guidelines for Low- 
Income Countries. N Engl J Med 2010;363(9):801–3. https://doi.org/10.1056/ 
NEJMp1002812. 
[3] Stathakis S. The Physics of Radiation Therapy. Med. Phys. 2010;37(3):1374–5. 
https://doi.org/10.1118/1.3319185. 
[4] Rand RE. Scanning electron beam computed tomography scanner with ion aided 
focusing. Google Patents 1985. 
[5] Van Lysel MS, Solomon EG, Wilfley BP, Dutta A, Speidel MA. Performance 
assessment of the scanning beam digital X-ray (SBDX) system. Proceedings of the 
SPIE - The International Society for Optical Engineering. 1997;3032:161-70. 
[6] Speidel MA, Wilfley BP, Star-Lack JM, Heanue JA, Van Lysel MS. Scanning-beam 
digital x-ray (SBDX) technology for interventional and diagnostic cardiac 
angiography: SBDX technology for interventional cardiac angiography. Med. Phys. 
2006;33(8):2714–27. https://doi.org/10.1118/1.2208736. 
[7] Dinsmore M, Harte KJ, Sliski AP, Smith DO, Nomikos PM, Dalterio MJ, Boom AJ, 
Leonard WF, Oettinger PE, Yanch JC. A new miniature x-ray source for interstitial 
radiosurgery: Device description. Med. Phys. 1996;23(1):45–52. https://doi.org/ 
10.1118/1.597790. 
[8] Rivard MJ, Davis SD, DeWerd LA, Rusch TW, Axelrod S. Calculated and measured 
brachytherapy dosimetry parameters in water for the Xoft Axxent X-Ray Source: An 
electronic brachytherapy sourcea): Dosimetry parameters for the Xoft Axxent X- 
Ray Source. Med. Phys. 2006;33(11):4020–32. https://doi.org/10.1118/ 
1.2357021. 
[9] Lei W, Li C, Cole MT, Qu Ke, Ding S, Zhang Y, Warner JH, Zhang X, Wang B, 
Milne WI. A graphene-based large area surface-conduction electron emission 
display. Carbon 2013;56:255–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2013.01.004. 
[10] Heo SH, Ihsan A, Cho SO. Transmission-type microfocus x-ray tube using carbon 
nanotube field emitters. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2007;90(18):183109. https://doi.org/ 
10.1063/1.2735549. 
Table 2 
Projections on annual kV teletherapy cases for the USA.  
Site 
Total Cases1 
Treatable fraction 2 
Projected # patients 
Bone, secondary 
208,000  
0.90 
187,000 
Breast 
266,000  
0.50 
133,000 
Lung, primary 
234,000  
0.60 
140,000 
Total 
708,000  
460,000  
1 National Cancer Institute, SEER Cancer Statistics Review [61]. 
2 Treatable fraction based on advanced stage, technical feasibility and referral 
patterns. 
D.Y. Breitkreutz et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Physica Medica 79 (2020) 103–112
111
[11] Parmee RJ, Collins CM, Milne WI, Cole MT. X-ray generation using carbon 
nanotubes. Nano Convergence 2015;2(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40580-014- 
0034-2. 
[12] Kim HJ, Ha JM, Heo SH, Cho SO. Small-Sized Flat-Tip CNT Emitters for 
Miniaturized X-Ray Tubes. J Nanomater 2012;2012:1–6. https://doi.org/10.1155/ 
2012/854602. 
[13] Serduc R, Br¨auer-Krisch E, Siegbahn EA, Bouchet A, Pouyatos B, Carron R, et al. 
High-precision radiosurgical dose delivery by interlaced microbeam arrays of high- 
flux low-energy synchrotron x-rays. PLoS ONE. 2010;5:1-12. 
[14] Br¨auer-Krisch E, Adam J-F, Alagoz E, Bartzsch S, Crosbie J, DeWagter C, 
Dipuglia A, Donzelli M, Doran S, Fournier P, Kalef-Ezra J, Kock A, Lerch M, 
McErlean C, Oelfke U, Olko P, Petasecca M, Povoli M, Rosenfeld A, Siegbahn EA, 
Sporea D, Stugu B. Medical physics aspects of the synchrotron radiation therapies: 
Microbeam radiation therapy (MRT) and synchrotron stereotactic radiotherapy 
(SSRT). Physica Med 2015;31(6):568–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ejmp.2015.04.016. 
[15] Laissue JA, Bartzsch S, Blattmann H, Br¨auer-Krisch E, Bravin A, Dall´ery D, 
Djonov V, Hanson AL, Hopewell JW, Kaser-Hotz B, Keyril¨ainen J, Laissue PP, 
Miura M, Serduc R, Siegbahn AE, Slatkin DN. Response of the rat spinal cord to X- 
ray microbeams. Radiother Oncol 2013;106(1):106–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
radonc.2012.12.007. 
[16] Huang Z, Ruth RD. Laser-Electron Storage Ring. Phys Rev Lett 1998;80(5):976–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.80.976. 
[17] Bech M, Bunk O, David C, Ruth R, Rifkin J, Loewen R, Feidenhans’l R, Pfeiffer F. 
Hard X-ray phase-contrast imaging with the Compact Light Source based on 
inverse Compton X-rays. J Synchrotron Rad 2009;16(1):43–7. https://doi.org/ 
10.1107/S090904950803464X. 
[18] Drebot I, Bacci A, Bosotti A, Broggi F, Canella F, Cardarelli P, et al. BriXs ultra high 
flux inverse compton source based on modified push-pull energy recovery linacs. 
Instruments. 2019;3:49. 
[19] Pilar A, Gupta M, Laskar SG, Laskar S. Intraoperative radiotherapy: review of 
techniques and results. Ecancermedicalscience. 2017;11. 
[20] Dickler A, Ivanov O, Francescatti D. Intraoperative radiation therapy in the 
treatment of early-stage breast cancer utilizing xoft axxent electronic 
brachytherapy. World J Surg Onc 2009;7(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-7819- 
7-24. 
[21] Boese A, Johnson F, Ebert T, Mahmoud-Pashazadeh A, Arens C, Friebe M. Trans- 
oral miniature X-ray radiation delivery system with endoscopic optical feedback. 
Int J CARS 2017;12(11):1995–2002. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11548-017-1601-x. 
[22] Mahmoud-Pashazadeh A, Illanes A, Joseph FJ, van Oepen A, Boese A, Friebe M. 
Miniature CNT-based X-ray tube: assessment for use in intraoperative radiation 
therapy: Miniature CNT-based X-ray tube. Current Directions in Biomedical 
Engineering. 2017;3:643-6. 
[23] McGregor S, Minni J, Herold D. Superficial radiation therapy for the treatment of 
nonmelanoma skin cancers. J Clinic Aesth Dermatol 2015;8:12. 
[24] Meitner L. Über die entstehung der β-strahl-spektren radioaktiver substanzen. 
Zeitschrift für Physik. 1922;9:131–44. 
[25] Mesa AV, Norman A, Solberg TD, Demarco JJ, Smathers JB. Dose distributions 
using kilovoltage x-rays and dose enhancement from iodine contrast agents. Phys 
Med Biol 1999;44(8):1955–68. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-9155/44/8/308. 
[26] Rose JH, Norman A, Ingram M, Aoki C, Solberg T, Mesa A. First radiotherapy of 
human metastatic brain tumors delivered by a computerized tomography scanner 
(CTRx). Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45(5):1127–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0360-3016(99)00347-8. 
[27] Norman A, Ingram M, Skillen RG, Freshwater DB, Iwamoto KS, Solberg T. X-ray 
phototherapy for canine brain masses. Radiat. Oncol. Investig. 1997;5(1):8–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1520-6823(1997)5:1<8::AID-ROI2>3.0.CO;2-1. 
[28] Seo J, Son J, Cho Y, Park N, Kim DW, Kim J, Yoon M. Kilovoltage radiotherapy for 
companion animals: dosimetric comparison of 300 kV, 450 kV, and 6 MV X-ray 
beams. J Vet Sci 2018;19(4):550. https://doi.org/10.4142/jvs.2018.19.4.550. 
[29] Hainfeld JF, Slatkin DN, Smilowitz HM. The use of gold nanoparticles to enhance 
radiotherapy in mice. Phys Med Biol 2004;49(18):N309–15. https://doi.org/ 
10.1088/0031-9155/49/18/N03. 
[30] Haume K, Rosa S, Grellet S, ´Smiałek MA, Butterworth KT, Solov’yov AV, Prise KM, 
Golding J, Mason NJ. Gold nanoparticles for cancer radiotherapy: a review. Cancer 
Nano 2016;7(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12645-016-0021-x. 
[31] Jain S, Coulter JA, Hounsell AR, Butterworth KT, McMahon SJ, Hyland WB, 
Muir MF, Dickson GR, Prise KM, Currell FJ, O’Sullivan JM, Hirst DG. Cell-Specific 
Radiosensitization by Gold Nanoparticles at Megavoltage Radiation Energies. Int J 
Rad Oncol Biol Phys 2011;79(2):531–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijrobp.2010.08.044. 
[32] Laissue JA, Geiser G, Spanne PO, Dilmanian FA, Gebbers J-O, Geiser M, Wu X-Y, 
Makar MS, Micca PL, Nawrocky MM, Joel DD, Slatkin DN. Neuropathology of 
ablation of rat gliosarcomas and contiguous brain tissues using a microplanar beam 
of synchrotron-wiggler-generated X rays. Int. J. Cancer 1998;78(5):654–60. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0215(19981123)78:5<654::AID-IJC21>3.0. 
CO;2-L. 
[33] Dilmanian FA, Button TM, Duc GL, Zhong N, Pe˜na LA, Smith JAL, et al. Response of 
rat intracranial 9L gliosarcoma to microbeam radiation therapy. Neuro Oncol 
2002;4:26–38. 
[34] Dilmanian FA, Morris GM, Zhong N, Bacarian T, Hainfeld JF, Kalef-Ezra J, 
Brewington LJ, Tammam J, Rosen EM. Murine EMT-6 Carcinoma: High 
Therapeutic Efficacy of Microbeam Radiation Therapy. Radiat Res 2003;159(5): 
632–41. https://doi.org/10.1667/0033-7587(2003)159[0632:MECHTE]2.0.CO;2. 
[35] Hadsell M, Cao G, Zhang J, Burk L, Schreiber T, Schreiber E, Chang S, Lu J, Zhou O. 
Pilot study for compact microbeam radiation therapy using a carbon nanotube field 
emission micro-CT scanner: Pilot study for MRT using CNT micro-CT scanner. Med 
Phys 2014;41(6Part1):061710. https://doi.org/10.1118/1.4873683. 
[36] Zhang L, Yuan H, Burk LM, Inscoe CR, Hadsell MJ, Chtcheprov P, Lee YZ, Lu J, 
Chang S, Zhou O. Image-guided microbeam irradiation to brain tumour bearing 
mice using a carbon nanotube x-ray source array. Phys Med Biol 2014;59(5): 
1283–303. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-9155/59/5/1283. 
[37] Yuan H, Zhang L, Frank JE, Inscoe CR, Burk LM, Hadsell M, et al. Treating brain 
tumor with microbeam radiation generated by a compact carbon-nanotube-based 
irradiator: initial radiation efficacy study. Radiation research. 2015;184:322-33. 
[38] Zhang L, Yuan H, Inscoe C, Chtcheprov P, Hadsell M, Lee Y, Lu J, Chang S, Zhou O. 
Nanotube x-ray for cancer therapy: a compact microbeam radiation therapy system 
for brain tumor treatment. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 2014;14(12):1411–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1586/14737140.2014.978293. 
[39] Le Duc G, Miladi I, Alric C, Mowat P, Br¨auer-Krisch E, Bouchet A, Khalil E, 
Billotey C, Janier M, Lux F, Epicier T, Perriat P, Roux S, Tillement O. Toward an 
Image-Guided Microbeam Radiation Therapy Using Gadolinium-Based 
Nanoparticles. ACS Nano 2011;5(12):9566–74. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
nn202797h. 
[40] Todd P, Winchell H, Feola J, Jones G. Inactivation by pulsed high-intensity x-rays 
of human cells cultured in vitro. RADIATION RESEARCH: RADIATION RESEARCH 
SOC 2021 SPRING RD, STE 600, OAK BROOK, IL 60521; 1967. p. 644-&. 
[41] TOWN CD. Effect of High Dose Rates on Survival of Mammalian Cells. Nature 
1967;215(5103):847–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/215847a0. 
[42] Favaudon V, Caplier L, Monceau V, Pouzoulet F, Sayarath M, Fouillade C, et al. 
Ultrahigh dose-rate FLASH irradiation increases the differential response between 
normal and tumor tissue in mice. Science translational medicine. 2014;6:245ra93- 
ra93. 
[43] Montay-Gruel Pierre, Bouchet Audrey, Jaccard Maud, Patin David, 
Serduc Raphael, Aim Warren, Petersson Kristoffer, Petit Benoit, Bailat Claude, 
Bourhis Jean, Br¨auer-Krisch Elke, Vozenin Marie-Catherine. X-rays can trigger the 
FLASH effect: Ultra-high dose-rate synchrotron light source prevents normal brain 
injury after whole brain irradiation in mice. Radiother Oncol 2018;129(3):582–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2018.08.016. 
[44] Bazalova-Carter Magdalena, Esplen Nolan. On the capabilities of conventional x- 
ray tubes to deliver ultra-high (FLASH) dose rates. Med. Phys. 2019;46(12): 
5690–5. https://doi.org/10.1002/mp.13858. 
[45] Lindfors Karen K, Boone John M, Nelson Thomas R, Yang Kai, Kwan Alexander LC, 
Miller DeWitt F. Dedicated Breast CT: Initial Clinical Experience. Radiology 2008; 
246(3):725–33. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2463070410. 
[46] Prionas Nicolas D, McKenney Sarah E, Stern Robin L, Boone John M. Kilovoltage 
Rotational External Beam Radiotherapy on a Breast Computed Tomography 
Platform: A Feasibility Study. Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys 2012;84(2):533–9. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2011.12.042. 
[47] Buonanno F, Sarno A, De Lucia PA, Di Lillo F, Masi M, Di Franco F, Mettivier G, 
Russo P. Rotational radiotherapy of breast cancer with polyenergetic kilovoltage X- 
ray beams: An experimental and Monte Carlo phantom study. Phys Med 2019;62: 
63–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2019.05.002. 
[48] Di Lillo Francesca, Mettivier Giovanni, Sarno Antonio, Castriconi Roberta, 
Russo Paolo. Towards breast cancer rotational radiotherapy with synchrotron 
radiation. Phys Med 2017;41:20–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2017.06.009. 
[49] Di Lillo F, Mettivier G, Castriconi R, Sarno A, Stevenson AW, Hall CJ, et al. 
Synchrotron radiation external beam rotational radiotherapy of breast cancer: 
proof of principle. Journal of synchrotron radiation. 2018;25:857-68. 
[50] Bazalova-Carter Magdalena, Weil Michael D, Breitkreutz Dylan Yamabe, 
Wilfley Brian P, Graves Edward E. Feasibility of external beam radiation therapy to 
deep-seated targets with kilovoltage x-rays. Med Phys 2017;44(2):597–607. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/mp.12047. 
[51] Breitkreutz Dylan Y, Weil Michael D, Zavgorodni Sergei, Bazalova- 
Carter Magdalena. Monte Carlo simulations of a kilovoltage external beam 
radiotherapy system on phantoms and breast patients. Med Phys 2017;44(12): 
6548–59. https://doi.org/10.1002/mp.12619. 
[52] Breitkreutz Dylan Y, Renaud Marc-Andr´e, Seuntjens Jan, Weil Michael D, 
Zavgorodni Sergei, Bazalova-Carter Magdalena. Inverse optimization of low-cost 
kilovoltage x-ray arc therapy plans. Med Phys 2018;45(11):5161–71. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/mp.13153. 
[53] Breitkreutz DY, Renaud M-A, Weil MD, Zavgorodni S, Han J, Baxter H, et al. Monte 
Carlo calculated kilovoltage x-ray arc therapy plans for three lung cancer patients. 
Biomedical Physics & Engineering Express. 2019;5:065022. 
[54] Stalbaum T, Boyd D, Weil M, Chen H, Plies M, Song S, et al. 200 kV x-ray source for 
radiotherapy and imaging: preliminary results and discussion. Medical Imaging 
2020: Physics of Medical Imaging: International Society for Optics and Photonics; 
2020. p. 113123I. 
[55] Zankowski C, Adelsheim C, Pyyry J, Kuusela E. Radiotherapy treatment planning 
using artificial intelligence (ai) engines. Google Patents; 2019. 
[56] Sarno A, Mettivier G, Russo P, Drebot I, Petrillo V, Bacci A, et al. Kilovoltage 
rotational radiotherapy of breast cancer with the BriXS source. Journal of 
Instrumentation. 2020;15:C05012. 
[57] Loughery B, Halford R, Dess K, Rakowski J, Cox M, Koh J, et al. A proof of concept 
kilovoltage intensity modulated radiotherapy platform for the treatment of 
glioblastoma multiforme. Biomedical Physics & Engineering Express. 2019;5: 
055013. 
[58] Bentzen Søren M, Constine Louis S, Deasy Joseph O, Eisbruch Avi, 
Jackson Andrew, Marks Lawrence B, Ten Haken Randall K, Yorke Ellen D. 
Quantitative Analyses of Normal Tissue Effects in the Clinic (QUANTEC): An 
Introduction to the Scientific Issues. Int J Rad Oncol Biol Phys 2010;76(3):S3–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.09.040. 
D.Y. Breitkreutz et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
Physica Medica 79 (2020) 103–112
112
[59] Icrp I. Publication 61: Annual limits on intake of radionuclides for workers based 
on the 1990 recommendations. New York: Pergamon Press; 1990. 
[60] Amols HI, Lagueux B, Cagna D. Radiobiological Effectiveness (RBE) of Megavoltage 
X-Ray and Electron Beams in Radiotherapy. Radiat Res 1986;105(1):58. https:// 
doi.org/10.2307/3576725. 
[61] Noone A, Howlader N, Krapcho M, Miller D, Brest A, Yu M, et al. SEER cancer 
statistics review, 1975–2015. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 2018. p. 4. 
[62] Sethi Anil, Emami Bahman, Small Jr William, Thomas Tarita. Intraoperative 
Radiotherapy With INTRABEAM: Technical and Dosimetric Considerations. Front 
Oncol 2018;8(74). https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2018.00074. 
[63] Esplen Nolan, Mendonca Marc, Bazalova-Carter Magdalena. Physics and biology of 
ultrahigh dose-rate (FLASH) radiotherapy: a topical review. Phys Med Biol 2020. In 
press. 
D.Y. Breitkreutz et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
