Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
Available online 14 August 2023
2452-199X/© 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Review article 
From oncolytic peptides to oncolytic polymers: A new paradigm 
for oncotherapy 
Hanmeng Liu a, Wei Shen a,d,e,**, Wanguo Liu c, Zexin Yang a, Dengke Yin a,e,***, 
Chunsheng Xiao b,* 
a School of Pharmacy, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei, 230012, China 
b Key Laboratory of Polymer Ecomaterials, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, 130022, China 
c Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, China-Japan Union Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, 130033, China 
d Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Preparation Technology and Application, Hefei, Anhui, 230012, China 
e Engineering Technology Research Center of Modernized Pharmaceutics, Anhui Education Department (AUCM), Hefei, Anhui, 230012, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Oncolytic polymers 
Oncolytic peptides 
Cancer therapy 
Therapeutic resistance 
Immunotherapy 
A B S T R A C T   
Traditional cancer therapy methods, especially those directed against specific intracellular targets or signaling 
pathways, are not powerful enough to overcome tumor heterogeneity and therapeutic resistance. Oncolytic 
peptides that can induce membrane lysis-mediated cancer cell death and subsequent anticancer immune re­
sponses, has provided a new paradigm for cancer therapy. However, the clinical application of oncolytic peptides 
is always limited by some factors such as unsatisfactory bio-distribution, poor stability, and off-target toxicity. To 
overcome these limitations, oncolytic polymers stand out as prospective therapeutic materials owing to their 
high stability, chemical versatility, and scalable production capacity, which has the potential to drive a revo­
lution in cancer treatment. This review provides an overview of the mechanism and structure-activity rela­
tionship of oncolytic peptides. Then the oncolytic peptides-mediated combination therapy and the nano-delivery 
strategies for oncolytic peptides are summarized. Emphatically, the current research progress of oncolytic 
polymers has been highlighted. Lastly, the challenges and prospects in the development of oncolytic polymers are 
discussed.   
1. Introduction 
Cancer is a major and increasing public health problem worldwide, 
which leads to high morbidity, mortality, and economic burden. In 
2020, there were an estimated 19.3 million new cases and 10.0 million 
deaths from cancer worldwide, and the annual number of new cancer 
cases would increase to 28.4 million by 2040 if the incidence rates 
remain unchanged [1]. At present, first-line cancer treatments including 
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and immunotherapy have improved out­
comes for cancer patients to some extent [2]. However, these treatments 
still have some limitations, for instance, chemotherapy and radiotherapy 
usually lead to therapeutic resistance as well as severe side effects, while 
immunotherapy only has low response rates in clinics [3–5]. Moreover, 
due to the genetic/epigenetic diversity of cancer cells and high selective 
pressure imposed by the tumor microenvironment (TME), extensive 
tumor heterogeneity was found in different patients, different tumor 
sites, and even within a single tumor [6–8]. For example, vascular ab­
normalities and high interstitial fluid pressure limit the penetration of 
traditional drugs to the tumor center, and the cancer cells in the hypoxic 
regions are thought to remain dormant and probably facilitate tumor 
invasion [9,10]. As a result, treatment-effect heterogeneity would be 
caused by tumor heterogeneity, and the therapy-resistant residual can­
cer cells will eventually lead to tumor recurrence and metastasis, which 
are the main reasons for treatment failure and death associated with 
cancer [11]. Therefore, the development of a new general strategy has 
become urgent to overcome the clonal heterogeneity or resistance. 
Peer review under responsibility of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. 
* Corresponding author. Key Laboratory of Polymer Ecomaterials, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, 130022, 
China. 
** Corresponding author. School of Pharmacy, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei, 230012, China. 
*** Corresponding author. School of Pharmacy, Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei, 230012, China. 
E-mail addresses: wshen@ahtcm.edu.cn (W. Shen), yindengke@ahtcm.edu.cn (D. Yin), xiaocs@ciac.ac.cn (C. Xiao).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Bioactive Materials 
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/bioactive-materials 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2023.08.007 
Received 17 February 2023; Received in revised form 18 July 2023; Accepted 8 August 2023   
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
207
Over the past two decades, a novel class of anti-tumor agents, named 
oncolytic peptides, has attracted much attention and interest in both 
basic research and clinical application (Scheme 1). Oncolytic peptides 
are derived from, or inspired by, natural host defense peptides (HDPs)/ 
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) that are produced in a wide variety of life 
forms. These peptides exhibit plasma membrane-lytic activity specif­
ically targeting malignant cells [12,13]. Oncolytic peptides typically are 
composed of positively charged amino acids and hydrophobic amino 
acids, with a cationic amphiphilic structure and high penetration [14]. 
Due to the plenty of negative charges on the tumor cells’ surface, 
oncolytic peptides would be adsorbed onto the membrane surface via 
electrostatic interaction firstly, eventually resulting in perturbation of 
the membrane and tumor cells lysis after the membrane-bound peptides 
reached a threshold concentration [15,16]. Unlike conventional cyto­
toxic agents, targeted agents, hormone-based drugs, and antibody drugs 
that act within various signaling pathways or interact with specific 
intracellular targets, the targets of oncolytic peptides are the negatively 
charged membrane components, which are uniquely but homogenously 
present on almost all cancer cells [13]. Because it would be probably a 
“costly” solution for most cancer cells to reprogram the organization 
and/or composition of the membrane lipids, the mode of action of 
oncolytic peptides not only appears to bypass the tumor innate therapy 
resistance but also reduce the risk of acquired resistance [17,18]. And 
this relatively non-specific mode of action endows oncolytic peptides 
with the ability to kill tumor cells within different TME and even the 
“dormant” tumor cells or cancer stem cells, which makes them prom­
ising agents for destroying the tumors with high heterogeneity [13,19, 
20]. This strategy should be superior to the traditional photodynamic 
therapy (PDT), photothermal therapy (PTT), and chemodynamic ther­
apy (CDT), whose antitumor effects are highly limited by the penetra­
tion depth of light or reductive TME [21–25]. In addition, besides acting 
directly on cancer cells and causing oncolysis, some oncolytic peptides 
can also induce the exposure of tumor-associated antigen (TAA) and 
release of danger-associated molecular pattern molecules (DAMPs) from 
dying tumor cells, thereby triggering systemic anticancer immune re­
sponses [26]. 
Although oncolytic peptides have broad prospects in combating 
malignant tumors, clinical application of the oncolytic peptides is still 
hindered by the unsatisfactory bio-distribution, poor bioactivity & sta­
bility in vivo, toxicity to normal cells, and high manufacturing costs 
[27–29]. Thanks to the recent rapid development of nanotechnology, 
various nano-delivery systems have been designed for improving the 
anticancer efficacy of oncolytic peptides in vivo. In a nutshell, these 
strategies can prevent the premature release of oncolytic peptides dur­
ing blood circulation, realize the physiology/external stimuli-controlled 
release of oncolytic peptides within solid tumors, protect oncolytic 
peptides from proteolytic attack and reduce the systemic toxicity, etc 
[30,31]. However, these nano-delivery systems do not address the issue 
of high-cost peptide-based drugs, and fabrication of the sophisticated 
oncolytic peptides nano-assemblies may in turn increase the synthetic 
complexity and total cost [31]. As a result, recently we and other labs 
have focused on developing oncolytic peptides-mimicking synthetic 
amphiphilic cationic polymers (defined as oncolytic polymers) for 
tumor treatment [32,33]. Due to the good chemical modifiability, high 
stability, low cost, and ease of mass production and storage, oncolytic 
polymers are emerging as a potential alternative to oncolytic peptides, 
which both represent a promising new therapeutic paradigm to com­
plement traditional cancer treatment. 
The advances in HDPs/AMPs with anticancer activity have been 
summarized in several review papers, which either focus on the tumor- 
suppressor mechanisms (membranolytic or non-membranolytic mode), 
factors affecting the anticancer activities, or the application in different 
tumor types [15,18,19,29,34–40]. Furthermore, Yang and Pan et al. 
recently summarized the application and prospects of AMPs-mimicking 
synthetic macromolecules and other peptidomimetics in combating 
cancer/microbial infection, respectively [32,41]. However, oncolytic 
peptides, as a major member of the HDPs/AMPs family possessing 
membrane lytic activity, and the emerging oncolytic polymers in the 
past few years also require special attention and systematic under­
standing. In this review, we provide overviews of the oncolytic peptides 
Scheme 1. Timeline illustrating the history of the development from oncolytic peptides to oncolytic polymers.  
Scheme 2. Schematic overview of the development of oncolytic peptides & 
oncolytic polymers and potential opportunities for oncolytic polymers. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
208
and oncolytic polymers-based therapeutics for cancer therapy (Scheme 
2). Specifically, the function mechanisms of oncolytic peptides and 
strategies for optimizing the biological activity of oncolytic peptides 
were first summed up. Then we will review the application of oncolytic 
peptides in combination with cancer therapy, emphasize the advances in 
stimuli-responsive oncolytic peptides and delivery strategies for onco­
lytic peptides, highlight the latest research development of oncolytic 
polymers, and discuss the challenges as well as future outlook in onco­
lytic polymers-mediated cancer therapies. 
2. Function mechanism and structure-activity relationship of 
oncolytic peptides 
2.1. Membrane differences between normal cells and cancer cells 
Based on the differences in components and structure of plasma 
membranes between normal cells and cancer cells, oncolytic peptides 
may achieve some degree of selectivity against tumor cells. First, it was 
reported that cancer cells possess more negative charges on the outer 
surface of the plasma membrane, which lead to a stronger electrostatic 
attraction between cationic oncolytic peptides and tumor cells [42]. The 
increased negative charges on tumor cells come from the following 
reasons: (1) anionic phosphatidylserine is mainly located in the inner 
leaflet of the membrane of normal cells, while the outer leaflet contains 
neutral lipids including sphingomyelin and phosphatidylcholine. How­
ever, cancer cells lose this membrane asymmetry due to the stress con­
ditions (e.g., acidity, hypoxia, and excess reactive oxygen species (ROS)) 
in the TME, resulting in plenty of phosphatidylserine exposed on the 
outer leaflet of the membrane [43,44]; (2) sialic acid, an anionic motif 
linked to O-glycosylated mucins and gangliosides, is overexpressed on 
external surfaces of many cancer cell lines [45–47]; (3) abundant pro­
teoglycans are located on external surfaces of tumor cells, which contain 
high negatively charged glycosaminoglycan motif such as heparan sul­
fate and chondroitin sulfate [48,49]; (4) hyaluronan, an anionic 
glycosaminoglycan adsorbed to membrane protein via non-covalently 
interaction, is also overexpressed within tumor tissue [50] (Fig. 1). 
Although most studies show that the increased negative charges on 
cancer cells’ membrane lay the foundation for the oncolytic 
peptides-mediated oncolysis, Fadnes et al. reported that high expression 
of heparan sulfate on the outer membrane surface would keep the LfcinB 
and KW5 peptide away from the lipid bilayer and finally inhibit their 
oncolytic activity [51]. Therefore, more detailed research is needed to 
further clarify the exact role of each negatively charged component on 
tumor cells membrane. 
Apart from the difference in charge properties of cells membrane, it 
was reported that cancer cells have more microvilli coated on the surface 
than normal cells, and this morphological structure provided tumor cells 
with a larger oncolytic peptides-accessible surface area [52,53]. Since 
oncolytic 
peptides-mediated 
membrane 
disruption 
is 
a 
concentration-dependent process, the increased membrane surface area 
favors the adsorption of oncolytic peptides and makes it easier to reach 
the threshold peptide concentration on the membrane surface [16,54, 
55]. 
The third reason for the selectivity of oncolytic peptides is the 
increased fluidity of the plasma membrane in many malignant cell lines 
such as lung cancer, lymphomas, and gliomas [42,56,57]. This could be 
because membrane fluidity and stiffness are mainly regulated by the 
membrane cholesterol content, and both of these cancer cells display the 
characteristic of decreased cholesterol levels. Conversely, a high level of 
sterol is present in the membrane of normal eukaryotic cells such as 
erythrocytes, which prevents the membrane-adsorbed oncolytic pep­
tides from inserting into the interior of the lipid bilayer and thereby 
increases the tolerance of normal cells [58]. However, lipid rafts, the 
detergent-resistant region in the plasma membrane composed of 
cholesterol and sphingolipids, are recently found to significantly in­
crease in the prostate and breast cancer cells [59]. The abundant 
membrane lipid rafts can increase the mechanical durability of the 
membrane structure, thereby making these cell lines less susceptible to 
oncolytic peptides-mediated membrane damage [60–62]. 
Therefore, the differences in outer membrane composition and 
structure have been implicated to make cancer cells more sensitive to 
membranolysis than normal cells. Though there are some exceptions for 
the interaction between different cancer cell lines with certain oncolytic 
peptides, the membrane-related factors are suggested to influence the 
oncolytic peptides-membrane interaction in a general manner [19]. 
Briefly, the abundant anionic components and microvilli on the mem­
brane can drive the attraction and accumulation of cationic oncolytic 
peptides on the cell surface, while the increased membrane fluidity 
owing to reduced cholesterol content eventually facilitates insertion of 
oncolytic peptides into the lipid bilayer. Additionally, some oncolytic 
peptides can specifically bind to the overexpressed membrane proteins 
on cancer cells’ surface, for example, the NK-2 peptide derived from 
NK-lysin was reported to co-localize with P-glycoprotein on the 
multi-drug resistance (MDR) cancer cells, thereby efficiently eradicating 
the P-glycoprotein-positive MDR cells within the heterogeneous tumor 
[63]. 
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram illustrating the difference 
between normal cells membrane and cancer cells 
membrane. Briefly, the exposed negatively charged 
phosphatidylserine on membrane outer leaflet, the 
increased expression levels of anionic components (e. 
g., sialic acid and glycosaminoglycan attached/ 
adsorbed to glycoproteins and/or glycolipids) on 
membrane outer leaflet, the presence of microvilli on 
the membrane, the decreased cholesterol level and 
increased 
expression 
level 
of 
P-glycoprotein 
contribute to the selectivity of oncolytic peptides 
(oncolytic polymers) towards tumor cells.   
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
209
2.2. Membranolytic mode of actions of oncolytic peptides 
Compared to normal eukaryotic cells, most of bacteria and cancer 
cells have similar membrane structures and properties, which also ex­
plains why oncolytic peptides can induce cancer membrane lysis in a 
similar mechanism to the AMPs-mediated disruption of bacterial mem­
brane [18]. Although the underlying interaction mechanism between 
oncolytic peptides and plasma membrane is not fully elucidated, several 
techniques have been employed to characterize the mode of action of 
oncolytic peptides towards tumor cells, such as X-ray diffraction, surface 
plasmon resonance, attenuated total reflectance-fourier transform 
infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy, confocal fluorescence microscopy, 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM), circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy, flow cytometry and mo­
lecular dynamics simulation (MD simulation), etc. [64–70]. In general, 
the oncolytic peptides-mediated cancer cell killing can be roughly 
divided into four main stages: (1) oncolytic peptides are attracted to the 
cancer cell surface via electrostatic interaction between the negatively 
charged cytoplasmic membrane components and the positively charged 
peptides residues [65]; (2) additional hydrophobic interactions between 
the phospholipid hydrophobic tail and the residues of the non-polar 
peptide serve to facilitate the embedding of oncolytic peptides into 
tumor cells membranes via multiple theoretical models [38]; (3) the 
membrane curvature would be changed, subsequently, the structure and 
integrity of the cells membrane were disrupted (e.g., blebbing, pore 
formation, and vascularization) [71]; (4) tumor cells are lysed and the 
intracellular contents would be released [68]. It is worth mentioning 
that most of oncolytic peptides are unfolded and inactive in an aqueous 
solution, whereas it would preferentially fold at the surface of tumor 
cells, thereby adopting a specifically amphiphilic secondary structure (e. 
g., helical conformation or β-structure) capable of membrane lysis [69]. 
For instance, Schneider et al. have designed an 18-residue SVS-1 onco­
lytic peptide, which is unstructured in solution or the presence of neutral 
lipid vesicles [67]. However, when SVS-1 was incubated with tumor 
cells membrane-mimicking negatively charged lipid vesicles, the 
resulting CD spectrum suggested that SVS-1 was driven by electrostatic 
interaction to adopt a β-sheet structure consistent with hairpin forma­
tion. Since SVS-2 (a control peptide that adopts a mixture of β-sheet 
structure and random coil, but is unable to fold into a hairpin confor­
mation) was inefficient to induce leakage of negatively charged lipo­
somes or kill any of the tumor cell lines, the β-hairpin conformation 
folding process is requisite for realizing the membranolytic function of 
the SVS-1 peptide. 
Among the above-mentioned theoretical modes of action between 
oncolytic peptides and cancer cells membrane, the most common 
models are the carpet-like model, barrel-stave model, and toroidal pore 
model (Fig. 2). In the carpet-like model, cationic oncolytic peptides (e. 
g., ovispirin, cecropins, dermaseptin, and LL-37 peptides) are usually 
performed as highly helical structures, which bind to the negatively 
charged membrane surface via interacting mainly with the headgroup of 
the phospholipids. According to the results of linear dichroism (LD) 
spectroscopy and MD simulation, the helical parts of these oncolytic 
peptides basically align parallel to the surface of tumor cells in a carpet- 
like fashion [69,72–75]. After the critical peptides concentration is 
reached, the phospholipids order and packing would be disrupted, 
which could be confirmed by the perturbations of the phosphate & 
choline groups of the lipids and the lipid ester & acyl chain vibrations 
observed by ATR-FTIR spectroscopy. As a result, the cell membrane 
stability and permeability would be disturbed, thereby leading to 
membrane disintegration in a detergent-like manner and tumor cell 
lysis. In the barrel-stave model, oncolytic peptides are aggregated and 
inserted perpendicularly into the membrane, meanwhile, the hydro­
phobic region of the amphiphilic peptides tends to bind to hydrophobic 
phospholipid tails [76,77]. As a result, a peptide bundle would be 
formed in the membrane with a central aqueous lumen, much like a 
barrel composed of helical peptides as the staves. And the pore size 
would become larger with the increased number of aggregated oncolytic 
peptides, finally resulting in cytoplasmic contents leakage and cell death 
[61,78]. This mechanism requires that the peptides possess sufficient 
backbone length to span the cell’s membrane lipid bilayer, therefore this 
model usually applies to the peptides containing more than twenty 
amino acid residues (e.g., alamethicin) [61,70,79]. According to the 
data of oriented circular dichroism, neutron scattering, and 
synchrotron-based X-ray scattering, the alamethicin-induced trans­
membrane pores consist of 3–11 parallel helical alamethicin molecules, 
which would be modulated by changing the composition of bilayer 
lipids. In addition, the approximate thickness of the transmembrane 
channel is 1.1 nm, which is consistent with the diameter of the alame­
thicin helix [76]. Differing from the barrel-stave model, in the toroidal 
pore model, oncolytic peptides always bind to the negative phospholipid 
head groups throughout the process of inserting these peptides into the 
lipid bilayer. Due to the continuously increased degree of membrane 
bending, the aqueous toroidal pore is formed, which is composed of the 
membrane lipid head groups and the embedded peptides [41,80]. In this 
process, the positively polar faces of the oncolytic peptides associate 
with the negatively polar head groups of the phospholipids. The lipids 
then tilt and connect the two leaflets of the membrane, creating a 
continuous bend in the shape of a toroidal pore from top to bottom. 
Because the pore is lined by both the cationic peptides and the anionic 
lipid head groups, the peptide charges could be screened and masked, 
thereby leading to a reduction in Coulomb energy and maintaining the 
toroidal pore stability [76]. Finally, cancer cells could be killed because 
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram illustrating the membranolytic mechanism of actions of oncolytic peptides and some representative acting modes of oncolytic peptides.  
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
210
of the loss of membrane integrity, depolarization of the plasma mem­
brane, and leakage of intracellular contents. In addition, the generated 
toroidal pore was unstable due to the increased membrane tension, 
which may lead to membrane perturbation and pore disintegration. As a 
result, some peptides (e.g., magainins 2, protegrin-1) may be released 
into the cells and further bind to the intracellular targets, such as DNA 
and RNA, thereby inhibiting the essential pathways such as DNA repli­
cation and protein synthesis [77,81]. 
In addition to the well-accepted three models, there are still some 
models suitable for describing the interaction between certain oncolytic 
peptides and eukaryotic cells membranes in different situations, such as 
the “sinking raft model”, “leaky-slit” model and “molecular electropo­
ration model” [77]. It is worth mentioning here that these proposed 
models are not mutually exclusive, which means that both of them may 
play a role in elucidating certain oncolytic peptides-mediated cancer 
membrane lysis process. For example, there is likely more than one 
sequential region in the relatively longer peptides such as LL-37, where 
the binding modes of actions may alter within the same peptide [69]. 
Moreover, 
the 
mechanism 
for 
membrane-active 
oncolytic 
peptides-mediated tumor cells death is not entirely caused by plasma 
membrane disruption, that is, certain peptides can translocate across the 
membrane and target the intracellular membranous compartments 
including mitochondrial membrane, endoplasmic reticulum membrane, 
Golgi membrane and lysosomes membrane [82–88]. However, detailed 
discussion about these aspects is beyond the scope of our review and 
remains to be summarized in the future. 
2.3. Immune responses elicited by oncolytic peptides 
The term “oncolytic” originated in the 1950s and was commonly 
used to describe the process of oncolytic viruses-mediated tumor cell 
lysis (oncolysis) [89,90]. Oncolytic viruses have been reported to trigger 
immunogenic cancer cell death (ICD) and induce systemic anticancer 
immune responses, which can induce abscopal effects for the treatment 
of advanced tumors [91,92]. Recently, a growing number of studies 
have suggested that the anticancer activity of oncolytic peptides not 
only depends on the membrane lysis effect but also depends on the 
immune activation events after oncolysis [92] (Fig. 3). LTX-302, a 9-mer 
cationic peptide derived from the bovine lactoferricin, was reported to 
induce subcutaneous xenograft A20 cells lymphomas regression [93]. 
The results suggested that intratumoral injection of LTX-302 can trigger 
cancer cell membrane damage and extensive tumor necrosis. Subse­
quently, the lysed cancer cells would release tumor-associated antigen 
(TAA), which can be presented by dendritic cells to T cells. In addition, 
the released damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) such as 
high mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1), will promote the antigen 
uptake and presentation process. The poor treatment effect in nude mice 
and tumor-rechallenge experiment in wild-type mice further revealed 
that LTX-302 injection not only induced local oncolytic effect, but also 
caused a specific and long-term systemic antitumor immunity. LTX-315 
(trade name Oncopore™), a de novo designed membrane-active cationic 
nonapeptide, can also trigger the release of DAMPs (HMGB1 and ATP), 
promote the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL1β, IL6, and 
IL18), and induce the infiltration of immune cells into solid tumor [94, 
95]. Furthermore, a series of studies have shown that LTX-315 is a 
broad-spectrum oncolytic agent, which can induce ICD in many tumor 
types including B16 melanomas, MCA205 fibrosarcomas, mesenchymal 
subcutaneous sarcomas, and pancreatic cancer [96–98]. Significantly, 
the therapeutic potential of LTX-315 has been validated in human 
clinical trials, that is, intratumoral injection of LTX-315 has been shown 
to not only promote the infiltration of CD8+ T cells within the tumor, but 
also expand the T-cell clones in blood [99,100]. It is worth mentioning 
that, although the oncolytic peptides are expected to act primarily on the 
tumor cells and trigger ICD, the interactions between various immune 
cells and oncolytic peptides are also very important for regulating an 
antitumor immune response, which unfortunately has long been 
ignored. 
2.4. Factors that contribute to the biological activity of oncolytic peptides 
Most of oncolytic peptides are derived from AMPs, although more 
than 20,000 AMPs have been discovered up to now (http://dramp. 
cpu-bioinfor.org/), it is worth noting that there are far fewer AMPs 
present with significant oncolytic activity (http://crdd.osdd.net/ragh 
ava/cancerppd/index.php). By systematically exploring the structure- 
activity relationship of oncolytic peptides, not only the biological ac­
tivity (e.g., anticancer activity, selectivity, stability, bioavailability) of 
naturally existing oncolytic peptides could be improved, but also more 
Fig. 3. Schematic overview of the representative immune activation effects of oncolytic peptides-mediated tumor cell lysis.  
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
211
well-designed synthetic oncolytic peptides and bionic oncolytic poly­
mers are expected to be developed for future clinical applications. 
Therefore, several important parameters influencing the potential 
treatment effect of oncolytic peptides would be briefly discussed here. 
2.4.1. Positive charge 
Cationic oncolytic peptides commonly contain net positive charges 
varying from 2 to 12 at neutral pH, which is mainly provided by L- 
arginine residue and L-lysine residue [36,101]. The cationic peptides are 
likely to induce electrostatic interactions with the negatively charged 
membrane, which is the major driving force for the adsorption and 
accumulation of oncolytic peptides on tumor cells [102]. For instance, 
melittin was reported to lose the oncolytic activity when its C-terminus 
positively charged residues were replaced by negatively charged resi­
dues, and the oncolytic activity would be restored by additional conju­
gation of a cationic sequence in its C-terminal domain [103]. However, 
these peptides containing positive charges (e.g., temporin family) may 
cause severe hemolysis. Considering that the arginine residue showed a 
stronger interaction with both anionic and zwitterionic membranes than 
lysine residue, introducing lysine instead of arginine into synthetic 
oncolytic peptides will reduce the hemolytic effect to some extent [104]. 
In addition, a high density of positive charges may reduce the blood 
circulation time and bioavailability of oncolytic peptides, and even 
cause severe off-target effects [42,105]. 
2.4.2. Hydrophobicity 
Generally, oncolytic peptides contain more than 30% hydrophobic 
amino acids, which can facilitate the insertion of peptides into the hy­
drophobic phospholipid bilayers and then cause membrane perturbation 
[101,106]. Huang & Fei et al. have replaced the alanine residues in the 
cationic amphipathic peptides with leucine to enhance their hydro­
phobicity, and the results suggested that their anticancer activity was 
significantly increased [107,108]. Furthermore, the introduction of fatty 
acids with C12 to C20 chain lengths to the N-terminus of amphipathic 
peptides (LVTX-9 and R-lycosin-I) could significantly increase their 
anticancer activity [109,110]. However, if the peptides are too hydro­
phobic, they not only tend to self-aggregate in a physiological envi­
ronment, but also will target indiscriminately to normal cells and cause 
toxicity [111]. Therefore, the biological activity of the oncolytic pep­
tides is expected to be increased first and then decreased in response to 
the increasing hydrophobicity. 
2.4.3. Peptides length 
The peptide length also plays an important role in the practical 
application of oncolytic peptides, not only affecting its biological ac­
tivity, but also determining its production complexity and cost. LL-37, a 
peptide containing 37 amino acids, is a human cathelicidin-derived AMP 
that can suppress leukemia, gastric cancer, and colon cancer. Ren et al. 
have found that FK-16, a short fragment of LL-37 containing 16 amino 
acids (from residues 17 to 32), showed better anticancer activity than its 
parent peptide LL-37 [112]. Lu et al. have prepared a series of cationic 
peptides consisting of repetitive sequences, G (IIKK)nI-NH2 (n = 1~4). 
As the sequence length increases, although the peptides exhibited higher 
membranolytic activity in tumor cells, the toxicity to red blood cells and 
HDFa cells also increased. The results suggested that G (IIKK)3I–NH2 had 
the best skeleton length to simultaneously achieve good oncolytic ac­
tivity and biocompatibility [113]. 
2.4.4. Secondary structure 
Free oncolytic peptides are commonly random coils in the water 
phase, however, binding with the anionic model lipid bilayers or cancer 
cells membrane would lead to conformational changes of the peptides 
into the extended, α-helical or β-sheeted structure [37]. It was widely 
reported that the secondary structure of oncolytic peptides can further 
influence the interaction between themselves and the targeted cell 
membrane. Li et al. found that the helicity of the ABH3 peptide would be 
increased after replacing the alanine and glycine with aminoisobutyric 
acid, and the mutated peptide showed greater membrane permeability 
and oncolytic activity [114]. Similarly, Womack et al. substituted 
asparagine with aspartic acid at position 29 of a chicken NK-lysin con­
taining 30 amino acids, the peptide helicity was reduced and its mem­
brane binding affinity was weakened, thereby leading to a decreased 
anticancer ability [115]. In addition, numerous studies show that 
incorporation of proline, changing the proline conformation (D-/L-), or 
adjusting the position of proline will both greatly affect the secondary 
structure of oncolytic peptides, and further affect the interaction be­
tween peptides and tumor cells [116,117]. 
2.4.5. Targeting units 
As we have discussed above, the anticancer activity of natural 
oncolytic peptides mainly depends on non-nonspecific physical in­
teractions such as electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions. Although 
the differences between normal cells and cancer cells membrane provide 
a physical basis for the selectivity of these oncolytic peptides, the 
imperfect selectivity may still result in off-target toxicity [30]. The 
incorporation of tumor-specific ligands into oncolytic peptides is an 
efficient strategy for improving their selectivity and therapeutic effect. 
For example, EGFR, a receptor overexpressed in a wide spectrum of 
epithelial-derived cancer cells, has been considered as a tumor-specific 
target for drug design. Kawakami et al. have developed an “EGFR-lytic 
hybrid peptide” containing the EGFR binding domain and the positively 
charged membranolytic domain, which exhibited high selectivity 
against EGFR-overexpressing tumor cells (e.g., MDA-MB-231 breast 
cancer, H322 lung cancer, LNCaP prostate cancer, and U251 glioma 
cells) and could overcome the resistance to EGFR antibody drugs [118]. 
Similarly, many other tumor-targeting peptides (e.g., transferrin 
receptor-binding peptide, LTV peptide, gastrin-releasing peptide, 
amino-terminal fragment of urokinase-type plasminogen activator, and 
iRGD peptide) were conjugated to different oncolytic peptides to 
generate the tumor-specific oncolytic peptides displayed better selec­
tivity and anticancer activity [119–122]. 
2.4.6. Multi-stimulus responsiveness 
TME-activatable oncolytic peptides have been designed based on the 
difference between normal and tumor tissue, which also aim to improve 
the therapeutic index and reduce toxicity. For example, membrane type- 
matrix metalloproteinases (MT-MMP), a proteolytic enzyme tethered to 
the plasma membrane, has been reported to be overexpressed at the 
tumor invasion border. A MT-MMP cleavable cyclic 25-mer peptide 
precursor (cycL-25) was synthesized by adding a MT-MMP-sensitive 
cyclizing linker to the 18-mer oncolytic peptide, within the TME, the 
oncolytic activity of the peptide would be restored after MT-MMP- 
mediated cleavage [123]. Results suggested that the cyclic peptide 
precursor exhibited significant cytotoxicity against highly invasive 
MDA-MB-435 (MMP-positive) tumor cells at high concentration, 
whereas normal RBC cells and noninvasive MCF-7 (MMP-negative) 
cancer cells were resistant to the peptide precursor at high concentra­
tion. But it should be noted that, in the MMP-negative cells, the toxicity 
and hemolysis of cycL-25 precursor were increased instead of being 
suppressed at low concentration compared to the parent linear oncolytic 
peptide. This result may be due to the stabilizing effect of 
cyclization-mediated partial formation of secondary structure, which 
could reduce the energy requirements for peptides’ initial folding and 
facilitate the membrane disturbance at low peptides concentration. This 
phenomenon may present a challenge for the in vivo application of cyclic 
peptide precursor due to the potential off-target toxicity. Moreover, a 
high concentration of lactic acid is secreted within the tumor due to the 
up-regulated anaerobic glycolysis, which leads to a lower pH in the 
tumor than in normal tissue. The acidic microenvironment was used as a 
trigger by Shai et al. to activate the oncolytic peptide, which means that 
the peptide can only convert to its active form at acidic pH conditions 
[124]. They replaced the lysine of [D]-K6L9 with histidine (pK˜a6) to 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
212
produce the pH-sensitive oncolytic peptide [D]-H6L9, which can only be 
protonated in the TME after intravenous injection, thereby reducing the 
unwanted systemic toxicity. Zhao et al. have introduced HCO3
−groups to 
interact with the peptide’s guanidine group of arginine, the peptide can 
therefore self-assemble into inactive nanoparticles [125]. The HCO3
−
group would be removed when these nanoparticles arrived at the acidic 
TME, which could result in the disassembly of the nanoparticle, then 
producing an activated oncolytic peptide nanomachine to lyse both 
targeted and neighbor cancer cells. Recently, Luo et al. have developed a 
self-assembling anticancer peptides precursor by computer-aided tools, 
which could be cleaved and activated only under the acidic TME con­
taining high levels of human kallikrein 2 (hK2) enzymes [126]. The 
peptides (CRGDKGPDCGKAFRRFLGALFKALSHLL, 1–9 disulfide bond) 
consists of two functional peptide sequences and a cleavable linker: the 
αVβ3-targeting sequence (iRGD), the acid-responsive oncolytic peptide 
sequence PTP-7b (FLGALFKALSHLL), and the hK2-responsive proteo­
lytic sequence (GKAFRR). As expected, the peptide nano-assemblies 
could be delivered to orthotopic prostate tumors via enhanced perme­
ability and retention (EPR) effect and iRGD targeting effect, and then the 
reactivated PTP-7b would lyse prostate tumor cells without inducing 
severe systematic toxicity. 
2.4.7. Topology 
Unlike the classic linear peptides, the membranolytic peptides with 
more complex architectures including branched and cyclic structures 
have been recently proven to be more reliable and efficient in cancer 
therapy. Recently, a linear parent cationic peptide (LLKK)4, its coun­
terpart 2-arm branched peptide [(LLKK)2]2κC and the 4-arm branched 
peptide ([(LLKK)2]2κC)2 have been synthesized by Huang and his col­
laborators [127]. They found that the 4-arm branched peptide exhibited 
better anticancer activity than the 2-arm branched peptide, and showed 
lower cytotoxicity to normal cells than the linear peptide, suggesting 
that branch modification of oncolytic peptides may increase their 
selectivity to tumor cells. In addition, Henriques et al. found that 
although backbone cyclization of tachyplesin I, II, and III (HDPs derived 
from horseshoe crab) could not improve their anticancer potency, but 
the cyclized analogs exhibited better serum stability and lower hemo­
lysis than parent tachyplesin peptides [128]. Similarly, a venom-derived 
cationic peptide was cyclized by Weidong Zhang’s team based on the 
side-chain-retention stapling strategy [129]. The stapled peptide analog 
showed higher resistance to protease and better selectivity to tumor cells 
rather than the corresponding linear peptide, furthermore, it could 
induce a significant oncolytic effect and immune responses within the 
immunologically “hot” melanoma models. 
2.4.8. Other factors 
Elucidating the structure-activity relationship can help to develop 
novel and efficient oncolytic peptides, in addition to the above- 
mentioned factors, there are still many other structural or physico­
chemical properties that may affect the bioactivity of oncolytic peptides. 
For instance, amphiphilicity, referring to the hydrophobic residues and 
hydrophilic residues that were orderly spatial segregated on the oppo­
site face, also plays an important role in the insertion process of onco­
lytic peptides into the membrane bilayer [36,130]. Fei et al. have found 
that the change in amino acid sequence would reduce the peptide 
amphiphilicity and then weaken its oncolytic activity [108]. Terminal 
modifications have also been proven to regulate the physiochemical 
properties and bioactivity of oncolytic peptides. Lu et al. have deleted 
the C-terminal isoleucine of the parental peptide G (IIKK)3I–NH2, the 
obtained 
peptides 
exhibited 
low 
permeability 
across 
the 
cholesterol-contained membrane, thereby leading to poor anticancer 
activity [131]. Furthermore, they found that replacing the N-terminal 
glycine with alanine, valine, glutamate, or lysine could retain the 
oncolytic activity while reducing the hemolytic activity of G (IIK­
K)3I–NH2, which represents a potential method for improving tumor 
selectivity of the oncolytic peptides [132]. Extensive literature has 
shown that replacing the L-amino acids with their D-amino acid enan­
tiomers is another efficient method to optimize the performance of 
oncolytic peptides, especially the protease stability and selectivity 
[133]. It is worth mentioning that Papo et al. have designed a diaste­
reomeric peptide composed of lysine and leucine that can directly be 
used for systemic administration, without needing any targeted motifs 
or delivery vesicles, and no side effects or mouse death were noted 
during the 165-day trial period [134]. However, there are also some 
reports claiming that excess D-amino acid substitutions may reduce the 
anticancer activity of oncolytic peptides, and even lead to renal toxicity 
[135,136]. As can be seen, the performance of oncolytic peptides will be 
affected by multiple factors, including some other factors that may not 
have been discussed in detail here. 
3. The combinatorial application of oncolytic peptides for 
cancer therapy 
3.1. Combination therapy of oncolytic peptides and chemotherapy drugs 
Thanks to the unique membrane disruption anticancer mechanism, 
oncolytic peptides have shown synergistic or additive effects in cancer 
therapy when combined with other chemotherapy agents (Table 1). As 
early as 1992, magainin analogs have been shown to enhance the 
inhibitory effect of cisplatin, etoposide, and doxorubicin against the 
SCLC cells [137]. Later, Chen et al. revealed that cecropin A was syn­
ergistic with S-fluorouracil and cytarabine in leukemia cells [138]. 
Hoskin’s team and Blancafort’s team have found that both NRC-03 
peptide and melittin can improve the killing effect of cisplatin and 
docetaxel against breast cancer cells [103,139]. Similarly, it was re­
ported that θ-defensin analogs can facilitate the uptake of cisplatin and 
doxorubicin into MDA-MB-231 cells, thereby decreasing the effective 
dose of these conventional small-molecule drugs [140]. Mastoparan, a 
cationic peptide derived from wasp venom, was shown to enhance the 
killing effect of etoposide in vitro and improve gemcitabine efficacy in 
vivo [141]. Nisin, a membranolytic peptide produced by Lactococcus 
lactis, has shown a synergistic effect against MCF-7 cells when 
co-administered with doxorubicin [142]. 
In addition, Chen et al. have reported two cationic lytic peptides 
respectively called C8 and C6, which both could be used as the drug 
carrier for ellipticine, a non-selective anticancer agent [143,144]. The 
results suggested that C8 and C6 not only promoted the anticancer ac­
tivity of ellipticine, but also improved the selectivity of ellipticine to­
wards tumor cells rather than normal cells. Subsequently, Chen’s group 
developed another cationic peptide PAH6, which could decrease the 
IC50 value of doxorubicin against A549 cells and improve penetration of 
doxorubicin in the A549 3D-spheroid model [145]. Also, since the 
bioactivity of oncolytic peptides was not affected by resistance muta­
tions, it has proven to be the potential for overcoming doxorubicin 
chemoresistance [146,147]. Furthermore, Camilio et al. have found that 
intra-tumoral injection of LTX-315 can significantly improve the ther­
apeutic efficacy of intravenous administration of doxorubicin, including 
activating antitumor immune response and increasing the infiltration of 
CD4+ and CD8+ immune cells within tumor tissue [148]. Notably, 
compared with the control group, treatment with LTX-315 and doxo­
rubicin could produce a 60–97% increase in median survival when used 
in combination with surgery. Although this pioneering research 
demonstrated synergy between LTX-315 and doxorubicin in vivo, the 
administration/dosing scheme was worthy of further discussion. Since 
LTX-315 was administrated by intra-tumoral injection and doxorubicin 
was injected intravenously, not only arrival time of different drugs to­
ward tumor tissue was difficult to be controlled precisely, but also it is 
difficult to determine the actual ratio between LTX-315 and doxorubicin 
within the tumor. In another study, Yang and his collaborators con­
structed a peptide-based hydrogel containing hybrid melittin (melit­
tin-RADA32) and doxorubicin. The results suggested that injection of the 
hydrogel not only destroyed some of the localized tumors, but also could 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
213
Table 1 
Current oncolytic peptides-based combination strategies for different cancers.  
Oncolytic peptides 
Drugs used in 
combination 
therapy 
Dosing schemes 
Tumor cell 
lines 
In vivo models 
Curative effects 
Magainin analogs [137] 
Cisplatin, 
etoposide, 
doxorubicin 
Simultaneous 
administration 
Six small cell 
lung cancer 
(SCLC) cell 
lines 
– 
Enhance the inhibitory 
effect of chemo-agents 
Cecropin A [138] 
S-fluorouracil, 
cytarabine 
Simultaneous 
administration 
Leukemia cells 
– 
Show synergistic effects 
with chemo-agents 
NRC-03 & NRC-07 [139] 
Cisplatin, 
docetaxel 
NRC-03 or NRC-07 was 
administered 20 min 
before exposure to 
cisplatin (only performed 
in vitro) 
MDA-MB-231 
cells 
Breast cancer 
xenograft tumor 
Reduce the EC50 of 
cisplatin 
Melittin [103] 
Cisplatin, 
docetaxel 
Simultaneous 
administration 
p53−TNBC cell 
line T11 
T11 xenograft 
model 
Show synergistic effects 
with chemo-agents 
θ-defensin analogs [140] 
Cisplatin, 
doxorubicin 
Simultaneous 
administration 
MDA-MB-231 
cells 
– 
Enhance the inhibitory 
effect of chemo-agents 
Mastoparan (INLKALAALAKKIL-NH2) [141] 
Etoposide, 
vinblastine, 
gemcitabine 
Gemcitabine was 
administered every 7 
days, Mastoparan was 
administered every 2 d 
Jurkat T-ALL 
cells 
4T1 mammary 
carcinoma model 
Show synergistic effects 
with chemo-agents 
Nisin [142] 
Doxorubicin 
Simultaneous 
administration 
MCF-7 cells 
– 
Show synergistic effects 
with doxorubicin 
C8 (WHIINNIIHHIINNIIRR) [143] 
Ellipticine 
Simultaneous 
administration (C8 forms 
a nanocomplex with 
ellipticine) 
A549 cells 
– 
Enhance the killing effect 
and selectivity of 
ellipticine 
C6 (Ac-RLLRLLLRLWRRLLRLLR-NH2) [144] 
Ellipticine 
Simultaneous 
administration (C6- 
ellipticine nanocomplex) 
A549 cells 
A549 tumor- 
bearing BALB/c 
nude mice 
Enhance the killing effect 
and selectivity of 
ellipticine 
PAH6 (Pal-H6G3KLAKLAKKLAKLAK-NH2) [145] 
Doxorubicin 
Simultaneous 
administration (Dox- 
DNA/PAH6 
Nanocomplex) 
A549 cells, 
3D-cultured 
A549 spheroid 
– 
Decrease the IC50 value, 
improve the therapeutic 
index and permeability of 
doxorubicin 
Defensins & cecropins [147] 
Doxorubicin 
Doxorubicin was added 
30 min before adding 
oncolytic peptides 
Multidrug- 
resistant cells 
– 
Sensitize drug-resistant 
tumor cells to 
doxorubicin 
LTX-315 [148] 
CAELYX® 
(doxorubicin), 
surgery 
LTX-315 was 
administered once a day 
for 2–3 days, CAELYX® 
was injected concurrently 
only once, and surgery 
was performed 6 days 
after treatment 
4T1 cells 
Orthotopic 4T1 
mammary fat pad 
model 
Induce anti-tumor 
immunity, tumor 
regression and prolong 
survival 
Melittin-RADA32 (Ac- 
RADARADARADARADARADARADARADARADA- 
GG-GIGAVLKVLTTGLPALISWIKRKRQQ-NH2) [149] 
Doxorubicin 
Concurrent 
administration 
(doxorubicin was loaded 
in the Melittin-RADA- 
based hydrogel) 
Melanoma 
B16–F10 cells 
Subcutaneous 
B16–F10 tumor 
model, spontaneous 
tumor metastasis 
model, and tumor 
rechallenge model 
Induce infiltration of DCs, 
cytotoxic T cells and NK 
cells, deplete M2-type 
TAMs, produce effector 
memory T cells 
D-K6L9 [150] 
IL-12 
D-K6L9 was injected 7 and 
8 days after tumor 
inoculation, and IL-12 
was administered for the 
subsequent 9 or 10 
consecutive days 
B16–F10 cells 
Subcutaneous 
B16–F10 tumor 
model, 
Subcutaneous C26 
tumor model 
Induce the HMGB1 
release, increase tumor- 
infiltrating NK cells and 
CD8+ T cells, prolong 
survival 
Melittin [151] 
A mutant IL-2 (in 
the form of the 
fusion protein, 
melittin-MIL-2) 
Simultaneous 
administration (melittin- 
MIL-2 fusion protein) 
SMMC-7721 
cells, MDA-MB- 
231 cells, 
SKOV3 cells, 
SGC-7901 cells 
and A549 cells 
SMMC-7721, A549 
and SKOV3 
xenograft models, 
subcutaneous MDA- 
MB-231 
spontaneous 
metastasis model 
Increase the level of IFN-γ 
and decrease the level of 
IL-4, inhibit lung 
metastasis, prolong 
survival 
Melittin [152] 
Doxorubicin, 
siTOX 
Simultaneous 
administration (siTOX, 
fluorinated doxorubicin, 
and melittin were co- 
assembled into 
nanoparticles) 
Hep1-6 cells 
Subcutaneous 
Hep1-6 tumor 
model, 
4T1 liver metastases 
model 
Increase tumor- 
infiltrating CD8+ T cells, 
decrease TOX expression 
and restrict CD8+ T cells 
exhaustion, reduce 
metastasis, and prolong 
survival 
LTX-315 [153] 
Anti-CTLA4 mAb 
Anti-CTLA4 was injected 
on days 0, 3, and 6, 
whereas LTX-315 was 
MCA205 
sarcoma cells 
A bilateral MCA205 
sarcoma model 
Increase the ratio of 
CTLs/Tregs, show 
synergistic anticancer 
(continued on next page) 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
214
reverse immune suppression and trigger a durable systemic immune 
memory [149]. 
3.2. Combination therapy of oncolytic peptides and biotherapeutic drugs 
Recently, immunotherapy has demonstrated a durable and efficient 
therapeutic efficacy, which provides a potential weapon against 
advanced or metastatic cancer [162]. However, only a minority of pa­
tients with T cell-inflamed “hot” tumors can benefit from cancer 
immunotherapy, while most of the patients with poor immunogenic 
tumors and immunosuppressive TME did not respond to the current 
immunotherapy [163]. As mentioned above, given the ability of onco­
lytic peptides to induce antitumor immunity, a growing number of 
studies have combined oncolytic peptides with biotherapeutic drugs to 
improve 
therapeutic 
outcomes. 
For 
instance, 
the 
combined 
intra-tumoral injection of interleukin (IL)-12 and D-K6L9 peptide could 
promote the infiltration of NK cells and CD8+ T cells within tumor tissue, 
thereby inducing complete regression of 60–75% tumors and prolonging 
mouse survival [150]. Sun et al. have reported a fusion protein 
melittin-MIL-2, which consists of melittin and a mutant Interleukin 
(IL)-2 [151]. Melittin-MIL-2 showed the ability to remodel the immu­
nosuppressive TME, such as increasing the level of IFN-γ and decreasing 
Table 1 (continued) 
Oncolytic peptides 
Drugs used in 
combination 
therapy 
Dosing schemes 
Tumor cell 
lines 
In vivo models 
Curative effects 
administered on days 7, 8, 
and 9 
effect both in local and 
distant tumors 
LTX-315 [154] 
Anti-PD-1 
antibody, CpG 
ODN 
On days 0, 1, and 2, LTX- 
315 or αPD-1 was 
administered each 
morning, and CpG was 
injected in the afternoon 
B16–F10 cells 
B16–F10 tumor 
bearing mice 
Increase CTLs and helper 
T cells, reduce Tregs, 
promote levels of IL-6, 
TNF-α, and IFN-γ, 
produce effector memory 
T cells 
LTX-315 [155] 
Pembrolizumab or 
ipilimumab 
LTX-315 was injected 
twice weekly in the 1, 2, 
and 3 weeks, and 
antibody was 
administered in the 1, 4, 
and every three weeks 
thereafter 
– 
Patients with 
melanoma and 
TNBC (triple 
negative breast 
cancer) 
The disease control rate 
(complete response [CR] 
+partial response [PR] 
+stable disease [SD]) was 
improved 
LTX-401 [156] 
Anti-CTLA-4 or/ 
and anti-PD-1 
mAbs 
LTX-401 was injected 
firstly and antibodies 
were sequentially 
injected on days 6, 9 and 
12 
– 
Bilateral 
subcutaneous 
MCA205 
fibrosarcoma model 
Showed distal and 
proximal effects, acquired 
immune memory 
Melittin-(RADA)6 [157] 
KN93, PD-1 
antibody 
Melittin-(RADA)6-KN93 
hydrogel was injected on 
day 7, and anti-PD-1 was 
injected on days 7, 9, 11, 
and 13 (in melanoma 
model) 
B16–F10 cells 
Subcutaneous 
B16–F10 melanoma 
model, 
H22 hepatoma 
ascites model 
Increase the ratio of M1/ 
M2 macrophage and 
expression of the PD-L1, 
improve the cure rate and 
survival rate 
Melittin [158] 
Chlorin e6, anti- 
PD-1 
Chlorin e6-Melittin 
nanocomplex was 
injected on day 0, light 
irradiation was received 
on day 1, then anti-PD-1 
was injected every other 
day for a total of four 
doses 
4T1 cells 
4T1 subcutaneous 
tumor model 
Increase the levels of ICD 
and numbers of mature 
DCs, improve the 
abscopal effect and 
survival rate 
LTX-315 [159] 
Radiation therapy, 
anti-CTLA4 and 
anti-PD1 
antibodies 
LTX-315 and radiation 
were delivered on days 0, 
1, and 2, and anti-PD1 
was injected on days 3, 4, 
and 5 (in the 4T1 breast 
cancer model) 
TS/A and 4T1 
mammary 
tumor cells 
Double and triple 
TS/A subcutaneous 
tumor models, 
M&D-driven breast 
cancer model 
Induce the accumulation 
of NK cells, enhance the 
proximal and distal 
anticancer effect 
Melittin [160] 
MnO2 
Simultaneous 
administration (in the 
form of MnO2-melittin 
nanoparticles) 
B16, MC38, 
and MB49 cells 
Subcutaneous 
unilateral and 
bilateral tumor 
models, B16–F10 
lung metastasis 
model 
Increase cytotoxicity of 
melittin when combined 
with chemodynamic 
therapy, activate STING 
pathway and promote 
APC maturation, inhibit 
metastasis, promote the 
levels of CXCL10, IFN-γ, 
IL-6 and TNF-α 
LTX-315 [161] (Incubated with cancer cells in vitro to 
produce cell vaccine) 
Surgery, 
dexamethasone 
Immediately after 
surgery, (oncolytic cell 
vaccine & 
dexamethasone) co- 
loaded hydrogel was 
injected with a single 
dose 
4T1 cells 
4T1 tumor 
recurrence and 
metastasis model 
after partial tumor 
resection 
Promote levels of CD8+ T 
cells and M1-type TAMs, 
reduce MDSCs and TDSFs, 
inhibit the postoperative 
recurrence and metastasis 
Note: DCs - dendritic cells; NK - natural killer cells; TAMs - tumor-associated macrophages; CTLs -cytotoxic T lymphocytes; M&D - medroxyprogesterone acetate and 
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene; APC - antigen presentation cells; MDSCs - myeloid-derived suppressor cells; TDSFs - tumor-derived secreted factors; PD-1 - pro­
grammed cell death protein 1; PD-L1 - programmed death-ligand 1; CTLA-4 - cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
215
the level of IL-4. The results also showed that intravenous injection of 
Melittin-MIL-2 
could 
inhibit 
the 
lung 
metastasis 
of 
MDA-MB-231-subcutaneous tumor. Although treatment with melittin or 
doxorubicin can induce ICD and the infiltration of CD8+ T cells within 
tumors, Sun et al. have found that thymocyte selection-associated high 
mobility group box protein (TOX), a key factor leading to the T cells 
exhaustion, would also be up-regulated during the treatment process 
[152]. Therefore, they developed a carrier-free nanoparticle composed 
of melittin, doxorubicin, and anti-TOX small interfering RNA (siTOX), 
which can not only activate T cell proliferation, but silence TOX 
expression to restrict CD8+ T cell exhaustion. 
Recently, immune checkpoint therapy, one of the most promising 
treatment strategies for cancer patients, has also been extensively used 
in combination with oncolytic peptides. Zitvogel et al. have found that 
intra-tumoral injection of LTX-315 would increase the expression of 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) on the CTLs and 
CD4+ T-helper cells membrane [153]. As expected, co-administration of 
LTX-315 and anti-CTLA4 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) showed a 
strong synergistic effect in combating MCA205 sarcomas, even in the 
anti-CTLA4 mAb-resistant tumors. LTX-315 has also been reported to 
reduce the PD-L1 expression by acting on the ATP11B-CMTM6-PD-L1 
axis in BXPC-3, SW1990, and KPC pancreatic cancer cells, which sug­
gested that LTX-315 has good application prospects in combination with 
PD-1/PD-L1 blockade [98]. Zhong et al. have developed a cocktail 
therapy based on LTX-315, immunoadjuvant CpG, and anti-PD-1 anti­
body, in which the median survival time was increased by more than 20 
days and 2/7 mice were completely cured, indicating that a robust 
anti-tumor immune response was maintained [154]. Another inspiring 
result is the enhanced systemic efficacy and response rates have been 
observed after the combination therapy of LTX-315 and immune 
checkpoint inhibitors (pembrolizumab or ipilimumab) in humans based 
on phase I/II clinical study [155]. LTX-401, another oncolytic peptide, 
also showed significant anticancer ability against primary tumors and 
distant tumors when combined with anti-CTLA-4/anti-PD-1 mAbs, and 
the cured mice exhibited resistance to the tumor re-challenge [156]. 
Immunosuppressive cells, such as TAMs in the TME, have been widely 
accepted to be linked with cancer progression, recurrence, and metas­
tasis. 
Jin 
et 
al. 
have found 
that 
KN93, 
an 
inhibitor 
of 
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CAMKII), can convert the 
TAMs from M2 towards M1 phenotype, thereby promoting the innate 
and adaptive immunity when used with melittin derivative melittin-(­
RADA)6 [157]. Furthermore, given that the combination of KN93 and 
melittin-(RADA)6 increased the expression of PD-L1 within the tumor, 
the PD-1 antibody was co-injected, and then significant synergy has 
been observed as expected. 
3.3. Other oncolytic peptides-based combination therapy 
With preclinical or early clinical success of oncolytic peptides-based 
synergistic cancer therapy, diversified therapeutic methods are being 
used in combination with oncolytic peptides, in hopes of further 
improving the treatment strategies and prognosis. For instance, Yang 
et al. demonstrated that receiving melittin could significantly enhance 
the treatment effect of chlorin e6-mediated photodynamic therapy 
(PDT) [158]. Both PDT and oncolysis would increase the levels of ICD 
and numbers of mature DCs, furthermore, the co-administration of 
anti-PD1 antibody further improved the abscopal effect and prolonged 
survival in the 4T1-breast cancer model. A synergistic effect has also 
been revealed between oncolytic peptide and radiotherapy, local 
radiotherapy and injection of LTX-315 showed better therapeutic effect 
against the primary HR+ TS/A and 4T1 breast tumors compared with 
monotherapy [159]. When combined with anti-CTLA4 antibody, almost 
complete regression has been observed on the primary tumors, and a 
significant inhibitory effect also occurred on the untreated distant tu­
mors. Notably, the research also confirmed that the combination of 
LTX-315 and radiotherapy mainly triggered NK cells-mediated 
anti-tumor immunity rather than T cells immunity. Recently, Zhou et al. 
have demonstrated that Mn2+ could improve the anticancer efficiency of 
melittin, not only because Mn2+ can trigger chemodynamic therapy 
(Mn2+ is capable of converting H2O2 into •OH within TME and then 
causing oxidative damage-induced apoptosis), but also because Mn2+ is 
an immunoadjuvant capable of activating cGAS-STING pathway and 
then enhancing systemic immune response [160]. Surgery is usually the 
primary choice for many early-stage cancer, however, surgical stress 
may create an inflammatory microenvironment and thus promote re­
sidual cancer cell metastasis to the pre-metastatic niche (PMN). Li et al. 
prepared an autologous cancer cells-based vaccine (ACCO) by using 
LTX-315 to induce 4T1 cells lysis, then a ROS-responsive hydrogel was 
designed for co-delivery of the ACCO vaccine and dexamethasone [161]. 
They have found that although injection of the ACCO vaccine could 
increase the level of CD8+ T cells within the residual tumor after sur­
gery, the immunosuppressive cells and related cytokines severely 
interfere with T-cells function. The combination of dexamethasone and 
ACCO 
vaccine 
not 
only 
alleviated 
the 
inflamma­
tion/immunosuppressive microenvironment, but also disrupted the 
PMN, thereby reducing the risk of postoperative recurrence and 
metastasis. 
4. Delivery strategies for oncolytic peptides 
Despite the potent and multi-faceted anticancer ability to fight 
against drug resistance, tumor heterogeneity, and metastasis, the in vivo 
applications of most of cationic oncolytic peptides are still hindered by 
their intrinsic properties, such as electrostatic adsorption to plasma 
proteins, susceptibility to proteases, unsatisfactory tissue distribution, 
hemolysis and undesired toxicity [31]. Although many efforts have been 
devoted to optimize the oncolytic peptides by chemical modification or 
de novo design (as shown in Section 2.4), these strategies cannot be 
applied to all existing oncolytic peptides, thus developing general stra­
tegies for improving their utility in clinical applications is still necessary. 
Recently, geared by nanotechnology, various nanocarriers have been 
well-designed for achieving targeted, specific, controlled oncolytic 
peptides delivery and multimodal cancer therapy, thereby improving 
therapeutic efficiency. Generally, there are two ways to load the onco­
lytic peptides onto/into nanocarriers, that is, physical encapsulation and 
covalent attachment. In this section, we briefly outline these represen­
tative nano-delivery strategies and their advantages. 
4.1. Physical encapsulation of oncolytic peptides 
Based on the physicochemical structure characteristics of oncolytic 
peptides, it could be conveniently loaded into the nanocarriers via 
electrostatic interactions, hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bonding, 
or other intermolecular interactions. Liposomes are a common nano- 
delivery system consisting of the phospholipid bilayer, however, it has 
been a great challenge to load the membranolytic oncolytic peptides 
without causing leakage of liposomes. In 2008, Wickline et al. have 
reported a nanoparticle with perfluorocarbon as the core and phos­
pholipids (egg-lecithin & dipalmitoyl-phosphotidylethanolamine) as the 
outer lipid monolayer [164]. The results suggested that melittin can be 
stably loaded into the lipid monolayers, which may be due to the hy­
drophobic and lipophobic perfluorocarbon core that restricts the 
melittin-mediated membrane destruction (Fig. 4A). Later, the safety and 
effectiveness of the melittin nanoparticles have been further confirmed 
in the precancerous lesions and solid tumors models [165]. However, 
compared to the large-sized melittin-perfluorocarbon nanoparticle 
(~270 nm), Zhang et al. have prepared a small melittin-loaded mono­
layer liposome (~20 nm), which is more suitable for the EPR effect. 
Briefly, a high-density lipoprotein-mimicking α-helical peptide was used 
to be conjugated with melittin, and the obtained α-hybrid peptide can be 
deeply incorporated within the phospholipid monolayer (Fig. 4B), then 
fabricating into a stable nanoparticle (α-melittin-NP) [166]. To improve 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
216
tumor targeting ability, a polyethylene glycol (PEG)-stabilized lipid disk 
has been modified with c (RGDyK) sequence, and the melittin could be 
adsorbed on the rim of the lipid disk (Fig. 4C) [167]. However, some 
researchers doubt whether surface adsorption of melittin can effectively 
avoid its hemolytic effect [166]. 
Some biocompatible polymers have been developed as oncolytic 
peptides delivery carriers due to their highly tunable physicochemical 
properties. For example, a membrane-lytic peptide (called L-EEK) 
designed by in silico modeling was encapsulated in PEG-PLGA nano­
particles (Fig. 4D), as expected, the prepared L-EEK nanoparticles 
Fig. 4. (A) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images and schematic diagrams of the melittin-loaded bilayer liposomes as well as melittin-loaded monolayers 
lipid-perfluorocarbon nanoparticles (Scale bars: 200 nm). Arrows point to the damaged liposome membrane. Adapted with permission from Ref. [164] Copyright 
2008 American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic diagrams of the α-helical peptide-melittin hybrid peptide and the corresponding α-melittin-NPs. Adapted with 
permission from Ref. [166] Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (C) a) Schematic diagram and b) TEM images of c (RGDyK) modified melittin-loaded lipid 
disks; c) Images of tumor-bearing mice at 12 h after injection of 1-PBS, 2-disk/DiR and 3-RGD-disk/DiR (Tumors are indicated with red dotted circles). Reproduced 
by permission from Ref. [167] Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Schematic diagram of L-EEK NPs preparation and the tumor volume curves of 
MDA-MB-231 tumor-bearing mice treated with or without L-EEK NPs, ***p < 0.005 (n = 4). Reproduced by permission from Ref. [168] Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. 
(E) Schematic description of the oncolytic peptides and miR-34a co-loaded multilayer polyelectrolyte nanocarrier. Adapted with permission from Ref. [169] 
Copyright 2021 Elsevier Ltd. (F) Schematic diagram of cRGD-CPs-L nanoparticles and the combination therapy of cRGD-CPs-L, CpG adjuvant & anti-PD-1 antibody. 
Adapted with permission from Ref. [170] Copyright 2021 Elsevier Ltd. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
217
showed lower hemolytic activity and good in vivo anticancer effect 
[168]. It is worth noting that complete tumor eradication has been 
observed in two of four L-EEK nanoparticles-treated mice, which may be 
due to their strong antitumor effect on both breast epithelial cancer cells 
and breast epithelial cancer stem cells. Motiei et al. developed a 
multilayer polyelectrolyte nanocarrier to realize the co-delivery of 
oncolytic peptides and microRNA (miR-34a) (Fig. 4E). Firstly, poly­
glutamic acid grafted chitosan (PGA-CS) has been employed as the inner 
core to incorporate cationic peptide (LTX-315 or melittin); next, nega­
tively dextran sulfate was used as a complexing agent to stabilize the 
Fig. 5. (A) Fabrication of melittin-loaded ZIF-8 NPs and their application in cancer treatment. Adapted with permission from Ref. [171] Copyright 2018 American 
Chemical Society. (B) Preparation of melittin-loaded PEG-GO-Fe3O4 nanocomposites and the cellular uptake of nanocomposites by HeLa cells. Adapted with 
permission from Ref. [172] Copyright IOP Publishing. (C) Preparation of Ce6/melittin co-loaded serum albumin/Boehmite nanocomposites. Adapted with permission 
from Ref. [158] Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (D) Preparation of siTOX-coated FD/FM NPs and the manipulation of “offense and defense” signaling by 
FD/FM@siTOX NPs. Adapted with permission from Ref. [152] Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH. (E) Preparation of the melittin-RADA32 hydrogel/MET (MRM)-Coated 
Spores and the TEM images of MRM, C-novyi-spores, and MRM-coated spores (Scale bars: 500 nm). Reproduced by permission from Ref. [173] Copyright 2022 
Elsevier Ltd. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
218
nano-assemblies; 
finally, 
folic 
acid-modified 
poly­
ethyleneimine/miR-34a complex was added together to form the 
tumor-targeted nanosystem [169]. This layer-by-layer self-assembly 
strategy successfully enhances the stability and encapsulation efficiency 
of cationic membranolytic peptides, and the agents with different 
mechanisms of action have also been co-loaded to synergistically inhibit 
tumor growth. Furthermore, a cRGD motif-functionalized, glutathione 
(GSH)-responsive chimaeric polymersomes has been designed by Zhong 
et al. to achieve targeted and controlled delivery of LTX-315 (termed as 
cRGD-CPs-L), in which the cationic LTX-315 was electrostatically 
adsorbed to the negatively charged poly aspartic acid segment [170]. 
cRGD-CPs-L could be safely administered via intravenous injection and 
then deposited within the tumor at 4.8% ID/g, which effectively induced 
ICD of B16F10 melanoma and resulted in a 30% complete cure rate in 
combination with immune checkpoint blockade (Fig. 4F). It is worth 
mentioning that the cRGD functionalized chimaeric polymersomes 
(cRGD-CPs) reported in this work not only can improve the stability of 
LTX-315 in blood circulation, but also enhanced its tumor inhibition 
ability even via intratumoral administration. The results showed that 
intratumoral injection of free LTX-315 has induced tumor necrosis only 
on days 1–6, and then rapid tumor recurrence was observed, whereas 
intratumoral injection of cRGD-CPs-LTX-315 produced sustained tumor 
suppression. 
Since many inorganic materials offer unique cargo-carrying, mag­
netic, redox, and immunomodulatory properties, several representative 
oncolytic peptides-loaded organic/inorganic hybrid nanosystems have 
been developed to improve cancer therapeutic efficacy. For instance, 
Zeotlitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8), a pH-sensitive metal-organic 
framework (MOF) consisting of Zn2+ and 2-methylimidazole, has been 
used to deliver melittin for combating U14 tumors in vivo (Fig. 5A) 
[171]. Lin et al. have prepared a PEGylated graphene oxide-Fe3O4 
(PEG-GO-Fe3O4) nanocomposites for melittin delivery (Fig. 5B). The 
melittin is designed to be shielded by the PEG-GO shell in blood circu­
lation and then transported to the tumor sites under an external mag­
netic field owing to the Fe3O4 component [172]. Boehmite [AlO(OH)] is 
a pro-oxidant biocompatible material that can accelerate GSH depletion. 
Yang et al. have developed a nanocarrier by coating boehmite with 
serum albumin (SA) (Fig. 5C), which was used for the co-delivery of 
chlorin e6 and melittin [158]. Boehmite not only is a carrier but also can 
reduce the level of GSH to enhance the PDT effect, and the introduction 
of melittin not only can promote nanoparticle penetration but syner­
gistically enhance the ICD-associated antitumor immune response. 
Recently, carrier-free nanosystems have attracted great attention due 
to some advantages compared to carrier-based systems, such as facile 
preparation and high drug loading. Sun et al. have synthesized pH- 
sensitive prodrugs, fluorinated doxorubicin (FD), and melittin (FM), 
which can self-assemble to form FD/FM NPs via fluorine interactions 
and hydrophobic interactions. Then, siTOX (anti-TOX small interfering 
RNA) was further coated on the FD/FM NPs via electrostatic interactions 
[152]. In the acidic TME, doxorubicin and melittin would be reactivated 
after the degradation of Schiff base linkage, which can trigger ICD and 
promote CD8+ T cells infiltration. Moreover, the released siTOX would 
silence TOX expression to prevent the CD8+ T cells exhaustion, thereby 
amplifying antitumor immunity (Fig. 5D). Melittin-RADA32, a poly­
peptide nanofiber previously reported by Yang’s group, has been 
co-deposited with metformin on the C-novyi-NT spores by self-assembly 
(Fig. 5E). It was observed that both the in vitro stability and 
intra-tumoral retention of nano-assemblies have been greatly improved, 
which could effectively reprogram the tumor immune microenviron­
ment and activate anticancer immunity. In addition, the spore-forming 
bacteria have only been found in the anaerobic site within tumors 
rather than normal tissue, suggesting that they can be safely used in vivo 
without inducing undesired infections [173]. Furthermore, Xu et al. 
designed an amphiphilic lipopeptide composed of dendritic arginine and 
hydrophobic cholesterol groups. Unlike the nanosystems described 
above, the amphiphilic lipopeptides can self-assemble to form 
hole-punching nanotoxins via supramolecular interactions, without 
needing any additional components [174]. The nanotoxins could trigger 
multimodal cancer cells death with 80.3% apoptotic cells (TdT-me­
diated dUTP nick-end labeling, TUNEL-positive), 97.8% necrotic cells 
(poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, PARP-positive) and 71.0% autophagic 
cells (microtubule-associated protein light chain 3, LC3-positive), which 
showed great promise for treating multidrug resistant cancer. 
While physical encapsulation holds promise for in vivo application of 
oncolytic peptides, a major concern is whether these peptides can 
maintain their selectivity against tumors once loaded into a delivery 
system. In one case, the physical encapsulation results in simultaneous 
decrease of oncolytic activity and hemolytic activity. For example, the 
oncolytic activity of melittin was partially compromised after physical 
encapsulation, and meanwhile the hemolytic activity of melittin also 
significantly decreased, leading to slight increase of tumor selectivity 
[166,167]. This should be because oncolytic peptides are relatively easy 
to be released for membrane perforating when the nanoparticles come 
into contact with highly negative tumor cell membrane [168,175]. 
Alternately, some other reports claimed that physical encapsulation of 
oncolytic peptides could reduce the hemolysis without compromising 
their oncolytic activity, thereby significantly increasing their tumor 
selectivity. For example, Aronson et al. reported that a kind of lip­
opeptisome, made of the tumor cell membrane-mimicking lipids, could 
preferentially fuse with cancer cell membranes and subsequently lead to 
the direct assimilation of loaded peptides into the membrane lipid 
bilayer, thereby improving the tumor selectivity [176]. It should be 
noted that free oncolytic peptides-mediated cell death is mainly due to 
the disintegration of cell membrane, while after internalization by 
cancer cells, the oncolytic peptides may act on cytosolic endomem­
branous organelles [168,170,171]. Moreover, compared to the free 
oncolytic peptides, the physically encapsulated peptides can selectively 
accumulate in tumors through either passive targeting (based on EPR 
effect) or active targeting strategy (e.g. by attachment of targeting 
moieties), which can further increase the tumor selectivity [167,170]. 
4.2. Covalent attachment of oncolytic peptides 
Compared to physical encapsulation, oncolytic peptides can also be 
covalently coupled to the polymer chains, which may improve the 
formulation stability to some extent. Commonly, peptides are chemi­
cally bonded to polymer chains via the Michael addition reaction, 
“Click” reaction, disulfide bond formation, amidation reaction, etc [31]. 
By introducing the stimuli-sensitive chemical bonds, the oncolytic 
peptides could be efficiently delivered to tumor tissue using diverse 
polymer-based vehicles, and then the oncolytic peptides can be released 
in a controlled manner within TME. Recently, an oil-soluble monomer 
(termed CDC) was synthesized by using two anhydride groups to modify 
the terminus of a linear aliphatic chain, which could react with amino 
groups to form an acid-responsive dynamic amide bond (Fig. 6A). After 
the oil phase containing CDC has been emulsified under ultrasonication, 
the water-soluble membranolytic peptide FKLAK could react with CDC 
at the interface of emulsion droplets to form the polypeptide nano­
spheres in situ [177]. Significantly, the drug-loading efficiency of the 
nanospheres was as high as 77%, and the FKLAK peptide could be 
released and reactivated within tumors due to the hydrolysis of the 
amide bond. Since GSH maintains a high concentration in tumors, 
oncolytic peptides have been designed to attach to various polymers via 
disulfide bonds for efficient delivery and controlled release. A negatively 
charged thiolated amidized glycol chitosan (SA-GCS-SH) was reported 
by Xu et al. which could serve as a carrier for melittin via electrostatic 
binding and disulfide cross-linking (Fig. 6B). However, different from 
the free melittin, the nano-complexes (DSNS) have been found to kill 
tumor cells by disrupting organelle membranes rather than plasma 
membranes, this is probably because the encapsulated melittin can only 
be released under the intracellular acidic pH and high level of GSH 
[178]. Similarly, another pH/GSH-dual responsive polymer vehicle was 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
219
Fig. 6. (A) A) The structures of FKLAK & CDC, the reaction diagram of an amino group and anhydride group at pH 7.4, and the hydrolysis process of the acid-labile 
amide group at pH 6.5; b) Schematic diagram of polypeptide nanospheres fabricated via emulsion interfacial polymerization. Reproduced by permission from 
Ref. [177] Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. (B) The chemical structure of SA-GCS-SH and the schematic diagrams of DSNS preparation and its intracellular pathway. 
Reproduced by permission from Ref. [178] Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Preparation of D-melittin conjugate and its self-assembly behavior at 
different pH conditions. Reproduced by permission from Ref. [179] Copyright 2021 Elsevier Ltd. (D) The synthesis process of poly (amidoamine)s-melittin conjugates 
(ISA23-MLT). Adapted with permission from Ref. [180] Copyright 2005 Elsevier Ltd. (E) Schematic diagram of the MnO2-melittin nanoparticles (M-M NPs) synthesis. 
Adapted with permission from Ref. [160] Copyright 2022 Elsevier Ltd. (F) a) Synthesis process of alkynyl dextran; b) synthesis process of Dex-(KW)3 conjugate. 
Reproduced by permission from Ref. [181] Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
220
prepared by reversible addition-fragmentation chain-transfer (RAFT) 
polymerization of pyridyl disulfide ethyl methacrylate (PDSEMA) and 
2-diisopropylaminoethyl methacrylate (DIPAMA) using poly (ethylene 
glycol) methyl ether (4-cyano-4-pentanoate dodecyl trithiocarbonate) as 
chain transfer agents (Fig. 6C). D-melittin was then conjugated to the 
polymer vehicle via a disulfide bond, which could be released due to the 
protonation of DIPAMA units and cleavage of disulfide bonds after 
endocytosis [179]. Previous studies have shown that repeat systemic 
administration of nano-bioactive drugs may trigger a host immune 
response, to elicit antibodies against the carrier (e.g., anti-PEG anti­
bodies against PEGylated platforms), which resulted in rapid blood 
clearance and fatal hypersensitivity reaction. It is inspiring to find that 
substituting the L-melittin with D-melittin could attenuate the immune 
response against the loaded cargos, without compromising its biological 
activity. 
Unlike the oncolytic peptides-nanosystems based on dynamic 
chemical bonds mentioned above, some uncleavable oncolytic peptides- 
polymer conjugates also showed superior biological activity. ISA23, an 
uncharged amphoteric poly (amidoamine)s at pH 7.4, would be pro­
tonated and undergo a conformation change from coil to stretch at acidic 
TME. Duncan et al. have synthesized an “activated melittin comonomer” 
functionalized with two C–C double bonds (Fig. 6D), which was then 
used to prepare poly (amidoamine)s-melittin conjugates (ISA23-MLT) 
together with 2-methylpiperazine and bis-acrylamidoacetic acid via 
hydrogen-transfer 
polyaddition 
reaction 
[180]. 
The 
obtained 
ISA23-MLT has no hemolytic activity at pH 7.4 due to the shielding 
effect of the ISA23 coil, as expected, the melittin domains would be 
exposed and allowed to interact with cancer cell membranes at acidic 
pH. According to Zhou’s work, melittin also has been successfully con­
jugated to polyacrylic acid (PAA)-modified manganese dioxide (MnO2) 
nanoparticle via 1-(3-Dimethylaminopropyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide hy­
drochloride (EDC) condensation reaction (Fig. 6E). The MnO2-melittin 
nanoparticles showed significant membranolytic activity and cytotox­
icity against B16, MC38, and MB49 tumor cells, but were safe to normal 
cells including antigen presentation cells [160]. This phenomenon may 
be probably due to the selective exposure of melittin domains within 
tumor cells caused by the GSH-specific responsiveness of MnO2 nano­
particles. Moreover, it is worth noting that polyvalent oncolytic 
peptides-polymer conjugates may have higher binding affinity to cancer 
cells membrane than that of free oncolytic peptides. Azide-terminated 
(KW)3 cationic peptide has been synthesized by Chau and Zhong 
(Fig. 6F), which was conjugated to alkynyl dextran via Cu(I)-catalyzed 
“Click” reaction [181]. The thermodynamic analyses suggested that 
Dex-(KW)3 conjugate can insert deeply into the core of the membrane 
due to the entropy-driven effect, while most of the free (KW)3 can only 
be adsorbed on the membrane surface due to the enthalpy-driven effect. 
As expected, the higher local concentration of (KW)3 peptide bound to 
dextran scaffold mainly contribute to its increasing membranolytic ac­
tivity, which also leads to the superior antitumor activity of Dex-(KW)3 
conjugate against PC-3 cells, MCF-7 cells, and even MES-SA/Dx5 mul­
tidrug-resistant cells. 
5. Advance of oncolytic polymers 
Oncolytic peptides have attracted great interest due to their advan­
tages in combating a broad spectrum of cancers and overcoming 
multidrug resistance, but the practical application has been significantly 
delayed due to the inherent limitations of peptide drugs. As mentioned 
above, the oncolytic peptides can be carefully engineered to have a 
precise sequence, charge, conformation, assembly, and almost any other 
desired physicochemical/physiological properties in terms of existing 
technical methods theoretically. To meet the market demands, not only 
the biocompatibility, stability, targeting ability and oncolytic activity 
need to be optimized, but the manufacturing scale, production 
complexity, and cost also cannot be ignored [30]. Oncolytic polymers, as 
a class of emerging macromolecular agents in the last ten years, have 
been defined as the oncolytic peptides-mimicking polymers that can 
induce tumor cell lysis and has the potential to treat a broad spectrum of 
tumors. Unlike the traditional polymers that only act as inert excipients 
or vehicles in the field of drug delivery (as mentioned in Section 4), 
oncolytic polymers have intrinsic anticancer activity, which can work 
independently or synergistically with other antineoplastic strategies. In 
addition, oncolytic polymers exhibit several advantages over natural 
oncolytic peptides, such as high stability against proteases, high salt 
tolerance, flexible structure for chemical modification, better compati­
bility with drug delivery technology, and ease of production as well as 
preservation [32,41,154,182–185]. In this section, we describe the 
recent advances in optimizing the therapeutic index of oncolytic poly­
mers, designing TME-activated oncolytic polymers, and developing 
synergistic therapeutic strategies with oncolytic polymers against 
cancers. 
5.1. Optimization of the bioactivity of the oncolytic polymers 
3-alkylpyridinium polymers (3-APS), a natural product derived from 
the marine sponge Reniera sarai, have been reported to possess mem­
branolytic activity against non small cell lung cancer cells, but are also 
hemolytic and even lethal when given intravenously. To elucidate the 
structure-activity relationship, Sepˇci´c et al. have synthesized several 3- 
APS derivatives (APS7, APS8, and APS12-2) (Fig. 7A), and the results 
showed that the hemolytic activity of 3-APS would be reduced by 
decreasing the degree of polymerization and carbon chain lengths at the 
3-position [186]. A series of methacrylate random copolymers have 
been designed to mimic the biological activities of oncolytic peptides by 
Taichman et al. which contain different lengths of cationic side chains 
and different ratios of hydrophobic-to-hydrophilic repeat units (Fig. 7B). 
They found that the antitumor activity of copolymers exhibited a sig­
nificant increasing trend when the ratio of EMA monomer increased or 
the cationic side chains was extended [187]. However, the increasing 
ratio of EMA (which means higher hydrophobicity) would also lead to 
more severe hemolysis, which may be due to the non-specific hydro­
phobic interaction with the red blood cell membrane. Moreover, it is 
worth emphasizing that the P-5 copolymer exhibited significant 
membrane-disrupting ability and cell-killing ability against dormant 
PC-3 cells and PC-3 spheroids model, while the docetaxel treated-group 
showed almost no difference from the control group. Recently, several 
membrane-active anticancer triblock copolymers PEG-PGCm-PLAn 
(PEG, guanidinium-functionalized polycarbonate, and polylactide 
blocks) have been synthesized via organocatalytic ring-opening poly­
merization (OROP) [188]. The cationic polycarbonate segment could be 
prevented from enzymatic degradation because the triblock copolymers 
were able to self-assemble into micellar nanostructures to achieve sta­
ble, long-term blood circulation (Fig. 7C). The results suggested that the 
copolymers could destroy cancer cell membranes and metabolic process 
via a non-apoptotic mechanism, which is different from the mode of 
action of intracellular-targeted small molecule drugs. As expected, the 
copolymers showed significantly selective killing of human cancer cell 
lines (BCap37, HepG2, A549, and A431) and even MDR cancer cell lines 
(Bats-72 and Bads-200), and its anticancer activity would be increased 
with 
the 
increasing 
degree 
of 
polymerization 
of 
guanidinium-functionalized 
polycarbonate 
block. 
In 
addition, 
intra-tumor injection of the optimized L3/D3 copolymers could not only 
could inhibit the orthotopic 4T1 tumor growth, but also showed the 
ability to prevent tumor metastasis. 
Cationic poly (L-lysine) (PLL), a kind of poly (α-amino acid)s syn­
thesized by ring-opening polymerization (ROP) of N-carboxyanhydrides 
(NCAs), can kill certain cancer cells by inducing membrane lysis and 
subsequent mitochondrial damage, but the non-selective toxicity to 
normal cells still limits its application. Jan et al. have prepared a poly (L- 
lysine)-b-poly (L-threonine) (PLL-b-PLT) block co-polypeptide adopting 
a random coil-β-sheet conformation, which can form 1D fibril assemblies 
through the intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions, thereby 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
221
Fig. 7. (A) Chemical structures of the natural 3-APS and its derivatives. Adapted with permission from Ref. [186] Copyright 2012 Elsevier Ltd. (B) Synthesis process 
of the methacrylate random copolymers (composition of EMA monomer was varied) and SEM images of the a) untreated dormant PC-3 cells and the dormant PC-3 
cells treated with b) P-5 copolymer or c) docetaxel. Reproduced by permission from Ref. [187] Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. (C) General synthetic procedure for 
PEG-PGCm-PLAn copolymers and application of the self-assembled nanomicelles in cancer therapy. Reproduced by permission from Ref. [188] Copyright 2019 
Elsevier Ltd. (D) Illustration of the chemical structures, self-assembly properties, and anticancer mechanism of the PLL60, PLL40-b-PLT20, and PLL20-b-PLT40. 
Reproduced by permission from Ref. [189] Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. (E) a) Schematic diagram of design and anticancer mechanism of the heterochiral β-peptide 
polymers; b) Observation and transcription analysis on the heterochiral β-peptide polymers’ insusceptible to antitumor resistance; c) β-peptide polymers suppress the 
pulmonary metastasis of circulating B16–F10 cells injected via tail vein. Reproduced by permission from Ref. [191] Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
222
shielding the positive charge of the PLL block to some extent and 
reducing its non-specific adsorption [189] (Fig. 7D). The cell membrane 
leakage assay revealed that PLL40-b-PLT20 exhibited stronger mem­
branolytic activity than PLL20-b-PLT40, and both of them have lower 
cytotoxicity to normal cells than PLL60. In the LL2 subcutaneous tumor 
model, PLL40-b-PLT20-formed fibril assemblies not only could suppress 
primary tumor growth, but also showed the ability to inhibit lung 
metastasis and extend tumor-bearing mice survival. Polyaniline (PANI), 
another cationic polymer with membranolytic activity towards micro­
bial cells, has been used to develop oncolytic polymer [190]. Briefly, an 
aniline-modified reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer 
(RAFT) chain transfer agent (CTA) was synthesized and used to initiate 
the radical polymerization of acrylic acid to prepare CTA-polyacrylic 
acid (CTA-PAA). Then, the nanorod-shaped diblock copolymer (PAN­
I-b-PAA) was synthesized by copolymerization of CTA-PAA with aniline 
monomer to achieve the desired water solubility of the PANI segment. 
Subsequent cytotoxicity assays revealed that PANI-b-PAA could selec­
tively inhibit the proliferation of HT29 cells at the concentration of 125 
μgmL−1. It should be mentioned that, although the introduction of 
polyacrylic acid to the PANI could increase the water-solubility and 
processability of the copolymer, the oncolytic activity was also reduced 
due to the negative charge of carboxyl groups. 
Lately, a series of heterochiral β-peptide polymers (MMxCOy, x: from 
50% to 90%) have been prepared to mimic oncolytic peptides via ROP of 
a monomethyl-substituted cationic β-lactam (MMβ) and a cyclo-octyl- 
substituted hydrophobic β-lactam (COβ) (Fig. 7E–a). The optimized 
Fig. 8. (A) A) Design and the underlying mechanism of the pH-activated macromolecular oncolytic agents; b) The IC50 of polymer 1c against different generations of 
Hep3B (no drug-resistance has been found); c) Therapeutic effect of polymer 1c in a human hepatocellular carcinoma PDX model. Reproduced by permission from 
Ref. [194] Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (B) a) Proposed mechanism of the ACPP-mediated membrane-lytic tumor cells necrosis; b) Localization of 
ACPP within 4T1 cells after incubation with Cy5-modified ACPP for 30 or 60 min observed by CLSM (nuclei and cell membranes were stained with DAPI and DiO, 
respectively. Scale bar: 20 μm); c) Schematic diagram of the activation of DA-ACPP into ACPP under the acidic TME; d) SEM images of B16–F10 cells after incubation 
with DA-ACPP for 12 h at different pH (400 × magnification, scale bar: 40 μm). Reproduced by permission from Ref. [33] Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
223
polymers MM60CO40 (degree of polymerization ~20) exhibited a broad- 
spectrum membrane-disrupting activity towards eight types of drug- 
sensitive tumor cells and eight types of drug-resistant tumor cells, 
which at the same time had low hemolytic activity and low cytotoxicity 
to mammalian cells [191]. Different from the common chemotherapy 
drugs, continuous exposure of B16 cells to MM60CO40 did not cause drug 
resistance, the further gene expression levels analysis revealed that 
MM60CO40-treatment would not induce the enrichment of the 
MDR-related pathway in B16 cells (Fig. 7E–b). The in vivo studies 
revealed that MM60CO40 (or in the dosage form of MM60CO40 and hy­
aluronic acid (HA) (MM60CO40&HA)) could not only inhibit both the 
sensitive B16 solid melanoma, MDR-solid melanomas, and cisplatin 
(DDP)-resistant A549 lung cancer, but also could prevent the orthotopic 
MDR-4T1 tumor metastasis and the seeding of circulating B16–F10 
melanoma cells (Fig. 7E–c). 
5.2. Tumor microenvironment (TME)-activated oncolytic polymers 
A class of pH-responsive poly (L-lysine iso-phthalamide) derivatives 
have been developed more than ten years ago, which can induce 
membrane damage and shows great application prospects for intracel­
lular drug delivery. However, the IC50 values of these membrane-lytic 
polymers against HeLa cells were too high to reach >250 μg mL−1, 
making them unusable as oncolytic polymers to destroy tumors directly 
[192,193]. To develop a TME-activated macromolecular oncolytic 
agent, Hedrick and Yang et al. have synthesized a diblock oncolytic 
polymer consisting of a hydrophilic PEG block and a quaternary 
ammonium-functionalized polycarbonate block, which is connected by 
an acid-sensitive acetal linker [194] (Fig. 8A). However, in the subse­
quent in vitro experiments, the acetal linked polymers were observed to 
have similar cytotoxicity compared to their non-acetal linked control 
compound, which could be due to the polymers-mediated rapid tumor 
cells membrane lysis and necrosis taking much less time than hydrolysis 
of the acetal linker, suggesting that PEG cleavage is not critical for 
realizing its membrane lytic activity. These results also indicate that the 
PEG chain might be ineffective to shield the positive charges of oncolytic 
polymers in these cases, and thus the potential toxicity of these polymers 
to normal cells or tissues needs to be carefully evaluated. Anyway, 
because of the membrane disruption mechanism, the optimized polymer 
1c was found to effectively kill both the drug-susceptible cells, MDR 
cells, and cancer stem cells with similar IC50 values, and repeated use of 
polymer 1c would not induce drug resistance. In addition, tail vein in­
jection of polymer 1c significantly increased tumor necrosis and inhibit 
tumor growth in the hepatocellular carcinoma patient derived xenograft 
(PDX) tumor model, with no obvious side effects. 
Inspired by natural HDPs, we have reported a polypeptide-based 
oncolytic polymer (called ACPP) synthesized by ROP and a subsequent 
“thiol-ene” click reaction, which contained a rigid α-helical peptide 
backbone, dense positive amino groups at the end of the side chains, and 
the membrane phospholipid tail-mimicking long hydrophobic alkyl 
chains [33] (Fig. 8B–a). Most of ACPP was observed to be located on the 
negative cancer cells membrane after incubation for only 30 min, which 
led to membrane lysis and rapid necrosis of tumor cells (Fig. 8B–b). 
It is worth noting that ACPP showed significant cytotoxicity against 
all of the tested 12 cell lines including highly metastatic cells and MDR 
cells, additionally, ACPP exhibited a higher selective index towards 
tumor cells and higher resistance to proteases when compared with 
native HDPs (e.g., melittin and temporin B). Prior to systemic injection, 
the cationic ACPP was converted to the zwitterionic precursor of 
oncolytic polymer (DA-ACPP) through the modification of ACPP with 2, 
3-dimethylmaleic anhydride, which exhibited lower hemolytic and 
cytotoxic activity against normal cells. As expected, DA-ACPP could be 
reactivated into ACPP to restore its oncolytic activity in the acidic TME 
via the pH-triggered breaking of maleic acid amide bonds and the re- 
exposed positive amino groups at the side chains (Fig. 8B-c&d). 
Furthermore, a remarkable treatment effect, as well as insignificant 
toxicity of DA-ACPP, have been verified in the 4T1 orthotopic subcu­
taneous tumor model and B16–F10 melanoma lung metastasis model. 
Subsequently, Yuan et al. synthesized an oncolytic polypeptide (OLPP) 
with similar chemical structure to ACPP. As expected, OLPP not only 
showed concentration-dependent membranolytic activity against drug- 
resistant cancer cell line (CAL27/DDP) in vitro, but also could inhibit 
the tumor growth in mouse models bearing MC38 tumor or Panc02 
tumor [195]. 
A series of polymethacrylates with pH-tunable net positive charges 
have been synthesized by Yang and her collaborators using dimethyl 
aminoethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA), hexyl methacrylate (HMA), and 
methacrylic acid (MAA) as monomers, in which cationic DMAEMA and 
hydrophobic HMA segments were designed as membrane disrupting 
domain while anionic MAA was used to provide a zwitterionic protective 
barrier for prolonging the circulation times, respectively [196]. 
Although the monomer composition remained unchanged in different 
polymers, the pKa of the amine group in the DMAEMA segment was 
observed to be decreased as the degree of polymerization increased. 
Therefore, at pH 6.8, about 50% amine groups of the DMAEMA segment 
in polymer M −14 K were protonated, whereas only 25% amine groups 
in polymer M −35 K were protonated, thereby explaining why M −14 K 
micelles could dissociate at pH 6.8 and then significantly disrupt 4T1 
cells membrane, but M −
35 K showed no activity (Fig. 9A–a). In the 
4T1-tumor models, the intratumoral delivery efficiency of M −
14 K 
(1.01%) is 4.8 times higher than M −
35 K (0.21%) due to the 
pH-activated interaction between oncolytic polymer with tumor cells, 
and a single dose of M −
14 K exhibited ability to suppress primary 
tumor growth and lung metastasis. In another study, they further 
established a three-dimensional cell spheroid BxPC-3@NIH-3T3 (core: 
human pancreatic BxPC-3 tumor cells, shell: cancer-associated fibro­
blasts transformed by NIH-3T3 cells) to mimic pancreatic solid tumor, 
the results suggested that M −
14 K treatment could significantly kill 
both the BxPC-3 and activated NIH-3T3 cells [197] (Fig. 9A and b). In 
the BxPC-3 tumors-bearing nude mice model, M −
14 K showed the 
ability to eliminate cancer-associated fibroblasts and tumor stroma, 
thereby making the otherwise sheltered tumor cells easier to be killed by 
M-14 K. Moreover, different from other stroma remodeling strategies 
reported in the past, M −14 K could break the pancreatic cancer stromal 
barrier and enhance antineoplastic drug penetration, but without pro­
moting tumor metastasis. 
In order to improve the sensitivity of the activatable oncolytic 
polymers in response to the subtle differences between TME and normal 
tissue, Wang and Xiong et al. have designed a series of oncolytic poly­
mers (named ‘proton transistor’ nanodetergents, pTNTs) composed of a 
membranolytic block (MB) and a PEG block, which could convert slight 
changes of pH values into noticeable changes of their membrane 
disruptive activity. pTNTs were prepared through RAFT polymerization 
of various methacrylates containing different hydrophobic groups (R) 
and a methacrylate containing an ionizable tertiary amine group (C6) by 
using mPEG113-CPDB as the macro-CTA, the transition pH (pHt: the 
membranolytic activity would be sharply changed at this pH) of which 
can be finely tuned by adjusting the percentage and species of hydro­
phobic monomers [198] (Fig. 9B–a). The results showed that benzyl 
group (Bn)-containing pTNTs (P(C6-Bn20)) could penetrate the mem­
brane with less resistance when compared to hexyl-containing pTNTs (P 
(C6–H20)), which probably due to the cation-π interaction could make 
Bn groups exposed on the surface of pTNTs together with the cationic 
groups (while hexyl groups were mainly located within the hydrophobic 
core), thereby facilitating Bn groups penetrating into the phospholipids 
tails domains and causing membrane disruption before the full insertion 
of polymer into membrane interior (Fig. 9B-b&c). They screened the 
library of pTNTs and found that P(C6-Bn20) has the highest selectivity 
(Fig. 9B–d), the cytotoxicity of which would be > 32 times enhanced due 
to the protonation of the tertiary amine group when pH decreased from 
6.9 to 6.8. Subsequently, Panc02GFP/mCherry cells were subcutaneously 
implanted into the ear of mice, and then the time-dependent 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
224
intracellular mCherry leakage was observed via a bio-imaging system 
after systematic injection of P(C6-Bn20)-cy5, suggesting that the pTNTs 
could effectively induce tumor lysis in vivo (Fig. 9B–f). As expected, P 
(C6-Bn20) exhibited good biocompatibility and significant anticancer 
efficacy in the Panc02 tumor-bearing mice model, CT26 tumor-bearing 
mice model, B16–F10 lung metastasis model, and PDX breast cancer 
model. 
5.3. Combination cancer therapy with oncolytic polymers 
Since the therapeutic window of most chemotherapy agents is 
narrow and cancer cells are prone to developing high drug efflux ability, 
it is urgent to explore methods to reduce the working concentrations of 
these drugs and reverse the MDR. Yang et al. have developed a qua­
ternary ammonium-functionalized oncolytic polycarbonate to synergize 
with small molecule chemotherapeutics (Fig. 10A). When combined 
with only 20 μg mL−1 of oncolytic polymer, the IC50 of doxorubicin for 
MCF-7 cells would be decreased from about 320 ng mL−1 to 0.5 ng mL−1, 
suggesting a significant synergistic efficiency [199]. Due to the oncolytic 
polymer-mediated damage of the plasma membrane, the cellular uptake 
of doxorubicin into MCF-7 cells was observed to be increased by 2.5 ±
0.5 times after incubation for 2 h. In addition, the polymers also showed 
Fig. 9. (A) A) Schematic illustrations of the chemical structure and self-assembly property of M −14 K, and the in vivo anticancer effect evaluation of M −14 K (scale 
bar: 400 μm). Reproduced by permission from Ref. [196] Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society; b) Schematic illustration of the M-14 K-mediated killing of 
cancer-associated fibroblasts (activated NIH-3T3) and BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cells in the three-dimensional BxPC-3@NIH-3T3 spheroid model (NIH-3T3 cells are 
pre-stained with the CFDA-SE (carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester, green); PI (propidium iodide, red) was used to stain cells with damaged membranes, 
scale bar: 100 μm). Reproduced by permission from Ref. [197] Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (B) a) Schematic illustration of the chemical structure and 
pH responsiveness of pTNTs. When the pH is higher than the pHt, pTNTs were observed as neutral nanoparticles with inactive membranolytic blocks (MBs) due to the 
deprotonation of the majority of C6 groups (‘OFF’ state), while the pH is lower than pHt, the pTNTs transform into free polymer chains or cationic nanoparticles with 
activated MBs after more C6 groups were protonated (‘ON’ state). The hydrophobic blocks containing deprotonated C6 and R groups are colored light blue and navy 
blue, while the positive block containing protonated C6 groups is colored red; b) Atomic molecular dynamics simulations of aggregation state of 16 molecules of P 
(C6-Bn20)l, P(C6-Bn20)h, P(C6–H20)l and P(C6–H20)h (the subscript ‘l’ and ‘h’ represents 12.5% (low) and 62.5% (high) protonation degree); c) Typical images of the 
insertion process of P(C6-Bn20)h and P(C6–H20)h into the bilayer membrane model; d) The top-performing pTNT was P(C6-Bn20); e) Excised Panc02 tumors weight 
after the treatment of PBS or different dose of P(C6-Bn20)h; f) In vivo evaluation of the intracellular mCherry leakage after intravenous injection of P(C6-Bn20)-cy5 into 
Panc02GFP/mCherry tumors-bearing mice, scale bar: 20 μm. Reproduced by permission from Ref. [198] Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
225
synergistic or additive effects with doxorubicin/paclitaxel/ciprofloxacin 
against MCF-7 cells, HepG2 cells, and MCF-7 ADR drug resistant cells, 
respectively. Furthermore, they found that a previously reported 
guanidinium-functionalized cationic polycarbonate (which can trans­
locate the plasma membrane without causing damage to the membrane) 
did not exhibit any synergistic effect with doxorubicin, implying that 
membrane lysis is key for achieving synergistic therapy. 
Photothermal therapy (PTT) has attracted extensive attention from 
researchers due to its spatiotemporal controllability and non­
invasiveness. However, heat shock proteins would be overexpressed in 
the surviving tumor cells after nonlethal photothermal treatment, 
thereby inducing thermo-tolerance, which means that these cells could 
acquire tolerance to extreme temperature and drug resistance. Yang 
et al. have prepared a pH-activated oncolytic polymethacrylate (aHLP) 
by random copolymerization of 3-methacrylamidophenylboronic acid, 
hexyl methacylate, methacrylic acid, and dimethylaminoethyl methac­
rylate, which exhibited membranolytic activity towards drug-resistant 
4T1 (4T1-R) cells and thermo-tolerant HeLa (HeLa-TR) cells at pH 6.8, 
but showed no activity at pH 7.4 [200]. Then, aHLP was conjugated to 
the surface of polydopamine (PDA) nanoparticles through the formation 
of the boronate ester bond, the obtained aHLP-PDA nanoparticle was 
aimed to achieve synergistic therapy of PTT and oncolytic polymer 
(Fig. 10B–a). As expected, the single treatment of PDA nanoparticles 
with irradiation can effectively kill wild-type HeLa cells at both pH 6.8 
and pH 7.4, but most of the HeLa-TR cells were still alive after PTT at 
either pH. In contrast, after incubation with aHLP-PDA and irradiation 
with near-infrared (NIR) laser, HeLa-TR cells were significantly inhibi­
ted at pH 6.8 due to the release and activation of aHLP (Fig. 10B–b). 
Moreover, in the 4T1-R tumor-bearing mice model, the intravenous in­
jection of aHLP-PDA could inhibit tumor growth during the entire 
observation period even after the laser irradiation removal, while the 
tumors size in the PDA-treated group decreased only after the first light 
irradiation but continued growing over time, suggesting the oncolytic 
effect of released aHLP did play an important role in combating 
drug-resistant tumors (Fig. 10B and c). 
6. Summary and prospect 
In conclusion, this review summarizes the recent advances on 
oncolytic peptides at the beginning, including their mechanisms of ac­
tion to kill tumor cells, the structure-activity relationship, and the 
emerging oncolytic peptides-based combination cancer therapy strate­
gies. Compared with traditional antineoplastic agents targeting specific 
metabolic and signaling pathways, most of oncolytic peptides can 
Fig. 10. (A) A) Chemical structure of the quaternary ammonium-functionalized oncolytic polymer and the previously reported guanidinium-functionalized poly­
carbonate; b) The membrane disrupting ability of quaternary ammonium polymer evaluated by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) leakage assay against MCF-7 ADR cells 
at different concentrations of Dox or ciprofloxacin. Reproduced by permission from Ref. [199] Copyright 2021 Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) a) The structure and 
synthesis process of aHLP-PDA nanoparticle, and the schematic diagram of its redox/heat dual-responsive behavior; b) Live/dead (Calcein-AM/PI) staining of the 
HeLa-TR cells incubated with aHLP-PDA nanoparticle at pH 7.4 or pH 6.8 after 5 min irradiation with a NIR laser at 1 W/cm2, scale bar = 50 μm; c) The tumor 
volume and survival rate after different treatments evaluated in the 4T1-R tumor-bearing BALB/c mice model. Reproduced by permission from Ref. [200] Copyright 
2016 American Chemical Society. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
226
rapidly induce plasma membrane perturbation and tumor cell lysis over 
tens of minutes. The novel targets and killing mechanism of oncolytic 
peptides endowed it with the ability to overcome tumor penetration 
barrier, heterogeneity, and multidrug resistance. Next, we summed up 
the massive efforts devoted to exploring diverse nano-delivery vesicles 
of oncolytic peptides, which aimed to achieve tumor-targeted controlled 
release and prevent undesired hemolysis as well as thrombosis. Unfor­
tunately, although oncolytic peptides-based nano-delivery systems can 
be theoretically well-designed and constructed relying on existing 
nanotechnology approaches to achieve any desired properties, those 
nanoparticles with complex structures were still unable to meet the 
needs for industrial production due to the time-consuming preparation 
procedures, low production yield, poor reproducibility, and high 
manufacturing cost [30,201]. Oncolytic polymers, a class of synthetic 
polymers designed to mimic natural oncolytic peptides, have gradually 
emerged in recent years, showing great potential as a novel treatment 
option for malignant tumors. In the last part of this review, the recent 
advances in oncolytic polymers-mediated cancer therapy have been 
summarized, and the common strategies used in the design and opti­
mization of oncolytic polymers have also been discussed. 
In fact, synthetic polymers have extensively served as an inert 
component (e.g., drug stabilizer, excipient, smart delivery vehicle, and 
scaffold) for the treatment of various diseases in the past few decades, 
which showed a great ability to improve the pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics of the functional ingredient [202]. On the contrary, 
oncolytic polymers, the materials with intrinsic membranolytic activity, 
can effectively destroy various phenotypes of tumors including MDR and 
metastatic tumors, without relying on any traditional antineoplastic 
agents. In addition, synthetic oncolytic polymers can not only be 
chemically modified via versatile methods and facilely produced on a 
large scale at low cost, but also are compatible with well-established 
nanotechnology and drug delivery strategies. Due to the many advan­
tages of oncolytic polymers, it may lead to a revolution in cancer therapy 
in the next few years. However, this is not to say that oncolytic polymers 
should be required to replace certain antineoplastic agents completely, 
but it is to say that oncolytic polymers probably serve as a new thera­
peutic paradigm to complement/improve existing cancer treatment 
strategies. For example: 1) Since most of oncolytic polymers contain 
plenty of amino groups, they can be easily post-modified with a diversity 
of functional units (e.g., proteins, chelations, zwitterions, fluorescent 
molecules, and targeted agents) via chemical conjugations, which fa­
cilitates the regulation of their architectures and expansion of their 
application. 
Specifically, 
modification 
of 
amino 
groups 
with 
stimuli-responsive groups leads to construction of stimuli-activable 
oncolytic polymers with improved therapeutic outcomes and 
enhanced biosafety [203–205]. However, most of recent researches 
focus on the design of stimuli-activable oncolytic polymers in response 
to the acidic pH within TME, the stimuli-activable oncolytic polymers 
that respond to other internal (e.g., redox state, and various enzymes) 
and external stimuli (e.g., light, heat, ultrasound and magnetic field) 
remain to be developed; 2) Due to the broad-spectrum membranolytic 
activity, oncolytic polymers are able to be designed for inducing lysis of 
endothelial cells and tumor stromal cells, thereby increasing the 
vascular permeability and breaking the “dense stromal barrier” to drug 
delivery [206]; 3) Due to the pore-forming ability on the plasma mem­
brane, oncolytic polymers could break the “cell membranes barrier” and 
then facilitate both small molecule drugs and macromolecular agents (e. 
g., nucleic acids and proteins) uptake into the tumor cells or other 
intra-tumoral cells (e.g., immune cells and stromal cells); 4) PDT or 
certain cytotoxic drugs are unable to kill cancer cells in the core of solid 
tumors due to the hypoxic microenvironment, while oncolytic polymers 
can help to eradicate these hypoxic cells because their antitumor activity 
would not be affected; 5) Immunotherapy has been shown to deal with 
various advanced tumors and prolong patient survival, but the response 
rates to immunotherapy are quite low due to the immunosuppressive 
TME and immune resistance. In view of the potential of oncolytic 
peptides (as described in Section 3.2) in cancer immunotherapy, we 
have preliminarily demonstrated that oncolytic polymers can also 
induce ICD of tumor cells, thereby activating the immune response 
[207]. In addition, oncolytic polymers can be rationally designed to 
target and lyse intra-tumoral immunosuppressive cells including TAMs, 
MDSCs, and cancer-associated fibroblasts, which not only can reverse 
immunosuppression, but also can disrupt the stromal barrier to promote 
activated immune cells infiltration. 
However, as the research of oncolytic polymers is still in its infancy, 
many doubts and obstacles are remaining to be solved in the future. 
Firstly, an in-depth understanding of the structure-activity relationships 
of oncolytic polymers is of high priority before the preclinical trials. 
Because the interactions between oncolytic polymers and cells mem­
brane were observed to be strongly dependent on the degree of poly­
merization/backbone length as described above, the controlled 
polymerization techniques should be optimized to synthesize biode­
gradable oncolytic polymers with narrower molecular weight distribu­
tion, thereby ensuring their physiological activity and avoiding the side 
effects; Moreover, the influences of comonomer sequence, topological 
structure, counterions and other factors (such as those listed in Section 
2.4) of the oncolytic polymers on their biological activity also need to be 
carefully studied. Fortunately, instead of screening through millions of 
different polymers, the introduction of machine learning and artificial 
intelligence would greatly simplify the process of design & screening of 
oncolytic polymers, which can reduce the cost and facilitate its further 
application. Secondly, the underlying action mechanism of oncolytic 
polymers at the subcellular level/molecular level needs to be explored in 
depth, for instance, the negatively charged phospholipids-contained 
endoplasmic reticulum membrane, Golgi membrane, and mitochon­
drial membrane may also become the potential targets of oncolytic 
polymers. And various immune cells may also be directly targeted and 
activated by certain well-designed cationic amphiphilic polymers [208]. 
In fact, the mechanism of action of oncolytic polymers may not be as 
simple as disrupting the tumor cells membrane, the largely unknown 
interactions between oncolytic polymers and non-membrane targets/­
non-tumor cells need to be further elucidated to ensure their safety and 
effectiveness in vivo. But it is worth noting that studies of the in vivo fate 
and targets of oncolytic polymers usually rely on fluorescence labeling 
and imaging methods so far, the fluorescent markers and modification 
sites need to be scrutinized to ensure that the biological activity of 
oncolytic polymers would not be changed [209]. Besides, to closely 
approximate the true state of nature, some label-free methods (e.g., 
surface plasmon resonance, mass spectrometry, biolayer interferometry, 
and backscattering interferometry) can also aid in the determination of 
the interactions between oncolytic polymers and the targets without 
altering the participating components [210]. Thirdly, although all of the 
oncolytic polymers reported currently have shown the ability to over­
come MDR tumors, some studies have shown that tumor cells developed 
resistance to oncolytic peptides by modulating their plasma membrane 
components (e.g., anionic glycan), thereby the possibility of oncolytic 
polymers resistance needs to be examined [211,212]. Fourthly, in order 
to broaden its application scope, the feasibility and effectiveness of 
oncolytic polymers in the treatment of some complex tumor models (e. 
g., glioma/glioblastoma brain tumors) should also be carefully studied. 
Although there has been some researches showing that oncolytic pep­
tides were able to induce glioma/glioblastoma tumor cells lysis and 
inhibit growth of subcutaneous glioblastoma tumor [118,213–217], the 
blood-brain barrier (BBB) remains a major obstacle in the treatment of 
brain tumors in vivo. So far, there has been a controversy about whether 
the oncolytic peptides/polymers could cross the BBB. For example, 
although cationic peptide Cypep-1 showed significant anticancer ability 
against six kinds of glioma cell lines in vitro, low concentration of 
Cypep-1 within the central nervous system indicated that it is hard to 
pass the BBB [218]. In contrast, some other studies showed that 
membrane-active peptides (including proline-rich antimicrobial pep­
tides and neutrophilic defensins) can cross the BBB [219,220]. In fact, 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
227
most of oncolytic peptides are lipophilic cationic compounds, which are 
theoretically prone to cross the BBB after certain structural design (e.g., 
surface charge regulation, targeting ligands modification, introduction 
of cell-penetrating peptides, etc.) [221–224]. Moreover, the cationic 
polymers such as poly-L-lysines and chitosan, have previously been 
observed to cross the BBB and used for brain-targeted drug delivery, thus 
suggesting the broad application prospects of positively-charged onco­
lytic polymers in the treatment of brain tumors [225]. Finally, although 
oncolytic polymers have already shown great promise in various mouse 
models, several fundamental issues still need to be considered before 
being applied to humans. For example, different administration routes 
of oncolytic polymers have a great influence on their safety, drug 
metabolism, and therapeutic efficacy, which should be carefully 
considered in designing treatment plans. Considering the physico­
chemical properties and mechanism of action of the oncolytic polymers, 
developing the oncolytic polymers-based transdermal formulations (e. 
g., hydrogels and microneedles) seems to be a promising strategy for the 
local treatment of superficial tumors (e.g., melanoma), thus deserving 
further exploration in larger trials. More importantly, for the concern of 
long-term safety, the immunogenicity and genotoxicity of oncolytic 
polymers and their degradation products also should be carefully 
investigated on large animals or humans for a relatively long period. 
Overall, with deepening research, oncolytic polymers are promising to 
be an integral part of multimodal therapeutic strategies for cancer 
patients. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Hanmeng Liu: Investigation, Writing-Original Draft. Wei Shen: 
Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing-Original Draft, Writing- 
Review & Editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition. Wanguo Liu: 
Visualization. Zexin Yang: Data Curation. Dengke Yin: Resources, 
Funding acquisition. Chunsheng Xiao: Conceptualization, Funding 
acquisition. 
Ethics approval and consent to participate 
The present manuscript is a systematic survey based on the review of 
publicly reported literatures, which did not require ethics review. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. 
Acknowledgement 
This work was financially supported by National Natural Science 
Foundation of China [52203154 and 52222307], the Key Project of 
Anhui Provincial Department of Education [KJ2021A0543], Anhui 
University of Chinese Medicine Foundation [2022rcZD003 and 
2022rczd010], and the Major Fund Project of Anhui Provincial 
Department of Education [2022AH040077]. 
References 
[1] H. Sung, et al., Global cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence 
and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries, CA A Cancer J. Clin. 71 
(2021) 209–249. 
[2] R.L. Anderson, et al., A framework for the development of effective anti- 
metastatic agents, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 16 (2019) 185–204. 
[3] S. Rottenberg, et al., The rediscovery of platinum-based cancer therapy, Nat. Rev. 
Cancer 21 (2021) 37–50. 
[4] S. Shinde-Jadhav, et al., Role of neutrophil extracellular traps in radiation 
resistance of invasive bladder cancer, Nat. Commun. 12 (2021) 2776. 
[5] M.D. Hellmann, et al., Genomic features of response to combination 
immunotherapy in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer, Cancer 
Cell 33 (2018) 843–852. 
[6] E.K. Bartlett, et al., Human melanoma metastases demonstrate nonstochastic site- 
specific antigen heterogeneity that correlates with T-cell infiltration, Clin. Cancer 
Res. 20 (2014) 2607–2616. 
[7] M. Rossi, et al., PHGDH heterogeneity potentiates cancer cell dissemination and 
metastasis, Nature 605 (2022) 747–753. 
[8] Q. Li, et al., Molecular profiling of human non-small cell lung cancer by single- 
cell RNA-seq, Genome Med. 14 (2022) 87. 
[9] Y.S. Shuji Kitahara, et al., Vasohibin-2 modulates tumor onset in the 
gastrointestinal tract by normalizing tumor angiogenesis, Mol. Cancer 13 (2014) 
99. 
[10] W. Johnson Rachelle, et al., Induction of LIFR confers a dormancy phenotype in 
breast cancer cells disseminated to the bone marrow, Nat. Cell Biol. 18 (2016) 
1078–1089. 
[11] Z.-F. Lim, et al., Emerging insights of tumor heterogeneity and drug resistance 
mechanisms in lung cancer targeted therapy, J. Hematol. Oncol. 12 (2019) 134. 
[12] R.E.W. Hancock, et al., Antimicrobial and host-defense peptides as new anti- 
infective therapeutic strategies, Nat. Biotechnol. 24 (2006) 1551–1557. 
[13] I. Vitale, et al., Targeting cancer heterogeneity with immune responses driven by 
oncolytic peptides, Trends Cancer 7 (2021) 557–572. 
[14] W. Chiangjong, et al., Anticancer peptide: physicochemical property, functional 
aspect and trend in clinical application, Int. J. Oncol. 57 (2020) 678–696. 
[15] N. Papo, et al., Host defense peptides as new weapons in cancer treatment, Cell. 
Mol. Life Sci. 62 (2005) 784–790. 
[16] N. Manuel, et al., Antimicrobial peptides: linking partition, activity and high 
membrane-bound concentrations, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 7 (2009) 245–250. 
[17] M. Zasloff, Antimicrobial peptides of multicellular organisms, Nature 415 (2002) 
389–395. 
[18] F. Schweizer, Cationic amphiphilic peptides with cancer-selective toxicity, Eur. J. 
Pharmacol. 625 (2009) 190–194. 
[19] A.A. Baxter, et al., Tumor cell membrane-targeting cationic antimicrobial 
peptides: novel insights into mechanisms of action and therapeutic prospects, 
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 74 (2017) 3809–3825. 
[20] A. Thadi, et al., Molecular targeting of H/MDM-2 oncoprotein in human colon 
cancer cells and stem-like colonic epithelial-derived progenitor cells, Anticancer 
Res. 41 (2021) 27–42. 
[21] Z. Chen, et al., Glucose oxidase-loaded colloidal stable WS2 nanobowls for 
combined starvation/photothermal therapy of colorectal tumors, Int. J. Pharm. 
(Amst.) 636 (2023), 122848. 
[22] B. Guo, et al., Intelligent nanoenzyme for T1-weighted MRI guided theranostic 
applications, Chem. Eng. J. 391 (2020), 123609. 
[23] J. Zhang, et al., Injectable ovalbumin-based composite implant for photothermal 
tumor therapy, Chembiochem 21 (2020) 865–873. 
[24] S. Wang, et al., Thermosensitive and tum or microenvironment activated 
nanotheranostics for the chemodynamic/photothermal therapy of colorectal 
tumor, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 612 (2022) 223–234. 
[25] C. Wu, et al., Biodegradable Fe(III)@WS2-PVP nanocapsules for redox reaction 
and TME-enhanced nanocatalytic, photothermal, and chemotherapy, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 29 (2019), 1901722. 
[26] B.E. Haug, et al., Discovery of a 9-mer cationic peptide (LTX-315) as a potential 
first in class oncolytic peptide, J. Med. Chem. 59 (2016) 2918–2927. 
[27] A.L. Hilchie, et al., Anticancer activities of natural and synthetic peptides, in: 
K. Matsuzaki (Ed.), Antimicrobial Peptides: Basics for Clinical Application, 
Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd., 2019, pp. 131–147. 
[28] A. Marr, et al., Antibacterial peptides for therapeutic use: obstacles and realistic 
outlook, Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 6 (2006) 468–472. 
[29] S. Aghamiri, et al., Antimicrobial peptides as potential therapeutics for breast 
cancer, Pharmacol. Res. 171 (2021), 105777. 
[30] J. Zhou, et al., Delivery strategies for melittin-based cancer therapy, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 13 (2021) 17158–17173. 
[31] S. Lv, et al., Design of polymeric carriers for intracellular peptide delivery in 
oncology applications, Chem. Rev. 121 (2021) 11653–11698. 
[32] J. Tan, et al., Synthetic macromolecules as therapeutics that overcome resistance 
in cancer and microbial infection, Biomaterials 252 (2020), 120078. 
[33] W. Shen, et al., Antineoplastic drug-free anticancer strategy enabled by host- 
defense-peptides-mimicking synthetic polypeptides, Adv. Mater. 32 (2020), 
e2001108. 
[34] J.S. Mader, et al., Cationic antimicrobial peptides as novel cytotoxic agents for 
cancer treatment, Expet Opin. Invest. Drugs 15 (2006) 933–946. 
[35] D. Gaspar, et al., From antimicrobial to anticancer peptides. A review, Front. 
Microbiol. 4 (2013) 294. 
[36] F. Harris, et al., On the selectivity and efficacy of defense peptides with respect to 
cancer cells, Med. Res. Rev. 33 (2013) 190–234. 
[37] C. Zhang, et al., Antimicrobial peptides: potential application in liver cancer, 
Front. Microbiol. 10 (2019) 1257. 
[38] N.K. Kunda, Antimicrobial peptides as novel therapeutics for non-small cell lung 
cancer, Drug Discov. Today 25 (2020) 238–247. 
[39] F. Zandsalimi, et al., Antimicrobial peptides: a promising strategy for lung cancer 
drug discovery? Expet Opin. Drug Discov. 15 (2020) 1343–1354. 
[40] J.K. Badawi, Bee venom components as therapeutic tools against prostate cancer, 
Toxins 13 (2021) 337. 
[41] L. Lin, et al., Membrane-disruptive peptides/peptidomimetics-based therapeutics: 
promising systems to combat bacteria and cancer in the drug-resistant era, Acta 
Pharm. Sin. B 11 (2021) 2609–2644. 
[42] P.A. Trinidad-Calderon, et al., Natural peptides inducing cancer cell death: 
mechanisms and properties of specific candidates for cancer therapeutics, 
Molecules 26 (2021) 7453. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
228
[43] D. Zweytick, et al., In search of new targets-the membrane lipid 
phosphatidylserine-the underestimated Achilles’ Heel of cancer cells, in: Ann 
Oncol. Conference: 9th International Symposium on Targeted Anticancer 
Therapies, 2011, p. 22. 
[44] S. Ran, et al., Increased exposure of anionic phospholipids on the surface of tumor 
blood vessels, Cancer Res. 62 (2002) 6132–6140. 
[45] D.W. Kufe, Mucins in cancer: function, prognosis and therapy, Nat. Rev. Cancer 9 
(2009) 874–885. 
[46] H.S. Lee, et al., Mechanism of anticancer activity of buforin IIb, a histone H2A- 
derived peptide, Cancer Lett. 271 (2008) 47–55. 
[47] K. Hac-Wydro, et al., Phospatidylserine or ganglioside-Which of anionic lipids 
determines the effect of cationic dextran on lipid membrane? Colloids Surf., B 126 
(2015) 204–209. 
[48] K. Raman, et al., Chemical tumor biology of heparan sulfate proteoglycans, Curr. 
Chem. Biol. 4 (2010) 20–31. 
[49] A.P. Asimakopoulou, et al., The biological role of chondroitin sulfate in cancer 
and chondroitin-based anticancer agents, In Vivo 22 (2008) 385–389. 
[50] N. Itano, et al., Altered hyaluronan biosynthesis in cancer progression, Semin. 
Cancer Biol. 18 (2008) 268–274. 
[51] B. Fadnes, et al., The anticancer activity of lytic peptides is inhibited by heparan 
sulfate on the surface of the tumor cells, BMC Cancer 9 (2009) 183. 
[52] X. Han, et al., Basal microvilli define the metabolic capacity and lethal phenotype 
of pancreatic cancer, J. Pathol. 253 (2021) 304–314. 
[53] A. Houdusse, et al., The many roles of myosins in filopodia, microvilli and 
stereocilia, Curr. Biol. 31 (2021) 586–R602. 
[54] H.M. Chen, et al., Effects of the anti-bacterial peptide cecropin B and its analogs, 
cecropins B-1 and B-2, on liposomes, bacteria, and cancer cells, BBA-Gen Subjects 
1336 (1997) 171–179. 
[55] S.C. Chan, et al., Enhancement of the cytolytic effect of anti-bacterial cecropin by 
the microvilli of cancer cells, Anticancer Res. 18 (1998) 4467–4474. 
[56] R. Campanella, Membrane lipids modifications in human gliomas of different 
degree of malignancy, J. Neurosurg. Sci. 36 (1992) 11–25. 
[57] G. Taraboletti, et al., Membrane fluidity affects tumor-cell motility, invasion and 
lung-colonizing potential, Int. J. Cancer 44 (1989) 707–713. 
[58] H. Raghuraman, et al., Cholesterol inhibits the lytic activity of melittin in 
erythrocytes, Chem. Phys. Lipids 134 (2005) 183–189. 
[59] Y.C. Li, et al., Elevated levels of cholesterol-rich lipid rafts in cancer cells are 
correlated with apoptosis sensitivity induced by cholesterol-depleting agents, 
J. Pathol. 168 (2006) 1107–1118. 
[60] K. Simons, et al., How cells handle cholesterol, Science 290 (2000) 1721–1726. 
[61] D. Ciumac, et al., Membrane targeting cationic antimicrobial peptides, J. Colloid 
Interface Sci. 537 (2019) 163–185. 
[62] A. Won, et al., Imaging the membrane lytic activity of bioactive peptide latarcin 
2a, BBA-Biomembranes 1818 (2012) 3072–3080. 
[63] J. Bankovic, et al., The elimination of P-glycoprotein over-expressing cancer cells 
by antimicrobial cationic peptide NK-2: the unique way of multi-drug resistance 
modulation, Exp. Cell Res. 319 (2013) 1013–1027. 
[64] N. Papo, et al., A novel lytic peptide composed of DL-Amino acids selectively kills 
cancer cells in culture and in mice, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 21018–21023. 
[65] N. Papo, et al., New lytic peptides based on the D, L-amphipathic helix motif 
preferentially kill tumor cells compared to normal cells, Biochemistry 42 (2003) 
9346–9354. 
[66] J.-Y. Chen, et al., A fish antimicrobial peptide, tilapia hepcidin TH2-3, shows 
potent antitumor activity against human fibrosarcoma cells, Peptides 30 (2009) 
1636–1642. 
[67] C. Sinthuvanich, et al., Anticancer beta-hairpin peptides: membrane-induced 
folding triggers activity, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134 (2012) 6210–6217. 
[68] G.K. Bindra, et al., Human beta-defensin 2 (HBD-2) displays oncolytic activity but 
does not affect tumour cell migration, Biomolecules 12 (2022) 264. 
[69] M. Queme-Pena, et al., Membrane association modes of natural anticancer 
peptides: mechanistic details on helicity, orientation, and surface coverage, Int. J. 
Mol. Sci. 22 (2021) 8613. 
[70] V. Teixeira, et al., Role of lipids in the interaction of antimicrobial peptides with 
membranes, Prog. Lipid Res. 51 (2012) 149–177. 
[71] N.W. Schmidt, et al., Criterion for amino acid composition of defensins and 
antimicrobial peptides based on geometry of membrane destabilization, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 133 (2011) 6720–6727. 
[72] Z. Oren, et al., Mode of action of linear amphipathic α-helical antimicrobial 
peptides, Biopolymers 47 (1998) 451–463. 
[73] S. Yamaguchi, et al., Orientation and dynamics of an antimicrobial peptide in the 
lipid bilayer by solid-state NMR spectroscopy, Biophys. J. 81 (2001) 2203–2214. 
[74] Y. Shai, Mechanism of the binding, insertion and destabilization of phospholipid 
bilayer membranes by α-helical antimicrobial and cell non-selective membrane- 
lytic peptides, BBA-Biomembranes. 1462 (1999) 55–70. 
[75] M. Pillong, et al., Rational design of membrane-pore-forming peptides, Small 13 
(2017), 1701316. 
[76] K.A. Brogden, Antimicrobial peptides: pore formers or metabolic inhibitors in 
bacteria? Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 3 (2005) 238–250. 
[77] A.L. Tornesello, et al., Antimicrobial peptides as anticancer agents: functional 
properties and biological activities, Molecules 25 (2020) 2850. 
[78] S. Lucy, M. Claire, The role of antimicrobial peptides in lung cancer therapy, Int. 
J. Antimicrob. Agents 3 (2017) 134. 
[79] M. Eisenberg, et al., The nature of the voltage-dependent conductance induced by 
alamethicin in black lipid membranes, J. Membr. Biol. 14 (1973) 143–176. 
[80] D. Sengupta, et al., Toroidal pores formed by antimicrobial peptides show 
significant disorder, BBA-Biomembranes. 1778 (2008) 2308–2317. 
[81] M.R. Yeaman, et al., Mechanisms of antimicrobial peptide action and resistance, 
Pharmacol. Rev. 55 (2003) 27–55. 
[82] S. Forveille, et al., The oncolytic peptide LTX-315 triggers necrotic cell death, Cell 
Cycle 14 (2015) 3506–3512. 
[83] H.M. Ellerby, et al., Anti-cancer activity of targeted pro-apoptotic peptides, Nat. 
Med. 5 (1999) 1032–1038. 
[84] Y. Lv, et al., The antimicrobial peptide PFR induces necroptosis mediated by ER 
stress and elevated cytoplasmic calcium and mitochondrial ROS levels: 
cooperation with Ara-C to act against acute myeloid leukemia, Signal Transduct. 
Targeted Ther. 4 (2019) 38. 
[85] H. Zhou, et al., The oncolytic compound LTX-401 targets the Golgi apparatus, Cell 
Death Differ. 23 (2016) 2031–2041. 
[86] S. Ghavami, et al., Brevinin-2R1 semi-selectively kills cancer cells by a distinct 
mechanism, which involves the lysosomal-mitochondrial death pathway, J. Cell 
Mol. Med. 12 (2008) 1005–1022. 
[87] A.A. Baxter, et al., The plant defensin NaD1 induces tumor cell death via a non- 
apoptotic, membranolytic process, Cell Death Dis. 3 (2017), 16102. 
[88] H. Zhou, et al., Oncolysis with DTT-205 and DTT-304 generates immunological 
memory in cured animals, Cell Death Dis. 9 (2018) 1086. 
[89] P.M. Aptekman, et al., Evidence of resistance to tumor graft in early stages of 
induced oncolysis, J. Immunol. 66 (1951) 361–364. 
[90] B.H. Park, et al., Use of a targeted oncolytic poxvirus, JX-594, in patients with 
refractory primary or metastatic liver cancer: a phase I trial, Lancet Oncol. 9 
(2008) 533–542. 
[91] S.T. Workenhe, et al., Oncolytic virotherapy and immunogenic cancer cell death: 
sharpening the sword for improved cancer treatment strategies, Mol. Ther. 22 
(2014) 251–256. 
[92] O. Kepp, et al., Oncolysis without viruses-inducing systemic anticancer immune 
responses with local therapies, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 17 (2020) 49–64. 
[93] G. Berge, et al., Therapeutic vaccination against a murine lymphoma by 
intratumoral injection of a cationic anticancer peptide, Cancer Immunol. 
Immunother. 59 (2010) 1285–1294. 
[94] K.A. Camilio, et al., Complete regression and systemic protective immune 
responses obtained in B16 melanomas after treatment with LTX-315, Cancer 
Immunol. Immunother. 63 (2014) 601–613. 
[95] K.A. Camilio, et al., LTX-315 (Oncopore (TM)) A short synthetic anticancer 
peptide and novel immunotherapeutic agent, OncoImmunology 3 (2014), 
e29181. 
[96] H. Zhou, et al., The oncolytic peptide LTX-315 triggers immunogenic cell death, 
Cell Death Dis. 7 (2016) e2134. 
[97] B. Sveinbjornsson, et al., LTX-315: a first-in-class oncolytic peptide that 
reprograms the tumor microenvironment, Future Med. Chem. 9 (2017) 
1339–1344. 
[98] T. Tang, et al., Oncolytic peptide LTX-315 induces anti-pancreatic cancer 
immunity by targeting the ATP11B-PD-L1 axis, J Immunother Cancer 10 (2022), 
e004129. 
[99] N.L. Jebsen, et al., Enhanced T-lymphocyte infiltration in a desmoid tumor of the 
thoracic wall in a young woman treated with intratumoral injections of the 
oncolytic peptide LTX-315: a case report, J. Med. Case Rep. 13 (2019) 1–9. 
[100] J. Spicer, et al., Safety, antitumor activity, and T-cell responses in a dose-ranging 
phase I trial of the oncolytic peptide LTX-315 in patients with solid tumors, Clin. 
Cancer Res. 27 (2021) 2755–2763. 
[101] C. Oelkrug, et al., Mode of action of anticancer peptides (ACPs) from Amphibian 
origin, Anticancer Res. 35 (2015) 635–643. 
[102] G. Li, et al., Tryptophan as a probe to study the anticancer mechanism of action 
and specificity of alpha-helical anticancer peptides, Molecules 19 (2014) 
12224–12241. 
[103] C. Duffy, et al., Honeybee venom and melittin suppress growth factor receptor 
activation in HER2-enriched and triple-negative breast cancer, npj Precis. Oncol. 
4 (2020) 24. 
[104] S.-T. Yang, et al., Selective cytotoxicity following Arg-to-Lys substitution in 
tritrpticin adopting a unique amphipathic turn structure, FEBS Lett. 540 (2003) 
229–233. 
[105] E. Jin, et al., Acid-active cell-penetrating peptides for in vivo tumor-targeted drug 
delivery, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135 (2013) 933–940. 
[106] G. Gabernet, et al., Membranolytic anticancer peptides, MedChemComm 7 (2016) 
2232–2245. 
[107] Y-b Huang, et al., Studies on mechanism of action of anticancer peptides by 
modulation of hydrophobicity within a defined structural framework, Mol. 
Cancer Therapeut. 10 (2011) 416–426. 
[108] X. Liu, et al., Amphipathicity determines different cytotoxic mechanisms of 
lysine- or arginine-rich cationic hydrophobic peptides in cancer cells, J. Med. 
Chem. 59 (2016) 5238–5247. 
[109] C. Jian, et al., The roles of fatty-acid modification in the activity of the anticancer 
peptide R-Lycosin-I, Mol. Pharm. 15 (2018) 4612–4620. 
[110] F. Li, et al., Fatty acid modification of the anticancer peptide LVTX-9 to enhance 
its cytotoxicity against malignant melanoma cells, Toxins 13 (2021) 867. 
[111] G.N. Tew, et al., De novo design of antimicrobial polymers, foldamers, and small 
molecules: from discovery to practical applications, Accounts Chem. Res. 43 
(2010) 30–39. 
[112] S.X. Ren, et al., FK-16 derived from the anticancer peptide LL-37 induces caspase- 
independent apoptosis and autophagic cell death in colon cancer cells, PLoS One 
8 (2013), e63641. 
[113] C. Chen, et al., Molecular mechanisms of anticancer action and cell selectivity of 
short alpha-helical peptides, Biomaterials 35 (2014) 1552–1561. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
229
[114] Q. Liu, et al., Development of a lytic peptide derived from BH3-only proteins, Cell 
Death Dis. 2 (2016) 1–7. 
[115] M.O. Lee, et al., Effects of a single nucleotide polymorphism in the chicken NK- 
lysin gene on antimicrobial activity and cytotoxicity of cancer cells, P Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 109 (2012) 12087–12092. 
[116] L.S. Vermeer, et al., Conformational flexibility determines selectivity and 
antibacterial, antiplasmodial, and anticancer potency of cationic alpha-helical 
peptides, J. Biol. Chem. 287 (2012) 34120–34133. 
[117] D. Gaspar, et al., Anticancer peptide SVS-1: efficacy precedes membrane 
neutralization, Biochemistry 51 (2012) 6263–6265. 
[118] M. Kohno, et al., A novel hybrid peptide targeting EGFR-expressing cancers, Eur. 
J. Cancer 47 (2011) 773–783. 
[119] M. Kawamoto, et al., A novel transferrin receptor-targeted hybrid peptide 
disintegrates cancer cell membrane to induce rapid killing of cancer cells, BMC 
Cancer 11 (2011) 1–13. 
[120] M. Sioud, et al., Selective killing of cancer cells by peptide-targeted delivery of an 
anti-microbial peptide, Biochem. Pharmacol. 84 (2012) 1123–1132. 
[121] M. Su, et al., Expression and purification of recombinant ATF-mellitin, a new type 
fusion protein targeting ovarian cancer cells, in P. pastoris, Oncol. Rep. 35 (2016) 
1179–1185. 
[122] C. Hu, et al., Targeted modification of the cationic anticancer peptide HPRP-A1 
with iRGD to improve specificity, penetration, and tumor-tissue accumulation, 
Mol. Pharm. 16 (2019) 561–572. 
[123] J. Zhong, et al., Antitumor activity of a membrane lytic peptide cyclized with a 
linker sensitive to membrane type 1-matrix metalloproteinase, Mol. Cancer 
Therapeut. 7 (2008) 2933–2940. 
[124] A. Makovitzki, et al., Suppression of human solid tumor growth in mice by 
intratumor and systemic inoculation of histidine-rich and pH-dependent host 
defense-like lytic peptides, Cancer Res. 69 (2009) 3458–3463. 
[125] J. Yang, et al., Oncolytic peptide nanomachine circumvents chemo resistance of 
renal cell carcinoma, Biomaterials 284 (2022), 121488. 
[126] P. Pei, et al., Computer-aided design of lasso-like self-assembling anticancer 
peptides with multiple functions for targeted self-delivery and cancer treatments, 
ACS Nano 16 (2022) 13783–13799. 
[127] X. Wang, et al., Branched alpha-helical peptides enhanced antitumor efficacy and 
selectivity, Biomater Sci-Uk 8 (2020) 6387–6394. 
[128] F. Vernen, et al., Characterization of tachyplesin peptides and their cyclized 
analogues to improve antimicrobial and anticancer properties, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20 
(2019) 4184. 
[129] Y. Wu, et al., Stapled wasp venom-derived oncolytic peptides with side chains 
induce rapid membrane lysis and prolonged immune responses in melanoma, 
J. Med. Chem. 64 (2021) 5802–5815. 
[130] M.R. Aronson, et al., Re-engineering antimicrobial peptides into oncolytics 
targeting drug-resistant ovarian cancers, Cell. Mol. Bioeng. 13 (2020) 447–461. 
[131] C. Chen, et al., High selective performance of designed antibacterial and 
anticancer peptide amphiphiles, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7 (2015) 
17346–17355. 
[132] C. Chen, et al., Surface physical activity and hydrophobicity of designed helical 
peptide amphiphiles control their bioactivity and cell selectivity, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 8 (2016) 26501–26510. 
[133] H. Li, et al., Roles of d-amino acids on the bioactivity of host defense peptides, Int. 
J. Mol. Sci. 17 (2016) 1023. 
[134] N. Papo, et al., Inhibition of tumor growth and elimination of multiple metastases 
in human prostate and breast xenografts by systemic inoculation of a host 
defense-like lytic peptide, Cancer Res. 66 (2006) 5371–5378. 
[135] Y.-B. Huang, et al., Role of helicity on the anticancer mechanism of action of 
cationic-helical peptides, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 13 (2012) 6849–6862. 
[136] A.W. Krug, et al., Why is d-serine nephrotoxic and α-aminoisobutyric acid 
protective? Am J Physiol-Renal 293 (2007) F382–F390. 
[137] Y. Ohsaki, et al., Antitumor activity of magainin analogues against human lung 
cancer cell lines, Cancer Res. 52 (1992) 3534–3538. 
[138] L. Hui, et al., The combined effects of antibacterial peptide cecropin A and anti- 
cancer agents on leukemia cells, Anticancer Res. 22 (2002) 2811–2816. 
[139] A.L. Hilchie, et al., Pleurocidin-family cationic antimicrobial peptides are 
cytolytic for breast carcinoma cells and prevent growth of tumor xenografts, 
Breast Cancer Res. 13 (2011) 1–16. 
[140] P. Strzelecka, et al., Simplified, serine-rich theta-defensin analogues as 
antitumour peptides, Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 90 (2017) 52–63. 
[141] A.L. Hilchie, et al., Mastoparan is a membranolytic anti-cancer peptide that works 
synergistically with gemcitabine in a mouse model of mammary carcinoma, BBA- 
Biomembranes. 1858 (2016) 3195–3204. 
[142] A. Avand, et al., In vitro cytotoxic activity of a lactococcus lactis antimicrobial 
peptide against breast cancer cells, Iran. J. Biotechnol. 16 (2018) 213–220. 
[143] S. Lu, et al., Design and characterization of a multifunctional pH-triggered peptide 
C8 for selective anticancer activity, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 4 (2015) 2709–2718. 
[144] S. Lu, et al., An amphipathic lytic peptide for enhanced and selective delivery of 
ellipticine, J. Mater. Chem. B 4 (2016) 4348–4355. 
[145] S. Lu, et al., Therapeutic peptide amphiphile as a drug carrier with ATP-triggered 
release for synergistic effect, improved therapeutic index, and penetration of 3D 
cancer cell spheroids, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19 (2018) 2773. 
[146] C.R. Lincke, et al., Multidrug resistance phenotype of human BRO melanoma cells 
transfected with a wild-type human mdr1 complementary DNA, Cancer Res. 50 
(1990) 1779–1785. 
[147] S.A. Johnstone, et al., In vitro characterization of the anticancer activity of 
membrane-active cationic peptides. I. Peptide-mediated cytotoxicity and peptide- 
enhanced cytotoxic activity of doxorubicin against wild-type and p-glycoprotein 
over-expressing tumor cell lines, Anti Cancer Drug Des. 15 (2000) 151–160. 
[148] K.A. Camilio, et al., Combining the oncolytic peptide LTX-315 with doxorubicin 
demonstrates therapeutic potential in a triple-negative breast cancer model, 
Breast Cancer Res. 21 (2019) 1–12. 
[149] H. Jin, et al., Tumor ablation and therapeutic immunity induction by an 
injectable peptide hydrogel, ACS Nano 12 (2018) 3295–3310. 
[150] T. Cichon, et al., D-K6L9 peptide combination with IL-12 inhibits the recurrence 
of tumors in mice, Arch. Immunol. Ther. Exp. 62 (2014) 341–351. 
[151] M. Liu, et al., Melittin-MIL-2 fusion protein as a candidate for cancer 
immunotherapy, J. Transl. Med. 14 (2016) 1–12. 
[152] P. Wu, et al., Manipulating offense and defense signaling to fight cold tumors with 
carrier-free nanoassembly of fluorinated prodrug and siRNA, Adv. Mater. 34 
(2022), 2203019. 
[153] T. Yamazaki, et al., The oncolytic peptide LTX-315 overcomes resistance of 
cancers to immunotherapy with CTLA4 checkpoint blockade, Cell Death Differ. 
23 (2016) 1004–1015. 
[154] Y. Xia, et al., Systemic administration of polymersomal oncolytic peptide LTX-315 
combining with CpG adjuvant and anti-PD-1 antibody boosts immunotherapy of 
melanoma, J. Contr. Release 336 (2021) 262–273. 
[155] J.F. Spicer, et al., A phase I/II study of the oncolytic peptide LTX-315 combined 
with checkpoint inhibition generates de novo T-cell responses and clinical benefit 
in patients with advanced solid tumors, J. Clin. Oncol. 36 (2018) 3094. 
[156] W. Xie, et al., Tumor lysis with LTX-401 creates anticancer immunity, 
OncoImmunology 8 (2019), e1594555. 
[157] X. Dai, et al., Targeting CAMKII to reprogram tumor-associated macrophages and 
inhibit tumor cells for cancer immunotherapy with an injectable hybrid peptide 
hydrogel, Theranostics 10 (2020) 3049–3063. 
[158] H. Liu, et al., Co-Delivery of bee venom melittin and a photosensitizer with an 
organic-inorganic hybrid nanocarrier for photodynamic therapy and 
immunotherapy, ACS Nano 13 (2019) 12638–12652. 
[159] T. Yamazaki, et al., LTX-315-enabled, radiotherapy-boosted immunotherapeutic 
control of breast cancer by NK cells, OncoImmunology 10 (2021), 1962592. 
[160] S. Tang, et al., MnO2-melittin nanoparticles serve as an effective anti-tumor 
immunotherapy by enhancing systemic immune response, Biomaterials 288 
(2022), 121706. 
[161] J. Li, et al., Trauma-responsive scaffold synchronizing oncolysis immunization 
and inflammation alleviation for post-operative suppression of cancer metastasis, 
ACS Nano 16 (2022) 6064–6079. 
[162] S. Antonia, et al., Safety and antitumour activity of durvalumab plus 
tremelimumab in non-small cell lung cancer: a multicentre, phase 1b study, 
Lancet Oncol. 17 (2016) 299–308. 
[163] H.J. Chon, et al., Tumor microenvironment remodeling by intratumoral oncolytic 
vaccinia virus enhances the efficacy of immune-checkpoint blockade, Clin. Cancer 
Res. 25 (2019) 1612–1623. 
[164] N.R. Soman, et al., Synthesis and characterization of stable fluorocarbon 
nanostructures as drug delivery vehicles for cytolytic peptides, Nano Lett. 8 
(2008) 1131–1136. 
[165] H. Pan, et al., Cytolytic peptide nanoparticles (’NanoBees’) for cancer therapy, 
WIRES Nanomed. Nanobi. 3 (2011) 318–327. 
[166] C. Huang, et al., Hybrid melittin cytolytic peptide-driven ultrasmall lipid 
nanoparticles block melanoma growth in vivo, ACS Nano 7 (2013) 5791–5800. 
[167] J. Gao, et al., RGD-modified lipid disks as drug carriers for tumor targeted drug 
delivery, Nanoscale 8 (2016) 7209–7216. 
[168] C.H. Chen, et al., Integrated design of a membrane-lytic peptide-based 
intravenous nanotherapeutic suppresses triple-negative breast cancer, Adv. Sci. 
(2022), e2105506. 
[169] M. Motiei, et al., Smart co-delivery of miR-34a and cytotoxic peptides (LTX-315 
and melittin) by chitosan based polyelectrolyte nanocarriers for specific cancer 
cell death induction, Mat Sci Eng C-Mater. 128 (2021), 112258. 
[170] Y. Xia, et al., Systemic administration of polymersomal oncolytic peptide LTX-315 
combining with CpG adjuvant and anti-PD-1 antibody boosts immunotherapy of 
melanoma, J. Contr. Release 336 (2021) 262–273. 
[171] Y. Li, et al., Nanoscale melittin@zeolitic imidazolate frameworks for enhanced 
anticancer activity and mechanism analysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 
(2018) 22974–22984. 
[172] J. Qi, et al., Graphene oxide-based magnetic nanocomposites for the delivery of 
melittin to cervical cancer HeLa cells, Nanotechnology 31 (2020), 065102. 
[173] L. Zhu, et al., Bacteria-mediated metformin-loaded peptide hydrogel reprograms 
the tumor immune microenvironment in glioblastoma, Biomaterials 288 (2022), 
121711. 
[174] X. Zhang, et al., Molecular and supramolecular engineering on lipopeptide-based 
hole-punching nanotoxins to trigger multimodal death of drug-resistant tumors: 
apoptosis, necrosis and autophagy, Chem. Eng. J. 465 (2023), 142698. 
[175] L. Zhang, et al., Hyaluronic acid-chitosan nanoparticles to deliver Gd-DTPA for 
MR cancer imaging, Nanomaterials 3 (2015) 1379–1396. 
[176] M.R. Aronson, et al., Lipopeptisomes: anticancer peptide-assembled particles for 
fusolytic oncotherapy, Acta Biomater. 80 (2018) 269–277. 
[177] J. Yang, et al., Emulsion interfacial polymerization of anticancer peptides: 
fabricating polypeptide nanospheres with high drug-loading efficiency and 
enhanced anticancer activity, Sci. China Chem. 65 (2022) 2252–2259. 
[178] C. Bei, et al., Dual secured nano-melittin for the safe and effective eradication of 
cancer cells, J. Mater. Chem. B 3 (2015) 25–29. 
[179] S. Lv, et al., Development of D-melittin polymeric nanoparticles for anti-cancer 
treatment, Biomaterials 277 (2021), 121076. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Bioactive Materials 31 (2024) 206–230
230
[180] N. Lavignac, et al., Synthesis and preliminary evaluation of poly(amidoamine)- 
melittin conjugates as endosomolytic polymers and/or potential anticancer 
therapeutics, Int. J. Pharm. (Amst.) 300 (2005) 102–112. 
[181] J. Zhong, et al., Synthesis, Characterization, and thermodynamic study of a 
polyvalent lytic peptide-polymer conjugate as novel anticancer agent, 
Bioconjugate Chem. 21 (2010) 2055–2064. 
[182] W. Shen, et al., From antimicrobial peptides to antimicrobial poly(α-amino acid)s, 
Adv. Healthcare Mater. 7 (2018), 1800354. 
[183] W. Cao, et al., Human neutrophil peptides and complement factor Bb in 
pathogenesis of acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, Haematologica 
101 (2016) 1319–1326. 
[184] R. Duncan, The dawning era of polymer therapeutics, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2 
(2003) 347–360. 
[185] P. Zhang, et al., A multistage cooperative nanoplatform enables intracellular co- 
delivery of proteins and chemotherapeutics for cancer therapy, Adv. Mater. 32 
(2020), 2000013. 
[186] M. Grandic, et al., Binding and permeabilization of lipid bilayers by natural and 
synthetic 3-alkylpyridinium polymers, Bioorg. Med. Chem. 20 (2012) 1659–1664. 
[187] H. Takahashi, et al., Anticancer polymers designed for killing dormant prostate 
cancer cells, Sci Rep-Uk 9 (2019) 1096. 
[188] G. Zhong, et al., Polymers with distinctive anticancer mechanism that kills MDR 
cancer cells and inhibits tumor metastasis, Biomaterials 199 (2019) 76–87. 
[189] Y.F. Chen, et al., One-dimensional poly(L-lysine)-block-poly(L-threonine) 
assemblies exhibit potent anticancer activity by enhancing membranolysis, Acta 
Biomater. 55 (2017) 283–295. 
[190] N. Bagheri, et al., Synthesis of bioactive polyaniline-b-polyacrylic acid copolymer 
nanofibrils as an effective antibacterial and anticancer agent in cancer therapy, 
especially for HT29 treatment, RSC Adv. 10 (2020) 25290–25304. 
[191] N. Shao, et al., Heterochiral β-Peptide polymers combating multidrug-resistant 
cancers effectively without inducing drug resistance, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144 
(2022) 7283–7294. 
[192] R. Chen, et al., The role of hydrophobic amino acid grafts in the enhancement of 
membrane-disruptive activity of pH-responsive pseudo-peptides, Biomaterials 30 
(2009) 1954–1961. 
[193] R. Chen, et al., Effect of L-leucine graft content on aqueous solution behavior and 
membrane-lytic activity of a pH-responsive pseudopeptide, Biomacromolecules 
10 (2009) 2601–2608. 
[194] N.H. Park, et al., Addressing drug resistance in cancer with macromolecular 
chemotherapeutic agents, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140 (2018) 4244–4252. 
[195] X. Hu, et al., A helical oncolytic polypeptide with potent membranolytic activity 
for cancer therapy, Biomater. Sci. 11 (2023) 1451–1458. 
[196] F. Fan, et al., Bioinspired membrane-disruptive macromolecules as drug-free 
therapeutics, ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 3 (2020) 1267–1275. 
[197] F. Fan, et al., pH-Sensitive nanoparticles composed solely of membrane-disruptive 
macromolecules for treating pancreatic cancer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13 
(2021) 12824–12835. 
[198] M. Liu, et al., A transistor-like pH-sensitive nanodetergent for selective cancer 
therapy, Nat. Nanotechnol. 17 (2022) 541–551. 
[199] Y. Zheng, et al., Cationic polymer synergizing with chemotherapeutics and re- 
purposing antibiotics against cancer cells, Biomater Sci-Uk 9 (2021) 2174–2182. 
[200] J.G. Piao, et al., Acid-responsive therapeutic polymer for prolonging nanoparticle 
circulation lifetime and destroying drug-resistant tumors, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 8 (2016) 936–944. 
[201] P. Qiu, et al., Oil phase evaporation-induced self-assembly of hydrophobic 
nanoparticles into spherical clusters with controlled surface chemistry in an oil- 
in-water dispersion and comparison of behaviors of individual and clustered iron 
oxide nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132 (2010) 17724–17732. 
[202] K. Jung, et al., Bioactive synthetic polymers, Adv. Mater. 34 (2022), e2105063. 
[203] X. Li, et al., Multi-responsive biodegradable cationic nanogels for highly efficient 
treatment of tumors, Adv. Funct. Mater. 31 (2021), 2100227. 
[204] X. Li, et al., Dendrimer-decorated nanogels: efficient nanocarriers for 
biodistribution in vivo and chemotherapy of ovarian carcinoma, Bioact. Mater. 6 
(2021) 3244–3253. 
[205] X. Li, et al., Charge-reversible and biodegradable chitosan-based microgels for 
lysozyme-triggered release of vancomycin, J. Adv. Res. 43 (2023) 87–96. 
[206] Y. Lu, et al., Multidisciplinary strategies to enhance therapeutic effects of 
flavonoids from Epimedii Folium: integration of herbal medicine, enzyme 
engineering, and nanotechnology, J Pharm Anal 13 (2023) 239–254. 
[207] Y. Wang, et al., The Host-defense-peptide-mimicking synthetic polypeptides 
effectively enhance antitumor immunity through promoting immunogenic tumor 
cell death, Macromol. Biosci. 21 (2021), e2100171. 
[208] W. Yang, et al., Smart nanovesicle-mediated immunogenic cell death through 
tumor microenvironment modulation for effective photodynamic 
immunotherapy, ACS Nano 14 (2020) 620–631. 
[209] M. Cavaco, et al., To what extent do fluorophores bias the biological activity of 
peptides? A practical approach using membrane-active peptides as models, Front. 
Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8 (2020), 552035. 
[210] D. Bornhop, et al., Origin and prediction of free-solution interaction studies 
performed label-free, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113 (2016) 1595–1604. 
[211] K. Ishikawa, et al., Glycan alteration imparts cellular resistance to a membrane- 
lytic anticancer peptide, Cell Chem. Biol. 24 (2017) 149–158. 
[212] A.L. Hilchie, et al., MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells resistant to pleurocidin- 
family lytic peptides are chemosensitive and exhibit reduced tumor-forming 
capacity, Biomolecules 10 (2020) 1220. 
[213] K. Ohara, et al., Entry of a cationic lytic-type peptide into the cytoplasm via 
endocytosis-dependent and -independent pathways in human glioma U251 cells, 
Peptides 50 (2013) 28–35. 
[214] M. Abdel-Salam, et al., The synthetic peptide LyeTxI-b derived from Lycosa 
erythrognatha spider venom is cytotoxic to U-87 MG glioblastoma cells, Amino 
Acids 51 (2019) 433–449. 
[215] A. Da Silva, et al., Pro-necrotic activity of cationic mastoparan peptides in human 
glioblastoma multiforme cells via membranolytic action, Mol. Neurobiol. 55 
(2018) 5490–5504. 
[216] M. Kawamoto, et al., Immunogenicity and toxicity of transferrin receptor-targeted 
hybrid peptide as a potent anticancer agent, Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 71 
(2013) 799–807. 
[217] R. Kurihara, et al., A novel interleukin-13 receptor alpha 2-targeted hybrid 
peptide for effective glioblastoma therapy, Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 94 (2019) 
1402–1413. 
[218] C. Szczepanski, et al., Identification of a novel lytic peptide for the treatment of 
solid tumours, Gene Cancer 5 (2014) 186–200. 
[219] H. Schluesener, et al., Neutrophilic defensins penetrate the blood-brain barrier, 
J. Neurosci. Res. 42 (1995) 718–723. 
[220] W. Li, et al., Proline-rich antimicrobial peptides: potential therapeutics against 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria, Amino Acids 46 (2014) 2287–2294. 
[221] M. Ribeiro, et al., Translocating the blood-brain barrier using electrostatics, Front. 
Cell. Neurosci. 6 (2012) 44. Lockman P, et al. Nanoparticle surface charges alter 
blood-brain barrier integrity and permeability, J Drug Target. 12 (2004) 635-641. 
[222] S. Veszelka, et al., A triple combination of targeting ligands increases the 
penetration of nanoparticles across a blood-brain barrier culture model, 
Pharmaceutics 14 (2022) 86. 
[223] R. Huang, et al., Brain-targeting mechanisms of lactoferrin-modified DNA-loaded 
nanoparticles, J Cerebr. Blood F Met. 29 (2009) 1914–1923. 
[224] L. Liu, et al., Self-assembled cationic peptide nanoparticles as an efficient 
antimicrobial agent, Nat. Nanotechnol. 4 (2009) 457–463. 
[225] L. Gonz´alez-Mariscal, et al., Strategies that target tight junctions for enhanced 
drug delivery, Curr. Pharmaceut. Des. 22 (2016) 5313–5346. 
H. Liu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
