Article
Genetic and microenvironmental evolution of
colorectal liver metastases under chemotherapy
Graphical abstract
Highlights
d Longitudinal sequencing reveals TME reorganization after
BVZ-C therapy
d Acquired resistance associates with the spatial distance of
tumors and hepatocytes
d SMAD4 mutation and chr20q copy-number gain associate
with intrinsic resistance
d STAT3 inhibition overcomes resistance in SMAD4-mutant
cells and holds therapeutic potential
Authors
Min Shi, Yingxi Yang, Na Huang, ...,
Quanhua Mu, Jiguang Wang,
Wangjun Liao
Correspondence
jgwang@ust.hk (J.W.),
liaowj@smu.edu.cn (W.L.)
In brief
Shi et al. identiﬁed spatial and genetic
factors contributing to intrinsic and
acquired resistance in patients with
colorectal cancer liver metastases. By
demonstrating the restoration of
therapeutic response with a STAT3
inhibitor, this study paves the way for
targeted therapeutic strategies to
overcome drug resistance.
Shi et al., 2024, Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838
December 17, 2024 ª 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101838
ll
Article
Genetic and microenvironmental evolution
of colorectal liver metastases under chemotherapy
Min Shi,1,3,5,6 Yingxi Yang,2,6 Na Huang,1,6 Dongqiang Zeng,1,3,5,6 Zongchao Mo,2,6 Jiao Wang,1 Xiaomeng Zhang,2
Ran Liu,2 Chunlin Wang,1 Xiaoxiang Rong,1 Zhenzhen Wu,1 Qiong Huang,1 Haixia Shang,2 Jihong Tang,2 Zhaojun Wang,1
Jianan Cai,1 Genjie Huang,1 Yijin Guan,1 Jian Guo,1 Quanhua Mu,2 Jiguang Wang,2,4,* and Wangjun Liao1,3,5,7,*
1Department of Oncology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, P.R. China
2Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Division of Life Science and State Key Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China
3Cancer Center, the Sixth Afﬁliated Hospital, School of Medicine, South China University of Technology, Foshan, China
4SIAT-HKUST Joint Laboratory of Cell Evolution and Digital Health, HKUST Shenzhen-Hong Kong Collaborative Innovation Research
Institute, Futian, Shenzhen 518000, P.R. China
5Foshan Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine in Oncology, the Sixth Afﬁliated Hospital, School of Medicine, South China University of
Technology, Foshan, China
6These authors contributed equally
7Lead contact
*Correspondence: jgwang@ust.hk (J.W.), liaowj@smu.edu.cn (W.L.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101838
SUMMARY
Drug resistance limits the efﬁcacy of chemotherapy for colorectal cancer liver metastasis (CRLM). However,
the evolution of CRLM during drug treatment remains poorly elucidated. Multi-omics and treatment response
data from 115 samples of 49 patients with CRLM undergoing bevacizumab (BVZ)-based chemotherapy show
little difference in genomic alterations in 92% of cases, while remarkable differences are observed at the tran-
scriptomic level. By decoupling intrinsic and acquired resistance, we ﬁnd that hepatocyte and myeloid cell
inﬁltration contribute to 38.5% and 23.1% of acquired resistance, respectively. Importantly, SMAD4 muta-
tions and chr20q copy-number gain are associated with intrinsic chemoresistance. Gene interference exper-
iments suggest that SMAD4R361H/C mutations confer BVZ and 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) resistance through STAT3
signaling. Notably, supplementing BVZ and 5-FU with the STAT3 inhibitor GB201 restores therapeutic efﬁ-
cacy in SMAD4R361H/C cancer cells. Our study uncovers the evolutionary dynamics of CRLM and its microen-
vironment during treatment and offers strategies to overcome drug resistance.
INTRODUCTION
Colorectal cancer liver metastases (CRLMs) constitute approxi-
mately 70% of colorectal cancer (CRC)-related deaths.1 In 2004,
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved bevacizumab
(BVZ), an antiangiogenic agent, in combination with chemothera-
peutic agents for treating metastatic CRC (mCRC).2 Since then, its
application has been extended to various treatment regimens,
including ﬁrst- and cross-line therapies,3,4 adjuvant therapy,5
and maintenance therapy.6 BVZ-based chemotherapies (BVZ-C
therapies) are currently administered as the primary ﬁrst-line treat-
ment for CRC and CRLMs. Notwithstanding such progress, nearly
50% of patients with CRLM fail to respond,7 and many patients
who initially beneﬁt would relapse rapidly.8 Identifying predictive
biomarkers of BVZ-C therapy responders in patients with CRLM
is urgently needed to optimize therapeutic decisions.
Exome and transcriptome sequencing technologies have
revolutionized our knowledge of CRC and its metastases. The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) group9 and Yaeger et al.10 estab-
lished a comprehensive genomic landscape of CRC and meta-
static CRCs. Subsequent expression-based analyses classiﬁed
CRC into four consensus molecular subtypes (CMSs) with distin-
guishing features.11 More recently, Zhao et al. expanded our
knowledge of Chinese patients, linking tumor genomic heteroge-
neity to different clinical characteristics.12 Nevertheless, the clin-
ical and molecular features associated with treatment response
remain poorly understood owing to the unavailability of treat-
ment data in these studies.
Remarkable efforts have been devoted to identifying bio-
markers of BVZ-C therapy response in patients with CRC.
Smeets
et
al.
performed
low-coverage
whole-genome
sequencing
on
patients
with
CRC
treated
with
BVZ-C
and discovered the role of chromosomal instability in treatment
outcomes.13 However, it is unclear how tumor cells evolve
to become chemoresistant in response to therapy. Additionally,
drug resistance cannot be completely explained by genomic
factors.14,15 Several studies have focused on non-genetic resis-
tance mechanisms, such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition,
metabolic reprogramming, and tumor-stromal cell interactions,16
particularly in microenvironment-targeted strategies, such as
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024 ª 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
1
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
BVZ. It has been reported that the redundancy of angiogenic
signaling molecules, vascular symbiosis, and increased inﬁltra-
tion of ﬁbroblasts and myeloid cells are closely related to BVZ
resistance.17,18 Studies have suggested that the molecular
mechanisms of genetic and non-genetic drug resistance are het-
erogeneous but partly overlapping.16 Hence, characterizing the
evolution of the tumor and tumor microenvironment (TME)
induced by BVZ-C treatment is crucial for understanding the
mechanisms of drug resistance.
In this study, we provided a longitudinal cohort of matched
pre- and post-treatment samples from 49 patients with CRLM
who received BVZ-C therapy as the ﬁrst-line standard treatment.
Leveraging whole-exome and RNA sequencing of multi-time
point tumor samples during the course of clinical treatment of
patients with CRLM, we aimed to dissect the underlying molec-
ular and TME determinants that may regulate patient prognosis
and tumor response to treatment.
RESULTS
Longitudinal sequencing characterized CRLM under
treatment
To investigate the treatment efﬁcacy of CRLM, we enrolled 49
patients diagnosed as CRLM at Nanfang Hospital of Southern
Medical University. They were treated with BVZ plus either
mFOLFOX6 (oxaliplatin + 5-ﬂuorouracil [5-FU]) or FOLFIRI (irino-
tecan + 5-FU), with follow-up durations ranging from 1.5 months
to over 50 months (Figure 1A; Table S1). Of the full cohort, 77%
migrated from left-sided CRCs, 83% were staged IVA or IVB, and
42% simultaneously developed lung metastases. The median
age at diagnosis was 55.5 years, range: 29–79 years (Figure S1A).
The median progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival
(OS) for the cohort were 9.97 and 25.37 months, respectively
(Figure S1B). To assess the treatment response of each tumor
sample, we used Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
(RECIST) 1.119 to classify all samples into partial response
(PR), stable disease (SD), or progressive disease (PD) (Figure 1B).
We then deﬁned responders as those with PR or non-continuous
stable disease (tumor volumes shrink continually to PR within
two cycles) and non-responders as those with PD or continuous
stable disease (tumor size was stable or increasing to PD over at
least four months; Figures 1C and S1C). As a result, 48 patients
were stratiﬁed into 21 responders and 27 non-responders, and
one patient (B29) was not stratiﬁed owing to inadequate
follow-up. Responders (median PFS: 11.67 months) portended
a longer PFS than non-responders (median PFS: 8.33 months,
p = 4.0e2; Figure S1D). Cohort-level analysis of the response
rate showed no signiﬁcant difference between the two ﬁrst-line
regimens (mFOLFOX6-BVZ: 60% [95% exact conﬁdence inter-
val (CI): 42.11%–76.13%, 21 of 35 patients] versus FOLFIRI-
BVZ: 46.2% [95% exact CI: 19.22%–74.87%, 6 of 13 patients])
(Figure 1D). Similarly, they had comparable PFS and OS rates
(Figure S1E), which are consistent with a previous study.20
Further examination of clinical parameters showed that neither
age, gender, primary site, nor the number of metastases
was associated with the response to BVZ-based therapies,
while lung metastases were slightly higher in responders (56%,
p = 0.04, Figure S1A).
It is worth mentioning that in the context of BVZ-C therapies for
CRLMs, a usual pattern is observed in which patients initially
respond well to treatment; however, as treatment continues,
drug resistance almost inevitably emerges.21,22 To monitor
CRLM evolution in response to therapeutic pressures, longitudi-
nal tumor specimens (n = 115) were collected (through either bi-
opsy or surgery) from the patients, among whom two cases had
four tumor samples, i.e., pre-treatment (Pre), Post1, Post2, and
Post3; 13 cases had three tumor samples (Pre, Post1, and
Post2), and the remaining cases had two samples. We observed
that approximately half of the patients were non-responders at
the beginning, and the proportion of non-responders steadily
increased over time, reaching 100% in the 10th month after the
ﬁrst BVZ-C therapy (Figure 1E). To investigate the molecular
mechanisms of both intrinsic resistance (IR) and acquired resis-
tance (AR) in BVZ-C-treated CRLMs, we carried out DNA and/or
RNA sequencing on the enrolled tumor samples, coupled with
matched blood controls, leading to whole-exome sequencing
(WES) or panel-seq data of 115 samples and RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq) data of 100 samples (Figure 1F).
Genomic aberrations were preserved after treatment
To delineate the evolving landscape of tumor genomic mutations,
we analyzed the WES and panel-seq data. WES achieved a me-
dian of 3183 (1253–6573) coverage in tumors and 3133
(1373–5353) in normal blood. In the panel-seq data, the average
depth of the targeted regions was 5003. The median somatic mu-
tation load per sample was 83 (range, 0–235; Table S2). We de-
tected somatic mutations in the driver genes of CRC (Figure S2),
including TP53 (73.5%), APC (63.3%), KRAS (57.1%), PIK3CA
(18.4%), BRAF (12.2%), and SMAD4 (16.3%). The altered
signaling pathways were P53 (77.6%), WNT (75.5%), RTK/RAS
(69.4%), TGF (26.5%), and PI3K (26.5%). Compared to the
TCGA CRC dataset,9 CRLMs in this cohort displayed a higher inci-
dence of TP53 mutations (73.5% versus 53.8%, p = 1.2e2), with
comparable mutation rates for other reported genes (Figure S2). In
addition, this cohort demonstrated a greater prevalence of micro-
satellite stability (MSS: 100% versus 70.2% in TCGA, p = 9.7e6;
Figure S2), consistent with a recent study that reported a high pro-
portion of MSS among Chinese patients with mCRC.23
We then used the CELLO pipeline24 to characterize the evolu-
tionary landscape of CRLM under therapy. All driver genes had
consistent mutation frequencies in tumors before and after treat-
ment (Figure 2A), and no statistical differences were observed in
the overall burden of somatic mutations (pre [median: 90, 0–202];
post [median: 86, range: 0–235]; Figure 2B), nor in chromosomal
copy-number heterogeneity25 (CNH, a global measure of chro-
mosomal complexity; Figure S3A) between the baseline and
treated tumors. In sharp contrast, a signiﬁcant reduction in tumor
purity was observed after therapy (Figure 2C), particularly in the
responder group, with no change in the non-responder group
(Figure S3B). We constructed phylogenetic trees to explore the
temporal evolution of tumors under treatment-induced pres-
sures and then mapped them to a Moduli space (Figure S3C).
Our analysis indicated that most patients were clustered in the
common corner (Figure S3D), but a few cases were scattered
near the pre- or post-treatment private corner, potentially biased
by the low tumor content (Figure S3C). We then applied an
2
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
A
D
E
F
C
B
Figure 1. Longitudinal follow-up and multi-omics characterization of CRLM under chemotherapy
(A) Schematic diagram of patient enrollment and sample collection.
(B) Swimmer plot depicting time on treatment, duration of treatment, response, and survival characteristics. Each lane represents a single patient’s data. The x
axis represents the duration of therapy for each patient. The key within the plot describes all symbols and color coding. Samples sequenced are encircled with
black border.
(C) Guideline of response classiﬁcation based on RECIST 1.1. Samples with inconsistent assessment are labeled with criteria b. cSD, continuous stable disease
(SD for 4 months or SD for 2 months and then PD for 2 months); ncSD, non-continuous stable disease (SD for 2 months and then PR for 2 months). R: responder;
NR: non-responder.
(D) Bar plot comparing differences in objective response rate between treatment arms.
(E) Bar plot depicting response rate over time in our cohort. The x axis indicates the number of months after the start of treatment and y axis denotes the fraction of
different response groups.
(F) Summary of DNA and RNA sequencing data collected in this study. See also Figure S1.
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
3
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
A
D
E
F
G
I
J
H
C
B
(legend on next page)
4
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
in-house mathematical method, the Evolutionary Tree Inference
Program (ETRIP) (Figure S3E), to recover the number of underes-
timated mutations due to limited sequencing coverage and/or
low tumor purity from the DNA sequencing data (Methods). Us-
ing ETRIP, we reconstructed phylogenetic trees and observed
that 92% of CRLM tumors showed no substantial divergence
in genomic proﬁles in response to current treatment regimens
(linear evolution, Figure 2D). Nevertheless, post-treatment tu-
mors from four cases (B21, B24, B05, and B55; Figures 2E and
2F) acquired 37 to 167 coding mutations compared to baseline
tumors (branched evolution). Together, our data showed a
marked convergence in the tumor genome during therapy.
Treatment reshaped TME
Next, we sought to investigate the transcriptomic changes in
CRLM during therapy. RNA sequencing data from 100 pre- or
post-treatment tumor samples of 43 patients were collected
and processed following the standard pipeline (Methods). To
evaluate temporal changes in gene expression, we conducted
differentially expressed gene (DEG) analysis between pre- and
post-treatment samples and identiﬁed 4,573 DEGs after control-
ling for the false discovery rate (q < 0.05, Figure 2G), suggesting
that treatment remarkably perturbs either tumor cell transcrip-
tomic proﬁles, TME, or both. Subsequent gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA) revealed prevailing downregulation of cell prolif-
eration hallmarks such as MYC targets, E2F targets, G2M check-
points, and DNA repair, and strong upregulation of genes
involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), immunity-
related
(e.g.,
coagulation,
complement,
and
inﬂammatory
response), and metabolism-related hallmarks (e.g., xenobiotic
metabolism, bile acid metabolism, and heme metabolism) after
treatment (Figure 2H). Using the CMS classiﬁcation system,11
we assessed the transcriptional subtype for each CRLM sample
and examined phenotype transitions in matched pre- and post-
treatment pairs. Importantly, the baseline CMS2-canonical/
epithelial (58.8%, 10/17) and mixed subtypes (58.8%, 10/17)
switched to CMS4-mesenchymal/stromal subtypes after treat-
ment (Figure 2I). These observations signiﬁed that BVZ-C ther-
apy triggers signiﬁcant transcriptional reconﬁguration and
phenotypic variation.
To further discern how BVZ-C therapy may impact the TME,
we deconvolved the RNA expression data using BayesPrism,26
a Bayesian method that jointly reconstructs cell type abundance
and cell-type-speciﬁc gene expression proﬁles from bulk tran-
scriptomes (Methods). To test the performance of BayesPrism
in the CRLM dataset, we generated pseudobulk samples from
public CRLM single-cell proﬁles covering eight major cell
types.27 The cell type proportions inferred by BayesPrism were
highly concordant with the ground truth (Figure S4A). As ex-
pected, using deconvolution in our cohort, we found strong
correlations between the proportion of epithelial (tumor cells)
proportions and the estimated tumor purity based on indepen-
dent methods (Figure S4B). Surprisingly, DEG analysis of epithe-
lial cells revealed that the transcriptional proﬁle of tumor cells
showed little change after therapy (Figure S4C). This observation
resembled our aforementioned ﬁndings concerning rare treat-
ment-associated genomic changes. Therefore, we turned our
attention to TME dynamics and observed a notable reduction
in epithelial cells along with increased inﬁltration of hepatocytes
and myeloid cells after treatment (Figures 2J and S4D), implying
an evolving shift in the composition of TME cells as a key feature
of BVZ-C treatment.
We next compared the transcriptional features of samples
before and after treatment by the response group. Compared
to the non-responders, a notably higher number of DEGs were
detected between pre- and post-treatment samples in the re-
sponders (Figure S5A). Enrichment analysis revealed that cell cy-
cle/proliferation pathways were prevalent in pre-treatment sam-
ples from both groups, while metabolism and immune response
pathways were enriched in post-treatment samples of re-
sponders (Figure S5B). Responders also displayed a greater
CMS2-to-CMS4 shift following treatment (Figures S5C and
S5D). Moreover, treatment signiﬁcantly altered the TME in re-
sponders, reducing epithelial cells and increasing hepatocytes
and myeloid cells, with no notable changes in non-responders
(Figures S5E and S5F). Collectively, responders to the treatment
demonstrated more substantial transcriptional changes, encom-
passing more DEGs, a larger CMS2-to-CMS4 shift, and greater
TME dynamics than non-responders.
Spatial proximity of hepatocytes and tumors contributed
to acquired resistance
To uncover the molecular mechanisms of how IR and AR limit
treatment beneﬁt (Figure 1E), we developed a biomarker
Figure 2. Genomic and transcriptomic proﬁles of pre- and post-treatment CLRMs
(A) Three-dimensional bubble plot showing the frequency of pre-treatment-private (blue; left axis), post-treatment-private (red; right axis), and common somatic
mutations (yellow; upper axis).
(B) Somatic mutation number of pre-treatment tumors versus post-treatment tumors. p value: two-sided paired t test.
(C) Tumor purity (inferred by ESTIMATE) of pre-treatment versus post-treatment tumors. p value: two-sided Mann-Whitney U test.
(D) Ternary plot of moduli space of evolutionary trees inferred by ETRIP. Each ball represents a patient, with colors indicating three clusters within moduli space.
Patients with a higher fraction of shared somatic mutations between pre- and post-treatment stages are clustered near the ‘‘Common’’ corner, while those with a
signiﬁcant reduction in mutations after treatment are located near the ‘‘Pre’’ corner. Purple shading highlights patients with branched tumor evolution.
(E) The phylogenetic tree and response history for the four patients highlighted in (D).
(F) The proportion of patients with linear evolution (yellow) and branched evolution (purple).
(G) Volcano plot showing DEGs in post-treatment versus pre-treatment tumor samples.
(H) The enriched hallmark gene sets in baseline compared with post-treatment samples.
(I) Consensus molecular subtype (CMS) transitions under treatment (left). Right: proportion change in each subtype. p value: chi-squared test.
(J) Percentage changes of various cell types between post-treatment and pre-treatment samples. Relative percentage of each cell type within the bulk RNA-seq
samples is inferred by the deconvolution method BayesPrism. Percentage changes (delta %) are calculated by subtracting the average cell type proportions in
treated samples from those in baseline samples. The bubble size is proportional to log10(p value). p value: two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. See also Figures S2–S5.
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
5
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
A
D
E
F
G
C
B
Figure 3. Genomic and transcriptomic factors associated with AR
(A) Different types of features prioritized by SRFS. Each dot represents an individual feature and signiﬁcant AR or IR-associated features are highlighted in green
(pro-sensitive) or purple (pro-resistant). The digital number at the bottom summarizes total feature numbers for the corresponding feature type. Shapes indicate
the therapeutic resistance types (triangle: AR-only, square: IR-only, diamond: AR and IR).
(B) The enriched hallmark gene sets from the AR-related genes identiﬁed from (A).
(legend continued on next page)
6
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
detection method, termed SRFS (sample-based response
feature selection) (Figure S6A; Table S3) to dissect the contribu-
tors of AR and IR. For each feature, SRFS evaluated its discrim-
inative power between sensitive (PR, n = 27) and resistant
groups (SD or PD, n = 64) using a univariate logistic regression
model (continuous features) or a Fisher’s exact test (categorical
features) and derived its relative contribution to AR and IR
(Methods). Employing SRFS on a comprehensive list of DNA
and RNA features, we identiﬁed 107 signiﬁcant AR-related fea-
tures (24 sensitive-relevant and 83 resistant-relevant; Fig-
ure S6B; Tables S4 and S5). We observed that none of the
genomic features were signiﬁcantly associated with AR, span-
ning mutations, copy-number alterations (CNAs), ploidy, muta-
tion burden, and CNH (Figures S6B and 3A). Instead, we found
that AR was largely dependent on transcriptomic features. Spe-
ciﬁcally, the sensitive-relevant features encompassed tumor pu-
rity, CMS2 subtype, relative abundance of epithelial and natural
killer (NK) cells, and expression levels of 20 genes, whereas the
resistant-relevant features nominated the CMS4 subtype, rela-
tive abundance of hepatocytes and myeloid cells, and expres-
sion levels of 80 genes (Figure 3A and S6B–D). Enrichment of
the
sensitive-relevant
genes
designated
Wnt/b-catenin
signaling. In contrast, the resistant-relevant genes were mainly
enriched in cancer hallmarks, including KRAS signaling upregu-
lation,
metabolism,
EMT,
hypoxia,
and
IL-6/JAK/STAT3
signaling (Figure 3B). Given the strong association between the
expression levels of these genes and AR in our cohort (Fig-
ure S6E), we tested this association in two previously published
patients with CRLM treated with oxaliplatin + BVZ.28 Consis-
tently, upregulation of resistant-relevant genes was observed
in the patient with disease progression, while the responsive pa-
tient displayed the opposite trend (Figure 3C), indicating that
these
resistant-relevant
genes
were
important
for
tumor
progression.
Following our earlier observations of AR-related cell types
(Figure 3A), we found that increased inﬁltration of hepatocytes
and myeloid cells contributed to 38.5% and 23.1% of AR,
respectively (Figure 3D), pinpointing the potential resistance-
promoting roles of the hepatic and myeloid milieu. The spatial
transcriptome dataset of patients with CRLM29 also revealed
the increased hepatocyte inﬁltration and decreased spatial dis-
tance between hepatocytes and tumor cells after XELOX treat-
ment (Figure S6F). Interestingly, previous studies have corrobo-
rated
that
replacement
histopathological
growth
patterns
(RHGPs), characterized by tumor cell invasion into hepatic plates
and co-option of existing sinusoidal vessels within the liver pa-
renchyma, were closely correlated with an adverse response
to BVZ-C.17,18,30 To elucidate the relationship between AR and
the spatial organization of tumors and hepatocytes in our cohort,
we classiﬁed CRLMs into three different histopathological
growth patterns (HGPs)31: desmoplastic HGP (DHGP), pushing
HGP (PHGP), and RHGP, which corresponds to a gradual
decrease in the spatial distance between the two. Our quantiﬁ-
cation of the three HGPs in CRLM samples using hematoxylin-
eosin (HE) staining demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase in
RHGP patterns in treated SD/PD samples compared to baseline,
with no signiﬁcant changes observed in the DHGP and PHGP
patterns (Figure 3E). Conversely, the post-treatment PR group
exhibited no changes in RHGP patterns compared with the
baseline controls. Some examples were examined in Figure 3E
by multiplex immunoﬂuorescence (mIF) staining, and samples
that developed AR showed a markedly reduced distance be-
tween tumor cells and hepatocytes. Assessment of contrast-
enhanced computed tomography (CT) images also revealed a
higher proportion of RHGP in disease-progressive tumors than
in disease-responsive tumors (Figure 3F). Furthermore, mIF
staining conﬁrmed a notably larger proportion of CD14+ (mono-
cyte marker) and CD163+ (macrophage marker) cells surround-
ing disease-progressive tumors compared to the responsive
baseline levels (Figure 3G). In sum, our data suggested the tumor
and hepatic cell proximity, as well as elevated myeloid cell abun-
dance as potential mechanisms underlying AR to BVZ-C
therapy.
SMAD4 mutations and chr20q-gain contributed to IR
By leveraging the SRFS method, we identiﬁed 100 features that
were signiﬁcantly related to IR (Figure S7A; Tables S4 and S5).
Whereas the somatic mutation load CNH and ploidy were not
correlated with IR (Figure 3A), somatic SMAD4 mutations,
TGF-b pathway mutations, relative abundance of hepatocytes,
and the upregulation of 50 genes were the key IR factors promot-
ing
resistance,
and
ampliﬁcation/gain
of
chromosome
20q13.12–32, 20q, 13q, and 20q11.21–23, high tumor purity,
CMS2 subtype, relative abundance of epithelial and NK cells,
and the upregulation of 50 genes were the signiﬁcant favorable
factors for a positive response (Figure 3A). Interestingly, the
top pro-sensitive genes were enriched in chromosome 20q,
which included SALL4, MYH7B, TAF4, FITM2, and TTI1, echoing
(C) Validation of AR-related genes in samples from an independent cohort. Re-analysis of previously reported patients demonstrated that pro-resistant genes are
remarkably upregulated in P029 (left side) but downregulated in P135 (right side). Both patients were partial response (PR) when treated by oxaliplatin plus BVZ,
and P029 became IRES (lesions continue to grow under therapy) when the post-treatment sample was collected, while P135 remained PR.
(D) Lollipop plot showing log10 p values of the AR relevance for different cell type proportions calculated by SRFS. Relative proportion for each cell type is
inferred by BayesPrism. Pie charts (bottom) show the fraction of patients whose AR was potentially contributed by certain cellular type.
(E) Comparison of three histopathological growth patterns (HGPs) of CRLMs before and after treatment. Left: proportion of HGPs by HE staining in SD/PD (n = 36)
or PR (n = 20) and corresponding pre-treatment nodes. p value: unpaired t test. Right: representative immunoﬂuorescence images of HGPs from tissues of
hepatic metastases in the PD and pre-treatment stages. Scale bars, 100 and 200 mm, respectively. The white and red dashed lines indicate the tumor interface
and liver-stromal interface, respectively. DHGP, desmoplastic HGP; PHGP, pushing HGP; RHGP, replacement HGP; CK20, cytokeratin 20 (cancer cell marker);
HEP, hepatocyte (hepatocyte marker).
(F) A histogram (left) and representative images (right) demonstrate the proportion of RHGP based on CT images in response (n = 6) and acquired resistance (n = 7)
CRLM cohorts. Red arrows indicate liver metastases.
(G) Representative IF images (left) and quantiﬁcation (right) of monocytes (CD14+) and macrophages (CD163+) in CRLM samples from SD/PD (n = 5) and pre-
treatment (n = 10). p value: two-sided Mann-Whitney U test. Scale bars, 100 mm. See also Figure S6.
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
7
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
A
D
E
F
G
I
J
K
H
C
B
Figure 4. Genomic and transcriptomic factors associated to IR
(A) Lollipop plot showing the top 10 genes related to IR. The y axis represents the proportion of patients whose IR might be driven by the corresponding gene
expression.
(B) The enriched hallmark gene sets from the signiﬁcant IR-related genes in Figure 3A.
(C) Lollipop plot showing log10 p values of the relevance of various cell types to IR, prioritized by SRFS. Pie charts (bottom) show the proportion of patients
whose IR might be driven by the corresponding cell type.
(D) Comparison of the proportion of RHGP in responders (n = 21) and patients with IR (n = 7). A bar chart (left) and representative IF images (right) illustrate the
proportion of RHGP. p value: Mann-Whitney U test. Scale bars, 100 mm.
(E) Chromosomal ideogram and heatmap, annotated with response status of ﬁrst-line therapy, showing that chr20q-gain was frequently observed in responders.
(legend continued on next page)
8
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
the aforementioned DNA-level results of chromosome 20q-gain
(Figures 4A and S7B). Furthermore, our analysis characterized
immune-related factors such as IL13RA1 (the receptor for inter-
leukin 13), MRC1, and CD14 (marker genes for myeloid cells),
metabolism-related transcripts (SLC1A1, CES1, and GUCD1),
and the stroma-related gene FGFR2 as the top genes whose
expression promote resistance. Functional enrichment analysis
revealed that pro-sensitive IR-relevant genes were enriched in
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling and UV response, while pro-resistant
IR-relevant genes were enriched in KRAS signaling, fatty acid
metabolism,
and
IL-6/JAK/STAT3
signaling
(Figure
4B).
Cellular-level analyses demonstrated that the post-treatment in-
crease in hepatocytes was the most pronounced compared to
other TME cell types, explaining 26.3% of IR (Figures 4C and
S4D). We then proposed that the spatial distance between tu-
mors and hepatocytes might be a determinant of IR. To provide
further evidence to this hypothesis, mIF staining images were
carefully examined and we found higher levels of RHGP in the
IR group than in responsive patients, supporting that early hepat-
ic inﬁltrates of tumors conferred IR to BVZ-C therapy (Figure 4D).
Besides, myeloid cells were also highly enriched in the IR group
(Figure S7C). Limited to the malignant RHGP tumors (n = 9), fac-
tors such as high tumor purity, CMS2 subtype, and relative abun-
dance of epithelial and NK cells were still associated with a pos-
itive response. Additionally, mutations in TGF-b pathway, along
with relative abundance of hepatocytes and myeloid cells were
still identiﬁed as IR factors in RHGP tumors (Figure S7D).
Regarding gene expression, no genes showed signiﬁcant corre-
lations with drug resistance, but due to the small RHGP sample
size, validation of these ﬁndings in additional cohorts is
warranted.
As the most signiﬁcant pro-sensitive IR-relevant factor at the
DNA level, gain/ampliﬁcation of chromosomal region 20q (here-
after referred to as 20q-gain) was detected in 26 cases (60.5%).
We conﬁrmed a higher incidence of 20q-gain in responders
(80%, 20/25) relative to non-responders (33.3%, 6/18) before
therapy (Figure 4E), suggesting the 20q-gain as a positive pre-
dictor of treatment response. To investigate the prognostic value
of 20q-gain, we examined the association between 20q copy-
number status and clinical outcome. Patients whose tumors
had 20q-gain exhibited a profound reduction in tumor size
following treatment (Figure 4F) and signiﬁcantly improved PFS
(p = 2.7e2, Figure 4G), with no stark difference observed in
the OS (Figure S7E). To verify this observation, we extracted
publicly available CNA data from 67 patients with CRLM treated
with oxaliplatin and/or irinotecan plus BVZ.28 As expected, 20q-
gain was more frequent in the CR/PR group than in the SD/PD
group (Figure S7F). Since CNAs may inﬂuence the genomic land-
scape of tumor cells and drive their evolution, we also explore
whether 20q-gain is correlated to tumor cell plasticity. We con-
ducted an analysis using the public CRC single-cell RNA-seq da-
taset (GSE13246532). Tumor cells were categorized into different
CMS cell states, and the Shannon entropy index was used to
measure the likelihood of tumor cell state transitions (Fig-
ure S7G). We revealed a signiﬁcant increase in CMS2 tumor cells
and lower cellular diversity in patients with 20q-gain, while those
without 20q-gain showed greater intratumor heterogeneity and
predominance of non-CMS2 subtypes. Hence, 20q-gain might
be linked to BVZ-C responsiveness due to the enrichment of
CMS2 tumor cells and reduced tumor cell plasticity, congruent
with CMS subtype results (Figure 3A).
The SMAD4 mutations stood out as the strongest genomic
predictor of IR (Figure 3A). The mutation rate of SMAD4 in this
cohort was 16.3% (8/49). Four of the eight SMAD4-mutant cases
(Figure 4H; Table S2) had recurrent hotspot mutations (R361H/C)
in the MH2 domain involved in heterodimeric complex formation
and transcriptional activation,33 and the other four patients car-
ried missense mutations in nearby regions. All were intrinsically
unresponsive (Figure S2). It was recently reported that SMAD4
loss in colon cancer cells is resistant to 5-FU and irinotecan.34
However, loss of SMAD4 did not distinguish responders from
non-responders in our cohort (Figure S8A). In addition, the pa-
tient’s IR response was not affected by the expression level of
SMAD4 (Figure S8A). Next, we examined the clinical relevance
of SMAD4 mutations. Remarkably, SMAD4mutated patients expe-
rienced a more signiﬁcant increase in tumor size following treat-
ment (p = 3.5e2) and had materially worse survival outcomes
(p = 5.4e3 for PFS and 8.8e2 for OS by log rank test) than
SMAD4wild-type patients (Figures 4I–4K). Intrigued by these ﬁnd-
ings, we replicated this observation in an independent cohort
of patients diagnosed with stage IV CRC from three Chinese cen-
ters and treated with BVZ-C therapy. Droplet digital PCR was
performed to analyze the SMAD4R361H and SMAD4R361C muta-
tions in primary or metastatic CRC tumor samples from these
cases. Importantly, patients harboring SMAD4R361H/C mutation
had signiﬁcantly worse PFS (p = 0.02 by log rank test, Figure S8B)
compared to those with SMAD4wild-type, strengthening the prog-
nostic value of SMAD4 mutations in predicting resistance to
BVZ-C therapy. We also veriﬁed this association in the published
Chinese ChangKang12 and MSK10 CRC cohorts. Consistently,
the R361H/C group had signiﬁcantly worse OS (Chinese Chang-
Kang: p = 9.8e3, MSK: p = 8.6e4) compared to the SMAD4
wild-type group (Figures S8C and S8D). A similar tendency for
PFS was also observed in the Chinese ChangKang cohort,
although the result was insigniﬁcant (Figure S8C).
Furthermore, the SMAD4 mutations were mutually exclusive
with 20q-gain in pre-treatment samples (Figure S8E). We next
examined the relationship between the IR-related genetic
(SMAD4 mutation and 20q-gain) and transcriptomic features
(CMS subtype, cell type proportion, and gene expression). The
CMS2 subtype showed a signiﬁcant depletion in the SMAD4-
mutant group but was markedly enriched in the 20q-gain group
(Figures S8F and S8G). Additionally, the SMAD4-mutant group
had a higher prevalence of the mixed subtype compared to
(F) Boxplot showing the association between RECIST changes and chr20q-gain. p value: two-sided Mann-Whitney U test.
(G) Kaplan-Meier estimates of PFS for patients segregated by chr20q-gain. p value: log rank test. HR: hazard ratio.
(H) Schematics of the protein structures showing the locations of SMAD4 mutations. MH: Mad homology.
(I) The association between RECIST changes and SMAD4 mutation. p value: two-sided Mann-Whitney U test.
(J and K) Kaplan-Meier estimates of PFS (J) and OS (K) for patients segregated by SMAD4mutated. p value: log rank test. See also Figures S7–S9.
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
9
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
A
D
E
F
C
B
Figure 5. SMAD4R361H/C mutations promote 5-FU and BVZ resistance in CRC
(A) IF staining for Ki-67 (red) and DAPI (blue) in HUVECs incubated with tumor conditioned medium (TCM) collected from the indicated cells and BVZ
(0.25 mg/mL). Representative IF images (left) and the quantiﬁcation (right) of mean ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) are shown (n = 4–5). Scale bar, 100 mm.
(B) Representative images (left) and quantiﬁcation (right) of the formation of HUVECs tubules following incubation with TCM and treatment with BVZ (n = 4–5).
Scale bar, 100 mm.
(C) Cell viability assay of SW480 and HCT116 cells following treatment with 5-FU for 48 h, IC50 value of 5-FU (bottom) and representative curve-ﬁtting graphs (top)
are shown (n = 5, 7).
(legend continued on next page)
10
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
wild type, indicating that SMAD4-mutant tumors may have
greater intratumoral heterogeneity. No signiﬁcant association
was identiﬁed between the two genomic features and TME
pro-sensitive (epithelial and NK cells) or pro-resistant (hepato-
cytes) cell types, but the SMAD4-mutant samples were distin-
guished by a higher proportion of endothelial and myeloid cells
compared to wild type. Moreover, most pro-sensitive genes
were upregulated in the 20q-gain group but downregulated in
the SMAD4-mutant group, while pro-resistant genes showed
the opposite trend, suggesting a strong concordance between
genomic
and
transcriptomic
response-related
features.
Compared with non-mutants, tumors with mutations in SMAD4
exhibited higher expression of metabolism (glucose transporter
SLC1A1) and angiogenesis (vascular endothelial growth factor
[VEGF] and semaphorin co-receptor NRP1)-associated genes.
Concurrently, the elevated expression of myeloid markers
(MRC1 and CD14) was observed, implying an increased myeloid
cell inﬁltration in SMAD4-mutant tumors. In contrast, tumors
harboring 20q-gain displayed strong upregulation of pro-sensi-
tive genes on chromosome 20q. Taken together, SMAD4 muta-
tions and 20q-gain might contribute to intrinsic drug resistance
and sensitivity, respectively; and 20q-gain associated with the
CMS2 subtype, whereas SMAD4 mutations associated with
increased myeloid cell inﬁltration and the mixed CMS subtype.
To extend our ﬁndings into practical clinical applications, we
utilized the identiﬁed resistance-related features to train a ma-
chine learning model (Figure S9A), which could assist in the early
prediction of drug resistance in patients with CRLM. The model
achieved an area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve of 0.82 and effectively distinguished responders versus
non-responders (Figures S9B and S9C). Notably, the key sensi-
tive determinants in the model included TAF4 and TRPM6
expression and chr20q-gain (Figure S9D). TAF4, involved in tran-
scription initiation, was previously linked to the maintenance of
stem cell function.35 The top resistant informative features
included the expression levels of SLC1A1, FGFR2, and ANO1
(Figure S9D). SLC1A1 was reported to be overexpressed in ox-
aliplatin-resistant CRCs.36 FGFR2 was a ﬁbroblast growth factor
receptor (FGFR), and prior studies have associated ﬁbroblast
growth factors and FGFRs with resistance to multiple cytotoxic
agents, like cisplatin, tamoxifen, 5-FU, and BVZ.37 ANO1 was
found to be associated with CRC progression.38 These evidence
together supported that our model could be a useful tool for fore-
casting drug response to optimize the treatment and beneﬁt pa-
tients in the clinic.
SMAD4R361 H/C induces resistance to BVZ and 5-FU
in vitro and in vivo
To experimentally gauge the biological effect of SMAD4 muta-
tions, we used the human CRC cell lines SW480 (SMAD4 nega-
tive) and HCT116 (SMAD4 positive and wild type), which were
transduced with retroviral constructs expressing either SMAD4
wild-type or point mutations at the arginine 361 residue (R361)
and containing an N-terminal FLAG tag (Figure S10A). We ﬁrst
explored the inﬂuence of SMAD4R361H/C mutations on BVZ treat-
ment efﬁcacy in vitro. The human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) were incubated with tumor conditioned medium
(TCM), which was derived from SMAD4-transduced tumor cells.
After 48 h of culturing, we measured the changes in cell prolifer-
ation and tubular formation of HUVECs. Notably, immunoﬂuo-
rescence (IF) staining in HUVECs revealed unchanged or even
higher expression levels of Ki-67 in SMAD4R361H/C groups after
BVZ treatment, in contrast to the decreased expression in the
control and wild-type groups (Figure 5A). Moreover, tube forma-
tion experiments showed that BVZ treatment signiﬁcantly
reduced the number of nodes in the control and wild-type
groups;
however,
no
changes
were
observed
in
the
SMAD4R361H/C group (Figure 5B). In brief, these results sug-
gested that SMAD4R361H/C tumors induced resistance to BVZ.
Next, we focused on the common chemotherapeutic agents,
mFOLFOX6 and FOLFIRI. Transfected SW480 and HCT116 cells
were treated with increasing concentrations of 5-FU, irinotecan,
or oxaliplatin (Figures 5C and S10B). Judging by the IC50 (half-
maximal inhibitory concentration) values, the control cells were
less sensitive to 5-FU and irinotecan relative to SMAD4WT cells,
while there was no difference in response to oxaliplatin, in agree-
ment with a previous report on drug resistance of SMAD4 loss.34
Importantly, compared to SMAD4WT cells, SMAD4R361H/C tumor
cells were markedly resistant to 5-FU, but not to irinotecan or ox-
aliplatin (Figures 5C and S10B), which was further conﬁrmed by
colony formation and apoptosis assays (Figures S10C and
S10D).
Taken
together,
these
results
demonstrated
that
SMAD4R361H/C conferred in vitro resistance to BVZ and 5-FU.
To extend these ﬁndings in vivo, we transduced murine CT26
cells with Smad4WT or Smad4R361H/C constructs and subcutane-
ously injected them into BALB/c mice, followed by treatment with
5-FU and monoclonal BVZ (B20.4–1.1, anti-VEGF antibody). In
the control and Smad4WT groups, 5-FU or 5-FU plus BVZ treat-
ment signiﬁcantly improved tumor growth inhibition compared
to PBS treatment, whereas tumor volume showed no change in
the Smad4R361H/C groups receiving the same therapies (Fig-
ure 5D). Similar results were obtained using immunohistochem-
ical staining for Ki-67 (Figures 5E and S10E). Additionally,
CD31-marked tumor vessels showed a remarkably decreased
density in the control and Smad4WT groups after treatment, espe-
cially with 5-FU plus BVZ, but no signiﬁcant trend was found in the
Smad4R361H/C groups (Figures 5F and S10E). Collectively, these
ﬁndings provided compelling evidence of in vivo resistance to
BVZ and 5-FU in SMAD4R361H/C-harboring CRC tumors.
GB201 combination treatment ameliorates resistance in
SMAD4R361 H/C CRCs
Next, we sought to identify the potential mechanisms underlying
BVZ and 5-FU resistance induced by SMAD4 mutations. To this
(D) Stably transfected CT26 cells were subcutaneously injected in BALB/c mice. Mice were treated with PBS, 5-FU (25 mg/kg), or 5-FU (25 mg/kg, twice a week)
combined with monoclonal BVZ (B20.4-1.1, 5 mg/kg, twice a week). Representative images (left) and tumor growth curve (right) are shown (n = 3).
(E and F) Transplanted subcutaneous tumors with treatment are collected for immunohistochemical staining of Ki-67 (E) and immunoﬂuorescence of vascular
marker CD31 (F); blue: DAPI, red: CD31. Scale bar, 100 mm. Data are graphed as the mean ± SD; *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001; ns, non-signiﬁcant, p > 0.05.
See also Figure S10.
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
11
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
A
D
E
F
G
I
H
C
B
Figure 6. GB201 can target SMAD4R361H/C mutation-mediated activation of the pSTAT3 pathway to reverse resistance in CRC
(A) Western blot analysis of pSTAT3 protein in SW480 and HCT116 cells.
(B) IF staining for FLAG-labeled SMAD4 protein (green), pSTAT3 protein (red), and DAPI (blue) in SW480. Scale bar, 100 mm.
(C) Co-IP assay shows a complex containing pSTAT3 and FLAG-SMAD4R361H, SMAD4R361C, or SHP2 in SW480 cells. Top, FLAG antibody co-precipitating
pSTAT3. Bottom, pSTAT3 antibody co-precipitating FLAG-SMAD4R361H, SMAD4R361C, or SHP2 protein. Input, protein expression in cell lysates detected by
western blot. IgG, negative control. IP, expression of compound co-precipitated by pSTAT3 or FLAG antibody.
(D) Schematic diagram of SMAD4R361H/C protein activating pSTAT3 through competitive binding with SHP2.
(E) Cell viability of SW480 and HCT116 cells with SMAD4R361H/C exposed to 5-FU at the gradient concentrations, with or without combination with GB201.
(legend continued on next page)
12
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
end, we conducted GSEA comparing pre-treatment RNA
samples with and without SMAD4 mutations. GSEA revealed
that the inﬂammatory response and TNFA signaling via NF-kB,
IL-2-STAT5, and IL-6-STAT3 were enriched in SMAD4-mutant
samples (Figure S11A). Based on this, three inhibitors, JSH-23
(NF-kB inhibitor), AC-4-130 (STAT5 inhibitor), and STATTIC
(STAT3 inhibitor), were tested in CRC cell lines; the IC50 values
showed that mutant cells were more sensitive to the STAT3 in-
hibitor,
highlighting
the
importance
of
STAT3
signaling
in SMAD4R361H/C tumor resistance (Figure S11B). Western blot-
ting (WB, Figure 6A) and IF staining (Figure 6B) of pSTAT3
together conﬁrmed the elevated phosphorylated STAT3 in
SMAD4R361H/C cells. Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) experi-
ments were conducted to examine functional connections.
Intriguingly, SMAD4R361H/C mutations bound to the pSTAT3 pro-
tein and impeded its interaction with tyrosine phosphatase
SHP2, protecting pSTAT3 from dephosphorylation (Figures 6C
and S11C). This mechanism resembles that observed in p53 mu-
tations.39 Thus, our data showed that SMAD4R361H/C mutation
could hyperactivate STAT3 through competitive displacement
of SHP2 (Figure 6D).
To further understand the mechanism of BVZ resistance, we re-
examined the DEGs in SMAD4-mutant versus SMAD4-WT CRLM
samples. The results revealed a signiﬁcant upregulation of several
chemokines in the inﬂammatory response pathway, such as
CCL2, CCL7, and CCL22, in SMAD4-mutant samples, with
qPCR assays further conﬁrming the upregulation of CCL2 in
SMAD4R361H/C CRC cell lines (Figures S11D and S11E). This led
us to speculate that CCL2 may be involved in BVZ resistance.
Next, we knocked down STAT3 in SMAD4R361H/C tumor cells us-
ing small interfering RNA and collected their tumor culture super-
natant after 48 h to stimulate HUVECs (Figures S11F–S11I).
STAT3 knockdown in tumor cells inhibited endothelial cell prolifer-
ation and tube formation, effectively attenuating SMAD4R361H/C-
induced BVZ resistance. Conversely, exogenous addition of
CCL2 enhanced cell proliferation and tube formation to restore
BVZ resistance. These data substantiated that SMAD4R361 H/C
might induce resistance to BVZ in CRC via the pSTAT3-
CCL2 axis.
Given the crucial role of STAT3 signaling in SMAD4R361H/C CRC,
we used STATTIC and GB201 (both STAT3 inhibitors) in combina-
tion with 5-FU to explore combinatorial treatment efﬁcacy through
drug-sensitive experiments. In contrast to STATTIC, GB201
signiﬁcantly reduced 5-FU resistance (Figures 6E, 6F, and
S11J). WB experiments further conﬁrmed the notable inhibitory
effect of GB201 on the pSTAT3-CCL2 axis (Figure S11K). There-
fore, we established Smad4-mutant CRC animal models and
administered them with single-agent GB201, doublet therapy
(BVZ and 5-FU), and triplet therapy (BVZ, 5-FU, and GB201).
The results showed that GB201 effectively restored sensitivity to
BVZ and 5-FU in Smad4R361H/C groups (Figure 6G), with a three-
drug combination signiﬁcantly abating tumor vessels and prolifer-
ation (Figures 6H and 6I). Based on the upregulation of STAT3
signaling in SMAD4R361H/C tumors, we proposed the addition of
GB201 to BVZ-C therapies as a novel drug repurposing strategy
to overcome therapeutic resistance in SMAD4R361H/C CRC.
DISCUSSION
Here, we gathered a large cohort of multi-time point samples to
study in-depth tumor and microenvironment evolution in patients
with CRLM before and after BVZ-C therapy. Previous studies
have shown that secondary drug resistance is often heteroge-
neous, possibly due to polyclonal and multiple selection pat-
terns.40 In contrast, we found that 92% of patients exhibited
linear tumor evolution under treatment, with only four cases
acquiring notable mutations post treatment. Moreover, high sim-
ilarities were observed in the tumor expression proﬁles after
treatment. Thus, tumor clonal selection is not the major mecha-
nism behind AR to BVZ-C, rendering the targeting of clonal sub-
populations an unviable approach to counteract AR. Phenotypic
plasticity, or non-genetic reprogramming, has been listed as one
of the 14 hallmarks of malignancy41 and is another critical deter-
minant in mediating tumor drug resistance.42 Transcriptional an-
alyses revealed a dramatic increase in hepatocyte and myeloid
cell composition after therapy, indicating that reprogramming
of microenvironmental cells, rather than tumor cells, may be
the primary driving force behind secondary resistance.
Next, we screened AR- and IR-related features using the
SRFS method. Interestingly, increased hepatic inﬁltration of tu-
mor cells not only predicts primary non-response to BVZ-C but
also correlates with disease progression, suggesting the poten-
tial enhancement of hepatocyte-tumor cell interactions under
treatment. Combining the histopathological, immunoﬂuores-
cence, and CT data of clinical patients, we found that the
RHGP largely contributed to IR and AR to BVZ-C therapy,
consistent with previous ﬁndings.17,18 The liver is highly vascu-
larized, and drug resistance in RHGP-type CRLMs is often asso-
ciated with vascular co-option, in which cancer cells can inﬁltrate
the hepatic plate of the liver parenchyma and absorb pre-exist-
ing hepatic sinusoidal vessels.30 Therefore, co-targeting angio-
genesis and vascular co-option is expected to be the key to
reversing drug resistance in patients with CRLM; however, the
underlying molecular mechanisms require further investigation.
The SRFS method revealed two predictive markers for IR: (1)
20q-gain with favorable response and (2) SMAD4 mutation
with unfavorable response. The 20q-gain showed the CMS2 tu-
mor cell predominance and was related to reduced intratumor
(F) IC50 value of SW480 and HCT116 cells with SMAD4R361H/C exposed to GB201 is shown (n = 3, 4).
(G) Stably transfected CT26 cells with Smad4R361H/C were subcutaneously injected in BALB/c mice. Mice were treated with PBS, 5-FU (25 mg/kg, twice a week)
combined with monoclonal BVZ (5 mg/kg, twice a week), GB201 (10 mg/kg, q2d), and three-drug combination for 2 weeks. Representative images (left) and
tumor growth curve (right) of transplanted subcutaneous tumors of CT26 cells with Smad4R361H/C are shown (n = 5).
(H) Transplanted subcutaneous tumors with treatment and Smad4R361H/C are collected for IF staining of CD31, representative IF images and the quantiﬁcation are
shown; blue: DAPI, red: CD31. Scale bar, 100 mm.
(I) Representative immunohistochemical staining for Ki-67 and pSTAT3 and their quantiﬁcation of xenograft tumor with Smad4R361H/C mutations. Scale bar,
100 mm. See also Figure S11.
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
13
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
heterogeneity. According to previous reports, chr20q ampliﬁca-
tion is related to the immune-cold microenvironment in CRC43
and lymph node metastasis in breast cancer.44 Therefore, CRC
with or without 20q-gain may be suitable for different treatment
options. 20q-gain tumors could potentially beneﬁt from targeted
combination chemotherapy, whereas immunotherapy or drugs
such as tipifarnib, mitomycin-C, and AUY92243 may hold prom-
ise for 20q-neutral tumors. SMAD4 is a key component of the
TGF-b pathway, and its mutations often lead to selective elimina-
tion of the anti-tumor effect of TGF-b, thereby promoting tumor
growth and progression.45 SMAD4 mutations have been re-
ported to occur in approximately 8.6% of CRC cases,46 are
more common in patients with stage IV and CMS3 subtypes,47
and are associated with worse OS and disease-free survival.48
A few studies have revealed correlations between SMAD4 loss
and 5-FU49 or cetuximab resistance.50,51 In this study, we found
that SMAD4R361H/C mutation mediated BVZ and 5-FU cross-
resistance in CRC cells through in vivo and in vitro experiments
but had no impact on sensitivity to oxaliplatin and irinotecan. In
addition, SMAD4R361C exhibited greater 5-FU resistance than
SMAD4R361H in vitro, but this difference was not observed in
mouse models. Previously, the biological function of SMAD4-
mutant protein was rarely reported, and its understanding was
limited to cell cycle disorder and apoptosis caused by SMAD4
protein inactivation.52 We proved that SMAD4R361H/C can acti-
vate the pSTAT3 pathway to mediate BVZ and 5-FU cross-resis-
tance through the competitive combination of pSTAT3 and
SHP2, as well as activate pSTAT3-CCL2 axis (pro-vascular
redundancy signal) to mediate BVZ resistance.
The STAT3 pathway has been widely reported to play a role in
regulating the expression of various chemokines and cytokines.53
Prior research also suggested that STAT3 can directly bind the
promoter of CCL2, thereby activating its transcription and
expression in CRC.54 Our investigation further elucidated that
the SMAD4R361H/C led to the activation of STAT3, which induced
the secretion of CCL2. Additionally, CCL2 can enhance inﬂam-
matory responses by recruiting myeloid cells into TME, and it
can also promote STAT3 phosphorylation.55,56 Together, the
SMAD4R361H/C augmented the expression of inﬂammatory che-
mokines such as CCL2 by activating STAT3, and STAT3-CCL2
regulatory relationship could further stimulate inﬂammation in
TME. GB201 (also known as napabucasin or BB608) is the only
STAT3 inhibitor that has entered phase 3 clinical trials. In 2016,
the FDA approved GB201 for the treatment of gastric cancer57
and pancreatic cancer58; subsequent phase 3 trials failed. The re-
sults of a phase 3 clinical trial (NCT01830621) of patients with
CRC also showed no difference in OS between the GB201 and
placebo groups.59 However, subgroup analysis showed that
GB201 signiﬁcantly beneﬁted the high pSTAT3 expression sub-
group.59 Our experiments showed that pSTAT3 was signiﬁcantly
activated
in
SMAD4R361H/C
CRC,
and
GB201
combined
with 5-FU and BVZ signiﬁcantly inhibited the growth of
SMAD4R361H/C
CRC,
indicating the importance of patient
screening as a crucial breakthrough for effective GB201
treatment.
Here, our study identiﬁed hepatocyte-tumor spatial proximity
and increased myeloid cell inﬁltration, rather than clonal selection
and transcriptional reprogramming of tumor cells, as the primary
causes of resistance to BVZ-C therapy in CRLMs. Importantly,
we demonstrated that SMAD4R361H/C serves as a genomic
marker, which provides a stratiﬁcation basis and therapeutic
target for the ﬁrst-line therapy of CRC, and GB201 combination
therapy is expected to reverse BVZ-C therapeutic resistance.
Finally, we summarized the BVZ-C response-associated features
as well as the well-known factors13,30,39,54–56,60–65 as a diagram to
connect the different feature categories (Figure S12).
Limitations of the study
There are some limitations to our study. Although our large
cohort of multi-time point samples enabled the study of IR and
AR to BVZ-C therapy, independent multi-source studies are
needed
to
validate
the
predictive
role
of
the
identiﬁed
response-related factors. In addition, the association between
AR and spatial proximity of hepatocytes or myeloid cells to tu-
mors cannot be investigated via the bulk transcriptomic data,
and the longitudinal spatial transcriptomics should be included
to further evaluate the spatial and architectural features.
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and data should be directed to
and will be fulﬁlled by the lead contact, Wangjun Liao (liaowj@smu.edu.cn).
Materials availability
All materials used in this paper are available from the lead contact upon
request.
Data and code availability
d The raw sequence data were deposited in the Genome Sequence
Archive at the National Genomics Data Center, under the accession
code GSA: HRA005455.
d All code has been deposited in Zenodo and can be accessed at https://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13997442.
d Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this
paper is available from the lead contact upon request.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by grants from Guangdong Province Science and
Technology Plan Project (no. 2020A0505090007) and the Guangdong Basic
and Applied Basic Research Foundation (no. 2022A1515011693), the Seed
fund of the Big Data for Bio-Intelligence Laboratory (Z0428) from HKUST,
Hong Kong Research Grant Council (16101021, R4017-18, and C4008-
23W), and Hong Kong Innovation and Technology Commission (ITCPD/17-
9). Jiguang Wang was also supported by the Padma Harilela Professorship.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, W.L. and Jiguang Wang; computational analyses, Y.Y.,
with help from D.Z., Z.M., X.Z., R.L., Q.M., H.S., and J.T.; experiments,
M.S., Jiao Wang, Z. Wang, J.C., and G.H.; surgery, W.L., M.S., N.H., C.W.,
X.R., and Z. Wu; data curation, G.H., Y.G., D.Z., and J.G.; writing – original
draft, Y.Y., N.H., and Q.H.; writing – review and editing, Y.Y., Q.H., D.Z.,
Z.M., and Jiguang Wang.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
14
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include
the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
B Clinical sample acquisition and treatment response evaluation
B Cell lines
B Animals
d METHOD DETAILS
B DNA extraction and library construction
B Somatic mutation detection
B Somatic copy number alteration
B Microsatellite instability prediction
B Evolutionary tree
B RNA extraction and library construction
B Bulk RNA-seq preprocessing
B Differential gene expression analysis, pathway analysis and gene
set enrichment
B Sample-based response feature selection
B Bulk transcriptional subtype classiﬁcation
B Deconvolution analysis
B Spatial transcriptomic data analysis
B Machine learning model
B Antibodies
B Chemicals
B Scoring of morphological response to therapy
B Tumor conditioned medium
B Cell tubule formation
B Cell viability assay
B Western blotting
B RNA isolation and quantitative PCR analysis
B Colony formation
B Cell apoptosis
B Immunoﬂuorescence staining
B Immunohistochemistry staining
B Co-IP analysis
B siRNA transfection
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
xcrm.2024.101838.
Received: May 17, 2024
Revised: September 16, 2024
Accepted: November 4, 2024
Published: December 3, 2024
REFERENCES
1. Wang, R., Li, J., Zhou, X., Mao, Y., Wang, W., Gao, S., Wang, W., Gao, Y.,
Chen, K., Yu, S., et al. (2022). Single-cell genomic and transcriptomic land-
scapes of primary and metastatic colorectal cancer tumors. Genome
Med. 14, 93.
2. Hurwitz, H., Fehrenbacher, L., Novotny, W., Cartwright, T., Hainsworth, J.,
Heim, W., Berlin, J., Baron, A., Grifﬁng, S., Holmgren, E., et al. (2004). Bev-
acizumab plus irinotecan, ﬂuorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colo-
rectal cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 350, 2335–2342.
3. Cremolini, C., Loupakis, F., Antoniotti, C., Lupi, C., Sensi, E., Lonardi, S.,
Mezi, S., Tomasello, G., Ronzoni, M., Zaniboni, A., et al. (2015). FOLFOX-
IRI plus bevacizumab versus FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab as ﬁrst-line treat-
ment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer: updated overall sur-
vival and molecular subgroup analyses of the open-label, phase 3
TRIBE study. Lancet Oncol. 16, 1306–1315.
4. Bennouna, J., Sastre, J., Arnold, D., O¨ sterlund, P., Greil, R., Van Cutsem,
E., von Moos, R., Vie´ itez, J.M., Bouche´ , O., Borg, C., et al. (2013). Contin-
uation of bevacizumab after ﬁrst progression in metastatic colorectal can-
cer (ML18147): a randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 14, 29–37.
5. Masi, G., Vivaldi, C., Fornaro, L., Lonardi, S., Buccianti, P., Sainato, A.,
Marcucci, L., Martignetti, A., Luca Urso, E.D., Castagna, M., et al.
(2019). Total neoadjuvant approach with FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab
followed by chemoradiotherapy plus bevacizumab in locally advanced
rectal cancer: the TRUST trial. Eur. J. Cancer 110, 32–41.
6. Simkens, L.H.J., van Tinteren, H., May, A., ten Tije, A.J., Creemers, G.J.M.,
Loosveld, O.J.L., de Jongh, F.E., Erdkamp, F.L.G., Erjavec, Z., van der
Torren, A.M.E., et al. (2015). Maintenance treatment with capecitabine
and bevacizumab in metastatic colorectal cancer (CAIRO3): a phase 3
randomised controlled trial of the Dutch Colorectal Cancer Group. Lancet
385, 1843–1852.
7. Heinemann, V., von Weikersthal, L.F., Decker, T., Kiani, A., Kaiser, F., Al-
Batran, S.E., Heintges, T., Lerchenm€uller, C., Kahl, C., Seipelt, G., et al.
(2021). FOLFIRI plus cetuximab or bevacizumab for advanced colorectal
cancer: ﬁnal survival and per-protocol analysis of FIRE-3, a randomised
clinical trial. Br. J. Cancer 124, 587–594.
8. Shen, Y., Wang, X., Lu, J., Salfenmoser, M., Wirsik, N.M., Schleussner, N.,
Imle, A., Freire Valls, A., Radhakrishnan, P., Liang, J., et al. (2020). Reduc-
tion of Liver Metastasis Stiffness Improves Response to Bevacizumab in
Metastatic Colorectal Cancer. Cancer Cell 37, 800–817.e7.
9. Cancer Genome Atlas Network (2012). Comprehensive molecular charac-
terization of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature (London) 487,
330–337.
10. Yaeger, R., Chatila, W.K., Lipsyc, M.D., Hechtman, J.F., Cercek, A., San-
chez-Vega, F., Jayakumaran, G., Middha, S., Zehir, A., Donoghue, M.T.A.,
et al. (2018). Clinical Sequencing Deﬁnes the Genomic Landscape of Met-
astatic Colorectal Cancer. Cancer Cell 33, 125–136.e3.
11. Guinney, J., Dienstmann, R., Wang, X., de Reynie` s, A., Schlicker, A., So-
neson, C., Marisa, L., Roepman, P., Nyamundanda, G., Angelino, P.,
et al. (2015). The consensus molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer.
Nat. Med. 21, 1350–1356. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3967.
12. Zhao, Q., Wang, F., Chen, Y.X., Chen, S., Yao, Y.C., Zeng, Z.L., Jiang, T.J.,
Wang, Y.N., Wu, C.Y., Jing, Y., et al. (2022). Comprehensive proﬁling of
1015 patients’ exomes reveals genomic-clinical associations in colorectal
cancer. Nat. Commun. 13, 2342. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-
30062-8.
13. Smeets, D., Miller, I.S., O’Connor, D.P., Das, S., Moran, B., Boeckx, B.,
Gaiser, T., Betge, J., Barat, A., Klinger, R., et al. (2018). Copy number
load predicts outcome of metastatic colorectal cancer patients receiving
bevacizumab combination therapy. Nat. Commun. 9, 4112.
14. Woolston, A., Khan, K., Spain, G., Barber, L.J., Grifﬁths, B., Gonzalez-Ex-
posito, R., Hornsteiner, L., Punta, M., Patil, Y., Newey, A., et al. (2019).
Genomic and Transcriptomic Determinants of Therapy Resistance and
Immune Landscape Evolution during Anti-EGFR Treatment in Colorectal
Cancer. Cancer Cell 36, 35–50.e9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2019.
05.013.
15. Kim, C., Gao, R., Sei, E., Brandt, R., Hartman, J., Hatschek, T., Crosetto,
N., Foukakis, T., and Navin, N.E. (2018). Chemoresistance Evolution in
Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Delineated by Single-Cell Sequencing.
Cell 173, 879–893.e13.
16. Marine, J.C., Dawson, S.J., and Dawson, M.A. (2020). Non-genetic mech-
anisms of therapeutic resistance in cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 20, 743–756.
17. Huang, M., Lin, Y., Wang, C., Deng, L., Chen, M., Assaraf, Y.G., Chen,
Z.S., Ye, W., and Zhang, D. (2022). New insights into antiangiogenic ther-
apy resistance in cancer: Mechanisms and therapeutic aspects. Drug
Resist. Updates 64, 100849.
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
15
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
18. Qi, M., Fan, S., Huang, M., Pan, J., Li, Y., Miao, Q., Lyu, W., Li, X., Deng, L.,
Qiu, S., et al. (2022). Targeting FAP$\alpha$-expressing hepatic stellate
cells overcomes resistance to antiangiogenics in colorectal cancer liver
metastasis models. J. Clin. Invest. 132.
19. Eisenhauer, E.A., Therasse, P., Bogaerts, J., Schwartz, L.H., Sargent, D.,
Ford, R., Dancey, J., Arbuck, S., Gwyther, S., Mooney, M., et al. (2009).
New response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: Revised RECIST guide-
line (version 1.1). Eur. J. Cancer 45, 228–247.
20. Parikh, A.R., Lee, F.-C., Yau, L., Koh, H., Knost, J., Mitchell, E.P., Bosanac,
I., Choong, N., Scappaticci, F., Mancao, C., and Lenz, H.-J. (2019). MAV-
ERICC, a Randomized, Biomarker-stratiﬁed, Phase II Study of mFOL-
FOX6-Bevacizumab versus FOLFIRI-Bevacizumab as First-line Chemo-
therapy in Metastatic Colorectal Cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 25, 2988–2995.
21. Turner, N.C., and Reis-Filho, J.S. (2012). Genetic heterogeneity and can-
cer drug resistance. Lancet Oncol. 13, e178–e185.
22. Lippert, T.H., Ruoff, H.J., and Volm, M. (2008). Intrinsic and acquired drug
resistance in malignant tumors. The main reason for therapeutic failure.
Arzneimittelforschung 58, 261–264.
23. Li, C., Sun, Y.D., Yu, G.Y., Cui, J.R., Lou, Z., Zhang, H., Huang, Y., Bai,
C.G., Deng, L.L., Liu, P., et al. (2020). Integrated Omics of Metastatic Colo-
rectal Cancer. Cancer Cell 38, 734–747.e9.
24. Jiang, B., Song, D., Mu, Q., and Wang, J.J.Q.B. (2020). CELLO: a longitu-
dinal data analysis toolbox untangling cancer evolution. Quantitative
Biology 8, 256–266.
25. van Dijk, E., van den Bosch, T., Lenos, K.J., El Makrini, K., Nijman, L.E., van
Essen, H.F.B., Lansu, N., Boekhout, M., Hageman, J.H., Fitzgerald, R.C.,
et al. (2021). Chromosomal copy number heterogeneity predicts survival
rates across cancers. Nat. Commun. 12, 3188. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-021-23384-6.
26. Chu, T., Wang, Z., Pe’er, D., and Danko, C.G. (2022). Cell type and gene
expression deconvolution with BayesPrism enables Bayesian integrative
analysis across bulk and single-cell RNA sequencing in oncology. Nat.
Can. (Ott.) 3, 505–517. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-022-00356-3.
27. Sathe, A., Mason, K., Grimes, S.M., Zhou, Z., Lau, B.T., Bai, X., Su, A., Tan,
X., Lee, H., Suarez, C.J., et al. (2023). Colorectal Cancer Metastases in the
Liver Establish Immunosuppressive Spatial Networking between Tumor-
Associated SPP1+ Macrophages and Fibroblasts. Clin. Cancer Res. 29,
244–260. https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.Ccr-22-2041.
28. Gambaro, K., Marques, M., McNamara, S., Couetoux du Tertre, M., Diaz,
Z., Hoffert, C., Srivastava, A., He´ bert, S., Samson, B., Lespe´ rance, B.,
et al. (2021). Copy number and transcriptome alterations associated
with metastatic lesion response to treatment in colorectal cancer. Clin.
Transl. Med. 11, e401.
29. Wu, Y., Yang, S., Ma, J., Chen, Z., Song, G., Rao, D., Cheng, Y., Huang, S.,
Liu, Y., Jiang, S., et al. (2022). Spatiotemporal Immune Landscape of Colo-
rectal Cancer Liver Metastasis at Single-Cell Level. Cancer Discov. 12,
134–153. https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.Cd-21-0316.
30. Frentzas, S., Simoneau, E., Bridgeman, V.L., Vermeulen, P.B., Foo, S.,
Kostaras, E., Nathan, M., Wotherspoon, A., Gao, Z.H., Shi, Y., et al.
(2016). Vessel co-option mediates resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy
in liver metastases. Nat. Med. 22, 1294–1302.
31. Chun, Y.S., Vauthey, J.N., Boonsirikamchai, P., Maru, D.M., Kopetz, S.,
Palavecino, M., Curley, S.A., Abdalla, E.K., Kaur, H., Charnsangavej, C.,
and Loyer, E.M. (2009). Association of computed tomography morpho-
logic criteria with pathologic response and survival in patients treated
with bevacizumab for colorectal liver metastases. JAMA 302, 2338–
2344. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2009.1755.
32. Lee, H.O., Hong, Y., Etlioglu, H.E., Cho, Y.B., Pomella, V., Van den Bosch,
B., Vanhecke, J., Verbandt, S., Hong, H., Min, J.W., et al. (2020). Lineage-
dependent gene expression programs inﬂuence the immune landscape of
colorectal cancer. Nat. Genet. 52, 594–603. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41588-020-0636-z.
33. Lanauze, C.B., Sehgal, P., Hayer, K., Torres-Diz, M., Pippin, J.A., Grant,
S.F.A.,
and
Thomas-Tikhonenko,
A.
(2021).
Colorectal
Cancer-
Associated Smad4 R361 Hotspot Mutations Boost Wnt/$\beta$-Catenin
Signaling through Enhanced Smad4–LEF1 Binding. Mol. Cancer Res.
19, 823–833.
34. Wong, C.K., Lambert, A.W., Ozturk, S., Papageorgis, P., Lopez, D., Shen,
N., Sen, Z., Abdolmaleky, H.M., Gy}orffy, B., Feng, H., and Thiagalingam, S.
(2020). Targeting RICTOR Sensitizes SMAD4-Negative Colon Cancer to
Irinotecan. Mol. Cancer Res. 18, 414–423.
35. Sa¨ isa¨ -Borreill, S., Davidson, G., Kleiber, T., Thevenot, A., Martin, E., Mon-
dot, S., Blottiere, H., Helleux, A., Mengus, G., Plateroti, M., et al. (2023).
General transcription factor TAF4 antagonizes epigenetic silencing by Pol-
ycomb to maintain intestine stem cell functions. Cell Death Differ. 30,
839–853. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41418-022-01109-6.
36. Pedraz-Cuesta, E., Christensen, S., Jensen, A.A., Jensen, N.F., Bunch, L.,
Romer, M.U., Br€unner, N., Stenvang, J., and Pedersen, S.F. (2015). The
glutamate transport inhibitor DL-Threo-beta-Benzyloxyaspartic acid (DL-
TBOA) differentially affects SN38- and oxaliplatin-induced death of
drug-resistant colorectal cancer cells. BMC Cancer 15, 411. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12885-015-1405-8.
37. Szymczyk, J., Sluzalska, K.D., Materla, I., Opalinski, L., Otlewski, J., and
Zakrzewska, M. (2021). FGF/FGFR-Dependent Molecular Mechanisms
Underlying Anti-Cancer Drug Resistance. Cancers 13, 5796. https://doi.
org/10.3390/cancers13225796.
38. Chen, J., Wang, H., Peng, F., Qiao, H., Liu, L., Wang, L., and Shang, B.
(2022). Ano1 is a Prognostic Biomarker That is Correlated with Immune
Inﬁltration in Colorectal Cancer. Int. J. Gen. Med. 15, 1547–1564.
https://doi.org/10.2147/IJGM.S348296.
39. Schulz-Heddergott, R., Stark, N., Edmunds, S.J., Li, J., Conradi, L.C.,
Bohnenberger, H., Ceteci, F., Greten, F.R., Dobbelstein, M., and Moll,
U.M. (2018). Therapeutic Ablation of Gain-of-Function Mutant p53 in Colo-
rectal Cancer Inhibits Stat3-Mediated Tumor Growth and Invasion. Cancer
Cell 34, 298–314.e7.
40. Pich, O., Bailey, C., Watkins, T.B.K., Zaccaria, S., Jamal-Hanjani, M., and
Swanton, C. (2022). The translational challenges of precision oncology.
Cancer Cell 40, 458–478.
41. Hanahan, D. (2022). Hallmarks of Cancer: New Dimensions. Cancer Dis-
cov. 12, 31–46.
42. Shi, Z.-D., Pang, K., Wu, Z.-X., Dong, Y., Hao, L., Qin, J.-X., Wang, W.,
Chen, Z.-S., and Han, C.-H. (2023). Tumor cell plasticity in targeted ther-
apy-induced resistance: mechanisms and new strategies. Signal Trans-
duct. Targeted Ther. 8, 113.
43. Zhang, B., Yao, K., Zhou, E., Zhang, L., and Cheng, C. (2021). Chr20q
Ampliﬁcation Deﬁnes a Distinct Molecular Subtype of Microsatellite Stable
Colorectal Cancer. Cancer Res. 81, 1977–1987.
44. Bao, L., Qian, Z., Lyng, M.B., Wang, L., Yu, Y., Wang, T., Zhang, X., Yang,
H., Br€unner, N., Wang, J., and Ditzel, H.J. (2018). Coexisting genomic ab-
errations associated with lymph node metastasis in breast cancer. J. Clin.
Invest. 128, 2310–2324.
45. Frey, P., Devisme, A., Rose, K., Schrempp, M., Freihen, V., Andrieux, G.,
Boerries, M., and Hecht, A. (2022). SMAD4 mutations do not preclude
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in colorectal cancer. Oncogene 41,
824–837.
46. Fleming, N.I., Jorissen, R.N., Mouradov, D., Christie, M., Sakthianandes-
waren, A., Palmieri, M., Day, F., Li, S., Tsui, C., Lipton, L., et al. (2013).
SMAD2, SMAD3 and SMAD4 mutations in colorectal cancer. Cancer
Res. 73, 725–735.
47. Mehrvarz Sarshekeh, A., Advani, S., Overman, M.J., Manyam, G., Kee,
B.K., Fogelman, D.R., Dasari, A., Raghav, K., Vilar, E., Manuel, S., et al.
(2017). Association of SMAD4 mutation with patient demographics, tumor
characteristics, and clinical outcomes in colorectal cancer. PLoS One 12,
e0173345.
16
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
48. Szeglin, B.C., Wu, C., Marco, M.R., Park, H.S., Zhang, Z., Zhang, B., Gar-
cia-Aguilar, J., Beauchamp, R.D., Chen, X.S., and Smith, J.J. (2022). A
SMAD4-modulated gene proﬁle predicts disease-free survival in stage II
and III colorectal cancer. Cancer Rep. 5, e1423.
49. Zhang, B., Zhang, B., Chen, X., Bae, S., Singh, K., Washington, M.K., and
Datta, P.K. (2014). Loss of Smad4 in colorectal cancer induces resistance
to 5-ﬂuorouracil through activating Akt pathway. Br. J. Cancer 110,
946–957.
50. Lin, Z., Zhang, L., Zhou, J., and Zheng, J. (2019). Silencing Smad4 atten-
uates sensitivity of colorectal cancer cells to cetuximab by promoting
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Mol. Med. Rep. 20, 3735–3745.
51. Ozawa, H., Ranaweera, R.S., Izumchenko, E., Makarev, E., Zhavoronkov,
A., Fertig, E.J., Howard, J.D., Markovic, A., Bedi, A., Ravi, R., et al. (2017).
SMAD4 Loss Is Associated with Cetuximab Resistance and Induction of
MAPK/JNK Activation in Head and Neck Cancer Cells. Clin. Cancer Res.
23, 5162–5175.
52. Zhang, B., Leng, C., Wu, C., Zhang, Z., Dou, L., Luo, X., Zhang, B., and
Chen, X. (2016). Smad4 sensitizes colorectal cancer to 5-ﬂuorouracil
through cell cycle arrest by inhibiting the PI3K/Akt/CDC2/survivin
cascade. Oncol. Rep. 35, 1807–1815.
53. Yu, H., Pardoll, D., and Jove, R. (2009). STATs in cancer inﬂammation and
immunity: a leading role for STAT3. Nat. Rev. Cancer 9, 798–809. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nrc2734.
54. Feng, H., Liu, K., Shen, X., Liang, J., Wang, C., Qiu, W., Cheng, X., and
Zhao, R. (2020). Targeting tumor cell-derived CCL2 as a strategy to over-
come Bevacizumab resistance in ETV5+ colorectal cancer. Cell Death Dis.
11, 916. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-020-03111-7.
55. Yu, D., Xu, H., Zhou, J., Fang, K., Zhao, Z., and Xu, K. (2024). PDPN/CCL2/
STAT3 feedback loop alter CAF heterogeneity to promote angiogenesis in
colorectal cancer. Angiogenesis 27, 809–825. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10456-024-09941-9.
56. Chun, E., Lavoie, S., Michaud, M., Gallini, C.A., Kim, J., Soucy, G., Odze,
R., Glickman, J.N., and Garrett, W.S. (2015). CCL2 Promotes Colorectal
Carcinogenesis by Enhancing Polymorphonuclear Myeloid-Derived Sup-
pressor Cell Population and Function. Cell Rep. 12, 244–257. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.024.
57. Shah, M.A., Shitara, K., Lordick, F., Bang, Y.J., Tebbutt, N.C., Metges,
J.P., Muro, K., Lee, K.W., Shen, L., Tjulandin, S., et al. (2022). Randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study of paclitaxel$\pm$Napa-
bucasin in pretreated advanced gastric or gastroesophageal junction
adenocarcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 28, OF1–OF9.
58. Sonbol, M.B., Ahn, D.H., Goldstein, D., Okusaka, T., Tabernero, J., Mac-
arulla, T., Reni, M., Li, C.P., O’Neil, B., Van Cutsem, E., and Bekaii-
Saab, T. (2019). CanStem111P trial: a Phase III study of napabucasin
plus nab-paclitaxel with gemcitabine. Future Oncol. 15, 1295–1302.
59. Jonker, D.J., Nott, L., Yoshino, T., Gill, S., Shapiro, J., Ohtsu, A., Zalcberg,
J., Vickers, M.M., Wei, A.C., Gao, Y., et al. (2018). Napabucasin versus pla-
cebo in refractory advanced colorectal cancer: a randomised phase 3 trial.
Lancet. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 3, 263–270.
60. Fan, Z., Cui, Y., Chen, L., Liu, P., and Duan, W. (2024). 23-Hydroxybetulinic
acid attenuates 5-ﬂuorouracil resistance of colorectal cancer by modu-
lating M2 macrophage polarization via STAT6 signaling. Cancer Immunol.
Immunother. 73, 83. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00262-024-03662-0.
61. Laoukili, J., Constantinides, A., Wassenaar, E.C.E., Elias, S.G., Raats,
D.A.E., van Schelven, S.J., van Wettum, J., Volckmann, R., Koster, J., Hui-
tema, A.D.R., et al. (2022). Peritoneal metastases from colorectal cancer
belong to Consensus Molecular Subtype 4 and are sensitised to oxaliplatin
by inhibiting reducing capacity. Br. J. Cancer 126, 1824–1833. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41416-022-01742-5.
62. Mitsuhashi, A., Goto, H., Saijo, A., Trung, V.T., Aono, Y., Ogino, H., Kura-
moto, T., Tabata, S., Uehara, H., Izumi, K., et al. (2015). Fibrocyte-like cells
mediate acquired resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy with bevacizu-
mab. Nat. Commun. 6, 8792. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9792.
63. Mooi, J.K., Wirapati, P., Asher, R., Lee, C.K., Savas, P., Price, T.J., Town-
send, A., Hardingham, J., Buchanan, D., Williams, D., et al. (2018). The
prognostic impact of consensus molecular subtypes (CMS) and its predic-
tive effects for bevacizumab beneﬁt in metastatic colorectal cancer: mo-
lecular analysis of the AGITG MAX clinical trial. Ann. Oncol. 29, 2240–
2246. https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdy410.
64. Yang, X., Lin, Y., Shi, Y., Li, B., Liu, W., Yin, W., Dang, Y., Chu, Y., Fan, J.,
and He, R. (2016). FAP Promotes Immunosuppression by Cancer-
Associated Fibroblasts in the Tumor Microenvironment via STAT3-CCL2
Signaling. Cancer Res. 76, 4124–4135. https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-
5472.CAN-15-2973.
65. Yu, H., Kortylewski, M., and Pardoll, D. (2007). Crosstalk between cancer
and immune cells: role of STAT3 in the tumour microenvironment. Nat.
Rev. Immunol. 7, 41–51. https://doi.org/10.1038/nri1995.
66. Cerami, E., Gao, J., Dogrusoz, U., Gross, B.E., Sumer, S.O., Aksoy, B.A.,
Jacobsen, A., Byrne, C.J., Heuer, M.L., Larsson, E., et al. (2012). The cBio
cancer genomics portal: an open platform for exploring multidimensional
cancer genomics data. Cancer Discov. 2, 401–404. https://doi.org/10.
1158/2159-8290.Cd-12-0095.
67. Li, H., and Durbin, R. (2009). Fast and accurate short read alignment with
Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760. https://doi.
org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324.
68. Chen, S., Zhou, Y., Chen, Y., and Gu, J. (2018). fastp: an ultra-fast all-in-
one FASTQ preprocessor. Bioinformatics 34, i884–i890. https://doi.org/
10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560.
69. Hu, H., Mu, Q., Bao, Z., Chen, Y., Liu, Y., Chen, J., Wang, K., Wang, Z.,
Nam, Y., Jiang, B., et al. (2018). Mutational Landscape of Secondary Glio-
blastoma Guides MET-Targeted Trial in Brain Tumor. Cell 175, 1665–
1678.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.038.
70. Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T., Ruan, J., Homer, N., Marth,
G., Abecasis, G., and Durbin, R.; 1000 Genome Project Data Processing
Subgroup (2009). The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools.
Bioinformatics 25, 2078–2079. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
btp352.
71. Shen, R., and Seshan, V.E. (2016). FACETS: allele-speciﬁc copy number
and
clonal
heterogeneity
analysis
tool
for
high-throughput
DNA
sequencing. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, e131. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkw520.
72. Kautto, E.A., Bonneville, R., Miya, J., Yu, L., Krook, M.A., Reeser, J.W.,
and Roychowdhury, S. (2017). Performance evaluation for rapid detection
of pan-cancer microsatellite instability with MANTIS. Oncotarget 8, 7452–
7463. https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.13918.
73. Paradis, E., Claude, J., and Strimmer, K. (2004). APE: Analyses of Phylo-
genetics and Evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 20, 289–290.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btg412.
74. Dobin, A., Davis, C.A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow, J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S.,
Batut, P., Chaisson, M., and Gingeras, T.R. (2013). STAR: ultrafast univer-
sal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21. https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/bts635.
75. Liao, Y., Smyth, G.K., and Shi, W. (2014). featureCounts: an efﬁcient gen-
eral purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features.
Bioinformatics
30,
923–930.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
btt656.
76. Zhang, Y., Parmigiani, G., and Johnson, W.E. (2020). ComBat-seq: batch
effect adjustment for RNA-seq count data. NAR Genom. Bioinform. 2,
lqaa078. https://doi.org/10.1093/nargab/lqaa078.
77. Yoshihara, K., Shahmoradgoli, M., Martı´nez, E., Vegesna, R., Kim, H.,
Torres-Garcia, W., Trevin˜ o, V., Shen, H., Laird, P.W., Levine, D.A., et al.
(2013). Inferring tumour purity and stromal and immune cell admixture
from expression data. Nat. Commun. 4, 2612. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms3612.
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
17
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
78. Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15,
550. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8.
79. Ritchie, M.E., Phipson, B., Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C.W., Shi, W., and Smyth,
G.K. (2015). limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-
sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, e47. https://
doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv007.
80. Subramanian, A., Tamayo, P., Mootha, V.K., Mukherjee, S., Ebert, B.L.,
Gillette, M.A., Paulovich, A., Pomeroy, S.L., Golub, T.R., Lander, E.S.,
and Mesirov, J.P. (2005). Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-
based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression proﬁles. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 15545–15550. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
0506580102.
81. Chen, E.Y., Tan, C.M., Kou, Y., Duan, Q., Wang, Z., Meirelles, G.V., Clark,
N.R., and Ma’ayan, A. (2013). Enrichr: interactive and collaborative HTML5
gene list enrichment analysis tool. BMC Bioinf. 14, 128. https://doi.org/10.
1186/1471-2105-14-128.
82. Cable, D.M., Murray, E., Zou, L.S., Goeva, A., Macosko, E.Z., Chen, F.,
and Irizarry, R.A. (2022). Robust decomposition of cell type mixtures in
spatial transcriptomics. Nat. Biotechnol. 40, 517–526. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41587-021-00830-w.
83. Hess, L.M., Brnabic, A., Mason, O., Lee, P., and Barker, S. (2019). Rela-
tionship between Progression-free Survival and Overall Survival in Ran-
domized Clinical Trials of Targeted and Biologic Agents in Oncology.
J. Cancer 10, 3717–3727. https://doi.org/10.7150/jca.32205.
84. Tarasov, A., Vilella, A.J., Cuppen, E., Nijman, I.J., and Prins, P. (2015).
Sambamba: fast processing of NGS alignment formats. Bioinformatics
31, 2032–2034. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv098.
85. Cancer Genome Atlas Network (2012). Comprehensive molecular charac-
terization of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature 487, 330–337. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nature11252.
86. Saitou, N., and Nei, M. (1987). The neighbor-joining method: a new
method for reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol. Biol. Evol. 4,
406–425. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a040454.
87. Liberzon, A., Birger, C., Thorvaldsdo´ ttir, H., Ghandi, M., Mesirov, J.P., and
Tamayo, P. (2015). The Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) hallmark
gene set collection. Cell Syst. 1, 417–425. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.
2015.12.004.
88. Varn, F.S., Johnson, K.C., Martinek, J., Huse, J.T., Nasrallah, M.P., Wes-
seling, P., Cooper, L.A.D., Malta, T.M., Wade, T.E., Sabedot, T.S., et al.
(2022). Glioma progression is shaped by genetic evolution and microenvi-
ronment interactions. Cell 185, 2184–2199.e16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2022.04.038.
89. Huang, N., Liu, Y., Fang, Y., Zheng, S., Wu, J., Wang, M., Zhong, W., Shi,
M., Xing, M., and Liao, W. (2020). Gold Nanoparticles Induce Tumor Vessel
Normalization and Impair Metastasis by Inhibiting Endothelial Smad2/3
Signaling. ACS Nano 14, 7940–7958. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.
9b08460.
90. Wang, J., Huang, Q., Hu, X., Zhang, S., Jiang, Y., Yao, G., Hu, K., Xu, X.,
Liang, B., Wu, Q., et al. (2022). Disrupting Circadian Rhythm via the
PER1-HK2 Axis Reverses Trastuzumab Resistance in Gastric Cancer.
Cancer Res. 82, 1503–1517. https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.Can-
21-1820.
18
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Rabbit anti-SMAD4
CST
Cat# 46535; RRID: AB_2736998
Rabbit anti-DYKDDDDK
CST
Cat# 14793; RRID: AB_2572291
Rabbit anti-STAT3
CST
Cat# 12640; RRID: AB_2629499
Rabbit anti-phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705)
CST
Cat# 9145; RRID: AB_2491009
Rabbit anti-SHP2
CST
Cat# 3397; RRID: AB_2174959
Mouse monoclonal
anti-SMAD4R361H
NewEast Biotechnologies
Cat# 26422; RRID: AB_2629384
Mouse monoclonal anti-b-Actin
Proteintech
Cat# 60008-1-Ig; RRID: AB_2289225
Mouse monoclonal anti-GAPDH
Proteintech
Cat# 60004–1-Ig; RRID: AB_2107436
Mouse monoclonal anti-CCL2
Proteintech
Cat# 66272-1-Ig; RRID: AB_2861337
Rabbit anti-Ki-67
Proteintech
Cat# 27309-1-AP; RRID: AB_2756525
Rabbit anti-CD31
Proteintech
Cat# 11265-1-AP; RRID: AB_2299349
Alexa Fluor 647-labeled
Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG
Beyotime
Cat# A0468; RRID: AB_2936379
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins
STATTIC
MCE (MedChemExpress)
Cat# HY-13818
JSH-23
MCE (MedChemExpress)
Cat# HY-13982
AC-4-130
MCE (MedChemExpress)
Cat# HY-124500
GB201
MCE (MedChemExpress)
Cat# HY-13919
Recombinant CCL2 protein
MCE (MedChemExpress)
Cat# HY-P7237
5-FU
Hainan Zhuotai
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd
N/A
Oxaliplatin
Jiangsu Hengrui
Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd
N/A
Irinotecan
Selleck
Cat# S5026
Bevacizumab
Roche Pharma (Schweiz) Ltd
N/A
B20.4–1.1
Genentech
N/A
Deposited data
Raw DNA sequencing data
Bao et al.44
PRJNA635121
MSK mutation data
Yaeger et al.10
PRJEB2384
ChangKang mutation data
Zhao et al.12
HRA000873
TCGA mutation data
Cerami et al.66
https://www.cbioportal.org/study/
summary?id=coadread_tcga
CRLM single cell data
Sathe et al.27
https://dna-discovery.stanford.edu/
research/datasets
CRLM spatial transcriptomic data
Wu et al.29
OEP001756
CRLM RNAseq raw data
This paper
HRA005455
CRLM WES raw data
This paper
HRA005455
Software and algorithms
bwa
Li et al.67
http://maq.sourceforge.net/
fastp
Chen et al.68
https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp
SAVI2
Hu et al.69
https://github.com/WangLabHKUST/SAVI
samtools
Li et al.70
http://samtools.sourceforge.net/
Facets
Shen et al.71
https://github.com/mskcc/facets
(Continued on next page)
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
e1
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
Clinical sample acquisition and treatment response evaluation
Patients’ samples were collected and analyzed after informed consent was obtained and approved by the ethics committee (NFEC-
2017-206) of Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University (Guangzhou, China). The enrolled patients with clinically and histolog-
ically conﬁrmed colorectal cancer liver metastases (CRLM) were deﬁned by the American Joint Committee on Cancer guidelines.
Forty-nine patients with unresectable CRLM were recruited. Thirty-six patients were treated with mFOLFOX6 (modiﬁed ﬂuorouracil,
leucovorin, and oxaliplatin) plus bevacizumab, and the other thirteen were treated with FOLFIRI (ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and irino-
tecan) plus bevacizumab (Table S1). A liver biopsy was performed in all patients before initial treatment, and the same site was bio-
psied within one week after response evaluation and blood samples as ref.14. Two patients received a fourth biopsy, and 13 patients
received a third biopsy as the tumor progressed. Therapeutic responses were deﬁned by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tu-
mors (RECIST 1.1) and assessed radiographically about every four treatment cycles. The RECIST of the biopsy and RECIST of all
evaluated lesions were used to determine of responders and non-responders (Figure S1C). Progression-free survival (PFS),83 the
period from the start of treatment until the ﬁrst of disease progressed, and overall survival (OS),83 the period of patient survival after
the start of treatment. The biopsy specimens were parafﬁn-embedded and stored in RNAlater (Qiagen, D€usseldorf, Germany),
respectively. Suppose tumor content was estimated to be over 40% after a thorough pathological review; tumor RNA and DNA
were extracted from freshly obtained tissues. Next, the whole-exome sequencing (WES, n = 44), panel sequencing data (n = 5),
and RNA sequencing of the tumor biopsy specimens were parallelly performed. As for blood samples, plasma, and blood cells
were sub-packaged into 500 pL per vial and stored at 80C until use.
Cell lines
Human colorectal cancer cell lines SW480 and HCT116 were obtained from were purchased from Guangzhou Jennio Biological Sci-
ence and Technology Ltd (Guangzhou, China), and murine colon cancer cell line CT26 was obtained from the Center for Typical Cul-
ture Collection, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China). All cells were cultured with RPMI 1640 medium (Solarbio, 31800)
with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone, USA) in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37C. For site mutation of SMAD4, cells were stably trans-
fected with pHBLV-CMV-MCS-3FLAG-EF1-Luc-T2A-Puro constructs (Hanbio, China) and subsequently selected with puromycin
medium (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with western blotting used to verify the efﬁciency of the sequence.
Animals
All animal experiments were conducted by the Public Health Service Policy in Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were
approved by the Ethical Committee of Southern Medical University. BALB/c male mice aged 4–5 weeks were purchased from the
Experimental Animal Center, Southern Medical University (Guangzhou, China). To assess the effectiveness of 5-FU and bevacizu-
mab on colon cancer with different states of the SMAD4 gene, 13107 transfected CT26 cells were subcutaneously injected into
the left ﬂank of mice. One week after cell inoculation, mice were treated with PBS, 5-FU (25 mg/kg, i.p., twice a week), or 5-FU
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
MANTIS
Kautto et al.72
https://github.com/OSU-SRLab/MANTIS
ape
Paradis et al.73
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ape/index.html
Cello2-R
Jiang et al.24
https://github.com/WangLabHKUST/CELLO
STAR
Dobin et al.74
https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR
featureCounts
Liao et al.75
http://subread.sourceforge.net/
Comb-seq
Zhang et al.76
https://github.com/zhangyuqing/ComBat-seq
ESTIMATE
Yoshihara et al.77
http://www.bioconductor.org/
DESeq2
Love et al.78
http://www.bioconductor.org/
limma
Ritchie et al.79
http://www.bioconductor.org/
GSEA
Subramanian et al.80
https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/index.jsp
Enrichr
Chen et al.81
https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr/
CMSclassiﬁer
Guinney et al.11
https://github.com/Sage-Bionetworks/CMSclassiﬁer
BayesPrism
Chu et al.26
https://github.com/Danko-Lab/BayesPrism
spacexr
Cable et al.82
https://github.com/dmcable/spacexr
Python (3.8.5)
Anaconda
https://www.anaconda.com/
R (4.2.2)
CRAN
https://cran.r-project.org/
Python code
This paper
https://github.com/WangLabHKUST/CRLM
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13997442
e2
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
combined with monoclonal BVZ (B20.4–1.1, 5 mg/kg, i.p., twice a week) for two weeks. Tumor volumes and mice weight were
measured every two days. Tumor volume was calculated using the formula V = 0.53L3W,2 where V is the volume, L is the length,
and W is the width. After two weeks, the mice were euthanized to compare tumor weight and volume, and tumors were collected for
immunohistochemistry and immunoﬂuorescence staining. In addition, to verify the effect of GB201 on reversing 5-FU and bevacizu-
mab resistance, 13107 transfected CT26 cells with SMAD4R361H or SMAD4R361C mutation were respectively injected into mice sub-
cutaneously. Mice were randomly divided into four groups. Each group was administered one of the following: PBS, 5-FU (25 mg/kg,
i.p., twice a week) combined with monoclonal BVZ (5 mg/kg, i.p., twice a week), GB201 (10 mg/kg, i.p., q2d), and three-drug com-
bination. Tumor volumes and mice weights were measured and recorded, and the mice were euthanized after two weeks.
METHOD DETAILS
DNA extraction and library construction
Genomic DNA was extracted from blood and tissue samples using the TIANamp Blood DNA Kits and TIANamp Genomic DNA Kits
(Tiangen Biotech, Beijing, China), respectively, following the manufacturer’s protocols. The extracted DNA was then fragmented us-
ing the ultra-sonicator UCD-200 (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium). Subsequently, the fragmented DNA was puriﬁed and size-selected
using magnetic beads (Beckman, MA, USA). The quality of the DNA was assessed using the Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer with the Quanti-IT
dsDNA HS Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, MA, USA). For library construction, the fragmented DNA was hybridized to the
SeqCap EZ Exome 64M (Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI, USA), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The sequencing process
was performed using the Gene+ Seq-2000 platform with 2 3 100-bp paired-end reads. To ensure data integrity, an in-house script
was utilized to remove terminal adaptor sequences and low-quality reads from the raw data.
Somatic mutation detection
Raw fastq ﬁles were aligned to hg19 reference using bwa mem with default parameters after fastp quality checking.67,68 Picard
MarkDuplicates was applied to mark PCR duplicates. Aligned bam ﬁles of longitudinal (pre- and post-samples) tumors and matched
normal blood were subjected to SAVI2 for somatic SNV/Indel calling which takes advantage of samtools for variant identiﬁcation as
before.69 We set the parameter as ‘–conf 1e5 –precision 5’ to acquire more accurate mutational allele frequency (MAF). To remove
false positives, we added three features to SAVI2 PD-ﬁlter report, including PON (all SNPs from blood samples were used to build a
Panel of Normal variant set), AltNormal (altered reads in corresponding blood control bam ﬁles), and MQ0 (average number of reads
with mapping quality of zero measured by sambamba84). The somatic mutation candidates were acquired based on the jointly
ﬁltering criteria: (1) MAF in blood %1%, altered depth in blood %2, altered depth in tumors >2; (2) not present in Meganormal data-
base; (3) PON %2, MQ0 % 5; AltNormal %2 for WES, AltNormal %15 for Panel; (4) not reported as common SNPs; (5) non-synon-
ymous mutations. We then sought to identify mutated genes that (1) were reported in the Cancer Genome Atlas Network (TCGA,
2012)85 analysis of CRC. The background mutation rate of each gene was calculated from 223 TCGA tumors (downloaded from cBio-
Portal).66 Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) was used to detect the SMAD4R361 H/C mutations in CRC tumor samples from the independent
cohort. The cases supported by > 5 positive droplets and >0.5% fractional abundance were categorized as mutant; otherwise, they
were classiﬁed as wild-type.
Somatic copy number alteration
Facets was applied to estimate somatic copy number alterations and tumor purity using WES/Panel sequencing data of tumor and
matched blood.71 The detailed parameter for embedded samtools mpileup was ‘-q15 -Q20’ when other parameters were set as
default. By taking the tumor purity (p) into account, the arm-level and cytoband-level copy number status was determined: a)
copy number gain: the segment log2 ratio R log2((2 + p)/2); b) copy number loss: the segment log2 ratio % log2((2-p)/2). Copy num-
ber heterogeneity (CNH), deﬁned as the average proportion of malignant cells that differ by one copy from the mode copy number
value at each position of the genome was predicted using CNH MATLAB code25 for each sample.
Microsatellite instability prediction
To estimate microsatellite instability status for each tumor sample, we applied MANTIS v1.0.472 with tumor-normal BAM ﬁles as
input. RepeatFinder function with default parameters was ﬁrstly used to capture microsatellite loci within hg19 reference genome.
Next, we run python program ‘‘mantis.py’’ with the following parameters: -mrq = 20.0, -mlq = 25.0, -mlc = 20, -mrr = 1. Samples
with StepWise Difference (DIF) score between the tumor and normal distributions R0.4 were assigned ‘‘MSI-H’’ as recommended
by the algorithm, and hence all samples were predicted as MSS.
Evolutionary tree
Somatic SNV/Indel of Pre, Post1, Post2 and Post3 samples from WES data were transformed as a binary matrix as representation of
somatic mutation status, with 0 for wildtype and 1 for mutant. Then the matrix of each patient was subjected to calculate sample
distance using adist function in R. Further, neighbor-joining tree estimation was completed using nj function from ape package.73,86
Finally, the evolutionary tree of longitudinal timepoints was visualized in an unrooted manner. For each tree, the length of tree is pro-
portional to the somatic mutation number. Cello2-R was used to obtain three-dimensional frequency of key driver altered genes and
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
e3
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
moduli space analysis were performed to represent the evolutionary patterns following therapy using Cello2-MATLAB.24 In the
ternary plot, three variables, which sum up to a constant, are depicted on a two-dimensional graph using a barycentric plot. Specif-
ically, the plot illustrates the fractions of mutations that are shared between pre-treatment and post-treatment, mutations that are
private to the pre-treatment stage, and mutations that are private to the post-treatment stage, all of which have been adjusted using
the ETRIP program and were represented in a matrix of three columns. The fractions matrix was subjected to K-means clustering with
clusters parameter set to three and visualized using Cello2 in MATLAB, which could also be done using ggtern function in ggtern R
package.
ETRIP (Evolutionary Tree Inference Program) is used to enhance the accuracy of phylogenetic tree inference by effectively esti-
mating the underestimated mutations in tumor samples caused by factors such as low-purity or low-sequencing depth in DNA
sequencing data. The real mutation allele spectrum (real MAS) is deﬁned as the distribution of mutational allele frequency (MAF).
The measured mutation allele spectrum (measured MAS) is deﬁned as the distribution of calculated MAF, which is obtained by
dividing the number of positive reads by the total reads. ETRIP ﬁrst partitioned MAS into n intervals, namely fang, where ai means
the number of alleles with MAF in
1  1
n ; i
n

. In real MAS, denoted as fang, with i ranging from 1 to n, while in measured MAS, denoted
as fa0
ng, with i ranging from 0 to n where a0 means the number of undetected alleles, i.e., false negatives. The purity of real MAS is 1,
while the measured MAS has a purity of p, determined by the sample purity. ETRIP mimicked the process by a function that mapped
the real MAS to the expected measured MAS (fa0
ngexp) based on predetermined purity and read depth parameters. Subsequently, it
generated an inferred real MAS whose measured MAS ﬁts the observed measured MAS. To evaluate the accuracy of ﬁtness, a chi-
square score is computed. Ultimately, ETRIP calculates the false-negative rates for both pretreatment and post-treatment samples
and regenerates the evolutionary trees.
The generation of the function fðfangÞ = fa0
ngexp is based on two assumptions.
1. For an allele, the number of reads X (including positive reads and negatives) follows Poisson distribution PðX = kÞ =
lk
k!e l,
where l is read depth and k is a positive integer.
2. For
an
allele
with
k
reads,
the
number
of
positive
reads
Y
follows
binomial
distribution
PðY =
mÞ =

k
m

ðp$MAFÞmð1  p$MAFÞk  m, where MAF is the allele frequency when purity is 1, m is an integer between 0 and k. Partic-
ularly, for an allele in the i-th interval in MAS, its MAF can be approximated to i  0:5
n
when n is large. Then PiðY = mÞ =

k
m

p$i  0:5
n
m
1  p$i  0:5
n
k  m.
Therefore, the contribution c from the alleles in the i-th interval in real MAS to the j-th interval in measured MAS is
cði; jÞ =
X
N
k = 0
2
66664
PðX = kÞ
X
m ˛

j  1
n k; j
n k
PiðY = mÞ
3
77775
Hence, the expected value of a0
j is derived as
a0
j =
X
n
i = 1
aicði; jÞ
And the function fðfangÞ = fa0
ngexp is generated.
Chi-square scoring system is used to evaluate the ﬁtness between expected measured MAS fa0
ngexp and observed measured MAS
fa0
ngobs which is obtained from DNA-seq data. It calculates Pn
i = 1
ð½a0
iexp  ½a0
iobsÞ2
½a0
iexp
with the degree of freedom n. The higher score indi-
cates less conﬁdence or less ﬁtness. ETRIP infers the real MAS with purity = 1 from the observed MAS with purity = p by performing
the following steps.
1. generate a rough candidate real MAS nfangca.
2. calculate fa0
ngexp = fðfangcanÞ, which is the expected measured MAS.
3. calculate Chi-square score between fa0
ngexp and sfa0
ngob.
4. iterate each element in fangcan, modify its value, perform step 2 and 3 again, compare the scores before and after modiﬁcation,
keep the version of fangcan with lower score.
5. repeat step 4 until no modiﬁcation is applied.
6. output fangcan as inferred real MAS.
e4
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
With the inferred real MAS, ETRIP calculates fa0
ng = fðfangcanÞ and hence false negative rate fn =
a0
0
Pn
i = 0a0
i
of Pre (fnPre) and Post
(fnPost) respectively. Then ETRIP infers the evolutionary tree by solving the following maximum likelihood equations.
Measured Pre-private = Inferred real Pre-private 3 ð1  fnPreÞ
Measured Post-private = Inferred real Post-private 3 ð1  fnPostÞ
Measured shared = Inferred real shared 3 ð1  fnPreÞ 3 ð1  fnPostÞ
The process of inferring the evolutionary tree is completed after resolving three false negative rates.
RNA extraction and library construction
For RNA extraction from tissue samples, the Trizol reagent was employed. Subsequently, strict quality control measures were im-
plemented for the RNA samples, which encompassed three main aspects. Firstly, concentration and total quantity were assessed
using Qubit 4.0. Secondly, the integrity of the RNA samples was evaluated using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies,
CA, USA). Lastly, sample purity was evaluated using the NanoDrop spectrophotometer. Following quality assessment, RNA
sequencing libraries were constructed using the TruSeq RNA Sample Prep Kits, v2 (Illumina, CA, USA). Once the library construction
was completed, an initial quantiﬁcation was carried out, and the library was subsequently diluted. The distribution of library fragments
was determined using the Agilent 2100 DNA 1000 Kit. Finally, the library was sequenced using a Gene+ Seq-2000 sequencer. Similar
to the earlier DNA sequencing process, an in-house script was utilized to remove terminal adaptor sequences and low-quality reads
from the raw data.
Bulk RNA-seq preprocessing
Data quality control was performed with fastp.68 Reads were aligned to the human reference genome (GRCh38) using STAR
v2.7.0days.74 Gene count tables were generated by featureCounts75 and normalized as Fragments Per Kilobase Million (FPKM).
Comb-seq76 was used for batch correction. The ESTIMATE algorithm77 was used to infer tumor purity from bulk tissue samples.
Differential gene expression analysis, pathway analysis and gene set enrichment
For the analysis of differentially expressed genes, we restricted our analysis on protein-coding transcripts. DESeq2 v.1.32.078 (two-
sided Wald-test and Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction) or limma v3.48.3 was used to identify genes differentially expressed
between two groups. Comparison of pathway activity between pre-treatment and posttreatment samples was performed by
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)80 of 50 MSigDB hallmark gene sets.87 The enriched gene sets with normalized enrichment
score >1.2 or < 1.2 were selected in Figure 2H. The AR and IR gene list was analyzed using Enrichr81 to identify signiﬁcantly enriched
pathways (p < 0.05), and the pathway rankings were determined based on the p values (Figures 3B and 4B). The AR gene signature
score (Figure S6E) was computed by taking the weighted average expression (log2FPKM) of 80 resistant genes and subtracting the
weighted average expression of 20 sensitive genes for each sample. The weights assigned to each gene were based on their AR
contribution.
Sample-based response feature selection
To identify molecular determinants related to BVZ-based chemotherapy response, we developed Sample-based Response Feature
Selection (SRFS). In the initial phase, SRFS pooled all available samples together to increase our statistical power for detecting
changes and then we excluded the post-therapy samples with PR to eliminate ambiguous response annotations. Following this,
the remaining samples were re-annotated based on their subsequent timepoint responses to roughly reﬂect how tumors would react
to the upcoming treatment. In the second phase, SRFS categorized the samples into two groups - sensitive (PR, n = 27) or resistant
group (SD or PD, n = 64) - based on their updated response. For genomic features, SRFS gauged their discriminative potential be-
tween the two groups using a two-sided Fisher’s exact test, while transcriptomic features were assessed in a univariate logistic
regression model. Signiﬁcant features were categorized as either resistance-related or sensitivity-related. In the third phase, for resis-
tance-related features, SRFS assessed their contribution to IR by calculating the proportion of patients consistently displaying
genomic alterations or higher gene expression (using average expression as a threshold) throughout the treatment period, among
all IR patients. Conversely, for sensitivity-related features, IR contribution counted the patients consistently lacking genomic alter-
ations or showing lower gene expression throughout treatment. In the context of AR contribution, resistance-related genomic fea-
tures measured the proportion of patients developing genomic alterations post-treatment among all AR patients, while sensitivity-
related features focused on lost alterations. For transcriptomic features, resistance-related ones considered patients with an
increased gene expression trend (from low to high) post-treatment, while sensitivity-related features assessed the declining trend.
To decouple AR-from IR-related features, we deﬁned the AR features as AR contributions exceeding the average (43.6%) of all sig-
niﬁcant genes, while IR features were deﬁned as contributions surpassing the average (47.3%) of IR contributions. Features such as
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
e5
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
somatic mutations, copy number alterations, tumor purity and ploidy, CNH, mutation burden, and CMS subtypes were classiﬁed as
AR and IR features if their contributions exceeded 30%. Cell type proportions were categorized using a cutoff of 20%.
Bulk transcriptional subtype classiﬁcation
Consensus Molecular Subtypes (CMS)11 were applied using classifyCMS.SSP function within CMSclassiﬁer v1.0.0. All CMS sub-
types with minCor>=0.15 and minDelta>=0.06 were assigned to the sample in SSP.predictedCMS output while the ‘‘mixed’’ CMS
subtypes were deﬁned by ‘NA’ (unclassiﬁed) results with minCor<0.15 or minDelta<0.06.
Deconvolution analysis
The BayesPrism v1.426 was used to infer the relative cellular proportions and cell type-speciﬁc gene expression matrices. Reference
scRNA-seq count matrix was extracted from a previous paper,27 which identiﬁed eight cell types including tumor epithelial cells,
normal hepatocytes, endothelial cells, ﬁbroblasts, myeloid cells, T cells, NK cells and B cells. To verify the validity of deconvolution
results in our CRLM RNA data, we applied the method to the synthetic mixtures created according to the previously described pro-
cedure.88 Correlation analysis was conducted to compare the inferred proportions from BayesPrism with the true proportions.
Spatial transcriptomic data analysis
The spatial transcriptomic data (ST-P1 and ST-P3) from CRLM samples pre- and post-XELOX treatment was downloaded from a
prior paper.29 RCTD (spacexr v2.0.3)82 was implemented to estimate relative cell type abundance for each spot. The scRNA-seq da-
taset27 was used for reference input. Cell types were considered to exist in spots only if their cell proportions exceeded a certain
threshold. We used the cell type labels from the prior paper as the ground truth. For cell types reported in prior paper (Epithelial, He-
patocyte, Fibroblast, and Endothelial), we selected thresholds that yielded the maximum F-scores between the predicted labels and
real labels. For other cell types (Myeloid, T, B, NK), we set the threshold as 0.1. Next, we examined if certain cell types had spatial
interactions or exclusions within a single spot. This involved calculating the ratio for the presence of each cell type amongst all spots.
The statistical signiﬁcance of spatial interactions or exclusions for speciﬁc cell type combinations was determined by one proportion
z-test with their presence probabilities as the null hypothesis.
Machine learning model
A machine-learning model was built to classify BVZ-C treatment response in patients based on genomic and transcriptomic markers.
Using 22 key features—including SMAD4 mutation status, 20q-gain, and expression of the top 10 resistance- and sensitivity-asso-
ciated genes—a Random Forest classiﬁer was trained on data from the main cohort (n = 48). Missing data was handled with
BayesianRidge iterative imputation, and the model involved 10 decision trees with a depth limit of 5, optimized through 5-fold
cross-validation for best performance.
Antibodies
Rabbit anti-SMAD4 (Cat# 46535, RRID: AB_2736998), rabbit anti-DYKDDDDK (Cat# 14793, RRID: AB_2572291), rabbit anti-STAT3
(Cat# 12640, RRID: AB_2629499), rabbit anti-phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705) (Cat# 9145, RRID: AB_2491009), rabbit anti-SHP2 (Cat#
3397, RRID: AB_2174959) were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology (CST). Mouse monoclonal anti-SMAD4R361H (Cat#
26422, RRID: AB_2629384) were obtained from NewEast Biotechnologies. Mouse monoclonal anti-b-Actin (Cat# 60008-1-Ig,
RRID: AB_2289225), mouse monoclonal anti-GAPDH (Cat# 60004–1-Ig, RRID: AB_2107436), mouse monoclonal anti-CCL2 (Cat#
66272-1-Ig, RRID:AB_2861337), rabbit anti-Ki-67 (Cat# 27309-1-AP, RRID: AB_2756525) and rabbit anti-CD31 (Cat# 11265-1-
AP, RRID: AB_2299349) were obtained from Proteintech. Alexa Fluor 647-labeled Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG (Cat# A0468, RRID:
AB_2936379) and 2-(4-Amidinophenyl)-6-indolecarbamidine dihydrochloride (DAPI) (Cat# C1002) were obtained from Beyotime.
Chemicals
5-FU and oxaliplatin were respectively obtained from Hainan Zhuotai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd and Jiangsu Hengrui Pharmaceuticals
Co., Ltd. Irinotecan (Cat# S5026) was obtained from Selleck. Human bevacizumab and murine monoclonal bevacizumab (B20.4–1.1)
were respectively obtained from Roche Pharma (Schweiz) Ltd and Genentech. The STATTIC (Cat# HY-13818), JSH-23 (Cat# HY-
13982), AC-4-130 (Cat# HY-124500), GB201(Cat# HY-13919), and recombinant CCL2 protein (Cat# HY-P7237) were obtained
from MCE (MedChemExpress).
Scoring of morphological response to therapy
The contrast-enhanced CT scans of CRLM patients at the efﬁcacy evaluation time node (Reponse, n = 6; Primary Resistance, n = 9;
Acquired Resistance, n = 7) were available for the analysis of morphological response to therapy using a method based on previously
published morphological response criteria.31 Morphological response to replacement histopathological growth pattern (RHGP) was
calculated based on whether the lesion changed from a homogeneous, low-attenuation lesion with a thin, sharply deﬁned tumor-liver
interface or a moderate degree of heterogeneous attenuation and a moderately deﬁned tumor-liver interface to a heterogeneous
attenuation and a thick, poorly deﬁned tumor-liver interface after treatment. Morphological response was scored independently
by 3 observers using the same criteria.
e6
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Tumor conditioned medium
For preparation of tumor conditioned medium (TCM), stable transfected SW480 and HCT116 cells were inoculated into growth me-
dium at a density of 13106 cells overnight. After adherence and removing the growth medium, fresh medium (5mL) was added to
further culture the cells for 48 h, and the supernatant was collected as tumor conditioned medium with cell debris and excess sub-
stances in the supernatant removed by centrifugation. Human vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) were stimulated with the collected
TCM and standard medium in a 1:1 ratio for the subsequent experiments.
Cell tubule formation
Tubule formation assay for HUVECs was performed as previously described.89 HUVECs were cultured with standard medium and
TCM with or without bevacizumab (0.25 mg/ml) for 48h, and subsequently suspended in corresponding medium and incubated in
matrigel (ABW, Cat# 082704) in m-slide angiogenesis 12-well plate for 4h at 37C before imaging. The capillary tubes were photo-
graphed and quantiﬁed by measuring the number of nudes. Three independent experiments were required for each treatment.
Cell viability assay
Cells were plated in 96-well plates and exposed to different concentrations of chemotherapeutic agents such as 5-FU and inhibitors
of signaling pathways such as STATTIC for 48 h. Cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) diluted with RPMI 1640 medium was added to the cells
that were incubated for 2–3 h. Absorbance was measured at 450 nm using the SpectraMax M5 microplate reader.
Western blotting
Western blotting was performed as previously described.90 The cells were washed with cold PBS buffer and prepared using lysis
buffer (1mM PMSF, phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, and protease inhibitor cocktail). Protein concentrations of lysates were estimated
using a BCA kit (Fdbio science). Separated proteins were resolved in SDS gels and transferred onto polyvinylidene diﬂuoride mem-
branes. Membranes were blocked in 5% BSA for 1 h. Primary antibodies used were anti-SMAD4 (1:1000; CST), anti-SMAD4R361H
(1:1000; NewEast Biotechnologies), anti-FLAG (1:1000; CST), anti-STAT3 (1:1000; CST), anti-phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705) (1:1000;
CST), anti-CCL2 (1:1000; Proteintech) and anti-b-Actin (1:5000; Proteintech). After incubation with goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit
IgG (Proteintech), the speciﬁc immunoreactive bands were detected with enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL kit, Fdbio science) us-
ing ﬂuorescence luminescence and quantiﬁed by image software.
RNA isolation and quantitative PCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted from the cells using the TRIzol kit (R401-01, Vazyme) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse
transcription was performed using the First Strand cDNA Synthesis kit (R312-01, Vazyme). Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was performed
using the LightCycler 480 system (Roche), as described in a previous study.90 The expression levels of the target genes were normal-
ized by subtracting the corresponding GAPDH threshold cycle (Ct) value. Primers used were: human CCL2: AGGTGACT
GGGGCATTGAT and GCCTCCAGCATGAAAGTCTC.
Colony formation
Transfected tumor cells were seeded into 12-well plates (200 cells per well) and cultured for about two weeks. The medium with 5-FU
treatment was replaced every three days. The colonies were washed using PBS, ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min, stained
with 0.1% crystal violet for 30 min, and ﬁnally photographed for quantitative analysis by ImageJ.
Cell apoptosis
Transfected tumor cells were seeded into 12-well plates and cultured with 5-FU for 48h. Cells were digested with Trypsin (without
EDTA) and ﬁnally resuspended in the binding buffer with PI (10mL) and Annexin V-APC (5mL) for 510min according to the operation
manual. The cells were analyzed with a ﬂow cytometer-BD FACS Melody (BD Bioscience, Franklin Lake, NJ, USA).
Immunoﬂuorescence staining
Immunoﬂuorescence staining of Figures 3 and 4 was performed using the Quadruple-Fluorescence Kit (Immunoway). First, dewax
the parafﬁn sections and perform antigen retrieval. Next, inactivate endogenous peroxidase activity and block the tissue samples.
Incubate the samples with the appropriate primary antibodies at 4C for 8 h. After washing with PBST, add the corresponding sec-
ondary antibodies and incubate at room temperature for 30 min. Following PBST washing, add the appropriate ﬂuorescent dyes and
incubate at room temperature for 10 min. Once the staining is complete, place the samples in a recovery box, add the antibody strip-
ping solution, and maintain the temperature above 95C for 15 min. After the samples have cooled to room temperature, repeat the
incubation with the primary antibodies following the antibody stripping step, sequentially labeling all markers with speciﬁc ﬂuores-
cence. The primary antibodies added include: D-594 ﬂuorescently labeled CK20 (Anti-Cytokeratin 20, abcam), D-488 ﬂuorescently
labeled HEP (Anti-Hepatocyte Speciﬁc, abcam), D-525 ﬂuorescently labeled CD14 (Immunoway), and D-647 ﬂuorescently labeled
CD163 (Immunoway). Finally, label the cell nuclei with DAPI. Image analyses were comducted using an Olympus BX53 inverted epi-
ﬂuorescence microscope or a Zeiss LSM 980 confocal microscope. Five areas from each section were randomly selected to count
the percentage of positively stained cells using Image-Pro Plus 6.0 software.
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
e7
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Immunoﬂuorescence staining of Figures 5 and 6 was performed as previously described.90 Tumor cells or tissues were directly
ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100, and incubated with the primary antibodies such as anti-
Ki-67 (1:200; Proteintech) for HUVECs staining and anti-phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705) (1:200; CST) for tumor cell stainings or
anti-CD31 (1:200; Proteintech) for tissue stainings overnight at 4C. Next, the cells or tissues were incubated with the secondary an-
tibodies Alexa Fluor 647-labeled Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG (1:500; Beyotime) for 1 h at room temperature. Finally, the cells or tissues were
incubated for 10 min with DAPI diluted with methanol to stain the nucleus. Images were obtained with ﬂuorescence and laser confocal
microscopes (A1-DUVB-2, Nikon) for quantitative analysis by ImageJ.
Immunohistochemistry staining
Formalin-ﬁxed tissue samples of mouse or human CRC liver metastasis tissues were embedded into parafﬁn and processed into
24mm sections. Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining was performed according to standard procedures. CRLM mainly contains 3
different histopathological growth patterns (HGPs): desmoplastic HGP (DHGP), pushing HGP (PHGP), and replacement HGP
(RHGP).31 The types of histopathological growth patterns were evaluated using ImageJ software (NIH), and the full-length pixels
of RHGP (a), DHGP (b), and PHGP (c) in the liver-tumor interface of each image were calculated and converted into micrometers.
The percentage RHGP was then quantiﬁed according to the following formula: a/(a + b + c)3100. The same calculation method
was used for the quantiﬁcation of DHGP and PHGP. Furthermore, from each HE-stained slide, 1–5 observation ﬁelds containing
the tumor boundary were randomly selected for statistics. For antigen retrieval, mounted sections were put into a pressure cooker
after being treated with sodium citrate. Slides were placed in 3% H2O2 for 10 min at room temperature, blocked in 5% BSA for 1 h and
incubated with primary antibodies against anti-Ki-67 (1:2000; Proteintech) and anti-CD31 (1:2000; Proteintech) overnight at 4C.
Secondary antibody goat anti-rabbit HRP IgG (ZSGB-BIO, PV6001) and DAB were used to perform the immunostain. Counterstain-
ing was developed using hematoxylin. Finally, images were obtained using a microscope (BX51, Olympus).
Co-IP analysis
As described previously in our study,90 cell lysates of stably transfected cells were collected and incubated with a speciﬁc primary
antibody, anti-FLAG (1:200; Cat# 14793, CST), anti-phospho-STAT3 (Tyr705) (1:200; Cat# 9145, CST), or anti-SHP2 (1:200; Cat#
3397, CST), and mixed with protein A/G-Sepharose beads (7 Sea Biotech) overnight at 4C. After extensive washing, the beads
were boiled in 43SDS-PAGE loading buffer for 5 min and analyzed by immunoblotting with speciﬁc antibodies to detect the protein
complex.
siRNA transfection
Ablation of STAT3 in tumor cells was performed by transfection with siRNA duplex oligos, which were synthesized by Ribobio Com-
pany. Cell transfection was performed with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) and replaced with a fresh medium after transfection for
1224h to further culture the cells for 48 h. The sequences used in this study are #1 GGCGTCCAGTTCACTACTA and #2
CATCGAGCAGCTGACTACA. Western blotting and qPCR were used to verify the efﬁciency of the sequence.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
For binary outcomes, 95% two-sided CIs were constructed using the Clopper–Pearson method. Fisher’s exact test for indepen-
dence was utilized to examine the relationship between two categorical variables and Mann-Whitney U test was conducted to assess
the independence between a continuous variable and a binary categorical variable. Each experiment was repeated at least three
times in this study. Differences between experimental groups were assessed using Student t tests, one-way or two-way ANOVA.
All data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 7.0 software (RRID: SCR_002798). All values are presented as mean ± SD, and sta-
tistical signiﬁcance was noted as a p value of <0.05.
e8
Cell Reports Medicine 5, 101838, December 17, 2024
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
