Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
Available online 7 December 2021
1044-5323/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Review 
Impact of cancer cell-intrinsic features on neutrophil behavior 
Danique E.M. Duits a, Karin E. de Visser a,b,* 
a Division of Tumor Biology & Immunology, Oncode Institute, Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066CX, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
b Department of Immunology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333ZA, Leiden, The Netherlands   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Cancer cell-intrinsic mechanisms 
Neutrophils 
Secretome 
Tumor microenvironment 
Personalized immunomodulation 
A B S T R A C T   
Neutrophils are multifaceted innate immune cells that play a significant role in the progression of cancer by 
exerting both pro- and anti-tumorigenic functions. The crosstalk between cancer cells and neutrophils is complex 
and emerging evidence is pointing at cancer cell-intrinsic programs regulating neutrophil abundance, phenotype 
and function. Cancer cell-derived soluble mediators are key players in modulating the interaction with neutro­
phils. Here, we review how intrinsic features of cancer cells, including cancer cell genetics, epigenetics, signaling, 
and metabolism, manipulate neutrophil behavior and how to target these processes to impact cancer progression. 
A molecular understanding of cancer cell-intrinsic properties that shape the crosstalk with neutrophils will 
provide novel therapeutic strategies for personalized immunomodulation in cancer patients.   
1. Introduction 
In 1863, the German cellular pathologist Rudolf Virchow was the 
first to connect inflammation and cancer when he observed leukocytes 
in cancerous tissues [1]. He hypothesized that cancer originates at sites 
of inflammation. This observation was made even before the recognition 
of cancer being of genetic origin by Theodor Boveri and David von 
Hansemann [2,3]. For a long time, a functional role for immune cells in 
the progression of cancer was ignored. Although the notion of immune 
cells being present in tumors was first reported in the 19th century, it 
took over hundred years before immune cells were seen as important 
players underlying disease progression. At the end of the 1990s, the 
oncology field started to shift towards the recognition of immune cells 
having both favoring and opposing functions in shaping the tumor 
microenvironment (TME) and in impacting tumorigenesis and the 
metastatic cascade [4]. Recognition of the influential role of the immune 
system on cancer is now fully integrated into the oncology field and has 
changed clinical practice by laying the foundation for cancer immuno­
therapy [5–7]. 
Despite the clinical breakthrough of cancer immunotherapy, still 
many challenges have to be overcome to increase the number of cancer 
patients that benefit from immunomodulatory strategies. One of the 
major challenges in the field of onco-immunology is the largely unex­
plained inter-patient heterogeneity in immune composition and immune 
cell function. Why would two cancer patients with the same cancer type 
and cancer stage present with a completely different composition of 
immune cells in their tumors? It is critical to solve this question, since 
the immune landscape influences cancer behavior and how patients 
respond to anti-cancer therapies. Understanding how tumors influence 
the local and systemic immune landscape at the molecular level may 
contribute to the design of personalized immune intervention strategies. 
There is a growing realization that cancer cell-intrinsic mechanisms 
influence the composition and functionality of immune cells in the 
tumor microenvironment [8,9]. Here, we will specifically focus on how 
cancer cell-intrinsic processes impact the presence and functionality of 
neutrophils in cancer-bearing hosts. 
Neutrophils are multifaceted innate immune cells that exert both 
promoting and opposing functions in cancer initiation and progression 
[10,11]. The nomenclature of cancer-associated neutrophils can be 
confusing, since some studies refer to neutrophils whereas others use the 
granulocytic or polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cell 
(G-MDSC or PMN-MDSC, respectively) terminology that has been 
introduced about 15 years ago [12,13]. However, many studies have 
looked at the CD11b+Gr1+ MDSC population as a whole without dis­
tinguishing G-MDSCs from monocytic MDSCs (M-MDSCs). Moreover, 
the MDSC terminology implies that this cell population is immunosup­
pressive, yet still many studies do not proof the suppressive capacity of 
MDSCs. In this review, we will therefore refer to neutrophils when 
studies have referred to G-MDSCs or PMN-MDSCs or refer to 
CD11b+Gr1+ cells when studies have not characterized this population 
further, and their immunosuppressive nature will be explicitly 
mentioned if this was experimentally tested in the concurrent study. 
* Corresponding author at: Division of Tumor Biology & Immunology, Oncode Institute, Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066CX, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
E-mail address: k.d.visser@nki.nl (K.E. de Visser).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Seminars in Immunology 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ysmim 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smim.2021.101546 
Received 29 September 2021; Accepted 29 November 2021   
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
2
Better understanding of the underlying mechanisms causing abun­
dance and distinct polarization states of neutrophils in cancer is needed 
to uncover novel actionable pathways that can be exploited to convert 
tumor-supportive states into those that favor anti-tumor immunity. In 
this review, the impact of cancer-cell intrinsic mechanisms on the 
crosstalk with neutrophils and how this influences the progression of 
cancer will be discussed. 
2. Neutrophil complexity in cancer 
A large body of clinical observations has correlated intratumoral and 
systemic neutrophil levels with poor prognosis of cancer patients [9,14, 
15], although in some cancer types neutrophils are associated with 
favorable outcome [16–18]. Moreover, dysregulation of the hemato­
poietic tree has been detected in cancer patients resulting in 
myeloid-biased skewing towards the generation of neutrophils [19]. 
More recently, neutrophils and neutrophil-associated mediators are 
emerging as adverse predictive factors for response to immunotherapy. 
Neutrophil-attractant IL-8 was identified as a strong adverse predictive 
marker for cancer patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors in 
two complementary retrospective studies that together represent over 
2700 advanced cancer patients [20,21]. Elevated serum levels of IL-8 at 
baseline correlated with reduced overall survival and limited response 
to immune checkpoint blockade as a result of neutrophil- and 
monocyte-mediated immunosuppression. Apart from the systemic effect 
induced by myeloid cell-derived IL-8, tumor-intrinsic expression of IL8 
also correlated with neutrophil and monocyte recruitment into the TME 
[20,21]. These findings highlight the importance of understanding how 
neutrophils are modulated in cancer and raise the question what cancer 
cell determinants underlie the production of such a strong immuno­
modulatory factor to activate immunosuppressive polarization of 
myeloid cells. 
In line with these clinical observations, preclinical studies have 
demonstrated that systemic accumulation of neutrophils promotes 
metastatic disease via blocking anti-tumor immune responses, by 
escorting circulating cancer cells, by facilitating cancer cell migration, 
by the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) or by preparing 
the metastatic niche via other mechanisms [22–26]. Furthermore, 
neutrophils can counteract the efficacy of immunotherapy by influ­
encing the adaptive immune system [27–31]. In contrast, in some pre­
clinical 
models, 
neutrophils 
have 
been 
reported 
to 
exert 
anti-tumorigenic functions preventing cancer progression and cancer 
cell spreading by inducing cancer cell killing, by activating anti-tumor 
immune responses or by preventing cancer cell colonization in the 
pre-metastatic niche [18,32,33]. We still have a relatively poor under­
standing of which host- or tumor-parameters dictate whether neutro­
phils exert beneficial or detrimental functions. Interestingly, Ballesteros 
et al. demonstrated that the longevity and phenotypical state of neu­
trophils depend on the tissue they reside in during homeostasis [34]. 
Additionally, in recent studies, single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis of 
systemic and tumor-associated neutrophils from both murine and 
human cancer-bearing hosts uncovered distinct neutrophil subsets that 
were conserved between mouse and human, defined by differential gene 
expression patterns, diverse expression of cell surface markers, and 
varying immunosuppressive capacity [35–37]. Together, these studies 
highlight the plasticity of neutrophils, a feature that could serve as an 
attractive therapeutic target. Although neutrophil function has been 
strongly implicated in the progression of solid cancers, neutrophilia in 
cancer patients is not yet being deployed in therapeutic strategies. The 
challenge in finding suitable targeting strategies is due to several rea­
sons, including but not limited to 1) adverse effects of neutrophil 
depletion given their essential role in the first line of immune defense, 2) 
inter-patient heterogeneity in terms of neutrophil expansion and their 
role in disease progression, 3) poorly understood mechanisms underly­
ing neutrophil recruitment and polarization. Emerging evidence points 
at multiple tumor properties, including genetic make-up and 
downstream molecular networks, tumor stage, and cancer type or tissue 
context, being involved in shaping the immune system. Therefore, it is 
critical to find underlying cancer cell-intrinsic features that promote 
distinct immune phenotypes to be able to pave the way towards preci­
sion medicine for cancer patients. 
3. The cancer secretome instructs crosstalk with neutrophils 
Neutrophils have a remarkable ability to adapt in response to tumor- 
derived mediators. The different steps of neutrophil biology – their 
development in the bone marrow, mobilization into the blood, recruit­
ment to tumors, and activation and systemic accumulation at (pre-) 
metastatic sites – can be manipulated by tumors through the secretion of 
mediators. Chemokine receptor CXCR2 expressed by neutrophils is 
known to mediate the mobilization of newly formed neutrophils from 
the bone marrow, which is activated by production of CXCR2-ligands 
including CXCL1, CXCL2 and CXCL5 [38,39]. Moreover, key growth 
factors, such as G-CSF and GM-CSF, skew hematopoiesis towards gran­
ulocyte production resulting in enhanced neutrophil mobilization into 
the circulation [40–42]. The IL-17–G-CSF axis – that is important for 
neutrophil expansion in homeostasis and infectious diseases [43] – has 
been reported to be involved in cancer-induced neutrophilic inflam­
mation [22,44]. Common upstream mediators of IL-17 production are 
IL-1β and IL-23 [22,45–47], both frequently produced in the TME, that 
are able to indirectly instruct neutrophils via the induction of additional 
cytokines. Furthermore, TGF-β is able to dictate the pro-tumorigenic 
function of neutrophils in cancer [48,49]. Production of these cyto­
kines, either by cancer cells or host cells in the TME, governs the 
interaction with and activation of neutrophils in cancer. Importantly, 
the secretion of cytokines into the TME can either directly lead to 
neutrophil recruitment or indirectly activate other immune or host cells 
to produce neutrophil attractants. The underlying mechanisms of direct 
or indirect neutrophil recruitment highly depend on the cancer cell 
features, the source of the cytokine and cancer-immune cell interactions. 
Preclinical studies using mouse models of cancer are instrumental to 
mechanistically dissect how neutrophils are recruited and activated 
during tumor progression [50]. The importance of the secretome of 
cancer cells in shaping the crosstalk with immune cells is illustrated by a 
comprehensive study using multiple breast cancer cell line-based mouse 
models reflecting different molecular portraits of triple negative breast 
cancer (TNBC) [51]. This study demonstrated that these cell line-based 
breast tumors could be categorized into three subtypes depending on 
their differential ability to recruit intratumoral neutrophils and macro­
phages [51]. Neutrophil-enriched breast cancer models showed abun­
dant systemic and intratumoral recruitment of immunosuppressive 
neutrophils rendering these tumors irresponsive to immune checkpoint 
blockade. Interestingly, the intratumoral immune profile was even 
maintained in the local tumor when breast tumors with different im­
mune phenotypes, i.e. macrophage- or neutrophil-enriched, were 
transplanted into opposite mammary glands of the same animal. Expo­
sure of bone marrow-derived neutrophils to the secretome of 
neutrophil-enriched models, which contained mediators like G-CSF, IL-6 
and CXCL-ligands, resulted in neutrophil migration in vitro [51]. The 
authors found that epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of can­
cer cells modulated their secretome. This study illustrates a central role 
for cancer cell-intrinsic programs driving the secretome to promote local 
and systemic neutrophil infiltrate. 
Besides well-known mediators of neutrophil behavior, a recent study 
demonstrated that secreted protease cathepsin C (CTSC) by breast can­
cer cells was associated with neutrophil-induced lung tropism of me­
tastases [52]. Breast cancer cell-derived CTSC was found to attract 
neutrophils towards the lung metastatic niche by directly acting on 
neutrophil membrane-bound proteinase 3 (PR3). Activation of inflam­
matory signaling via NFκB in neutrophils led to the production of IL-6 
and CCL3 providing a positive feedback loop to recruit more neutro­
phils and also led to ROS production providing NET formation [52]. 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
3
Impairment of NET formation by inhibition of neutrophil elastase or 
DNase I reduced lung metastases illustrating the pro-metastatic capacity 
of CTSC-induced NETosis [52]. These findings highlight that the secre­
tome of cancer cells directly instructs the pro-tumorigenic function of 
neutrophils. 
The complexity of immune cell modulation by cancer cell-derived 
cytokines is illustrated by two studies that describe distinct functions 
of neutrophils in breast cancer, both involving the CCL2 chemokine [32, 
53]. Breast tumor-derived CCL2 was found to initiate a systemic cascade 
of events activating G-CSF-mediated neutrophil expansion in the trans­
genic K14cre;Cdh1F/F;Trp53F/F breast cancer model [53]. In contrast, in 
the 4T1 metastatic breast cancer model, cancer cell-derived CCL2 was 
not an upstream mediator of G-CSF-induced systemic accumulation of 
neutrophils, but specifically dictated neutrophil education towards a 
cytotoxic phenotype preventing pulmonary metastases [32]. Although 
these findings highlight the functional plasticity of neutrophils dictated 
by cytokines, additional features are potentially involved in the polari­
zation of neutrophils given that these two studies used different models 
of breast cancer recapitulating distinct breast cancer subtypes with 
diverse tumor characteristics. Notably, multiple studies using the 4T1 
breast cancer model have shown that neutrophils are a driving force of 
metastatic disease [54–56]. Altogether, these controversial findings 
illustrate the complexity of cancer cell-neutrophil crosstalk that is most 
likely regulated by multiple characteristics of the tumor and its immune 
microenvironment. However, it is still largely unclear how cancer cells 
modulate cytokine secretion to guide neutrophil recruitment and 
phenotypical state. What are the cancer cell-intrinsic features that 
instruct immune cells? Which characteristics determine that some tu­
mors produce certain cytokines that attract neutrophils, whereas others 
do not? Besides the secretion of soluble mediators, other mechanisms of 
intercellular communication are being exploited by cancer cells that 
influence immune cells, for instance the secretion of tumor-derived 
extracellular vesicles or direct cancer cell-neutrophil interactions [23, 
57–60]. The heterogeneity in the neutrophilic landscape of cancer that 
exists between cancer patients is conceivably defined by multiple pa­
rameters including patient characteristics such as age, the composition 
of the microbiome, and treatment history. In addition to many other 
variables that can dictate the immune composition of cancer, the char­
acteristics of the tumor form an important basis for the crosstalk with 
neutrophils. We will focus on cancer cell-intrinsic processes, including 
Fig. 1. Cancer cell-intrinsic processes influ­
ence neutrophil behavior in the tumor 
microenvironment. Schematic representation 
of how multiple cancer cell-intrinsic features, 
indicated in boxes A-D, modulate the recruit­
ment, polarization and suppressive capacity of 
neutrophils. A. The genetic make-up of cancer 
plays a major role in tumorigenesis, but also 
impacts the crosstalk between cancer- and im­
mune cells. Cancer cell-intrinsic loss of tumor 
suppressor genes (Trp53, Pten, Zbtb7a, Smad4 or 
Stk11/Lkb1) [68–70,86–92,94], overexpression 
of kinases (PRKCI or CCRK) [93,95], or gene 
mutations (Trp53R172H or KRASG12D) [78, 
80–85], dictate the expression pattern and 
secretion 
of 
immunomodulatory 
factors 
involved in the recruitment of neutrophils and 
neutrophil-mediated suppression of anti-tumor 
immune responses. Neutrophil accumulation 
occurs via cancer cell-derived factors including 
G-CSF, IL-6, and TNF-alpha, or CXCL-ligands 
for CXCR2-mediated recruitment. Immunosup­
pressive neutrophils block the anti-tumor im­
mune 
response 
via 
S100A8, 
S100A9, 
Arginase-1, and iNOS. B. Gene expression of 
chemokines and cytokines that modulate 
neutrophil recruitment, such as CXCL1, CXCL15 
and IL-6, is regulated at the epigenetic level 
[95,101–103]. Activation of transcription is 
dictated by chromatin accessibility, histone 
modification and transcription factor activity. 
Binding of transcription factors at (super) 
enhancer regions increases transcriptional acti­
vation. C. The signaling pathways involving 
NFκB, STAT3 and mTOR are frequently acti­
vated in cancer and lead to cancer cell secretion 
of factors that prompt the recruitment of 
immunosuppressive neutrophils [83,90,95,104, 
106,108,110,114]. Also, TGF-β is an important 
modulator of neutrophil polarization in cancer, 
dictating both pro- and anti-tumorigenic functions of neutrophils [48,116–120]. Whether tyrosine kinase receptors are involved in cancer cell-neutrophil crosstalk 
remains to be further elucidated. D. Multiple metabolic processes that occur in tumors, including cancer cell states and the availability of metabolites, can affect 
surrounding immune cells. Neutrophils recruited to hypoxic areas of tumors are more prone to form NETs [138,139], while enhanced oxygen availability (hyperoxia) 
induces neutrophil-mediated cancer cell killing [140,141]. The recruitment of neutrophils towards senescent tumors can also lead to tumor cell clearance [145], 
whereas the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) can mediate attraction of immunosuppressive neutrophils [146,147]. Besides cellular state, the 
production of metabolites, including lipid mediators (prostaglandins) and derivatives of aerobic glycolysis (lactate), promote immunosuppressive neutrophil 
recruitment in cancer [124–127,133–136]. Abbreviations used in this Figure: TF = transcription factor, E = enhancer, SE = super enhancer, BET = bromo- and 
extra-terminal domain, RTK = receptor tyrosine kinase, SASP = senescence-associated secretory phenotype.   
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
4
cancer cell (epi)genetics, intracellular signaling molecules, and the 
metabolic state of the tumor, that impact neutrophil biology. 
3.1. Genetic aberrations in cancer influencing neutrophil dynamics 
Cancer-associated genetic aberrations that have been widely studied 
in the context of tumorigenesis are now also emerging as key regulators 
of cancer-induced inflammation. Multi-omics analyses, including 
computational deconvolution approaches on publicly available clinical 
datasets, have indicated a correlation between cancer genetics and the 
immune landscape of tumors [61–64]. Specific oncogenes and loss of 
tumor suppressor genes greatly influence the secretome of cancer cells 
involved in cancer-immune cell crosstalk. The relationship between the 
cancer genome and global immune infiltration in cancers has been 
reviewed elsewhere [8,65,66]. Below, we will highlight key genetic 
drivers of cancer that have been reported in multiple independent 
studies to directly influence the crosstalk between cancer and neutro­
phils (Fig. 1A). 
3.1.1. Tumor suppressor p53 
Tumor suppressor gene TP53 is the most frequently mutated gene 
across human cancers and plays versatile roles in cancer processes, 
including dictating cancer-induced inflammation [67]. Both mutated 
and genetic loss of p53 lead to loss of tumor suppressor activity. In 
addition, mutations in p53 can lead to gain-of-functions (GOF) of the 
gene resulting in additional oncogenic functions for p53-mutated cancer 
cells. Several studies have demonstrated how cancer cell-intrinsic loss of 
p53, or mutant p53, modulates the crosstalk with neutrophils. 
In a murine KrasG12D;Trp53−/−driven pancreatic cancer model, p53 
deficiency led to infiltration of a CD11b+ myeloid cell population, which 
includes monocytes, macrophages and neutrophils [68,69]. One study 
showed that p53 loss leads to activation of JAK2-STAT3 signaling that 
mediates neutrophil recruitment, as demonstrated by the strong reduc­
tion in neutrophil infiltration upon conditional deletion of Stat3 in 
KrasG12D;Trp53−/−pancreatic tumors [68]. In another study, pancreatic 
cancer cell-intrinsic loss of p53 was reported to regulate the production 
of cytokines that are involved in neutrophil recruitment, such as CXCL1 
and CXCL5 [69]. Using a co-culture setting of tumor-derived CD11b+
myeloid cells and pre-activated splenic CD4+ or CD8+ T cells, the au­
thors showed that CD11b+ myeloid cells from p53-null tumors have a 
greater capability of suppressing T cell proliferation compared to 
myeloid cells from p53 wildtype tumors. Whether neutrophils are 
involved in this immunosuppressive phenotype has not been specified in 
this study [69]. These studies highlight the functional role of cancer 
cell-intrinsic loss of p53 in regulating the intratumoral myeloid 
compartment, although the functional significance of neutrophils in the 
context of p53-null cancers was not addressed here. To mechanistically 
understand inter-patient heterogeneity in the tumor-induced systemic 
immune landscape, we have previously utilized a unique panel of 16 
transgenic mouse models of breast cancer driven by different genetic 
aberrations [70]. Interestingly, also from this extensive GEMM panel, 
loss of p53 emerged as the most dominant cancer cell-intrinsic genetic 
modifier driving neutrophil accumulation and polarization [70]. Here, 
loss of p53 resulted in secretion of Wnt ligands by cancer cells that 
activated IL-1β production in macrophages as kick-starter of systemic 
neutrophilia that promoted metastatic disease. Therapeutic targeting of 
Wnt ligand secretion using LGK974 – which blocks porcupine, the 
regulator of Wnt ligand secretion – led to abrogated neutrophil expan­
sion and reduced metastasis formation [70]. The discovery that this 
therapeutic strategy was solely effective in p53-null tumor-bearing hosts 
and not in p53 wildtype tumor-bearing hosts [70], is setting the stage for 
personalized intervention strategies impacting neutrophil-driven dis­
ease progression. 
Besides loss of p53 gene activity, mutated p53 has also been reported 
to modulate multiple processes involved in cancer-associated inflam­
mation. Various studies have illustrated that p53 mutations can lead to 
an altered secretome via transcription of cytokines and chemokines [71, 
72], modulation of intracellular signaling pathways involved in 
inflammation including NFκB and STING signaling [71,73,74], and 
differential recruitment of macrophages, NK cells and T cells into the 
TME [73]. All of these steps could affect neutrophil recruitment and 
polarization in p53-mutated tumors, but this was not formally tested in 
these studies. Moreover, clinical data indicated mutated TP53 as a 
predictive marker for response to immunotherapy for patients with 
breast or lung cancer [75–77], illustrating the clinical relevance of 
studying the role of p53-mutated cancers in immunomodulation. 
Although these studies have illustrated that p53 mutations in cancer can 
influence immune parameters, limited evidence exists on how neutro­
phils are shaped in the context of p53-mutated tumors. A recent study 
reported that the p53R172H mutation in pancreatic tumors mediates 
intratumoral neutrophil infiltration via cancer cell-derived CXCL2 in an 
orthotopic model using the KrasG12D/+;p53R172H pancreatic cancer cell 
line [78]. Neutrophils were shown not to be involved in cancer pro­
gression, given that primary tumor growth was not affected when neu­
trophils were depleted using an anti-Ly6G antibody [78]. Strikingly, 
neutrophil depletion during combination treatment of chemotherapy 
and immunotherapy enhanced treatment efficacy, illustrating a pro­
found role for neutrophils in therapy resistance [78]. Given these 
insightful findings regarding the immune landscape in p53 mutant 
cancer, it would be interesting to further explore how neutrophils are 
affected when p53 is mutated in cancer cells. 
3.1.2. Mutant KRAS 
Another cancer driver that has been implicated to attract and acti­
vate neutrophils in tumors is mutant KRAS, which is often aberrantly 
expressed in cancer of the lungs, pancreas and colon. A recent analysis of 
a small cohort of patients with colorectal liver metastases showed 
increased levels of neutrophils in the peritumoral area of KRAS mutated 
tumors [79]. Interestingly, elevated levels of neutrophils that were 
found in the circulation of patients bearing KRAS-mutated colorectal 
liver metastases could potentially have a prognostic value once corre­
lated with clinical and pathological outcome, yet this remains to be 
studied in more detail in additional patient cohorts. The underlying 
mechanism how mutant KRAS can affect neutrophil recruitment and 
behavior has been studied in multiple murine cancer models. Although 
more than one point mutation in KRAS can occur in solid tumors, the 
G12D-mutation has mainly been associated with cancer cell-neutrophil 
crosstalk. In a murine transplantation-based pancreatic cancer model, 
KRASG12D was linked to GM-CSF release by cancer cells as mediator of 
neutrophil recruitment into the TME [80]. Interestingly, genetic 
downregulation of GM-CSF expression in pancreatic cancer cells resul­
ted in the absence of neutrophils and in tumor control [80], suggesting 
that GM-CSF-induced neutrophils play a role in counteracting the 
anti-tumor response. Indeed, neutrophils isolated from these pancreatic 
tumors showed high capacity of T cell suppression ex vivo [80]. Also, 
control of pancreatic GM-CSF-knockdown tumors was attenuated by 
depletion of CD8+ T cells [80], indicating an active function for CD8+ T 
cells in tumor clearance in the absence of immunosuppressive 
neutrophils. 
Mutant KRAS has also been associated with CXCR2-ligand secretion 
to recruit neutrophils into tumors of the lungs and pancreas [81–84]. 
When comparing KrasG12D/+ to Trp53R172H/+ pancreatic tumors, mutant 
KRAS was found to be the driver of cancer cell-specific expression of 
Cxcl5 leading to pro-tumorigenic neutrophil infiltration [83]. Where 
most of the mentioned studies solely show the involvement of mutant 
KRAS in CXCL5-induced neutrophil homing, two studies in fact 
demonstrated how neutrophils influence the anti-tumor immune 
response. By utilizing full-body Cxcr2-knockout mice and CD4+/CD8+ T 
cell depleting antibodies in the context of KRASG12D pancreatic cancer, 
CXCR2-mediated intratumoral neutrophil infiltration was demonstrated 
to enhance pancreatic cancer progression by blocking recruitment and 
activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells rendering them insensitive to 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
5
anti-PD-1 treatment [83,84]. Interestingly, these preclinical studies 
illustrate that one point mutation in KRAS in pancreatic cancer can 
induce multiple patterns of gene expression and protein secretion to 
modulate neutrophil recruitment and function. 
CyTOF analysis of the immune landscape of transgenic mice devel­
oping KRASG12D colorectal tumors revealed that KRASG12D led to infil­
tration of neutrophils expressing immunosuppressive markers including 
S100A9, Arginase-1 and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) [85]. 
This study unraveled the KRAS-IRF2 axis to be underlying the immu­
nosuppressive environment, where mutant KRAS inhibits IRF2 to relieve 
the repression of CXCL3-mediated neutrophil recruitment [85]. Indirect 
targeting of immunosuppressive neutrophils, either by activating IRF2 
or by blocking CXCR2, sensitized colorectal tumors to anti-PD-1 
treatment [85]. In conclusion, in different cancer types, one 
KRAS-mutation can exert distinct mechanisms to regulate neutrophil 
dynamics. 
3.1.3. PTEN deficiency 
Loss of the tumor suppressor gene PTEN leads to the downstream 
activation of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling pathway resulting in accel­
erated cell proliferation, and is most often observed in human breast 
cancer, prostate cancer, and glioblastoma. Multiple studies have re­
ported neutrophil infiltration in PTEN-deficient cancers [86–88]. How­
ever, limited studies have dissected the distinct role of PTEN in 
modulating neutrophil behavior. Here, we highlight a few studies that 
illustrate a potential role for PTEN in impacting neutrophils. 
In synovial sarcoma, PTEN deficiency led to both systemic and 
intratumoral accumulation of neutrophils [89]. Since synovial sarcoma 
cells did not show differential expression of genes related to neutrophil 
recruitment, it was hypothesized that the infiltration of neutrophils into 
PTEN-null tumors was an indirect effect of PTEN loss in cancer cells. 
Indeed, intratumoral macrophages were found to be the main producers 
of neutrophil attractant IL-1β [89]. Another study illustrated that 
additional loss of PTEN in a pancreatic cancer model driven by mutant 
KRAS induced NFκB-mediated gene expression of cytokines that are 
known to be involved in neutrophil recruitment, including Il6, Csf3, 
Cxcl1 and Il23 [90]. Moreover, in the Pb-Cre;Ptenlox/lox prostate cancer 
model, high number of CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells – a population of 
which the majority of cells was neutrophil – infiltrated prostate tumors 
[91]. Interestingly, no substantial systemic expansion of neutrophils was 
found in prostate tumor-bearing mice, suggesting that the neutrophil 
phenotype observed in PTEN-null prostate tumors is regulated locally. 
Upon PTEN deletion in murine prostate epithelial cells, gene expression 
of Csf1 and Il1b was upregulated and this gene expression pattern was 
confirmed in human prostate tumors compared to healthy prostates 
[91]. Neutrophils isolated from murine prostate tumors – but not sys­
temic neutrophils isolated from the spleen – had the capability to sup­
press T cells ex vivo [91]. Blocking of the CSF1 receptor reduced the 
recruitment of the immunosuppressive CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cell pop­
ulation and resulted in attraction of activated T cells [91]. Likely, CSF1R 
blockade inhibited the infiltration of monocytic myeloid cells and not 
neutrophils, but the affected myeloid cell population was not specified 
further. Altogether, these findings suggest a profound role for PTEN 
loss-induced secretome alterations in modulating neutrophils. However, 
the functional characterization of neutrophils in the context of cancer 
cell-intrinsic loss of PTEN is subject for further investigation and will be 
specifically important for solid cancers of which the majority is driven 
by PTEN deficiency, such as prostate cancer. 
3.1.4. Other genetic events in cancer affecting neutrophils 
Besides aforementioned well-known genetic drivers of cancer, there 
is a growing number of other, sometimes less frequent, oncogenes and 
tumor suppressor genes that are involved in regulating the cancer cell 
secretome to modulate neutrophil dynamics. 
3.1.4.1. Tumor suppressor genes. By utilizing transgenic mice with 
different genetic aberrations driving prostate cancer, Bezzi et al. 
demonstrated the role of distinct genetic drivers in the context of im­
mune infiltrate [88]. In a PTEN-driven prostate cancer model, loss of 
three additional tumor suppressor genes, Zbtb7a, Trp53 and Pml, were 
studied and each of these genes induced a distinct intratumoral immune 
composition [88]. Infiltration of CD11b+Gr1+ cells was specifically 
observed in models driven by loss of Zbtb7a or Trp53. Interestingly, 
Zbtb7a loss led to pro-tumorigenic neutrophil recruitment via cancer 
cell-intrinsic SOX9-induced CXCL5 expression, whereas Trp53 loss 
induced upregulation of CXCL17 to attract monocytes [88]. Strikingly, 
both Zbtb7a-Cxcl5 and Trp53-Cxcl17 genetic links plus the high 
neutrophil signature of ZBTB7A-null prostate tumors were validated in a 
human prostate cancer dataset [88], illustrating the clinical relevance of 
cancer genotype-neutrophil relationships. Furthermore, by using CyTOF 
analysis of the same backbone model for prostate cancer (Ptenpc−/−), 
another study showed that additional loss of tumor suppressor SMAD4 
induced CXCL5-mediated attraction of neutrophils into prostate tumors 
[92]. By comparing Ptenpc-/- and Ptenpc−/−Smad4pc−/−prostate cancer 
models, the authors found the YAP1 protein to be enriched in 
Ptenpc−/−Smad4pc−/−prostate cancer and this protein directly regulated 
Cxcl5 expression [92]. Impairment of neutrophil recruitment upon 
CXCR2-blockade or cancer cell-specific knockdown of YAP1 to abrogate 
Cxcl5 expression reduced prostate cancer progression in vivo [92], 
illustrating the pro-tumorigenic function of neutrophils induced by 
SMAD4 loss. These studies demonstrate that distinct regulatory mech­
anisms underlie CXCL5-mediated neutrophil recruitment in different 
models of prostate cancer, depending on the genetic make-up of cancer 
cells. 
3.1.4.2. Oncogenic kinases. Conditional overexpression of protein ki­
nase C family member PRKCI in the fallopian tube epithelium leads to 
ovarian tumors enriched for neutrophils [93]. By assessing inducible 
overexpression of PRKCI in the Tp53L/L;PtenL/L;Pax8-Cre ovarian cancer 
model, PRKCI was demonstrated to induce YAP1-mediated TNF-α 
secretion by ovarian cancer cells to attract neutrophils into the TME 
[93]. 
Interestingly, 
the 
human 
TCGA 
dataset 
showed 
that 
PRKCI-expressing ovarian cancer correlated with a neutrophil gene 
signature and with low number of infiltrating T cells, confirming the 
immunosuppressive environment in ovarian tumors expressing PRKCI 
[93]. Additional studies addressed how aberrant expression of two 
different kinases in cancer cells affected neutrophils in influencing the 
anti-tumor CD8+ T cell response. In human lung adenocarcinoma, 
mutant STK11 correlated with enrichment of neutrophils in the TME 
[76]. Likewise, loss of tumor suppressor kinase STK11/LKB1 in a murine 
KRAS-driven lung cancer model resulted in chemokine and cytokine 
production by cancer cells, including G-CSF, CXCL7 and IL-6, which are 
potentially involved in the observed recruitment of immunosuppressive 
neutrophils in LKB1-deficient lung tumors [94]. Immunosuppression 
was abrogated using an IL-6 neutralizing antibody that prompted CD8+
T cells to proliferate and to express effector cytokine IFN-γ [94]. A 
similar IL-6-mediated neutrophil phenotype was reported in hepato­
cellular carcinoma driven by cell cycle-related kinase (CCRK). Cancer 
cell-intrinsic CCRK gene overexpression induced NFκB-dependent acti­
vation of IL-6-mediated recruitment of neutrophils [95]. Blockade of 
CCRK alone or in combination with anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy dimin­
ished neutrophil levels and activated IFN-γ/TNF-α producing CD8+ T 
cell infiltration to eradicate the tumor [95]. Together, these findings 
highlight that aberrant expression of different kinases in cancer cells 
dictate similar mechanisms involved in modulating the recruitment and 
immunosuppressive features of neutrophils in multiple cancer types. 
Altogether, these findings illustrate how distinct genetic programs in 
solid cancers of different origin can manipulate the extent of neutrophil 
recruitment and activation. These studies provide a mechanistic view on 
how genetic aberrations dictate the secretome of cancer cells to instruct 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
6
neutrophil functionality in cancer progression. By interfering with early 
steps in the cascade, through disruption of cancer cell intrinsic-processes 
or via blockade of secreted mediators, neutrophil accumulation or 
activation can be reduced preventing the suppression of the anti-tumor T 
cell response. Looking further than well-known genetic drivers of cancer 
is crucial to move a step closer to personalized medicine, as implied by 
the effect of less frequent genetic aberrations in cancer on neutrophil 
crosstalk that has detrimental consequences for cancer progression. 
Underlying mechanisms relating cancer genetics to immune phenotype 
are now being uncovered and will provide novel therapeutic options for 
precision medicine over the coming years. 
3.2. Epigenetic regulation of the cancer secretome modulates neutrophils 
Besides aberrations in the genetic code, cancer cells regulate intra­
cellular molecular networks by modifying epigenetic programs. Epige­
netic control of the transcriptome is mediated via histone modification, 
DNA methylation and non-coding RNAs. Alterations in the epigenome 
allow oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes to be aberrantly expressed 
without affecting the DNA code [96]. Epigenetic changes in cancer cells 
have been reported to control various immune parameters in the TME 
including the cancer cell secretome, T cell infiltration, and immuno­
therapy efficacy [97–100]. 
Apart from the impact on the adaptive immune system, the cancer 
epigenome is also involved in modulating the expression of genes that 
potentially affect neutrophil dynamics (Fig. 1B). Assessment of different 
clones derived from the KrasLSL−G12D/+;Trp53LSL-R172H/+;Pdx1-Cre; 
Rosa26YFP/YFP (KPCY) pancreatic cancer model gave rise to distinct 
immune phenotypes defining T cell- and neutrophil-enriched clones, of 
which the latter were resistant to immunotherapy [101]. Because the 
immune phenotype persisted after re-implantation of these clones, the 
authors asked which pancreatic cancer cell-derived factors could control 
this phenomenon. The neutrophil-enriched pancreatic cancer clones 
displayed upregulated Cxcl1 expression that was controlled at the 
epigenetic level through a combination of greater accessibility of the 
promoter region, enrichment of the active H3K4me3 histone mark and 
activity of transcription factor MYC that governed Cxcl1 expression 
[101]. In hepatocellular carcinoma, neutrophils were recruited towards 
the TME when transcription of Il6 was activated by co-binding of histone 
methyl transferase EZH2 and NFκB to the promoter region of IL-6 [95]. 
Another study focused on neutrophil-driven metastatic disease of renal 
cell carcinoma in which an orthotopic transplantation-based mouse 
model of human RCC cell lines was used. Here, multiple CXCL chemo­
kines were highly expressed by renal cancer cells due to binding of BRD4 
to acetylated histones at super enhancers (SEs) formed at chemokine 
enhancer regions [102]. Epigenetic targeting using a BET inhibitor to 
block binding of BRD4 and SEs at genomic loci abrogated CXCL gene 
expression, neutrophil accumulation and pulmonary metastases in vivo 
[102]. Together, these studies demonstrate that cancer cell-intrinsic 
epigenetic control of neutrophil mediators shapes the neutrophil 
compartment of the TME. Therapeutic intervention of epigenetic pro­
cesses can abrogate neutrophil-mediated cancer progression, illustrating 
that the epigenome is an attractive therapeutic target for anti-cancer 
therapies. 
Whereas activating epigenetic signals often correlate with the in­
duction of transcription, lack of repressing signals can also lead to 
activated gene expression. The androgen receptor is a nuclear receptor 
that directly acts as a transcription factor to regulate gene expression in 
prostate cells, where it represses the expression of murine Cxcl15 or 
human IL8 by competing with transcription activators [103]. This came 
to 
light 
during 
androgen 
deprivation 
therapy 
(ADT) 
in 
a 
transplantation-based prostate cancer cell line model, where reduced 
activation of the androgen receptor led to CXCR2-mediated enrichment 
of neutrophils in the TME that impaired the response to immune 
checkpoint blockade [103]. ADT allowed recruitment of active tran­
scription marks such as phosphorylated RNA polymerase II and histone 
acetylation (H3K9ac), and released the brake of Cxcl15 gene transcrip­
tion [103]. Thus, antagonizing the androgen receptor – which is 
standard-of-care treatment for prostate cancer – actually promotes an 
immunosuppressive environment by attracting neutrophils into the 
tumor. These findings illustrate the need for additional therapies tar­
geting immunosuppression in cancer. Although the use of epigenetic 
targeting as therapeutic strategy in cancer is coming up in the clinic 
[96], there are still limited insights into how the epigenetic control in 
cancer cells impacts communication in the TME. Various epigenetic 
molecules that are known to impact tumorigenesis, such as non-coding 
RNAs, are not yet coupled to cancer cell-immune cell interactions and 
are subject for future research. Deeper understanding how certain tu­
mors impact neutrophils through modified epigenetics is crucial to be 
able to manipulate the cancer cell-neutrophil crosstalk and to design 
combinatorial therapies to improve efficacy of current therapies such as 
immunotherapy. 
3.3. Cancer cell-intrinsic signaling pathways impacting neutrophil 
presence and function 
Dysregulated signaling pathways lie at the basis of changes in 
cellular communication and behavior, and can be a consequence of both 
intrinsic signals (e.g. at the level of genetics or epigenetics) and extrinsic 
mediators (e.g. ligands binding to membrane receptors). Below, we 
discuss several frequently altered cancer cell-intrinsic signaling path­
ways that have been reported to directly affect the crosstalk with neu­
trophils (Fig. 1C). 
3.3.1. Signaling of kinases and their receptors 
Intracellular signaling pathways, such as the MAPK and PI3K-Akt 
signal transduction routes, can be affected in cancer as a consequence 
of mutations in or amplification of cell surface receptors or molecules in 
that particular pathway. This leads to aberrant activation of intracellular 
signaling, which renders the receptors and the kinases involved inter­
esting therapeutic targets for many cancer types. Given their intrinsic 
role in regulating cellular state and behavior, kinases and their receptors 
likely also play a role in regulating the secretome of cancer cells, yet 
limited studies have focused on signaling molecules in the context of 
neutrophil dynamics in cancer. As an example, when cytosolic focal 
adhesion kinase (FAK) is highly active in pancreatic cancer, STAT3 
phosphorylation and G-CSF expression are activated in cancer cells and 
attract neutrophils into the TME [104]. Either pharmacologic FAK in­
hibition in p48-Cre;LSL-KrasG12D;Trp53flox/+ and p48-Cre;LSL-KrasG12D 
mice or genetic knockdown of FAK in cell lines derived from these 
pancreatic cancer models reduced intratumoral neutrophil homing and 
rendered pancreatic tumors responsive to immunotherapy [104]. The 
tumor responsive phenotype during FAK inhibition was reverted by 
CD4+/CD8+ T cell depletion indicating the immunosuppressive nature 
of FAK-induced neutrophils [104]. However, anti-tumor control induced 
by pharmacological FAK inhibition could also be a consequence of direct 
targeting of myeloid cell function, since FAK has also been demonstrated 
to regulate the pro-tumorigenic function of myeloid cells during the 
invasive stage of breast cancer progression [105]. Interestingly, these 
data show that kinases that are known to regulate cancer-related pro­
cesses such as cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion are 
indirectly contributing to an immunosuppressive environment in the 
tumor via downstream signaling, while they can also intrinsically 
regulate immune cell phenotype. 
Another signaling route that is often activated in cancer and illus­
trates the crosstalk with immune cells involves mTOR, a member of the 
PI3K-related kinases family of protein kinases. The mTOR signaling 
pathway was enriched in mammary tumors with high content of neu­
trophils, an immune phenotype that was observed in transgenic MMTV- 
Wnt1-iFGFR, somatic Trp53−/−Pten−/−
and p53-null cell line-based 
mammary tumor models [106]. Activation of the mTOR pathway 
mediated G-CSF expression by breast cancer cells to attract neutrophils 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
7
[106]. Neutrophil infiltration into mammary tumors was abrogated 
when the mTOR–G-CSF axis was targeted using mTOR inhibitor rapa­
mycin or breast cancer cell-specific genetic ablation of either Raptor 
(part of the mTORC1 complex) or G-CSF [106]. Interestingly, targeting 
FGFR – the receptor that signals upstream of mTOR – in 
Wnt1-FGFR-driven mammary tumors resulted in decreased G-CSF levels 
[106]. Since the mTOR–G-CSF axis was also found in mammary tumors 
not driven by FGFR [106], it is likely that there is another mechanism 
underlying mTOR activation in these breast cancer models. Still, this 
study shows that cancer cell-intrinsic mTOR signaling is evidently 
involved in recruiting immunosuppressive neutrophils contributing to 
disease progression [106]. Pharmacological targeting of mTOR 
signaling using rapamycin could also have directly affected neutrophils, 
as was shown for monocytic CD11b+Gr1+ cells in skin graft and lym­
phoma cell line models [107]. Notably, this may also be a consequence 
of other targeted therapies that are currently being used in the clinic to 
treat cancers with specific alterations, such as BRAF/MEK-inhibitors for 
BRAF mutant tumors. 
Although limited evidence exists on the role of cancer cell surface 
receptors in modulating neutrophil crosstalk, some studies have indi­
cated hints regarding how cell surface receptors contribute to neutrophil 
behavior. We anticipate that more insights will be generated over the 
coming years given the crucial function of such receptors in tumori­
genesis across solid cancers. In human lung adenocarcinoma, mutant 
EGFR has been connected to an immune microenvironment consisting of 
a low number of neutrophils [76]. In contrast, EGFR activation in a 
human breast cancer cell line was reported to induce the production of 
cytokines including IL-8, IL-1β and CXCL1 – all neutrophil attractants 
[108]. Activation of another tyrosine kinase receptor, HER2, that is 
frequently amplified in epithelial cancers, has been shown to block the 
STING signaling pathway via Akt1 in the B16 melanoma model [109]. 
The HER2-Akt1 axis reduces the infiltration of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell 
populations to prevent anti-tumor immunity, but it is unknown whether 
neutrophils contributed to the immunosuppressive phenotype, as neu­
trophils were not included in the immune parameter analysis [109]. 
Moreover, 
activated 
signaling 
of 
the 
NOTCH1 
cell 
surface 
receptor 
in 
the 
murine 
colorectal 
cancer 
model 
villinCreERKrasG12D/+Trp53fl/flRosa26N1icd/+ led to secretion of TGF-β2 
that regulated recruitment of neutrophils driving liver metastasis by 
suppressing T cell activation [110]. Interestingly, the signature of 
NOTCH1 and TGFB2 that was found in murine colorectal tumors 
resembled a subset of human colorectal carcinoma patients with poor 
prognosis [110]. 
These findings indicate that signaling pathways in cancer cells 
dictate the secretome of cancer cells, but also highlight the complexity of 
targeting these signaling routes, since they are also regulating immune 
cell states directly. 
3.3.2. NFκB signaling pathway 
The NFκB transcription factor family is a major regulator of inflam­
mation and cancer by acting in various processes, including direct 
control of target gene expression, crosstalk with other signaling routes, 
and dictating cancer- and immune cell states [111–113]. For instance in 
a human dataset for pancreatic adenocarcinoma, elevated expression of 
CXCR2 ligands correlated with enrichment of both neutrophils and the 
NFκB signaling pathway in pancreatic tumors [83]. In in vitro cancer cell 
line-based assays, cancer cell-intrinsic NFκB signaling was shown to 
regulate gene expression of neutrophil attractants including Cxcl5, 
Cxcl1, Csf3 and Il6 [83,90,95]. Furthermore, toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) 
expressed on prostate cancer cells activated NFκB-mediated gene tran­
scription of the LIF cytokine [114]. Paracrine signaling of LIF was shown 
to attract neutrophils into prostate tumors and activated their immu­
nosuppressive capacity by inducing STAT3-mediated expression of 
Arginase-1 and S100A8/A9 [114]. These examples illustrate how cancer 
cells can exploit inflammatory signaling molecules, such as NFκB and 
STAT3, to polarize neutrophils towards immunosuppression. However, 
targeting pathways that act in both cancer- and immune cells makes 
them a challenging target for anti-cancer therapies. 
3.3.3. TGF-β signaling pathway 
Another signaling route that impacts both cancer and immune cells is 
the TGF-β signaling pathway, which has a dual role in cancer initiation 
and is a known regulator of EMT and metastasis, while it also exerts 
immunomodulatory functions affecting the TME [115]. By utilizing an 
in vitro neutrophil migration assay in the context of hepatocellular car­
cinoma, stimulation of cancer cells with TGF-β resulted in CXCL5 
expression and neutrophil migration [116]. Similarly, in a migration 
assay using conditioned medium from breast cancer cells, neutrophil 
migration was mediated by cancer cell-derived TGF-β [117]. Together, 
these studies illustrate that TGF-β acting on cancer cells or derived from 
cancer cells can both affect neutrophil dynamics. Strikingly, Fridlender 
et al. was the first to demonstrate that TGF-β blockade switched the 
phenotype of intratumoral neutrophils from pro-tumorigenic into 
anti-tumorigenic in cell line transplantation models of lung and meso­
thelioma cancer [48]. By utilizing Ly6G+ or CD8+ cell depleting anti­
bodies, neutrophils were shown to suppress the adaptive immune system 
in the control setting, whereas the anti-tumorigenic polarization of 
neutrophils by TGF-β inhibition resulted in active immunity and tumor 
control [48]. The neutrophil phenotype switch induced by TGF-β 
blockade was confirmed in colorectal cancer [118]. Here, in a co-culture 
setting of colorectal cancer cells with neutrophils that were 
pre-incubated with tumor conditioned medium, blockade of TGF-β 
resulted in an anti-tumorigenic neutrophil phenotype indicated by 
enhanced cytotoxic mediators and reduced levels of immunosuppressive 
factors including neutrophil elastase and Arginase-1 [118]. In a recent 
study, the TGF-β–CXCL6 axis in hepatocellular carcinoma formed the 
basis of pro-tumorigenic neutrophil recruitment [119]. Interestingly, 
this neutrophil phenotype was supported by a multi-cellular crosstalk in 
the TME, as activation of cancer cell-intrinsic expression of TGF-β and 
CXCL6 was induced by cancer-associated fibroblast-derived CLCF1, and 
together provided a positive feedback loop between cancer cells, fibro­
blasts and neutrophils promoting cancer progression [119]. Interest­
ingly, abrogated TGF-β signaling by conditional deletion of Tgfbr2 in the 
MMTV-PyMT mammary carcinoma model enhanced CXCL5 expression 
and recruitment of CD11b+Gr1+ cells into the TME that supported 
metastasis formation [120]. Notably, mammary tumor-specific defi­
ciency in Tgfbr2 resulted in enhanced production of TGF-β by myeloid 
cells in tumor-bearing hosts [120], which could have affected the 
phenotype of CD11b+Gr1+ cells beyond the cancer cell-intrinsic 
blockade of the TGF-β signaling pathway, although this was not tested 
here. Together, these findings illustrate a profound role for TGF-β in 
cancer-induced neutrophil behavior, either by regulating the cancer cell 
secretome or by directly acting on neutrophils. Still, additional insights 
are needed to be able to utilize this pathway as a therapeutic target for 
immunomodulation that favors anti-tumor immunity. 
These studies demonstrate how different components of intracellular 
signaling pathways in cancer can modulate cancer progression via the 
crosstalk with neutrophils. From a therapeutic perspective, it is crucial 
to take into account that similar intracellular signaling networks can be 
activated in both cancer cells and neutrophils. The total wiring of cancer 
cells comprises cellular regulation at the level of epigenetics, genetics 
and intracellular molecules that together form a cancer cell-intrinsic 
signaling network, which makes it complex to dissect how one feature 
in cancer cells alters the immune phenotype of tumors. Though, finding 
underlying mechanisms of how such cancer cell-intrinsic features co- 
operate to impact the neutrophilic landscape will aid the development 
of novel therapeutic strategies for cancer patients. 
3.4. Cancer metabolic processes affecting neutrophil behavior 
Cancer cells depend on reprogramming of cellular metabolism to 
survive and to sustain proliferation in the frequently harsh conditions 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
8
present in the tumor microenvironment, including deprivation from 
nutrients and oxygen. The metabolic wiring in cancer cells can affect 
tumorigenesis and cancer progression, but also the crosstalk with im­
mune cells. Current advances on this subject have been discussed in a 
recent perspective [121]. Here, we will discuss examples of how cancer 
cell-intrinsic metabolic reprogramming and the metabolic state of tu­
mors affect neutrophils in cancer (Fig. 1D). 
3.4.1. Lipid mediators 
Lipid metabolism covers multiple pathways varying from cellular 
uptake and processing of lipids to de novo synthesis of fatty acids and 
lipid mediators serving as energy source [122]. Altered lipid metabolism 
contributes to the progression of cancer by fueling cancer cell prolifer­
ation, but cancer cell-derived lipid mediators may also influence the 
function and metabolic state of surrounding cells in the TME. The 
enzyme cyclooxygenase (COX) that is involved in the formation of lipid 
compounds, including converting arachidonic acid into prostaglandins, 
is a known influencer of inflammation and can be induced by inflam­
matory mediators [123]. In collagen-rich mammary tumors, COX-2 
enabled cancer cells to secrete cytokines resulting in neutrophil 
recruitment [124]. Hence, cancer cell-derived prostaglandin drove 
cancer progression via evasion of the adaptive immune system in mul­
tiple cancer cell line-based transplantation models [125,126]. More­
over, lung cancer cell-intrinsic prostaglandin signaling was shown to 
dictate the secretome of lung cancer cells involved in the recruitment of 
immunosuppressive neutrophils, both in vitro and in a mouse model for 
experimental lung metastasis [127]. Interestingly, uptake of arachidonic 
acid by cancer-induced neutrophils facilitated prostaglandin release to 
promote immunosuppression [128]. This is in line with recent studies 
showing that neutrophil-derived lipids directly act on cancer cell pro­
liferation aiding cancer progression [129,130], although it is yet unclear 
whether cancer cell-intrinsic mechanisms are a fundamental part of 
these phenomena. One other study provides evidence for tumor-derived 
G-CSF and GM-CSF in inducing neutrophil-intrinsic lipid metabolism to 
fuel their immunosuppressive capacity [131]. Whereas cancer cells are 
able to use lipid metabolites to instruct immune cells, neutrophils also 
rely on their own metabolic state to exert inflammatory functions. 
3.4.2. Glucose metabolism 
Tumors employ glycolysis as main source of energy, even in the 
presence of oxygen and is therefore referred to as aerobic glycolysis 
[132]. This phenomenon – the Warburg effect, named after the German 
physiologist Otto Warburg – comprises enhanced glucose metabolism 
and lactate production by cancer cells that can benefit tumor growth, 
but can also affect neighboring cells in the TME. Indeed, in two breast 
cancer cell line-based in vitro and in vivo models, aerobic glycolysis was 
demonstrated to regulate immunosuppression in mammary tumors via a 
cascade of intracellular signaling events [133]. Mammary tumor 
glycolysis induced the AMPK-ULK1 autophagy pathway to activate 
liver-enriched transcriptional activator protein (LAP) that in turn 
regulated G-CSF expression in cancer cells [133]. Using cancer 
cell-intrinsic genetic knockdown of lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) to 
abrogate glycolysis, tumor glycolysis was shown to modulate 
G-CSF-mediated infiltration of immunosuppressive neutrophils into 
mammary tumors and to regulate cancer progression [133]. A similar 
immune phenotype was observed in a syngeneic mouse model for 
pancreatic cancer, where knockdown of LDHA in pancreatic cancer cells 
led to reduced numbers of intratumoral and splenic CD11b+Gr1+ cells 
[134]. Administration of lactate to the culture of murine bone marrow or 
human PBMCs cultures, exposed to medium containing GM-CSF and 
IL-6, increased the capability of CD11b+Gr1+ cells to suppress NK cell 
cytotoxicity to lymphoma cells [134]. Furthermore, radiotherapy 
induced the accumulation of CD11b+Gr1+ cells in the transgenic 
LSL-KrasG12D/+;Pdx-1-Cre and orthotopic Panc-02 pancreatic cancer 
model via the activation of aerobic glycolysis in tumors [135]. Upon 
radiotherapy, pancreatic cancer cell-derived lactate promoted the 
expression of immunosuppressive genes encoding S100A8/9, iNOS and 
Arginase-1 in CD11b+Gr1+ cells exposed to conditioned medium from 
radiotherapy-treated cancer cells [135]. Interestingly, in an orthotopic 
transplantation-based model of hepatocellular carcinoma, treatment 
with VEGFR inhibitor lenvatinib resulted in glycolysis pathway enrich­
ment in tumors, lactate production by cancer cells and the recruitment 
of neutrophils into the TME [136], although the link between VEGFR 
blockade and lactate generation was not explained here. Tumor-derived 
lactate activated the NFκB/COX-2 axis in neutrophils to express PD-L1, 
underlying the suppression of the anti-tumor immune response in 
lenvatinib-treated hepatocellular carcinoma-bearing mice. The efficacy 
of lenvatinib was improved by alleviating the neutrophil-mediated 
suppression of the T cell response by combination therapy of lenvati­
nib with COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib [136]. These studies demonstrate 
that cancer cell-derived lactate, as a consequence of enhanced glucose 
metabolism in tumors, influences neutrophil abundance and function in 
the TME. At the same time, changes in tumor glycolysis may have a 
direct effect on neutrophils, since the immune system also relies on 
glucose metabolism as fuel to exert their function. 
3.4.3. Hypoxia 
Hypoxia is a state of low oxygen availability that is due to a com­
bination of oxygen consumption to support cell proliferation and 
reduced or leaky vascularization in tumors. Hypoxic conditions affect 
the metabolic state of cancer and immune cells present in the TME 
[137]. Interestingly, neutrophils gained a higher capacity to form NETs 
that promoted metastatic disease when these neutrophils were infil­
trating hypoxic areas of tumors [138]. Cancer cells respond to low ox­
ygen conditions by activating hypoxia-inducible transcription factors 
(HIFs) that in turn induce specific programs of gene expression to adapt 
to hypoxic conditions [137]. HIF-2α expression in colon cancer cells 
directly mediated CXCL1 expression via binding to hypoxia response 
elements of the Cxcl1 promoter to induce transcription resulting in 
recruitment of neutrophils that promote tumorigenesis [139]. In 
contrast, the accumulated neutrophils in hypoxic areas of HIF-1α 
expressing uterine adenocarcinoma tend to have an anti-tumorigenic 
function by detaching cancer cells from the basement membrane 
rendering them as debris in the uterine lumen [140]. Restoring oxygen 
levels by creating hyperoxic conditions relieved hypoxia-induced 
recruitment of neutrophils, yet enhanced the amount of debris in the 
uterine lumen [141]. Hyperoxia rendered neutrophils that were already 
present in the tumor more prone to direct tumor cell killing independent 
of the adaptive immune system by expressing active MMP-9 and ROS, 
but lower levels of neutrophil elastase indicative of reduced NETosis 
[141]. Collectively, the hypoxic state of solid tumors shapes neutrophil 
dynamics in the TME and the switch between pro- and anti-tumorigenic 
functions of neutrophils in cancer progression, either by directly 
affecting 
neutrophils 
or 
via 
cancer 
cell-intrinsic 
metabolic 
reprogramming. 
3.4.4. Senescence 
Another process that is frequently observed in cancer is cellular 
senescence. Active secretion of cytokines and other immune mediators 
via the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) of cancer cells 
plays a key role in modulating the TME. Senescence and SASP have been 
reported to affect neighboring non-senescent immune cells and their 
inflammatory responses in cancer [142–144], and a few examples of the 
effect of SASP on tumor-associated neutrophils are highlighted here. 
In a cell line transplantation-based mouse model for liver cancer, 
doxycycline-induced restoration of p53 gene expression in p53-null 
cancer cells resulted in senescence and altered gene expression of im­
mune mediators including neutrophil attractant Cxcl1 [145]. Here, 
neutrophil infiltration favored tumor control by mediating clearance of 
senescent hepatocellular carcinoma [145]. However, in two comple­
mentary studies, senescent Ptenpc−/−mouse prostate tumors were infil­
trated with pro-tumorigenic CD11b+Gr1+ cells [146,147]. Treatment of 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
9
prostate tumor-bearing mice with docetaxel induced senescence in 
prostate tumors, but was not sufficient for tumor eradication, while 
targeting myeloid cell recruitment in combination with docetaxel 
induced regression of prostate tumors [146,147]. Toso et al. demon­
strated that PTEN deletion in prostates resulted in activation of the 
JAK2/STAT3 pathway and SASP, including neutrophil attractants 
CXCL1, CXCL2, G-CSF and IL-6, to mediate infiltration of immunosup­
pressive CD11b+Gr1+ cells into prostate tumors [146]. Blockade of the 
JAK2/STAT3 pathway, either by pharmacological JAK2 inhibition or by 
cancer cell-intrinsic ablation of STAT3 using Ptenpc−/−Stat3pc−/−mice, 
led to improved efficacy of docetaxel treatment in prostate cancer [146]. 
Likewise, Di Mitri et al. found that PTEN-null senescent prostate tumors 
produced CXCL1 and CXCL2 mediating CD11b+Gr1+ cell recruitment, 
while myeloid cell-derived IL-1RA served as protective mediator of 
cancer cell senescence in prostate tumors [147]. Interfering with 
myeloid cell recruitment using a CXCR2 antagonist enhanced the effi­
cacy of docetaxel and reduced prostate tumor growth. Both studies 
demonstrate that oncogene-induced senescence in a model of mutant 
RAS-driven lung or prostate cancer did not lead to neutrophil infiltra­
tion, indicating a potential interplay between senescent cancer cell state 
and the genetic make-up of cancer cells in dictating the immune land­
scape, of which the latter is described in section 3.1 of this review. 
Together, these studies demonstrate that cancer cell senescence alters 
the secretome or SASP of cancer cells that impacts immune cells in the 
TME to exert pro- or anti-tumorigenic functions. 
The findings described above only cover part of the metabolic pro­
cesses occurring in cancer and highlight the role of cancer cell meta­
bolism and cancer cell-derived metabolites in dictating neutrophil 
responses. Besides cancer cell-intrinsic metabolic reprogramming that 
affects secretome-mediated immunomodulation in the TME, cancer cell- 
extrinsic metabolic conditions such as stress, starvation, or hypoxia in 
the tumor niche can also directly influence the metabolic state of im­
mune cells. In case of nutrient deprivation in the 4T1 breast cancer 
model, neutrophils are able to adapt their metabolism to ensure their 
immunosuppressive features against T cells are preserved [148]. Strik­
ingly, a recent study illustrated that cell-intrinsic programs define 
whether nutrients are consumed by either cancer or immune cells rather 
than cell competition for the available nutrients in the tumor niche 
[149]. These findings indicate a strong intrinsic ability of immune cells 
to adapt to changing environments. Thus, the capacity of neutrophils to 
influence cancer progression is supported by metabolic programming of 
both cancer cells and neutrophils. 
4. Exploiting cancer cell-neutrophil crosstalk for personalized 
immune intervention 
As discussed in this review, numerous cancer cell-intrinsic programs 
involved in tumorigenesis guide cancer cell-neutrophil crosstalk in the 
TME. As such, existing targeted therapies acting on oncogenic signaling 
pathways to combat solid tumors will also impact neutrophil abundance 
and behavior. Especially the immunosuppressive nature of neutrophils 
towards cytotoxic lymphocytes is a key feature of primary resistance to 
cancer immunotherapy, indicating that there is a critical need for 
additional strategies to improve the success of immunomodulatory 
agents in cancer patients. Indeed, indirect blockade of neutrophil 
mobilization by pharmacological inhibition of oncogenic kinase FAK 
sensitized tumors to immunotherapy [104], illustrating the potential 
powerful combination of targeted cancer therapies and immunotherapy 
to modulate the cancer cell-induced immune landscape. Moreover, as 
cancer cell-intrinsic mechanisms shape the secretome-mediated 
communication with neutrophils, interfering with the secretome of 
cancer cells is another eligible therapeutic strategy. For instance, the 
accumulation of pro-metastatic neutrophils in p53-null mammary 
tumor-bearing mice was abrogated by therapeutically blocking the 
p53-induced secretion of Wnt ligands by cancer cells [70]. Such existing 
treatment options that have been developed as anti-cancer therapies are 
also promising to be exploited for the intervention with cancer-induced 
neutrophil responses to tackle cancer progression. Importantly, targeted 
cancer therapies will also directly act on neutrophil-intrinsic activity of 
signaling pathways affecting their phenotypical state. For example, 
targeting the tyrosine kinase receptor c-MET enhances the efficacy of 
cancer immunotherapy by relieving the immunosuppressive environ­
ment induced by a subpopulation of neutrophils that expressed c-MET 
[31]. However, c-MET+ neutrophils have also been implicated to 
counteract tumorigenesis by direct killing of cancer cells, so targeting of 
c-MET gives a pro-tumoral effect in this setting [33]. In another study, 
stimulation of TLR-9 and simultaneous blockade of STAT3 signaling in 
neutrophils using oligonucleotide conjugate-based therapy abrogated 
cancer progression via activation of anti-tumor T cell responses [150]. 
These findings demonstrate the importance of oncogenic signaling in 
neutrophil modulation, independent of the intrinsic features of the pri­
mary tumor, and highlight the challenging part of the search for immune 
modulatory drugs to treat cancer. 
An additional challenge of targeting cancer cell-neutrophil crosstalk 
lies in the extensive functions that neutrophils can exert in the context of 
cancer, a topic reviewed in this issue and elsewhere [151]. Here, we 
have provided a discussion of experimental examples demonstrating 
how cancer cells utilize a variety of programs to manipulate neutrophil 
abundance and function. Depending on cancer cell-intrinsic features and 
the tissue context, neutrophils can be polarized to suppress the adaptive 
immune system or to directly target cancer cells. For instance, 
neutrophil-derived molecules like ROS and NO are able to block the 
anti-tumor T cell response to promote tumorigenesis and metastatic 
spread [22,152], whereas these same factors have also been implicated 
in direct killing of cancer cells being beneficial for cancer prognosis [32, 
33,141]. Given that similar immunomodulatory mediators are involved 
in regulating dual functions of neutrophils in the context of cancer, it is 
crucial to mechanistically understand how such factors are driven by 
cancer cells prior to utilizing them for cancer therapy. 
The majority of studies focusing on cancer-neutrophil crosstalk 
demonstrate the pro-tumorigenic role of neutrophils in cancer. Still, 
neutrophils are key players in target cell elimination and direct cancer 
cell killing can be achieved by granule release, phagocytosis or 
neutrophil antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC), a topic 
reviewed in more detail in another contribution in this issue. Further 
research on how cancer cells modulate anti-tumorigenic features of 
neutrophils could provide additional immunomodulatory strategies to 
polarize neutrophils towards an anti-tumor phenotype and boost cancer 
cell elimination. 
Although the impact of neutrophils on cancer cell state is beyond the 
scope of this review, it is noteworthy that cancer cell-neutrophil cross­
talk is not an one-way route. Multiple studies have illustrated feedback 
loops between cancer cells and neutrophils illustrating how cancer cells 
impact neutrophils and vice versa. For instance, neutrophils contribute to 
enhancing metastatic cues by inducing EMT via juxtacrine-paracrine 
crosstalk with breast cancer cells [153]. In lung cancer, neutrophils 
induce a feedback loop comprising expression of EMT-inducer Snail, 
hypoxia and additional recruitment of neutrophils promoting cancer 
progression [154]. Interfering with such a continuum will abrogate the 
reinforcing effect that both cancer cells and neutrophils have on each 
other and is a potentially successful multi-target therapy to impact 
cancer progression. 
Over recent years, the use of datasets of cancer patient cohorts and 
the application of machine learning prediction models and multi-omics 
techniques is being implemented to strive towards personalized immune 
intervention [61–64,155,156]. Importantly, single cell-sequencing an­
alyses of cancer-associated neutrophils uncovered multiple neutrophil 
subsets being conserved between mice and humans indicating trans­
lational 
relevance 
of 
preclinical mouse 
studies 
focusing on 
cancer-associated neutrophils [35–37]. In addition, the introduction of 
somatic tumor modeling has made it easier to modify additional genetic 
aberrations in cancer while staying close to the original transgenic mice 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
10
in terms of tissue-specific gene expression and the time frame of cancer 
development [157]. Also, the inducible (in)activation of signaling, such 
as doxycycline- or tamoxifen-based models, enables spatiotemporal 
control of gene expression to assess the impact and timing of cancer 
cell-intrinsic mechanisms on the immune landscape [85,158]. Utilizing 
these sophisticated tools will encourage mechanistic unraveling of 
cancer cell-intrinsic programming of neutrophils and paves the way 
towards personalized immune intervention strategies for cancer 
patients. 
5. Conclusion 
The studies discussed in this review illustrate that cancer cell- 
intrinsic mechanisms shape the neutrophil compartment of the im­
mune landscape and dictate their functional state to influence disease 
progression. It is important to realize that the cancer cell-neutrophil 
interactions described above should be considered in light of the 
larger intratumoral immune cell dynamics and crosstalk. Many different 
cancer cell-intrinsic factors are at play at the same time, which impact 
the great diversity of immune cell (sub)types present in tumors and thus 
demands development of therapeutic strategies covering multiple as­
pects of cancer-immune cell cascades. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
K.E.d.V. reports research funding from Roche and is consultant for 
Macomics, outside the scope of this work. D.E.M.D. reports no 
competing interests. 
Acknowledgements 
We apologize to those researchers whose original work could not be 
cited due to space restrictions. We thank Quinte Braster for insightful 
comments during the writing process. Research in the De Visser labo­
ratory is funded by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research 
(grant NWO-VICI 91819616), the Dutch Cancer Society (grants 
KWF10083, KWF10623, KWF13191) and Oncode Institute. 
References 
[1] F. Balkwill, A. Mantovani, Inflammation and cancer: back to Virchow? Lancet 
357 (9255) (2001) 539–545. 
[2] T. Boveri, Zur frage der entstehung maligner tumoren, Fischer, 1914. 
[3] D. Hansemann, Ueber asymmetrische Zelltheilung in Epithelkrebsen und deren 
biologische Bedeutung, Virchows Arch. Pathol. Anat. Physiol. Klin. Med. 119 (2) 
(1890) 299–326. 
[4] L.M. Coussens, Z. Werb, Inflammation and cancer, Nature 420 (6917) (2002) 
860–867. 
[5] S.S. McAllister, R.A. Weinberg, The tumour-induced systemic environment as a 
critical regulator of cancer progression and metastasis, Nat. Cell Biol. 16 (8) 
(2014) 717–727. 
[6] O.S. Blomberg, L. Spagnuolo, K.E. de Visser, Immune regulation of metastasis: 
mechanistic insights and therapeutic opportunities, Dis. Model. Mech. 11 (10) 
(2018). 
[7] H. Garner, K.E. de Visser, Immune crosstalk in cancer progression and metastatic 
spread: a complex conversation, Nat. Rev. Immunol. (2020). 
[8] M.D. Wellenstein, K.E. de Visser, Cancer-cell-Intrinsic mechanisms shaping the 
tumor immune landscape, Immunity 48 (3) (2018) 399–416. 
[9] V. Thorsson, D.L. Gibbs, S.D. Brown, D. Wolf, D.S. Bortone, T.H. Ou Yang, 
E. Porta-Pardo, G.F. Gao, C.L. Plaisier, J.A. Eddy, E. Ziv, A.C. Culhane, E.O. Paull, 
I.K.A. Sivakumar, A.J. Gentles, R. Malhotra, F. Farshidfar, A. Colaprico, J. 
S. Parker, L.E. Mose, N.S. Vo, J. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Rader, V. Dhankani, S.M. Reynolds, 
R. Bowlby, A. Califano, A.D. Cherniack, D. Anastassiou, D. Bedognetti, A. Rao, 
K. Chen, A. Krasnitz, H. Hu, T.M. Malta, H. Noushmehr, C.S. Pedamallu, 
S. Bullman, A.I. Ojesina, A. Lamb, W. Zhou, H. Shen, T.K. Choueiri, J. 
N. Weinstein, J. Guinney, J. Saltz, R.A. Holt, C.E. Rabkin, A.J. Lazar, J.S. Serody, 
E.G. Demicco, M.L. Disis, B.G. Vincent, L. Shmulevich, The immune landscape of 
cancer, Immunity 48 (4) (2018) 812–830, e814. 
[10] S.B. Coffelt, M.D. Wellenstein, K.E. de Visser, Neutrophils in cancer: neutral no 
more, Nat. Rev. Cancer 16 (7) (2016) 431–446. 
[11] C.C. Hedrick, I. Malanchi, Neutrophils in cancer: heterogeneous and multifaceted, 
Nat. Rev. Immunol. (2021). 
[12] D.I. Gabrilovich, V. Bronte, S.H. Chen, M.P. Colombo, A. Ochoa, S. Ostrand- 
Rosenberg, H. Schreiber, The terminology issue for myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells, Cancer Res. 67 (1) (2007) 425, author reply 426. 
[13] F. Veglia, E. Sanseviero, D.I. Gabrilovich, Myeloid-derived suppressor cells in the 
era of increasing myeloid cell diversity, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 21 (8) (2021) 
485–498. 
[14] A.J. Gentles, A.M. Newman, C.L. Liu, S.V. Bratman, W. Feng, D. Kim, V.S. Nair, 
Y. Xu, A. Khuong, C.D. Hoang, M. Diehn, R.B. West, S.K. Plevritis, A.A. Alizadeh, 
The prognostic landscape of genes and infiltrating immune cells across human 
cancers, Nat. Med. 21 (8) (2015) 938–945. 
[15] A.J. Templeton, M.G. McNamara, B. Seruga, F.E. Vera-Badillo, P. Aneja, 
A. Ocana, R. Leibowitz-Amit, G. Sonpavde, J.J. Knox, B. Tran, I.F. Tannock, 
E. Amir, Prognostic role of neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio in solid tumors: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis, J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 106 (6) (2014) dju124. 
[16] M.R. Galdiero, P. Bianchi, F. Grizzi, G. Di Caro, G. Basso, A. Ponzetta, E. Bonavita, 
M. Barbagallo, S. Tartari, N. Polentarutti, A. Malesci, G. Marone, M. Roncalli, 
L. Laghi, C. Garlanda, A. Mantovani, S. Jaillon, Occurrence and significance of 
tumor-associated neutrophils in patients with colorectal cancer, Int. J. Cancer 139 
(2) (2016) 446–456. 
[17] R.A. Caruso, R. Bellocco, M. Pagano, G. Bertoli, L. Rigoli, C. Inferrera, Prognostic 
value of intratumoral neutrophils in advanced gastric carcinoma in a high-risk 
area in northern Italy, Mod. Pathol. 15 (8) (2002) 831–837. 
[18] A. Ponzetta, R. Carriero, S. Carnevale, M. Barbagallo, M. Molgora, C. Perucchini, 
E. Magrini, F. Gianni, P. Kunderfranco, N. Polentarutti, F. Pasqualini, S. Di Marco, 
D. Supino, C. Peano, F. Cananzi, P. Colombo, S. Pilotti, S.Y. Alomar, E. Bonavita, 
M.R. Galdiero, C. Garlanda, A. Mantovani, S. Jaillon, Neutrophils driving 
unconventional t cells mediate resistance against murine sarcomas and selected 
human tumors, Cell 178 (2) (2019) 346–360, e324. 
[19] W.C. Wu, H.W. Sun, H.T. Chen, J. Liang, X.J. Yu, C. Wu, Z. Wang, L. Zheng, 
Circulating hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells are myeloid-biased in cancer 
patients, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111 (11) (2014) 4221–4226. 
[20] K.A. Schalper, M. Carleton, M. Zhou, T. Chen, Y. Feng, S.P. Huang, A.M. Walsh, 
V. Baxi, D. Pandya, T. Baradet, D. Locke, Q. Wu, T.P. Reilly, P. Phillips, 
V. Nagineni, N. Gianino, J. Gu, H. Zhao, J.L. Perez-Gracia, M.F. Sanmamed, 
I. Melero, Elevated serum interleukin-8 is associated with enhanced intratumor 
neutrophils and reduced clinical benefit of immune-checkpoint inhibitors, Nat. 
Med. 26 (5) (2020) 688–692. 
[21] K.C. Yuen, L.F. Liu, V. Gupta, S. Madireddi, S. Keerthivasan, C. Li, D. Rishipathak, 
P. Williams, E.E. Kadel 3rd, H. Koeppen, Y.J. Chen, Z. Modrusan, J.L. Grogan, 
R. Banchereau, N. Leng, A. Thastrom, X. Shen, K. Hashimoto, D. Tayama, M. 
S. van der Heijden, J.E. Rosenberg, D.F. McDermott, T. Powles, P.S. Hegde, M. 
A. Huseni, S. Mariathasan, High systemic and tumor-associated IL-8 correlates 
with reduced clinical benefit of PD-L1 blockade, Nat. Med. 26 (5) (2020) 
693–698. 
[22] S.B. Coffelt, K. Kersten, C.W. Doornebal, J. Weiden, K. Vrijland, C.-S. Hau, N.J. 
M. Verstegen, M. Ciampricotti, L.J.A.C. Hawinkels, J. Jonkers, K.E. de Visser, IL- 
17-producing γδ T cells and neutrophils conspire to promote breast cancer 
metastasis, Nature 522 (2015) 345. 
[23] B.M. Szczerba, F. Castro-Giner, M. Vetter, I. Krol, S. Gkountela, J. Landin, M. 
C. Scheidmann, C. Donato, R. Scherrer, J. Singer, C. Beisel, C. Kurzeder, 
V. Heinzelmann-Schwarz, C. Rochlitz, W.P. Weber, N. Beerenwinkel, N. Aceto, 
Neutrophils escort circulating tumour cells to enable cell cycle progression, 
Nature 566 (7745) (2019) 553–557. 
[24] J. Park, R.W. Wysocki, Z. Amoozgar, L. Maiorino, M.R. Fein, J. Jorns, A.F. Schott, 
Y. Kinugasa-Katayama, Y. Lee, N.H. Won, E.S. Nakasone, S.A. Hearn, V. Küttner, 
J. Qiu, A.S. Almeida, N. Perurena, K. Kessenbrock, M.S. Goldberg, M. Egeblad, 
Cancer cells induce metastasis-supporting neutrophil extracellular DNA traps, Sci. 
Transl. Med. 8 (361) (2016) 361ra138. 
[25] T. Bald, T. Quast, J. Landsberg, M. Rogava, N. Glodde, D. Lopez-Ramos, 
J. Kohlmeyer, S. Riesenberg, D. van den Boorn-Konijnenberg, C. H¨omig-H¨olzel, 
R. Reuten, B. Schadow, H. Weighardt, D. Wenzel, I. Helfrich, D. Schadendorf, 
W. Bloch, M.E. Bianchi, C. Lugassy, R.L. Barnhill, M. Koch, B.K. Fleischmann, 
I. F¨orster, W. Kastenmüller, W. Kolanus, M. H¨olzel, E. Gaffal, T. Tüting, 
Ultraviolet-radiation-induced inflammation promotes angiotropism and 
metastasis in melanoma, Nature 507 (7490) (2014) 109–113. 
[26] S.K. Wculek, I. Malanchi, Neutrophils support lung colonization of metastasis- 
initiating breast cancer cells, Nature 528 (7582) (2015) 413–417. 
[27] S.L. Highfill, Y. Cui, A.J. Giles, J.P. Smith, H. Zhang, E. Morse, R.N. Kaplan, C. 
L. Mackall, Disruption of CXCR2-mediated MDSC tumor trafficking enhances 
anti-PD1 efficacy, Sci. Transl. Med. 6 (237) (2014) 237ra267. 
[28] K. Kim, A.D. Skora, Z. Li, Q. Liu, A.J. Tam, R.L. Blosser, L.A. Diaz Jr., 
N. Papadopoulos, K.W. Kinzler, B. Vogelstein, S. Zhou, Eradication of metastatic 
mouse cancers resistant to immune checkpoint blockade by suppression of 
myeloid-derived cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111 (32) (2014) 
11774–11779. 
[29] J. Kargl, X. Zhu, H. Zhang, G.H.Y. Yang, T.J. Friesen, M. Shipley, D.Y. Maeda, J. 
A. Zebala, J. McKay-Fleisch, G. Meredith, A. Mashadi-Hossein, C. Baik, R. 
H. Pierce, M.W. Redman, J.C. Thompson, S.M. Albelda, H. Bolouri, A. 
M. Houghton, Neutrophil content predicts lymphocyte depletion and anti-PD1 
treatment failure in NSCLC, JCI Insight 4 (24) (2019). 
[30] L. Sun, P.E. Clavijo, Y. Robbins, P. Patel, J. Friedman, S. Greene, R. Das, C. Silvin, 
C. Van Waes, L.A. Horn, J. Schlom, C. Palena, D. Maeda, J. Zebala, C.T. Allen, 
Inhibiting myeloid-derived suppressor cell trafficking enhances T cell 
immunotherapy, JCI Insight 4 (7) (2019). 
[31] N. Glodde, T. Bald, D. van den Boorn-Konijnenberg, K. Nakamura, J.S. O’Donnell, 
S. Szczepanski, M. Brandes, S. Eickhoff, I. Das, N. Shridhar, D. Hinze, M. Rogava, 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
11
T.C. van der Sluis, J.J. Ruotsalainen, E. Gaffal, J. Landsberg, K.U. Ludwig, 
C. Wilhelm, M. Riek-Burchardt, A.J. Muller, C. Gebhardt, R.A. Scolyer, G.V. Long, 
V. Janzen, M.W.L. Teng, W. Kastenmuller, M. Mazzone, M.J. Smyth, T. Tuting, 
M. Holzel, Reactive neutrophil responses dependent on the receptor tyrosine 
kinase c-MET limit cancer immunotherapy, Immunity 47 (4) (2017) 789–802, 
e789. 
[32] Z. Granot, E. Henke, E.A. Comen, T.A. King, L. Norton, R. Benezra, Tumor 
entrained neutrophils inhibit seeding in the premetastatic lung, Cancer Cell 20 (3) 
(2011) 300–314. 
[33] V. Finisguerra, G. Di Conza, M. Di Matteo, J. Serneels, S. Costa, A.A. Thompson, 
E. Wauters, S. Walmsley, H. Prenen, Z. Granot, A. Casazza, M. Mazzone, MET is 
required for the recruitment of anti-tumoural neutrophils, Nature 522 (7556) 
(2015) 349–353. 
[34] I. Ballesteros, A. Rubio-Ponce, M. Genua, E. Lusito, I. Kwok, G. Fern´andez-Calvo, 
T.E. Khoyratty, E. van Grinsven, S. Gonz´alez-Hern´andez, J. Nicol´as-´Avila, 
T. Vicanolo, A. Maccataio, A. Benguría, J.L. Li, J.M. Adrover, A. Aroca-Crevillen, 
J.A. Quintana, S. Martín-Salamanca, F. Mayo, S. Ascher, G. Barbiera, 
O. Soehnlein, M. Gunzer, F. Ginhoux, F. S´anchez-Cabo, E. Nistal-Vill´an, C. Schulz, 
A. Dopazo, C. Reinhardt, I.A. Udalova, L.G. Ng, R. Ostuni, A. Hidalgo, Co-option 
of neutrophil fates by tissue environments, Cell 183 (5) (2020) 1282–1297, 
e1218. 
[35] H. Alshetaiwi, N. Pervolarakis, L.L. McIntyre, D. Ma, Q. Nguyen, J.A. Rath, 
K. Nee, G. Hernandez, K. Evans, L. Torosian, A. Silva, C. Walsh, K. Kessenbrock, 
Defining the emergence of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in breast cancer using 
single-cell transcriptomics, Sci. Immunol. 5 (44) (2020). 
[36] F. Veglia, A. Hashimoto, H. Dweep, E. Sanseviero, A. De Leo, E. Tcyganov, 
A. Kossenkov, C. Mulligan, B. Nam, G. Masters, J. Patel, V. Bhargava, 
P. Wilkinson, D. Smirnov, M.A. Sepulveda, S. Singhal, E.B. Eruslanov, 
R. Cristescu, A. Loboda, Y. Nefedova, D.I. Gabrilovich, Analysis of classical 
neutrophils and polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cells in cancer 
patients and tumor-bearing mice, J. Exp. Med. 218 (4) (2021). 
[37] R. Zilionis, C. Engblom, C. Pfirschke, V. Savova, D. Zemmour, H.D. Saatcioglu, 
I. Krishnan, G. Maroni, C.V. Meyerovitz, C.M. Kerwin, S. Choi, W.G. Richards, 
A. De Rienzo, D.G. Tenen, R. Bueno, E. Levantini, M.J. Pittet, A.M. Klein, Single- 
cell transcriptomics of human and mouse lung cancers reveals conserved myeloid 
populations across individuals and species, Immunity 50 (5) (2019) 1317–1334, 
e1310. 
[38] M. Yuan, H. Zhu, J. Xu, Y. Zheng, X. Cao, Q. Liu, Tumor-derived CXCL1 promotes 
lung cancer growth via recruitment of tumor-associated neutrophils, J. Immunol. 
Res. 2016 (2016), 6530410. 
[39] ´A. Teijeira, S. Garasa, M. Gato, C. Alfaro, I. Migueliz, A. Cirella, C. de Andrea, M. 
C. Ochoa, I. Otano, I. Etxeberria, M.P. Andueza, C.P. Nieto, L. Resano, 
A. Azpilikueta, M. Allegretti, M. de Pizzol, M. Ponz-Sarvis´e, A. Rouzaut, M. 
F. Sanmamed, K. Schalper, M. Carleton, M. Mellado, M.E. Rodriguez-Ruiz, 
P. Berraondo, J.L. Perez-Gracia, I. Melero, CXCR1 and CXCR2 chemokine receptor 
agonists produced by tumors induce neutrophil extracellular traps that interfere 
with immune cytotoxicity, Immunity 52 (5) (2020) 856–871, e858. 
[40] A.J. Casbon, D. Reynaud, C. Park, E. Khuc, D.D. Gan, K. Schepers, E. Passegue, 
Z. Werb, Invasive breast cancer reprograms early myeloid differentiation in the 
bone marrow to generate immunosuppressive neutrophils, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U. S. A. 112 (6) (2015) E566–575. 
[41] L.J. Bayne, G.L. Beatty, N. Jhala, C.E. Clark, A.D. Rhim, B.Z. Stanger, R. 
H. Vonderheide, Tumor-derived granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor regulates myeloid inflammation and T cell immunity in pancreatic cancer, 
Cancer Cell 21 (6) (2012) 822–835. 
[42] M. Demers, D.S. Krause, D. Schatzberg, K. Martinod, J.R. Voorhees, T.A. Fuchs, D. 
T. Scadden, D.D. Wagner, Cancers predispose neutrophils to release extracellular 
DNA traps that contribute to cancer-associated thrombosis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U. S. A. 109 (32) (2012) 13076–13081. 
[43] J. Mei, Y. Liu, N. Dai, C. Hoffmann, K.M. Hudock, P. Zhang, S.H. Guttentag, J. 
K. Kolls, P.M. Oliver, F.D. Bushman, G.S. Worthen, Cxcr2 and Cxcl5 regulate the 
IL-17/G-CSF axis and neutrophil homeostasis in mice, J. Clin. Invest. 122 (3) 
(2012) 974–986. 
[44] E.A. Akbay, S. Koyama, Y. Liu, R. Dries, L.E. Bufe, M. Silkes, M.M. Alam, D. 
M. Magee, R. Jones, M. Jinushi, M. Kulkarni, J. Carretero, X. Wang, T. Warner- 
Hatten, J.D. Cavanaugh, A. Osa, A. Kumanogoh, G.J. Freeman, M.M. Awad, D. 
C. Christiani, R. Bueno, P.S. Hammerman, G. Dranoff, K.K. Wong, Interleukin-17A 
promotes lung tumor progression through neutrophil attraction to tumor sites and 
mediating resistance to PD-1 blockade, J. Thorac. Oncol. 12 (8) (2017) 
1268–1279. 
[45] C.E. Sutton, S.J. Lalor, C.M. Sweeney, C.F. Brereton, E.C. Lavelle, K.H. Mills, 
Interleukin-1 and IL-23 induce innate IL-17 production from gammadelta T cells, 
amplifying Th17 responses and autoimmunity, Immunity 31 (2) (2009) 331–341. 
[46] M.A. Stark, Y. Huo, T.L. Burcin, M.A. Morris, T.S. Olson, K. Ley, Phagocytosis of 
apoptotic neutrophils regulates granulopoiesis via IL-23 and IL-17, Immunity 22 
(3) (2005) 285–294. 
[47] C. Jin, G.K. Lagoudas, C. Zhao, S. Bullman, A. Bhutkar, B. Hu, S. Ameh, D. Sandel, 
X.S. Liang, S. Mazzilli, M.T. Whary, M. Meyerson, R. Germain, P.C. Blainey, J. 
G. Fox, T. Jacks, Commensal microbiota promote lung cancer development via γδ 
T cells, Cell 176 (5) (2019) 998–1013, e1016. 
[48] Z.G. Fridlender, J. Sun, S. Kim, V. Kapoor, G. Cheng, L. Ling, G.S. Worthen, S. 
M. Albelda, Polarization of tumor-associated neutrophil phenotype by TGF-beta: 
"N1" versus "N2" TAN, Cancer Cell 16 (3) (2009) 183–194. 
[49] Z. Li, Y. Pang, S.K. Gara, B.R. Achyut, C. Heger, P.K. Goldsmith, S. Lonning, 
L. Yang, Gr-1+CD11b+ cells are responsible for tumor promoting effect of TGF-β 
in breast cancer progression, Int. J. Cancer 131 (11) (2012) 2584–2595. 
[50] K. Kersten, K.E. de Visser, M.H. van Miltenburg, J. Jonkers, Genetically 
engineered mouse models in oncology research and cancer medicine, EMBO Mol. 
Med. 9 (2) (2017) 137–153. 
[51] I.S. Kim, Y. Gao, T. Welte, H. Wang, J. Liu, M. Janghorban, K. Sheng, Y. Niu, 
A. Goldstein, N. Zhao, I. Bado, H.-C. Lo, M.J. Toneff, T. Nguyen, W. Bu, W. Jiang, 
J. Arnold, F. Gu, J. He, D. Jebakumar, K. Walker, Y. Li, Q. Mo, T.F. Westbrook, 
C. Zong, A. Rao, A. Sreekumar, J.M. Rosen, X.H.F. Zhang, Immuno-subtyping of 
breast cancer reveals distinct myeloid cell profiles and immunotherapy resistance 
mechanisms, Nat. Cell Biol. 21 (9) (2019) 1113–1126. 
[52] Y. Xiao, M. Cong, J. Li, D. He, Q. Wu, P. Tian, Y. Wang, S. Yang, C. Liang, 
Y. Liang, J. Wen, Y. Liu, W. Luo, X. Lv, Y. He, D.D. Cheng, T. Zhou, W. Zhao, 
P. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Qian, H. Wang, Q. Gao, Q.C. Yang, Q. Yang, G. Hu, 
Cathepsin C promotes breast cancer lung metastasis by modulating neutrophil 
infiltration and neutrophil extracellular trap formation, Cancer Cell 39 (3) (2021) 
423–437, e427. 
[53] K. Kersten, S.B. Coffelt, M. Hoogstraat, N.J.M. Verstegen, K. Vrijland, 
M. Ciampricotti, C.W. Doornebal, C.S. Hau, M.D. Wellenstein, C. Salvagno, 
P. Doshi, E.H. Lips, L.F.A. Wessels, K.E. de Visser, Mammary tumor-derived CCL2 
enhances pro-metastatic systemic inflammation through upregulation of IL1beta 
in tumor-associated macrophages, Oncoimmunology 6 (8) (2017), e1334744. 
[54] M. Kowanetz, X. Wu, J. Lee, M. Tan, T. Hagenbeek, X. Qu, L. Yu, J. Ross, 
N. Korsisaari, T. Cao, H. Bou-Reslan, D. Kallop, R. Weimer, M.J. Ludlam, J. 
S. Kaminker, Z. Modrusan, N. van Bruggen, F.V. Peale, R. Carano, Y.G. Meng, 
N. Ferrara, Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor promotes lung metastasis 
through mobilization of Ly6G+Ly6C+ granulocytes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
107 (50) (2010) 21248–21255. 
[55] A. Spiegel, M.W. Brooks, S. Houshyar, F. Reinhardt, M. Ardolino, E. Fessler, M. 
B. Chen, J.A. Krall, J. DeCock, I.K. Zervantonakis, A. Iannello, Y. Iwamoto, 
V. Cortez-Retamozo, R.D. Kamm, M.J. Pittet, D.H. Raulet, R.A. Weinberg, 
Neutrophils suppress intraluminal NK cell-mediated tumor cell clearance and 
enhance extravasation of disseminated carcinoma cells, Cancer Discov. 6 (6) 
(2016) 630–649. 
[56] P. Li, M. Lu, J. Shi, L. Hua, Z. Gong, Q. Li, L.D. Shultz, G. Ren, Dual roles of 
neutrophils in metastatic colonization are governed by the host NK cell status, 
Nat. Commun. 11 (1) (2020) 4387. 
[57] A. Hoshino, B. Costa-Silva, T.-L. Shen, G. Rodrigues, A. Hashimoto, M. Tesic 
Mark, H. Molina, S. Kohsaka, A. Di Giannatale, S. Ceder, S. Singh, C. Williams, 
N. Soplop, K. Uryu, L. Pharmer, T. King, L. Bojmar, A.E. Davies, Y. Ararso, 
T. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Hernandez, J.M. Weiss, V.D. Dumont-Cole, K. Kramer, L. 
H. Wexler, A. Narendran, G.K. Schwartz, J.H. Healey, P. Sandstrom, K. Jørgen 
Labori, E.H. Kure, P.M. Grandgenett, M.A. Hollingsworth, M. de Sousa, S. Kaur, 
M. Jain, K. Mallya, S.K. Batra, W.R. Jarnagin, M.S. Brady, O. Fodstad, V. Muller, 
K. Pantel, A.J. Minn, M.J. Bissell, B.A. Garcia, Y. Kang, V.K. Rajasekhar, C. 
M. Ghajar, I. Matei, H. Peinado, J. Bromberg, D. Lyden, Tumour exosome 
integrins determine organotropic metastasis, Nature 527 (7578) (2015) 329–335. 
[58] I. Keklikoglou, C. Cianciaruso, E. Güç, M.L. Squadrito, L.M. Spring, S. Tazzyman, 
L. Lambein, A. Poissonnier, G.B. Ferraro, C. Baer, A. Cassar´a, A. Guichard, M. 
L. Iruela-Arispe, C.E. Lewis, L.M. Coussens, A. Bardia, R.K. Jain, J.W. Pollard, 
M. De Palma, Chemotherapy elicits pro-metastatic extracellular vesicles in breast 
cancer models, Nat. Cell Biol. 21 (2) (2019) 190–202. 
[59] H. Peinado, M. Aleckovic, S. Lavotshkin, I. Matei, B. Costa-Silva, G. Moreno- 
Bueno, M. Hergueta-Redondo, C. Williams, G. Garcia-Santos, C. Ghajar, 
A. Nitadori-Hoshino, C. Hoffman, K. Badal, B.A. Garcia, M.K. Callahan, J. Yuan, 
V.R. Martins, J. Skog, R.N. Kaplan, M.S. Brady, J.D. Wolchok, P.B. Chapman, 
Y. Kang, J. Bromberg, D. Lyden, Melanoma exosomes educate bone marrow 
progenitor cells toward a pro-metastatic phenotype through MET, Nat. Med. 18 
(6) (2012) 883–891. 
[60] Y. Liu, Y. Gu, Y. Han, Q. Zhang, Z. Jiang, X. Zhang, B. Huang, X. Xu, J. Zheng, 
X. Cao, Tumor exosomal RNAs promote lung pre-metastatic niche formation by 
activating alveolar epithelial TLR3 to recruit neutrophils, Cancer Cell 30 (2) 
(2016) 243–256. 
[61] M. Angelova, P. Charoentong, H. Hackl, M.L. Fischer, R. Snajder, A.M. Krogsdam, 
M.J. Waldner, G. Bindea, B. Mlecnik, J. Galon, Z. Trajanoski, Characterization of 
the immunophenotypes and antigenomes of colorectal cancers reveals distinct 
tumor escape mechanisms and novel targets for immunotherapy, Genome Biol. 16 
(1) (2015) 64. 
[62] B. Li, E. Severson, J.C. Pignon, H. Zhao, T. Li, J. Novak, P. Jiang, H. Shen, J. 
C. Aster, S. Rodig, S. Signoretti, J.S. Liu, X.S. Liu, Comprehensive analyses of 
tumor immunity: implications for cancer immunotherapy, Genome Biol. 17 (1) 
(2016) 174. 
[63] Y. Xiao, D. Ma, S. Zhao, C. Suo, J. Shi, M.Z. Xue, M. Ruan, H. Wang, J. Zhao, Q. Li, 
P. Wang, L. Shi, W.T. Yang, W. Huang, X. Hu, K.D. Yu, S. Huang, F. Bertucci, Y. 
Z. Jiang, Z.M. Shao, Multi-omics profiling reveals distinct microenvironment 
characterization and suggests immune escape mechanisms of triple-negative 
breast Cancer, Clin. Cancer Res. 25 (16) (2019) 5002–5014. 
[64] P. Charoentong, F. Finotello, M. Angelova, C. Mayer, M. Efremova, D. Rieder, 
H. Hackl, Z. Trajanoski, Pan-cancer immunogenomic analyses reveal genotype- 
immunophenotype relationships and predictors of response to checkpoint 
blockade, Cell Rep. 18 (1) (2017) 248–262. 
[65] S. Spranger, T.F. Gajewski, Mechanisms of tumor cell–Intrinsic immune evasion, 
Annu Rev Cancer Biol 2 (1) (2018) 213–228. 
[66] K.B. Nguyen, S. Spranger, Modulation of the immune microenvironment by 
tumor-intrinsic oncogenic signaling, J. Cell Biol. 219 (1) (2019). 
[67] E.R. Kastenhuber, S.W. Lowe, Putting p53 in context, Cell 170 (6) (2017) 
1062–1078. 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
12
[68] S.M. W¨ormann, L. Song, J. Ai, K.N. Diakopoulos, M.U. Kurkowski, K. G¨orgülü, 
D. Ruess, A. Campbell, C. Doglioni, D. Jodrell, A. Neesse, I.E. Demir, A. 
P. Karpathaki, M. Barenboim, T. Hagemann, S. Rose-John, O. Sansom, R. 
M. Schmid, M.P. Protti, M. Lesina, H. Algül, Loss of P53 function activates JAK2- 
STAT3 signaling to promote pancreatic tumor growth, stroma modification, and 
gemcitabine resistance in mice and is associated with patient survival, 
Gastroenterology 151 (1) (2016) 180–193, e112. 
[69] J. Blagih, F. Zani, P. Chakravarty, M. Hennequart, S. Pilley, S. Hobor, A.K. Hock, 
J.B. Walton, J.P. Morton, E. Gronroos, S. Mason, M. Yang, I. McNeish, 
C. Swanton, K. Blyth, K.H. Vousden, Cancer-specific loss of p53 leads to a 
modulation of myeloid and t cell responses, Cell Rep. 30 (2) (2020) 481–496, 
e486. 
[70] M.D. Wellenstein, S.B. Coffelt, D.E.M. Duits, M.H. van Miltenburg, M. Slagter, 
I. de Rink, L. Henneman, S.M. Kas, S. Prekovic, C.S. Hau, K. Vrijland, A.P. Drenth, 
R. de Korte-Grimmerink, E. Schut, I. van der Heijden, W. Zwart, L.F.A. Wessels, T. 
N. Schumacher, J. Jonkers, K.E. de Visser, Loss of p53 triggers WNT-dependent 
systemic inflammation to drive breast cancer metastasis, Nature (2019). 
[71] G. Di Minin, A. Bellazzo, M. Dal Ferro, G. Chiaruttini, S. Nuzzo, S. Bicciato, 
S. Piazza, D. Rami, R. Bulla, R. Sommaggio, A. Rosato, G. Del Sal, L. Collavin, 
Mutant p53 reprograms TNF signaling in cancer cells through interaction with the 
tumor suppressor DAB2IP, Mol. Cell 56 (5) (2014) 617–629. 
[72] W.A. Yeudall, C.A. Vaughan, H. Miyazaki, M. Ramamoorthy, M.Y. Choi, C. 
G. Chapman, H. Wang, E. Black, A.A. Bulysheva, S.P. Deb, B. Windle, S. Deb, 
Gain-of-function mutant p53 upregulates CXC chemokines and enhances cell 
migration, Carcinogenesis 33 (2) (2012) 442–451. 
[73] M. Ghosh, S. Saha, J. Bettke, R. Nagar, A. Parrales, T. Iwakuma, A.W.M. van der 
Velden, L.A. Martinez, Mutant p53 suppresses innate immune signaling to 
promote tumorigenesis, Cancer Cell (2021). 
[74] T. Cooks, I.S. Pateras, O. Tarcic, H. Solomon, A.J. Schetter, S. Wilder, G. Lozano, 
E. Pikarsky, T. Forshew, N. Rosenfeld, N. Harpaz, S. Itzkowitz, C.C. Harris, 
V. Rotter, V.G. Gorgoulis, M. Oren, Mutant p53 prolongs NF-κB activation and 
promotes chronic inflammation and inflammation-associated colorectal cancer, 
Cancer Cell 23 (5) (2013) 634–646. 
[75] Z.Y. Dong, W.Z. Zhong, X.C. Zhang, J. Su, Z. Xie, S.Y. Liu, H.Y. Tu, H.J. Chen, Y. 
L. Sun, Q. Zhou, J.J. Yang, X.N. Yang, J.X. Lin, H.H. Yan, H.R. Zhai, L.X. Yan, R. 
Q. Liao, S.P. Wu, Y.L. Wu, Potential predictive value of TP53 and KRAS mutation 
status for response to PD-1 blockade immunotherapy in lung adenocarcinoma, 
Clin. Cancer Res. 23 (12) (2017) 3012–3024. 
[76] J. Biton, A. Mansuet-Lupo, N. P´ecuchet, M. Alifano, H. Ouakrim, J. Arrondeau, 
P. Boudou-Rouquette, F. Goldwasser, K. Leroy, J. Goc, M. Wislez, C. Germain, 
P. Laurent-Puig, M.C. Dieu-Nosjean, I. Cremer, R. Herbst, H. Blons, D. Damotte, 
TP53, STK11, and EGFR mutations predict tumor immune profile and the 
response to anti-PD-1 in lung adenocarcinoma, Clin. Cancer Res. 24 (22) (2018) 
5710–5723. 
[77] S. Assoun, N. Theou-Anton, M. Nguenang, A. Cazes, C. Danel, B. Abbar, J. Pluvy, 
V. Gounant, A. Khalil, C. Namour, S. Brosseau, G. Zalcman, Association of TP53 
mutations with response and longer survival under immune checkpoint inhibitors 
in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer, Lung Cancer 132 (2019) 65–71. 
[78] D. Siolas, E. Vucic, E. Kurz, C. Hajdu, D. Bar-Sagi, Gain-of-function p53(R172H) 
mutation drives accumulation of neutrophils in pancreatic tumors, promoting 
resistance to immunotherapy, Cell Rep. 36 (8) (2021), 109578. 
[79] M.A. Polidoro, F. Milana, C. Soldani, B. Franceschini, A. Anselmo, F.S. Colombo, 
L. Di Tommaso, M. Cimino, S. Carnevale, A. Lleo, S. Jaillon, G. Torzilli, 
M. Donadon, Impact of RAS mutations on the immune infiltrate of colorectal liver 
metastases: a preliminary study, J. Leukoc. Biol. 108 (2) (2020) 715–721. 
[80] Y. Pylayeva-Gupta, K.E. Lee, C.H. Hajdu, G. Miller, D. Bar-Sagi, Oncogenic Kras- 
induced GM-CSF production promotes the development of pancreatic neoplasia, 
Cancer Cell 21 (6) (2012) 836–847. 
[81] M. Wislez, N. Fujimoto, J.G. Izzo, A.E. Hanna, D.D. Cody, R.R. Langley, H. Tang, 
M.D. Burdick, M. Sato, J.D. Minna, L. Mao, I. Wistuba, R.M. Strieter, J.M. Kurie, 
High expression of ligands for chemokine receptor CXCR2 in alveolar epithelial 
neoplasia induced by oncogenic kras, Cancer Res. 66 (8) (2006) 4198–4207. 
[82] H. Ji, A.M. Houghton, T.J. Mariani, S. Perera, C.B. Kim, R. Padera, G. Tonon, 
K. McNamara, L.A. Marconcini, A. Hezel, N. El-Bardeesy, R.T. Bronson, 
D. Sugarbaker, R.S. Maser, S.D. Shapiro, K.K. Wong, K-ras activation generates an 
inflammatory response in lung tumors, Oncogene 25 (14) (2006) 2105–2112. 
[83] T. Chao, E.E. Furth, R.H. Vonderheide, CXCR2-dependent accumulation of tumor- 
associated neutrophils regulates T-cell immunity in pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma, Cancer Immunol. Res. 4 (11) (2016) 968–982. 
[84] C.W. Steele, S.A. Karim, J.D.G. Leach, P. Bailey, R. Upstill-Goddard, L. Rishi, 
M. Foth, S. Bryson, K. McDaid, Z. Wilson, C. Eberlein, J.B. Candido, M. Clarke, 
C. Nixon, J. Connelly, N. Jamieson, C.R. Carter, F. Balkwill, D.K. Chang, T.R. 
J. Evans, D. Strathdee, A.V. Biankin, R.J.B. Nibbs, S.T. Barry, O.J. Sansom, J. 
P. Morton, CXCR2 inhibition profoundly suppresses metastases and augments 
immunotherapy in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Cancer Cell 29 (6) (2016) 
832–845. 
[85] W. Liao, M.J. Overman, A.T. Boutin, X. Shang, D. Zhao, P. Dey, J. Li, G. Wang, 
Z. Lan, J. Li, M. Tang, S. Jiang, X. Ma, P. Chen, R. Katkhuda, K. Korphaisarn, 
D. Chakravarti, A. Chang, D.J. Spring, Q. Chang, J. Zhang, D.M. Maru, D. 
Y. Maeda, J.A. Zebala, S. Kopetz, Y.A. Wang, R.A. DePinho, KRAS-IRF2 axis 
drives immune suppression and immune therapy resistance in colorectal cancer, 
Cancer Cell 35 (4) (2019) 559–572, e557. 
[86] T. Jamieson, M. Clarke, C.W. Steele, M.S. Samuel, J. Neumann, A. Jung, D. Huels, 
M.F. Olson, S. Das, R.J. Nibbs, O.J. Sansom, Inhibition of CXCR2 profoundly 
suppresses inflammation-driven and spontaneous tumorigenesis, J. Clin. Invest. 
122 (9) (2012) 3127–3144. 
[87] C. Xu, C.M. Fillmore, S. Koyama, H. Wu, Y. Zhao, Z. Chen, G.S. Herter-Sprie, E. 
A. Akbay, J.H. Tchaicha, A. Altabef, J.B. Reibel, Z. Walton, H. Ji, H. Watanabe, P. 
A. J¨anne, D.H. Castrillon, A.K. Rustgi, A.J. Bass, G.J. Freeman, R.F. Padera, 
G. Dranoff, P.S. Hammerman, C.F. Kim, K.K. Wong, Loss of Lkb1 and Pten leads to 
lung squamous cell carcinoma with elevated PD-L1 expression, Cancer Cell 25 (5) 
(2014) 590–604. 
[88] M. Bezzi, N. Seitzer, T. Ishikawa, M. Reschke, M. Chen, G. Wang, C. Mitchell, 
C. Ng, J. Katon, A. Lunardi, S. Signoretti, J.G. Clohessy, J. Zhang, P.P. Pandolfi, 
Diverse genetic-driven immune landscapes dictate tumor progression through 
distinct mechanisms, Nat. Med. 24 (2) (2018) 165–175. 
[89] J.J. Barrott, L.A. Kafchinski, H. Jin, J.W. Potter, S.D. Kannan, R. Kennedy, 
T. Mosbruger, W.L. Wang, J.W. Tsai, D.M. Araujo, T. Liu, M.R. Capecchi, A. 
J. Lazar, K.B. Jones, Modeling synovial sarcoma metastasis in the mouse: PI3’- 
lipid signaling and inflammation, J. Exp. Med. 213 (13) (2016) 2989–3005. 
[90] H. Ying, K.G. Elpek, A. Vinjamoori, S.M. Zimmerman, G.C. Chu, H. Yan, 
E. Fletcher-Sananikone, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Wang, X. Ren, H. Zheng, A. 
C. Kimmelman, J.H. Paik, C. Lim, S.R. Perry, S. Jiang, B. Malinn, A. Protopopov, 
S. Colla, Y. Xiao, A.F. Hezel, N. Bardeesy, S.J. Turley, Y.A. Wang, L. Chin, S. 
P. Thayer, R.A. DePinho, PTEN is a major tumor suppressor in pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma and regulates an NF-κB-cytokine network, Cancer Discov. 1 (2) 
(2011) 158–169. 
[91] A.J. Garcia, M. Ruscetti, T.L. Arenzana, L.M. Tran, D. Bianci-Frias, E. Sybert, S. 
J. Priceman, L. Wu, P.S. Nelson, S.T. Smale, H. Wu, Pten null prostate epithelium 
promotes localized myeloid-derived suppressor cell expansion and immune 
suppression during tumor initiation and progression, Mol. Cell. Biol. 34 (11) 
(2014) 2017–2028. 
[92] G. Wang, X. Lu, P. Dey, P. Deng, C.C. Wu, S. Jiang, Z. Fang, K. Zhao, 
R. Konaparthi, S. Hua, J. Zhang, E.M. Li-Ning-Tapia, A. Kapoor, C.J. Wu, N. 
B. Patel, Z. Guo, V. Ramamoorthy, T.N. Tieu, T. Heffernan, D. Zhao, X. Shang, 
S. Khadka, P. Hou, B. Hu, E.J. Jin, W. Yao, X. Pan, Z. Ding, Y. Shi, L. Li, Q. Chang, 
P. Troncoso, C.J. Logothetis, M.J. McArthur, L. Chin, Y.A. Wang, R.A. DePinho, 
Targeting YAP-dependent MDSC infiltration impairs tumor progression, Cancer 
Discov. 6 (1) (2016) 80–95. 
[93] S. Sarkar, C.A. Bristow, P. Dey, K. Rai, R. Perets, A. Ramirez-Cardenas, S. Malasi, 
E. Huang-Hobbs, M. Haemmerle, S.Y. Wu, M. McGuire, A. Protopopov, S. Jiang, J. 
F. Liu, M.S. Hirsch, Q. Chang, A.J. Lazar, A.K. Sood, R. Drapkin, R. DePinho, 
G. Draetta, L. Chin, PRKCI promotes immune suppression in ovarian cancer, 
Genes Dev. 31 (11) (2017) 1109–1121. 
[94] S. Koyama, E.A. Akbay, Y.Y. Li, A.R. Aref, F. Skoulidis, G.S. Herter-Sprie, K. 
A. Buczkowski, Y. Liu, M.M. Awad, W.L. Denning, L. Diao, J. Wang, E.R. Parra- 
Cuentas, I.I. Wistuba, M. Soucheray, T. Thai, H. Asahina, S. Kitajima, A. Altabef, 
J.D. Cavanaugh, K. Rhee, P. Gao, H. Zhang, P.E. Fecci, T. Shimamura, M. 
D. Hellmann, J.V. Heymach, F.S. Hodi, G.J. Freeman, D.A. Barbie, G. Dranoff, P. 
S. Hammerman, K.K. Wong, STK11/LKB1 deficiency promotes neutrophil 
recruitment and proinflammatory cytokine production to suppress T-cell activity 
in the lung tumor microenvironment, Cancer Res. 76 (5) (2016) 999–1008. 
[95] J. Zhou, M. Liu, H. Sun, Y. Feng, L. Xu, A.W.H. Chan, J.H. Tong, J. Wong, C.C. 
N. Chong, P.B.S. Lai, H.K. Wang, S.W. Tsang, T. Goodwin, R. Liu, L. Huang, 
Z. Chen, J.J. Sung, K.L. Chow, K.F. To, A.S. Cheng, Hepatoma-intrinsic CCRK 
inhibition diminishes myeloid-derived suppressor cell immunosuppression and 
enhances immune-checkpoint blockade efficacy, Gut 67 (5) (2018) 931–944. 
[96] Y. Lu, Y.-T. Chan, H.-Y. Tan, S. Li, N. Wang, Y. Feng, Epigenetic regulation in 
human cancer: the potential role of epi-drug in cancer therapy, Mol. Cancer 19 
(1) (2020) 79. 
[97] Y. Bian, W. Li, D.M. Kremer, P. Sajjakulnukit, S. Li, J. Crespo, Z.C. Nwosu, 
L. Zhang, A. Czerwonka, A. Pawłowska, H. Xia, J. Li, P. Liao, J. Yu, L. Vatan, 
W. Szeliga, S. Wei, S. Grove, J.R. Liu, K. McLean, M. Cieslik, A.M. Chinnaiyan, 
W. Zgodzi´nski, G. Wallner, I. Wertel, K. Okła, I. Kryczek, C.A. Lyssiotis, W. Zou, 
Cancer SLC43A2 alters T cell methionine metabolism and histone methylation, 
Nature 585 (7824) (2020) 277–282. 
[98] G. Li, I. Kryczek, J. Nam, X. Li, S. Li, J. Li, S. Wei, S. Grove, L. Vatan, J. Zhou, 
W. Du, H. Lin, T. Wang, C. Subramanian, J.J. Moon, M. Cieslik, M. Cohen, W. Zou, 
LIMIT is an immunogenic lncRNA in cancer immunity and immunotherapy, Nat. 
Cell Biol. 23 (5) (2021) 526–537. 
[99] J. Li, W. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Cie´slik, J. Guo, M. Tan, M.D. Green, W. Wang, 
H. Lin, W. Li, S. Wei, J. Zhou, G. Li, X. Jing, L. Vatan, L. Zhao, B. Bitler, R. Zhang, 
K.R. Cho, Y. Dou, I. Kryczek, T.A. Chan, D. Huntsman, A.M. Chinnaiyan, W. Zou, 
Epigenetic driver mutations in ARID1A shape cancer immune phenotype and 
immunotherapy, J. Clin. Invest. 130 (5) (2020) 2712–2726. 
[100] L.L. Chen, M.D. Smith, L. Lv, T. Nakagawa, Z. Li, S.C. Sun, N.G. Brown, Y. Xiong, 
Y.P. Xu, USP15 suppresses tumor immunity via deubiquitylation and inactivation 
of TET2, Sci. Adv. 6 (38) (2020). 
[101] J. Li, K.T. Byrne, F. Yan, T. Yamazoe, Z. Chen, T. Baslan, L.P. Richman, J.H. Lin, Y. 
H. Sun, A.J. Rech, D. Balli, C.A. Hay, Y. Sela, A.J. Merrell, S.M. Liudahl, 
N. Gordon, R.J. Norgard, S. Yuan, S. Yu, T. Chao, S. Ye, T.S.K. Eisinger-Mathason, 
R.B. Faryabi, J.W. Tobias, S.W. Lowe, L.M. Coussens, E.J. Wherry, R. 
H. Vonderheide, B.Z. Stanger, Tumor cell-intrinsic factors underlie heterogeneity 
of immune cell infiltration and response to immunotherapy, Immunity 49 (1) 
(2018) 178–193, e177. 
[102] J. Nishida, Y. Momoi, K. Miyakuni, Y. Tamura, K. Takahashi, D. Koinuma, 
K. Miyazono, S. Ehata, Epigenetic remodelling shapes inflammatory renal cancer 
and neutrophil-dependent metastasis, Nat. Cell Biol. (2020). 
[103] Z.A. Lopez-Bujanda, M.C. Haffner, M.G. Chaimowitz, N. Chowdhury, N. 
J. Venturini, R.A. Patel, A. Obradovic, C.S. Hansen, J. Jack´ow, J.P. Maynard, K. 
S. Sfanos, C. Abate-Shen, C.J. Bieberich, P.J. Hurley, M.J. Selby, A.J. Korman, A. 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
13
M. Christiano, A.M. De Marzo, C.G. Drake, Castration-mediated IL-8 promotes 
myeloid infiltration and prostate cancer progression, Nature Cancer (2021). 
[104] H. Jiang, S. Hegde, B.L. Knolhoff, Y. Zhu, J.M. Herndon, M.A. Meyer, T. 
M. Nywening, W.G. Hawkins, I.M. Shapiro, D.T. Weaver, J.A. Pachter, A. Wang- 
Gillam, D.G. DeNardo, Targeting focal adhesion kinase renders pancreatic cancers 
responsive to checkpoint immunotherapy, Nat. Med. 22 (8) (2016) 851–860. 
[105] R.A. Llewellyn, M.F. Gutknecht, K.S. Thomas, M.R. Conaway, A.H. Bouton, Focal 
adhesion kinase (FAK) deficiency in mononuclear phagocytes alters murine breast 
tumor progression, Am. J. Cancer Res. 8 (4) (2018) 675–687. 
[106] T. Welte, I.S. Kim, L. Tian, X. Gao, H. Wang, J. Li, X.B. Holdman, J. 
I. Herschkowitz, A. Pond, G. Xie, S. Kurley, T. Nguyen, L. Liao, L.E. Dobrolecki, 
L. Pang, Q. Mo, D.P. Edwards, S. Huang, L. Xin, J. Xu, Y. Li, M.T. Lewis, T. Wang, 
T.F. Westbrook, J.M. Rosen, X.H.F. Zhang, Oncogenic mTOR signalling recruits 
myeloid-derived suppressor cells to promote tumour initiation, Nat. Cell Biol. 18 
(6) (2016) 632–644. 
[107] T. Wu, Y. Zhao, H. Wang, Y. Li, L. Shao, R. Wang, J. Lu, Z. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, 
mTOR masters monocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells in mice with allografts 
or tumors, Sci. Rep. 6 (2016) 20250. 
[108] V. Gelfo, M.T. Rodia, M. Pucci, M. Dall’Ora, S. Santi, R. Solmi, L. Roth, 
M. Lindzen, M. Bonaf`e, A. Bertotti, E. Caramelli, P.L. Lollini, L. Trusolino, 
Y. Yarden, G. D’Uva, M. Lauriola, A module of inflammatory cytokines defines 
resistance of colorectal cancer to EGFR inhibitors, Oncotarget 7 (44) (2016) 
72167–72183. 
[109] S. Wu, Q. Zhang, F. Zhang, F. Meng, S. Liu, R. Zhou, Q. Wu, X. Li, L. Shen, 
J. Huang, J. Qin, S. Ouyang, Z. Xia, H. Song, X.H. Feng, J. Zou, P. Xu, HER2 
recruits AKT1 to disrupt STING signalling and suppress antiviral defence and 
antitumour immunity, Nat. Cell Biol. 21 (8) (2019) 1027–1040. 
[110] R. Jackstadt, S.R. van Hooff, J.D. Leach, X. Cortes-Lavaud, J.O. Lohuis, R. 
A. Ridgway, V.M. Wouters, J. Roper, T.J. Kendall, C.S. Roxburgh, P.G. Horgan, 
C. Nixon, C. Nourse, M. Gunzer, W. Clark, A. Hedley, O.H. Yilmaz, M. Rashid, 
P. Bailey, A.V. Biankin, A.D. Campbell, D.J. Adams, S.T. Barry, C.W. Steele, J. 
P. Medema, O.J. Sansom, Epithelial NOTCH signaling rewires the tumor 
microenvironment of colorectal cancer to drive poor-prognosis subtypes and 
metastasis, Cancer Cell 36 (3) (2019) 319–336, e317. 
[111] F.R. Greten, L. Eckmann, T.F. Greten, J.M. Park, Z.W. Li, L.J. Egan, M.F. Kagnoff, 
M. Karin, IKKbeta links inflammation and tumorigenesis in a mouse model of 
colitis-associated cancer, Cell 118 (3) (2004) 285–296. 
[112] E. Pikarsky, R.M. Porat, I. Stein, R. Abramovitch, S. Amit, S. Kasem, E. Gutkovich- 
Pyest, S. Urieli-Shoval, E. Galun, Y. Ben-Neriah, NF-kappaB functions as a tumour 
promoter in inflammation-associated cancer, Nature 431 (7007) (2004) 461–466. 
[113] K. Taniguchi, M. Karin, NF-κB, inflammation, immunity and cancer: coming of 
age, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 18 (5) (2018) 309–324. 
[114] H. Won, D. Moreira, C. Gao, P. Duttagupta, X. Zhao, E. Manuel, D. Diamond, Y. 
C. Yuan, Z. Liu, J. Jones, M. D’Apuzzo, S. Pal, M. Kortylewski, TLR9 expression 
and secretion of LIF by prostate cancer cells stimulates accumulation and activity 
of polymorphonuclear MDSCs, J. Leukoc. Biol. 102 (2) (2017) 423–436. 
[115] E. Batlle, J. Massagu´e, Transforming growth factor-β signaling in immunity and 
cancer, Immunity 50 (4) (2019) 924–940. 
[116] C. Haider, J. Hnat, R. Wagner, H. Huber, G. Timelthaler, M. Grubinger, 
C. Coulouarn, W. Schreiner, K. Schlangen, W. Sieghart, M. Peck-Radosavljevic, 
W. Mikulits, Transforming growth Factor-β and axl induce CXCL5 and neutrophil 
recruitment in hepatocellular carcinoma, Hepatology 69 (1) (2019) 222–236. 
[117] S. SenGupta, L.E. Hein, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, J.R. Konwerski, Y. Li, C. Johnson, D. Cai, 
J.L. Smith, C.A. Parent, Triple-negative breast cancer cells recruit neutrophils by 
secreting TGF-β and CXCR2 ligands, Front. Immunol. 12 (2021), 659996. 
[118] F. Qin, X. Liu, J. Chen, S. Huang, W. Wei, Y. Zou, X. Liu, K. Deng, S. Mo, J. Chen, 
X. Chen, Y. Huang, W. Liang, Anti-TGF-β attenuates tumor growth via 
polarization of tumor associated neutrophils towards an anti-tumor phenotype in 
colorectal cancer, J. Cancer 11 (9) (2020) 2580–2592. 
[119] M. Song, J. He, Q.Z. Pan, J. Yang, J. Zhao, Y.J. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Tang, 
Q. Wang, J. He, J. Gu, Y. Li, S. Chen, J. Zeng, Z.Q. Zhou, C. Yang, Y. Han, H. Chen, 
T. Xiang, D.S. Weng, J.C. Xia, Cancer-associated fibroblast-mediated cellular 
crosstalk supports hepatocellular carcinoma progression, Hepatology 73 (5) 
(2021) 1717–1735. 
[120] L. Yang, J. Huang, X. Ren, A.E. Gorska, A. Chytil, M. Aakre, D.P. Carbone, L. 
M. Matrisian, A. Richmond, P.C. Lin, H.L. Moses, Abrogation of TGF beta 
signaling in mammary carcinomas recruits Gr-1+CD11b+ myeloid cells that 
promote metastasis, Cancer Cell 13 (1) (2008) 23–35. 
[121] I. Martínez-Reyes, N.S. Chandel, Cancer metabolism: looking forward, Nat. Rev. 
Cancer (2021). 
[122] M.T. Snaebjornsson, S. Janaki-Raman, A. Schulze, Greasing the wheels of the 
cancer machine: the role of lipid metabolism in cancer, Cell Metab. 31 (1) (2020) 
62–76. 
[123] B. Wang, L. Wu, J. Chen, L. Dong, C. Chen, Z. Wen, J. Hu, I. Fleming, D.W. Wang, 
Metabolism pathways of arachidonic acids: mechanisms and potential therapeutic 
targets, Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 6 (1) (2021) 94. 
[124] K. Esbona, D. Inman, S. Saha, J. Jeffery, P. Schedin, L. Wilke, P. Keely, COX-2 
modulates mammary tumor progression in response to collagen density, Breast 
Cancer Res. 18 (1) (2016) 35. 
[125] S. Zelenay, A.G. van der Veen, J.P. B¨ottcher, K.J. Snelgrove, N. Rogers, S.E. Acton, 
P. Chakravarty, M.R. Girotti, R. Marais, S.A. Quezada, E. Sahai, C. Reis e Sousa, 
Cyclooxygenase-dependent tumor growth through evasion of immunity, Cell 162 
(6) (2015) 1257–1270. 
[126] P. Sinha, V.K. Clements, A.M. Fulton, S. Ostrand-Rosenberg, Prostaglandin E2 
promotes tumor progression by inducing myeloid-derived suppressor cells, 
Cancer Res. 67 (9) (2007) 4507–4513. 
[127] T. Wang, B. Jing, D. Xu, Y. Liao, H. Song, B. Sun, W. Guo, J. Xu, K. Li, M. Hu, 
S. Liu, J. Ling, Y. Kuang, T. Zhang, S. Zhang, F. Yao, B.P. Zhou, J. Deng, PTGES/ 
PGE(2) signaling links immunosuppression and lung metastasis in Gprc5a- 
knockout mouse model, Oncogene 39 (15) (2020) 3179–3194. 
[128] F. Veglia, V.A. Tyurin, M. Blasi, A. De Leo, A.V. Kossenkov, L. Donthireddy, T.K. 
J. To, Z. Schug, S. Basu, F. Wang, E. Ricciotti, C. DiRusso, M.E. Murphy, R. 
H. Vonderheide, P.M. Lieberman, C. Mulligan, B. Nam, N. Hockstein, G. Masters, 
M. Guarino, C. Lin, Y. Nefedova, P. Black, V.E. Kagan, D.I. Gabrilovich, Fatty acid 
transport protein 2 reprograms neutrophils in cancer, Nature 569 (7754) (2019) 
73–78. 
[129] M. Perego, V.A. Tyurin, Y.Y. Tyurina, J. Yellets, T. Nacarelli, C. Lin, Y. Nefedova, 
A. Kossenkov, Q. Liu, S. Sreedhar, H. Pass, J. Roth, T. Vogl, D. Feldser, R. Zhang, 
V.E. Kagan, D.I. Gabrilovich, Reactivation of dormant tumor cells by modified 
lipids derived from stress-activated neutrophils, Sci. Transl. Med. 12 (572) 
(2020). 
[130] P. Li, M. Lu, J. Shi, Z. Gong, L. Hua, Q. Li, B. Lim, X.H. Zhang, X. Chen, S. Li, L. 
D. Shultz, G. Ren, Lung mesenchymal cells elicit lipid storage in neutrophils that 
fuel breast cancer lung metastasis, Nat. Immunol. 21 (11) (2020) 1444–1455. 
[131] A.A. Al-Khami, L. Zheng, L. Del Valle, F. Hossain, D. Wyczechowska, J. Zabaleta, 
M.D. Sanchez, M.J. Dean, P.C. Rodriguez, A.C. Ochoa, Exogenous lipid uptake 
induces metabolic and functional reprogramming of tumor-associated myeloid- 
derived suppressor cells, Oncoimmunology 6 (10) (2017), e1344804. 
[132] O. Warburg, On the origin of cancer cells, Science 123 (3191) (1956) 309–314. 
[133] W. Li, T. Tanikawa, I. Kryczek, H. Xia, G. Li, K. Wu, S. Wei, L. Zhao, L. Vatan, 
B. Wen, P. Shu, D. Sun, C. Kleer, M. Wicha, M. Sabel, K. Tao, G. Wang, W. Zou, 
Aerobic glycolysis controls myeloid-derived suppressor cells and tumor immunity 
via a specific CEBPB isoform in triple-negative breast cancer, Cell Metab. 28 (1) 
(2018) 87–103, e106. 
[134] Z. Husain, Y. Huang, P. Seth, V.P. Sukhatme, Tumor-derived lactate modifies 
antitumor immune response: effect on myeloid-derived suppressor cells and NK 
cells, J. Immunol. 191 (3) (2013) 1486–1495. 
[135] X. Yang, Y. Lu, J. Hang, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Huo, J. Liu, S. Lai, D. Luo, L. Wang, 
R. Hua, Y. Lin, Lactate-modulated immunosuppression of myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells contributes to the radioresistance of pancreatic cancer, Cancer 
Immunol. Res. 8 (11) (2020) 1440–1451. 
[136] H. Deng, A. Kan, N. Lyu, M. He, X. Huang, S. Qiao, S. Li, W. Lu, Q. Xie, H. Chen, 
J. Lai, Q. Chen, X. Jiang, S. Liu, Z. Zhang, M. Zhao, Tumor-derived lactate inhibit 
the efficacy of lenvatinib through regulating PD-L1 expression on neutrophil in 
hepatocellular carcinoma, J. Immunother. Cancer 9 (6) (2021). 
[137] B. Wang, Q. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, Z. Zheng, S. Liu, L. Meng, Y. Xin, X. Jiang, 
Targeting hypoxia in the tumor microenvironment: a potential strategy to 
improve cancer immunotherapy, J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 40 (1) (2021) 24. 
[138] S. Tohme, H.O. Yazdani, A.B. Al-Khafaji, A.P. Chidi, P. Loughran, K. Mowen, 
Y. Wang, R.L. Simmons, H. Huang, A. Tsung, Neutrophil extracellular traps 
promote the development and progression of liver metastases after surgical stress, 
Cancer Res. 76 (6) (2016) 1367–1380. 
[139] D. Triner, X. Xue, A.J. Schwartz, I. Jung, J.A. Colacino, Y.M. Shah, Epithelial 
hypoxia-inducible factor 2α facilitates the progression of colon tumors through 
recruiting neutrophils, Mol. Cell. Biol. 37 (5) (2017). 
[140] A. Blaisdell, A. Crequer, D. Columbus, T. Daikoku, K. Mittal, S.K. Dey, 
A. Erlebacher, Neutrophils oppose uterine epithelial carcinogenesis via 
debridement of hypoxic tumor cells, Cancer Cell 28 (6) (2015) 785–799. 
[141] K. Mahiddine, A. Blaisdell, S. Ma, A. Cr´equer-Grandhomme, C.A. Lowell, 
A. Erlebacher, Relief of tumor hypoxia unleashes the tumoricidal potential of 
neutrophils, J. Clin. Invest. 130 (1) (2020) 389–403. 
[142] A. Pribluda, E. Elyada, Z. Wiener, H. Hamza, R.E. Goldstein, M. Biton, I. Burstain, 
Y. Morgenstern, G. Brachya, H. Billauer, S. Biton, I. Snir-Alkalay, D. Vucic, 
K. Schlereth, M. Mernberger, T. Stiewe, M. Oren, K. Alitalo, E. Pikarsky, Y. Ben- 
Neriah, A senescence-inflammatory switch from cancer-inhibitory to cancer- 
promoting mechanism, Cancer Cell 24 (2) (2013) 242–256. 
[143] T. Eggert, K. Wolter, J. Ji, C. Ma, T. Yevsa, S. Klotz, J. Medina-Echeverz, 
T. Longerich, M. Forgues, F. Reisinger, M. Heikenwalder, X.W. Wang, L. Zender, 
T.F. Greten, Distinct functions of senescence-associated immune responses in liver 
tumor surveillance and tumor progression, Cancer Cell 30 (4) (2016) 533–547. 
[144] M. Hoare, Y. Ito, T.W. Kang, M.P. Weekes, N.J. Matheson, D.A. Patten, S. Shetty, 
A.J. Parry, S. Menon, R. Salama, R. Antrobus, K. Tomimatsu, W. Howat, P. 
J. Lehner, L. Zender, M. Narita, NOTCH1 mediates a switch between two distinct 
secretomes during senescence, Nat. Cell Biol. 18 (9) (2016) 979–992. 
[145] W. Xue, L. Zender, C. Miething, R.A. Dickins, E. Hernando, V. Krizhanovsky, 
C. Cordon-Cardo, S.W. Lowe, Senescence and tumour clearance is triggered by 
p53 restoration in murine liver carcinomas, Nature 445 (7128) (2007) 656–660. 
[146] A. Toso, A. Revandkar, D. Di Mitri, I. Guccini, M. Proietti, M. Sarti, S. Pinton, 
J. Zhang, M. Kalathur, G. Civenni, D. Jarrossay, E. Montani, C. Marini, R. Garcia- 
Escudero, E. Scanziani, F. Grassi, P.P. Pandolfi, C.V. Catapano, A. Alimonti, 
Enhancing chemotherapy efficacy in Pten-deficient prostate tumors by activating 
the senescence-associated antitumor immunity, Cell Rep. 9 (1) (2014) 75–89. 
[147] D. Di Mitri, A. Toso, J.J. Chen, M. Sarti, S. Pinton, T.R. Jost, R. D’Antuono, 
E. Montani, R. Garcia-Escudero, I. Guccini, S. Da Silva-Alvarez, M. Collado, 
M. Eisenberger, Z. Zhang, C. Catapano, F. Grassi, A. Alimonti, Tumour-infiltrating 
Gr-1+ myeloid cells antagonize senescence in cancer, Nature 515 (7525) (2014) 
134–137. 
[148] C.M. Rice, L.C. Davies, J.J. Subleski, N. Maio, M. Gonzalez-Cotto, C. Andrews, N. 
L. Patel, E.M. Palmieri, J.M. Weiss, J.-M. Lee, C.M. Annunziata, T.A. Rouault, S. 
K. Durum, D.W. McVicar, Tumour-elicited neutrophils engage mitochondrial 
metabolism to circumvent nutrient limitations and maintain immune suppression, 
Nat. Commun. 9 (1) (2018) 5099. 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Seminars in Immunology 57 (2021) 101546
14
[149] B.I. Reinfeld, M.Z. Madden, M.M. Wolf, A. Chytil, J.E. Bader, A.R. Patterson, 
A. Sugiura, A.S. Cohen, A. Ali, B.T. Do, A. Muir, C.A. Lewis, R.A. Hongo, K. 
L. Young, R.E. Brown, V.M. Todd, T. Huffstater, A. Abraham, R.T. O’Neil, M. 
H. Wilson, F. Xin, M.N. Tantawy, W.D. Merryman, R.W. Johnson, C.S. Williams, 
E.F. Mason, F.M. Mason, K.E. Beckermann, M.G. Vander Heiden, H.C. Manning, J. 
C. Rathmell, W.K. Rathmell, Cell-programmed nutrient partitioning in the tumour 
microenvironment, Nature 593 (7858) (2021) 282–288. 
[150] D. Moreira, T. Adamus, X. Zhao, Y.L. Su, Z. Zhang, S.V. White, P. Swiderski, X. Lu, 
R.A. DePinho, S.K. Pal, M. Kortylewski, STAT3 inhibition combined with CpG 
immunostimulation activates antitumor immunity to eradicate genetically 
distinct castration-resistant prostate cancers, Clin. Cancer Res. 24 (23) (2018) 
5948–5962. 
[151] N. Mukaida, S.I. Sasaki, T. Baba, Two-faced roles of tumor-associated neutrophils 
in Cancer development and progression, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (10) (2020). 
[152] S. Mensurado, M. Rei, T. Lanca, M. Ioannou, N. Goncalves-Sousa, H. Kubo, 
M. Malissen, V. Papayannopoulos, K. Serre, B. Silva-Santos, Tumor-associated 
neutrophils suppress pro-tumoral IL-17+ gammadelta T cells through induction of 
oxidative stress, PLoS Biol. 16 (5) (2018), e2004990. 
[153] Y. Wang, J. Chen, L. Yang, J. Li, W. Wu, M. Huang, L. Lin, S. Su, Tumor-contacted 
neutrophils promote metastasis by a CD90-TIMP-1 juxtacrine-paracrine loop, 
Clin. Cancer Res. 25 (6) (2019) 1957–1969. 
[154] J. Faget, S. Groeneveld, G. Boivin, M. Sankar, N. Zangger, M. Garcia, N. Guex, 
I. Zlobec, L. Steiner, A. Piersigilli, I. Xenarios, E. Meylan, Neutrophils and snail 
orchestrate the establishment of a pro-tumor microenvironment in lung cancer, 
Cell Rep. 21 (11) (2017) 3190–3204. 
[155] F. Wu, J. Fan, Y. He, A. Xiong, J. Yu, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Zhao, F. Zhou, W. Li, 
J. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. Qiao, G. Gao, S. Chen, X. Chen, X. Li, L. Hou, C. Wu, C. Su, 
S. Ren, M. Odenthal, R. Buettner, N. Fang, C. Zhou, Single-cell profiling of tumor 
heterogeneity and the microenvironment in advanced non-small cell lung cancer, 
Nat. Commun. 12 (1) (2021) 2540. 
[156] E. Azizi, A.J. Carr, G. Plitas, A.E. Cornish, C. Konopacki, S. Prabhakaran, 
J. Nainys, K. Wu, V. Kiseliovas, M. Setty, K. Choi, R.M. Fromme, P. Dao, P. 
T. McKenney, R.C. Wasti, K. Kadaveru, L. Mazutis, A.Y. Rudensky, D. Pe’er, 
Single-cell map of diverse immune phenotypes in the breast tumor 
microenvironment, Cell 174 (5) (2018) 1293–1308, e1236. 
[157] A. Lima, D. Maddalo, SEMMs: somatically engineered mouse models. A new tool 
for in vivo disease modeling for basic and translational research, Front. Oncol. 11 
(2021), 667189. 
[158] R.M. Kortlever, N.M. Sodir, C.H. Wilson, D.L. Burkhart, L. Pellegrinet, L. Brown 
Swigart, T.D. Littlewood, G.I. Evan, Myc cooperates with Ras by programming 
inflammation and immune suppression, Cell 171 (6) (2017) 1301–1315, e1314. 
D.E.M. Duits and K.E. de Visser                                                                                                                                                                                                             
