Breast Cancer Screening
and Diagnosis
Recent Advances in Imaging and Current
Limitations
Alison R. Gegios, MDa, Molly S. Peterson, MDa,
Amy M. Fowler, MD, PhDa,b,c,*
INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer detection has improved over de-
cades with increasingly advanced technology,
including digital breast tomosynthesis, breast MR
imaging, and ultrasound. Breast imaging modal-
ities with high diagnostic accuracy have a signifi-
cant impact on population health, as breast
cancer has surpassed lung cancer as the most
commonly diagnosed nonskin cancer globally
and accounts for 1 in 8 cancer diagnoses overall.1
Breast cancer also remains the second leading
cause of cancer-related mortality in women.2
Treatment
of
breast
cancer
has
greatly
improved over the past several decades, and
increased emphasis has been placed on the mo-
lecular and genetic features of breast cancer.
However, the size of the malignant tumor (T stage),
number of nodal metastases (N stage), and pres-
ence or absence of distant metastatic disease (M
stage) at the time of diagnosis also directly affects
patient prognosis.3 Imaging plays a key role in
determining overall clinical stage.
This article highlights traditional breast imaging
techniques, advances in imaging, as well as
emerging technologies and potential future direc-
tions. Mammography, ultrasound, and breast MR
imaging are the most common tools used not
only for screening and diagnosis but also for preop-
erative locoregional staging for newly diagnosed
a Section of Breast Imaging and Intervention, Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53792-3252, USA; b University of Wisconsin
Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, WI, USA;
c Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison, WI, USA
* Corresponding author. Section of Breast Imaging and Intervention, Department of Radiology, University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, 600 Highland Avenue, Madison, WI 53792-3252.
E-mail address: afowler@uwhealth.org
KEYWORDS
 Mammography  Digital breast tomosynthesis  Ultrasound  Breast magnetic resonance imaging
 Molecular breast imaging  Positron emission mammography  Breast cancer screening
KEY POINTS
 Mammography is the primary imaging modality used for breast cancer screening and is associated
with a significant decrease in breast cancer mortality. Although screening guidelines vary by pro-
fessional society, annual screening mammography starting at age 40 years for average-risk women
is associated with the greatest reduction in mortality.
 Supplemental screening can be considered as an adjunct to mammography for women at high and
intermediate risk for breast cancer, as well as in women with dense breasts. The 2 most prevalent
modalities for supplemental screening are contrast-enhanced breast MR imaging and ultrasound.
 Molecular breast imaging also can be used to detect mammographically occult breast cancer,
particularly in patients with contraindications to MR imaging, and provides functional metabolic
data.
PET Clin 18 (2023) 459–471
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpet.2023.04.003
1556-8598/23/ 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
pet.theclinics.com
