Volume 28 Number C June 2022 pp. 100796 
1 
Original Research 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
and its impact on tumor interactions 
with the immune system 
Rebecca Anne Bekker a , ∗; Sungjune Kim b ; 
Shari Pilon-Thomas c ; Heiko Enderling a , b , ∗
a Department of Integrated Mathematical Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research 
Institute, Tampa, FL, USA 
b Department of Radiation Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, 
FL, USA 
c Department of Immunology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA 
Abstract 
Radiotherapy is a primary therapeutic modality widely utilized with curative intent. Traditionally tumor response was hypothesized 
to be due to high levels of cell death induced by irreparable DNA damage. However, the immunomodulatory aspect of radiation is 
now widely accepted. As such, interest into the combination of radiotherapy and immunotherapy is increasing, the synergy of which 
has the potential to improve tumor regression beyond that observed after either treatment alone. However, questions regarding the 
timing (sequential vs concurrent) and dose fractionation (hyper-, standard-, or hypo-fractionation) that result in improved anti-tumor 
immune responses, and thus potentially enhanced tumor inhibition, remain. Here we discuss the biological response to radiotherapy 
and its immunomodulatory properties before giving an overview of pre-clinical data and clinical trials concerned with answering these 
questions. Finally, we review published mathematical models of the impact of radiotherapy on tumor-immune interactions. Ranging 
from considering the impact of properties of the tumor microenvironment on the induction of anti-tumor responses, to the impact of 
choice of radiation site in the setting of metastatic disease, these models all have an underlying feature in common: the push towards 
personalized therapy. 
Neoplasia (2022) 28, 100796 
Keywords: Tumor immune interactions, Radiotherapy, Immunotherapy, Mathematical model, Personalized oncology 
Introduction 
Mathematical modeling in oncology has a long history, with various 
theoretical approaches being used to explore and describe biological 
mechanisms as well as tumor growth and treatment response dynamics 
Abbreviations: APC, antigen presenting cells; BED, biologically effective dose; CTLA-4, 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4; DAMP, damage-associated molecular pattern; 
GARD, genomic-adjusted radiation dose; IT, immunotherapy; LQ, linear-quadratic model; 
OAR, organ at risk; PD-1, programmed cell death protein 1; PD-L1, programmed 
death-ligand 1; PSI, proliferation saturation index; RSI, radiation sensitivity index; RT, 
radiotherapy; SFRT, spatially fractionated radiotherapy; TAA, tumor associated antigen; 
TFRT, temporally feathered radiotherapy; TIME, tumor immune microenvironment. 
∗Corresponding authors. 
E-mail addresses: Rebecca.Bekker@moffitt.org (R.A. Bekker), Heiko.Enderling@mof 
fitt.org (H. Enderling). 
Received 7 September 2021; received in revised form 27 March 2022; accepted 1 April 2022 
©
2022 
The 
Authors. 
Published 
by 
Elsevier 
Inc. 
This 
is 
an 
open 
access 
article 
under 
the 
CC 
BY-NC-ND 
license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neo.2022.100796 
[1–7] . Mathematical oncology may hold the key to bridging experimental, 
clinical, and data science studies; to test and generate hypotheses and 
evaluate conceptual models for validity. In radiation oncology specifically, 
mathematical modeling has a rich history, likely due in part to the field 
of medical physics. Approximately 50% of cancer patients are prescribed 
radiotherapy (RT) during their treatment course, either alone as definitive 
therapy or in combination with surgery, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, 
or immunotherapy. As our understanding of the complexity of tumor 
heterogeneity grows, motivation for the tailoring of cancer therapy to 
individual patients increases, thus driving the push towards precision 
medicine. While the flood of new available genomic data has thus far 
affected decisions regarding chemotherapy and certain targeted biological 
agents, it has yet to impact radiotherapy: the selection of total dose and 
fractionation is currently based empirically on average clinical outcome data, 
albeit often from randomized trials. 
Historically, the main driver of tumor response to radiotherapy was 
thought to be cytotoxic DNA damage, however, the immunomodulatory 
effects of radiation can no longer be ignored, leading to research into potential 
synergy between radiotherapy and immunotherapies. While the exact 
mechanisms and relationships between radiation dose, dose fractionation, 
2 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
and immune response have not yet been fully elucidated, ongoing preclinical 
studies and clinical trials are investigating the combination of RT with 
various types of immunotherapies such as vaccines, adoptive cell transfers, 
and checkpoint inhibitors against cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 
4 (CTLA-4) or programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) or the associated 
PD-1 ligand (PD-L1) [8–10] . These studies aim to answer important 
questions regarding combination treatment schedules, such as optimal timing 
(sequential vs concurrent) and dose fractionation (hyper-, standard-, or hypo- 
fractionation) to achieve superior tumor inhibition. 
Mathematical oncology is well positioned to assist in these investigations, 
either by elucidating underlying biological mechanisms of radio- 
immunotherapy synergy, or by predicting which patients may benefit 
most from these combination treatments. Here we review published 
pre-clinical data and clinical trials investigating these questions and 
discuss the contribution of published mathematical models of tumor 
immune interactions focusing on those that explicitly include radiotherapy 
simulations. 
The biological response to radiotherapy 
The administration of total radiation dose as smaller fractionated doses, 
often over many weeks, creates a therapeutic window for normal tissue to 
recover from radiation injury. The biological effects of fractionated radiation 
are often described by the 5 R’s, namely radiosensitivity, repair, reoxygenation, 
reassortment, and repopulation [ 11 , 12 ]. Seminal studies in the 1980s showed 
that different types of cells exhibit a wide range of inherent radiosensitivity 
[13] . Indeed, significant variations in radiosensitivity between cancer types, 
and even between tumors of the same type have recently been reported 
[14] . Understanding tumor and patient-specific sensitivity to radiation, and 
particularly to radiation dose fractionation, may help inform the choice of RT 
schedule, to ultimately control the tumor whilst preventing overtreatment of 
radiosensitive tumors. 
Radiation causes DNA damage primarily in the form of double strand 
breaks [15–17] . Cellular attempts to repair such damage between therapeutic 
radiation fractions may lead to cell cycle arrest, recovery, or death, depending 
on the degree of DNA damage induced and the cells’ capacity for repair. 
Dysregulation of DNA repair mechanisms occurs early on in carcinogenesis 
[18] across many cancer types. By comparison, DNA repair processes are 
usually intact in normal cells, allowing for repair of radiation induced 
damage in normal cells which mediates reduced radiation toxicity in normal 
tissue [19] . The extent of DNA damage induced by radiation is strongly 
dependent on tissue oxygenation, as radiation energy deposited in the tissue 
creates reactive oxygen species that in turn damage DNA [20] . Consequently, 
tumor cells in hypoxic conditions often require approximately three times 
the radiation dose to exhibit a comparable response to tumor cells in 
well oxygenated, normoxic conditions. Notably, the discrepant effects of 
equivalent radiation doses in hypoxic versus normoxic conditions can be 
quantitatively described by the oxygen enhancement ratio [21] . Several 
factors determine oxygen availability in the tumor bed, including the varying 
degree of functional vasculature in the tumor. Radiation-induced cell death 
may release pressure on obstructed blood vessels in a dense tumor, thereby 
increasing blood flow and reoxygenation of the tissue and increased sensitivity 
to subsequent radiation fractions. 
Furthermore, cells in different cell cycle phases exhibit differential 
levels of radiosensitivity and capacity to initiate DNA damage repair 
[22] . Killing of radiosensitive cells and re-oxygenation of the tumor 
allows for cells to redistribute into cell cycle phases that confer higher 
radiosensitivity. Simultaneously, tumors may enter phases of accelerated 
repopulation . Historically, the repopulation of tumors after fractionated 
doses was attributed to the gradual proliferation of surviving tumor cells 
[ 23 , 24 ]. However, factors released by dying malignant cells have recently 
been implicated as inducers of rapid re-growth and subsequent repopulation 
[25] . Additionally, dying cells may also release damage associated molecular 
patterns (DAMPs) which stimulate an immunogenic response, while other 
forms of cell death may be immunogenically silent [26] . Furthermore, 
tumors that quickly regenerate after radiation have been reported to exhibit 
reduced local control under prolonged treatment plans [27] . Thus, the length 
of radiotherapy treatment schedules may also play an important role in 
treatment response [28] , and therein exist as a crucial factor to consider when 
making treatment decisions. 
The immunomodulatory effects of radiotherapy 
Radiation kills cells either directly via induction of double stranded 
DNA breaks, or indirectly by generating free radicals from water molecules 
within the cell which react with DNA to cause macromolecular damage 
[29] . The resulting DNA damage varies in lethality, depending on the 
severity and pervasiveness of the induced DNA damage and functionality 
of DNA damage repair pathways. However, loss or disruption of DNA 
damage repair pathways occurs early in carcinogenesis [18] , leaving cancer 
cells sensitive to DNA damaging agents. Following irradiation cells may 
undergo various forms of cell death, including immunogenic cell death [26] . 
Critically, the form of death cancer cells undergo significantly impacts their 
induction or suppression of immune responses. Apoptotic or other forms of 
immunogenically silent cell death hinder activation of anti-tumor immune 
responses whereas immunostimulatory forms of cell death, most notably 
immunogenic cell death itself, support radiation induced immune activation 
[30] . Thus, the capacity for radiation to induce immune activation also hinges 
on the propensity for irradiated tumor cells to undergo different forms of cell 
death which likely occurs in a tumor type and radiation dose specific manner. 
Notably, the context in which DNA is detected significantly impacts 
the cellular effects. In the context of pro-inflammatory cues, exposure to 
DNA can stimulate immune activation, whereas exposure to DNA under 
homeostatic conditions can promote development of immunosuppressive 
subsets to avert development of auto-immune responses. Release of additional 
DAMPs via immunogenic cell death during irradiation including heat shock 
proteins (HSPs), nuclear protein HMGB1, calreticulin and ATP all promote 
the development of antitumor immune responses upon DNA exposure 
[31–33] . 
Cytosolic DNA-sensing via the cGAS-STING pathway among others 
and detection of both intra- and extracellular DNA via toll ligand receptors 
(TLRs) promotes immune activation in response to radiation induced DNA 
damage. Detection of DNA damage within cancer cells occurs via direct 
interaction of the cGas protein with cytosolic DNA which has leaked 
from the nuclei or mitochondria of damaged cells. There cGas associates 
with STING which undergoes activating phosphorylation and induction of 
downstream signaling to induce type I interferon production and secretion 
of inflammatory cytokines. Furthermore, cytosolic DNA can be sensed by 
intracellular TLR receptors, most notably CpG motif recognizing TLR9 
which stimulates subsequent activation of the NFKB transcription factors 
upon DNA binding. Additional intracellular sensors of cytosolic DNA 
include AIM2, which stimulates caspase 1 activation; RIG1 and DAI which 
stimulate downstream STING activation and LRRFIP1. Notably, in the 
context of transformed cells, activation of each intracellular DNA sensor 
hinges on intact expression of pathway members and the sequence specific 
motifs present in cytosolic DNA. Overall, exposure of tumor cells to cytosolic 
DNA can result in induction of immunogenic cell death via STING- 
pathways induced NLRP3 activation, AIM2 induced caspase activation, 
and TLR-mediated induction of mitochondrial pore formation. Collectively 
induction of tumor cell death in response to cytosolic DNA stimulates 
production of immunostimulatory cytokines and release of additional 
DAMPs [ 34 , 35 ]. 
Similarly, tumor infiltrating immune cells can react to radiation induced 
release of DNA via several mechanisms. Immune cells may also react to 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
3 
the release of tumor DNA into the extracellular environment or respond to 
DNA from phagocytosed/endocytosed tumor debris [36] . In immune cells, 
exposure to DNA triggers cell type specific responses. Exposure of immature 
dendritic cells to DNA promotes dendritic cell maturation, secretion of 
immunostimulatory cytokines and expression of costimulatory markers. 
Exposure of B cells or macrophages to DNA can provoke upregulation of 
antigen presenting functions and secretion of stimulatory cytokines [37] . 
Exposure of T cells to tumor DNA can also promote development of anti- 
tumor effector functions including production of type I interferon; however, 
prolonged exposure to DNA can activate cell death pathways in T cells [38] . 
In terms of stimulating tumor specific T cell responses, exposure to 
DNA directs maturation of antigen presenting cells and promotes uptake of 
antigen containing tumor debris material released from dying tumor cells 
following irradiation. Importantly, presentation of tumor antigens alongside 
costimulatory markers occurs after DNA-induced maturation of antigen 
presenting cells. Additionally, DNA exposed antigen presenting cells secrete 
chemotactic factors which promote T cell infiltration into the tumor which 
further amplifies the anti-tumor potential of radiation induced DNA release 
[39] . 
Multiple pre-clinical studies have shown that radiation affects this process, 
with some reporting immune stimulation, while others have observed 
immune suppression. For instance, although radiation has been shown to 
increase dendritic cell maturation [40] , it may also impair the antigen 
presentation ability of mature dendritic cells [41] . Increases in MHCI 
expression levels on cancer cells following radiation have also been reported 
[42] , leading to an increase in the recognition of tumor cells by activated 
CD8 + T-cells, although radiation has been shown to be detrimental to 
vasculature in the tumor bed, thereby inhibiting the trafficking of immune 
cells [43] . Furthermore, the radiation-induced increase in programmed 
death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression may strengthen the immune-suppressive 
capacity of tumor cells [44] . A thorough review of the contradictory 
immunological consequences of radiation can be found elsewhere [ 45 , 46 ]. In 
the face of so much evidence, a sixth ‘R’ of radiobiology, that of immunological 
response has been postulated [47] . 
The radiation-induced immune response can act both locally at the 
site of irradiation, and systemically, mediating regression of distant tumors 
[48] . Previously thought to be a rare event, with only 46 cases reported 
during the 1969-2014 period [49] , the abscopal effect has become more 
common, especially in pre-clinical and clinical trials of radio-immunotherapy 
combinations [50] . However, the exact relationships between radio- 
immunotherapy schedules and the induction of the abscopal effect remain 
to be elucidated. Below we briefly discuss pre-clinical and clinical studies 
investigating these matters. 
Investigating the timing of radiation with 
concurrent immunotherapy 
Dovedi et al. showed survival in a murine colon carcinoma model was 
significantly higher in mice receiving anti-PD-L1 concurrently with 2 Gy ×
5 radiation as opposed to sequentially [51] . Investigating this result, the 
authors observed a transient but significant increase in PD-1 expression on 
both CD4 + T-cells and CD8 + T-cells, which was present 24 hours after 
the last dose of radiation but not 7 days after. This suggests the existence 
of an optimal timing for administration of this immunotherapy when in 
combination with radiation. However, PD-1 failure may interfere with 
subsequent radiation responses [52] . Young et al. investigated a similar timing 
schedule in the same murine model as Dovedi et al., but in combination 
with either an anti-CTLA-4 antibody or an anti-OX40 antibody [53] . 
OX40 (CD134) is a co-stimulatory molecule transiently expressed on T 
cells following activation. The antibody binds to and activates the OX40 
receptor, inducing the proliferation of T cells [54] . Although the overall 
survival of mice treated with the radiotherapy and anti-CTLA-4 antibody 
combination was improved compared to those treated with monotherapies, 
all mice treated with the inhibitor prior to irradiation had complete tumor 
clearance. However, the same results were not seen in mice treated with 
combinations of radiotherapy and the anti-OX40 agonist antibody; in fact, 
administration of this immunotherapy a day after radiation resulted in the 
highest overall survival. Similar experiments using a MMTV-PyMT model 
did not yield the same results, indicating that the optimal timing of the 
combination therapy may also be cancer type and immunotherapy type 
specific. 
The KEYNOTE 001 trial (NCT01295827), which investigated the PD- 
1 targeted antibody pembrolizumab for treatment of non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC), found that patients who received radiotherapy prior to 
the trial demonstrated higher overall and progression free survival compared 
to patients who had not received any radiation [55] . In addition, NSCLC 
patients in the PACIFIC trial (NCT02125461) treated with chemoradiation 
(CRT) and the PD-L1 inhibitor durvalumab, showed a higher progression 
free survival when receiving the immunotherapy within 14 days following 
CRT, compared to patients with longer wait times until durvalumab 
[56] . Recruitment for NCT02239900 which investigates concurrent vs 
sequential administration of the anti-CTLA-4 antibody ipilimumab and 
stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) for both liver and lung cancers 
has recently been completed, although results are still pending. A similar trial, 
NCT03223155, is focused on the sequencing of ipilimumab, nivolumab and 
SBRT for NSCLC with estimated completion in December 2022. 
Investigating radiation dose fractionations for 
immune activation 
Dewan et al. investigated the immunological consequences of radio- 
immunotherapy in a bi-lateral murine mammary adenocarcinoma model 
[57] . Mice were randomized into cohorts receiving either no treatment to 
the primary tumor or 20 Gy × 1 , 8 Gy × 3 , or 6 Gy × 5 on consecutive 
days with or without an anti-CTLA-4 antibody at various times following 
radiation. The primary tumors of mice receiving radiation alone exhibited 
comparable responses regardless of dosing schedule. However, combination 
therapy resulted in improved primary tumor inhibition, with complete 
regression of the primary tumor observed in mice treated with either the 
8 Gy × 3 or 6 Gy × 5 dose schedules. In addition, complete regression of 
2 of 5 non-irradiated secondary tumors was reported in mice treated with the 
8 Gy × 3 combination therapy, indicative of systemic anti-tumor immunity 
and radiation-induced immune-mediated abscopal responses. In contrast, the 
6 Gy × 5 combination exhibited superior responses in a murine colon 
carcinoma model, lending further support to the notion that optimal dose 
fractionations may be tumor type specific. 
Vanpouille-Box et al. completed a similar investigation using radiotherapy 
doses of 8 Gy, 30 Gy or 8 Gy × 3 and an anti-CTLA-4 antibody [58] . 
Delayed growth of the irradiated primary tumor was observed, but only the 
8 Gy × 3 combination treatment regimen resulted in complete regression of 
primary tumors (6 out of 7 tumors). Although significant growth inhibition 
of the unirradiated secondary tumors was observed in mice that received this 
combination therapy, tumor volumes at the abscopal site were comparable 
between all other cohorts. 
Immunostimulatory properties effects have also been reported following 
low dose radiation. In a preclinical study of pancreatic cancer, Klug et al. 
observed higher levels of infiltration by tumor specific T cells following 
radiation with 0 . 5 Gy compared to more clinically standard doses of 1 Gy, 
2 Gy or 6 Gy. The authors compared infiltration levels of host derived CD8 + 
T cells following priming of the tumor with either 0 . 5 Gy, 1 Gy, 2 Gy or 6 Gy
prior to transfer of tumor specific CD8 + T cells. Priming with 1 Gy resulted 
in the highest levels of infiltration of host derived CD8 + T cells, although 
all treatment groups had significantly higher levels of infiltration than the 
control group [59] . 
4 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
Multiple clinical trials have investigated optimal radiotherapy dose 
fractionation schemes to be used in combination with immunotherapies. 
For instance, NCT02659540 investigated the combination of ipilimumab, 
nivolumab and RT in the setting of stage IV melanoma. Here radiation 
was administered in either 3 Gy × 10 or 9 Gy × 3 fractions. A limited 
number of patients completed this trial, only 4 and 2 of the 10 enrolled 
patients enrolled in each cohort respectively, yet the results suggest that 
treatment with the lower fractionation exhibits a higher number of partial 
responses and a lower number of progressive disease occurrences compared 
to the hypofractionated regimen [60] . NCT02888743 is investigating the 
combination of monoclonal antibodies that inhibit CTLA-4 and the PD- 
L1:PD-1 interaction and radiotherapy in high or low dose fractions, focusing 
on colorectal cancer and non-small cell lung cancer, with an expected 
completion date of December 2021. A similar trial, NCT03085719, is 
actively recruiting head and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients to 
investigate the combination of anti-PD-1 immunotherapy and three high- 
dose RT fractions, with or without two additional low-dose fractions. Started 
in 2015, NCT02406183 looked at ipilimumab-SBRT combination for the 
treatment of metastatic melanoma. Here, radiotherapy was administered in 
either 8 Gy × 3 , 10 Gy × 3 , or 12 Gy × 3 dose fractionation schemes, 
no results have yet been posted. 
More in-depth discussions of clinical trials investigating the combination 
of radiotherapy and immunotherapies can be found elsewhere [8–10] . 
While these clinical studies provide invaluable insights into selected 
protocols, to exhaustively evaluate every possible radiation dose and dose 
fractionation with different sequencing and timing of the various immuno- 
therapeutics remains infeasible [61] . Integrating mathematical modeling into 
experimental and clinical research may help analyze the complex, non-linear 
multifactorial treatment responses [62–64] . 
The purpose of mathematical oncology 
Interest into mathematical oncology has increased with the growing 
realization that the translation of in vitro and in vivo results into clinic is 
hindered by crucial differences between humans and animal models [ 64 , 65 ]. 
The burgeoning field of mathematical oncology may be uniquely positioned 
to help bridge the scales from pre-clinical to clinical studies. The type of data 
at hand and the scale of the system under consideration both inform the type 
of mathematical model to be developed [66] . 
Modeling of the temporal evolution of data on the population level is 
best done using deterministic modelling methods such as ordinary differential 
equations, or partial differential equations if also accounting for spatial 
evolution. However, when the available data is of higher granularity and 
the system is instead focused on interactions between or movement of 
discrete individuals (or cells), agent-based models (ABMs) are better suited. 
Individuals within these models follow predetermined sets of rules giving 
rise to emergent behavior, which may vary with each simulation due to the 
inherent stochasticity of this model type. Thus, a high number of simulations 
is required to ensure consistency of model outcomes [67] . Conversely, the 
behavior of deterministic systems is fully determined by initial conditions 
and the parameter set used. 
The extent to which the underlying biological mechanisms are reflected 
in a mathematical model may inform its use. For instance, mechanistic 
models, which include in-depth quantitative descriptions of a system’s 
underlying biological processes, can be used in hypothesis generation to 
further knowledge [68] . Alternatively, descriptive models, which may include 
little to no biological mechanism explicitly, can be used in predictive settings 
[ 7 , 69–71 ]. For predictive modeling, it is paramount to integrate the model 
with experimental and clinical data [62–64] . Successful studies calibrate 
mathematical models with relevant data, validate the model on independent 
data sets, and test the prediction accuracy on known outcomes before making 
predictions about novel treatment protocols [72–76] . Most challenging for 
such interdisciplinary modeling is to match available data with the right 
modeling approaches to test specific scientific hypotheses. Often, further 
abstractions and simplifications have to be made to accommodate and balance 
lack of data, biological uncertainty, and mathematical modeling complexity. 
These can most successfully be overcome by a close dialog of interdisciplinary 
collaborations. 
Mathematical models that faithfully include a myriad of tumor-associated 
cell populations, their interactions, associated biological processes, and 
underlying mechanisms in the tumor-immune microenvironment under 
radiotherapy and/or immunotherapies would be incredibly complex (see 
Fig. 1 ). However, assumptions regarding the cellular populations can simplify 
the system sans treatment to a six-compartment model: Cancer cells ( C ), 
dying cancer cells (D) , tumor associated antigen (A), antigen presenting 
cells (P), effector immune cells such as CD8 + T cells (E), and regulatory 
immune cells denoted by (R). A general formulation of such a mathematical 
model is presented below, where ˙ 
C , ˙ 
D , ˙ 
A , ˙ 
P , ˙ 
E and ˙ 
R denote the 
temporal evolution of the respective population. While this formulation 
may be a relatively faithful representation of the population level of the 
underlying biological system, the complexity requires large amounts of data 
for calibration, and limits the possible mathematical analysis and utility of 
the model [77] . Development of mathematical models must be done with 
the trade-offs between complexity and simplicity in mind. 
Icon 
Equation 
˙ 
C = 
pr olif er ation 
   
f (C) 
−
inactivation 
   
g( C, E ) 
˙ 
D = g( C, E ) −
r emov al 
 
a D 
˙ 
A = 
production 
   
h (D) −
uptake & proces s ing 
   
j( A, P ) 
−
decay 
 
bA 
˙ 
P = 
inf lux 
 

−
decay 
 
cP 
˙ 
E = 
inf lux & r ecr uitment 
 
 
 
k( E, P, A ) 
−
exhaustion 
   
m ( C, E ) −
regulation & death 
   
n ( E, R ) 
˙ 
R = 
inf lux & r ecr uitment 
 
 
 
n ( C, D, P, E ) 
−
death 
 
dR 
In this system however, additional simplifying assumptions can be made, 
resulting in a so-called predator-prey or Lotka-Volterra type mathematical 
model [ 78 , 79 ]. This model describes the proliferation of cancer cells, influx 
and recruitment of tumor specific effector immune cells, and the interactions 
between these two populations. A general example of the structure of such a 
model can be seen below. The oscillatory behavior of this system is dependent 
on parameter values and recapitulates the immunoediting phase of the three 
E’s as postulated by Dunn et al. [80] ( Fig. 2 ). 
˙ 
C = 
proli f erati on 
   
f ( C ) −
immune −me diate d de ath 
   
g ( C, E ) 
−
death 
 
μC 
˙ 
E = 
i n f lux & recrui tment 
   
k ( E , C ) 
−
exhaustion 
   
m ( C, E ) −
death 
 
d E 
Thus, assumptions regarding the importance of subpopulations and their 
contributions yield models of varying simplicity for the same biological 
system. The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) [ 81 , 82 ] is one of several 
measures that report on a model’s ability to balance data fitting and 
complexity, relative to others fitted to the same dataset. Comparison of 
AIC values can be used in model selection, and hypothesis generation. 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
5 
Fig. 1. The tumor immune microenvironment (TIME), and the effects of radiation and immunotherapy thereon. A) The tumor immune microenvironment, 
consisting of various cell types including cancer and immune subpopulations, some of which are shown. Interactions within the TIME include the uptake and 
processing of tumor associated antigen (TAA) by professional antigen presentation cells (APC) such as dendritic cells; the influx of TAA specific activated T 
cells, the recognition and lysis of cancer cells. Additionally, activated T cells can be regulated and suppressed by T-reg cells or tumor cells via the PD-1:PD-L1 
axis or CTLA-4, and macrophages can phagocytose cancer cells. B-C) Interactions within the TIME can be generalized as occurring between six compartments: 
cancer cells, doomed cancer cells, TAA, APCs, effector immune cells, and regulatory immune cells. Black arrows denote these interactions, with inhibitory 
interactions shown as blocked arrows, and stimulatory interactions indicated by sharp arrows. Administration of (B) radiotherapy and (C) immunotherapy 
affect these interactions in different ways, detailed reviews of which can be found elsewhere [ 45 , 151 ]. Figures created with BioRender ( www.biorender.com ). 
6 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
Fig. 2. The dynamics of a predator-prey type model of cancer-effector immune interactions. A) Model schematic. Cancer cells (C) proliferate, (curved returning 
arrow), and die (outgoing arrow). Effector cells (E) are recruited (incoming arrow) and die (outgoing arrow). The interactions between cancer cells and effector 
immune cells are inhibitory, denoted by the blunt arrow. Inhibition of cancer cells by effector cells recruits more immune cells (curved, returning arrow). B) 
The phase-plane of the model in (A). The red trajectory illustrates how the two populations change with regards to each other. Starting from the bottom 
left, the cancer cells increase in number while effector cells are recruited. Once the inhibitory effect exerted by effector cells is larger than the replacement of 
cancer cells, the trajectory moves towards the vertical axis. At this point the effector population is unsustainable by the cancer cell population and experiences a 
rapid decline, and the trajectory moves towards the horizontal axis. These oscillations continue indefinitely. C) Two solutions of the model in (A). Top panel, 
this model can recapitulate the three E’s of immunoediting postulated by Dunn et al. [80] : elimination ( ε 1 ), equilibrium ( ε 2 ) and escape ( ε 3 ). Bottom panel, 
solutions showing the explicit oscillatory behavior described in (B). 
This is the approach Yamamoto et al. followed in their investigation of 
the impact of the immune system on transient increases in prostate specific 
antigen (PSA) levels in prostate cancer patients undergoing interstitial 
brachytherapy [83] . Comparison of AIC values of two models, one with and 
one without an immune compartment, suggests the immune compartment 
is a necessary inclusion to explain the PSA bounces. The authors go on 
to confirm, at least mathematically, that patients who experience this PSA 
bounce have significantly higher mean densities of CD8 + T cells and 
CD3 + T cells pre-treatment, although further validation of this hypothesis is 
required. 
Several mathematical models that predict response to radiation have 
been developed, but the most widely used is the linear quadratic (LQ) 
model. The underlying assumptions can be summarized as: radiation-induced 
cellular death is due to sufficient levels of irreparable double strand DNA 
breaks created directly by ionizing radiation, or through interactions between 
non-lethal (single-strand) DNA breaks [84] . The LQ model, SF (d ) = 
exp ( −αd −βd 2 ) , predicts the surviving fraction of a population following 
a radiation dose of d Gy, where α G y −1 denotes the cellular responses 
due mainly to ‘single-hit’ damage, and β G y −2 denotes ‘multi-hit’ damage 
from independent radiation events [85] . Estimates for these radiosensitivity 
parameters of various cancer types have been reported [14] and are useful 
in the calculation of the biological effective dose (BED) [ 86 , 87 ]. BED can 
be used to compare dose fractionation schemes, and to identify alternative 
fractionation regimens [88] . 
Radiobiological response models have been used in more complex models 
of tumors undergoing treatment with radiotherapy, such as the seminal work 
by Leder et al. [73] . Here the authors used an approach that iteratively 
integrates theoretical and experimental methods to develop a mathematical 
model with which to predict optimal radiotherapy schedules for platelet 
derived growth factor (PDGF) driven glioblastoma. In this interdisciplinary 
study, the mathematical model was calibrated with experimental data and 
used to identify two optimal treatment schedules. The response predicted for 
these schedules showed improved response over standard, hyper- and hypo- 
fractionated regimens with equal total dose. These model predictions were 
subsequently verified in a glioma murine model. 
Proliferating cells are more radiosensitive than quiescent cells [89] , and 
thus the proportions in which these cells appear in a tumor may influence 
response to radiation. This is the basis of Prokopirou et al.’s proliferation 
saturation index (PSI), which originally used a logistic-type growth model to 
implicitly link the proliferative fraction of the tumor to radiation sensitivity 
and response [90] . It has since been shown to be descriptive of tumor 
data for various growth models [91] and different cancer types including 
non-small cell lung cancer [92] and head and neck cancers (HNC) [93] . 
PSI can specifically be used to compare predicted outcomes for various 
treatment schedules with different BEDs, using only two data points, 
making it useful for identifying patients who may benefit from alternative 
radiation schedules. The PSI model is currently being validated in the 
ongoing clinical trial NCT03656133, using patient-specific PSI to select 
between a hyperfractionated regimen of 1 . 2 Gy doses twice daily or the 
standard 2 Gy daily fractionation for oropharyngeal cancer patients. In 
a recent variation of the PSI model, Zahid et al. simulated the effect of 
radiation not by linear-quadratic cell survival but by modulation of the 
tumor microenvironment to prospectively predict patient-specific responses 
to radiation in head and neck cancer with high accuracy [74] . Of note, 
the PSI model assumes that the proportion of cells that proliferate decrease 
as the tumor approaches its carrying capacity, which in turn decreases the 
overall tumor response to radiation. Routine radiological imaging cannot 
give sufficient resolution into intra-tumoral composition to validate such 
assumption. An alternative explanation for growth saturation could be a 
balance of rapid proliferation and high cell death rates. In such scenario, the 
tumor would remain radiosensitive even at dormancy. Different mathematical 
models have explored these alternatives and discuss future data collection 
suggestions to better decipher the intra-tumoral dynamics during different 
tumor growth and dormancy phases [94–96] . 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
7 
A different application of mathematical modeling in radiation oncology 
was demonstrated in the development of the radiation sensitivity index (RSI), 
a linear regression model that relates the expression of ten genes to the 
radiosensitivity of a cell line, specifically for single doses of 2 Gy [97] . First 
proposed in 2009, this model has been validated for multiple disease sites, 
including head and neck, rectal, and esophageal cancers [97] , breast cancer 
[98] , and glioblastoma [99] . Building on this work, Scott et al. developed a 
genome-based model for adjusting radiotherapy dose (GARD) [100] . This 
model links patient specific RSI values and the LQ model to radiation 
dose fractionation schedules to evaluate dose-fractionation schemes. This 
model may enable personalization of treatment schedules according to patient 
radiosensitivity or inform clinicians as to which patients would benefit from 
receiving treatments other than radiation. GARD has been retrospectively 
validated using lung, breast, and pancreas cancer cohorts [ 100 , 101 ]. 
Treatment types or plans that aim to protect surrounding normal tissue are 
also on the rise, such as temporally feathered radiotherapy (TFRT). Recently 
proposed by Alfonso et al. [102] , this strategy consists of specific daily 
treatment plans that result in the sequential administration of high and low 
doses to each organ at risk (OAR). The underlying logistic-type model for the 
recovery of normal tissue from sublethal damage takes OAR-specific recovery 
rates into account and can easily be made patient-specific. The first stage I/IIa 
trial, NCT03768856, using TFRT was recently completed for head and neck 
cancer [103] . Further clinical investigation and implementation has recently 
been rendered more clinically accessible by the publication of a step-by-step 
technical paper on TFRT utilization [104] . 
Mathematical models of tumor immune dynamics 
Mathematical models of tumor-immune interactions have a long history, 
and range in complexity. Some focus on the effect of anti-tumor effector 
immune cells such as CD8 + T cells, natural killer cells, or classically activated 
macrophages. These models generally have the dynamics of ecological 
predator-prey systems, with the immune system preying on tumor cells. 
Other models may include separate compartments for naïve T-cells [105] , 
immunosuppressive cell types [106] and cytokines [107] . Reviews of these 
models can be found elsewhere [108–111] . Many of the models we discuss 
here are based on pioneering work done by Kuznetsov et al., wherein a model 
of the interaction between cytotoxic lymphocytes and cancer cells is proposed 
[ 112 , 113 ]. The mathematical model is a good fit to growth data of a murine 
B-cell lymphoma (BCL 1 ) model [114] , and can predict the observed regrowth 
in the murine model to which it was calibrated [115] . The steady states of 
this model are descriptive of tumor immunoediting phases [ 80 , 116 ], namely 
tumor dormancy due to a tumor-immune equilibrium and tumor escape 
despite a strong anti-tumor immune response. 
Trafficking of activated T-cells between metastatic sites after local therapy 
Poleszczuk et al. modeled the activation and movement of activated 
effector T cells within and between distinct metastases [117] following 
an unspecified local therapy. The growth dynamics of individual sites 
are governed by logistic growth with immune predation, as in Kuznetsov 
et al.’s tumor regrowth model [113] . Here, the immune compartment is 
extended to include the probability that T cells that are activated at one 
anatomical site arrive at a tumor in a different location after extravasation 
out of the circulatory system, dependent on the blood flow fraction to 
the different organs and tissues . Analysis of a virtual cohort of 40 patients 
with combinations of lung, breast, liver, and kidney metastases suggests that 
the strength of the immune response following local therapy is a complex 
combination of the different tumor volumes and their respective locations. 
Thus, decisions of which metastases to target with local therapies to induce 
systemic immune responses may be highly patient-specific. 
Systemic consequences of local radiotherapy 
Walker et al. extended Poleszczuk et al.’s model to explicitly consider the 
cytotoxic and immune activating effects of radiotherapy [118] , by including 
a subpopulation of lethally damaged tumor cells that contribute to immune 
recruitment. The net effect of radiation on immune cells is also included. 
The model is fit to data from a BCL 1 murine model [114] , and used to 
investigate the systemic immune effects after local radiotherapy. Analysis 
of model simulations suggest that the order in which metastases emerge, 
the corresponding growth rates, as well as which site is focally irradiated 
combine to yield systemic pro- or anti-tumor immune response. These 
relationships and the underlying mechanisms, whilst intriguing, remain as 
of yet experimentally unvalidated. 
Considering instead the relationship between radiation-induced immune 
responses, dose sizes and inter-fraction time, Serre et al. proposed the concept 
of an immunologically effective dose (IED). This metric can be used for 
comparing radiation dose fractionation schedules to identify those expected 
to result in higher systemic immune responses [119] . As with most conceptual 
models, experimental and clinical validation will be necessary before IED can 
be translated into clinical practice. 
Treatment schedules to protect the induced immune response 
Sung et al. investigated the relationships between both the radiation 
schedule length and inter-fraction time, and the recovery period of the 
immune system of hepatocellular carcinoma patients treated with radiation 
[120] . This model considers primary tumor cells, radiotherapy-inactivated 
tumor cells releasing a tumor-specific antigen, metastatic cells, and circulatory 
lymphocytes (CL). The tumor is assumed to follow exponential growth, and 
interaction with lymphocytes occurs along the periphery. Radiation effects on 
the tumor are modelled using the LQ model, but the higher radiosensitivity 
of lymphocytes motivates a modification by omitting the quadratic term. 
Thus, in this model the surviving fraction of lymphocytes after a dose d Gy is 
given by S F L ( D L ) = e −αL ∗D L where D L denotes the dose per fraction delivered 
to a given volume of circulating lymphocytes. The model, calibrated to 
longitudinal CL data of 17 hepatocellular carcinoma patients, is used to 
simulate various radiotherapy schedules. Comparisons of the recovery time 
of CLs reveals that immune recovery time is shortest after treatments with 
fewer total fractions. However, when treated with a fixed number of fractions, 
schedules with shorter inter-fraction breaks are ideal for immune recovery. It is 
conceivable that inter-fraction times are further dependent on several patient- 
specific factors, including the tumor growth and repopulation rates as well as 
the radiosensitivity, trafficking and extravasation of cytotoxic immune effector 
cells, and the immunological composition of the tumor microenvironment. 
Possible predictive biomarkers for response to radio-immunotherapy 
Byun et al. investigated the relationship between the ratio of PD-1 and 
PD-L1 expression levels and the tumor size pre- and post-treatment with 
radio-immunotherapy [121] . The efficacy of both treatments is modelled 
by exponential decay. After calibration to longitudinal data from a murine 
mammary carcinoma model [44] , a global sensitivity analysis between the 
parameters and tumor size throughout therapy suggests that the ratio in which 
PD-1 and PD-L1 are expressed on effector T cells may be informative as to 
which patients will benefit from radio-immunotherapy. 
The relationship between vascularization of tumors and radiotherapy 
response 
Hatzikirou et al. proposed a tumor-immune-vasculature model, which 
they used to investigate immune- and vasomodulatory combination therapies 
but not RT [122] . This model assumes a radially symmetric tumor, with an 
8 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
outer vascularized proliferative layer and an inner avascular region composed 
of a proliferative rim, a hypoxic quiescent section, and a necrotic inner core. 
Immune cells are recruited by immunogenic signals released by tumor cells 
and those undergoing immunogenic cell death. Tumor-immune interactions 
initially occur along the periphery of the tumor, but immune cells rely on 
the degree of functional vasculature to infiltrate and attack the tumor. This 
model has subsequently been modified by Montaseri et al. [123] and Alfonso 
et al. [124] to investigate the impact of vascularity on treatment success 
following radiotherapy. Montaseri et al. developed a radiotherapy planning 
framework based on the application of impulse control theory to Hatzikirou’s 
model [123] . This approach was chosen to determine radiation schedules 
which lead to a tumor-free state. In particular, the authors link tumor growth, 
radiosensitivity, vascularity and hypoxia, as well as immune response to the 
required number of fractions with a specific dose to eradicate a tumor. Once 
calibrated to patient data, and validated, this framework could be used to 
personalize treatment. 
Alfonso et al. modified Hatzikirou’s model to investigate the impact of 
vascularity on radiation response and the efficacy of radiation induced anti- 
tumor immune responses [124] . Simulation outcomes suggest the existence 
of a range of tumor sizes for which the efficacy of combination therapy 
is high. Outside this range, however, tumor reduction by radiation may 
be too small or too large to generate an immune response of sufficient 
strength to control the tumor. Comparison of outcomes for in silico tumors 
treated with schedules of various lengths reveal that a higher number of 
total fractions, and thus longer schedules, may lead to progressive disease, 
suggesting the existence of a subset of patients that may benefit from radiation 
de-escalation. The impact of treatment breaks was investigated via simulation 
of a standard weekday-only schedule vs. consecutive fractions without breaks. 
Results suggest that regardless of the degree of functional vasculature and 
simulated tumor outcome, treatment breaks lead to larger populations of 
radiation-induced effector cells suggesting that these schedules may be ideal 
candidates for radio-immunotherapy combinations. Further analysis reveals 
the existence of ranges of vascularity and effector recruitment for which 
each type of schedule would be better suited. For instance, treatments 
with weekend breaks led to control of poor to intermediately vascularized 
tumors, but not for those with high levels of functional vasculature. Thus, 
patients may benefit from treatment personalization according to their tumor 
microenvironments. However, experimental, and clinical validation of the 
model results are necessary. 
Investigating personalization of radio-immunotherapy to patients’ 
immune responses 
Sotolongo-Grau et al. proposed a simple predator-prey like model 
describing tumor-immune interactions [125] . The effects of radiation on 
cancer cells are included by the addition of a non-clonogenic tumor cell 
compartment which has no contribution to tumor growth but retains the 
ability to induce and suppress the immune response. This suppression is 
mediated by secreted factors such as interleukins. The LQ model was used 
to describe the effect of radiation on both the tumor and immune cell 
populations. The authors identified parameters for which tumor growth 
isn’t controlled by the anti-tumor immune response due tumor-mediated 
suppression of the immune system. Analysis of a large cohort of virtual 
patients with characteristics within this region suggests a relationship between 
the treatment success probability, immune efficiency, and the so-called tissue 
effects that depend on the radiosensitivity parameters of the tissue. Based 
on this the authors suggest a method for personalization of dose according 
to immune efficacy. However, by sampling values for the tissue effects from 
a Gaussian distribution, rather than clinical or preclinical data, this model 
requires rigorous validation before being used for predictions. 
Investigating the optimal radiation dose fractionation schedules to 
induce immune responses 
Poleszczuk and Enderling investigated the induction of a systemic anti- 
tumor immune response following treatment with radio-immunotherapy 
[126] . This model considers two spatially distant tumors, of which only one 
is irradiated, although activated T-cells are assumed to travel between the two 
sites. Comparison of simulated post-treatment tumor volumes suggest that 
the optimal dose fractionation scheme for the clinically relevant dose range 
of 60 −70 Gy is 5 −6 fractions in the range of 11 −13 Gy as opposed to 
the clinically used 2 Gy × 30 . While this model was calibrated to murine 
data, results of recent clinical studies corroborate these findings [127] . 
Serre et al. reports a model describing the tumor dynamics, antigen, 
immune effector cells, primary immune response, and secondary immune 
response [128] . Radiotherapy and two checkpoint inhibitors are included, 
namely anti-PD-L1 and anti-CTLA-4. The model is calibrated to data from a 
murine fibrosarcoma model and is able to describe the non-linear relationship 
between tumor size and rejection probability observed in a preclinical study 
[129] . 
Chakwizira et al. adapted the model from Serre et al. to investigate the 
synergy between radiotherapy and 1-MT (1-methyl tryptophan) [130] . This 
immunotherapy abrogates tumor-tolerance developed by a variety of immune 
cells by inhibiting IDO (indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase) [131] . The immune 
component is adapted via removal of the anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 specific 
terms, and the assumption that the tumor is strongly immunosuppressive 
on days without immunotherapy but has no immunosuppressive ability on 
days that 1-MT is administered. From the lack of long-term survivors in the 
syngeneic rat glioma model to which this mathematical model is calibrated, 
Chakwizira et al. assume that the effect of the memory immune cells is 
negligible, and thus omit it from the model completely. In silico simulations 
suggest the existence of an optimal number of fractions for a range of BED 
values, which increase the synergy between the treatments leading to increased 
predicted survival time. However, the model requires validation before it can 
be used in a non-hypothesis generating manner. 
In 2020, Ahlstedt et al. investigated the effect of single- or two-fraction 
radiotherapy in combination with 1-MT in a syngeneic rat glioma model 
[132] . The authors adapted the model proposed by Chakwizira et al. [130] to 
include Gompertzian tumor growth as opposed to exponential tumor growth. 
The model yields a good visual fit to tumor area measurements, and model 
simulations suggest that variations in inter-fraction timing may affect tumor 
regression at day 18, with intervals of between 5 and 7 days resulting in the 
lowest predicted tumor areas. However, statistical significance remains to be 
further demonstrated. 
Kosinsky et al. presented a tumor growth model [133] with detailed 
immune components related to the cancer-immune cycle described by Chen 
and Mellman [134] . These include tumor antigen levels, population levels 
of mature dendritic cells, differentiated and non-differentiated T cells, and 
an immune-suppression component related to PD-L1 expression levels. The 
model was calibrated and validated on data from a CT26 murine colorectal 
carcinoma model and can recapitulate observed growth dynamics of control 
tumors and those receiving treatments, including radiation and anti-PD-L1 
monotherapies, and combinations of these. After investigation of various 
combination therapy characteristics including timing and dose size, the 
authors suggest that administration of the immune checkpoint inhibitor prior 
to, or concurrently with, radiotherapy results in superior tumor responses 
compared to administration following radiation. 
More recently, Alfonso et al. developed a three-dimensional, spatially 
explicit, agent-based model to simulate radiation-induced shifts in patient- 
specific tumor-immune ecosystem composition [135] . Combining molecular 
and bioinformatics analysis of over 10,000 patient tissue samples across 31 
cancer types to map the pan-cancer tumor-immune milieu with dynamic 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
9 
simulation of radiation response revealed that radiation response may be a 
combination of the direct cytotoxic effects of radiation on cancer cells as 
well as subsequent stimulation or inhibition of immune cell infiltrates. For 
selected patients, radiation could potentially be drastically de-escalated while 
other patients may need significantly larger doses to control the tumor. This 
work further emphasizes the need to depart from average outcomes of large 
clinical trials towards more patient-specific response analyses. 
Optimal sequencing of radiotherapy and surgery for the induction of an 
immune response 
Poleszczuk et al. [136] and Alfonso et al. [137] focused on comparing 
adjuvant and neoadjuvant radiotherapy. In a rigorous analysis of more than 
a quarter of a million female patients in the Surveillance, Epidemiology, 
and End Results (SEER) database with early-stage breast cancer who 
received radiation either before or after surgery, Poleszczuk used different 
statistical approaches including the Wilcoxon rank-sum test with normal 
approximation to compare continuous factors, Pearson’s chi-square test to 
compare categorical factors, Kaplan-Meier analysis, and multivariate Cox 
proportional hazards models to estimate hazard ratios of developing second 
primary tumors after either adjuvant or neoadjuvant radiation. Their analyses 
showed that neoadjuvant radiotherapy may significantly improve disease-free 
survival without reducing overall survival, especially for estrogen receptor- 
positive patients 
Alfonso et al. [137] extended this work by statistically analyzing additional 
SEER data sets of adjuvant or neoadjuvant radiation of early-stage cancers, 
including cancers of lung and bronchus, esophagus, rectum, cervix uteri, 
corpus uteri, and breast. Data suggested improved overall survival after 
neoadjuvant radiation for cancers with low 20-year survival rates and 
improved disease-free survival for cancers with higher survival (breast: 
HR = 0.64; P < .001). In addition to the statistical analyses, mechanistic 
ordinary differential equation mathematical model simulations suggested 
that neoadjuvant radiation could increase outcomes by creating an immune 
memory that facilitates tumor elimination for a broader range of model 
parameters. 
The spatial evolution of these interaction dynamics may also be considered 
using systems of partial differential equations. Lai and Friedman considered 
six cell populations, four different cytokines, the levels of PD-1, PD-L1 
and the PD-1:PD-L1 complex, and an anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy [138] . 
Simulations suggest combination therapy with concurrent administration 
results in higher treatment efficacies than sequential schedules. However, 
the authors caution against drawing conclusions from this model, instead 
encouraging its use in hypothesis generation. 
As previously discussed, preclinical and clinical studies into the optimal 
timing, and fractionation schedules are ongoing for various cancer sites 
and immunotherapies. Once optimal schedules have been found, we expect 
the focus will shift to identifying patients who would benefit from these 
combinations, and how to truly personalize radiation treatment with and 
without concurrent immunotherapeutics. 
Spatially fractionated radiotherapy 
Recently Asperud et al. [139] developed a model for tumor-immune 
interactions following spatially fractionated radiotherapy (SFRT). In this 
radiotherapy modality the radiation beam is fractionated, creating areas of 
high and low dose [ 140 , 141 ]. The model was calibrated to published tumor 
growth data for syngeneic xenograft models of breast cancer (67NR) and 
Lewis lung carcinoma, following administration of either full tumor or half- 
tumor irradiation with singles doses of 10 Gy or 15 Gy respectively [142] . 
Despite acceptable model fits, predictions of 67NR tumor growth following 
15 Gy and 20 Gy failed to recapitulate the reported regrowth of tumors. The 
authors comment that these discrepancies may be due to the adoption of 
parameter values from published data of various cancer models, rather than 
parameter values specifically calibrated to the experimental data reported by 
Markovsky et al. [142] . Another possibility is the underlying assumption of a 
well-mixed tumor-immune model. SFRT induced cell death is concentrated 
in the irradiated portion of the tumor, although higher than expected death 
has been reported in the unirradiated portions, suggesting that bystander 
effects may occur [143] . Thus, incorporation of a spatial aspect may be 
necessary. 
Tools that are useful in the field 
Most of the models discussed herein consider tumor-immune interactions 
on the cell population level, modeled by either ordinary or partial differential 
equations. These models can be simulated and analyzed using commercial 
software packages such as MATLAB, Mathematica, and Maple, or a variety 
of open-source differential equation solver solutions. However, the type and 
granularity of the available data, including multiplex-immuno-florescence 
images from patient biopsy samples, may facilitate the use of cell-based 
approaches, such as agent-based models, cellular automata, or hybrid models 
[144] . Several freely available tools have been developed for these modeling 
techniques, including NetLogo [145] , CompuCell3D [146] , PhysiCell 
[147] , and HAL [148] . 
Open questions 
The combination of radiotherapy and immunotherapy has the potential 
to induce durable responses and may be more effective than either treatment 
individually for a subset of patients. However, the underlying mechanisms of 
such synergy and methods with which to identify eligible patients remain to 
be determined. Whilst a large selection of mathematical models in oncology 
have been developed to help answer intriguing questions, a close iterative 
dialog between mathematics, cancer biology, immunology, radiobiology, and 
radiation oncology is necessary to advance the rapidly evolving field of radio- 
immunology. 
A current hot topic in the field is the induction of sustained systemic 
anti-tumor immune responses, especially in the setting of metastatic disease. 
Reports of such abscopal effects in clinic, which lead to either partial 
or complete responses are increasing [ 49 , 149 ], yet they remain a rarity. 
Thus, elucidation of the underlying mechanisms of this process and the 
identification of responsible treatment schedules as well as time frames to 
monitor responses may lead to improved tumor regression. The use of 
mathematical models in this setting could shift the discussion from “do 
abscopal effects exist” to “how can we best observe and monitor them.”
This will pave the way for interdisciplinary identification of radiation and 
radio-immunotherapy protocols to best harness the patient immune system 
to achieve systemic tumor clearance. 
However, the relatively high radiosensitivity of immune effector cells 
motivates investigation into radiotherapy modalities with immune sparing 
potential such as spatially fractionated radiotherapy [142] . Exploration of 
the immunological consequences of these modalities alone, or in combination 
with conventional external beam radiation or immunotherapies would be well 
suited to in silico models with explicit spatial components such as agent-based 
models or partial differential equations. Future investigations may reveal 
immune protection in so-called immune reservoirs, opening another avenue 
for personalization of treatment: according to the patient’s tumor immune 
microenvironment. 
Other exciting discoveries in the field are the extreme tissue sparing 
benefits of irradiation at ultra-high dose rates (FLASH-RT). Recent studies 
have shown that FLASH-RT, delivered at ≥40 Gy s −1 compared to 
conventional dose rates of ≥0 . 01 Gy s −1 , leads to tumor growth inhibition 
comparable to conventional RT but has higher tissue sparing effects [150] , 
10 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
and may have immune sparing potential due to the short associated on- 
treatment times. Investigation into possible synergy between FLASH-RT 
and immunotherapies may elucidate the protective effects and determine for 
which patients this treatment would be most beneficial for. 
Conclusion 
Pioneering work in mathematical modeling has both accompanied and 
accelerated the fields of radiation biology and radiation oncology over many 
decades. The increasing understanding of the complex dynamic tumor- 
immune interactions and their perturbation by radiotherapy, in combination 
with expanding computing capabilities, has enabled mathematical oncology 
approaches to help investigate the immunological consequences of radiation 
– alone and in combination with novel immunotherapies. A wealth of 
preclinical- and clinical trial data are collected while testing variations 
of radio-immunotherapies, and mathematical modeling approaches may 
become invaluable tools to complement available techniques to help elucidate 
the mechanistic underpinnings of observed dynamics and responses. While 
clearly promising, and truly exciting, we should proceed with caution. 
Mathematical and computational models developed in isolation without 
proper calibration and validation may not be positioned to advance the fields 
[72] . However, iterative integration of mathematical modeling, computer 
simulation, and quantitative data sciences, including the bourgeoning fields 
of artificial intelligence and machine learning, in oncology in general, and 
particularly radiation oncology, could help propel our understanding of 
the adaptive and ever-evolving dynamics of tumor growth, tumor-immune 
interactions, and radiation responses. This may allow for reliable prediction 
of treatment outcomes, leading to the ultimate goal of therapy personalization 
and optimization. 
Funding 
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health 
U01CA244100 and by support from the Florida Breast Cancer Foundation. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
None. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Rebecca Anne Bekker: Conceptualization, Investigation, Writing –
original draft. Sungjune Kim: Writing – review & editing. Shari Pilon- 
Thomas: Writing – review & editing. Heiko Enderling: Conceptualization, 
Writing – review & editing, Supervision. 
References 
[1] Araujo RP , McElwain DL . A history of the study of solid tumour growth: the 
contribution of mathematical modelling. Bull Math Biol 2004; 66 (5):1039–91 . 
[2] Anderson ARA , Quaranta V . Integrative mathematical oncology. Nat Rev Cancer 
2008; 8 :227–34 . 
[3] Lowengrub JS , et al. Nonlinear modelling of cancer: bridging the gap between 
cells and tumours. Nonlinearity 2009; 23 (1):R1–R91 . 
[4] Rejniak KA , Anderson AR . Hybrid models of tumor growth. Wiley Interdiscip 
Rev Syst Biol Med 2011; 3 (1):115–25 . 
[5] Altrock PM , Liu LL , Michor F . The mathematics of cancer: integrating 
quantitative models. Nat Rev Cancer 2015; 15 (12):730–45 . 
[6] Metzcar J , et al. A review of cell-based computational modeling in cancer 
biology. JCO Clin Cancer Inform 2019; 3 :1–13 . 
[7] Rockne RC , et al. The 2019 mathematical oncology roadmap. Phys Biol 
2019; 16 (4):041005 . 
[8] Crittenden M , et al. Current clinical trials testing combinations of 
immunotherapy and radiation. Semin Radiat Oncol 2015; 25 (1):54–64 . 
[9] Kang J , Demaria S , Formenti S . Current clinical trials testing the combination 
of immunotherapy with radiotherapy. J Immunother Cancer 2016; 4 :51 . 
[10] Kabiljo J , et al. Radiotherapy as a backbone for novel concepts in cancer 
immunotherapy. Cancers (Basel) 2019; 12 (1) . 
[11] Withers HR . The Four R’s of Radiotherapy. Adv Rad Biol 1975; 5 :241–71 . 
[12] Steel GG , McMillan TJ , Peacock JH . The 5Rs of radiobiology. Int J Radiat Biol 
1989; 56 (6):1045–8 . 
[13] Steel GG , et al. The dose-rate effect in human tumour cells. Radiother Oncol 
1987; 9 :299–310 . 
[14] van Leeuwen CM , et al. The alfa and beta of tumours: a review of parameters 
of the linear-quadratic model, derived from clinical radiotherapy studies. Radiat 
Oncol 2018; 13 (1):96 . 
[15] Jeggo P , Löbrich M . Radiation-induced DNA damage responses. Radiat Prot 
Dosimetry 2006; 122 (1-4):124–7 . 
[16] Lomax ME , Folkes LK , O’Neill P . Biological consequences of radiation-induced 
DNA damage: relevance to radiotherapy. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 
2013; 25 (10):578–85 . 
[17] Santivasi WL , Xia F . Ionizing Radiation-Induced DNA Damage, Response, and 
Repair. Antioxid Redox Signaling 2014; 21 (2):251–9 . 
[18] Torgovnick A , Schumacher B . DNA repair mechanisms in cancer development 
and therapy. Front Genet 2015; 6 :157 . 
[19] Hubenak JR , et al. Mechanisms of injury to normal tissue after radiotherapy: a 
review. Plast Reconstr Surg 2014; 133 (1):49e–56e . 
[20] Rockwell S , et al. Hypoxia and radiation therapy: past history, ongoing research, 
and future promise. Curr Mol Med 2009; 9 (4):442–58 . 
[21] Hill RP , et al. Hypoxia and predicting radiation response. Semin Radiat Oncol 
2015; 25 (4):260–72 . 
[22] Pawlik TM , Keyomarsi K . Role of cell cycle in mediating sensitivity to 
radiotherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2004; 59 (4):928–42 . 
[23] Hermens AF , Barendsen GW . Changes of cell proliferation characteristics 
in a rat rhabdomyosarcoma before and after x-irradiation. Eur J Cancer 
1969; 5 (2):173–89 . 
[24] Stephens TC , Currie GA , Peacock JH . Repopulation of gamma-irradiated Lewis 
lung carcinoma by malignant cells and host macrophage progenitors. Br J Cancer 
1978; 38 (5):573–82 . 
[25] Huang Q , et al. Caspase 3-mediated stimulation of tumor cell repopulation 
during cancer radiotherapy. Nat Med 2011; 17 (7):860–6 . 
[26] Sia J , et al. Molecular mechanisms of radiation-induced cancer cell death: a 
primer. Front Cell Dev Biol 2020; 8 . 
[27] Bentzen SM , et al. Clinical radiobiology of squamous cell carcinoma of the 
oropharynx. Int J Radiat Biol 1991; 20 (6):1197–206 . 
[28] Yoder AK , et al. Cancer radiotherapy: general considerations and human 
radiobiology Locoregional Radionuclide Cancer Therapy . Wong FC, editor, 
Cham: Springer; 2021. Editor . 
[29] Hall EJ , Giaccia AJ . Radiobology for the Radiologist . 7 Ed. Philadelphia: Wolters 
Kluwer Health/Lippinsott Williams & Wilkins; 2012 . 
[30] Golden EB , Apetoh L . Radiotherapy and immunogenic cell death. Semin Radiat 
Oncol 2015; 25 (1):11–17 . 
[31] Galluzzi L , et al. Immunogenic cell death in cancer and infectious disease. Nat 
Rev Immunol 2017; 17 (2):97–111 . 
[32] Galluzzi L , et al. Consensus guidelines for the definition, detection and 
interpretation of immunogenic cell death. J Immunother Cancer 2020; 8 (1) . 
[33] Fucikova J , et al. Detection of immunogenic cell death and its relevance for 
cancer therapy. Cell Death Dis 2020; 11 (11):1013 . 
[34] Lind NA , et al. Regulation of the nucleic acid-sensing Toll-like receptors. Nat 
Rev Immunol 2021 . 
[35] Okude H , Ori D , Kawai T . Signaling through nucleic acid sensors and their 
roles in inflammatory diseases. Front Immunol 2020; 11 :625833 . 
[36] Feng M , et al. Phagocytosis checkpoints as new targets for cancer 
immunotherapy. Nature reviews. Cancer 2019; 19 (10):568–86 . 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
11 
[37] Behboudi S , et al. The effects of DNA containing CpG motif on dendritic cells. 
Immunology 2000; 99 (3):361–6 . 
[38] Larkin B , et al. Cutting edge: activation of STING in T cells induces type I IFN 
responses and cell death. J Immunol 2017; 199 (2):397–402 . 
[39] Marciscano AE , Anandasabapathy N . The role of dendritic cells in cancer and 
anti-tumor immunity. Semin Immunol 2021; 52 :101481 . 
[40] Lee Y , et al. Therapeutic effects of ablative radiation on local tumor 
require CD8 + T cells: changing strategies for cancer treatment. Blood 
2009; 114 (3):589–95 . 
[41] Merrick A , et al. Immunosuppressive effects of radiation on human dendritic 
cells: reduced IL-12 production on activation and impairment of naive T-cell 
priming. Br J Cancer 2005; 92 (8):1450–8 . 
[42] Wan S , et al. Chemotherapeutics and radiation stimulate MHC class I expression 
through elevated interferon-beta signaling in breast cancer cells. PLoS One 
2012; 7 (3):e32542 . 
[43] Song C , Payne J , Levitt S . Vascularity and blood flow in X-irradiated walker 
carcinoma 256 of rats. Radiology 1972; 104 (3):693–7 . 
[44] Deng L , et al. Irradiation and anti-PD-L1 treatment synergistically promote 
antitumor immunity in mice. J Clin Invest 2014; 124 (2):687–95 . 
[45] Arnold KM , et al. The impact of radiation on the tumor microenvironment: 
effect of dose and fractionation schedules. Cancer Growth Metastasis 
2018; 11 :1–17 . 
[46] Brandmaier A , Formenti SC . The impact of radiation therapy on innate and 
adaptive tumor immunity. Semin Radiat Oncol 2020; 30 (2):139–44 . 
[47] Boustani, J., et al., The 6th R of radiobiology: reactivation of anti-tumor 
immune response. Cancers (Basel), 2019. 11(6). 
[48] Demaria S , et al. Ionizing radiation inhibition of distant untreated tumors 
(abscopal effect) is immune mediated. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 
2004; 58 (3):862–70 . 
[49] Abuodeh Y , Venkat P , Kim S . Systematic review of case reports on the abscopal 
effect. Curr Probl Cancer 2016; 40 (1):25–37 . 
[50] Demaria S , Formenti SC . The abscopal effect 67 years later: from a side story to 
center stage. Br J Radiol 2020; 93 (1109):20200042 . 
[51] Dovedi SJ , et al. Acquired resistance to fractionated radiotherapy can be 
overcome by concurrent PD-L1 blockade. Cancer Res 2014; 74 (19):5458–68 . 
[52] Verma V , et al. PD-1 blockade in subprimed CD8 cells induces 
dysfunctional PD-1( + )CD38(hi) cells and anti-PD-1 resistance. Nat Immunol 
2019; 20 (9):1231–43 . 
[53] Young KH , et al. Optimizing timing of immunotherapy improves control of 
tumors by hypofractionated radiation therapy. PLoS One 2016; 11 (6):e0157164 . 
[54] Croft M , et al. The significance of OX40 and OX40L to T-cell biology and 
immune disease. Immunol Rev 2009; 229 (1):173–91 . 
[55] Shaverdian N , et al. Previous radiotherapy and the clinical activity and toxicity 
of pembrolizumab in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer: a secondary 
analysis of the KEYNOTE-001 phase 1 trial. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18 (7):895–
903 . 
[56] Gray JE , et al. Three-Year Overall Survival with Durvalumab after 
Chemoradiotherapy in Stage III NSCLC-Update from PACIFIC. J Thorac 
Oncol 2020; 15 (2):288–93 . 
[57] Dewan MZ , et al. Fractionated but not single-dose radiotherapy induces an 
immune-mediated abscopal effect when combined with anti-CTLA-4 antibody. 
Clin Cancer Res 2009; 15 (17):5379–88 . 
[58] Vanpouille-Box 
C , 
et 
al. 
DNA 
exonuclease 
Trex1 
regulates 
radiotherapy-induced tumour immunogenicity. Nat Commun 2017; 8 :15618 . 
[59] Klug F , et al. Low-dose irradiation programs macrophage differentiation to 
an iNOS( + )/M1 phenotype that orchestrates effective T cell immunotherapy. 
Cancer Cell 2013; 24 (5):589–602 . 
[60] Pilot Study of the Safety/Efficacy of Combination Checkpoint Blockade 
+ External Beam Radiotherapy in Stage IV Melanoma. Available from: https: 
//ClinicalTrials.gov/show/NCT02659540 . 
[61] Michor F , Beal K . Improving cancer treatment via mathematical modeling: 
surmounting the challenges is worth the effort. Cell 2015; 163 (5):1059–63 . 
[62] Caudell JJ , et al. The future of personalised radiotherapy for head and neck 
cancer. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18 (5):e266–73 . 
[63] Enderling H , et al. Integrating mathematical modeling into the roadmap for 
personalized adaptive radiation therapy. Trends Cancer 2019; 5 (8):467–74 . 
[64] Aherne NJ , et al. Mathematical oncology and it’s application in non melanoma 
skin cancer - A primer for radiation oncology professionals. Oral Oncol 
2020; 103 :104473 . 
[65] Hoyte L , Kaur J , Buchan AM . Lost in translation: taking neuroprotection from 
animal models to clinical trials. Exp Neurol 2004; 188 (2):200–4 . 
[66] Meier-Schellersheim M , Fraser IDC , Klauschen F . Multiscale modeling for 
biologists. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 2009; 1 (1):4–14 . 
[67] Hamis, S., S. Stratiev, and G.G. Powathil, Uncertainty and Sensitivity Analyses 
Methods for Agent-Based Mathematical Models: An Introductory Review, in 
The Physics of Cancer. p. 1-37. 
[68] Byrne HM . Dissecting cancer through mathematics: from the cell to the animal 
model. Nat Rev Cancer 2010; 10 (3):221–30 . 
[69] Karolak A , et al. Towards personalized computational oncology: from spatial 
models of tumour spheroids, to organoids, to tissues. J R Soc Interface 
2018(138):15 . 
[70] Brady-Nicholls R , et al. Prostate-specific antigen dynamics predict individual 
responses to intermittent androgen deprivation. Nat Commun 2020; 11 (1): 
1750 . 
[71] Glazar DJ , et al. Tumor volume dynamics as an early biomarker for 
patient-specific evolution of resistance and progression in recurrent high-grade 
glioma. J Clin Med 2020; 9 (7) . 
[72] Brady R , Enderling H . Mathematical models of cancer: when to predict novel 
therapies, and when not to. Bull Math Biol 2019; 81 (10):3722–31 . 
[73] Leder K , et al. Mathematical modeling of PDGF-driven glioblastoma reveals 
optimized radiation dosing schedules. Cell 2014; 156 (3):603–16 . 
[74] Zahid MU , et al. Forecasting Individual Patient Response to Radiotherapy in 
Head and Neck Cancer with a Dynamic Carrying Capacity Model. Int J Radiat 
Oncol Biol Phys 2021 . 
[75] Paczkowski M , et al. Reciprocal interactions between tumour cell populations 
enhance growth and reduce radiation sensitivity in prostate cancer. Commun Biol 
2021; 4 (1):6 . 
[76] Liu J , et al. A time-resolved experimental–mathematical model for predicting 
the response of glioma cells to single-dose radiation therapy. Integr Biol 
2021; 13 (7):167–83 . 
[77] Walker R , Enderling H . From concept to clinic: Mathematically informed 
immunotherapy. Curr Probl Cancer 2016; 40 (1):68–83 . 
[78] Murray JD . Mathematical Biology. 3 ed. Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics. 
New York, NY: Springer; 2002. p. 551 . 
[79] Wangersky PJ . Lotka-Volterra population models. Annual Rev Ecol Systemat 
1978; 9 :189–218 . 
[80] Dunn GP , Old LJ , Schreiber RD . The immunobiology of cancer 
immunosurveillance and immunoediting. Immunity 2004; 21 (2):137–48 . 
[81] Hurvich CM , Tsai CL . Regression and time series model selection in small 
samples. Biometrika 1989; 76 (2):297–397 . 
[82] Fang Y . Asymptotic equivalence between cross-validations and akaike 
information criteria in mixed-effects models. J Data Sci 2011; 9 (1):15–21 . 
[83] Yamamoto Y , et al. Tumour and immune cell dynamics explain the PSA bounce 
after prostate cancer brachytherapy. Br J Cancer 2016; 115 (2):195–202 . 
[84] Chadwick KH , Leenhouts HP . A molecular theory of cell survival. Phys Med 
Biol 1973; 18 (78) . 
[85] McMahon SJ . The linear quadratic model: usage, interpretation and challenges. 
Phys Med Biol 2018; 64 (1):01TR01 . 
[86] Barendsen GW . Dose fractionation, dose rate and iso-effect relationships for 
normal tissue responses. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1982; 8 (11):1981–97 . 
[87] Dale RG . The application of the linear-quadratic dose-effect equation 
to fractionated and protracted radiotherapy. Br J Radiol 1985; 58 (690): 
515–528 . 
[88] Jones B , et al. The role of biologically effective dose (BED) in clinical oncology. 
Clin Oncol 2001; 3 :71–81 . 
12 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
[89] Masunaga S , Ono K . Significance of the response of quiescent cell populations 
within solid tumors in cancer therapy. J Radiat Res (Tokyo) 2002; 43 (1):11–25 . 
[90] Prokopiou S , et al. A proliferation saturation index to predict radiation response 
and personalize radiotherapy fractionation. Radiat Oncol 2015; 10 :159 . 
[91] Poleszczuk J , et al. Predicting patient-specific radiotherapy protocols based on 
mathematical model choice for proliferation saturation index. Bull Math Biol 
2018; 80 (5):1195–206 . 
[92] Sunassee ED , et al. Proliferation saturation index in an adaptive Bayesian 
approach to predict patient-specific radiotherapy responses. Int J Radiat Biol 
2019; 95 (10):1421–6 . 
[93] Zahid MU , et al. Proliferation saturation index to characterize response to RT 
and evaluate altered fractionation in head and neck cancer. Appl Rad Oncol 
2021; 18 (1):18–25 . 
[94] Lewin, T.D., et al., Using mathematical modelling to identify data requirements 
for increased prediction accuracy in radiotherapy. arXiv, 2022. 
[95] Lewin TD , et al. The importance of dead material within a tumour on the 
dynamics in response to radiotherapy. Phys Med Biol 2020; 65 (1):015007 . 
[96] Lewin T , et al. A three phase model to investigate the effects of dead material 
on the growth of avascular tumours. Mathematical Modell Natural Phenomena 
2020; 15 (1) . 
[97] Eschrich S , et al. Systems biology modeling of the radiation sensitivity network: a 
biomarker discovery platform. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2009; 75 (2):497–505 . 
[98] Torres-Roca JF , et al. Integration of a radiosensitivity molecular signature into 
the assessment of local recurrence risk in breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol 
Phys 2015; 93 (3):631–8 . 
[99] Ahmed KA , et al. The radiosensitivity index predicts for overall survival in 
glioblastoma. Oncotarget 2015; 6 (33):34414–22 . 
[100] Scott JG , et al. A genome-based model for adjusting radiotherapy dose (GARD): 
a retrospective, cohort-based study. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18 (2):202–11 . 
[101] Scott JG , et al. Pan-cancer prediction of radiotherapy benefit using 
genomic-adjusted radiation dose (GARD): a cohort-based pooled analysis. 
Lancet Oncol 2021 . 
[102] Lopez Alfonso JC , et al. Temporally feathered intensity-modulated radiation 
therapy: A planning technique to reduce normal tissue toxicity. Med Phys 
2018; 45 (7):3466–74 . 
[103] Parsai S , et al. Feasibility of temporally feathered intensity modulated 
radiation therapy plans: techniques to reduce normal tissue toxicity. Int J Rad 
Oncolog y ∗Biolog y ∗Physics 2018; 102 (3) . 
[104] Parsai S , et al. Technical Note: A step-by-step guide to Temporally Feathered 
Radiation Therapy planning for head and neck cancer. J Appl Clin Med Phys 
2020; 21 (7):209–15 . 
[105] Moore H , Li NK . A mathematical model for chronic myelogenous leukemia 
(CML) and T cell interaction. J Theor Biol 2004; 227 (4):513–23 . 
[106] Leon K , et al. How regulatory CD25( + )CD4( + ) T cells impinge on tumor 
immunobiology? On the existence of two alternative dynamical classes of 
tumors. J Theor Biol 2007; 247 (1):122–37 . 
[107] Arciero JC , Jackson TL , Kirschner DE . A mathematical model of 
tumor-immune evasion and siRNA treatment. Discrete Continuous Dynamical 
Syst 2004; 4 (1):39–58 . 
[108] Eftimie R , Bramson JL , Earn DJ . Interactions between the immune system 
and cancer: a brief review of non-spatial mathematical models. Bull Math Biol 
2011; 73 (1):2–32 . 
[109] Eftimie R , Gillard JJ , Cantrell DA . Mathematical models for immunology: 
current state of the art and future research directions. Bull Math Biol 
2016; 78 (10):2091–134 . 
[110] Mahlbacher GE , Reihmer KC , Frieboes HB . Mathematical modeling of 
tumor-immune cell interactions. J Theor Biol 2019; 469 :47–60 . 
[111] Makaryan SZ , Cess CG , Finley SD . Modeling immune cell behavior across 
scales in cancer. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 2020; 12 (4):e1484 . 
[112] Kuznetsov V , et al. Nonlinear dyanmics of immunogenic tumors: parameter 
estimation and global bifurcation analysis. Bull Math Biol 1994; 56 (2):295–321 . 
[113] Kuznetsov V , Knott G . Modeling tumor regrowth and immunotherapy. Math 
Comput Modell 2001; 33 :1275–87 . 
[114] Siu H , et al. Tumor dormancy. I. Regression of BCL1 tumor and induction of a 
dormant tumor state in mice chimeric at the major histocompatibility complex. 
J Immunol 1986; 137 :1376–82 . 
[115] Uhr JW , et al. Cancer dormancy: studies of the murine BCL1l ymphoma. 
Cancer Res (Supp) 1991; 51 (5045s-5053s) . 
[116] Teng MW , et al. Immune-mediated dormancy: an equilibrium with cancer. J 
Leukoc Biol 2008; 84 (4):988–93 . 
[117] Poleszczuk JT , et al. Abscopal benefits of localized radiotherapy depend on 
activated T-cell trafficking and distribution between metastatic lesions. Cancer 
Res 2016; 76 (5):1009–18 . 
[118] Walker R , et al. Immune interconnectivity of anatomically distant tumors 
as a potential mediator of systemic responses to local therapy. Sci Rep 
2018; 8 (1):9474 . 
[119] Serre R , et al. Immunologically effective dose: a practical model for 
immuno-radiotherapy. Oncotarget 2018; 9 (61):31812–3819 . 
[120] Sung W , et al. A tumor-immune interaction model for hepatocellular carcinoma 
based on measured lymphocyte counts in patients undergoing radiotherapy. 
Radiother Oncol 2020; 151 :73–81 . 
[121] Byun JH , et al. A tumor-immune interaction model for synergistic combinations 
of anti PD-L1 and ionizing irradiation treatment. Pharmaceutics 2020; 12 (9) . 
[122] Hatzikirou H , et al. Cancer therapeutic potential of combinatorial immuno- 
and vasomodulatory interventions. J R Soc Interface 2015; 12 (112) . 
[123] Montaseri G , et al. A minimal modeling framework of radiation and immune 
system synergy to assist radiotherapy planning. J Theor Biol 2020; 486 :110099 . 
[124] Alfonso JCL , et al. On the immunological consequences of conventionally 
fractionated radiotherapy. iScience 2020; 23 (3):100897 . 
[125] Sotolongo-Grau O , et al. Immune system-tumour efficiency ratio as a new 
oncological index for radiotherapy treatment optimization. Math Med Biol 
2009; 26 (4):297–307 . 
[126] Poleszczuk J , Enderling H . The optimal radiation dose to induce robust systemic 
anti-tumor immunity. Int J Mol Sci 2018; 19 (11) . 
[127] Golden EB , et al. Local radiotherapy and granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor to generate abscopal responses in patients 
with metastatic solid tumours: a proof-of-principle trial. Lancet Oncol 
2015; 16 (7):795–803 . 
[128] Serre R , et al. Mathematical modeling of cancer immunotherapy and its synergy 
with radiotherapy. Cancer Res 2016; 76 (17):4931–40 . 
[129] Vaage J . Influence of tumor antigen on maintenance versus depression of 
tumor-specific immunity. Cancer Res 1973; 33 :493–503 . 
[130] Chakwizira A , et al. Mathematical modelling of the synergistic combination 
of radiotherapy and indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) inhibitory 
immunotherapy against glioblastoma. Br J Radiol 2018; 91 (1087):20170857 . 
[131] Miyazaki T , et al. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase as a new target for malignant 
glioma therapy. Laboratory investigation. J Neurosurg 2009; 111 (2):230–7 . 
[132] Ahlstedt J , et al. Increased effect of two-fraction radiotherapy in 
conjunction with IDO1 inhibition in experimental glioblastoma. PLoS 
One 2020; 15 (5):e0233617 . 
[133] Kosinsky Y , et al. Radiation and PD-(L)1 treatment combinations: immune 
response and dose optimization via a predictive systems model. J Immunother 
Cancer 2018; 6 (1):17 . 
[134] Chen DS , Mellman I . Oncology meets immunology: the cancer-immunity 
cycle. Immunity 2013; 39 (1):1–10 . 
[135] Alfonso JCL , et al. Tumor-immune ecosystem dynamics define an individual 
Radiation Immune Score to predict pan-cancer radiocurability. Neoplasia 
2021; 23 (11):1110–22 . 
[136] Poleszczuk J , et al. Neoadjuvant radiotherapy of early-stage breast cancer and 
long-term disease-free survival. Breast Cancer Res 2017; 19 (1):75 . 
[137] Alfonso JC , et al. Immunologic Consequences of Sequencing Cancer 
Radiotherapy and Surgery. JCO Clin Cancer Inform 2019; 3 :1–16 . 
[138] Lai X , Friedman A . Mathematical modeling of cancer treatment with radiation 
and PD-L1 inhibitor. Science China Mathematics 2020; 63 (3):465–84 . 
[139] Asperud J , et al. Spatially fractionated radiotherapy: tumor response modelling 
including immunomodulation. Phys Med Biol 2021; 66 (17) . 
Neoplasia Vol. 28, No. C, 2022 
Mathematical modeling of radiotherapy 
R.A. Bekker et al. 
13 
[140] Kohler A . Zur röntgentiefentherapie mit massendosen, 56. MMW; 1909. 
p. 2314–16 . 
[141] Yan W , et al. Spatially fractionated radiation therapy: history, present and the 
future. Clin Transl Radiat Oncol 2019; 20 :30–8 . 
[142] Markovsky E , et al. An antitumor immune response is evoked by partial-volume 
single-dose radiation in 2 murine models. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 
2019; 103 (3):697–708 . 
[143] Asur RS , et al. Spatially fractionated radiation induces cytotoxicity and changes 
in gene expression in bystander and radiation adjacent murine carcinoma cells. 
Radiat Res 2012; 177 (6):751–65 . 
[144] Enderling H , Hlatky L , Hanhnfeldt P . Immunoediting: evidence of the 
multifaceted role of the immune system in self-metastatic tumor growth. 
Theoretical Biology and Medical Modelling 2012; 9 (1) . 
[145] Wilensky, U., NetLogo. 1999. 
[146] Swat MH , et al. Multi-scale modeling of tissues using compuCell3D. In: 
Asthagiri AR, Arking AP, editors. Methods in Cell Biology . Academic Press; 2012. 
p. 325–66. Editors . 
[147] Ghaffarizadeh A , et al. Physicell: an open source physics-based cell simulator for 
3-D multicellular systems. PLoS Comput Biol 2018; 14 (2):e1005991 . 
[148] Bravo R , et al. Hybrid Automata Library: A flexible platform for hybrid 
modeling with real-time visualization. PLoS Comput Biol 2020; 16 (3):e1007635 . 
[149] Dagoglu N , et al. Abscopal effect of radiotherapy in the immunotherapy era: 
systematic review of reported cases. Cureus 2019; 11 (2):e4103 . 
[150] Bourhis J , et al. Clinical translation of FLASH radiotherapy: why and how? 
Radiother Oncol 2019; 139 :11–17 . 
[151] da Silva JL , et al. Cancer immunotherapy: the art of targeting the tumor immune 
microenvironment. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2019; 84 (2):227–40 . 
