Perspective on using non-human primates in Exposome research
Qiu Tu a,b, Gaojing Liu a,b,c, Xiuyun Liu a,b,c, Jiao Zhang a,b, Wenxian Xiao a,d,e,  
Longbao Lv a,d,e,*, Bo Zhao a,b,d,*
a Key Laboratory of Genetic Evolution & Animal Models, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China
b Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan Province, and KIZ-CUHK Joint Laboratory of 
Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common Diseases, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China
c University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China
d Primate Facility, National Research Facility for Phenotypic & Genetic Analysis of Model Animals, and National Resource Center for Non-Human Primates, Kunming 
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China
e National Resource Center for Non-Human Primates, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650107, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Exposome
Pollutome
Ultrafine nanoparticles
Animal model
Non-human primate
A B S T R A C T
The physiological and pathological changes in the human body caused by environmental pressures are collec­
tively referred to as the Exposome. Human society is facing escalating environmental pollution, leading to a 
rising prevalence of associated diseases, including respiratory diseases, cardiovascular diseases, neurological 
disorders, reproductive development disorders, among others. Vulnerable populations to the pathogenic effects 
of environmental pollution include those in the prenatal, infancy, and elderly stages of life. Conducting Expo­
some mechanistic research and proposing effective health interventions are urgent in addressing the current 
severe environmental pollution. In this review, we address the core issues and bottlenecks faced by current 
Exposome research, specifically focusing on the most toxic ultrafine nanoparticles. We summarize multiple 
research models being used in Exposome research. Especially, we discuss the limitations of rodent animal models 
in mimicking human physiopathological phenotypes, and prospect advantages and necessity of non-human 
primates in Exposome research based on their evolutionary relatedness, anatomical and physiological similar­
ities to human. Finally, we declare the initiation of NHPE (Non-Human Primate Exposome) project for con­
ducting Exposome research using non-human primates and provide insights into its feasibility and key areas of 
focus.
Synopsis: Non-human primate models hold unique advantages in human Exposome research.
1. Conceptual introduction
1.1. Exposome
Since the advent of genome sequencing technology, genomic infor­
mation of many biological species including human has been deciphered 
(Gibbs, 2020). This has allowed us to gain a deeper understanding of the 
operational principles of life at the genetic level and the mechanistic 
pathways underlying the occurrence and progression of human diseases. 
However, it is estimated that only about 15 % of human diseases can be 
entirely attributed to genetic variations. Correspondingly, approxi­
mately 85 % of human diseases do not solely rely on genetic variations 
but result from the interplay between genetics and the environment 
(Berg, 2016; Scheen and Junien, 2012). For instance, diseases such as 
cardiovascular disorders, tumors, and neurodegenerative diseases are 
not only associated with individual genetic variations but also heavily 
influenced by factors such as age, lifestyle, and occupational exposures 
in terms of their incidence and progression (Alonso-Curbelo et al., 2021; 
Kwo and Christiani, 2017). Therefore, a profound comprehension of the 
impact of environmental factors on human health and the driving 
mechanisms behind human diseases has become a crucial focus in 
post-genomic era health research.
The concept of the Exposome was introduced by Christopher Paul 
Wild in 2005, referring to the collective term for physiological and 
pathological changes in the human body caused by various environ­
mental exposure factors throughout the entire lifespan (Wild, 2005). In 
* Corresponding authors at: Key Laboratory of Genetic Evolution & Animal Models, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 
650223, China.
E-mail addresses: lvlongbao@mail.kiz.ac.cn (L. Lv), zhaobo@mail.kiz.ac.cn (B. Zhao). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ecoenv
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2024.117199
Received 18 March 2024; Received in revised form 2 August 2024; Accepted 13 October 2024  
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
Available online 18 October 2024 
0147-6513/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 
contrast to the emphasis on the importance of genetic variations in 
genomic research, the Exposome underscores the role of non-genetic 
factors in human health. These non-genetic factors can be categorized 
as ecosystem disturbances, societal behaviors, 
lifestyles, and 
physical-chemical factors, among others (Vermeulen et al., 2020). 
Simultaneously, Exposomics encompasses a research framework span­
ning various levels, including the genome, transcriptome, proteome, 
epigenome, and metabolome, with the aim of comprehensively under­
standing the environmental and genetic interplays in human physio­
logical and pathological scenarios (Wu et al., 2023). In fact, drawing 
inspiration from Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) and Bio­
bank databases (Patel et al., 2010), the concept of Environment-wide 
association study (EWAS) has been introduced (Patel et al., 2013). The 
construction of EWAS databases is still in its early stage. The integration 
of comprehensive EWAS data resources, including human-related omics 
data, cohort data, and those obtained from cell lines and various living 
organism models, requires further efforts. Moreover, while EWAS often 
consolidates data from short-term time points, there is a relative scarcity 
of long-term, continuous monitoring data from specific individuals or 
populations. Additionally, EWAS mega data identifies numerous genetic 
risk factors and environmental exposure factors, but the in-depth 
mechanistic understanding of these factors remain limited (Wu et al., 
2023). Thus, two aspects need to be promised in current Exposome 
research: there is a need to prioritize the collection of long-term (e.g. 
life-long) continuous data to improve research breadth, meanwhile 
detailed biological mechanistic studies are essential for study depth.
1.2. Pollutome
Environmental pollution is undeniably the central focus of Exposome 
research. Environmental pollution can be broadly categorized into 
subtypes such as air pollution, water pollution, soil pollution, and 
occupational exposure (Fuller et al., 2022). In order to facilitate a sci­
entific, systematic, and hierarchical understanding of environmental 
pollution, Philip J Landrigan and colleagues proposed the concept of the 
"Pollutome" in 2017 (Landrigan et al., 2018a). The Pollutome refers to 
the sum total of all pollutants that have detrimental effects on human 
health. Thus, the Pollutome constitutes a subset within the Exposome 
category. Based on the mechanisms of pollutants and their association 
with human diseases, the Pollutome is further divided into three zones 
(Landrigan et al., 2018a). Zone 1 comprises known pollutants with clear 
toxic mechanisms and well-established etiological effects on specific 
human diseases. Relevant data has been consolidated into the Global 
Burden of Disease (GBD) database (Global, 2022). Zone 2 includes 
emerging pollutants, where it has been recognized that these pollutants 
have toxic effects on human health, but the quantitative relationship 
with specific diseases and the resulting societal disease burden are not 
yet clear. Examples include PM2.5 and its relationship with diabetes, 
preterm birth, childhood autism, and late-life dementia (Wu et al., 2022; 
Malley et al., 2017; Heusinkveld et al., 2016; Kioumourtzoglou et al., 
2016). Relevant data has not yet been consolidated into the GBD data­
base. Zone 3 refers to emerging pollutants that may have strong toxic 
effects, but the toxic mechanisms, quantitative relationships, and the 
types of diseases and mechanisms they cause are currently unclear. 
Examples include new pesticides, herbicides, battery waste, etc. Rele­
vant data has not been consolidated into the GBD database. The toxic 
mechanisms of pollutants classified in zone 1 are relatively clear, and 
corresponding prevention and control measures have been implemented 
nationally or internationally (Pascual, 2021). However, substantial 
detailed work is still required to understand the pathogenic mechanisms 
of zone 2 pollutants, as well as the identification, disease associations, 
toxic mechanisms, and corresponding prevention and control measures 
for potential pollutants in zone 3.
It is estimated that all types of environmental pollution causes 
approximately 9 million deaths globally per year (Landrigan et al., 
2018a). Among them, the mortality and morbidity rates attributed to air 
pollution are particularly significant. Based on physical characteristics 
and composition, air pollution can be further subdivided into solid 
particulate pollution such as black carbon particles, microplastics, 
nanoplastics, tire particles, etc., and gaseous chemical pollution such as 
ammonia (Manisalidis et al., 2020). The escalating microplastics and 
nanoplastics in the oceans are major emerging pollutants that are being 
paid attention to in the research field (Peng et al., 2020). These sub­
stances do not exist in isolation but often exist in the form of complex 
multi-component aerosols. In the process of biosphere recycling, they 
may deposit in rivers, lakes, swamps, etc., intermingling with pollutants 
such as heavy metals (Nguyen et al., 2019; Ivleva, 2021), further 
increasing the difficulty of toxicological research on specific 
components.
1.3. Environmental ultrafine nanoparticles (UFPs)
Regarding pollutants grouped in zone 1 of Pollutome, there are 
outstanding reviews for reference (Rajagopalan et al., 2018; Landrigan 
et al., 2018b; Cohen et al., 2017). Here we focused on environmental 
ultrafine nanoparticles for further discussion. It is noteworthy that 
coarse particles in the atmosphere, with diameters in the tens of mi­
crometers (PM10), tend to settle down rapidly, resulting in limited harm 
to human health. Micron-sized fine particles (PM2.5), when exposed 
through inhalation, often remain in the respiratory tract and lungs 
(Thomas, 2013; Brown et al., 2013). The cilia and mucosal systems in 
the human respiratory system can effectively clear most fine particles 
(Bustamante-Marin and Ostrowski, 2017). However, nanoscale ultrafine 
particles, characterized by small size, large quantity, and high surface 
area, exhibit heightened toxicity (Kwon et al., 2020a). In addition to 
respiratory exposure, dietary intake and skin contact are exposure 
pathways that require attention as well (Han et al., 2023). Ultrafine 
particles can enter the human circulatory system through multiple 
pathways such as deep lung alveoli, olfactory bulbs, digestive tract, and 
skin (Calder´on-Garcidue˜nas and Ayala, 2022). It is generally believed 
that ultrafine particles with a diameter smaller than 240 nanometers can 
penetrate almost all barrier systems in the human body, including the 
blood-brain barrier (Heusinkveld et al., 2016; Wick et al., 2010), 
blood-placenta barrier (Medley et al., 2023), and blood-testis barrier (Ni 
et al., 2021). These kinds of particles deposit in various organs and tis­
sues, disrupting the microenvironmental homeostasis, disturbing phys­
iological processes as well as accelerating the progression of diseases 
(Ural et al., 2022). Indeed, types of UFPs were detected in multiple or­
gans and tissues from bodies at embryonic stages (Bos et al., 2023) or 
adults (Zhang et al., 2024).
The body possesses inherent mechanisms for clearing ultrafine par­
ticles, such as macrophages in the immune system (Geiser et al., 2008) 
and lymphatic clearance systems in the brain (Schraufnagel, 2020). 
However, faced with escalating pollution, these clearance systems may 
operate under overwhelmed conditions. The glymphatic clearance sys­
tem operates primarily during sleep, and individuals with sleep disor­
ders may experience inefficiencies in clearance of ultrafine particles 
from brain (Hussain et al., 2023). This may explain the causal associa­
tion between PM2.5 and childhood autism, as well as late-life dementia 
(Costa et al., 2020; Fu et al., 2019). Although we realized the toxicity of 
ultrafine particles, health mitigation measures remain limited. Consid­
ering that we unavoidably breathe them in continuously, and our daily 
diet also unavoidably exposes us to substances like nanoplastics, simple 
protective measures, such as wearing N95 masks (Adhikari et al., 2018) 
or supplementing antioxidants deliberately to counteract oxidative 
stress caused by ultrafine particles (Li et al., 2022a), might be quite 
insufficient.
Q. Tu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
2 
Table 1 
animal models in UFPs Exposome research.
Life stage
UFP subtype
Animal model
Methodology
Major conclusions
Reference
Early-stage 
embryos
Diesel exhaust
C57BL/6 mice
Pregnant mice exposure to UFPs at a low dose 
(LD, 100 mg/m3) or high dose (HD, 500 mg/m3) 
for 6 hours per day from gestational day 0.5–18.5
Decreased placental weights and crown to rump 
lengths and disturbed lipid metabolism in 
offspring, especially in female in the LD exposure 
group
(Behlen et al., 
2021a)
Polystyrene
ICR mice
Exposed pregnant mice to 0.5 and 5μm with 100 
and 1000 μg/L polystyrene MPs from gestational 
day 0 to production day
Increased risk of fatty acid metabolism 
disruption in offspring: In both sexes, 5 µm 
particle exposure reduced β-oxidation and fatty 
acid synthesis. Amino acid metabolism is 
reduced in females
(Luo et al., 2019)
Polystyrene
C57BL/6-mated 
BALB/c mice
Pregnant mice were intraperitoneally injected 
polystyrene at a dose of 250 μg in a 200 μL saline 
solution on days 5.5 and 7.5 of gestation
Elevated embryo reabsorption rate and 
decreased the number and diameter of uterine 
arterioles in PS particle exposure; disturbed 
maternal-fetal immune balance
(Hu et al., 2021)
Ultrafine particles 
from the air
C57BL/6 J pun/ 
pun mice
Pregnant mice were exposed by intratracheal 
instillation repeated six times during the 
gestation day 6.5, 8.5, 10.5, 12.5, 14.5 and 
16.5 day, and 12 μg or 400 μg/kg
Increased embryo reabsorption, intrauterine 
oxidative damage and inflammation; decreased 
uterus, placental, and fetal weights
(Morales-Rubio 
et al., 2019)
PS/100 nm and 157 ±
52 µm
Zebrafish, 
embryos/ larvae 
(Danio rerio)
μ-PS or n-PS suspended in 50 mL exposure 
solution
PS particles have high affinity to embryonic 
chorions leading to an antioxidant system 
disorder in the embryo, and enter the blood 
stream liver and brain of fish larvae after 
hatching.
(Duan et al., 2020)
Organ  
development
Polystyrene 
nanoparticles
Kunming mice
Pregnant mice were administered gestationally 
and lactationally PS-NPs dispersed in drinking 
water at different doses of 0, 0.1, 1 and 10 mg/L
Cause hepatic and testicular toxicity in male 
mouse pups.
(Huang et al., 
2022a)
Carbon black 
nanoparticle (CB-NP)
Pregnant ICR mice Intranasal instillation 1 mL/kg body weight 
suspension of CB-NP (95 μg/kg body weight) or 
ultra-pure water
Dysregulation of major functional genes and 
mental neurotoxicity
(Onoda et al., 
2018)
Silica nanoparticles
sea urchin
Studying the sperm of the sea urchin through a 
multidisciplinary approach, including 
developmental biology, ecotoxicology, 
biochemistry, and microscopy analyses.
Increased undeveloped and anomalous embryos 
in SiO2 NPs in sea urchin offspring, SiO2 NPs 
exposure did not affect fertilization ability
(Gambardella 
et al., 2015)
Nylon and 
polyethylene 
terephthalate
Female C57BL/6 
mice
Human and murine alveolar and airway-type 
organoids as well as air-liquid interface cultures
Nylon microfibers inhibited airway epithelial 
differentiation in airway organoids
(Song et al., 2023)
Infancy
Ultrafine Particulate
C57BL/6 n
Exposed time- mated C57Bl/6 n mice to filtered 
air (FA) or UFPs at a low dose (LD, 55μg/m3) and 
high dose (HD, 275μg/m3) and challenged their 
offspring with RSV or sham (control) shortly 
after birth to evaluate infection responses.
Reduced Offspring body weights in response to 
infection in the LD RSV group, particularly 
females. Increased levels of oxidative stress and 
inflammation related genes in HD exposed male 
offspring in RSV-infected groups.
(Lau et al., 2022)
Ultrafine Particulate
C57BL/6 J mice
Exposed to ultrafine elemental carbon at 50 μg/ 
m3 from postnatal days 4–7 and 10–13 for 
4 hours per day
No significant differences in anogenital distance, 
body weight, central nervous system 
pathological markers, novel object recognition, 
and elevated plus maze performance
(Morris-Schaffer 
et al., 2019)
Polystyrene 
nanoparticles
NRVMs from rat
Intracellular distribution of PS NPs at the single- 
cell level at 0, 5, 15, 30, and 60 min
Impaired collective contractility of neonatal 
cardiomyocytes under electrical 
synchronization.
(Roshanzadeh 
et al., 2021)
Adult
Polystyrene
BALB/c mice 
(Male, 6 weeks)
100 μL PS, PS-COOH and PS NH2 NPs (10 mg/ 
mL) by gavage once a day (1 mg/day) for 28 day
Hematological system injury and lipid 
metabolism disorder; Induced cell apoptosis, 
inflammation, and structure disorder in mice 
spleen, lung, kidney, small intestine, large 
intestine, testis, and brain.
(Xu et al., 2021)
Graphene oxide
Xenopus laevis (X. 
laevis) tadpoles
Exposed to various concentrations of typical 
pyrethroid, either alone or in combination with 
graphene oxide (GO), for 21 days
Disruption of neurotransmitter systems and 
interference in metamorphic development
(Li et al., 2020)
Diesel exhaust 
particles, iron oxide 
(Fe2O3) or silica(SiO2)
Pregnant, eight- 
week-old C57BL/ 
6 J mice
Exposed intranasally to 50 mg in 50 μL of saline, 
or saline alone, on gestational day (E) 7.5, E12.5 
and E17.5. Groups of non-pregnant mice were 
exposed on day (D)0, D5 and D10
Changed the inflammatory response to silica and 
altered the immune response to DEP.
(Thaver et al., 
2019)
Gerontic stage
Fluorescently-labeled 
pristine polystyrene
C57BL/6 J mice
Young (4-month-old) and old (21-month-old) 
C57BL/6 J female mice were exposed to 
polystyrene particles and assessed using 
behavioral assays,
Short-term exposure to polystyrene particles 
induces both behavioral changes and alterations 
in immune markers in liver and brain tissues.
(Gaspar et al., 
2023)
SiO2
Rat, 3 weeks 
(65 g), 8 weeks 
(265 g), and 20 
months
Young, adult, and old rats physiologically 
inhaled air containing aerosol of SiO2 
nanoparticles (24.1 mg/m3; 40 min/day) for four 
weeks.
Pulmonary and cardiovascular alterations in old 
rats, yet less change in young and adult rats, 
including pulmonary inflammation, myocardial 
ischemic damage, atrio-ventricular blockage, 
and increasing in fibrinogen concentration and 
blood viscosity.
(Chen et al., 2008)
Ultrafine particles 
from the air
Rat
Isolated Langendorff-perfused rat hearts from 
young adult and aged rats were perfused with 
buffer only and UFPs
Ultrafine particles instilled directly into the 
cardiac vasculature were equally cardiotoxic in 
young adult and old rat hearts.
(Simkhovich et al., 
2007)
Q. Tu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
3 
2. Threats of UFPs on human health and diseases
2.1. Physiological
As mentioned above, ultrafine particles could penetrate various 
barriers in the human body and enter the circulatory system, diffusing 
and depositing in various corners of the body. Therefore, it is essential to 
perceive ultrafine particles from the perspective of systemic toxicology 
rather than simply respiratory toxicology (Terzano et al., 2010). 
Combining data from epidemiological investigations, meteorological 
monitoring, and pathology testing in clinical samples, along with ex­
periments conducted in cell lines and animal models, we have realized 
the toxic effects of ultrafine particles at multiple levels or from different 
angles. Regarding animal models, zebrafish, Xenopus, mice, rats, etc., 
have been employed in environmental toxicology research (Table 1). 
Emerging models, such as pluripotent stem cell derived organoids, are 
also beginning to be applied in UFPs toxic studies (Chandy et al., 2022; 
Hua et al., 2022).
UFPs disrupt the microenvironmental homeostasis under normal 
physiological conditions in tissues such as the cardiovascular system, 
central nervous system, respiratory system, digestive system, and 
reproductive system (Kan et al., 2018) (Sawicki et al., 2019; Li et al., 
2022b). The vulnerability of two specific groups, infants and the elderly, 
makes the mortality and morbidity rates caused by UFPs particularly 
high (Zhang et al., 2016). Even fetuses within the uterus, before their 
first breath, are already facing with exposure to carbon nanoparticles 
through blood exchange between mother and fetus (Bongaerts et al., 
2022).
2.2. Pathological
Besides physiological conditions, ultrafine nanoparticles also alter 
the progression of certain diseases such as tumors and neurodegenera­
tive disorders (Table 2). For instance, chronic exposure to carbon 
nanoparticles reshapes macrophage metabolism and accelerates lung 
cancer progression (Chang et al., 2022). The delayed toxicity following 
exposure to carbon nanotubes has an impact on tumor occurrence and 
progression in distant organs or tissues beyond the lungs, leading to the 
multiple metastases of in situ breast tumors (Lu et al., 2019). In addition, 
PM2.5 is considered a significant inducer of neurodegenerative diseases 
(Zhu et al., 2020). This highlights the necessity for effective daily pro­
tection against ultrafine particles for patients particularly, through 
which potentially improve therapeutic outcomes.
2.3. Mechanism research
In terms of molecular mechanisms, it is currently understood that 
ultrafine particles have the capability to enter the interior of cells and 
deposit within the cytoplasm or nucleus. For instance, Cytoplasmic UFPs 
alter the morphology and functions of endoplasmic reticulum 
(Calder´on-Garcidue˜nas and Ayala, 2022) and mitochondria (Xia et al., 
2004), while nuclear UFPs induce DNA damage and genomic instability 
(Quezada-Maldonado et al., 2021; Mroz et al., 2008). UFPs interact with 
biomolecules closely with the form of protein coronas. Other biological 
components such as RNAs may also be contained in corona complex 
with unknown functions (Nel et al., 2009). Research on protein coronas 
is a focal point in understanding the toxicological mechanisms of ul­
trafine particles, but UFPs purification from biosamples is still chal­
lenging. For ultrafine particles containing iron oxide components, 
purification can be achieved through magnetic adsorption (B¨ohmert 
et al., 2020). However, for non-magnetic ultrafine particles like 
nano-carbon particles or nanoplastics, purification is often only possible 
through density gradient centrifugation, and the resulting purity and 
specificity cannot be guaranteed (Cai et al., 2021). In summary, ultrafine 
particles may disrupt cellular homeostasis through physical and/or 
chemical means. Methodological innovations are required to purify 
UFPs from biological samples for deep examination
2.4. Current issues in UFPs Exposome research
Based on the above mention, we believe that there are several 
important issues to be addressed in the following Exposome research 
field focusing on UFPs:
I. Animal Models: Although various animal models such as zebrafish, 
Table 2 
influences of UFPs on occurrence and progression of human diseases.
Disease
UFP subtype
Methodology
Major conclusions
Reference
Lung cancer
Carbon black 
ultrafine (nCB) 
particles
Mouse models with non–small cell lung cancers 
chronic exposure to nCB
nCB exposure metabolically rewires lung macrophages to 
promote immunosuppression and accelerates the 
development of lung cancer
(Chang et al., 
2022)
Carbon black 
nanoparticles
An ex vivo biosensor assay and transcriptome 
change of primary bronchial epithelial cells from 
workers with long-term occupational carbon black 
exposure history.
Carbon black exposure increased lung cancer risk by 
affecting the cell cycle via circulatory inflammation
(Zhang et al., 
2022a)
Ovarian cancer
Polystyrene 
nanoplastics (PS- 
NPs)
Human EOC cell line HEY as an in vitro cell model 
and mice as a mammalian model exposure to PS- 
NPs
PS-NPs exposure accelerates ovarian cancer development in 
mice by altering the tumor microenvironment
(Chen et al., 
2024)
Breast cancer
Multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes 
(MWCNTs)
The timeline of MWCNT exposure, 
establishment of tumor allografts, tumor excision 
and detection of tumor metastasis
A single pulmonary exposure to MWCNT dramatically 
enhances angiogenesis and the invasiveness of 
orthotopically implanted mammary carcinoma, leading to 
metastasis and rapid colonization of the lungs and other 
organs
(Lu et al., 
2019)
SiO2 nanoparticles
SiO2 nanoparticles exposure to breast cancer 
mouse model
SiO2 nanoparticles injection increased lung metastasis of 
breast cancer cells compared to the untreated mice
(Dai et al., 
2022)
Neurodegenerative 
disease
Polystyrene 
nanoplastic particles
In vitro, nanoplastic exposure with α-synuclein 
fibrils; In vivo, nanoplastic and α-synuclein fibrils 
intracranial injections and tissue staining
Nanoplastics promote Parkinson’s 
disease–slows the degradation of aggregated α-synuclein
(Liu et al., 
2023)
Silica oxide 
nanoparticles (SiO2 
NPs)
SiO2 NPs exposure to SH-SY5Y cells, different 
cellular and molecular assays were performed to 
reveal the α-syn amyloid fibrils-associated 
cytotoxicity
Acceleration of α-synuclein fibril formation and associated 
cytotoxicity stimulated by silica nanoparticles
(Pang et al., 
2021)
Ultrafine black 
carbon (uBC)
Cytotoxicity and oxidative stress increased in SH- 
SY5Y cells by uBC
uBC initiated progressive development of Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD) associated features, including neuro- 
inflammation and phosphorylation of tau protein (p-Tau) 
accumulation.
(Shang et al., 
2019)
Q. Tu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
4 
mice, and rats have been used in Exposome research, these species hold 
inherent evolutionary and genetic differences from humans (Ernst and 
Carvunis, 2018; Seok et al., 2013; Twigger, 2004; Davis et al., 2014). For 
example, commonly used mice models hold substantial differences in 
brain structure and lack advanced cognitive functions (Davis et al., 
2014). Therefore, these models may be unable to phenocopy structural 
or behavioral changes in human brain accurately in Exposome studies. 
UFPs induce cardiac arrhythmias (Zhu et al., 2023). However, the dif­
ferences of the ventricular action potential and ionic currents between 
human and mouse hearts need to be pay attention to (Blackwell et al., 
2022). In addition, mice lack respiratory bronchiole structure in lungs, 
while this structure is abundant in human lungs (Basil et al., 2022). Mice 
also display dramatic difference in spermatogenesis from humans (Chen 
et al., 2021). Considering the accumulative effects of UFP derived 
toxicity, common used rodent models hold much shorter timescale 
compared to human regarding gestational age or lifespan. For instance, 
the gestational age in mouse or rat is around 3 weeks, while around 40 
weeks in human (Rokas et al., 2020). In addition, human hold around 75 
years longevity on average, while mouse has 4 years lifespan maximum 
(Cremer et al., 2022). All these divergences make mice not ideal enough 
in UFPs Exposome research. So developing more suitable animal models 
should be a crucial consideration in Exposome research.
II. Long-term Monitoring and Data Collection: Recent studies suggest 
that humans are exposed to UFPs such as carbon nanoparticles since the 
fetal stage (Bongaerts et al., 2022), reminding that Exposome research 
on UFPs should adopt a lifelong perspective. In addition, human diseases 
such as cognitive decline Alzheimer’s disease, respiratory and cardio­
vascular illnesses have been associated with aging (Pandics et al., 2023). 
However, published studies always set up short-term acute exposure 
procedures or selected a few time points for sampling within exposure 
periods ranging from several days to months (Table 1). These studies 
may not be able to answer the entire lifespan toxic dynamics of exper­
imental animals. On the cellular level, the proliferating cells might un­
dermine UFP deposition through cell division. However, some 
long-lived post-mitotic cell types, such as neurons, adult car­
diomyocytes and skeletal myofibers, may have to face UFP toxicity in 
their whole long life if under UFP exposure (Rodriguez et al., 2010). 
Therefore, understanding the systematic toxic effects of UFPs from a 
lifelong perspective remains a critical area that requires the establish­
ment of continuous monitoring databases. However, neither using small 
nor large animal models for life-long exposure assay is easy. To this goal, 
we may need to modify or upgrade facility equipment, a long period of 
time (years to decades), high-cost to collect samples and multi-omics 
analysis. This seems to be impracticable. Alternatively, it could be a 
better choice to leverage on cutting-edge artificial intelligence and 
machine learning to integrate cohort tracing database to achieve human 
life-long Exposome research (Merino Martinez et al., 2021).
III. Molecular Mechanism Studies: UFPs cause cellular toxicity either 
through indirect ways such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Durga 
et al., 2014), or through direct interaction with biomolecules 
(Hadjidemetriou and Kostarelos, 2017). The absorbance of biomolecules 
on UFPs surface has been defined as corona. The corona structure con­
tains proteins, nucleic acids, glycans, lipids, among others (Mahmoudi 
et al., 2023). Furthermore, the corona structure is separated into solid 
layer (biomolecules stably combining onto UFPs surface) and soft layer 
(incompact binding, dynamically attach to or detach from UFPs surface) 
(García-´Alvarez and Vallet-Regí, 2021). Mass spectrometry analysis 
revealed that proteins involving cytoskeleton, gene transcription, 
translation, epigenetic modification, chromatin remodeling, DNA repair 
pathways have been identified in corona purification (da Costa Marques 
et al., 2023). In addition, UFPs induced ROS also influence the pathways 
mentioned above (Yu et al., 2020; Hussain et al., 2014). Therefore, the 
impact of UFPs on the genome, transcriptome, epigenome, proteome, 
and metabolome should be studied comprehensively crossing multiple 
levels. The components and status of corona depends on cell types and 
microenvironmental context (Mahmoudi et al., 2023). The same UFPs 
may hold different corona components in different cell types, which 
remind us the cell type heterogeneity should be taken into account when 
studying UFPs toxicity. Single-cell multi-omics technologies may serve 
as ideal tools to address these questions. Understanding what and how 
biomolecules interact with UFPs, including proteins, nucleic acids, 
lipids, and sugars in the toxicological processes are crucial (Saptarshi 
Table 3 
Summary of molecular mechanism research of UFPs.
UFP subtype
Research model
Methodology
Major conclusions
Reference
Carbon black nanoparticle 
14 nm (average)
A549 cell line
Cellular exposure
Induce DNA damage, activate P53 and DNA repair proteins and 
proinflammatory transcription factor
(Mroz et al., 2007)
Polystyrene (PS) 
100 nm
Rats
Inhalation
Activate TGF-β and TNF-α signaling in the lung tissue, and promote fibrosis 
and inflammation
(Lim et al., 2021)
Polystyrene (PS) 
23 nm
Swiss mice
Intraperitoneal 
injection
Induce DNA damage and cognitive impairment
(Estrela et al., 
2021)
Road traffic 
45 nm (average)
Ldlr-/- mice
Whole-body 
exposure
Activate the NF-κB signaling 
Induce vascular calcification and atherosclerosis
(Li et al., 2013)
Polyethylene (PE) 
65 nm
RAW 264.7 
cell line
Cellular exposure
Down-regulate SIRT1, enhance ER stress and 
promote osteoclastogenesis and osteolysis
(Zhang et al., 
2018)
Carbon black nanoparticle 
35 nm (average)
C57BL/6 mice
Intravenous injection
Induce oxidative DNA damage 
and hepatic genotoxicity
(Shukla et al., 
2013)
Ambient sampling 
66 nm (average)
C57BL/6 mice
Whole-body 
exposure
Activate the FXR/LXR and Hnf4a Signaling 
and induce Lipid metabolism disorders
(Behlen et al., 
2021b)
SiO2 NPs 
15, 30 and 100 nm
HUVECs cell line
Cellular exposure
Activation of NLRP3 inflammasome and HMGB1/TLR4/MYD88/NF-κB 
signaling pathway
(Liu et al., 2021)
SiO2 NPs 
15 nm
Sprague–Dawley 
rats
Intravitreal injection
Induce oxidative stress and retinal toxicity
(Zhang et al., 
2022b)
Diesel Exhaust 
<100 nm
Fischer rats
Whole-body 
exposure
Increase TNFα, α-Synuclein, Aβ42 
Tau hyperphosphorylation, Neuroinflammation
(Levesque et al., 
2011)
Polystyrene (PS) 
20 nm
A549 cell line
Cellular exposure
Disrupt cell membrane and interaction 
with chromosome
(Kihara et al., 
2021)
Polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) 
100 nm
Caco−2 cell line
Cellular exposure
Destroy the integrity of cell membrane, and stimulate inflammatory 
adipocytokines
(Magrì et al., 
2018)
Polypropylene (PP)
ICR mice
Intratracheal 
instillation
Up-regulate p38 and NF-κB signaling and induce infammation and ROS 
production in the lung tissues
(Woo et al., 2023)
Polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) 
100 nm
Zebrafish
Whole-body 
exposure
Affect the embryonic development of zebrafish including hatchability, heart 
rate and ROS production
(Ji et al., 2020)
Q. Tu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
5 
et al., 2013; Engin et al., 2017). Single-cell RNA and ATAC sequencing 
have been used broadly in recent biomedical studies by far (Baysoy 
et al., 2023). However, other techs such as single-cell proteomics, 
single-cell epigenomic sequencing, or single-cell metabolism are still at 
initiated stages (Perkel, 2021). Furthermore, there will be an upgraded 
challenge to integrate above single-cell techs in one cell simultaneous 
detection, which needs elaborate optimization to achieve real compre­
hensive understanding of UFP toxicity at the single-cell level.
Single-cell omics and EWAS/ GWAS database may provide us the 
macroscopic molecular landscape of UFP toxicity. We also require 
exploring one more layer that the interaction modules of UFPs and key 
nodes through cellular and biochemical assays to understand the UFPs 
endowed etiology deeply. For example, TDP-43 is a key node of amyo­
trophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) disease. Polystyrene plastics (PS) UFPs 
were found to interact with cytoplasmic TDP-43 to form a complex with 
PS UFPs. This complex promotes the condensation and solidification of 
TDP-43, triggering ALS-like characteristics (Sun et al., 2024). β-amyloid 
(Aβ) deposition is the main cause of Alzheimer’s disease. Silica nano­
particles could pass through blood-brain barrier and promote Aβ influx 
to the brain, leading to Aβ burden in the brain (Wei et al., 2024). These 
studies provide direct connection between environmental pollution and 
neurodegenerative disorders. In these studies, either wildtype or gene 
edited mice models were used. For instance, ApoE knockout (ApoE-/-) 
mice provided a ready-to-use model to examine silica nanoparticle 
induced phenotypes in the context of Alzheimer’s disease, making the 
phenotypic analysis more easily and concentrated than using than 
wildtype (Wei et al., 2024). Similar strategies were also used in UFPs and 
cancer crossover studies (Chang et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2019), Besides, 
cutting-edge in vitro organoids have been discussed to be novel models 
in Exposome research (Chandy et al., 2022). For example, human 
pluripotent stem cell derived cerebral organoids or retinal organoids 
have been used to evaluate particulate matter toxicity (Bilinovich et al., 
2020; Zeng et al., 2021). Although organoids models display plenty of 
advantages in terms of three-dimensional structure, cell-type diversity, 
large-scale screening and dynamic monitoring, some limitations still 
need to be considered when using organoids in UFPs exposure research, 
such as lack of blood and immune microenvironment, organoids het­
erogeneity and data reproducibility. All these limitation rely on the 
methodological progress of organoids field to be overcome. Undoubt­
edly, organoids provide us good tools to fast screen potential pollutants 
as well as identify toxicological mechanism integrating single-cell omic 
techs.
IV. Health Intervention: Regarding persistent entering of UFPs into 
human circulatory system, research is needed to develop practical 
measures for clearing or neutralizing their toxicity. UFPs in human 
tracheobronchial tree could be clear out through cilia movement and 
mucus. However, UFPs in deep alveoli would not be clear out through 
mucosa system, finally penetrate into human blood stream (Chen et al., 
2016). In addition, UFPs may also enter into human circulatory system 
through 
gastrointestinal 
tract, 
skin 
or 
olfactory 
nerve 
(Calder´on-Garcidue˜nas and Ayala, 2022; Kwon et al., 2020b), and 
macrophages could transfer ingested UFPs in circulation along with 
their mitigation (Wieland et al., 2024). Oxidative stress is common in 
UFPs toxicity. However, it has been revealed that not all UFP types lead 
to oxidative stress (Horie and Tabei, 2021). Lu et.al.used chemical 
multi-fingerprinting technology to quantify exogenous UFPs in human 
serum and pleural effusion samples (Lu et al., 2020), providing a feasible 
avenue to measure UFPs dosage in human individuals. Indeed, UFPs in 
human circulatory system displayed much complexed manners 
regarding their size, chemical constitution, organ/tissue distribution 
and translocation. So it is still difficult to achieve accurate measurement 
of UFPs in human bodies at present.
In terms of human health intervention under UFPs exposure, some 
dietary strategies have been proposed including daily addition of 
vitamin C/E, omega-3 fatty acids or metformin to neutralize oxidative 
stress, inhibit inflammation or rewire metabolic status (Aryal et al., 
2021). These health protection strategies might be passive, but not 
active enough. While there are some commercial products available for 
protecting against atmospheric UFPs, such as N95 and N100 masks, and 
air purifiers dealing with indoor air pollution (Adanur and Jayswal, 
2020). Several reviews discussed the intervention effects of air purifiers 
or masks (Allen and Barn, 2020; Bard et al., 2019; Carlsten et al., 2020). 
For example, commercial high-efficiency particulate air/arresting 
(HEPA) filter air purifier was confirmed to be able to reduce indoor 
PM2.5 concentration from 60 to 24 μg/m3 to more than 50 % over pe­
riods of two weeks, reducing systemic inflammation but not affect lung 
function, blood pressure or heart rate variability (Shao et al., 2017). In 
UGAAR (Ulaanbaatar Gestation and Air Pollution Research) cohort 
study, portable HEPA filter air purifier was evaluated in pregnancy on 
fetal growth and childhood development (Barn et al., 2018). HEPA air 
purifiers dramatically reduced indoor PM2.5 concentrations during 
pregnancy by 29 % (from 25 to 17 μg/m3), and improved fetal growth 
(birth weight increased by 85 g) (Barn et al., 2018). This indicated that 
air purifiers could benefit susceptible subpopulations under UFPs 
exposure. In addition, well-fitting facemasks such as N95 (KN95 in 
China) were reported to attenuate pollution-induced effects on airway 
inflammation, but no effects on systemic oxidative stress (Guan et al., 
2018). The efficiency of other types of masks in reducing UFPs exposure 
is highly variable. Overall, these studies were conducted in short-term 
timescale (from days to weeks), we still need long-term evaluation of 
face coverings and air purifiers in improving subclinical or even clinical 
human health (Allen and Barn, 2020).
Rapid urbanization is an important element needing to be taken into 
consideration in UFPs pollution abatement. Currently, the total UFPs 
levels in megacities all over the world are still above World Health Or­
ganization (WHO) guideline (de Jesus et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2014). 
In addition to elevated construction dust, industrial development and 
new technologies are also changing UFPs composition and ratios when 
remodeling human lifestyle. For instance, electric vehicle (EV) usage 
may help to decrease traditional diesel burning produced UFPs, but may 
increase tire wearing derived rubber and carbon black nanoparticles 
(Kim et al., 2021; Alanazi, 2023). Along with lithium battery application 
in EV industry, the process covering recycling, disassembling, and deep 
processing of scrapped lithium battery would cause new contaminants 
Fig. 1. Advantages of non-human primates in human biomedical research. This 
illustration enumerates the seven advantages in non-human primates versus 
rodent models in the context of human biomedical studies.
Q. Tu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
6 
including UFPs (Mrozik et al., 2021; Grabow et al., 2023). Currently, the 
public policies and government actions still lag behind emerging 
pollution situations, with lacking legal procedures to promise the envi­
ronmental safety. Moreover, with the rapid development of the fast-food 
and delivery industries, the harm caused by microplastics and nano­
plastics from plastic packages in daily diet should also be considered 
(S´anchez et al., 2022). Urban forests have been investigated to intercept 
atmospheric microplastics (12,593 n/m2 of fibers and 347.69 kg of 
microplastics for one year), supporting the notion that urban afforesta­
tion should be improved in government and public health agencies 
(Huang et al., 2022b). Regarding citizen personal lifestyle, compared to 
drivers, the median life expectancy losses in active commuter population 
were up to 1 year lower, indicating that the benefits outweighed the 
negative effects of ambient pollution (Cepeda et al., 2017). In summary, 
both urban planning policies and personal behaviors should be consid­
ered seriously to improve health intervention following current pollu­
tion episode.
3. Rationale of using non-human primates (NHPs) in UFPs 
Exposome research
3.1. Non-human primates in biomedical research
There are more than 500 species of non-human primates distributed 
worldwide, with a few species such as macaques, crab-eating monkeys, 
and marmosets being applied in biomedical research (Ardith, 2008; 
Hannibal et al., 2017). In comparison to commonly used animal models 
in Exposome research such as mice, rats, and zebrafish, non-human 
primates offer unique advantages in the following aspects (Fig. 1):
I. Genomic Similarity: Non-human primates possess a functional 
genome more similar to humans, facilitating a more accurate analysis of 
gene function and genomic regulatory patterns (Enard et al., 2010; 
Harding, 2013).
II. Early-stage Development: The embryonic development process of 
non-human primates, especially at the peri-implantation embryonic 
stage, exhibits structures, cell composition and gene expression dy­
namics highly similar to humans (Zhai et al., 2022).
III. Cardiovascular Research: Non-human primates are better suited 
Fig. 2. Graphic summary of Non-Human Primate Exposome (NHPE) project. This illustration encompasses the designed modules in NHEP. Briefly, rhesus macaques 
will be categorized into groups spanning from prenatal to infancy (pregnancy to four years old), youth (seven to ten years old), and elderly (15 years old and above). 
We will conduct exposure experiments involving UFPs including nano-plastics (through dietary and water intake pathways) and carbon black nanoparticles (via 
respiratory pathways). At the organ and tissue level, we will engage in phased monitoring and analysis of physiological and biochemical parameters, biomedical 
imaging, tissue pathology, and other assessments. On the cellular and molecular level, we will employ single-cell multi-omics and bioinformatics techniques to 
scrutinize alterations in organs such as the central nervous system, cardiovascular system, respiratory system, and reproductive system. Focusing on significant 
variances in molecular pathways and key factors, we will utilize corresponding organoids systems to dissect functional mechanisms.
Q. Tu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
7 
for cardiovascular toxicology, as well as microvascular degradation 
studies (Heyen and Vargas, 2015; Cox et al., 2017).
IV. Brain Development and Function: Non-human primates share 
similarities with humans in terms of gyrus structure, functional zoning, 
projection pathways, and the unique phenomenon of neoteny (Niu and 
Palomero-Gallagher, 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Linker et al., 2022). In 
addition, non-human primates hold unique advantages in advanced 
behavior testing (Stephan et al., 2019).
V. Lung Development and Structure: Non-human primates closely 
resemble humans in respiratory bronchiole structure, which is absent in 
mice (Basil et al., 2022; Miller et al., 2017).
VI. Reproduction: Non-human primates and humans share a con­
servative spermatogenesis process (Murat et al., 2023), and female 
monkeys have menstrual and ovulation cycles (Hunnell et al., 2007). 
The placental structure during pregnancy is also more similar to humans 
compared to mice (Matsumoto et al., 2023).
VII. Immune Response and Metabolism: Non-human primates exhibit 
high similarity to humans in infection immunity and metabolism, both 
crucial aspects of population Exposome research (Bjornson-Hooper 
et al., 2022).
Despite these advantages, utilizing non-human primates in scientific 
research still poses several challenges: limited animal resources, high 
labor, time, and economic costs, the need for specialized personnel and 
technology for the care, maintenance, and quarantine of non-human 
primates, requirement for experimental instrument modifications, and 
stringent biomedical ethical scrutiny (Cauvin et al., 2015). These limi­
tations hinder the widespread use of non-human primates in Exposome 
research.
3.2. Initiation of NHPE (Non-Human Primate Exposome) project
Leveraging non-human primates may prove to be a more suitable 
animal model for Exposome research. To our knowledge, there are no 
published Exposome studies performed in NHP models by far. Here we 
propose the NHPE project, which is being performed relying on National 
Research Facility for Phenotypic and Genetic Analysis of Primate Model 
Animals in China (referred to as the Primate Facility). The Primate Fa­
cility is a state-level support platform established at the Kunming 
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, dedicated to con­
ducting biomedical research on non-human primates (Yao and K.I.Z.P.F, 
2022). This facility encompasses modules for non-human primate 
breeding, phenotype determination, genetic analysis, imaging, pathol­
ogy, toxicology, and biomedical mega data integration. It features 
scalability, standardization, precision, automation, and intelligence. 
The Primate Facility enables a systematic and accurate description of 
non-human primate phenotypes, genotypes, and their responses to 
environmental changes. This aids in understanding the regulatory states 
and mechanisms of life, supporting research on human diseases and the 
regulation of animal life processes accurately.
We have equipped the facility with several key instruments for 
conducting Exposome research on non-human primates, including non- 
human primate respiratory exposure system, metabolic monitoring 
system, and devices for embryonic manipulation, infant daycare, phys­
iological analysis, biochemical analysis, behavioral test, and medical 
imaging. Leveraging the non-human primates, we aim to conduct life­
long (from early embryonic stages to old) Exposome research of UFPs 
carbon nanoparticles, nanoplastics among others on non-human pri­
mates. Besides routine whole-body physiological and biochemical index 
monitoring, our research will place extra emphasis on the toxicological 
effects of UFPs on NHPs’ cardiovascular system, central nervous system, 
respiratory system, and reproductive system. Combining cutting-edge 
single-cell multi-omics and pluripotent stem cell derived organoids 
technologies, we will establish a comprehensive Exposome biobanking 
database, conduct in-depth mechanistic studies, and develop effective 
strategies for human health interventions (Fig. 2).
4. Conclusions
Here we summarize the conceptual scope, current state, and several 
key issues that need to be addressed in the Exposome research on UFPs. 
We discuss the feasibility of conducting Exposome research using non- 
human primates as models rely on the national primate facility in 
China. We raise the NHPE project through which will enrich EWAS 
datasets, strengthen the study of the toxicological mechanisms of envi­
ronmental UFPs, and inspire new health intervention strategies.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The “Exposome research of ultrafine particulate pollutants in rhesus 
macaque models” was established following the guidelines of Institu­
tional Animal Care and Use Committee of Kunming Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences. All experiments conducted on animals 
were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of 
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Approval 
No: IACUC-PE-2024–01–004 for prenatal/infancy group, approval date 
was January 10, 2024; IACUC-PE-2024–01–002 for youth/elderly 
group, approval date was January 03, 2024).
Declaration of AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing 
process
During the preparation of this work, the authors used Chat GPT in 
order to improve English language and readability. After using this tool, 
the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full 
responsibility for the content of the publication.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Bo Zhao: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Su­
pervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualiza­
tion. Qiu Tu: Writing – original draft, Investigation. Jiao Zhang: 
Writing – original draft, Investigation. Wenxian Xiao: Investigation. 
Gaojing Liu: Writing – original draft, Investigation. Xiuyun Liu: 
Writing – original draft, Investigation. Longbao Lv: Writing – review & 
editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
The authors would thank Wei Wang and Yuqi Ning for graphic 
preparation, and thank animal facility and Primate Facility Management 
group at Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. 
This work was supported by National Key Research and Development 
Plan Program (2022YFF0710900 to L. L.), Academician Expert Work­
station of Yunnan Kunming (YSZJGZZ-2022063 to L. L.), Technology 
Talent and Platform Plan of Yunnan Province (202305AF150160 to L. 
L.), Yunnan Province (202305AH340006 to B.Z.), Yunnan Revitaliza­
tion Talent Support Program Innovation Team (202405AS350008 to B. 
Z.) and Kunming Science and Technology Bureau (2022SCP007 to B.Z.).
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Data Availability
No data was used for the research described in the article. 
Q. Tu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
8 
References
Adanur, S., Jayswal, A., 2020. Filtration mechanisms and manufacturing methods of face 
masks: an overview. J. Ind. Text. 51 (3_suppl), 3683S–3717S.
Adhikari, A., et al., 2018. Field evaluation of N95 filtering facepiece respirators on 
construction jobsites for protection against airborne ultrafine particles. Int J. 
Environ. Res Public Health 15 (9).
Alanazi, F., 2023. Electric vehicles: benefits, challenges, and potential solutions for 
widespread adaptation. Appl. Sci. 13 (10), 6016.
Allen, R.W., Barn, P., 2020. Individual- and household-level interventions to reduce air 
pollution exposures and health risks: a review of the recent literature. Curr. Environ. 
Health Rep. 7 (4), 424–440.
Alonso-Curbelo, D., et al., 2021. A gene-environment-induced epigenetic program 
initiates tumorigenesis. Nature 590 (7847), 642–648.
Ardith, A.E., 2008. The Crab-Eating Macaque (Macaca fascicularis): widespread and 
Rapidly Declining. Primate Conserv. 23 (1), 129–132.
Aryal, A., Harmon, A.C., Dugas, T.R., 2021. Particulate matter air pollutants and 
cardiovascular disease: strategies for intervention. Pharm. Ther. 223, 107890.
Bard, R.L., et al., 2019. Interventions to reduce personal exposures to air pollution: a 
primer for health care providers. Glob. Heart 14 (1), 47–60.
Barn, P., et al., 2018. The effect of portable HEPA filter air cleaner use during pregnancy 
on fetal growth: The UGAAR randomized controlled trial. Environ. Int 121 (Pt 1), 
981–989.
Basil, M.C., et al., 2022. Human distal airways contain a multipotent secretory cell that 
can regenerate alveoli. Nature 604 (7904), 120–126.
Baysoy, A., et al., 2023. The technological landscape and applications of single-cell 
multi-omics. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 24 (10), 695–713.
Behlen, J.C., et al., 2021b. Gestational Exposure to Ultrafine Particles Reveals Sex- and 
Dose-Specific Changes in Offspring Birth Outcomes, Placental Morphology, and Gene 
Networks. Toxicol. Sci. 184 (2), 204–213.
Behlen, J.C., et al., 2021a. Gestational exposure to ultrafine particles reveals sex- and 
dose-specific changes in offspring birth outcomes, placental morphology, and gene 
networks. Toxicol. Sci. 184 (2), 204–213.
Berg, J., 2016. Gene-environment interplay. Science 354 (6308)), 15.
Bilinovich, S.M., et al., 2020. Integrated RNA sequencing reveals epigenetic impacts of 
diesel particulate matter exposure in human cerebral organoids. Dev. Neurosci. 42 
(5-6), 195–207.
Bjornson-Hooper, Z.B., et al., 2022. A COmprehensive Atlas of Immunological 
Differences between Humans, Mice, and Non-human Primates. Front. Immunol. 13.
Blackwell, D.J., Schmeckpeper, J., Knollmann, B.C., 2022. Animal models to study 
cardiac arrhythmias. Circ. Res 130 (12), 1926–1964.
B¨ohmert, L., et al., 2020. Isolation methods for particle protein corona complexes from 
protein-rich matrices. Nanoscale Adv. 2 (2), 563–582.
Bongaerts, E., et al., 2022. Maternal exposure to ambient black carbon particles and their 
presence in maternal and fetal circulation and organs: an analysis of two 
independent population-based observational studies. Lancet Planet Health 6 (10), 
e804–e811.
Bos, B., et al., 2023. Prenatal exposure to air pollution is associated with structural 
changes in the neonatal brain. Environ. Int 174, 107921.
Brown, J.S., et al., 2013. Thoracic and respirable particle definitions for human health 
risk assessment. Part Fibre Toxicol. 10, 12.
Bustamante-Marin, X.M., Ostrowski, L.E., 2017. Cilia and mucociliary clearance. Cold 
Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 9 (4).
Cai, H., et al., 2021. Separation and enrichment of nanoplastics in environmental water 
samples via ultracentrifugation. Water Res. 203, 117509.
Calder´on-Garcidue˜nas, L., Ayala, A., 2022. Air pollution, ultrafine particles, and your 
brain: are combustion nanoparticle emissions and engineered nanoparticles causing 
preventable fatal neurodegenerative diseases and common neuropsychiatric 
outcomes? Environ. Sci. Technol. 56 (11), 6847–6856.
Carlsten, C., et al., 2020. Personal strategies to minimise effects of air pollution on 
respiratory health: advice for providers, patients and the public. Eur. Respir. J. 55 
(6).
Cauvin, A.J., Peters, C., Brennan, F., 2015. Advantages and Limitations of Commonly 
Used Nonhuman Primate Species in Research and Development of 
Biopharmaceuticals. Nonhum. Primate Nonclinical Drug Dev. Saf. Assess. 379–395. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-417144-2.00019-6. Epub 2015 Mar 20. 
Cepeda, M., et al., 2017. Levels of ambient air pollution according to mode of transport: a 
systematic review. Lancet Public Health 2 (1), e23–e34.
Chandy, M., Obal, D., Wu, J.C., 2022. Elucidating effects of environmental exposure 
using human-induced pluripotent stem cell disease modeling. EMBO Mol. Med 14 
(11), e13260.
Chang, C.Y., et al., 2022. Chronic exposure to carbon black ultrafine particles reprograms 
macrophage metabolism and accelerates lung cancer. Sci. Adv. 8 (46), eabq0615.
Chen, G., et al., 2024. Polystyrene nanoparticle exposure accelerates ovarian cancer 
development in mice by altering the tumor microenvironment. Sci. Total Environ. 
906, 167592.
Chen, H., et al., 2021. Dissecting mammalian spermatogenesis using spatial 
transcriptomics. Cell Rep. 37 (5), 109915.
Chen, R., et al., 2016. Beyond PM2.5: The role of ultrafine particles on adverse health 
effects of air pollution. Biochim Biophys. Acta 1860 (12), 2844–2855.
Chen, Z., et al., 2008. Age-related differences in pulmonary and cardiovascular responses 
to SiO2 nanoparticle inhalation: nanotoxicity has susceptible population. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 42 (23), 8985–8992.
Cohen, A.J., et al., 2017. Estimates and 25-year trends of the global burden of disease 
attributable to ambient air pollution: an analysis of data from the Global Burden of 
Diseases Study 2015. Lancet 389 (10082), 1907–1918.
Costa, L.G., et al., 2020. Effects of air pollution on the nervous system and its possible 
role in neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders. Pharm. Ther. 210, 
107523.
da Costa Marques, R., et al., 2023. Proteomics reveals time-dependent protein corona 
changes in the intracellular pathway. Acta Biomater. 172, 355–368.
Cox, L.A., et al., 2017. Nonhuman Primates and Translational Research—Cardiovascular 
Disease. ILAR J. 58 (2), 235–250.
Cremer, A., Abplanalp, W.T., Rieger, M.A., 2022. Time’s up: mutation rate and lifespan. 
Signal Transduct. Target Ther. 7 (1), 282.
Dai, H., et al., 2022. Systemically administered silica nanoparticles result in diminished T 
cell response in lung. Nano Today 42, 101332.
Davis, E.E., Frangakis, S., Katsanis, N., 2014. Interpreting human genetic variation with 
in vivo zebrafish assays. Biochim Biophys. Acta 1842 (10), 1960–1970.
Duan, Z., et al., 2020. Barrier function of zebrafish embryonic chorions against 
microplastics and nanoplastics and its impact on embryo development. J. Hazard 
Mater. 395, 122621.
Durga, M., et al., 2014. Effects of ultrafine petrol exhaust particles on cytotoxicity, 
oxidative stress generation, DNA damage and inflammation in human A549 lung 
cells and murine RAW 264.7 macrophages. Environ. Toxicol. Pharm. 38 (2), 
518–530.
Enard, D., Depaulis, F., Roest Crollius, H., 2010. Human and Non-Human Primate 
Genomes Share Hotspots of Positive Selection. PLOS Genet. 6 (2), e1000840.
Engin, A.B., et al., 2017. Mechanistic understanding of nanoparticles’ interactions with 
extracellular matrix: the cell and immune system. Part. Fibre Toxicol. 14 (1), 22.
Ernst, P.B., Carvunis, A.R., 2018. Of mice, men and immunity: a case for evolutionary 
systems biology. Nat. Immunol. 19 (5), 421–425.
Estrela, F.N., et al., 2021. Toxicity of polystyrene nanoplastics and zinc oxide to mice. 
Chemosphere 271, 129476.
Fu, P., et al., 2019. The association between PM(2.5) exposure and neurological 
disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sci. Total Environ. 655, 
1240–1248.
Fuller, R., et al., 2022. Pollution and health: a progress update. Lancet Planet Health 6 
(6), e535–e547.
Gambardella, C., et al., 2015. Multidisciplinary screening of toxicity induced by silica 
nanoparticles during sea urchin development. Chemosphere 139, 486–495.
García-´Alvarez, R., Vallet-Regí, M., 2021. Hard and soft protein corona of nanomaterials: 
analysis and relevance. Nanomater. (Basel) 11 (4).
Gaspar, L., et al., 2023. Acute exposure to microplastics induced changes in behavior and 
inflammation in young and old mice. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24 (15).
Geiser, M., et al., 2008. The role of macrophages in the clearance of inhaled ultrafine 
titanium dioxide particles. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 38 (3), 371–376.
Gibbs, R.A., 2020. The human genome project changed everything. Nat. Rev. Genet 21 
(10), 575–576.
Global, regional, and national burden of 12 mental disorders in 204 countries and 
territories, 1990-2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2019. Lancet Psychiatry, 2022. 9(2): p. 137-150.
Grabow, J., et al., 2023. Particle Contamination in Commercial Lithium-Ion Cells—Risk 
Assessment with Focus on Internal Short Circuits and Replication by Currently 
Discussed Trigger Methods. Batteries 9 (1), 9.
Guan, T., et al., 2018. The effects of facemasks on airway inflammation and endothelial 
dysfunction in healthy young adults: a double-blind, randomized, controlled 
crossover study. Part Fibre Toxicol. 15 (1), 30.
Hadjidemetriou, M., Kostarelos, K., 2017. Nanomedicine: Evolution of the nanoparticle 
corona. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12 (4), 288–290.
Han, D., et al., 2023. The bio-distribution, clearance pathways, and toxicity mechanisms 
of ambient ultrafine particles. Eco-Environ. Health 2 (3), 95–106.
Hannibal, D.L., et al., 2017. Laboratory rhesus macaque social housing and social 
changes: Implications for research. Am. J. Prima 79 (1), 1–14.
Harding, J.D., 2013. Progress in genetics and genomics of nonhuman primates. ILAR J. 
54 (2), 77–81.
Heusinkveld, H.J., et al., 2016. Neurodegenerative and neurological disorders by small 
inhaled particles. Neurotoxicology 56, 94–106.
Heyen, J., Vargas, H., 2015. The Use of Nonhuman Primates in Cardiovascular Safety 
Assessment. Nonhum. Primate Nonclinical Drug Dev. Saf. Assess. 551–578.
Horie, M., Tabei, Y., 2021. Role of oxidative stress in nanoparticles toxicity. Free Radic. 
Res 55 (4), 331–342.
Hu, J., et al., 2021. Polystyrene microplastics disturb maternal-fetal immune balance and 
cause reproductive toxicity in pregnant mice. Reprod. Toxicol. 106, 42–50.
Hua, T., et al., 2022. Microplastics exposure affects neural development of human 
pluripotent stem cell-derived cortical spheroids. J. Hazard Mater. 435, 128884.
Huang, T., et al., 2022a. Maternal exposure to polystyrene nanoplastics during gestation 
and lactation induces hepatic and testicular toxicity in male mouse offspring. Food 
Chem. Toxicol. 160, 112803.
Huang, X., et al., 2022b. Are we ignoring the role of urban forests in intercepting 
atmospheric microplastics? J. Hazard Mater. 436, 129096.
Hunnell, N.A., et al., 2007. Physical activity of adult female rhesus monkeys (Macaca 
mulatta) across the menstrual cycle. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 292 (6), 
E1520–E1525.
Hussain, R., et al., 2023. Air pollution, glymphatic impairment, and Alzheimer’s disease. 
Trends Neurosci. 46 (11), 901–911.
Hussain, S., et al., 2014. Intracellular signal modulation by nanomaterials. Adv. Exp. Med 
Biol. 811, 111–134.
Ivleva, N.P., 2021. Chemical analysis of microplastics and nanoplastics: challenges, 
advanced methods, and perspectives. Chem. Rev. 121 (19), 11886–11936.
de Jesus, A.L., et al., 2019. Ultrafine particles and PM2.5 in the air of cities around the 
world: Are they representative of each other? Environ. Int. 129, 118–135.
Q. Tu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
9 
Ji, Y., et al., 2020. Realistic polyethylene terephthalate nanoplastics and the size- and 
surface coating-dependent toxicological impacts on zebrafish embryos. Environ. Sci.: 
Nano 7 (8), 2313–2324.
Kan, H., Pan, D., Castranova, V., 2018. Engineered nanoparticle exposure and 
cardiovascular effects: the role of a neuronal-regulated pathway. Inhal. Toxicol. 30 
(9-10), 335–342.
Kihara, S., et al., 2021. Cellular interactions with polystyrene nanoplastics—The role of 
particle size and protein corona. Biointerphases 16 (4), 041001.
Kim, J., et al., 2021. Potential release of nano-carbon black from tire-wear particles 
through the weathering effect. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 96, 322–329.
Kioumourtzoglou, M.A., et al., 2016. Long-term PM2.5 Exposure and Neurological 
Hospital Admissions in the Northeastern United States. Environ. Health Perspect. 
124 (1), 23–29.
Kumar, P., et al., 2014. Ultrafine particles in cities. Environ. Int. 66, 1–10.
Kwo, E., Christiani, D., 2017. The role of gene-environment interplay in occupational and 
environmental diseases: current concepts and knowledge gaps. Curr. Opin. Pulm. 
Med 23 (2), 173–176.
Kwon, H.S., Ryu, M.H., Carlsten, C., 2020a. Ultrafine particles: unique physicochemical 
properties relevant to health and disease. Exp. Mol. Med 52 (3), 318–328.
Kwon, H.-S., Ryu, M.H., Carlsten, C., 2020b. Ultrafine particles: unique physicochemical 
properties relevant to health and disease. Exp. Mol. Med. 52 (3), 318–328.
Landrigan, P.J., et al., 2018a. The Lancet Commission on pollution and health. Lancet 
391 (10119), 462–512.
Landrigan, P.J., et al., 2018b. Pollution and Global Health – An Agenda for Prevention. 
Environ. Health Perspect. 126 (8), 084501.
Lau, C., et al., 2022. In utero ultrafine particulate exposure yields sex- and dose-specific 
responses to neonatal respiratory syncytial virus infection. Environ. Sci. Technol. 56 
(16), 11527–11535.
Levesque, S., et al., 2011. Air pollution & the brain: subchronic diesel exhaust exposure 
causes neuroinflammation and elevates early markers of neurodegenerative disease. 
J. Neuroinflamm. 8 (1), 105.
Li, H., et al., 2022a. Is dietary intake of antioxidant vitamins associated with reduced 
adverse effects of air pollution on diabetes? Findings from a large cohort study. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 246, 114182.
Li, M., et al., 2020. Coexposure to environmental concentrations of cis-bifenthrin and 
graphene oxide: Adverse effects on the nervous system during metamorphic 
development of Xenopus laevis. J. Hazard Mater. 381, 120995.
Li, R., et al., 2013. Ambient ultrafine particles alter lipid metabolism and HDL anti- 
oxidant capacity in LDLR-null mice. J. Lipid Res. 54 (6), 1608–1615.
Li, T., et al., 2022b. A comprehensive understanding of ambient particulate matter and 
its components on the adverse health effects based from epidemiological and 
laboratory evidence. Part. Fibre Toxicol. 19 (1), 67.
Lim, D., et al., 2021. Inhalation toxicity of polystyrene micro(nano)plastics using 
modified OECD TG 412. Chemosphere 262, 128330.
Linker, S.B., et al., 2022. Human-specific regulation of neural maturation identified by 
cross-primate transcriptomics. Curr. Biol. 32 (22), 4797–4807.e5.
Liu, X., et al., 2021. Amorphous silica nanoparticles induce inflammation via activation 
of NLRP3 inflammasome and HMGB1/TLR4/MYD88/NF-kb signaling pathway in 
HUVEC cells. J. Hazard. Mater. 404, 124050.
Liu, Z., et al., 2023. Anionic nanoplastic contaminants promote Parkinson’s disease- 
associated α-synuclein aggregation. Sci. Adv. 9 (46), eadi8716.
Lu, D., et al., 2020. Chemical multi-fingerprinting of exogenous ultrafine particles in 
human serum and pleural effusion. Nat. Commun. 11 (1), 2567.
Lu, X., et al., 2019. Long-term pulmonary exposure to multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
promotes breast cancer metastatic cascades. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14 (7), 719–727.
Luo, T., et al., 2019. Maternal exposure to different sizes of polystyrene microplastics 
during gestation causes metabolic disorders in their offspring. Environ. Pollut. 255 
(Pt 1)), 113122.
Magrì, D., et al., 2018. Laser Ablation as a Versatile Tool To Mimic Polyethylene 
Terephthalate Nanoplastic Pollutants: Characterization and Toxicology Assessment. 
ACS Nano 12 (8), 7690–7700.
Mahmoudi, M., et al., 2023. The protein corona from nanomedicine to environmental 
science. Nat. Rev. Mater. 1–17.
Malley, C.S., et al., 2017. Preterm birth associated with maternal fine particulate matter 
exposure: A global, regional and national assessment. Environ. Int 101, 173–182.
Manisalidis, I., et al., 2020. Environmental and Health Impacts of Air Pollution: A 
Review. Front Public Health 8, 14.
Matsumoto, S., et al., 2023. Similarities and differences in placental development 
between humans and cynomolgus monkeys. Reprod. Med Biol. 22 (1), e12522.
Medley, E.A., et al., 2023. A systematic review of the placental translocation of micro- 
and nanoplastics. Curr. Environ. Health Rep. 10 (2), 99–111.
Merino Martinez, R., et al., 2021. Human exposome assessment platform. Environ. 
Epidemiol. 5 (6), e182.
Miller, L.A., et al., 2017. Nonhuman Primate Models of Respiratory Disease: Past, 
Present, and Future. Ilar J. 58 (2), 269–280.
Morales-Rubio, R.A., et al., 2019. In utero exposure to ultrafine particles promotes 
placental stress-induced programming of renin-angiotensin system-related elements 
in the offspring results in altered blood pressure in adult mice. Part Fibre Toxicol. 16 
(1), 7.
Morris-Schaffer, K., et al., 2019. Effects of neonatal inhalation exposure to ultrafine 
carbon particles on pathology and behavioral outcomes in C57BL/6J mice. Part 
Fibre Toxicol. 16 (1), 10.
Mroz, R.M., et al., 2007. Nanoparticle carbon black driven DNA damage induces growth 
arrest and AP-1 and NFkappaB DNA binding in lung epithelial A549 cell line. 
J. Physiol. Pharm. 58 (Suppl 5), 461–470. Pt 2. 
Mroz, R.M., et al., 2008. Nanoparticle-driven DNA damage mimics irradiation-related 
carcinogenesis pathways. Eur. Respir. J. 31 (2), 241.
Mrozik, W., et al., 2021. Environmental impacts, pollution sources and pathways of spent 
lithium-ion batteries. Energy Environ. Sci. 14 (12), 6099–6121.
Murat, F., et al., 2023. The molecular evolution of spermatogenesis across mammals. 
Nature 613 (7943), 308–316.
Nel, A.E., et al., 2009. Understanding biophysicochemical interactions at the nano-bio 
interface. Nat. Mater. 8 (7), 543–557.
Nguyen, B., et al., 2019. Separation and Analysis of Microplastics and Nanoplastics in 
Complex Environmental Samples. Acc. Chem. Res 52 (4), 858–866.
Ni, D.Q., et al., 2021. Titanium dioxide nanoparticles perturb the blood-testis barrier via 
disruption of actin-based cell adhesive function. Aging (Albany NY) 13 (23), 
25440–25452.
Niu, M., Palomero-Gallagher, N., 2023. Architecture and connectivity of the human 
angular gyrus and of its homolog region in the macaque brain. Brain Struct. Funct. 
228 (1), 47–61.
Onoda, A., Takeda, K., Umezawa, M., 2018. Dysregulation of major functional genes in 
frontal cortex by maternal exposure to carbon black nanoparticle is not ameliorated 
by ascorbic acid pretreatment. Sci. Total Environ. 634, 1126–1135.
Pandics, T., et al., 2023. Exposome and unhealthy aging: environmental drivers from air 
pollution to occupational exposures. Geroscience 45 (6), 3381–3408.
Pang, C., Zhang, N., Falahati, M., 2021. Acceleration of α-synuclein fibril formation and 
associated cytotoxicity stimulated by silica nanoparticles as a model of 
neurodegenerative diseases. Int J. Biol. Macromol. 169, 532–540.
Pascual, F., 2021. Potential Mechanisms behind Air Pollution Toxicity: Findings from 
Real-World Chronic Exposures. Environ. Health Perspect. 129 (2), 24001.
Patel, C.J., et al., 2013. Systematic identification of interaction effects between genome- 
and environment-wide associations in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Hum. Genet 132 (5), 
495–508.
Patel, C.J., Bhattacharya, J., Butte, A.J., 2010. An Environment-Wide Association Study 
(EWAS) on type 2 diabetes mellitus. PLoS One 5 (5), e10746.
Peng, L., et al., 2020. Micro- and nano-plastics in marine environment: Source, 
distribution and threats - A review. Sci. Total Environ. 698, 134254.
Perkel, J.M., 2021. Single-cell proteomics takes centre stage. Nature 597 (7877), 
580–582.
Quezada-Maldonado, E.M., et al., 2021. Airborne particulate matter induces oxidative 
damage, DNA adduct formation and alterations in DNA repair pathways. Environ. 
Pollut. 287, 117313.
Rajagopalan, S., Al-Kindi, S.G., Brook, R.D., 2018. Air Pollution and Cardiovascular 
Disease: JACC State-of-the-Art Review. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 72 (17), 2054–2070.
Rodriguez, K.A., Gaczynska, M., Osmulski, P.A., 2010. Molecular mechanisms of 
proteasome plasticity in aging. Mech. Ageing Dev. 131 (2), 144–155.
Rokas, A., et al., 2020. Developing a theoretical evolutionary framework to solve the 
mystery of parturition initiation. Elife 9.
Roshanzadeh, A., et al., 2021. Exposure to nanoplastics impairs collective contractility of 
neonatal cardiomyocytes under electrical synchronization. Biomaterials 278, 
121175.
S´anchez, A., et al., 2022. Dietary microplastics: occurrence, exposure and health 
implications. Environ. Res. 212, 113150.
Saptarshi, S.R., Duschl, A., Lopata, A.L., 2013. Interaction of nanoparticles with proteins: 
relation to bio-reactivity of the nanoparticle. J. Nanobiotechnol. 11, 26.
Sawicki, K., et al., 2019. Toxicity of metallic nanoparticles in the central nervous system, 
8 (1), 175–200.
Scheen, A.J., Junien, C., 2012. [Epigenetics, interface between environment and genes: 
role in complex diseases]. Rev. Med Liege 67 (5-6), 250–257.
Schraufnagel, D.E., 2020. The health effects of ultrafine particles. Exp. Mol. Med 52 (3), 
311–317.
Seok, J., et al., 2013. Genomic responses in mouse models poorly mimic human 
inflammatory diseases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110 (9), 3507–3512.
Shang, Y., et al., 2019. Modifications of autophagy influenced the Alzheimer-like 
changes in SH-SY5Y cells promoted by ultrafine black carbon. Environ. Pollut. 246, 
763–771.
Shao, D., et al., 2017. Cardiorespiratory responses of air filtration: a randomized 
crossover intervention trial in seniors living in Beijing: Beijing Indoor Air Purifier 
StudY, BIAPSY. Sci. Total Environ. 603-604, 541–549.
Shukla, R.K., et al., 2013. Titanium dioxide nanoparticle-induced oxidative stress triggers 
DNA damage and hepatic injury in mice. Nanomedicine 9 (9), 1423–1434.
Simkhovich, B.Z., et al., 2007. Direct and acute cardiotoxicity of ultrafine particles in 
young adult and old rat hearts. Basic Res Cardiol. 102 (6), 467–475.
Song, S., et al., 2023. Inhalable textile microplastic fibers impair airway epithelial 
differentiation. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med.
Stephan, M., Volkmann, P., Rossner, M.J., 2019. Assessing behavior and cognition in 
rodents, nonhuman primates, and humans: where are the limits of translation? 
Dialog-. Clin. Neurosci. 21 (3), 249–259.
Sun, H., et al., 2024. Polystyrene nanoparticles trigger aberrant condensation of TDP-43 
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-like symptoms. Nat. Nanotechnol.
Terzano, C., et al., 2010. Air pollution ultrafine particles: toxicity beyond the lung. Eur. 
Rev. Med Pharm. Sci. 14 (10), 809–821.
Thaver, S., et al., 2019. Pregnancy protects against the pro-inflammatory respiratory 
responses induced by particulate matter exposure. Chemosphere 225, 796–802.
Thomas, R.J., 2013. Particle size and pathogenicity in the respiratory tract. Virulence 4 
(8), 847–858.
Twigger, S.N., 2004. Of rats and men. Genome Biol. 5 (3), 314.
Ural, B.B., et al., 2022. Inhaled particulate accumulation with age impairs immune 
function and architecture in human lung lymph nodes. Nat. Med 28 (12), 
2622–2632.
Q. Tu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
10 
Vermeulen, R., et al., 2020. The exposome and health: where chemistry meets biology. 
Science 367 (6476), 392–396.
Wei, W., et al., 2024. Silica nanoparticle exposure implicates β-Amyloid (1-42) Inbound 
and the Accelerating Alzheimer’s disease progression in mice overexpressing 
mutated forms of human amyloid precursor protein and presenilin 1 genes. Chem. 
Res Toxicol. 37 (2), 429–438.
Wick, P., et al., 2010. Barrier capacity of human placenta for nanosized materials. 
Environ. Health Perspect. 118 (3), 432–436.
Wieland, S., et al., 2024. Nominally identical microplastic models differ greatly in their 
particle-cell interactions. Nat. Commun. 15 (1), 922.
Wild, C.P., 2005. Complementing the genome with an "exposome": the outstanding 
challenge of environmental exposure measurement in molecular epidemiology. 
Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 14 (8), 1847–1850.
Woo, J.H., et al., 2023. Polypropylene nanoplastic exposure leads to lung inflammation 
through p38-mediated NF-κB pathway due to mitochondrial damage. Part Fibre 
Toxicol. 20 (1), 2.
Wu, H., Eckhardt, C.M., Baccarelli, A.A., 2023. Molecular mechanisms of environmental 
exposures and human disease. Nat. Rev. Genet 24 (5), 332–344.
Wu, Y., et al., 2022. Ambient air pollution associated with incidence and dynamic 
progression of type 2 diabetes: a trajectory analysis of a population-based cohort. 
BMC Med 20 (1), 375.
Xia, T., et al., 2004. Quinones and aromatic chemical compounds in particulate matter 
induce mitochondrial dysfunction: implications for ultrafine particle toxicity. 
Environ. Health Perspect. 112 (14), 1347–1358.
Xu, D., et al., 2021. Systematic toxicity evaluation of polystyrene nanoplastics on mice 
and molecular mechanism investigation about their internalization into Caco-2 cells. 
J. Hazard Mater. 417, 126092.
Yao, Y.G., K.I.Z.P.F, 2022. Construction Team of the, Towards the peak: the 10-year 
journey of the National Research Facility for Phenotypic and Genetic Analysis of 
Model Animals (Primate Facility) and a call for international collaboration in non- 
human primate research. Zool. Res 43 (2), 237–240.
Yu, Z., et al., 2020. Reactive oxygen species-related nanoparticle toxicity in the 
biomedical field. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 15 (1), 115.
Zeng, Y., et al., 2021. The impact of particulate matter (PM2.5) on human retinal 
development in hESC-derived retinal organoids. Front Cell Dev. Biol. 9, 607341.
Zhai, J., et al., 2022. Primate gastrulation and early organogenesis at single-cell 
resolution. Nature 612 (7941), 732–738.
Zhang, J., et al., 2022a. Chronic carbon black nanoparticles exposure increases lung 
cancer risk by affecting the cell cycle via circulatory inflammation. Environ. Pollut. 
305, 119293.
Zhang, J., et al., 2024. Adverse effects of exposure to fine particles and ultrafine particles 
in the environment on different organs of organisms. J. Environ. Sci. (China) 135, 
449–473.
Zhang, L., et al., 2018. Particle-induced SIRT1 downregulation promotes 
osteoclastogenesis and osteolysis through ER stress regulation. Biomed. 
Pharmacother. 104, 300–306.
Zhang, R., et al., 2023. Neurogenesis in primates versus rodents and the value of non- 
human primate models. Natl. Sci. Rev. 10 (11), nwad248.
Zhang, S., et al., 2016. Interventions to reduce individual exposure of elderly individuals 
and children to haze: a review. J. Thorac. Dis. 8 (1), E62–E68.
Zhang, Z., et al., 2022b. Mechanistic study of silica nanoparticles on the size-dependent 
retinal toxicity in vitro and in vivo. J. Nanobiotechnol. 20 (1), 146.
Zhu, X., et al., 2020. Recent advances in understanding the mechanisms of PM2.5- 
mediated neurodegenerative diseases. Toxicol. Lett. 329, 31–37.
Zhu, X., et al., 2023. Micro- and nanoplastics: a new cardiovascular risk factor? Environ. 
Int 171, 107662.
Q. Tu et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 286 (2024) 117199 
11 
