Recent advances in 3D bioprinted neural models: A systematic review on
the applications to drug discovery☆
Amanda Orr a, Farnoosh Kalantarnia b, Shama Nazir c, Behzad Bolandi d, Dominic Alderson e,
Kerrin O’Grady f, Mina Hoorfar b, Lisa M. Julian c, Stephanie M. Willerth a,g,h,i,*
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 2Y2, Canada
b Mechanical Engineering, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 2Y2, Canada
c Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada
d Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, Canada
e Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK
f Department of Biomedical & Chemical Engineering, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA
g Division of Medical Sciences, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 2Y2, Canada
h Centre for Advanced Materials and Technology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 2Y2, Canada
i School of Biomedical Engineering, University of British Columbia, Victoria, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada
G R A P H I C A L A B S T R A C T
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Neural tissue engineering
3D bioprinting
Standardized 3D model characterization
Cellular characterization
Functional brain tissues
Mechanical characterization
Drug discovery
Human induced pluripotent stem cells
A B S T R A C T
The design of neural tissue models with architectural and biochemical relevance to native tissues opens the way
for the fundamental study and development of therapies for many disorders with limited treatment options.
Here, we systematically review the most recent literature on 3D bioprinted neural models, including their po-
tential for use in drug screening. Neural tissues that model the central nervous system (CNS) from the relevant
literature are reviewed with comprehensive summaries of each study, and discussion of the model types, bioinks
and additives, cell types used, bioprinted construct shapes and culture time, and the characterization methods
used. In this review, we accentuate the lack of standardization among characterization methods to analyze the
functionality (including chemical, metabolic and other pathways) and mechanical relevance of the 3D bioprinted
☆This article is part of a special issue entitled: ‘PharmBio3DP’ published in Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: willerth@uvic.ca (S.M. Willerth).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/adr
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2025.115524
Received 2 September 2024; Received in revised form 12 December 2024; Accepted 26 January 2025
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
Available online 1 February 2025 
0169-409X/© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
Neurodegenerative disease
Neural progenitor cells
Neural stem cells
Construct culture
Bioinks
Construct geometry
constructs, and discuss this as a critical area for future exploration. These gaps must be addressed for this
technology to be applied for effective drug screening applications, despite its enormous potential for rapid and
efficient drug screening. The future of biomimetic, 3D printed neural tissues is promising and evaluation of the in
vivo relevance on multiple levels should be sought to adequately compare model performance and develop viable
treatment options for neurodegenerative diseases, or other conditions that affect the CNS.
Nomenclature
Acronyms
2D
two dimensional
3D
three dimensional
6-ODHA 6-hydroxydopamine
AA
amino acid
AAS
antibiotic antimitotic solution
AB
Alamar blue
AD
Alzheimer’s disease
ADSCs
adipose-derived stem cells
AI
artificial intelligence
AuNPs
gold nanoparticles
BBB
blood brain barrier
BDNF
brain derived neurotrophic factor
BFCNs
basal forebrain cholinergic neurons
bFGF
basic fibroblast growth factor
BIONs
bioengineered immunomodulatory organelle targeted
nanozymes
BMECs
brain microvascular endothelial cells
C-AMP
cyclic adenosine monophosphate
CaCl2
calcium chloride
CAM
Calcein AM
CaSO4
calcium sulphate
CCH
conductive composite hydrogel
CHIR
CHIR99021
CMC
carboxymethylcellulose
CNS
central nervous system
CSMA
chondroitin sulfate methacrylate
CSMS
chondroitin sulfate methacrylate
DA
dopaminergic
DC
dopamine conjugated
DC-Gel
dopamine-conjugated gelatin
DC-Gel-MA dopamine-conjugated gelatin methacrylate
DC-HA
dopamine-conjugated HA
DIW
direct ink writing
DLP
digital light processing
DMSO
dimethylsulfoxide
E
elastic modulus
eAPs
evoked action potentials
EB
embryoid body
ECM
extracellular matrix
EDOT
3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene
EGF
epidermal growth factor
EGM-2
Endothelial cell growth medium
EHD
electrohydrodynamic
ELISA
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
FBS
fetal bovine serum
FGF-2
fibroblast growth factor 2
FPA
primary fetal astrocytes
FRESH
freeform reversible embedding of suspended hydrogels
FTIR
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
G’
storage modulus
G”
loss modulus
GBM
glioblastoma
GDNF
glial-derived neurotrophic factor
GelMA
gelatin methacrylate
GEMMs
genetically engineered mouse models
GG
gellan gum
GMHA
glycidyl methacrylate hyaluronic acid
HA
hyaluronic acid
HA-BCN
bicyclo[6.1.0]nonyne modified HA
hiPSCs
human induced pluripotent stem cells
hMG
human microglia cells
hNSCs
human neural stem cells
HTS
high-throughput screening
HUVECs human umbilical vein endothelial cells
ICC
immunocytochemistry
ID
inner diameter
IHC
immunohistochemistry
IKVAV
Ile-Lys-Val-Ala-Val
IPSCs
inhibitory postsynaptic currents
IVFK
Ac-Ile-Val-Phe-Lys-NH2
IVZK
Ac-Ile-Val-Cha-Lys-NH2
KCl
potassium chloride
LAB
laser-assisted bioprinting
LAP
lithium phenyl (2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyl) phosphinate
LDN
LDN193189
LIFT
laser-induced forward transfer
MDCKs
Madin-Darby Canine Kidney epithelial cells
MEAs
microelectrode arrays
MGE
medial ganglionic eminence
MMP
matrix metalloproteinase
MNPs
motor neuron progenitors
MNs
motor neurons
mRNA
messenger RNA
MSCs
mesenchymal stem cells
MSs
microspheres
mTG
micro-transglutaminase
MTT
3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5 diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide
NAs
neural aggregates
NGF
nerve growth factor
NPCs
neural progenitor cells
NPs
nanoparticles
NSCs
neural stem cells
NSPCs
neural stem/progenitor cells
OoC
organ on a chip
OPCs
oligodendrocyte precursors
P/S
penicillin/streptomycin
PD
Parkinson’s disease
PDMS
polydimethylsiloxane
PDXs
patient-derived xenografts
PecMA
pectin methacrylol
PEDOT
3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene polymer
PEG
polyethylene glycol
PEGDA
PEG-diacrylate
PF127-SH thiolated Pluronic F-127
PI
photoinitiator
PLO
poly-L-ornithine
PNS
peripheral nervous system
PRISMA
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses
Puro
purmorphamine
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
2 
qPCR
quantitative polymerase chain reaction
RA
retinoic acid
RGD
Arg-Gly-Asp
RGD-GG RGD-modified gellan gum
rhPDGF-AA recombinant human platelet-derived growth factor-AA
rhShh
recombinant human sonic hedgehog
RNA
ribonucleic acid
RT-qPCR reverse transcriptase quantitative polymerase chain
reaction OR real-time quantitative PCR used throughout
sALS
sporadic Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
sAPs
spontaneous action potentials
SB
SB431542
SCI
spinal cord injury
SEM
scanning electron microscopy
SHAPE
Self-Healing Annealable Particle-ECM
SilMA
methacrylated silk fibroin
SISMA
methacryloyl-modified decellularized small intestinal
submucosa
SISMA-GO SISMA with electroconductive graphene oxide
nanoflakes
SLA
stereolithography
SRB
sulforhodamine B
t-ZnO
tetrapodal-shaped zinc oxide
TA
tannic acid
TMZ
Temozolomide
TPP
two-photon polymerization
UV
ultraviolet
VEGFA
vascular endothelial growth factor A
VGFs
vascular growth factors
VM
ventral midbrain
WJ-MSCs Wharton jelly mesenchymal stem cells
Markers:
βIII tubulin/TUJ1 Beta III tubulin
AADC
aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
APOL4
apolipoprotein L4
APOL6
apolipoprotein L6
ATP
adenosine triphosphate
β-Actin
beta actin
BDNF
brain-derived neurotrophic factor
BRN2
also known as POU3F2 (NPC marker)
CA IX
carbonic anhydrase 9
CB
calbindin
CD133
prominin 1 (GBM stem cell marker)
CD31
also known as platelet and endothelial cell adhesion
molecule 1 (PECAM1)
CD44
transmembrane glycoprotein
ChAT
choline acetyltransferase
CNPase
cyclic nucleotide 3′-phosphodiesterase
CR
calretinin
CTIP2
COUP-TF-interacting protein 2
DAPI
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
DAPT
γ-secretase inhibitor IX
DAT
dopamine transporter
DCX
doublecortin
ESG1
TLE family member 1
F-actin
filamentous actin
FBP
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
FOXA2
Forkhead Box A2
FOXG1
Forkhead Box G1
GABA
γ-aminobutyric acid
GAD
glutamic acid decarboxylase
GFAP
glial fibrillary acidic protein
GFP
green fluorescent protein
GLT-1
glutamate transporter 1
H19
endodermal marker
HAND1
heart and neural crest derivatives expressed 1 (mesoderm
marker)
HB9
protein homeobox 9
HIF1-α
hypoxia inducible factor 1 subunit alpha
HMG
high mobility group
HMGB1
high mobility group box 1
I-BET 151 BET bromodomain inhibitor
IGF-1
insulin-like growth factor 1
IGF2
insulin like growth factor 2 (mesoderm marker)
iGluSnFR glutamate-sensing fluorescent reporter
IKK
inhibitory kappa B kinase
IL-1β
interleukin-1 beta
Isl1
ISL LIM homeobox 1
ISX9
isoxazole 9
ITGB1
integrin subunit beta 1
Ki-67
proliferation marker
LMX1B
LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 beta
MAP2
microtubule-associated protein 2
MKI67
marker of Ki-67
NANOG
nanog homeobox
NCAD
N-cadherin
NCAM
neural cell adhesion molecule
Nestin
neuroepithelial stem cell protein
NeuN
neuronal nuclear protein
NG2
nerve/glial-antigen 2
NGF
Nerve growth factor
NKX2-1
NK2 homeobox 1
Nr4A1
nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 1
Nr4a2
nuclear receptor subfamily 4, group A, member 2
(“Nurr1”)
Nrf2
nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2
NT3
neurotrophin-3
NURR1
Nr4a2
O4
oligodendrocyte marker
OCT4
octamer-binding transcription factor 4
OLIGO2
oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2
PAX
paxillin focal adhesion protein
PAX6
Paired box protein 6
PDX1
pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (endodermal
marker)
PSD95
discs large MAGUK scaffold protein 4 (also DLG4)
PTK2
protein tyrosine kinase 2
PV
parvalbumin
REX1
zinc finger protein 42 (Zfp42)
S100β
S100 calcium-binding protein B
SATB2
special AT-rich sequence binding protein 2
SLC2A1
solute carrier family 2 member 1
SMI312
neurofilament marker
SOX1
SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 1
SOX2
SRY-box transcription factor 2
SOX9
SRY-box transcription factor 9
SOX10
SRY-box transcription factor 10
SPP1
secreted phosphoprotein 1
SSEA4
stage-specific embryonic antigen-4
SST
somatostatin
SYN
synaptophysin
SYN1
synapsin-I
SYP
presynaptic terminals marker
TBR1
T-box brain transcription factor 1
TBR2
T-box brain protein 2
TDGF1
teratocarcinoma-derived growth factor 1
TH
tyrosine hydroxylase
TNF-α
tumour necrosis factor-alpha
TRA-1–60 pluripotent marker
TUBB3
class III beta-tubulin protein
TUJ1
β-III tubulin (may be referred to as β-III tubulin, III beta-
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
3 
1. Introduction
Neural tissues are not limited to the brain as neural cells can be found
throughout the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous
system (PNS) [1]. The brain and spinal cord comprise the CNS and are
both vital to human function, sensory capacities, and the emergence of
various neurodegenerative disorders. The brain is a complex and intri-
cate organ that hosts an abundance of cellular components, defences,
and synaptic pathways and is directly responsible for movement,
memory, and all processes that occur within the human body. Brain
tissue is predominantly populated with a diverse arrangement of cells,
including neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia and other
support cells [2]. Spatially, neurons primarily comprise the periphery
(or grey matter) of the brain and are surrounded by interior white matter
filled with support cells – astrocytes, microglia and oligodendrocytes
[3]. The cells of the brain form complex interactions through cell sig-
nalling and coordination, where neurons are the signalling cells, and the
glial cells coexist as structural support cells, generating intricate neural
networks responsible for multifaceted functions. These organizations
are heterogeneous throughout the brain microstructure and exhibit
regional distinctions that vary in stiffness, cellular composition and
function [4], so recapitulating the structure through in vitro models re-
mains challenging. The formation of the brain itself has complexities
that may not be mimicked such as spatial coordination for synaptic
connections [4], and the plasticity of the brain generates complex
restructuring depending on the timescale, adding to this challenge.
The blood brain barrier (BBB), a crucial component of the brain,
serves as the protective physiochemical barrier in the CNS that selec-
tively regulates nutrient and hormonal transport using various routes
that rely on biochemical recognition and passive transport [5]. The
cellular composition of the BBB is comprised primarily of brain micro-
vascular endothelial cells, supported by the basement membrane
(collagen, elastin, fibronectin, laminin, proteoglycans), astrocytes, per-
icytes, and microglial cells [5]. Neurons interact with these regulating
bodies to generate a convoluted symbiotic functioning network [5].
Importantly, the BBB plays a crucial role in drug efficacy, as its main-
tenance controls the primary defence system to restrict passage into the
brain, thereby limiting drug adsorption.
Three dimensional (3D) bioengineered models can serve as funda-
mental tools in advancing the understanding of functional biology and
neurodegenerative disorders, among others. Prominently, their use can
be used for screening various drug therapies for disease treatments and
extend to evaluating drug toxicity and other effects during brain
development and address the high costs associated with ineffective pre-
clinical disease models [6]. The design of more complex models that
resemble native tissue are more beneficial compared to two-dimensional
(2D) models and those that use monocultures. Importantly, disease pa-
thology has been more pronounced when multi-cell models are
employed, inherently due to synergistic cellular signalling. The reca-
pitulation of native cells is promoted through the incorporation of
hydrogel-based environments that resemble the extracellular matrix
(ECM). Further, the design of representative 3D neural tissues can be
enhanced using human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). These
cells can be sourced from individuals to create patient-specific models
that can be precisely patterned to form networks via intrinsic cell
signaling pathways and organization similar to native brain tissue by
incorporating 3D bioprinting into neural tissue model workflows.
1.1. 3D bioprinting
Our understanding of the human brain is limited due to the general
inaccessibility of human brain tissue and the lack of experimental
models that accurately replicate key aspects of its developmental and
functional complexity. Much of our knowledge of how the brain de-
velops and functions has been gained from rodent models, whose brains
lack the intricate cytoarchitecture and many characteristic features of
the human brain. Various structural and biological limitations constrain
the use of 2D cell cultures as the foundation for most brain models.
Monolayer cultures lack the essential morphological and spatial orga-
nization of tissues, fail to replicate the complex 3D structure of the brain
and do not capture crucial interactions between cells or between cells
and the ECM [7]. The dynamics of waste accumulation and removal are
also omitted [8]. Therefore, developing more complex 3D models is
crucial for a better understanding of the CNS.
3D bioprinting of human derived neural cells enables the creation of
complex tissue structures that closely mimic the architecture and func-
tion of human brain tissues [9]. Additionally, 3D bioprinting can enable
us to reproduce abnormal structures associated with human brain dis-
eases (Lewy bodies, amyloid plaques), which are often not replicable in
animal models [10,11]. Due to a historical lack of ideal brain models,
scientists have faced major setbacks in drug discovery for neurological
disorders. Drugs tested and deemed successful in animal models often
fail in clinical settings. While replicating the full architecture and
function of the human brain is not yet possible, the field of tissue en-
gineering has made significant progress toward this goal [9]. 3D bio-
printing deposits bioinks in a layer-by-layer fashion to achieve precise
patterning and relevant geometries as well as integrates cues for dif-
ferentiation,
growth
and
interaction.
These
architectures
better
resemble the complex structures within neural tissues for more precise
cell deposition and inherently more representative tissue models
compared to 2D models [1], especially for disease models [12,13].
3D models better emulate the complex organization and signalling
between cells, which play a major role in recapitulating disease patho-
physiology [14]. Non-bioprinted 3D models, such as organoids can have
limited disease expression, demonstrate experimental variability, and/
or are difficult to structurally reproduce [15]. 3D bioprinting can
address these obstacles since it can generate highly complex and precise
tissue patterning that incorporates relevant mechanical stiffness of
native tissues, which are crucial for mimicking disease pathology in the
lab [16,17]. Here, we briefly discuss the various 3D bioprinting
approaches.
1.1.1. Extrusion-based bioprinting
Extrusion-based bioprinting is a widely used technique that deposits
viscous bioinks, including hydrogels and cell suspensions, layer-by-layer
to create 3D structures [18]. This method is versatile and cost-effective
but can exert significant pressure on cells, leading to lower survival rates
and reduced tissue functionality [19,20]. Despite these challenges,
extrusion-based bioprinting is favoured in tissue engineering and cancer
research due to its ability to create complex models that mimic in vivo
tissue architecture [21,22]. Ongoing advancements focus on optimizing
printing parameters, such as nozzle geometry and extrusion pressure, to
enhance cell viability and achieve high-resolution prints [22,23]. This
method has proven effective in creating compartmental tumoroids and
other models that closely replicate the in vivo environment, making it a
key tool in studying cancer and other diseases [21,24].
tubulin, or βT III in the original paper)
UTF1
undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1
VEGFA
vascular endothelial growth factor A
VEGFR2
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2
vGAT
vesicular GABA transporter
vGlut1
vesicular glutamate transporter 1
Vimentin structural intermediate filament protein
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
4 
1.1.2. Droplet-based bioprinting
As the name implies, droplet-based bioprinting deposits droplets that
are generated from various mechanisms (sound, thermal, electric), and
includes the methods of inkjet and acoustic bioprinting. Inkjet bio-
printing uses low-viscosity solutions to deposit microdroplets onto a
substrate in a precise, layer-by-layer manner [25]. Thermal or piezo-
electric actuators control this process, with thermal inkjet printing
relying on localized heating to generate droplets and piezoelectric
printers using acoustic waves [19,26]. The technique offers high print-
ing speed and micron precision, making it ideal for creating detailed 3D
structures at a relatively low cost [19]. Inkjet bioprinting is versatile,
enabling the printing of human cancer cellular spheroids and complex
biomaterial combinations [27–29]. However, challenges such as nozzle
clogging and limitations in the range of printable bioinks due to vis-
cosity constraints remain [30,31]. Ongoing improvements aim to
enhance resolution and expand material versatility while addressing the
impact of crosslinking agents on cell viability [32–34].
Acoustic-based bioprinting alleviates the nozzle-clogging issue of
other droplet-based printing methods since it uses sound waves to po-
sition bioinks in layered formulations [35]. In addition, this method
allows for the printing of sensitive biomaterials with high precision, but
the technique has limited printed speeds and requires specialized
equipment which may be inaccessible for users [35].
1.1.3. Light-based methods
Laser-assisted bioprinting (LAB) leverages laser-induced forward
transfer (LIFT) technology to produce intricate tissue constructs with
high precision. Originally developed for metal patterning in computer
chip fabrication, LIFT was adapted for bioprinting, enabling the precise
deposition of cells and bioinks at the micron level [36–39]. LAB excels in
creating high-resolution, complex 3D cellular models, with high cell
viability and density [40,41]. The absence of nozzles eliminates clogging
issues, and LAB supports a wide range of bioink viscosities, making it
suitable for advanced tissue engineering applications [42,43]. Despite
these strengths, LAB faces challenges, such as limited productivity and
high equipment costs [44]. However, its precision and ability to produce
complex cellular models with high fidelity make it a promising tool for
tissue engineering and regenerative medicine [41,45–47].
Another LAB technique is two-photon polymerization (TPP). TPP
uses femtosecond lasers to induce polymerization and has the potential
to generate sub-micron-level printing resolution [35]. This technique
incorporates the principles of two-photon absorption, which in the
presence of a photoinitiator, leads to polymerization of the material(s)
[35]. Since this technique requires the use of specialized lasers, TPP can
be costly and the use of photoinitiators may lead to cytotoxicity, but the
ability to achieve nanometer-level resolution has favourable relevance
to neurite outgrowth in vitro [48].
1.1.4. Stereolithography
Stereolithography (SLA) uses photosensitive polymers, solidified
layer-by-layer with light, to fabricate complex structures with high
resolution [49,50]. Originally adapted from a 2D method, SLA allows for
efficient construction of intricate scaffolds in biomedical applications,
maintaining high cell viability and consistency in print times regardless
of layer complexity [51–54]. Recent advancements address the toxicity
of photo-curing agents and potential DNA damage from UV light by
using visible light for biocompatibility and material versatility [50,54].
Despite these improvements, challenges remain, including the devel-
opment
of
fully
biocompatible
polymers
and
the
need
for
a
photopolymer-filled reservoir, leading to material waste and increased
costs [55,56]. Nevertheless, SLA continues to be a prominent technique
for creating detailed 3D structures in tissue engineering.
1.1.5. Indirect printing
Indirect bioprinting uses a sacrificial framework to support the for-
mation of polymer-based scaffolds, with the support material removed
post-printing to create the final structure [57]. This technique is versa-
tile, allowing for the incorporation of various materials, including
bioactive substances, into scaffolds with controlled external and internal
architectures [58]. For example, carbohydrate glass networks can serve
as sacrificial templates, enabling precise control over endothelialization
and network geometry in engineered tissues [59]. Indirect bioprinting
shows promise in creating complex hydrogel scaffolds, although its
application in nerve tissue regeneration is still underexplored, with the
mechanical and biological properties of such scaffolds needing further
research. The method’s capability to incorporate different materials and
create advanced architectural designs makes it a valuable tool for
complex tissue engineering applications [31,60,61].
1.1.6. FRESH printing
Freeform Reversible Embedding of Suspended Hydrogels (FRESH)
bioprinting is a cutting-edge technique designed to print soft, fragile
hydrogels with high fidelity by extruding low-viscosity inks into a
thermoreversible gelatin microparticle support bath, stabilizing the
printed material and allowing complex freeform structures that would
otherwise collapse under gravity [62,63]. This method supports multi-
ple crosslinking strategies, enabling the construction of large, intricate
tissue scaffolds, such as vascularized heart and neural models, with
applications in surgical training and tissue engineering [64,65]. Recent
advancements have improved printing resolution and mechanical
properties by refining the support bath’s properties, enhancing its
capability to print various hydrogels with precise resolution [65–67].
This technique’s versatility extends to creating complex biological
structures, demonstrating its potential in biomedical applications [68].
1.1.7. Emerging printing technologies
Beyond the aforementioned printing methods, relatively new tech-
nologies are emerging that have applications in tissue engineering such
as magnetically induced and chaotic bioprinting. Typical printing stra-
tegies for magnetic bioprinting involve seeding cells that have been
magnetized with magnetic nanoparticles (NPs), allowing for precise
patterning of cells using an external magnet [69]. This technique has
been commonly used to form spheroids through suspension or levitation
within a culture dish or in ring form based on differing magnetic fields to
dictate the structure [69]. However, compared to other printing tech-
niques, this method does not specifically deposit cells through a print-
head within bioink, and relies on the magnetic organization from
stimulus outside of the dish, and concentrations of magnetic NPs or
media conditions are not always clear [69]. The technique also has
limitations in ensuring multiple cell phenotype of spheroid co-cultures
for aortic valves [70] and adipose tissue [71] models. There are also
uncertainties of the influence of the magnetic NPs on cell function [72].
However, research has shown that the magnetic properties of NPs within
cells can be regenerated in mesenchymal stem cells in conditions asso-
ciated with high iron and ferritin [73].
Chaotic bioprinting is a method of printing that incorporates chaotic
mixing through laminar flow within the printhead that happens in a
predictable and reproducible fashion [74]. The mechanism combines
droplets into viscous fluids in a defined flow cycle, which generates
exponentially complex mixing interfaces which can be solidified and
create favourable environments for cells [75]. While this technique has
yet to be incorporated with neural models, it has the potential to mimic
the BBB given the hierarchical patterning of chaotic bioprinting [75].
1.2. Other models
As mentioned, 3D models better emulate the complex organization
and signalling between cells, but certain models, such as organoids, can
have limited disease expression and reproducibility [15]. These models
were not explored in our review, but given their prevalence in the
literature, are worth mentioning.
Spheroids −clusters of proliferating neural cells −do not possess the
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
5 
complex structures or functions of mature brain tissue [7]. To overcome
the limitations of spheroids, organoids have been developed, which are
3D models capable of self-organization and mimicking certain aspects of
brain architecture, such as the formation of structures resembling
cortical layers [76,77]. Organoids offer a more representative in-vivo
physiology than 2D cultures despite the variability that results from
their formation and development differences [78]. 3D matrix models
have emerged as a promising alternative to address the inherent vari-
ability often encountered with spheroids and organoids. Self-organizing
organoids can vary significantly in size, shape, and cellular composition,
whereas 3D matrix models offer a higher degree of standardization.
These models require culturing or embedding specific cells in hydrogels
that solidify into a controlled-thickness matrix. The hydrogels create a
supportive scaffold for cell growth and organization while maintaining
predictable and reproducible conditions.
Additionally, organ-on-a-chip (OoC) is a powerful tool for studying
the brain. OoC systems are engineered devices with channels, chambers,
and membranes to provide a small-scale platform and replicate the
natural environment of tissues by mimicking the physiological structure
and biochemical cues [76,79]. These devices offer precise control over
the microenvironment, allowing for the study of cell behaviour, drug
responses, and disease progression in a controlled setting [80,81]. Pol-
ydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is commonly used in OoC fabrication due to
its optical clarity, stretchability, ease of fabrication, and high oxygen
permeability, making it ideal for creating detailed microstructures [79].
In the field of brain tissue engineering, OoC systems can mimic the
complex vascularization and nutrient gradients found in the brain,
making them valuable for studying neurological disorders [82–84].
Integrating OoC and 3D bioprinting approaches shows promise for
creating more sophisticated brain models. For example, a 3D bioprinted
GBM model was developed on a chip to simulate the oxygen-deprived
environment of a tumour by creating an oxygen gradient [85]. How-
ever, due to its specialized and complex nature, a detailed discussion on
OoC is beyond the scope of this review. For comprehensive insights,
readers are referred to several reviews on the topic, including those by
Amirifar et al. and Akcay et al. [86,87].
Animal models are also widely used for understanding function,
pathology, and testing drug therapies in clinical settings. Rodents that
include genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs)[88] or patient-
derived xenografts (PDXs)[89] have been instrumental in advancing our
understanding of disease mechanisms and pathologies. Despite their
utility, differences in anatomical structures and developmental trajec-
tories between species pose challenges to directly translating findings.
For instance, mouse brains differ from human brains in size, complexity,
and regional organization, limiting their ability to replicate the spatial
heterogeneity and microenvironment of human brain [90].
Animal models of glioblastoma (GBM) facilitate studying mecha-
nisms such as tumor invasiveness, angiogenesis, and resistance to ther-
apies, but genetic and immunological differences further complicate
their translational potential to preclinical studies [91]. Mice often
exhibit a heightened immune response to GBM, which contrasts with the
immunosuppressive nature of the human GBM microenvironment. This
heightened immunogenicity can skew the evaluation of immunother-
apies [92]. Furthermore, the genetic background of mouse GBM models
does not fully recapitulate the heterogeneity and mutational landscape
of human GBM, potentially overlooking critical aspects of tumor biology
[91]. Moreover, age-related neurodegenerative diseases are largely
human-specific and cannot be replicated in rodents. Some aged mam-
mals, including nonhuman primates, bears, and dogs, spontaneously
develop neuropathological features like β-amyloidosis and neurofibril-
lary tangles, though these do not fully match human disease phenotypes
[93]. For instance, despite similarities in the amino acid sequences of
pathogenic proteins between humans and nonhuman primates, the
latter appear more resilient. Differences in protein clearance mecha-
nisms, chaperone activity, proteasomal and autophagosomal pathways
and lifespan likely contribute to this resistance [93]. Drug screening
using animal models is time-consuming, while cellular models offer a
faster alternative, being highly valuable for high-throughput screening
and assays, where animal models are limited. The goal of 3D cellular
models is to be able to offer better pre-clinical screening for drug ther-
apies, alleviating the costly expense (time and money) of poor trans-
lational aspects of animal models.
1.3. Systematic review
There has been extensive review of 3D bioprinting for neural tissue
Fig. 1. Overview of common cellular and mechanical characterization techniques involved in 3D bioprinted neural tissue models. Cellular characterizations include
cell viability, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), calcium imaging, and immunofluorescent analysis. Mechanical characterizations include compression
tests, rheology, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). Created with BioRender.com.
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
6 
engineering and its optimizations, applications, among others. There-
fore, this systematic review aims to comprehensively explore the work
that has been done in the last decade on 3D bioprinting of neural tissues
– with an emphasis on neural brain tissue – to rationally compare the
methods, materials, and characterization of the bioprinted models.
Specifically, the objective of the systematic review was to understand
what research has been done on 3D bioprinting neural tissues and
evaluate the types of methods used to assess the efficacy of these models.
Here we review what the field of 3D bioprinting has accomplished in the
last 10 years toward the establishment of human-relevant models of
brain
disorders,
assessment
of
drug
efficacy,
and
nerve
tissue
regeneration.
While innovation and variation in materials are practical and
encouraged to explore the most accurate models of the brain, we found a
wide variation in the characterization methods used. The characteriza-
tion of the 3D bioprinted constructs should include methods that aptly
investigate their relevance to human neural tissues (Fig. 1). These
techniques include an assessment of structure, fundamental function,
and behaviour, and in the case of disease models, recapitulate the dis-
ease pathophysiology.
2. Methods
2.1. Systematic review
The systematic literature search followed the updated Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)
2020 guidelines [94]. Three databases were examined, PubMed, Scopus,
and Web of Science. Three or four main keywords were searched to
capture original research articles that covered the broad topics of ‘3D
bioprinting’, ‘neuronal cells/brain models’ or ‘co-cultures’ and ‘dis-
eases’ (Table 1). The term “disease” was included to attempt to incor-
porate applications for drug discovery and drug screening as the focused
application of this review. The search was conducted over the last ten
years (from 01/01/2014 to 12/08/2024) in all cases. In PubMed, arti-
cles were filtered to not include review articles or systematic review
articles; for Web of Science, review articles were excluded; for Scopus,
articles exclusive to research articles or “ar” document types were
included (full details in Supplemental Information, Tables S1, S2). The
last search was conducted on August 12th, 2024. The 3-keyword and 4-
keyword searches and screening were conducted by two individual
reviewers, respectively, and the results were compiled.
Papers were exported from the respective databases as summaries
(including abstracts). The documents were initially screened by reading
the title; relevant articles were also evaluated within their abstracts to
ensure applicability. The articles that were not immediately excluded
based on title were assessed based on their abstract, and if it was still
unclear if relevant, an assessment of methodology was sought. The
reasons for exclusion were recorded in Excel as being removed from the
title, abstracts or methods, and the reasons for removal were recorded
and summarized in Excel.
Reasons for removal were done for various reasons including non-
research articles – such as reviews, commentaries or chapters (n = 78,
‘3-keyword’ search), or simply no bioprinting (Fig. 2). Papers were
excluded based on the most obvious exclusion criteria but could have
been excluded under multiple criteria. Classification as “not bio-
printing” was the broadest exclusion criteria, which varied from no
bioprinting being mentioned with no relevance to neural tissue engi-
neering (e.g., the detection of VOCs from 3D printing), or the lack of 3D
bioprinting in cell culture (e.g., co-cultures but no printing). Nerve guide
conduits were excluded; cells that were seeded on either 3D bioprinted,
3D printed, or non-printed matrices were also excluded since it has been
thoroughly demonstrated that 3D bioprinting can achieve reproducible
constructs with highly accurate patterning.
Of the included articles, evaluation of and documenting the model
type (neural, brain, spinal cord, tumour, etc.), number of printed cell
types (1, 2, >2), biomaterials used, days of construct culture assessment,
and key functional features (e.g., viability, protein expression markers
identified), were recorded. The accumulated data was evaluated to infer
trends in 3D bioprinting of neural tissues.
3. Results and discussion
Based on our search, in the last ten years, there have been 44
research papers that involve 3D bioprinted neural tissue models with
disease applications. Two papers were not identified during the sys-
tematic search but were manually added due to their relevance, for a
total of 46 included papers. Neural tissues were 3D bioprinted using a
variety of polymers (Fig. 3A); alginate was the most prevalent polymer
for bioinks (used 18.18 % overall), followed by fibrinogen (11.82 %) and
gelatin (10.0 %), and gelatin-methacrylate (GelMA; 8.18 %). A detailed
description of polymers and their respective influence on material
Table 1
General keywords for 3 database searches of 3-keyword and 4-keyword (including co-culture specific) searches. The search was conducted on 12/08/2024.
3 Keywords
Platform
Bioprinting
iPSCs/neurons
Disease
Co-culture/Glial
Results
PubMed
Bioprinting/
Three-Dimensional printing/
Guided Tissue Regeneration
Brain/ Neurons/ Motor Neurons/ Serotonergic Neurons/ GABAergic Neurons/
Adrenergic Neurons/ Dopaminergic Neurons/ Nitrergic Neurons/ Nerve Tissue/
Induced pluripotent
Disease
202
Web of
Science
−
211
Scopus
388
4 Keywords
PubMed
Bioprinting/
Three-Dimensional printing/
Guided Tissue Regeneration
Brain/ Neurons/ Motor Neurons/ Serotonergic Neurons/ GABAergic Neurons/
Adrenergic Neurons/ Dopaminergic Neurons/ Nitrergic Neurons/ Nerve Tissue/
Induced pluripotent
Disease
Neuroglia/microglia
17
Coculture
Techniques/
Coculture
34
Neuroglia
76
Web of
Science
Neuroglia/microglia
3
Coculture
Techniques/
Coculture
14
Neuroglia
4
Scopus
Neuroglia/microglia
21
Coculture
Techniques/
Coculture
37
Neuroglia
12
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
7 
design and functionality is discussed in Section 3.2. One limitation in the
reporting on bioinks here was that commercial bioinks (Axolotl and
Cellink bioinks, Geltrex, and Pgworks) were reported as a single entity,
without reporting their composition. For example, Axolotl bioink is a
fibrin-based bioink, but it was not reported for fibrinogen percentages.
Therefore, there is likely an underreporting of the percentages of certain
polymers. In addition, in Abdelrahman et al. used two peptides to form
their bioink, but this was only recorded as “peptides” once [11].
3.1. Models
The 46 papers included four that discussed spinal models directly,
whereas the remaining 43 papers discussed neural tissues focusing on
the brain (n = 22), tumour models – including glioblastoma/gliomas (n
= 8), or more broadly discussed models of the CNS (n = 5), and “neural”
models (n = 5) (Fig. 3B). Other models include those that were used for
cellular expansion (n = 2) and spinal models (n = 4). Models that con-
ducted 3D bioprinting for applications such as nerve repair and guidance
or the peripheral nervous system were excluded. A majority of the 3D
bioprinted materials printed one cell type (n = 36), followed by co-
printing with two cells (n = 9); only two papers printed more than
two cell types (Fig. 3C). The geometries that were bioprinted varied, and
typically correlated to the model/function of the 3D bioprinted neural
tissues. Most often, grid constructs were formed (n = 16), followed by
dome-shaped (n = 6), cuboid (3D rectangular lattices, n = 5), cylindrical
(n = 4), ring (n = 3), brain geometry (n = 2), square sheets (n = 2), tube/
Fig. 2. Systematic screening process based on PRISMA Guidelines for both 3 keywords ‘3D bioprinting’, ‘neuronal cells/brain models’, and ‘diseases’ (A) and 4
keywords with the addition of ‘co-culture’ (B). The total included articles (n = 46) for the systematic review are compiled at the bottom of (A).
Fig. 3. Results from systematic search on (A) bioink compositions, (B) types of models, (C) number of cells printed and (D) construct shapes. The total included
articles was n = 46, but one study did not report the constructed geometry (n = 45).
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
8 
line (n = 2), droplet (n = 1), vascular (n = 1), and a combination of
circular and grid-shaped (n = 1) (Fig. 3D). Three papers printed multiple
construct architectures that were bioprinted with cells.
The reviewed literature is discussed next, summarizing the main
findings of the relevant papers by model type. An analysis of the me-
chanical and cellular characterization techniques is provided later in
more detail in section 3.5. The main findings related to cellular analysis
regarding viability and protein expression are summarized to supple-
ment the text to intuitively compare similar models and cell types
(Figs. 4 and 5). The cellular-based characterization summaries are
sectioned by cell type: those using immature cells, such as stem cells,
neural progenitor cells (NPCs), and neural stem cells (NSCs), and more
mature lineages related to tumour cells (glioblastoma, glioma, neuro-
blastoma), glial cells (Schwann, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes) and neu-
rons. The ‘stem cells’ include those that have the potential to
differentiate into multiple lineages, including hiPSCs, mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs), and adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs). In the
literature, we noted that inconsistencies exist between the use of the
terms ‘NPCs’ and ‘NSCs’, but we aimed to differentiate NSCs as being
those sourced directly without differentiation (e.g., mouse-derived stem
cells). Interestingly, one paper referred to their cells as “neural stem/
progenitor cells (NSPCs)”, emphasizing this variation [95].
Inconsistencies in the literature were largely associated with the
discrepancy of terms or methods relating to characterization. Most
commonly, there was an incongruity in using βIII tubulin or TUJ1, or
other variations to identify neural lineage. Several reported variations
were noted, where typically analysis with reverse transcriptase quanti-
tative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) referred to class III beta-
tubulin protein (TUBB3), but immunocytochemistry (ICC) or similar
methods referenced βT-III, β3III-tubulin, β-tubulin III, β-III-tubulin,
among others. Throughout the text, we aimed to state the terms used
within the respective article, but for comparison consistencies, the
outlined tables and figures include ‘TUJ1′ as a representative term. It
should be noted that inconsistencies in nomenclature may inhibit intu-
itive comparative analyses using systematic screening, which may be a
bias in our review search.
3.1.1. Brain
Modeling the brain offers fundamental insights into the intricacy of
biological and chemical pathways, including understanding the complex
pathophysiology of neurological and neurodegenerative disorders such
as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and Huntington’s disease,
among others. 3D bioprinted tissue constructs must recapitulate the
multifaceted sophistication of the brain, which is a non-linear entity,
Fig. 4. Summary of select cellular characterization assessments (viability and protein expression) for cells that were 3D bioprinted over various days in culture.
Summaries are divided by stem cell-like cell types of A) NPCs, B) stem cells (hiPSCs, MSCs, ADSCs), and C) NSCs. Viability measurements are shown on top; if no
quantitative numbers were given, the general trends are shown (green). Summary of protein markers (ICC/RT-qPCR) are shown below each bar at relevant days
assessed. Colours indicate the neural model application. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version
of this article.)
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
9 
composed of varying stiffnesses, cell types and functions.
The level of sophistication of 3D bioprinted neural tissue models has
increased in the last decade, which shows promise for the future
bioengineering of 3D bioprinted neural tissues. In 2015, Lozano et al.
conducted semi-manual “3D bioprinting” using a coaxial needle,
combining manual extrusion of the bioink and a syringe pump for the
crosslinker [96]. Their neural model used an Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD)-
modified gellan gum (RGD-GG) printed with mouse primary cortical
neurons, which increased cell adhesion and differentiation of primary
cortical neurons into both neurons (βIII tubulin+) and glial cells
(GFAP+, glial fibrillary acid protein) after 7 days (Table 2). No modulus
mechanical characterizations were done, but they attributed the dif-
ferentiation to the sufficient mechanical support of the hydrogels to
maintain 3D structure and suitable porosity that permitted the exchange
of nutrients and cellular debris (shown through a BSA diffusion study),
which promoted cell growth and neurite extension, even extending into
cell-absent printed layers. Also focused on cortical tissues, Zhou et al.
conducted a non-conventional printing method using droplet printing to
achieve soft, but mechanically stable matrices to bioprint human
cortical cells in Matrigel [97]. They were able to print high-viscosity
biomaterials using a customized driver, and when dropped into a
lipid-containing oil bath, a lipid-bilayer supported network was formed
which maintained the 3D architecture. The droplets were conserved as
distinct chambers during printing, and upon media exchange, aging, and
incubation, 3D geometries of Matrigel (representing the ECM) and cells
remained. The printed tissues using human neural stem cells (hNSCs)
with and without astrocytes were cultured in media (containing B-27,
neurotrophin-3 – NT3, and brain-derived neurotropic factor – BDNF) for
up to 14 days. Alone, the hNSCs showed neuronal migration, differen-
tiation, axon outgrowth, and astrogenesis, and importantly, pre-
patterning arrangements of astrocytes and hNSCs indicated key bio-
logical functions regarding neurogenesis and astrogenesis. When hNSCs
were centrally printed bordered by empty ‘ECM’, hNSCs began to
migrate to the empty space by day 14, expanded by day 28 (CTIP2+,
TUJ1+, SOX2+), and saw astrogenesis by day 56, but astrocytes
(GFAP+) remained within the empty compartments. Similar results
were found if astrocytes were printed within the centre; they tended to
migrate away from the proliferating hNSCs. This, in combination with
progenitors (SOX2+) aligning along the bundle, suggested astrocyte-
induced neural fasciculation and axon-guided cell migration. Further,
the presence of various markers relating to progenitors (SOX2+), young
neurons (TUJ1+), deep-layer cortical neurons (CTIP2+), sub-plate
neurons (TBR1+), and differentiated neurons (MAP2+, microtubule-
associated protein 2) and proliferating cells (nuclear proliferation
marker, Ki67+) recapitulated the aspects of cortical development.
In 2016, Gu et al. bioprinted frontal cortical hNSCs within a bioink
made of alginate, carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) and agarose [98]. Cell
survival and proliferation were largely influenced by CMC concentration
due to the effect CMC had on porosity, but 5 % w/v CMC was found to be
favourable. In the absence of differentiation factors, the bioprinted
hNSCs remained undifferentiated after 3 weeks – expressing SOX2,
vimentin, Nestin, and Ki67, with limited expression of GFAP, OLIGO2,
or TUJ1. Adding induction molecules to the media (StemPro, N2, and
BDNF) produced cells that expressed high levels of TUJ1, γ-Amino-
butyric acid (GABA), glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), GFAP,
OLIGO2, and Synaptophysin, and low SOX2 by 24 days (14 days of
differentiation). TUJ1+ staining was performed at 31 days post printing
(21 days of differentiation); it was unclear if only TUJ1+ was stained, or
if the other markers were not present. Importantly, 3D bioprinted
models were associated with higher expression of neural and neuroglial
Fig. 5. Summary of select cellular characterization assessments (viability and protein expression) for cells that were 3D bioprinted over various days in culture.
Summaries are divided by matured/limited lineage of A) glial cells, B) neural cells, and C) tumour cells (GBM, glioma, neuroblastoma). Viability measurements are
shown on top; if no quantitative numbers were given, the general trends are shown (green). Summary of protein markers (ICC/RT-qPCR) are shown below each bar at
relevant days assessed. Colours indicate the neural model application. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article.)
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
10 
Table 2
Summary of the included articles that model the brain.
Source
Printed Bioink Composition
Cells
Construct Media
Bioprinter
Characterization
Bioink
Crosslinker
Bioink
Cells/Construct
Lozano et al.,
2015 [96]
RGD-Gellan gum (RGD-GG; 0.5
% w/v)
DMEM (5X; CaCl2 = 9 mM,
MgSO4 = 4.05 mM), or
CaCl2 (1 M)
Mouse primary
cortical neurons
(1x106 cells/mL)
Complete neurobasal media
Handheld printing
(coaxial needle; 0.2 mm ID,
1 mm OD; 0.1 mL/min)
SEM (RGD-GG)
Diffusion study
(labelled BSA)
Viability (Live/dead; 2 hr, D3, 5)
ICC (TUJ1, GFAP, DAPI; D7)
SEM (RGD-GG)
Gu et al., 2016
[98]
Alginate (5 % w/v),
carboxymethyl-chitosan (CMC;
5 % w/v), agarose (1.5 % w/v)
CaCl2 (2 % w/v, 10 mins)
Frontal cortical
hNSCs
(5x106 cells/mL)
Differentiation mediaa, P/S
(P = 100 U/mL, S = 100 ug/
mL)
EnvisionTEC GmbH (200
μm printing nozzle;
1.5–2.0 bar)
Consistency (extrusion
force)
Modulus (compression,
EComp, Indentation,
EOmd)
Diffusion study
(labelled BSA)
SEM (surface/internal
porosity)
Viability (Live/dead; D1, 3, 5, 7, 9,
11)
hNSC proliferation (PrestoBlue)
ICC (GFAP, SOX2, vimentin,
OLIGO2, Ki67, TUJ1, Nestin,
synaptophysin, GABA, GAD, DAPI;
D21, 24, 31)
RT-qPCR (TUJ1, GFAP, OLIGO2,
SYP, GABA, NKX2.1, MYST, VGLT,
SERT, PET-1, β-Actin; D21)
Calcium imaging (Fluo-4,
bicuculline)
SEM (cell adhesion and position)
Gu et al., 2017
[99]
Agarose (1.5 %), alginate (2 %),
CMC (5 %)
CaCl2 (2 %) for 10 min
Human iPSCs
(8 × 107 cells/mL)
hiPSC expansion = mTESR1,
Y-27632b
EBs inductionc
Neural induction mediumd
Neural differentiation
mediume
3D-Bioplotter® System
(EnvisionTEC; 200 µm
printing nozzle)
SEM
*Material characterized
previously
Viability (Live/dead; D1, 3, 7)
Cell proliferation (PrestoBlue; D1, 3,
5, 7, 9, 11)
Calcium imaging (D40)
RT-qPCR (OCT4, NANOG, TDGF1,
UTF1, H19, HAND1, NES, PDX1,
IGF2, TUBB3; D15)
Flow cytometry (OCT4, SSEA4, TRA-
1–60 and SOX2)
ICC (OCT4, SSEA4, TRA-1–60,
PAX6, Nestin, Synaptophysin,
TUJ1, GABA, GFAP, MAP2, SOX2,
DAPI; D3, 7, 14, 40)
Gu et al., 2018
[100]
Agarose (1.5 %), alginate (5 %),
CMC (5 %)
CaCl2 (2 %) for 10 min
hNSC cell line (1 ×
107 cells/mL)
hNSC differentiation
mediumf
3D-Bioplotter® System
(EnvisionTEC; 1.5–2.0 bar)
*Material characterized
previously
Viability (Live/dead; D1, 7)
ICC (Undifferentiated = D10;
Differentiated = D24; Nestin, TUJ1,
OLIGO2, SOX2, GFAP, vimentin,
synaptophysin, GABA, GAD, DAPI)
Calcium imaging
Fantini et al.,
2019 [101]
Alginate (6 %), gelatin (4 %)
CaCl2 (2 %, 5 min)
SH-SY5Y (5 x104
cells/mL)
hiPSCs
NSCs derived from
hiPSCs (2 x106 cells/
mL)
DMEM, FBS (15 %), P/S (100
U/mL /100 mg/mL), and L-
glutamine (2 mM)
CELLINK INKREDIBLE+
(grid constructs; 0.41 mm
nozzle; 25 ◦C, 37 ◦C; 30–70
(kPa); 600 mm/min; 0.4
mm LH)
Repeatability tests (3
days)
Viability (SH-SY5Y cells; D5)
ICC (GAPDH, α-Tubulin, DAPI)
3D bioprinted constructs:
Viability (Live/dead for iPSC/NSC;
D0, 3, 7)
Abelseth et al.,
2019 [102]
Alginate (5 mg/mL), genipin
(0.3 mg/mL), fibrin (20 mg/mL)
CaCl2 (20 mg/mL),
chitosan (0.75 mg/mL),
thrombin (10 U/mL)
hiPSC-derived neural
aggregates (NAs;
10,000 cells/
aggregate)
D17: Gradually from neural
induction media to neural
basal media, puro (0.5 µm)
and RA (0.25 µm)
Aspect Biosystems’ RX1
with DUO-1 Printhead
−
Viability (Live/dead: D10, 15; Flow
cytometry – Guava ViaCount assay:
D6)
ICC (TUJ1, GFAP, DAPI; D30, 41)
(continued on next page)
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
11 
Table 2 (continued)
Source
Printed Bioink Composition
Cells
Construct Media
Bioprinter
Characterization
Bioink
Crosslinker
Bioink
Cells/Construct
Y.-C. E. Li et al.,
2020 [108]
Gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA; 4
% w/v), gelatin (1 % wt),
alginate (0.5 % wt), PI (0.25 %)
in HBSS (40 % v/v) and MEM
(60 % v/v), laminin (10 μg/mL)
Support bath: DMEM,
CaCl2 (11 mM), PI (0.25 %
wt), GelMA (5 % wt) in
HBSS (40 % v/v), astrocyte
complete media (60 % v/
v)g
UV crosslinked (60 s)
Rat neural cells
derived from
neuroepithelial cells
(25x106 cells/mL)
*Astrocytes (in
support bath; 8x106
cells/mL)
MEM complete media =
MEM, FBS (10 %), P/S (1 %)
+/- RA (1 μM)
CELLINK INKREDIBLE (30
G needle; 3 µL/min)
Compressive moduli
Rheology (viscosity,
oscillatory stress
sweep, oscillatory time
sweep)
Printability
Viability (Live/dead)
Cell metabolic activity (Presto Blue
Reagent; D1, 3, 7, 14)
ICC (TUJ1, GFAP, DAPI, F-actin;
D5, 7, 10, 14)
Glutamate Assay (Glutamate assay
kit)
Sharma et al.
2020 [103]
Fibrinogen (20 mg/mL), alginate
(0.5 % w/v), genipin (0.3 mg/
mL), guggulsterone/PCL
microspheres (0.5 mg)
CaCl2 (20 mg/mL),
chitosan (0.075 % w/v),
thrombin (1.7 U/mL)
NPCs derived from
hiPSCs (1 x106 cells/
mL)
PLO/laminin coated plates,
STEMdiff™Neural
Progenitor Media (EGF,
bFGF), AAS (1 %)
D10: STEMdiff™Neural
Induction Medium, AAS (1
%)
D20: Brain Phys Neuronal
Medium
Aspect Biosystems RX1
dome shaped constructs;
rectilinear infill; 6 layers;
25 mm/s; 50 mbar (bioink),
60 mbar (crosslinker), 100
mbar (buffer)
−
Microscopy
Viability (Flow cytometer + Guava
ViaCount reagent®; D1, 7)
ICC (FOXA2, TUJ1, TH; DAPI; D15,
30)
Flow Cytometry (TUJ1, O4, TH,
GFAP; D30)
RT-qPCR (TUJ1, TH, Nr4a2, PAX6,
LMX1B; D30)
Zhou et al.,
2020 [97]
Matrigel
Print bath: DPhPC (4 mg/mL) in
a mixture of undecane and
silicone oil AR20
30 min room temperature
iPSC-derived:
hNSCs
Red-fluorescent-
protein-labeled
hNSCs (RFP-hNSCs)
Human cortical
neurons (hCNs)
Human primary
astrocytes (hAs)
*Cell densities
ranged up to 3.5x107
cells/mL)
hNSCs constructs:
Neural Maintenance Media
= 1:1N-2 mediumh to B-27
mediumi
hCN constructs:
comp:GCN mediumj, +
variations (Y-27632 (10 uM)
and/or doxycycline (1 ug/
mL))
Droplet printing (piezo-
electric driver; Peltier-
based temperature-
controlled stage; coated
glass printing nozzle)
Ejected droplet size and
nozzle diameter
Viability (Live/dead; D1, 4, 8, 14,
28)
ICC (TUJ1, GFAP, CTIP2, MAP2,
Ki67, NeuN, CAM, DAPI, D100)
Calcium imaging (Fluo-4 Direct
calcium assay kit; D4, 44, 65)
Cell migration (fluorescence-labeled
cells; D3, 14)
hAs Segregation Analysis (ICC: TUJ1,
GFAP, SOX2)
Process Analysis (Density, length,
bundle with ICC (TUJ1))
Chiang et al.,
2021 [109]
CELLINK bioink
Crosslinking solution (5
mins)
Human neural stem
cells (1x107 cells)
NSC Serum free media
(SFM)k
3 parameters:
(1) NSC SFM (72 hrs)
(2) Aβ1-42 (5 µM; 24 hrs), NSC
SFM (48 hrs)
(3) Aβ1-42 (5 µM; 24 hrs),
AuNPs (10 ppm; 48 hrs)
CELLINK INKREDIBLE
bioprinter (22 G needle;
10–20 kPa)
*TEM and FTIR done
previously
SEM
Viability (in vitro Sulforhodamine B
(SRB)-based assay kit)
ELISA (TNF-α, IL-1β)
qPCR (IKKα, IKKβ, p65, iNOS,
COX2, Nrf2, SOD1, SOD2, Gpx,
Catalase, HO-1, HSP27, HSP70)
Western blot (p65, lamin)
ICC (SOX2, Nrf2)
*Various AuNP-related
characterizationl
Restan Perez
et al., 2021
[104]
Fibrinogen (20 mg/mL), alginate
(0.5 % w/v), genipin (0.3 mg/
mL)
CaCl2 (20 mg/mL),
chitosan (0.075 % w/v),
thrombin (1.7 U/mL)
Human adipose-
derived MSCs (2 ×
106 cells/mL)
PLO/Laminin coated plate
with MSC media
D0-D9: Control Media or
Differentiation Mediam
D9-12: BDNF (50 ng/mL) to
differentiation group
Aspect RX1 with LOP™
printhead (half spherical
constructs; 7 layers; 40 %
rectilinear infill; 60 mbar
(crosslinker), 50 mbar
(bioink), 100 mbar (buffer);
25 mm/s)
*Characterized
previously
Microscopy (Phase, D0, 4, 9, 12)
Viability (Live/dead; D0, 9, 12)
ICC (TUJ1, TH, DAPI; D12)
Dopamine release (ELISA; D12)
Electrical properties (voltage
sensitive dye)
(continued on next page)
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
12 
Table 2 (continued)
Source
Printed Bioink Composition
Cells
Construct Media
Bioprinter
Characterization
Bioink
Crosslinker
Bioink
Cells/Construct
de Melo et al.,
2022 [110]
GGFL = Gelatin (4 % w/v),
GelMA (2 % w/v), fibrinogen (3
mg/mL), laminin (2 µg/mL), PI
(Irgacure 2959, 0.5 %)
Thrombin (1 U/mL), CaCl2
(10 % w/v; 90:1 thrombin:
Ca2+)
UV Crosslinking (2 x 60 s)
Murine cortical
astrocytes (1x106
cells/mL)
Mature murine
neurons seeded on
top (1x104 cells)
D0-7:Astrocyte culture
medium
D7: media removed, soaked
in laminin (30 µg/mL),
seeded with mature neurons;
media = astrocyte culture
medium, neuronal medium
(1:1)
Infected with either SARS-
CoV-2 (0.2 MOI) or MA-
SARS-CoV-2 (0.2 MOI); 2 h)
3D bioprinter (3D
Biotechnology Solutions;
22 G; 400 mm/min; 25 ◦C)
Rheology (temperature
sweep, shear viscosity,
frequency sweep)
Mechanical
(mechanical
compression, Young’s
modulus)
SEM (surface)
Physical
characterization
(degradation, porosity)
Viability (Live/dead; D0, 7, 14)
ICC (spike S1, MAP2, TUJ1, GFAP,
ACE2, DAPI; D7)
Abdelrahman
et al., 2022
[11]
Ac-Ile-Val-Cha-Lys-NH2 (IVZK;
13 mg/mL)
Ac-Ile-Val-Phe-Lys-NH2 (IVFK;
13 mg/mL)
N/A
Ventral midbrain DA
and non-DA neurons
(suspended in 1X
PBS)
N2 Media
Custom 3D bioprinter
37 ◦C; three variations
(none, half molded, fully
molded); 10–20 µl/min
flow rate; 24 layers (cells
extruded in top 2 layers)
SEM
TEM
Raman spectroscopy
AFM
*Other assessments done
previously
Printability
Viability (Live/dead; D1, 2, 3)
Metabolic activity (CellTiter-Glo®
3D Cell Viability Assay; D2, 3)
ICC (TUJ1, TH, TBR1, CD31, DAPI)
Neurite Outgrowth (NeuronJ)
Neurosphere migration assay
(ICC: TUJ1, TH, DAPI; D3)
Neuronal activity (MEAs; up to D42)
6-OHDA Hydrochloride Treatment
(Live/dead, ATP assay, ICC for TH)
qPCR (Th, Nurr1, En1, Lmx1a,
Pitx3; D3)
3D bioprinted constructs:
Viability (Live/dead; D3)
ICC (TUJ1; D3)
Kajtez et al.,
2022 [65]
Growth medium, Xanthan gum
(0.1 %)
Support system:
Jammed microgels =
Alginate (0.5 % w/v),
CaCO3 (1 mg/mL),
collagen (1 mg/mL),
laminin (2 µg/mL),
fibronectin (5 µg/mL), HA
(100 µg/mL)
Dispersed microgels =
jammed microgels:cell
culture media (2:1)
hNSCs (9x106 cells/
mL)
Growth Mediumn
D1: Differentiation mediumo
3D Discovery bioprinter
(RegenHU; 27G; 4 ◦C; 3.6
µL/min (extrusion), 0.3
mm/s (lateral))
Rheology (frequency
sweep, viscosity, stress
sweep, time sweep,
temperature sweep)
ICC (TUJ1, TH, GFAP, DAPI; 1 and
2 month)
RT-qPCR (BRN2, SOX1, SOX2,
NURR1, AADC, DAT, TH, SYN,
MAP2, NC; 1 month)
Calcium imaging (Fluo3 AM; 2
months)
Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings
(cells with neuronal morphology
and round cell body positive for
synapsin-GFP)
3D Oxygen Mapping (oxygen
mapping microbeads, live staining;
D2 to D50)
Scarian et al.,
2022 [111]
CELLINK bioink (cellulose
nanofibrils, alginate)
Crosslinking agent
(CELLINK)
hNSCs (6x105 cells/
mL)
D0-14: Neurobasal medium,
expansion medium
D14-21: MNP Differentiation
Mediump
D21-28: iMNs differentiation
mediumq
D28-35: MNs differentiation
mediumr
Bioplotter BioX (CELLINK;
grid construct; 23 G nozzle;
25 ◦C; 600 mm/min; 45–70
kPa)
Hydrogel moisture %
Swelling test
Porosity % (Liquid
displacement)
Viability (Live/dead; D0, 3, 7, 10,
14, 20)
ICC (Nestin, SOX2, SOX1, PAX6,
Oligo2, TUBB3, ChAT, DAPI)
RT-qPCR (Nestin, SOX2, SOX1,
PAX6, TUBB3, MAP2)
Electrophysiological analysis (c-fos
marker; D0, 1, 4, 7, 11, 14)
Chrenek et al.,
2022 [106]
(1) High viscosity, fibrin-based
bioink – TissuePrint-HV Kit
(Axolotl Biosciences)
(2) Alginate (2 % w/v), gelatin
(2 % w/v)
(1) TissuePrint Crosslink
(Axolotl Biosciences) (in
agarose support bath*)
(2) CaCl2 (2 %)
hiPSCs, MSCs, or U-
87 GBMs (1x106
cells/mL)
Cell culture media or TBS
(without cells)
BioX (CELLINK)
(grid lattice, others; 22G)
TissuePrint-HV kit:
Support bath = 10/11 kPa,
15 mm/s
Pre-crosslinked = 5 kPa, 10
mm/s
−
−
(continued on next page)
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
13 
Table 2 (continued)
Source
Printed Bioink Composition
Cells
Construct Media
Bioprinter
Characterization
Bioink
Crosslinker
Bioink
Cells/Construct
Alg/Gel:
20 kPa, 20 mm/s)
Matthiesen et
al., 2023
[112]
Azide-terminated polyethylene
glycol – (PEG-Az)8 (1 % w/v)
HA- bicyclo [6.1.0]nonyne
(HA-BCN) modified with 1
mM cRGD or IKVAV (1 %
w/v)
Human fetal primary
astrocytes (FPA;
2x105 per 100 µL)
ScienCell astrocyte media,
FBS (2 %), Astrocyte growth
supplement (1 %), P/S (1 %)
High Glucose DMEM, FBS
(10 %), P/S (1 %)
CELLINK BioX (grid
structure)
Rheology (strain sweep,
frequency sweep,
time/ temperature
sweep)
SEM (internal)
Viability (AlamarBlue; D1, 3, 6)
qPCR (Vimentin, PAX, ITGB1,
PTK2, CD44, GFAP, S100B,
GAPDH)
ICC (CD44, F-actin, Hoechst)
3D bioprinted construct:
ICC (F-actin, Hoechst; D4)
Perez et al.,
2023 [105]
TissuePrint – Low Viscosity (LV;
Axolotl Biosystems)
TissuePrint – Hight Viscosity
(HV; alginate/fibrin; Axolotl
Biosystems)
Component 2 (genipin)
MSCs (2-10x106
cells/mL)
PLO/Laminin,
Control and Experimental
medias
D −1: complete MSC media
D0: respective media; no
media change until D9
D9: BDNF (50 ng/mL) to
experimental group
BioX (CELLINK; dome; 10 x
3 mm; 20–25 %; rectilinear
infill)
RX1 (Aspect Biosystems;
LOP™printhead; 40 %
rectilinear infill)
*LV characterized
previously
Viability (Live/dead; D9, 12)
ICC (TUJ1, TH, DAPI; D12)
Electrophysiology (FLIPR Membrane
Potential Assay Kit)
Dopamine release (ELISA; D12)
Gomila Pelegri
et al., 2023
[2]
PEG, RGD and YIGSR
(Tyr–Ile–Gly–Ser–Arg) peptides
= 1.1 kPa
−
Human adipose-
derived stem cells
(ADSCs; 1x106 cells/
mL)
DMEM/F12, GlutaMAX, FBS
(10 %), AAS (1 %)
Changed every 84 hr
RASTRUM bioprinter
(~1.1 kPa)
Stiffness (unknown
method)
Morphology (Incucyte imaging)
Viability (AlamarBlue; D3.5, 7,
10.5, 14)
ICC (GFAP, CNPase, Neurofilament
200; D14)
Protein analysis (Proteomics, LC-
MS/MS; D14)
Cruz et al.,
2023 [116]
‘4GMA_Gx’ = Geltrex, GelMA (8
wt%; 1:1 v/v)
PI (Irgacure; 0.5 % w/v)
Murine cortical
astrocytes (4x106
cells/mL)
hiPSC-derived NPCs
(14.5x106 cells/mL)
Neuroblastoma cells
(SH-SY5Y; 2x106
cells/mL)
NPCs = Neural maturation
mediat
Astrocytes = astrocyte cell
medium or NSC medium u
3DBS Educational Starter
Printer
(4x4x1 mm)
*Various combinations
of bioink tested
Compression test
(Instron)
Degradation (D1, 3, 7)
Rheology (temperature
sweep, viscosity)
SEM (surface)
Cell proliferation (Resazurin assay;
D2, 5, 6)
qPCR (ACTB, SOX2, Nestin,
NANOG, TUBB3, MAP2, vGlut1)
3D bioprinted construct:
ICC (DCX, TUBB3, SOX2, MAP2,
GFAP, DAPI; astrocytes = D3, 5, 10,
NPCs = D28; after differentiation
= D17, 24)
J. Li et al., 2023
[117]
Alginate (2 % w/w), Pluronic
F127 (30 % w/w), tetrapodal-
shaped-ZnO microparticles (t-
ZnO; 0.025 %)
CaCl2 (2 % w/w); 1 min
CaCl2 (1.5 % w/w) the
following day/before
viability testing
Neuroblastoma (SH-
SY5Y)-derived
dopaminergic
neurons (3x106 cells/
mL)
Cell culture medium: P/S (20
U/mL / 20 μg/mL), heat
inactivated fetal calf serum
(15 % v/v), DMEM/F-12
3D Discovery printer
(RegenHU; circular grid; 21
G needle)
Rheology (frequency
sweep)
SEM (surface)
Photoluminescence
spectroscopy
Material properties
(FTIR, XPS)
Dopamine Sensing
Viability (Live/dead; D7)
ICC (TUJ1, F-actin, DAPI; D7)
Z. Wang et al.,
2023 [113]
Pluronic F127, poly(ethylene
glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA, Mn
= 700)
UV light
HT22 cells (2x106
cells/mL GelMA)
DMEM, FBS (10 %), P/S (1
%)
3D extrusion printer EFL-
BP-6602 (custom-made
coaxial extrusion head; 17
G OD, 22 G ID; cuboid
structure; 16 L x 16 W x 6H
mm; 3 layers; 0.74 mL/min
(inner), 2.21 mL/min
(outer);
37 ◦C)
SEM (internal)
Swelling behaviour
FTIR
Diffusion (Eosin Y, up
to 24 hrs)
Rheology (temperature
sweep, viscosity, shear
recovery, storage and
loss moduli)
Viability and proliferation (Live/
dead, CCK-8; D1, 7)
Compression modulus
Rueda-Gensini
et al., 2023
[10]
SISMA
SISMA-GO
Blue light irradiation (1
min)
DA neurons
differentiated from
Lund human
mesencephalic
Differentiation medium;
media changes on D2, 5, 7
D7: constructs over immune
co-culture (THP-1
monocytes:astrocytes, 2:1).
BioX (CELLINK; 13 ◦C
(print head), 37 ◦C (print
bed); 20 G (conical); 8 kPa)
Rheology (time sweep)
Growth factor
quantification
(Quantibody™Human
Growth Factor Array)
Viability/Metabolic
Activity (Alamar Blue; D0, 3, 7)
Apoptosis (apoptosis; ROS
production; MMP1; intracellular-
syn immunostaining; D1, 2, 5)
(continued on next page)
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
14 
Table 2 (continued)
Source
Printed Bioink Composition
Cells
Construct Media
Bioprinter
Characterization
Bioink
Crosslinker
Bioink
Cells/Construct
(LUHMES) NPCs
(1x107 cells/ml)
Media = LUHMES
differentiation medium,
A53T α-syn (10 µg/mL)
D10: LUHMES differentiation
medium, A53T α-syn (5 µg/
mL)
ICC (CCR7, TUJ1, α-synuclein,
GFAP, Hoechst; D1, 2, 7)
Flow Cytometry (CD68, CD14)
qRT-PCR (KCNJ6, DAT, TH, SYN1,
GFAP, OLIG2, PINK1, PARKIN, DC-
STAMP, CD206; D7)
Benwood et al.,
2023 [107]
Fibrinogen (20 mg/mL), alginate
(0.5 % w/v), genipin (0.3 mg/
mL), puro-loaded microspheres
(1 mg/mL)
CaCl2 (20 mg/mL),
chitosan (0.075 % w/v),
thrombin (1.7 U/mL)
NPCS from Patient-
derived Alzheimer
Disease hiPSCs,
healthy female
control hiPSCs (HN1)
(1x106 cells/mL)
PLO/laminin coated
D1,3: BrainPhys™Neuronal
Mediumv
D5: ½ volume media change;
D7: full media changew
D9-45: ½ volume media
changes every 2 daysx
RX1 with DUO™printhead
(Aspect Biosystems; dome-
shaped constructs; 10 mm
diameter, 5 mm high; 100
mbar (crosslinker), 90
mbar (bioink), 500 mbar
(buffer); 25 mm/s
40 % rectilinear infill; 9
layers; cultured up to 45
days)
Microspheres:
SEM (size/shape)
Encapsulation efficiency
(HPLC)
Polydispersity Index
(DLS)
Viability (Live/dead; D1, 30, 45)
ICC (FoxG1, ChAT, Aβ, Tau, TUJ1,
DAPI; D30)
Electrophysiology (FLIPR Membrane
Potential Assay Kit; D30, 45)
H.-W. Lee et al.,
2024 [95]
SilMA (15 % w/v), pectin (1 %)
PI (Irgacure 2959, 0.5 %)
UV Light (PI = 0.5 %, 30 s)
Calcium ion solution
(outer portion of coaxial, 1
M)
Rat primary cortical
NPC spheroids (500
spheroids/mL)
Culture medium, bFGF (20
ng/mL)
Customized extrusion-
based 3D printer (TL-D5
TMC2209; coaxial printing;
50–100 mm/min; 1–30
mm/s; 2x2 cm; 0–500 µm
thick)
Coaxial: bioink = 5 mm/
min; crosslinker = 15 μL/
min)
Gelation
Swelling ratio
Porosity
SEM (surface)
Compression
Rheology (viscosity,
frequency sweep,
strain sweep)
Printability (continuity,
design, Pr value)
Biocompatibility/Proliferation (MTT,
LDH assays/CCK-8)
Viability (Live/dead; D5)
ICC (MAP2, GFAP, Nestin, Synapsin
I; D5)
3D:
Viability (Live/dead; D0, 5)
Yan et al., 2024
[14]
Fibrinogen (2.5 mg/mL), HA
(1:2 HA:fibrinogen, 3 % w/v)
*Other variations assessed for
printing
CaCl2 (2.5 mM), thrombin
(1U), transglutaminase
(0.2 % w/v)
hiPSC-NPCs
(1x107 cells/mL
fibrinogen)
D0: neural basal medium, B-
27 (2 %), BDNF (10 ng/mL),
GDNF (10 mg/mL), ascorbic
acid (200 µM), cAMP (1 µM),
CNTF (10 ng/mL; for
printing with astrocytes);
Y27632 (10 µM) added for
the first 24 hrs
CELLINK INKREDIBLE+ (5
mm/s; 100 kPa; 30G (150
µm ID), 27G (200 µm ID))
CELLINK BioX (5 mm/s;
100 kPa; 30G (150 µm ID),
27G (200 µm ID))
Gelation Time
Printability
(Descriptive: Low,
High, Intermediate)
Viability (Live/dead)
ICC (calbindin, calretinin, CTIP2,
DARPP32, drebrin, FOXG1, GABA,
gephyrin, GFAP, GLT1, GFP, MAP2,
mCherry, NeuN, NKX2.1, OTX2,
parvalbumin, PAX6, PSD95, S100β,
SATB2, SMI312, somatostatin,
SOX2, SYN1, TBR1, TUJ1, vGAT,
vGlut1, Hoechst; D3, 7, 15, 20, 28
30, 40, 60)
Synaptic puncta quantification
Calcium and glutamate imaging
(GCaMP6 or iGluSnFR labelled;
D14, 28, 42)
Optogenetic stimulation (jRGECO1b
labelled)
Electrophysiology (whole cell patch
clamp)y
L. Wang et al.,
2024 [115]
G5F0.5 = GelMA (5 % w/v),
fibrinogen (0.5 % w/v)
*Other variations tested
Thrombin (10 U/mL),
CaCl2 (0.2 % w/v)
UV light (15 s)
PC12 (4x106 cells/
mL)
GL261 (2x106 cells/
mL)
Complete Culture Mediaz
Custom 3D bioprinter
24 ◦C
6 layers
Compression (Universal
testing machine)
SEM (surface)
Viability (Live/dead; D2, 4, 6, 12,
18. 24, 30)
ICC (BIII-tub, DAPI; D6)
a 1:1 DMEM/F12:Neurobasal, supplemented with StemPro (2 %), N2 (0.5 %), BDNF (50 ng/mL).
b ROCK inhibitor (Y-27632). Used for first 3 days.
c EB induction = DMEM/F12, K/O (20 %), MEM NEAA, B-mercaptoethanol (55 × 10−6 M).
d NIM = DMEM/F12 (1:1), 1 % N-2 (1 %), heparin (2 µg/mL), MEM NEAA.
e NDM = (2:1) DMEM/F-12 to Neurobasal Medium, StemPro Neural supplement (2 %), N-2 (0.5 %), BDNF (50 ng/mL).
f Differentiation medium = DMEM/F-12:Neurobasal Medium, 2:1 (v/v) supplemented with StemPro (2 %), N2 (0.5 %), BDNF (50 ng/mL).
g DMEM, 10% FBS, 1% P/S.
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
15 
markers with functional neurons (calcium imaging) compared to 2D
systems. In 2017, Gu et al. 3D bioprinted hiPSCs for the first time [99].
The hiPSCs were maintained and renewed within the 3D bioprinted
constructs and could be directed to form embryoid bodies (EBs) by using
media without basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). EB formation of
three germ layers was confirmed through morphological assessment and
reverse-transcriptase quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-
qPCR); the cells expressed markers of the endoderm (H19, PDX1),
mesoderm (HAND1, IGF2) and ectoderm (Nestin, TUBB-3) and down-
regulated pluripotent markers 15 days post-printing. They were able to
demonstrate that pluripotency can be maintained, but differentiation
can be directed to neuronal fate using neural induction media for 2–3
weeks after printing, then switching to a medium with BDNF to mature
the neurons. The cells expressed neural progenitor markers PAX6 and
Nestin 20 days post-printing, and expression of MAP2, βIII tubulin,
GFAP, GABA, and presynaptic vesicle glycoprotein synaptophysin after
40 days. In 2018, Gu et al. combined their previous work, printing with
frontal cortical hNSCs on a 3D-Bioplotter® using an agarose, alginate,
and CMC-based bioink broadly described for neural tissue engineering
detailed in a protocol paper [100]. They characterized cell viability,
immunophenotyping using various antibodies (GFAP, SOX2, vimentin,
OLIGO2, MKI67, TUJ1, Nestin, synaptophysin, GABA, and GAD) and
live calcium imaging (Fuo-4, bicuculline) using confocal microscopy.
The constructs were incubated for 10 days and differentiated from
hNSCs to neurons/neuroglia using the differentiation media as before
and culturing for at least two weeks. Viability was assessed on days 1
and 7 after printing; immunophenotyping is suggested at 3 weeks post-
printing for undifferentiated constructs and at 24 days post-printing for
differentiated constructs (2 weeks after differentiation started). They
only showed staining for SOX2, Nestin, OLIGO2 and TUJ1, and spon-
taneous intracellular calcium release was observed.
Fantini et al. individually 3D bioprinted two different cell types
(hiPSCs and hiPSC-derived NSCs) in alginate and gelatin-based bioinks
crosslinked with calcium chloride (CaCl2) [101]. Their optimal printing
conditions were found to be 6 % alginate, and 4 % gelatin printed at
25 ◦C. Encapsulation with the neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) showed
viability of ~ 50 % after 5 days of culture. Bioprinted cells of hiPSCs and
NPCs showed better viability, (hiPSCs D0 = 100 %, D7 > 100 %; NSCs:
D0 = 100 %, D3 = ~175 %, D7 = ~140 %), although viability was
normalized to day 0, making it difficult to compare these directly to
other models. No other characterization was done for the 3D bioprinted
materials.
Abelseth et al. published a protocol detailing how an Aspect RX1
printer with novel lab-on-a-chip microfluidic printhead (DUO-1) could
be used to print hiPSC neural aggregates (NAs) that remained viable
within the construct up to 36 days [102]. Their bioink consisted of
fibrin, genipin, and alginate, which was crosslinked with chitosan, CaCl2
and thrombin. The culture medium included neural induction medium,
and to direct motor neuron differentiation, the media was switched (day
17) to neural basal media with purmorphamine (puro) and retinoic acid
(RA). They conducted viability assessments on day 10 (5 days after
printing) and day 15 and found the viability to be 94.72 ± 3.48 % and
64.12 ± 21.27 %, respectively. The low viability was attributed to cells
within the construct not being counted and the potential for the ag-
gregates benefiting cells within the centre and limiting resources to the
external cells. Flow cytometry was used to confirm this, where after 6
days the cell viability showed similar viability to live/dead imaging
(91.65 ± 6.85 %). By day 30, the cells showed visible changes in their
morphology, exhibiting extensions; immunocytochemistry (ICC) was
performed to visualize neurite extension and confirm neuron pheno-
types. On day 41, cells stained positive for TUJ1 (early neuronal marker)
and showed no astrocyte phenotypes (GFAP–), which was thought to
occur from low-stress printing promoting neuronal differentiation.
However, quantitative viability assessments were not investigated past
day 15. Using the same bioink, Sharma et al. investigated the use of
guggulsterone-releasing microspheres (MSs) to differentiate hiPSC-
h N-2 medium = DMEM/F12, 1 × N-2, 5 µg/mL insulin, 100 µM, 2-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM GlutaMax, 100 µM nonessential amino acids (NEAA), and 50 U/mL P/S.
i B-27 medium = neurobasal medium, 1 × B-27, 1 mM GlutaMax, and 50 U/mL P/S.
j Comp:GCN medium = neurobasal medium, GlutaMax (1 mM), 2-mercaptoethanol (25 µM), B-27 (1X), NT3 (10 ng/mL), and BDNF (5 ng/mL).
k StemPro® NSC SFM complete medium consists of KnockOut™D-MEM/F-12 with 2 % StemPro®Neural Supplement, 20 ng/mL of EGF, 20 ng/mL of bFGF, and 2 mM of GlutaMAX™-I.
l Reactive oxygen species (ROS; microplate reader); Dihydroethidium staining; Nrf2 binding activity (Colorimetric assay kit); Superoxide dismutase activity (SOD; SOD assay kit); Glutathione peroxidase activity (Gpx; color-
imetric assay kit); Total glutathione (GSH; colorimetric assay kit); Filter retardation assay (β-amyloid, tau, Actin); Proteasome activity assay.
m Control Media = Neurobasal Media (NBM), B-27 (2 %), GlutaMAX (1 %), P/S (1 %); Differentiation Media = NBM, B-27 (2 %), GlutaMAX (1 %), puro (250 ng/mL), FGF8 (100 ng/mL), bFGF (50 ng/mL), LDN-193189
(100 nM), SB431542 (10 µM).
n DMEM/F12 with GlutaMAX, glucose (30 × 10−3 M), HEPES (5 × 10−6 M), AlbuMAX (0.5 % w/v), L-alanine, L-asparagine monohydrate, L-aspartic acid, L-glutamin acid, and L-proline – each 40 × 10−6 M, N2
supplement (1 %), P/S (1 %), epidermal growth factor (EGF; 20 ng/L), fibroblast growth factor (FGF; 20 ng/L).
o Growth medium without FGF or EGF, with N6,2-O-dibutyryladenosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate sodium salt (1 × 10−3 M) and GDNF (2 ng/L).
p MNP Differentiation Medium = Neurobasal 2X, Advanced DMEM/F12 2X, Neural induction supplement 50X, RA (0.1 μM), Purmorphamine (0.5 μM).
q Neurobasal 2X, Advanced DMEM/F12 2X, RA (0.5 uM), purmorphamine (0.1 uM), GDNF (10 ng/mL), IGF (10 ng/mL), BDNF (10 ng/mL).
r MNP Differentiation Medium + Compound E (0.1 uM).
s Control Media = NBM, B-27 (2 %), GlutaMAX (1 %), P/S (1 %); Experimental media = control media, puro (250 ng/mL), FGF8 (100 ng/mL), LDN-193189 (100 nM), SB431542 (10 µM)’.
t NMM = Neurobasal (50 %), DMEM/F12 (50 %), B-27 (w/o Vit A), N2, Glutamax (2 mM), PS (1 %), ascorbic acid (80 µM), db-cAMP (50 µM), BDNF (20 ng/mL), GDNF (10 ng/mL); media change every 3 days).
u AST = DMEM F12, FBS (10 %), glutamine (2 %), P/S (1 %); NSC medium = DMEM F12, B-27 (2 %), glutamine (1 %), P/S (1 %), EGF (10 µg/mL), bFGF (10 µg/mL), heparin (20 µg/mL)); NSC medium – (EGF, bFGF),
RA (10 µM; D10).
v Mitochondrial membrane potential.
w Media + puro (100 ng/mL), FGF-8 (100 ng/mL), BMP9 (10 ng/mL), NGF (100 ng/mL).
x BrainPhys™, NGF (100 ng/mL), BDNF (5 ng/mL).
y BrainPhys™, NGF (100 ng/mL), BDNF (5 ng/mL), P/S (0.5 %).
z DMEM (89 % v/v), FBS (10 % v/v), P/S (1 % v/v) and nerve growth factor (50 ng/mL).
1 Mitochondrial membrane potential.
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
16 
derived NPCs into dopaminergic (DA) neurons to generate neural tissues
[103]. Cell viability and neuronal marker expression were used to
compare the guggulsterone-MSs in the bioink to guggulsterone in the
media and unloaded MSs. For NPC differentiation, constructs were
added to plates consisting of NPC media (10 days), neural induction
media (10 days), and Brain Phys Neuronal Medium (Day 20 post-
printing). The cells and MSs were evenly distributed in the bioprinted
constructs, with good viability. After one day post-printing, no signifi-
cant
differences
were
found
between
printed
constructs
with
guggulsterone-MSs (‘GM’, 92 ± 3 %), blank microspheres (‘UM’, 78 ±
11 %), or guggulsterone in the media (‘SG’, 89 ± 2 %). The same was
true after seven days, although GM had higher viability (98 ± 1 %). The
constructs were positive for FOXA2+ (midbrain-type dopamine neuron
marker) and β-tubulin III (TUJ1+, an early neuronal marker) after 15
days, although TUJ1 was much lower in GM. After 30 days, constructs
were positive for TUJ1+ and TH+ (tyrosine hydroxylase; dopaminergic
neuron marker) both for cells that migrated out of and stayed within the
construct. Flow cytometry indicated that TUJ1 (15 ± 1 %), TH (8 ± 1
%), and GFAP (15 ± 4 %) were higher in GM condition, suggesting that
the guggulsterone MSs promote neuronal differentiation, although both
astrocyte and neural markers were proportionally expressed. O4
expression was similar between GM and UM, suggesting that the mi-
crospheres may play a role in oligodendrocyte differentiation. The cells
were shown to differentiate into neurons due to the upregulation of TH,
NR4A1 and LMX1B (roles in dopaminergic neurons), and FOXA2, which
was expressed in all conditions, suggesting the media was beneficial for
DA neuron differentiation.
Restan Perez et al. continued the use of this bioink to fabricate the
first neural model using MSCs [104]. The MSCs were differentiated to
DA neurons using small molecules puro, LDN193189 (LDN) and
SB431542 (SB) and characterized their constructs over 12 days for
viability, differentiation, dopamine release (in the supernatant) and
electrophysical activity. No media changes were performed between
days 0 and 9 to allow for growth factor production to influence dopa-
minergic neuron generation. Their microscopy images showed even
distribution in the constructs and noted that the control group had more
cell death (53.4 ± 1.6 %) compared to the differentiated group (93.5 ±
0.7 %) on after 7 days. This low viability was possibly due to a lack of
media changes, but the viability of the differentiating group (both 3D
printed and non) had high viability (>93 %) up to 12 days. The viability
was higher than shown previously in Abelseth et al. 100 using the same
bioink and bioprinter to print NPCs (Day 15 = 64.12 ± 21.27 %) [102].
The 3D bioprinted models could successfully differentiate (TUJ1+ =
~87 %, TH+ = ~76 %); however, no neurite extension was seen in 3D
models but were present in 2D controls (~87 % of the TUJ1+ cells had
neurite extensions), and the 2D conditions had higher relative TUJ1 and
TH (~98 % both). Notably, the 3D bioprinted models did show
enhanced dopamine release (5.47 ± 0.18 pg/mL), where no dopamine
was released in 2D or 3D control groups, in addition to enhanced elec-
trical activity after excitation with potassium chloride (KCl). Similar
work was detailed in a protocol paper which outlined the use of a fibrin-
based bioink for 3D bioprinting MSCs and differentiating them into DA
neurons [105]. This protocol paper outlines the preparation of MSCs,
including plate coating with poly-L-ornithine (PLO) and laminin to
enhance cell attachment, and the formulation of low viscosity (Tissue-
Print-LV) and high viscosity (TissuePrint-HV) bioinks. The bioprinting
process is described for two different bioprinters (RX1 & BIOX), fol-
lowed by instructions for culturing the 3D constructs and inducing MSC
differentiation using growth factors, and includes analysis techniques
such as cell viability assays, ICC, electrophysiology, and dopamine
Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). Chrenek et al. also re-
ported a workflow for 3D bioprinting with the Axolotl TissuePrint-HV
kit both with and without a support bath, as well as an alginate and
gelatin-based crosslinker [106]. While no results were shown, it was
indicated that cell viability is sustained at high levels and constructs
remain stable up to 6 weeks of incubation.
Further work with this bioink was used to model Alzheimer’s disease
(AD) by integrating puro-releasing MSs into the bioink using the RX1
bioprinter [107]. This work bioprinted AD patient-derived NPCs into
dome-shaped constructs mimicking the in vivo environment. The inclu-
sion of MSs, encapsulated with differentiation-inducing compounds,
supported the development of cholinergic neurons resembling basal
forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCNs). The bioprinted models were
assessed for cell viability, marker expression, and electrical activity,
demonstrating successful differentiation and the presence of immature
electrical responses. The fibrin-based bioink, coupled with a micro-
fluidic extrusion printhead system, further enhanced cellular viability
and functionality. The study highlighted that the bioprinted tissue
models not only exhibited expression of key AD markers (amyloid-beta –
Aβ, tau protein) and neuronal characteristics (TUJ1+, FOXG1+,
ChAT+) but also showed potential for use in drug screening and
personalized medicine applications. The microspheres played a crucial
role in improving the mechanical properties and longevity of the con-
structs, underscoring their value in AD research and treatment
development.
Y. Li et al. designed a ‘co-cultured’ neural tissue model using photo-
crosslinkable bioink (containing neurospheroids) printed into a low
Young’s modulus gelatin support bath (containing astrocytes) [108].
The elasticity of the support bath was designed to mimic the natural
stiffness of non-neural regions of the brain, favouring astrocyte growth
and self-assembled neural-astrocyte construction. In addition, the sup-
port bath enabled physical crosslinking of the alginate during printing
with divalent cations and enhanced shear thinning (and ensured ho-
mogenous embedding), followed by UV crosslinking for mechanical
stability. The optimized bioink contained GelMA, gelatin, alginate, and
laminin within a media-based solution. The goal was to promote neural
differentiation, where RA was added to the media after 4 days. It was
found that fetal bovine serum (FBS)-containing culture promoted the
formation of neuroglia cells. The neural cells extended along the bio-
printed fibres after 7 days of co-culture and by 14 days, elongated
morphologies were observed (F-actin+, TUJ1+). Importantly, the
interconnected networks were observed where neural extension beyond
the printed niche was present (TUJ1+). After 2 weeks, astrocytes
(GFAP+) formed large networks, which was attributed to construct
degeneration leading to unincumbered cell proliferation. Morphological
differences were observed at the niches, where astrocytes had more
rounded
morphology,
and
invading
neurons
also
had
circular
morphology (but TUJ1+), likely due to the higher stiffness within the
bath.
Kajtez et al. used embedded bioprinting, where a soft gel is extruded
into a stiff (yield-stress) support medium with high fidelity, using similar
principles of sacrificial printing (Fig. 6) [65]. The discussed Self-Healing
Annealable Particle-ECM (SHAPE) composites for the printing bath
generate pseudoplastic materials that are capable of smooth sol–gel
transitions, integrating hydrogel-based polymers, and long-term sup-
port. The SHAPE support material has a ~ 70 % granular volume in a ~
30 % hydrogel/volume composed of common ECM molecules collagen,
laminin, hyaluronic acid (HA) and fibronectin. Importantly, this method
can be tailored for various mechanical stiffnesses to match other tissue
regimes or crosslinking techniques. After 2 months of differentiation,
axonal extension and neurite outgrowth from the proliferating hNSCs
were observed. Significantly, differentiating neurons had interregional
organization along the path and extending axonal bodies, which is a
function of native brain tissue and function, and these morphologies
were highly preserved in the SHAPE hydrogels during fixation. After 4
weeks, the hNSCs were TUJ1+ and TH+, and RT-qPCR showed down-
regulated expression of progenitor markers (BRN2, SOX1, SOX2),
increased neuronal expression (MAP2, NCAM, SYN), and midbrain/
dopaminergic fate (NURR1, AADC, DAT, TH) (Fig. 6G). In a co-printed
geometry of a core (containing ventral mesencephalic hNSCs) and
outer ring (with hNSCs from a forebrain region that typically differen-
tiates to astrocytes), showed after 4 weeks TUJ1+ core and highly
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
17 
expressed GFAP+ outer ring (Fig. 6J). Gelatin was printed within the
SHAPE composites and upon sacrificial removal, simultaneous flow
through the channels was demonstrated which could be useful for flow
dynamics during vascularization. Ultimately, they found that oxygena-
tion could be controlled by infill density and extrusion to generate
relevant brain levels (1–3.5 % dissolved O2).
The influence of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) in a simplistic AD model
was investigated by Chiang et al. using a CELLINK bioink to 3D bioprint
hNSCs [109]. The protective effects of AuNPs on Aβ inflammation and
oxidative stress were investigated by assessing inflammatory cytokine
expression and cell viability. While the target was AD, the phenotype
was not naturally produced in vitro using AD-derived cells, rather they
used their neural model for a proof-of-concept of the effect of AuNPs
following Aβ exposure (Aβ1-42 treated for 24 h). They found that in the
presence of Aβ, the AuNPs enhanced the viability of hNSCs, reduced
tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β)
expression (which are inflammatory cytokines) and increased inhibitory
kappa B kinase (IKK) expression. Their control models (no Aβ treatment
of AuNPs) models expressed SOX2 and Nuclear factor erythroid 2-
related factor 2 (Nrf2). This study emphasizes the potential of treat-
ment investigations with functional neural models, however, without
functional analysis of the bioprinted model, caution must be used in
interpreting these findings. When investigating infection with either
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 SARS-CoV-2 or mouse-
adapted versions (MA-SARS-CoV-2), de Melo et al. conducted some
functional assessments for their disease model [110]. The bioink com-
bined gelatin and GelMA with or without laminin to 3D bioprint murine
cortical astrocytes and seeded surface layer of mature murine neurons.
Initially, they compared bioink formulations with and without laminin,
where ultimately laminin-included bioinks favoured softer materials
with increased porosity and enhanced viability over 2 weeks. In addi-
tion, the laminin-containing bioink had higher cell adhesion and more
elongated astrocyte morphologies, suggesting higher matrix recognition
and anchorage and that laminin is necessary for the native tissue-like
behaviour of astrocytes. The models were used in combination with
seeded neurons (since they had low viability with ultraviolet (UV)
exposure and various printing speeds), which were infected with MA-
SARS-CoV-2 to adapt to species differences in susceptibility. In this
Fig. 6. Reproduced from Reference [65] with permissions from © Kajtez J. et al 2022. Creative Commons Attribution License. Original caption: Generation of
authentic human neurons within 3D printed constructs. A) Photograph of a 3D printed construct in annealed SHAPE support after 2 months of differentiation. B)
Confocal image of the same construct labeled with Calcein-AM. C) Maximum intensity projection of a 200 μm optical section showing that neural projections extend
in the volume between printed lines. D) Quantification of the extent of projection outgrowth away from a 3D printed structure as a function of the differentiation
time. E) Orthogonal projection showing that the structural integrity with defined features in different layers are preserved. F) Fluorescence images of immunostained
3D printed construct after 2 months of differentiation displaying neuronal and dopaminergic markers (β-III tubulin and TH respectively). G) RT-qPCR gene expression
analysis of the printed construct at 3 different time points indicating midbrain patterning and neuronal maturation. Nondifferentiated hNSCs were used as a
reference. H) Maximum projection fluorescence image of neurons in a 3D printed construct resembling brain meanders with a 3D close-up view of a selected segment.
I) Illustration showing the printing of cells with orthogonal differentiation trajectories by using 2 inks containing hNSCs with different predefined fates. Inks were
printed in consecutive order in concentric circle design within the same SHAPE support. The outer radius of the inner and outer disk is 2 and 4 mm, respectively. J)
Fluorescence images of fixed and immunolabeled constructs after 1 month of differentiation. DNA counterstain shows the presence of cells both in the inner and outer
ring but staining for GFAP and β-III tubulin reveal distinct protein expression characteristics between cells generated from each ink. Cells display elongated
morphology indicating successful differentiation.
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
18 
model, there was an increased expression of spike protein (15.9 ± 2.6 %
of cells were infected), and after 7 days, neuronal phenotypes (β-tubulin
III+) and astrocytes (GFAP+) were connected.
Work by Abdelrahman et al. used two self-assembling amino acid
(AAs) sequences (Ac-Ile-Val-Cha-Lys-NH2 = IVZK; Ac-Ile-Val-Phe-Lys-
NH2 = IVFK) as their bioink to bioprint ventral midbrain (VM) DA and
non-DA neurons [11]. Initial work performed encapsulation studies to
characterize viability, ICC, morphology, and extracellular spontaneous
neuronal activity. The compound 6-hydroxydopamine (6-ODHA) hy-
drochloride was used to simulate DA-loss expressed in Parkinson’s
Disease. Most characterization was done in scaffolded (not bioprinted)
scenarios. In the scaffolds, they found that viability increased, adenosine
triphosphate (ATP)-related signals increased, and encapsulation in IVFK
showed cell attachment, migration and neurite extension after 3 days.
The number of neurites, number of branches, neurites length, and
dominant neurite length in both TUJ1+ and TH+ cells were also
quantified. Successful neuron migration out of the neurospheroids
encapsulated was observed by day 3 and microelectrode arrays (MEAs)
showed that the peptides enhanced spontaneous electrical activity until
day 34 (IVFK) and 42 days (IVZK). The 3D bioprinted models were only
assessed until 3 days after printing, and the AAs were printed in an
elastic mould to allow for shape retention during the crosslinking pro-
cess. After 3 days post-printing, the VM neurons expressed TUJ1+ and
TH+ (TUJ1 was more pronounced), and the cells were viable, although
no quantification was given.
Scarian et al. used a CELLINK bioink (IK-102000; composed of cel-
lulose nanofibrils and alginate) to bioprint hiPSC-derived NSCs from a
patient suffering from sporadic Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (sALS) and
differentiate these in the constructs to motor neurons [111]. Cell
viability continually increased over the differentiation period, but was
low after printing, rising from approximately 40 % on day 0 to ~ 60 %
after 20 days. The cells were positive for typical differentiation markers
at various stages: NSCs (Nestin, SOX2, SOX1, PAX6), motor neuron
progenitors (MNPs; Olig2, PAX6) and motor neurons (MNs; TUBB3,
ChAT). It is unclear on what days these were expressed, but it is assumed
to be similar to the viability timeline (NSCs = D0-7; MNPs = D7-20;
MNs = D20). This differentiation was confirmed quantitatively using
RT-qPCR. It was suggested that the sALS leads to decreased differenti-
ation, since sALS NSCs had higher levels of Nestin and SOX2 (typically
earlier progenitor markers), whereas the controls had typically more
mature markers (higher SOX1 and PAX6). Electrophysiological analysis
showed that the neurons responded to KCl induction, and displayed
electrical activity when untreated, which was attributed to auto-
fluorescence of bioink causing background fluorescence.
Matthiesen et al. investigated 3D bioprinting with human primary
fetal astrocytes (FPA) in a bioink made of modified HA and an 8-arm
polyethylene glycol (PEG) with terminal azide groups, (PEG-Az)8
which forms hydrogels via click chemistry [112]. The HA was modified
with bicyclo[6.1.0]nonyne (HA-BCN) to functionalize with ECM de-
rivatives cyclic RGD (cRGD) and IKVAV (Ile-Lys-Val-Ala-Val). 3D bio-
printing
was
individually
assessed
with
human
SH-SY5Y,
U87
glioblastoma (GBM) and human FPAs. SH-SY5Y cells were used to assess
biocompatibility over 6 days. While the metabolic activity (indicated by
% reduction of AB) was shown to decrease significantly in all groups in
the first 6 days, ICC staining showed clustering of cells and increased cell
numbers over the same period, suggesting that the systems support cell
proliferation. All hydrogels showed similar viability on day 1 for FPA
cells and increased viability over 6 days. For 3D bioprinting, the FPA
cells were printed in either i) HA-BCN:(PEG-Az)8, ii) HA-BCN:(PEG-Az)8
with cRGD, or iii) HA-BCN:(PEG-Az)8 with IKVAV. The only analysis for
the 3D bioprinted cells was staining with phalloidin for F-actin after 4
days and investigating morphology and number. Interestingly, the ma-
terial, while soft, could be printed with high fidelity; no apparent dif-
ferences (qualitative) were seen for cell viability between modifications
(none, cRGD, or IKVAV) similar to the 2D conditions. Morphologically
speaking, no peptide modifications generated rounded cells whereas
peptide modifications lead to dendritic morphologies and enhanced
cellular interaction. Cells printed in the RGD-modified hydrogel all led
to a significant number of extensions although this was not quantified.
They did observe condensed morphology compared to the 2D systems
indicative of stress–strain effects of printing.
Z. Wang et al. fabricated a 3D nerve cell model with brain-like me-
chanical properties and tuneable vascular structures using a grid ge-
ometry [113]. Using a 3D coaxial printing approach, the vascular
structures were created with an outer PEG-diacrylate (PEGDA)/Pluronic
F127 hydrogel layer and an inner Pluronic F127 layer, where porosity
could be adjusted through the sacrificial Pluronic F127. The nerve cells,
encapsulated in a gelatin-based hydrogel (GelMA), showed better pro-
liferation in matrices with lower compressive moduli (2–7 kPa). The
vascular structures enhanced nutrient exchange and cell viability,
making this 3D nerve cell model a promising tool for studying ischemic
stroke and neurodegenerative diseases. The 3D bioprinted model at-
tempts to resolve the 3D model contradiction, requiring both high
modulus for stability and low modulus for nerve stimuli, by creating a
low-modulus, brain-like (2.3 ± 0.6 kPa compression modulus) 3D nerve
cell model with adjustable porosity.
Rueda-Gensini et al. developed a 3D neuroimmune co-culture system
to model Parkinson’s disease (PD) microenvironments using a bio-
mimetic hydrogel bioink, methacryloyl-modified decellularized small
intestinal submucosa (SISMA) with electroconductive graphene oxide
nanoflakes (SISMA-GO) [10]. This bioink facilitated the bioprinting of
dense networks of mature human dopaminergic neurons, with enhanced
functionality and differentiation compared to 2D cultures. The system
also integrated neuroimmune interactions by co-culturing neurons with
astrocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells. The model replicated key
PD pathologies, including α-synuclein aggregation, mitochondrial
dysfunction, and oxidative stress, demonstrating increased resilience
and enabling extended study of PD progression upon exposure to the
neurotoxin A53T α-synuclein. Key functions include generating mature
dopaminergic neuron networks with enhanced activity and connectiv-
ity, incorporating neuroimmune interactions with astrocytes and
monocytes, and recapitulating PD pathologies such as α-synuclein ag-
gregation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and oxidative stress. The model
offers a more comprehensive tool for studying PD compared to tradi-
tional methods.
Recent research by Yan et al. was not originally identified in our
systematic search, even though it has clear relevance to the topic at hand
[14]. Here, 3D bioprinted models investigated cell types within similar
tissues (excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons and astrocytes), between
tissues (cortical and striatal) and for disease modeling of Alexander
disease (using a tri-culture). Their models were printed as horizontal
patterning between cell types to circumvent the limited oxygen diffusion
in avascular models, but was also necessary since the soft bioinks rele-
vant to neural tissues could not be achieved with vertical layered ge-
ometries. A cerebral cortex model was formulated with GABAergic
interneurons (derived from medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) cells)
and glutamatergic neurons (derived from cortical progenitors) printed
at a ratio of 1:4, respectively. After 60 days post-printing, cortical
transcription factors (TBR1, CTIP2, SATB2) and GABAergic subtypes
were observed (calretinin – CR, calbindin – CB, parvalbumin – PV, and
somatostatin – SST) (Fig. 4A). Co-culturing the two neural types led to a
relatively increased presynaptic marker (SYN1), suggesting that these
cellular interactions promote synaptogenesis. The formation of inhibi-
tory and excitatory synapses was identified by presynaptic (vGAT,
vGlut1) and postsynaptic (gephyrin) markers within 45 days (Fig. 4A).
The models were also shown to have functional Na+ and K+ currents,
evoked and spontaneous action potentials (eAPs, sAPs, respectively) 3
weeks after printing. Tri-culture with this system and astrocyte pro-
genitors identified matured neurons (NeuN+) 30 days post-printing,
with extensive branching and close neuron-astrocyte interactions
(Fig. 5A). Functional properties were analyzed through whole-cell patch
clamping, revealing excitatory and inhibitory synaptic connections,
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
19 
while live-cell imaging using calcium and glutamate indicators explored
neuron-astrocyte interactions. Notably, the tissues showed functional
properties (KCl response) and expression of the functional marker
glutamate transporter 1 (GLT-1) after 40 days post-printing, which was
corroborated by identified functional glutamate uptake by astrocytes
(iGluSnFR signals). Cortical neurons and striatal neurons were co-
printed to model interactions between tissues; axonal staining with
SMI312 showed that cortical neurons project axons towards the stria-
tum, similar to native tissues (Fig. 5B). This model enables the formation
of functional neural circuits, integrates astrocytes for neuron-astrocyte
interaction assessment, and allows bioprinting of layered tissues with
defined compositions. The tri-culture (glutamate and GABA neurons
with astrocytes with the Alexander disease mutation, or its isogenic
control) was able to replicate the disease-relevant phenotypes of Alex-
ander disease, including intracellular astrocyte aggregation, lower GLT-
1 (20 days post-printing), reduced synaptic puncta density, and lessened
Ca2+ response. The platform serves as a valuable tool for modeling
neural network activity under both physiological and pathological
conditions.
The most recent paper include in the review was work by L. Wang et
al., who designed a biomimetic six-layer 3D brain tissue model resem-
bling the natural brain cortex [115]. This model was bioprinted using an
integrated 3D printing platform that combined direct ink writing (DIW)
and electrohydrodynamic (EHD) fibre printing to fabricate 6-layer trans-
sectional patterning of PC12 and GL261 cells in a GelMA and fibrinogen-
based bioink. Their optimal bioink consisted of 5 % GelMA and 0.5 %
fibrinogen, which had modulus values less than 4 kPa. The research
investigated how structural parameters of fibres, such as diameter and
spacing, influence cell behaviour. It was found that smaller diameter
fibres (10 μm) and closer spacing (150 μm) guided neurite orientation
and cell migration, highlighting the importance of fibre structures in
directing neural network formation and connectivity. Here, they
examined the effects of structural features on neural cell directionality
and neuron-glia interactions and found that smaller-diameter fibers
better guide neurite growth. In addition, they discuss the role that
topographical cues play in neurite extension and function, highlighting
the importance of geometrical features within tissue constructs. This
study was a proof of concept for the 3D bioprinted architecture, and the
authors suggest the integration of hiPSC-derived cells to fully assess the
potential for neural tissue modeling. They also mention that the 6 layers
were difficult to assess for ICC, and found 5-layer constructions were
suitable for immunohistology.
3.1.2. Spinal cord
Of the systematically reviewed papers, Joung et al. were the first to
co-culture cells, using Matrigel-based bioink to co-print neural progen-
itor and oligodendrocyte progenitors to precisely pattern a cell-laden
scaffold with point-dispension printing for applications such as the
treatment of spinal cord injuries [118] (Table 3). Their work generated
intricate scaffolds with 200 μm spaced channels for axonal guidance,
generating similar cytoarchitecture patterning of spinal cord tissue. The
spinal NPCs decreased in viability from ~ 75–80 % to ~ 20 % after 4
days compared to fibroblasts (>90 %); this can be attributed to the
sensitivity of neural cells compared to other cell types. They were able to
show the maturation of their model when co-cultured after 7 days where
OPCs expressed mCherry and NPCs expressed βIII-tubulin (also shown to
be NeuN+ by day 7 when printed alone), and functional neurons
through calcium imaging 14 days after printing.
In 2018, de la Vega et al. bioprinted NPCs derived from hiPSCs in a
fibrinogen, chitosan, and alginate-based bioink over 30 days to generate
spinal cord models using a microfluidic-based printhead with the Aspect
RX1 bioprinter [119]. The NPCs were differentiated to motor neurons
using various combinations of small molecules CHIR99021 (CHIR), SB,
LDN, puro and RA. The differentiation media did not affect cell viability,
where all were ~ 90 % after 7 days. After 15 days, almost all media
conditions had higher levels of Olig2 and HB9 than βT-III. As expected,
the combination of small molecules was thought to play a role in dif-
ferentiation, where different combinations produced different signifi-
cance – e.g., for Olig2, expression was drastically reduced when Puro
and RA were combined with other small molecules, but this same con-
dition enhanced βT-III and HB9 expression. The use of RA was shown to
preferentially express Olig2 and HB9, but had lower βT-III expression,
similar to media without added factors (PR-). The addition of Puro also
enhanced spheroid formation, with highly concentrated βT-III by day
30. After 30 days, all conditions expressed βT-III, but all combined small
molecules (PR+) showed enhanced βT-III and ChAT expression, and low
GFAP, suggesting a better environment for motor neuron differentiation.
Han et al. used gelatin-based bioinks to demonstrate that both
boundary cap neural crest stem cells and mixtures of astrocytes and
motor neuron precursors could be viably bioprinted over several weeks
[120].
They
first
tested
optimal
concentrations
of
micro-
transglutaminase (mTG) concentrations and gelatin and found that 12
% gelatin and 25 mg/mL mTG mixture provided optimal gelation
properties
and
cell
viability
based
on
relative
cell
count
and
morphology. Interestingly, they determined differentiation by deter-
mining the proportion of elongated cells. They also tested different
layers of printed (1, 3, and 5), and found that 1 layer had little fluo-
rescence and lost viability, and 3 layers showed increased fluorescence
after 1 day compared to 5 layers but did not change after 3 days, and by
day 3, the 5-layer had higher fluorescence. These phenomena were
reasoned to be caused by delayed media diffusion in 5 layers, where
longer incubation led to increased dispersion. The boundary cap neural
crest stem cells contain fluorescent proteins, which enabled live imaging
for up to 5 weeks. The cells were evenly distributed and immunofluo-
rescent analysis of sectioned constructs (immunohistochemistry, IHC)
showed TUJ1+ (referred to as bTUB in the text) and GFAP+ cells, but
exterior cells had advanced morphologies. When 3D bioprinting was
done with iPSC-derived MN progenitors and astrocytes mixed, both
GFAP+ and bTUB+ were seen throughout, with surface cell clusters
with extensions. They found that neural differentiation depended on the
density and location of printed cells since the interior had immature
morphologies, but surface cells obtained dendritic processes suggesting
differentiation.
Most recently, Song et al. developed a conductive composite hydro-
gel (CCH) scaffold for delivering NSCs to treat spinal cord injuries (SCI)
[121]. The CCH scaffold, synthesized using a novel conductive polymer
of 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) monomers, chondroitin sulfate
methacrylate (CSMA) and tannic acid (TA) (PEDOT:CSMA,TA) inte-
grated into a GelMA/PEG matrix, was 3D bioprinted to transport NSCs
and repair spinal cord damage. In vivo experiments on SCI rats showed
that the scaffold inhibited astrocytic differentiation, promoted neuro-
genesis, and facilitated the development of organized nerve fibres while
reducing glial scar tissue, leading to significant recovery in locomotor
function. The study highlights the scaffold’s potential for stem cell-based
SCI therapy, offering a promising approach for future clinical applica-
tions in regenerative medicine. Importantly, the drawbacks of hydrogels
in nerve regeneration were discussed, and, while the systematic search
focus on brain neural models, may explain the lack of spinal models in
our search.
3.1.3. Tumour models
While not specifically including neural cells for the purpose of
modeling neurons and supporting cells, tumour models, including
glioblastoma and neuroblastoma cancer models are worth discussing.
These models have been developed and used for patient-specific treat-
ments and drug screening. A significant number of papers conducted 3D
bioprinting for modeling glioblastoma (GBM) (Table 4), which is the
most prevalent CNS tumour with high fatality [122]. Not unlike other
complex diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, the mechanisms involved
of tumour angiogenesis, a feature prominent in GBM, is complex and
would benefit greatly from representative functional models [122]. The
common theme of disease models is to enhance the understanding of
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
20 
disease function, progression, and treatment, and GBM is not immune to
this need. Drug screening in this area would be of great benefit since
uncontrolled vascular growth can lead to drug resistance [122]. How-
ever, traditional GBM models typically lack the characteristic tumour
angiogenesis, are unable to replicate the complex tumour microenvi-
ronment, and fail to generate the hypoxic environments of in vivo tu-
mours [122]. In the lab, most GBM models co-culture GBM cells and
endothelial cells in the presence of vascular growth factors (VGFs),
either cell-secreted or supplemented.
Using this same bioink and crosslinker composition and bioprinter as
Abelseth et al. [102], (except for a lower thrombin concentration of 1.7
U/mL), C. Lee et al. fabricated 3D bioprinted glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM) models using U87MG human GBM cells [123]. The constructs
were maintained in DMEM, FBS, and penicillin/streptomycin (P/S), or
the same medium with the small molecules Forskolin, ISX9, CHIR99021,
I-BET 151, and DAPT after 3 days. There was minimal cell clustering
after printing, but the GBM cells tended to form spheroids in the con-
structs, which grew in density over time. The models were similar to
tumour propagation in vivo conditions, where spheroids grew due to the
proliferation of cells within the outer core of the spheres. Live/dead
Table 3
Summary of the included articles that were designed for modeling the spinal cord.
Source
Printed Bioink Composition
Cells
Construct Media
Bioprinter
Characterization
Bioink
Crosslinker
Bioink
Cells/Construct
Joung
et al.
2018
[118]
(1) Matrigel (50 %
v/v)
(2) Gelatin (7.5 %
w/v), fibrinogen
(10 mg/mL), HA (3
mg/mL), CaCl2
(2.5 x 10−3 M)
(3) GelMa (7.5 %
w/v), PI (LAP; 0.05
%)
(4) 1:3 (w/v)
alginate:
methycellulosea
(designed for
scaffold)
(2) Thrombin (100
U/mL),
transglutaminase
(TG) (0.2 % w/v)
(3) UV irradiation
(4) Ca2+ or Ba2+
Primary human
neonatal
dermal
fibroblasts
(107 cells/mL)
hiPSC-derived
ventral sNPCs
(107 cells/mL)
miPSC-derived
OPCs (107
cells/mL)
sNPCs: N2/B27 media,
GDNF (20 ng/mL),
BDNF (20 ng/mL), and
NT3 (20 ng/mL);
OPCs: N2/B27, FGF-2
(20 ng/mL), rhPDGF-
AA (20 ng/mL), rhShh
(100 ng mL), P/S (1×)
Custom
microextrusion 3D
printer (100 µm ID;
1–3 mm/s; 0.5–1 psi
(cell laden);
customized heating
(37 ◦C)/cooling
(4 ◦C) system)
Compression
(uniaxial,
unconfined;
Young’s modulus)
Viability (Live/dead; 3 h,
D1, 4)
ICC (STEM121, TUJ1,
mCherry, NeuN, Sox10,
eGFP; D1, 4, 7)
Calcium Imaging (D14)
AG:MC (Viability, D3;
Morphology, D3)
de la
Vega
et al.
2018
[119]
Fibrinogen (20 mg/
mL), alginate (0.5 %
w/v), genipin (0.3
mg/mL)
CaCl2 (20 mg/mL),
chitosan (0.075 %
w/v), thrombin (1.7
U/mL)
hiPSC-derived
NPCs
Various media:
Negative (N+), Puro
positive (P+), RA
positive (R+), Puro
and RA positive
(PR+), Puro and RA
negative (PR-)b
D15: BrainPhys
Neuronal Medium,
GDNF (10 ng/mL),
IGF-1 (10 ng/mL), C-
AMP (1 µM), N2 (1 %),
B-27 (1 %), Ascorbic
Acid (200 ng/mL),
BDNF (10 ng/mL), P/S
(1 %)
Aspect Biosystems
RX1 with LOP™
printhead (20 mm/s;
20 mbar (bioink), 40
mbar (crosslinker),
100 mbar (buffer))
−
Viability (Guava
ViaCount®, flow
cytometry; D7)
Flow cytometry (βT-III,
Olig2, HB9; D15)
ICC (TUJ1, ChAT, GFAP;
D30)
Microscopy (D0, 1, 7, 10)
Han et
al.
2022
[120]
Gelatin (12 % w/v),
Laminin (5, 10 μg/
mL)
Micro TG (1:10 v/v,
mTG:gelatin, 25
mg/mL)
Boundary cap
neural stem
cells (2.5 × 106
cells/mL)
Motor neuron
precursors
(MNP) +
Astrocytes
(60:40, 50:50,
40:60 % MNP:
astrocytes;
total = 3.86 ×
106 cells/mL)
Proliferation medium
Differentiation
medium (D3)
CELLINK BIO X
(3 mm syringe, 0.41
mm ID)
3 layers
Rheology (viscosity,
temperature sweep)
Viability (AlamarBlue;
D1, 3)
Immunohistochemistry
(GFAP, TUJ1, Hoechst;
D7, D14, D21)
Live Imaging (up to 5
weeks)
Song
et al.
2023
[121]
PEDOT:CSMA,TA
(0.1 % w/v), GelMA
(5 % w/v), PEGDA
(0.3 % w/v), PI
(LAP, 0.3 % w/v)
UV crosslinking
(405 nm)
Rat NSC
spheroids
(3x106 cells/
mL)
Proliferation medium
(DMEM/F-12, L-gluta-
mine, B27, P/S, EGF,
bFGF) Differentiation
medium (Complete
DMEM/F-12, L-
glutamine, B27, P/S)
Microextrusion-
based 3D printer
(GeSim, Bioscaffold
3.2; z-axially
stacking structure;
5x5x3 mm)
Rheology
(oscillating
viscoelasticity tests,
temperature-
dependent gelation,
viscosity)
FTIR
Conductivity
measurement
(electrochemical
workstation)
Biodegradability
SEM (D7)
Calcium imaging (Fluo-4
AM; D7)
In vivo studies (Female
SD rats; behaviour
assessment, Histological
assessment)
ICC (TUJ1, GFAP,
MAP2, NF200, MBP,
Olig2)
a Printed with sNPCs or OPCs only.
b N+ = SB (2 µM), LDN (2 µM), CHIR (1 µM); P+ = Puro (0.1 µM), SB (2 µM), LDN (2 µM), CHIR (1 µM); R+ = RA (0.5 µM), SB (2 µM), LDN (2 µM), CHIR (1 µM); PR+
= Puro (0.1 µM), RA (0.5 µM), SB (2 µM), LDN (2 µM), CHIR (1 µM); PR- = Puro (0.1 µM), RA (0.5 µM).
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
21 
imaging showed that the GBMs could be printed with high viability
(~90 %), which was relatively similar after 12 days. The GBM constructs
were stained on day 12 using ICC for TUJ1 (early neuronal), and either
CD133 (GBM stem cell marker), DCX (doublecortin – an early neuronal
marker), or Nestin (neural stem cell and GBM marker). Printed cells
showed very low TUJ1 but had higher expression of CD133 and Nestin
compared to the 2D cultures, indicating cancer stem cell-like properties.
The intensity was low for the ICC staining but could be due to the length
of construct aging or autofluorescence of bioink mentioned elsewhere
[104]. Using this same bioink, Smits et al. discussed the first use of 3D
bioprinted models to evaluate model response to drugs/small molecules
in our systematic review [124]. They used the RX1 bioprinter to co-print
GBM cells with astrocytes, which was used as a GBM model to investi-
gate a small anti-cancer drug, Compound 15. This compound is an
antagonist to N-cadherin (NCAD), a commonly overexpressed molecule
in tumours, especially in gliomas. Three conditions were investigated, a
control, 10 μM of Compound 15, and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO); cells
were printed both individually and as a co-culture to investigate the
effects of Compound 15. Most of the characterization was done on the
influence of Compound 15 on viability and tumour size, to assess drug
effectiveness. It was noted that there were differences in cellular staining
between 2D and 3D bioprinted constructs, where 3D bioprinted models
were more organized and rounded. Importantly, Compound 15 selec-
tively acted on the GBM cells to decrease viability, whereas the astro-
cytes remained viable.
Tang et al. developed a co-cultured GBM model that contained three
structures representing tumour-like regions, acellular ECM regions and
an endothelial region (human umbilical vein endothelial cells, HUVECs)
[125]. They used bioinks comprised of glycidyl methacrylate HA
(GMHA) and GelMA to create four models (1): a tumour-only stiff model;
(2): a tumour-only soft model; (3): a co-culture stiff model; and (4) a co-
culture soft model. Their stiff models were 21 kPa, and soft were 2 kPa,
which was designed to recapitulate in vivo differences in GBM patients,
where higher stiffness is observed. They aimed to design varying stiff-
ness levels to convey the intricacies and reciprocity of the ECM and
cellular remodeling during GBM and address the lack of models that
represent the complex, heterogenous, and dynamic tumour microenvi-
ronment of GBM using digital light processing (DLP) bioprinting. They
adjusted the printing parameters and biomaterial concentrations to
provide 3 stiffness levels. Each model had a 500 μm wide GBM area,
surrounded by a ring-shaped ECM (500 μm), and co-cultures with
endothelial cells printed on an external region of HUVECs. Compared to
the soft models, the stiffer models had increased expression of genes
related to hypoxia (CA IX, HIF1-α, SLC2A1), angiogenesis (VEGFA,
SPP1), and apolipoproteins (APOL4, APOL6), among others. Soft gels
also lead to more relaxed structures, and increased invasion of GBM
cells. In the co-cultures, in both stiff and soft conditions, HUVECs
migrated toward GBM cells, but in the stiff model, HUVECs (CD31+)
both proliferated and sprouted blood-vessel like morphology adjacent to
GBM cells (SOX2+). The stiff models also expressed higher angiogenic
markers compared to soft, such as FN1, which is involved in the adhe-
sion, growth, angiogenesis and reoccurrence of GBM. The models were
shown to have biochemical and biophysical relevance to native GBM,
which can be used to model various levels of GBM.
Neufeld et al. incorporated vasculature in their 3D bioprinted models
to enhance the relevance of cancer models to achieve angiogenesis
[126]. They used a tumour bioink (fibrinogen and gelatin) and a
vascular bioink (Pluronic F127) to fabricate a GBM model. Their model
included a printed bottom layer of fibrin/gelatin and cells (patient-
derived GBM cells – PD-GB4, human astrocytes, and microglia) into a
PDMS mold equipped with gaskets for connection to a peristaltic pump.
A vascular geometry layer was printed on top using Pluronic F127 and
thrombin, and then a final layer of the tumour bioink and cells was
added, and sealed. For their vascular component, connection to a peri-
staltic pump allowed for fibronectin injection to create an adherent
surface,
followed
by
injection
of
labelled
HUVECs
and
human
microvascular brain pericytes. Cells were cultured for 5 days in the
media, followed by injection with dextran-FITC, and perfusion was
created with unlabelled cancer and stromal cells (astrocytes and
microglia). They found that their 3D GBM model recapitulated in vivo
tumours compared to the 2D models, such as increased proliferation of
both PD-GB4 and GL261 cells (GBM cells), and increased cell invasion in
the presence of astrocytes. Further, using dextran, it was indicated that
the cells within the “vessels” could circulate, leading to more intuitive
drug screening scenarios. They looked at the effects of a P-selectin in-
hibitor (SELPi), which led to significantly decreased tumour growth
after exposure. Further, the presence of GFAP (astrocytes) and IBA1
(microglia) were identified, which are highly active in GBM tumours.
X. Wang et al. Used coaxial 3D bioprinting to generate tube-like
structures using an inner core of endothelial cells (HUVECs) sur-
rounded by an outer shell of GBM cells (human glioma cells −
U118)
[122]. Their bioink was composed of alginate (mixed with U118-RFP
cells in the core) and collagen (mixed with GFP-labelled HUVECs as a
shell) which was printed into CaCl2. They assessed cellular interaction
over 9 days and confirmed the recruitment of endothelial cells by GBM
cells was also exhibited in a mouse model. They found that in the co-
culture, the amount of relative cell proliferation, and concentration of
secreted VEGFA and bFGF were enhanced compared to individual cul-
tures. After 5 days, the HUVECs extended into the U118 shell, and
cellular fusion was observed by 9 days. Co-cultures also showed tubular
structure and had higher levels of CD31 and VEGFR2 compared to
HUVEC-only cultures. Vascular growth factors play a role in angiogen-
esis and this model comprised such factors; and the possibility that the
tumour cells were secreting vascular growth factors together led to the
enhanced tubular formation in the co-cultures (although ~ 9 were
observed)
Sunil et al. used their 3D bioprinted brain model to investigate the
potential of Bioengineered Immunomodulatory Organelle targeted
Nanozymes (BIONs) in GBM [127]. They stated that their models could
model the biology relevant between GBM cells and macrophages within
their bioink to test the immune response of the BIONs. When exposed to
BIONs and light, there was a drastic decrease in tumour volume and high
cell death of the GBM spheroids. While most of their characterization
methods relied on understanding the influence of BIONs on the host
model, some techniques could be adapted to assess the functionality of
neural tissue models. For example, the surface expression of calreticulin
and high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) release from the GBMs was
assessed. In this way, they wanted to see if the BIONs could trigger
immunogenic cell death – an essential immune response. In the highest
activated group (BIONs + light), there was a significant increase in
HMGB1 release and calreticulin. They also analyzed mitochondrial
membrane potential (Δψm) to indicate apoptosis. This was done using a
JC-1 assay and Annexin-V/FITC to indicate apoptosis. They used mito-
chondria, lysosome, endoplasmic reticulum, and golgi trackers. While
these weren’t used on the bioprinted models, incorporation into func-
tional testing could be useful for other 3D bioprinted models.
While not explicitly a GBM model, Pei et al. 3D bioprinted layered
constructs using gelatin and alginate, with collagen to regulate pore size
and stiffness relevant to differing cortex layers [9]. Collagen was shown
to directly influence porosity, allowing for complex mechanical
patterning by tuning collagen concentration, although printing less than
30 layers was necessary to maintain the construct shape. A layered
gradient was printed by alternating between various bioink composi-
tions and cells (only U87 cells were indicated). the study largely focused
on mimicking the porosity and moduli of gradient neural tissues. U87
cells were printed within the constructs and viability was tested after 7
days, which was shown to increase qualitatively. Viability was reported
to be as high as 94.5 %, which is assumed to have been on day 7. The
benefit of adding RGD peptide or bioactive factors (structural protein,
glycoproteins etc.) was mentioned, but these were not investigated.
Yavuz et al. explored the neuroprotective effects of dopamine-loaded
exosomes derived from Wharton jelly stem cells (WJ-MSCs) on the
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
22 
Table 4
Summary of the included articles based on glioma, neuroblastoma, or glioblastoma models.
Source
Printed Bioink Composition
Cells
Construct Media
Bioprinter
Characterization
Bioink
Crosslinker
Bioink
Cells/Construct
C. Lee
et al.,
2019
[123]
Fibrin (20 mg/
mL), alginate (5
mg/mL), genipin
(0.3 mg/mL)
CaCl2 (20 mg/
mL), chitosan
(0.75 mg/mL),
thrombin (1.7 U/
mL)
Human GBM cells
(U87MG; u/k
concentration)
DMEM, FBS (10 %),
P/S (1 %)
Aspect RX1 bioprinter
SEM (surface; D3)
ICC (TUJ1, CD133,
DCX, Nestin, DAPI;
D12)
Viability (D0, 3, 6, 8,
12)
SEM (surface; D3)
Smits
et al.,
2020
[124]
Alginate (0.5 %
w/v), genipin
(0.3 mg/mL),
fibrinogen (20
mg/mL)
CaCl2 (20 mg/
mL), chitosan
(0.075 mg/mL),
thrombin (1.7 U/
mL)
Human GBM cells
(U87MG; 1 × 106
cells/mL)
Human Astrocytes
(1 × 106 cells/mL)
GBMs: DMEM, FBS
(10 %), AAS (1 %)
Astrocytes:
Astrocyte Medium
(AM) + antagonist
Co-culture: AM
3 conditions:
control, Compound
15 (10 μM) and
DMSO
Aspect Biosystems’
RX1 with DUO
Printhead (25 mm/s;
50 mbar (bioink), 60
mbar (crosslinker),
100 mbar (buffer))
−
Viability (Live/dead;
D12 – GBM, D4 –
astrocytes)
ICC (NCAD, Actin,
DAPI; D12)
Tang
et al.,
2021
[125]
Tumour Region =
GelMA (10 % w/
v)a, GMHA (2 %
w/v)b
Endothelial
Region and Soft
ECM = GelMA (5
% w/v), GMHA (1
% w/v)
Stiff ECM =
GelMA (10 % w/
v), GMHA (1 % w/
v)+
Light source
Soft ECM = 20 s
Endothelial/
tumour region =
25 s
Still ECM = 30 s
Human
glioblastoma stem
cells (TS576;
10x107 cells/mL)
CW468 cells
HUVECs (5x10[7]
cells/mL)
Maintenance
medium = TS576
medium (50 %),
EGM-2 (50 %)
Customized DLP-
based 3D bioprinting
system
Compressive Modulus
(MicroSquisher; D1, 3,
7)
SEM (surface)
Molecular diffusion
assessment
ICC (SOX2, GFAP,
CD31, Ki67, Hoechst
33342; D3, 7, 14)
RT-qPCR (ABCG2,
CXCL12, GAPDH,
MGMT, SPP1, VEGFA)
RNA sequencing
(tumour only)
Drug Response (TMZ;
D11)
Pei et al.,
2021
[9]
Gelatin (6 % wt),
sodium alginate
(1 wt%), collagen
(0.5, 1, 1.5 mg/
mL)c
CaCl2 (0.1 %, 30
mins)
U87 cells (GBM)
(1 × 106 cells/mL)
−
Custom-built 3D
extrusion printer (27
G, 15 mm/s, 60 μL/
min for top and
middle layer, 30 μL/
min for bottom layer)
Viscosity (viscometer)
Compression modulus
(Universal testing
machine)
SEM (porosity)
Printability
Viability (Live/dead;
D1, 3, 7)
Neufeld et
al.,
2021
[126]
Fibrin bioink =
Fibrinogen (1 %
w/v), gelatin (6,
12 % w/v)
Vascular bioink =
Pluronic F127 (38
% w/v), thrombin
(100 U/mL)
TG (3 % w/v),
CaCl2 (250 mM),
thrombin 0.5 U/
mL); (min 3 h)
Patient derived-
GB4 cells (Azurite-
labelled; 1x106
cells/mL)
hAstro (GFP-
labelled; 1x106
cells/mL)
hMG (1x105 cells/
mL) *printed
together
1:1:1:1:1 ratio of
DMEM, astrocyte
medium, microglia
medium, pericyte
medium, and EGM-
2
3D-Bioplotter
(Envision TEC;
24–29 ◦C; vasculature
= 0.25 mm needle,
6–8 layers)
Rheology (oscillatory
time sweep)
Mechanical (Young’s
modulus)
Swelling (to D28)
SEM (D14)
Swelling (to D28)
Viability (PrestoBlue,
up to 6–7 week)
ICC (GFAP, IBA1, P-
selectin, DAPI,
Hoechst)
SEM (D14)
X. Wang
et al.,
2021
[122]
Alginate (2 % w/
v), collagen (1
mg/mL)
CaCl2 (3 %)
Human glioma cell
line U118 (1x106
cells/mL)
Human umbilical
vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs;
1x105 cells/mL)
DMEM, FBS (10 %)
Coaxial sheath /core
nozzle
Core: 0.577 mm, 5
mL/hr
Shell: 1.469 mm, 15
mL/hr
Microscopy (inner and
outer diamter)
Cell proliferation
(Alamar blue; D1, 3, 5,
7, 9)
VEGFA/bFGF Secretion
(Sandwich enzyme
immunoassay kit; D1,
3, 5, 7, 9)
Morphology and
Migration (Fluorescent
labeled cells under
confocal microscope,
D1, 5, 9)
qRT-PCR/Western Blot
(VEGFR2, CD31; D1,
9)
In vivo transplant: ICC
(CD31, CD105, vWF,
GFAP, 6 week)
Microvessel Density
(ICC)
Sunil
et al.,
2022
[127]
GelMA (2 % w/v),
gelatin (4 % w/v),
PI (LAP, 0.4 %),
FBS (10 % v/v),
P/S (1 % v/v)
UV Crosslinking
(2 mins)
RAW 264.7
macrophages
(3x106 cells/mL)
U87 GBM
spheroids (2000
cells/mL)
DMEM medium
CELLINK BIO X
25 G needle
BIONs:
Particle size analyzer
(size distribution,
polydispersity index,
zeta potential)
TEM (shape, surface
morphology)
Fluorescence
Viability (CellTiter-Glo
3D cell viability assay;
D4 pp, 6hr + BIONs)
Various BION
characterizationd
(continued on next page)
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
23 
dopaminergic neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y [114]. To induce
neurotoxicity, cells were exposed to 6-OHDA. The results indicated that
the dopamine-loaded exosomes effectively mitigated neurotoxicity in
both 2D and 3D cell cultures. Increased cell viability and enhanced
expression of the neuronal marker β-tubulin were observed in the
exosome-treated groups compared to controls, as confirmed by Live/
Dead analysis and immunostaining. The study predicts that exosome-
based carrier systems from WJ-MSCs have significant potential for
treating neurodegenerative diseases due to their regenerative properties
and size. This research outlines the potential of dopamine-loaded WJ-
MSC exosomes as an effective nano-drug delivery system for neuro-
protection and highlights their promise as a therapeutic platform for
central nervous system disorders. Additionally, they emphasize exo-
somes’ abilities to transfer genetic information, regulate immune
response, and cross the blood–brain barrier, with 3D cultures as a
promising alternative for in vivo research. Further studies on their in vivo
efficacy were recommended. While the authors expressed that their
model was used to represent Parkinson-like features, it was considered
within the tumour model since neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) cells were
used.
3.1.4. Other models
Beyond establishing brain, spinal cord, or tumour models exclu-
sively, some studies discussed general applications for their respective
bioprinted tissues. These applications are summarized next.
3.1.4.1. CNS. With a CNS model in mind, Tomaskovic-Crook & Crook
established a protocol to bioprint hNSCs using agarose (1.5 %), CMC (5
%) and alginate (5 %) in the bioink [128] (Table 5). While only briefly
mentioned in the protocol, electrically conductive bioink can be made
using conductive polymer and electrodes to penetrate the construct to
initiate differentiation. Following printing, the constructs were covered
with 2 % CaCl2 in PBS and crosslinked for 10 min, followed by washing
with DMEM/F-12 (x3 washes), hNSC proliferation medium (10 min, x2;
1 h, x1) and then changed to full media, composed of Complete Neu-
roCult Proliferation Medium with NeuroCult NS-A Basal Medium,
NeuroCult NS-A Proliferation Supplement, heparin, epidermal growth
factor (EGF) and bFGF. They suggest having the hNSCs in a proliferation
medium (without heparin, EGF and bFGF) for at least 4 days, and dif-
ferentiation to functional neurons and supporting neuroglia can be done
by switching to hNSC differentiation medium. In the protocol, it is
suggested to assess viability on days 1 and 7 with calcein and propidium
iodide. For membrane permeant live neural labelling, they used Neu-
roFluor NeuO diluted in hNSC differentiation medium added directly to
the constructs and visualized using a fluorescent microscope. This
labelling technique is temporary and is non-vital to cells. They also
report conducting immunophenotyping, and live cell calcium imaging
using Fluo-4 AM and confocal microscopy.
Kapr et al. used alginate, gellan gum (GG) and laminin-based
hydrogels to 3D bioprint hiPSCs and NPCs emulating CNS models
[129]. Most of their cellular characterization and assessments were done
via the mixing of hiPSC-derived NPC spheres within the optimal bioinks.
The spheres were chopped and “embedded” into the gels and analyzed
over 21 days. They noted thick bundles of BIII tubulin+ and F-actin, and
differentiation into neurons (BIII-tubulin+), dopaminergic neurons
(TH+) and astrocytes (GFAP+), and similar results were found in pre-
differentiated NPC spheres. However, it was noted that in the absence
of pre-differentiation, complex, multicellular tissues were formed within
3 weeks, while pre-differentiating led to limited extension, but gener-
ated a 3D multicellular network within 1 week. The two models could be
used for long-term disease modeling in the former, and screening ap-
plications in the latter. The only characterization done for 3D bioprinted
constructs was viability on day 3, which showed ~ 62 % viability.
De Melo et al. printed mice-derived astrocytes in gelatin, GelMA,
fibrinogen, and laminin-containing bioink to model mouse brain
modulus
values
(although
no
mechanical
characterization
was
described in the protocol) [130]. Their bioink was crosslinked with
thrombin, CaCl2, photoinitiator and UV light for two consecutive 60 s
intervals. Lower printing speeds favoured increased viability (74.08 %
± 1.33 % after bioprinting, 83.54 % ± 3.00 % after 1 week) and the
bioinks could be printed into various complex geometries. They found
that printing astrocytes had lower viability compared to 2D controls but
enriched the typical morphology of in vivo interconnected astrocytes. In
addition, the astrocytes maintained relevant phenotype (GFAP+) after 7
days.
Sullivan et al. investigated the use of 3D bioprinting for creating stem
cell-derived CNS models, focusing on the development and application
of bioinks [131]. The researchers developed a biocompatible PEG-based
matrix incorporating peptide motifs and collagen IV to simulate human
brain stiffness (1.5 kPa). Using a commercial bioprinter, they success-
fully integrated cells resembling brain microvascular endothelial cells
(BMECs), NPCs and astrocytes, highlighting its potential for creating
complex multicellular models. The study highlights the value of 3D
bioprinting in generating in vitro models that closely resemble the
human CNS environment, including increased spontaneous calcium
transients and signal intensity after 4 weeks. They also explored how 3D
bioprinting enhances the growth of astrocytes, vasculogenesis, and
neural differentiation. The bioinks used supported the development of
intricate 3D structures that improve the function and differentiation of
Table 4 (continued)
Source
Printed Bioink Composition
Cells
Construct Media
Bioprinter
Characterization
Bioink
Crosslinker
Bioink
Cells/Construct
spectrophotometer
UV–Vis
Western blot
Catalytic activity
Polyacrylamide gel
In vitro release study
Yavuz
et al.,
2023
[114]
Alginate:gelatin
(3:5) (from HD
Bioink)
CaCl2 (0.1 N)
SH-SY5Y spheroids
(1x107 cells in 5
mL)
DMEM-F12, 10%
FBS, L-Glutamine,
NEAAs, Sodium
pyruvate, Sodium
bicarbonate
Bioprinter; 7.5 psi;
60% speed; 37ºC; cell
suspension seeded on
top of construct
(1x106 cells/2 mL)
*FTIR/Trasmission
Electron Microscopy
(TEM) done previously
Viability (Live/dead)
ICC (TUJ1, DAPI)
a GelMA = GelMa (20 % w/v; 1 g gelatin:0.1 mL methacrylic anhydride).
b GMHA (4 % w/v; 200 kDa HA, trimethylamine, glycidyl methacrylate).
c Each concentration was optimal for printing gradient.
d Reactive oxygen species (DCFH-DA; 6 hr); Mitochondrial membrane damage (JC-1 assay); Apoptosis (Annexin V-FITC/PI Apoptosis Detection kit); Immunogenic Cell
Death Induction (HMGB1 release/calreticulin exposure); Cellular uptake of BIONs (ICC; DAPI; 3, 6 hr); Extracellular HMGB1 Release (Human HMGB1 Elisa Kit); Endocytic
Pathway of BIONs (confocal microscopy); Intracellular trafficking of BIONs in U87 cells (LysoTracker Green, Mitotracker Green, kDaRhoBdextran, ER Staining Kit Green,
Golgi Staining Kit; 6 hr); Penetration of BIONs in 3D Spheroids (confocal microscopy; 6 hr).
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
24 
CNS cells. This research suggests that bioink-based 3D bioprinting could
be pivotal for modeling and studying CNS disorders in vitro and facili-
tating high-throughput drug discovery.
Haring et al. designed multi-CNS and PNS constructs from ECM-
based polymers (HA, gelatin) that were dopamine conjugated (DC)
combined with the synthetic polymer Pluronic F-127 (thiolated, PF127-
SH) to enhance biomimicry, printability, and mechanical relevance
[132]. Since both CNS and PNS components were integrated into the
model, this article was deemed relevant, despite the PNS modeling
which typically warranted exclusion. Two bioinks were investigated: a
chelating bioink (12 wt% PF127-SH, 1 wt% DC-HA, 2 wt% DC-Gelatin)
and a photocured neural bioink (12 wt% PF127-SH, 1 wt% DC-HA, 5 wt
% DC-GelMA) printed with Schwann cells (PNS), human glioma cells
and rat neuronal cells (CNS). They conducted extensive mechanical
characterizations in response to the traditional lack of rheological
optimization, but limited investigation was done on the functional
performance of the models. Similar viability was found between the
photocured ink and the alginate control, but the chelated ink had higher
viability on day 7 for Schwann cells (~80 % AB reduction after 7 days).
Each cell type (human glioma cells, rat neural and rat Schwann cells)
Table 5
Summary of the included articles based on generic models of the CNS.
Source
Printed Bioink Composition
Cells
Construct Media
Bioprinter
Characterization
Bioink
Crosslinker
Bioink
Cells/Construct
Haring et al.,
2019 [132]
(1) Chelating neural
bioink = PF127-SH (9
%, 12 wt%), DC-HA (1
wt%), DC-Gel (2 wt%)
(2) Photocured neural
bioink = PF127-SH (12
wt%), DC-HA (1 wt%),
DC-Gel-MA (5 wt%)
(1) Ferric nitrate
(50 mM, 2 mins)
(2) PI (DMPA;
0.1 wt%)
through 10 min
exposure to UV
light
Rat Schwann
cells
(3.2 × 106 or
2 × 106 cells/
mL)
Rodent
neuronal cells
(PC12; 4 ×
106 cells/mL)
Human
glioma cells
(D54-MG; 4 ×
106 cells/mL)
Phenol-free DMEM
Custom micro
extrusion 3D
bioprinter
(27 G tapered needle;
1 mm/s; 2–10 psi)
CELLINK
INKREDIBLE+
(27 G tapered needle;
1 mm/s; 2–10 psi)
Gelation
temperature
(Differential
scanning
calorimetry)
Rheology
(frequency and
stress sweeps)
Velocity profile
(finite element
modeling
software)
Elastic modulus
(dynamic
mechanical
analyzer)
Viability
(AlamarBlue assay;
D1, 3, 7)
Fluorescence
microscopy (D1, 3,
7)
Tomaskovic-
Crook &
Crook, 2020
[128]
Agarose (1.5 %), CMC
(5 %), alginate (5 %)
*Can add penetrating
conducting polymer
(CP)
CaCl2 (2 %)
hNSCs
(10x106 cells/
mL)
hNSC Proliferation
Mediuma
hNSC Differentiation
Mediumb
EnvisionTEC 3D
Bioplotter
*Previously done
Viability (D1, 7)
Membrane permeant
live cell neural
labeling
(NeuroFluor NeuO)
ICC (not specified)
Live Cell Calcium
Imaging (Fluo-4
AM)
Kapr et al.,
2021 [129]
Alginate (1.5 %), gellan
gum (0.5 %), laminin
(0.01 %)
CaCl2 (0.09 M, 5
mins)
hiPSC-derived
NPC spheres
(4.9 x 103
spheres/mL
gel)
Differentiation
medium
EnvisioTEC 3D-Bio-
plotter
(Manufacturers
Series; 37 ◦C; 0.1 bar;
31–33 mm/s; 200 µm
ID)
FTIR
SEM (surface)
Mechanical testing
(unconfined
compression tests,
gel stiffness, stress
relaxation)
Degradation (mass
over 21 days)
Printability
Viability (Live/
dead; D7)
ICC (TUJ1, GFAP,
S100β, F-actin, TH,
Hoechst, D21)
Calcium imaging
(Fura-2; D21)
3D bioprinting
constructs:
Viability (Live/
dead; D3)
de Melo et al.,
2021 [130]
Gelatin (4 % w/v),
gelatin methacryloyl
(GelMA, 2 % w/v),
fibrinogen (3 mg/mL),
PI (0.5 % w/v), laminin
(2 µg/mL)
Thrombin (1 U/
mL), CaCl2 (10
%, 1:9, CaCl2:
thrombin)
UV crosslinking
(2 x 60 s)
Cortical
Astrocytes
from Mice
(1x106 cells/
mL)
Astrocyte culture
medium (DMEM/F12,
10 % FBS, 2 %
glutamine, 1 % P/S)
Extrusion-based
bioprinter (grid
construct; 6 x 6 mm; 6
layers; 400 mm/min;
22 G; 2D control)
Printability
(Bioink’s ability
to print different
shapes)
Print speed
(Viability; D7)
Viability (Live/
dead, D0, 7)
ICC (GFAP, F-actin,
DAPI; D7)
Sullivan et al.,
2023 [131]
PEG, RGD peptide,
YIGSR peptide (Tyr-Ile-
Gly-Ser-Arg)
*Concentrations
unknown, modulus of
bioink was 1.5 kPa
variation
Activator
solution
(Inventia Life
Sciences),
collagen IV (3
mg/mL), cells
iPSC-derived
BMEC-like
cells
(iBMECLs;
10x106 cells/
mL)
NPCS (10x106
cells/mL)
Astrocytes
(5x106 cells/
mL)
BrainPhys™,
NeuroCult (1:50), N2
(1:100), BDNF (20 ng/
mL), GDNF(20 ng/mL),
cyclic-AMP (1 mM),
Vitamin C (200 nM)
RASTRUM Bioprinter
(Inventia Life
Sciences)
Stiffness
(unknown
method)
Viability (Live/
dead; D1)
ICC (GFAP, S100β,
Nestin, PAX6,
MAP2, Ve
Cadherin,
Occludin, PECAM-
1, Laminin α4,
GLUT-1)
Interleukin 6 (IL-6;
ELISA)
Calcium imaging (4
weeks)
a Complete NeuroCult Proliferation Medium comprising NeuroCult NS-A Basal Medium and NeuroCult NS-A Proliferation Supplement, supplemented with heparin
(2 μg/mL), epidermal growth factor (EGF, 20 ng/mL), and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF, 20 ng/mL).
b DMEM/Ham’s/F2 Nutrient Mixture (F-12):Neurobasal Medium, 1:1 (v/v), supplemented with 1% NeuroCult SM1 neuronal supplement, 0.5% N2 Supplement-A, 1
GlutaMAX Supplement.
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
25 
was separately mixed with a 9 % PF127-SH chelating bioink, which
crosslinks using ferric nitrate, printed as single layers and cultured for 7
days. Fluorescent microscopy was to image the tagged cells in the con-
structs on days 1, 3 and 7. The authors note that the cells exhibited
“reasonable morphology”, and that viability “remained high” but did
not conduct a quantitative assessment.
3.1.4.2. hiPSC expansion. The work of Lindsay et al. fabricated NPC
expansion lattices to generate high-quality NPCs for various CNS
dysfunction therapies [133]. While not typically designed for neural
tissue simulation, it was included since the methods therein have
application to neural tissue engineering using similar principles. Inter-
estingly, they used low concentrations of calcium (8 mM CaSO4) to
crosslink alginate before printing. Higher concentrations of crosslinker
were used post-printing to enable mechanically stiff materials that could
be easily remodelled by proliferating cells and dissociation for NPC
removal. During their initial bioink optimization (assessed various
blends of low-viscosity, very low-viscosity alginate, and RGD-modified
low-viscosity alginate) they found that RGD-modified was not as effi-
cient at enhancing NPC proliferation compared to higher modulus RGD-
free bioinks; therefore, only low viscosity alginate was explored. Print-
ing of low-viscosity alginate was possible due to pre-crosslinking and
printing into a support bath of gelatin, CaCl2 (10 mM) and P/S
(Supplemental Information, Table S3). The concentration of NPCs was
relatively high (30 x106 NPCs/mL). 5 mM of Ca2+ was also supple-
mented in the media (Stemness Maintenance Media), where lower Ca2+
concentration favoured expansion and maintained expression of stem-
ness maintenance markers (Nestin, SOX2) compared to higher concen-
trations (30 mM). The higher concentration of calcium also showed
increased GFAP – likely due to the increased stiffness promoting dif-
ferentiation. The constructs favoured increased metabolic activity until
2 days post-printing, which plateaued up to 7 days. All cells were pos-
itive for SOX2 and Nestin, but only some expressed Ki-67, indicating that
only some cells were proliferating. This model showed relatively high
cell viability (~80 %) and demonstrated renewal within the constructs
(Stemness Maintenance Media, SOX2+, Nestin+), and could differen-
tiate once extracted (Mixed Differentiation Medium, BIII tubulin+,
GFAP+) indicating their ability to retain multipotency (also confirmed
using ICC and RT-qPCR). Similar work was done by Q. Li et al., who used
a PG-matrix-M based hydrogel to encapsulate and bioprint hiPSC in a
sheet that maintains pluripotency and spheroid formation [134]. Their
PGmatrix-M comprises a modified triblock amphiphilic peptide (h9e),
where the amino acids encode proteins of human muscle and β-spiral
motif of the spider flagelliform silk proteins. The self-assembly of the
peptides forms nanofibers which generate reversible sol–gel materials
under physical conditions, which required no additional crosslinking
and remained stable in culture medium for up to 3 months. They propose
this as a scalable and efficient way to generate mass amounts of hiPSCs
compared to traditional methods (microarray molding or U-bottom
plates). Interestingly, they found that gel strength and porosity had a
limited effect on proliferation and viability, but seeding density was
more influential. Importantly, up to 37 passages could be conducted
with the hiPSCs within a 0.5 % peptide concentration, signifying long-
term culture. The 3D method showed superior expansion efficiency
and maintained pluripotency markers, where printed spheroids had
enhanced
SOX2,
REX1,
ESG1,
SOX1,
and
decreased
Brachyury
compared to pipetted spheroids in the same matrix.
3.2. Bioinks
Bioinks provide structural and chemical support for the formation of
functional neural networks, which were shown to vary throughout the
literature. Pei et al. outlined that the most conducive design for brain
tissues is to use bioinks and geometries that achieve the layered gradient
of the cerebral cortex and recommended that bioprinted constructs be
formed using multi-component bioinks of varying concentrations, have
moduli of 1000 Pa, and have appropriate porosity, with pore sizes be-
tween 30 – 150 μm [9]. Han et al. noted the importance of investigating
different bioinks to find suitable environments for stem cell survival,
differentiation and function [120]. One of the most challenging com-
ponents of 3D bioprinting neural tissue models is the intricate balance
between generating relevant tissue constructs that resemble the soft
brain tissue but are structurally viscoelastic to achieve high-fidelity
printing and enhanced cell survival [113,132]. Many groups have
aimed to investigate the optimal microenvironments for neural tissue
models by refining various polymers, additives, cells, and geometries
into the bioprinting workflows. These components are summarized in
the following sections.
3.2.1. Polymers
As mentioned, various polymers were used for the 3D bioprinted
models ranging from natural (alginate, gelatin, fibrinogen, GelMA, HA,
etc.) to synthetic-based polymers (Pluronic F127, PEDOT-based, PEG-
based, etc.). The importance of bioink optimization was noted as
optimal bioinks should target the mechanical properties of desired
native tissues and should permit cellular interaction and proliferation.
Polymers offer the main network for cell support, proliferation and
degradation of 3D bioprinted materials. Hydrogels provide many ben-
efits in bioink preparation including their high water content, biocom-
patibility, mechanical properties, and cell adhesion properties. Common
polymers have been reviewed elsewhere, and here we focus on key in-
sights regarding polymers from the reviewed literature. Different me-
chanical and physical properties are needed depending on the
application. For example, shear thinning and conductive properties may
be more beneficial for nerve regeneration applications [121] but for
generating representative neural models it requires mechanical and
structurally patterned relevance. Factors that inherently influence cell
differentiation a related to bioink composition and printing properties
[99], highlighting the importance of bioink selection.
3.2.1.1. Alginate. Alginate was the most ubiquitous polymer bioink in
the reviewed literature. Alginate has favourable properties due to
biocompatibility and enhanced mechanical properties and printability
while being capable of degrading within the construct, providing
favourable environments for cellular proliferation and differentiation.
These benefits are emphasized through the mixture of alginate with
multiple other polymer types. Alginate has the potential to be tuned for
specific mechanical stiffness, but importantly contains reversible bonds,
which is imperative for cellular remodeling, and enabling interactions
between cells [133]. Intuitively, there is an equilibrium that must be
achieved between wanting prolonged stability in the case of disease
modeling (the phenotype must have enough time to appear) and
allowing cellular remodeling, which is necessary to induce communi-
cation and function between cells.
Given its low cell adhesion, few studies printed with alginate alone,
where its solitary use was done for pre-crosslinking with CaSO4 [133].
As a control, Haring et al. used 1.5 % alginate (crosslinked with 100 mM
CaCl2) as a bioink and saw increased viability over 7 days with Schwann
cells [132]. However, Kapr et al. showed that pure alginate gels
deformed during crosslinking (0.09 M CaCl2) but could maintain over
50 % viability after 7 days [129].
In Gu et al. they note that low-viscosity alginate (100–300 cP) is
typically used to support the hNSC survival during printing [100].
Beyond cellular support and tissue relevance, some studies noted that
alginate was useful for characterization techniques. For example, higher
alginate percentages were used to enhance the potential for sectioning
tissue constructs for calcium imaging since the stiffer materials could be
more easily processed [129].
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
26 
3.2.1.2. GelMA/Gelatin. Gelatin methacrylate or gelatin methacryloyl
[109] was used in approximately 11 % of all investigated studies.
Gelatin has arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) and matrix metal-
loproteinase (MMP) recognition sequences within its chain [116],
making it beneficial for bioink selection. In addition, both gelatin and
GelMA have thermally reversible gelation kinetics, which is desirable for
extrusion-based bioprinting where lower temperatures lead to gelled
materials with high fidelity [108]. However, since the viscoelastic
properties have limited stability at physiological temperature [130],
modified versions of gelatin, such as GelMA, are desirable to enhance
mechanical features.
GelMA can be tuned to desired porosity, degradation and modulus
values [130]. For example, higher concentrations of GelMA lead to
faster gelation kinetics, but compromise the ability to sterile-filter the
solution greater than 5 % w/v [130].
Typically, materials with high gelatin concentrations (>5% w/v)
have low printability, but faster gelation kinetics and stiffer gels [108].
The choice of concentration should reflect the incorporated cell type,
where neural tissues benefit from soft environments, but muscle cells
can favour higher stiffnesses [108]. Han et al. reported that boundary
cap neural crest stem cell viability was directly proportional to gelatin
concentration (assessed between 4–15 % w/v), but 12 % gelatin was
favourable with higher relative cell count and more elongated cells over
3 days, indicating attachment and proliferation [120]. Neufeld et al.
used TG as a crosslinker to covalently crosslink glutamine and lysine
residues on gelatin and to stabilize fibrinogen [126]. The addition of
thrombin was necessary to initiate fibrinogen cleavage to effectively
crosslink with TG, which yielded high modulus biomaterials [126]. This
same study showed that gelatin concentration influenced swelling (12 %
w/v gelatin had increased swelling compared to 3 and 6 %) and control
the stiffness, but 6 % gelatin led to optimal Young’s modulus of 24.5 ±
2.6 kPa [126]. Interestingly, one study initially investigated GelMA,
gelatin and fibrinogen hydrogels to print spinal NPCs, but they found
that after 4 days, viability was low (~20 %), so Matrigel was studied
[118]. Therefore, careful consideration should be given to the cell types
being used for optimal bioink selection.
3.2.1.3. Fibrinogen. Fibrinogen is a natural blood-derived glycoprotein
that plays a role in the clotting cascade and has been used frequently in
neural tissue engineering [102,126]. Fibrinogen concentrations influ-
ence the stiffness and porosity of bioinks, and its use promotes cell
attachment. Notably, it is a favourable biopolymer since it contains cell-
adhesion molecules, has slow gelation, and decreased mechanical sta-
bility [119], which allows for remodeling by proliferating cells. In
addition, molecules such as genipin or TG can be added to enhance
stability and promote neural outgrowth [119,126]. However, it was
found in Neufeld et al. that TG (3 % w/v), fibrinogen (1 % w/v) with
varying concentrations of gelatin (3, 6, and 12 % w/v) could not achieve
relevant stiffness of neural tissues alone, and the addition of thrombin
was necessary to cleave the fibrinogen [126]. Fibrin is a viscous polymer
that limits its printability at high concentrations or when printed on its
own [14]. In a protocol paper, de Melo et al. noted that fibrinogen (in
addition to gelatin and GelMA) was added to increase cell-specificity,
enhance printability, and physical stability [130]. Importantly, the
versatility of fibrin was shown through its use in neural tissues and
tumour models (Figure 3).
3.2.1.4. Chitosan/CMC. Chitosan was mentioned in seven of the
included articles, but all containing the same formulations of fibrin and
alginate bioinks crosslinked with genipin, thrombin and CaCl2. Chitosan
enhances mechanical properties and providing sites for ionic or covalent
attachment of other polymers/crosslinkers [119].
Four papers used modified chitosan, in the form of carboxymethyl
chitosan (CMC) in thier bioinks. Initial work by Gu et al. explored CMC, a
chitosan-derived water-soluble polymer, which was shown to influence
hNSC viability during printing and after 9 days of culture [98]. CMC-
based hydrogels were porous, where increased CMC% led to increased
porosity and higher concentrations of CMC showed higher initial cell
viability and better support over the tested timeframe.
3.2.1.5. ECM polymers. The ECM plays an integral role in cellular
functioning and regulates cell differentiation, adhesion, and recruitment
in the body, and therefore have recognizable advantages in neural tissue
engineering. ECM proteins such as HA, collagen, and laminin have been
commonly recruited in bioink development in the last ten years. HA is a
hydrated glycosaminoglycan that is found in the ECM [132]. It was re-
ported in an excluded study that HA forms an open lattice structure with
fibrin for enhanced cell migration, but by itself has slow gelation kinetics
and limited mechanical properties [135].
Collagen is an ECM polymer that influences pore size. In Pei et al, as
collagen concentration increased from 0.5 to 1.5 mg/mL, the pore size of
the printed structure also showed a significant increase; this was used to
design layered cortical resembling tissue models with heterogenous pore
size distribution [9]. Similar to gelatin, collagen exhibits temperature-
dependant gelation, which can be beneficial in extrusion bioprinting
[65].
Laminin contains cell-surface receptors such as RGD, which leads to
increased cellular anchorage and recognition [129]. When printing as-
trocytes, laminin incorporation enhanced viability, led to higher
porosity (~50 %), a lower Young’s modulus, viscosity and G’, and an
increased mass loss over time [130]. Kapr et al. opted for alginate and
GG-based bioink, but also incorporated laminin due to its role in sup-
porting cell viability and generating functional cellular networks [129].
Further, it was found in another study that when laminin was incorpo-
rated into 3D constructs, neural differentiation and morphology was
enhanced [108].
Modifications to polymers to enhance cellular recognition and
anchorage were also used. Lozano et al. used RGD-modified GG and
showed increased cell attachment and proliferation of mouse primary
cortical neurons [96]. They also showed that RGD-GG could be cross-
linked with DMEM or CaCl2 (1 M) for sustained viability. Matthiesen
et al. found that fetal primary astrocytes had a higher degree of in-
teractions using RGD-modified HA and IKVAV cell adhesion peptides
[112]. In this study, adding RGD enhanced astrocyte viability but
showed limited effects in promoting proliferation; however, for GBM
(U87) cells, IKVAV appeared for favourable for viability, but RGD had
no effect. This is similar to the work of Lindsay et al., who noted that
RGD-alginate was not as efficient at enhancing NPC proliferation
compared to stiffer RGD-free bioinks [133]. Together, these show that
different cell lineages can be influenced by different microenviron-
ments, and coalesced mechanical and functional characterizations
should be assessed.
Dopamine can also be added to enhance cell adhesion, increase
flexible elasticity and neuron interaction. In Haring et al., dopamine was
conjugated to both HA and gelatin to 3D bioprint various cell types
[132]. While comparisons were made between the type of crosslinking
(chelated with iron or photocrosslinked), there was enhanced viability
after 7 days for Schwann, glioma, and neuronal cells in both systems.
Other ECM-like materials were also used such as Matrigel – a mouse-
derived material containing growth factors and proteins that resemble
the basement membrane that is routinely used in cell culture [118]. For
example, Joung et al. found that 50 % Matrigel had superior mechanical
properties and viability to bioprint spinal NPCs and oligodendrocyte
precursors (OPCs) in a spinal cord model [118]. Matrigel was favourable
for spinal NPC culture, with viability > 75 % after 4 days. The amount of
Matrigel was critical, where low amounts led to softer gels resembling
2D conditions and high percentages (>75 %) had higher aggregation
and decreased axon length [118]. In Yan et al., Matrigel was investigated
within their bioink compositions, which showed high viability (92.19 ±
4.26 %), however, the Matrigel caused clogging in the nozzle while
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
27 
printing [14].
Q. Li et al. used a peptide polymer (h9e) to generate a self-assembling
PGmatrix hydrogel, capable of reversible sol–gel transitions on a fast
timescale (100 Pa after few seconds, shown through rheology) [134].
They investigated various concentrations and temperature preparations
during optimization and found that each concentration (0.2, 0.5 and 1 %
peptides) had ~ 95 % recovery after 10 min; the entangled fibrous
network was also accompanied by single nanofibers ~ 20 nm in diam-
eter and nanofiber cluster around 100–500 nm. They saw heterogeneous
pore sizes, but the PG matrix had poor printability, so increasing the
hydrophobic segment was considered (PGmatrix-M). Compared to
PGmatrix, PGmatrix-M had similar shear thinning, but higher viscosity
and faster self-healing properties (84–94 % recovery by 1 min), had
heterogeneous porosity (200–1800 nm) but more uniform nanoweb.
Further, Cruz et al. used a naturally derived polymer, Geltrex™, which
combines common ECM polymers, which was shown to significantly
enhances NPC viability over 6 days and provide an environment suitable
for NPC proliferation [116].
Finally, Rueda-Gensini et al. generated ECM-derived bioinks from
small intestine submucosa (SIS) powder from porcine and functionalized
with MA (SISMA) in addition to fibronectin-coated graphine oxide (GO)
nanoflakes to generate conductive polymers (SISMA-GO) [10]. These
systems could be tuned mechanically via blue light crosslinking with
high stability, and the concentration of SISMA/SISMA-GO was shown to
influenced stiffness and cell viability. The incorporation of SISMA-GO
also enhanced synaptic activity. The prevalence of ECM-based poly-
mers emerging in the literature is promising for the development of
biochemically and biomechanically relevant neural tissues that promote
cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation.
3.2.1.6. Pectin. H.-W. Lee et al. combined methacrylated silk fibroin
(SilMA) with pectin, a polysaccharide derived from plants, or pectin
methacrylol (PecMA) [95]. The materials were biocompatible, porous,
and sustained neural cell growth and differentiation. Importantly, the
addition of pectin was beneficial for improving printability and low
modulus values, and the constructs had high fidelity which permitted
orientation into complex geometries. Alone, SilMA had good biocom-
patibility and mechanical properties, however, incorporating pectin into
the bioinks increased swelling, allowing for more favourable environ-
ments for the exchange of waste and nutrients. Compared to the SilMA/
pectin, PecMA and silk fibroin hydrogels obtained weaker mechanical
properties post printing, suggesting its combined use in bioinks for
enhanced mechanical stability.
3.2.1.7. Synthetic polymers. Besides the naturally derived polymers
discussed, synthetic polymers have value when supplemented into the
design of 3D bioprinted neural tissue engineering – either in the bioinks
or as sacrificial frameworks. The most commonly used synthetic poly-
mer was Pluronic F127, which is a soft and biocompatible copolymer of
polyethylene oxide and polypropylene oxide that displays thermally
reversible and shear thinning behaviour [126,132]. Haring et al. used a
combination of natural (HA and dopamine-conjugated gelatin) and
synthetic thiol-modified Pluronic F-127 (PF127-SH) [132]. The con-
centration of PF127-SH directly influenced the viscosity, gelation tem-
perature, and higher concentrations led to more stable bioinks.
Oftentimes, studies use the thermally reversible properties of materials
such as gelatin and Pluronic F127 to generate sacrificial frameworks to
enhance the organization and functional properties of the 3D bioprinted
materials. In Neufeld et al., Pluronic F127 was used as a sacrificial ma-
terial to fabricate embedded vasculature within their 3D printed model;
upon liquidation, it created a 3D lumen vascular structure [126].
Song et al. integrated the electroconductive additive of PEDOT to
promote NSC differentiation due to its high electroconductivity and
chemical stability [121]. The bioink was composed of PEDOT, chon-
droitin sulfate methacrylate (CSMA) and tannic acid (TA) – PEDOT:
CSMS,TA (PECT) – with GelMA and PEGDA to bioprint representative
physiochemical spinal cord tissues. It was suggested that for in vivo
transplantation, other formulations with enhanced biocompatibility and
elimination are recommended.
PEG-based polymers were also used in bioink formulations. Gomila
Pelegri et al. used a PEG-based matrix to enhance the formation of neural
subtypes, particularly oligodendrocyte formation from ADSCs [2].
Matthiesen et al. used an 8-arm azide-modified PEG to design copper-
free click chemistry bioinks connecting between modified HA (HA-
BCN) [112]. The addition of either RGD or IKVAV into the (PEG-Az)8
and HA-BCN matrices was necessary to enhance cell attachment and
viability.
3.2.2. Additives
Bioinks often contained support molecules (additives) that were
investigated for a host of reasons, such as increasing conductivity, dif-
ferentiation or rheological benefits. While not investigated in their
work, Haring et al. referenced other research that had added nano-
fibrillated cellulose or clay nanoparticles for enhancing mechanical
stability but suggested that these conditions may negate the soft re-
quirements for differentiation [132].
Sharma et al. integrated guggulsterone-releasing MSs to initiate
neuronal differentiation to a dopaminergic state [103]. The MSs led to
an increased percentage of TUJ1 and GFAP, TH and O4 based on
quantitative flow cytometry after 30 days. qPCR was used to evaluate
the relative gene expression, showing that the MSs led to enhanced
TUBB3 (compared to soluble guggulsterone), TH (compared to unloaded
MSs), and PAX6 (compared to unloaded MSs). Notably, the incorpora-
tion of MSs enhanced access to soluble factors necessary for growth and
differentiation. Benwood et al. also incorporated small molecule
releasing MSs into their AD model printed with NPCs [107]. In this
work, puro-releasing MSs were used to direct NPCs to cells resembling
basal forebrain cholinergic neurons. Printing with the MSs showed a
slight increase in cell viability after 1 day of printing (63 % in the
control, 73 % with MSs), but this was not statistically different, nor were
differences found over 45 days in the healthy cells. In the AD models, the
MSs showed decreased viability compared to the control after 30 days,
but this was drastically reversed after 45 days, where the viability was
~ 80 % at day 45 post-printing with the MSs. Importantly, the MSs
increased the relative rate of electrophysical maturity, but the resting
membrane potentials were relatively high compared to in vivo condi-
tions, indicating that the cultures holistically were electrophysically
immature.
J. Li et al. integrated tetrapodal-shaped zinc oxide (t-ZnO) micro-
particles into the bioink to develop biosensing capabilities for the
detection of dopamine in the 3D bioprinted constructs [117]. They were
able to show that the t-ZnO microparticles have high selectivity and
specificity for dopamine released in vitro and suggest the potential for
these to monitor neurotransmitter release in 3D bioprinted models in the
future [117].
3.3. Cell types
3.3.1. Single culture
Most of the literature in the past decade of our investigated cohort
has explored 3D bioprinting of monocultures (n = 35). It should be noted
that some cell types, such as hiPSCs, NSCs or NPCs can be differentiated
into multiple cell types within the same construct, but these are still
considered as monocultures. The cells that were printed varied, but
typically reflected the model type or application. Most often, hNSCs
were printed, but tumour cells (U87, SH-SY5Y), and hiPSCs were also
routinely used. Human astrocytes, neural cells (rodent) and both
human- and rodent-NPCs were also commonly employed for single-
culture bioprinting. MSCs, which were first printed in Restan Perez et
al., can also be used for neural tissue modeling [104]. Namely, they note
that there are several benefits of MSCs over hiPSCs, including
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
28 
procurement, robustness during printing, and their higher proliferation,
expression and electrophysical activity make them viable candidates for
3D bioprinting (including references therein) [104]. Similar benefits
were also noted for ADSCs, due to their abundance and relevance to
neural tissues [2].
The printing of single cell cultures is beneficial in optimization
studies to assess the influence of various 3D bioprinting parameters.
However, these unimodal tissues have limited relevance to the
complexity of the human brain and co-culturing should be the goal of
regenerative medicine in the future to design complex functional neural
networks.
3.3.2. Co-culture
The functional complexity of the brain inherently depends on
multifaceted networks from all cell types that contribute to brain func-
tion, aging, and disease pathophysiology. Most co-cultures explored in
the systematic review combined glial cells, such as astrocytes, with
neural cell types or glioma cells. Interestingly, astrocytes were the pri-
mary glial cell type co-cultured with varying neural cells (hNSCs, hNPCs
– GABAergic and glutaminergic). Astrocytes and HUVECs were often
integrated into co-cultured tumour models of GBM and neuroblastomas.
Astrocytes play key functional and regulatory roles within the CNS
relating to synaptogenesis and neurotransmitter recycling and are
highly regulated by the ECM [112]. Astrocytes are known to influence
immune response, maintenance of the BBB, neurogenesis and astro-
gliosis [130]. Therefore, astrocyte inclusion in 3D bioprinted neural
models is necessary to understand fundamental functions, including
neurological disorders. Including other glial cell types of integral to
brain function, such as oligodendrocytes, endothelial cells and micro-
glia, would also be conducive in neural tissue design, especially since
current research has not investigated these interactions in 3D systems
and mimicking inflammatory response is crucial for understanding the
influence of drug therapies.
Y.-C. E. Li et al. investigated bioprinting neurospheroids into an
astrocyte-containing support bath to generate a co-culture [108]. Sup-
port cells such as astrocytes play a crucial role in regulating functions
within the brain stemmed from tight cellular interactions. In particular,
astrocytes play a role in the initiation of neurogenesis, a critical function
in tissue injury. The authors note that these mechanisms should be
studied in vitro to understand fundamental cellular behaviour. In their
study, rodent-based NSC-derived neurons and cortical astrocytes were
patterned to mimic the anisotropic structure of the subventricular zone
of the brain. Notably, astrocytes may enhance neuronal differentiation
due to the higher TUJ1+ expression at the printed niche, and also
alluded to the role of astrocytes in glutamate-glutamine cycle [108].
Further, a study by Zhou et al. where they co-printed NSCs and astro-
cytes using a droplet-based method highlighted the fundamental bio-
logical signalling and recruitment between astrocytes and maturing
neurons [97]. In both co– and tri–culture GBM models, Neufeld et al.
showed that in the presence of astrocytes, there was increased cell
growth and invasion, and the triad of GBM, astrocyte and human
microglial cells led to changes in tumour-dependant pore sizes [126].
Therefore, the incorporation of multiple cell types, such as astrocytes
and microglia, can provide key insight into biochemical interactions
between cells.
Kajtez et al. conducted a proof-of-concept printing of astrocyte-fate
cells (derived from forebrain hNSCs) surrounding neural-fate cells
(derived from ventral mesencephalic hNSCs) [65]. They showed distinct
phenotypes on the inner and outer regions (β-III tubulin+ and GFAP+,
respectively) after 4 weeks, but suggest the use of these patterning to
investigate cellular interactions in the future [65]. One of the most
intricate neural tissue models included in the systematic review was the
work of Yan et al., who printed multiple combinations of neural pro-
genitors (glutamate, GABA, striatal) and astrocyte progenitors within a
fibrin– and HA–based bioink [14]. The research included comprehen-
sive mechanical and cellular characterization of systems that modeled
interactions between cells of the same tissues, between tissues and in
disease models (Alexander disease). However, only a single layer of
horizontally patterned constructs was printed due to the low-modulus
bioink, where the height of their models was approximately 50 μm.
Future work should aim to replicate the intricate modeling and char-
acterization conducted herein using more archetypally relevant geom-
etries of the human brain.
Co-culturing was also intuitive for tumour models. In a GBM model,
X. Wang et al. demonstrated that when HUVECs and U118 cells were co-
cultured, there was enhanced tubular morphology and expression of
tumour–related markers (CD31, VEGFR2) [122]. In Tang et al., HUVECs
(CD31+) were shown to migrate toward GBM cells (SOX2+), which had
spatially close connections and vascular morphology in the HUVECs
[125]. They were able to demonstrate cellular crosstalk and key GBM
features of angiogenesis, tumour invasion and drug resistance. As
mentioned, co-culturing relevant cell types that represent the regional
differences within the brain should be the focus of future work to
elucidate key chemico-physical interactions in 3D bioprinted neural
models.
3.4. 3D bioprinted constructs
3.4.1. Geometries
Various construct architectures were generated which reflected the
application of the bioprinted neural tissues. For example, dome-shaped
constructs were fabricated to produce similar architecture to the human
brain [103–105,107], but grid shapes, either printed in single or mul-
tiple layers, were most often produced (n = 16). One paper had un-
specified geometries, where no specified construction was provided in
the methods or visually in the figures [114]. Vascularization architec-
tures were generated by Neufeld et al. and Kajtez et al. using sacrificial
materials of Pluronic F127 and gelatin, respectively [65,126]. Vascu-
larization in bioprinting constructs can ensure oxygen supply within
complex structures, and connection to peristaltic pumps resembling in
vivo circulation. Both models showed the ability for perfusion through
the vascular channels, supporting their relevance in neural models,
especially those relating to the highly vascularized BBB [65,126]. More
research should be done to understand the potential of these vascular
networks in cellular interaction, proliferation and differentiation.
Han et al. compared the printing of multiple layers (1, 3, and 5 layers)
and found that more layers supported higher cell viability over 3 days
[120]. Interestingly, Kajtez et al. used oxygen-sensing particles to track
oxygen levels within their 3D SHAPE composites [65]. For this, the
oxygen-sensing microbeads were embedded either in the printing sup-
port or within the bioink, and their association was co-analyzed with
calcein-AM stained cells using a fluorescence and phosphoresce micro-
scope. They analyzed oxygen progression over 50 days and identified
that the geometry influences oxygenation. Importantly, it was found
that when printed with cells, a higher infill density led to lower O2
percentage compared to lower (or wider/spaced) infills. This has
important implications in the design of constructs, where the mainte-
nance of oxygen levels is crucial to modeling in vivo conditions. It was
suggested that this technique could be used to measure oxygenation at
desired times and suggest using this for timing of switching to differ-
entiation media, since cells will consume oxygen during proliferation,
and their plateau correlates with a plateau in O2 %. However, this type
of analysis would require the integration into the hydrogel system.
3.4.2. Culturing timeline
The 3D bioprinted constructs also displayed varying times of
construct culture (Figs. 4 and 5). Both Yan et al. and Kajtez et al. assessed
their construct functionality (ICC) up to 60 days post-printing [14,65].
Several studies investigated culturing at 30 days or more for ICC,
viability, RNA expression (RT-qPCR), electrophysiology- and metabolic-
related characterizations. The length of construct culture should reflect
the need of the investigated systems. For example, neural tissue
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
29 
investigation modeling disease pathology should have sufficient time for
the emergence of disease-related phenotypes. In general, longer
culturing timelines allowed for the enhancement of distinct cellular
networks. This was shown in Kajtez et al. where after one month, neural-
fate hNSCs printed in the center of an outer ring of astrocyte-fate hNSCs
(with a ‘ECM’ separating region) remained unconnected; however,
when hNSCs were printed in a grid geometry, after 2 months highly
interconnected networks were observed [65]. Yan et al. also showed that
as culturing time increased, more synaptic puncta were observed after
60 days compared to 20 and 43 days post printing, and this was
significantly enhanced when glutamate and GABA neurons were co-
cultured [14]. Further, electrochemical signals relating to glutamate
recycling, and calcium imaging also increased with culture time, indi-
cating the importance of assessing construct functionality over an
appropriate timeframe.
3.5. 3D model characterization
The characterization of the 3D constructs remains the most crucial
component of assessing the functionality and appropriateness of 3D
neural tissue models. Yet, these characterization methods are variable
and inconsistent between the work done on constructing neural models
to date. The importance of characterization and lack of thorough
investigation was highlighted in Fantini et al., who emphasized the poor
characterization of bioinks for cell viability [101]. Lindsay et al. defined
ideal bioinks as those with mechanical support before and after printing,
maintaining cell viability, being able to be remodelled by cells, and
enabling effective withdrawal of cells from the constructs [133]. The
latter point is more conducive to their application of expansion lattices
but has application in characterization methods of 3D bioprinted neural
tissues. For example, for phenotyping, access to the cells within the
middle of the construct is necessary; if effective 3D visualization without
deforming the construct cannot be achieved, which is a major current
limitation, cells must be extracted to fully understand the wholistic
phenotypes of the tissues.
3.5.1. Material properties – Without cells
The success of 3D bioprinting in creating functional brain tissue
depends on the intricate interplay between scaffold properties and
cellular behaviour. Typically, the material properties of the crosslinked
hydrogels are characterized by their mechanical properties (rheology,
compression), physical properties (SEM, FTIR), and printability prior to
cell integration. These characteristics are not just structural concerns but
pivotal factors influencing the fate of embedded cells. These properties
determine the microenvironment that cells encounter, which in turn
affects cell survival, proliferation, differentiation, and integration into
the engineered tissue. Understanding these relationships is crucial for
designing scaffolds that can accurately mimic native brain tissue,
providing appropriate biochemical and biophysical cues to guide cell
behaviour and tissue formation.
3.5.1.1. Mechanical properties. Brain tissue studies show significant
variability due to differing protocols, making it crucial to select methods
aligned with specific modeling goals [136]. Brain properties vary by
region and pathological condition [125,126]. For example, tumour re-
gions in mice and humans show higher storage and complex modulus.
Also, inter-species differences are significant, while age mainly affects
comparisons between children and adults [136]. Considering the
aforementioned criteria, these factors are essential for realistic brain
tissue modeling. However, studies lack standardized parameters for
testing properties against brain tissues, hindering result benchmarking
and tissue replication. Thus, standardized testing parameters are
essential for reliable and reproducible research in this area.
Amplitude sweeps are among the frequently used methods to study
the viscoelastic behaviour of 3D bioprinted structures by giving storage
(G’) and loss (G’’) modulus [95,112,133]. While G’’ represents the
material’s liquid-like behaviour, the storage modulus reflects its ability
to store energy during deformation, indicating its elastic behaviour. A
higher G’ corresponds to greater stiffness, meaning the material resists
deformation more effectively. The stiffness of 3D bioprinted constructs
affects structural integrity and cellular responses. It has been suggested
that neural stem cells tend to differentiate into neurons in a softer matrix
with E < 1.5 kPa (where E represents the Elastic modulus), whereas glial
differentiation happens in a stiffer matrix [129]. However, no difference
in NPC stemness was observed with varying matrix stiffness of cova-
lently crosslinked protein hydrogels [133].
Stiffness can also be calculated as the slope of the linear region of the
stress–strain curve and is significantly influenced by the composition
and concentration of the polymers [9,108,110,116,125,126,129,132].
Stiffness also affects cell viability and morphology. For example, a softer
hydrogel (0.6 kPa vs 7.9 kPa) promoted higher astrocyte viability and
lower cell circularity over 14 days [110]. In disease modeling, hydrogels
should mimic the heterogeneity of the brain. For example, a tri-regional
model of GBM was achieved by varying matrix stiffnesses of 2 kPa for
the soft, healthy region, 7.3 kPa for the tumour site, and endothelial
regions 0.45 kPa [125]. These findings emphasize the importance of
carefully adjusting hydrogel stiffness to balance mechanical stability
with biological functionality, particularly when modeling the complex
and soft environment of brain tissue (E = 0.6–1.1 kPa) [108].
Apart from post-printing, the rheological properties of pre-printed
bioink are also deciding for successful 3D bioprinting of brain tissue.
For extrusion bioprinting, viscosity and shear-thinning behaviour are of
high importance, which infers how well a bioink can be extruded and
maintain its shape post-printing [113,121,133]. Viscosity also plays a
critical role in preventing cell sedimentation within the bioink during
the printing process, as higher viscosity can help keep cells evenly sus-
pended, ensuring uniform cell distribution in the final printed structure
[133]. Having the viscosity curve, the shear thinning property can be
quantified using the following power-law equation:
η = K • γ(n−1)
where η is the viscosity, K denotes the consistency index, and γ is the
shear rate [113]. The flow index “n” represents shear thickening (n > 1),
shear-thinning (n < 1), or Newtonian (n = 1) fluids. Additionally, an
oscillatory time sweep with high and low strains can help observe the
ability of bioink to regain the initial storage modulus after being exposed
to high-shear strains during the printing process, which can impact its
structural fidelity [113,121,132,133].
Low viscosity bioinks pose a challenge for maintaining shape fidelity
during printing. The FRESH technique addresses this by using a
removable support bath, creating precise structures. The rheological
properties of the bath are also critical as it needs to provide solid-like
support under low shear and transition to a fluid-like state under
higher shear stress. Notably, studies by Kajtez et al. and Y. Li et al. have
conducted in-depth analyses of rheological properties for their bioink
and support baths, demonstrating the importance of fine-tuning these
parameters for 3D bioprinting [65,108].
3.5.1.2. Physical properties. The wettability of a polymer surface,
measured by water contact angle and influenced by functional groups, is
essential for cell-material interactions as it affects protein adsorption
[137]. Also, mammalian cells prefer surfaces with a slightly positive
charge due to the negatively charged membrane. Positively charged
surfaces, such as amine-modified surfaces, can facilitate better cell
attachment through electrostatic interactions, enhancing neuron adhe-
sion and growth [137,138]. Surface morphology, often examined using
SEM, is also key to cell attachment and interaction [96,113,123]. De
Melo et al. reported that increased porosity percentage favoured cell
interconnection and nutrient exchange [110]. Small pore sizes can
obstruct the transport of nutrients and oxygen into cells, resulting in
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
30 
necrotic areas [113]. Additionally, pore size is critical for the prolifer-
ation of neural cells; larger pore sizes are conducive to vascularization
and neuronal differentiation [7,95,139]. It has been suggested that
structures imitating the cerebral cortex should have an internal pore size
of 30 to 150 µm and a modulus close to 1000 Pa [9]. Notably, studies
have shown significant variation in pore sizes within constructs
[9,96,98]. For instance, Lozano et al. observed a gradient in pore size,
with larger pores of 10 to 250 µm in the interior and smaller ones (1.5 to
5 µm) near the edges [96].
The concentration, composition of the bioinks, and cell interactions
influence the size and distribution of pores [9,95,110,126,135]. For
instance, higher concentrations of SilMA led to denser structures with
smaller pores [95]. Conversely, increasing collagen concentration in
bioink has been associated with a gradual increase in internal pore size,
a pattern also observed when increasing carboxymethyl cellulose con-
centration led to larger surface pores [9,98]. Interestingly, Neufeld et al.
observed that acellular fibrin bioinks had smaller pores compared to
cell-laden bioinks, where the addition of tumour cells significantly
increased pore sizes, indicating that cellular activity can alter the
microstructure of the constructs [126].
The microstructure can also affect the mechanical properties and
swelling ratio [116,125]. The water content of the brain has been re-
ported to vary from 68 to 99 in different regions [140]. Thus, hydrogels
possess beneficial properties for 3D neural model cultivation due to their
high water content [129]. The swelling ratio of the hydrogels can be
quantified using the following formula [113]:
Swelling rate (%) = W1-W0
W0
× 100%
where W0 and W1 are dry and swollen weights, respectively.
Generally, smaller pores correlate with stiffer extracellular matrices
[125]. For instance, Pei et al. showed higher crosslinking density leads to
a denser structure with smaller pores and a higher compressive modulus
[9]. Similarly, a higher crosslinking percentage results in a lower
porosity, limiting the swelling ratio [95]. A more interconnected pore
structure can increase the diffusion potential of the scaffold, which can
be tested by diffusing fluorescently labelled molecules within the
structure [96,98,125].
The degradation of hydrogels is influenced by their structural
properties. Softer and more porous structures tend to degrade faster due
to lower polymer concentration [110]. Degradation often consists of an
initial rapid phase due to non-crosslinked polymer diffusion, followed
by a slower, steady increase over time [110,116]. In disease modeling,
the degradation rate of hydrogels should align with the progression of
disease. For example, in some Alzheimer’s disease models, extracellular
Aβ aggregates begin to form after 6 weeks of differentiation, with sig-
nificant p-tau accumulation observed after 10 weeks [141]. Thus,
hydrogel degradation must be carefully timed to match these disease
progression milestones.
3.5.1.3. Printability. Printability refers to a bioink ability to be effec-
tively deposited into a 3D structure while maintaining mechanical sta-
bility [95]. Kapr et al. defined printability as the repeatability of printing
with designed measurements without quantifying it, relying on photo-
graphic evidence [129]. However, Y. Li et al. quantified the printability
by measuring the diameter and circularity of embedded-printed fibers,
varying printing and extrusion speeds [108]. Similarly, Pei et al.
examined single-layer grid structures, noting that needle diameter,
moving speed, and extrusion rate significantly influenced printability
[9]. Needle diameter had the most substantial effect on the line width,
whereas moving speed impacted multi-layer printing and ink deposition
continuity. Another way of quantifying printability is to measure the
ratio of the lattice area to the area of the CAD file, with values close to 1
indicating ideal printability [95]. The standard way of measuring the
printability is using the circularity of lattice pores (C):
C = 4πA
L2
where A and L are the area and perimeter of the lattice pores,
respectively [142]. Here, the printability (Pr) is defined as:
Pr = π
4C = L2
16A
with values close to 1 indicating ideal printability, while values < 1
or > 1 indicate inadequate or excessive gelation. However, none of the
studies included in this paper performed the test in this manner. This
highlights the need for greater standardization and adherence to
established methodologies to facilitate easier comparisons across
studies.
3.5.2. Material properties – With cells
Cellular characterization is arguably the most important assessment
for understanding cell function, viability, and relevance of 3D bioprinted
tissues. In particular, the cells must be assessed for their function to
ensure that their behaviour within the tissue models represents the
intrinsic cellular mechanisms of fundamental biological processes
related to cell signalling, interaction, and differentiation. The relevance
of the bioprinted tissues must be established to ensure similar me-
chanical and biochemical relevance to native tissues, which will trans-
late to enhanced clinical success of investigated therapies. Further,
ensuring the viability of cells within the tissues allows for an intuitive
assessment of the data; cells must be able to survive long enough to
exhibit disease pathology and prolonged testing. In addition, in vivo
biocompatibility and treatment success must be ensured, where appro-
priate. The lack of characterization of 3D bioprinted materials and
constructs has been noted within articles included in our search, espe-
cially for functional analysis [129]. We also noted that these charac-
terization techniques varied among similar model types and cell types in
addition to their inspected timelines of functionality assessments.
3.5.2.1. Cell viability & proliferation. Typically, determining the cell
viability and proliferation can be done using similar reagents given that
both rely on the detection of living cells. Cell viability is a simplistic and
efficient measurement of the influence that various conditions such as
biomaterials, printing parameters, and construct aging, have on the
contained cells. For example, when optimizing their bioink, Joung et al.
first assessed the viability of three different cell types (fibroblasts, hiPSC-
derived spinal NPCs, and mouse iPSC-derived OPCs) over 4 days [118].
They saw low viability and opted to print with 50 % Matrigel using
cooling systems to maintain printability. They also used viability as-
sessments to see how long the cells could be exposed to air before death,
where exposure for 30 min had detrimental effects at low printing
volumes.
Most papers used variations of live/dead imaging to investigate cell
viability over various time points (Figs. 4 and 5). Live/dead was often
conducted using calcein AM to stain live cells and either propidium io-
dide, ethidium homodimer-III or ethidium homodimer-1 to stain dead
cells. The concentrations of each varied across the literature, where it
appeared that higher concentrations were typically used for 3D bio-
printed materials compared to 2D cultures. Other methods for viability
included flow cytometry, often using a Guava ViaCount Reagent or
AlamarBlue (AB; Resazurin-based) or CellTiter-Glo (ATP-based detec-
tion). Most methods depend on a colorimetric change with living cells
and detection and quantification using spectrophotometric approaches.
Sulforhodamine B (SRB)-based assay kit, a protein-based detection that
can be used for viability [109]. Alamar Blue is typically used for both
cell viability and proliferation assessments [2]. Quantification of the cell
viability also varied; some papers simply stated that viability ‘increased’
or ‘decreased’ without quantification. Cell viability was often normal-
ized using various methods such as normalization to 2D controls
(calculated using software in de Melo et al.[130]) or correction with pre-
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
31 
print viability using the following equation [101]:
Cell viability =
cell viability (%)
pre −print cell viability (%) × 100%
In Abelseth et al.[102], viability was calculated as a percentage of the
live area determined through ImageJ with the following equation:
% Live Area =
Live area
Live area + Dead area × 100%
Haring et al. measured viability using an AB assay [132]. They
calculated viability from % AB reduction using the following equation:
%ABreduced = (εOXλ2)(Aλ1) −(εOXλ1)(Aλ2)
(εREDλ1)(Aʹλ2) −(εREDλ2)(Aʹλ1) × 100
where ελ1 and ελ2 are molar extinction coefficients of AB at 570 and
600 nm, respectively; εOX and εRED represent the oxidized or reduced
forms, respectively; Aλ1 and Aλ2 are the measured absorbance at 570
and 600 nm, respectively; A′ is the absorbance in a negative control. De
Melo et al. normalized their cell viability to the 2D control and calcu-
lated viability using software [130]. If flow cytometry was used, the
constructs required degradation. For example, for viability assessments
in Sharma et al. dissociated constructs using enzymatic (Neural Tissue
Dissociation Kit – Postnatal Neurons) and mechanical (gentleMACS™
Dissociator) on days 1 and 7 to obtain single cell suspension for analysis
[103]. Viability was determined by adding the dissociated and filtered
cells to a plate and using a flow cytometer. MTT assays can also be used
for inference of viability, it is discussed in more detail next. While
generally, the mechanisms for evaluating viability varied, those that use
quantified methods should be explored to compare neural tissue models
directly. Flow cytometry offers high-resolution assessments of viability
(and other assays) but relies on the dissociation of the tissue constructs
to accurately quantify cell viability.
3.5.2.2. Cell proliferation. The ability of cells to proliferate and migrate
can display key functions related to tissue development and remodeling
[11]. Typically, explicit analysis of cell proliferation was quantified
using various methods, such as MTT assay, total DNA content, Cell
Counting Kit-8 (CCK8), AlamarBlue assay, PrestoBlue or Resazurin. An
MTT
assay
uses
MTT
[3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenylte-
trazolium bromide] to generate a precipitate of formazan relative to
active cells. DMSO can be used to dissolve precipitated formazan, and
the dissolved analyte is then measured at 555/650 nm on a microplate
reader to analyze cell number and proliferation of cells [135]. Other
studies assessed proliferation using Alamar Blue assay kits, oftentimes
normalizing the values to day 1 using a microplate reader [122]. Lindsay
et al. determined proliferation through normalized total DNA content of
extracted cells from the constructs using Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA
assay kit [133]. PrestoBlue cell viability indicator was typically
employed for proliferation analysis of hNSCs and hiPSCs [98–100]. Cruz
et al. used a Resazurin assay to identify cell proliferation, which is a
redox-based detection assay similar to MTT assays [116]. More indirect
analysis of proliferation can evaluate the number of cells or circularity.
Cell number can be used to interpret or corroborate other analyses using
either fluorescent staining of nuclei (DAPI or Hoechst) or using labelled
cells. Circularity is also assessed as a way of interpreting attachment.
Zhou et al. used ICC to investigate proliferation through the length of
TUJ1+ processes [97]. Constructs were fixed and sectioned for immu-
nohistological analysis (30 μm slices) and analyzed for the length of the
TUJ1+ processes, and quantified for cell migration, process density, and
bundle width. Grey values were also used to quantify these values.
Similarly, Abdelrahman et al., assessed neuron morphology based on
neurite number, total length of neurites, length of dominant neurites,
and number of branches for both non-DA neurons (TUJ1+ and TH-) and
DA neurons (TH+, TUJ1-)[11]. Interestingly, in a co-culture, they
looked at ATP release, staining (TUJ1, TH, TBR1) and used Tracker
Green dye to assess the formation of cellular connections between two
cells (mouse embryonic cortical and DA neurons) [11].
3.5.2.3. Protein expression. As mentioned, establishing the function of
3D bioprinted models is a principal prerequisite for intuitively inter-
preting the in vitro cellular interactions and translating these functions to
in vivo conditions. Typical evaluations of cellular function include the
analysis of protein expression within the 3D bioprinted models using
ICC, flow cytometry, and confocal microscopy, depending on the
labelling technique. Quantitation of protein markers can also be done
using RT-qPCR.
Understanding the fundamental function of the cells is critical to
ensuring the relevance of the 3D bioprinted tissue models. ICC is both
qualitative (e.g., identification of the presence or absence of a marker)
and quantitative (through the quantification of fluorescence intensity,
area, etc.). It should be noted that ICC can also be referred to as
immunohistochemistry if tissue constructs are sectioned and analyzed,
immunophenotyping or immunofluorescent labelling, among others.
Identification of markers using ICC at various stages of cellular devel-
opment and maturation can be used to interpret the functionality and
relevance of the tissue models. Typical markers used for the analysis of
hiPSCs, NPCs, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and neurons are outlined in
Fig. 7.
Identification of cell markers can be used for the assessment of purity
of cells. For example, Gu et al. confirmed both the pluripotency of cells
within constructs in the absence of differentiating molecules in the
media and subsequently confirmed neuronal differentiation after the
inclusion of small molecules (StemPro, N2, BDNF) [99]. In another work
by Gu et al., pluripotency was confirmed after 10 days of culture within
their 3D bioprinted constructs using flow cytometry and immunophe-
notyping with confocal microscopy for the pluripotent markers OCT4,
SOX2, TRA-1–60, and SSEA4 [99]. They also used a combination of ICC
and RT-qPCR to identify mature neuron and glial markers within their
differentiating cells; neural subtypes of GABA (gamma-aminobutyric
acid), NKX2-1, PET1 (serotonergic marker), and OLIGO2 (oligoden-
drocyte lineage transcription factor 2), Nestin, βIII tubulin, and GFAP
were identified with a simultaneous downregulation of pluripotency
markers (OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2). These investigations are essential
to ensure that the models demonstrate representative behaviour for the
designated cell and/or tissue environments. Relevant to tissue engi-
neering, if cells are still in a pluripotent state, heterogeneous constructs
can be formed which may impede function.
Given the sensitivity of RT-qPCR, markers identified using ICC or
similar can be confirmed quantitatively with high confidence or can
identify markers that cannot be easily visualized. For example, this ap-
plies to bioinks that use fibrinogen, which exhibits autofluorescence and
obscures low expression levels, where RT-qPCR sensitivity can circum-
vent this. However, the caveat of using RT-qPCR is that this technique
relies on the extraction and quantification of ribonucleic acid (RNA) or
messenger RNA (mRNA), which may not directly reflect the protein
expression in vitro. Therefore, corroborating the findings between ICC
and RT-qPCR is suggested, which has been typically done in the
literature.
3.5.2.4. Calcium imaging. In addition to protein expression, establishing
fundamental functions of cell types, especially in neurons, is essential.
Calcium imaging is used to explore baseline spontaneous or induced
calcium release, which uses a marker-based assay to excite cells and
subsequently quantify the calcium flux [128]. This method typically
detects calcium ions (Ca2+) within the networks, indicating spontaneous
neural signalling and function [65]. Most often, Fluo-4 AM was used for
baseline calcium imaging. Gu et al. used Fluo-4 to demonstrate sponta-
neous calcium spikes in their 3D bioprinted differentiated hNSCs and
also used bicuculline to induce activity [98]. It was unclear on what day
this was done, although it is assumed to be at least 10 days after
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
32 
differentiation (24 days post-printing). In another study, Gu et al. again
used Fluo-4 to conduct live calcium imaging on the calcium influx and
cell migration after 40 days of bioprinting their iPSC-containing con-
structs [99]. Further, they expended bicuculline to confirm the function
of intracellular calcium of their suspected neuron type, GABAergic
neurons.
Induced activity can be measured using KCl, bicuculline, or neuro-
transmitters such as acetylcholine or glutamate. Bicuculline is an
antagonist of GABA(A) receptor which is added to induce release of the
intracellular calcium [100]. KCl can be used to selectively depolarize
neurons leading to the release of relevant neurotransmitters such as
glutamate in the case of cortical neurons [14]. This method works
particularly well when astrocytes are co-cultured since the KCl does not
influence these cell types, allowing for investigation of neural subtypes
[14]. While not done in their study, Kapr et al. discuss that analysis of
sodium signals can probe for glutamate transporters, which are more
expressed by astrocytes [129]. In addition to assessing NPC basal neural
activity, Joung et al. combined KCl and glutamate to assess doped
response [118]. Early detection of functionality can be done in as little as
four days, where Zhou et al. detected spontaneous Ca2+ oscillations 4
days post printing, and this response strengthened with increased days
in culture [97]. At 65 days post-printing, exposure to the constructs with
KCl triggered rapid Ca2+ transients, suggesting functional tissues [97].
It showed that action potentials could induce voltage-gated sodium
and potassium channels and that the resting membrane potentials were
similar to endogenous dopamine neurons but showed various stages of
development and differentiation. Yan et al. used high and low potassium
Tyrode’s solution to conduct calcium and glutamate imaging and
assessed fluorescence change was defined using the following equation:
Δ F
F(t) = (F0 −F(t))
F0
where F0 is the average fluorescence intensity of the imaging area for
samples in the low KCl solution, and F(t) is the fluorescence intensity at a
given time [14]. The fluorescence change was normalized to the control
group. In addition, cells were infected with a glutamate-sensing fluo-
rescent reporter (iGluSnFR), and calcium and glutamate imaging within
varying regions of interest were conducted. The signals increased from 2
to 4 weeks, indicating that astrocytes can uptake glutamate release from
neurons. This live glutamate imaging allowed for the assessment of
glutamate recycling, a key function of astrocytes.
These characterizations highlight the important trend in neural tis-
sue engineering to design both mechanically relevant and functional
tissues, and the incorporation of methods to evaluate the chemically
relevant functions of in vivo tissues.
3.5.2.5. Metabolic activity & electrophysiology. Metabolic activity can
also provide key insight on functionality using assays that probe mem-
brane potential, where electrophysiological analysis can be measured
using voltage-sensitive dye, MEAs, and other direct or indirect assays.
CellTiter-Glo® [11] and CellTiter Blue [133] have been used to assess
metabolic activity. These assay measure ATP to indicate metabolic ac-
tivity and can be done in as little as three days [11]. In Y.-C. E. Li et al.,
metabolic activity was assessed using Presto Blue Reagent for both
neural lineages and astrocytes [108]. In addition, they intuitively
investigated the metabolic interactions between neurons and astrocytes
in their co-culture by investigating the glutamate-glutamine pathway.
They showed that neurons by themselves had higher levels of glutamate
released compared to the neuron-astrocyte co-culture or the astrocyte
culture. Similar work was done by Perez et al. where dopamine release
was detected using ELISA after 12 days [105].
While not in their bioprinted constructs, Abdelrahman et al. assessed
the metabolic activity of co-cultured mouse embryonic cortical and
ventral midbrain DA neurons by assessing the amount of ATP release, in
addition to staining for TUJ1, TH, and TBR1 to assess connections be-
tween TH+ and TBR1+ neurons [11]. When treated with 6-OHDA, the
Fig. 7. Typical cellular markers investigated for various cell types including human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), neural progenitor cells (NPCs), as-
trocytes, oligodendrocytes (and precursors) and neurons. Markers with dashed border indicate reported astrocyte markers outside of systematic review; grouped
markers are based on specific neuron sub-type. The marker Ki-67 was reported as a proliferation marker at multiple stages of cell growth. Created with BioR
ender.com.
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
33 
% ATP release and the number of TH+ cells decreased, indicative of
neuronal function for DA neurons in PD. In addition, MEAs were used to
capture the extracellular activity of their networks. By printing directly
on MEAs, it was demonstrated that NPC spheres embedded and differ-
entiated contain electrical activity after 21 days in culture. Analysis
using MEAs can be used to assess the efficiency of 3D bioprinted models
to recapitulate in vivo environments [11], and provide functional read-
outs beyond calcium imaging [129].
Electrophysiology was assessed in Perez et al. using voltage-sensitive
dye. They used the following equation to determine the membrane po-
tential [105]:
ΔE = RT
zʹF ln
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
ΔF
F0 + 1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
where R = gas constant (8.314 J/Kmol), T = temperature (Kelvin), F
= Faraday’s constant (As/mol), z = apparent charge of external dye, ΔF
= F–F0, where F = the construct and cells reading, and F0 is the back-
ground fluorescence of the construct only.
Restan Perez et al. used the FLIPR Membrane Potential Assay Kit Blue
(voltage-sensitive dye), followed by KCl addition to assess dopaminergic
neuron electrical properties since the 3D constructs could not be patch-
clamped [104]. Importantly, in this work it was shown that compared to
2D culture, the 3D environment enabled the cells to become more
electrophysically mature; these systems were shown to be relatively
adolescent from native tissues but confirmed doped response to KCl
[104]. Similarly, Scarian et al. noted that patch clamps and MEAs could
not be used due to the hydrating bioink forming a film around the cells
which impedes connection [111]. Instead, they measured electrophysi-
ological characteristics using c-fos, an indirect marker of neuronal ac-
tivity during action potential firing over 14 days [111]. The cells were
also treated with KCl since NSC34 cells (motor neuron-like cells) do not
have spontaneous electrical activity; however, their bioink (Cellink
bioink) had background fluorescence with c-fos labelling, but induction
with KCl did show statistically increased firing capacity.
Some studies could use whole-cell patch clamps, such as those
printed into SHAPE support baths [65] or thin layered constructs [14].
Kajtez et al. was able to use whole-cell patch clamps to record single-cell
electrophysiology using a microelectrode to target cells labelled with
synapsin-GFP and neuronal morphology [65]. After 21 days in their tri-
culture, Yan et al. measured the spontaneous action potentials of
glutamate cortical cells within the bioprinted models [14]. They noted
that the spontaneous action potentials increased both in the percentage
of cortical neurons with these features and the frequency over time, and
these activities were enhanced when GABAergic and glutamatergic
neurons were co-cultured. Additionally, whole-cell patch clamping was
used to monitor the cycling Na+ (in) and K+ (out), excitatory post-
synaptic currents (EPSCs) and inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs).
In addition, bicuculline inhibited the spontaneous IPSC activity, indi-
cating functional maturation of the GABA neurons. The relatively small
layer height (50 μm) of their constructs enabled the use of whole cell
patch clamping for these analyses.
X. Wang et al. used a sandwich enzyme immunoassay kit to quantify
VEGFA and bFGF secreted by the cells, and the concentration was
measured based on OD values of a standard [122]. In the work of
Matthiesen et al., it was noted that viability can be measured using
AlamarBlue, and the % reduction of AB is indicative of metabolic ac-
tivity [112]. An innovative way to look at expression and function was
shown in Sunil et al. Here, surface expression of calreticulin and high-
mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) release from the GBMs was assessed
[127]. In this way, they wanted to see if the BIONs could trigger ICD – an
essential immune response. In the highest activated group (BIONs +
light), there was a significant increase in HMGB1 release and calreti-
culin. They also analyzed mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm) to
indicate apoptosis. This was done using a JC-1 assay and Annexin-V/
FITC to indicate apoptosis.
Methods related to electrophysiology such as whole cell patch
clamping and MEAs lend superior functional analysis of fabricated
neural tissues. Going forward, a way of performing these analyses
should be considered, given their inherent value. A way around the
limitation of hydrogels impeding electrical signals was shown by Kapr
et al. by printing constructs directly on MEAs [129]. While this may not
be feasible for sterility reasons on all constructs, printing select con-
structs for MEA analysis could be of benefit and can circumvent the
current
caveat
of
hydrogels.
Additionally,
the
incorporation
of
biocompatible and inert polymers that allow for conductive analysis
may also be practical.
3.6. Applications of 3D bioprinting
3.6.1. Disease modeling
Current cell culture and 3D bioprinting technologies allow us to
successfully generate various brain-associated cell types and co-culture
them in specific hydrogel formulations to obtain tissues that resemble
aspects of the human brain [115]. Furthermore, differentiating plurip-
otent stem cells into NSCs, neurons and glia within the hydrogel scaffold
provides an opportunity to study brain development and understand the
processes that give rise to neurodevelopmental disorders, a window of
development that otherwise is very difficult to capture in human-
specific systems [116].
Disrupted neural circuits ultimately leading to neurodegeneration
are a hallmark of diseases like Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease,
epilepsy, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, and multiple scle-
rosis [10,107]. Neural circuits are often studied in 2D cell cultures, but it
cannot be understated that neural circuits are in fact complex, three-
dimensional structures in which diverse cell–cell interactions occur,
and this 3D environment is essential for accuracy in circuit function,
connectivity, and response to stimuli [14]. Moreover, the presence of
ECM is crucial for neural circuit formation as it provides structural
support, regulates cell adhesion and migration, and influences synapse
formation and plasticity, thereby guiding the development and con-
nectivity of neural networks [100]. Yan et al. utilized an innovative
approach to producing functionalized neural tissues in which multilay-
ered constructs were established by horizontal stacking of layers of
glutamatergic neurons, GABAergic neurons and astrocytes [14]. These
heterogeneous tissues facilitated synapse formation between these
diverse cell types and improved modeling of neural circuits. Notably,
they found that the formation of functional networks between cortical
and striatal tissues is similar to observations in vivo where striatal neu-
rons project their axons towards cortical neurons. This model was
further applied to study Alexander disease, a neurodegenerative disease
where the accumulation of GFAP within astrocytes disrupts their normal
function, leading to impaired neuronal support, altered neurotrans-
mitter regulation, and a breakdown in neural circuitry. The disease
model containing mutant astrocytes (which carried an R88C mutation)
had significantly fewer synapses than controls as the mutated astrocytes
were less supportive for synaptogenesis. This approach therefore has the
potential to provide detailed models of various neurological disorders
that involve neural network dysfunction.
Neural death in PD, characterized by progressive degeneration of DA
neurons, is thought to involve oxidative stress and neuroinflammation,
making it important to establish a model that can capture neuroimmune
interactions. Rueda-Gensini et al. [10] therefore modeled PD incorpo-
rating monocytes, macrophages and astrocytes with human mid-brain
DA neurons in an electroconductive scaffold. In this model, key pa-
thologies of PD were replicated including α-sync aggregation, mito-
chondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress. These types of models that
feature scaffolds with improved relevance to human brain tissue, and
incorporate multiple cell types, are invaluable for studying complex
disorders. While the apparent cause of disease in PD is the loss of DA
neurons, it is the integration of all contributing factors that leads to
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
34 
neuronal loss and therefore co-culturing cells together to study these
diseases is of paramount importance. Diseases that affect motor neurons,
such as ALS, have been modeled by differentiating pluripotent stem cells
to motor neurons in vitro [111]. In addition to NSCs, Perez et al. [105]
employed mesenchymal stem cells to create neural tissues, offering
another accessible strategy for generating patient-specific tissues.
Among disorders of the brain, GBM stands out as particularly lethal
and incurable, with a median survival of just 15 months, and represents
one of the most malignant forms of brain cancer [143]. GBM exists
within a complex and hostile milieu where altered ECM, hypoxia,
cellular heterogeneity and drug efflux mechanisms hamper the effec-
tiveness of drug treatments. Thus, GBM-targeted drugs typically fail in
clinical trials [144]. 3D bioprinting technology has been employed to
help overcome this challenge due to its efficient spatial control, ability to
use biomaterials that mimic human brain ECM, and capability to culture
multiple cell types in an organized manner [122]. Neufeld et al. pro-
posed an incredible approach to not only model GBM neural cells in 3D
but to also introduce vasculature into the engineered tumours by
printing a combination of two bioinks, specifically a tumour-specific ink
and a vascular-specific ink [126]. This group used a fugitive bioink to
create temporary channels within the tissue construct that can be
removed by pumping fibronectin using a peristaltic pump, leaving
behind a hollow vascular network surrounded by 3D-bioprinted neural
tissue. The hollow channels are later flooded with endothelial cells,
pericytes, astrocytes and microglia in an effort to model the BBB.
Impressively, growth of GBM cells in this model was found to be com-
parable to in vivo tumour growth. A similar GBM model was created by
Wang et al. where they printed hydrogels loaded with glioblastoma
(U118) with an inner core of HUVEC cells in the form of fibers using a
coaxial printer [122]. This model effectively replicates the vasculari-
zation ability of GBM, making it an ideal platform for discovering drugs
to control angiogenesis within GBM tumours, which is one of the main
biological aspects of interest to control tumour growth [145].
Since tumour tissue naturally varies in stiffness, Tang et al. created a
GBM model with varying stiffness and found that the drug temozolo-
mide exhibited differential responses [125]. The drug was less effective
in stiffer tissue regions, corresponding to the tumour mass, and more
effective in softer areas which are associated with active cell differen-
tiation. Such models are valuable in studying the response of drugs
within defined tumour microenvironments and help in developing more
targeted therapies that account for the physical heterogeneity of tu-
mours, potentially leading to more effective treatments. Smits et al.
showed that GBM cannot be accurately modeled in 2D, rather 3D models
of GBM present as spheroids within hydrogel [124]. They also showed
that these spheroids, which indicate tumour growth can be controlled by
N-cadherin antagonist (Compound 15), N-cadherin over expression is
associated with gliomas. Using 3D bioprinting the native tumour
microenvironment can be replicated making it an excellent platform for
assessing the clinical potential of new anticancer agents.
3.6.2. Drug discovery
Since 3D bioprinting provides more predictive and accurate models
of brain tissue over 2D models, 3D approaches should also provide
optimal strategies for preclinical testing of drug efficacy and toxicity
[126]. Additionally, 3D bioprinted models can be customized to include
patient-specific cells, enabling personalized medicine approaches where
drug responses can be tested on tissue engineered from a patient’s own
cells [107,111]. 3D bioprinting can also be coupled with high
throughput screening to test large libraries of compounds for restoration
of cell and tissue phenotypes as potential drug candidates [146]. This
way it can also accelerate the drug development process. Aligning with
ethical considerations, 3D bioprinted models also reduce the reliance on
animal testing.
Of all 46 studies included in the review, most focus on the devel-
opment and validation of the bioprinted constructs, with few exploring
the efficacy of therapeutic agents within these complex systems. C. Lee
et al. aimed to test whether a 3D-printed scaffold would respond
uniquely to a GBM-reprogramming cocktail (FICBD; Forskolin, ISX9,
CHIR99021, BET 151, and DAPT), previously shown to convert GBM
cells into neurons in 2D [123]. While the cells treated within the 3D
scaffold showed reduced proliferation, they did not exhibit the expected
neurite elongation. Additionally, key markers like TUJ1, DCX, and
Nestin did not show significant changes compared to untreated scaffolds
which signifies a resistance of cells towards drugs that is only observed
in 3D environments.
As mentioned previously, small molecule compounds and other po-
tential drugs can have different effects in 2D as compared to 3D envi-
ronments. In a model of GBM, P-selectin inhibitor SELPi, that controls
growth of GBM had no effect in 2D cultures of human GB cells (PD-GB4)
[126]. However, SELPi significantly inhibited PD-GB4 cell proliferation
in 3D cultures, an effect also observed in vivo in GB-bearing mice, likely
due to differing P-selectin expression in 3D compared to 2D cultures.
Similar results were seen in additional GB cell types, indicating that the
3D model better reflects the tumour’s response to SELPi treatment. This
is one example that demonstrates the significance of using 3D models for
drug testing [126]. Similarly, TMZ, a chemotherapy drug for glioblas-
toma, showed similar IC50 values across different patient-derived cells
in 2D cultures, but varied significantly in 3D models [126].
These findings suggest that 3D scaffolds provide a more relevant
cellular environment to in vivo, they may offer valuable insights for
optimizing new drugs before moving on to animal trials.
3.6.3. Tissue regeneration
The studies on peripheral nerve regeneration were excluded from the
review as the main focus of the review is neural brain tissue, however,
their relevance to clinical research is worth mentioning.
Outside of modeling development and disease pathogenesis, another
important application of 3D bioprinting is the mounting effort to
generate functional neural tissue. Among those, nerve conduits hold
significant importance as peripheral nerve injuries are difficult to treat
with medical and physiotherapy procedures [147]. It is complex as not
only is the growth of functional neuronal connections important, but
proper myelination is also essential for the rapid transmission of nerve
impulses [135]. Damage to myelin sheaths leads to slower signal
transmission and reduced nerve function. Restoration of myelin, which
is produced by Schwann cells, is a prime requirement of nerve regen-
eration [148].
By enabling the precise fabrication of biomimetic scaffolds that
support the growth and differentiation of neural cells, 3D bioprinting
offers a promising avenue for nerve tissue regeneration, facilitating the
establishment of a neural relay to repair the damaged site. It holds the
potential to overcome the challenges of traditional nerve repair methods
by facilitating the formation of functional neural networks and pro-
moting myelination have employed various strategies for regeneration
of nerve implants [122,148,149]. More innovative strategies have been
employed for spinal cord regeneration, a process that requires the pre-
cise establishment of axon connections within its highly organized
structure, making it challenging to recapitulate in vitro [118]. As the
field advances, 3D bioprinting could also revolutionize the treatment of
nerve injuries, providing personalized therapeutic options for patients.
4. Conclusion and future Outlooks
In this review, we systematically examined the most recent literature
in the last ten years to compare neural models that have been generated
using 3D bioprinting. In particular, we emphasized the analysis of neural
tissue models of the brain and aimed to investigate the potential drug
screening applications. In the systematic review, we found that neural
tissues were designed using various bioinks, cell types, and for a host of
applications relating to modeling the brain or spinal cord exclusively or
were generated for more broad applications in modeling the CNS, or
tumour conditions such as glioblastomas.
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
35 
4.1. Improving reproducibility and transparency
Based on this review, we underscore that the transparency of
methodologies used in research should be conducted. While it appears
that strides have been made over the years to report comprehensive and
straightforward methods, we encourage transparency and explanation
in methodology – especially related to characterization. For example,
the literature should aim to provide comprehensive explanations of
frequency (e.g., on what days) and conditions (e.g., polymer variations,
media, cells, etc.) of characterization techniques. This truancy can still
be found in present-day research and should be rectified in future works.
While we appreciate the proprietary nature of intellectual property in
biomaterial design, encouraging methodology transparency will only
advance the newly designed neural models and allow for adequate
comparisons between 3D bioengineered neural tissues.
4.2. Standardizing material characterization
The heterogeneities in material characterization, both relating to
mechanical and cellular domains, are quite evident (Tables 2-5,
Table S3), but this appears to be trending towards more sophisticated
characterization techniques that aim to understand the relevance of the
neural tissue models. There was a clear lack of studies in our search that
investigated effective drug screening applications in conjunction with a
comprehensive evaluation of neural tissue models’ physical and
biochemical performance. This is a critical area of neural tissue engi-
neering that needs to be addressed to strive toward accurate tissue
models that can effectively recapitulate the spatiotemporal and
chemical-physical networks found in neural tissues. Understanding the
mechanical
properties
through
printability
testing,
rheological/
compression testing, degradation, and porosity assessments is sug-
gested. Further, cellular characterization of viability and proliferation,
protein expression, inflammatory state, and evaluating the electro-
physiology is necessary. Recent literature has suggested the use of
characterization techniques for drug screening applications be con-
ducted related to dysfunctions in a variety of physiological functions
such as: proteostasis, metabolic pathways, oxidative stress, immune
activation, and synaptic loss [150]. In addition, models should aim to
incorporate multiple relevant cell types into their tissues to truly capture
the complexity and fundamental function of the human brain.
4.3. Translational relevance to drug discovery
3D bioprinted tissue models can be used to improve pre-clinical
disease modeling compared to traditional 2D and animal models,
which can play a pivotal role in drug screening applications [48,151].
3D bioprinting can generate architecturally relevant models that can be
effectively used for drug screening [150]. Incorporating reproducible
human cell-based models can identify poor candidate drugs early in the
drug development pipeline using high-throughput screening (HTS),
before expensive and time-consuming clinical testing can take place
[146]. Further, in addition to treatment efficacy, these models can
elucidate important features such as cytotoxicity, and the influence on
cell proliferation, morphology, and metabolic pathways, among others.
An important feature of 3D bioprinting is that it can be easily inte-
grated with precision medicine, a technique that integrates personalized
approaches to disease treatment. Patient-specific models account for
underlying genetic effects and have the potential to be rapidly fabri-
cated, allowing for efficient HTS of multiple drugs for their individual
efficacy [152]. In practice, it can be time-consuming to generate indi-
vidual cell lines, but can greatly enhance patient response to drugs in
multiple disease-based scenarios and can alleviate some of the disad-
vantages of currently used xenografts. Patient-derived xenografts within
animal models are time-consuming, have limited drug testing capacities,
and often occur in immunodeficient mice, limiting the replication of the
disease microenvironment [152].
These challenges have the unique opportunity to strengthen collab-
orations at multiple levels of research and practice – where academia,
industry and regulatory bodies can play critical roles in bridging the gap
from research to clinical success. Industry and academic research groups
can have reciprocal relationships by sharing insights on drug testing
needs and offering mutual feedback on drug performance. Additionally,
governing bodies can support these relationships through funding
[153,154]. This highlights the importance of collaboration and fosters
successful environments for viable drug identification. For example,
academic settings typically lack the expertise in regulatory factors for
drug testing [154] and have limited resources for large scale HTS for
multiple diseases, patients, etc. Collaboration with regulatory and in-
dustry partners (who often have more resources) can bridge this gap and
strengthen the translation of scientific research to clinical settings
[153,154].
4.4. Challenges and future perspectives
While the future of regenerative medicine and disease therapy can be
advanced with 3D bioprinting technologies, these avenues do not come
without challenges. An important concept in drug screening is the ability
to cross the BBB, which is a current limit in 3D tissue models. The BBB is
a crucially relevant microstructure in brain models, especially when
modelling neurodegenerative disorders and evaluating drug efficacy
[155,156]. Simplification in these BBB models can be effective to assess
cell migration and molecule permeability, where in vitro models
commonly use TransWell inserts in combination with monolayers of
BMECs or Madin-Darby Canine Kidney epithelial cells (MDCKs) [156].
The challenges associated with accurate modelling have been effectively
outlined in a review by Linville and Searson [156]. One of the challenges
highlighted is that approaches for achieving multiscale and hierarchical
models should be explored [156]. As mentioned previously, chaotic
bioprinting may provide a sophisticated solution to accomplish this hi-
erarchical patterning for improving BBB-containing 3D models [75].
Moreover, advances in DLP and extrusion-based bioprinting have
allowed for the creation of BBB models by incorporating endothelial
cells, pericytes, astrocytes, and dynamic flow systems to replicate BBB
structure and function [157–159]. However, the resolution of these
systems is still insufficient to print small capillary structures, with lumen
diameters in models being larger than actual capillaries. Although two-
photon printing offers higher resolution, its slow printing speed makes it
unsuitable for large-scale applications [160]. Nonetheless, the integra-
tion of bioactive hydrogels, perfusion systems, and advanced bioinfor-
matics for characterization is pushing the field forward, enabling more
accurate and relevant BBB models for drug screening and disease
modelling [159].
Emerging research in the last few years has demonstrated the po-
tential for advanced characterization techniques using bioinformatics to
reveal underlying changes in cellular function, proliferation capabilities,
among others. Further, integrating machine learning and artificial in-
telligence (AI) platforms within 3D bioprinting workflows has the po-
tential to strongly enhance the optimization, relevance and functionality
of these models [161]. Not only will these advancing techniques be
useful for understanding disease pathology in a new light, but will offer
novel tools to characterize preclinical models for their relevance.
4.5. Concluding Remarks
Overall, recent work has shown how bioprinted neural tissues can be
produced with complex structures and replicate relevant neural phe-
notypes −
making it a powerful tool for neuroscience and drug discov-
ery. An intriguing find was that in the most recent literature evaluated,
the design of brain tissue models that recapitulate in vivo functions is still
emphasized as a critical need in biomedical research. We currently face
the challenge of mimicking the functional complexity and structural
layered hierarchy of the human brain, despite progressing technologies.
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
36 
When reviewed systematically, we note that the trend of bio-
manufacturing 3D bioprinted neural models is progressing towards the
design of more representative environments, that include the crucial
components of the ECM [14,65], in addition to the investigation of
mechanical relevance and its influence on function [108,115,125].
These trends should be adopted as the standard for assessing the
relevance of 3D bioprinted neural models going forward. Constructs
should mimic the mechanical properties found naturally in the brain to
encourage appropriate cellular function. Importantly, research in
biomaterial design for 3D bioprinted tissue models should also focus on
assessing the translational relevance to in vivo conditions, where
possible, including basic cell function and behaviour. Addressing these
clear gaps in 3D tissue engineering will be beneficial to advance the
design, analysis, and versatility of these models to answer complex
questions relating to disease pathology and treatment in the future.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by multiple funding agencies: the Micheal
Smith Health Research B.C./Canadians for Leading Edge Alzheimer
Research (CLEAR) to A.O. (RT-2023-3070), the Canadian Biomaterials
Society Visiting Scholar Award (B.B.), NSERC Discovery Grants to S.M.
W. (RGPIN-2017-04044) and L.M.J. (JULIAN, L-RGPIN-03965), the
Canadian Research Chairs program to L.M.J. (950-233179), the Cana-
dian Institutes of Health Research Project Grant to S.M.W. (Project
Grant: 460840), the Michael Smith Health Research B.C. to S.M.W. (I2C-
2019-2160) and L.M.J. (SCH-2021-1907), the Pacific Parkinson’s
Research Institute to S.M.W. (I2C-2019-2160), Fulbright Canada -
MITACS Globalink program (K.O.), and a Cancer Research Society
operating grant to L.M.J. (JULIAN, L-CRS 25551).
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.addr.2025.115524.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] L. de la Vega, C. Lee, R. Sharma, M. Amereh, S.M. Willerth, 3D bioprinting
models of neural tissues: the current state of the field and future directions, Brain
Res. Bull. 2019 (150) (2019) 240–249, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
brainresbull.2019.06.007.
[2] N. Gomila Pelegri, A.M. Stanczak, A.L. Bottomley, B.K. Milthorpe, C.A. Gorrie, M.
P. Padula, J. Santos, Adipose-derived stem cells spontaneously express neural
markers when grown in a PEG-based 3D matrix, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24 (15) (2023),
https://doi.org/10.3390/IJMS241512139.
[3] J. Wang, X. Kong, Q. Li, C. Li, H. Yu, G. Ning, Z. Xiang, Y. Liu, S. Feng, The spatial
arrangement of cells in a 3D-Printed biomimetic spinal cord promotes directional
differentiation and repairs the motor function after spinal cord injury,
Biofabrication 13 (4) (2021), https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/AC0C5F.
[4] D.S. Bassett, M.S. Gazzaniga, Understanding complexity in the human brain,
Trends Cognitive Sci 15 (2011) 200–209, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tics.2011.03.006.
[5] S. Bagchi, T. Chhibber, B. Lahooti, A. Verma, V. Borse, R.D. Jayant, In-Vitro
Blood-Brain Barrier Models for Drug Screening and Permeation Studies: An
Overview, Drug Des Devel Ther. 13 (2019) 3591–3605, https://doi.org/10.2147/
DDDT.S218708.
[6] H.T. Hogberg, J. Bressler, K.M. Christian, G. Harris, G. Makri, C. O’Driscoll, D.
Pamies, L. Smirnova, Z. Wen, T. Hartung, Toward a 3D model of human brain
development for studying gene/environment interactions, Stem Cell Res Ther. 4
Suppl 1(Suppl 1) (2013) S4, https://doi.org/10.1186/scrt365.
[7] P. Zhuang, A.X. Sun, J. An, C.K. Chua, S.Y. Chew, 3D neural tissue models: from
spheroids to bioprinting, Biomaterials 154 (2018) 113–133, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2017.10.002.
[8] D. Anton, H. Burckel, E. Josset, G. Noel, Three-Dimensional Cell Culture: A
Breakthrough In Vivo, Int. J. Mol. Sci. (2015) 5517–5527, https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijms16035517.
[9] N. Pei, Z. Hao, S. Wang, B. Pan, A. Fang, J. Kang, D. Li, J. He, L. Wang, 3D
printing of layered gradient pore structure of brain-like tissue, Int. J. Bioprint. 7
(3) (2021) 71–85, https://doi.org/10.18063/IJB.V7I3.359.
[10] L. Rueda-Gensini, J.A. Serna, D. Rubio, J.C. Orozco, N.I. Bola˜nos, J.C. Cruz,
C. Mu˜noz-Camargo, Three-dimensional neuroimmune co-culture system for
modeling Parkinson’s disease microenvironments in vitro, Biofabrication 15 (4)
(2023), https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/ace21b.
[11] S. Abdelrahman, W.F. Alsanie, Z.N. Khan, H.I. Albalawi, R.I. Felimban,
M. Moretti, N. Steiner, A.G. Chaudhary, C.A.E. Hauser, A Parkinson’s disease
model composed of 3D bioprinted dopaminergic neurons within a biomimetic
peptide scaffold, Biofabrication 14 (4) (2022), https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-
5090/AC7EEC.
[12] K. Grenier, J. Kao, P. Diamandis, Three-dimensional modeling of human
neurodegeneration: brain organoids coming of age, Mol. Psychiatry. 25 (2)
(2020) 254–274, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-019-0500-7.
[13] W.K. Raja, A.E. Mungenast, Y.T. Lin, T. Ko, F. Abdurrob, J. Seo, L.H. Tsai, Self-
Organizing 3D human neural tissue derived from induced pluripotent stem cells
recapitulate Alzheimer’s disease phenotypes, PLoS One 11 (9) (2016), https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0161969.
[14] Y. Yan, X. Li, Y. Gao, S. Mathivanan, L. Kong, Y. Tao, Y. Dong, X. Li,
A. Bhattacharyya, X. Zhao, S.C. Zhang, 3D Bioprinting of human neural tissues
with functional connectivity, Cell Stem Cell 31 (2) (2024) 260–274, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.stem.2023.12.009.
[15] J.A. Garcia-Leon, L. Caceres-Palomo, E. Sanchez-Mejias, M. Mejias-Ortega,
C. Nu˜nez-Diaz, J.J. Fernandez-Valenzuela, R. Sanchez-Varo, J.C. Davila,
J. Vitorica, A. Gutierrez, Human pluripotent stem cell-derived neural cells as a
relevant platform for drug screening in Alzheimer’s disease, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21
(18) (2020) 6867, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21186867.
[16] J.C. Park, S.Y. Jang, D. Lee, J. Lee, U. Kang, H. Chang, H.J. Kim, S.H. Han, J. Seo,
M. Choi, D.Y. Lee, M.S. Byun, D. Yi, K.H. Cho, I. Mook-Jung, A logical network-
based drug-screening platform for Alzheimer’s disease representing pathological
features of human brain organoids, Nat. Commun. 12 (1) (2021) 280, https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-020-20440-5.
[17] S.S. Kwak, K.J. Washicosky, E. Brand, D. von Maydell, J. Aronson, S. Kim, D.
E. Capen, M. Cetinbas, R. Sadreyev, S. Ning, E. Bylykbashi, W. Xia, S.L. Wagner, S.
H. Choi, R.E. Tanzi, D.Y. Kim, Amyloid-В42/40 ratio drives tau pathology in 3D
human neural cell culture models of Alzheimer’s disease, Nat. Commun. 11 (1)
(2020) 1377, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15120-3.
[18] K. Karzy´nski, K. Kosowska, F. Ambro˙zkiewicz, A. Berman, J. Cicho´n, M. Klak,
M. Serwa´nska-´Swiętek, M. Wszoła, Use of 3D bioprinting in biomedical
engineering for clinical application, Medical Studies/studia Medyczne 34 (1)
(2018) 93–97, https://doi.org/10.5114/ms.2018.74827.
[19] A. Arslan-Yildiz, R. El Assal, P. Chen, S. Guven, F. Inci, U. Demirci, Towards
artificial tissue models: past, present, and future of 3D bioprinting, Biofabrication
8 (1) (2016) 014103, https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/8/1/014103.
[20] Y.S. Zhang, M. Duchamp, R. Oklu, L.W. Ellisen, R. Langer, A. Khademhosseini,
Bioprinting the cancer microenvironment, ACS Biomater Sci. Eng. 2 (10) (2016)
1710–1721, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.6b00246.
[21] C. Mazzaglia, Y. Sheng, L.N. Rodrigues, I.M. Lei, J.D. Shields, Y.Y.S. Huang,
Deployable extrusion bioprinting of compartmental tumoroids with cancer
associated fibroblasts for immune cell interactions, Biofabrication 15 (2) (2023)
25005, https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/acb1db.
[22] I.T. Ozbolat, M. Hospodiuk, Current advances and future perspectives in
extrusion-based bioprinting, Biomaterials 76 (2016) 321–343, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.10.076.
[23] P. Zhuang, W.L. Ng, J. An, C.K. Chua, L.P. Tan, Layer-by-layer ultraviolet assisted
extrusion-based (UAE) bioprinting of hydrogel constructs with high aspect ratio
for soft tissue engineering applications, PLoS One 14 (6) (2019) e0216776,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0216776.
[24] K. Ling, G. Huang, J. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Ma, T. Lu, F. Xu, Bioprinting-based high-
throughput fabrication of three-dimensional MCF-7 human breast cancer cellular
spheroids, Engineering 1 (2) (2015) 269–274, https://doi.org/10.15302/J-ENG-
2015062.
[25] A. Shafiee, A. Atala, Printing technologies for medical applications, Trends Mol.
Med. 22 (3) (2016) 254–265, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2016.01.003.
[26] J.H. Park, J. Jang, J.-S. Lee, D.-W. Cho, Three-dimensional printing of tissue/
organ analogues containing living cells, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 45 (2017) 180–194,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10439-016-1611-9.
[27] D. Caballero, S. Kaushik, V.M. Correlo, J.M. Oliveira, R.L. Reis, S.C. Kundu,
Organ-on-chip models of cancer metastasis for future personalized medicine:
from chip to the patient, Biomaterials 149 (2017) 98–115, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2017.10.005.
[28] Y. Kang, P. Datta, S. Shanmughapriya, I.T. Ozbolat, 3D bioprinting of tumor
models for cancer research, ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 3 (9) (2020) 5552–5573,
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsabm.0c00791.
[29] W. Wan, Z. Li, X. Wang, F. Tian, J. Yang, Surface-fabrication of fluorescent
hydroxyapatite for cancer cell imaging and bio-printing applications, Biosensors
(Basel) 12 (6) (2022) 419, https://doi.org/10.3390/bios12060419.
[30] A. Memic, A. Navaei, B. Mirani, J.A.V. Cordova, M. Aldhahri, A. Dolatshahi-
Pirouz, M. Akbari, M. Nikkhah, Bioprinting technologies for disease modeling,
Biotechnol. Lett 39 (9) (2017) 1279–1290, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10529-017-
2360-z.
[31] J.M. Lee, W.Y. Yeong, Design and printing strategies in 3d bioprinting of cell-
hydrogels: a review, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 5 (22) (2016) 2856–2865, https://doi.
org/10.1002/adhm.201600435.
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
37 
[32] R. Suntornnond, W.L. Ng, X. Huang, C.H.E. Yeow, W.Y. Yeong, Improving
printability of hydrogel-based bio-inks for thermal inkjet bioprinting applications
via saponification and heat treatment processes, J. Mater. Chem. B 10 (31) (2022)
5989–6000, https://doi.org/10.1039/D2TB00442A.
[33] X. Li, B. Liu, B. Pei, J. Chen, D. Zhou, J. Peng, X. Zhang, W. Jia, T. Xu, Inkjet
bioprinting of biomaterials, Chem. Rev. 120 (19) (2020) 10793–10833, https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00008.
[34] P. Kumar, S. Ebbens, X. Zhao, Inkjet printing of mammalian cells–theory and
applications, Bioprinting 23 (2021) e00157, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bprint.2021.e00157.
[35] N. Bhardwaj, S. Dey, B. Bhar, B.B. Mandal, Bioprinted in vitro tissue models: an
emerging platform for developing therapeutic interventions and disease
modelling, Prog. Biomed. Eng. 6 (1) (2023), https://doi.org/10.1088/2516-
1091/ad10b4.
[36] J. Bohandy, B.F. Kim, F.J. Adrian, Metal deposition from a supported metal film
using an excimer laser, J. Appl. Phys. 60 (4) (1986) 1538–1539, https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.337287.
[37] J. Li, M. Chen, X. Fan, H. Zhou, Recent advances in bioprinting techniques:
approaches, applications and future prospects, J. Transl. Med. 14 (2016) 271,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-016-1028-0.
[38] F. Guillemot, A. Souquet, S. Catros, B. Guillotin, Laser-assisted cell printing:
principle, physical parameters versus cell fate and perspectives in tissue
engineering, Nanomedicine (Lond.) 5 (3) (2010) 507–515, https://doi.org/
10.2217/nnm.10.14.
[39] F. Guillemot, A. Souquet, S. Catros, B. Guillotin, J. Lopez, M. Faucon,
B. Pippenger, R. Bareille, M. R´emy, S. Bellance, High-throughput laser printing of
cells and biomaterials for tissue engineering, Acta Biomater. 6 (7) (2010)
2494–2500, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2009.09.029.
[40] B.R. Ringeisen, S.E. Lizewski, L.A. Fitzgerald, J.C. Biffinger, C.L. Knight, W.
J. Crookes-Goodson, P.K. Wu, Single cell isolation of bacteria from microbial fuel
cells and potomac river sediment, Electroanalysis. 22 (7–8) (2010) 875–882,
https://doi.org/10.1002/elan.200880012.
[41] B. Guillotin, A. Souquet, S. Catros, M. Duocastella, B. Pippenger, S. Bellance,
R. Bareille, M. R´emy, L. Bordenave, J. Am´ed´ee, Laser assisted bioprinting of
engineered tissue with high cell density and microscale organization,
Biomaterials 31 (28) (2010) 7250–7256, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biomaterials.2010.05.055.
[42] O. K´erour´edan, D. Hakobyan, M. R´emy, S. Ziane, N. Dusserre, J.C. Fricain,
S. Delmond, N.B. Th´ebaud, R. Devillard, In situ prevascularization designed by
laser-assisted bioprinting: effect on bone regeneration, Biofabrication 11 (4)
(2019) 045002, https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/ab2620.
[43] P. Delaporte, A.-P. Alloncle, Laser-induced forward transfer: a high resolution
additive manufacturing technology, Opt. Laser Technol. 78 (2016) 33–41,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2015.09.022.
[44] A. Bakhshinejad, R.M. D’Souza, A brief comparison between available bio-
printing methods, IEEE Great Lakes Biomed. Conf. (GLBC) 2015 (2015) 1–3,
https://doi.org/10.1109/GLBC.2015.7158294.
[45] B. Hopp, T. Smausz, N. Kresz, N. Barna, Z. Bor, L. Kolozsv´ari, D.B. Chrisey,
A. Szab´o, A. N´ogr´adi, Survival and proliferative ability of various living cell types
after laser-induced forward transfer, Tissue Eng. 11 (11–12) (2005) 1817–1823,
https://doi.org/10.1089/ten.2005.11.1817.
[46] M. Gruene, A. Deiwick, L. Koch, S. Schlie, C. Unger, N. Hofmann, I. Bernemann,
B. Glasmacher, B. Chichkov, Laser printing of stem cells for biofabrication of
scaffold-free autologous grafts, Tissue Eng. Part C Methods 17 (1) (2011) 79–87,
https://doi.org/10.1089/ten.TEC.2010.0359.
[47] L. Koch, S. Kuhn, H. Sorg, M. Gruene, S. Schlie, R. Gaebel, B. Polchow,
K. Reimers, S. Stoelting, N. Ma, P.M. Vogt, G. Steinhoff, B. Chichkov, Laser
printing of skin cells and human stem cells, Tissue Eng. Part C Methods 16 (5)
(2010) 847–854, https://doi.org/10.1089/ten.TEC.2009.0397.
[48] B. Qiu, N. Bessler, K. Figler, M.B. Buchholz, A.C. Rios, J. Malda, R. Levato,
M. Caiazzo, Bioprinting neural systems to model central nervous system diseases,
Adv. Functional Mater. 30 (44) (2020) 1910250, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adfm.201910250.
[49] J.Z. Manapat, Q. Chen, P. Ye, R.C. Advincula, 3D printing of polymer
nanocomposites via stereolithography, Macromol. Mater. Eng. 302 (9) (2017)
1600553, https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.201600553.
[50] Z. Wang, R. Abdulla, B. Parker, R. Samanipour, S. Ghosh, K. Kim, A simple and
high-resolution stereolithography-based 3D Bioprinting system using visible light
crosslinkable bioinks, Biofabrication 7 (4) (2015) 045009, https://doi.org/
10.1088/1758-5090/7/4/045009.
[51] S.P. Grogan, P.H. Chung, P. Soman, P. Chen, M.K. Lotz, S. Chen, D.D. D’Lima,
Digital micromirror device projection printing system for meniscus tissue
engineering, Acta Biomater. 9 (7) (2013) 7218–7226, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
actbio.2013.03.020.
[52] R. Gauvin, Y.-C. Chen, J.W. Lee, P. Soman, P. Zorlutuna, J.W. Nichol, H. Bae,
S. Chen, A. Khademhosseini, Microfabrication of complex porous tissue
engineering scaffolds using 3D projection stereolithography, Biomaterials 33 (15)
(2012) 3824–3834, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.01.048.
[53] T.Q. Huang, X. Qu, J. Liu, S. Chen, 3D printing of biomimetic microstructures for
cancer cell migration, Biomed. Microdevices 16 (2014) 127–132, https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10544-013-9812-6.
[54] H. Lin, D. Zhang, P.G. Alexander, G. Yang, J. Tan, A.-W.-M. Cheng, R.S. Tuan,
Application of Visible light-based projection stereolithography for live cell-
scaffold fabrication with designed architecture, Biomaterials 34 (2) (2013)
331–339, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.09.048.
[55] L.S.S. Magalh˜aes, F.E.P. Santos, C.D.M.V. Elias, S. Afewerki, G.F. Sousa, A.
S. Furtado, F.R. Marciano, A.O. Lobo, Printing 3D hydrogel structures employing
low-cost stereolithography technology, J. Funct. Biomater. 11 (1) (2020) 12,
https://doi.org/10.3390/jfb11010012.
[56] S.-J. Lee, M. Nowicki, B. Harris, L.G. Zhang, Fabrication of a highly aligned neural
scaffold via a table top stereolithography 3D printing and electrospinning, Tissue
Eng. Part A 23 (11–12) (2017) 491–502, https://doi.org/10.1089/ten.
TEA.2016.0353.
[57] E. Tamjid, A. Simchi, Fabrication of a highly ordered hierarchically designed
porous nanocomposite via indirect 3D printing: mechanical properties and in
vitro cell responses, Mater. Des. 88 (2015) 924–931, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matdes.2015.08.133.
[58] J.-Q. Wang, B.-J. Jiang, W.-J. Guo, Y.-M. Zhao, Indirect 3D printing technology
for the fabrication of customised β-TCP/chitosan scaffold with the shape of rabbit
radial head—an in vitro study, J. Orthop. Surg. Res. 14 (2019) 102, https://doi.
org/10.1186/s13018-019-1136-7.
[59] J.S. Miller, K.R. Stevens, M.T. Yang, B.M. Baker, D.-H.-T. Nguyen, D.M. Cohen,
E. Toro, A.A. Chen, P.A. Galie, X. Yu, Rapid casting of patterned vascular
networks for perfusable engineered three-dimensional tissues, Nat. Mater. 11 (9)
(2012) 768–774, https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat3357.
[60] E.Y.S. Tan, R. Suntornnond, W.Y. Yeong, High-resolution novel indirect
bioprinting of low-viscosity cell-laden hydrogels via model-support bioink
interaction, 3D Print. Addit. Manuf. 8 (1) (2021) 69–78, https://doi.org/
10.1089/3dp.2020.0153.
[61] S. Wüst, M.E. Godla, R. Müller, S. Hofmann, Tunable hydrogel composite with
two-step processing in combination with innovative hardware upgrade for cell-
based three-dimensional bioprinting, Acta Biomater. 10 (2) (2014) 630–640,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2013.10.016.
[62] T.J. Hinton, Q. Jallerat, R.N. Palchesko, J.H. Park, M.S. Grodzicki, H.-J. Shue, M.
H. Ramadan, A.R. Hudson, A.W. Feinberg, Three-dimensional printing of complex
biological structures by freeform reversible embedding of suspended hydrogels,
Sci. Adv. 1 (9) (2015) e1500758, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1500758.
[63] A. Lee, A.R. Hudson, D.J. Shiwarski, J.W. Tashman, T.J. Hinton, S. Yerneni, J.
M. Bliley, P.G. Campbell, A.W. Feinberg, 3D bioprinting of collagen to rebuild
components of the human heart, Science 365 (6452) (2019) 482–487, https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.aav9051.
[64] P. Siqueira, ´E. Siqueira, A.E. De Lima, G. Siqueira, A.D. Pinz´on-Garcia, A.P. Lopes,
M.E.C. Segura, A. Isaac, F.V. Pereira, V.R. Botaro, Three-dimensional stable
alginate-nanocellulose gels for biomedical applications: towards tunable
mechanical properties and cell growing, Nanomaterials (Basel) 9 (1) (2019) 78,
https://doi.org/10.3390/nano9010078.
[65] J. Kajtez, M.F. Wesseler, M. Birtele, F.R. Khorasgani, D. Rylander Ottosson,
A. Heiskanen, T. Kamperman, J. Leijten, A. Martínez-Serrano, N.B. Larsen, T.
E. Angelini, M. Parmar, J.U. Lind, J. Emn´eus, Embedded 3D printing in self-
healing annealable composites for precise patterning of functionally mature
human neural constructs, Adv. Sci. (Weinh). 9 (25) (2022) e2201392, https://doi.
org/10.1002/ADVS.202201392.
[66] E. Mirdamadi, J.W. Tashman, D.J. Shiwarski, R.N. Palchesko, A.W. Feinberg,
FRESH 3D bioprinting a full-size model of the human heart, ACS Biomater Sci.
Eng. 6 (11) (2020) 6453–6459, https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsbiomaterials.0c01133.
[67] M. Rahimnejad, A. Adoungotchodo, N.R. Demarquette, S. Lerouge, FRESH
bioprinting of biodegradable chitosan thermosensitive hydrogels, Bioprinting 27
(2022) e00209, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bprint.2022.e00209.
[68] D.J. Shiwarski, A.R. Hudson, J.W. Tashman, A.W. Feinberg, Emergence of FRESH
3D printing as a platform for advanced tissue biofabrication, APL Bioeng. 5 (1)
(2021) 010904, https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0032777.
[69] I.A. Marques, C. Fernandes, N.T. Tavares, A.S. Pires, A.M. Abrantes, M.F. Botelho,
Magnetic-based human tissue 3D cell culture: a systematic review, Int. J. Mol. Sci.
23 (20) (2022) 12681, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232012681.
[70] H. Tseng, L.R. Balaoing, B. Grigoryan, R.M. Raphael, T.C. Killian, G.R. Souza, K.
J. Grande-Allen, A three-dimensional co-culture model of the aortic valve using
magnetic levitation, Acta Biomater. 10 (1) (2014) 173–182, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.actbio.2013.09.003.
[71] H. Tseng, A.C. Daquinag, G.R. Souza, M.G. Kolonin, Three-dimensional magnetic
levitation culture system simulating white adipose tissue, Methods Mol Biol 1773
(2018) 147–154, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7799-4_12.
[72] A. Van de Walle, J.E. Perez, C. Wilhelm, Magnetic Bioprinting of Stem Cell-Based
Tissues, Bioprinting 30 (2023) e00265, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bprint.2023.
e00265.
[73] A. Van de Walle, A.P. Sangnier, A. Abou-Hassan, A. Curcio, M. H´emadi,
N. Menguy, Y. Lalatonne, N. Luciani, C. Wilhelm, Biosynthesis of Magnetic
nanoparticles from nanodegradation products revealed in human stem cells, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. 116 (10) (2019) 4044–4053, https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1816792116.
[74] G. Trujillo-de Santiago, M.M. Alvarez, M. Samandari, G. Prakash,
G. Chandrabhatla, P.I. Rellstab-S´anchez, B. Byambaa, P.P.S.S. Abadi, S. Mandla,
R.K. Avery, A. Vallejo-Arroyo, Chaotic printing: using chaos to fabricate densely
packed micro- and nanostructures at high resolution and speed, Mater. Horiz. 5
(5) (2018) 813–822, https://doi.org/10.1039/c8mh00344k.
[75] M.M. Alvarez, A. Cantoral-S´anchez, G. Trujillo-de Santiago, Chaotic (Bio)printing
in the context of drug delivery systems, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 216 (2025)
115475, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ADDR.2024.115475.
[76] W. Balestri, R. Sharma, V.A. da Silva, B.C. Bobotis, A.J. Curle, V. Kothakota,
F. Kalantarnia, M.V. Hangad, M. Hoorfar, J.L. Jones, M.`E. Tremblay, Modeling
the neuroimmune system in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases,
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
38 
J. Neuroinflammation 21 (1) (2024) 32, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-024-
03024-8.
[77] I. Chiaradia, M.A. Lancaster, Brain organoids for the study of human
neurobiology at the interface of in vitro and in vivo, Nat. Neurosci. 23 (12) (2020)
1496–1508, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00730-3.
[78] M. Hofer, M.P. Lutolf, Engineering organoids, Nat. Rev. Mater. 6 (5) (2021)
402–420, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41578-021-00279-y.
[79] C.M. Leung, P. De Haan, K. Ronaldson-Bouchard, G.A. Kim, J. Ko, H.S. Rho,
Z. Chen, P. Habibovic, N.L. Jeon, S. Takayama, M.L. Shuler, A guide to the organ-
on-a-chip, Nat. Rev. Methods Primers 2 (1) (2022) 33, https://doi.org/10.1038/
s43586-022-00118-6.
[80] Y. Shin, S.H. Choi, E. Kim, E. Bylykbashi, J.A. Kim, S. Chung, D.Y. Kim, R.D.
Kamm, R.E. Tanzi, Blood–brain barrier dysfunction in a 3D in vitro model of
Alzheimer’s disease, Adv. Sci. (Weinh). 6 (20) (2019) 1900962, https://doi.
org/10.1002/advs.201900962.
[81] H. Cho, T. Hashimoto, E. Wong, Y. Hori, L.B. Wood, L. Zhao, K.M. Haigis, B.T.
Hyman, D. Irimia, Microfluidic chemotaxis platform for differentiating the roles
of soluble and bound amyloid-β on microglial accumulation, Sci. Rep. 3 (2013)
1823, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep01823.
[82] Y.J. Choi, S. Chae, J.H. Kim, K.F. Barald, J.Y. Park, S.H. Lee, Neurotoxic amyloid
beta oligomeric assemblies recreated in microfluidic platform with interstitial
level of slow flow, Sci. Rep. 3 (2013) 1921, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep01921.
[83] S. Seo, C.H. Choi, K.S. Yi, S.U. Kim, K. Lee, N. Choi, H.J. Lee, S.H. Cha, H.N. Kim,
An engineered neurovascular unit for modeling neuroinflammation,
Biofabrication 13 (3) (2021), https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/abf741.
[84] H. Uwamori, T. Higuchi, K. Arai, R. Sudo, Integration of neurogenesis and
angiogenesis models for constructing a neurovascular tissue, Sci. Rep. 7 (1)
(2017) 17349, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-17411-0.
[85] H.G. Yi, Y.H. Jeong, Y. Kim, Y.J. Choi, H.E. Moon, S.H. Park, K.S. Kang, M. Bae,
J. Jang, H. Youn, S.H. Paek, D.W. Cho, A bioprinted human-glioblastoma-on-a-
chip for the identification of patient-specific responses to chemoradiotherapy,
Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3 (2019) 509–519, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-019-
0363-x.
[86] G. Akcay, R. Luttge, Microenvironments matter: advances in brain-on-chip,
Biosensors (Basel) 13 (5) (2023) 551, https://doi.org/10.3390/BIOS13050551.
[87] L. Amirifar, A. Shamloo, R. Nasiri, N.R. de Barros, Z.Z. Wang, B.D. Unluturk,
A. Libanori, O. Ievglevskyi, S.E. Diltemiz, S. Sances, I. Balasingham, S.K. Seidlits,
N. Ashammakhi, Brain-on-a-chip: recent advances in design and techniques for
microfluidic models of the brain in health and disease, Biomaterials 285 (2022)
121531, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIOMATERIALS.2022.121531.
[88] A. Harper, Mouse models of neurological disorders—a comparison of heritable
and acquired traits, Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1802 (10) (2010) 785–795, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.05.009.
[89] D. Siolas, G.J. Hannon, Patient-derived tumor xenografts: transforming clinical
samples into mouse models, Cancer Res. 73 (17) (2013) 5315–5319, https://doi.
org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1069.
[90] B.J. Casey, C.E. Glatt, F.S. Lee, Treating the developing versus developed brain:
translating preclinical mouse and human studies, Neuron 86 (6) (2015)
1358–1368, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.05.020.
[91] A.F. Haddad, J.S. Young, D. Amara, M.S. Berger, D.R. Raleigh, M.K. Aghi, N.A.
Butowski, Mouse models of glioblastoma for the evaluation of novel therapeutic
strategies, Neurooncol Adv 3 (1) (2021) vdab100, https://doi.org/10.1093/noajn
l/vdab100.
[92] Y. Liu, F. Zhou, H. Ali, J.D. Lathia, P. Chen, Immunotherapy for glioblastoma:
current state, challenges, and future perspectives, Cell. Mol. Immunol. 21 (12)
(2024) 1354–1375, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41423-024-01226-x.
[93] M. Jucker, The benefits and limitations of animal models for translational
research in neurodegenerative diseases, Nat. Med. 16 (11) (2010) 1210–1214,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2224.
[94] M.J. Page, J.E. McKenzie, P.M. Bossuyt, I. Boutron, T.C. Hoffmann, C.D. Mulrow,
L. Shamseer, J.M. Tetzlaff, E.A. Akl, S.E. Brennan, R. Chou, J. Glanville, J.
M. Grimshaw, A. Hr´objartsson, M.M. Lalu, T. Li, E.W. Loder, E. Mayo-Wilson,
S. McDonald, L.A. McGuinness, L.A. Stewart, J. Thomas, A.C. Tricco, V.A. Welch,
P. Whiting, D. Moher, The PRISMA 2020 Statement: An Updated Guideline for
Reporting Systematic Reviews, BMJ 372 (2021) n71, https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.n71.
[95] H.-W. Lee, K.-T. Chen, Y.-C.-E. Li, Y.-C. Yeh, C.-Y. Chiang, I.-C. Lee, Dual
crosslinking silk fibroin/pectin-based bioink development and the application on
neural stem/progenitor cells spheroid laden 3D bioprinting, Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 269 (2024) 131720, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2024.131720.
[96] R. Lozano, L. Stevens, B.C. Thompson, K.J. Gilmore, R. Gorkin, E.M. Stewart,
M. in het Panhuis, M. Romero-Ortega, G.G. Wallace, 3D Printing of Layered
Brain-like Structures Using Peptide Modified Gellan Gum Substrates, Biomaterials
67 (2015) 264–273, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.07.022.
[97] L. Zhou, A.C. Wolfes, Y. Li, D.C.W. Chan, H. Ko, F.G. Szele, H. Bayley, Lipid-
bilayer-supported 3D printing of human cerebral cortex cells reveals
developmental interactions, Adv. Mater. 32 (31) (2020) e2002183, https://doi.
org/10.1002/adma.202002183.
[98] Q. Gu, E. Tomaskovic-Crook, R. Lozano, Y. Chen, R.M. Kapsa, Q. Zhou, G.
G. Wallace, J.M. Crook, Functional 3D neural mini-tissues from printed gel-based
bioink and human neural stem cells, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 5 (12) (2016)
1429–1438, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201600095.
[99] Q. Gu, E. Tomaskovic-Crook, G.G. Wallace, J.M. Crook, 3D bioprinting human
induced pluripotent stem cell constructs for in situ cell proliferation and
successive multilineage differentiation, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 6 (17) (2017),
https://doi.org/10.1002/ADHM.201700175.
[100] Q. Gu, E. Tomaskovic-Crook, G.G. Wallace, J.M. Crook, Engineering human
neural tissue by 3D bioprinting, Methods Mol. Biol. 1758 (2018) 129–138,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-7741-3_10.
[101] V. Fantini, M. Bordoni, F. Scocozza, M. Conti, E. Scarian, S. Carelli, A.M. Di
Giulio, S. Marconi, O. Pansarasa, F. Auricchio, C. Cereda, Bioink composition and
printing parameters for 3D modeling neural tissue, Cells 8 (8) (2019) 830,
https://doi.org/10.3390/cells8080830.
[102] E. Abelseth, L. Abelseth, L. De La Vega, S.T. Beyer, S.J. Wadsworth, S.M. Willerth,
3D printing of neural tissues derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells
using a fibrin-based bioink, ACS Biomater Sci. Eng. 5 (1) (2019) 234–243,
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.8b01235.
[103] R. Sharma, I.P.M. Smits, L. De La Vega, C. Lee, S.M. Willerth, 3D bioprinting
pluripotent stem cell derived neural tissues using a novel fibrin bioink containing
drug releasing microspheres, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8 (2020) 57, https://doi.
org/10.3389/fbioe.2020.00057.
[104] M. Restan Perez, R. Sharma, N.Z. Masri, S.M. Willerth, 3D bioprinting
mesenchymal stem cell-derived neural tissues using a fibrin-based bioink,
Biomolecules 11 (8) (2021) 1250, https://doi.org/10.3390/biom11081250.
[105] M.R. Perez, N.Z. Masri, J. Walters-Shumka, S. Kahale, S.M. Willerth, Protocol for
3D bioprinting mesenchymal stem cell-derived neural tissues using a fibrin-based
bioink, Bio Protoc 13 (9) (2023) e4663, https://doi.org/10.21769/
BIOPROTOC.4663.
[106] J. Chrenek, R. Kirsch, K. Scheck, S.M. Willerth, Protocol for printing 3D neural
tissues using the BIO X equipped with a pneumatic printhead, STAR Protoc 3 (2)
(2022) 101348, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xpro.2022.101348.
[107] C. Benwood, J. Walters-Shumka, K. Scheck, S.M. Willerth, 3D bioprinting patient-
derived induced pluripotent stem cell models of Alzheimer’s disease using a smart
bioink, Bioelectron Med 9 (1) (2023) 10, https://doi.org/10.1186/s42234-02
3-00112-7.
[108] Y.-C.-E. Li, Y.A. Jodat, R. Samanipour, G. Zorzi, K. Zhu, M. Hirano, K. Chang,
A. Arnaout, S. Hassan, N. Matharu, A. Khademhosseini, M. Hoorfar, S.R. Shin,
Toward a neurospheroid niche model: optimizing embedded 3D bioprinting for
fabrication of neurospheroid brain-like co-culture constructs, Biofabrication 13
(1) (2020), https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/ABC1BE.
[109] M.C. Chiang, C.J.B. Nicol, C.H. Lin, S.J. Chen, C. Yen, R.N. Huang, Nanogold
induces anti-inflammation against oxidative stress induced in human neural stem
cells exposed to amyloid-beta peptide, Neurochem. Int. 145 (2021) 104992,
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUINT.2021.104992.
[110] B.A.G. de Melo, M.V. Mundim, R.M.R. Lemes, E.M. Cruz, T.N. Ribeiro, C.
F. Santiago, J.H.L. da Fonsˆeca, J.C. Benincasa, R.S. Stilhano, N. Mantovani, L.
C. Santana, R. Dur˜aes-Carvalho, R.S. Diaz, L.M.R. Janini, J.T. Maricato, M.
A. Porcionatto, 3D bioprinted neural-like tissue as a platform to study
neurotropism of mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2, Adv Biol (Weing) 6 (8) (2022)
e2200002, https://doi.org/10.1002/adbi.202200002.
[111] E. Scarian, M. Bordoni, V. Fantini, E. Jacchetti, M.T. Raimondi, L. Diamanti,
S. Carelli, C. Cereda, O. Pansarasa, Patients’ Stem cells differentiation in a 3D
environment as a promising experimental tool for the study of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (10) (2022) 5344, https://doi.org/10.3390/
IJMS23105344.
[112] I. Matthiesen, M. Jury, F. Rasti Boroojeni, S.L. Ludwig, M. Holzreuter,
S. Buchmann, A. Åman Tr¨ager, R. Selegård, T.E. Winkler, D. Aili, A. Herland,
Astrocyte 3D culture and bioprinting using peptide functionalized hyaluronan
hydrogels, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 24 (1) (2023) 2165871, https://doi.org/
10.1080/14686996.2023.2165871.
[113] Z. Wang, C. Huang, H. Liu, Z. Shi, X. Han, S. Li, J. Huang, Z. Wang, Y. Yan,
Z. Chen, Two-step method fabricating a 3D nerve cell model with brain-like
mechanical properties and tunable porosity vascular structures via coaxial
printing, Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 224 (2023) 113202, https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.COLSURFB.2023.113202.
[114] B. Yavuz, A.P.Z. Yildiz, E.S. Abamor, H. Darici, A.M. Allahverdiyev,
Neuroprotective effects of wharton jelly stem cell-derived exosomes developed as
nano-drug delivery system in 6-OHDA-induced neurotoxicity in 2D and 3D
neuronal cell line, Regen. Eng. Transl. Med. 10 (2023) 243–252, https://doi.org/
10.1007/s40883-023-00322-0.
[115] L. Wang, L. Bai, S. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Liu, C. Zhang, S. Yao, J. He, C. Liu, D. Li,
Biomimetic design and integrated biofabrication of an in-vitro three-dimensional
multi-scale multilayer cortical model, Mater. Today Bio 28 (2024) 101176,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2024.101176.
[116] E.M. Cruz, L.S. Machado, L.N. Zamproni, L.V. Bim, P.S. Ferreira, L.A. Pinto, L.
A. Pessan, E.H. Backes, M.A. Porcionatto, A gelatin methacrylate-based hydrogel
as a potential bioink for 3D bioprinting and neuronal differentiation,
Pharmaceutics 15 (2) (2023), https://doi.org/10.3390/
PHARMACEUTICS15020627.
[117] J. Li, A. Reimers, K.M. Dang, M.G.K. Brunk, J. Drewes, U.M. Hirsch, C. Willems, C.
E.H. Schmelzer, T. Groth, A.S. Nia, X. Feng, R. Adelung, W.D. Sacher, F. Schütt, J.
K.S. Poon, 3D printed neural tissues with in situ optical dopamine sensors,
Biosens. Bioelectron. 222 (2023) 114942, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
BIOS.2022.114942.
[118] D. Joung, V. Truong, C.C. Neitzke, S.Z. Guo, P.J. Walsh, J.R. Monat, F. Meng, S.
H. Park, J.R. Dutton, A.M. Parr, M.C. McAlpine, 3D printed stem-cell derived
neural progenitors generate spinal cord scaffolds, Adv. Funct. Mater. 28 (39)
(2018) 1801850, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201801850.
[119] L. de la Vega, D.A.R. G´omez, E. Abelseth, L. Abelseth, V.A. da Silva, S.M. Willerth,
3D bioprinting human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural tissues using
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
39 
a novel lab-on-a-printer technology, Applied Sciences (Switzerland) 8 (12) (2018)
2414, https://doi.org/10.3390/app8122414.
[120] Y. Han, M. King, E. Tikhomirov, P. Barasa, C.D.S. Souza, J. Lindh, D. Baltriukiene,
L. Ferraiuolo, M. Azzouz, M.R. Gullo, E.N. Kozlova, Towards 3D bioprinted spinal
cord organoids, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (10) (2022) 5788, https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms23105788.
[121] S. Song, Y. Li, J. Huang, S. Cheng, Z. Zhang, Inhibited Astrocytic differentiation in
neural stem cell-laden 3D bioprinted conductive composite hydrogel scaffolds for
repair of spinal cord injury, Biomater. Adv. 148 (2023) 213385, https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.BIOADV.2023.213385.
[122] X. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Long, H. Zhang, T. Xu, C. Niu, Coaxially bioprinted
cell-laden tubular-like structure for studying glioma angiogenesis, Front. Bioeng.
Biotechnol. 9 (2021) 761861, https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2021.761861.
[123] C. Lee, E. Abelseth, L. de la Vega, S.M. Willerth, Bioprinting a novel glioblastoma
tumor model using a fibrin-based bioink for drug screening, Mater. Today Chem.
12 (2019) 78–84, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtchem.2018.12.005.
[124] I.P.M. Smits, O.W. Blaschuk, S.M. Willerth, Novel N-cadherin antagonist causes
glioblastoma cell death in a 3D bioprinted co-culture model, Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 529 (2) (2020) 162–168, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bbrc.2020.06.001.
[125] M. Tang, S.K. Tiwari, K. Agrawal, M. Tan, J. Dang, T. Tam, J. Tian, X. Wan,
J. Schimelman, S. You, Q. Xia, T.M. Rana, S. Chen, Rapid 3D Bioprinting of
glioblastoma model mimicking native biophysical heterogeneity, Small 17 (15)
(2021) e2006050, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202006050.
[126] L. Neufeld, E. Yeini, N. Reisman, Y. Shtilerman, D. Ben-Shushan, S. Pozzi, A.
Madi, G. Tiram, A. Eldar-Boock, S. Ferber, R. Grossman, Z. Ram, R. Satchi-
Fainaro, Microengineered perfusable 3D-bioprinted glioblastoma model for in
vivo mimicry of tumor microenvironment, Sci. Adv. 7 (34) (2021) eabi9119,
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abi9119.
[127] V. Sunil, J.H. Teoh, B.C. Mohan, A. Mozhi, C.H. Wang, Bioengineered
immunomodulatory organelle targeted nanozymes for photodynamic
immunometabolic therapy, J. Control. Release 350 (2022) 215–227, https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.JCONREL.2022.08.025.
[128] E. Tomaskovic-Crook, J.M. Crook, 3D bioprinting electrically conductive bioink
with human neural stem cells for human neural tissues, Methods Mol. Biol. 2140
(2020) 159–170, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-0520-2_10.
[129] J. Kapr, L. Petersilie, T. Distler, I. Lauria, F. Bendt, C.M. Sauter, A.R. Boccaccini,
C.R. Rose, E. Fritsche, Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural
progenitor cells produce distinct neural 3D In vitro models depending on
alginate/gellan gum/laminin hydrogel blend properties, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 10
(16) (2021) e2100131, https://doi.org/10.1002/ADHM.202100131.
[130] B.A.G. de Melo, E.M. Cruz, T.N. Ribeiro, M.V. Mundim, M.A. Porcionatto, 3D
bioprinting of murine cortical astrocytes for engineering neural-like tissue, J. Vis.
Exp. (173) (2021), https://doi.org/10.3791/62691.
[131] M.A. Sullivan, S. Lane, A. Volkerling, M. Engel, E.L. Werry, M. Kassiou, Three-
dimensional bioprinting of stem cell-derived central nervous system cells enables
astrocyte growth, vasculogenesis, and enhances neural differentiation/function,
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 120 (10) (2023) 3079–3091, https://doi.org/10.1002/
bit.28470.
[132] A.P. Haring, E.G. Thompson, Y. Tong, S. Laheri, E. Cesewski, H. Sontheimer, B.N.
Johnson, Process- and bio-inspired hydrogels for 3D bioprinting of soft free-
standing neural and glial tissues, Biofabrication 11 (2) (2019) 025009,
https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/ab02c9.
[133] C.D. Lindsay, J.G. Roth, B.L. LeSavage, S.C. Heilshorn, Bioprinting of stem cell
expansion lattices, Acta Biomater. 95 (2019) 225–235, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.actbio.2019.05.014.
[134] Q. Li, G. Qi, X. Liu, J. Bai, J. Zhao, G. Tang, Y.S. Zhang, R. Chen-Tsai, M. Zhang,
D. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Atala, J.Q. He, X.S. Sun, Universal peptide hydrogel for
scalable physiological formation and bioprinting of 3D spheroids from human
induced pluripotent stem cells, Adv. Funct. Mater. 31 (41) (2021), https://doi.
org/10.1002/adfm.202104046.
[135] L. Ning, H. Sun, T. Lelong, R. Guilloteau, N. Zhu, D.J. Schreyer, X. Chen, 3D
Bioprinting of scaffolds with living schwann cells for potential nerve tissue
engineering applications, Biofabrication 10 (3) (2018) 035014, https://doi.
org/10.1088/1758-5090/aacd30.
[136] S. Chatelin, A. Constantinesco, R. Willinger, Fifty years of brain tissue mechanical
testing: from in vitro to in vivo investigations, Biorheology 47 (5–6) (2010)
255–276, https://doi.org/10.3233/BIR-2010-0576.
[137] L. Chen, C. Yan, Z. Zheng, Functional polymer surfaces for controlling cell
behaviors, Mater. Today. 21 (1) (2018) 38–59, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mattod.2017.07.002.
[138] K. Webb, V. Hlady, P.A. Tresco, Relative importance of surface wettability and
charged functional groups on NIH 3T3 fibroblast attachment, spreading, and
cytoskeletal organization, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 41 (3) (1998) 422–430, https://
doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-4636(19980905)41:3<422::AID-JBM12>3.0.CO;2-
K.
[139] G. Potjewyd, S. Moxon, T. Wang, M. Domingos, N.M. Hooper, Tissue engineering
3D neurovascular units: a biomaterials and bioprinting perspective, Trends
Biotechnol. 36 (4) (2018) 457–472, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tibtech.2018.01.003.
[140] N.J. Shah, Z. Abbas, D. Ridder, M. Zimmermann, A.M. Oros-Peusquens, A novel
MRI-based quantitative water content atlas of the human brain, Neuroimage 252
(2022) 119014, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119014.
[141] Y.H. Kim, S.H. Choi, C. D’Avanzo, M. Hebisch, C. Sliwinski, E. Bylykbashi, K.
J. Washicosky, J.B. Klee, O. Brüstle, R.E. Tanzi, D.Y. Kim, A 3D human neural cell
culture system for modeling Alzheimer’s disease, Nat. Protoc. 10 (7) (2015)
985–1006, https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.065.
[142] L. Ouyang, R. Yao, Y. Zhao, W. Sun, Effect of bioink properties on printability and
cell viability for 3D bioplotting of embryonic stem cells, Biofabrication 8 (3)
(2016) 035020, https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/8/3/035020.
[143] T. Kanderi, S. Munakomi, V. Gupta, Glioblastoma Multiforme. 2024 May 6. In:
StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing. PMID:
32644380.
[144] Y. Wang, S. Li, Y. Peng, W. Ma, Y. Wang, W. Li, Progress in phase III clinical trials
of molecular targeted therapy and immunotherapy for glioblastoma, Cancer
Innov. 2 (2) (2023) 114–130, https://doi.org/10.1002/cai2.59.
[145] Z.L. Liu, H.H. Chen, L.L. Zheng, L.P. Sun, L. Shi, Angiogenic Signaling Pathways
and Anti-Angiogenic Therapy for Cancer. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 8 (1)
(2023) 198, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-023-01460-1.
[146] G. Gao, M. Ahn, W.W. Cho, B.S. Kim, D.W. Cho, 3D Printing of Pharmaceutical
Application, Drug Screening and Drug Delivery. Pharmaceutics. 13 (9) (2021)
1373, https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics13091373.
[147] S. Naghieh, M.D. Sarker, E. Abelseth, X. Chen, Indirect 3D bioprinting and
characterization of alginate scaffolds for potential nerve tissue engineering
applications, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. 93 (2019) 183–193, https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.JMBBM.2019.02.014.
[148] Z. Wu, Q. Li, S. Xie, X. Shan, Z. Cai, In vitro and in vivo biocompatibility
evaluation of a 3D bioprinted gelatin-sodium alginate/rat schwann-cell scaffold,
Mater. Sci. Eng. C Mater. Biol. Appl. 109 (2020) 110530, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.msec.2019.110530.
[149] J. Chen, D. Huang, L. Wang, J. Hou, H. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Zhong, Y. Wang, Y. Wu,
W. Huang, 3D bioprinted multiscale composite scaffolds based on gelatin
methacryloyl (GelMA)/chitosan microspheres as a modular bioink for enhancing
3D neurite outgrowth and elongation, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 574 (2020)
162–173, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.04.040.
[150] C. Whitehouse, N. Corbett, J. Brownlees, 3D models of neurodegeneration:
implementation in drug discovery, Trends Pharmacol Sci. 44 (4) (2023) 208–221,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2023.01.005.
[151] S.M. Willerth, Bioprinting neural tissues using stem cells as a tool for screening
drug targets for Alzheimer’s disease, J. 3D Print. Med. 2 (4) (2018) 163–165,
https://doi.org/10.2217/3dp-2018-0016.
[152] A.A. Friedman, A. Letai, D.E. Fisher, K.T. Flaherty, Precision medicine for cancer
with next-generation functional diagnostics, Nat. Rev. Cancer 15 (12) (2015)
747–756, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc4015.
[153] J. Frearson, P. Wyatt, Drug Discovery in Academia: The Third Way? Expert Opin
Drug Discov. 5 (10) (2010) 909–919, https://doi.org/10.1517/17460441.2010
.506508.
[154] M. Everts, M. Drew, Successfully Navigating the Valley of Death: The Importance
of Accelerators to Support Academic Drug Discovery and Development, Expert
Opin Drug Discov 19 (2) (2024) 253–258, https://doi.org/10.1080/
17460441.2023.2284824.
[155] A.M. Palmer, The Role of the Blood Brain Barrier in Neurodegenerative Disorders
and Their Treatment, J Alzheimers Dis 24 (4) (2011) 643–656, https://doi.org/
10.3233/JAD-2011-110368.
[156] R.M. Linville, P.C. Searson, Next-Generation in Vitro Blood–Brain Barrier Models:
Benchmarking and Improving Model Accuracy, Fluids Barriers CNS 18 (1) (2021)
56, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12987-021-00291-y.
[157] K.N.U. Galpayage Dona, S.H. Ramirez, A.M. Andrews, A next-generation 3D
tissue-engineered model of the human brain microvasculature to study the blood-
brain barrier, Bioengineering (Basel) 10 (7) (2023) 817, https://doi.org/10.3390/
bioengineering10070817.
[158] H. Han, S. Lee, G. Gao, H.G. Yi, S.H. Paek, J. Jang, Cerebrovascular-Specific
Extracellular Matrix Bioink Promotes Blood-Brain Barrier Properties, Biomater
Res 28 (2024) 0115, https://doi.org/10.34133/bmr.0115.
[159] L.S. Paone, M.M. Benmassaoud, A. Curran, S.L. Vega, P.A. Galie, A 3D-printed
blood-brain barrier model with tunable topology and cell-matrix interactions,
Biofabrication 16 (1) (2023), https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/ad0260.
[160] M. Tang, J.N. Rich, S. Chen, Biomaterials and 3D Bioprinting Strategies to Model
Glioblastoma and the Blood–Brain Barrier, Adv Mater 33 (5) (2021) e2004776,
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202004776.
[161] V.A. da Silva, R. Sharma, E. Shteinberg, V. Patel, L. Bhardwaj, T. Garay, B. Yu, S.
M. Willerth, Machine learning approaches to 3D models for drug screening,
Biomed. Mater. Devices. 2 (2024) 695–720, https://doi.org/10.1007/s44174-
023-00142-4.
A. Orr et al.
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 218 (2025) 115524 
40 
