Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
Available online 25 January 2024
1773-2247/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Review article 
Recent advancements in nanoconstructs for the theranostics applications 
for triple negative breast cancer 
Ashutosh Gupta a, Kumar Nishchaya b, Moumita Saha a, Gaurisha Alias Resha Ramnath Naik b, 
Sarika Yadav c, Shreya Srivastava d, Amrita Arup Roy b, Sudheer Moorkoth a, Srinivas Mutalik b, 
Namdev Dhas b,* 
a Department of Pharmaceutical Quality Assurance, Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, Udupi, 
Karnataka State, 576104, India 
b Department of Pharmaceutics, Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, Udupi, Karnataka State, 
576104, India 
c CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, 226001, India 
d Goel Institute of Pharmacy and Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, 226019, India   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Pathophysiology and types of TNBC 
Drug resistance 
Gene therapy 
Nanomedicine 
Cancer treatment and diagnosis 
Nanorobotics 
A B S T R A C T   
Cancer is a major public health concern worldwide; it is the second-highest cause of death in the United States. 
According to projections of cancer incidence and mortality rates throughout the world for the year 2023, triple- 
negative breast cancer (TNBC) is expected to be the leading cause of cancer related death among women 
worldwide. Traditional strategies for the treatment of TNBC have many drawbacks, such as drug resistance, 
toxicity etc. Discovering novel treatment delivery techniques and researching innovative, efficient drug delivery 
methods is important. This review discusses the types and subtypes of TNBC. The problems associated with 
standard therapies, mechanism of drug resistance for TNBC and highlights the need to develop novel therapeutic 
strategies. It provides information on the relative prevalence and severity of TNBC in the world of cancer. Several 
treatment approaches viz. targeted therapy, gene therapy, bacterial-mediated therapy, nanomedicine, immune 
checkpoint inhibitors, theranostic, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, herbal therapy, and AI-based 
treatment for TNBC, are discussed in detail. Additionally, diagnostic techniques, including imaging and bi­
opsy, gene expression profiling, mammography, magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound, computed tomography 
scan, positron emission tomography scan, and immunohistochemistry, have been discussed in the review for 
effective cancer treatment. This in-depth analysis highlights the need for innovative and individualized TNBC 
care methods to serve patients better.   
1. Introduction 
Cancer has long been a significant public health crisis in the world, 
indicated by the complex progression of disease conditions that are 
evidenced by a gradual loss of growth control [1]. The challenge lies in 
the specific diagnosis of cancer due to the diverse tissues it affects. 
Among different types of cancer, breast cancer projects as the most 
dominant form and the primary reason for cancer-related deaths in 
women worldwide, contributing significantly as the second-leading 
cause of mortality in 2022 [2,3]. 
Breast cancer (BC) is a heterogenous condition with numerous 
genomic transformations that lead to a metastatic state. The new 
incidences of invasive BC in 2023 were expected to be 279,790 in 
women of the USA, alongside 55,720 new incidences of DCIS. Similarly, 
2800 new cases were expected to be diagnosed in men [4]. The rate of 
BC incidences is undergoing a gradual increase of about 0.5% per year 
since the mid-2000s. From birth to death, females have a 12.9% (1 in 8) 
chance of developing breast cancer, which varies from 2.1% to 7.0% by 
age. A statistical study from 2023 states that breast cancer accounts for 
31% of all new diagnoses in women. The risk for a man to be diagnosed 
with BC is about 1 in 833, which amounts to less than 1% of all BC cases 
in the USA. Of the estimated 3,00,590 new breast cancer cases and 43, 
700 deaths for both genders in the United States, 2800 and 530 were in 
males respectively and 2,97,790 and 43,170 respectively were estimated 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: namdevdhas89@gmail.com (N. Dhas).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jddst 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jddst.2024.105401 
Received 10 September 2023; Received in revised form 4 January 2024; Accepted 18 January 2024   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
2
in females. The highest number of estimated new cases in the USA is in 
California, around 32,020, whereas the lowest is in Wyoming, i.e., 460 
[5]. 
The basic pathogenesis explains genetic expression and alteration in 
the patterns in three of the primary targets. These cancer subtypes differ 
based on their receptor profile, whether present (+) or absent (−), in the 
BC subtype. The lack of overexpression or amplification of the human 
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2), estrogen receptors (ER) 
and progesterone receptors (PR) are characteristics of triple-negative 
breast cancer (TNBC). It counts for 10–20% of newly diagnosed occur­
rences of BC worldwide and that of 12% in the USA. It frequently affects 
young women, particularly those of African ancestry [6,7]. Especially in 
comparison to those European American women, African American 
women have an increased incidence of TNBC with deteriorated clinical 
manifestations [8]. Breast cancer statistics showed in Fig. 1. 
TNBC includes a large spectral range of breast malignancies. It is also 
highly heterogenous and is divided into many subtypes based on his­
tology, molecule features, and clinical behavior [9]. TNBC is well known 
for its high recurrence and poor prognosis with a 5-year survival rate of 
8–16% lower than rest of the breast cancers [10]. Women below the age 
of 40 are more likely to have it diagnosed. It can spread swiftly and is 
extremely aggressive [11]. Its resistance to hormone therapy further 
complicates the circumstances of the incidence [12]. The unique chal­
lenge posed by TNBC is that it is an aggressive type which spreads 
rapidly as cells multiply, and a lack of progesterone and oestrogen re­
ceptors implies that it is resistant to hormonal therapy making it more 
serious than other types of breast cancers [13]. In contrast to the other 
types, which spread to the bone and soft tissues, TNBC mostly affects the 
brain and lungs. 
According to cancer statistics and studies it is seen that Asian 
countries has higher proportion of aggressive subtype of TNBC [14]. 
Specially in India, around 1,00,000 people are diagnosed with BC 
annually. With global cancer incidence and deaths expected to reach 
29.8 million and 16.93 million respectively, by the year 2025, the rising 
prevalence is attributed to factors like urbanization, aging population, 
unhealthy lifestyles and pollution [15–17]. In India, like the USA, breast 
cancer is the second leading most common cancer after lung cancer. 
Diagnosis of breast cancer is the major obstacle in the proper manage­
ment of the disease. Around 90% in the high-income countries, 60% in 
India and 40% in South Africa is the survival rate according to WHO [4, 
18]. 
The current treatment available for TNBC is chemotherapy, radiation 
therapy and hormone therapy in traditional delivery approach. How­
ever, these therapies often fail to eradicate the tumor because of the 
insufficient drug delivery to the tumor site and may cause the recurrence 
of the tumor. Thus, the treatment of TNBC has been a challenge for the 
medical practitioners. The TME and genomic characteristics play a vital 
role in the pathogenesis of TNBC and a thorough knowledge of these 
factors is essential for the development of newer strategies to combat the 
disease. This article aims to probe into the complexities of TNBC 
including its current treatment modalities, recent advancement with 
respect to therapeutic and diagnostic applications and the future pros­
pects. We intend to comprehensively explore these factors and 
contribute to gaining an in-depth understanding of TNBC and help in 
devising efficient strategies for the treatment of TNBC. 
1.1. Types of breast cancer 
In the year 2000, Perou and Sorlie introduced a fundamental sorting 
system for Breast Cancer, which recognized 4 distinct subtypes: luminal 
A and luminal B (characterized by the presence of the estrogen receptor 
(ER)), basal-like, and HER2-enriched (characterized by the absence of 
ER expression). The reclassification of BC clinical management has 
shifted from a focus on tumor burden to a more biologically-centered 
Fig. 1. Statistics of TNBC (A) Estimated breast cancer cases and deaths by sex in United States, (B) % Probability of breast cancer, (C) Estimated new cases for breast 
cancers by state in United States Modified from Ref (2). 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
3
approach. Hormone receptor-positive breast malignancies refer to BCs 
that exhibit the presence of ER and progesterone receptor (PR). At the 
same time, TNBC is characterized by the absence of ER, PR, and HER2 
expression. 
Based on histological and molecular characteristics, the current 
clinical approach commonly utilizes an approximate categorization of 
five subtypes. BC subtypes include Triple negative, HER-2 enriched 
(non-luminal), Luminal B-like HER2+, Luminal B-like HER2-, and 
Luminal A-like [19]. 
1.2. Subtypes of TNBC 
TNBC subtyping is based on biological and clinical attributes which 
may aid in identifying therapeutic markers, optimizing designs for a 
clinical trial, and stratifying patient risk [20]. 
1.2.1. Histological classification of triple-negative breast cancer as per 
WHO classification 
Invasive Carcinomas: Invasive carcinomas are also known as 
infiltrating breast cancer and are classified into Invasive Ductal car­
cinoma – No Special Type (IDC-NST), Triple Negative Invasive 
Lobular Carcinoma (TN-ILC), and Metaplastic Carcinoma. The high- 
grade IDC-NST is characterized by pushing non-invasive borders, 
widespread geographic necrosis, an absence of nuclear pleomorphism 
differentiation, increased mitotic activity, and a rapid inflammatory 
infiltrate [21]. IDC shows poorly differentiated cells with a surrounding 
lymphoplasmacytic invasion and well-circumscribed having medullary 
features. DCIS is considered to be a precursor of IDC. The transformation 
of normal tissue to DCIS and IDC leads to a gradual rise in tissue stiffness, 
which is highest at the invasive front [22]. It is characterized by cyto­
keratin 5/6 positivity and a high rate of TP53 mutation. 
ILC is the second most prevalent histologic BC, constituting about 
5–15%. They tend to be large, multifocal, slow growing and are more 
than often mammographically occult [23]. Lobular carcinoma com­
prises loosened monomorphic cells that lack tubule formation due to the 
inactivation of E-cadherin, a cell adhesion molecule [24]. E-cadherin 
expression is reduced or absent in 84 % of invasive lobular carcinomas 
[25]. 
MpCC is a very rare type of breast cancer. It contains heterogenous 
group neoplasm, including the epithelial cell and mesenchymal cell. It 
accounts for 0.2–5% of all types of breast cancer. The Triple negative 
phenotype of MpBC is more therapeutically aggressive and has a poorer 
prognosis than that of TNBC [26]. The MpBC is categorized into 5 
subtypes: spindle cell carcinoma (SpCC), squamous cell carcinoma 
(SqCC), matrix-producing carcinoma, and mixed carcinoma. SpCC is a 
highly aggressive variant of highly atypical spindle-cell, with necrosis 
and numerous mitotic figures [28]. Less than 0.3% of the diagnosed 
cancers are of SpCC [27]. Metaplastic SqCC is an aggressive carcinoma 
that amounts to less than 0.1% of BCs. SqCC must be suspected if 
atypical squamous epithelial is adjacent to atypical ductal epithelial 
[28]. Matrix Producing carcinoma (MPC) is a frequently diagnosed 
subtype of MpBC and has well demarcated nodules with central necrosis 
with a chondroid and osteoid matrix. Around 94% of MPC has a large 
area of necrosis occupying 47% of the tumor area with a peripheral ring. 
It has been associated with micro-glandular adenosis [28–30]. Mixed 
Metaplastic BC includes chondroid metaplasia, carcinosarcoma, and 
osseous metaplasia carcinoma [26]. It is rare; not many cases have been 
diagnosed in this subtype [31]. 
Salivary Gland type Breast tumor are rare tumors that pose a 
challenge in the diagnosis. They are subcategorised into Adenoid Cystic 
Carcinoma (AdCC) and Secretory Breast Carcinoma (SBC). AdCC has 
characteristics overlying to those of the basal–like subtype of TNBC 
[32]. AdCC is a type of salivary gland type tumor in the breast. There are 
three AdCC i.e. Classic, Solid basaloid, and AdCC with high-grade 
transformation [33]. The tumors of AdCC were well differentiated, 
grade 1, with negative axillary lymph nodes. A good prognosis of TNBC 
with AdCC was reported [34]. SBC is a rare and low-grade TNBC variant. 
SBC is a movable, palpable, well-circumscribed mass present in the 
subareolar region, which is tan to yellow in color and round or angulated 
in shape, having a vacuolated or finely granulated cytoplasm. SBCs have 
a good prognosis and are sometimes presented with axillary lymph node 
metastasis. It has three main morphological components: solid, tubular, 
and microcystic [35,36]. 
Neuroendocrine Neoplasm: Neuroendocrine carcinomas are char­
acterized by metastatic well-differentiated endocrine-neoplasm of 
visceral origin. It is highly aggressive and has small-cell as well as large- 
cell carcinomas. Neuroendocrine differentiation is common in BC [37, 
38]. They are negative for GATA3 and TRPS1 as they originate from 
breast cancer-specific stem cells [39]. 
Very rare type: As the name suggests, these carcinomas are very 
rare. They are classified into subtypes. It includes a subtype of Invasive 
Breast Carcinoma that is Mucinous Cystadenocarcinoma. It has 
unique features like a high-columnal cell enriched with intracellular 
mucin and a lumen containing high levels of extracellular mucin. 
Genomically these tumors are characterized by PI3CA, RB1, CRAS3, and 
TP53 mutations [40,41]. Also subtypes of Salivary gland-type breast 
tumor are included in rare type carcinomas like Acinic Cell Carcinoma 
(AcCC), which is a Triple negative phenotype and is like AcCC of the 
salivary gland. It is less aggressive than TNBC. It shows a serous acinar 
differentiation along with zymogen-like granules in its cytoplasm [42, 
43]. AcCC is usually benign but can occasionally cause metastasis [44]. 
Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma (MEC) is identified by basaloid, epider­
moid, intermediate, and mucinous cells in a solid and cystic arrange­
ment. MEC has characteristic MAML2 rearrangements and lacks TP53. 
The MEC of a breast is very similar to that of a salivary gland. It mostly 
affects middle-aged women [33,45,46]. Polymorphous adenocarci­
noma (PmA) is the rarest subtype of TNBC. It is not a low-grade car­
cinoma, which was known for the rest Salivary gland-like carcinoma. 
PRKD1 mutations are the most specific feature of PmA. They are related 
to Tyrosine kinase receptors, PI3K pathway, NOTCH pathway, and 
chromatin remodelers [44–46]. Tall-cell carcinoma with reversed 
polarity (TCCRP) is a rare tall-cell variant of papillary breast carcinoma 
(TCVPBC), which imitates papillary thyroid cancer. The rate of 
lymph-node metastasis is low. The mutations observed in 90% of pa­
tients are IDH2, and 60% showed PIK3CA. They are composed of 
columnar epithelial cells that show reversed polarity with large cyto­
plasms and basally located nuclei rather than apically located [47,48]. 
1.2.2. Medullary carcinoma 
Medullary carcinomas are rare and have specific features such as 
well-constrained, pushed margins and syncytial growth pattern, a 
moderate or marked lymphoplasmacytic invasion, and no tubule for­
mation. MC and TNBC have a characteristic way of Genetic changes [21, 
49]. Adenoid cystic carcinoma, apocrine carcinoma, and IDC-NST with 
medullary pattern all have a favorable prognosis, whereas the most 
aggressive subtypes are ILC and metaplastic carcinoma [50]. The 
number of positive lymph nodes increased significantly with tumor size 
in invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) and mixed NST and lobular carci­
noma (NST-ILC), but only slightly in metaplastic carcinoma. Despite the 
advent of molecular subtyping of breast cancer, the histologic classifi­
cation of TNBC remains clinically significant [51]. 
1.2.3. Molecular classification of TNBC 
1.2.3.1. Basal-like 1 (BL1). Bl1 accounts for almost 35% of TNBC. BL1 
is highly enriched in cell proliferation and cell cycle regulation. BL1 is of 
luminal progenitor origin. It has a high gene expression. It shows high 
Ki-67 protein expression and has a DNA damage response. DNA damage 
mechanisms involved in BL1 are MDM2, BRCA1, TP53, RB and PTEN 
[20,33,52,53]. It has a high level of basal cytokinin. It also shows a low 
stage, high grade, and increased overall survival without relapse [54]. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
4
PARP inhibitors, CDK inhibitors, and CHK inhibitors can target this 
subtype. 
1.2.3.2. Basal-like 2 (BL2). BL2 is enriched in stromal and myoepithe­
lial cells and contains epithelial cells. It originates from myoepithelial 
cells [55]. It expresses high growth factor levels involving signaling 
pathways, gluconeogenesis, and glycolysis [56]. It also has a moderate 
pCR rate and is susceptible to platinum and PARP inhibitors concerning 
BL1. It also shows an increased myoepithelial marker expression. 
Growth factors involved in EGF, NGF, Wnt/Catenin Signaling pathway, 
HGF, impaired glucose metabolism, and IGF1R. It can be targeted by 
therapeutic agents affecting metabolic pathways, RTK inhibitors, and by 
interfering with EMT [53]. 
1.2.3.3. Immunomodulatory (IM). IM subtype features immune cell 
processes and signaling cascades. It has a high immune response and a 
low M2-like macrophage. It has an increased expression of genes related 
to immune cell processes. The gene clusters include cytokine signaling, 
immune cell signaling, immune signal transduction pathway, and anti­
gen presentation [57]. It has a tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) 
origin. The presence of TIL is promising for prognostic markers and 
immune-checkpoint targeting as well as JAK/STAT pathway [58,59]. 
1.2.3.4. Mesenchymal (M). M subtypes are genes concerned with cell 
motility and EMT, show cellular proliferation gene expression, and are 
enriched in genes related to mesenchymal stem cells. High PAM 
pathway aberrations and a low PCR rate characterize it. It showed lower 
stromal and immune cell estimates, indicating a lack of immune cells in 
these tumors. Both lymphocyte and monocyte signatures were absent in 
the M-subtype [55]. It is also called metaplastic breast cancer, which 
involves highly activated signaling pathways related to cell migration, 
differentiation, and extra-cellular matrix interaction pathways. It is 
promising targeting therapies like TGF inhibitors, NOTCH, AKT, and 
mTOR inhibitors [58–60]. 
1.2.3.5. Mesenchymal stem-like (MSL). MSL subtypes are quite like the 
M subtype as they are enriched for cell motility and EMT genes. The MSL 
subtype also shows a reduced expression of cellular proliferator genes 
and is enriched in the mesenchymal stem cells gene. Angiogenesis genes 
and stemness characterize it. The potential therapies for this subtype are 
Src antagonists, antiangiogenic drugs, and PI3K inhibitors [11,58–60]. 
1.2.3.6. Luminal androgen receptor (LAR). LAR has a significantly 
different gene expression profile different from the rest of the TNBS 
subtypes. LAR subtype has a gene expression pattern like luminal types, 
despite being ER-negative. It is also involved in Hormone signaling and 
luminal gene up-regulation. The signaling pathways involved are steroid 
synthesis, androgen or estrogen metabolism, and porphyrin metabolism 
[20,60,61]. LAR is related to hormone-responsive L2-type genes [55]. 
Lehmann’s team analyzed the genetic sequences of TNBC patients 
using mRNA expression profiling clustering and discovered that TNBC 
can be classified into six groups with different gene expression profiles 
and involvement in various signal transduction pathways. TNBC is made 
up of roughly half of BL1 and BL2 [11]. TNBC subtypes have different 
benign appearances, clinical features, and delay in diagnosis, which can 
lead to an upgrade of the tumor stage [62]. 
1.2.4. Molecular subtypes of TNBC based on FUSCC classification 
TNBCs were classified into four mRNA subtypes with distinct mo­
lecular characteristics: 
Basal-like Immuno-Suppressed (BLIS) accounts for approximately 
39% of diagnosed cases of TNBC. BLIS shows downregulation of 
signaling pathways related to B cell, T cell, and NF-κB and cytokine 
networks, showing the worst prognosis. It shows an upregulation in the 
mitotic cell cycle, mitotic prometaphase, DNA replication, and DNA 
repair [60,63]. Basal-like Immuno-Activated/Immunomodulatory 
comprises around 14% of the diagnosed cases of TNBC. It shows upre­
gulation of the B cell, T cell, and NF-κB and cytokine networks related to 
genetic factors and high expression of STAT pathways, leading to 
excellent prognosis [60,63]. Mesenchymal–like (MES) constitutes 
about 20% of the TNBC case. It expresses an upregulation of 
ECM-receptor interaction, Focal adhesion, ABC transporters, TGF-β, and 
Adipocytokine signaling pathway [52,60,63]. Luminal Androgen Re­
ceptor accounts for 28% of TNBC cases. It shows an upregulation in 
Steroid hormone biosynthesis, porphyrin, chlorophyll, androgen and 
estrogen metabolism, and the PPAR signaling pathway [20,60,63]. 
Exploring the genomic deviations that drive each TNBC mRNA 
subtype added to our understanding of TNBC heterogeneity and po­
tential therapeutic options. The development of genomics has fuelled 
efforts toward “precision oncology,” which targets cancers based on 
genetic mutations [62,64]. 
1.2.5. DNA methylation 
DNA methylation is an epigenetic marker in human cancer. Espe­
cially in TNBC, there is a lack of effective targeted therapy due to its 
heterogeneity. DNA methylation plays a significant role. DNA methyl­
ation plays an essential role in numerous cellular processes. DNA 
methylation markers are also biologically and chemically stable. Two 
types of methods occur in tumorigenesis: gene-specific hyper­
methylation and genome-wide hypomethylation. DNA methylation 
patterns of numerous TNBC-related genes have been found [65,66]. Few 
aberrations of DNA methylation have been found in TNBC, and though 
they do not have any diagnostic function, they have promising value in 
prognosis and drug response [67]. Hyper-methylation is observed at 
tumor-suppressor genes (TSG), whereas Hypomethylation leads to 
genome instability [68]. Hypermethylation is related to the inactivation 
of TSG, which aids in the proliferation of tumor cells [66]. Hypo­
methylation induces the activation of the CT83 gene, which has a high 
significance in TNBC [69]. 
2. Biology of triple negative breast cancer resistance 
Prognostic factors are crucial in determining the potential outcome 
of a disease or condition. In this context, unfavorable prognostic factors 
refer to indicators linked with a lesser diagnosis and prognosis. The 
study population consisted of women of varying ages diagnosed with a 
particular condition. The data collected from medical records and pa­
tient interviews were analyzed to identify unfavorable prognostic fac­
tors. These factors included but were not limited to tumor 
characteristics. Upon initial diagnosis, it was observed that the lesions 
tend to exhibit larger sizes, less maturity, and a decreased frequency of 
estrogen receptors (ER) and progesterone receptors (PR). Conversely, 
these cases have a higher prevalence of HER2 overexpression and 
vascular invasion. 
Ductal BC is a type of malignancy considered by the uncontrolled 
proliferation of luminal epithelial cells within the breast ducts. This 
aberrant cell growth can initially manifest as carcinoma-in-situ, a non- 
invasive form of cancer confined to the ductal system. However, if left 
untreated, carcinoma-in-situ has the potential to progress into invasive 
and metastatic BC, which poses a more significant threat to the patient’s 
health and survival. The evolution from in situ cancer to invasive cancer 
is characterized by the disruption of the myoepithelial cell layer and the 
subsequent infiltration of malignant luminal epithelial cells into the 
surrounding stroma, ultimately leading to the development of invasive 
carcinoma [70]. 
In the context of classic invasive lobular BC (ILC), the growth pattern 
is distinguished by the infiltration of individual cells through the stroma 
while causing minimal disruption to the typical architecture of the 
surrounding tissue. The present study examines the spatial organization 
of invading tumor cells, which often exhibit a distinctive concentric 
(targetoid) arrangement surrounding normal ducts or structures. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
5
Hormonal factors primarily regulate the phenomenon known as invasive 
lobular carcinoma (ILC). It is typically observed in individuals of 
advanced age and often manifests as multiple tumor sites. Furthermore, 
ILC tumors commonly exhibit positive expression of ER/PR while 
showing a negative status for the HER2-neu receptor [71]. 
Despite the rapid advancements in research, the precise pathophys­
iology of TNBC remains elusive. The current body of research encom­
passes various aspects related to the overexpression of the BRCA1 gene, 
TP53 mutation, RB1 loss, and other relevant factors. In this article, we 
will delve into the latest developments in understanding the pathogen­
esis of TNBC [19]. 
2.1. TP53 mutation 
Several processes within the cell are controlled by the TP53 gene, 
also known as tumor protein 53. In addition, these processes include the 
cell cycle, cell proliferation, DNA repair, cellular senescence, and 
apoptosis. It is well-documented that cells harboring mutated TP53 can 
evade apoptosis and transform into aggressive tumor cells. A tumor 
suppressor gene such as TP53 regulates cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, and 
programmed cell death. It is possible for mutations to disrupt the normal 
function of TP53, leading to the accumulation of genetic alterations and 
the development of TP53-mutated tumors, which are highly invasive, 
poorly differentiated, and of high histologic grade, which decreases the 
effectiveness of therapeutic interventions. The prevalence of TP53 mu­
tations in primary BCs ranges from 18% to 25%, with a significantly 
higher occurrence observed in TNBC, reaching approximately 80%. This 
notable disparity in TP53 mutation rates distinguishes TNBCs from other 
subtypes of BC. The prevailing proportion of TP53 mutations encom­
passes missense mutations, which give rise to mutant p53 proteins. 
Moreover, the heightened resistance to degradation exhibited by the 
mutant protein in malignant cells, as compared to the wild-type p53, 
renders the TP53 mutation a captivating focus for therapeutic inter­
vention in TNBC [72,73]. 
2.2. BRCA1 mutations 
The incidence of BRCA mutations varied from 9.3% to 15.4% across 
TNBC groups and 2.7%–4.2% among individuals with metastatic BC 
[74,75]. BRCA proteins play a crucial part in the DNA damage response, 
which supports the survival of both standard and cancerous breast cells 
[76]. Therefore, individuals who carry the BRCA gene mutation and 
have triple-negative TNBC are expected to exhibit sensitivity to DNA 
damage therapy. However, the clinical outcomes do not align with these 
expectations, as only a modest proportion of patients (20–40%) expe­
rience benefits from PARP inhibitors and survive for five years following 
diagnosis. The lack of effective therapy results in a significant proportion 
of patients with TNBC experiencing early recurrence and the develop­
ment of distant metastases. Epigenetic silencing through promoter 
hypermethylation is a prominent mechanism that can lead to BRCA1 
deficiency, which is considered the primary cause of malignancy asso­
ciated with BRCA1 deficiency [77]. 
2.3. RB1 alterations 
The loss of the tumor suppressor RB1 is common in various human 
cancers due to mutations, deletions, transcriptional silence, and hyper­
phosphorylation affecting its gene product, pRb. Indeed, it has been 
observed that approximately 20–25% of breast cancer cell lines exhibit 
deletions or rearrangements. The activity level of TNBC is predomi­
nantly low. Furthermore, recent progressions in the field of genomic 
sequencing, transcriptome analysis, epigenetic research, and proteomic 
inquiries have unveiled the occurrence of RB1 deletion in approximately 
0.20% of TNBC. The ablation of murine Rb within the mammary 
epithelium results in the emergence of basal-like and luminal 
malignancies. 
Nevertheless, the lack of both Rb and p53 results in tumors that 
resemble claudin-low tumors. This finding provides evidence for the 
involvement of RB1 in the development and progression of TNBC. A 
considerable proportion of patients diagnosed with luminal-B (61.5%) 
and Basal-like (72%) breast cancer subtypes exhibited diminished 
expression of the RB1 gene and experienced loss of heterozygosity (LOH) 
at the RB1 locus [78,79]. 
2.4. JAK STAT pathway 
Janus kinases (JAK) are members of the non-receptor tyrosine kinase 
family and play a crucial role in activating STAT proteins in BC. To shut 
down the JAK-STAT pathway, it is essential to use several techniques 
that target specific JAKs. Some natural and manmade STAT inhibitors 
enhanced BC decrease. It was discovered that curcumin-BTP hybrids are 
efficient against STAT3The administration of curcumin-BTP hybrids 
resulted in a reduction in STAT3 phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, 
and the expression of genes regulated by STAT3. BMA097 was found to 
interact directly with the SH2 (Src Homology 2) domain of STAT3, 
thereby impeding the phosphorylation and activation of STAT3. 
Consequently, this interaction led to the suppression of genes regulated 
by STAT3 [80]. Han et al. also examined paclitaxel resistance in TNBC 
patients whose JAK2 pathway was modulated. PDX models of BC were 
treated with paclitaxel for four weeks however no substantial changes 
were observed in the transcriptomic environment. The differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs) linked to the response to paclitaxel predomi­
nantly pertain to developing resistance to paclitaxel rather than the 
acquired resistance that occurs during therapy in vivo [81]. Wang and 
his colleagues demonstrated that the JAK/STAT pathway caused Pacli­
taxel resistance. IL-22 used this mechanism to generate resistance in 
TNBC. The Wound Healing Assay was used to assess IL-22 in TNBC. 
Further Transwell Assays determined the increase in dosage of 
IL-22-treated cells [82]. 
2.5. MAPK-ERK pathway 
Zhao et al. established that the MAPK/ERK pathway plays a role in 
cell viability. Significantly, increased ERK1/2 activity (phosphoryla­
tion) has been seen in metastasis locations compared to primary BCs and 
is more prevalent in TNBC. The chemosensitivity is regulated by the 
activation of ERK1/2 through FLNA. The Western Blot analysis con­
ducted on MDA-MB-231 cells demonstrated that the downregulation of 
FLNA reduced FLNA protein abundance. A simultaneous decline in the 
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 accompanied this decrease in FLNA levels. 
Conversely, the restoration of FLNA expression led to the activation of 
ERK signaling [83]. According to scientific research, the TRPC3/RA­
SA4/MAPK Pathway is crucial in regulating the proliferation and 
apoptosis resistance of TNBC cells [84]. Linc-RoR similarly enhances 
MAPK/ERK signaling and imparts estrogen-independent BC develop­
ment [85]. 
2.6. PI3K/ATK/mTOR pathway 
The progression of cancer and the development of drug resistance 
can be attributed to the heightened sensitivity of the PI3K/ATK/mTOR 
pathway. Numerous pharmaceutical agents are being developed to 
specifically target the PI3K/ATK/mTOR Pathway to impede the 
advancement of cancer stem cells. The pathways above are commonly 
activated in various types of carcinomas. 
The PIK3CA gene is frequently mutated in breast cancer (BC), 
resulting in the activation of PI3K and exerting a significant influence on 
the development of resistance to conventional anticancer drugs. 
Conversely, the activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway possesses the ca­
pacity to induce the upregulation of multidrug resistance-associated 
protein-1 (MRP1), ABCG2, and P-glycoprotein (P-gp, also known as 
ABCB1), thus potentially contributing to the emergence of multidrug 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
6
resistance. Individuals who have been diagnosed with cancer and 
demonstrate dysregulation of the PI3K/AKT pathway are more suscep­
tible to developing resistance to a range of treatment approaches, such 
as chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, HER2-targeted therapy, PARP 
inhibitors, and immunotherapy. The inhibition of this biological 
pathway holds promise in increasing drug susceptibility and mitigating 
the emergence of resistance. Based on the existing evidence, it can be 
inferred that the utilization of PI3K/AKT inhibitors in combination with 
other anticancer medications presents a potential approach for miti­
gating medication resistance in breast cancer [86,87]. Also, the 
PI3K/ATK/mTOR Pathway caused trastuzumab, Cisplatin, and lapatinib 
resistance in breast cancer [88–90]. 
2.7. Notch signaling 
The Notch signaling pathway has been associated with various dis­
ease pathologies, including cancer. Chemotherapy administered for 
breast cancer has been found to elicit the activation of Notch signaling, a 
pathway that is observed to be upregulated in tumors that exhibit 
resistance to therapy. The activation of Notch signaling alone is 
adequate to induce resistance to chemotherapy, whereas the inhibition 
of Notch signaling restores the sensitivity of resistant cells to conven­
tional treatment [91]. Using Notch inhibitors with standard chemo­
therapies increases in vitro and in vivo treatment effectiveness via an 
additive effect. In addition, Notch signaling has been primarily ascribed 
to the failure of inhibitors of critical pro-oncogenic signaling pathways 
in clinical studies [92]. For example, an examination of resistance to 
TNBC PI3K/mTOR inhibitors demonstrated that administering 
PI3K/mTOR or TORC1/2 resulted in the enrichment of breast cancer 
stem cells (BCSCs) accompanied by elevated expression of Notch1. The 
enrichment of BCSCs was impeded due to the blockage of the GSI Notch 
signaling pathway. Furthermore, Diluvio et al. (2018) discovered that 
GSI therapy had the effect of increasing the sensitivity of TNBC cells that 
were resistant to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), specifically 
gefitinib [93]. The resistance to trastuzumab and lapatinib in HER2+
breast cancer has been associated with Notch signaling. Following 
treatment with trastuzumab or lapatinib, there is an observed elevation 
in Notch signaling, accompanied by a reduction in Notch transcriptional 
activity in HER2-positive cells relative to HER2-negative cells [94,95]. 
2.8. Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway 
Wan et al. observed an upregulation of ST8SIA1 mRNA and protein 
expression in multiple TNBC cell lines following prolonged exposure to 
chemotherapeutic agents. Consistently previous studies have demon­
strated that a significant proportion of patients with TNBC who devel­
oped resistance to chemotherapy exhibited elevated expression levels of 
the ST8SIA1 gene. The findings from mechanistic investigations have 
shown that the suppression of ST8SIA1 inhibits the FAK/Akt/mTOR and 
Wnt/-catenin signaling pathways [96]. Similarly, Zheng et al. demon­
strated that NLRP3 antagonist suppressed the EMT, IL-1, and 
Wnt/-catenin signaling pathways in vitro in TNBC resistant to gemci­
tabine [97]. 
2.9. TGF-β signaling 
The cytokine known as transforming growth factor (TGF-β) possesses 
multiple functions. According to recent studies, there is evidence to 
suggest that TGF-β influences the population of cancer stem cells, 
thereby potentially affecting the development of resistance to cancer 
medications. Xu conducted an experimental study wherein MDA-MB- 
231 (MB-231) cells were exposed to epirubicin. The findings demon­
strated a correlation between dosage and an elevation in the concen­
trations of TGF-β and markers associated with breast cancer stem cells. 
CD44 + CD24 [98]. Chen and his colleagues demonstrated that curcu­
min is used to inverse the effect of doxorubicin resistance. It was seen 
that TGF- β induces EMT and contributes to the metastatic development 
of many cancer cells. The investigation focused on examining the effect 
of doxorubicin on the expression of Ser465/467 phosphorylation of 
Smad2, as TGF-β has been shown to induce this phosphorylation. The 
application of Doxorubicin led to an elevation in the phosphorylation of 
Ser465/467 on Smad2 in BT-20 cells. SB431542, a selective inhibitor of 
TGF-β receptor kinase, was utilized to provide evidence that the in­
duction of the TGF-β pathway in BT-20 cells was facilitated by doxo­
rubicin [99]. 
3. Modalities for the treatment of TNBC 
Despite ongoing efforts to discover new therapies, treating patients 
with TNBC poses significant challenges. TNBC patients do not derive 
benefits from hormonal therapies or trastuzumab-based treatments due 
to the loss of crucial receptor targets, such as estrogen receptors (ER), 
progesterone receptors (PGR), and human epidermal growth factor re­
ceptor 2 (HER-2) [100]. Consequently, immunotherapy surgical inter­
vention and chemotherapy, either as standalone approaches or 
combined, remain the primary modalities for managing TNBC [101]. 
These interventions aim to remove the tumor through surgery and 
subsequently administer chemotherapy to eliminate any remaining 
cancer cells. However, it is essential to note that this approach may not 
fully address the diverse characteristics of TNBC, limiting the overall 
effectiveness of treatment. 
3.1. Problem related with the available treatment of triple negative breast 
cancer 
Breast cancer is a prevalent form of cancer among women, consti­
tuting approximately 25% of all cancer cases [102]. Within breast 
cancer, TNBC accounts for around 15–20% of all breast cancers. 
Currently, the main treatment approaches for breast cancer involve 
conventional chemotherapy and radiation [103]. Unfortunately, no 
targeted therapies approved by the FDA specifically for TNBC exist. 
TNBC is characterized by its aggressive nature, with a poor prognosis 
and a tendency for rapid proliferation and metastasis (spread to other 
parts of the body). Due to these challenging characteristics and the 
absence of approved targeted treatments, extensive efforts have been 
undertaken to identify potential molecular targets for TNBC [104]. 
However, with technological advancements, molecular subtyping of 
TNBC and the development of targeted therapies have progressed 
extensively. 
Meanwhile, numerous cohort studies, clinical trials, and in-depth 
analyses have revealed diverse molecular alterations in TNBC, causing 
controversy in diagnosis and treatment. The subtyping helps understand 
the underlying biology and develop personalized treatment strategies 
[105]. With a focus on promising therapeutic approaches and problems 
associated with treatment options for TNBC, this section discusses crit­
ical findings and therapeutic trends in TNBC. 
3.1.1. Immunotherapy challenges with TNBC 
Pembrolizumab and atezolizumab, two immunotherapy drugs with 
promising potential in treating various cancers, including TNBC, face 
several challenges when explicitly used for TNBC patients [106]. The 
immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment prevalent in TNBC poses 
a significant hurdle for immunotherapy [107]. TNBC tumor cells often 
exhibit low expression of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), which is 
the target for Pembrolizumab and atezolizumab [108]. This low PD-L1 
expression reduces the likelihood of a robust response to pem­
brolizumab and atezolizumab, which work by blocking the PD-1/PD-L1 
pathway to enhance the immune response against cancer cells [109]. 
Moreover, the heterogeneity of TNBC further complicates the outcome 
of immunotherapy. TNBC patients display diverse molecular charac­
teristics and immune profiles, resulting in varying responses to immu­
notherapy [110]. The identification of predictive biomarkers that can 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
7
accurately determine which TNBC patients benefit from pembrolizumab 
and atezolizumab remains a significant challenge. While PD-L1 expres­
sion has been proposed as a potential biomarker, its correlation with 
immunotherapy response in TNBC is not yet fully established [111]. 
TNBC cells can employ various mechanisms to evade immune recogni­
tion and attack, such as upregulating alternative immune checkpoint 
pathways or activating other immunosuppressive mechanisms [112]. 
Overcoming these resistance mechanisms is a critical challenge in 
achieving long-term success with immunotherapy for TNBC. To improve 
treatment outcomes, researchers are exploring the combination of 
immunotherapy with other modalities, such as chemotherapy or tar­
geted therapies. However, determining the optimal combination regi­
mens, dosages, and treatment sequences is an area of ongoing research. 
Striking the right balance between maximizing efficacy and minimizing 
toxicities is crucial but challenging in TNBC. With continued research 
and advancements, it is hoped that immunotherapy can become a more 
effective and personalized treatment option for TNBC patients in the 
future. 
3.1.2. TNBC treatment challenges associated with receptor tyrosine kinases 
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are a class of transmembrane re­
ceptors with enzymatic activity that are situated on the cellular mem­
brane. The components of these entities encompass an extracellular 
region responsible for ligand binding, a transmembrane helix, a protein 
tyrosine kinase domain, and juxtamembrane regulatory regions [113]. 
The family in question consists of a total of 58 distinct receptors, which 
encompass notable examples such as the epidermal growth factor re­
ceptor (EGFR), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), 
insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGFR), fibroblast growth factor re­
ceptor (FGFR), and AXL [114]. Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) operate 
through the ligand binding process, which triggers the formation of 
receptor dimers and subsequent activation of signaling pathways 
downstream. The pathways under consideration encompass the 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, the RTK/Ras/MAPK pathway, and the 
Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of the transcription protein 
family pathway [115]. The occurrence of mutations or dysregulation in 
receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) has contributed to the advancement of 
cancer, rendering them appealing targets for therapeutic interventions 
in cancer treatment [116]. As a result, there has been a growing 
approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for a more 
significant number of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and anti-TKI 
antibodies to be utilized in the treatment of cancer (17). Targeting 
RTKs and associated pathways holds promise as a therapeutic approach 
for TNBC. 
However, several challenges are associated with this strategy. It is 
evident that TNBC is a highly heterogeneous disease, both intra­
tumorally and between patients. The expression and activation status of 
RTKs can vary significantly among TNBC patients [117]. Identifying the 
specific RTKs that are aberrantly activated in individual tumors is 
challenging. This heterogeneity necessitates a personalized approach to 
target the relevant RTKs for each patient. 
Moreover, RTKs are often interconnected with multiple signaling 
pathways, making it difficult to selectively target a single RTK without 
affecting other pathways. These overlapping pathways can lead to 
compensatory mechanisms and resistance to therapy. Furthermore, 
TNBC cells are shown to develop resistance to RTK-targeted therapies 
through various mechanisms, such as mutations in the targeted RTK or 
downstream signaling molecules, activation of alternative pathways, or 
alterations in the tumor microenvironment [116]. In addition, targeted 
therapies directed against RTKs can have off-target effects and cause 
toxicity also. It is essential to carefully evaluate the potential side effects 
of inhibiting specific RTKs and develop strategies to mitigate these 
adverse events. Balancing the efficacy and tolerability of targeted 
therapies is a significant challenge in the clinical management of TNBC. 
3.1.3. TNBC surgical challenges 
In many studies, it has been determined that patients with TNBC 
disease are more likely to undergo mastectomy than lumpectomy [118]. 
Despite the association between TNBC status and younger age and 
higher-grade tumors, surgical treatment choice was not affected [103]. 
However, due to the aggressive nature of TNBC, achieving clear margins 
can be challenging, potentially leading to an increased risk of local 
recurrence and the need for additional treatments. Suppose TNBC has 
already spread to distant sites. In that case, surgery alone may not be 
curative, and a multidisciplinary approach combining surgery with 
systemic therapies, such as chemotherapy or targeted agents, is often 
required [119]. However, despite these challenges, surgery remains an 
integral part of the management of TNBC. Surgery plays a crucial role in 
removing the primary tumor, assessing lymph node involvement, and 
obtaining tumor tissue for further characterization and prognostic in­
formation. To optimize surgical outcomes, a multidisciplinary approach 
involving surgeons, medical oncologists, and radiation oncologists is 
essential to ensure comprehensive and personalized treatment strategies 
for TNBC patients [120]. 
3.1.4. DNA damage response (DDR) pathway challenges in TNBC 
treatment 
The DNA damage response (DDR) pathway is crucial for maintaining 
genomic integrity and repairing DNA damage. TNBC often exhibits de­
fects in the DDR machinery, including mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 
genes [121]. These mutations impair the ability of tumor cells to repair 
DNA damage, leading to genomic instability and increased sensitivity to 
further DNA damage. Exploiting the impaired DDR pathway in TNBC 
cells has shown clinical benefit through poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 
(PARP) inhibitors. PARP inhibitors selectively target cancer cells with 
DDR deficiencies, as they rely heavily on PARP-mediated DNA repair 
mechanisms [122]. Clinical trials have demonstrated improved out­
comes in TNBC patients with BRCA mutations treated with PARP in­
hibitors, such as Olaparib and talizumab [123]. However, several 
challenges are associated with DDR pathway targeting in TNBC. For 
example, BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations are reliable biomarkers for 
response to PARP inhibitors, but not all TNBC patients with DDR de­
ficiencies have these mutations. Therefore, identifying additional bio­
markers beyond BRCA mutations that accurately predict response to 
PARP inhibitors is essential [124]. There is also a possibility of acquired 
resistance to PARP inhibitors developing over time, which could limit 
their long-term efficacy [125]. Moreover, resistance mechanisms can 
include restoration of homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair 
pathways, secondary mutations in DDR genes, or activation of alterna­
tive DNA repair mechanisms [126]. Therefore, elucidating these resis­
tance mechanisms and developing strategies to overcome them is crucial 
for improving the durability of response to DDR-targeted therapies. 
Although PARP inhibitors have demonstrated clinical advantages in 
TNBC patients with DNA damage response (DDR) deficiencies, their 
effectiveness as standalone treatments is restricted. 
In contrast, the Canadian study conducted a randomized, double- 
blind, multicenter trial to assess the efficacy of Olaparib in conjunc­
tion with paclitaxel as an initial or subsequent therapy for metastatic 
TNBC and observed significant toxicity patterns [127]. Exploring com­
bination strategies that enhance the DDR deficiency and exploit syn­
thetic lethal interactions may improve treatment outcomes. These 
combinations could include other targeted agents, chemotherapy, or 
immunotherapies, with the goal of increasing tumor sensitivity and 
preventing the emergence of resistance. Additionally, optimizing clin­
ical trial designs to efficiently evaluate the efficacy of DDR-targeted 
therapies, including appropriate endpoints and patient stratification 
strategies, is essential for translating preclinical findings into clinical 
practice. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
8
3.2. The prime determinant for drug resistance 
Drug resistance in TNBC can be regarded as a complex phenomenon 
that is influenced by several factors. An understanding of these de­
terminants is crucial for developing effective treatment strategies. Here 
are some of the determinants that need to be considered in detail. TNBC 
is characterized by high genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity (Fig. 2). 
As a result, different subpopulations of cancer cells can have different 
characteristics and genetic changes within a tumor. Some sub­
populations may inherently resist specific treatments, while others can 
adapt and develop resistance over time [128]. Tumor heterogeneity 
poses a challenge in effectively targeting all cancer cell populations 
within the tumor. TNBC tumors exhibit extensive genetic diversity, with 
the presence of multiple subclones or people of cells harboring different 
genetic alterations [129]. These genetic differences can lead to varia­
tions in tumor response to treatment. Some subclones may possess 
intrinsic resistance to certain drugs, while others may acquire resistance 
by accumulating additional mutations over time [128]. In addition, 
TNBC cells can exhibit phenotypic plasticity, meaning they can switch 
between different cell states with distinct characteristics. This plasticity 
allows tumor cells to adapt to changing environments and evade the 
effects of drugs. For example, some TNBC cells can undergo an 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which confers resistance to 
chemotherapy and promotes metastasis. Also, TNBC tumors can display 
intratumoral heterogeneity, in which different subregions within the 
same tumor display other genetic and phenotypic characteristics [130]. 
This heterogeneity can lead to spatial variation in treatment 
response, as different regions may have varying sensitivities or re­
sistances to specific drugs. Consequently, targeting a single molecular 
alteration or pathway may not eradicate the tumor. Overall, the complex 
interplay of genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity, phenotypic plas­
ticity, the tumor microenvironment, evolutionary adaptation, and intra- 
tumoral heterogeneity in TNBC contributes to the development of drug 
resistance [131]. Moreover, TNBC cells can upregulate efflux pumps, 
such as P-glycoprotein, which are responsible for actively pumping 
chemotherapy drugs out of the cells through the efflux pumps [132]. 
This efflux mechanism reduces the intracellular concentration of drugs, 
limiting their effectiveness [133]. Multidrug resistance is associated 
with increased expression of drug efflux pumps within cancer cells, 
making it difficult for chemotherapy drugs to accumulate within them, 
which makes chemotherapy more effective [134]. However, the im­
mune microenvironment can also contribute to resistance by promoting 
immunosuppressive factors or immune evasion mechanisms. 
Interestingly, it is evident that dysregulation of specific signaling 
pathways can confer resistance to targeted therapies. For instance, the 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway and the JAK/STAT pathway are frequently 
dysregulated in TNBC [135]. Of note, other factors within the tumor 
microenvironment, such as hypoxia (low oxygen levels) and acidity, can 
impact drug penetration and effectiveness. Hypoxic regions within tu­
mors have reduced drug delivery due to limited blood supply, making 
them resistant to therapy [136]. Additionally, the acidic pH in the tumor 
microenvironment can influence the activity of drugs and impair their 
efficacy [137]. Considering all these facts, we must understand these 
drug resistance determinants in TNBC to develop personalized treatment 
approaches that target multiple pathways and overcome resistance 
mechanisms. 
4. Novel approaches for combating the drug resistance 
TNBC is subtype of conventional breast cancer that lacks some spe­
cific expressions such PR, Era and HER2 [138,139]. Furthermore, novel 
approaches for TNBCs was not so much successful in the early 20s. The 
unavailability of diagnostics advancement, lack of certain receptors 
collectively worsen the treatment to breast cancer. The pathogenesis of 
TNBCs explains the deficiencies of progesterone and estrogen receptors 
with gene amplification related to HER2 gene. The tumor microenvi­
ronment and several heterogeneous factors contribute to the growth of 
TNBCs [140,141]. Besides, the chemoresistance of anti-cancer agents is 
a major hurdle for effective treatment. Numerous mechanisms support 
chemoresistance, especially transporter-regulated drug efflux accounts 
Fig. 2. The major factors for TNBC drug resistance. 1) tumor heterogeneity; 2) growth kinetics; 3) undruggable genomic drivers; 4) selective therapeutic pressure; 5) 
immune component; 6) Efflux transporters and 7) Activation of different survival signaling pathways. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
9
for the most. ATP-binding cassettes (ABCs) transporter and its subunits 
(eg. ABCC1/MRP1, ABCG2/BCRP, ABC11/MRP8) mainly involve drug 
resistance in several solid tumors, including BC. 
Similarly, other agents or factors include Cancer stem cells, hypoxia, 
escaping of apoptosis, microRNAs, etc. Also enhance chemo-resistance 
[142]. Researchers reported Wnt ligands and TGF- β as the significant 
cause of propagation and chemoresistance against TNBCs [143,144]. 
Different Treatment strategies for the management of TNBC are shown 
in Figs. 3 and 4. Additionally, various types of delivery systems are 
discussed in Table 1. 
4.1. Targeted therapy in cancer 
The cancer cell is considered a dramatic cell since it can resist drugs 
given during treatment. The self-mutation tendency of these cells chal­
lenges scientists to target specific ligands and receptors to halt chemo­
resistance for available drugs [128]. 
The Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in 
nearly half of cases of TNBCs or Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC). 
Studies proved that anti-EGFR therapy is a promising approach for 
reducing chemoresistance. Jin [145] provided excellent strategies for 
Fig. 3. Novel approaches for combating the drug resistance.  
Fig. 4. Treatment strategies for the management of TNBC.  
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
10
combating drug resistance for TBNCs. EGFR has an ongoing mechanism 
with Insulin-like growth factor 1 type (IGF-IR). The resistance of 
anti-EGFR agent gefitinib is confirmed by increased PI3K and Akt ac­
tivity, which is directly associated with IGF-IR. Further, Non-receptor 
tyrosine kinases such as Src, show excellent activity through tamox­
ifen/gefitinib resistance BC [146]. 
The presence of Luminal androgen receptor (LAR) in breast cancer 
shows necessary particulars for DRs. Androgen receptors (AR) and 
Luminal Expression layouts are the primary identification parameters 
for detecting LAR. Similarly, PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways activated by the 
Phosphoinositol 3 Kinase CA (PI3KCA) mutations also sum up for 
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents. Inhibiting Androgen receptors 
can directly suppress LAR ultimately it decreases chemical resistance 
[147]. 
Liu proved that Tuftelin (TUFT1), a protein, is also directly respon­
sible for chemoresistance associated with TNBCs [148]. The chemo­
resistance studies were done on shTUFT1—MDA-MB-231 cells, and it 
was seen that TUFTI1 was overexpressed in the TNBC xenograft tumor 
model. Semaphorin-3F, modulator, and RAc1 inhibitor indirectly inhibit 
the expression of TUFT1 protein, which ultimately reduces drug resis­
tance [149]. 
Evidence also claimed that Hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF-1α) 
equally contributed to progression and metastasis associated with 
docetaxel resistance by reducing the miR-494 expression/survivin 
signaling pathway. HIF-1α can be easily targeted by using PX-478, an 
antagonist that either reduces protein expression and lead to 
Table 1 
Drug delivery system for breast cancer treatment.  
Therapy 
Drugs/Ligands/antibodies 
Formulations 
Outcomes 
References 
siRNA-Mediated 
Gene Silencing 
siRNA targeting cyclin- 
dependent kinase 1 (CDK-1) 
Cationic lipid-assisted PEG-PLA 
nanoparticles 
Promotion of cell death in c-myc overexpressed TNBC 
cells by inhibiting CDK-1 expression 
[325] 
Aptamer-guided siRNA 
nanoparticles targeting CD-44 
Core: siRNA-protamine complex, Shell: 
Aptamer ligand 
Exhibited anti-tumor activity 
[326] 
siRNA loaded into lipid-coated 
calcium phosphate 
nanoparticles 
Lipid-coated calcium phosphate 
nanoparticles 
Increased delivery of siRNA to TNBC cells 
[327] 
Doxorubicin, Orlistat 
Combination of Orlistat-loaded nanoparticles 
with doxorubicin/antisense-miR-21-loaded 
NPs 
The combination increases in the apoptotic impact 
[328] 
Chemotherapy 
Anthracyclines (e.g., 
doxorubicin) 
Liposomal Intravenous administration 
Tumor shrinkage, reduction in recurrence rates 
[329] 
Docetaxel and Carboplatin 
Intravenous administration 
Determination of the pCR rate with docetaxel and 
carboplatin and to identify molecular alterations and/or 
immune gene signatures predicting pCR. 
[330] 
Sonodynamic 
Therapy 
Nitrogen mustard, 
Cyclophosphamide, Bleomycin, 
Adriamycin 
Sonosensitizer 
Enhances the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents using 
ultrasound waves 
[331] 
Chlorin e6 
Sonosensitizer: PEG-IR780@Ce6 
Excellent performance in inhibiting cancer cells and in 
simultaneously suppressing the migration and invasion of 
cancer cells 
[332] 
Doxorubicin 
Deep-penetrating sonochemistry 
nanoplatform (Pp18-lipos@SRA737&DOX, 
PSDL) 
Study portrays controlled production of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) upon ultrasound activation and the 
resulting intercalation of DOX into the nucleus DNA and 
induction of apoptosis 
[333] 
Manganese-protoporphyrin 
(MnP) 
Folate-liposomes 
The study shows that nano sonosensitizer, exhibited high 
acoustic sensitivity in deep tissue under ultrasound 
treatment, generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
suppressing both superficial and deep-seated tumor 
growth 
[334] 
Photothermal 
Therapy 
IR820 
PLGA nanoparticles 
Induced cell death through apoptosis in TNBC 
[335] 
Gold nanobipyramids 
HA-coated nanoparticles (high and low MW 
HA) 
Superior targeting of CD44 overexpressed TNBC cells 
[336] 
Gold nanostar, siRNA 
Gold nanostar, siRNA targeting CD44, 
reducing HSP72 
Selectively sensitized TNBC cells to hyperthermia 
[337] 
Doxorubicin 
Polydopamine nanoparticles loaded with JQ1 
and PD-L1 
Increased immune response through cytotoxic T- 
lymphocytes 
[338] 
Immunotherapy 
Bispecific Antibodies 
Combination therapy with immune 
checkpoint inhibitors 
Targeted TNBC cells and combination therapy with 
immune checkpoint inhibitors 
[339] 
Curcumin analogue 
HA-SMA-TPGS nanomicelles 
Targeted CD44-mediated apoptosis pathway in TNBC 
[340] 
PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors 
Anti-PD-1 antibodies, anti-PD-L1 therapeutic 
antibodies 
Activated anti-tumor immune responses by blocking 
immune regulatory checkpoints 
[341,342] 
Tremelimumab, Ipilimumab 
CTLA-4 inhibitors 
Activated T-cell-dependent immune response 
[343] 
Photodynamic 
therapy 
Indocyanine green (ICG) 
Thermosensitive liposomes 
Successful accumulation in tumor cells 
[344] 
Cationic porphyrin, HIF-1 alpha 
siRNA 
Multifunctional cationic porphyrin grafted 
microbubble 
Effective treatment of TNBC using ultrasound targeted 
PDT 
[345] 
Targeted therapy 
VEGF inhibitor (siRNA) 
Biocompatible copolymer nanocomplex 
Inhibited migration and invasion of TNBC cells, high 
tumor penetration and cellular uptake 
[346] 
VEGF inhibitor (siRNA): 
Paclitaxel 
DEAE-Dextran coated paclitaxel 
nanoparticles 
Maximum cellular uptake, downregulated intratumoural 
VEGF protein levels, and strong anti-tumor activity 
[347] 
EGFR inhibitors: Doxorubicin, 
Docetaxel 
Gefitinib, Cetuximab, PEGylated 
nanomedicine (PEG-liposomal doxorubicin), 
Docetaxel-loaded PEG-PCL nanoparticles 
Targeted EGFR, inhibition of cell proliferation and DNA 
repair, improved anti-proliferative activity 
[348, 
349], 
[350,351] 
PARP inhibitors: Olaparib, 
Veliparib, Niraparib, Rucaparib, 
Talizumab 
Olaparib, Veliparib, Niraparib, Rucaparib, 
Talizumab 
Promising results in BRCA-mutated TNBC, improved 
immune responses, reprogramming glucose and lipid 
metabolism 
[352] 
mTOR inhibitors 
Ipatasertib, Capivasertib, Combination with 
paclitaxel, CDK4/6 inhibitors 
Enhanced efficacy, improved progression-free survival, 
manageable adverse effects 
[353,354]  
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
11
degradation [150,151]. Scialla et al., developed the targeted theranostic 
nanoformulation for the treatment of TNBC. The formulation was 
composed of iron oxide NPs and doxorubicin. Conducting in vitro in­
vestigations, we employed the J774A. One macrophage cell line at pH 
levels of 7.4 and 6.5 to confirm the pH-responsive targeting ability to­
wards tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). To demonstrate the 
viability and efficacy of the refined targeted formulations, both the 
MDA-MB-231 TNBC cell line and an animal model harboring M-Wnt 
tumors were utilized. The lipid nanovehicles loaded with DOX exhibited 
a selective accumulation within the tumors of M-Wnt tumor-bearing 
mice. This led to a potent inhibition of tumor growth while signifi­
cantly mitigating off-target damage compared to free DOX, showcasing 
promising results for targeted therapy [152]. 
4.2. Gene therapy 
Gene therapy is a technique of curing and preventing disease by 
addressing the cause at its genetic level. Rather than relying on phar­
maceuticals or invasive procedures, doctors can now use gene therapy to 
modify a patient’s genetic composition in order to alleviate their con­
dition. There has been a dramatic transition from the theoretical realm 
of works to the practical and therapeutic area of cancer gene therapy, 
notably in the management of TNBC [153]. While current treatments for 
breast cancer encompass chemotherapy, radiation therapy, surgery, 
hormone therapy, and laser therapy, these methods come with inherent 
risks and adverse effects for patients [154]. In contrast, gene therapy 
uses molecular techniques that significantly reduce patients’ exposure to 
potentially harmful substances while providing all the benefits of con­
ventional treatment. Gene therapy was first introduced in 1980 by 
Martin Cline to modify human DNA. In May 1989, the first 
NIH-approved nuclear gene transfer was successfully carried out in 
humans. In a trial beginning in September 1990, French Anderson used 
gene transfer for the first time for therapeutic purposes. This was also the 
first time human DNA had been inserted directly into the nuclear 
genome. In the long run, it may be able to correct or perhaps reverse 
many 
hereditary 
problems 
[155]. 
Lui 
et al., 
designed the 
hypoxia-responsive polymeric micelles loaded with doxorubicin and 
shHIF-1α. Results showed within a mouse model simulating orthotopic 
TNBC, the concurrent utilization of chemotherapy and gene therapy 
targeting HIF-1 effectively inhibited the primary tumor’s growth and the 
emergence of distant metastases. The notable biocompatibility and 
sensitivity to hypoxia of hypoxia-responsive polymeric micelles have 
positioned them as a promising avenue for delivering medications and 
genes, holding significant potential for treating TNBC and other tumors 
thriving in hypoxic conditions [156]. Gene therapy consists of different 
techniques such as: 
Gene replacement therapy in this therapy, tumor suppressor gene 
(TSG) replacement, is a promising strategy in gene therapy for TNBC. 
Cancer development may occur when one or more TSG genes are 
missing. TSGs may induce either tumor cell suppression or death. 
Gatekeeper genes is are inactive gene that activate only in the presence 
of the cancerous cell and can halt the cell cycle. Some of these gene are 
including BRCA1, BRCA2, p53, Rb, p16, p27, p21, Testin, Maspin, and 
melanoma differentiation-associated gene-7 (mda7) [157]. TSGs, such 
as p53, were found to be the targets of most replacement strategies in 
clinical studies. This approach aims to reestablish the natural balance 
between cell growth and cell death in cancer cells by introducing the 
expression of wild-type p53 into these cells. One facet of p53 insertion is 
the bystander effect. This indicates that a tiny fraction of transduced 
in-vivo cancer cells undergo a double-stranded DNA break, killing out 
both the transduced and non-transduced cells around them when p53 is 
introduced. Proposed processes include the production of soluble pro­
apoptotic proteins, activating the immune system, and antiangiogenesis. 
A bystander effect is advantageous for effective gene therapy strategies 
[158]. Zhang et al., In 1994, researchers reported the first effective de­
livery of p53 to lung cancer using adenoviral vectors. Consequently, an 
in-vivo investigation of breast cancer p53 gene transfer xenograft models 
was conducted [159]. The rb gene is the second potential TSG for 
replacement therapy in TNBC. Registered clinical studies include p53, 
Rb, and md7 genes in TSG gene replacement therapy for TNBC [160]. 
Antisense strategy in this method, it’s possible that antisense 
chemicals may stop dangerous genes from being expressed. Small mol­
ecules of single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) called antisense oligonucleotides 
alter the regulation of genes by blocking the translation of DNA into 
protein [161]. The most effective antisense method involves substituting 
sulfur for one of the oxygen atoms in the phosphodiester bond. In fact, 
this backbone change improves oligomer stability and nuclease resis­
tance. Studies on antisense suppression of oncogene activity showed that 
c-MYC treated with bare antisense DNA might stop lymphoma growth. 
Other TNBC-related genes that antisense oligonucleotides have suc­
cessfully targeted include telomerase, telomerase reverse transcriptase, 
plasma membrane calcium ATPase, erythroblastic oncogene B homolog 
2 (c-erbB-2), p21, B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2), cellular oncogene fos 
(c-fos), erythroblastic oncogene B homo (IGF-IR) [162]. 
RNA interference therapy RNA interference (RNAi) technology is 
also another useful approach for gene therapy. It is a possible intracel­
lular mechanism that can turn off genes after they have been written 
down. It starts with double-stranded RNAs (dsRNA) that are the same as 
the genes [163,164]. This method for either short-term or long-term 
suppression of the target gene’s expression in TNBC may be used 
using siRNA and short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Accordingly, several in­
vestigations showed that downregulating c-specifically through RNA 
interference, prevents the growth of breast cancer MCF-7 cells both in 
vitro and in vivo [165]. Ribozymes are a different method for elimi­
nating oncogenes in breast cancer. These RNA molecules can function as 
enzymes even when no proteins are present. Additionally, they may 
stimulate the creation of covalent bonds in RNA strands at certain places 
and the cleavage of RNA substrates [166]. Human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) infection was the first condition for which ribozymes were 
used as a treatment [167]. 
Growth receptor strategies: This method employs the extensively 
studied protooncogene erbB-2 to interfere with the standard cellular 
location of growth receptors. Therefore, transduction of a gene pro­
ducing an anti-erbB-2 intracellular single-chain antibody (sFv) may 
reduce cell surface erbB-2 levels and induce death in erbB-2 over­
expressing breast cancer cells. 
Suicide gene therapy This therapy was introduced in 1980 [157]. In 
this therapy genes injecting into the enzyme or protein that causes tumor 
cells to self-destruct. This method is classified into toxin-based gene 
therapy and gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy (GDEPT) [168]. 
Transferring genes to enable the production of toxins is referred to as 
toxin gene therapy, whereas the transfer of genes to facilitate the 
expression of enzymes that selectively activate specific prodrugs is 
known as enzyme-activating prodrug treatment. GDEPT is advantageous 
because it improves the effectiveness and safety of traditional cancer 
chemotherapies. This method is categorized as a two-phase gene therapy 
strategy for cancer treatment [169]. Stage one involves introducing the 
gene for an exogenous enzyme to breast cancer cells. Step two involves 
providing a non-toxic prodrug that, once produced by the foreign 
enzyme within the tumor, becomes a cytotoxic active form. The same 
holds for transfected breast cancer cells, which active prodrugs may 
destroy. GDEPT-indicated enzymes in breast cancer may be split into 
two categories [170]. Carboxypeptidase G2 (CPG2), cytosine deaminase 
(CD) from bacteria, and thymidine kinase (TK) from viruses all fall into 
the first class of nonmammalian enzymes. In contrast, human enzymes 
belong to a separate second group, including cytochrome P450 isoforms. 
CD and TK are crucial examples in this context, as they play significant 
roles in activating 5-fluorocytosine and ganciclovir (GCV), respectively, 
leading to their conversion into potentially hazardous medication forms 
[171]. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
12
4.3. Bacterial-mediated therapy 
Busch and Fehleisen discovered a connection between tumor and 
bacteria, describing a case in which infection with Streptococcus pyo­
genes caused erysipelas and subsequently slowed the development of the 
patient’s tumor [172]. During the 1890s, William Coley was the first to 
employ a Streptococcus and Serratia marcescens attenuated bacterial 
combination for treating tumors. Coley’s toxin was the name given to 
this compound [173]. As a result, researchers began looking for and 
testing bacterial strains and their products to combat cancer [174]. A 
wide range of tumors, such as leukemia, lymphoma, melanoma, and 
solid carcinomas, may be treated using bacterial-mediated treatment. 
Today, genetically engineered microorganisms are usually employed for 
this purpose, and bacteria allow for various approaches to cancer 
treatment [175]. The production of gene transfer, tumor-specific anti­
gens, pro-drug cleavage and RNA interference are just a few of the many 
methods that have been developed to combat cancer [176]. Infecting 
low-antigenic tumors with specific facultative or obligate anaerobic 
bacteria increases bacterial concentration and proliferation. Conse­
quently, antitumor immune responses become more active, leading to 
accelerated tumor destruction. This process involves manipulating 
various resistant system components, including CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, 
Tregs, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), and tumor-associated 
macrophages (TAMs). Additionally, researchers have observed that 
certain conserved bacterial ligands act as agonists for receptors in the 
innate immune system, such as toll-like receptors (TLR). Binding of 
these ligands to the receptors triggers an intracellular signaling cascade, 
resulting in the production of proinflammatory cytokines. In addition, 
certain bacterial components, such as exotoxins, have been shown to 
begin anticancer activities by acting directly on tumor cells, as opposed 
to acting indirectly [172]. Using bacteria as a vector for delivering 
therapeutically relevant transgenes offers several advantages. These 
bacteria, such as Clostridium, flourish and move freely in the anaero­
bic/hypoxic environment commonly found in tumor cells. Among the 
frequently employed bacteria for breast cancer vaccines are Salmonella 
typhimurium, Listeria monocytogenes, Clostridium novyi, Clostridium 
acetobutylicum, Bifidobacterium longum, Bifidobacterium adolescentis, 
and Escherichia coli [177,178]. Tumor treatment using bacteria can 
classified into two; (1) oncolysis or (2) addition of the cytotoxic/desired 
gene into tumor cell [179]. Yamada et al., discovered bacterial strains to 
generate redox proteins that destroy tumor cells by triggering pro­
grammed cell death and cell cycle arrest in MCF-7 cells. Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa’s Azurin protein kills cancer cells by interrupting the cell 
cycle and inducing apoptosis via the production of p53 and Bax, pre­
venting the growth of TNBC and halting its spread [180]. 
Li et al., prepared a therapeutic platform centered around bacterial 
outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) for the management of TNBC. These 
modified OMVs have shown potential as immune-stimulating agents, 
enhancing antitumor immunity. However, the limited therapeutic win­
dow of free OMVs has hindered their widespread use. To address this, 
the author loaded OMVs into macrophages and explored their potential 
for co-delivering Ce6 and DOX, enabling combinational tumor photo­
dynamic/chemo-/immunotherapy. The OMVs exhibited a particle size 
of 70–140 nm with a polydispersed index of 0.234, and in-vivo antitumor 
effectiveness demonstrated that macrophages produced them effec­
tively. Which would subsequently be taken up by neighboring cells in 
the tumor microenvironment, resulting in synergistic anticancer effects. 
Although the released chemotherapeutics may cause harm to the vehicle 
macrophages, the immunostimulatory action of OMVs would ultimately 
lead to more potent antitumor responses. Mice with tumors whose 
weight was reduced by OMV treatments quickly regained lost weight. 
Furthermore, as 4T1 tumors were significantly metastatic to the lung, 
we analyzed lung metastasis in treated mice. Biodistribution data indi­
cated that Ce6/DOX-OMVs@M accumulated in the liver; hence its 
hepatotoxicity was tested. Because of this, no abnormal alterations were 
seen in the H&E staining of the liver tissue, and the ALT and AST values 
in the blood were within normal limits. Treatment with Ce6/DOX- 
OMVs@M had no discernible effect on kidney function, as measured 
by blood levels of BUN and Cr. In vitro, hemolysis assays demonstrated 
that i. v. Administration of Ce6/DOX-OMVs@M would not cause he­
molysis, indicating that the compound is harmless to RBCs [181]. 
Ganai et al., reported the tumor targeting using the Salmonella 
typhimurium. The author used the bacterial radiation-inducible RecA 
promoter to create a non-pathogenic S. Typhimurium to release murine 
TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). Results showed Irradi­
ation TRAIL secretion from modified S. Typhimurium, which leads to 
caspase-3-mediated cell death and death in 4T1 mammary cancer cells 
in culture. Salmonella systemic injection coupled with TRAIL expression 
upregulation by 2Gy g-irradiation significantly slowed the progression 
of breast tumors and lowered the probability of mortality by 76% 
compared to irradiated controls. The 30-day survival rate went from 
zero to one hundred percent after repeated doses with TRAIL-bearing 
Salmonella combined with radiation [182]. Yazawa et al., systemically 
applied non-pathogenic and anaerobic microorganisms Bifidobacterium 
longum localized specifically to and flourished in 7,12-dimethylbenz [a] 
anthracene-induced rat mammary tumors. After the examination of the 
rat the bacteria were detected only in tumor tissue and not detected in 
the normal tissues, including the liver, spleen, kidney, and lung. The 
author found that gene therapy of solid tumors might benefit from this 
innovative method to tumor targeting utilizing Bifidobacteria [183]. L 
et al., conducted the study to examine the efficacy of Clostridium per­
fringens enterotoxin (CPE)-mediated treatment in treating breast cancer, 
and looked into CLDN 3 and 4 expression. Overexpression of CLDN 3 and 
4 in comparison to normal mammary epithelial tissue was seen in 
roughly 62% and 26% of primary breast carcinomas, respectively (n =
21). When CPE was added to cultured breast cancer cell lines, only the 
cells that expressed CLDN 3 and 4 were killed quickly and 
dose-dependently. Tumor volume was significantly reduced (P < 0.007), 
and necrosis was seen after intra-tumoral CPE treatment of xenografts of 
T47D cancer cells in immunodeficient mice [184]. Ei-atti et al., discussed 
the application of probiotics in managing chemotherapy-induced diar­
rhea in this case study. The authors discuss the experience of a stage IV 
breast cancer patient who found relief from diarrhea through the use of a 
probiotic blend containing various species [185]. Hu et al., synthesized 
the doxorubicin NPs with the surface modified with alized bacteria 
(Bifidobacterium bifidum). The in-vivo results showed that the developed 
NPs prolonged the survival rate and significantly inhibited tumor pro­
gression and metastasis [186]. 
4.4. Nanomedicine 
Patients with TNBC are typically given a combination of mainstream 
treatments (chemotherapy, surgery, radiotherapy) and alternative 
therapies (acupuncture, nutritional counselling, etc.). Radiation therapy 
and surgical removal of the breast tumor are the two most common 
approaches to dealing with this kind of cancer. They become less useful 
as the cancer spreads [187]. Here, focusing on the medication treatment, 
which is the last of the modalities, since it may diminish the tumor load 
and help stop, slow, or reverse cancer’s spread to other organs. The last 
twenty years have seen significant developments in nanotechnology, 
which may one day lead to novel approaches to treating various ail­
ments. The development of nanotechnology-based contrast substance 
and drug delivery carriers for detecting and managing illness is moving 
toward greater specificity and efficacy [188]. Drug delivery systems 
based on nanoparticles (NPs) can potentially improve treatment efficacy 
with fewer side effects, pharmacokinetics, encapsulation of the drug, 
and tumor deposition burden via the EPR effect. 
Furthermore, tumor selectivity and drug distribution in cancer cells 
may be improved by binding active target ligands to particle surfaces 
[189]. To overcome the difficulty inherent in getting NPs to their 
intended human tissue sites, researchers have come up with several 
solutions, 
including 
designing 
nanoparticles 
with 
improved 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
13
pharmacokinetic properties and a multistage delivery system, as well as 
increasing EPR effects through the application of X-ray radiation and 
high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) [190]. Nanocarriers, such as 
NPs/tubes [191], micelles/dendrimers, and liposomes, are now made up 
mostly of polymers, metals, lipids, nucleic acids, and proteins. Different 
types of nano formulations for treating TNBC are shown in Fig. 5. 
4.4.1. Lipid-based nano formulation 
Lipid-based formulations have demonstrated the greatest success 
among the numerous nanoformulations utilized in cancer treatment. 
Several lipid-based formulations, such as liposomal systems, solid lipid 
nanoparticles (SLN), and nanostructured lipid carriers (NLC), are 
currently in use. 
Chaudhuri et al. discussed the lipid-based nanoparticle for the man­
agement of TNBC. The author addressed many therapeutic benefits over 
traditional treatment and other nanoparticles, such as higher loading 
capacity, improved temporal and thermal stability, reduced therapeutic 
dosage and related toxicity, and minimal drug resistance. Furthermore, 
LNPs transcend physiological barriers, enhancing therapeutic accumu­
lation at the target region [192]. 
Liu et al., used gene therapy with the combination of lipid-based 
nanoparticles to manage TNBC. Targeted lipid-protamine-DNA (LPD) 
nanoparticles are employed to deliver the C–C motif chemokine ligand 2 
(CCL2) trap plasmid DNA (pCCL2) to the tumor microenvironment 
(TME). This localized expression of the CCL2 trap aims to alleviate the 
immunosuppressive effects of the TME. This method significantly out­
performs the currently available CCL2 antibody regarding therapeutic 
effectiveness and tumor growth suppression in murine TNBC 4T1 cells 
[193]. 
Yan et al. discussed the lipid-based NPs decorated with siRNA for 
treating BC. This approach attracts researchers because of its unique 
properties to target the tumor and protect the siRNA [194]. 
4.4.2. Liposomal based nanocarrier 
In nanoformulation, liposomes are most typically utilized for medi­
cation delivery. Lipoproteins have a bilayer structure made of phos­
pholipids and cholesterol, which are biocompatible and biodegradable. 
The bilayer-structured phospholipids improve the solubility and stabil­
ity of anticancer medicines [195]. Additionally, cholesterol enhances 
the stability of NPs in blood, increases the penetrability of lipophilic 
drugs across the lipid bilayer, and decreases the mobility of NPs. They’re 
used to load both hydrophobic and hydrophilic medications [196]. The 
U.S. FDA has approved liposomal drug delivery. Targeted liposomes 
have been produced to deliver medicines to the cancer cell or tumor 
microenvironment with the least amount of non-specific distribution in 
healthy tissues or organs. The first chemotherapy nano system utilized 
therapeutically is Doxil, a liposome containing doxorubicin (DOX). The 
PEGylated liposomal formulation of Doxorubicin reduces blood levels 
without compromising the drug’s anticancer properties. This is achieved 
by prolonging the circulation time of the nanoformulation and pre­
venting its early clearance [197]. Li et al., reported the targeted lipo­
somal nanocarrier of different anticancer drugs for the management of 
TNBC. IC50 value of anticancer agents such as mertansine, paclitaxel, 
gemcitabine, and DOX were tested in the TNBC cell lines MDA-MB-231 
and MDA-MB-468. The study of the cell lines revealed that the devel­
oped targeted liposomal nanocarrier inhibits tumor growth [196]. Dong 
et al., reported the epalrestat and doxorubicin dual-loaded liposomal 
nanoformulation for treating TNBC. Hyaluronic acid is used as a tar­
geting agent at the CD44 receptor. The formulation releases both drugs 
simultaneously to the tumor environment, which suppresses the tumor 
Fig. 5. Nanomedicine for combating the drug resistance.  
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
14
growth and epithelial-mesenchymal transition [198]. 
Duarte et al., prepared a pH-sensitive liposomal formulation by co- 
encapsulating DOX and simvastatin (SIM). The study evaluated the ef­
fect of these medication combinations, at molar ratios of 1:1, 1:2, and 
2:1, on three human breast cancer cell lines: MDA-MB-231, MCF-7, and 
SK-BR-3. Both free drugs and the drugs co-encapsulated into pH- 
sensitive liposomes were assessed in the study. The formulations had a 
polydispersity index (PDI) of less than 0.3 and a size of less than 200 nm. 
DOX to SIM had encapsulation contents of around 100% and 70%, 
respectively. DOX: SIM molar ratios of 2:1 were shown to have a more 
significant inhibitory impact on breast cancer cell lines when using free 
and encapsulated drugs [199]. 
4.4.3. Solid lipid nanocarrier 
Lipid-based colloidal medicinal drug delivery systems, known as 
solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs), are nontoxic and biodegradable. In the 
early 1990s, a polymer-based alternate delivery system became recog­
nized. Most often, SLNs are used to improve the oral bioavailability of 
less water-soluble drugs. They offer various benefits, including simple 
manufacture, pharmaceutical stability, improved drug entrapment, 
effective in-vitro drug release, and long-term stability [200]. Multiple 
investigations have shown that SLNs may either solubilize lipophilic 
chemotherapeutics uniformly inside the lipidic matrix or form a 
drug-rich shell encircling the lipidic core. Moreover, depending on the 
drug 
accumulation 
pattern 
inside 
the 
lipid 
matrices, 
i.e., 
chemotherapeutics-enriched core or chemotherapeutics-enriched shell, 
the drug release profile may be managed to our benefit to meet the 
required release profile [192]. Rocha et al., developed the docetaxel 
encapsulate SLN for managing lung and mammary carcinoma. The 
high-energy approach was used to create SLNs. The lipid matrix Com­
pritol 888 ATO was utilized to formulate the SLNs. The surfactants 
Pluronic F127 and Span 80 were employed to stabilize the dispersion of 
the SLNs. Notably, there was minimal change in particle stability 
observed over a period of at least 120 days. The polydispersity index 
(PDI) for the SLNs was 0.2, and both the particle size and zeta potential 
showed negative values. With a drug loading of only 2%, the SLNs 
demonstrated an impressive 86% effectiveness in entrapping docetaxel 
(DTX). The IC50 of SLN-DTX was over a factor of 100 lower than that of 
free DTX when tested on 4T1 cells. In the cellular uptake test, SLN-DTX 
was substantially more efficiently taken up by cells than free DTX. 
SLN-DTX (73.7%) accumulated in the G2-M phase, which was much 
greater in the cells than in the free DTX alone (23%). It showed apoptosis 
[201]. Zheng et al., developed the DOX-loaded arginine-glycine-aspartic 
(RGD) tripeptide-modified pH-sensitive SLN. To investigate the anti­
tumor activity of RGD-DOX-SLNs, cancer cell lines (MCF-7) and 
DOX-resistant cell lines (MCF-7/ADR) were used. The particle size and 
zeta potential of developed NPs were 93.3 nm and 35.6 mV. Terminal 
half-life (T1/2) and maximum drug concentration (Cmax) were 10.58 h 
and 39.12 ± 2.71 L/kg/h [195]. Hatami et al., prepared the 
quercetin-loaded SLN for the treatment BC by β-catenin pathway. The 
results revealed that the quercetin-SLN exhibited the most favorable 
characteristics, boasting a particle size of 154 nm, a zeta potential of 
−27.7 mV, and an impressive encapsulation efficacy of 99.6%. 
Compared to quercetin alone, the application of quercetin-SLN notably 
decreased cell viability, migration, sphere formation, and the expression 
of key proteins β-catenin and p-Smad 2 and 3. Moreover, gene expres­
sions of CD44, zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), and 
vimentin were substantially reduced, while gene expression of E-cad­
herin witnessed a noteworthy increase [202]. 
4.4.4. Nanostructured lipid carriers 
Nanostructured lipid carriers (NLCs) represent the second generation 
of lipid nanoparticles, consisting of a hybrid blend of solid and liquid 
(oil) lipids. The unique combination of these lipids allows the NLC 
matrix to remain solid at body temperature while maintaining a melting 
point below that of the SLNs. This property enhances the stability and 
performance of NLCs as drug delivery carriers. These characteristics may 
manage SLN particle issues such as storage, distribution, and medication 
limiting. All developed NLCs aim to improve active ingredient delivery 
and prevent medication leakage by creating a specific structure in the 
lipid matrix during storage [203]. SLNs with these advantages show 
potential for the delivery of anticancer agents. The delivery of anti­
cancer agents to cancer cells more precisely means that normal cells are 
less impacted and will thus have fewer side effects. On the other side, 
there might be more drug concentration closest to the cancerous cells, 
meaning that lower drug dosages would be sufficient and resistant cells 
would be eliminated, decreasing the need for larger drug doses and the 
likelihood of resistance [204]. Borges et al., developed the doxorubicin 
and sclareol encapsulated NLC to manage TNBC. The developed 
formulation was tested for the in-vitro parameters, and cell-line studies 
were conducted on the MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells. Both drugs showed 
synergism at the molar ratio of DOX:SC (1:7.5) in-vitro. Dual drugs 
loaded NLCs showed good efficacy for the breast cancer treatment in 
mice and histopathological study reviled no toxicity of the formation to 
the organ [205]. Varshosaz et al., developed DTX-loaded NLCs modified 
with trastuzumab (The results demonstrated that the stearyl 
amine-loaded NLCs had the smallest particle size, the most significant 
zeta potential, and the highest antibody coupling efficiency values. Zeta 
potential and drug entrapment effectiveness were decreased due to 
Herceptin 
binding 
to 
NLCs, 
whereas 
particle 
size 
rose. 
Spermine-containing NLCs released DTX more slowly than those con­
taining other fatty amines for the management of HER2-positive breast 
cancer. The efficacy of the developed formulation was evaluated on the 
MDA-MB-468 (HER2 negative receptor) and BT-474 (HER2 positive) 
breast cancer cell lines. Cell line studies revealed the excellent efficacy of 
the NLCs for the selected cell. Flow cytometry studies showed that the 
BT-474 cells more readily absorbed nanoparticles chemically attached 
to Herceptin [206]. Ersoz et al., prepared doxorubicin and gold NPs 
loaded in NLCs. The results showed cytotoxic effect of prepared NPs on 
the MDA-MB-231 BC cells and tumor growth inhibition was found to be 
81%. The investigation revealed that the geometry of AuNPs directly 
influences their photothermal capabilities. The synergistic interplay 
between the cytotoxic effects of DOX and the localized hyperthermia 
induced by AuNPs greatly amplifies their ability to cause irreversible 
cellular damage. These advanced formulations exhibit substantial po­
tential as highly effective agents for combined cancer therapy [207]. 
4.4.5. Polymeric nanoparticles 
It consists of chemotherapeutic agent-loaded nanosized particles that 
are biocompatible and biodegradable (encapsulated or, entrapped or 
conjugated) [208,209]. NPs are classified as nanospheres or nano­
capsules, depending on how the medicine is contained. Due to the 
physical characteristics of the polymer, NPs delivery at targets has many 
advantages over conventional colloidal systems, including reduced 
toxicity, longer circulation period leading to health benefits, improved 
cell absorption, biocompatibility, organ distribution uniformity, and 
EPR effect. These different properties of polymeric nanoparticle clams 
make it a good option for effectively managing TNBC [210]. Almoustafa 
et al., developed the DOX-loaded surface coated with hyaluronic acid 
polymeric NPs to manage TNBC metastasis. The in-vivo studies outcomes 
reveled that hyaluronic acid-coated NPs decrease tumor growth. Ac­
cording to fluorescence microscopy, metastasis in the liver, spleen, 
colon, and lungs was considerably (p < 0.05) lower in the HA-PEG-PLGA 
NPs group compared to the control and Free DOX groups [211]. Akram 
et al., reported the tumor micro-environment sensitive chitosan-based 
doxorubicin polymeric nanoparticle. The particle size of the NPs was 
175 nm. The XRD confirmed the amorphous nature, and the thermal 
stability of the sample was 100 ◦C. It was determined whether or not the 
pH of the tumor location affected the release of doxorubicin from the 
PNPs. In a study utilizing a UV–Vis Spectrophotometer, the encapsula­
tion efficacy of PNPs for the chemotherapy doxorubicin was calculated 
to be 89% (4.45 mg/5 mg). At a pH of 5.3, drug release from PNPs was 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
15
88% (3.92 mg/4.45 mg) after 96 h. Different PNPs with varied con­
centrations of DPA may be utilized to deliver chemotherapeutic drugs 
[211] efficiently. 
4.4.6. Polymeric micelles 
Hydrophobic bases for water-insoluble and hydrophilic shells meant 
to load water-soluble drug molecules make polymeric micelles (PMs) a 
promising drug delivery method. Hydrophilic encapsulation provides 
nanostructured micelles with structural integrity [212]. Micelles of the 
nanometric size are well suited for the administration of water-soluble 
anti-cancer drugs because they can sustain a large payload, a pro­
longed retention period in the circulation, an improved permeability to 
the drug, a powerful penetration of the tumor, and an even dispersion of 
the medication. The biological stability of polymeric micelles has been 
improved, and new developments in polymeric micelles design show 
that drug delivery systems may be created to specifically target certain 
tissues. Various strategies are available in micelles for targeting TNBC: 
conventional 
PMs, 
pH-responsive 
PMs, 
redox-responsive 
PMs, 
temperature-responsive 
PMs, 
magnetism-responsive, 
and 
enzyme-responsive PMs [213]. Lim et al., fabricate the PMs encapsu­
lated with paclitaxel and CSF1R inhibitors to manage TNBC. The find­
ings show that large doses of PTX in POx, even when used alone, have 
profound effects on TME and trigger the formation of permanent 
immunological memories. Authors further show that repolarization of 
the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME) and an 
increased T cell immune response decrease primary tumor progress and 
metastasis when used together in a variety of TNBC models, yielding 
consistent treatment benefit [214]. Lim et al., developed the spherical 
and worm-like PMs to manage TNBC. Poly (2-oxazoline)-based poly­
meric micelles have been shown to undergo elongation from a spherical 
to a worm-like form over time, with elongation regulated by several 
factors such as the quantity and kind of medication injected into the 
micelles. Micelles with a spherical shape aggregate quickly in tumor 
tissue while retaining considerable doses of medication; micelles with a 
worm-like shape collect more slowly and only after releasing significant 
amounts of drug. The results showed the importance of the PMs for 
effectively delivering anticancer agents to the target sites [215]. Zuo 
et al., developed the halofuginone-loaded TPGS PMs to manage TNBC. 
The findings showed that HTPM was stable and released steadily in the 
model GI fluids. Since HF was shown to be a P-glycoprotein (P-gp) 
substrate, encapsulation in TPGS polymeric micelles significantly 
improved its permeability across Caco-2 cell monolayers by increasing 
intracellular uptake and suppressing P-gp efflux. When taken orally, 
HTPM had more tumor-suppressing effects than HF alone in subcu­
taneous xenografts of MDA-MB-231 cells. While HF alone caused weight 
loss and jejunal hemorrhage in the studied animals, oral administration 
of HTPM at the therapeutic dosage did not produce any pathological 
harm [216]. Lim et al. developed PMs containing paclitaxel and CSF1R 
inhibitors. The findings underscore that administering high-dose PTX 
via POx formulation exerts potent effects on the tumor microenviron­
ment (TME) and fosters enduring immune memory, even when used as a 
standalone treatment. Moreover, our study illustrates that combining 
PTX and PLX3397 consistently enhances therapeutic outcomes across 
diverse TNBC models. This improvement arises from the repolarization 
of the immunosuppressive TME and an augmented T cell immune 
response, culminating in the suppression of both primary tumor growth 
and metastasis. In essence, this research underscores the significance of 
medication reformulation and introduces a promising translational 
strategy for PTX monotherapy and the PTX plus PLX3397 combination 
therapy, thereby advancing the potential treatment of TNBC through the 
utilization of POX polymeric micelles [217]. 
4.4.7. Nanocrystals 
Nanocrystals are considered nano-sized pure drug particles shielded 
by a little number of surfactants. Nanocrystal is practical for water drug 
delivery, with promising industrialization and desirable drug loading 
[218]. US-FDA has permitted the use of nine different nanocrystal-based 
products in human trials. Drug nanocrystals, in studies conducted in the 
lab, showed improved oral and systemic anticancer properties [219]. 
Zhao et al., developed the thermosensitive nanocrystals loaded with 
paclitaxel and niclosamide to manage TNBC. The developed nano­
crystals were loaded in the PLGA_PEG_PLGA thermosensitive hydrogel. 
The optimal particle size and high drug loading were achieved in the 
optimized formulation. The drug release from PN-NCs-Ts Gel was stable 
for up to 8 days in vitro. Synergistic effects of combination treatment in 
reducing cell proliferation and migration and causing programmed cell 
death were reported in in-vitro anticancer testing. The combination 
treatment demonstrated the expected level of safety and an in vivo 
tumor growth inhibition rate of around 68% [220]. 
4.4.8. Inorganic nanoparticles 
Many recent studies have revealed the potential of inorganic NPs for 
use in cancer detection and therapy. Better therapeutic effectiveness and 
decreased side effects may be achieved by using inorganic NPs as drug 
carriers owing to the simplicity with which targeting molecules can be 
modified, the rate of drug release can be regulated using a variety of 
stimuli, and the NPs can be targeted for delivery [221]. There are four 
main kinds of metallic nanoparticles: metal-ion NPs, metal oxide NPs, 
metal sulphide NPs, and bimetallic NPs. Metals used in various NPs, such 
as magnesium (Mg), gold (Au), copper (Cu), titanium (Ti), silver (Ag), 
zinc (Zn), and platinum (Pt) make up the first category of nanomaterials. 
Recent imaging and detection methods, such as magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET), may benefit 
from using inorganic NPs. Benefits of using inorganic nanoparticles for 
breast cancer include increased permeation and accumulation in ma­
lignant tissue, light absorbance, and surface plasma resonance in the 
near-infrared, radiation interaction leading to the generation of sec­
ondary electrons, and the capability to be conjugated with drugs or other 
agents. Gold (Au NPs) and silver (Ag NPs) are the most studied metallic 
nanoparticles for biomedical activities such as cancer treatment, di­
agnostics, and medication delivery [222]. It has been shown that gold 
NPs (AuNPs) are the most studied and promising metal NPs known to 
transport paclitaxel, a well-known anti-cancer medication. Differently 
shaped and fabricated Au NPs, such as Au-nanoshells (AuNS), 
Au-nanorods (AuNR), and Au-nanocages (AuNC), are emerging as a 
versatile nanovehicle for cancer treatment. PEG-coated Au NP and 
ionizing radiation improved survival in a mouse model of TNBC [223]. 
Serum-coated AuNR can potentially suppress gene expression in cellular 
energy production. In conclusion, cancer cells having less energy and 
being unable to migrate leads to invasion both in vitro and in vivo [224]. 
Antimicrobial and cytotoxic characteristics of silver NPs (AgNPs) have 
led to their broad use for treating a wide variety of cancers, including 
those of the breast, ovary, colon, brain, liver, and blood [225]. Ac­
cording to Swanner et al., AgNPs are taken up by both TNBC and 
nonmalignant breast cells, however, due to their fast breakdown in 
cancer cells, AgNPs are particularly harmful for TNBC cells. But, healthy 
cells were not affected by them [226]. After AgNPs were taken up by 
cells, the endoplasmic reticulum of TNBC cells was stressed owing to the 
increased production of cellular antioxidants. Still, the endoplasmic 
reticulum of normal cells was not negatively affected. To combat cancer, 
ZnO NPs may be used similarly to genotoxic medicines. Micronuclei 
formed by ZnO NPs inside tumor cells augment mitotic and interphase 
apoptosis, leading to increased cell death. ZnO NPs loaded with aspar­
aginase improve the selectivity and stability of the chemotherapy 
combination of paclitaxel and daunorubicin. Asparaginase is a 
well-known anticancer enzyme utilized as a chemotherapeutic agent in 
different anticancer therapies [227]. ZnO NPs have been shown to 
decrease toxicity and boost effectiveness in conjunction with paclitaxel 
and cisplatin in managing TNBC cells [228]. 
Among the new nanocarriers, mesoporous silica nanoparticles 
(MSNs) are being employed to solve this problem. Meng et al., results 
revealed that combining DOX and siRNA delivery through MSNs 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
16
significantly reduced tumor development in vivo and had synergistic 
effects compared to either drug or siRNA delivery alone [229]. Paredes 
et al., developed MSNs based multifunctional metallodrug nano-system. 
Researchers found that nanocarriers inhibited cell mobility and 
decreased cell viability in MDA-MB-231 cells in a dose-dependent 
manner. Abundant targeting, better treatment effectiveness, and 
increased tumor shrinkage were seen in vivo trials with mice harboring 
TNBC cells [230]. 
4.4.9. Theranostic nanomedicine 
Numerous imaging agents were included in the formulation to track 
the movement and effectiveness of the active therapeutic ingredient in 
vivo. “Diagnostic and therapeutic agents in one system” is the definition 
of theranostic nanomedicine [231,232]. First used by Funkhouser in 
2002, the word “theranostic” refers to substances with both diagnostic 
and therapeutic potential [233]. It is hoped that the idea of concurrent 
medication and contrast agent administration to the site of action would 
help the individualization of modern medicine. Micelles and liposomes 
are examples of nano-carriers that bring theranostic closer to clinical use 
[234]. In treating complicated illnesses like cancer and proliferative 
tumors, theranostic nanomedicine has been discovered to have a sub­
stantial impact since an exact photocopy for each tumor can be gener­
ated together with its genetic and proteomic profile [190]. The most 
effective techniques for theranostic application and distribution of 
anticancer medicine and an imaging agent are quantum dot (QD) 
modified nanohybrids (Protein, polysaccharide, lipid, polymer). NPs 
quantum dots (QDs) are semiconductor crystals with photo­
luminescence properties and sizes in the 2–10 nm range [235]. Another 
research demonstrated a considerable cytotoxic impact of Au–SiO2/QDs 
micelles theranostic compared to free doxorubicin, which was shown to 
be associated to the hyperthermic action of Au–SiO2/QDs micelles 
theranostic [236]. Increased therapeutic effectiveness and tumor image 
detection were seen when paclitaxel was encapsulated with 
CdTe/CdS/ZnS QDs into NLC for theranostic use [237]. Cai et al., 
developed This enzyme combination, which breaks down into small 
molecular weight (MW) products (44 kDa) and releases paclitaxel into 
the tumor microenvironment, making it a potentially useful therapeutic 
and detection theranostic nanomedicine. The MRI contrast agent 
Gd-DTPA improved the imaging capabilities of theranostic nano­
medicine, leading to a dramatic upsurge in conjugate accumulation in 
tumors [238]. Choi et al., developed theranostic targeted erythrocyte 
membrane nanoparticles for cancer management. This work describes, 
QDs were integrated into the lipid bilayers of EDNs, and the anti-cancer 
medication doxorubicin was encapsulated into the NPs. TNBC was then 
targeted by conjugating anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
antibody molecules to the surface of EDNs (iEDNs). Results from the 
biodistribution test and confocal microscopy studies indicated that 
iEDNs accumulated more heavily in EGFR-positive MDA-MB-231 tu­
mors than non-targeted EDNs in both vitro and in vivo. The growth of 
the targeted tumors was considerably slowed by doxorubicin-containing 
iEDNs (iEDNs-DOX) compared to non-targeted iEDNs. The anti-EGFR 
iEDNs that resulted were highly biocompatible, circulated in the blood 
for a prolong period of time, and efficiently targeted TNBC in mice 
[239]. Tade et al., discussed about the theranostic graphene quantum 
dots (GQDs) for the management of BC. Author reveled that GQDs used 
for the Photothermal treatment, hyperthermia therapy, and photody­
namic therapy. The author also emphasizes the importance of GQDs as 
delivery of drugs motifs and as drug carriers [240]. Although there are 
currently no theranostic authorized by the FDA specifically for TNBC, 
there is a clear and rising demand for such treatments. Li et al., devel­
oped the nanoplatform for the treatment of TNBC with multi model 
imaging guided chemodynamic/photodynamic/photothermal synergis­
tic therapy. The formulation surface was modified with the hyaluronic 
acid which helped on the tumor targeting and accumulate the formu­
lation at target site. The proposed nanoplatform has demonstrated its 
biocompatibility and efficacy in both in vitro and in vivo settings for 
cancer treatment, showcasing its ability to precisely target TNBC 
through precise NIR fluorescence, magnetic resonance, and photo­
thermal trimodal imaging [241]. 
4.5. Radiotherapy 
A breast cancer advisory committee from the German Society for 
Radiation Oncology (DEGRO) has been publishing and updating 
evidence-based practical recommendations for the treatment of breast 
cancer with radiation for the essential clinical scenarios since 2005 
[242]. In order to eradicate breast cancer cells, radiation treatment 
makes use of high-energy X-rays, protons, or other particles. Radiation 
therapy is more effective against rapidly dividing cells, such as cancer 
cells, than it is against slower-dividing cells, such as healthy tissue cells. 
Invisible and painless X-rays or particles are used in this therapy. The 
patient will no longer be radioactive following treatment and may safely 
interact with others, including little ones. Varzandeh et al., evaluated 
thioglycolic acid-modified bismuth nanosheet for enhanced loading of 
Mitomycin C that can potentially damage 62.47% of MDA-MB-231 cells 
(TNBC cell line) via apoptosis pathway [243]. Radiotherapy for the 
treatment of breast cancer may be divided into the following: 
Accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI): It has been deter­
mined that, for carefully chosen patients, women with early-stage breast 
cancer may benefit from accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) 
rather than whole-breast radiation. During APBI, radiation is particu­
larly aimed at the breast tissue that is near the original tumor location, 
usually a margin of 1–2 cm of breast tissue around the surgical cavity. 
The reasoning for this strategy is that metastases tend to form in close 
proximity to the primary tumor. This method can potentially limit ra­
diation exposure to healthy organs and tissues outside of the targeted 
area, including the remaining breast, the heart, lungs, rib cage, and chest 
and shoulder muscles [244,245]. 
Multicatheter brachytherapy: Brachytherapy is a localized kind of 
care; it can only be seen in its close surroundings. In patients with early 
breast cancer who undergo breast-conserving surgery and whole breast 
radiation therapy, administering a boost to the tumor bed has been 
shown to decrease the risk of local recurrence. Excellent local control 
and aesthetic outcomes may be achieved with brachytherapy because of 
its dose-escalation capability [246,247]. Additionally, for appropriately 
selected patients with early breast cancer who have undergone 
breast-conserving surgery, accelerated partial breast irradiation with 
multicatheter brachytherapy has demonstrated comparable effective­
ness to adjuvant whole breast irradiation [248]. It’s enticing as a ther­
apeutic option since it shortens the duration of radiation therapy from 
3–7 weeks to 2–5 days and significantly lessens the amount of radiation 
exposed to the breasts, heart, skin, and lungs [249]. To date, brachy­
therapy has been shown to be the most effective method of irradiating a 
tiny area with a high radiation dosage. When it comes to treating breast 
cancer, brachytherapy is one of the tools in the toolbox. 
Intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT): In the early 1960s, re­
searchers at the University of Kyoto in Japan reported using IORT on 
various intra-abdominal tumors. IORT refers to the administration of 
radiation to the tumor and its bed during surgical procedures. With 
IORT, large radiation doses may be directed directly to the cancer bed, 
sparing the surrounding healthy tissue. As part of a multidisciplinary 
strategy, IORT is often utilized with other modalities, such as maximum 
surgical resection, external beam radiation (EBRT), or chemotherapy. 
The effectiveness of IORT has been explored in a broad range of tumor 
types, including early TNBC, pancreatic cancer, retroperitoneal sar­
coma, locally progressed and recurrent rectal cancer, and a few gyne­
cologic and genitourinary malignancies [250,251]. Delivering IORT has 
been done in a variety of ways. In contemporary clinical practice, X-rays 
(kV IORT), electron beams (electron IORT/IOERT), and high-dose-rate 
brachytherapy (HDR IORT) are some of the frequently used modalities 
for the administration of IORT [252]. 
External-beam radiotherapy (EBRT): External beam radiation 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
17
therapy (EBRT) is the most commonly employed type of radiation 
therapy for individuals with BC. Cancer cells are targeted and destroyed 
in this approach using concentrated energy beams. The radiation beams 
are precisely directed at the tumor site using a device that rotates around 
the patient’s body. High-energy X-rays, protons, or other particles are 
utilized in breast cancer radiation therapy to eliminate cancer cells 
[253] effectively. Zangouri et al., conducted the study for observation of 
breast cancer (BC) patients undergoing intraoperative radiation treat­
ment (IORT). Patients in this study was selected from April 2014 to 
march 2020 and same age or elder than 45 years old. 252 patients 
enrolled in total for the research. The patients’ average (SD) age was 
56.43 ± 7.79 years. In all, 32.9% of patients had a history of breast 
cancer in their families. Tumor size was 1.56 ± 0.55 cm on average (SD). 
Patient follow-up lasted 36.3 ± 18.7 months on average (IQR). The 
author reported the utilizing IORT in a location with few IORT facilities 
and our adjusted patient selection criteria [253]. Brund et al., the author 
focuses on the technical elements of interstitial large-dose rate brachy­
therapy deployment with a step-by-step methodology. Patients were 
chosen using inclusion criteria modified from GEC-ESTRO standards, 
and multidisciplinary tumor boards oversaw the process. Twenty pa­
tients were treated between July 2017 and January 2020. An over­
whelming majority, specifically 94.7% of the treatment plans, met the 
required standards for adequate coverage of the target volume, appro­
priate dose delivery, dosage homogeneity, conformation index, and 
protection of critical organs at risk. Acute grade 1-2 adverse events 
occurred in 21% of patients, but no incidents of severity 3–4 occurred 
[254]. 
Nosrati et al., reported using Bi2S3–Fe3O4, a new bimetallic nano 
radiosensitizer, to increase tumor formation and boost radiation- 
induced DNA damage with minimal side effects. These recently pro­
duced NPs include iron oxide and bismuth sulfide metallic NPs, which 
suggests that they would have a high radiosensitizing capability by 
forming reactive oxygen species (ROS) to cause DNA damage under X- 
ray irradiation. Using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a coating for 
Bi2S3–Fe3O4 bimetallic nanoparticles enhanced their blood circulation 
time, biocompatibility, colloidal stability, and fine-tuned functionali­
zation. Comprehensive in vitro and in vivo tests have confirmed the 
biocompatibility and safety of these coated nanoparticles and their 
ability to induce radiation-induced DNA damage through the activation 
and generation of ROS. Moreover, the nanoparticles have demonstrated 
radiosensitizing capability in both in-vitro and in-vivo experiments. 
Extremely efficient tumor eradication was seen after administration of 
Bi2S3@BSA-Fe3O4-FA in a 4T1 breast cancer mouse model exposed to X- 
ray radiation, without resulting in death or severe damage in healthy 
tissues [255]. Torres et al., described the effects of various physical ac­
tivities on tiredness and identified the most efficient means of alleviating 
this side effect following adjuvant therapy for breast cancer. Random­
ized clinical studies assessing the effects of physical activity on tiredness 
in postmenopausal women with a detection of stage I to IV breast cancer 
were included. Meta-analysis combined data using the standardized 
mean difference (SMD). 20 controlled clinical studies with a total of 
1793 individuals found that regular exercise significantly reduced 
weariness [256]. Nafissi et al., studied the IORT’s effect on angiogenic 
factor concentrations in breast cancer patients’ blood and surgical 
wound fluids (SWF). Three hundred sixty women who underwent 
breast-conserving surgery between 2013 and 2018 were split 
non-randomly into two groups: those who received IORT and those who 
did not. EGF, DLL4, and VEGF blood levels were all shown to fluctuate 
significantly before and after surgery. In addition, ROC analysis 
demonstrated that TGF- and DLL4 may distinguish between early and 
late illness. Intriguingly, the IORT group had a lower mortality and 
recurrence rate [257]. Tutzauer et al., check whether there is a 
connection between tumor HIF-1 positivity and hypoxia gene expression 
profiles and the success of radiation in terms of patient outcome. Over 
the course of 15 years, researchers looked for recurrences, and in 20 
years, women who had been detected with initial T1-2N0M0 breast 
cancer were tracked to see whether they had died. Results showed that 
patients with HIF-1-positive and -negative initial tumors reaped the 
same benefits from radiation. Women with HIF-1-positive initial tumors 
had an increased chance of both ipsilateral and overall cancer recur­
rence. Ten of the eleven hypoxia gene profiles studied showed a positive 
correlation with HIF-1-positivity, and five showed a positive correlation 
with an elevated rate/risk of recurrence [258]. 
4.6. Photodynamic therapy 
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a substitute therapy for cancer that 
has been revealed to be effective against a range of cancer types with few 
side effects and has been authorized for use in clinical trials. PDT uses 
nontoxic photosensitizers (PS) with light to eradicate tumor cells by 
localizing or removing them within the tumor and in vasculature [259, 
260]. Light-activated PSs undergo energy-transfer cascades that 
generate cytotoxic superoxide anion radicals and reactive singlet oxygen 
molecules, which may cause cell death [261]. Three interconnected 
processes are responsible for PDT’s antitumor effects: direct cytotoxic 
effects on tumor cells, indirect damage to the tumor vasculature, and the 
development of an inflammatory process that might activate systemic 
immunity. Since neo-vascularization and “leaky capillaries” are tumor 
features, the nature of the biological effect may be confined to the 
tumor. An increased photosensitizer concentration in malignant cells 
may arise from this. A growing body of studies supports PDT’s ability to 
elicit robust immune responses [262]. As a crucial component, the 
photosensitizer must not be ignored. The ideal PS for use in photody­
namic therapy (PDT) for solid tumors would meet some or all of the 
following criteria: it would be a pure chemical readily available for 
purchase, it would have low dark toxicity but high photocytotoxicity, it 
would be highly selective for tumor cells, its wavelength would be long 
enough to allow for greater light penetration, it would be quickly 
eliminated from the body, and it would have multiple administration 
options (oral, intravenous, intertumoral or inhalational) [263,264]. M 
et al., conducted a phase I/IIa dose escalation trial involving 12 female 
patients with a recent diagnosis of invasive ductal BC, who were 
scheduled to undergo mastectomy as their initial treatment. As part of 
the treatment, the patients received an intravenous administration of the 
photosensitizer verteporfin at a 0.4 mg/kg dose. Subsequently, the pa­
tients were exposed to increasing light doses of 20, 30, 40, and 50 J (with 
three patients receiving each dosage), delivered through a laser fiber 
positioned interstitially under ultrasound guidance. Before PDT and 
again 4 days later, patients had MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 
scans. The tissue that was removed underwent a histological analysis. 
There were no reported side effects with PDT. A strong connection was 
observed between the MRI and histological findings, suggesting that the 
PDT effects were present in both cases. Histologically, PDT necrosis 
differed from spontaneous necrosis in many important ways. Adjacent 
normal tissue showed signs of apoptosis. No negative effects were seen, 
and outcomes were not worse than those in the control group, during the 
course of the median 50-month follow-up. This research lends credence 
to the idea that PDT might be useful in the treatment of early breast 
cancer [261]. Kim et al., Here the author introduces a self-luminescent 
and biodegradable protein-based PDT system based on the protein 
complex Luc-RGP, which consists of luciferase and a protein capable of 
generating reactive oxygen species (ROS), was utilized in the study. 
When breast cells treated with coelenterazine-h, a substrate for lucif­
erase, were exposed to Luc-RGP in the absence of external light irradi­
ation, malignancy in these cells was eradicated. This effect was achieved 
by combining Luc-RGP with a short lead peptide, which induced the 
production of bioluminescence-sensitive ROS in the plasma membrane, 
leading to cell death in the breast cancer cells. Targeted effects were 
shown with BLiP-PDT even at low light intensities in patient-derived 
primary breast tumor cells and in in-vivo tumor xenograft mice 
models. These results indicate that BLiP-PDT has immediate application 
as a potential theranostic strategy against a wide range of malignancies 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
18
[265]. Ashkbar et al., reported the nanocomposite (NC) dual photody­
namic and photothermal therapy for the treatment of an animal model 
of BC in the Balb/c mice strain. In photothermal therapy (PTT), hyper­
thermia is generated using laser light or other heat sources to raise the 
temperature of cancer cells, ultimately leading to their destruction. On 
the other hand, in PDT, a photosensitizing reagent is administered to the 
patient, and it is then activated by laser light of a specific wavelength. 
This activation produces reactive oxygen species (ROS) that selectively 
damage and kill cancer cells. PTT and PDT are non-invasive therapeutic 
approaches used in cancer treatment. The result reveals that tumor 
volume in the NC + PDT + PTT group was 27% lower than in the 
baseline condition. It’s important to highlight that the therapies didn’t 
cause any noticeable weight loss or side effects in the key organs. 
Apoptosis was also shown by the IHC data, which showed that the 
growth of proapoptotic Bax and Caspase3 proteins was considerably 
greater in the NC + PDT + PTT group against to the control group [261]. 
HA-ICG-Fe-PDA, which showed photosensitivity and near IR range, has 
been developed by Li et al. resulting in better photothermal performance 
in 808 nm laser irradiation. The nanoplatform can actively target 
CD44-overexpressed TNBC [266,267]. Chen et al., fabricated a 
MnO2-coated Prussian blue nanoparticle showing 21.4% reduced cell 
viability in a combined in-vitro photodynamic/photothermal study. This 
method achieved tumor inhibition rates of up to 93% against TNBC 
[268]. 
4.7. Chemotherapy 
Chemotherapy, as defined by Sporn, “involves the administration of 
pharmacologic or natural agents with the goal of preventing or treating 
invasive breast cancer by preventing or treating the DNA damage that 
initiates carcinogenesis or by arresting or reversing the progression of 
premalignant cells in which such damage has already occurred” [269]. 
In chemotherapy, medications are often used to kill cancer cells and 
prevent them from multiplying. Adjuvant chemotherapy is given after 
surgery, while neoadjuvant chemotherapy is used before surgery to 
shrink big cancer cells [270]. In cases of early and locally progressed 
breast cancer, combination therapy is often more beneficial than single 
therapies. A few of the most frequent treatments for breast cancer are 
covered here [271]. Carboplatin and cisplatin are platinum-based 
chemotherapeutic agents commonly used in cancer treatment. These 
compounds are used alone or in combination with other medications to 
combat various types of cancer. The mechanism of action of platinum 
compounds involves forming covalent bonds with DNA, forming 
platinum-DNA adducts. These adducts cause structural changes and 
impair DNA stability, thereby interfering with DNA replication and 
transcription processes in cancer cells. This disruption eventually trig­
gers cell death. The formation of platinum-DNA adducts has been 
extensively studied both in laboratory settings (in vitro) and within 
living organisms (in vivo), providing valuable insights into the molec­
ular mechanisms of platinum-based chemotherapy and its impact on 
cancer cells. The effect of these diverse lesions on DNA replication, 
mutation induction, and sensitivity to DNA repair techniques have all 
been measured in preliminary research. Platinum (IV) compounds may 
cause further DNA damage by being broken down by the cell into 
platinum (II) compounds [272]. In approximately 20%–35% of cases, 
patients with metastatic breast cancer experienced an improvement in 
their condition when treated with carboplatin as a monotherapy [273]. 
Cancer management with Platinum compounds is often combined with 
Gemcitabine and Taxanes [274]. Cyclophosphamide: it is used to stop 
the spread of breast cancer by interfering with the cancer cells’ ability to 
replicate their DNA. Liver intracellular enzymes convert this prodrug 
into its active metabolites (4-hydroxycyclophosphamide, aldophospha­
mide, acrolein, and phosphor amide mustard) [275]. Wang et al., pre­
pared a caramelized nanosphere loaded with doxorubicin and Fe3o4 
that showed better tumor suppression in NIR range and can be used for 
accurate MRI imaging for TNBC [276]. Zhu et al., prepared PLGA_PEG 
nanoparticles loaded with NIR dye and DOX and showed high chemo­
therapeutic efficiency against primary tumor cells of TNBC. It also 
produced an antitumor immune response against distant tumors [277]. 
Taxanes: The most widely used taxanes, paclitaxel and docetaxel, 
induce mitotic arrest by stabilizing cellular microtubule components. 
Both monotherapy and combination regimens using these medicines 
have been successfully used. It has been observed that a weekly main­
tenance plan of these medicines is well tolerated with little harm in 
breast cancer [278–280]. Anthracyclines: It is common practice to 
utilize a combined treatment (i.e., FAC, AC, TAC) that includes 
anthracyclines like doxorubicin and epirubicin to manage BC. Anthra­
cyclines exert their cytostatic and cytotoxic actions through several 
suggested mechanisms, such as the generation of free radicals, lipid 
peroxidation, and direct impacts on cell membranes. These mechanisms 
contribute to the anticancer properties of anthracycline drugs and their 
ability to induce cell death in cancer cells. Intercalation, covalent 
bonding, and base modifications are the best-described methods for 
interacting with DNA or the DNA-topoisomerase II complex, leading to 
instabilities in DNA reproduction and transcription and, ultimately, the 
beginning of DNA repair or programmed cell death [281]. Capecita­
bine: it is a fluoropyrimidine pro-drug that, when taken orally, is con­
verted into 5-FU by the enzyme thymidine phosphorylase, mimicking 
the infusion’s effects. To complement taxanes, it has been applied to 
treat patients with metastatic breast cancer who have progressed [282, 
283]. Gemcitabine, also known as difluoro deoxy cytidine, is a py­
rimidine nucleotide used to treat malignancies of the lung, bladder, 
breast, and other tissues. Gemcitabine is generally well tolerated when 
administered through intravenous infusion once weekly [275]. Vinor­
elbine inhibits mitosis by binding to tubulin and stopping the progres­
sion of metaphase. Several studies have revealed that this medication 
has shown encouraging outcomes in treating advanced breast cancer 
[284]. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) include sorafenib, sunitinib, 
and erlotinib. TKIs inhibit cell growth and proliferation by inhibiting 
aberrant signal transduction pathways. Many TKIs block more than one 
signaling route. Anti-EGFR drugs go at a specific tyrosine kinase receptor 
that has been linked to a wide variety of malignancies [285]. Vinca 
alkaloids it includes vincristine and vinblastine. Drugs mechanisms of 
action were shown to inhibit cell development by inhibiting mitosis and 
microtubule polymerization [286]. Topotecan: A topoisomerase in­
hibitor, topotecan is a camptothecin derivative. DNA damage occurs 
when topotecan blocks topoisomerase from mending a snipped DNA 
strand. Apoptosis and cell death occur when topoisomerase is inhibited 
[287]. Anjum et al., conducted a non-interventional study on 811 fe­
males for breast cancer. After the 3–6-month follow-up, the adverse drug 
events were observed. The adverse occurrences were analyzed for fac­
tors such as severity, preventability, and causation, all of which may 
have been influenced by the use of adjuvant chemotherapy. The results 
conclude that six cycles of FAC (5-fluorouracil, Adriamycin/doxor­
ubicin, cyclophosphamide) were given to the majority of patients, with 
positive results. Hair loss, nausea, vomiting, anemia, and neutropenia 
were identified as non-preventable, definite symptoms suffered by pa­
tients after the ADRs were evaluated using various scales. Preventing 
mild to severe diarrhea or constipation is quite unlikely. Fever and chills 
are potential side effects, whereas mucositis and mouth ulcers are 
somewhat likely side effects [288]. kashiwagi et al., conducted a study in 
190 breast cancer patients was there about 138 (73%) of 190 TNBC 
patients did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy; of them, 60 had an 
anthracyclin-based treatment, and 78 had a 5-fluorouracil-based treat­
ment. The results showed that adjunct therapy improved survival for 
patients with TNBC, particularly those at Stage II (P = 0.0043), against 
surgery alone. However, neither the anthracycline-based nor the 5-fluo­
rouracil-based therapy improved survival rates [289]. 
4.8. Immunotherapy 
In 1891, William Bradley Coley, now recognized as the Father of 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
19
Immunotherapy, injected a variety of Streptococcus pyogenes and Ser­
ratia marcescens bacteria, both live and inactivated, into cancer patients’ 
tumors. The five mainstays of cancer care are surgery, chemotherapy, 
radiation therapy, and targeted therapy. Immunotherapy is the newest 
addition to this list [290]. In contrast to healthy people, whose immune 
systems can quickly eliminate the altered cancer cells, cancer patients 
often have impaired immune functions that fail to identify and destroy 
tumor cells [291]. Most tumor cells, however, use a wide variety of 
strategies to avoid being recognized by immune cells. While immuno­
therapy effectively eliminates small residual lesions and drug-resistant 
tumor cells, it is insufficient to eradicate most tumor cells indepen­
dently. To the maximum degree, it can avoid the drawbacks of many 
other treatments. In recent years, good outcomes have been seen in the 
clinical use of cell immunotherapy, a novel method with a targeted 
killing impact. This therapy is classified in the following: 
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs): ICIs are surface-expressed 
molecules that suppress cell activation, namely T-cell activation. Its 
primary function is analogous to an auto-braking cell’s mechanism in 
that it allows the immune system to “brake” within normal parameters 
after activation, preventing excessive activation [292]. Suppression of 
immune function due to either an excess of expression or an excess of 
action of immune checkpoint molecules results in poor immunity and 
increased vulnerability to tumors and other illnesses. Another way to put 
it is that abnormalities in the immune system may be attributed to 
checkpoint molecules inability to perform their immunosuppressive role 
[293,294]. 
CTLA-4: The negative regulatory role of CTLA-4 in T cell-mediated 
immunity is well established. CTLA-4 and CD28 have opposite effects 
on T cells when they attach to their respective receptors on antigen- 
presenting cells (CD80 and CD86). CTLA-4 and its ligand mediate T 
cell response inhibition, whereas T cell response activation is mediated 
by CD28 and its ligand. CTLA-4 has a stronger attraction for CD80/CD86 
than it does for CD28. CTLA-4 overexpression in cancer patients is 
thought to play a key role in mediating immune escape. Researchers 
have revealed that TNBC tumor cells express CTLA-4 in a variety of 
cellular locations [295]. Expression of its primary ligand, CD80/CD86, is 
seen in TNBC cell lines and malignancies. It follows that the anti-CTLA-4 
monoclonal antibody Ipilimumab approved as a checkpoint inhibitor for 
managing malignancy, may effectively block CTLA-4 and hence greatly 
stimulate the molecular cascade, potentially enhancing the immune 
response to tumor cells [295]. Checkpoint inhibitors may be directed 
towards CTLA-4 expressed on the surface of tumor cells while treating 
patients 
with 
TNBC, 
making 
it 
a 
potential 
biomarker 
for 
immunotherapy. 
PD-1 and PD-L1: The anti-programmed death-1 (PD-1) antibody is 
one of the most studied and widely used immunotherapies. Various 
immune cells, including T cells, B cells, and myeloid cells, express PD-1 
when activated. The human immune response is negatively regulated by 
the binding of PD-1 and PD-L1, which mediates the co-inhibitory signal 
of T cell activation and inhibits T cell death [296–298]. Immune toler­
ance is maintained in a healthy immune system by PD-1. Immune escape 
is a mechanism through which tumor cells might evade immune moni­
toring. Currently, immunosuppressive checkpoint immunotherapy and 
targeted treatment based on immunosuppressive receptors are the most 
exciting areas in oncology. Furthermore, it is shown that PD-L1 inhibits 
anti-tumor immunity by blocking the activation signal sent out by T cells 
via binding to the PD-1 receptor on active T cells [299,300]. Zhang et al., 
developed the pH-responsive nano micelles loaded with paclitaxel, 
CXCR4 antagonist AMD3100, and PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitor. The results 
revealed that formulation showed cytotoxicity against MDA-MB-231 
cells, and IC50 was 105 μg/mL. A nanomedicine formulation comprising 
PTX, AMD3100, and BMS-1 emerges as a potent strategy, efficiently 
curbing tumor progression and diminishing liver/lung metastasis. This 
approach accomplishes reprogramming the tumor stroma and immu­
nosuppressive microenvironment, effectively triggering antitumor im­
mune responses by inhibiting the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis and the induction 
of immunogenic cell death [301]. 
4.9. Herbal therapy 
Humans have been investigating new plant species for thousands of 
years in search of those with medicinal properties. As a result, they have 
identified several bioactive chemicals in plants that have considerable 
therapeutic potential. Studies have revealed that various plant com­
pounds, with flavonoids, carotenes, alkaloids, and phenolics, have 
therapeutic benefits and anticancer potential [302]. Breast cancer is one 
of the most frequent types of cancer, which is a hereditary illness 
characterized by the uncontrolled multiplication of abnormal cells in­
side the body and their migration to other regions of the body. 
Chemotherapy, which employs cytotoxic chemicals to destroy cancer 
cells, is the mainstay of cancer treatment. While effective against cancer 
cells, these chemicals or medications also adversely affect healthy cells. 
To combat these issues, researchers devote a lot of time and energy to 
discovering herbal treatments specifically targeting cancer cells. In 
addition, breast cancer is unique among cancers in that its genetic al­
terations disrupt several different pathways [303,304]. Cancer is treated 
using chemotherapeutic drugs derived from plants, most often from 
their fruits, leaves, flowers, lichens, and fungus. Herbs are defined in 
botany as fruiting and seed-bearing plants with soft, nonwoody stems 
[305,306]. These plants and herbs have been crucial in helping to keep 
people healthy. People are increasingly interested in herbal treatments 
rather than synthetic medications because of the natural active 
component in herbals that may aid human health. Many herbal sub­
stances with specific cytotoxicity have been reported in recent years, 
suggesting their potential application as chemotherapeutics. Different 
herbal preparations were also found to prevent or alleviate 
treatment-related adverse events, improve quality of life, and lower 
stress levels [307]. Some commonly used herbs worldwide in treating 
breast cancer are Echinacea, garlic, turmeric, burdock, carotenoids, 
green tea, ginseng, black cohosh, flax seed, and vitamin D [308]. Mi 
et al., developed the formula for treating TNBC using baipuhang keli by 
hindering DNA damage repair via MAPK/ERK pathway. The results 
highlight that BPH exhibited greater susceptibility towards TNBC cells 
than mammary epithelial cells. BPH demonstrated a substantial 
dose-dependent reduction in the growth of TNBC cells. Moreover, BPH 
induced DNA damage in TNBC cells in a manner contingent on both time 
and concentration. Intriguingly, BPH restrained the DNA damage 
response (DDR) in TNBC cells. It was observed that introducing EGF 
alongside BPH activated the MAPK/ERK pathway, potentially enabling 
DNA damage repair. This anti-proliferative impact of BPH on TNBC was 
further affirmed through its efficacy in the 4T1 orthotopic tumor model 
and the MDA-MB-231 subcutaneous tumor model [309]. 
Echinacea: The genus Echinacea is classified as a member of the 
Asteraceae family. Primarily cultivated in the Great Plains and eastern 
regions of North America, this aromatic plant is also grown in Europe. 
Echinacea purpurea, Echinacea angustifolia, and Echinacea pallida are 
the three most prevalent species of Echinacea utilized in herbal medi­
cines. Nevertheless, E. purpurea is widely used in academic research and 
clinical practice. The number of natural killer cells in mice exposed to E. 
purpurea was shown to increase. One day, E. purpurea may be used as a 
cancer-fighting medicine [310]. Abraham et al., Studies have demon­
strated that when treated with echinacea angustifolia extract combined 
with paclitaxel, human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 
exhibit apoptosis and cell cycle arrest responses [311]. 
Garlic: Allium sativum, or garlic, has been used medicinally for 
hundreds of years. Alliin, alliinase, and allicin are only a few of the 
hundreds of therapeutically beneficial secondary metabolites involved. 
Garlic oil contains allicin, an amino acid generated when garlic rhizomes 
are crushed. Allicin, a sulfur-containing molecule, was one of the first of 
its kind and is essential for both the smell and the medicinal benefits of 
garlic. The high levels of organic sulfides and polysulfides in garlic are 
accountable for its anti-cancer action. Stimulating anti-tumor activity by 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
20
lymphocytes and macrophages kills malignant cells and disrupts the 
metabolism of tumor cells [312]. Tsubura et al., discussed about the use 
of garlic and its derivative for the treatment of TNBC. The mechanisms 
of action for echinacea angustifolia in the context of TNBC treatment 
include stimulating carcinogen-detoxifying metabolizing enzymes, pre­
venting DNA adduct formation, suppressing ROS production, regulating 
cell-cycle arrest, and inducing apoptosis. These combined actions 
contribute to its potential anticancer effects and make it a subject of 
interest in cancer research [313]. 
Turmeric: Turmeric, or Curcuma longa, is the plant’s scientific 
name. Turmeric is responsible for the deep yellow hue it imparts to 
dishes. Turmeric’s rhizome and rootstock are where you’ll get the active 
component, curcumin. The phenolic compounds in curcumin are 
responsible for its anticancer properties. The use of turmeric slows 
cancers of the lung, breast, skin, and stomach. Cancer growth inhibition 
by curcumin has been shown during the disease’s induction, promotion, 
and dissemination stages. Turmeric reduces nitric oxide (NO) produc­
tion, which boosts the body’s endogenous antioxidant defenses [314]. 
Carotenoids: Besides being a leafy green herb, rose hips also contain 
an active component called carotenoids. Saffron, annatto, and paprika 
are just a few of the fragrant plants used to make different dye colors. In 
many animal models, fruit and vegetable consumption is associated with 
slower tumor growth. A diet rich in carotenoids may help prevent cancer 
[315]. 
Vitamin D: Sunlight on the skin results in the body producing 
vitamin D. In the summer, just exposing your arms, hands, and face to 
the sun may generate a substantial quantity of vitamin D. To get the 
same amount of vitamin D2 as if you took 20,000 IU orally, all you have 
to do is stand in the sun until your skin becomes pink at the beach. Vi­
tamins are essential for proper bodily function, and we need at least 
1000 international units (IU) daily. The only way to keep your vitamin D 
levels stable while not outside is to take vitamin D supplements orally. 
The safe daily maximum is 4000 IU, which may be taken in one dose and 
has additional advantages. This form of vitamin D is the active form, and 
it has anti-cancer properties [316]. Wilhelm et al., reported the syner­
gistic effect of paclitaxel with vitamin D on the DU4475 cells of TNBC 
[317]. 
4.10. Nanorobots controlled by artificial intelligence for use in cancer 
treatment: a possible future 
The term “artificial intelligence” (AI) refers to the subfield of com­
puter science that focuses on developing automated systems capable of 
performing tasks that typically require human intelligence. These AI 
systems are trained to learn from data and adapt their behavior, 
enabling them to perform problem-solving, pattern recognition, lan­
guage understanding, and decision-making tasks. AI has seen significant 
advancements in recent years and is applied in various domains, 
including natural language processing, image recognition, robotics, and 
autonomous vehicles [318]. To improve model performance and un­
cover previously unseen patterns in data, computers use a subfield of 
artificial intelligence known as machine learning (ML) [319]. It has been 
predicted for some time that AI will be used to revolutionize the medical 
industry by simplifying previously intractable problems. Oncology 
significantly depends on scoring systems derived from evidence-based 
therapy for cancer risk analysis, illness diagnostics, prognostic staging, 
therapy, and surveillance monitoring. Gene expression tests and 
next-generation sequencing of somatic and germline genomes are two 
examples of the types of sophisticated testing that have increased the 
effectiveness of systems that often began from very straightforward light 
microscopy findings. The use of deep sequencing to identify all types of 
cancer in a person’s blood is a promising new method for screening for 
the disease. Since all cells in the body have access to the circulatory 
system in some way, whether it is directly or indirectly, analysing whole 
blood is appealing [320]. By learning patterns from the whole tran­
scriptome, ML/DL algorithms can circumvent the restrictions of 
Fig. 6. Diagnosis techniques for the TNBC.  
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
21
traditional computational approaches. For instance, one ML method has 
been shown to accurately identify a cancerous state and discriminate it 
from normal cells by using whole-transcriptome RNA sequencing data 
and incorporating multiple tumor profiles; this method also performed 
well for rare cancer types and showed utility in predicting the tumor site 
of origin [210]. Similarly, transcriptome data has been used in 
conjunction with neural networks to identify molecular subtypes of 
different malignancies [321]. 
Drug uptake assessment by image analysis is a lengthy process. 
Artificial intelligence is now being applied in identifying and diagnosing 
cancer using radiographic imaging. The use of computer-assisted 
detection in TNBC imaging has a long history but has not shown any 
therapeutic relevance [322]. This is why research into AI-based cancer 
diagnosis has focused heavily on breast cancer imaging. For instance, 
AI-based models are now often employed in the clinic for breast imag­
ing. At present, the Food and Drug Administration in the United States 
has authorized at least five algorithms for detecting and diagnosing 
breast cancer in imaging studies [323]. The application of AI for tumor 
identification and diagnosis is not limited to only breast cancer. Multi­
parametric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been shown to 
improve the identification of clinically significant malignancies in 
several diseases, including prostate cancer [324]. 
5. Diagnostic techniques for breast cancer 
The clinical characteristics of TNBC include rapid disease advance­
ment, metastasis to other parts of the body, an earlier onset age, and a 
high rate of mortality. Unfortunately, there are currently no specific 
medications designed to treat TNBC. However, administering neo­
adjuvant chemotherapy before surgery has been found to be effective in 
considerably prolonging the survival period of patients. Therefore, 
achieving an early and precise diagnosis is crucial for effectively man­
aging TNBC. Different techniques for diagnosis of TNBC are shown in 
Fig. 6. 
5.1. Imaging technique 
A typical two-step procedure involving imaging and immunohisto­
chemistry (IHC) is used to diagnose TNBC [355]. The imaging technique 
includes. 
5.2. Mammography 
Mammograms are frequently used as the first imaging method to 
screen for breast cancer. They utilize low levels of X-rays to produce 
precise images of breast tissue, aiding in detecting any potentially 
concerning regions. Detecting TNBC through mammograms involves 
identifying calcifications (white spots), growths, or masses. Usually, 
malignancy is indicated by abnormal spiculated groups and varied 
micro-calcifications, which are not typically observed in the case of 
TNBC [356,357]. The usual representation of TNBC on mammography is 
as a mass without any microcalcifications (white spot). Around 18% of 
TNBCs may not be detectable during the initial mammography even 
though they are bigger in size than other forms of breast cancer 
[357–359]. After analyzing TNBC mammograms in mediolateral oblique 
and craniocaudal view, most cases are found to have a mass (62.4%). 
Among these masses, those with micro-lobulated margins were the most 
frequent (39.6%), followed by unidentified (32.0%) and circumscribed 
(20.8%) margins. However, masses with spiculated margins were rare 
(4.7%) [360]. Moreover, 49% of patients suffering from TNBC calcifi­
cations are absent. TNBC may be characterized as focal asymmetry in 
9–22% of cases or as calcifications along with a mass in 15% of cases. In 
comparison to HER2-positive (67%) and ER-positive cancers (61%), 
isolated calcifications are less common in TNBC [361]. Study found that 
presence of calcification in TNBC varies on the basis of the age of the 
patients. In women aging 40 years and younger, up to 88% of cancers 
had calcifications accompanying invasive cancer, whereas in women of 
age 70 years and older, only 22% of cancers had calcifications [357,362, 
363]. The absence of mammographic calcification signifies a lower 
occurrence of associated ductal carcinoma in situ in TNBC. Thus, TNBC 
can quickly progress into an invasive cancer without a significant in situ 
component or precancerous stage. The specific characteristic of cir­
cumscribed mass without microcalcification of TNBC signifies it as an 
aggressive and fast-growing tumor with a chance of being associated 
with ductal in-situ carcinoma [357]. 
The primary challenge of detecting TNBC by mammography lies in 
the chance of getting both false-negative and false-positive results, 
which can impact the effectiveness of the patient’s treatment [364]. 
Using mammography to detect early TNBC in young females, who 
typically have a worse outlook, may not be the most suitable approach 
[357]. Furthermore, individuals having high-risk of breast cancer, such 
as those carrying the BRCA gene or with a family history of breast 
cancer, the radiation from mammograms may contribute to the devel­
opment of breast cancer [365]. Lastly, the accuracy of mammography 
can vary depending on the operator, potentially affecting the imaging 
results [356,366]. Hence, mammography alone is often not the most 
effective method for screening TNBC. Therefore, further exploration of 
the effectiveness of additional imaging methods such as sonography, 
magnetic resonance imaging, and functional imaging is recommended to 
improve the accuracy of diagnosis [357]. 
5.3. Ultrasound 
Ultrasound, which utilizes sound waves, generates live images of 
breast tissue. Its primary role is to differentiate between solid masses 
and fluid-filled cysts. It is frequently utilized to examine the detected 
findings of a mammogram further. Ultrasound can detect potentially 
concerning regions in the breast, such as abnormal growths or clusters of 
cells that might suggest the existence of TNBC [367]. It can also deliver 
detailed dimensions, form, and location of the tumor for assessing the 
stage and extent of TNBC. With the assistance of ultrasound, directing 
the needle during biopsy can enable exact tissue collection from the 
suspicious region for further verification. Furthermore, tracking the 
treatment efficacy by evaluating tumor dimension and blood circulation 
can also be monitored via ultrasound. Ultrasound diagnosis is used when 
a mammogram does not detect a lump or swelling that can still be felt. It 
is the primary method to differentiate between breast cysts (fluid-filled 
sacs) and tumors [367–370]. 
Studies have found that in ultrasound, TNBC commonly presents as 
mass lesions characterized by oval or round shapes (48.9%, 17.8%; 
respectively). Additionally, it is more likely to exhibit well-defined 
boundaries (82.2%), and less likely to exhibit posterior attenuation 
(8.9 indicating a lack of stromal reaction, which suggests an aggressive 
and rapidly growing nature of TNBC. %). Additionally, compared with 
non-TNBC, TNBC was a low likelihood to have calcification (35.6%) 
[371]. Studies showed that in ultrasound, TNBC often exhibits invasive 
tumor sizes larger than 2 cm (56.1% out of 41 cases), more frequently 
compared to non-TNBC cases. However, a higher incidence of axillary 
lymph node positivity in TNBC (56.1%) can be observed compared to 
ER-positive cancer (31.3%) and HER2-positive cancer (30.3%) [368, 
371,372]. Specific ultrasound features commonly observed in TNBC 
include a well-defined boundary in approximately 21%–27% of lesions 
and posterior acoustic enhancement in about 24%–41% of cases [358, 
360,369,373]. Well-defined margins are commonly seen in benign 
breast malignant tumors, cysts, or abscesses but posterior acoustic 
expansion (53.3%) can also indicate the presence of internal fluid, such 
as tumor necrosis, which is frequently observed in TNBC upon patho­
logical evaluation [361,374,375]. Elevated occurrence of micro­
lobulated margin in TNBC (48.8%) compared to ER+ and HER2+
cancers can be a significant factor for avoiding false-negative cases of 
TNBC [371]. A new approach to TNBC diagnosis is therapy and diag­
nosis via nanocarriers called as theranostic. Xiao et al. found that 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
22
melanin carbonaceous dots (MCDs) can be a potential diagnostic option 
in photoacoustic imaging as well as ultraviolet imaging for TNBC as 
TNBC 
cell 
line 
4T1 
uptakes 
the 
MCDs 
in 
a 
time 
and 
concentration-dependent way [376]. Similarly, Xie et al. found that 
semiconducting polymer nanoparticles showed amplified photoacoustic 
properties in in vivo breast cancer imaging in mice [377]. 
Ultrasound examinations offer several advantages, including cost- 
effectiveness and the absence of radiation exposure, making them 
widely utilized in clinical diagnosis [378,379]. Analyzing the texture of 
ultrasound images can detect subtle pixel changes. This texture analysis 
provides an additional objective diagnostic tool, enhancing the effi­
ciency of differential diagnosis of TNBC. Additionally, ultrasound im­
proves the accuracy of mammography by increasing specificity, thus 
reducing false negatives in dense breasts and minimizing unnecessary 
biopsy recommendations [380]. Overall, ultrasound demonstrates a 
high sensitivity for detecting TNBC, ranging from 92% to 100% across 
various studies. However, there are some drawbacks to ultrasound ex­
aminations. They heavily rely on the operator’s expertise and lack 
reproducibility, making interpretations subjective. Furthermore, the 
lack of a standardized procedure for lesion classification and recom­
mendations creates confusion among physicians, radiologists, and pa­
tients [381]. 
5.4. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
Breast MRI employs a powerful magnet and radio waves to produce 
highly detailed images of the breast. It is a highly sensitive imaging 
technique that can effectively assess the presence and extent of breast 
cancer. Additionally, it can detect additional tumors that might not be 
detectable through other imaging methods. It has been extensively re­
ported that magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is used to screen people 
who are at a high risk of getting breast cancer [356,361,382]. A UK 
multi-center study found that MRI has an overall sensitivity of 77% and 
specificity of 81%, whereas mammography has a sensitivity of 40% and 
specificity of 93%. This indicates a substantial advancement in MRI 
detection [383]. 
Breast MRI is typically recommended when a suspicious breast ab­
normality is detected through a mammogram, ultrasound, or physical 
examination, further information about the area may be obtained by 
recommending an MRI. MRI can be used to assess a tumor’s features, 
size, and extent. Additionally, it may reveal whether cancer has spread 
to neighboring lymph nodes or other breast tissues. This information 
plays a crucial role in staging the cancer and selecting the most suitable 
treatment approach. Women at a higher risk of developing breast can­
cer, such as those with a family history of the disease or BRCA genetic 
mutations, may undergo regular breast MRI screenings as part of their 
surveillance plan. As it detects the initial stages of breast cancer more 
accurately than breast ultrasound and mammography, it is also utilized 
to evaluate the severity of the carcinoma. 
The most common enhancement pattern that is observed in TNBC via 
MRI, which is highly indicative of malignancy, was rim enhancement. 
This pattern was found in 76% of the cases [373]. At least 90% of all 
TNBCs have invasive ductal tumors with high mitotic nature, central 
necrotic sections, and pushing boundaries. These aggressive biological 
characteristics are reflected in the MRI appearances of the tumors. 
Studies found that 21% of the tumors exhibited multifocality, and the 
mean tumor size was 4.1 ± 2.7 cm [361,384,385]. Through dynamic 
contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) parameters that are commonly found 
in other breast cancer subtypes, such as the distribution of fibro­
glandular tissue (FGT) and background parenchymal enhancement 
(BPE), mass margin, non-mass enrichment distribution, and enhance­
ment pattern, lymph node status, and several types of kinetic curves, are 
still maintained in the MRI [386,387]. Furthermore, it was observed that 
prominent skin enhancement raised concerns of dermal lymph drainage 
in 34% of lesions having less than 5 cm diameter. Additionally, 79% of 
the patients were diagnosed with stage T2 or higher at the time of initial 
examination in the case of TNBC compared to non-TNBC (62%) [388]. It 
is also reported that in TNBC, 93% of patients showed substantial ho­
mogeneous and heterogeneous enhancement (23%, 31%, respectively), 
41% exhibited rim enhancement, and 78% demonstrated a measurable 
choline peak through MRI [387,389]. Most significant features that can 
be seen in MRI are smooth tumor margin with rim expansion, persistent 
enhancement pattern, and elevated intra-tumoral signal intensity on 
T2-weighted 
imaging. 
In 
contrast, 
uneven 
mass 
shape 
and 
non-circumscribed margins are more commonly linked with non-TNBC 
[390,391]. Regarding functional imaging, the mean apparent diffusion 
coefficient (ADC) values are considerably higher for TNBC than 
non-TNBC. Another study reported vascular characteristics of TNBC 
where TNBC was compared to ER-positive/PR-positive/HER2-negative 
cancers using contrast-enhanced MRI. The results showed significantly 
higher outflow rate constant (kep) values for TNBC (0.70 vs 0.56), lower 
leakage space values (0.33 vs 0.39), and shorter mean transit time 
(44.27 vs 47.69) in TNBC [392]. Another study revealed that rim 
enhancement can be considered the most effective MRI feature for 
detecting TNBC and this type of enhancement is related to higher stage 
tumors. A significant association has been found between increased 
signal intensity on non-boosted fat-suppressed T2-weighted images that 
corresponded morphologically and pathologically to intra-tumoural 
necrosis [389]. To improve T1-weighted MRI for TNBC, Zhang et al. 
created a gold nanocomposite with a metal-organic framework (AuN­
S@MOF-ZD2) that is capable of interacting with ZD2 peptide, which 
yielded 40.5% more efficiency and consistent photothermal conversion 
capability for MRI [393]. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) have been 
extensively used in diagnosing breast cancer as tumors collect AuNPs, 
thus being detected in MRI [394]. Another approach includes low mo­
lecular weight amphiphilic copolymer that yields a fluorous particle that 
can detected TNBC using F19 MRI. Systemic administration of the fluo­
rinated tracer resulted in significant uptake in TNBC, with minimal 
accumulation in off-target tissues [395]. 
Additionally, Schmadeka et al. suggested that MRI is the most sen­
sitive imaging modality for detecting TNBC, with a sensitivity of 
99–100% [396]. However, it should be noted that breast MRI cannot 
classify the specific types of breast cancer and it can only provide evi­
dence of the presence of tumors in the breast. Compared with 
mammographic, ultrasound, and MRI findings in patients on TNBC, it 
was found that TNBC were visualized among 91% of patients using 
mammography and 93% using ultrasound. However, MRI can detect all 
tumors. Thus, it is generally not used as the sole diagnostic tool for 
breast cancer. It is often used with other imaging techniques like 
mammography and ultrasound and additional diagnostic tests such as 
biopsies to form a comprehensive diagnosis before definitive surgery 
[388]. Although Wu et al. discovered that DCE-MRI characteristics of 
breast cancer, along with background parenchymal enhancement (BPE), 
have the potential to differentiate among molecular subtypes of TNBC, 
these need further investigation [397]. 
5.5. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan 
Positron Emission Tomography Scan (PET scan) is an imaging 
technique that utilizes a radioactive substance to assess the functionality 
of organs and tissues. It is recognized for its ability to detect certain 
diseases even before different imaging methods can identify them. In 
this process, the radioactive substance, known as a tracer, consists of 
molecules (isotopes) that carry radioactive atoms tightly linked 
together. These isotopes bind with some specific biomolecules (such as 
sugar or protein) present in the body, generating positrons that interact 
with surrounding electrons and produce photons. The PET scanner de­
tects the electrical signals emitted by these photons and further utilizes 
the acquired data to create an image of the investigated organ, tissue, or 
cell. These scans can be used to find any cases of cancer that have spread 
outside of the breast, such as in distant organs or lymph nodes [356]. 
With a sensitivity of up to 97% and a specificity of 100%, PET can more 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
23
precisely identify axillary lymphatic node metastases in primary TNBC 
than in ER+ and HER2+ tumors [361]. Nanoparticles used for diagnosis 
of TNBC, like zirconium labelled PEGylated gold nanocord coated with 
mesoporous silica nanoshell, showed 4.7 fold stronger imaging of 4T1 
breast cancer cell line in PET scan on mice [398]. 
Immuno-PET imaging, a similar technique, combines the PET system 
and monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to improve the precision of tumor 
diagnosis and aid in selecting the most effective targeted mAb-based 
therapy [399]. The primary purpose of the antibody in this approach 
is to recognize specific cancer markers or components on the cell surface 
or extracellular matrix (ECM), which are subsequently identified by the 
PET system [400]. Detection of the ATL-836 fragment antigen-binding 
(Fab) chimeric mAb, which targets the tissue factor found in humans 
(TF), has supported this strategy. Future developments in the diagnosis 
and therapy of TNBC have a lot of potential, thanks to identifying the 
ATL-836 antibody. To prevent apoptosis (cell death) and promote cell 
migration, platelet tissue factor/factor III (TF), an essential component 
of cancer cell signaling, is required by TNBC cells. TF is present on TNBC 
cells [401–403]. In 2017, a new diagnostic imaging antibody was 
developed and tested in a xenograft animal model for TNBC. This anti­
body specifically targets a protein known as glycoprotein non-metastatic 
B (GPNMB) or osteoactivin. The discovery of this technique is vital 
because GPNMB expression is found to be significantly higher in TNBC 
patients, particularly in tumor progression recurrence. Furthermore, 
when the antibody was attached to a toxin, it effectively inhibited the 
proliferation of TNBC cells expressing GPNMB [356,404,405]. Hence, 
immuno-PET imaging helps not only with the early identification of 
TNBC but also aids in identifying a suitable therapeutic approach for 
each patient. This is because immuno-PET imaging allows us to visualize 
the expression of therapeutic targets [356]. Though 2-fluoro-2-deox­
y-D-glucose positron emission tomography (18F-FDG-PET) shows po­
tential for detecting distant metastases and monitoring the response to 
chemotherapy in breast cancer patients, it is not recommended as the 
main diagnostic procedure for breast cancer. Preliminary data suggests 
that PET may be more sensitive for the TNBC subtype, as it exhibits 
higher 18F-FDG uptake than ER+/PR+/HER2-tumors. This is likely due 
to increased glycolysis and high proliferation rates [361,406]. 
5.6. Computed tomography (CT) scan 
CT scans use multiple x-ray images to generate cross-sectional im­
ages of the body. CT scans are useful for evaluating the spread and 
severity of tnbc. They provide valuable details about the tumor’s size 
and location, involvement of nearby lymph nodes, and potential spread 
to other organs. 
TNBC patients often exhibit varied and inadequate responses to 
identical treatment plans due to the tumor’s heterogeneity. Image sig­
natures can quantitatively extract tumor images, providing a more 
comprehensive and subjective approach. Moreover, this method is non- 
invasive and offers quantitative descriptions of tumor heterogeneity. 
MRI has a higher resolution in soft tissue than CT, but it is more 
expensive and takes longer to examine. Diagnosis of axillary lymph node 
metastases in TNBC, similar to primary TNBC, is more accurately done 
using PET/CT scans (with 100% accuracy and up to 97% sensitivity) 
compared to ER+ and HER2+ tumors [407]. In accord to CT scan, re­
searchers found that PEG-attached gold nanoparticles can specifically 
attach to HER2, leading to improved CT imaging in contrast with 
iopamidol (commonly clinically used iodine-based contrast agent) in 
mice [408]. Mesoporous silica NPs, and surface-modified mesoporous 
silica NPs with platinum NPs have also been found to be significant in 
creating optical contrast in CT in mouse models by Chu et al. [409]. 
Studies found that radiomic signatures based on preoperative CT can 
differentiate between patients with TNBC and non-triple-negative breast 
cancer (NTNBC) [407]. This signature provides additional value 
compared to conventional chest contrast-enhanced CT, assisting in 
planning clinical treatment strategies for these patients. Additionally, 
hybrid imaging techniques such as PET-CT have become more wide­
spread due to improved accessibility to radiopharmaceutical production 
facilities and scanner availability. In TNBC bone metastases, the clear­
ance of 18F-sodium fluoride (18F-NAF) is significantly higher than in 
healthy bone, making detecting both osteolytic and osteosclerotic me­
tastases possible. Compared to 18F-NAF PET alone, 18F-NAF PET-CT 
displays better diagnostic performance without the CT component 
[410]. However, it is crucial to realise that TNBC cannot be accurately 
diagnosed with CT scans alone. A biopsy, which involves taking a 
sample of the tumor for microscopic analysis, is required to provide a 
definitive diagnosis. This enables in-depth examination of cancer cells, 
notably their hormone receptor status and expression of HER2/neu, 
which are important indicators of the particular subtype of breast cancer 
[385]. 
5.7. Biopsy techniques 
A tissue sample from the breast is collected and placed through a 
pathological test to determine the presence of TNBC and comprehend its 
unique characteristics. A core needle biopsy is the fundamental tech­
nique for identifying TNBC. Large hollow needles called core needles are 
used during this technique to extract microscopic cylindrical samples 
(cores) of breast tissue. Typically, local anesthetics are used, and im­
aging methods like ultrasound, CT scan, MRI, or mammography are used 
as guides. In addition to these other methods, TNBC can be diagnosed 
via liquid biopsy, surgical biopsy, and fine needle aspiration (FNA). 
During the fine needle aspiration (FNA) technique, fluid or tumor cells 
are taken out for additional investigation It is typically used to facilitate 
sample collection when fluid or cysts are present [411]. When a larger 
sample is required or the outcomes of a core needle biopsy are ques­
tionable, a surgical biopsy may be performed. This may necessitate 
either an incisional biopsy, in which only a piece of the tumor is 
removed for analysis, or an excisional biopsy, in which the entire tumor 
is removed. It is typically used to facilitate sample collection when fluid 
or cysts are present. When a larger sample is required or the outcomes of 
a core needle biopsy are questionable, a surgical biopsy may be per­
formed. This may necessitate either an incisional biopsy, in which only a 
piece of the tumor is removed for analysis, or an excisional biopsy, in 
which the entire tumor is removed [356,412,413]. Additionally, studies 
have looked into the potential predictive and diagnostic value of serum 
apolipoprotein C–I (ApoC-I) in TNBC [414]. 
The concentration of tumor ctDNAs in the blood is influenced by the 
size of the lesion or metastasis. Studies suggested that tumor burden 
percentage increases with higher ctDNA concentrations. ctDNA analysis 
has also been utilized to ensure the diagnosis of metastatic relapse. 
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short RNA molecules composed of around 22 
nucleotides. They regulate the activity of thousands of genes by 
attaching to target mRNAs. Some miRNAs act as oncogenes or tumor 
suppressors, playing a crucial role in cancer development. Tumor sup­
pressor miRNAs, on the other hand, are often anti-proliferative and pro- 
apoptotic and are downregulated in cancer cells [356]. The study by 
Thakur et al. found elevated expression of miR-21, miR-220, and 
miR-221 in TNBC patients [415]. Fr`eres et al., created a new screening 
tool for breast cancer by using diagnostic test based on eight circulating 
miRNAs (miR-16, miR-103, miR-107, miR-148a, miR-19b, miR-22, and 
let-7d, let-7i). This test can identify breast cancer malignancy and detect 
early breast cancer incidences. It produces consistent results regardless 
of the patient age or tumor stage [416]. Research has found that exo­
somes derived from TNBC cells can facilitate cell communication and 
transfer phenotypic traits to secondary cells. It has been discovered that 
these TNBC exosomes aid in the development, metastasis, and evasion of 
the immune system in cancer. Studies have also shown that specific 
exosome proteins can be used as predictive and diagnostic indicators for 
breast cancer. For instance, endothelial locus-1 (DEL-1) and fibronectin 
in circulating exosomes serve as biomarker candidates for detecting 
early stages of TNBC. CD24 has also been proposed as a potential 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
24
circulating biomarker for breast cancer [356,417,418]. Liquid biopsy, 
which involves the examination of biomarkers in human fluids, provides 
immediate and accurate results, lowers the expense and length of the 
diagnosis process, and does not involve the hazards of surgery. This 
strategy shows promise for the advancement of TNBC diagnosis in the 
future. 
5.8. Immunohistochemistry 
IHC, or immunohistochemistry, is a critical component in diagnosing 
TNBC. IHC aids in the categorization of breast cancer subtypes by 
detecting the expression of the estrogen receptor (ER), human epidermal 
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), and progesterone receptor (PR). IHC is 
performed explicitly in TNBC to use specific antibodies to confirm the 
lack of ER, PR, and HER2. Given that TNBC often does not react to 
hormone therapy or targeted medications that target the HER2 receptor, 
the absence of these receptors is crucial for assessing treatment options 
[367]. IHC can also be utilized to evaluate additional biomarkers and 
proteins linked to TNBC, including basal indicators like cytokeratin 5/6 
and EGFR, proliferative markers like Ki-67, and particular molecular 
subtypes like BRCA1 mutation [419]. Regarding the microscopic study 
of tissue (histology), it was observed that TNBC had a lower occurrence 
of ductal carcinoma in situ compared to HER2+ and ER + cancers. 
Additional methods like fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) may 
be conducted to confirm HER2 negativity in uncertain cases. 82% of 
TRN cancers were found to be invasive without any evidence of an in 
situ component [420]. 
Most TNBC are aggressive invasive ductal carcinomas of no specific 
type, while the remaining cases can be categorized as medullary carci­
nomas or metaplastic carcinomas. This indicates that TNBC can occur in 
various histological subtypes of breast cancer, which might have im­
plications for their development, progression, and prognosis. Addition­
ally, TNBC is associated with higher levels of Ki-67 expression, which is 
a marker of cell proliferation, and these cases generally have a poor 
prognosis in terms of survival. Immunohistochemistry was utilized to 
examine the presence of EGFR and ck5/6 in TNBC. In most of these 
tumors, we identified the expression of at least one of the markers, EGFR 
and/or ck 5/6, amounting to 74%. Studies found that the individual 
basal marker, EGFR, was expressed in over half of the triple-negative 
tumors (64%). However, ck5/6 was described in more than a quarter 
of TNBC (40%), which is relatively low [421]. To improve the accuracy 
and effectiveness of IHC testing for ER, HER2, and PR, the American 
Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO)/College of American Pathologists 
(CAP) has provided approximately 126 updated guidelines. These 
guidelines aim to enhance the reliability and reproducibility of IHC 
testing while minimizing false-positive and false-negative results. Ac­
cording to the recommendations, IHC testing for ER and PR is classified 
as positive if only at least 1% of immunoreactive cancer cells are present. 
Additionally, after the initial IHC confirmation, another confirmatory 
test of HER2+ should be performed using fluorescent in situ hybridi­
zation (FISH). This additional step helps prevent potential misdiagnosis 
that could impact the direction and effectiveness of treatment [422]. 
5.9. Gene expression profiling 
Examining the specific gene expression and proteins can offer a 
valuable understanding of the molecular traits associated with TNBC. 
This knowledge holds the potential for the creation of focused thera­
peutic approaches. To surpass the shortcomings of current techniques 
like IHC, the gene profile assay presents an efficient alternative. Unlike 
IHC, which frequently encounters issues such as limited specificity, false 
positive results, and the absence of precise biomarkers for tumor origin, 
the gene profile assay proves more reliable. Large-scale investigation of 
gene expression patterns has been made possible by microarray tech­
nologies. Gene expression profiling in TNBC has identified several 
different subtypes, including luminal androgen receptor, basal-like 1 
and basal-like 2 subtypes, and low M2-like macrophages [356]. Genes 
that control hormone signaling, particularly androgen signaling and 
synthesis, are more abundant in the luminal androgen receptor (LAR) 
subtype. Genes including Ki-67, ATR, BRCA, MYC, and NRAS involved 
in cell division and DNA damage are highly expressed in the basal-like 1 
subtype of TNBC. The basal-like 2 sub-type, on the other hand, is 
characterized by high levels of expression of genes like EGFR, MET, 
EPHA2, and TP53. The mesenchymal subtype, which is similar to 
chemo-resistant metaplastic breast cancer, exhibits higher levels of 
genes linked to cell motility, proliferation, and differentiation, including 
Wnt, ALK, and TGF. According to a study on African-American women, 
TNBC and the deletion of the PTEN gene are strongly correlated. Addi­
tionally, the discovery of unregulated Wnt-catenin pathway genes in 
African women as opposed to European women shows that the 
Wnt-catenin pathway may contribute to the emergence of a more 
aggressive phenotype of TNBC [423,424]. 
In the case of TNBC, the genes KRT14 and KRT19 were found to be 
differentially expressed between basal-like and luminal-like subtypes. 
Additionally, the expression of SFRP1 was found to be higher in com­
parison with other breast cancer subtypes. KR15 gene was upregulated 
in mammary stem cells compared to myoepithelial or luminal cells in 
TNBC. Studies reported that overexpression of genes like AZGP1, PIGR, 
SPINK1, RPS11, TACSTD2, and EPCAM can suggest TNBC [425]. So­
matic mutations in genes such as TP53, PIK3CA, and PTEN dominate 
most TNBC. TP53 mutations, in particular, are the most common and 
can lead to genetic instability and cytogenetic alterations. Loss of TP53 
has been associated with enhanced metastasis and worse overall sur­
vival. Another essential gene involved in TNBC is BRCA1/2, with around 
80% of hereditary TNBC cases carrying mutations in BRCA1. Germ-line 
mutations in BRCA1 occur in 15% of TNBC cases. Furthermore, alter­
ations in the PIK3CA gene were observed in approximately 10% of TNBC 
cases. The study also reported six differentially expressed genes (IL32, 
PTX3, GATA3, TMEM158, ETS1, and MYBL1) that were able to differ­
entiate a subset of TNBC samples from other TNBC subtypes, as well as 
differentiating TNBC from normal-like, luminal A, luminal B, and HER2 
patient samples [423]. Another study conducted in Mexican TNBC pa­
tients utilized microarray gene expression profiling and gene set 
enrichment analysis (GSEA) to identify an overexpression of nine genes 
(PRKX/PRKY, UGT8, HMGA1, LPIN1, HAPLN3, FAM171A1, BCL141A, 
FOXC1, and ANKRD11) involved in metabolism [426]. Additionally, 
one gene (ANX9) was found to be down-regulated. This gene signature 
provided insights into the metabolic aspects of TNBC. Furthermore, the 
analysis also revealed that the upregulation of the FOXM1 gene and 
downregulation of the PPARα gene were associated with TNBC. 
In a study by Komatsu et al. DNA microarray analysis was used to 
identify 104 genes that are highly overexpressed in TNBC. Several 
cancer-specific kinases, such as NEK2, PBK, and MELK, and genes 
involved in mitosis, such as ASPM and CENPK, were identified. These 
genes could be targeted for upcoming therapeutic research [427]. In 
China, gene microarray analysis was conducted to characterize TNBC 
and identified potential biomarkers such as HORMAD1, ELF5, KLK6, 
GABRP, AGR2, AGR3, ANKRD30A, NME5, and CYP4Z3P. Microarray 
analysis was used in another study in China to compare the gene 
expression profiles of several breast cancer subtypes. They discovered 
COL4A2, BMF, DUSP1, FOXA1, and MLPH as probable candidate TNBC 
gene targets [423,425,428]. Gene expression profiling, in general, offers 
molecular characteristics of the illness, revealing possibilities for indi­
vidualized therapy options. All of these gene expression assays have not 
yet been approved or suggested for use in TNBC and HER2-negative 
patients. It should be noted. They have primarily been validated for 
ER + breast cancers. This highlights the need for further efforts to 
validate these gene expression assays. 
6. Future perspective 
Recent advancements in novel drug delivery systems hold immense 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
25
Table 2 
Patent for TNBC treatment.  
Patent 
Claim 
Patent No. 
Patent 
date 
Applicant 
References 
Compounds for treating TNBC 
This patent describes a technique for treating 
TNBC, whether relapsed or refractory, in 
patients with the BL1 subtype or BRCA-1 
wildtype. It involves administering 
tinostamustine or salt to the patient 
appropriate for therapeutic application. 
Tinostamustine may be used with other 
medications, such as PARP inhibitors, DNA 
repair inhibitors, or DDR inhibitors, to treat 
certain conditions. The patent specifies precise 
dose levels and delivery techniques. 
Tinostamustine may be used in conjunction 
with radiotherapy. For TNBC patients with the 
specified subtypes and ailments, another 
embodiment combines tinostamustine with a 
DDR inhibitor. 
US 
11,413,276 
B2 
Aug. 
16, 
2022 
Purdue Pharma LP 
[429] 
Methods and compositions for TNBC 
stratification and treatment 
The patent claims focus on applying Protein C 
receptor (PROCR) for TNBC diagnosis and 
treatment. An H-score of 120 indicates PROCR- 
high TNBC, which is determined by an 
immunohistochemical test. For diagnosis and 
therapy, including cross-competition capacity, 
specific anti-PROCR antibodies are utilized. 
The claims include diagnostic tools, 
pharmacological formulations containing 
PROCR inhibitors, and strategies for reducing 
TNBC cell proliferation, metastasis, and EMT 
using a PROCR inhibitor. In conclusion, the 
patent suggests potential uses for PROCR in 
detecting and treating TNBC. 
WO 2019/ 
109,331 A1 
June 
13, 
2019 
Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy Of 
Sciences 
[430] 
Methods for assessing the treatment 
response of TNBC patients to neo- 
adjuvant chemotherapy by analyzing 
CpG methylation 
The technique described in the patent involves 
examining the methylation status for specific 
CpG dinucleotides within the PITX2 gene in a 
breast cancer tissue sample to treat TNBC in a 
human patient. Depending on the subject’s 
methylation status, the patient is assigned to 
either an anthracycline-based neoadjuvant 
TNBC chemotherapy treatment or a non- 
anthracycline-based TNBC therapeutic 
treatment. The procedure involves isolating 
genomic DNA, altering cytosine that hasn’t 
been methylated into uracil, amplifying the 
PITX2 gene area, and figuring out the 
methylation level. Different states allow for the 
provision of breast cancer tissue samples. Based 
on the PITX2 gene methylation status, this 
diagnostic method offers customized therapy 
for TNBC patients. 
US 
11,230,737 
B2 
Jan. 25, 
2022 
Therawis Diagnostics Gmbh, Munich 
[431] 
Treatment of high Trop-2 expressing triple- 
negative breast cancer (TNBC) with 
sacituzumab govitecan (IMMU-132) 
overcomes homologous recombination 
repair (HRR) rescue mediated by Rad51 
The technique described in the patent involves 
employing an anti-Trop-2 antibody-drug 
conjugate (ADC) with SN-38 as a medication to 
treat TNBC, a malignancy that expresses Trop- 
2. The medication contains a Rad51 inhibitor. 
The combo treatment shrinks tumors and could 
treat metastatic or resistant malignancies. To 
increase the ADC treatment’s efficiency against 
cancer, several therapeutic methods may be 
added. 
US 
10,918,734 
B2 
Feb. 16, 
2021 
Immunomedics, Inc. , Morris Plains, 
NJ (US) 
[432] 
Markers of Triple-Negative Breast Cancer 
and Uses Thereof 
The method described in the patent enables the 
identification and treatment of various 
subtypes of TNBC in human patients. To 
determine if TNBC IM or TNBC LAR subtypes 
exist, it is necessary to examine the gene 
expression in TNBC cells. Then, according to 
the detected subtype, treatment strategies are 
given, including immune checkpoint inhibitors 
for TNBC IM and androgen receptor antagonists 
with or without PI3K inhibitors for TNBC LAR. 
The objective is to provide individualized and 
more efficient treatments for various TNBC 
subtypes. 
US 2020/ 
0224,282 A1 
Jul. 16, 
2020 
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 
(US) 
[433] 
Methods and compositions for treating 
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) 
According to the patent, a technique for 
estimating TNBC patient life expectancy based 
WO 2023/ 
078,900 A1 
May 11, 
2023 
INSERM (National Institute of Health 
and Medical Research), University of 
[434] 
(continued on next page) 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
26
promise for the management of TNBC. As research progresses, person­
alized and targeted therapies are expected to become more widespread, 
enabling the development of patient-specific drug carriers tailored to 
individual TNBC characteristics. Combination therapies, integrating 
multiple therapeutic agents within one platform, will likely play a 
pivotal role in overcoming drug resistance and achieving synergistic 
effects, thereby enhancing treatment efficacy. The integration of 
immunotherapeutic agents with drug delivery systems can bolster the 
antitumor immune response and improve long-term treatment out­
comes. Moreover, the adaptability of nanoparticles and stimuli- 
responsive drug carriers presents an opportunity to tackle the chal­
lenges of tumor heterogeneity, leading to more effective treatment re­
sponses and prolonged survival rates. Real-time monitoring of treatment 
response through theranostic drug delivery platforms will enable clini­
cians to make timely adjustments based on individual patient responses. 
Additionally, the utilization of natural drug delivery vehicles like exo­
somes holds promise for targeted drug delivery with inherent biocom­
patibility. Therapeutic techniques that consider the individual patient’s 
molecular profile may be made more accessible with omics-guided 
treatments that include genomic and proteomic data. Integrating 
novel drug delivery systems with precision medicine strategies will lead 
the way for a revolutionary era in TNBC management, improving 
treatment outcomes and enhancing the quality of life for TNBC patients 
as regulatory hurdles are overcome, and clinical translation is 
facilitated. 
7. Conclusion 
In conclusion, TNBC treatment has entered a new era because to 
innovative medication delivery technologies. These novel strategies are 
attempts to address the problems associated with TNBC, including as the 
cancer’s aggressiveness and the scarcity of available treatments. Re­
searchers have created targeted, personalized, and stimuli-responsive 
drug carriers that may increase therapeutic effectiveness while 
decreasing systemic toxicity using state-of-the-art technology and 
nanomedicine concepts. Drug carriers that can carry therapeutic 
compounds directly to cancer sites have been developed due to the 
combination of nanotechnology, biomaterials, and cutting-edge imaging 
methods. Drug accumulation inside TNBC cells may be improved using 
these drug delivery methods. There is great hope in the battle against 
TNBC, especially when drug delivery technologies are combined with 
immunotherapy, gene therapy, and other developing treatment ap­
proaches. Targeted delivery of drugs in conjunction with innovative 
therapies may be the key to unlocking the immune system’s full capacity 
and successfully combating the difficulties presented by cancer hetero­
geneity. The significance of personalized medication in TNBC treatment 
will become more critical. More effective and individualized treatments 
may be possible by developing patient-specific medication delivery 
systems based on unique cancer features and genetic profiles. However, 
obstacles remain, such as gaining regulatory authorization, translating 
research into clinical practice, and scaling up manufacturing. Over­
coming these challenges and speeding up the incorporation of innova­
tive drug delivery methods into clinical practice requires ongoing 
cooperation between researchers, doctors, and industry partners. New 
medication delivery methods have shown considerable promise in the 
treatment of TNBC. More beneficial and individually tailored therapy 
choices that boost health outcomes and standard of living should be 
expected as research, patents and clinical trials continue as mentioned in 
Table 2 and 3. In the future, we aim to be able to successfully treat and 
even eliminate this aggressive type of breast cancer. We believe further 
developing these technologies will substantially contribute to this fight. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Ashutosh Gupta: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. 
Kumar Nishchaya: Writing – original draft. Moumita Saha: Writing – 
original draft. Gaurisha Alias Resha Ramnath Naik: Writing – original 
draft. Sarika Yadav: Writing – original draft. Shreya Srivastava: 
Writing – original draft. Amrita Arup Roy: Writing – original draft. 
Sudheer Moorkoth: Writing – review & editing. Srinivas Mutalik: 
Writing – review & editing. Namdev Dhas: Conceptualization, Soft­
ware, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. 
Table 2 (continued) 
Patent 
Claim 
Patent No. 
Patent 
date 
Applicant 
References 
on the expression of SPARC (Secreted Protein 
Acidic and Rich in Cysteine) in cancer- 
associated fibroblasts (CAFs) from a biological 
sample. Shorter survival in CAFs is associated 
with positive SPARC expression. Anti-SPARC 
therapy is also covered for treating individuals 
with a limited prognosis for survival. The 
patent covers combination therapy for TNBC 
that uses anti-PD1/PDL1 and anti-SPARC 
drugs. It also outlines a technique for finding 
drugs that target SPARC expression in CAFs. A 
kit with reagents for SPARC mRNA/protein in 
CAFs and usage guidelines is included in the 
patent. 
Montpellier, Regional Cancer Institute 
of Montpellier, University Hospital of 
Nimes 
Method and system for predicting tumor 
mutation burden (TMB) in triple 
negative breast cancer (TNBC) based on 
nuclear scores and histopathological 
whole slide images (WSIs) 
The technique and system described in the 
patent involve the use of nuclear scores and 
histopathological whole slide images (WSIs) to 
forecast the tumor mutation burden (TMB) in 
TNBC. The procedure involves screening TNBC 
WSIs, computing TMB values based on gene 
mutations, categorising patients into groups 
with high and low TMB values, preprocessing 
and segmenting WSIs into patches, extracting 
nuclear scores, and creating a convolutional 
neural network (CNN) classification model for 
TMB prediction. The system consists of a 
processor and memory where programme 
codes are stored to carry out the prediction 
process and produce visual reports of the 
outcomes. 
US 2023/ 
0153,994 A1 
May 18, 
2023 
Wuhan University, Wuhan City (CN) 
[435]  
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
27
Table 3 
A brief insight of currently active clinical trials against TNBC resistance.  
Study title 
Nanocarriers/Therapy 
Purpose/Outcome 
Status 
Company 
NCT and 
Reference 
A Study to Evaluate Safety/Tolerability of 
Immunotherapy Combinations in 
Participants With Triple-Negative 
Breast Cancer or Gynecologic 
Malignancies 
Pegylated liposomal 
doxorubicin (PLD) and 
nanoparticle albumin- 
bound paclitaxel (NP) 
This Phase 1/1b study investigates the 
safety and efficacy of etrumadenant 
(AB928) in combination with different 
chemotherapeutic agents for advanced 
metastatic TNBC and ovarian cancer. The 
study aims to determine the 
recommended dosing and assess clinical 
activity in these patient populations. 
Phase 1 
Arcus Biosciences, 
Inc. 
NCT03719326 
Study start: 
2018-10-15 
Study 
completion: 
2021-07-02 
A Phase II Study to Explore the Safety, 
Tolerability, and Preliminary 
Antitumor Activity of Sitravatinib Plus 
Tislelizumab or Combination With Nab- 
paclitaxel in Patients With Locally 
Recurrent or Metastatic Triple Negative 
Breast Cancer (TNBC) 
Drugs involved Sitravatinib, 
Tislelizumab and Nab- 
paclitaxel 
Sitravatinib combined with tislelizumab 
demonstrated clinically meaningful anti- 
tumor activity and had a manageable 
safety profile. 
Phase 2 
Fudan University 
NCT04734262 
[436] 
Study start: 
2021-04-01 
Study 
completion: 
2023-06-30 
A Study to Evaluate the Efficacy and 
Safety of Nanosomal Docetaxel Lipid 
Suspension in Triple Negative Breast 
Cancer Patients 
Nanosomal Liquid 
Suspension 
This randomized, open-label study aims to 
evaluate the efficacy and safety of 
Nanosomal Docetaxel Lipid Suspension 
compared to Taxotere® in TNBC patients, 
assessing different doses and monitoring 
disease progression using imaging studies 
and safety variables. The study involves 
657 patients randomized into three arms. 
Phase 3 
Jina 
Pharmaceuticals 
Inc. 
NCT03671044 
[437] 
Study start: 
2018-07-10 
Study 
completion: 
2024-07-31 
Cryoablation and Anti-PD-L1 
Immunotherapy for Triple Negative 
Breast Cancer (TNBC) 
Drugs involved 
Atezolizumab and Nab- 
paclitaxel Procedure used 
Cryosurgery 
This early phase I trial investigates the 
safety and feasibility of combining 
cryoablation, atezolizumab, and nab- 
paclitaxel in treating locally advanced or 
metastatic TNBC. Cryoablation freezes the 
tumor cells, while atezolizumab and nab- 
paclitaxel aim to enhance the immune 
response and inhibit tumor growth, 
potentially improving treatment 
outcomes. 
Early Phase 1 
Mayo Clinic 
NCT04249167 
Study start: 
2020-01-23 
Study 
completion: 
2021-11-17 
A Randomized, Double-Blind, 
International Multi-Center, Phase III 
Clinical Study to Evaluate Efficacy and 
Safety of HLX10 
In combination with 
Chemotherapy (as 
Neoadjuvant Therapy) 
A Tumor assessment is done in this study. 
Phase 3 
Shanghai Henlius 
Biotech 
NCT04301739 
Study start: 
2020-04-17 
Study 
completion: 
2027-04-09 
Nanoparticle Albumin-Bound Paclitaxel 
Followed by Dose-Intensive Epirubicin 
in Combination With 
Cyclophosphamide as Neoadjuvant 
Chemotherapy in TNBC 
Albumin-Bound Paclitaxel 
nanoparticle 
This open-label study aims to evaluate the 
efficacy and safety of weekly Nanoparticle 
Albumin-Bound Paclitaxel followed by 
dose-intensive Epirubicin in combination 
with Cyclophosphamide as neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy in TNBC. The primary 
endpoint is to assess the pathological 
complete response rate using RECIST 1.1 
criteria, with a total of 60 patients 
expected to be included in the study over a 
duration of approximately 19 months. 
Phase 4 
Fudan University 
NCT03799679 
Study start: 
2018-11-26 
Study 
completion: 
2020-02-01 
Nab-Paclitaxel and Bevacizumab 
Followed By Bevacizumab and Erlotinib 
in Metastatic Breast Cancer 
Paclitaxel albumin- 
stabilized nanoparticle 
formulation along with 
bevacizumab and erlotinib 
hydrochloride 
This phase II trial aims to assess the 
effectiveness of paclitaxel albumin- 
stabilized nanoparticle formulation (Nab- 
paclitaxel) combined with bevacizumab 
followed by maintenance treatment with 
bevacizumab and erlotinib hydrochloride 
in patients with metastatic breast cancer. 
The study will evaluate progression-free 
survival, response rate, overall survival, 
safety, and exploratory biomarkers, with 
patients receiving induction therapy 
followed by maintenance therapy based 
on their response. 
Phase 2 
University of 
Washington 
NCT00733408 
Study start: 
2008-04-23 
Study 
completion: 
2017-09-28 
A Phase II Study of Abraxane®, 
Carboplatin and Bevacizumab in “Triple 
Negative” (Demonstrating No 
Expression for Estrogen, Progesterone, 
or Her2 Receptors) Metastatic Breast 
Cancer 
Drugs involved are 
Abraxane, Bevacizumab 
and Carboplatin 
This study aims to evaluate the efficacy 
and tolerability of weekly Abraxane® 
(nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel) 
in combination with carboplatin and 
biweekly bevacizumab for the treatment 
of metastatic breast cancer. The goal is to 
prolong time to progression without 
significant toxicity, considering the 
limitations of anthracycline-based 
chemotherapy and the potential benefits 
of targeted biologics. 
Phase 2 
Duke University 
NCT00479674 
Study start: 
2007-05 
Study 
completion: 
2014-03  
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
28
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgment 
The authors are thankful to Science and Engineering Research Board 
(SERB), Government of India, New Delhi for providing the funding in the 
form of Start-Up Research Grant (SRG) (SRG/2022/001870) for the 
research project to Dr. Namdev Dhas. The authors are thankful to Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Government of India, New Delhi 
for the funding provide under ICMR-SRF fellowship program (File no. 3/ 
2/2/16/2022-NCD-III) to Ashutosh Gupta. The authors are grateful to 
Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Manipal Academy of 
Higher Education (MAHE), Manipal, India for providing necessary fa­
cilities. Authors would like to acknowledge biorender for providing 
platform for drawing figures for this manuscript. 
References 
[1] S.H. Hassanpour, M. Dehghani, Review of cancer from perspective of molecular, 
Journal of Cancer Research and Practice 4 (2017) 127–129, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jcrpr.2017.07.001. 
[2] Cancer in 2023, AACR Cancer Progress Report, 2023. https://cancerprogressrep 
ort.aacr.org/progress/cpr23-contents/cpr23-cancer-in-2023/. (Accessed 3 
January 2024). 
[3] D.T. Debela, S.G. Muzazu, K.D. Heraro, M.T. Ndalama, B.W. Mesele, D.C. Haile, S. 
K. Kitui, T. Manyazewal, New Approaches and Procedures for Cancer Treatment: 
Current Perspectives, vol. 9, SAGE Open Med, 2021 20503121211034366, 
https://doi.org/10.1177/20503121211034366. 
[4] Breast Cancer Facts & Statistics, 2023. https://www.breastcancer.org/facts-statis 
tics. (Accessed 5 July 2023). 
[5] R.L. Siegel, K.D. Miller, N.S. Wagle, A. Jemal, Cancer statistics, 2023, CA, 
A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 73 (2023) 17–48, https://doi.org/10.3322/ 
caac.21763. 
[6] Racial disparity and triple-negative breast cancer in African-American women: a 
multifaceted affair between obesity, biology, and socioeconomic determinants - 
PubMed, (n.d.). https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30558195/(accessed March 
27, 2023). 
[7] Epidemiology of triple-negative breast cancer: a review - PubMed, (n.d.). https:// 
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33475288/ (accessed March 27, 2023). 
[8] O. Prakash, F. Hossain, D. Danos, A. Lassak, R. Scribner, L. Miele, Racial 
disparities in triple negative breast cancer: a review of the role of biologic and 
non-biologic factors, Front. Public Health 8 (2020) 576964, https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpubh.2020.576964. 
[9] Response to neoadjuvant therapy and long-term survival in patients with triple- 
negative breast cancer - PubMed, (n.d.). https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
18250347/ (accessed March 27, 2023). 
[10] N.M. Almansour, Triple-negative breast cancer: a brief review about 
epidemiology, risk factors, signaling pathways, treatment and role of artificial 
intelligence, Front. Mol. Biosci. 9 (2022) 836417, https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fmolb.2022.836417. 
[11] C.-J. Li, Y.-D.T. Tzeng, Y.-H. Chiu, H.-Y. Lin, M.-F. Hou, P.-Y. Chu, Pathogenesis 
and potential therapeutic targets for triple-negative breast cancer, Cancers 13 
(2021) 2978, https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13122978. 
[12] Update on triple-negative breast cancer disparities for the United States: a 
population-based study from the United States Cancer Statistics database, 2010 
through 2014 - PubMed, (n.d.). https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31282032/ 
(accessed March 27, 2023). 
[13] S.-Y. Hwang, S. Park, Y. Kwon, Recent therapeutic trends and promising targets in 
triple negative breast cancer, Pharmacol. Ther. 199 (2019) 30–57, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2019.02.006. 
[14] F.M. Howard, O.I. Olopade, Epidemiology of triple-negative breast cancer: a 
review, Cancer J. 27 (2021) 8, https://doi.org/10.1097/ 
PPO.0000000000000500. 
[15] V. Kulothungan, K. Sathishkumar, S. Leburu, T. Ramamoorthy, S. Stephen, 
D. Basavarajappa, N. Tomy, R. Mohan, G.R. Menon, P. Mathur, Burden of cancers 
in India - estimates of cancer crude incidence, YLLs, YLDs and DALYs for 2021 
and 2025 based on National Cancer Registry Program, BMC Cancer 22 (2022) 
1–12, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-022-09578-1. 
[16] P.V. Bhardwaj, R. Dulala, S. Rajappa, C. Loke, Breast cancer in India: screening, 
detection, and management, Hematol./Oncol. Clin. 0 (2023), https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.hoc.2023.05.014. 
[17] M. Chaturvedi, K. Sathishkumar, S.K. Lakshminarayana, A. Nath, P. Das, 
P. Mathur, Women cancers in India: incidence, trends and their clinical extent 
from the national cancer registry programme, Cancer Epidemiology 80 (2022) 
102248, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canep.2022.102248. 
[18] S. Greco, N. Fabbri, R. Spaggiari, A. De Giorgi, F. Fabbian, A. Giovine, Update on 
classic and novel approaches in metastatic triple-negative breast cancer 
treatment: a comprehensive review, Biomedicines 11 (2023) 1772, https://doi. 
org/10.3390/biomedicines11061772. 
[19] C.M. Perou, T. Sørlie, M.B. Eisen, M. van de Rijn, S.S. Jeffrey, C.A. Rees, J. 
R. Pollack, D.T. Ross, H. Johnsen, L.A. Akslen, O. Fluge, A. Pergamenschikov, 
C. Williams, S.X. Zhu, P.E. Lønning, A.L. Børresen-Dale, P.O. Brown, D. Botstein, 
Molecular portraits of human breast tumours, Nature 406 (2000) 747–752, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/35021093. 
[20] S. Zhao, W.-J. Zuo, Z.-M. Shao, Y.-Z. Jiang, Molecular subtypes and precision 
treatment of triple-negative breast cancer, Ann. Transl. Med. 8 (2020) 499, 
https://doi.org/10.21037/atm.2020.03.194, 499. 
[21] F. Borri, A. Granaglia, Pathology of triple negative breast cancer, Semin. Cancer 
Biol. 72 (2021) 136–145, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2020.06.005. 
[22] S. G¨oransson, S. Chen, H. Olofsson, O. Larsson, S. Str¨omblad, An extracellular 
matrix stiffness-induced breast cancer cell transcriptome resembles the transition 
from ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 654 (2023) 73–79, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bbrc.2023.03.001. 
[23] D.J. O’Connor, M.G. Davey, L.R. Barkley, M.J. Kerin, Differences in sensitivity to 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy among invasive lobular and ductal carcinoma of the 
breast and implications on surgery–A systematic review and meta-analysis, Breast 
61 (2022) 1–10, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.breast.2021.11.017. 
[24] A.R. Scholl, M.B. Flanagan, Educational case: invasive ductal carcinoma of the 
breast, Academic Pathology 7 (2020) 2374289519897390, https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/2374289519897390. 
[25] M. Alsaleem, M.S. Toss, C. Joseph, M. Aleskandarany, S. Kurozumi, I. Alshankyty, 
A. Ogden, P.C.G. Rida, I.O. Ellis, R. Aneja, A.R. Green, N.P. Mongan, E.A. Rakha, 
The molecular mechanisms underlying reduced E-cadherin expression in invasive 
ductal carcinoma of the breast: high throughput analysis of large cohorts, Mod. 
Pathol. 32 (2019) 967–976, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41379-019-0209-9. 
[26] T.P. Reddy, R.R. Rosato, X. Li, S. Moulder, H. Piwnica-Worms, J.C. Chang, 
A comprehensive overview of metaplastic breast cancer: clinical features and 
molecular aberrations, Breast Cancer Res. 22 (2020) 121, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s13058-020-01353-z. 
[27] V. Sanmugasiva, M.T.R. Hamid, F. Fadzli, N. Ab Mumin, K. Rahmat, Spindle cell 
metaplastic breast carcinoma, Curr Med Imaging 18 (2022) 684–688, https://doi. 
org/10.2174/1573405617666211004114041. 
[28] E.R. McMullen, N.A. Zoumberos, C.G. Kleer, Metaplastic breast carcinoma: 
update on histopathology and molecular alterations, Arch. Pathol. Lab Med. 143 
(2019) 1492–1496, https://doi.org/10.5858/arpa.2019-0396-RA. 
[29] N. Koufopoulos, S. Kokkali, F. Antoniadou, D.T. Dimas, I.L. Missitzis, 
N. Koufopoulos, S. Kokkali, F. Antoniadou, D.T. Dimas, I.L. Missitzis, Matrix- 
producing breast carcinoma: a rare subtype of metaplastic breast carcinoma, 
Cureus 11 (2019), https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.5188. 
[30] C.J. Schwartz, I. Dolgalev, E. Yoon, I. Osman, A. Heguy, E.C. Vega-Saenz de 
Miera, D. Nimeh, G. Jour, F. Darvishian, Microglandular adenosis is an advanced 
precursor breast lesion with evidence of molecular progression to matrix- 
producing metaplastic carcinoma, Hum. Pathol. 85 (2019) 65–71, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.humpath.2018.10.021. 
[31] A. Tower, J. Hughes, L. Moore, K. Srivastava, Mixed metaplastic carcinoma of the 
breast: a case report, J. Surg. Case Rep. 2023 (2023) rjad144, https://doi.org/ 
10.1093/jscr/rjad144. 
[32] M.R. Butcher, M.J. White, L.M. Rooper, P. Argani, A. Cimino-Mathews, MYB RNA 
in situ hybridization is a useful diagnostic tool to distinguish breast adenoid cystic 
carcinoma from other triple-negative breast carcinomas, Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 46 
(2022) 878–888, https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0000000000001913. 
[33] G. Cserni, C.M. Quinn, M.P. Foschini, S. Bianchi, G. Callagy, E. Chmielik, 
T. Decker, F. Fend, A. Kov´acs, P.J. van Diest, I.O. Ellis, E. Rakha, T. Tot, European 
working group for breast screening pathology, triple-negative breast cancer 
histological subtypes with a favourable prognosis, Cancers 13 (2021) 5694, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13225694. 
[34] D. Trapani, F. Giugliano, J. Uliano, V.A.A. Zia, A. Marra, G. Viale, E. Ferraro, 
A. Esposito, C. Criscitiello, P. D’amico, G. Curigliano, Benefit of adjuvant 
chemotherapy in patients with special histology subtypes of triple-negative breast 
cancer: a systematic review, Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 187 (2021) 323–337, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-021-06259-8. 
[35] N. Shaker, Q. Ding, Y. Wang, Z. Li, Low-grade invasive triple negative breast 
carcinoma, J Clin Transl Pathol (2022), https://doi.org/10.14218/ 
JCTP.2022.00010, 000–000. 
[36] T. Lei, X. Deng, Y. Peng, T. Chen, The genomic profile of double primary secretory 
breast carcinoma in one patient provides evidence for the treatment of such 
carcinoma: a case report, Pathol. Res. Pract. 236 (2022) 154006, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.prp.2022.154006. 
[37] J. Cloutier, E.D. Thompson, A. Cimino-Mathews, L.M. Rooper, A. Matoso, 
P. Argani, Metastatic breast cancer simulating well-differentiated neuroendocrine 
neoplasms of visceral organs, Hum. Pathol. 82 (2018) 76–86, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.humpath.2018.07.011. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
29
[38] Y. Zhao, Q. Zhu, S. Fan, W. Nan, L. Zhang, J. Zhu, W. Du, X. Jin, Neuroendocrine 
neoplasms of breast:A rare breast tumor worthy of attention, Review (2022), 
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-1212361/v1. 
[39] E.C. Yoon, G. Wang, B. Parkinson, L. Huo, Y. Peng, J. Wang, T. Salisbury, Y. Wu, 
H. Chen, C.T. Albarracin, E. Resetkova, L.P. Middleton, S. Krishnamurthy, Q. Gan, 
H. Sun, X. Huang, T. Shen, W. Chen, A.V. Parwani, A.A. Sahin, Z. Li, Q. Ding, 
TRPS1, GATA3, and SOX10 expression in triple-negative breast carcinoma, Hum. 
Pathol. 125 (2022) 97–107, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2022.04.006. 
[40] T. Lei, Y.Q. Shi, T.B. Chen, Mammary mucinous cystadenocarcinoma with long- 
term follow-up: molecular information and literature review, Diagn. Pathol. 18 
(2023) 13, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13000-023-01302-2. 
[41] M. Sun, S. Su, Q. Liu, Q. Li, K. Wang, Mammary synchronous mucinous 
cystadenocarcinoma and columnar cell mucinous carcinoma: a case report, Int. J. 
Clin. Exp. Pathol. 13 (2020) 2381–2386. 
[42] A. Ajkunic, F. Skenderi, N. Shaker, S. Akhtar, J. Lamovec, Z. Gatalica, S. Vranic, 
Acinic cell carcinoma of the breast: a comprehensive review, Breast 66 (2022) 
208–216, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.breast.2022.10.012. 
[43] K.D. Weaver, J. Isom, A. Esnakula, K. Daily, J.R. Asirvatham, Acinic cell 
carcinoma of the breast: report of a case with immunohistochemical and next- 
generation sequencing studies, Int. J. Surg. Pathol. 29 (2021) 882–886, https:// 
doi.org/10.1177/10668969211008508. 
[44] F. Pareja, B. Weigelt, J.S. Reis-Filho, Problematic breast tumors reassessed in light 
of novel molecular data, Mod. Pathol. 34 (2021) 38–47, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41379-020-00693-7. 
[45] K. Pal, The Annals of the Recalcitrant Triple Negative Breast Cancer: 
Classifications and its Potential Ameliorative Measures, (n.d.).. 
[46] K. Venetis, E. Sajjadi, M. Ivanova, S. Andaloro, S. Pessina, C. Zanetti, 
A. Ranghiero, G. Citelli, C. Rossi, M. Lucioni, U. Malapelle, F. Pagni, M. Barberis, 
E. Guerini-Rocco, G. Viale, N. Fusco, The molecular landscape of breast 
mucoepidermoid carcinoma, Cancer Med. (2023), https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
cam4.5754 cam4.5754. 
[47] X. Zhang, H. Wu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, F. Mao, Y. Lin, S. Shen, Z. Liang, Q. Sun, Tall 
cell carcinoma of the breast with reverse polarity: case report with gene 
sequencing and literature review, Gland Surg. 10 (2021) 837, https://doi.org/ 
10.21037/gs-20-695. 
[48] F. Pareja, E.M. da Silva, D. Frosina, F.C. Geyer, J.R. Lozada, T. Basili, A. Da Cruz 
Paula, E. Zhong, F. Derakhshan, T. D’Alfonso, H.Y. Wen, D.D. Giri, M.M. Hayes, 
G. Krings, R. Bhargava, J.P. Palazzo, E.A. Rakha, S.A. Hoda, M.E. Sanders, L. 
C. Collins, S.J. Schnitt, Y.-Y. Chen, B. Weigelt, A.A. Jungbluth, J.S. Reis-Filho, 
E. Brogi, Immunohistochemical analysis of IDH2 R172 hotspot mutations in 
breast papillary neoplasms: applications in the diagnosis of tall cell carcinoma 
with reverse polarity, Mod. Pathol. 33 (2020) 1056–1064, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41379-019-0442-2. 
[49] R. Rubin, D.S. Strayer, E. Rubin, J.M. McDonald, Rubin’s Pathology: 
Clinicopathologic Foundations of Medicine, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2008. 
[50] F. Sanges, M. Floris, P. Cossu-Rocca, M.R. Muroni, G. Pira, S.A.M. Urru, 
R. Barrocu, S. Gallus, C. Bosetti, M. D’Incalci, A. Manca, M.G. Uras, R. Medda, 
E. Sollai, A. Murgia, D. Palmas, F. Atzori, A. Zinellu, F. Cambosu, T. Moi, 
M. Ghiani, V. Marras, M.C. Santona, L. Canu, E. Valle, M.G. Sarobba, D. Onnis, 
A. Asunis, S. Cossu, S. Orrù, M.R. De Miglio, Histologic subtyping affecting 
outcome of triple negative breast cancer: a large Sardinian population-based 
analysis, BMC Cancer 20 (2020) 491, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-020- 
06998-9. 
[51] S. Zhao, D. Ma, Y. Xiao, Y.-Z. Jiang, Z.-M. Shao, Clinicopathologic features and 
prognoses of different histologic types of triple-negative breast cancer: a large 
population-based analysis, Eur. J. Surg. Oncol. 44 (2018) 420–428, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ejso.2017.11.027. 
[52] Y.-Z. Jiang, Y. Liu, Y. Xiao, X. Hu, L. Jiang, W.-J. Zuo, D. Ma, J. Ding, X. Zhu, 
J. Zou, C. Verschraegen, D.G. Stover, V. Kaklamani, Z.-H. Wang, Z.-M. Shao, 
Molecular subtyping and genomic profiling expand precision medicine in 
refractory metastatic triple-negative breast cancer: the FUTURE trial, Cell Res. 31 
(2021) 178–186, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-020-0375-9. 
[53] H.-M. Nguyen, W. Paulishak, M. Oladejo, L. Wood, Dynamic tumor 
microenvironment, molecular heterogeneity, and distinct immunologic portrait 
of triple-negative breast cancer: an impact on classification and treatment 
approaches, Breast Cancer 30 (2023) 167–186, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12282- 
022-01415-4. 
[54] A. Angius, P. Cossu-Rocca, C. Arru, M.R. Muroni, V. Rallo, C. Carru, P. Uva, 
G. Pira, S. Orrù, M.R. De Miglio, Modulatory role of microRNAs in triple negative 
breast cancer with basal-like phenotype, Cancers 12 (2020) 3298, https://doi. 
org/10.3390/cancers12113298. 
[55] B.D. Lehmann, A. Colaprico, T.C. Silva, J. Chen, H. An, Y. Ban, H. Huang, 
L. Wang, J.L. James, J.M. Balko, P.I. Gonzalez-Ericsson, M.E. Sanders, B. Zhang, 
J.A. Pietenpol, X.S. Chen, Multi-omics analysis identifies therapeutic 
vulnerabilities in triple-negative breast cancer subtypes, Nat. Commun. 12 (2021) 
6276, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26502-6. 
[56] C.S. Fermaintt, T. Peramuna, S. Cai, L. Takahashi-Ruiz, J.N. Essif, C.V. Grant, B. 
R. O’Keefe, S.L. Mooberry, R.H. Cichewicz, A.L. Risinger, Yuanhuacine is a potent 
and selective inhibitor of the basal-like 2 subtype of triple negative breast cancer 
with immunogenic potential, Cancers 13 (2021) 2834, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
cancers13112834. 
[57] Y.-M. Lee, M.H. Oh, J.-H. Go, K. Han, S.-Y. Choi, Molecular subtypes of triple- 
negative breast cancer: understanding of subtype categories and clinical 
implication, Genes Genom 42 (2020) 1381–1387, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s13258-020-01014-7. 
[58] P. Sharma, Biology and management of patients with triple-negative breast 
cancer, Oncol. 21 (2016) 1050–1062, https://doi.org/10.1634/ 
theoncologist.2016-0067. 
[59] M. Nedeljkovi´c, A. Damjanovi´c, Mechanisms of chemotherapy resistance in triple- 
negative breast cancer—how we can rise to the challenge, Cells 8 (2019) 957, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/cells8090957. 
[60] L. Yin, J.-J. Duan, X.-W. Bian, S. Yu, Triple-negative breast cancer molecular 
subtyping and treatment progress, Breast Cancer Res. 22 (2020) 61, https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s13058-020-01296-5. 
[61] A. Marra, D. Trapani, G. Viale, C. Criscitiello, G. Curigliano, Practical 
classification of triple-negative breast cancer: intratumoral heterogeneity, 
mechanisms of drug resistance, and novel therapies, Npj Breast Cancer 6 (2020) 
1–16, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41523-020-00197-2. 
[62] C. Elfgen, Z. Varga, K. Reeve, L. Moskovszky, V. Bjelic-Radisic, C. Tausch, 
U. Güth, The impact of distinct triple-negative breast cancer subtypes on 
misdiagnosis and diagnostic delay, Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 177 (2019) 67–75, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-019-05298-6. 
[63] Y.-Z. Jiang, D. Ma, C. Suo, J. Shi, M. Xue, X. Hu, Y. Xiao, K.-D. Yu, Y.-R. Liu, Y. Yu, 
Y. Zheng, X. Li, C. Zhang, P. Hu, J. Zhang, Q. Hua, J. Zhang, W. Hou, L. Ren, 
D. Bao, B. Li, J. Yang, L. Yao, W.-J. Zuo, S. Zhao, Y. Gong, Y.-X. Ren, Y.-X. Zhao, 
Y.-S. Yang, Z. Niu, Z.-G. Cao, D.G. Stover, C. Verschraegen, V. Kaklamani, 
A. Daemen, J.R. Benson, K. Takabe, F. Bai, D.-Q. Li, P. Wang, L. Shi, W. Huang, Z.- 
M. Shao, Genomic and transcriptomic landscape of triple-negative breast cancers: 
subtypes and treatment strategies, Cancer Cell 35 (2019) 428–440.e5, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2019.02.001. 
[64] D.-Y. Wang, Z. Jiang, Y. Ben-David, J.R. Woodgett, E. Zacksenhaus, Molecular 
stratification within triple-negative breast cancer subtypes, Sci. Rep. 9 (2019) 
19107, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-55710-w. 
[65] X. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Dai, DNA methylation profiles capturing breast cancer 
heterogeneity, BMC Genom. 20 (2019) 823, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864- 
019-6142-y. 
[66] K. Cristall, F.-C. Bidard, J.-Y. Pierga, M.J. Rauh, T. Popova, C. Sebbag, O. Lantz, 
M.-H. Stern, C.R. Mueller, A DNA methylation-based liquid biopsy for triple- 
negative breast cancer, Npj Precis. Onc. 5 (2021) 53, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41698-021-00198-9. 
[67] S. Mendaza, D. Guerrero-Setas, I. Monreal-Santesteban, A. Ulazia-Garmendia, 
A. Cordoba Iturriagagoitia, S. De la Cruz, E. Martín-S´anchez, A DNA methylation- 
based gene signature can predict triple-negative breast cancer diagnosis, 
Biomedicines 9 (2021) 1394, https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9101394. 
[68] A. Mathe, M. Wong-Brown, W.J. Locke, C. Stirzaker, S.G. Braye, J.F. Forbes, S. 
J. Clark, K.A. Avery-Kiejda, R.J. Scott, DNA methylation profile of triple negative 
breast cancer-specific genes comparing lymph node positive patients to lymph 
node negative patients, Sci. Rep. 6 (2016) 33435, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
srep33435. 
[69] C. Chen, D. Gao, J. Huo, R. Qu, Y. Guo, X. Hu, L. Luo, Multiomics analysis reveals 
CT83 is the most specific gene for triple negative breast cancer and its 
hypomethylation is oncogenic in breast cancer, Sci. Rep. 11 (2021) 12172, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-91290-4. 
[70] Involvement of the tumor microenvironment in the pathogenesis of breast cancer, 
Am. J. Pathol. 191 (2021) 1328–1329, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ajpath.2021.05.012. 
[71] M. Thomas, E.D. Kelly, J. Abraham, M. Kruse, Invasive lobular breast cancer: a 
review of pathogenesis, diagnosis, management, and future directions of early 
stage disease, Semin. Oncol. 46 (2019) 121–132, https://doi.org/10.1053/j. 
seminoncol.2019.03.002. 
[72] K. Oros Klein, K. Oualkacha, M.-H. Lafond, S. Bhatnagar, P.N. Tonin, C.M. 
T. Greenwood, Gene coexpression analyses differentiate networks associated with 
diverse cancers harboring TP53 missense or null mutations, Front. Genet. 7 
(2016) 137, https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2016.00137. 
[73] B.S. Yadav, P. Chanana, S. Jhamb, Biomarkers in triple negative breast cancer: a 
review, World J. Clin. Oncol. 6 (2015) 252–263, https://doi.org/10.5306/wjco. 
v6.i6.252. 
[74] N. Armstrong, S. Ryder, C. Forbes, J. Ross, R.G. Quek, A systematic review of the 
international prevalence of BRCA mutation in breast cancer, Clin. Epidemiol. 11 
(2019) 543–561, https://doi.org/10.2147/CLEP.S206949. 
[75] R. Greenup, A. Buchanan, W. Lorizio, K. Rhoads, S. Chan, T. Leedom, R. King, 
J. McLennan, B. Crawford, P. Kelly Marcom, E. Shelley Hwang, Prevalence of 
BRCA mutations among women with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) in a 
genetic counseling cohort, Ann. Surg Oncol. 20 (2013) 3254–3258, https://doi. 
org/10.1245/s10434-013-3205-1. 
[76] K. Pogoda, A. Niwi´nska, E. Sarnowska, D. Nowakowska, A. Jagiełło-Gruszfeld, 
J. Siedlecki, Z. Nowecki, Effects of BRCA germline mutations on triple-negative 
breast cancer prognosis, Journal of Oncology 2020 (2020) e8545643, https://doi. 
org/10.1155/2020/8545643. 
[77] Y. Han, X. Yu, S. Li, Y. Tian, C. Liu, New perspectives for resistance to PARP 
inhibitors in triple-negative breast cancer, Front. Oncol. 10 (2020). https://www. 
frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fonc.2020.578095. (Accessed 3 March 2023). 
[78] T.J.W. Robinson, J.C. Liu, F. Vizeacoumar, T. Sun, N. Maclean, S.E. Egan, A. 
D. Schimmer, A. Datti, E. Zacksenhaus, RB1 status in triple negative breast cancer 
cells dictates response to radiation treatment and selective therapeutic drugs, 
PLoS One 8 (2013) e78641, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0078641. 
[79] R.A. Jones, T.J. Robinson, J.C. Liu, M. Shrestha, V. Voisin, Y. Ju, P.E.D. Chung, 
G. Pellecchia, V.L. Fell, S. Bae, L. Muthuswamy, A. Datti, S.E. Egan, Z. Jiang, 
G. Leone, G.D. Bader, A. Schimmer, E. Zacksenhaus, RB1 deficiency in triple- 
negative breast cancer induces mitochondrial protein translation, J. Clin. Invest. 
126 (2016) 3739–3757, https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI81568. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
30
[80] S. Tabassum, R. Abbasi, N. Ahmad, A.A. Farooqi, Targeting of JAK-STAT 
signaling in breast cancer: therapeutic strategies to overcome drug resistance, in: 
A. Ahmad (Ed.), Breast Cancer Metastasis and Drug Resistance: Challenges and 
Progress, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019, pp. 271–281, https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-20301-6_14. 
[81] J. Han, J. Yun, M. Quan, W. Kang, J.-G. Jung, W. Heo, S. Li, K.J. Lee, H.-Y. Son, J. 
H. Kim, J. Choi, D.-Y. Noh, D. Na, H.S. Ryu, C. Lee, J.-I. Kim, H.-G. Moon, JAK2 
regulates paclitaxel resistance in triple negative breast cancers, J. Mol. Med. 99 
(2021) 1783–1795, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00109-021-02138-3. 
[82] S. Wang, Y. Yao, M. Yao, P. Fu, W. Wang, Interleukin-22 promotes triple negative 
breast cancer cells migration and paclitaxel resistance through JAK-STAT3/ 
MAPKs/AKT signaling pathways, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 503 (2018) 
1605–1609, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.07.088. 
[83] P. Zhao, W. Ma, Z. Hu, L. Zang, Z. Tian, K. Zhang, Filamin A (FLNA) modulates 
chemosensitivity to docetaxel in triple-negative breast cancer through the MAPK/ 
ERK pathway, Tumor Biol. 37 (2016) 5107–5115, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s13277-015-4357-3. 
[84] Y. Wang, Y.-X. Qi, Z. Qi, S.-Y. Tsang, TRPC3 regulates the proliferation and 
apoptosis resistance of triple negative breast cancer cells through the TRPC3/ 
RASA4/MAPK pathway, Cancers 11 (2019) 558, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
cancers11040558. 
[85] W. Peng, J. Huang, L. Yang, A. Gong, Y.-Y. Mo, Linc-RoR promotes MAPK/ERK 
signaling and confers estrogen-independent growth of breast cancer, Mol. Cancer 
16 (2017) 161, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-017-0727-3. 
[86] C. Dong, J. Wu, Y. Chen, J. Nie, C. Chen, Activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway 
causes drug resistance in breast cancer, Front. Pharmacol. 12 (2021) accessed 
March 20, 2023, https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphar.2021.628 
690. 
[87] H. Hu, J. Zhu, Y. Zhong, R. Geng, Y. Ji, Q. Guan, C. Hong, Y. Wei, N. Min, A. Qi, 
Y. Zhang, X. Li, PIK3CA mutation confers resistance to chemotherapy in triple- 
negative breast cancer by inhibiting apoptosis and activating the PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR signaling pathway, Ann. Transl. Med. 9 (2021) 410, https://doi.org/ 
10.21037/atm-21-698. 
[88] X. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Ding, C. Li, H. Zhao, J. Wang, S. Meng, Posttranscriptional 
upregulation of HER3 by HER2 mRNA induces trastuzumab resistance in breast 
cancer, Mol. Cancer 17 (2018) 113, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-018-0862- 
5. 
[89] K. Gohr, A. Hamacher, L.H. Engelke, M.U. Kassack, Inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR 
overcomes cisplatin resistance in the triple negative breast cancer cell line 
HCC38, BMC Cancer 17 (2017) 711, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-017-3695- 
5. 
[90] N. Elster, M. Cremona, C. Morgan, S. Toomey, A. Carr, A. O’Grady, B.T. Hennessy, 
A.J. Eustace, A preclinical evaluation of the PI3K alpha/delta dominant inhibitor 
BAY 80-6946 in HER2-positive breast cancer models with acquired resistance to 
the HER2-targeted therapies trastuzumab and lapatinib, Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 
149 (2015) 373–383, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-014-3239-5. 
[91] N.E. Bhola, V.M. Jansen, J.P. Koch, H. Li, L. Formisano, J.A. Williams, J. 
R. Grandis, C.L. Arteaga, Treatment of triple-negative breast cancer with TORC1/ 
2 inhibitors sustains a drug-resistant and notch-dependent cancer stem cell 
population, Cancer Res. 76 (2016) 440–452, https://doi.org/10.1158/0008- 
5472.CAN-15-1640-T. 
[92] A. Edwards, K. Brennan, Notch signalling in breast development and cancer, 
Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9 (2021) 692173, https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fcell.2021.692173. 
[93] G. Diluvio, F. Del Gaudio, M.V. Giuli, G. Franciosa, E. Giuliani, R. Palermo, Z. 
M. Besharat, M.G. Pignataro, A. Vacca, G. d’Amati, M. Maroder, C. Talora, 
C. Capalbo, D. Bellavia, S. Checquolo, NOTCH3 inactivation increases triple 
negative breast cancer sensitivity to gefitinib by promoting EGFR tyrosine 
dephosphorylation and its intracellular arrest, Oncogenesis 7 (2018) 1–15, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41389-018-0051-9. 
[94] C. Osipo, P. Patel, P. Rizzo, A.G. Clementz, L. Hao, T.E. Golde, L. Miele, ErbB-2 
inhibition activates Notch-1 and sensitizes breast cancer cells to a γ-secretase 
inhibitor, Oncogene 27 (2008) 5019–5032, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
onc.2008.149. 
[95] D.L. Abravanel, G.K. Belka, T. Pan, D.K. Pant, M.A. Collins, C.J. Sterner, L. 
A. Chodosh, Notch promotes recurrence of dormant tumor cells following HER2/ 
neu-targeted therapy, J. Clin. Invest. 125 (2015) 2484–2496, https://doi.org/ 
10.1172/JCI74883. 
[96] H. Wan, Z. Li, H. Wang, F. Cai, L. Wang, ST8SIA1 inhibition sensitizes triple 
negative breast cancer to chemotherapy via suppressing Wnt/β-catenin and FAK/ 
Akt/mTOR, Clin. Transl. Oncol. 23 (2021) 902–910, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s12094-020-02484-7. 
[97] Q. Zheng, D. Yao, Y. Cai, T. Zhou, NLRP3 augmented resistance to gemcitabine in 
triple-negative breast cancer cells via EMT/IL-1β/Wnt/β-catenin signaling 
pathway, Biosci. Rep. 40 (2020) BSR20200730, https://doi.org/10.1042/ 
BSR20200730. 
[98] X. Xu, L. Zhang, X. He, P. Zhang, C. Sun, X. Xu, Y. Lu, F. Li, TGF-β plays a vital role 
in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) drug-resistance through regulating 
stemness, EMT and apoptosis, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 502 (2018) 
160–165, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.05.139. 
[99] W.-C. Chen, Y.-A. Lai, Y.-C. Lin, J.-W. Ma, L.-F. Huang, N.-S. Yang, C.-T. Ho, S.- 
C. Kuo, T.-D. Way, Curcumin suppresses doxorubicin-induced 
epithelial–mesenchymal transition via the inhibition of TGF-β and PI3K/AKT 
signaling pathways in triple-negative breast cancer cells, J. Agric. Food Chem. 61 
(2013) 11817–11824, https://doi.org/10.1021/jf404092f. 
[100] H. Yao, G. He, S. Yan, C. Chen, L. Song, T.J. Rosol, X. Deng, Triple-negative breast 
cancer: is there a treatment on the horizon? Oncotarget 8 (2016) 1913–1924, 
https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.12284. 
[101] L. Li, F. Zhang, Z. Liu, Z. Fan, Immunotherapy for triple-negative breast cancer: 
combination strategies to improve outcome, Cancers 15 (2023) 321, https://doi. 
org/10.3390/cancers15010321. 
[102] S. Łukasiewicz, M. Czeczelewski, A. Forma, J. Baj, R. Sitarz, A. Stanisławek, 
Breast cancer—epidemiology, risk factors, classification, prognostic markers, and 
current treatment strategies—an updated review, Cancers 13 (2021) 4287, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13174287. 
[103] H.A. Wahba, H.A. El-Hadaad, Current approaches in treatment of triple-negative 
breast cancer, Cancer Biol Med 12 (2015) 106–116, https://doi.org/10.7497/j. 
issn.2095-3941.2015.0030. 
[104] G. Bianchini, J.M. Balko, I.A. Mayer, M.E. Sanders, L. Gianni, Triple-negative 
breast cancer: challenges and opportunities of a heterogeneous disease, Nat. Rev. 
Clin. Oncol. 13 (2016) 674–690, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrclinonc.2016.66. 
[105] R.C. Wang, Z. Wang, Precision medicine: disease subtyping and tailored 
treatment, Cancers 15 (2023) 3837, https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15153837. 
[106] D. Kwapisz, Pembrolizumab and atezolizumab in triple-negative breast cancer, 
Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 70 (2021) 607–617, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00262-020-02736-z. 
[107] H. Zheng, S. Siddharth, S. Parida, X. Wu, D. Sharma, Tumor microenvironment: 
key players in triple negative breast cancer immunomodulation, Cancers 13 
(2021) 3357, https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers13133357. 
[108] Y. Ren, J. Song, X. Li, N. Luo, Rationale and clinical research progress on PD-1/ 
PD-L1-based immunotherapy for metastatic triple-negative breast cancer, Int. J. 
Mol. Sci. 23 (2022) 8878, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23168878. 
[109] Y. Han, D. Liu, L. Li, PD-1/PD-L1 pathway: current researches in cancer, Am. J. 
Cancer Res. 10 (2020) 727–742. 
[110] Y. Zhou, Y. Che, Z. Fu, H. Zhang, H. Wu, Triple-negative breast cancer analysis 
based on metabolic gene classification and immunotherapy, Front. Public Health 
10 (2022) 902378, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.902378. 
[111] X. Wang, L. Collet, M. Rediti, V. Debien, A.D. Caluw´e, D. Venet, E. Romano, 
F. Roth´e, C. Sotiriou, L. Buisseret, Predictive biomarkers for response to 
immunotherapy in triple negative breast cancer: promises and challenges, J. Clin. 
Med. 12 (2023), https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12030953. 
[112] S.K. Kim, S.W. Cho, The evasion mechanisms of cancer immunity and drug 
intervention in the tumor microenvironment, Front. Pharmacol. 13 (2022) 
868695, https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2022.868695. 
[113] E. Li, K. Hristova, Role of receptor tyrosine kinase transmembrane domains in cell 
signaling and human pathologies, Biochemistry 45 (2006) 6241–6251, https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/bi060609y. 
[114] M.A. Lemmon, J. Schlessinger, Cell signaling by receptor-tyrosine kinases, Cell 
141 (2010) 1117–1134, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.06.011. 
[115] C. Braicu, M. Buse, C. Busuioc, R. Drula, D. Gulei, L. Raduly, A. Rusu, A. Irimie, A. 
G. Atanasov, O. Slaby, C. Ionescu, I. Berindan-Neagoe, A comprehensive review 
on MAPK: a promising therapeutic target in cancer, Cancers 11 (2019) 1618, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers11101618. 
[116] R. Butti, S. Das, V.P. Gunasekaran, A.S. Yadav, D. Kumar, G.C. Kundu, Receptor 
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) in breast cancer: signaling, therapeutic implications and 
challenges, Mol. Cancer 17 (2018) 34, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-018- 
0797-x. 
[117] Y.H. Tang, A. Rockstroh, K.A. Sokolowski, L.-R. Lynam, M. Lehman, E. 
W. Thompson, P.A. Gregory, C.C. Nelson, M. Volpert, B.G. Hollier, Neuropilin-1 is 
over-expressed in claudin-low breast cancer and promotes tumor progression 
through acquisition of stem cell characteristics and RAS/MAPK pathway 
activation, Breast Cancer Res. 24 (2022) 8, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13058-022- 
01501-7. 
[118] O. Saifi, M.A. Chahrour, Z. Li, J. Hoballah, J. Panoff, L.A. Vallow, Y.H. Zeidan, Is 
breast conservation superior to mastectomy in early stage triple negative breast 
cancer? Breast 62 (2022) 144–151, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
breast.2022.02.006. 
[119] M. Bou Zerdan, T. Ghorayeb, F. Saliba, S. Allam, M. Bou Zerdan, M. Yaghi, 
N. Bilani, R. Jaafar, Z. Nahleh, Triple negative breast cancer: updates on 
classification and treatment in 2021, Cancers 14 (2022) 1253, https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/cancers14051253. 
[120] P.V. Bhardwaj, H. Mason, S.A. Kaufman, P. Visintainer, G. Makari-Judson, 
Outcomes of a multidisciplinary team in the management of patients with early- 
stage breast cancer undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy at a community 
cancer center, Curr. Oncol. 30 (2023) 4861–4870, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
curroncol30050366. 
[121] A.R. Parikh, Y. He, T.S. Hong, R.B. Corcoran, J.W. Clark, D.P. Ryan, L. Zou, D. 
T. Ting, D.V. Catenacci, J. Chao, M. Fakih, S.J. Klempner, J.S. Ross, G. 
M. Frampton, V.A. Miller, S.M. Ali, A.B. Schrock, Analysis of DNA damage 
response gene alterations and tumor mutational burden across 17,486 tubular 
gastrointestinal carcinomas: implications for therapy, Oncol. 24 (2019) 
1340–1347, https://doi.org/10.1634/theoncologist.2019-0034. 
[122] J.S. Brown, B. O’Carrigan, S.P. Jackson, T.A. Yap, Targeting DNA repair in cancer: 
beyond PARP inhibitors, Cancer Discov. 7 (2017) 20–37, https://doi.org/ 
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-16-0860. 
[123] G. Barchiesi, M. Roberto, M. Verrico, P. Vici, S. Tomao, F. Tomao, Emerging role 
of PARP inhibitors in metastatic triple negative breast cancer. Current scenario 
and future perspectives, Front. Oncol. 11 (2021) 769280, https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fonc.2021.769280. 
[124] Y.-Y. Chu, C. Yam, H. Yamaguchi, M.-C. Hung, Biomarkers beyond BRCA: 
promising combinatorial treatment strategies in overcoming resistance to PARP 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
31
inhibitors, J. Biomed. Sci. 29 (2022) 86, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12929-022- 
00870-7. 
[125] D. Kim, H.J. Nam, PARP inhibitors: clinical limitations and recent attempts to 
overcome them, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (2022) 8412, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ijms23158412. 
[126] H. Li, Z.-Y. Liu, N. Wu, Y.-C. Chen, Q. Cheng, J. Wang, PARP inhibitor resistance: 
the underlying mechanisms and clinical implications, Mol. Cancer 19 (2020) 107, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-020-01227-0. 
[127] C.K. Anders, E.P. Winer, J.M. Ford, R. Dent, D.P. Silver, G.W. Sledge, L.A. Carey, 
PARP inhibition: “targeted” therapy for triple negative breast cancer, Clin. Cancer 
Res. 16 (2010) 4702–4710, https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-0939. 
[128] X. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Chen, Drug resistance and combating drug resistance in 
cancer, Cancer Drug Resist 2 (2019) 141–160, https://doi.org/10.20517/ 
cdr.2019.10. 
[129] F. Pareja, F.C. Geyer, C. Marchi`o, K.A. Burke, B. Weigelt, J.S. Reis-Filho, Triple- 
negative breast cancer: the importance of molecular and histologic subtyping, and 
recognition of low-grade variants, NPJ Breast Cancer 2 (2016) 16036, https://doi. 
org/10.1038/npjbcancer.2016.36. 
[130] Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, H. Dai, B. Han, Epithelial–mesenchymal transition-mediated 
tumor therapeutic resistance, Molecules 27 (2022) 4750, https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/molecules27154750. 
[131] A. Biswas, S. De, Drivers of dynamic intratumor heterogeneity and phenotypic 
plasticity, Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 320 (2021) C750–C760, https://doi.org/ 
10.1152/ajpcell.00575.2020. 
[132] R.W. Robey, K.M. Pluchino, M.D. Hall, A.T. Fojo, S.E. Bates, M.M. Gottesman, 
Revisiting the role of efflux pumps in multidrug-resistant cancer, Nat. Rev. Cancer 
18 (2018) 452–464, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41568-018-0005-8. 
[133] P. Ughachukwu, P. Unekwe, Efflux pump-mediated resistance in chemotherapy, 
Ann. Med. Health Sci. Res. 2 (2012) 191–198, https://doi.org/10.4103/2141- 
9248.105671. 
[134] G. Housman, S. Byler, S. Heerboth, K. Lapinska, M. Longacre, N. Snyder, 
S. Sarkar, Drug resistance in cancer: an overview, Cancers 6 (2014) 1769–1792, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers6031769. 
[135] D. Massihnia, A. Galvano, D. Fanale, A. Perez, M. Castiglia, L. Incorvaia, A. Listì, 
S. Rizzo, G. Cicero, V. Bazan, S. Castorina, A. Russo, Triple negative breast cancer: 
shedding light onto the role of pi3k/akt/mtor pathway, Oncotarget 7 (2016) 
60712–60722, https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.10858. 
[136] B. Muz, P. de la Puente, F. Azab, A.K. Azab, The role of hypoxia in cancer 
progression, angiogenesis, metastasis, and resistance to therapy, Hypoxia 3 
(2015) 83–92, https://doi.org/10.2147/HP.S93413. 
[137] M. Bellone, A. Calcinotto, P. Filipazzi, A. De Milito, S. Fais, L. Rivoltini, The 
acidity of the tumor microenvironment is a mechanism of immune escape that 
can be overcome by proton pump inhibitors, OncoImmunology 2 (2013) e22058, 
https://doi.org/10.4161/onci.22058. 
[138] R.L. Copeland, Y. Kanaan, New targets in triple-negative breast cancer, Nat. Rev. 
Cancer 21 (2021) 744, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41568-021-00415-4, 744. 
[139] O. Obidiro, G. Battogtokh, E.O. Akala, Triple negative breast cancer treatment 
options and limitations: future outlook, Pharmaceutics 15 (2023) 1796, https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics15071796. 
[140] P. Zagami, L.A. Carey, Triple negative breast cancer: pitfalls and progress, Npj 
Breast Cancer 8 (2022) 1–10, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41523-022-00468-0. 
[141] G. Bianchini, C. De Angelis, L. Licata, L. Gianni, Treatment landscape of triple- 
negative breast cancer — expanded options, evolving needs, Nat. Rev. Clin. 
Oncol. 19 (2022) 91–113, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41571-021-00565-2. 
[142] M. Nedeljkovi´c, A. Damjanovi´c, Mechanisms of chemotherapy resistance in triple- 
negative breast cancer—how we can rise to the challenge, Cells 8 (2019) 957, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/cells8090957. 
[143] P. Merikhian, M.R. Eisavand, L. Farahmand, Triple-negative breast cancer: 
understanding Wnt signaling in drug resistance, Cancer Cell Int. 21 (2021) 419, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12935-021-02107-3. 
[144] G. Wu, Y. Li, TGF-β induced reprogramming and drug resistance in triple-negative 
breast cells, BMC Pharmacology and Toxicology 23 (2022) 23, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s40360-022-00561-x. 
[145] Q. Jin, F.J. Esteva, Cross-talk between the ErbB/HER family and the type I 
insulin-like growth factor receptor signaling pathway in breast cancer, 
J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia 13 (2008) 485–498, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10911-008-9107-3. 
[146] J.M. Knowlden, I.R. Hutcheson, D. Barrow, J.M.W. Gee, R.I. Nicholson, Insulin- 
like growth factor-I receptor signaling in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer: a 
supporting role to the epidermal growth factor receptor, Endocrinology 146 
(2005) 4609–4618, https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2005-0247. 
[147] B.D. Lehmann, J.A. Bauer, J.M. Schafer, C.S. Pendleton, L. Tang, K.C. Johnson, 
X. Chen, J.M. Balko, H. G´omez, C.L. Arteaga, G.B. Mills, M.E. Sanders, J. 
A. Pietenpol, PIK3CA mutations in androgen receptor-positive triple negative 
breast cancer confer sensitivity to the combination of PI3K and androgen receptor 
inhibitors, Breast Cancer Res. 16 (2014) 406, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13058- 
014-0406-x. 
[148] W. Liu, G. Chen, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Han, Y. Dai, J. He, S. Shi, B. Chen, TUFT1 
promotes triple negative breast cancer metastasis, stemness, and chemoresistance 
by up-regulating the rac1/β-catenin pathway, Front. Oncol. 9 (2019). https 
://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fonc.2019.00617. (Accessed 30 
December 2022). 
[149] J. Rao, Z. Zhou, J. Yang, Y. Shi, S. Xu, B. Wang, Y. Ping, L. Chen, Y. Cui, X. Zhang, 
F. Wu, X. Bian, Semaphorin-3F suppresses the stemness of colorectal cancer cells 
by inactivating Rac1, Cancer Lett. 358 (2015) 76–84, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
canlet.2014.12.040. 
[150] H. Li, X. Sun, J. Li, W. Liu, G. Pan, A. Mao, J. Liu, Q. Zhang, L. Rao, X. Xie, 
X. Sheng, Hypoxia induces docetaxel resistance in triple-negative breast cancer 
via the HIF-1α/miR-494/Survivin signaling pathway, Neoplasia 32 (2022) 
100821, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neo.2022.100821. 
[151] Y. Shirai, C.C.T. Chow, G. Kambe, T. Suwa, M. Kobayashi, I. Takahashi, 
H. Harada, J.-M. Nam, An overview of the recent development of anticancer 
agents targeting the HIF-1 transcription factor, Cancers 13 (2021) 2813, https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/cancers13112813. 
[152] S. Scialla, M.S. Hanafy, J.-L. Wang, N. Genicio, M. Costa Da Silva, M. Costa, 
S. Oliveira-Pinto, F. Baltazar, J. Gallo, Z. Cui, M. Ba˜nobre-L´opez, Targeted 
treatment of triple-negative-breast cancer through pH-triggered tumour 
associated macrophages using smart theranostic nanoformulations, Int. J. Pharm. 
632 (2023) 122575, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2022.122575. 
[153] S.M.A. Kormi, G. Motalleb, Gene Therapy in Breast Cancer, vol. 3, The Cancer 
Press, 2017, p. 16, https://doi.org/10.15562/tcp.39. 
[154] H.K.E. Boxhorn, S.L. Eck, Gene Theraphy for Breast Cancer, (n.d.).. 
[155] G.G. Dhakad, S.P. Shirsat, K.P. Tmabe, N.R. Jaiswal, Review on Gene Therapy on 
Cancer, RJPPD, 2022, pp. 37–42, https://doi.org/10.52711/2321- 
5836.2022.00006. 
[156] X. Liu, J. Sun, J. Gu, L. Weng, X. Wang, L. Zhu, Q. Luo, Z. Chen, Effective drug and 
shRNA delivery for synergistic treatment of triple-negative breast cancer by 
sequentially targeting tumor hypoxia, Chem. Eng. J. 470 (2023) 144271, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2023.144271. 
[157] M. Sheikh-Hosseini, B. Larijani, Z. Gholipoor Kakroodi, M. Shokoohi, 
M. Moarefzadeh, F.A. Sayahpour, P. Goodarzi, B. Arjmand, Gene therapy as an 
emerging therapeutic approach to breast cancer: new developments and 
challenges, Hum. Gene Ther. 199 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1089/ 
hum.2020.199 hum.2020. 
[158] R. Wang, T. Zhou, W. Liu, L. Zuo, Molecular mechanism of bystander effects and 
related abscopal/cohort effects in cancer therapy, Oncotarget 9 (2018) 
18637–18647, https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.24746. 
[159] Y. Guan, Y. Liu, Q. Zou, Q. He, Z. La, L. Yang, Y. Hu, Adenovirus-mediated wild- 
type p53 gene transfer in combination with bronchial arterial infusion for 
treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer, one year follow-up, J. Zhejiang 
Univ. - Sci. B 10 (2009) 331–340, https://doi.org/10.1631/jzus.B0820248. 
[160] M.A. Stoff-Khalili, P. Dall, D.T. Curiel, Gene therapy for carcinoma of the breast, 
Cancer Gene Ther. 13 (2006) 633–647, https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cgt.7700929. 
[161] M. Monta˜no-Samaniego, D.M. Bravo-Estupi˜nan, O. M´endez-Guerrero, E. Alarc´on- 
Hern´andez, M. Ib´a˜nez-Hern´andez, Strategies for targeting gene therapy in cancer 
cells with tumor-specific promoters, Front. Oncol. 10 (2020) 605380, https://doi. 
org/10.3389/fonc.2020.605380. 
[162] D. Roychowdhury, M. Lahn, Antisense therapy directed to protein kinase C-alpha 
(affinitak, LY900003/ISIS 3521): potential role in breast cancer, Semin. Oncol. 30 
(2003) 30–33, https://doi.org/10.1053/sonc.2003.37273. 
[163] H. McCarthy, C. McCrudden, Current Status of Gene Therapy for Breast Cancer: 
Progress and Challenges, TACG, 2014, p. 209, https://doi.org/10.2147/TACG. 
S54992. 
[164] P.-I. Huang, W.-L. Lo, J.-Y. Cherng, Y. Chien, G.-Y. Chiou, S.-H. Chiou, Non-Viral 
delivery of RNA interference targeting cancer cells in cancer gene therapy, CGT 
12 (2012) 275–284, https://doi.org/10.2174/156652312802083576. 
[165] R. Bora, RNA interference therapeutics for cancer: challenges and opportunities, 
Mol. Med. Rep. (2012), https://doi.org/10.3892/mmr.2012.871. 
[166] J. Mulhbacher, P. St-Pierre, D.A. Lafontaine, Therapeutic applications of 
ribozymes and riboswitches, Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 10 (2010) 551–556, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.coph.2010.07.002. 
[167] J.J. Rossi, D. Elkins, J.A. Zaia, S. Sullivan, Ribozymes as anti-HIV-1 therapeutic 
agents: principles, applications, and problems, AIDS Res. Hum. Retrovir. 8 (1992) 
183–189, https://doi.org/10.1089/aid.1992.8.183. 
[168] I. Niculescu-Duvaz, C.J. Springer, Introduction to the background, principles, and 
state of the art in suicide gene therapy, Suicide Gene Therapy 30 (2005). 
[169] M. Malecki, Frontiers in suicide gene therapy of cancer, J. Genet. Syndr. Gene 
Ther. 3 (2012), https://doi.org/10.4172/2157-7412.1000119. 
[170] J. Zhang, V. Kale, M. Chen, Gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy, AAPS J. 17 
(2015) 102–110, https://doi.org/10.1208/s12248-014-9675-7. 
[171] D. Amaechi, I.P. Ekpe, B.N. Yisa, A Short Review of Recent Advances in Cancer 
Gene Therapy in Relation to Chemotherapy for the Treatment of Breast and 
Prostate Cancer, vol. 2, 2022. 
[172] B. Shanmugaraj, L.B. Priya, B. Mahalakshmi, S. Subbiah, R.-M. Hu, B. 
K. Velmurugan, R. Baskaran, Bacterial and viral vectors as vaccine delivery 
vehicles for breast cancer therapy, Life Sci. 250 (2020) 117550, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.lfs.2020.117550. 
[173] A. Zargar, S. Chang, A. Kothari, A.M. Snijders, J. Mao, J. Wang, A.C. Hern´andez, 
J.D. Keasling, T.G. Bivona, Overcoming the challenges of cancer drug resistance 
through bacterial-mediated therapy, Chronic Diseases and Translational Medicine 
5 (2019) 258–266, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cdtm.2019.11.001. 
[174] W.B. Coley, The treatment of inoperable sarcoma by bacterial toxins (the mixed 
toxins of the Streptococcus erysipelas and the Bacillus prodigiosus), Proc. Roy. 
Soc. Med. 3 (1910) 1–48. 
[175] M. Sedighi, A. Zahedi Bialvaei, M.R. Hamblin, E. Ohadi, A. Asadi, M. Halajzadeh, 
V. Lohrasbi, N. Mohammadzadeh, T. Amiriani, M. Krutova, A. Amini, E. Kouhsari, 
Therapeutic Bacteria to Combat Cancer; Current Advances, Challenges, and 
Opportunities, Cancer Med, 2019, https://doi.org/10.1002/cam4.2148 
cam4.2148. 
[176] N.S. Forbes, Engineering the perfect (bacterial) cancer therapy, Nat. Rev. Cancer 
10 (2010) 785–794, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc2934. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
32
[177] S.-H. Park, J.H. Zheng, V.H. Nguyen, S.-N. Jiang, D.-Y. Kim, M. Szardenings, J. 
H. Min, Y. Hong, H.E. Choy, J.-J. Min, RGD peptide cell-surface display enhances 
the targeting and therapeutic efficacy of attenuated Salmonella -mediated cancer 
therapy, Theranostics 6 (2016) 1672–1682, https://doi.org/10.7150/ 
thno.16135. 
[178] S.H. Kim, F. Castro, Y. Paterson, C. Gravekamp, High efficacy of a Listeria -based 
vaccine against metastatic breast cancer reveals a dual mode of action, Cancer 
Res. 69 (2009) 5860–5866, https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4855. 
[179] A.K. Mitra, V. Agrahari, A. Mandal, K. Cholkar, C. Natarajan, S. Shah, M. Joseph, 
H.M. Trinh, R. Vaishya, X. Yang, Y. Hao, V. Khurana, D. Pal, Novel delivery 
approaches for cancer therapeutics, J. Contr. Release 219 (2015) 248–268, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.09.067. 
[180] T. Yamada, Y. Hiraoka, M. Ikehata, K. Kimbara, B.S. Avner, T.K. Das Gupta, A. 
M. Chakrabarty, Apoptosis or growth arrest: modulation of tumor suppressor 
p53’s specificity by bacterial redox protein azurin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
101 (2004) 4770–4775, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0400899101. 
[181] Y. Li, J. Wu, X. Qiu, S. Dong, J. He, J. Liu, W. Xu, S. Huang, X. Hu, D.-X. Xiang, 
Bacterial outer membrane vesicles-based therapeutic platform eradicates triple- 
negative breast tumor by combinational photodynamic/chemo-/immunotherapy, 
Bioact. Mater. 20 (2023) 548–560, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bioactmat.2022.05.037. 
[182] S. Ganai, R.B. Arenas, N.S. Forbes, Tumour-targeted delivery of TRAIL using 
Salmonella typhimurium enhances breast cancer survival in mice, Br. J. Cancer 
101 (2009) 1683–1691, https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bjc.6605403. 
[183] K. Yazawa, M. Fujimori, T. Nakamura, T. Sasaki, J. Amano, Y. Kano, S. Taniguchi, 
Bifidobacterium longum as a delivery system for gene therapy of chemically 
induced rat mammary tumors, Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 66 (2001) 165–170, 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010644217648. 
[184] S.L. Kominsky, M. Vali, D. Korz, T.G. Gabig, S.A. Weitzman, P. Argani, 
S. Sukumar, Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin elicits rapid and specific 
cytolysis of breast carcinoma cells mediated through tight junction proteins 
claudin 3 and 4, Am. J. Pathol. 164 (2004) 1627–1633, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0002-9440(10)63721-2. 
[185] S.A. El-Atti, K. Wasicek, S. Mark, R. Hegazi, Use of probiotics in the management 
of chemotherapy-induced diarrhea: a case study, JPEN - J. Parenter. Enter. Nutr. 
33 (2009) 569–570, https://doi.org/10.1177/0148607109332004. 
[186] T. He, L. Wang, S. Gou, L. Lu, G. Liu, K. Wang, Y. Yang, Q. Duan, W. Geng, 
P. Zhao, Z. Luo, K. Cai, Enhanced immunogenic cell death and antigen 
presentation via engineered Bifidobacterium bifidum to boost chemo- 
immunotherapy, ACS Nano 17 (2023) 9953–9971, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.2c11474. 
[187] D. Wu, M. Si, H.-Y. Xue, H.L. Wong, Nanomedicine applications in the treatment 
of breast cancer: current state of the art, IJN 12 (2017) 5879–5892, https://doi. 
org/10.2147/IJN.S123437. 
[188] K. Hou, Nanomaterial technology and triple negative breast cancer, Front. Oncol. 
11 (2022). 
[189] J.K. Patra, G. Das, L.F. Fraceto, E.V.R. Campos, M. del P. Rodriguez-Torres, L. 
S. Acosta-Torres, L.A. Diaz-Torres, R. Grillo, M.K. Swamy, S. Sharma, 
S. Habtemariam, H.-S. Shin, Nano based drug delivery systems: recent 
developments and future prospects, J. Nanobiotechnol. 16 (2018) 71, https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s12951-018-0392-8. 
[190] M. Afzal, Ameeduzzafar, K.S. Alharbi, N.K. Alruwaili, F.A. Al-Abassi, A.A.L. Al- 
Malki, I. Kazmi, V. Kumar, M.A. Kamal, M.S. Nadeem, M. Aslam, F. Anwar, 
Nanomedicine in treatment of breast cancer – a challenge to conventional 
therapy, Semin. Cancer Biol. 69 (2021) 279–292, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
semcancer.2019.12.016. 
[191] S. Jagadish Shetty, M.P. Shilpa, S. Shirish Bhat, K.S. Pavithra, S. Moorkoth, 
A. Gupta, S. Surabhi, R.C. Shivamurthy, S.C. Gurumurthy, Surface functionalized 
multi-wall carbon nanotubes for degradation of organic dyes, Mater. Chem. Phys. 
311 (2024) 128566, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2023.128566. 
[192] A. Chaudhuri, D.N. Kumar, R.A. Shaik, B.G. Eid, A.B. Abdel-Naim, S. Md, 
A. Ahmad, A.K. Agrawal, Lipid-based nanoparticles as a pivotal delivery approach 
in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) therapy, Indian J. Manag. Sci. 23 (2022) 
10068, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms231710068. 
[193] Y. Liu, K. Tiruthani, M. Wang, X. Zhou, N. Qiu, Y. Xiong, C.V. Pecot, R. Liu, 
L. Huang, Tumor-targeted gene therapy with lipid nanoparticles inhibits tumor- 
associated adipocytes and remodels the immunosuppressive tumor 
microenvironment in triple-negative breast cancer, Nanoscale Horiz 6 (2021) 
319–329, https://doi.org/10.1039/D0NH00588F. 
[194] C. Yan, J. Zhang, M. Huang, J. Xiao, N. Li, T. Wang, R. Ling, Design, strategies, 
and therapeutics in nanoparticle-based siRNA delivery systems for breast cancer, 
J. Mater. Chem. B (2023), https://doi.org/10.1039/D3TB00278K. 
[195] G. Zheng, M. Zheng, B. Yang, H. Fu, Y. Li, Improving breast cancer therapy using 
doxorubicin loaded solid lipid nanoparticles: synthesis of a novel arginine- 
glycine-aspartic tripeptide conjugated, pH sensitive lipid and evaluation of the 
nanomedicine in vitro and in vivo, Biomed. Pharmacother. 116 (2019) 109006, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2019.109006. 
[196] Y. Si, Y. Zhang, H.G. Ngo, J.-S. Guan, K. Chen, Q. Wang, A.P. Singh, Y. Xu, 
L. Zhou, E.S. Yang, X. Margaret Liu, Targeted liposomal chemotherapies to treat 
triple-negative breast cancer, Cancers 13 (2021) 3749, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
cancers13153749. 
[197] P. Yingchoncharoen, D.S. Kalinowski, D.R. Richardson, Lipid-based drug delivery 
systems in cancer therapy: what is available and what is yet to come, Pharmacol. 
Rev. 68 (2016) 701–787, https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.115.012070. 
[198] S. Dong, Y. Bi, X. Sun, Y. Zhao, R. Sun, F. Hao, Y. Sun, Y. Wang, X. Li, W. Deng, 
X. Liu, J. Ha, L. Teng, P. Gong, J. Xie, B.Y.S. Kim, Z. Yang, W. Jiang, L. Teng, Dual- 
loaded liposomes tagged with hyaluronic acid have synergistic effects in triple- 
negative breast cancer, Small 18 (2022) 2107690, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
smll.202107690. 
[199] J.A. Duarte, E.R. Gomes, A.L.B. De Barros, E.A. Leite, Co-encapsulation of 
simvastatin and doxorubicin into pH-sensitive liposomes enhances antitumoral 
activity in breast cancer cell lines, Pharmaceutics 15 (2023) 369, https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/pharmaceutics15020369. 
[200] T. Xia, Q. He, K. Shi, Y. Wang, Q. Yu, L. Zhang, Q. Zhang, H. Gao, L. Ma, J. Liu, 
Losartan loaded liposomes improve the antitumor efficacy of liposomal paclitaxel 
modified with pH sensitive peptides by inhibition of collagen in breast cancer, 
Pharmaceut. Dev. Technol. 23 (2018) 13–21, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10837450.2016.1265553. 
[201] M.C.O. da Rocha, P.B. da Silva, M.A. Radicchi, B.Y.G. Andrade, J.V. de Oliveira, 
T. Venus, C. Merker, I. Estrela-Lopis, J.P.F. Longo, S.N. B´ao, Docetaxel-loaded 
solid lipid nanoparticles prevent tumor growth and lung metastasis of 4T1 murine 
mammary carcinoma cells, J. Nanobiotechnol. 18 (2020) 43, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s12951-020-00604-7. 
[202] M. Hatami, M. Kouchak, A. Kheirollah, L. Khorsandi, M. Rashidi, Effective 
inhibition of breast cancer stem cell properties by quercetin-loaded solid lipid 
nanoparticles via reduction of Smad2/Smad3 phosphorylation and β-catenin 
signaling pathway in triple-negative breast cancer, Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 664 (2023) 69–76, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2023.03.077. 
[203] S. Khan, S. Baboota, J. Ali, S. Khan, R. Narang, J. Narang, Nanostructured lipid 
carriers: an emerging platform for improving oral bioavailability of lipophilic 
drugs, Int J Pharma Investig 5 (2015) 182, https://doi.org/10.4103/2230- 
973X.167661. 
[204] H.-H. Chen, I.-L. Lu, T.-I. Liu, Y.-C. Tsai, W.-H. Chiang, S.-C. Lin, H.-C. Chiu, 
Indocyanine green/doxorubicin-encapsulated functionalized nanoparticles for 
effective combination therapy against human MDR breast cancer, Colloids Surf. B 
Biointerfaces 177 (2019) 294–305, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfb.2019.02.001. 
[205] G.S.M. Borges, J. de O. Silva, R.S. Fernandes, ˆA.M. de Souza, G.D. Cassali, M. 
I. Yoshida, E.A. Leite, A.L.B. de Barros, L.A.M. Ferreira, Sclareol is a potent 
enhancer of doxorubicin: evaluation of the free combination and co-loaded 
nanostructured lipid carriers against breast cancer, Life Sci. 232 (2019) 116678, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2019.116678. 
[206] J. Varshosaz, M.A. Davoudi, S. Rasoul-Amini, Docetaxel-loaded nanostructured 
lipid carriers functionalized with trastuzumab (Herceptin) for HER2-positive 
breast cancer cells, J. Liposome Res. 28 (2018) 285–295, https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/08982104.2017.1370471. 
[207] C.E. Okuyucu, G.D. Kalaycioglu, D. Kacaroglu, A.K. Ozden, N. Aydogan, Trojan- 
like doxorubicin and gold nanoparticle entrapped smart nanostructured lipid 
carriers for breast cancer synergistic chemo/photothermal therapy, Colloids Surf. 
A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 672 (2023) 131763, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfa.2023.131763. 
[208] Z.C. Soe, J.B. Kwon, R.K. Thapa, W. Ou, H.T. Nguyen, M. Gautam, K.T. Oh, H.- 
G. Choi, S.K. Ku, C.S. Yong, J.O. Kim, Transferrin-conjugated polymeric 
nanoparticle for receptor-mediated delivery of doxorubicin in doxorubicin- 
resistant breast cancer cells, Pharmaceutics 11 (2019) 63, https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/pharmaceutics11020063. 
[209] A. Gupta, S. Shetty, S. Mutalik, R. Chandrashekar H, N. K, E.M. Mathew, A. Jha, 
B. Mishra, S. Rajpurohit, G. Ravi, M. Saha, S. Moorkoth, Treatment of H. pylori 
infection and gastric ulcer: need for novel Pharmaceutical formulation, Heliyon 9 
(2023) e20406, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e20406. 
[210] J.K. Grewal, B. Tessier-Cloutier, M. Jones, S. Gakkhar, Y. Ma, R. Moore, A. 
J. Mungall, Y. Zhao, M.D. Taylor, K. Gelmon, H. Lim, D. Renouf, J. Laskin, 
M. Marra, S. Yip, S.J.M. Jones, Application of a neural network whole 
transcriptome–based pan-cancer method for diagnosis of primary and metastatic 
cancers, JAMA Netw. Open 2 (2019) e192597, https://doi.org/10.1001/ 
jamanetworkopen.2019.2597. 
[211] H.A. Almoustafa, M.A. Alshawsh, F.S.R. Al-Suede, S.A. Alshehade, A.M.S. Abdul 
Majid, Z. Chik, The chemotherapeutic efficacy of hyaluronic acid coated 
polymeric nanoparticles against breast cancer metastasis in female NCr-Nu/Nu 
nude mice, Polymers 15 (2023) 284, https://doi.org/10.3390/polym15020284. 
[212] S. Enteshari, J. Varshosaz, M. Minayian, F. Hassanzadeh, Antitumor activity of 
raloxifene-targeted poly(styrene maleic acid)-poly (amide-ether-ester-imide) co- 
polymeric nanomicelles loaded with docetaxel in breast cancer-bearing mice, 
Invest. N. Drugs 36 (2018) 206–216, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10637-017-0533- 
1. 
[213] V. Junnuthula, P. Kolimi, D. Nyavanandi, S. Sampathi, L.K. Vora, 
S. Dyawanapelly, Polymeric micelles for breast cancer therapy: recent updates, 
clinical translation and regulatory considerations, Pharmaceutics 14 (2022) 1860, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14091860. 
[214] C. Lim, D. Hwang, M. Yazdimamaghani, H.M. Atkins, H. Hyun, Y. Shin, J. 
D. Ramsey, C.M. Perou, M. Sokolsky-Papkov, A.V. Kabanov, High-dose paclitaxel 
and its combination with CSF1R inhibitor in polymeric micelles for 
chemoimmunotherapy of triple negative breast cancer, Cancer Biology (2022), 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.12.503695. 
[215] C. Lim, J.D. Ramsey, D. Hwang, S.C.M. Teixeira, C. Poon, J.D. Strauss, E.P. Rosen, 
M. Sokolsky-Papkov, A.V. Kabanov, Drug-dependent morphological transitions in 
spherical and worm-like polymeric micelles define stability and pharmacological 
performance of micellar drugs, Small 18 (2022) 2103552, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/smll.202103552. 
[216] R. Zuo, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, S. Hu, X. Song, X. Gao, J. Gong, H. Ji, F. Yang, L. Peng, 
K. Fang, Y. Lv, J. Zhang, S. Jiang, D. Guo, Orally administered halofuginone- 
loaded TPGS polymeric micelles against triple-negative breast cancer: enhanced 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
33
absorption and efficacy with reduced toxicity and metastasis, IJN 17 (2022) 
2475–2491, https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S352538. 
[217] C. Lim, D. Hwang, M. Yazdimamaghani, H.M. Atkins, H. Hyun, Y. Shin, J. 
D. Ramsey, P.D. R¨adler, K.R. Mott, C.M. Perou, M. Sokolsky-Papkov, A. 
V. Kabanov, High-dose paclitaxel and its combination with CSF1R inhibitor in 
polymeric micelles for chemoimmunotherapy of triple negative breast cancer, 
Nano Today 51 (2023) 101884, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2023.101884. 
[218] D.A. Shah, S.B. Murdande, R.H. Dave, A review: pharmaceutical and 
pharmacokinetic aspect of nanocrystalline suspensions, J. Pharmaceut. Sci. 105 
(2016) 10–24, https://doi.org/10.1002/jps.24694. 
[219] L. Chen, L. Wang, H. Shen, H. Lin, D. Li, Anthelminthic drug niclosamide 
sensitizes the responsiveness of cervical cancer cells to paclitaxel via oxidative 
stress-mediated mTOR inhibition, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 484 (2017) 
416–421, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.01.140. 
[220] D. Zhao, C. Hu, Q. Fu, H. Lv, Combined chemotherapy for triple negative breast 
cancer treatment by paclitaxel and niclosamide nanocrystals loaded 
thermosensitive hydrogel, Eur. J. Pharmaceut. Sci. 167 (2021) 105992, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ejps.2021.105992. 
[221] V. Jain, H. Kumar, H.V. Anod, P. Chand, N.V. Gupta, S. Dey, S.S. Kesharwani, 
A review of nanotechnology-based approaches for breast cancer and triple- 
negative breast cancer, J. Contr. Release 326 (2020) 628–647, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jconrel.2020.07.003. 
[222] I. Nahvi, S. Belkahla, S. Biswas, S. Chakraborty, A review on nanocarrier mediated 
treatment and management of triple negative breast cancer: a Saudi Arabian 
scenario, Front. Oncol. 12 (2022) 953865, https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fonc.2022.953865. 
[223] T. Kong, J. Zeng, X. Wang, X. Yang, J. Yang, S. McQuarrie, A. McEwan, W. Roa, 
J. Chen, J.Z. Xing, Enhancement of radiation cytotoxicity in breast-cancer cells by 
localized attachment of gold nanoparticles, Small 4 (2008) 1537–1543, https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/smll.200700794. 
[224] V. Thakur, R.V. Kutty, Recent advances in nanotheranostics for triple negative 
breast cancer treatment, J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 38 (2019) 430, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s13046-019-1443-1. 
[225] D. Guo, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Huang, Q. Ding, Z. Guo, X. Zhou, L. Zhu, 
N. Gu, The cellular uptake and cytotoxic effect of silver nanoparticles on chronic 
myeloid leukemia cells, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 10 (2014) 669–678, https://doi. 
org/10.1166/jbn.2014.1625. 
[226] S. Sharma, S. Chockalingam, P. Sanpui, A. Chattopadhyay, S.S. Ghosh, Silver 
nanoparticles impregnated alginate-chitosan-blended nanocarrier induces 
apoptosis in human glioblastoma cells, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 3 (2014) 106–114, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201300090. 
[227] G. Baskar, J. Chandhuru, K. Sheraz Fahad, A.S. Praveen, M. Chamundeeswari, 
T. Muthukumar, Anticancer activity of fungal l-asparaginase conjugated with zinc 
oxide nanoparticles, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 26 (2015) 43, https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10856-015-5380-z. 
[228] S. Hackenberg, A. Scherzed, W. Harnisch, K. Froelich, C. Ginzkey, C. Koehler, 
R. Hagen, N. Kleinsasser, Antitumor activity of photo-stimulated zinc oxide 
nanoparticles combined with paclitaxel or cisplatin in HNSCC cell lines, 
J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 114 (2012) 87–93, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jphotobiol.2012.05.014. 
[229] H. Meng, W.X. Mai, H. Zhang, M. Xue, T. Xia, S. Lin, X. Wang, Y. Zhao, Z. Ji, J. 
I. Zink, A.E. Nel, Codelivery of an optimal drug/siRNA combination using 
mesoporous silica nanoparticles to overcome drug resistance in breast cancer in 
vitro and in vivo, ACS Nano 7 (2013) 994–1005, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
nn3044066. 
[230] V.P. Torchilin, Recent advances with liposomes as pharmaceutical carriers, Nat. 
Rev. Drug Discov. 4 (2005) 145–160, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd1632. 
[231] A. Nikdouz, N. Namarvari, R.G. Shayan, A. Hosseini, Comprehensive Comparison 
of Theranostic Nanoparticles in Breast Cancer, (n.d.). 
[232] N. Vahidfar, A. Aghanejad, H. Ahmadzadehfar, S. Farzanehfar, E. Eppard, 
Theranostic advances in breast cancer in nuclear medicine, Indian J. Manag. Sci. 
22 (2021) 4597, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22094597. 
[233] P. Kumari, B. Ghosh, S. Biswas, Nanocarriers for cancer-targeted drug delivery, 
J. Drug Target. 24 (2016) 179–191, https://doi.org/10.3109/ 
1061186X.2015.1051049. 
[234] H. Choi, K. Kim, Theranostics for triple-negative breast cancer, Diagnostics 13 
(2023) 272, https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13020272. 
[235] A. Valizadeh, H. Mikaeili, M. Samiei, S.M. Farkhani, N. Zarghami, M. kouhi, 
A. Akbarzadeh, S. Davaran, Quantum dots: synthesis, bioapplications, and 
toxicity, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 7 (2012) 480, https://doi.org/10.1186/1556-276X- 
7-480. 
[236] A. Li Volsi, C. Fiorica, M. D’Amico, C. Scialabba, F.S. Palumbo, G. Giammona, 
M. Licciardi, Hybrid Gold/Silica/Quantum-Dots supramolecular-nanostructures 
encapsulated in polymeric micelles as potential theranostic tool for targeted 
cancer therapy, Eur. Polym. J. 105 (2018) 38–47, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eurpolymj.2018.05.013. 
[237] L.D. Olerile, Y. Liu, B. Zhang, T. Wang, S. Mu, J. Zhang, L. Selotlegeng, N. Zhang, 
Near-infrared mediated quantum dots and paclitaxel co-loaded nanostructured 
lipid carriers for cancer theragnostic, Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 150 (2017) 
121–130, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2016.11.032. 
[238] Z. Liu, H. Lin, M. Zhao, C. Dai, S. Zhang, W. Peng, Y. Chen, 2D superparamagnetic 
tantalum carbide composite MXenes for efficient breast-cancer theranostics, 
Theranostics 8 (2018) 1648–1664, https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.23369. 
[239] M.J. Choi, Y.K. Lee, K.C. Choi, D.H. Lee, H.Y. Jeong, S.J. Kang, M.W. Kim, Y. 
M. You, C.S. Im, T.S. Lee, Y.S. Park, Tumor-targeted erythrocyte membrane 
nanoparticles for theranostics of triple-negative breast cancer, Pharmaceutics 15 
(2023) 350, https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics15020350. 
[240] R.S. Tade, P.O. Patil, Theranostic prospects of graphene quantum dots in breast 
cancer, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 6 (2020) 5987–6008, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsbiomaterials.0c01045. 
[241] L. Li, J. Li, R. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Ding, G. Ren, W. Liu, H. Wang, B. Wang, C. Zhang, 
H. Diao, Tumor cell targeting and responsive nanoplatform for multimodal- 
imaging guided chemodynamic/photodynamic/photothermal therapy toward 
triple negative breast cancer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15 (2023) 
27706–27718, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.3c04709. 
[242] Breast cancer expert panel of the German Society of Radiation Oncology 
(DEGRO), D. Krug, R. Baumann, W. Budach, J. Dunst, P. Feyer, R. Fietkau, 
W. Haase, W. Harms, M.D. Piroth, M.-L. Sautter-Bihl, F. Sedlmayer, R. Souchon, 
F. Wenz, R. Sauer, Current controversies in radiotherapy for breast cancer, Radiat. 
Oncol. 12 (2017) 25, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13014-017-0766-3. 
[243] M. Varzandeh, J. Varshosaz, S. Labbaf, N. Esmaeil, Sodium-borohydride 
exfoliated bismuthene loaded with Mitomycin C for chemo-photo-radiotherapy of 
triple negative breast cancer, Int. J. Pharm. 636 (2023) 122825, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijpharm.2023.122825. 
[244] M.A. Thomas, L.L. Ochoa, T.M. Zygmunt, M. Matesa, M.B. Altman, J.L. Garcia- 
Ramirez, J. Esthappan, I. Zoberi, _ĐĐ˘Gů˘Gƌ˘Aƚ˘GˇE_W˘AƌƟ˘Aů__ƌ˘G˘AƐƚ_/ƌƌ˘AˇEˆs˘AƟˇZˆY͗ _ 
__^˘A˜I˘G͕ __¯ı˘GĐƟǀ˘G͕ _˘AˆYˇE__ˇZˆYǀ˘GˆYˆs˘GˆYƚ_ _˘AƌůǇ__ƌ˘G˘AƐƚ__˘AˆYĐ˘Gƌ_dƌ˘G˘Aƚˆw˘GˆYƚ_KƉƟˇZˆY, 
RADIATION ONCOLOGY (n.d).. 
[245] T. Forster, C.V.K. K¨ohler, J. Debus, J. H¨orner-Rieber, Accelerated partial breast 
irradiation: a new standard of care? Breast Care 15 (2020) 136–147, https://doi. 
org/10.1159/000506254. 
[246] B. Harry, H. Jean-Claude, P. Philip, S. Henk, Recurrence rates after treatment of 
breast cancer with standard radiotherapy with or without additional radiation, 
N. Engl. J. Med. 345 (2001) 1378–1387, https://doi.org/10.1056/ 
NEJMoa010874. 
[247] H. Bartelink, P. Maingon, P. Poortmans, C. Weltens, A. Fourquet, J. Jager, 
D. Schinagl, B. Oei, C. Rodenhuis, J.-C. Horiot, H. Struikmans, E. Van Limbergen, 
Y. Kirova, P. Elkhuizen, R. Bongartz, R. Miralbell, D. Morgan, J.-B. Dubois, 
V. Remouchamps, R.-O. Mirimanoff, S. Collette, L. Collette, Whole-breast 
irradiation with or without a boost for patients treated with breast-conserving 
surgery for early breast cancer: 20-year follow-up of a randomised phase 3 trial, 
Lancet Oncol. 16 (2015) 47–56, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(14)71156- 
8. 
[248] V. Strnad, O.J. Ott, G. Hildebrandt, D. Kauer-Dorner, H. Knauerhase, T. Major, 
J. Lyczek, J.L. Guinot, J. Dunst, C.G. Miguelez, P. Slampa, M. Allg¨auer, K. L¨ossl, 
B. Polat, G. Kov´acs, A.-R. Fischedick, T.G. Wendt, R. Fietkau, M. Hindemith, 
A. Resch, A. Kulik, L. Arribas, P. Niehoff, F. Guedea, A. Schlamann, R. P¨otter, 
C. Gall, M. Malzer, W. Uter, C. Polg´ar, 5-year results of accelerated partial breast 
irradiation using sole interstitial multicatheter brachytherapy versus whole-breast 
irradiation with boost after breast-conserving surgery for low-risk invasive and in- 
situ carcinoma of the female breast: a randomised, phase 3, non-inferiority trial, 
Lancet 387 (2016) 229–238, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00471-7. 
[249] S. Sumodhee, V. Strnad, J.-M. Hannoun-L´evi, Multicatheter interstitial 
brachytherapy for breast cancer, Cancer Radiother. 22 (2018) 341–344, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.canrad.2018.01.006. 
[250] E.E.R. Harris, W. Small, Intraoperative radiotherapy for breast cancer, Front. 
Oncol. 7 (2017) 317, https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2017.00317. 
[251] the TARGIT-A investigators, J.S. Vaidya, M. Bulsara, M. Baum, M. Alvarado, 
M. Bernstein, S. Massarut, C. Saunders, E. Sperk, F. Wenz, J.S. Tobias, 
Intraoperative radiotherapy for breast cancer: powerful evidence to change 
practice, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 18 (2021) 187–188, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41571-021-00471-7. 
[252] A. Pilar, M. Gupta, S. Ghosh Laskar, S. Laskar, Intraoperative radiotherapy: 
review of techniques and results, Ecancer 11 (2017), https://doi.org/10.3332/ 
ecancer.2017.750. 
[253] V. Zangouri, H. Nasrollahi, A. Taheri, M. Akrami, P. Arasteh, S.H. Hamedi, M. 
G. Johari, N. Karimaghaee, A. Ranjbar, M.Y. Karami, S. Tahmasebi, A. Mosalaei, 
A. Talei, Intraoperative radiation therapy for early stage breast cancer, BMC Surg. 
22 (2022) 26, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12893-021-01427-5. 
[254] M. Bruand, S. Renard, J. Salleron, E. Meknaci, C. Charra-Brunaud, D. Peiffert, 
Interstitial multi-catheter breast brachytherapy: technical aspects and experience 
feedback in a comprehensive cancer center, Cancer Radiother. 26 (2022) 
450–457, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canrad.2021.06.001. 
[255] H. Nosrati, M. Ghaffarlou, M. Salehiabar, N. Mousazadeh, F. Abhari, M. Barsbay, 
Y.N. Ertas, H. Rashidzadeh, A. Mohammadi, L. Nasehi, H. Rezaeejam, S. Davaran, 
A. Ramazani, J. Conde, H. Danafar, Magnetite and bismuth sulfide Janus 
heterostructures as radiosensitizers for in vivo enhanced radiotherapy in breast 
cancer, Biomater. Adv. 140 (2022) 213090, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bioadv.2022.213090. 
[256] D. Medeiros Torres, R. Jorge Koifman, S. da Silva Santos, Impact on fatigue of 
different types of physical exercise during adjuvant chemotherapy and 
radiotherapy in breast cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis, Support. Care 
Cancer 30 (2022) 4651–4662, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00520-022-06809-w. 
[257] N. Nafissi, M. Mohammadlou, M.E. Akbari, S.R. Mahdavi, M. Sheikh, M. Borji, 
E. Babaee, R. Baharlou, The impact of intraoperative radiotherapy on breast 
cancer: focus on the levels of angiogenic factors, World J. Surg. Oncol. 20 (2022) 
191, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12957-022-02653-8. 
[258] J. Tutzauer, M. Sj¨ostr¨om, E. Holmberg, P. Karlsson, F. Killander, L.M.F. Leeb- 
Lundberg, P. Malmstr¨om, E. Nim´eus, M. Fern¨o, A. J¨ogi, Breast cancer hypoxia in 
relation to prognosis and benefit from radiotherapy after breast-conserving 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
34
surgery in a large, randomised trial with long-term follow-up, Br. J. Cancer 126 
(2022) 1145–1156, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-021-01630-4. 
[259] A. Ashkbar, F. Rezaei, F. Attari, S. Ashkevarian, Treatment of breast cancer in 
vivo by dual photodynamic and photothermal approaches with the aid of 
curcumin photosensitizer and magnetic nanoparticles, Sci. Rep. 10 (2020) 21206, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-78241-1. 
[260] E. Osta´nska, D. Aebisher, D. Bartusik-Aebisher, The potential of photodynamic 
therapy in current breast cancer treatment methodologies, Biomed. 
Pharmacother. 137 (2021) 111302, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biopha.2021.111302. 
[261] S.M. Banerjee, S. El-Sheikh, A. Malhotra, C.A. Mosse, S. Parker, N.R. Williams, A. 
J. MacRobert, R. Hamoudi, S.G. Bown, M.R.S. Keshtgar, Photodynamic therapy in 
primary breast cancer, JCM 9 (2020) 483, https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9020483. 
[262] J.W. Kleinovink, M.F. Fransen, C.W. L¨owik, F. Ossendorp, Photodynamic-immune 
checkpoint therapy eradicates local and distant tumors by CD8+ T cells, Cancer 
Immunol. Res. 5 (2017) 832–838, https://doi.org/10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-17- 
0055. 
[263] M.J. Lamberti, Breast cancer as photodynamic therapy target: enhanced 
therapeutic efficiency by overview of tumor complexity, WJCO 5 (2014) 901, 
https://doi.org/10.5306/wjco.v5.i5.901. 
[264] B. Mansoori, A. Mohammadi, M. Amin Doustvandi, F. Mohammadnejad, 
F. Kamari, M.F. Gjerstorff, B. Baradaran, M.R. Hamblin, Photodynamic therapy 
for cancer: role of natural products, Photodiagnosis Photodyn. Ther. 26 (2019) 
395–404, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pdpdt.2019.04.033. 
[265] E.H. Kim, S. Park, Y.K. Kim, M. Moon, J. Park, K.J. Lee, S. Lee, Y.-P. Kim, Self- 
luminescent photodynamic therapy using breast cancer targeted proteins, Sci. 
Adv. 6 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aba3009 eaba3009. 
[266] L. Li, J. Li, R. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Ding, G. Ren, W. Liu, H. Wang, B. Wang, C. Zhang, 
H. Diao, Tumor cell targeting and responsive nanoplatform for multimodal- 
imaging guided chemodynamic/photodynamic/photothermal therapy toward 
triple negative breast cancer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15 (2023) 
27706–27718, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.3c04709. 
[267] M. Sharma, N. Mittapelly, V.T. Banala, S. Urandur, S. Gautam, D. Marwaha, 
N. Rai, N. Singh, A. Gupta, K. Mitra, P.R. Mishra, Amalgamated microneedle array 
bearing ribociclib-loaded transfersomes eradicates breast cancer via CD44 
targeting, Biomacromolecules 23 (2022) 661–675, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
biomac.1c01076. 
[268] S. Chen, J. Fan, F. Xiao, Y. Qin, Y. Long, L. Yuan, B. Liu, Erythrocyte membrane- 
camouflaged Prussian blue nanocomplexes for combinational therapy of triple- 
negative breast cancer, J. Mater. Chem. B 11 (2023) 2219–2233, https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/D2TB02289C. 
[269] M.B. Sporn, Approaches to Prevention of Epithelial Cancer during the 
Preneoplastic Period, 1976, p. 36. 
[270] M. Tazhibi, A. Feizi, Awareness levels about breast cancer risk factors, early 
warning signs, and screening and therapeutic approaches among Iranian adult 
women: a large population based study using latent class analysis, BioMed Res. 
Int. 2014 (2014) 1–9, https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/306352. 
[271] F. Anjum, N. Razvi, M.A. Masood, Breast cancer therapy: a mini review, MOJDDT 
1 (2017), https://doi.org/10.15406/mojddt.2017.01.00006. 
[272] N.P. Johnson, J.-L. Butour, G. Villani, F.L. Wimmer, M. Defais, V. Pierson, 
V. Brabec, Metal antitumor compounds: the mechanism of action of platinum 
complexes, in: E. Baulieu, D.T. Forman, M. Ingelman-Sundberg, L. Jaenicke, J. 
A. Kellen, Y. Nagai, G.F. Springer, L. Tr¨ager, L. Will-Shahab, J.L. Wittliff (Eds.), 
Ruthenium and Other Non-platinum Metal Complexes in Cancer Chemotherapy, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1989, pp. 1–24, https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-642-74760-1_1. 
[273] M. Martín, E. Díaz-Rubio, A. Casado, P. Santab´arbara, J.M. L´opez Vega, 
E. Adrover, L. Lenaz, Carboplatin: an active drug in metastatic breast cancer, 
J. Clin. Orthod. 10 (1992) 433–437, https://doi.org/10.1200/ 
JCO.1992.10.3.433. 
[274] E.A. Perez, V.J. Suman, K.M. Rowland, J.N. Ingle, M. Salim, C.L. Loprinzi, P. 
J. Flynn, J.A. Mailliard, C.G. Kardinal, J.E. Krook, A.R. Thrower, D.W. Visscher, 
R.B. Jenkins, Two concurrent phase II trials of paclitaxel/carboplatin/ 
trastuzumab (weekly or every-3-week schedule) as first-line therapy in women 
with HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer: NCCTG study 983252, Clin. 
Breast Cancer 6 (2005) 425–432, https://doi.org/10.3816/CBC.2005.n.047. 
[275] S.A. Waldman, W.K. Kraft, T.J. Nelson, A. Terzic, Clinical pharmacology: a 
paradigm for individualized medicine, Biomarkers Med. 3 (2009) 679–684, 
https://doi.org/10.2217/bmm.09.76. 
[276] F. Wang, N. Li, W. Wang, L. Ma, Y. Sun, H. Wang, J. Zhan, D. Yu, 
A multifunctional, highly biocompatible, and double-triggering caramelized 
nanotheranostic system loaded with Fe3O4 and DOX for combined chemo- 
photothermal therapy and real-time magnetic resonance imaging monitoring of 
triple negative breast cancer, Int. J. Nanomed. 18 (2023) 881–897, https://doi. 
org/10.2147/IJN.S393507. 
[277] H. Zhu, K. Yang, H. Yao, X. Chen, S. Yan, Y. He, Y. Cao, J. Luo, D. Wang, 
Multifunctional nanoplatform-mediated chemo-photothermal therapy combines 
immunogenic cell death with checkpoint blockade to combat triple-negative 
breast cancer and distant metastasis, Int. J. Nanomed. 18 (2023) 3109–3124, 
https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S408855. 
[278] Hassan, Chemotherapy for breast cancer, Oncol. Rep. 24 (2010), https://doi.org/ 
10.3892/or_00000963. 
[279] J.A. Sparano, Taxanes for breast cancer: an evidence-based review of randomized 
phase II and phase III trials, Clin. Breast Cancer 1 (2000) 32–40, https://doi.org/ 
10.3816/CBC.2000.n.002. 
[280] H.J. Burstein, J. Manola, J. Younger, L.M. Parker, C.A. Bunnell, R. Scheib, U. 
A. Matulonis, J.E. Garber, K.D. Clarke, L.N. Shulman, E.P. Winer, Docetaxel 
administered on a weekly basis for metastatic breast cancer, J. Clin. Orthod. 18 
(2000) 1212–1219, https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2000.18.6.1212. 
[281] G.L. Beretta, F. Zunino, Molecular mechanisms of anthracycline activity, in: 
K. Krohn (Ed.), Anthracycline Chemistry and Biology II, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 1–19, https://doi.org/10.1007/128_ 
2007_3. 
[282] J.L. Blum, V. Dieras, P.M. Lo Russo, J. Horton, O. Rutman, A. Buzdar, 
B. Osterwalder, Multicenter, Phase II study of capecitabine in taxane-pretreated 
metastatic breast carcinoma patients, Cancer 92 (2001) 1759–1768, https://doi. 
org/10.1002/1097-0142(20011001)92:7<1759::AID-CNCR1691>3.0.CO;2-A. 
[283] G.N. Hortobagyi, Developments in chemotherapy of breast cancer, Cancer 88 
(2000) 3073–3079, https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-0142(20000615)88:12+<
3073::AID-CNCR26>3.0.CO;2-R. 
[284] B.L. Weber, C. Vogel, S. Jones, H. Harvey, L. Hutchins, J. Bigley, J. Hohneker, 
Intravenous vinorelbine as first-line and second-line therapy in advanced breast 
cancer, J. Clin. Oncol. 13 (1995) 2722–2730, https://doi.org/10.1200/ 
JCO.1995.13.11.2722. 
[285] G. Iancu, D. Serban, C. Badiu, C. Tanasescu, M. Tudosie, C. Tudor, D. Costea, 
A. Zgura, R. Iancu, D. Vasile, Tyrosine kinase inhibitors in breast cancer, Exp. 
Ther. Med. 23 (2021) 114, https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2021.11037. 
[286] B.L. Salerni, D.J. Bates, T.C. Albershardt, C.H. Lowrey, A. Eastman, Vinblastine 
induces acute, cell cycle phase–independent apoptosis in some leukemias and 
lymphomas and can induce acute apoptosis in others when mcl-1 is suppressed, 
Mol. Cancer Therapeut. 9 (2010) 791–802, https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163. 
MCT-10-0028. 
[287] C. Kollmannsberger, K. Mross, A. Jakob, L. Kanz, C. Bokemeyer, Topotecan – a 
novel topoisomerase I inhibitor: pharmacology and clinical experience, Oncology 
56 (1999) 1–12, https://doi.org/10.1159/000011923. 
[288] F. Anjum, N. Razvi, U. Saeed, Effects of chemotherapy in breast cancer patients, 
Natl. j. Health Sci. 2 (2017) 67–74, https://doi.org/10.21089/njhs.22.0067. 
[289] S. Kashiwagi, M. Yashiro, T. Takashima, N. Aomatsu, K. Ikeda, Y. Ogawa, 
T. Ishikawa, K. Hirakawa, Advantages of adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with 
triple-negative breast cancer at Stage II: usefulness of prognostic markers E- 
cadherin and Ki67, Breast Cancer Res. 13 (2011) R122, https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
bcr3068. 
[290] C. Luo, P. Wang, S. He, J. Zhu, Y. Shi, J. Wang, Progress and prospect of 
immunotherapy for triple-negative breast cancer, Front. Oncol. 12 (2022) 
919072, https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2022.919072. 
[291] B.M. Smits, D. Sharma, D.J. Samuelson, S. Woditschka, B. Mau, J.D. Haag, M. 
N. Gould, The non-protein coding breast cancer susceptibility locus Mcs5a acts in 
a non-mammary cell-autonomous fashion through the immune system and 
modulates T-cell homeostasis and functions, Breast Cancer Res. 13 (2011) R81, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/bcr2933. 
[292] H. Katz, M. Alsharedi, Immunotherapy in triple-negative breast cancer, Med. 
Oncol. 35 (2018) 13, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12032-017-1071-6. 
[293] Y. Abdou, A. Goudarzi, J.X. Yu, S. Upadhaya, B. Vincent, L.A. Carey, 
Immunotherapy in triple negative breast cancer: beyond checkpoint inhibitors, 
Npj Breast Cancer 8 (2022) 121, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41523-022-00486-y. 
[294] P. Tarantino, C. Corti, P. Schmid, J. Cortes, E.A. Mittendorf, H. Rugo, S. 
M. Tolaney, G. Bianchini, F. Andr`e, G. Curigliano, Immunotherapy for early triple 
negative breast cancer: research agenda for the next decade, Npj Breast Cancer 8 
(2022) 23, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41523-022-00386-1. 
[295] C. Bernier, A. Soliman, M. Gravel, M. Dankner, P. Savage, K. Petrecca, M. Park, P. 
M. Siegel, G.C. Shore, A. Roulston, DZ-2384 has a superior preclinical profile to 
taxanes for the treatment of triple-negative breast cancer and is synergistic with 
anti-CTLA-4 immunotherapy, Anti Cancer Drugs 29 (2018) 774–785, https://doi. 
org/10.1097/CAD.0000000000000653. 
[296] V.A. Boussiotis, Molecular and biochemical aspects of the PD-1 checkpoint 
pathway, N. Engl. J. Med. 375 (2016) 1767–1778, https://doi.org/10.1056/ 
NEJMra1514296. 
[297] Y. Tokumaru, D. Joyce, K. Takabe, Current status and limitations of 
immunotherapy for breast cancer, Surgery 167 (2020) 628–630, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.surg.2019.09.018. 
[298] H.O. Alsaab, S. Sau, R. Alzhrani, K. Tatiparti, K. Bhise, S.K. Kashaw, A.K. Iyer, PD- 
1 and PD-L1 checkpoint signaling inhibition for cancer immunotherapy: 
mechanism, combinations, and clinical outcome, Front. Pharmacol. 8 (2017) 561, 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2017.00561. 
[299] J.R. Conway, E. Kofman, S.S. Mo, H. Elmarakeby, E. Van Allen, Genomics of 
response to immune checkpoint therapies for cancer: implications for precision 
medicine, Genome Med. 10 (2018) 93, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-018- 
0605-7. 
[300] T. Krieger, I. Pearson, J. Bell, J. Doherty, P. Robbins, Targeted literature review 
on use of tumor mutational burden status and programmed cell death ligand 1 
expression to predict outcomes of checkpoint inhibitor treatment, Diagn. Pathol. 
15 (2020) 6, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13000-020-0927-9. 
[301] Y. Zhang, X. Han, K. Wang, D. Liu, X. Ding, Z. Hu, J. Wang, Co-delivery 
nanomicelles for potentiating TNBC immunotherapy by synergetically reshaping 
CAFs-mediated tumor stroma and reprogramming immunosuppressive 
microenvironment, Int. J. Nanomed. 18 (2023) 4329–4346, https://doi.org/ 
10.2147/IJN.S418100. 
[302] E. Keshamma, A. Kumar, R. Jha, V.S. Amle, G.S. Dudhate, D. Patel, P. Saha, 
R. Kumar, Breast cancer treatment relying on herbal bioactive components, 
J. Res. Appl. Sci. Biotechnol. 1 (2022) 105–115, https://doi.org/10.55544/ 
jrasb.1.4.13. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
35
[303] Y. Baktiar Laskar, R. Meitei Lourembam, P. Behari Mazumder, Herbal remedies 
for breast cancer prevention and treatment, in: B. Abdul Rasool Hassan (Ed.), 
Medicinal Plants - Use in Prevention and Treatment of Diseases, IntechOpen, 
2020, https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.89669. 
[304] B.T. Hennessy, A.M. Gonzalez-Angulo, M.S. Carey, G.B. Mills, A systems approach 
to analysis of molecular complexity in breast cancer, Clin. Cancer Res. 15 (2009) 
417–419, https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2620. 
[305] O. Olaku, J.D. White, Herbal therapy use by cancer patients: a literature review 
on case reports, Eur. J. Cancer 47 (2011) 508–514, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ejca.2010.11.018. 
[306] M.J. Webb, C. Kukard, A review of natural therapies potentially relevant in triple 
negative breast cancer aimed at targeting cancer cell vulnerabilities, Integr. 
Cancer Ther. 19 (2020) 153473542097586, https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1534735420975861. 
[307] M. Shareef, M.A. Ashraf, M. Sarfraz, Natural cures for breast cancer treatment, 
Saudi Pharmaceut. J. 24 (2016) 233–240, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jsps.2016.04.018. 
[308] M. Shareef, M.A. Ashraf, M. Sarfraz, Natural cures for breast cancer treatment, 
Saudi Pharmaceut. J. 24 (2016) 233–240, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jsps.2016.04.018. 
[309] S. Mi, X. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Sun, S. Yuan, M. Cui, Y. Liu, Chinese medicine 
formula ‘Baipuhuang Keli’ inhibits triple-negative breast cancer by hindering 
DNA damage repair via MAPK/ERK pathway, J. Ethnopharmacol. 304 (2023) 
116077, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2022.116077. 
[310] S.N. Driggins, The Anti-carcinogenic Effect of Echinacea Purpurea and Echinacea 
Pallida on a Mammalian Breast Cancer Cell Line, ETD Collection for Tennessee 
State University, 2005, pp. 1–145. 
[311] D.A. Espinosa-Paredes, J. Cornejo-Garrido, M.A. Moreno-Eutimio, O.P. Martínez- 
Rodríguez, M.E. Jaramillo-Flores, C. Ordaz-Pichardo, Echinacea angustifolia DC 
extract induces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest and synergizes with paclitaxel in 
the MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast cancer cell lines, Nutr. Cancer 73 
(2021) 2287–2305, https://doi.org/10.1080/01635581.2020.1817956. 
[312] W.J. Craig, Health-promoting properties of common herbs, Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 70 
(1999) S491–S499, https://doi.org/10.1093/ajcn/70.3.491s. 
[313] A. Tsubura, Y.-C. Lai, M. Kuwata, N. Uehara, K. Yoshizawa, Anticancer effects of 
garlic and garlic-derived compounds for breast cancer control, ACAMC 11 (2011) 
249–253, https://doi.org/10.2174/187152011795347441. 
[314] A.S. Ombredane, V.R.P. Silva, L.R. Andrade, W.O. Pinheiro, M. Simonelly, J. 
V. Oliveira, A.C. Pinheiro, G.F. Gonçalves, G.J. Felice, M.P. Garcia, P.M. Campos, 
G.V.S. Luz, G.A. Joanitti, In vivo efficacy and toxicity of curcumin nanoparticles 
in breast cancer treatment: a systematic review, Front. Oncol. 11 (2021) 612903, 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2021.612903. 
[315] M.S. Donaldson, Nutrition and cancer: a review of the evidence for an anti-cancer 
diet, Nutr. J. 3 (2004) 19, https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2891-3-19. 
[316] J. Blasiak, E. Pawlowska, J. Chojnacki, J. Szczepanska, M. Fila, C. Chojnacki, 
Vitamin D in triple-negative and BRCA1-deficient breast cancer—implications for 
pathogenesis and therapy, Indian J. Manag. Sci. 21 (2020) 3670, https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/ijms21103670. 
[317] C.A. Wilhelm, Z.J. Clor, J.L. Kelts, Effect of vitamin D on paclitaxel efficacy in 
triple-negative breast cancer cell lines, Anticancer Res. 38 (2018) 5043–5048, 
https://doi.org/10.21873/anticanres.12823. 
[318] A. Rajkomar, J. Dean, I. Kohane, Machine learning in medicine, N. Engl. J. Med. 
380 (2019) 1347–1358, https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1814259. 
[319] H. Shimizu, K.I. Nakayama, Artificial intelligence in oncology, Cancer Sci. 111 
(2020) 1452–1460, https://doi.org/10.1111/cas.14377. 
[320] J.T. Shreve, S.A. Khanani, T.C. Haddad, Artificial Intelligence in Oncology: 
Current Capabilities, Future Opportunities, and Ethical Considerations, American 
Society of Clinical Oncology Educational Book, 2022, pp. 842–851, https://doi. 
org/10.1200/EDBK_350652. 
[321] K. Wang, X. Duan, F. Gao, W. Wang, L. Liu, X. Wang, Dissecting cancer 
heterogeneity based on dimension reduction of transcriptomic profiles using 
extreme learning machines, PLoS One 13 (2018) e0203824, https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0203824. 
[322] D. Uzun Ozsahin, D. Ikechukwu Emegano, B. Uzun, I. Ozsahin, The systematic 
review of artificial intelligence applications in breast cancer diagnosis, 
Diagnostics 13 (2022) 45, https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13010045. 
[323] L.R. Lamb, C.D. Lehman, A. Gastounioti, E.F. Conant, M. Bahl, Artificial 
intelligence (AI) for screening mammography, from the AJR special series on AI 
applications, Am. J. Roentgenol. 219 (2022) 369–380, https://doi.org/10.2214/ 
AJR.21.27071. 
[324] A. Stabile, F. Giganti, A.B. Rosenkrantz, S.S. Taneja, G. Villeirs, I.S. Gill, C. Allen, 
M. Emberton, C.M. Moore, V. Kasivisvanathan, Multiparametric MRI for prostate 
cancer diagnosis: current status and future directions, Nat. Rev. Urol. 17 (2020) 
41–61, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41585-019-0212-4. 
[325] Y. Liu, Y.-H. Zhu, C.-Q. Mao, S. Dou, S. Shen, Z.-B. Tan, J. Wang, Triple negative 
breast cancer therapy with CDK1 siRNA delivered by cationic lipid assisted PEG- 
PLA nanoparticles, J. Contr. Release 192 (2014) 114–121, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.07.001. 
[326] W. Alshaer, H. Hillaireau, J. Vergnaud, S. Mura, C. Delom´enie, F. Sauvage, 
S. Ismail, E. Fattal, Aptamer-guided siRNA-loaded nanomedicines for systemic 
gene silencing in CD-44 expressing murine triple-negative breast cancer model, 
J. Contr. Release 271 (2018) 98–106, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jconrel.2017.12.022. 
[327] J. Tang, C.B. Howard, S.M. Mahler, K.J. Thurecht, L. Huang, Z.P. Xu, Enhanced 
delivery of siRNA to triple negative breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo 
through functionalizing lipid-coated calcium phosphate nanoparticles with dual 
target ligands, Nanoscale 10 (2018) 4258–4266, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C7NR08644J. 
[328] A. Bhargava-Shah, K. Foygel, R. Devulapally, R. Paulmurugan, Orlistat and 
antisense-miRNA-loaded PLGA-PEG nanoparticles for enhanced triple negative 
breast cancer therapy, Nanomedicine 11 (2016) 235–247, https://doi.org/ 
10.2217/nnm.15.193. 
[329] W.J. Gradishar, B.O. Anderson, J. Abraham, R. Aft, D. Agnese, K.H. Allison, S. 
L. Blair, H.J. Burstein, C. Dang, A.D. Elias, S.H. Giordano, M.P. Goetz, L. 
J. Goldstein, S.J. Isakoff, J. Krishnamurthy, J. Lyons, P.K. Marcom, J. Matro, I. 
A. Mayer, M.S. Moran, J. Mortimer, R.M. O’Regan, S.A. Patel, L.J. Pierce, H. 
S. Rugo, A. Sitapati, K.L. Smith, M.L. Smith, H. Soliman, E.M. Stringer-Reasor, M. 
L. Telli, J.H. Ward, J.S. Young, J.L. Burns, R. Kumar, Breast cancer, version 
3.2020, NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology, J. Natl. Compr. Cancer 
Netw. 18 (2020) 452–478, https://doi.org/10.6004/jnccn.2020.0016. 
[330] F.O. Ademuyiwa, I. Chen, J. Luo, M.F. Rimawi, I.S. Hagemann, B. Fisk, G. Jeffers, 
Z.L. Skidmore, A. Basu, M. Richters, C.X. Ma, K. Weilbaecher, J. Davis, R. Suresh, 
L.L. Peterson, R. Bose, N. Bagegni, C.E. Rigden, A. Frith, T.P. Rearden, L. 
F. Hernandez-Aya, A. Roshal, K. Clifton, M. Opyrchal, O. Akintola-Ogunremi, B. 
H. Lee, S. Ferrando-Martinez, S.E. Church, M. Anurag, M.J. Ellis, F. Gao, 
W. Gillanders, O.L. Griffith, M. Griffith, Immunogenomic profiling and 
pathological response results from a clinical trial of docetaxel and carboplatin in 
triple-negative breast cancer, Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 189 (2021) 187–202, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-021-06307-3. 
[331] R. Pradhan, A. Dey, R. Taliyan, A. Puri, S. Kharavtekar, S.K. Dubey, Recent 
advances in targeted nanocarriers for the management of triple negative breast 
cancer, Pharmaceutics 15 (2023) 246, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
pharmaceutics15010246. 
[332] X. Han, Z. Song, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Deng, J. Qin, T. Zhang, Z. Jiang, 
Mitochondria-targeted high-load sound-sensitive micelles for sonodynamic 
therapy to treat triple-negative breast cancer and inhibit metastasis, Mater. Sci. 
Eng. C 124 (2021) 112054, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2021.112054. 
[333] X. Feng, C. Wu, W. Yang, J. Wu, P. Wang, Mechanism-based sonodynamic-chemo 
combinations against triple-negative breast cancer, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 (2022) 
7981, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23147981. 
[334] H. Chen, L. Liu, A. Ma, T. Yin, Z. Chen, R. Liang, Y. Qiu, M. Zheng, L. Cai, 
Noninvasively immunogenic sonodynamic therapy with manganese 
protoporphyrin liposomes against triple-negative breast cancer, Biomaterials 269 
(2021) 120639, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2020.120639. 
[335] D.M. Valcourt, M.N. Dang, E.S. Day, IR820-loaded PLGA nanoparticles for 
photothermal therapy of triple-negative breast cancer, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 107 
(2019) 1702–1712, https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.36685. 
[336] S. Zhao, Y. Tian, W. Liu, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, Z. Teng, Y. Zhao, S. Wang, G. Lu, Z. Yu, 
High and low molecular weight hyaluronic acid-coated gold nanobipyramids for 
photothermal therapy, RSC Adv. 8 (2018) 9023–9030, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C7RA11667E. 
[337] S. Wang, Y. Tian, W. Tian, J. Sun, S. Zhao, Y. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Tang, X. Ma, 
Z. Teng, G. Lu, Selectively sensitizing malignant cells to photothermal therapy 
using a CD44-targeting heat shock protein 72 depletion nanosystem, ACS Nano 10 
(2016) 8578–8590, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6b03874. 
[338] Y. Tian, M. Lei, Polydopamine-based composite nanoparticles with redox-labile 
polymer shells for controlled drug release and enhanced chemo-photothermal 
therapy, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 14 (2019) 186, https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671- 
019-3027-6. 
[339] S. Dees, R. Ganesan, S. Singh, I.S. Grewal, Bispecific antibodies for triple negative 
breast cancer, Trends in Cancer 7 (2021) 162–173, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
trecan.2020.09.004. 
[340] Z. Wang, S. Sau, H.O. Alsaab, A.K. Iyer, CD44 directed nanomicellar payload 
delivery platform for selective anticancer effect and tumor specific imaging of 
triple negative breast cancer, Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 14 (2018) 
1441–1454, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2018.04.004. 
[341] J. Lee, D.-M. Kim, A. Lee, Prognostic role and clinical association of tumor- 
infiltrating lymphocyte, programmed death ligand-1 expression with neutrophil- 
lymphocyte ratio in locally advanced triple-negative breast cancer, Cancer Res 
Treat 51 (2018) 649–663, https://doi.org/10.4143/crt.2018.270. 
[342] L.A. Mina, S. Lim, S.W. Bahadur, A.T. Firoz, Immunotherapy for the Treatment of 
Breast Cancer: Emerging New Data, Breast Cancer, vol. 11, Dove Med Press, 2019, 
pp. 321–328, https://doi.org/10.2147/BCTT.S184710. 
[343] X. Du, F. Tang, M. Liu, J. Su, Y. Zhang, W. Wu, M. Devenport, C.A. Lazarski, 
P. Zhang, X. Wang, P. Ye, C. Wang, E. Hwang, T. Zhu, T. Xu, P. Zheng, Y. Liu, 
A reappraisal of CTLA-4 checkpoint blockade in cancer immunotherapy, Cell Res. 
28 (2018) 416–432, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-018-0011-0. 
[344] C.S. Shemesh, C.W. Hardy, D.S. Yu, B. Fernandez, H. Zhang, Indocyanine green 
loaded liposome nanocarriers for photodynamic therapy using human triple 
negative breast cancer cells, Photodiagnosis Photodyn. Ther. 11 (2014) 193–203, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pdpdt.2014.02.001. 
[345] S. Sun, Y. Xu, P. Fu, M. Chen, S. Sun, R. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Liang, S. Wang, 
Ultrasound-targeted photodynamic and gene dual therapy for effectively 
inhibiting triple negative breast cancer by cationic porphyrin lipid microbubbles 
loaded with HIF1α-siRNA, Nanoscale 10 (2018) 19945–19956, https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/C8NR03074J. 
[346] Z. Zhao, Y. Li, R. Shukla, H. Liu, A. Jain, A. Barve, K. Cheng, Development of a 
biocompatible copolymer nanocomplex to deliver VEGF siRNA for triple negative 
breast cancer, Theranostics 9 (2019) 4508–4524, https://doi.org/10.7150/ 
thno.34314. 
[347] S. Ghosh, A. Javia, S. Shetty, D. Bardoliwala, K. Maiti, S. Banerjee, A. Khopade, 
A. Misra, K. Sawant, S. Bhowmick, Triple negative breast cancer and non-small 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
36
cell lung cancer: clinical challenges and nano-formulation approaches, J. Contr. 
Release 337 (2021) 27–58, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2021.07.014. 
[348] K. Nakai, M.-C. Hung, H. Yamaguchi, A perspective on anti-EGFR therapies 
targeting triple-negative breast cancer, Am. J. Cancer Res. 6 (2016) 1609–1623. 
[349] Y. Wang, T. Zhang, N. Kwiatkowski, B.J. Abraham, T.I. Lee, S. Xie, H. Yuzugullu, 
T. Von, H. Li, Z. Lin, D.G. Stover, E. Lim, Z.C. Wang, J.D. Iglehart, R.A. Young, N. 
S. Gray, J.J. Zhao, CDK7-Dependent transcriptional addiction in triple-negative 
breast cancer, Cell 163 (2015) 174–186, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cell.2015.08.063. 
[350] Y. Si, Y. Xu, J. Guan, K. Chen, S. Kim, E.S. Yang, L. Zhou, X.M. Liu, Anti-EGFR 
antibody-drug conjugate for triple-negative breast cancer therapy, Eng. Life Sci. 
21 (2021) 37–44, https://doi.org/10.1002/elsc.202000027. 
[351] Y.-C. Su, P.-A. Burnouf, K.-H. Chuang, B.-M. Chen, T.-L. Cheng, S.R. Roffler, 
Conditional internalization of PEGylated nanomedicines by PEG engagers for 
triple negative breast cancer therapy, Nat. Commun. 8 (2017) 15507, https://doi. 
org/10.1038/ncomms15507. 
[352] A.K. Mehta, E.M. Cheney, C.A. Hartl, C. Pantelidou, M. Oliwa, J.A. Castrillon, J.- 
R. Lin, K.E. Hurst, M. de Oliveira Taveira, N.T. Johnson, W.M. Oldham, 
M. Kalocsay, M.J. Berberich, S.A. Boswell, A. Kothari, S. Johnson, D.A. Dillon, 
M. Lipschitz, S. Rodig, S. Santagata, J.E. Garber, N. Tung, J. Y´elamos, J. 
E. Thaxton, E.A. Mittendorf, P.K. Sorger, G.I. Shapiro, J.L. Guerriero, Targeting 
immunosuppressive macrophages overcomes PARP inhibitor resistance in 
BRCA1-associated triple-negative breast cancer, Nat. Can. (Ott.) 2 (2021) 66–82, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-020-00148-7. 
[353] D. Cretella, A. Ravelli, C. Fumarola, S. La Monica, G. Digiacomo, A. Cavazzoni, 
R. Alfieri, A. Biondi, D. Generali, M. Bonelli, P.G. Petronini, The anti-tumor 
efficacy of CDK4/6 inhibition is enhanced by the combination with PI3K/AKT/ 
mTOR inhibitors through impairment of glucose metabolism in TNBC cells, 
J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 37 (2018) 72, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13046-018- 
0741-3. 
[354] K.-Y. Kim, K.-I. Park, S.-H. Kim, S.-N. Yu, S.-G. Park, Y.W. Kim, Y.-K. Seo, J.-Y. Ma, 
S.-C. Ahn, Inhibition of autophagy promotes salinomycin-induced apoptosis via 
reactive oxygen species-mediated PI3K/AKT/mTOR and ERK/p38 MAPK- 
dependent signaling in human prostate cancer cells, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18 (2017) 
1088, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms18051088. 
[355] F. Penault-Llorca, G. Viale, Pathological and molecular diagnosis of triple- 
negative breast cancer: a clinical perspective, Ann. Oncol. 23 (2012) vi19–vi22, 
https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mds190. 
[356] Medicina | free full-text | triple negative breast cancer: a review of present and 
future diagnostic modalities, (n.d.). https://www.mdpi.com/1648-9144/57/1/62 
(accessed June 28, 2023). 
[357] W.-T. Yang, M. Dryden, K. Broglio, M. Gilcrease, S. Dawood, P.J. Dempsey, 
V. Valero, G. Hortobagyi, D. Atchley, B. Arun, Mammographic features of triple 
receptor-negative primary breast cancers in young premenopausal women, Breast 
Cancer Res. Treat. 111 (2008) 405–410, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-007- 
9810-6. 
[358] Y. Wang, D.M. Ikeda, B. Narasimhan, T.A. Longacre, R.J. Bleicher, S. Pal, R. 
J. Jackman, S.S. Jeffrey, Estrogen receptor–negative invasive breast cancer: 
imaging features of tumors with and without human epidermal growth factor 
receptor type 2 overexpression, Radiology 246 (2008) 367–375, https://doi.org/ 
10.1148/radiol.2462070169. 
[359] Multimodality imaging of triple receptor–negative tumors with mammography, 
ultrasound, and MRI | AJR, (n.d.). https://www.ajronline.org/doi/full/10.2214/ 
AJR.09.2355 (accessed June 28, 2023). 
[360] Y. Kojima, H. Tsunoda, Mammography and ultrasound features of triple-negative 
breast cancer, Breast Cancer 18 (2011) 146–151, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s12282-010-0223-8. 
[361] B.E. Dogan, L.W. Turnbull, Imaging of triple-negative breast cancer, Ann. Oncol. 
23 (2012) vi23–vi29, https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mds191. 
[362] C. Ferranti, G. Coopmans de Yoldi, E. Biganzoli, S. Bergonzi, L. Mariani, 
G. Scaperrotta, M. Marchesini, Relationships between age, mammographic 
features and pathological tumour characteristics in non-palpable breast cancer, 
BJR 73 (2000) 698–705, https://doi.org/10.1259/bjr.73.871.11089459. 
[363] B.K. Seo, E.D. Pisano, C.M. Kuzimak, M. Koomen, D. Pavic, Y. Lee, E.B. Cole, 
J. Lee, Correlation of HER-2/neu overexpression with mammography and age 
distribution in primary breast carcinomas, Acad. Radiol. 13 (2006) 1211–1218, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acra.2006.06.015. 
[364] S.H. Heywang-K¨obrunner, A. Hacker, S. Sedlacek, Advantages and disadvantages 
of mammography screening, Breast Care 6 (2011) 199–207, https://doi.org/ 
10.1159/000329005. 
[365] T. Pal, S.T. Vadaparampil, Genetic risk assessments in individuals at high risk for 
inherited breast cancer in the breast oncology care setting, Cancer Control 19 
(2012) 255–266, https://doi.org/10.1177/107327481201900402. 
[366] G.J. Wengert, T.H. Helbich, D. Leithner, E.A. Morris, P.A.T. Baltzer, K. Pinker, 
Multimodality imaging of breast parenchymal density and correlation with risk 
assessment, Curr Breast Cancer Rep 11 (2019) 23–33, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s12609-019-0302-6. 
[367] H.-Y. Du, B.-R. Lin, D.-P. Huang, Ultrasonographic findings of triple-negative 
breast cancer, Int. J. Clin. Exp. Med. 8 (2015) 10040–10043. https://www.ncbi. 
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4538191/. (Accessed 28 June 2023). 
[368] S. Wojcinski, A.A. Soliman, J. Schmidt, L. Makowski, F. Degenhardt, 
P. Hillemanns, Sonographic features of triple-negative and non–triple-negative 
breast cancer, J. Ultrasound Med. 31 (2012) 1531–1541, https://doi.org/ 
10.7863/jum.2012.31.10.1531. 
[369] E.S. Ko, B.H. Lee, H.-A. Kim, W.-C. Noh, M.S. Kim, S.-A. Lee, Triple-negative 
breast cancer: correlation between imaging and pathological findings, Eur. 
Radiol. 20 (2010) 1111–1117, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00330-009-1656-3. 
[370] N. Abdullah, B. Mesurolle, M. El-Khoury, E. Kao, Breast imaging reporting and 
data system lexicon for US: interobserver agreement for assessment of breast 
masses, Radiology 252 (2009) 665–672, https://doi.org/10.1148/ 
radiol.2523080670. 
[371] Ultrasonographic features of triple-negative breast cancer: a comparison with 
other breast cancer subtypes, Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. APJCP 16 (2015) 
3229–3232. https://journal.waocp.org/article_30902.html. (Accessed 28 June 
2023). 
[372] M.Y. Kim, N. Choi, Mammographic and ultrasonographic features of triple- 
negative breast cancer: a comparison with other breast cancer subtypes, Acta 
Radiol. 54 (2013) 889–894, https://doi.org/10.1177/0284185113488580. 
[373] B.E. Dogan, A.M. Gonzalez-Angulo, M. Gilcrease, M.J. Dryden, W.T. Yang, 
Multimodality imaging of triple receptor–negative tumors with mammography, 
ultrasound, and MRI, Am. J. Roentgenol. 194 (2010) 1160–1166, https://doi.org/ 
10.2214/AJR.09.2355. 
[374] E. Lerma, G. Peiro, T. Ram´on, S. Fernandez, D. Martinez, C. Pons, F. Mu˜noz, J. 
M. Sabate, C. Alonso, B. Ojeda, J. Prat, A. Barnadas, Immunohistochemical 
heterogeneity of breast carcinomas negative for estrogen receptors, progesterone 
receptors and Her2/neu (basal-like breast carcinomas), Mod. Pathol. 20 (2007) 
1200–1207, https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.3800961. 
[375] Associations between mammography and ultrasound imaging features and 
molecular characteristics of triple-negative breast cancer, Asian Pac. J. Cancer 
Prev. APJCP 15 (2014) 3555–3559. https://journal.waocp.org/article_29118. 
html. (Accessed 28 June 2023). 
[376] W. Xiao, Y. Li, C. Hu, Y. Huang, Q. He, H. Gao, Melanin-originated carbonaceous 
dots for triple negative breast cancer diagnosis by fluorescence and photoacoustic 
dual-mode imaging, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 497 (2017) 226–232, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jcis.2017.02.068. 
[377] C. Xie, P.K. Upputuri, X. Zhen, M. Pramanik, K. Pu, Self-quenched semiconducting 
polymer nanoparticles for amplified in vivo photoacoustic imaging, Biomaterials 
119 (2017) 1–8, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.12.004. 
[378] M. Hambardzumyan, A. Hayrapetyan, Differential diagnosis of malignant 
melanoma and benign cutaneous lesions by ultrasound analysis, SciMedicine 
Journal 2 (2020) 100–107, https://doi.org/10.28991/SciMedJ-2020-0202-7. 
[379] S.H. Lee, Y.-S. Kim, W. Han, H.S. Ryu, J.M. Chang, N. Cho, W.K. Moon, Tumor 
growth rate of invasive breast cancers during wait times for surgery assessed by 
ultrasonography, Medicine (Baltim.) 95 (2016) e4874, https://doi.org/10.1097/ 
MD.0000000000004874. 
[380] Q. Chen, J. Xia, J. Zhang, Identify the triple-negative and non-triple-negative 
breast cancer by using texture features of medicale ultrasonic image, Medicine 
(Baltim.) 100 (2021) e25878, https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000025878. 
[381] C.S. Park, J.H. Lee, H.W. Yim, B.J. Kang, H.S. Kim, J.I. Jung, N.Y. Jung, S.H. Kim, 
Observer agreement using the ACR breast imaging reporting and data system (BI- 
RADS)-Ultrasound, first edition (2003), Korean J. Radiol. 8 (2007) 397–402, 
https://doi.org/10.3348/kjr.2007.8.5.397. 
[382] W.A. Berg, Z. Zhang, D. Lehrer, R.A. Jong, E.D. Pisano, R.G. Barr, M. B¨ohm-V´elez, 
M.C. Mahoney, W.P. Evans, L.H. Larsen, M.J. Morton, E.B. Mendelson, D. 
M. Farria, J.B. Cormack, H.S. Marques, A. Adams, N.M. Yeh, G. Gabrielli, For the 
ACRIN 6666 investigators, detection of breast cancer with addition of annual 
screening ultrasound or a single screening MRI to mammography in women with 
elevated breast cancer risk, JAMA 307 (2012) 1394–1404, https://doi.org/ 
10.1001/jama.2012.388. 
[383] Screening with magnetic resonance imaging and mammography of a UK 
population at high familial risk of breast cancer: a prospective multicentre cohort 
study (MARIBS), Lancet 365 (2005) 1769–1778, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140- 
6736(05)66481-1. 
[384] Specific Morphological Features Predictive for the Basal Phenotype in Grade 3 
Invasive Ductal Carcinoma of Breast - Fulford, Histopathology - Wiley Online 
Library, 2006 (n.d.), https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.136 
5-2559.2006.02453.x. (Accessed 28 June 2023). 
[385] J.-H. Chen, G. Agrawal, B. Feig, H.-M. Baek, P.M. Carpenter, O. Nalcioglu, M.- 
Y. Su, R.S. Mehta, Triple-negative breast cancer: MRI features in 29 patients, Ann. 
Oncol. 18 (2007) 2042–2043, https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdm504. 
[386] M.S. Bae, M. Seo, K.G. Kim, I.-A. Park, W.K. Moon, Quantitative MRI morphology 
of invasive breast cancer: correlation with immunohistochemical biomarkers and 
subtypes, Acta Radiol. 56 (2015) 269–275, https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0284185114524197. 
[387] G. Moffa, F. Galati, E. Collalunga, V. Rizzo, E. Kripa, G. D’Amati, F. Pediconi, Can 
MRI biomarkers predict triple-negative breast cancer? Diagnostics 10 (2020) 
1090, https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics10121090. 
[388] H. Azzam, R. Kamal, H. El-Assaly, L. Omer, The value of dynamic contrast- 
enhanced MRI in the diagnosis and management of triple-negative breast cancer, 
Egyptian Journal of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine 51 (2020) 26, https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s43055-020-0147-z. 
[389] M. Boisserie-Lacroix, G. MacGrogan, M. Debled, S. Ferron, M. Asad-Syed, 
P. McKelvie-Sebileau, S. Mathoulin-P´elissier, V. Brouste, G. Hurtevent-Labrot, 
Triple-negative breast cancers: associations between imaging and pathological 
findings for triple-negative tumors compared with hormone receptor-positive/ 
human epidermal growth factor receptor-2-negative breast cancers, Oncol. 18 
(2013) 802–811, https://doi.org/10.1634/theoncologist.2013-0380. 
[390] P. Kumar, R. Aggarwal, An overview of triple-negative breast cancer, Arch. 
Gynecol. Obstet. 293 (2016) 247–269, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00404-015- 
3859-y. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
37
[391] D.P. Atchley, C.T. Albarracin, A. Lopez, V. Valero, C.I. Amos, A.M. Gonzalez- 
Angulo, G.N. Hortobagyi, B.K. Arun, Clinical and pathologic characteristics of 
patients with BRCA-positive and BRCA-negative breast cancer, J. Clin. Oncol. 26 
(2008) 4282–4288, https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2008.16.6231. 
[392] S.P. Li, A.R. Padhani, N.J. Taylor, M.J. Beresford, M.-L.W. Ah-See, J.J. Stirling, J. 
A. d’Arcy, D.J. Collins, A. Makris, Vascular characterisation of triple negative 
breast carcinomas using dynamic MRI, Eur. Radiol. 21 (2011) 1364–1373, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00330-011-2061-2. 
[393] L. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Gao, Z. Li, J. Xing, W. Ren, L. Zhang, A. Li, G. Lu, A. Wu, 
L. Zeng, ZD2-Engineered gold Nanostar@Metal-organic framework nanoprobes 
for T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging and photothermal therapy 
specifically toward triple-negative breast cancer, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 7 (2018) 
1801144, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201801144. 
[394] J. Lee, D.K. Chatterjee, M.H. Lee, S. Krishnan, Gold nanoparticles in breast cancer 
treatment: promise and potential pitfalls, Cancer Lett. 347 (2014) 46–53, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2014.02.006. 
[395] J.D. Wallat, A.E. Czapar, C. Wang, A.M. Wen, K.S. Wek, X. Yu, N.F. Steinmetz, J. 
K. Pokorski, Optical and magnetic resonance imaging using fluorous colloidal 
nanoparticles, Biomacromolecules 18 (2017) 103–112, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.biomac.6b01389. 
[396] R. Schmadeka, B.E. Harmon, M. Singh, Triple-negative breast carcinoma: current 
and emerging concepts, Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 141 (2014) 462–477, https://doi. 
org/10.1309/AJCPQN8GZ8SILKGN. 
[397] J. Wu, X. Sun, J. Wang, Y. Cui, F. Kato, H. Shirato, D.M. Ikeda, R. Li, Identifying 
relations between imaging phenotypes and molecular subtypes of breast cancer: 
model discovery and external validation, J. Magn. Reson. Imag. 46 (2017) 
1017–1027, https://doi.org/10.1002/jmri.25661. 
[398] C. Xu, F. Chen, H.F. Valdovinos, D. Jiang, S. Goel, B. Yu, H. Sun, T.E. Barnhart, J. 
J. Moon, W. Cai, Bacteria-like mesoporous silica-coated gold nanorods for 
positron emission tomography and photoacoustic imaging-guided chemo- 
photothermal combined therapy, Biomaterials 165 (2018) 56–65, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2018.02.043. 
[399] I. Verel, G.W.M. Visser, G.A. van Dongen, The promise of immuno-PET in 
radioimmunotherapy, J. Nucl. Med. 46 (2005) 164S–171S. https://jnm. 
snmjournals.org/content/46/1_suppl/164S. (Accessed 28 June 2023). 
[400] G.A.M.S. van Dongen, G.W.M. Visser, M.N. Lub-de Hooge, E.G. de Vries, L. 
R. Perk, Immuno-PET: a navigator in monoclonal antibody development and 
applications, Oncol. 12 (2007) 1379–1389, https://doi.org/10.1634/ 
theoncologist.12-12-1379. 
[401] S. Shi, H. Hong, H. Orbay, S.A. Graves, Y. Yang, J.D. Ohman, B. Liu, R.J. Nickles, 
H.C. Wong, W. Cai, ImmunoPET of tissue factor expression in triple-negative 
breast cancer with a radiolabeled antibody Fab fragment, Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. 
Imag. 42 (2015) 1295–1303, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00259-015-3038-1. 
[402] Z. Hu, R. Shen, A. Campbell, E. McMichael, L. Yu, B. Ramaswamy, C.A. London, 
T. Xu, W.E. Carson III, Targeting tissue factor for immunotherapy of triple- 
negative breast cancer using a second-generation ICON, Cancer Immunol. Res. 6 
(2018) 671–684, https://doi.org/10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-17-0343. 
[403] X. Zhang, Q. Li, H. Zhao, L. Ma, T. Meng, J. Qian, R. Jin, J. Shen, K. Yu, 
Pathological expression of tissue factor confers promising antitumor response to a 
novel therapeutic antibody SC1 in triple negative breast cancer and pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma, Oncotarget 8 (2017) 59086–59102, https://doi.org/10.18632/ 
oncotarget.19175. 
[404] B.V. Marquez-Nostra, S. Lee, R. Laforest, L. Vitale, X. Nie, K. Hyrc, T. Keler, 
T. Hawthorne, J. Hoog, S. Li, F. Dehdashti, C.X. Ma, S.E. Lapi, Preclinical PET 
imaging of glycoprotein non-metastatic melanoma B in triple negative breast 
cancer: feasibility of an antibody-based companion diagnostic agent, Oncotarget 
8 (2017) 104303–104314, https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.22228. 
[405] D. Yardley, R. Weaver, M. Melisko, M. Saleh, F. Arena, A. Forero, T. Cigler, 
A. Stopeck, D. Citrin, I. Oliff, R. Bechhold, R. Loutfi, A. Garcia, S. Cruickshank, 
E. Crowley, J. Green, T. Hawthorne, M. Yellin, T. Davis, L. Vahdat, EMERGE: a 
randomized phase II study of the antibody-drug conjugate glembatumumab 
vedotin in advanced glycoprotein NMB-expressing breast cancer, J. Clin. Oncol. : 
Official Journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology 33 (2015) 
1609–1619. https://scholarlycommons.henryford.com/hematologyoncology_art 
icles/108. 
[406] G.A. Ulaner, R. Castillo, D.A. Goldman, J. Wills, C.C. Riedl, K. Pinker-Domenig, 
M.S. Jochelson, M. G¨onen, 18F-FDG-PET/CT for systemic staging of newly 
diagnosed triple-negative breast cancer, Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imag. 43 (2016) 
1937–1944, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00259-016-3402-9. 
[407] Q. Feng, Q. Hu, Y. Liu, T. Yang, Z. Yin, Diagnosis of triple negative breast cancer 
based on radiomics signatures extracted from preoperative contrast-enhanced 
chest computed tomography, BMC Cancer 20 (2020) 579, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s12885-020-07053-3. 
[408] T. Nakagawa, K. Gonda, T. Kamei, L. Cong, Y. Hamada, N. Kitamura, H. Tada, 
T. Ishida, T. Aimiya, N. Furusawa, Y. Nakano, N. Ohuchi, X-ray computed 
tomography imaging of a tumor with high sensitivity using gold nanoparticles 
conjugated to a cancer-specific antibody via polyethylene glycol chains on their 
surface, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 17 (2016) 387–397, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
14686996.2016.1194167. 
[409] C.-H. Chu, S.-H. Cheng, N.-T. Chen, W.-N. Liao, L.-W. Lo, Microwave-synthesized 
platinum-embedded mesoporous silica nanoparticles as dual-modality contrast 
agents: computed tomography and optical imaging, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20 (2019) 
1560, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20071560. 
[410] F. Pesapane, K. Downey, A. Rotili, E. Cassano, D.-M. Koh, Imaging diagnosis of 
metastatic breast cancer, Insights Imaging 11 (2020) 79, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s13244-020-00885-4. 
[411] A. Mohammadi, M. Rosa, S. Masood, The use of fine-needle aspiration biopsy 
samples for the assessment of basal phenotype in triple negative breast cancer 
patients: a correlative study, Diagn. Cytopathol. 39 (2011) 1–7, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/dc.21312. 
[412] W. Zhang, W. Xia, Z. Lv, C. Ni, Y. Xin, L. Yang, Liquid biopsy for cancer: 
circulating tumor cells, circulating free DNA or exosomes? Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 
41 (2017) 755–768, https://doi.org/10.1159/000458736. 
[413] S. Jia, R. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Li, Clinical and biological significance of circulating 
tumor cells, circulating tumor DNA, and exosomes as biomarkers in colorectal 
cancer, Oncotarget 8 (2017) 55632–55645, https://doi.org/10.18632/ 
oncotarget.17184. 
[414] D. Song, L. Yue, J. Zhang, S. Ma, W. Zhao, F. Guo, Y. Fan, H. Yang, Q. Liu, 
D. Zhang, Z. Xia, P. Qin, J. Jia, M. Yue, J. Yu, S. Zheng, F. Yang, J. Wang, 
Diagnostic and prognostic significance of serum apolipoprotein C-I in triple- 
negative breast cancer based on mass spectrometry, Cancer Biol. Ther. 17 (2016) 
635–647, https://doi.org/10.1080/15384047.2016.1156262. 
[415] Identification of specific miRNA signature in paired sera and tissue samples of 
Indian women with triple negative breast cancer | PLOS ONE, (n.d.). https://jou 
rnals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0158946 (accessed 
June 30, 2023). 
[416] P. Fr`eres, S. Wenric, M. Boukerroucha, C. Fasquelle, J. Thiry, N. Bovy, I. Struman, 
P. Geurts, J. Collignon, H. Schroeder, F. Kridelka, E. Lifrange, V. Jossa, V. Bours, 
C. Josse, G. Jerusalem, Circulating microRNA-based screening tool for breast 
cancer, Oncotarget 7 (2015) 5416–5428, https://doi.org/10.18632/ 
oncotarget.6786. 
[417] A.-K. Rupp, C. Rupp, S. Keller, J.C. Brase, R. Ehehalt, M. Fogel, G. Moldenhauer, 
F. Marm´e, H. Sültmann, P. Altevogt, Loss of EpCAM expression in breast cancer 
derived serum exosomes: role of proteolytic cleavage, Gynecol. Oncol. 122 (2011) 
437–446, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.04.035. 
[418] Identification of developmental endothelial locus-1 on circulating extracellular 
vesicles as a novel biomarker for early breast cancer detection | clinical cancer 
research | American association for cancer research, (n.d.). https://aacrjournals. 
org/clincancerres/article/22/7/1757/122208/Identification-of-Developmental 
-Endothelial-Locus (accessed June 30, 2023). 
[419] M.A. Arafah, A. Ouban, O.Z. Ameer, K.J. Quek, KI-67 LI expression in triple- 
negative breast cancer patients and its significance, Breast Cancer 15 (2021) 
11782234211016977, https://doi.org/10.1177/11782234211016977. 
[420] K.I. Goud, S. Dayakar, K. Vijayalaxmi, S.J. Babu, A.R.P. Vijay, Evaluation of HER- 
2/neu status in breast cancer specimens using immunohistochemistry (IHC) & 
fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) assay, Indian J. Med. Res. 135 (2012) 
312–317. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3361866/. (Accessed 
30 June 2023). 
[421] C. Rao, J. Shetty, K.H. Prasad, Immunohistochemical profile and morphology in 
triple – negative breast cancers, J. Clin. Diagn. Res. 7 (2013) 1361–1365, https:// 
doi.org/10.7860/JCDR/2013/5823.3129. 
[422] M.E.H. Hammond, D.F. Hayes, M. Dowsett, D.C. Allred, K.L. Hagerty, S. Badve, P. 
L. Fitzgibbons, G. Francis, N.S. Goldstein, M. Hayes, D.G. Hicks, S. Lester, R. Love, 
P.B. Mangu, L. McShane, K. Miller, C.K. Osborne, S. Paik, J. Perlmutter, 
A. Rhodes, H. Sasano, J.N. Schwartz, F.C.G. Sweep, S. Taube, E.E. Torlakovic, 
P. Valenstein, G. Viale, D. Visscher, T. Wheeler, R.B. Williams, J.L. Wittliff, A. 
C. Wolff, American society of clinical oncology/college of American Pathologists 
guideline recommendations for immunohistochemical testing of estrogen and 
progesterone receptors in breast cancer, Arch. Pathol. Lab Med. 134 (2010) 
907–922. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3073033/. (Accessed 
30 June 2023). 
[423] I. Gupta, R.M. Sareyeldin, I. Al-Hashimi, H.A. Al-Thawadi, H. Al Farsi, S. Vranic, 
A.-E. Al Moustafa, Triple negative breast cancer profile, from gene to microRNA, 
Relation to Ethnicity, Cancers (Basel) 11 (2019) 363, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
cancers11030363. 
[424] F. Khan, A. Esnakula, L.J. Ricks-Santi, R. Zafar, Y. Kanaan, T. Naab, Loss of PTEN 
in high grade advanced stage triple negative breast ductal cancers in African 
American women, Pathol. Res. Pract. 214 (2018) 673–678, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.prp.2018.03.020. 
[425] Q. Wang, M. Xu, Y. Sun, J. Chen, C. Chen, C. Qian, Y. Chen, L. Cao, Q. Xu, X. Du, 
W. Yang, Gene expression profiling for diagnosis of triple-negative breast cancer: 
a multicenter, retrospective cohort study, Front. Oncol. 9 (2019) 354, https://doi. 
org/10.3389/fonc.2019.00354. 
[426] A New Gene Expression Signature for Triple-Negative Breast Cancer using Frozen 
Fresh Tissue before Neoadjuvant chemotherapy | SpringerLink, (n.d.). https://li 
nk.springer.com/article/10.2119/molmed.2016.00257 (accessed June 30, 2023). 
[427] M. Komatsu, T. Yoshimaru, T. Matsuo, K. Kiyotani, Y. Miyoshi, T. Tanahashi, 
K. Rokutan, R. Yamaguchi, A. Saito, S. Imoto, S. Miyano, Y. Nakamura, M. Sasa, 
M. Shimada, T. Katagiri, Molecular features of triple negative breast cancer cells 
by genome-wide gene expression profiling analysis, Int. J. Oncol. 42 (2013) 
478–506, https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo.2012.1744. 
[428] C. Liedtke, C. Bernemann, L. Kiesel, A. Rody, Genomic profiling in triple-negative 
breast cancer, Breast Care 8 (2013) 408–413, https://doi.org/10.1159/ 
000357534. 
[429] T.J. Mehrling, Compounds for Treating TNBC, 2022. US11413276B2, https://pat 
ents.google.com/patent/US11413276B2/en. (Accessed 27 December 2023). 
[430] Y. Zeng, D. Wang, Methods and Compositions for Tnbc Stratification and 
Treatment, WO2019109331A1, 2019. https://patents.google.com/patent/ 
WO2019109331A1/en?oq=WO+2019%2f109331+A1. (Accessed 27 December 
2023). 
[431] M. Schmitt, O.G. Wilhelm, R. Napieralski, Methods for Assessing the Treatment 
Response of TNBC Patients to Neo-Adjuvant Chemotherapy by Analysing CpG 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 93 (2024) 105401
38
Methylation, US11230737B2, 2022. https://patents.google.com/patent/US1123 
0737B2/en?oq=US+11%2c230%2c737+B2. (Accessed 27 December 2023). 
[432] T.M. Cardillo, D.M. Goldenberg, Treatment of High Trop-2 Expressing Triple 
Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) with Sacituzumab Govitecan (IMMU-132) 
Overcomes Homologous Recombination Repair (HRR) Rescue Mediated by 
Rad51, US10918734B2, 2021. https://patents.google.com/patent/US10918734B 
2/en?oq=US+10%2c918%2c734+B2. (Accessed 27 December 2023). 
[433] J.A. Pietenpol, B. Lehmann, J. Bauer, X. Chen, Markers of Triple-Negative Breast 
Cancer and Uses Thereof, US20200224282A1, 2020. https://patents.google. 
com/patent/US20200224282A1/en?oq=US+2020%2f0224282+A1. (Accessed 
27 December 2023). 
[434] E. Liaudet-Coopman, L.A.- Cacchia, P. Roger, S. Guiu, Methods and Compositions 
for Treating Triple Negative Breast Cancer (Tnbc), WO2023078900A1, 2023. 
https://patents.google.com/patent/WO2023078900A1/en?oq=WO+2023%2f0 
78900+A1. (Accessed 27 December 2023). 
[435] J. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Feng, Method and System for Predicting Tumor Mutation 
Burden (TMB) in Triple Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) Based on Nuclear Scores 
and Histopathological Whole Slide Images (WSIs), US20230153994A1, 2023. htt 
ps://patents.google.com/patent/US20230153994A1/en?oq=US+2023%2f0 
153994+A1. (Accessed 27 December 2023). 
[436] L. Fan, X. Liu, X. Jin, Y. Yang, L. Chen, X. Hu, Z. Wang, Y. Jiang, Z. Shao, The 
safety, tolerability, and preliminary antitumor activity of sitravatinib plus 
tislelizumab in patients with locally recurrent or metastatic triple-negative breast 
cancer, J. Clin. Orthod. 40 (2022) 1070, https://doi.org/10.1200/ 
JCO.2022.40.16_suppl.1070, 1070. 
[437] S. Subramanian, R. Prasanna, G. Biswas, S.K. Das Majumdar, N. Joshi, D. Bunger, 
M.A. Khan, I. Ahmad, Nanosomal docetaxel lipid suspension-based chemotherapy 
in breast cancer: results from a multicenter retrospective study, Breast Cancer 
(Dove Med Press) 12 (2020) 77–85, https://doi.org/10.2147/BCTT.S236108. 
A. Gupta et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
