Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Journal of Digital Imaging 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10278-021-00476-9
ORIGINAL PAPER
Research Goal‑Driven Data Model and Harmonization 
for De‑Identifying Patient Data in Radiomics
Surajit Kundu1   · Santam Chakraborty2 · Jayanta Mukhopadhyay1 · Syamantak Das2 · Sanjoy Chatterjee2 · 
Rimpa Basu Achari2 · Indranil Mallick2 · Partha Pratim Das1 · Moses Arunsingh2 · Tapesh Bhattacharyya2 · 
Soumendranath Ray2
Received: 24 July 2020 / Revised: 22 May 2021 / Accepted: 9 June 2021 
© Society for Imaging Informatics in Medicine 2021
Abstract
There are various efforts in de-identifying patient’s radiation oncology data for their uses in the advancement of research 
in medicine. Though the task of de-identification needs to be defined in the context of research goals and objectives, exist-
ing systems lack the flexibility of modeling data and normalization of names of attributes for accomplishing them. In this 
work, we describe a de-identification process of radiation and clinical oncology data, which is guided by a data model and 
a schema of dynamically capturing domain ontology and normalization of terminologies, defined in tune with the research 
goals in this area. The radiological images are obtained in DICOM format. It consists of diagnostic, radiation therapy (RT) 
treatment planning, RT verification, and RT response images. During the DICOM de-identification, a few crucial pieces of 
information are taken about the dataset. The proposed model is generic in organizing information modeling in sync with the 
de-identification of a patient’s clinical information. The treatment and clinical data are provided in the comma-separated 
values (CSV) format, which follows a predefined data structure. The de-identified data is harmonized throughout the entire 
process. We have presented four specific case studies on four different types of cancers, namely glioblastoma multiforme, 
head–neck, breast, and lung. We also present experimental validation on a few patients’ data in these four areas. A few 
aspects are taken care of during de-identification, such as preservation of longitudinal date changes (LDC), incremental 
de-identification, referential data integrity between the clinical and image data, de-identified data harmonization, and trans-
formation of the data to an underlined database schema.
Keywords  Radiomics · Radiology · Protected Health Information (PHI) · Patient Health Record (PHR) · De-identification · 
DICOM · Longitudinal Date Changes (LDC) · Glioblastoma · Head–neck cancer · Normalization · Harmonization
 *	 Surajit Kundu 
	
surajit.113125@gmail.com
	
Santam Chakraborty 
	
drsantam@gmail.com
	
Jayanta Mukhopadhyay 
	
jay@cse.iitkgp.ac.in
	
Syamantak Das 
	
syamdas40@gmail.com
	
Sanjoy Chatterjee 
	
chatterjee72@hotmail.com
	
Rimpa Basu Achari 
	
rimpaachari@gmail.com
	
Indranil Mallick 
	
imallick@gmail.com
	
Partha Pratim Das 
	
ppd@cse.iitkgp.ac.in
	
Moses Arunsingh 
	
85moses@gmail.com
	
Tapesh Bhattacharyya 
	
tapesh27@gmail.com
	
Soumendranath Ray 
	
soumen.ray@tmckolkata.com
1	
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India
2	
Department of Radiation Oncology, Tata Medical Center, 14 
MAR (E‑W), Kolkata 700160, India
	
Journal of Digital Imaging
1 3
Introduction
With the advancement of data-driven machine learning tech-
niques, there is increasing emphasis on the banking of medi-
cal data. Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine 
(DICOM) is a worldwide standard to facilitate radiological data 
exchange. It defines a digital imaging format, file structure, and 
image interchange protocol [1]. However, most patients’ clinical 
information is stored in medical records captured in free text 
format. The integration of this data with radiological image data 
is essential for medical grade decision making using radiomics. 
However, appropriate de-identification of this data is neces-
sary for the interests of patient privacy and medical ethics. In 
practice, radiological images and clinical data are both acquired 
separately during the treatment of a patient. The DICOM stand-
ards facilitate transmission, storage, retrieval, processing, and 
display of radiological imaging data. Such data is commonly 
stored in a Picture Archiving and Communication System 
(PACS). Furthermore, the patient health records (PHR) are 
managed by the Clinical Data Management System (CDMS) 
or Hospital Information Systems (HIS), which lack standards 
like DICOM. Therefore, there is no direct linkage between the 
PHR and radiological data.
At present, there are several robust systems, which enable 
complete de-identification of the DICOM datasets when they 
are stored in image data banks [2, 3]. Additionally, another key 
requirement for the research data bank is the de-identification of 
PHR while maintaining an associative relationship to DICOM 
data. A good example of such data is The Cancer Imaging 
Archive (TCIA) [4], where PHR is stored separately from the 
imaging data in spreadsheets.
Another example is the Oncospace platform [5] that has 
defined unified radiation oncology (RO) database schema 
designed for facilitating research in personalized medicine. The 
schema integrates treatment planning and dose data with PHR 
like diagnosis, pathology, treatment, and disease outcomes.
In the present system, we describe a platform for contex-
tual modeling of data obtained from patient health records 
under a flexible entity relationship modeling in an image 
data bank (CHAVI—CompreHensive ArchiVe of Imaging 
in Oncology). The de-identification schema also allows data 
normalization in a generic form and harmonization across 
diverse research projects. The de-identification system retains 
the entity-relationship between clinical and imaging data. 
The de-identified dataset can facilitate complex queries’ 
design and aid data retrieval processes in the image databank.
Motivation
A publicly accessible image data bank for research purposes 
should host valid data in a consistent data structure. However, 
PHR in clinical practice is often recorded variably and hence 
needs to be structured before it can be used in a data bank. 
Additionally, a lexicon of data elements needs to be maintained 
such that consistency can be ensured. Hence, a data structure 
specification is required to ensure that high quality PHR can be 
stored and associated consistently with imaging data.
Gap in the Area
There are many existing works on radiological image dataset 
de-identification, which include PHI anonymization, burned-
pixel data removal, face de-identification, etc. However, most 
of these systems do not allow the de-identification of the clini-
cal data and patient health records while maintaining asso-
ciation with de-identified DICOM data. A desirable system 
should be able to de-identify ongoing patient health record 
data while retaining the temporal association with previously 
de-identified data.
Requirements
Data harmonization is an iterative process of capturing, 
interpreting, examining, and reconciling organization infor-
mation requirements and data standardization as the map-
ping of the simplified data [6].
In this paper, we report the development of a standalone sys-
tem, which provides the facility to de-identify both DICOM and 
PHR data. We propose a generalized data model for accumulat-
ing the comprehensive de-identified clinical and imaging data. 
DICOM imaging data can include diagnostic images (used for 
initial diagnosis and response assessment) and radiation therapy-
related objects like RT structure sets, RT plans, RT dose, etc. 
PHR obtained from clinical records have patients’ demographic 
data, disease related data (e.g., history, examination, pathology, 
stage), treatment, and outcomes data. As this data is available as 
unstructured text, a data harmonization method needs to be used 
before the data can be archived. This requires that a lexicon to be 
developed. Normalised and de-identified PHR data is temporally 
associated with de-identified image data and subsequently stored 
in the database. The entire pipeline describes the methodologies 
following, de-identification, data cleansing, harmonization, and 
ER data model for mapping de-identified data with the databank. 
Throughout the de-identification process, the system captures 
the entity relationship (ER) model of the databank and puts the 
de-identified data in insertion queries of the database by men-
tioning specific tables, attribute names, and associated values.
Methods and Materials
The radiological images are acquired in DICOM format from 
the Treatment Planning System (TPS) and the PACS. The clin-
ical data of the patient is taken in the form of comma-separated 
values (CSV), which follows a predefined data structure.
Journal of Digital Imaging	
1 3
For demonstrating we present four typical case studies 
on four different disease site, following Glioblastoma mul-
tiforme, Intensifying Radiation Treatment in Advanced/Poor 
Prognosis Laryngeal Hypopharyngeal (LH) and Oropharyn-
geal Cancers (OPC) using PET-CT Based Dose Escalation 
Strategies (INTELHOPE), randomised phase II of immu-
notherapy with pembrolizumab for the prevention of lung 
cancer (IMPRINT), and hypofractionated radiation therapy 
(HYPORT-B). The same model can be applied to other stud-
ies also. INTELHOPE, IMPRINT, and HYPORT-B are short 
names of these studies undertaken at Tata Medical Center, 
Kolkata.
Definition of Research Project
The starting point is the definition of a research project. It 
may be specific for a particular cancer (e.g., head–neck can-
cer) or include multiple cancer types. The system allows a 
user with appropriate privileges to create a project definition 
in CHAVI, which has information on the research project. 
Each project is assigned a unique ID that is a secondary ref-
erence for all datasets stored in the CHAVI database. At pre-
sent, the system requires that all research projects included 
in the system should have an Institutional Review Board 
approval or waiver. Clinical data of patients are stored in a 
research database or a clinical trial management system. The 
data is exported from the source and then de-identified, as 
shown in graphical user interface (GUI) in Fig. 1. Although 
data from other databases can also be used, the current 
system has been tested exclusively on data imported from 
REDCap databases [7, 8]. The clinical data may be recorded 
prospectively or retrospectively in REDCap. A longitudinal 
database with repeating instruments may also be used in 
specific projects depending upon the research question. The 
current system is flexible enough to allow data from all of 
these different types of databases.
Project‑Driven De‑Identification Schema
For each project, an external template is provided to acquire 
the data attribute and types. This template is currently cre-
ated in a spreadsheet. It contains the attributes list of both 
ER model and the source data, as shown in Fig. 2. The attrib-
ute properties provide knowledge regarding the dataset and 
match the data elements to be exported from the medical 
database. A few examples are given below.
Fig. 1   Graphical User Interface of the de-identification system
	
Journal of Digital Imaging
1 3
–	 IsIncludeInSchema (Y/N)—It specifies whether the given 
clinical data is to be accommodated in the schema.
–	 DefaultValues—The same information may be implicitly 
applied to all cases in certain projects but is not speci-
fied in the database. For example, if this is a brain tumor 
project, all patients will have the anatomic site as CNS. 
In this case, even if the exported data does not contain 
the information, the system will have the information.
–	 DataFieldType—It allows three types of entities to be 
selected following attribute (A), value (V), and multiple 
references (M). An attribute will have a value, which is 
mapped to the corresponding field in the ER model. The 
value itself is a piece of information, which may need de- 
identification. It will be associated with specific attrib-
utes of the existing ER model. Such designs are modeled 
to store the extensive list of the gene, protein, and 
other molecules. There is a particular attribute called 
Multiple references attribute. It encodes two pieces of 
information, following one corresponding attribute value, 
and another is attribute reference. An example is Tel-
omerase Reverse Transcriptase (TERT) is a code name 
of the gene. Alongside this, it keeps the references of 
another attribute named mutation result.
It may occur that a part of clinical data cannot be accom-
modated in the existing data model. The schema contains a 
separate table consisting of three attributes: medical record 
name, value, and instance time of the data acquisition. The 
inharmonious data is stored in this table. The user renders this 
information once for a single project. It helps in the informa-
tion mapping of source data with the de-identification schema, 
which is consistent with the ER modeling of image data bank. 
A patient may belong to one or more projects. In our case 
study, the clinical data is exported in a CSV file. Each file 
consists of patient-level clinical data of multiple subjects who 
belong to the same research protocol. However, in practice, 
CSV files can be generated for other databases also. The data 
definition in the CSV file is specified at the time project is cre-
ated. Thus, updated data of multiple patients can be imported 
at various time points as long as the data definition is main-
tained. Once the de-identification is completed, the system 
produces a JSON file. It contains de-identified clinical data 
and the references of the project with each patient.
These projects deal with different cancer sites having variable 
endpoints and objectives. We have evaluated the process with 
respect to the following during this de-identification process.
–	 De-identification of data harmonized with entity relation-
ship model of databank.
–	 Clinical data harmonization prior to storage.
–	 Incremental de-identification of data where longitudinal 
information is recorded.
Fig. 2   The information collecting template for data mapping
Journal of Digital Imaging	
1 3
–	 Ensuring that temporal relationships between clinical 
records and DICOM data are maintained.
–	 Referential data integrity between clinical records and 
imaging data, while de-identifying multiple patients’ data 
at a time.
Entity‑Relationship Model of the Databank
There is an underlying ER model for archiving the data after 
the de-identification. The system performs de-identification, 
harmonization, and re-transformation on both DICOM and 
clinical patient data. The de-identification process is defined 
with a project-specific data model and follows a schema for 
storing the clinical data. This process helps to shape the 
data in a uniform structure. The harmonization process helps 
to achieve consistent and quality data. This uniformity is 
maintained in the databank as well. Hence, the databank 
recognizes the correct de-identified data and then allows it 
to be uploaded in the system. Any raw data or unstructured 
data is rejected during the uploading process in the data-
bank. This ensures data security, consistency, and quality. 
Radiological imaging data are to be uploaded incrementally 
or in a ZIP archive.
Clinical information is transmuted in a specific mor-
phological order. We represented an object in the structure 
of JSON (JavaScript Object Notation), which is a set of 
unordered name/value pairs. The object is confined with 
curly braces. It starts with the left brace and ends with the 
right brace. Each name/value pairs are separated by a comma 
(,). A single object may contain one or more name/value 
pairs. In this system, the clinical data are encapsulated with 
the entity set, attribute, and the corresponding de-identified 
record. And the values are parsed from the corresponding 
key names. A single JSON consists of clinical data, which 
belongs to a particular disease site. An overview of the 
entire process is shown in Fig. 3. During the data transfer to 
the databank, the system recognizes a project specific data 
model and parses the data object wise. Then it performs 
a one-to-one data mapping in the database of the medical 
image databank.
De‑Identification of Radiological Images and PHI
A study on the de-identification process of both RT DICOM 
data and basic clinical data is published earlier [9]. The pro-
posed de-identification system categorizes protected health 
information (PHI) into two classes: direct and derived identi-
fiers. The direct identifiers are name, address, contact infor-
mation, etc. These are the most serviceable and fundamental 
information to identify a patient. The derived identifiers (DI) 
are deduced from supplementary data. While these may not 
Fig. 3   A system flowchart
	
Journal of Digital Imaging
1 3
hold identifiable patient information, identifying informa-
tion may be deduced from this. The DIs are date, DateTime 
(date and time together), unique identifiers (UIDs), date of 
birth (DOB), etc.
The # symbol replaces all direct identifiers in patient infor-
mation. DIs such as the date and DateTime values are modified 
such that longitudinal temporal date relationships are preserved. 
Patient UIDs are replaced by the system generated unique ID. 
The system uses a relational database management system 
(RDBMS) MySQL to store the original unique identifier (UID) 
references in a local database in an encrypted format.
Schema of Clinical Data
A generalized schema is designed for archiving the clini-
cal data. It maintains the hierarchy of different entities in 
a relational database, as shown in Fig. 4. This information 
hierarchy is adopted to match the way clinical information 
is usually collected and related to the patient. The schema 
is flexible enough for storing and retrieving the data based 
on complex queries. It is a 1:N parent–child relationship. 
Each record of the patient dataset is stored against a unique 
identifier. Concurrently, the references of the associated 
information are maintained. Thus, it ensures consistent data 
storage. In order to envisage the potential of the data model, 
we describe each entity and its corresponding medical data 
elements. The patient information like personal history, 
menstrual history, habits, survival is organized in a 1 to n 
relationship with the patient information table. Similarly, the 
diagnosis table has one to many relationships with patient 
information as a disease is a unique event for a patient. 
Treatment delivered for the disease and disease-related tests 
is linked to the diagnosis in turn by a 1 to n relationship. 
Hence, the treatment, treatment results, and disease investi-
gations results can be extracted from the database.
Project Patient Map  The “ProjectPatientMap” table holds 
a mapping between patient ID and project ID. The table 
is linked to the Project Information (PI) table through the 
patient ID key references. This table also contains project ID 
and patient entry date, which is the date on which the patient 
was registered at the treating center.
Patient Information  The “Patient Information” (PI) con-
tains a set of data elements related to patient profile based 
details. This table stores age, gender, center code in which 
the patient originates, de-identified date of registration at 
the center, patient date of birth, and Performance Status of 
the patient. These data elements at this hierarchical level 
relate directly to the patient and do not vary across diagno-
ses. Most of these elements are captured in history during a 
patient encounter.
Fig. 4   Hierarchical database model of clinical data
Journal of Digital Imaging	
1 3
Family History  This part of the schema manages the infor-
mation regarding the family history of malignancies. The 
family history dataset has one-to-one relation to PI. In addi-
tion, it contains patient-specific detail such as the relation-
ship of the affected family member with malignancy, age 
of the family member at the diagnosis of his/her cancer, 
the patient’s survival status (alive or dead), and the type of 
cancer the family member had. Typically, this would include 
the site as well as the pathology if available.
Comorbidity  The comorbidity grading and classification 
are variable. The relational table can accommodate multiple 
comorbidities to be coded separately. The attribute set is as 
follows: the date on which comorbidity was diagnosed, the 
duration for which comorbidity was present, the severity of 
the comorbidity, comorbidity type status, and name of the 
comorbidity.
Mensthistory  The menstrual history attribute sets are fol-
lowing, age at menarche, attained menopause status, age 
at which patient become postmenopausal, duration of each 
menstrual cycle in days, duration of time each menstrual 
period lasts in days, menstrual cycle, date of last menstrual 
period, pain with menstrual periods records.
Habits  The substance abuse-related habits the patient may 
have or had in the past. The system de-identifies and acquires 
the relevant information like substance type, substance quan-
tity, substance unit, substance duration in the year, last use of 
the substance, and current usage of the substance.
Personal History   This part of the schema stores information 
on the patient’s personal history, such as marital status and 
immunization status.
Diagnosis  Diagnosis is a key element that comprises disease 
related information, e.g., pathology, stage, etc. There is a 1 
to n relationship between patient information and diagnosis. 
Thus, a single patient can have multiple disease diagnoses, 
but each diagnosis can only belong to a single patient. Thus 
a patient with bilateral breast cancer will have information 
obtained for left and right breast cancers captured as a sepa-
rate diagnosis. It allows differential treatments for the two 
diagnoses. The diagnosis contains the following component 
of medical records, recurrence—Indicate if the diagnosis is 
recurrent cancer, laterality of the disease, anatomic sites, 
subsite of the disease, pathology type of the disease, and the 
date when the pathology was obtained first.
Stage Information  The staging of the patient is usually done 
after the diagnosis. Every individual stage information keeps the 
corresponding diagnosis references after the de-identification. 
The system allows the user to choose the staging system type 
and stores record on T, N, and M stages if the AJCC staging 
system is being followed.
Survival  The patients’ survival status is included in the clin-
ical information. It tracks the current state (dead or alive) of 
survival. Alongside this, queries can be executed to obtain 
information on when the patient died after the diagnosis of 
a disease. The survival object incorporates the following 
information in the de-identified JSON, status of the patient 
of the last follow-up, date of death of a patient, overall sur-
vival from the patient’s admission date, and the date of the 
last follow-up. This date can be increased as the length of 
follow-up increases for a patient.
Tumor Pathology  The system enables the de-identification 
of different aspects of the tumor pathology such as histo-
logical type, grade of the tumor, necrosis status, existence 
of angioinvasion, lymphatic invasion status, appearance of 
perineural invasion, tumor deposits fact, and treatment effect 
status.
Tumor Description  The gross description of the tumor is 
noted in the surgical pathology. The tumor description con-
sists of the maximum size of the tumor in millimeters (mm), 
tumor site, focality (unifocal, multifocal, or multicentric), 
description of the tumor extent, and tumor perforation of 
the viscus.
Tumor Margin  Margin status often holds prognostic sig-
nificance when tumors are resected. Therefore the system 
allows the granular description of the margin status, which 
includes the following properties margin name, involvement, 
and distance in mm. The database is also capable of storing 
multiple margins for the same tumor pathology specimen.
Nodal Status  The nodal status is typically obtained from 
information after a nodal dissection or sampling procedure. 
The attributes set are pathology specimen, node level, num-
ber of positive nodes, number of nodes with isolated tumor 
cells found in pathology, number of nodes with micrometas-
tases, extranodal extension status.
Recurrence  This table holds the details of all recurrences 
and tumor response data for the patient’s disease. Note that 
the recurrence table is kept necessarily separate from the 
survival table as a disease can have one or many recurrences 
without affecting the patient’s survival. The attributes that 
are available include the recurrence type (recurrent disease, 
stable disease, or progressive disease), recurrence location, 
recurrence date, duration of time which the patient was 
recurrence-free, response assessment, response location, 
response to treatment, time at which intervention is assessed 
in days, and date on which response is assessed.
	
Journal of Digital Imaging
1 3
Genetic Information  The genetic makeup of the tumor 
is acquired in harmonized form. The system maintains a 
catalog of the gene, protein, and other molecules. The new 
substances can be added through the user interface of the 
system. The results of the genomics tests performed can be 
recorded for an arbitrary number of genes and proteins. The 
gene from the clinical data is mapped to the existing catalog. 
All relevant objects are individually linked to the diagnosis 
dataset, allowing different genes and protein abnormalities 
to be recorded. The patient data related to MutationProfile, 
FishProfile, ExpressionProfile, IHCProfile, and Epigenet-
icProfile are stored after the de-identification.
Imaging Data and Features  It is mostly semantic informa-
tion, as the quantitative imaging data will be extracted for 
each imaging dataset. The image data keeps its type and 
acquisition date. The attribute set of “ImageFeature” is the 
timing of the imaging in relation to the disease, site abnor-
mality, contrast enhancement presence, status of edema in 
the image, disease status during the time of imagery, and the 
type of disease progression noted on imaging.
Treatment information  The treatments are performed for a 
particular diagnosis, the associated information transitively 
dependent on that diagnosis. Alongside this, it keeps the refer-
ences of the corresponding stage information so that the treat-
ment delivered for different stages of the same diagnosis may 
be captured. The treatment information of the patients is stored 
in several objects of the data model, which is listed below.
–	 Surgery—Consists of surgery date, surgery details, sen-
tinel node biopsy status, side surgery status, nodal dis-
section status, and reconstruction type.
–	 Radiotherapy—Data fields are radiotherapy status, radio-
therapy intent, radiation dose in cGy, number of frac-
tions, radiotherapy start date, radiotherapy complete date, 
radiated volume, side of radiation, concurrent chemo-
therapy status, and radiotherapy setting it which it is 
delivered.
–	 Chemotherapy—Contains chemotherapy status, intent of 
chemotherapy treatment, chemotherapy setting, regimen, 
number of chemotherapy cycles are received, chemother-
apy start date, and complete date.
–	 Brachy therapy—List of attributes are following brachy-
therapy status, brachytherapy setting, total brachytherapy 
dose in cGy unit, number of fractions, radiated volumes, 
radiated side, re-irradiation status, name of equipment, 
brachytherapy applicator, brachytherapy dose point, 
brachytherapy dose volume, brachytherapy start date, 
and complete date.
–	 Endocrine therapy—Consists of endocrinetherapy sta-
tus, treatment intent, setting, regimen, endocrine therapy 
regimen start date, and end date.
–	 Targeted therapy—Data fields are current status, targeted 
therapy treatment intent, setting, regimen, number of tar-
geted therapy cycles, start date, and complete date.
–	 Immuno therapy—Contains immunotherapy status, 
immunotherapy treatment intent, setting, regimen, num-
ber of immunotherapy cycles, immunotherapy regimen 
start date, and complete date.
–	 Radionuclide therapy—List of attributes are following 
status, radionuclide isotope therapy type, radionuclide 
dose in Bequrel, number of radionuclide therapy, start 
date, and end date.
Additionally, a “drugtable” is provided so that granular 
information on each drug delivered to the patient can be 
accommodated as required.
Clinical Data Harmonization
Every medical institute collects the clinical data in a specific 
format through a CDMS. Therefore, there is always a hazard 
that each medical specialist may interpret each data element 
differently. For example, a glioblastoma multiforme patient’s 
anatomic site could be written as the central nervous system, 
CNS, or brain. Similarly, a study date can be obtained in 
a different date format. Likewise, the attribute name can 
vary in several CDMS, such as the side of the tumor can be 
discerned through laterality, disease side, or other phrases. 
Therefore, the attribute list is mapped to the data model for 
every individual project data to overcome these issues.
At the first step toward the clinical data de-identification, 
the system creates a hash-map containing data fields of the 
actual clinical data and encapsulated attribute and entity set 
of the underline database schema, as shown in Fig. 6. The 
a1, a2, a3...an is the list of data elements in exported origi-
nal data, L1, L2, L3...Ln is the composition of attributes and 
entity set. For every project, there is one-to-one attribute 
mapping between the source and the de-identified data field. 
For example, in Fig. 5, a1 is mapped to A1 ( a1 →A1 ). It cre-
ates a knowledge base to discern each record. The attribute 
list is mapped in a relational table. This is exerted for mov-
ing inaccurate, broken, and erroneous data from the original 
treatment dataset. The project configuration file comprises 
a set of structural JSON objects containing the expected 
medical record and the harmonized value. Once an attribute 
matches, the system parses the corresponding clinical data 
and converts it to the normalized form. There are general 
use cases like the gender of a patient who is male, female, 
or transgender. However, this same data can be collected 
inclusive of {male, female, transgender}, {M, F, T}, {0, 1, 
2}, and many other forms. This type of data is contradictory 
to the database. In this circumstance, this file is utilized for 
transforming multi-source data into one cohesive data set.
Journal of Digital Imaging	
1 3
A configuration file is perpetuated for regulating data 
harmonization and validation. It includes project informa-
tion, attribute set of medical records, actual data, and harmo-
nized values. A typical example of the configuration file with 
dummy data shows in Listing 1. It has two objects along with 
the project id. The first one (“default”) is a JSON array, con-
tains the default value, such as the anatomic site for a specific 
project. This array may have N number of JSON objects. An 
inner object “system_attribute_name” —attribute name in 
the data model that keeps the default value. The object holds 
an array having two indexes. The first index contains the 
default value, and the second is the table name where the 
value will be stored. The “valuesmap” object consists of the 
necessary attribute list, which corresponding value needs to 
be harmonized. The “input_data_attribute” is the data field 
name in the actual clinical data. It holds another inner JSON 
object. “system_attribute” is the key of the object, which 
contains two arrays of the same length. One array contains 
the expected value from the input data, and another holds 
actual values that are acquired in the de-identified file. It is 
mapped one to one like array1[0]
Mapped
→array2[0].
The same approach is followed for retaining longitudinal 
temporal information as reported in a previous publication 
[9]. The proposed de-identification system preserves the lon-
gitudinal date changes (LDC) in both projects-driven clinical 
and image data. The same is applied for incremental de-
identification as well.
Clinical Data De‑Identification
The complete process of the clinical data de-identification is 
shown in Fig. 6. At first, a CSV file containing the clinical 
data from a single project is imported to the de-identification 
system. Next, the user has to select the associated project 
name from the list. Once the de-identification starts, the 
system creates a hash map of the original and de-identified 
Fig. 5   Overview of data harmo-
nization
	
Journal of Digital Imaging
1 3
patient ID. Then the system goes through each row of the 
CSV against its actual medical record number. A hash table 
of the attribute set is created with the entity set of the gener-
alized data model. During the de-identification, the system 
parses the value of each mapped attribute and applies LDC 
on all dates. If a corresponding medical record name can 
not be found in the hash list, the system searches it from the 
catalog. If the record exists in the catalog, It is discerned as 
gene, protein, or other molecules. The nonexistence records 
are excluded from the de-identified dataset. Concurrently, a 
log file will be generated, including the list of all discarded 
data fields for emending. Once the data parsing is complete, 
the system applies the harmonization process to every single 
clinical data. Then all distinct tuples are merged in different 
relative objects. And all the objects are encapsulated in a 
single JSON. It contains de-identified clinical data with the 
references of the project.
Case Studies
We have considered at least 30 patients’ data from every pro-
ject. As shown in Table 1, a case study has been performed 
on a total of 150 patients’ complete treatment data. It consists 
of radiological images (diagnostic, treatment therapy plan, 
treatment verification images) and clinical data. The image 
data is compressed in the ZIP format and imported in the 
de-identification system. Total 543 radiological studies are 
de-identified, which includes different modalities such as CT, 
PET, CBCT, MRI, RTSTRUCT, RTPLAN, and RTDOSE.
Glioblastoma Multiforme Treatment Data 
Acquisition
A total of 30 patients with glioblastoma multiforme data are 
taken. The process starts with radiological images, followed 
by the clinical data of the patient. The DICOM images, 
including diagnostic images, RT treatment planning anno-
tated DICOM, plan parameters, RT verification images such 
as CBCT, and RT response images, are exported from TPS. 
A CSV file containing extracted clinical data for each patient 
is obtained from RedCap. Each record contains the actual 
hospital UID corresponding to the clinical records of that 
patient. The treatment information comprises patient demo-
graphic details, imaging data and features, gene mutation, 
patient followup detail, surgery, tumor pathology, chemo-
therapy, radiation, and re-irradiation data. The demographic 
details are incorporated with the PI while replacing the iden-
tifiers like the patient’s hospital UID with de-identified UID 
throughout the de-identification process. Pathology informa-
tion is accommodated in diagnosis, tumor pathology, tumor 
margin, and tumor description. Imaging correlated data are 
mapped to imaging data and imaging feature modules. The 
followup records of the patient are amassed in survival and 
recurrence. Chemotherapy and radiation data can directly be 
shifted to the chemotherapy and radiotherapy correspond-
ingly in the data model. Re-irradiation details are collected 
Fig. 6   Workflow of clinical data 
de-identification
Journal of Digital Imaging	
1 3
in the radiotherapy module as a new instance. There are 
some semantic descriptions of images like edema volume, t2 
enhancement, sub-ventricular zone (SVZ) involvement, etc. 
These entities are not defined distinctly in the existing data 
model. In this situation, the data are collected in the form of 
name and value pairs. Then it is kept in a relational database 
table of the current schema.
The values against clinical data elements are harmo-
nized. The anatomic site is CNS across all the patients of 
this project. Likewise, the diagnosis site is the brain, and 
the radiotherapy setting is adjuvant. Pathology information 
in the source data is following 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. After 
the harmonization, the data is replaced with the consecu-
tive denomination “Anaplastic astrocytoma, IDH-mutant”, 
“Anaplastic astrocytoma, IDH-wildtype”, “Anaplastic astro-
cytoma, NOS”, “Glioblastoma, IDH-wildtype”, “Glioblas-
toma, IDH-mutant”, “Glioblastoma, NOS”. As an example, 
the normalized values of image timing are “Baseline”, “Post 
primary surgery”, “Pre-chemotherapy”, “Interim during 
adjuvant chemotherapy”, “End of treatment”, “Followup”, 
and “Post re-do surgery”.
After the completion of de-identification, the de-identified 
images are stored in a folder tagged with patient ID and study 
instance UID. Then the patient’s clinical data is de-identified 
and encapsulated in a JSON. It contains a de-identified patient 
id along with the reformed clinical data and the corresponding 
project identity. The system de-identifies only delineated data 
fields, and the remaining attributes list appears in a warning 
dialog box. The LDC is preserved on both de-identified images 
and patient health data. In some cases, patients underwent mul-
tiple treatments due to a second primary or recurrence of the 
tumor. In such circumstances, collective repeat instances occur 
for the recapitulated diagnosis, stage information, and treat-
ment details. The clinical data of a patient is shown in Table 7. 
The data field of the input data source and attributes of the data 
model represents a one to one medical record mapping. The “Is 
Modified” column shows the participation of a single record in 
the de-identification process. It has three indications following 
Yes, No, Not Included. If the system applies harmonization, 
LDC, or system-generated value replacement on the original 
clinical data, it shows status “Yes”. “No” indication means the 
original record is acquired without any modification. There is a 
certainty that all attributes of the input data source may not be 
mapped in the system. The unmapped data does not participate 
in the de-identification process. It is specified “Not Included” 
in the column of the table.
It may also occur that the schema has N number of 
attributes in the corresponding table. But data sources 
provide K ( K ⊆N ) number of records. So in this situa-
tion, the system keeps K number of records while (N −K) 
remains NULL.
As shown in Table 2, the statistics for the glioblastoma 
multiforme data de-identification are displayed in tabular 
Table 1   The glossary of the dataset
Total Patient = 150 || Total study = 543
Site
Glioblastoma = 30
IntelHope = 30
HYPORT-B = 30
Lung = 60
Radiological study
99
82
62
300
Diagnostic Images
MRI = 15
PET = 30
PET = 22
NA
CT = 17
RT Therapy planning
CT = 30
CT = 30
PET = 23
CT = 60
RT Therapy verification
CBCT = 22
CBCT = 30
CBCT = 240
RT Therapy Response
MRI = 24
NA
NA
Clinical data
Patient profile information (age, gender, 
registration date, performance status), 
diagnosis, stages, recurrence, imaging 
features, expression profile, treatment 
details, and survival
Patient profile information (age, gender, 
registration date, performance status), 
diagnosis, stages, recurrence, imaging 
features, expression profile, comor-
bidities, treatment details, and smok-
ing/drinking habits
Patient profile information smoking-
drinking habits, diagnosis, stages, 
imaging features, stage information, 
comorbidities, survival, recurrence, 
and tumor pathology —grade
Patient profile information (age, gender, 
registration date, performance status), 
diagnosis, stages, recurrence, imaging 
features, and survival
	
Journal of Digital Imaging
1 3
form. A total of 35 medical records should be de-identified, 
which is successfully de-identified. Similarly, 14 data fields 
are not de-identified, which does not need de-identification.
INTELHOPE Data Acquisition
INTELHOPE is a study on head and neck cancer patients. We 
have taken ten patients’ data for this project. A total number of 
90 studies are de-identified where the anatomic site is chosen 
as head–neck, followed by the laterality of the disease. The 
radiological studies comprise ten diagnostic PET, 30 RT plan-
ning CT, and 22 treatment verification CBCT. The patients 
are planned for radiation therapy in either TomoTherapy®or 
Eclipse treatment planning system (Varian Medical Systems, 
Palo Alto, USA) [10]. First, the RT structure set, RT plan, and 
RT dose files are exported from the TPS. Then the RT treat-
ment planning images are de-identified.
The clinical data are extracted from the CDMS following, 
smoking and drinking habits details, comorbidities (hyperten-
sion, diabetes, ischemic heart disease, chronic renal disease, 
altered hepatic function, chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease), histology, staging, imaging data, treatment, recurrence, 
and survival. The data are imported to the de-identification 
system as a CSV file. After the de-identification, the system 
produces one JSON file containing the de-identified clinical 
data. It also generates a log file that includes all the attribute 
names, which are not de-identified in this process. Finally, 
the de-identified clinical data are mapped to the data model, 
and the actual mr_number is replaced with the de-identified 
patient ID. Smoking and drinking addiction details relate to 
the “Habits” in the schema. The comorbidities of the patient 
are kept in the “Comorbidity” module. The histological sub-
type, date of histopathological, and tumor location are incor-
porated in “Diagnosis”. PETscan and planning ct dates are 
associated with the “Imaging data”. Chemotherapy cycles 
and agents are mapped to the chemotherapy module. Total 
dose, number of fractions, concurrent chemotherapy, RT 
course correspond to the radiotherapy. The randomization 
group, local recurrence, regional recurrence, distant metas-
tases details are wrapped in “Recurrence,” and the date of 
the last assessment is saved in the survival status. The clini-
cal records of an INTELHOPE patient are shown in Table 6. 
The patient’s medical data field mapping, de-identified values, 
and associated modules are displayed in tabular form. It may 
transpire that the de-identified value is an empty string. For 
example, the patient has hypertension or not; A flag is set 
in “comorbidities___1” to get the status of that. Similarly, 
each delineated number with the “comorbidities___” speci-
fies a comorbidity type. As shown in Table 6 Rows 4-9, the 
patient has hypertension and diabetes. Alongside this, the 
patient does not have Ischemic heart disease, chronic renal 
disease, Altered hepatic function, and Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease. The de-identified values of the comor-
bidity remain empty if it is not present in the patient. In such 
cases, the databank can identify these data and keep them out 
of the uploading process. As shown in Table 3, It shows the 
statistics on de-identified and not de-identified attributes. A 
total of 28 medical records needs to be de-identified, which 
is successfully de-identified. Similarly, 11 data fields are not 
de-identified as it is expected to keep the same.
HYPORT‑B Treatment Data Acquisition
In hypofractionated radiation therapy (HYPORT-B) pro-
tocol, ten breast cancer patients’ data are taken. Those are 
having aggressive tumor pathology. A total of 30 stud-
ies are associated with the treatment process. First, the 
radiological data are de-identified, followed by the clini-
cal data. Every radiological study contains a JSON file 
after the de-identification. It includes the anatomic site 
“Breast”, indicates the determined laterality of the tumor 
and image type. The clinical data includes patient informa-
tion (age, gender, registration date, performance status), 
smoking/drinking habits, diagnosis, stages, imaging fea-
tures, stage information, comorbidities, survival, recur-
rence, and tumor pathology—grade. The treatment data 
consist of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Some recurrent 
features are used for all the breast cancer patients, such as 
the intent of the treatment is palliative, recurrence type as 
a progressive disease, pathology being Invasive mammary 
carcinoma, adjuvant type chemotherapy is given.
Lung Treatment Data Acquisition
Randomized Phase II of Immunotherapy With Pembroli-
zumab for the Prevention of Lung Cancer (IMPRINT-Lung) 
trial is used to treat the patients. As shown in Table 1, 60 
Table 2   The statistics for the de-identification status of Glioblastoma 
multiforme data
Records de-identified
Records not 
de-identified
Data fields need to be de-
identified
35
0
Data fields not to be de-
identified
0
14
Table 3   The statistics for the de-identification status of INTELHOPE 
data
Total = 39
Records de-
identified
Records not 
de-identified
Data fields need to be de-identified
28
0
Data fields not to be de-identified
0
11
Journal of Digital Imaging	
1 3
patients’ data consists of 300 studies is de-identified with the 
associated clinical data. The LDC is applied to the date and 
DateTime values for both datasets. The radiological images 
contain CT and CBCT modalities. The CT images are used 
for diagnostic and treatment planning. The CBCT images 
are taken for the therapy verification.
Experimental Validation
The de-identified results are validated for the individual research 
project data. The clinical records de-identification is manually 
scrutinized by comparing it with the actual data—a group of the 
radiation oncologist and physicist involved in this process. The 
decisive points of the validation were the following,
–	 Feasibility of the data model for archiving in a databank.
–	 Harmonization effects to ensure data quality and consistency.
Feasibility of the Data Model for Archiving 
in a Databank
After the completion of the de-identification process, 
the dataset is transformed into a specific structure. The 
de-identified data is mapped to the associated attribute 
and table name, which is defined in the database schema. 
All the medical records are then uploaded to the data-
bank. Thus it is ensured that any data entered in the data 
bank should be screened by the de-identification system. 
Manual or external data entry is not allowed to ensure 
error-free and redundant data entry. We test the upload 
process with the existing data. The databank first recog-
nizes the project details and obtains the dataset from the 
JSON. Then it extracts each object as a form of a data-
base table. And it parses the inner object contains key/
value pairs. The keys are attribute set, and values are the 
corresponding de-identified record. In the process, each 
data is captured and fit in the ER model of the databank. 
We have shown in Listing 2 the structure of data after 
de-identification.
Technology Details of the JSON Dataset   The de-
identified dataset is assembled in a single object into the 
JSON. A single object is a collection of name/value pairs, 
which are coated with curly braces. The JSON array is 
an ordered list of values and is covered by square braces. 
The complete de-identified data is a set of umpteen JSON 
objects and arrays. The outer object contains the two ele-
ments following project ID and table information. The 
“tables” is a JSON array that contains the entity list as set 
objects. Each object has three components: de-identified 
	
Journal of Digital Imaging
1 3
patient ID (“dcmpatientid”), table name, and study occur-
rence. The “diagnosis” is the table name of the database 
schema. It contains the list of attributes and associated 
values in an object. This inner object is typically a key/
value pair. Key is the column name of the table, and value 
is the corresponding attribute value. At last, “objectid” 
indicates the number of occurrences of the study for the 
particular patient.
We have shown in Fig. 3 the key attributes for connecting 
the clinical records with the radiological data. Every treat-
ment module has a unique identifier that is created based on 
the “objectid” and the position in the hierarchy.
Harmonization Effects to Ensure Data Quality 
and Consistency
The radiation oncologist and physicist exported the actual 
clinical data from the CDMS. Then de-identified JSON data-
set was reviewed and verified manually against the original 
dataset. We observed that LDC was consistently applied, 
while any date format was changed in the YYYY-MM-DD 
form. A few clinical data were encoded correctly with code 
values. In this situation, the code values are replaced with the 
harmonized string. Project-specific data were also included 
in the de-identified dataset.
Complex Query Processing and Benefits
The de-identified records are relational data. The desirable 
data can be extracted from given complex queries. A few 
typical examples are presented below.
–	 Query example 1:  Find the survival status of more than 
37-year-old female having invasive mammary carcinoma 
(ca) diagnosed of ca breast visceral crisis (cN2M1) 
human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER) 2 (+ve) 
started on anti HER 2 therapy.
–	 SQL
Table 4   Result set for query 
example 1
Patient ID
Last Followup Date
Status
Date of Death
TTML01920130311122005202100002
2019-08-09
Dead
2020-02-06
TTML01920130311122005202100003
2019-06-08
Alive
TTML01920130311122005202100020
2020-02-06
Alive
TTML01920130311122005202100032
2020-01-11
Alive
Table 5   Result set for query example 2
Patient ID
DICOM Study UID
Image Type
Anatomic Site
Modality
DICOMReference
TMCKL01920130311122701202000004
20130311122701202000004.0
RT Treatment 
Planning
Brain
CT
/home/surajit/ iMediX/tomcat7 /webapps/
CHAVIRO-DATABANK/ DICOM-
DATA/ TMCKL0192013031112270120
2000004/ 20130311122701202000004.0
Journal of Digital Imaging	
1 3
–	 Utilization:  This kind of query is used for finding the 
survival details of real world patient (See Table 4).
–	 Result:  
–	 Query example 2:  Find the radiological studies of the 
alive patients who are suffering from Glioblastoma, IDH-
wild type and the timing of the imaging is End of treat-
ment with presence of edema having gross total resection 
surgery (See Table 5).
–	 SQL
–	 Result:  
–	 Utilization:  This case is worth in finding the radiologi-
cal images from the clinical records.
Discussion And Conclusion
There are several studies on patient health records and clinical 
data de-identification. An effective de-identification system, 
named “deid.pl” [11] is developed in 2009. It discusses dif-
ferent strategies for de-identifying the patient health records 
and clinical data. A development process of biomarker [12] is 
reported for quantitative imaging research. In this biomarker, 
the clinical data of head and neck cancer patients is manu-
ally extracted and stored in a PostgreSQL relational database. 
The same patient’s PET/CT data are taken in DICOM format 
and demonstrate the capability of DICOM standard. Also, it 
represents the interrelationships between imaging and clinical 
information. A study on archiving image and clinical data of 
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients [13] was car-
ried out in 2018. The patients are treated with curative intent 
RT. The clinical data comprises patient’s demographics infor-
mation, stages, risk factors, recurrence, grade, and survival 
data. The Posda tool [14] from TCIA is used for the pres-
ervation of the hierarchy structure. Another state-of-the-art 
describes non-small cell lung cancer dataset acquisition [15]. 
The radiological images are CT and PET-CT in this study. 
These data are de-identified using the CTP anonymization 
tool [16]. The patient information other than imaging data 
consists of the mutation profile, expression profile, imaging 
features, survival outcomes, smoking status, stage informa-
tion, histopathological grade, and profile information such as 
age, sex, weight, and ethnicity.
The research-driven data model is developed, facilitat-
ing de-identification and segmenting diverse disciplines of 
cancer patients’ data. This dataset can be exploited in inflex-
ible and accurate modeling of information related to several 
research projects. The Oncospace is used for efficient data 
retrieval and curation. It has a very good impact on statistical 
analysis and other decision support on real-life clinical data. 
The proposed system harmonized the dataset to maintain 
data quality and consistency, which increases the usability of 
the data for further research. However, we have similarities 
like both methods are using a hierarchical ER model. In our 
exposition, the schema includes an extensive list of studies 
and treatment details. The system is compatible to accom-
modate the data that does not belong to the existing data 
model. We made the database schema generic to store vari-
ous disease site data. The data can also be classified and seg-
mented site-wise. Both the radiological and clinical data are 
involved in the de-identification process, which perpetuates 
	
Journal of Digital Imaging
1 3
the interrelationships among them. An open-source applica-
tion, the Posda tool uses a normalized permissive database 
schema that differs from traditional DICOM databases. It 
is capable of automatic integrity checking on a bulk basis 
DICOM data [17]. It collects imaging data, clinical data, 
pathology data, particular sites, cancer types, and treatment 
or imaging modalities. The clinical dataset is kept in a file 
and stored in the database. Our proposed schema represents 
a robust design. Each radiomics study can easily be classi-
fied as every entity is connected in the relational model. The 
classification can be done at each level like disease site wise, 
patient wise, study wise.
We recommend this system for radiation oncology patients’ 
data collection. An experimental trial of de-identification and 
validation is performed on a few studies. The clinical data and 
imaging data both maintain referential integrity. The dataset 
is capture based on an underlined ER model in JSON format 
while the clinical data is normalized. This will helps in com-
plex query processing and desirable data searching.
A Appendix I
The Input and Output Clinical Dataset Uses 
for De‑Identification Process
Table 6   The clinical dataset of a patient under INTELHOPE study
Medical Terms (Semantic)
Input Attributes
Is Modified Mapped Attributes
De-identified Values
Associated Module
Patient Hospital ID
mrn
Yes
systempatientid
2013031803202000001
Patient Information
Date of Registration
date_of_registration Yes
date_registered_center
2017-07-21
Patient Information
Patient age
age
No
age
61
Patient Information
Hypertension
co_morbidities___1 Yes
comorbidity_type
Hypertension
Comorbidity
Diabetes
co_morbidities___2 Yes
comorbidity_type
Diabetes
Comorbidity
Ischemic heart disease
co_morbidities___3 Yes
comorbidity_type
Comorbidity
Chronic renal disease
co_morbidities___4 Yes
comorbidity_type
Comorbidity
Altered hepatic function
co_morbidities___5 Yes
comorbidity_type
Comorbidity
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease
co_morbidities___6 Yes
comorbidity_type
Comorbidity
WHO Performance Status
performance_status
No
performance_status
1
Patient Information
Habit of taking alcohol
alcohol
Yes
substance_used
Habits
Habit of smoking
smoking
Yes
substance_used
Smoking
Habits
Histological Subtype
hpe_subtype
Yes
pathology
squamous cell carcinoma Diagnosis
Date of histopathological 
diagnosis
hpe_date
Yes
diagnosis_date
2016-07-20
Diagnosis
Location of tumour
tumour_location
No
diagnsosis_site
2
Diagnosis
HPV status
hpvstatus
Yes
protein_tested
p16
IHC Profile
ihc_result
Positive
Randomization Group
rand_grp
No
randomization_group
1
Name/value Pair
Tumour stage
t_stage
Yes
t_stage
3
Stage information
Nodal stage
n_stage
Yes
n_stage
2C
Stage Information
Planning PET Scan date
petscan_date
Yes
imagedate
2017-08-06
Imaging data
Planning CT scan date
planning_ct_date
Yes
imagedate
2017-08-06
Imaging data
Planned Total Dose(Gy) of RT
total_dose
No
radiotherapy_dose
66
Radiotherapy
Total Number of Fractions of 
radiotherapy
total_fractions
No
radiotherapy_fractions
30
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy Start Date
rt_start_date
Yes
startdate
2017-08-19
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy End Date
rt_end_date
Yes
enddate
2017-09-28
Radiotherapy
Concurrent Chemotherapy
conc_chemo
No
concurrentchemotherapy 1
Radiotherapy
Number of cycles of chemo-
therapy given
chemo_cycles
No
Chemotherapy cycles
6
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy agent used
chemo_agent
No
Chemotherapy regimen
CISPLATIN
Chemotherapy
Boost target volume
btv
No
boost_volume
55.67
Name/value Pair
Planning target volume
ptv1
No
planning_target_volume
188.03
Name/value Pair
Journal of Digital Imaging	
1 3
Table 6   (continued)
Medical Terms (Semantic)
Input Attributes
Is Modified Mapped Attributes
De-identified Values
Associated Module
3 months followup date of 
assessment
mon3_date
Yes
last_followup_date
01-01-2018
Survival
Local Recurrence in 3 months 
followup
mon3_lr
Yes
responselocation
Recurrence
Date of local recurrence in 3 
months followup
mon3_date_lr
Yes
dateresponseassess
Recurrence
Regional Recurrence in 3 
months followup
mon3_rr
Yes
responselocation
Recurrence
Date of regional recurrence in 3 
months followup
mon3_date_rr
Yes
dateresponseassess
Recurrence
Distant Metastases in 3 months 
followup
mon3_dm
Yes
responselocation
Recurrence
Date of distant metastases in 3 
months followup
mon3_date_dm
Yes
dateresponseassess
Recurrence
Death known in 3 months fol-
lowup
mon3_death
Yes
status
Survival
Date of death in 3 months fol-
lowup
mon3_date_death
Yes
dateofdeath
Survival
Table 7   The clinical dataset of a patient under Glioblastoma multiforme study
Medical Terms (Seman-
tic)
Input Attributes
Is Modified
Mapped Attributes
De-identified Values
Associated Module
Patient Hospital ID
mr_number
Yes
systempatientid
2013032611201900005
Patient Information
redcap_repeat_instance
No
objectid
1…N
All
Date of first registration
date_first_registration
Yes
date_registered_center
2016-11-12
Patient Information
Patient Name
name
Not Included X
X
X
Patient Age
age
No
age
30
Patient Information
Patient Gender
gender
No
gender
FEMALE
Patient Information
NPS/ECOG_baseline
performance_status
No
performance_status
1
Patient Information
MRI_Date
mri_date
Yes
imagedate
2016-11-15
Imaging Data
Location
location
Yes
site_abnormality
Frontal
Imaging Feature
MRI_Timing
mri_timing
Yes
imaging_timing
Post primary surgery
Imaging Feature
T1W Contrast enhance-
ment
enhancement
Yes
enhancement
Yes
Imaging Feature
Perilesional edema
edema
Yes
edema
1
Imaging Feature
T2W Changes
enhancement_t2
Yes
enhancement_t2
1
Name/value pair
Subventricular zone 
involvement
svz
Yes
svz
1
Name/value pair
Crossing Midline
midline
Yes
midline
0
Name/value pair
Corpus Callosum 
Involvement
callosum
Yes
callosum
0
Name/value pair
Necrotic Core
necrotic_core
No
necrotic_core
0
Name/value pair
SVZ SIDE
side_svz
Yes
side_svz
1
Name/value pair
T1C volume in cc
t1c_volume
No
t1c_volume
36.3
Name/value pair
T2FL PBZ volume in cc
edema_vol
No
edema_vol
78.4
Name/value pair
T2 volume in cc
t2contrast_vol
No
t2contrast_vol
81.4
Name/value pair
MRI Disease Status
mri_disease_status
Yes
disease_status_img
Subtotal resection
Imaging Feature
MRI Disease Details
mri_disease_progres-
sion_details
No
disease_progression_
type
5
Imaging Feature
Remarks MRI
remarks_mri
Not Included X
X
X
Imaging Impression
imaging_impression
Not Included X
X
X
Date of Surgery
date_of_surgery
Yes
surgerydate
2016-10-17
Surgery
	
Journal of Digital Imaging
1 3
Table 7   (continued)
Medical Terms (Seman-
tic)
Input Attributes
Is Modified
Mapped Attributes
De-identified Values
Associated Module
Extent of resection
extent_of_resection
No
extent_of_resection
2
Surgery
Surgery Remarks
surgery_remarks
Not Included X
X
X
Pathology Date
pathology_date
Yes
pathology_date
2016-11-27
Diagnosis
Diffuse astrocytic and 
oligodendroglial 
tumours
diffuse_astrocytic_and_
oligodendroglial_
tumours
Yes
pathology
Glioblastoma, IDH-
mutant
Diagnosis
MGMT methylation 
status
mgmt
Yes
gene_tested
MGMT
Expression Profile
expression_result
Not Known
TERT mutation
tert
Yes
gene_tested
TERT
Expression Profile
expression_result
Not Known
ATRX
atrx
Yes
gene_tested
ATRX
Expression Profile
expression_result
Not Known
TP53
p53
Yes
gene_tested
TP53
Expression Profile
expression_result
Wildtype
Remarks
remarks
Not Included X
X
X
Paraffin block available
wax_block
Not Included X
X
X
Radiation therapy
rt_used_or_not
Yes
radiotherapy_given
Yes
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy Dose
rt_dose
No
radiotherapy_dose
1
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy Start Date
rt_start_date
Yes
radiotherapy_startdate
2016-12-03
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy End Date
rt_end_date
Yes
radiotherapy_enddate
2017-01-15
Radiotherapy
Corticosteroid use at any 
point during RT
steroids_during_rt
Yes
concurrentmedication
Yes
Radiotherapy
RT_Concurrent TMZ @ 
75mg/m2
conc_tmz
Yes
concurrentchemotherapy
TMZ
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy Remarks
rt_remarks
Not Included X
X
X
Reirradiation Therapy
re_rt_used_or_not
Yes
is_reiradiation
Yes
Radiotherapy
Re-Radiotherapy Dose
re_rt_dose
Not Included X
X
X
Re-Radiotherapy Start 
Date
re_rt_start_date
Yes
radiotherapy_dose
2019-07-14
Radiotherapy
Re-Radiotherapy End 
Date
re_rt_end_date
Yes
radiotherapy_enddate
2019-09-13
Radiotherapy
Corticosteroid use at any 
point during RE_RT
steroids_during_re_rt
Yes
concurrentmedication
Yes
Radiotherapy
RE_RT_Concurrent 
TMZ @ 75mg/m2
conc_tmz_re_rt
Yes
concurrentchemotherapy
TMZ
Radiotherapy
Re-radiotherapy Remarks
re_rt_remarks
Not Included X
X
X
Primary chemotherapy 
protocol
primary_chemo_proto-
col_used
No
chemotherapyregimen
1
Chemotherapy
Number of cycles
cycles
No
chemotherapycycles
6
Chemotherapy
Salvage Chemotherapy 
Protocol
salvage_chemotherapy_
proto
Not Included X
X
X
Number of cycles
cycle
Not Included X
X
X
Date of last followup
date_registration
Yes
last_followup_date
2018-03-29
Survival
Survival Status at the last 
followup
status_lastfu
Yes
status
Dead
Survival
Date of death
date_of_death
Yes
dateofdeath
2018-03-29
Survival
Disease status at last 
followup
disease_last_followup
Yes
recurrencetype
Progressive Disease
Recurrence
Date of disease progres-
sion
progression_date
Yes
recurrencedate
2017-11-11
Recurrence
PFS Initial Treatment
pfs_initial_treatment
No
durationrecurrencefree
403260
Recurrence
Journal of Digital Imaging	
1 3
Acknowledgements  This project is funded under National Digital 
Library of India (NDLI) sponsored by Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (MHRD), Govt. of India.
Funding  This study has been funded by the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development IN (IIT/SRIC/CS/NDM/2018-19/096). None 
of the authors have conflicts of interest to declare. The CHAVI protocol 
is approved by the institutional review board at the Tata Medical Center 
Kolkata and consent waiver for taken for storing data from retrospec-
tive studies. The reference no is EC/GOVT/24/IRB23 on August 31, 
2018.   After the inception of the biobank, patients have given writ-
ten informed consent for storing their images and clinical data in the 
biobank prospectively.
References
	 1.	 W. D. Bidgood Jr, S. C. Horii, F. W. Prior, and D. E. Van Syckle, 
“Understanding and using dicom, the data interchange standard 
for biomedical imaging,” Journal of the American Medical Infor-
matics Association, 4(3):199–212, 1997.
	 2.	 K. Aryanto, M. Oudkerk, and P. van Ooijen, “Free dicom de-
identification tools in clinical research: functioning and safety of 
patient privacy,” European radiology, 25(12):3685–3695, 2015.
	 3.	 P. Vcelak, M. Kryl, M. Kratochvil, and J. Kleckova, “Identification 
and classification of dicom files with burned-in text content,” Inter-
national journal of medical informatics, 126:128–137, 2019.
	 4.	 F. Prior, K. Smith, A. Sharma, J. Kirby, L. Tarbox, K. Clark, W. Bennett, 
T. Nolan, and J. Freymann, “The public cancer radiology imaging col-
lections of the cancer imaging archive,” Scientific data, 4:170124, 2017.
	 5.	 M. R. Bowers, T. R. McNutt, J. W. Wong, M. H. Phillips, K. R. 
Hendrickson, P. Kwok, W. Song, and T. L. DeWeese, “Oncospace 
consortium: A shared radiation oncology database system designed 
for personalized medicine and research,” International Journal of 
Radiation Oncology Biology Physics, 93(3):E385, 2015.
	 6.	 U. UNNExT, UNESCAP, “Data harmonization and modelling 
guide for single windows environment,” 2012.
	 7.	 P. A. Harris, R. Taylor, B. L. Minor, V. Elliott, M. Fernandez, 
L. O’Neal, L. McLeod, G. Delacqua, F. Delacqua, J. Kirby, et al., 
“The redcap consortium: Building an international community of 
software platform partners,” Journal of biomedical informatics, 
95:103208, 2019.
	 8.	 P. A. Harris, R. Taylor, R. Thielke, J. Payne, N. Gonzalez, 
and J. G. Conde, “Research electronic data capture (redcap)–a 
metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for pro-
viding translational research informatics support,” Journal of 
biomedical informatics, 42(2):377–381, 2009.
	 9.	 S. Kundu, S. Chakraborty, S. Chatterjee, S. Das, R. B. Achari, 
J. Mukhopadhyay, and P. P. Das, “De-identification of radiomics 
data retaining longitudinal temporal information” Journal of Medi-
cal Systems, 2020.
	10.	 M. W. Kan, L. H. Leung, and K. Peter, “The use of biologically 
related model (eclipse) for the intensity-modulated radiation 
therapy planning of nasopharyngeal carcinomas,” PloS One, 
9(11):e112229, 2014.
	11.	 F. P. Morrison, S. Sengupta, and G. Hripcsak, “Using a pipeline 
to improve de-identification performance,” In AMIA Annual Sym-
posium Proceedings, volume 2009, page 447. American Medical 
Informatics Association, 2009.
	12.	 A. Fedorov, D. Clunie, E. Ulrich, C. Bauer, A. Wahle, B. Brown, 
M. Onken, J. Riesmeier, S. Pieper, R. Kikinis, et al., “Dicom for 
quantitative imaging biomarker development: a standards based 
approach to sharing clinical data and structured pet/ct analysis 
results in head and neck cancer research,” PeerJ, 4:e2057, 2016.
	13.	 A. J. Grossberg, A. S. Mohamed, H. Elhalawani, W. C. Bennett, 
K. E. Smith, T. S. Nolan, B. Williams, S. Chamchod, J. Heukelom, 
M. E. Kantor, et al., “Imaging and clinical data archive for head 
and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients treated with radio-
therapy,” Scientific data, 5:180173, 2018.
	14.	 W. Bennett, J. Matthews, and W. Bosch, “Su-gg-t-262: Open-
source tool for assessing variability in dicom data,” Medical Phys-
ics, 37(6Part19):3245, 2010.
	15.	 S. Bakr, O. Gevaert, S. Echegaray, K. Ayers, M. Zhou, M. Shafiq, 
H. Zheng, J. A. Benson, W. Zhang, A. N. Leung, et al., “A radiog-
enomic dataset of non-small cell lung cancer,” Scientific data, 
5(1):1–9, 2018.
	16.	 O. Brook, “Radiological society of north america, inc. ctp-the rsna 
clinical trial processor,”
	17.	 W. Bennett, K. Smith, Q. Jarosz, T. Nolan, and W. Bosch, “Reen-
gineering workflow for curation of dicom datasets,” Journal of 
digital imaging, 31(6):783–791, 2018.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
