Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
Available online 17 May 2024
0304-3835/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Review Articles 
Revisiting the advances and challenges in the clinical applications of 
extracellular vesicles in cancer 
Guangpeng He a,b,1, Jiaxing Liu a,b,1, Yifan Yu a,b, Shibo Wei a,b, Xueqiang Peng a,b,**, 
Liang Yang a,b,***, Hangyu Li a,b,* 
a Department of General Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, 110032, China 
b Shenyang Clinical Medical Research Center for Diagnosis, Treatment and Health Management of Early Digestive Cancer, Shenyang, 110032, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Tumor microenvironment 
Drug delivery 
Biomarker 
EV heterogeneity 
A B S T R A C T   
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been the subject of an exponentially growing number of studies covering their 
biogenesis mechanisms, isolation and analysis techniques, physiological and pathological roles, and clinical 
applications, such as biomarker and therapeutic uses. Nevertheless, the heterogeneity of EVs both challenges our 
understanding of them and presents new opportunities for their potential application. Recently, the EV field 
experienced a wide range of advances. However, the challenges also remain huge. This review focuses on the 
recent progress and difficulties encountered in the practical use of EVs in clinical settings. In addition, we also 
explored the concept of EV heterogeneity to acquire a more thorough understanding of EVs and their involve­
ment in cancer, specifically focusing on the fundamental nature of EVs.   
1. Introduction 
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) arise from all cells and are similar in 
topology to the cell, having a lipid bilayer membrane but no functional 
nucleus [1,2]. EVs naturally carry various bioactive materials (such as 
proteins, nucleic acids, glycoconjugates, lipids, etc.) and function as an 
important transport and signal transduction system in the body in 
pathophysiological processes (e.g. human reproduction, pregnancy, 
embryonic development, tumors [3]. The functions of EVs in the pro­
liferation, metastasis, immune response, treatment resistance, and other 
cancer hallmarks are deciphered gradually and the reports related to the 
diverse roles of EVs in cancer are increasing explosively [4–6]. Among 
these EV-related researches, the therapeutic usage and functioning as 
biomarkers of EVs are gaining more and more attraction due to the huge 
value in potential clinical translation, which could transform present 
clinical practice [7–9]. EVs with natural or artificial advantages showed 
excellent potential as drug delivery tools [7–9]. The resources of EVs in 
therapeutic applications and the combination of EV modifications are 
various [7–9]. Besides, it’s demonstrated effective in directly targeting 
EVs in tumor-bearing mice via several novel elimination methods [10, 
11]. In terms of functioning as biomarkers, analysis strategies are 
evolving from taking advantage of a single property or molecule, 
comprehensively analyzing multiple properties or molecules [12,13], 
and combining EV analysis with other liquid biopsies [14] to the 
application of machine learning [15,16] in EVs. However, despite the 
advances in the clinical application of EVs, the challenges remain 
outstanding. For instance, the heterogeneity of EVs not only benefits the 
applications of EVs but also blocks our understanding of EVs [6]. 
This study primarily focused on the crucial role of EV heterogeneity 
in our current understanding and recent advancements in the field of EV 
heterogeneity. Subsequently, we reassessed the diverse functions of EVs 
in cancer, focusing on their substantial role, which distinguishes this 
study from previous studies. Finally, we examined current progress in 
the utilization of EVs, particularly in the context of cancer. Nevertheless, 
we focused on common scenarios rather than including all associated 
research to establish a broad structure for the application of EVs in 
clinical settings. 
* Corresponding author. Department of General Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, 110032, China. 
** Corresponding author. Department of General Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, 110032, China. 
*** Corresponding author. Department of General Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang, 110032, China 
E-mail addresses: xqpeng@cmu.edu.cn (X. Peng), 20191264@cmu.edu.cn (L. Yang), sj_li_hangyu@sina.com (H. Li).   
1 These authors contributed equally: Guangpeng He, Jiaxing Liu. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Cancer Letters 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/canlet 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2024.216960 
Received 14 March 2024; Received in revised form 26 April 2024; Accepted 13 May 2024   
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
2
2. The EV heterogeneity 
The most dominant feature of EVs is heterogeneities which not only 
represent the promising aspects of EVs but are also among the biggest 
obstacles to a better understanding of these organelles [6]. EVs is a 
general and heterogenous term referring to different kinds of vesicles 
from cells. At present, EVs can be divided into some main subtypes, 
including exosomes, ectosomes, and apoptotic bodies. The biogenesis of 
exosomes involves the formation of intraluminal vesicles (ILVs, 
pre-exosomes) in multivesicular bodies (MVBs) via ESCRT-dependent or 
ESCRT-independent mechanisms and the fusion of fusion of MVBs with 
the plasma membrane [3]. The ectosomes (also known as microvesicles) 
are directly shed from the plasma membrane [3] while apoptotic bodies 
are the products of cell apoptosis [7]. However, some new subtypes of 
EVs have been identified, including secretory autophagosomes/amphi­
somes which were generated by the fusion of vesicles originating from 
macroautophagy or MVB-autophagosome fusion, and the plasma 
membrane, migrasomes which were generated from retraction fibers 
when cell migrated [17], retractosomes resulting from broken-off 
retraction fibers [18], and so on. Besides, the biogenesis of these EVs 
is context-specific [19]and may vary in different cell types [9]. Due to 
the heterogeneity in EV biogenesis, these EVs also differ in structure. 
The most different aspect of the structure is EV size. Exosomes range 
from 30 to 150 nm, ectosomes range from 50 to 10, 000 nm, apoptotic 
bodies range from 50 to 5, 000 nm, migrasomes range from 500 to 3, 
000 nm, and retractosomes range from 50 nm to 250 nm [9,18]. The 
cargoes (including lipids, proteins, nucleic acids, and other materials) of 
EVs also are both multifarious and heterogeneous. Taking exosomal 
proteins as an example, they include tetraspanins, heat shock proteins, 
lipid raft proteins, cytoskeletal proteins, as well as proteins integral to 
multivesicular body formation, membrane transport and fusion, antigen 
presentation, and adhesion [20]. These proteins actively engage in 
processes like cell membrane fusion and the release of exosomes [20]. 
Heterogeneities in the EV subtypes, biogenesis, origin, size, contents, 
and biofunctions of EVs also have been identified by most researchers 
[3,6]. Nevertheless, it is necessary to thoroughly examine additional 
physicochemical and biological characteristics, such as affinity/immu­
noaffinity, density, stiffness, bending modulus, osmotic pressure, elec­
tric charge, pH, and gravity. Consequently, we have incorporated these 
qualities into the heterogeneities of EVs. Interestingly, most available 
isolation methods for EVs are based on these basic properties such as 
ultracentrifugation or density gradient centrifugation based on size, 
mass, and density, filtration (ultrafiltration and sequential filtration), 
and size-exclusion chromatography based on size [21,22]. Recently, 
some new technologies have been developed that take advantage of 
different properties to isolate EVs. For example, cyclical electrical field 
flow fractionation (Cy-El-FFF) was developed to isolate exosomes based 
on both size and charge [23]. Understanding these characteristics can 
spur significant advancements in the EV space and help us identify the 
diverse heterogeneities connected to EVs. To understand the intricate 
communication mechanisms between cells in the context of various 
diseases, particularly cancer, we can use these fundamental character­
istics to identify some significant subpopulations of EVs. In addition, 
these crucial features have a strong correlation with the phenotypes of 
the disease or tumor. Several previous studies (such as size and contents) 
[6] and recent advances have proven this aspect [24–27]. The stiffness 
and osmotic pressure are positively associated with the malignancy of 
the 
tumor-derived 
small 
extracellular 
vesicles 
(sEVs) 
and 
negative-related with the size of the tumor-derived sEVs but the bending 
modulus can significantly decrease with increasing malignancy of the 
sEVs and was found to be lower in smaller sEVs [24]. The corona of EVs, 
which is partially developed through electrostatic interactions, is 
another major advancement relative to these fundamental features. In 
essence, EV corona is cargo, but it also occurs outside and around EVs, 
supporting our theory that EV cargoes were more significant than their 
contents [6,25]. Besides this nonspecific electrostatic absorbance, 
ligand-receptor interactions and protein-protein interactions are also 
involved in the formation of corona [25]. The biological significance of 
the corona is enormous. The corona (EVs-LDL interaction) from the 
brain metastases cells can access the monocytes more easily and plays an 
important role in the formation of brain metastases niches [26], whereas 
the corona (WNT11 on exosome surface) derived from fibroblast can 
stimulate the activity, motility as well as invasion of the breast cancer 
cells [28]. In addition, a recent article demonstrated that the corona can 
significantly enhance angiogenesis, skin regeneration, and immuno­
modulation [27]. A recent study showed there were great differences in 
the electroactive cargo of EVs from different cell lines [29], which also 
indicated the great clinical translation potential of some EV properties 
that were not well-studied previously, although the differences between 
healthy people and cancer patients remained unknown. Hence, it is 
important to consider multiple aspects when studying the heterogene­
ities of EVs to fully comprehend their diverse and complex roles. 
Therefore, we should expand our awareness of the various dimensions of 
heterogeneities in EVs. We anticipate further research that examines 
additional characteristics of EVs, not just in mammalian cells but also in 
microorganisms. 
It is well-established that various cells, or even the same cell under 
different circumstances, can release diverse EVs into bodily fluids. This 
phenomenon is crucial for liquid biopsy using EVs since the EVs can 
transport a wide range of biomaterials. This characteristic of EVs can 
significantly improve the effectiveness of drug delivery [6]. This claim 
does not, however, imply that all EVs from the same cell are identical in 
every condition. Since the processes of cargo loading and biogenesis are 
dynamic, two EVs produced by a single cell under the same circum­
stances may differ from one another. Moreover, this argument does not 
preclude the existence of similarities between EVs derived from distinct 
cell types or the same cells under disparate environmental circum­
stances. Conversely, the fact that EVs are non-identifiable in several 
ways ensures that none of the platforms for separation in use today can 
collect entirely pure EV populations. One of the most exquisite studies 
by Smith et al. provides the best example for the following two points 
[30]. Raman spectroscopy was employed to detect exosomes at the in­
dividual vesicle level. The researchers used hierarchical clustering 
analysis to separate exosomes from seven different cell lines into four 
distinct subpopulations. This separation was based on the unique 
vibrational signatures of certain proteins, phospholipids, and cholesterol 
[30]. All exosomes from 3T3 cell lines fall into one cluster whereas six 
other cell lines (including A549, Huh-7, SKOV3, Kasumi-1, Jurkat, and 
IMR90) had exosomes in more than one cluster [30], which demon­
strated the heterogeneities in one cell line. However, all four acquired 
exosome clusters were composed of exosomes from more than one cell 
line and A549, Huh-7, and 3T3 cells displayed similar exosome pop­
ulations [30], which indicates that EVs from different cells or the same 
cells living under different conditions can share some similarities. Our 
primary objective is to investigate the biological similarities underlying 
these variations and subsequently implement them in clinical settings. 
Nevertheless, no two EVs are indeed completely identical. Due to the 
significant variations observed at the level of individual vesicles and the 
common practice of analyzing vesicles in large quantities or by averaged 
measurements [31], the development of a single-vesicle atlas can be 
considered a major advancement in the research of EVs. Traditional 
single EV analysis includes nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), atomic 
force microscopy (AFM), and microscopic imaging, which are lacking 
because of the low throughput and limited detectable information [31]. 
Other popular individual EV investigations include (nano-)flow cytom­
etry and advanced microfluidic systems, which provide additional in­
formation and allow for the relatively high throughput isolation and 
identification of single EVs based on fluorescence staining. In addition, 
other available reviews provide relevant benefits and recommendations 
[32,33]. 
Fortunately, 
several 
novel 
single-vesicle 
technologies 
(including above Raman spectroscopy, PBA, and NP-SIMS) have signif­
icantly expanded our horizons regarding heterogeneities at the 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
3
single-vesicle level [31,34–36]. Nanoprojectile (NP) secondary ion mass 
spectrometry (NP-SIMS) could detect four markers at individual EVs, 
which enables to distinction of EVs from hepatocytes and liver cancer 
cells [36]. About 200 surface proteins on a single exosome can be pro­
filed using the proximity barcoding assay (PBA), and single-exosome 
high-throughput analysis [34]. For example, there were 12 different 
exosome subpopulations identified in CRC patients and healthy people 
and two special subtypes were found. ITGAM+ exosomes were enriched 
in healthy individuals and suppressed CRC development whereas 
ITGB3+ exosomes were enriched in CRC patients with hepatic metastasis 
and promoted CRC progression [37]. The more practical single EV ap­
proaches, which allow for the detection of multiparametric even large 
numbers of components, are still required. Moreover, there is still a great 
deal of uncertainty and disagreement surrounding the spatial and tem­
poral heterogeneity of EVs. Some research focused on the bio­
distribution of EVs in vivo, which impacted both the therapeutic usage 
and the biomarker function of EVs. On the one hand, the surface proteins 
on EVs and the administration method could impact the effect of the 
therapeutic EVs by affecting target organs or cell kinds in vivo (more 
details available in Part 4.1). One the other hand, the biodistribution of 
EVs in vivo determined which body liquid should be collected when 
using EVs as biomarkers (more details available in Part 4.2). 
3. The role of EVs in tumors 
All the cells release EVs into the tumor microenvironment (TME), 
forming an EV communication network (EVnet) in which both the ma­
lignant cells and non-malignant cells could experience autocrine self- 
communication or interact with each other [9,38]. A comprehensive 
elaboration about the roles of EVs in tumor biology appears to be very 
complicated [6] and hence we just provide a conceptualization of the 
role of EVs in tumor biology. When examining the potential involvement 
of EVs in any disease, including cancer, it is essential to adhere to the 
following fundamental principles: EVs function as vehicles or conveyors 
of biological information. Consequently, the inherent cargo of EVs 
derived from parental cells and the response of recipient cells determine 
whether EVs are beneficial or detrimental. The types of cells that EVs 
release and the types of cells they absorb in a specific condition can be 
compared to two speakers engaged in a situational discourse over the 
phone. The process of encoding and decoding the contents of EVs by 
these "speakers” is what eventually facilitates their biological tasks. By 
adhering to this framework, the diverse and disruptive impacts of EVs on 
carcinogenesis have become simpler and clearer to understand. 
Harm-avoiding and benefit-following tumor cells usually can absorb 
tumor-promoting EVs from the tumor cells themselves [39] and the 
various nonmalignant (including endothelial, stromal, and immune) 
cells, such as cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) [40], TAMs [41,42], 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) [43] as well as astrocytes [44]), and can 
then exclude the different unnecessary or tumor-inhibitory materials via 
EVs (such as tumor-suppressive circRHOBTB3 [45]) [46]. These crafty 
malign cells also share “candies” with their friends and administer 
“poisons” to their “enemies” via EVs. In this review, we used the TGF-β 
pathway, which is an anti-growth pathway, as an example for demon­
stration purposes. The presence of c-Myc in EVs formed from lung cancer 
can enhance the growth of lung bronchial cells. Similarly, circPACRGL 
in EVs from colorectal cancer cells can induce the transformation of 
pro-tumorigenic N2 neutrophils, which in turn suppresses the TGF-β 
pathway [39,47]. TGF-β1 in EVs from breast cancer cells can signifi­
cantly impair T cell proliferation [48]. Since EVs are neither always 
beneficial nor harmful, they can also mediate a range of 
tumor-inhibitory effects. Better clinical outcomes have been associated 
with the stimulation of a tumor immune microenvironment by EVs 
carrying CSF-1 from triple-negative breast cancer [49]. EVs can also be 
used by tumor cells to handle unfavorable environments. When tumor 
cells are exposed to unfavorable anti-growth factors (such as TGF-β and 
liver kinase B1) they secrete more EVs to stimulate their compatriots to 
proliferate or migrate away from this terrible environment [50,51]. 
Therefore, taking into account the characteristics of tumors as well as 
other aspects, EVs can directly affect the majority of them. These aspects 
include regulating cell death and proliferation/anti-growth signal bal­
ance, mediating immune evasion or response, inducing angiogenesis, 
activating invasion or metastasis, modulating metabolism reprogram­
ming and tumor-promoting inflammation, and affecting treatment 
resistance or response [6]. However, TME is always in a state of dynamic 
changes where various cells can experience concerted evolution, leading 
to a more pernicious outcome [52] and consequential changes in EVnet. 
The most intuitive evidence is the differences in EVs derived from 
different cancer stages [53]. While some tumor-inhibitory cells in TME, 
including M1 macrophages, can prevent tumor advancement through 
EVs, other cells in TME can facilitate tumor progression through EVs. A 
major unanswered topic is how tumor cells eventually disrupt the 
tumor-promoting/inhibiting balance by eluding tumor-inhibiting EVs, 
transforming the unfavorable TME into a tumor-promoting niche 
through EVs, and advancing toward malignancy. Therefore, more 
research is needed to gain a more thorough understanding of EVs’ 
function in tumor biology. 
4. Clinical applications of EVs in tumor 
EVs are associated with great expectations in clinical oncology due to 
their beneficial properties although numerous efforts are urgently 
required before implementation of successful translational in medical 
practices. We will discuss this from the following two aspects. 
4.1. Therapeutic applications 
In the TME, the pro- or anti-tumor effects of EVs are contingent on 
intracellular genetic and metabolic properties and environmental con­
ditions at the time of their biogenesis. Consequently, the primary and 
most immediate approach is to decrease the pro-tumor EVs (Table 1). 
For example, reducing the release of melanoma exosomes, which can 
significantly enhance the pro-metastatic phenotype of bone marrow 
progenitor cells (BMDC), by targeting Rab27a, which is one of the key 
proteins involved in exosome production, can effectively prevent both 
tumor invasion and metastasis in mice which were injected with these 
highly metastatic melanoma cells [53]. GW4869, a compound inhibiting 
EV release, was also found to display substantial anti-tumoral effects in 
different cell experiments [54,55]. Antiviral α-helical peptide (AH-D) 
Table 1 
Examples of targeting EVs in cancers discussed in this review.  
Cancer 
In 
vivo/ 
vitro 
Treatments 
Effects 
ovarian cancer 
[55] 
In vivo 
and in 
vitro 
GW4869 or 
RAB27A 
knockdown 
Reducing the release of EVs 
in vitro; 
Decreasing the peritoneal 
dissemination and 
promoting macrophage 
infiltration in vivo 
prostate cancer 
[54] 
in vitro 
GW4869 
Reducing the release of EVs 
and reducing tumor growth 
in vitro 
Melanoma [53] 
In vivo 
and in 
vitro 
RAB27A 
knockdown 
Reducing the release of EVs 
in vitro; 
Inhabiting tumor growth 
and metastasis in vivo 
Melanoma and 
mammary 
carcinoma 
[11] 
In vivo 
and in 
vitro 
a 27-mer 
amphipathic, 
α-helical (AH-D) 
peptide 
Disrupt tumor-derived 
exosomes in vitro; 
Preventing tumor-derived 
exosome-mediated T cell 
exhaustion and enhancing 
antitumor efficacy of PD-1 
blockade in vivo  
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
4
can disrupt tumor-derived exosomes and acidic properties of TME can 
enhance this disruption, thus rendering it suitable for targeting tumors 
in vivo. Notably, AH-D peptide can improve PD-1 blockade therapy, 
which contributes to developing an environment that fights against tu­
mors and prevents the formation of premetastatic niches mediated by 
tumor exosomes [11]. Another similar research developed a blood pu­
rification equipment (pro-metastatic derivatives eliminator, PMDE) to 
remove circulating tumor cells and tumor-derived exosomes via EpCAM 
and EGFR on the surface of CTCs and exosomes [10]. Remodeling the 
TME or reprogramming the intracellular genetic properties from a state 
that induces pro-tumor EVs to a state that favors the production of 
anti-tumor EVs appears to be another good strategy (Fig. 1). Exosomes 
derived from the cancer cells in acidic [56], hypoxic [6], or stiff [57] 
environments can promote tumor progression, whereby decreased 
number of released EVs have been shown to regulate these chemical or 
physical properties of TME to inhibit tumors in different cell lines. 
However, concerning Rab27a alone, it can control the exocytosis of 
various cells (such as neutrophils [58,59] and cytotoxic T lymphocytes 
[60]). Therefore, directly targeting the release of EVs in the human body 
remains a major challenge, as non-specific targeting of key genes may 
also impair the antitumor effect of EVs and lead to side or off-effects. 
Furthermore, most studies, if not all, simply examined them through 
cellular experiments. Because of the difficulty in directly modulating the 
acidic, hypoxic, or rigid TMEs in vivo, most studies did not reduce EV 
release via these ways to suppress tumors. This reflects the challenges in 
targeting EV release in vivo and the broad implications of the chemical or 
physical properties of TMEs. Therefore, it is crucial to preserve physio­
logically healthy EVs when especially focusing on combating harmful 
EVs or enhancing the generation of advantageous EVs. Thus, to trans­
form EVs into direct therapeutic targets in living organisms, advance­
ments in various biological fields are necessary. These include achieving 
a comprehensive understanding of the diverse characteristics of tumors 
and EVs, developing a more accurate and specialized gene editing 
technology, and effectively manipulating the chemical or physical 
properties of the TME. 
In contrast to directly targeting EVs, a wide range of studies focusing 
on using EVs as therapeutic tools are growing almost exponentially 
because targeting tumors via EVs offers many unique advantages partly 
based on EV heterogeneity (Table 2). First, EV heterogeneity meant that 
some EVs could be more specifically delivered to the target cells. For 
example, it has been reported that EVs possess the same tropisms as the 
cells from which their membranes originate [61], and thus the tumor 
cells tend to adhere to each other [62], which reflects EV heterogeneity 
in origin and uptake. Besides, exosomes reprogrammed with 
low-pH/hypoxia had a better affinity towards low-pH treated and hyp­
oxic tumor cells respectively [63], which reflected EV heterogeneity in 
context-specificity. Interestingly, taking advantage of this affinity phe­
nomenon, researchers have developed a smart drug delivery system 
LP-exosAlp+Dox through loading low-pH reprogrammed exosomes 
(LP-exos) with a hydrophilic photosensitizing compound Al (III) 
phthalocyanine chloride tetrasulfonic acid (Alp) and the hydrophobic 
chemo drug doxorubicin (Dox). LP-exosAlp+Dox can effectively kill the 
tumor cells under both in vitro and in vivo settings [63]. Moreover, 
compared to cell therapy, the application of EVs can significantly reduce 
carcinogenesis or toxic risks [7]. Second, EVs can reach where conven­
tional drugs cannot, such as crossing the blood-brain barrier [64] or the 
blood-testis barrier [65]. Third, the membrane of EVs can also deceive 
immune cells and prevent immune clearance due to their cell-mimicking 
properties, which results in the prolongation of the half-life of EVs. The 
three virtues mentioned above can significantly improve the bioavail­
ability of EVs. Last but not least, the structure of EVs is extremely suit­
able for drug delivery because they can naturally carry lipids, proteins, 
and nucleic acids, which reflect EV heterogeneity in cargo. Therefore, 
EVs can load both lipophilic and hydrophilic drugs. More importantly, 
EVs can enable the delivery of multiple drugs in an appropriate pro­
portion, such as LP-exosAlp+Dox [63]. Hence, due to these important 
merits, EVs serve as ideal “transport tools”. 
Post-generation or naturally modified EVs derived from engineered 
or natural cells can be successfully applied to treatments [66] (Fig. 1). 
Currently, the cells that are being produced for therapies include red 
Fig. 1. Production process of therapeutic EVs. Native EVs are collected from milk, blood, and native cells/bacteria cultures. Engineered cells/bacteria can also be 
used as EV sources. In this condition, EVs are directly collected from cultures or manually generated as synthetic EVs. All kinds of EVs are modified after isolation or 
directly enter the quality control stage. EV products are stored under the most suitable conditions so that stable EV formulations can be developed. Evaluating the 
safety, activity and suitable dose of the EV formulation in various models, including cell lines, 3D models (organoids), animals and other preclinical trials identifies 
the best EV formulation for the clinical application. Finally, the most suitable administration method is selected according to patients’ diseases. 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
5
Table 2 
Examples of therapeutic EVs in cancers discussed in this review.  
Therapeutic EVs 
Parental cells  
Function materials 
Targeting 
cells/tissues 
Effects 
Function model 
LPexosAlp+Dox [63] 
Tumor cells in 
low pH (LP)  
Alp, Dox 
Tumor cells 
Killing tumor cells in vitro and in 
vivo 
1): exosomes from tumor cells 
living in low pH targeted tumor 
cells; 
2): Alp enhanced the irradiation 
effects and deconstructed the 
exosome for the release of Dox; 
3): Dox-induced chemotherapy 
Responsive 
exosome nano- 
bioconjugates 
[69] 
M1 macrophages  
The immune-regulating cargoes in 
exosomes from M1 macrophages; 
aCD47 and aSIRPα; pH-sensitive 
benzoic-imine bonds. 
macrophages 
Reprogramming M2 towards M1 
phenotype in vitro and in vivo; 
inhabiting tumor in vivo 
1): M1 exosomes reprogramed 
M2 macrophages; 
2): A pH-sensitive benzoic-imine 
bond promoted the release of 
aCD47 and aSIRPα in acidic TME; 
3): aCD47 and aSIRPα improved 
the phagocytosis of macrophages. 
miR-146b-bearing 
exosomes [71] 
marrow stromal 
cell  
miR-146b 
Tumor cells 
Reducing glioma growth in vitro 
and in vivo 
miR-146b inhibited EGFR 
expression 
aMT-exos: 
chimeric 
exosomes [72] 
macrophage- 
tumor hybrid 
cells  
Various immunostimulatory 
factors (details unknown) 
lymph nodes 
and tumor 
tissue 
Preventing immunosuppressive 
TME in vivo; inhabiting tumor 
growth, metastasis, and 
postsurgical recurrence in vivo 
aMT-expos formed an anti-tumor 
immune microenvironment but 
details were unknown. 
iExosomes [75] 
fibroblast-like 
mesenchymal 
cells  
siRNA or shRNA targeting KrasG12D 
(and CD47) 
Tumor cells 
Inhibiting tumor growth and 
metastasis in vivo 
1): CD47 presence on exosomes 
facilitated iExosome efficacy; 
2): iExosomes reduced KrasG12D 
mRNA and phosphorylated-ERK 
protein levels 
Exosomes hybrid 
with liposomes 
[77] 
Tumor cells  
Triptolide (TP), miR497, cRGD 
Tumor cells 
and 
macrophages 
Overcoming the cisplatin-resistance 
of tumor cells and inducing M2 to 
M1 polarization of macrophages 
both in vitro and in vivo 
1): Tumor-derived exosome and 
cRGD targeted tumor sites; 
2): miR497 and TP inhibited the 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling 
pathway; 
3): TP depleted GSH and elevated 
intracellular ROS; 
4): TP regulated macrophages 
(but details were unknown) 
PASEVs [78] 
M1 macrophages  
siRNA targeting PAK4, ROS, EVs 
from M1 macrophages 
Tumor cells 
Inhabiting tumors and regulating 
immune responses in vitro and in 
vivo; cooperating with 
immunotherapy to prevent tumors. 
1): Laser irradiation generated 
ROS and induced the release of 
siPAK4; 
2); siPAK4 silenced PAK4 and 
blocked Wnt/β-catenin signaling; 
3): EVs from M1 macrophages 
targeted tumor; 
4): ROS triggered a robust ICD 
cascade accompanied by the 
release of DAMPs; 
5): EVs from M1 macrophages 
could regulate immune cells. 
PARP-1 sgR/Cas9- 
loaded 
exosomes [82] 
Tumor cells  
PARP-1 sgR/Cas9 which targets 
and inhabits PARP-1 
Tumor cells 
Cooperating with cisplatin to 
induce tumor cell death in vitro and 
in vivo 
1): exosomes from tumor cells 
accumulated in tumor cells. 
2): PARP-1 sgR/Cas9 inhabited 
PARP1 
γδ-T-Exos [79] 
γδ-T cells  
details unknown 
Tumor cells 
Cooperating with radiotherapy to 
inhabit tumor in vivo 
1): γδ-T-Exos induced tumor cell 
apoptosis via death receptor 
ligation and inhibited tumor 
progression 
2): γδ-T-Exos promoted T-cell 
migration; 
3): Radiotherapy increased the 
accumulation of γδ-T-Exos in 
tumors 
IL12 mRNA load 
EVs [92] 
HEK293T cells  
IL12 mRNA 
Cancer cells 
and immune 
cells 
Activating tumor immune 
microenvironment in vivo 
1): the expansion of tumor 
cytotoxic immune effector cells, 
including CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T 
cells, NK cells, and NKT cells; 
2): the decrease of immune- 
suppressive Treg cells and 
MDSCs; 
3): the formation of immune 
memory 
4): improved antigen 
presentation and tumor-specific 
T-cell priming 
LP-exosAlp+Dox: loading Alp and Dox into exosomes from tumor cells living in low pH; LP: low pH; Alp: hydrophilic photosensitizer compound Al(III) phthalocyanine 
chloride tetra sulfonic acid; Dox: doxorubicin; Responsive exosome nano-bioconjugates: Azide-modified exosomes derived from M1 macrophages are conjugated with 
dibenzocyclooctyne-modified antibodies of CD47 and SIRPα (aCD47 and aSIRPα) through pH-sensitive linkers; iExosomes: Exosomes with siRNA or shRNA targeting 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
6
blood cells (RBCs), platelets, MSCs, fibroblasts, dendritic cells (DCs), 
macrophages, neutrophils, natural killer cells (NK cells), T cells, 
epithelial cells, cancer cells, bacteria and plant cells [7,61,67]. In 
addition, there is also an increased focus on various EVs obtained from 
the bioliquid [68] as well as milk and factitious biomimetic EVs pro­
duced by physical extrusion or sonication. The different intrinsic prop­
erties inherited from their parental cells can cultivate EVs with some 
beneficial characteristics, such as non-immunogenic EVs from RBCs, 
immunogenic EVs from the platelets, MSCs, and other immune cells, 
tumor-homing EVs from the cancer cells, etc. [7,61,63]. Despite the 
advantages of these innate characteristics, natural EVs frequently fall 
short of treatment requirements because of factors including low yield, 
inadequate payload, possible pathogenicity, etc. Therefore, to address 
these limitations, either separately or in combination, engineering or 
external stimuli in the cells and post-generation alterations in EVs are 
being applied. A typical example that utilizes all of these strategies is 
pH-responsive exosome nano-bioconjugates [69]. It was found that the 
external stimulus that Mn2+ was used to treat RAW264.7 cells can 
induce the tumor-inhabiting M1 phenotype to produce the various 
immunomodulatory and anti-tumoral exosomes. Additionally, the 
membrane of RAW264.7 cells was modified using azide-choline incu­
bation to indirectly enhance the exosome membrane. This modification 
allows the exosome membrane to have azide groups, which serve as a 
connecting bridge. The pH-sensitive benzoic-imine bond was also 
incorporated between anti-CD47/anti-SIRPα and DBCO to synthesize 
the amplifier effect. It has been documented that free anti-CD47 and 
anti-SIRPα can work in concert to strengthen macrophages’ immune 
response against tumor cells, while the pH-sensitive benzoic-imine bond 
may substantially boost the release of these bioconjugates’ free 
anti-CD47 and anti-SIRPα in acidic TME. Moreover, DBCO was mixed 
with azide groups on the surface of exosomes to produce pH-responsive 
exosome nano-bioconjugates that can effectively inhibit tumor growth 
in both tumor-bearing mice and in vitro settings [69]. In this case, 
characteristics 
of 
EVs, 
including 
the 
natural 
macrophage-reprogramming properties inherited from the parental 
cells, the ability acquired from the manipulation to regulate the 
phagocytosis of macrophages against the tumor cells, and TME-targeting 
through the acidic tropism, function in a comprehensive manner. Long 
noncoding RNAs and miRNAs are relatively stable because they are 
predominantly secreted in EVs, or in complex with other proteins. 
Furthermore, it has been designed to genetically modify different cells in 
order to include protein- and RNA-based therapeutic drugs and/or tar­
geting ligands into EVs. This process mainly relies on the cellular ma­
chinery responsible for producing EVs [8,70]. For example, 
miR-146b-containing exosomes from the marrow stromal cells trans­
fected with miR-146b expression plasmid can significantly decrease the 
glioma xenograft growth in a rat model of the primary brain tumor [71]. 
EVs derived from hybrid cells, which result from the integration of two 
distinct cell types, can possess additional advantages. Hybrid cells, 
known as activated macrophage-tumor (aMT) cells, were produced 
through the process of macrophages engulfing the nuclei of tumor cells 
and being stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) [72]. Exosomes from 
aMT cells (aMT-exo) were demonstrated to inherit the tumor tropism 
from the tumor cells and pronounced immunostimulatory effects from 
LPS-induced M1-like macrophages [72]. Macrophage-tumor chimeric 
exosomes can accumulate in tumors as well as lymph nodes. They then 
trigger immune responses and help reverse the immunosuppressive 
tumor microenvironment (TME), which prevents the progression of the 
primary tumor, distant tumor metastases, and postoperative tumor 
recurrence [72]. Adoptive T-cell therapy, such as chimeric antigen re­
ceptor T-cell (CAR-T) and engineered T cell receptor T cells (TCR-T) 
immunotherapy, was at the forefront of cancer therapy [73]. EVs from 
these T cells also showed great potential in cancer treatment. And CAR-T 
cell-derived exosomes inhabited tumor growth via the chimeric antigen 
receptor (CAR) on their surface and didn’t express immunosuppressive 
PD1 [74]. Furthermore, electroporation was widely used. For example, 
in an elegant study, Kamerkar et al. loaded KRASG12D siRNA into exo­
somes from the normal fibroblast-like mesenchymal cells via electro­
poration. These exosomes containing KRASG12D siRNA were able to 
successfully suppress tumor growth in multiple mouse models of 
pancreatic cancer and significantly increased overall survival [75]. EVs 
can also fuse with other nanoparticles. EVs fused with the liposomes can 
facilitate the generation of EV-inspired liposomes that gain the versatile 
properties of the liposomes (tunable lipid and protein composition, 
surface functionalization, lumen loading, etc.) and the functionality of 
EVs 
(natural 
targeting 
properties, 
low 
immunogenicity, 
anti-inflammatory properties, etc.) [76]. For example, Li et al. fused 
CD47-expressing tumor exosomes and cRGD-modified liposomes to 
deliver miR497 and triptolide [77]. These exosome-liposome hybrid 
nanoparticles could overcome cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer and 
induce M2 macrophage reprogramming toward M1 macrophages [77]. 
When discussing the functioning of EVs, it is important to note that they 
can also serve as adjuvant therapy to improve the effectiveness of other 
treatment methods. Additionally, they have the potential to be used as 
drugs in cancer treatment. For example, photoactivatable silencing 
extracellular vesicles can effectively sensitize cancer immunotherapy 
[78]; a combination of exosomes derived from γδ-T cells with radio­
therapy can augment the immunosuppressive nasopharyngeal carci­
noma [79]. Delivering gene-editing tools (such as CRISPR/Cas9) 
through EVs constitutes another new therapeutic for cancer. The PARP 
protein functions in various biological processes, such as DNA damage 
response, chromatin remodeling, cell cycle regulation, and cell death 
[80,81]. Targeting PARP in cancer treatments to overcome drug resis­
tance has been developed [80,81]. A recent study showed that targeted 
inhibition of PARP-1 by CRISPR/Cas9-loaded exosomes can substan­
tially enhance the chemosensitivity of SKOV3 cells (an ovarian cancer 
cell line) to cisplatin and exhibit marked antitumor activity in SKOV3 
xenograft mice [82]. EVs encapsulated into an extended-release 
hydrogel can maintain a sustained treatment [83,84]. 
The potential of EV-based treatments is immense, as are the 
accompanying obstacles. The diverse nature of EVs poses a complex 
obstacle in the implementation of EV treatments, however, this het­
erogeneity additionally provides them certain advantages in specific 
areas [6]. The heterogeneity in the size and content of EVs makes their 
purification and identification difficult. The different EV subtypes 
sharing similar characteristics (such as size and density) could be 
co-isolated [85]. The absence of a comprehensive term "extracellular 
vesicle” is due to the inability to ensure the exclusion of all potential 
impurities from a certain subtype of EV, as EVs are just a diverse and 
varied population [2]. These problems require much better isolation and 
analysis methods to solve. In addition, more studies related to the cap­
ture [86] and analysis [37] of EVs at the single-vesicle level are urgent 
and could be very helpful [6,31]. The content heterogeneity adds 
another layer of challenge in EV therapeutics since both the active 
substances and non-active components should be declared from a 
pharmaceutical perspective and it is impossible to describe all the ma­
terials in EVs [87]. However, clear content is a prerequisite for the safety 
of EV therapeutics. For example, although stem cell-derived EVs can 
minimize the inherent disadvantages (e.g. oncological complications, 
fusion toxicity, etc.) inherent to their parental stem cells, the potential 
tumor-promoting activity (e.g. proangiogenesis) of these EVs still needs 
more attention [66,88]. Moreover, the exclusion of oncogenic effects of 
tumor-derived EVs (or the pathogenic functions of EVs from bacteria) is 
also the predominant requirement when exploiting their affinity for 
tumors (or yield advantages). The primary objective is to detect and 
subsequently eliminate compounds that have the potential to cause 
KrasG12D; PASEVs: EVs fusing with cores (PAS) which were engineered by complexing siPAK4 with a photo-activated reactive-oxygen-species (ROS)-sensitive polymer 
TKPEI–Ce6 (PA); γδ-T-Exos: exosomes fromγδ-T cells. 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
7
cancer, have negative effects, are disease-causing, or are unwanted. In 
order to accomplish this, the parental cells must undergo EV editing or 
gene editing after a thorough characterization of EV payloads. However, 
due to the context-dependent heterogeneity in origin [6,19], fine-tuning 
changes can have a large impact on the production of EVs so the 
“batch-to-batch” variations in EV production compared to the other 
synthetic formulations will be a larger conundrum. Therefore, the pro­
duction standard of EVs for therapeutic purposes must be stricter and 
more complex in comparison to other synthetic formulations. The 
autologous use of EVs, which refers to collecting EVs from patients for 
re-administration, could have advantages related to compatibility and 
other aforementioned aspects. However, this autologous manner lacks 
sufficient clinic safety data and is difficult for a streamlined qualified 
product and acute diseases [66] (Table 3). Although EVs derived from 
blood- or plasma-derived are readily available [66], the long-term 
application of autologous EVs for therapy may require a large volume 
of blood, which can cause harm to the patient’s body. As mentioned 
above, the biodistribution of EVs in vivo also impacted the therapeutic 
usage of EVs. When injected intravenously, EVs tend to accumulate in 
the liver and cancer in vivo, meaning that many EVs cannot reach the 
targeted tissues, and there is no evidence as to whether EVs act primarily 
systemically rather than locally [89]. Whereas subcutaneously injected 
into the tail base and the tumor tissue, EVs accumulated in the lymph 
nodes (LNs), rather than in the liver and the spleen [90]. A recent study 
showed that both the EV source and the dose had determined impacts on 
the cellular response to EVs [91]. Another recent study developed 
inhalable EVs loading IL-12 mRNA via electroporation targeting lung 
cancer [92]. These inhalable EVs showed an excellent superior lung 
distribution and better tumor specificity in C57BL/6 mice bearing LL/2 
lung carcinoma cells. Treating tumor-bearing mice with inhalable EVs 
three times resulted in an increase in some immune-active cells and a 
decrease in some immune-suppressive cells [92]. Compared with pre­
vious intravenous injections of lipid nanoparticles carrying IL-12 RNA, 
which resulted in hepatic toxicity and weight loss [93], drug adminis­
tration of IL12 mRNA-containing EVs and IL mRNA-containing lipo­
somes via inhalation didn’t lead to weight loss and hepatotoxicity. 
Therefore, what are the suitable administration methods [66,94] and 
the amount [89] of therapeutical EVs for different diseases? Besides, the 
storage condition, such as temperature and solvent, also impacts the 
stability of EV products. For example, the EV structure would be 
damaged and EV aggregated if EVs were stored at 4 ◦C [95]. At present, 
more researches are needed although −80 ◦C is the recommended 
storage temperature [66]. The experiments revealed significant 
disparities in the quantity of released EVs, proteins, and glycans between 
EVs derived from gastric cancer cells cultured in 2D and 3D environ­
ments [96]. These findings also suggested the potential variations in 
cellular response to therapeutic EVs between 2D and 3D settings, as well 
as between in vivo and in vitro experiments, and among different animal 
models. Current research often uses cell lines, but exploring 3D micro­
environments (such as organoids) and other complex animal models 
(not limited to mice or small animals) to evaluate the effects of EVs could 
be more convincing [9,89]. 
4.2. Functioning as biomarkers 
Another important clinical application of EVs is to use them as po­
tential biomarkers for cancer diagnosis (Table 4), patient stratification, 
monitoring progress, and guiding treatment through inducing changes 
in EV cargo (including proteins [13,97], RNA [98,99], DNA [12], lipid, 
glycan, etc. [100]) or physicochemical properties (such as size [12], 
concentration [12]). EVs acting as biomarkers can be collected from 
various body liquids, such as blood [12,13,97,98], urine [99,101], saliva 
[102], cerebrospinal fluid, and ascites [100] because EVs from different 
cancer may enrich in different body liquids, which reflected that the 
heterogeneity in EV biodistribution impacted the biomarker function of 
EVs (Fig. 2). Therefore, EVs together with the cell-free DNA (cfDNA)/­
circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) and CTCs in the body fluids are the three 
main research subjects in liquid biopsy. cfDNA has a shorter half-life of 
approximately an hour or less [103], which is due to the unstable nature 
of ctDNA and is easily degraded in the body fluids [104,105], whereas 
CTC is very rarely detectable. Therefore, EVs have unique advantages, as 
they are relatively abundant and have a longer half-life for detection. 
Finding a single critical ingredient or a significant physicochemical 
characteristic that strongly corresponds with the advancement of the 
tumor and the response to therapy is the main strategy for employing 
EVs from bodily fluids as biomarkers. For example, an individual with 
positive KRAS mutations in exosomal DNA is 8.17 times more likely to 
develop early-stage pancreatic cancer than a cancer-free person and the 
mean KRAS mutations found in exosomal DNA were higher in the 
metastatic compared with localized samples [12]; Circulating exosomes 
carrying glypican-1 were enriched in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
(PDAC) patients in comparison to the healthy donors [13]. Nevertheless, 
the identification of a single key component is considerably challenging, 
and its diagnostic accuracy or specificity may not meet the required 
standards. As a result, (multi)omics or combinations of marker mole­
cules have been commonly employed [97,98]. Numerous diagnostic, 
Table 3 
Clinical trials investigating the use of EVs in the treatment of various cancers.  
EV Origin 
Deliver Drug 
Cancer Type 
Study 
Phase 
Study Title 
NCT Number 
DC 
– 
Lung cancer 
Phase 2 
Trial of a Vaccination With Tumor Antigen-loaded Dendritic Cell-derived 
Exosomes 
NCT01159288 
DC 
– 
Lung cancer 
Phase 1 
A phase I study of dexosome immunotherapy in patients with advanced non- 
small cell lung cancer [113] 
– 
Plant 
Curcumin 
Colon Cancer 
Phase 1 
Study Investigating the Ability of Plant Exosomes to Deliver Curcumin to 
Normal and Colon Cancer Tissue 
NCT01294072 
Plant 
– 
Head and Neck 
Cancer 
Phase 1 
Edible Plant Exosome Ability to Prevent Oral Mucositis Associated With 
Chemoradiation Treatment of Head and Neck Cancer 
NCT01668849 
MSC 
KrasG12D siRNA 
Pancreas 
Cancer 
Phase 1 
iExosomes in Treating Participants With Metastatic Pancreas Cancer With 
KrasG12D Mutation 
NCT03608631 
APC-tumor 
chimeric cell 
– 
Bladder Cancer 
Early 
Phase 1 
An Open, Dose-escalation Clinical Study of Chimeric Exosomal Tumor Vaccines 
for Recurrent or Metastatic Bladder Cancer 
NCT05559177 
– 
CDK-004 and STAT6 anti- 
sense oligonucleotide 
Advanced 
(HCC); 
GC Metastatic 
to Liver; 
CRC Metastatic 
to Liver 
Phase 1 
A Study of exoASO-STAT6 (CDK-004) in Patients With Advanced 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) and Patients With Liver Metastases From 
EIther Primary Gastric Cancer or Colorectal Cancer (CRC) 
NCT05375604 
DC: dendritic cell; APC: antigen-presenting cells, including dendritic cell or macrophage; MSC: mesenchymal stem cell; HCC: hepatocellular carcinoma; GC: gastric 
cancer; CRC: colorectal cancer. 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
8
developmental, and prognostic indicators for cholangiocarcinoma were 
discovered by high-throughput proteomics of EVs. The best protein 
combinations for poor prognosis (COMP, GNAI2, and CFAI) and excel­
lent prognosis (ACTN1, MYCT1, and PF4V) were identified among the 
prognostic biomarkers [97]. A combination of three RNA genes (ERG, 
PCA3, and SPDEF) from urine exosomes could effectively discriminate 
high-grade (Gleason 7 and higher) from low-grade (Gleason 6) prostate 
cancer and benign disease [99]. Interestingly, evidence about the EVs 
from the plasma samples obtained from the pancreatic cancer patients 
demonstrated that the diagnostic accuracy of a combination of six 
miRNAs 
(miRNA-21, 
miRNA-16, 
miRNA-10b, 
miRNA-155, 
miRNA-1246, and miRNA-196a) in EVs (98 %) was significantly better 
than a single miRNA in EVs (e.g., 73 % for miRNA-155) [98]. Further­
more, research on the physicochemical characteristics of EVs has 
demonstrated a correlation between the quantity and size of EVs and the 
advancement of cancer. In order to meet the requirements of cell-to-cell 
communication, tumor cells release more EVs than healthy cells [6]. For 
instance, more exosomes in the blood represented a worse median sur­
vival in PDAC patients [12]. 
Furthermore, average exosome size was greater among patients with 
PDAC in comparison with the healthy controls [12]. However, another 
study showed that the plasma exosomes from prostate cancer patients 
were substantially smaller than those from individuals with no signs of 
urological disease [106]. The conflicting impact of EV size in cancer 
patients may be attributable to changes in circumstances. Additional 
data is required about the physicochemical characteristics of EVs 
functioning as biomarkers. To improve detection, researchers have also 
examined the use of EVs in combination with another liquid biopsy. This 
is because the cargo carried by EVs may compensate for the lack of 
ctDNA or CTC. The combination of exosomal RNA/DNA and cfDNA for 
T790 M mutation detection was reported to have higher sensitivity and 
specificity compared with the historical cohorts using cfDNA alone [14]. 
However, it was difficult to select the best combination as a 
cancer-specific or therapy-specific signature. Computer technologies, 
such as artificial intelligence (AI) or machine learning (ML), can be 
beneficial to solve this problem. To concurrently diagnose six cancer 
types by label-free analysis of plasma exosomes, surface-enhanced 
Raman spectroscopy (SERS) and artificial intelligence (AI) were com­
bined in a research study. With a sensitivity of 89.4 % and a specificity of 
96.3 % at the ideal cutoff, this method demonstrated an accuracy of 97 
% (AUC) for all cancer types. AUC values by cancer type were 0.936, 
0.984, 0.972, 0.978, 0.992, and 0.999 for lung, breast, colorectal, liver, 
pancreatic, and stomach cancer respectively. When analyzed by cancer 
stage, the sensitivity for patients with advanced-stage cancer was 97.5 % 
but early-stage cancer patients were detectable at a sensitivity of 88.1 % 
[15]. 
Another study also revealed that ML can significantly improve the 
diagnostic performance of EV liquid biopsy. For example, when dis­
tinguishing the breast cancer patients from the healthy group, the AUC 
with ML (0.9167 for PGR mRNA alone, 0.8929 for ESR1 mRNA alone, 
and 0.8553 for ERBB2 mRNA alone) was remarkably better than the 
AUC without ML (0.8697 for PGR mRNA alone, 0.8270 for ESR1 mRNA 
alone and 0.7948 for ERBB2 mRNA alone). Additionally, as the number 
of biomarkers increased, the diagnostic accuracy also increased sub­
stantially. Among these biomarkers, the combination of the three 
mentioned markers resulted in an AUC value of 1.000 (95 % CI =
1.000–1.000), with a sensitivity of 94.74 % (95 % CI = 75.36–99.73) 
and a specificity of 100 % (95 % CI = 60.97–100.0) [16]. 
However, there also are huge challenges with EV liquid biopsy. A 
major problem is how to extract EVs from the different biofluids and 
which one of the EV subtypes is most suitable for cancer detection. For 
example, EV-LPP (lipoproteins particle) complexes can form spontane­
ously in physiological solutions (such as blood plasma) and affect the 
identification and detection of CD9, one of the EV markers [107]. This 
study demonstrated that the natural contaminants in bioliquid could 
influence the accuracy of EV biopsy [107]. Certain vital information 
may be lost if some EVs are purposefully or inadvertently neglected. 
International collaboration and rigorous standardization are particu­
larly vital in this expanding sector because variations among labora­
tories worldwide might also impede future clinical translation. Another 
issue is how to identify the few biomolecules in EVs because of the 
restricted space. For instance, the average amount of miRNA per EV was 
significantly lower than a given amount [108]. Therefore, improving the 
detection sensitivity in EV biopsy is urgent. Recently, some methods 
have occurred, such as EXTRA-CRISPR (Endonucleolytically Expo­
nentiated Rolling Circle Amplification with CRISPR–Cas12a) which is a 
method based on Cas12 [109]. This EXTRA-CRISPR has a sensitivity 
comparable to RT-qPCR testing when detecting key markers in EVs and a 
more simplified and convenient detection procedure [109]. In addition, 
an ideal test method should possess high sensitivity and specificity, as 
even a minor proportion of inaccurate positive or negative test outcomes 
could lead to irreversible harm to the patients. False-negative test 
findings can lead to the advancement of cancer into an incurable stage, 
while false-positive test results can cause significant psychological 
distress and unnecessary treatments that may have adverse effects. 
Preclinical data and advancements in other areas are necessary before 
EV diagnostics may be employed in a clinical setting. 
5. Conclusions 
The heterogeneity of EVs hinders our understanding of EVs while 
providing them with promising applications. Thus, focusing on EV 
Table 4 
Examples of using EVs as biomarkers in cancers discussed in this review.  
Methods 
Judgment indicators 
Cancers 
Exosome 
sources 
single marker 
KRAS mutation 
PDAC [12] 
blood 
single marker 
Glypican-1 
PDAC [13] 
blood 
(multi)omics or 
marker 
combination 
Combination for poor 
prognosis: COMP, 
GNAI2, and CFAI; 
Combination for good 
prognosis: COMP, 
ACTN1, MYCT1, and 
PF4V. 
Cholangiocarcinoma 
[97] 
blood 
(multi)omics or 
marker 
combination 
ERG, PCA3, and 
SPDEF 
Prostate cancer [99] 
urine 
(multi)omics or 
marker 
combination 
miRNA-21, miRNA- 
16, miRNA-10b, 
miRNA-155, miRNA- 
1246, and miRNA- 
196a 
Pancreatic cancer 
[98] 
blood 
(multi)omics or 
marker 
combination 
tRNA-GlyGCC-5 and 
small RNA RESE 
ESCC [102] 
saliva 
EVs combine with 
another liquid 
biopsy 
Exosomal RNA/DNA 
combined with 
cfDNA 
NSCLC [14] 
blood 
physicochemical 
properties 
the number of EVs 
PDAC [12] 
blood 
physicochemical 
properties 
the size of EVs 
PDAC [12] 
blood 
ML/AL 
Using ML to analyze 
SERS signals 
early-stage cancers* 
[15] 
blood 
ML/AL 
Using ML to analyze 
the results from 
simultaneously 
detecting 4 mRNAs 
(PGR, ESR1, ERBB2 
and GAPDH) via 4- 
plex droplet digital 
PCR 
breast cancer [16] 
blood 
AI: artificial intelligence; ML: machine-learning; PDAC: pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma; ESCC: esophageal squamous cell carcinoma; NSCLC: non-small 
cell lung cancer; SERS: surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. *: 6 types of 
early-stage cancers (lung, breast, colon, liver, pancreas, and stomach). 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
9
heterogeneity with a broader horizon can benefit the clinical application 
of EVs. A detailed understanding of EV heterogeneity broadly and at the 
single-vesicle level remains the foreland in EV research. Currently, the 
clinical application of EVs includes EV treatment and EV biopsy. Along 
with the development of precision medicine and personalized treatment, 
EV research my benefit cancer patients [110,111]. On the one hand, the 
therapeutic usage of EVs could provide the next-generation therapeutic 
platform and especially target organs or cells [7]. On the other hand, the 
biomarker function of EVs could guide cancer treatment, especially 
precision medicine and personalized treatment, which could handle the 
following important problems: the correct time to treat cancers, which 
target is the best, how to personally detect cancer progression, etc. 
[112]. While EV therapy and EV biopsy have distinct benefits, their 
thorough clinical translation is fraught with complications. Advanced 
technologies are needed for EV research to overcome these challenges. 
These days, multidisciplinary teamwork offers countless benefits and 
sources of inspiration. EV research has been greatly enhanced by expe­
riences from other domains, such as gene editing technology, nano­
medicine, biomaterials, pharmacology, precision or personality 
medicine, AI, etc. To overcome current obstacles, the therapeutic use of 
EVs in cancers will move further. We can eventually achieve the 
EV-everything world if we can successfully overcome these obstacles. 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  
AI 
Artificial intelligence 
BMDC 
Bone marrow progenitor cells 
CAFs 
Cancer-associated fibroblasts 
cfDNA 
Cell-free DNA 
CRC 
Colorectal carcinoma 
CTCs 
Circulating tumor cells 
ctDNA 
Circulating tumor DNA 
DCs 
Dendritic cells 
EVnet 
Extracellular vesicle communication network 
EVs 
Extracellular vesicles 
LNs 
Lymph nodes 
(continued on next column)  
(continued) 
ML 
Machine learning 
MSCs 
Mesenchymal stem cells 
NK 
cells Natural killer cells 
PDAC 
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
RBCs 
Red blood cells 
SERS 
Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy 
sEVs 
Small extracellular vesicles 
TAMs 
Tumor-associated macrophages 
TME 
Tumor microenvironment  
6. Ethics approval and consent to participate 
Not applicable. 
7. Consent for publication 
Not applicable. 
Availability of data and materials 
Not applicable. 
Funding 
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Founda­
tion of China (No.82372919; No.82003040; No.82303373), China 
Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2021M703602), Natural Science 
Foundation of Liaoning Province (2022-BS-137), Scientific Research 
Funding of Liaoning Province Education Department (LJKZ0770; 
LJKMZ20221210), Science and Technology Projects of Shenyang (21- 
104-0-04; 22-321-31-02), Support plan for young and middle-aged sci­
entific and technological talents in Shenyang (RC220032). 
Fig. 2. Illustration of EV diagnosis process. A, Body liquids are enriched with EVs. B, Present EV isolation methods. C, Current EV detection methods. D, The clinical 
applications of EV diagnosis. 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
10
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Guangpeng He: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. 
Jiaxing Liu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. Yifan 
Yu: Supervision, Investigation. Shibo Wei: Supervision, Conceptuali­
zation. Xueqiang Peng: Supervision, Funding acquisition. Liang Yang: 
Validation, Supervision, Funding acquisition. Hangyu Li: Validation, 
Supervision, Funding acquisition. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
We are grateful to Hongxu Zhang from China Medical University for 
his helpful and kind painting support. We thank Editideas (www.editi 
deas.cn) for its linguistic assistance during the preparation of this 
manuscript. 
References 
[1] D.M. Pegtel, S.J. Gould, Exosomes, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 88 (2019) 487–514. 
[2] C. Th´ery, K.W. Witwer, E. Aikawa, M.J. Alcaraz, J.D. Anderson, 
R. Andriantsitohaina, A. Antoniou, T. Arab, F. Archer, G.K. Atkin-Smith, D. 
C. Ayre, J.M. Bach, D. Bachurski, H. Baharvand, L. Balaj, S. Baldacchino, N. 
N. Bauer, A.A. Baxter, M. Bebawy, C. Beckham, A. Bedina Zavec, A. Benmoussa, 
A.C. Berardi, P. Bergese, E. Bielska, C. Blenkiron, S. Bobis-Wozowicz, E. Boilard, 
W. Boireau, A. Bongiovanni, F.E. Borr`as, S. Bosch, C.M. Boulanger, X. Breakefield, 
A.M. Breglio, M. Brennan, D.R. Brigstock, A. Brisson, M.L. Broekman, J. 
F. Bromberg, P. Bryl-G´orecka, S. Buch, A.H. Buck, D. Burger, S. Busatto, 
D. Buschmann, B. Bussolati, E.I. Buz´as, J.B. Byrd, G. Camussi, D.R. Carter, 
S. Caruso, L.W. Chamley, Y.T. Chang, C. Chen, S. Chen, L. Cheng, A.R. Chin, 
A. Clayton, S.P. Clerici, A. Cocks, E. Cocucci, R.J. Coffey, A. Cordeiro-da-Silva, 
Y. Couch, F.A. Coumans, B. Coyle, R. Crescitelli, M.F. Criado, C. D’Souza-Schorey, 
S. Das, A. Datta Chaudhuri, P. de Candia, E.F. De Santana, O. De Wever, H.A. Del 
Portillo, T. Demaret, S. Deville, A. Devitt, B. Dhondt, D. Di Vizio, L.C. Dieterich, 
V. Dolo, A.P. Dominguez Rubio, M. Dominici, M.R. Dourado, T.A. Driedonks, F. 
V. Duarte, H.M. Duncan, R.M. Eichenberger, K. Ekstr¨om, S. El Andaloussi, C. Elie- 
Caille, U. Erdbrügger, J.M. Falc´on-P´erez, F. Fatima, J.E. Fish, M. Flores-Bellver, 
A. F¨ors¨onits, A. Frelet-Barrand, F. Fricke, G. Fuhrmann, S. Gabrielsson, A. G´amez- 
Valero, C. Gardiner, K. G¨artner, R. Gaudin, Y.S. Gho, B. Giebel, C. Gilbert, 
M. Gimona, I. Giusti, D.C. Goberdhan, A. G¨orgens, S.M. Gorski, D.W. Greening, J. 
C. Gross, A. Gualerzi, G.N. Gupta, D. Gustafson, A. Handberg, R.A. Haraszti, 
P. Harrison, H. Hegyesi, A. Hendrix, A.F. Hill, F.H. Hochberg, K.F. Hoffmann, 
B. Holder, H. Holthofer, B. Hosseinkhani, G. Hu, Y. Huang, V. Huber, S. Hunt, A. 
G. Ibrahim, T. Ikezu, J.M. Inal, M. Isin, A. Ivanova, H.K. Jackson, S. Jacobsen, S. 
M. Jay, M. Jayachandran, G. Jenster, L. Jiang, S.M. Johnson, J.C. Jones, A. Jong, 
T. Jovanovic-Talisman, S. Jung, R. Kalluri, S.I. Kano, S. Kaur, Y. Kawamura, E. 
T. Keller, D. Khamari, E. Khomyakova, A. Khvorova, P. Kierulf, K.P. Kim, 
T. Kislinger, M. Klingeborn, D.J. Klinke 2nd, M. Kornek, M.M. Kosanovi´c, 
F. Kov´acs ´A, E.M. Kr¨amer-Albers, S. Krasemann, M. Krause, I.V. Kurochkin, G. 
D. Kusuma, S. Kuypers, S. Laitinen, S.M. Langevin, L.R. Languino, J. Lannigan, 
C. L¨asser, L.C. Laurent, G. Lavieu, E. L´azaro-Ib´a˜nez, S. Le Lay, M.S. Lee, Y.X. 
F. Lee, D.S. Lemos, M. Lenassi, A. Leszczynska, I.T. Li, K. Liao, S.F. Libregts, 
E. Ligeti, R. Lim, S.K. Lim, A. Lin¯e, K. Linnemannst¨ons, A. Llorente, C.A. Lombard, 
M.J. Lorenowicz, M. L¨orincz ´A, J. L¨otvall, J. Lovett, M.C. Lowry, X. Loyer, Q. Lu, 
B. Lukomska, T.R. Lunavat, S.L. Maas, H. Malhi, A. Marcilla, J. Mariani, 
J. Mariscal, E.S. Martens-Uzunova, L. Martin-Jaular, M.C. Martinez, V.R. Martins, 
M. Mathieu, S. Mathivanan, M. Maugeri, L.K. McGinnis, M.J. McVey, D. 
G. Meckes Jr., K.L. Meehan, I. Mertens, V.R. Minciacchi, A. M¨oller, M. Møller 
Jørgensen, A. Morales-Kastresana, J. Morhayim, F. Mullier, M. Muraca, 
L. Musante, V. Mussack, D.C. Muth, K.H. Myburgh, T. Najrana, M. Nawaz, 
I. Nazarenko, P. Nejsum, C. Neri, T. Neri, R. Nieuwland, L. Nimrichter, J.P. Nolan, 
E.N. Nolte-’t Hoen, N. Noren Hooten, L. O’Driscoll, T. O’Grady, A. O’Loghlen, 
T. Ochiya, M. Olivier, A. Ortiz, L.A. Ortiz, X. Osteikoetxea, O. Østergaard, 
M. Ostrowski, J. Park, D.M. Pegtel, H. Peinado, F. Perut, M.W. Pfaffl, D. 
G. Phinney, B.C. Pieters, R.C. Pink, D.S. Pisetsky, E. Pogge von Strandmann, 
I. Polakovicova, I.K. Poon, B.H. Powell, I. Prada, L. Pulliam, P. Quesenberry, 
A. Radeghieri, R.L. Raffai, S. Raimondo, J. Rak, M.I. Ramirez, G. Raposo, M. 
S. Rayyan, N. Regev-Rudzki, F.L. Ricklefs, P.D. Robbins, D.D. Roberts, S. 
C. Rodrigues, E. Rohde, S. Rome, K.M. Rouschop, A. Rughetti, A.E. Russell, P. Sa´a, 
S. Sahoo, E. Salas-Huenuleo, C. S´anchez, J.A. Saugstad, M.J. Saul, R. 
M. Schiffelers, R. Schneider, T.H. Schøyen, A. Scott, E. Shahaj, S. Sharma, 
O. Shatnyeva, F. Shekari, G.V. Shelke, A.K. Shetty, K. Shiba, P.R. Siljander, A. 
M. Silva, A. Skowronek, O.L. Snyder 2nd, R.P. Soares, B.W. S´odar, C. Soekmadji, 
J. Sotillo, P.D. Stahl, W. Stoorvogel, S.L. Stott, E.F. Strasser, S. Swift, H. Tahara, 
M. Tewari, K. Timms, S. Tiwari, R. Tixeira, M. Tkach, W.S. Toh, R. Tomasini, A. 
C. Torrecilhas, J.P. Tosar, V. Toxavidis, L. Urbanelli, P. Vader, B.W. van Balkom, 
S.G. van der Grein, J. Van Deun, M.J. van Herwijnen, K. Van Keuren-Jensen, 
G. van Niel, M.E. van Royen, A.J. van Wijnen, M.H. Vasconcelos, I.J. Vechetti Jr., 
T.D. Veit, L.J. Vella, ´E. Velot, F.J. Verweij, B. Vestad, J.L. Vi˜nas, T. Visnovitz, K. 
V. Vukman, J. Wahlgren, D.C. Watson, M.H. Wauben, A. Weaver, J.P. Webber, 
V. Weber, A.M. Wehman, D.J. Weiss, J.A. Welsh, S. Wendt, A.M. Wheelock, 
Z. Wiener, L. Witte, J. Wolfram, A. Xagorari, P. Xander, J. Xu, X. Yan, M. Y´a˜nez- 
M´o, H. Yin, Y. Yuana, V. Zappulli, J. Zarubova, V. ˇZ˙ekas, J.Y. Zhang, Z. Zhao, 
L. Zheng, A.R. Zheutlin, A.M. Zickler, P. Zimmermann, A.M. Zivkovic, D. Zocco, 
E.K. Zuba-Surma, Minimal information for studies of extracellular vesicles 2018 
(MISEV2018): a position statement of the International Society for Extracellular 
Vesicles and update of the MISEV2014 guidelines, J. Extracell. Vesicles 7 (2018) 
1535750. 
[3] R. Kalluri, V.S. LeBleu, The biology, function, and biomedical applications of 
exosomes, Science 367 (2020) eaau6977. 
[4] R. Kalluri, K.M. McAndrews, The role of extracellular vesicles in cancer, Cell 186 
(2023) 1610–1626. 
[5] S. Yoo, S. Choi, I. Kim, I.S. Kim, Hypoxic regulation of extracellular vesicles: 
implications for cancer therapy, J. Contr. Release 363 (2023) 201–220. 
[6] G. He, X. Peng, S. Wei, S. Yang, X. Li, M. Huang, S. Tang, H. Jin, J. Liu, S. Zhang, 
H. Zheng, Q. Fan, J. Liu, L. Yang, H. Li, Exosomes in the hypoxic TME: from 
release, uptake and biofunctions to clinical applications, Mol. Cancer 21 (2022) 
19. 
[7] L. Cheng, A.F. Hill, Therapeutically harnessing extracellular vesicles, Nat. Rev. 
Drug Discov. 21 (2022) 379–399. 
[8] K.W. Witwer, J. Wolfram, Extracellular vesicles versus synthetic nanoparticles for 
drug delivery, Nat. Rev. Mater. 6 (2021) 103–106. 
[9] G. van Niel, D.R.F. Carter, A. Clayton, D.W. Lambert, G. Raposo, P. Vader, 
Challenges and directions in studying cell-cell communication by extracellular 
vesicles, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 23 (2022) 369–382. 
[10] Y. Sun, L. Xing, J. Luo, M.T. Yu, X.J. Wang, Y. Wang, T.J. Zhou, H.L. Jiang, A pro- 
metastatic derivatives eliminator for in vivo dual-removal of circulating tumor 
cells and tumor-derived exosomes impedes their biodistribution into distant 
organs, Adv. Sci. 10 (2023) e2304287. 
[11] S. Shin, H. Ko, C.H. Kim, B.K. Yoon, S. Son, J.A. Lee, J.M. Shin, J. Lee, S.H. Song, 
J.A. Jackman, J.H. Park, Curvature-sensing peptide inhibits tumour-derived 
exosomes for enhanced cancer immunotherapy, Nat. Mater. 22 (2023) 656–665. 
[12] K. Allenson, J. Castillo, F.A. San Lucas, G. Scelo, D.U. Kim, V. Bernard, G. Davis, 
T. Kumar, M. Katz, M.J. Overman, L. Foretova, E. Fabianova, I. Holcatova, 
V. Janout, F. Meric-Bernstam, P. Gascoyne, I. Wistuba, G. Varadhachary, 
P. Brennan, S. Hanash, D. Li, A. Maitra, H. Alvarez, High prevalence of mutant 
KRAS in circulating exosome-derived DNA from early-stage pancreatic cancer 
patients, Ann. Oncol. 28 (2017) 741–747. 
[13] S.A. Melo, L.B. Luecke, C. Kahlert, A.F. Fernandez, S.T. Gammon, J. Kaye, V. 
S. LeBleu, E.A. Mittendorf, J. Weitz, N. Rahbari, C. Reissfelder, C. Pilarsky, M. 
F. Fraga, D. Piwnica-Worms, R. Kalluri, Glypican-1 identifies cancer exosomes 
and detects early pancreatic cancer, Nature 523 (2015) 177–182. 
[14] E. Castellanos-Rizaldos, D.G. Grimm, V. Tadigotla, J. Hurley, J. Healy, P.L. Neal, 
M. Sher, R. Venkatesan, C. Karlovich, M. Raponi, A. Krug, M. Noerholm, 
J. Tannous, B.A. Tannous, L.E. Raez, J.K. Skog, Exosome-based detection of EGFR 
T790M in plasma from non-small cell lung cancer patients, Clin. Cancer Res. 24 
(2018) 2944–2950. 
[15] H. Shin, B.H. Choi, O. Shim, J. Kim, Y. Park, S.K. Cho, H.K. Kim, Y. Choi, Single 
test-based diagnosis of multiple cancer types using Exosome-SERS-AI for early 
stage cancers, Nat. Commun. 14 (2023) 1644. 
[16] C. Liu, B. Li, H. Lin, C. Yang, J. Guo, B. Cui, W. Pan, J. Feng, T. Luo, F. Chu, X. Xu, 
L. Zheng, S. Yao, Multiplexed analysis of small extracellular vesicle-derived 
mRNAs by droplet digital PCR and machine learning improves breast cancer 
diagnosis, Biosens. Bioelectron. 194 (2021) 113615. 
[17] L. Ma, Y. Li, J. Peng, D. Wu, X. Zhao, Y. Cui, L. Chen, X. Yan, Y. Du, L. Yu, 
Discovery of the migrasome, an organelle mediating release of cytoplasmic 
contents during cell migration, Cell Res. 25 (2015) 24–38. 
[18] Y. Wang, S. Gao, Y. Liu, D. Wang, B. Liu, D. Jiang, C.C.L. Wong, Y. Chen, L. Yu, 
Retractosomes: small extracellular vesicles generated from broken-off retraction 
fibers, Cell Res. (2022). 
[19] A.C. Dixson, T.R. Dawson, D. Di Vizio, A.M. Weaver, Context-specific regulation 
of extracellular vesicle biogenesis and cargo selection, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
(2023). 
[20] S. Boussios, P. Devo, I.C.A. Goodall, K. Sirlantzis, A. Ghose, S.D. Shinde, 
V. Papadopoulos, E. Sanchez, E. Rassy, S.V. Ovsepian, Exosomes in the diagnosis 
and treatment of renal cell cancer, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24 (2023). 
[21] C. Gardiner, D. Di Vizio, S. Sahoo, C. Th´ery, K.W. Witwer, M. Wauben, A.F. Hill, 
Techniques used for the isolation and characterization of extracellular vesicles: 
results of a worldwide survey, J. Extracell. Vesicles 5 (2016) 32945. 
[22] P. Li, M. Kaslan, S.H. Lee, J. Yao, Z. Gao, Progress in exosome isolation 
techniques, Theranostics 7 (2017) 789. 
[23] K.E. Petersen, F. Shiri, T. White, G.T. Bardi, H. Sant, B.K. Gale, J.L. Hood, 
Exosome isolation: cyclical electrical field flow fractionation in low-ionic-strength 
fluids, Anal. Chem. 90 (2018) 12783–12790. 
[24] S. Ye, W. Li, H. Wang, L. Zhu, C. Wang, Y. Yang, Quantitative nanomechanical 
analysis of small extracellular vesicles for tumor malignancy indication, Adv. Sci. 
(2021) e2100825. 
[25] E.I. Buzas, Opportunities and challenges in studying the extracellular vesicle 
corona, Nat. Cell Biol. (2022). 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
11
[26] S. Busatto, Y. Yang, S.A. Walker, I. Davidovich, W.H. Lin, L. Lewis-Tuffin, P. 
Z. Anastasiadis, J. Sarkaria, Y. Talmon, G. Wurtz, J. Wolfram, Brain metastases- 
derived extracellular vesicles induce binding and aggregation of low-density 
lipoprotein, J. Nanobiotechnol. 18 (2020) 162. 
[27] M. Wolf, R.W. Poupardin, P. Ebner-Peking, A.C. Andrade, C. Bl¨ochl, 
A. Obermayer, F.G. Gomes, B. Vari, N. Maeding, E. Eminger, H.M. Binder, A. 
M. Raninger, S. Hochmann, G. Brachtl, A. Spittler, T. Heuser, R. Ofir, C.G. Huber, 
Z. Aberman, K. Schallmoser, H.D. Volk, D. Strunk, A functional corona around 
extracellular vesicles enhances angiogenesis, skin regeneration and 
immunomodulation, J. Extracell. Vesicles 11 (2022) e12207. 
[28] V. Luga, L. Zhang, A.M. Viloria-Petit, A.A. Ogunjimi, M.R. Inanlou, E. Chiu, 
M. Buchanan, A.N. Hosein, M. Basik, J.L. Wrana, Exosomes mediate stromal 
mobilization of autocrine Wnt-PCP signaling in breast cancer cell migration, Cell 
151 (2012) 1542–1556. 
[29] C.L. Miller, M. Herrmann, D.R.F. Carter, N. Turner, P. Samuel, B.A. Patel, 
Monitoring the electroactive cargo of extracellular vesicles can differentiate 
various cancer cell lines, Biosens. Bioelectron. 254 (2024) 116224. 
[30] Z.J. Smith, C. Lee, T. Rojalin, R.P. Carney, S. Hazari, A. Knudson, K. Lam, 
H. Saari, E.L. Ibanez, T. Viitala, T. Laaksonen, M. Yliperttula, S. Wachsmann- 
Hogiu, Single exosome study reveals subpopulations distributed among cell lines 
with variability related to membrane content, J. Extracell. Vesicles 4 (2015) 
28533. 
[31] G. Bordanaba-Florit, F. Royo, S.G. Kruglik, J.M. Falcon-Perez, Using single-vesicle 
technologies to unravel the heterogeneity of extracellular vesicles, Nat. Protoc. 
(2021). 
[32] M. Chen, S. Lin, C. Zhou, D. Cui, H. Haick, N. Tang, From conventional to 
microfluidic: progress in extracellular vesicle separation and individual 
characterization, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 12 (2023) e2202437. 
[33] J.A. Welsh, G.J.A. Arkesteijn, M. Bremer, M. Cimorelli, F. Dignat-George, 
B. Giebel, A. G¨orgens, A. Hendrix, M. Kuiper, R. Lacroix, J. Lannigan, T.G. van 
Leeuwen, E. Lozano-Andr´es, S. Rao, S. Robert, L. de Rond, V.A. Tang, T. Tertel, 
X. Yan, M.H.M. Wauben, J.P. Nolan, J.C. Jones, R. Nieuwland, E. van der Pol, 
A compendium of single extracellular vesicle flow cytometry, J. Extracell. 
Vesicles 12 (2023) e12299. 
[34] D. Wu, J. Yan, X. Shen, Y. Sun, M. Thulin, Y. Cai, L. Wik, Q. Shen, J. Oelrich, 
X. Qian, K.L. Dubois, K.G. Ronquist, M. Nilsson, U. Landegren, M. Kamali- 
Moghaddam, Profiling surface proteins on individual exosomes using a proximity 
barcoding assay, Nat. Commun. 10 (2019) 3854. 
[35] M. Jalali, C. Del Real Mata, L. Montermini, O. Jeanne, I.H. I, Z. Gu, C. Spinelli, 
Y. Lu, N. Tawil, M.C. Guiot, Z. He, S. Wachsmann-Hogiu, R. Zhou, K. Petrecca, W. 
W. Reisner, J. Rak, S. Mahshid, MoS(2)-Plasmonic nanocavities for Raman spectra 
of single extracellular vesicles reveal molecular progression in glioblastoma, ACS 
Nano 17 (2023) 12052–12071. 
[36] S. Lee, D.S. Verkhoturov, M.J. Eller, S.V. Verkhoturov, M.A. Shaw, K. Gwon, 
Y. Kim, F. Lucien, H. Malhi, A. Revzin, E.A. Schweikert, Nanoprojectile secondary 
ion mass spectrometry enables multiplexed analysis of individual hepatic 
extracellular vesicles, ACS Nano 17 (2023) 23584–23594. 
[37] W. Guo, Y. Cai, X. Liu, Y. Ji, C. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Liao, Y. Liu, N. Cui, J. Xiang, 
Z. Li, D. Wu, J. Li, Single-Exosome Profiling Identifies ITGB3+ and ITGAM+
Exosome Subpopulations as Promising Early Diagnostic Biomarkers and 
Therapeutic Targets for Colorectal Cancer, vol. 6, Research (Wash D C), 2023, 
p. 41. 
[38] C.F. Ruivo, N. Bastos, B. Adem, I. Batista, C. Duraes, C.A. Melo, S.A. Castaldo, 
F. Campos-Laborie, P. Moutinho-Ribeiro, B. Mor˜ao, A. Costa-Pinto, S. Silva, 
H. Osorio, S. Ciordia, J.L. Costa, D. Goodrich, B. Cavadas, L. Pereira, 
T. Kouzarides, G. Macedo, R. Maio, F. Carneiro, M. Cravo, R. Kalluri, J. 
C. Machado, S.A. Melo, Extracellular vesicles from pancreatic cancer stem cells 
lead an intratumor communication network (EVNet) to fuel tumour progression, 
Gut 71 (2022) 2043–2068. 
[39] A. Shang, C. Gu, W. Wang, X. Wang, J. Sun, B. Zeng, C. Chen, W. Chang, Y. Ping, 
P. Ji, J. Wu, W. Quan, Y. Yao, Y. Zhou, Z. Sun, D. Li, Exosomal circPACRGL 
promotes progression of colorectal cancer via the miR-142-3p/miR-506-3p- TGF- 
β1 axis, Mol. Cancer 19 (2020) 117. 
[40] K.E. Richards, A.E. Zeleniak, M.L. Fishel, J. Wu, L.E. Littlepage, R. Hill, Cancer- 
associated fibroblast exosomes regulate survival and proliferation of pancreatic 
cancer cells, Oncogene 36 (2017) 1770–1778. 
[41] L. Lu, W. Ling, Z. Ruan, TAM-derived extracellular vesicles containing microRNA- 
29a-3p explain the deterioration of ovarian cancer, Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 25 
(2021) 468–482. 
[42] H. Guan, R. Peng, F. Fang, L. Mao, Z. Chen, S. Yang, C. Dai, H. Wu, C. Wang, 
N. Feng, B. Xu, M. Chen, Tumor-associated macrophages promote prostate cancer 
progression via exosome-mediated miR-95 transfer, J. Cell. Physiol. 235 (2020) 
9729–9742. 
[43] L. Dong, Y. Pu, L. Zhang, Q. Qi, L. Xu, W. Li, C. Wei, X. Wang, S. Zhou, J. Zhu, 
X. Wang, F. Liu, X. Chen, C. Su, Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell- 
derived extracellular vesicles promote lung adenocarcinoma growth by 
transferring miR-410, Cell Death Dis. 9 (2018) 218. 
[44] L. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Yao, F.J. Lowery, Q. Zhang, W.C. Huang, P. Li, M. Li, 
X. Wang, C. Zhang, H. Wang, K. Ellis, M. Cheerathodi, J.H. McCarty, D. Palmieri, 
J. Saunus, S. Lakhani, S. Huang, A.A. Sahin, K.D. Aldape, P.S. Steeg, D. Yu, 
Microenvironment-induced PTEN loss by exosomal microRNA primes brain 
metastasis outgrowth, Nature 527 (2015) 100–104. 
[45] C. Chen, H. Yu, F. Han, X. Lai, K. Ye, S. Lei, M. Mai, M. Lai, H. Zhang, Tumor- 
suppressive circRHOBTB3 is excreted out of cells via exosome to sustain 
colorectal cancer cell fitness, Mol. Cancer 21 (2022) 46. 
[46] E.I. Buzas, The roles of extracellular vesicles in the immune system, Nat. Rev. 
Immunol. (2022). 
[47] C. Borzi, L. Calzolari, A.M. Ferretti, L. Caleca, U. Pastorino, G. Sozzi, O. Fortunato, 
c-Myc shuttled by tumour-derived extracellular vesicles promotes lung bronchial 
cell proliferation through miR-19b and miR-92a, Cell Death Dis. 10 (2019) 759. 
[48] L. Rong, R. Li, S. Li, R. Luo, Immunosuppression of breast cancer cells mediated 
by transforming growth factor-β in exosomes from cancer cells, Oncol. Lett. 11 
(2016) 500–504. 
[49] M. Tkach, J. Thalmensi, E. Timperi, P. Gueguen, N. N´evo, E. Grisard, P. Sirven, 
F. Cocozza, A. Gouronnec, L. Martin-Jaular, M. Jouve, F. Delisle, N. Manel, D. 
C. Rookhuizen, C.L. Guerin, V. Soumelis, E. Romano, E. Segura, C. Th´ery, 
Extracellular vesicles from triple negative breast cancer promote pro- 
inflammatory macrophages associated with better clinical outcome, Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 119 (2022) e2107394119. 
[50] Z. Zhang, T. Xing, Y. Chen, J. Xiao, Exosome-mediated miR-200b promotes 
colorectal cancer proliferation upon TGF-β1 exposure, Biomed. Pharmacother. 
106 (2018) 1135–1143. 
[51] C. Zhang, X. Xiao, M. Chen, H. Aldharee, Y. Chen, W. Long, Liver kinase B1 
restoration promotes exosome secretion and motility of lung cancer cells, Oncol. 
Rep. 39 (2018) 376–382. 
[52] I. Vitale, E. Shema, S. Loi, L. Galluzzi, Intratumoral heterogeneity in cancer 
progression and response to immunotherapy, Nat. Med. 27 (2021) 212–224. 
[53] H. Peinado, M. Aleˇckovi´c, S. Lavotshkin, I. Matei, B. Costa-Silva, G. Moreno- 
Bueno, M. Hergueta-Redondo, C. Williams, G. García-Santos, C. Ghajar, 
A. Nitadori-Hoshino, C. Hoffman, K. Badal, B.A. Garcia, M.K. Callahan, J. Yuan, 
V.R. Martins, J. Skog, R.N. Kaplan, M.S. Brady, J.D. Wolchok, P.B. Chapman, 
Y. Kang, J. Bromberg, D. Lyden, Melanoma exosomes educate bone marrow 
progenitor cells toward a pro-metastatic phenotype through MET, Nat. Med. 18 
(2012) 883–891. 
[54] G.K. Panigrahi, P.P. Praharaj, T.C. Peak, J. Long, R. Singh, J.S. Rhim, Z.Y. Abd 
Elmageed, G. Deep, Hypoxia-induced exosome secretion promotes survival of 
African-American and Caucasian prostate cancer cells, Sci. Rep. 8 (2018) 3853. 
[55] A. Shimizu, K. Sawada, M. Kobayashi, M. Yamamoto, T. Yagi, Y. Kinose, 
M. Kodama, K. Hashimoto, T. Kimura, Exosomal CD47 plays an essential role in 
immune evasion in ovarian cancer, Mol. Cancer Res. 19 (2021) 1583–1595. 
[56] Z. Boussadia, J. Lamberti, F. Mattei, E. Pizzi, R. Puglisi, C. Zanetti, L. Pasquini, 
F. Fratini, L. Fantozzi, F. Felicetti, K. Fecchi, C. Raggi, M. Sanchez, S. D’Atri, 
A. Car`e, M. Sargiacomo, I. Parolini, Acidic microenvironment plays a key role in 
human melanoma progression through a sustained exosome mediated transfer of 
clinically relevant metastatic molecules, J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 37 (2018) 245. 
[57] B. Wu, D.A. Liu, L. Guan, P.K. Myint, L. Chin, H. Dang, Y. Xu, J. Ren, T. Li, Z. Yu, 
S. Jabban, G.B. Mills, J. Nukpezah, Y.H. Chen, E.E. Furth, P.A. Gimotty, R. 
G. Wells, V.M. Weaver, R. Radhakrishnan, X.W. Wang, W. Guo, Stiff matrix 
induces exosome secretion to promote tumour growth, Nat. Cell Biol. 25 (2023) 
415–424. 
[58] J.L. Johnson, A.A. Brzezinska, T. Tolmachova, D.B. Munafo, B.A. Ellis, M. 
C. Seabra, H. Hong, S.D. Catz, Rab27a and Rab27b regulate neutrophil 
azurophilic granule exocytosis and NADPH oxidase activity by independent 
mechanisms, Traffic 11 (2010) 533–547. 
[59] M. Ramadass, J.L. Johnson, S.D. Catz, Rab27a regulates GM-CSF-dependent 
priming of neutrophil exocytosis, J. Leukoc. Biol. 101 (2017) 693–702. 
[60] E.K. Haddad, X. Wu, J.A. Hammer 3rd, P.A. Henkart, Defective granule exocytosis 
in Rab27a-deficient lymphocytes from Ashen mice, J. Cell Biol. 152 (2001) 
835–842. 
[61] R.H. Fang, W. Gao, L. Zhang, Targeting drugs to tumours using cell membrane- 
coated nanoparticles, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 20 (2023) 33–48. 
[62] E.M. Balzer, K. Konstantopoulos, Intercellular adhesion: mechanisms for growth 
and metastasis of epithelial cancers, Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 4 (2012) 
171–181. 
[63] C. Gong, X. Zhang, M. Shi, F. Li, S. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Wei, G. Ma, 
Tumor exosomes reprogrammed by low pH are efficient targeting vehicles for 
smart drug delivery and personalized therapy against their homologous tumor, 
Adv. Sci. 8 (2021) 2002787. 
[64] G. Morad, C.V. Carman, E.J. Hagedorn, J.R. Perlin, L.I. Zon, N. Mustafaoglu, T. 
E. Park, D.E. Ingber, C.C. Daisy, M.A. Moses, Tumor-derived extracellular vesicles 
breach the intact blood-brain barrier via transcytosis, ACS Nano 13 (2019) 
13853–13865. 
[65] Y. Ma, Y. Zhou, S.S. Zou, Y. Sun, X.F. Chen, Exosomes released from Sertoli cells 
contribute to the survival of Leydig cells through CCL20 in rats, Mol. Hum. 
Reprod. 28 (2022). 
[66] I.K. Herrmann, M.J.A. Wood, G. Fuhrmann, Extracellular vesicles as a next- 
generation drug delivery platform, Nat. Nanotechnol. 16 (2021) 748–759. 
[67] H.A. Dad, T.W. Gu, A.Q. Zhu, L.Q. Huang, L.H. Peng, Plant exosome-like 
nanovesicles: emerging therapeutics and drug delivery nanoplatforms, Mol. Ther. 
29 (2021) 13–31. 
[68] S. Hyung, J. Ko, Y.J. Heo, S.M. Blum, S.T. Kim, S.H. Park, J.O. Park, W.K. Kang, 
H.Y. Lim, S.J. Klempner, J. Lee, Patient-derived exosomes facilitate therapeutic 
targeting of oncogenic MET in advanced gastric cancer, Sci. Adv. 9 (2023) 
eadk1098. 
[69] W. Nie, G. Wu, J. Zhang, L.L. Huang, J. Ding, A. Jiang, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Li, 
K. Pu, H.Y. Xie, Responsive exosome nano-bioconjugates for synergistic cancer 
therapy, Angew Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 59 (2020) 2018–2022. 
[70] K. O’Brien, K. Breyne, S. Ughetto, L.C. Laurent, X.O. Breakefield, RNA delivery by 
extracellular vesicles in mammalian cells and its applications, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell 
Biol. 21 (2020) 585–606. 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
12
[71] M. Katakowski, B. Buller, X. Zheng, Y. Lu, T. Rogers, O. Osobamiro, W. Shu, 
F. Jiang, M. Chopp, Exosomes from marrow stromal cells expressing miR-146b 
inhibit glioma growth, Cancer Lett. 335 (2013) 201–204. 
[72] S. Wang, F. Li, T. Ye, J. Wang, C. Lyu, S. Qing, Z. Ding, X. Gao, R. Jia, D. Yu, 
J. Ren, W. Wei, G. Ma, Macrophage-tumor chimeric exosomes accumulate in 
lymph node and tumor to activate the immune response and the tumor 
microenvironment, Sci. Transl. Med. 13 (2021) eabb6981. 
[73] A. Das, A. Ghose, K. Naicker, E. Sanchez, C. Chargari, E. Rassy, S. Boussios, 
Advances in adoptive T-cell therapy for metastatic melanoma, Curr Res Transl 
Med 71 (2023) 103404. 
[74] W. Fu, C. Lei, S. Liu, Y. Cui, C. Wang, K. Qian, T. Li, Y. Shen, X. Fan, F. Lin, 
M. Ding, M. Pan, X. Ye, Y. Yang, S. Hu, CAR exosomes derived from effector CAR- 
T cells have potent antitumour effects and low toxicity, Nat. Commun. 10 (2019) 
4355. 
[75] S. Kamerkar, V.S. LeBleu, H. Sugimoto, S. Yang, C.F. Ruivo, S.A. Melo, J.J. Lee, 
R. Kalluri, Exosomes facilitate therapeutic targeting of oncogenic KRAS in 
pancreatic cancer, Nature 546 (2017) 498–503. 
[76] M. Piffoux, A.K.A. Silva, F. Gazeau, D. Tareste, Generation of hybrid extracellular 
vesicles by fusion with functionalized liposomes, Methods Mol. Biol. 2473 (2022) 
385–396. 
[77] L. Li, D. He, Q. Guo, Z. Zhang, D. Ru, L. Wang, K. Gong, F. Liu, Y. Duan, H. Li, 
Exosome-liposome hybrid nanoparticle codelivery of TP and miR497 
conspicuously overcomes chemoresistant ovarian cancer, J. Nanobiotechnol. 20 
(2022) 50. 
[78] M. Lu, H. Xing, W. Shao, T. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Li, Y. Weng, A. Zheng, 
Y. Huang, X.J. Liang, Photoactivatable silencing extracellular vesicle (PASEV) 
sensitizes cancer immunotherapy, Adv. Mater. 34 (2022) e2204765. 
[79] X. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Mu, C.R. Tu, Y. Chung, S.W. Tsao, G.C. Chan, W.H. Leung, 
Y.L. Lau, Y. Liu, W. Tu, Exosomes derived from γδ-T cells synergize with 
radiotherapy and preserve antitumor activities against nasopharyngeal carcinoma 
in immunosuppressive microenvironment, J Immunother Cancer 10 (2022). 
[80] F. Aliyuda, M. Moschetta, A. Ghose, K. Sofia Rallis, M. Sheriff, E. Sanchez, 
E. Rassy, S. Boussios, Advances in ovarian cancer treatment beyond PARP 
inhibitors, Curr. Cancer Drug Targets 23 (2023) 433–446. 
[81] J. Michels, I. Vitale, M. Saparbaev, M. Castedo, G. Kroemer, Predictive 
biomarkers for cancer therapy with PARP inhibitors, Oncogene 33 (2014) 
3894–3907. 
[82] S.M. Kim, Y. Yang, S.J. Oh, Y. Hong, M. Seo, M. Jang, Cancer-derived exosomes as 
a delivery platform of CRISPR/Cas9 confer cancer cell tropism-dependent 
targeting, J. Contr. Release 266 (2017) 8–16. 
[83] B. Liu, B.W. Lee, K. Nakanishi, A. Villasante, R. Williamson, J. Metz, J. Kim, 
M. Kanai, L. Bi, K. Brown, G. Di Paolo, S. Homma, P.A. Sims, V.K. Topkara, 
G. Vunjak-Novakovic, Cardiac recovery via extended cell-free delivery of 
extracellular vesicles secreted by cardiomyocytes derived from induced 
pluripotent stem cells, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2 (2018) 293–303. 
[84] Y. Wang, Z. Cao, Q. Wei, K. Ma, W. Hu, Q. Huang, J. Su, H. Li, C. Zhang, X. Fu, 
VH298-loaded extracellular vesicles released from gelatin methacryloyl hydrogel 
facilitate diabetic wound healing by HIF-1α-mediated enhancement of 
angiogenesis, Acta Biomater. 147 (2022) 342–355. 
[85] M. Mathieu, L. Martin-Jaular, G. Lavieu, C. Thery, Specificities of secretion and 
uptake of exosomes and other extracellular vesicles for cell-to-cell 
communication, Nat. Cell Biol. 21 (2019) 9–17. 
[86] C. Hong, J.C. Ndukaife, Scalable trapping of single nanosized extracellular 
vesicles using plasmonics, Nat. Commun. 14 (2023) 4801. 
[87] T. Lener, M. Gimona, L. Aigner, V. Borger, E. Buzas, G. Camussi, N. Chaput, 
D. Chatterjee, F.A. Court, H.A. Del Portillo, L. O’Driscoll, S. Fais, J.M. Falcon- 
Perez, U. Felderhoff-Mueser, L. Fraile, Y.S. Gho, A. Gorgens, R.C. Gupta, 
A. Hendrix, D.M. Hermann, A.F. Hill, F. Hochberg, P.A. Horn, D. de Kleijn, 
L. Kordelas, B.W. Kramer, E.M. Kramer-Albers, S. Laner-Plamberger, S. Laitinen, 
T. Leonardi, M.J. Lorenowicz, S.K. Lim, J. Lotvall, C.A. Maguire, A. Marcilla, 
I. Nazarenko, T. Ochiya, T. Patel, S. Pedersen, G. Pocsfalvi, S. Pluchino, 
P. Quesenberry, I.G. Reischl, F.J. Rivera, R. Sanzenbacher, K. Schallmoser, 
I. Slaper-Cortenbach, D. Strunk, T. Tonn, P. Vader, B.W. van Balkom, M. Wauben, 
S.E. Andaloussi, C. Thery, E. Rohde, B. Giebel, Applying extracellular vesicles 
based therapeutics in clinical trials - an ISEV position paper, J. Extracell. Vesicles 
4 (2015) 30087. 
[88] K. Zhang, K. Cheng, Stem cell-derived exosome versus stem cell therapy, Nat Rev 
Bioeng (2023) 1–2. 
[89] F.J. Verweij, L. Balaj, C.M. Boulanger, D.R.F. Carter, E.B. Compeer, G. D’Angelo, 
S. El Andaloussi, J.G. Goetz, J.C. Gross, V. Hyenne, E.M. Kr¨amer-Albers, C.P. Lai, 
X. Loyer, A. Marki, S. Momma, E.N.M. Nolte-’t Hoen, D.M. Pegtel, H. Peinado, 
G. Raposo, K. Rilla, H. Tahara, C. Th´ery, M.E. van Royen, R.E. Vandenbroucke, A. 
M. Wehman, K. Witwer, Z. Wu, R. Wubbolts, G. van Niel, The power of imaging to 
understand extracellular vesicle biology in vivo, Nat. Methods 18 (2021) 
1013–1026. 
[90] Y. Sakurai, A. Ohtani, Y. Nakayama, M. Gomi, T. Masuda, S. Ohtsuki, H. Tanaka, 
H. Akita, Logistics and distribution of small extracellular vesicles from the 
subcutaneous space to the lymphatic system, J. Contr. Release 361 (2023) 77–86. 
[91] D.W. Hagey, M. Ojansivu, B.R. Bostancioglu, O. Saher, J.P. Bost, M.O. Gustafsson, 
R. Gramignoli, M. Svahn, D. Gupta, M.M. Stevens, A. G¨orgens, S. El Andaloussi, 
The cellular response to extracellular vesicles is dependent on their cell source 
and dose, Sci. Adv. 9 (2023) eadh1168. 
[92] M. Liu, S. Hu, N. Yan, K.D. Popowski, K. Cheng, Inhalable extracellular vesicle 
delivery of IL-12 mRNA to treat lung cancer and promote systemic immunity, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. (2024). 
[93] Y. Li, Z. Su, W. Zhao, X. Zhang, N. Momin, C. Zhang, K.D. Wittrup, Y. Dong, D. 
J. Irvine, R. Weiss, Multifunctional oncolytic nanoparticles deliver self-replicating 
IL-12 RNA to eliminate established tumors and prime systemic immunity, Nat. 
Can. (Ott.) 1 (2020) 882–893. 
[94] K. Cheng, R. Kalluri, Guidelines for clinical translation and commercialization of 
extracellular vesicles and exosomes based therapeutics, Extracellular Vesicle 2 
(2023) 100029. 
[95] C. Paganini, U. Capasso Palmiero, G. Pocsfalvi, N. Touzet, A. Bongiovanni, 
P. Arosio, Scalable production and isolation of extracellular vesicles: available 
sources and lessons from current industrial bioprocesses, Biotechnol. J. 14 (2019) 
e1800528. 
[96] M. Martins ´A, T.M. Lopes, F. Diniz, J. Pires, H. Os´orio, F. Pinto, D. Freitas, C. 
A. Reis, Differential protein and glycan packaging into extracellular vesicles in 
response to 3D gastric cancer cellular organization, Adv. Sci. 10 (2023) 
e2300588. 
[97] A. Lapitz, M. Azkargorta, P. Milkiewicz, P. Olaizola, E. Zhuravleva, M. 
M. Grimsrud, C. Schramm, A. Arbelaiz, C.J. O’Rourke, A. La Casta, M. Milkiewicz, 
T. Pastor, M. Vesterhus, R. Jimenez-Agüero, M.T. Dill, A. Lamarca, J.W. Valle, R.I. 
R. Macias, L. Izquierdo-Sanchez, Y. P´erez Casta˜no, F.J. Caballero-Camino, 
I. Ria˜no, M. Krawczyk, C. Ibarra, J. Bustamante, L.M. Nova-Camacho, J. 
M. Falcon-Perez, F. Elortza, M.J. Perugorria, J.B. Andersen, L. Bujanda, T. 
H. Karlsen, T. Folseraas, P.M. Rodrigues, J.M. Banales, Liquid biopsy-based 
protein biomarkers for risk prediction, early diagnosis, and prognostication of 
cholangiocarcinoma, J. Hepatol. 79 (2023) 93–108. 
[98] J. Feng, Y. Shu, Y. An, Q. Niu, Q. Fan, Y. Lei, Y. Gong, X. Hu, P. Zhang, Y. Liu, 
C. Yang, L. Wu, Encoded fusion-mediated MicroRNA signature profiling of tumor- 
derived extracellular vesicles for pancreatic cancer diagnosis, Anal. Chem. 95 
(2023) 7743–7752. 
[99] J. McKiernan, M.J. Donovan, V. O’Neill, S. Bentink, M. Noerholm, S. Belzer, 
J. Skog, M.W. Kattan, A. Partin, G. Andriole, G. Brown, J.T. Wei, I. 
M. Thompson Jr., P. Carroll, A novel urine exosome gene expression assay to 
predict high-grade prostate cancer at initial biopsy, JAMA Oncol. 2 (2016) 
882–889. 
[100] W. Yu, J. Hurley, D. Roberts, S.K. Chakrabortty, D. Enderle, M. Noerholm, X. 
O. Breakefield, J.K. Skog, Exosome-based liquid biopsies in cancer: opportunities 
and challenges, Ann. Oncol. 32 (2021) 466–477. 
[101] M.L. Merchant, I.M. Rood, J.K.J. Deegens, J.B. Klein, Isolation and 
characterization of urinary extracellular vesicles: implications for biomarker 
discovery, Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 13 (2017) 731–749. 
[102] K. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Luo, X. Xiong, L. Wang, K. Durante, J. Li, F. Zhou, Y. Guo, S. Chen, 
Y. Chen, D. Zhang, S.J. Yeung, H. Zhang, A signature of saliva-derived exosomal 
small RNAs as predicting biomarker for esophageal carcinoma: a multicenter 
prospective study, Mol. Cancer 21 (2022) 21. 
[103] R.B. Corcoran, B.A. Chabner, Application of cell-free DNA analysis to cancer 
treatment, N. Engl. J. Med. 379 (2018) 1754–1765. 
[104] C. Bettegowda, M. Sausen, R.J. Leary, I. Kinde, Y. Wang, N. Agrawal, B.R. Bartlett, 
H. Wang, B. Luber, R.M. Alani, E.S. Antonarakis, N.S. Azad, A. Bardelli, H. Brem, 
J.L. Cameron, C.C. Lee, L.A. Fecher, G.L. Gallia, P. Gibbs, D. Le, R.L. Giuntoli, 
M. Goggins, M.D. Hogarty, M. Holdhoff, S.M. Hong, Y. Jiao, H.H. Juhl, J.J. Kim, 
G. Siravegna, D.A. Laheru, C. Lauricella, M. Lim, E.J. Lipson, S.K. Marie, G. 
J. Netto, K.S. Oliner, A. Olivi, L. Olsson, G.J. Riggins, A. Sartore-Bianchi, 
K. Schmidt, M. Shih l, S.M. Oba-Shinjo, S. Siena, D. Theodorescu, J. Tie, T. 
T. Harkins, S. Veronese, T.L. Wang, J.D. Weingart, C.L. Wolfgang, L.D. Wood, 
D. Xing, R.H. Hruban, J. Wu, P.J. Allen, C.M. Schmidt, M.A. Choti, V. 
E. Velculescu, K.W. Kinzler, B. Vogelstein, N. Papadopoulos, L.A. Diaz Jr., 
Detection of circulating tumor DNA in early- and late-stage human malignancies, 
Sci. Transl. Med. 6 (2014) 224ra224. 
[105] S.A. Leon, B. Shapiro, D.M. Sklaroff, M.J. Yaros, Free DNA in the serum of cancer 
patients and the effect of therapy, Cancer Res. 37 (1977) 646–650. 
[106] M. Logozzi, D. Mizzoni, R. Di Raimo, A. Giuliani, M. Maggi, A. Sciarra, S. Fais, 
Plasmatic exosome number and size distinguish prostate cancer patients from 
healthy individuals: a prospective clinical study, Front. Oncol. 11 (2021) 727317. 
[107] E. Lozano-Andr´es, A. Enciso-Martinez, A. Gijsbers, A. Ridolfi, G. Van Niel, 
S. Libregts, C. Pinheiro, M.J.C. van Herwijnen, A. Hendrix, M. Brucale, F. Valle, P. 
J. Peters, C. Otto, G.J.A. Arkesteijn, M.H.M. Wauben, Physical association of low 
density lipoprotein particles and extracellular vesicles unveiled by single particle 
analysis, J. Extracell. Vesicles 12 (2023) e12376. 
[108] J.R. Chevillet, Q. Kang, I.K. Ruf, H.A. Briggs, L.N. Vojtech, S.M. Hughes, H. 
H. Cheng, J.D. Arroyo, E.K. Meredith, E.N. Gallichotte, E.L. Pogosova- 
Agadjanyan, C. Morrissey, D.L. Stirewalt, F. Hladik, E.Y. Yu, C.S. Higano, 
M. Tewari, Quantitative and stoichiometric analysis of the microRNA content of 
exosomes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111 (2014) 14888–14893. 
[109] H. Yan, Y. Wen, Z. Tian, N. Hart, S. Han, S.J. Hughes, Y. Zeng, A one-pot 
isothermal Cas12-based assay for the sensitive detection of microRNAs, Nat. 
Biomed. Eng. 7 (2023) 1583–1601. 
[110] B. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Shi, Exosome biochemistry and advanced nanotechnology for 
next-generation theranostic platforms, Adv. Mater. 31 (2019) e1802896. 
[111] S. Fais, L. O’Driscoll, F.E. Borras, E. Buzas, G. Camussi, F. Cappello, J. Carvalho, 
A. Cordeiro da Silva, H. Del Portillo, S. El Andaloussi, T. Ficko Trˇcek, R. Furlan, 
A. Hendrix, I. Gursel, V. Kralj-Iglic, B. Kaeffer, M. Kosanovic, M.E. Lekka, 
G. Lipps, M. Logozzi, A. Marcilla, M. Sammar, A. Llorente, I. Nazarenko, 
C. Oliveira, G. Pocsfalvi, L. Rajendran, G. Raposo, E. Rohde, P. Siljander, G. van 
Niel, M.H. Vasconcelos, M. Y´a˜nez-M´o, M.L. Yliperttula, N. Zarovni, A.B. Zavec, 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
Cancer Letters 593 (2024) 216960
13
B. Giebel, Evidence-based clinical use of nanoscale extracellular vesicles in 
nanomedicine, ACS Nano 10 (2016) 3886–3899. 
[112] A. Wahida, L. Buschhorn, S. Fr¨ohling, P.J. Jost, A. Schneeweiss, P. Lichter, 
R. Kurzrock, The coming decade in precision oncology: six riddles, Nat. Rev. 
Cancer 23 (2023) 43–54. 
[113] M.A. Morse, J. Garst, T. Osada, S. Khan, A. Hobeika, T.M. Clay, N. Valente, 
R. Shreeniwas, M.A. Sutton, A. Delcayre, D.H. Hsu, J.B. Le Pecq, H.K. Lyerly, 
A phase I study of dexosome immunotherapy in patients with advanced non-small 
cell lung cancer, J. Transl. Med. 3 (2005) 9. 
G. He et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
