Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
Available online 28 February 2024
2949-8228/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Review article 
Role of nanoparticles in enhancing chemotherapy efficacy for 
cancer treatment 
Huma Ghazal a,l, Aimen Waqar b,c, Faiza Yaseen a, Muhammad Shahid a,m, Mahnoor Sultana d, 
Mehlayl Tariq e,k, Muhammad Kamran Bashir f, Hira Tahseen g, Tehreem Raza h, 
Farooq Ahmad i,j,* 
a Institute of Zoology, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
b Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 01-224 Warsaw, Poland 
c Department of Biochemistry, Govt. College University Faisalabad, Pakistan 
d Department of Zoology, Wildlife, and Fisheries, University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Pakistan 
e Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University Islamabad, Pakistan 
f Quaid-i-Azam Medical College, Bahawalpur, Pakistan 
g Department of Chemistry, University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Pakistan 
h Department of Zoology, Government College University, Faisalabad, Pakistan 
i Centre of Excellence in Solid State Physics, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan 
j Institute of Molecular Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland 
k Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland 
l College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China 
m Laboratory of Agricultural and Food Biophysics, Institute of Biophysics, College of Science, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Cancer therapy 
Nanoparticles 
Clinical trials 
Active targeting 
Passive targeting 
A B S T R A C T   
This article is an overview of the current state of nanoparticles because of their emerging usage in cancer 
treatment, covering nanoparticles that have been authorized for use in cancer therapy currently undergoing 
clinical testing. Recent advances in nanoparticle engineering, coupled with an enhanced understanding of critical 
nanoparticle attributes (size, shape, and surface properties) in conjunction with biological systems, present novel 
prospects for therapeutic nanoparticle development. Although inorganic and metallic nanoparticles are gaining 
recognition in clinical studies due to their potential usefulness but nanomaterials primarily polymeric, liposomal, 
and nano crystal based dominate the cancer therapy. Polymeric nanoparticles (NPs) contain specific ligands, such 
as polyglycolic acid (PGA) and polylactic acid (PLA), which have a chemical affinity for malignant cells and 
target tumors. Nanocrystals stand out with their high loading efficiency, stability, extended drug release, and 
capacity to deliver poorly soluble medications. The limitations of conventional chemotherapy are overcome in a 
variety of applications for improved cancer care by metal-based nanoparticles, either used alone or in combi­
nation. The dynamic nature of nanotechnology drives continued developments like protein-based nanoparticles 
and micelles. Polymer and lipid encapsulation within nanocrystals is becoming more and more popular, sug­
gesting a long-term trend. This advancement marks a significant breakthrough in life-saving nanotechnology, 
particularly in cancer treatment, and sets the stage for pioneering applications in nanomedicine.   
1. Introduction 
The most crucial obstacle to extending the average lifespan in the 
twenty-first century is cancer, currently the leading cause of mortality 
worldwide. Genetic and epigenetic factors may influence tumor growth 
and recurrence. The prevalence of cancer is rising in emerging nations 
due to factors like population aging and development, as well as 
controllable elements like smoking, sedentary behavior, and modern 
foods [1]. Due to the complicated interaction of inherited and envi­
ronmental factors, cancer is a multifaceted disorder. The defects that 
* Corresponding author at: Institute of Molecular Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland. 
E-mail addresses: huma.ghazal@nwafu.edu.cn (H. Ghazal), fiza.yasin95@gmail.com (F. Yaseen), mshahid@nwafu.edu.cn (M. Shahid), mahnoorsultana194@ 
gmail.com (M. Sultana), m.tariq@nencki.edu.pl (M. Tariq), farooq.ahmad@ifmpan.poznan.pl, ahmadfarooq1999@gmail.com (F. Ahmad).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Next Materials 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/next-materials 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nxmate.2024.100128 
Received 9 November 2023; Received in revised form 26 December 2023; Accepted 15 January 2024   
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
2
lead to cancer are primarily brought on by DNA damage [2]. According 
to cause-specific disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), cancer has the 
most significant clinical, social, and economic impact of any human 
disease. Chemotherapy has a crucial drawback in that it is hard to reach 
tumor tissues, whereas radiotherapy and immunotherapy are other 
traditional cancer treatments. A variety of adverse drug reactions are 
linked to the need for high doses and the nonselective nature of the 
treatment choices that are now accessible [3,4]. 
Nonetheless, combination treatments for the treatment of cancer are 
growing in popularity. These therapies merge two or more anticancer 
drugs to increase their anticancer effects, lessen their possible side ef­
fects, and prevent the development of drug resistance. Nanotechnologies 
are essential to provide effective anticancer combination medication 
delivery that distributes pharmaceuticals to targeted tumor tissues. 
Moreover, targeted and controlled drug delivery systems improve 
chemotherapeutic agents’ safety profile while increasing therapeutic 
efficacy [5]. 
An innovative method of cancer drug delivery using nanoparticles 
(with sizes in the nanometer range) functions as a carrier for entry 
through open windows in tumor vasculature, giving direct cell access 
[6–8]. These particles permit acceptable customization for attaching to 
the microenvironment, cytoplasmic or nuclear receptor sites, or the 
membranes of cancer cells. As a result, the targeted cancer cell receives 
high medication concentrations with minor damage to healthy tissue 
[9]. The application of nanotechnology to medicine, or "nanomedicine," 
offers important tools for the detection and treatment of disease. Many 
submicron materials have been developed and produced in this way, 
especially for the treatment of cancer. The development of drugs, drug 
delivery methods, theranostics, and contrast agents is accelerated by 
applications. Biodegradable and biocompatible polymers derived from 
natural or synthetic materials have been utilized to create nanoparticles 
(NPs) for use in drug delivery applications. Synthetic polymers can be 
produced precisely, well-controlled, and with high degrees of purity 
compared to natural materials [10]. 
Among all the nanoparticles, metal NPs have drawn particular 
attraction because of their ability to function as versatile agents. 
Numerous metal nanoparticles (NPs) with bases in bismuth, zinc, tita­
nium, cerium oxide, gold, silver, iron, or iron oxide, calcium, barium, 
magnesium, copper, and nickel have been reported as cancer therapies 
[11–13]. Metal NPs play a vital role in the ongoing cancer research 
platforms, and the area of research in this domain is steadily growing, as 
seen when five widely manufactured metal nanoparticles were 
analyzed; gold NPs came out on top, followed by magnetic and silver 
nanoparticles (MNPs) [14]. Drug delivery using Nanoparticles 
composed of gold, silver, or metal compounds has drawn much attention 
from researchers. One of the metal-based NPs that has been studied the 
most in medicine is old nanoparticles (Au NPs) [15]. Au NPs have 
several desirable characteristics, including minimal immunogenicity 
and toxicity, high stability, increased permeability and retention, 
intrinsic immune activation capabilities, and an easily changeable 
surface. 
This review’s main objective is to determine nanoparticle properties, 
tumor-destructive effects, toxicity, and possible applications in cancer 
treatment. Technically, particles having a single dimension of less than 
100 nm are referred to as NPs, and they usually possess unique char­
acteristics that are absent from bulk materials of the same chemical 
composition [15]. The core of NPs, which is essentially its central sec­
tion and sometimes referred to as the NP itself, comprises of the shell 
layer, surface layer, and other layers [16]. These materials have grown 
significantly in various disciplines due to their unique qualities, 
including high surface-to-volume ratios, dissimilarities, sub-micron 
sizes, and enhanced targeting systems [17]. Moreover, NPs are classi­
fied as hybrid nNPs, combining more than one nanostructure form.  
Table 1 includes diagnostic and therapeutic nanocomponents [20]. 
Medicine, MRI contrast agents, cancer diagnostics, and catalysis 
have all benefited from using metal NPs [18]. These substances can be 
coupled with Iron Oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) that demonstrate various 
characteristics. Gold, silver, copper, platinum, and palladium are a few 
of the coatings employed. Also, these structures can be altered by 
varying the surface charges or functional groups of IONPs, increasing 
their compatibility and stability [19]. IONPs functionalized with poly 
(ethylenimine), and gold produced intriguing multifunctional Nano 
platforms for the bimodal application of light and magnetic hyperther­
mia while also exhibiting very low cytotoxicity employing the 
micro-emulsion approach to create IONPs that were aptamer and 
gold-functionalized to target breast cancer cells [20]. 
In order to boost the effect of enhanced permeability and retention 
(EPR), NPs are discovered to have deep tissue penetration. Moreover, 
bioavailability and half-life are impacted by surface characteristics that 
effectively overcome epithelial fenestration [15]. To prevent particle 
aggregation, the polymers produce electrostatic repulsion and steric 
effects. The most researched coatings are made of polymers such as 
polylactic acid (PLA), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyethylene glycol 
(PEG), and polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) [16]. Moreover, re­
searchers have developed coverings of intelligent polymers that react to 
many incitements, including pH, temperature, light, and others [17]. 
The manufacture of NPs for cancer treatment frequently uses natural 
polymers include starch, chitosan, dextran, and gelatin.To improve the 
stability, 
biocompatibility, 
and 
biodegradability 
during 
the 
manufacturing process, these chemicals function as stabilizers [18]. GEL 
NPs may be used as stable drug carriers for cancer treatment with two 
therapeutic effects (hyperthermia and chemotherapy) [19]. 
2. Passive targeting 
Passive targeting increases EPR [21]. This can only happen if the 
endothelium lining the blood vessels supplying the tumor develops 
fenestrations. Large NPs can enter the tumor through channels and 
enhance its permeability effect. The retention effect occurs because the 
lymphatic system is compromised in tumor tissue, making it harder to 
recapture these macromolecules [22–27]. Due to physicochemical or 
pharmacological variables, this process is known as passive targeting 
and it occurs when a drug or drug-carrier structure is placed at a certain 
location [28,29]. The absence of lymphatic outflow makes NP retention 
easier. However, small molecule medicines do not share this property 
due to their rapid circulation and elimination from the tumor. Yet, 
there’s a silver lining. Incorporating small-molecule medications into 
nano-sized drug carriers increases certain tumor selectivity, lessens 
adverse effects, and improves pharmacokinetics (longer systemic cir­
culation). The features of the carrier (size, circulation duration) and the 
biology of the tumor determine the success of this’ passive’ tumor tar­
geting [30,31]. This innovative approach offers a glimmer of hope for 
improved cancer treatment. The restricted lymphatic drainage and leaky 
vasculature that characterize solid tumors make NPs ideal candidates for 
passive targeting. The EPR was initially documented by Matsumura and 
Maeda in 1986. Macromolecules and NPs with molecular weights 
greater than 50 kDa can preferentially accumulate in the tumor inter­
station [32]. By changing the EPR effect, you can get more nano-carriers 
to gather and help blood vessels return to normal. Bradykinin, nitric 
Table 1 
Two principal designs for hybrid Nanoparticles.  
Component 
Types of 
Nanoparticles 
Function 
References 
Therapeutic 
Nanocomponent 
Liposome, polymer, and 
virus 
Drug delivery 
[20] 
Gold nanoparticles, 
Carbon Nanotubes 
Photothermal 
heating 
Diagnostic 
Nanocomponent 
Gold Nanoparticles and 
Nano dot 
Optical imaging 
Magnetic Nanocrystal 
MRI, Magnetic 
Targeting  
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
3
oxide, peroxynitrite, prostaglandins, chemical EPR enhancers include 
vascular endothelial growth factor and various cytokines [33]. These 
medications normalize or increase blood pressure in the vessels, which 
may have a short-term beneficial effect on tumor perfusion. Many 
methods, 
such 
as 
ultrasound, 
radiation, 
heat, 
and 
photo-immunotherapy, can change the tumor’s vasculature and increase 
nano-systems permeation [34–37]. 
Despite the vast and phenotypic diversity of cancerous cells and tu­
mors, only a few methods exist for focusing on malignancies cancerous 
cells have gained widespread application. The EPR effect, however, 
stands out. It enables the passive targeting of anti-tumor medications for 
various cancers, some vascularized solid tumors, and a few vascularized 
metastatic 
tumor 
masses [38]. Certain 
situations (inflamma­
tion/hypoxia, typical of cancers) cause the blood vessel endothelium to 
become more permeable than it is in a healthy state [39]. The diversity 
in EPR effects within and between different cancers can impact the 
therapeutic efficacy of passively targeted NPs. This versatility of the EPR 
effect, where the endothelial gap might range from 1 to 100 nm and the 
varied extravasations of NPs into the tumor, is genuinely admirable 
[40]. Despite some research suggesting that NPs delivered intravenously 
are more likely to extravagate to the tumor’s periphery, NPS may be 
more likely to extravagate into the tumor’s hypoxic center than into the 
tumor’s more permeable peripheral [41,42]. Fig. 1 provides a schematic 
representation of active targeting and passive targeting tumors, further 
illustrating the remarkable adaptability of the EPR effect. 
2.1. Case study: architectural abnormalities of the neoplastic vessels and 
blood pressure 
The smooth muscle layer in healthy blood arteries is crucial for 
regulating the vasogenic reaction to mediators in the vascular system 
and, as a result, ensuring that an organ receives steady blood flow. On 
the other hand, the microvasculature in neoplastic tissues is devoid of 
these smooth muscle cells; as a result, these vessels are permanently 
vasodilated and unresponsive to physiological stimuli that control blood 
flow. The irregular fluid and solute transport dynamics caused by these 
aberrant neoplastic channels across tumor vessels can be used to in­
crease the EPR effect [43]. The infusion of Angiotensin II significantly 
elevates the mean arterial blood pressure by approximately 5.7 times. 
Interestingly, this increase does not correspond to the rise in blood flow 
to normal tissue [44]. Later, Li et al. confirmed that the EPR effect is 
amplified by hypertension generated by angiotensin II. Depending on 
the blood pressure reached, increasing the systolic blood pressure in 
tumor-bearing rats with angiotensin II infusion caused a selective in­
crease in tumor blood flow volume by two to six times. The study’s 
authors also noted a preferential buildup of medications with a molec­
ular mass of less than 80 kDa inside the tumor tissue, in addition to the 
enhanced blood flow [45]. Taxanes stand out as one of the most effective 
pharmacological classes in the fight against cancer. The drug paclitaxel, 
for instance, has shown effectiveness against a wide range of malig­
nancies. The most common cancers treated with taxanes include small 
cell and non-small cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer, and breast cancer. In 
2005, the US FDA authorized a medication for the treatment of 
Fig. 1. Schematic representing active targeting (ICG) and passive targeting (EPR) of a tumor.  
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
4
advanced or metastatic breast cancer (MBC) i.e. Abraxane® (albumin-­
bound paclitaxel, Abraxis Bio-Sciences). An anti-microtubule medica­
tion called Abraxane® works by stopping the depolymerization of 
microtubules and stabilizing them. It happens when a medication pro­
motes tubulin dimer-based microtubule assembly. Microtubule rear­
rangement, which is essential for interphase and mitotic cellular 
processes, is hampered by this increased stability. The popular taxane 
paclitaxel causes aberrant microtubule arrangement and numerous as­
ters during cell cycle and mitosis. In cases of pancreatic cancer, Abrax­
ane® by itself or in combination with another cytotoxic drug like 
gemcitabine reduces the pancreatic stroma in Mice xenograft models 
[46]. 
2.2. Active targeting 
NPs can only interact with their target cells when a ligand is attached 
to their surface [49]. Active targeting is vital in transporting genes, 
medications and theranostic agents to the target area while avoiding 
normal tissues, which increases therapeutic efficacy and lowers un­
wanted effects. Active targeting has the potential to significantly in­
crease the quantity of medication given to the target cell when compared 
to free medicines or passively targeted Nano-systems [50]. When tumor 
site is accumulated, the active targeting enhances the treatment’s effi­
cacy. Ligands that are specifically bind to receptors that are overex­
pressed on tumor cells are coated on the Nano carriers’ surfaces. 
Antibodies attached to the outside liposomes were the first to provide 
proof of this phenomenon in 1980 [51]. 
Active targeting in cancer therapy is not a one-size-fits-all approach. 
It offers a variety of strategies, each tailored to the unique features of the 
milieu surrounding the tumor microenvironment (TME). For example, 
the RGD peptide has been discovered for aVb3 integrin binding, a re­
ceptor overproduced in the TME vasculature and glioma cells. Similarly, 
the F3 peptide has been found to interact with the receptor of nucleolin 
on antigenic endothelial cells that are present in the TME. Even the 
tripeptide Asn-Gly-Arg peptide targets aminopeptidase N (CD13), a 
putative receptor in the TME. These strategies can directly target tumor 
cells, the moderately acidic TME, the vascularization of the TME, or the 
tumor nucleus. Folic acid (FA), a component of the TME, serves as a 
prototypical ligand due to its binding to the folate acid receptor (FAR). 
Angiogenesis, developing new blood vessels, is a crucial process in 
cancer therapy. It is necessary for the growth of solid tumors., invasion, 
and metastasis. Without a sufficient blood supply, tumor growth is 
hindered, and the potential for spread is controlled. This is why anti- 
angiogenesis and blood supply blockage strategies are crucial in can­
cer therapy. Tumor cells express a range of pro-angiogenic chemicals, 
including transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α), platelet-derived 
growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, TGF-β, and vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), when angiogenesis is stimulated. 
Thus, one important area of focus for cancer therapy is targeted angio­
genesis. Furthermore, the surface of tumor cells exhibits overexpression 
of a number of particular receptors linked to angiogenesis, such as 
matrix metalloproteinases, αvβ3 integrins, VEGFRs, and vascular cell 
adhesion molecule-1 [58,59]. A tyrosine kinase (TK) receptor belonging 
to the ErbB family, EGFR is overexpressed in a number of cancer forms, 
particularly those with squamous cell histology. The human SCC can be 
targeted by gold nanoparticles containing anti-EGFR-PEG-AuNPs and 
anti-IgG-PEG-AuNPs [60]. The therapeutic drug Herceptin® targets the 
overexpressed human EGF receptor-2 (HER2) on the surface of breast 
cancer cells. HER2-targeted PEGylated liposomal doxorubicin was 
developed in order to reduce cardiotoxicity, a known side effect of 
anthracyclines [61]. Additionally, a glycoprotein expressed on the sur­
face of tumor endothelium that contributes to angiogenesis is called 
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1). In the model of breast 
cancer, NPs that target VCAM-1 have been identified in a study, sug­
gesting a possible involvement for this protein [62]. Also, Vitamin B9, or 
folic acid, is essential for synthesizing nucleotides. The cells express the 
folate receptor responsible for internalizing folic acid. On the other 
hand, liquid cancer cells overexpress FR-β, On the other hand, tumor 
cells overexpress the alpha isoform of the folate receptor, or FR-α [63]. 
Moreover, the NPs have been used to target the folate receptors in 
specific cancer treatments [64]. 
2.3. Combination therapy 
Resistance to cancer treatment is a continuous problem that neces­
sitates the development of new combination medicines. Because of its 
ability to enhance the therapeutic efficacy, combination chemotherapy 
has been the standard of care for many types of cancer. It is widely 
accepted that synergistic actions, increased target selectivity and 
decreased cancer drug resistance can be achieved by strategically using 
pharmacological combinations [65]. The current cocktail dosing tech­
nique is a clinical norm, but it may be better. Combination chemo­
therapy has been considered the standard of care for several types of 
cancer. The use of NPs and chemotherapeutic medications at lower 
concentrations, eliminating undesirable cytotoxic effects, and greater 
efficacy are just some of the benefits of combination therapy, making it a 
potential cancer research method [66]. 
Camptothecin nanocrystals coated with hyaluronic acid were created 
using the antisolvent precipitation method. These nanocrystals 
enhanced the drug loading, stability, prolonged circulation, and water 
dispersion. The innovative potential of Nano-carriers cannot be over­
stated. Their ability to co-encapsulate various therapeutic drugs and 
coordinate their distribution to sick cells has garnered significant 
attention. Liposomes, polymeric micelles, polymeric NPs, and den­
drimers are all examples of NPs systems. The response and survival rates 
achieved by combination chemotherapy are significantly higher than 
those achieved by single-agent chemotherapy. By combining numerous 
therapeutic agents with diverse physicochemical properties and phar­
macological behavior, Nano formulations can overcome the challenges 
of multiple medicines with dissimilar pharmacokinetics and bio distri­
bution due to differing metabolism rates. In this review study, we 
explore many NP technologies that have been used for the simultaneous 
encapsulation and administration of multiple drugs. This article aims to 
provide a comprehensive review of NP-based combination techniques 
for treating multidrug-resistant cancer [68–71]. 
One of the most promising strategies in cancer treatment is the de­
livery of two or more cytotoxic medications using nanoparticles. This 
approach has the potential to significantly increase the sensitivity of 
tumors to medicines [72]. Consequently, an additional anticancer 
strategy that has shown promise is the combination of cytotoxic medi­
cations with nucleic acids, which can lower dosage and reverse drug 
resistance [73]. Co-delivery of genes and gene agents, which results in 
the synergistic regulation of gene expression in tumor cells, is a recent 
trend in this field [74]. 
Second-generation drug carriers, such as nanostructured lipid car­
riers (NLC), represent a significant advancement in the field. Based on 
lipid nanoparticles, these carriers can precisely regulate drug release, 
thereby improving carrier stability [75]. Nanostructured lipid carriers’ 
vast internal regulatory space enables them to administer hydrophobic 
medications [76,77]. Due to the distinct modes of action exhibited by 
Paclitaxel PTX and Doxorubicin DOX, the combination administration 
showed promising outcomes in treating solid tumors [78]. To investi­
gate cytotoxicity in lung cancer cell lines that are not small cell, PTX and 
DOX nano lipid carriers using melt emulsification techniques were 
prepared. It was shown that the cytotoxic effects of PTX-DOX-NLC on 
lung cancer cells were three times more than those of NLC as a single 
drug and nine times better than those of the free drug formula, according 
to their viability data employing NCL-H460 cells. When PTX-DOX-NLC 
was compared to single-drug NLC, it demonstrated improved tumor 
targeting, more potent anti-tumor activity, decreased systemic toxicity, 
and increased effectiveness in preventing the growth of lung cancer. 
These findings point to an efficient approach for the targeted treatment 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
5
of lung cancer. 
2.4. Liposomes 
Liposomes are bilayer phospholipid vesicles that are typically round 
and amphiphilic. Liposomal formulations typically include phosphati­
dylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine, whereas cholesterol is pre­
sent to modify the membrane rigidity. Multi-lamellar vesicles (MLV) are 
often formed by rehydrating lipid sheets [79]. MLVs are then physically 
extruded into unilamellar vesicles. The ability of liposomes to encap­
sulate a wide range of pharmaceuticals, as well as their efficacy, 
biocompatibility, non-immunogenicity, and improved solubility of 
chemotherapeutic agents, make liposome-mediated drug administration 
an improvement [80]. Micelles and liposomes were the first to be used 
for drug delivery. 
Lipoplatin, a liposomal version of cisplatin created by Regulon Inc., 
is being assessed for patients with non-small cell lung cancer in a phase 
III clinical trial. Furthermore, the incorporation of the drug into the 
polymer is represented by the exact core-shell nanostructures of cationic 
dendrimers, which have characteristics including chemical conjugation, 
surface adsorption, and interior encapsulation. 
The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics features of the thera­
peutic payload are improved by liposome-mediated drug delivery sys­
tems, promoting controlled and prolonged release of medications and 
decreasing systemic toxicity compared to free drugs. The therapeutic 
potential of liposomes as payload carriers and delivery vehicles is 
considerable [81]. A critical factor in this is the ability of nanoparticles 
to readily incorporate into liposomal membranes, thereby improving the 
stability, rigidity, delivery pharmacokinetics, and bioactivity of bioac­
tive agents like drugs, proteins, and oligonucleotides. Phosphatidyleth­
anolamine (PE), phosphatidylcholine, and cholesterol are liposome’s 
most commonly used building blocks [82]. The versatility of liposomes 
is further demonstrated by their ability to encapsulate genes and med­
ications in combination with lipids and other components, allowing 
them to carry nucleic acid agents and chemotherapeutic treatments 
[83]. Furthermore, the interaction between the loaded medicines and 
lipid carriers also impacts the tumors’ co-delivery efficiency [84]. 
Generally, it forms complexes through the electrostatic contact between 
small interfering RNA and cationic liposomes. In addition, if the carrier 
is similarly charged, siRNA can be loaded into the liposome core [85, 
86]. 
To improve tumor penetration, Zhao et al. created a liposomal 
platform called (Deep learning model)D-L/si-DTX (docetaxel)that uses 
the pH-sensitive peptide DPRP(decidual prolactin-relaxed protein) to 
co-deliver DTX and Polo-like kinase (PLK-1-siRNA) for cancer therapy. 
The findings demonstrated that sufficient lysosome escape in the cyto­
plasm and cellular absorption was greatly enhanced by the liposome 
complex that is advanced and composed of DSPE-PEG2000-DPRP. 
Additionally, by improving penetration in tumor spheroids, D-L/si- 
DTX demonstrated tumor-selective administration and suppressed 
tumor growth. Compared to single-loaded liposomes, in vivo and in vitro 
studies showed that D-L/si-DTX could accurately deliver D-L/si-PLK-1 
and stop tumor growth without causing adverse toxicity. This suggests 
that their suggested delivery platform could be a viable approach for 
combination therapy [87,88]. 
2.5. Polymeric micelles (PMs) 
PMs are made up of graft copolymers or self-assembling amphiphilic 
blocks, and their average diameter ranges from 10 to 100 nm. Due to 
PMs’ advantageous kinetic and thermodynamic properties, anticancer 
drug delivery has been targeted to tumors [89]. Amphiphilic polymers 
can reduce their free energy by assembling themselves into PMs in 
certain solvents. Micelles are beneficial because of their spherical 
shell-core shape, diminutive size, and ease with which they can be 
sterilized by filtration [90]. Due to the regulated release of PNP therapy, 
several chemotherapy medicines are amenable to PNP therapy. Regular 
micelles position themselves with an external hydrophilic portion and 
an interior hydrophobic core when they are in a polar solvent. The 
approach of targeted medication administration makes use of nano­
micelles, which enhance the drugs’ bioavailability and permit deeper 
tissue penetration [91]. Conversely, the reverse micelles are oriented in 
an opposite way in a non-polar solvent, with the hydrophobic portions 
facing the outside and the hydrophilic sections facing the inside. They 
are used for the delivery and encapsulation of hydrophilic medications, 
proteins such as lysozymes [92], and solutes such as fluorescein [93] and 
trypan blue [94]. The micelles’ small size is a big advantage for drug 
targeting when compared to larger systems [95]. Amphiphilic molecule 
clusters have many advantages, such as enhanced solubility of scarce 
soluble chemicals, stability, and ease of sterilizing. Longer circulation 
times are made possible by the hydrophilic outer layer, which blocks 
steric hindrance and the construct from being identified and ensnared by 
the Reticular Endothelial System (RES) [96]. In order to facilitate active 
targeting, it also helps drive the conjugation with a ligand. The hydro­
phobic core of micelles created by van der Waals forces contains the 
lipophilic molecules grouped inside [97,98]. Polymeric micelles that 
self-assemble from amphiphilic block copolymers offer various physical 
and biological advantages over other nanocarriers, which have sparked 
significant interest in targeted cancer medication delivery. Their di­
mensions range from 20 to 100 nm, with a hydrophobic core facilitating 
effective drug loading for low-solubility medicines and a hydrophilic 
shell offering colloidal stability and the inherent sheath effect [99,100]. 
Polymeric micelles which are biodegradable are also perfect for hy­
drophobic anticancer medicines like doxorubicin (DOX) and paclitaxel 
(PTX) for targeted and regulated drug delivery [101,102]. These nano­
carriers: (i) Increase the anticancer medications’ water solubility. (ii) It 
can extend the duration of drug circulation. (iii)Tumor tissues can be 
passively targeted through the EPR effect. (iv) Increase bioavailability 
[103]. Possess outstanding biocompatibility and the ability to decom­
pose in vivo into harmless substances that the body can absorb and 
eliminate. Because of their biodegradable nature, micellar solutions help 
regulate medication release and stop the long-term toxicity of drugs 
accumulating in human tissues [104]. 
2.6. Polymeric nanoparticles (PNPs) 
Polymer NPs (PNPs) are the preferred platform for NP-based cancer 
drug delivery applications because of their versatility in modulating 
drug activity, delaying and controlling drug release, and increasing drug 
adhesion or duration in the skin [105,106]. Because of their solid, 
polymer-filled core, therapeutic payloads that are insoluble in water are 
more suited to polymeric NPs. Amphiphilic diblock copolymers are 
commonly used to self-assemble polymeric NPs. Natural polymers, 
including polysaccharides, polypeptides, and synthetic polymers like 
poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), have been used to make polymeric 
NPs. PNPs, often having a diameter of less than 1 m, are categorized as 
either Nano spheres or Nanocapsules, depending on their chemical 
composition [107,108]. 
PNPs can be generated by one of two fundamental processes: the 
dispersion of premade polymers or the polymerization of monomers. 
PNPs are commonly utilized in targeted delivery systems for cancer 
therapy due to their fundamentally unique qualities, such as biode­
gradability, biocompatibility, nontoxicity, prolonged circulation, and a 
large payload spectrum of therapeutic medicines [28]. To improve 
compatibility with hydrophilic drugs [109–111], precisely control drug 
loading ratios, and precisely tune drug release sequence and kinetics, 
more advanced combinatorial drug encapsulation techniques have been 
developed through drug-polymer conjugations and particle functional­
ization. The cytotoxic medication DOX, the chemo sensitizer GG918, 
and the combination of DOX and GG918 were all delivered via novel 
polymer-lipid hybrid nanoparticle (PLN) formulations. A human MDR 
breast cancer cell line (MDA435/LCC6/MDR1) shows improved 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
6
encapsulation and therapeutic activity of DOX and GG918 when PLNs 
are present [112]. 
2.7. Dendrimers 
Dendrimers are artificial macromolecules that share some charac­
teristics with natural polymers, including a well-defined molecular 
structure, a mixture of functional groups, a nanoscale size, radial sym­
metry, and a structure that resembles the branches or limbs of a tree 
[113–115]. Dendrimers are hyper branched polymers that have a core 
surrounded by layers of repeating units and an outer layer of multivalent 
functional groups. The symmetrical, tree-like spherical shape has its 
origins in the center [116]. Dendritic polymers, which are similar to 
proteins, enzymes, and viruses, are easily functionalized and offer many 
benefits, such as increasing the stability of drugs that have been con­
jugated with dendrimers and reducing their immunogenicity and anti­
genicity. Because of their unusual combination of properties, 
dendrimers have attracted attention for use in a wide range of 
biomedical applications, such as drug administration, gene transfer, MRI 
contrast agents, and sensors [117–119]. 
Furthermore, the plan was to achieve MDR management using a 
PAMAM dendrimer. There are many descriptions available for DNA- 
assembled PAMAM dendrimers. The growth of epithelial cancer xeno­
grafts was greatly delayed by the produced dendrimers as compared to 
mice treated with single-agent chemotherapy [120]. 
2.8. Cancer imaging 
According to the National Cancer Institute (NCI), nanotechnology 
has the potential to significantly improve cancer prevention, diagnosis, 
imaging, 
and 
treatment 
[121]. 
In 
clinical 
practice, 
various 
Nano-formulated drugs demonstrated highly targeted tumor delivery 
and were effective anti-cancer agent carriers [122]. Utilizing nano­
technology, it is possible to target tumors, detect pathophysiological 
abnormalities in tumors, deliver therapeutic medications, genes, or 
imaging agents, respond to external stimuli to release the agent, and 
track the therapeutic response. In addition, NPs have been used to 
identify imaging contrast agents, radioactive isotopes, chemical/­
fluorescent dyes, and other imaging probes in cancer diagnostic imaging 
[123,124]. A significant advantage of using NP imaging agents as 
opposed to small molecules is the potential for preferential localization 
at the disease site due to increased permeability and retention. Thera­
peutic applications call for a biodegradable or rapidly excreted NP im­
aging probe with low toxicity and a strong imaging signal. Many NPs 
share a variety of obstacles that impede their therapeutic application 
development. NPs with prolonged blood circulation periods tend to 
congregate in the interstitial space of tumors after passing through 
leaking tumor blood capillaries. Tumor vasculature apertures are typi­
cally 400–600 nm, which is significantly larger than most normal tissues 
[125–127]. 
2.9. Therapeutic use of polymeric nanoparticles in cancer 
Small-molecule drugs, peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids can all be 
put inside polymeric NPs and used as medicines. Liposomes, PNPs, and 
polymer micelles are all examples of PNPs. They can lengthen the time 
until a drug’s effects wear off, making it more soluble and more selective 
for its intended targets [128,129]. Liposomes’ limited ability to cure 
cancers resistant to many therapies stems from their poor ability to 
transport drug molecules into cells and control the timing of medication 
release [130]. 
Lipoplatin, a liposomal version of cisplatin created by Regulon Inc., 
is being assessed for patients with non-small cell lung cancer in a phase 
III clinical trial. Furthermore, the incorporation of the drug into the 
polymer is represented by the exact core-shell nanostructures of cationic 
dendrimers, which have characteristics including chemical conjugation, 
surface adsorption, and interior encapsulation. 
3. Cancer imaging and treatment using multifunctional 
polymeric nanoparticles 
Polymeric nanoparticles have been used as effective ways to deliver 
drugs to improve the effectiveness of therapy while reducing side effects. 
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a method of treating cancer that uses 
light and photosensitizers. Photosensitizers take in photons and send the 
energy to molecular oxygen, making singlet oxygen or other reactive 
oxygen species harmful to nearby tissues. Cons of PDT include photo­
toxicity to the skin and eyes and low tumor selectivity [131]. To kill 
tumor cells, scientists are now developing complex polymeric NP de­
signs that can specifically target diseased tissues, pinpoint tumor loca­
tions, and release a variety of medications [132]. 
3.1. Nanoparticle quantum dots for cancer diagnosis and treatment 
Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) are being used increasingly as 
imaging and labeling probes. The natural fluorescence emission spectra 
of QDs span the 400–2000 nm [133]. For both diagnostic imaging and 
treatment, chemicals can be delivered in the form of QDs [134]. It has 
been reported that quantum dots (QDs) in photodynamic therapy (PDT) 
can work either as photosensitizers themselves or as energy donors that 
activate other photosensitizers [135,136]. QDs can generate singlet 
oxygen, but their quantum yield is much lower (5%) than that of a 
regular photosensitizer (40–60%) [137,138]. Because of their consistent 
composition, ease of manufacture, low cost, lack of toxicity when not 
exposed to light, and possible cytotoxicity when exposed to UV radia­
tion, QDs make excellent photosensitizers. QDs can be engineered to 
emit in the near-infrared (NIR) spectrum, making them ideal for 
photodynamic therapy (PDT) of deep-seated cancers [139], in contrast 
to the vast majority of conventional photosensitizers, which emit in the 
visible spectrum. 
4. In vitro studies 
4.1. Cell viability and cytotoxicity assays 
It is a common practice to evaluate the efficacy of the drugs before 
they become commercially available in the market. It has been observed 
that approximately a quarter of drugs fail to perform laboratory testing. 
Therefore, it is compulsory to evaluate the effectiveness of medicines for 
their effects in vitro and in-vivo experimental models [140]. Cell 
viability and cytotoxicity response of the NPs are majorly assessed on the 
cell cultures and by the following protocols. Many researchers have 
reported the LDH, MTT, MTS, Trypan blue, and Live and Dead assays as 
reliable methods for assessing the nanoparticle effects in cancer treat­
ment [141]. As Song, Choi [142] has reported, the RH- (GFLG)3 with the 
formulated nanoparticles enhanced cellular uptake and negligible 
toxicity in Henrietta lacks (HeLa) cell lines using the MTT assay for 
cytotoxic effects. The MTT assay follows the calorimetric approach, and 
it is used to evaluate the cyto-viability at more sites. A previous study 
has assessed the silica NPs 15 nm in size in a dose-dependent manner for 
breast cancer where the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)−2,5-diphenylte­
trazolium bromide (MTT) used, and which turn into dark blue color 
Formazan indicated the reduced cell viability [143]. The MTT assay was 
also used to assess the mitochondrial activity and cell integrity for the 
efficacy of the drugs [144]. 
Another most widely reported approach in oncology is the Lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH) assay, which analyzes the cell viability and 
cytotoxicity of the drugs in in-vitro studies, which is correlated with the 
high concentration of lactose dehydrogenase and the presence of the 
damaged cells in culture media [145]. Other assays, including the trypan 
blue and live and dead cells, are performed to determine the cytotoxic 
effects for both the tumor and normal healthy cells in the tumor 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
7
microenvironment. In the trypan blue assay, the trypan blue chemical 
penetrates the cells and stains the intracellular compartments. The re­
sults of this procedure indicate the presence of live cells in the experi­
mental groups [146]. The live and dead assay is also used for cell 
viability analysis, in which the ethidium homodimer and calcein ace­
toxymethyl chemicals differentiate between the damaged and normal 
cells. The ethidium homodimer could only stain the cells whose cell 
membrane broke after toxicity [147]. Sayes and coworkers [148] have 
reported the gold nano-shell and fullerenes toxicity in human cell lines 
by using live and dead assays, where the ethidium only stains the 
damaged cells, which bind to the nucleus and colors the damaged or­
ganelles red. Using live/slow labeling on 4T1 tumor cells, the impact of 
p12 alteration on the cytotoxicity of liposomes containing doxorubicin 
and indocyanine green was assessed. As a result of improved cellular 
absorption, the results demonstrated that p12-modified liposomes 
significantly increased tumor cell death compared to non-modified li­
posomes. Moreover, the maximum level of cytotoxicity toward tumor 
cells was produced by the photothermal-induced structural breakdown 
of liposomes following near-infrared (NIR) laser irradiation. The 
viability of irradiated cells was assessed using the live/dead staining 
technique, and the proper and safe irradiation dosage was validated 
[149]. 
The bright-field microscopy method is used to visually observe the 
tumor cells’ cell integrity and metabolic activity [150]. Most published 
data utilize These techniques to evaluate the effectiveness and side ef­
fects of the nanoparticles employed in cancer treatment. The apoptosis 
assay, ROS assays, oxidative stress enzyme tests, and NP evaluation are 
more approaches published for assessing cell survival. 
4.2. Cellular uptake and localization studies 
The internalization of nano-medicine in cancer and other tumor- 
related illnesses is significantly influenced by cellular uptake and its 
localization. The effectiveness of nano-drugs depends on the interaction 
with the extracellular environment and with intracellular components 
such as mitochondria and the nucleus. Many previous studies have 
mentioned that without the internalization of the anticancer drugs to 
infected tissues, these could not produce an immediate response against 
disease. NPs majorly worked in the targeted delivery of anti-cancerous 
medication at specific tumor sites [151]. Table 2 shows the types of 
NPs and their influence and cellular interactions depending on the type 
of NPs, such as organic (graphenes 6, carbon nano-tubs 8, carbon 
quantum dots ten and fullerene), inorganic (Metal oxide) [152,153] As 
many small size NPs show the higher cellular uptake than larger nano­
particles similarly the NPs with positive charge show the higher uptake 
by the tumorous cells. There are many factors, such as size, shape, 
charge density, hydrophobicity, and the presence of the functional 
group [154]. The weak interactions with the cell membrane result in 
collisions of nanoparticles with the cell membrane without facilitating 
the adhesion to the plasma membrane [155]. Many studies have re­
ported the efficacy of the inorganic metal oxide NPs for their immuno­
therapeutic effects [156]. NPs migrate inside the cells through 
endocytosis, in which the clathrin-mediated endocytosis facilitates the 
movement of 100 to 350 nm NPs. However, the caveolin-1 pro­
tein-mediated target delivery is mainly responsible for the uptake of 20 
to 100 nm NPs [157]. Phagocytosis and pinocytosis methods were also 
reported for the cellular uptake of nanomaterials [158]. 
Some NPs are investigated and reported for their beneficial utiliza­
tion as anticancer drugs. For instance, cerium oxide is reported for its 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging abilities for normal bodily 
cells [159]. These NP therapies have revealed insights into cancer and 
normal cells for their cyto-viability and cytotoxicity [160]. Furthermore, 
the NPs could cross the blood-brain barrier, and this property allows 
many chemotherapies to reach the targeted organs [161]. However, 
these nanoparticles showed less migration for the highly packed cells 
akin to cancer cells. Therefore, further studies are needed for the 
investigation of NPs for the cellular uptake in tumorous tissues [162]. 
Also, these nanoparticles cause the production of ROS, which leads to 
cellular damage and induces apoptosis in normal cells. 
4.3. Mechanistic studies 
The NPs could move into the cells through passive and active 
migration. As in passive movement, the NPs move independently 
enhanced permeation and retention effects through the leaky channels 
[163,164]. In the NPs active targeting the nanoparticles conjugated with 
antibodies target specific receptors without the hindrance of vasculature 
and angiogenesis. In using these combined nanoparticles and chemo­
therapies, these particles work as the nano-carriers for anticancer drugs, 
Table 2 
Presents the characteristic and mechanisms for organic and inorganic nano­
particles used in cancer treatment.  
Nanoparticles 
Characteristics 
Mechanism 
References 
Inorganic Nanoparticles 
Zinc Oxide 
Electrical sensitive 
semiconductor 
ROS production and 
Cell wall 
internalization 
[1] 
Copper oxide 
Antibacterial and 
catalytic properties 
Enter the cell and 
detachment and 
membrane blebbing 
Cytotoxic 
[2] 
Graphene 
Heat-sensitive, 
inexpensive, 
mechanical strength 
Cause 
immunogenicity, 
Low retention 
[3] 
Quantum dots 
Semiconductor, 
absorptive, 
photochemical 
stability 
Invivo and invitro 
imaging, targeted 
gene delivery, tumor 
diagnosis 
[4] 
Titanium oxide 
Bio-compatibility, 
retention effects, 
suitability 
Partially enter the cell 
membrane, ROS 
production reduce 
proliferation, cell 
dyeing 
[5] 
Gold based NPs 
Biocompatibility, 
surface plasmon 
resonance, easy 
synthesis 
ROS concentration, 
cytokines release, 
apoptosis, use heat to 
destroy cancer cells 
[6] 
Silica based NPs 
High surface area, 
adjustable pore 
diameter 
Autophagy, ROS 
production, cell 
tracking 
[7] 
Nanoshells 
Electrostatic 
stabilization 
Kill the tumor cells 
and destroy the cancer 
cells, diagnosis of 
tumor 
[8] 
Organic Nanoparticles 
Polymeric NPs 
Drug delivery, anti- 
inflammatory 
Facilitate in 
Endocytosis, Ligand 
targeted delivery 
[9] 
Nanostructured 
lipid NPs 
Increased solubility, 
low side effect 
Active and passive 
delivery 
[10] 
Solid Lipid NPs 
Assist in delivery of 
drugs 
Reduce the 
development of cancer 
cell 
[11] 
Nanogels 
Charge and softness, 
degradability, 
porosity 
Ligand base delivery, 
enhance drug 
accumulation 
[12] 
Dendrimers 
Branched, inner and 
outer shell, nano- 
sized and modifiable 
structures 
Associated with the 
drugs and nucleic 
acid, conjugated mAbs 
[13] 
Chitosan NPs 
Biodegradable and 
Nontoxic, 
biocompatible 
Safe targeted delivery, 
safe unleash the huge 
amount of anticancer 
drugs, cellular 
immune response. 
[14] 
Liposomes 
Biocompatible, 
Biodegradable 
Increase the 
temperature of tumor 
cells, cause 
agglomeration, reduce 
toxic effects 
[15]  
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
8
targeting the specific receptors, and also cause ROS production, leading 
the cancerous cells to cell arrest and to natural cell death. These con­
jugated molecules are designed according to the TME. Therefore, on the 
interaction with the specific receptors, these NPs unload the anticancer 
drugs into the TME. This nano-carrier is specifically designed as sensi­
tive to the pH, temperature, hypoxic conditions, and interaction with 
specific enzymes for the tumor sites [165]. For instance, the amphiphilic 
polymer-based NPs release the drug upon encountering with highly 
acidic medium. Another study has reported that the copolymer poly­
styrene co-maleic anhydride conjugate with paclitaxel released the 
paclitaxel in an acidic environment where it exhibited tumor inhibition 
in Tumor-bearing BALB/ mice [166]. 
Similarly, Zhao and his colleagues [167] have reported acid sensi­
tivity in PEGylated polyethyleneimine linked to Schiff base and conju­
gated with docetaxel, and indomethacin has shown the pH-based release 
under an acidic medium. Nanoparticles use another pathway where 
these tiny particles work against the vasculature in cancer. These NPs 
could target multiple tumors without hindering Enhanced Permeation 
and Retention (EPR) effects as they bound to specific antibodies for the 
particular overexpressed receptors in the cancerous tissues. Zhu and 
coworkers [168] have analyzed that the insoluble gel blocks the vessels, 
which causes the hypoxic condition. As a result, these hinder the 
migration of anticancer drugs to the target site; these NPs could pass 
these blocked vessels because of their tiny size and conjugated anti­
bodies this NPs could pass this vasculature. 
Some NPs target the alpha-v-beta-3 receptors, which are involved in 
cell-to-cell communication. It is reported in one research that the lipo­
somes conjugated Doxorubicin (DOX) target alpha-v-beta-3 receptor 
showed increased therapeutic efficacy [169]. Gold NPs coated with 
chitosan with Sunitinib malate in the MCF-7 cell lines also showed 
higher cellular uptake and toxicity than free drugs [170]. Other NPs also 
target the different receptors involved in metastasis, such as CD105 
endoglin glycoprotein, which is the growth factor targeted for cancer 
therapy using the nanoparticles [171]. 
Besides the role of NPs in the delivery of drugs the NPs also work as 
the therapeutic agent in leading the tumors to apoptosis without causing 
harm to normal cells. Some medications must be delivered to organelles 
where these NPs also enhance the oxidative stress and inhibit topo­
isomerase II, leading to apoptosis at the cancer site with minimized side 
effects [172]. The preclinical studies for micelles loaded with docetaxel 
were used to target prostate cancer, which shows increased circulation 
time and low accumulation in the liver of patients [173]. 
Overall, the anticancer medications’ toxicity towards healthy organs 
is reduced by the NPs, which are mostly utilized for targeted distribution 
as conjugated antibodies. Yet, certain NPs disrupt the cell cycle, induce 
oxidative damage, and increase the effectiveness of using NPs in com­
bination with anticancer medications. Overall, the results of mechanistic 
investigations suggest that NPs as a promising therapy approach for 
cancer because of their capacity to target and transport drugs only to 
cancer cells while posing the least amount of harm to healthy cells. 
Overall, Fig. 2 Illustrates the traditional use of the NPs in cancer ther­
apeutics, as it has been used to detect biomarkers, locate cancer cells, 
and reduce the toxicities of chemotherapies by active and passive drug 
delivery of anticancer medicines. Furthermore, polyoxyl 15 hydroxy 
stearate micelle has the potential to dramatically increase myricetin’s 
antioxidant activity in vitro and speed up membrane permeability for 
myricetin’s optical transport [174].. 
4.4. In-vitro applications of protein nanoparticles 
Protein-based nanoparticles have several advantages, including easy 
manufacturing, high medicine binding capacity, lack of toxicity, lack of 
immunogenicity, biocompatibility, biodegradability, and plasma half- 
life [175–177]. Targeted ligand binding and other surface modifica­
tions are made more accessible by the functional groups on the surfaces 
of protein nanoparticles, which act as intelligent nanoparticles [178, 
179]. One of the most important proteins in plasma, albumin, has been 
used in a number of medical applications within the last few decades. 
When administered to neuroblastoma cell lines, Dox-loaded human 
serum albumin nanoparticles were found to have superior in vitro 
anticancer activity compared to the pure drug [180]. Bovine serum al­
bumin nanoparticles loaded with PTX are created by dissolving and 
coating folic acid., have been recognized to target human prostate 
cancer cell lines [181] effectively. Protein nanoparticles function as an 
efficient, noncovalent, reversible carrier of hydrophobic substances, 
enabling their passage through physiological fluids and discharge at the 
surface of the cell. Furthermore, Glycoprotein receptor interactions with 
protein can facilitate the transcytosis of molecules associated with al­
bumin [182]. Abraxane, a medication with a diameter of roughly 
130 nm, is the first pharmaceutical product authorized by the FDA for 
commercial use that has demonstrated notable efficacy in treating 
metastatic breast cancer [183]. 
4.5. A54 peptide 
In a phage display random peptide library, the hepatic carcinoma 
can be bound by the A54 peptide. For the BEL-7402 human hepatoma 
cancer cell line, it is the most effective peptide. As a result, a target 
ligand for liver cancer is the A54 peptide. Polyethylene glycol 1000 
vitamin E succinate, or A54-TPGS, was esterified by Zhang et al. and 
mixed with calcium phosphate nanoparticles to create a multifunctional 
drug-carrying system with enhanced tumor tissue homing characteris­
tics and an extended tumor tissue residency duration [184]. Du et al. 
synthesized the PEGylated stearic acid grafted chitosan micelle 
(PEG-CS-SA), which was functionalized with the A54 peptide acting as a 
targeted ligand. In vitro, it demonstrates a unique ability to internalize 
liver cancer cells, and in vivo, it has a wide spread capacity in the liver 
and liver cancer tissues. It can lessen toxicity and suppress tumor growth 
more successfully [185]. According to research, artesunate (AS) has a 
potent cytotoxic effect on tumor cells both in vivo and in vitro. It is 
activated by iron within cells. As a result, Hou et al. used thin films as an 
anchor on the surface of artesunate-loaded copper sulfide nanoparticles 
as a targeting molecule. Through tf-mediated endocytosis, the system 
can preferentially target tumor cells and allow breast cancer cells to 
absorb them. As it delivers iron ions and As to the tumor, it enhances 
antitumor activity [186]. 
5. In vivo studies 
5.1. Efficacy studies in animal models 
Because of their unique characteristics, such as their small size and 
large surface area, which allow for effective drug delivery to cancer 
Fig. 2. shows the approaches for Nanoparticles in cancer therapeutics.  
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
9
cells, NPs have become an attractive therapeutic approach for cancer 
treatment. Several factors influence the efficacy of NPs in cancer ther­
apy, including their physicochemical characteristics, tumor-targeting 
strategies, and their therapeutic effects [187]. The EPR effect, which 
allows for the passive deposition of NPs in tumor tissue via leaky blood 
vessels, is an essential factor influencing NP efficacy [188]. Further­
more, NPs can be designed and synthesized with targeting ligands like 
antibodies or peptides that can vigorously attach to particular receptors 
on cancer cells, allowing for the selective delivery of therapeutic agents 
to tumor tissue [189]. Furthermore, NPs can overcome multidrug 
resistance (MDR) in cancer cells by simultaneously delivering multiple 
drugs or by inhibiting efflux pumps that cause drug resistance [190]. 
Pharmacological treatments with nanoparticles have additionally been 
demonstrated to have synergistic activity, resulting in improved cancer 
therapeutic response [191]. NPs, for example, can be used to deliver 
chemotherapeutic drugs in combination with immuno-stimulatory 
agents or gene therapy vectors, enhancing the immunologic reaction 
against cancer cells and improving overall clinical outcomes [192]. NP 
efficacy in cancer treatment has been demonstrated in preclinical and 
clinical studies. Mao and his co-workers studied the acute toxicity of 
submicron mesoporous bioactive glass microspheres (SMBGs) in Insti­
tute of Cancer Research (ICR) mice following intravenous injection of 
SMBGs 20, 100, and 180 mg/kg over 14 days, and they found that the 
LD50 of SMBGs was more significant than 250 mg/kg. They also found 
that no death or aberrant behavior was noticed in any of the experi­
mental animals, indicating that the in vivo toxicity of SMBGs is low in 
groups [193]. 
Similarly, liposomal doxorubicin and paclitaxel, for example, have 
been granted clinical use in breast and ovarian cancer [194], respec­
tively. Additionally, the carbon nanotube (CNT)-ABT737 nano 
drug-coated in polyethylene glycol targets explicitly the mitochondria of 
lung cancer cells; the researchers created a lung cancer cells experienced 
apoptosis as a consequence of the nano drug’s delivery into early 
endosomes and delivery into the mitochondria [195]. According to the 
study’s findings, using this nano-drug to better target the mitochondria 
of anticancer Nano drugs for the fight against lung cancer may be a 
successful technique. 
However, there are several limitations and challenges associated 
with NP-based cancer therapy, such as concerns about toxicity and 
biocompatibility, low capacity for loading drugs, and a lack of stan­
dardized procedures for NP production and characterization. Many 
studies reported their side effects in in-vivo studies. For instance, Sybille 
and his colleagues analyzed the pulmonary toxicity and respiratory 
persistence of Ge-imogolite nanomaterials in rats. Ge-imogolite from SW 
and DW was shown to cause a more severe inflammatory and fibrotic 
response than crocidolite after exposure for 60 days [196]. In another 
study, the in vivo experiment used zebrafish embryos to test the viability 
of using Au NPs as probes for embryonic imaging. The study has shown 
that Au NPs affected zebrafish embryos in real-time and discovered that 
the random distribution of Au NPs throughout the source led to harmful 
effects that were mostly stochastic. This implies that there may be re­
strictions on the use of Au NPs for imaging the developing fetus due to 
the possibility of unforeseen harmful consequences. The viability and 
safety of utilizing Au NPs as probes for embryonic imaging require more 
investigation [197]. This emphasizes the significance of carrying out 
lengthy toxicology studies to comprehend any dangers related to the 
usage of NPs. 
Several clinical research trials with an emphasis on combination 
therapy were made possible by the advantages of functionalized nano­
carriers, including their enhanced drug loading for targeted modifica­
tion, passive targeting ability, enhanced permeation and retention, and a 
high surface-to-volume ratio [198]. For example, phase 1 clinical studies 
have only produced modest results from the safe and effective nanosized 
formulation demonstrated by Katragadda et al. for the delivery of 
paclitaxel and 17-AAG combination therapy [199]. 
Liu et al.’s novel nanoparticles for pulmonary transport were 
developed utilizing two anticancer medications encapsulated into 
polymeric microspheres drugs. Research conducted on the in vivo 
pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of the microspheres demonstrated 
their extended half-life and potential for lung development [200]. Also, 
Fig. 3. Representative Image shows a clinical trial that used nanoparticles to treat pancreatic cancer that had become resistant to other treatments. (a) Thermodox 
shows the smooth-thermosensitive liposomal NPs carrying intravenous doxorubicin-one in the open phase II study NCT02181075. (b) Cetuximab loaded in polymeric 
NPs coated with somatostatin is administered orally in an open phase I study NCT03774680. (c) The LNP with siRNA TKM-080301 targets the PLK1 protein. 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
10
the Tyrosine kinase inhibitors are utilized in clinical practice to treat 
solid tumors, as reported by Araujo et al. [201]. Moreover, tyrosine 
kinase SRC (proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase) is a promising 
therapeutic agent for treating solid tumors since it is essential to both the 
oncogenic and bone-metastatic processes. Determining whether target­
ing SRC is an effective therapeutic method is made more accessible by 
the current discoveries and one of the SRC inhibitors that are currently 
being developed. Both in vitro and in vivo experiments showed that the 
NPs had a better antitumor impact and were less harmful [202,203]. 
5.2. Cell membrane coated nanoparticles 
Using a biomimetic approach, therapeutic devices with a nano­
particle core coated in a membrane derived from different cell sour­
ces—such as cancer cells, stem cells, platelets, or white blood cells—are 
made using cell membrane-coated nanoparticles [204,205]. The stan­
dard procedure for creating CMCNPs involves isolating plasma mem­
branes from different cell sources and incorporating core nanoparticles 
into membrane vesicles. Recently, there has been a lot of interest in 
these biomimetic CMCNPs because of their tailored nanomaterials and 
advanced smart nanoparticles for cancer therapy [206]. For instance, it 
is possible to generate platelet membrane-coated nanoparticles with 
TRAIL (tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand) placed 
onto the outside membrane and Dox loaded into the inner nanoparticles. 
Platelet membrane-coated nanoparticles demonstrated the highest level 
of anticancer efficacy in an animal model with a subcutaneous tumor 
and a metastatic location [207]. 
5.3. Gold nanoparticles 
Doctors can easily distinguish between tumors and healthy cells 
thanks to the way that gold nanoparticles reflect light after being 
injected and adhere only to malignant cells [208]. Photothermal therapy 
(PTT) has gained more attention lately due to the near-infrared ab­
sorption of gold nanoparticles [209]. A multifunctional nanoplatform 
based on Ti3C2-MXene Au nanocomposite was proposed by Chang et al. 
in addition to photoacoustic (PA) and thermal dual-mode imaging in 
vivo. This enabled the triune of PTT/enzyme kinetics treatment/anti­
tumor immune therapy [210]. 
5.4. Prostate-specific membrane antigen 
Prostate cancer cells overexpress PSMA, a transmembrane glyco­
protein known to be a biomarker for the disease. Cho et al. developed a 
multifunctional nanosystem to inject anti-prostate-specific membrane 
antigen (anti-PSMA) into the paclitaxel-loaded composite nanocarrier. 
The hybrid nanoparticles were effectively guided into the tumor area 
and LNCaP cells both in vivo and in vitro through the targeted receptor 
PSMA [211]. 
5.5. C16Y peptide 
The αvβ3 integrin also targets the C16Y peptide. Negishi et al. 
examined the targeting capability of C16Y-L liposomes, which they 
modified using the C16Y peptide, both in vitro and in vivo. It can 
preferentially adhere to tumor slices and has better cellular absorption 
in colon 26 cells than liposomes. According to in vivo research, C16Y-L 
builds up in tumor blood vessels and tissues. This demonstrates the 
precise tumor targeting of the C16Y peptide. 
5.6. Pharmacokinetics and bio-distribution studies 
NP distribution and clearance in vivo are critical experiments for 
understanding their behavior within the body. Researchers can gain 
valuable insights into how NPs are digested and eliminated by the body 
by monitoring their localization in different tissues and organs over time 
and analyzing their metabolism and excretion. This data is critical for 
optimizing NP-based treatments and diagnostics and identifying po­
tential cytotoxic effects or other challenges. Finally, in vivo, nano­
particle distribution and clearance enable the development of safe and 
effective nanoparticle-based technologies for various biomedical uses. 
There are numerous methods for studying in vivo distribution. NPs 
containing definite functional groups, for example, can be identified 
using atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS), inductively coupled 
emission spectrometry (ICP-AES), ICP-MS, and other techniques [212]. 
The study’s findings revealed that AS1411-CS/rGO/Ag+ -DNA initially 
accumulated in the liver and lung after entering the body and then 
transferred to the tumor site. Huang, Zhong, Li, Wu, He, Tang, Tang, Su, 
Feng, and Wang [213] used ICP-MS to detect AS1411-CS/rGO/ 
Ag+ -DNA in various organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney) 
and tumor tissues after 0 h, 12 h, 72 h, 216 h, 288 h. The integration of 
fluorescent substances into nanoparticles enables tracking there in vivo 
distribution and localization. CaO2 @CuS-MnO2 @HA (CCMH) nano­
composites in 4T1 tumor-bearing mice were observed by Huang, Lin, 
Chen, Wang, Lin, Liu, Ren, Tao, Zhao, Xu [214] using the small animal in 
vivo fluorescence imaging at various time points. After 6 h, the results 
showed that CCMH accumulated most significantly at the tumor site. 
Different nanoparticles used for cancer or tumor treatment showed 
different pharmacokinetics and efficacy rates in different animal 
models. The effectiveness of NP formulations containing docetaxel 
(DXL) in Wistar rats was investigated in this study. The results showed 
that these NPS formulations had approximately three times the relative 
bioavailability of the DXL control. Compared to DXL, the pharmacoki­
netic profile of DXL-CS-F-Ctmab-NP showed an increased half-life and 
mean residence time [215]. Similarly, another study has reported that 
ultra-small porous silica NPs (USPN) conjugated with the isotopic pair 
90/86Y could be used for cancer imaging and therapy. The USPN 
demonstrated excellent pharmacokinetics, with lengthy blood circula­
tion and elevated tumor-to-muscle and tumor-to-liver uptake values. 
The USPN was found to accumulate significantly in the tumor (12% 
ID/g) while trying to evade the reticuloendothelial system (RES) organs 
using in vivo PET imaging [216]. 
In another study, the two NPs showed a different bio-distribution 
rate where the passive tumor targeting ability of TiN and TiN-PEG 
NPs was tested in a murine model using EMT6/P mammary carcinoma 
cells. NPs were injected when the tumor size was 300 100 mm3, and 
their pharmacokinetics and bio-distribution were studied using ICP-MS. 
TiN NPs with a short half-life in the bloodstream were detected in the 
bloodstream. TiN-PEG NPs, on the other hand, had increased circulation 
time and were detected in the bloodstream 1 h after administration, 
indicating that PEGylation improved the colloidal stability of the NPs 
under physiological conditions [217]. Although nanoparticles offer 
considerable potential for targeted medication administration and 
increased therapeutic efficacy, their pharmacokinetic characteristics 
must be thoroughly evaluated and tuned to guarantee safe and suc­
cessful usage. Size, shape, surface chemistry, and bio-distribution are 
only a few elements that affect how pharmacologically active NPs are in 
living organisms. The reported knowledge of the pharmacokinetics of 
NPs and their potential application in the treatment of cancer is ex­
pected to continue to grow as a result of ongoing research in this field. 
5.7. Clinical trials 
On a worldwide basis, researchers are still looking for an alternative 
to chemotherapy and other ineffective cancer treatments. NPs are 
already widely used in the medical industry, even if efforts to use 
nanotechnology to cure cancer and boost the potency of medicines are 
still in the development stages. NPs have a relatively high surface area 
because they are so small and have unique properties. Because of this, 
they can work well with a wide range of ligands, such as DNA, peptides, 
RNA, aptamers, and antibodies [196]. So, the changed NPs are more 
likely to reach where they need to go (in vivo). NPs can be used with a 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
11
broader range of theranostic elements to improve their pharmacokinetic 
properties and, as a result, their effectiveness in treating cancer [218]. 
Researchers are also looking into how NPs can be used as immunogenic 
cargo in traditional radio- and chemotherapies and cutting-edge adju­
vant therapies. Nano-artificial antigen-presenting cells (Nano-aAPCs) 
have the potential to be among the most sophisticated cancer nano­
medicines [219 because, like aAPCs used in cancer immunotherapy 
[220], they mimic the antigen-presenting cell by stimulating essential 
signal proteins that fight carcinoma. By modifying the expression of 
genes involved in a broad range of biological processes in tumor cells, 
NPs have the potential to be used to treat cancer. Many genes are 
controlled in (human lung cancer cells) A549 cell lines to have an 
anticancer impact, including PCBP2, HNRNPL, ATF3, RAB5C, NFKB2, 
EIF3I, NKIRAS2, PIAS4, RRAS, STAT3, AKT1, SRC, EIF2C2, HRAS, 
CDC34, and EIF5A [221]. Some of these genes have been appropriately 
identified as molecular markers due to their overexpression in cancer 
cells. Due to the possible anticancer effects of Fe3O4 nanoparticles on 
cancer-specific molecular markers, gene therapy may have broader ap­
plications and implications. 
Even though Nano formulations are routinely used in medicine, there 
aren’t many clinical types of research examining how effective they are 
for colorectal rectal cancer (CRC). TKM-080301 is made up of tiny 
liposomal NPs that contain small interfering RNA directed against the 
protein PLK1. PLK1 is a protein that helps control the different stages of 
mitosis and is found in high amounts in some tumor cells [222]. Rectal 
cancer (NCT02010567) treatment possibilities for CRLX101, a nano­
particle made of camptothecin attached to a biocompatible copolymer of 
cyclodextrin and polyethylene glycol (PEG), have been investigated. 
Compared to free camptothecin, CRLX101 significantly increased ther­
apeutic efficacy and lowered gastrointestinal toxicity when coupled 
with standard chemotherapy. Hence, CRLX101 may provide a new 
alternative for treating rectal cancer by improving the efficiency of 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy [223]. 
Around this time, clinical research (NCT01375816) evaluated the 
effectiveness of 5-fluorouracil leucovorin irinotecan (FOLFIRI) and 
PEP02 (FUPEP) in patients with spreading CRC who had previously had 
oxaliplatin (OXA) treatment. PEP02, a liposomal nanoformulation of 
irinotecan (IRI) hydrochloride, is used. Bevacizumab was approved for 
usage by both groups. In the study population (n = 55), the 2-month 
response rates for FOLFIRI and FUPEP were 7.4% and 10.2%, respec­
tively. The most frequent side effects at higher severity levels were 
diarrhea, mucositis, neutropenia, and grade 2 baldness (similar for both 
arms). Silica NPs are being studied in an open phase I study 
(NCT02106598) to more accurately map nodal metastases, which might 
result in more effective metastasis removal. These fluorescent cRGDY- 
PEG-Cy5.5-C dots (A fluorescent imaging agent made of silica nano­
particles surrounded by polyethylene glycol (PEG) chains connected to 
cyclo-[Arg-Gly-Asp-Tyr] (cRGDY) peptides and tagged with the near- 
infrared fluorophore cyanine 5.5) on the silica NPs allow for the 
detection of tumor cells in nodules before surgery [224]. 
Thermodox is a lipid-encapsulated doxorubicin (DOX) that is both 
stable at high temperatures and sensitive to heat, making it ideal for 
thermal ablation. A randomized, controlled phase II open research study 
assessed the effectiveness, safety, and practicability of employing 
Thermodox in conjunction with temperature ablation to cure liver me­
tastases in colorectal cancer (NCT02181075). The primary goal of 
temperature ablation is to eradicate the tumor’s core, whereas DOX 
improves the treatment outcome by focusing on the tumor’s periphery 
[225]. A disadvantage of mitomycin C, a very effective chemotherapy 
drug with minimal resistance rates, is its toxicity. As part of phase I 
clinical investigation (NCT01705002), the safety profile of a mitomycin 
C nanoformulation PEGylated Liposome (PROMITIL) given intrave­
nously to patients with solid malignancies, such as metastatic CRC, was 
assessed. The well-tolerated dosing range of PROMITIL was much more 
comprehensive than that of free mitomycin C [226]. Also, in patients 
with advanced CRC with the KRAS (gene) mutation, phase II clinical 
research (NCT00931840) assessed the effectiveness, safety, and tolera­
bility of a water-soluble PEGylated SN-38 molecule, a topoisomerase 
inhibitor [227], in combination or not with cetuximab. 
Compared to IRI plus cetuximab, the combination of EZN-2208 and 
cetuximab was well tolerated but did not significantly increase overall 
survival or progression-free survival. In a different open-label phase I 
trial (NCT03774680), polymeric NPs loaded with cetuximab and a so­
matostatin analog are being assessed. Targeting cancer cells using 
somatostatin-coated NPs may be successful [228]. These NPs were given 
orally to CRC patients, shielding the medication from the stomach’s 
acidic pH and releasing it at a pH of around 6.8. Because of the excep­
tionally high density of somatostatin receptors on CRC cancer cells, the 
NPs would be directed there. The amino acid arginine, which is neces­
sary for the survival of cancer cells, is swiftly degraded by the anticancer 
drug arginine deiminase (AD). Free AD is highly immunogenic because 
of its Mycoplasma origin, which means certain persons may have allergic 
responses [229]. AD is thus not broadly applicable; however, it may be 
less immunogenic if it were encapsulated. In the phase I/II clinical study, 
AD-PEG20, a Nano formulation of AD with PEG, was investigated with 
Folfox 
for 
patients 
with 
advanced 
gastrointestinal 
cancers 
(NCT02102022). Nano-encapsulated immunotherapy clinical studies 
have not been conducted on CRC patients. Yet, clinical research will 
soon begin examining this approach with advanced solid tumors. Pa­
tients with advanced CRC are a good fit. In phase I clinical studies 
(NCT03781362), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved 
using CPI-100 in patients with metastatic solid tumors in 2018. The 
immunostimulatory and anticancer medicines are included in the NPs 
CPI-100 based on the preparation of coordination polymers are going to 
be used. 
The selectivity of chemotherapy treatments or conventional or 
herbal medicines has improved by conjugating different proteins or 
short peptides to the surface of NPs. The serum glycoprotein transferrin 
was the most often used ligand. Enhances iron transport from the blood 
into cells by binding to the transferrin receptor on the cell surface. 
Higher transferrin receptor levels have been linked to cancer cells’ 
ability to spread and resist treatment [230]. Conjugated transferrin NPs 
for chemotherapy have been proven to improve the cytotoxicity of the 
drugs and their uptake by cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Delivery of 
hydroxyl camptothecin via a transferrin-conjugated polyethylene glycol 
(PEG) NPs resulted in increased in vivo growth inhibitory activity 
against the S180 tumor, enhanced drug accumulation in cancer cells, 
and an extended half-life in circulation compared to non-targeted NPs. 
Research using transferrin-conjugated chitosan-PEG nanoparticles 
carrying paclitaxel showed an enhanced cytotoxic impact against 
transferrin-overexpressing human non-small cell lung cancer cells 
[231]. The arginine-glycine-aspartic acid peptide has been added to the 
surface of NPs in addition to transferrin to target the integrin V3 re­
ceptor specifically. This receptor plays a crucial role in promoting tumor 
development, metastasis, and angiogenesis and is found on the surface 
of tumor vessels and several cancer cell types [232]. Several 
RGD-conjugated NPs have been developed and demonstrated to facili­
tate the delivery of conventional or herbal remedies or chemothera­
peutic drugs to cancer cells. While testing the cytotoxic effect of 
paclitaxel against integrin V3-overexpressing human glioblastoma cells, 
a cyclic arginine-glycine-aspartic acid-tyrosine-lysine (RGDyK)-conju­
gated poly (trimethylene carbonate)-PEG micellar NP was shown to be 
superior to non-targeted NPs (U87MG). Inhibition of cell death by tar­
geted NPs was more significant than that seen with non-specific ones 
(11.23% vs. 8.31% and 8.03% vs. 5.38%, respectively). As a percentage 
of the total medicine supply, 6.67% and 4.32% (mean values) were 
given out free of charge. Medication absorption was also shown to be 
enhanced in U87MG cells. 
In addition, doxorubicin-delivering RGD-conjugated magnetic iron 
oxide nanoparticles (MIONPs)-PEG displayed improved cellular ab­
sorption and cytotoxic activity against integrin V3-overexpressing 
human cervical cancer cells compared to free drug and non-targeted 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
12
MIONPs (HeLa). Further studies have shown that cRGDyK-conjugated 
poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline)-poly(D, L-lactide) NPs used for paclitaxel 
administration were more toxic to cells compared to non-targeted NPs 
and free drug (mean IC50: 51.16 ng/mL, 64.53 ng/mL, and 62.95 ng/ 
mL, respectively). Increased activity was achieved by enhanced cellular 
absorption and specific targeting of prostate cancer cells (PC-3) that 
overexpress integrin V3. In mice bearing the PC-3 tumor, the targeted 
NP was also found to hasten the suppression of tumor formation in vivo 
[233]. 
To increase the selectivity of chemotherapeutic drugs for cancer 
cells, peptides have been connected to the surface of NPs. Two examples 
are bombesin peptide-conjugated poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) 
and NR-7 peptide-conjugated PLGA-PEG NPs. The use of these NPs has 
enhanced the selection of chemotherapeutic drugs for cancer cells. 
Prostate, breast, ovary, pancreatic, and colorectal cancers, all of which 
overexpress gastrin-releasing peptide receptors, are primary targets for 
bombesin-conjugated NPs carrying docetaxel [234,235]. Human breast 
cancer cells (MDA-MB-231) that overexpress the gastrin-releasing 
Table 3 
The below table shows the summary of studies that looked at how active targeting nanoparticles (NPs) could be used to deliver chemotherapeutic drugs to treat cancer.  
Name 
Drug-NP platform 
Types of study 
References 
H2009.1 peptide 
Doxorubicin-liposome 
In vivo: human non-small cell lung cancer cell lines (H2009) xenograft 
[44] 
AP-1 peptide 
Paclitaxel-cyclodextrin 
In vivo: human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines MDA-MB-231 xenograft 
[45] 
Peptide 
CVKTPAQSC 
Docetaxel-PLA 
In vitro: human lung cancer cell lines (A549) 
In vivo: cell lines A549 xenograft 
[46] 
Transferrin 
Hydroxycamptothecin-PEG 
In vivo: murine sarcoma cell lines (S180) xenograft 
[47] 
Transferrin 
Paclitaxel-PEG-chitosan 
In vitro: non-small cell lung cancer cell lines (HOP-62) 
[48] 
RGDS 
Doxorubicin-PEG-MIONP 
In vitro: human cervical carcinoma cell lines (HeLa) 
[49] 
cRGDyK 
Paclitaxel-micelle 
In vitro: human prostate cancer cell lines (PC-3) 
In vivo: cell lines PC-3 xenograft 
[50] 
RGD 
Doxorubicin-dendritic poly-L- 
lysine-gelatin 
In vitro: mouse mammary breast tumor cell lines (4T1) 
In vivo: cell lines 4T1 xenograft 
[51] 
Bombesin peptide 
Docetaxel-PLGA 
In vitro: human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MDA-MB-231) 
[52] 
NR7 peptide 
Doxorubicin-PLGA-PEG 
In vitro: human ovarian carcinoma cell lines (SKOV3) 
In vivo: cell lines SKOV3 xenograft 
[53] 
LHRH peptide 
Methotrexate-HSA 
In vitro: human breast carcinoma cell lines (T47D) 
[54] 
Angiopep-2 
Doxorubicin-dendritic poly-L- 
lysine-gelatin NP 
In vitro: mouse mammary breast tumor cell lines (4T1) 
In vivo: cell lines 4T1 xenograft 
[55] 
Hyaluronic acid 
Doxorubicin hydroxylapatite 
In vitro: human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (HepG2) 
In vivo: cell lines HepG2 xenograft 
[56] 
Hyaluronic acid 
Doxorubicin-HACE-PEG 
In vitro: murine squamous cell carcinoma cell lines (SCC7) and mouse embryo fibroblast cell lines 
(NIH3T3) 
In vivo: cell lines SCC7 xenograft 
[57] 
Hyaluronic acid 
Doxorubicin hyaluronic acid-Lys- 
LA10 
In vitro: doxorubicin-resistant human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MCF-7/ADR) 
In vivo: cell lines MCF-7/ADR xenograft 
[58] 
Hyaluronic acid 
Doxorubicin-PBLG-LA 
In vitro: human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MCF-7) 
In vivo: cell lines MCF-7 xenograft 
[59] 
Folic acid 
Docetaxel-PEG-PLGA 
In vitro: human cervical carcinoma cell lines (HeLa) 
In vivo: cell lines HeLaxenograft 
[60] 
Folic acid 
Doxorubicin-dendrimer 
In vitro: human epidermal carcinoma cell lines (KB) 
[61] 
Folic acid 
Gemcitabine-BSA 
In vitro: human ovarian cancer cell lines (Ovcar-5) and human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MCF-7) 
In vivo: Ehrlich ascites carcinoma tumor cell-bearing mice 
[62] 
Folic acid 
Carboplatin-PLGA-chitosan 
In vitro: human cervical carcinoma cell lines (HeLa) 
[63] 
Folic acid 
Doxorubicin-PEG 
In vitro: human epidermal carcinoma cell lines (KB), human lung cancer cell lines (A549) and human 
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (HepG2) 
In vivo: cell lines KB xenograft 
[64] 
Folic acid 
Cisplatin-PEG-MSN 
In vitro: human cervical carcinoma cell lines (HeLa) 
[65] 
Folic acid 
Doxorubicin-β-cyclodextrin 
In vitro: human placenta choriocarcinoma cell lines (JAR), human colon adenocarcinoma cell lines (HT- 
29), human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MCF-7), and mouse fibroblast cell lines (3T3) 
[66] 
Folic acid 
Paclitaxel-PEG-PLGA 
In vitro: human endometrial carcinoma cell lines (HEC-1A) 
In vivo: cell lines HEC-1A xenograft 
[67] 
Anti-Fas mAb 
Camptothecin-PLGA 
In vitro: human colorectal cancer cell lines (HCT116) 
[68] 
Anti-CD20 mAb 
Doxorubicin-DSPE-PEG2000 
In vitro: human Burkitt’s lymphoma cell lines (Raji) 
[69] 
Anti-CD47 mAb 
Gemcitabine-MIONP 
In vitro: human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma primary cells (Panc215 and Panc354) 
[70] 
EGFR antibody 
Rapamycin-PLGA 
In vitro: human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MCF-7) 
[71] 
PR81 mAb 
fluorouracil 
5- -BSA 
In vitro: human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MCF-7) 
[72] 
Aptamer AS1411 
Doxorubicin-HPAEG 
In vitro: human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MCF-7) 
[73] 
Aptamer AS1411 
Gemcitabine-PEG-PLGA 
In vitro: human lung cancer cell lines (A549) 
[74] 
Aptamer AS1411 
Methotrexate-UnTHCPSi-PEI 
In vitro: human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MDA-MB-231) 
[75] 
Aptamer AS1411 
Docetaxel-mannitol-PLGA-TPGS 
In vitro: human cervical carcinoma cell lines (HeLa) 
In vivo: cell lines HeLaxenograft 
[76] 
Aptamer AS1411 
Doxorubicin-polymersome 
In vitro: human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MCF-7) 
In vivo: cell lines MCF-7 xenograft 
[77] 
Galactose 
Doxorubicin-LPL 
In vitro: human liver cancer cell lines (SK-HEP-1) 
In vivo: cell lines SK-HEP-1 orthotopicxenograft 
[78] 
Galactose 
5-Fluorouracil-pectin 
In vitro: human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (HepG2) 
[79] 
Galactosamine 
Paclitaxel-γ-PGA-PLA 
In vitro: cell lines HepG2 
[80] 
Galactose 
Doxorubicin solid lipid NP 
In vitro: human lung cancer cell lines (A549) 
[81] 
EGF 
Gemcitabine-stearoyl 
In vitro: human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines (MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-231, and MCF-7) 
In vivo: cell lines MDA-MB-468 xenograft 
Ex vivo: MDA-MB-468 tumor 
[82] 
EGa1 
Doxorubicin-micelle 
In vitro: human mouth squamous cell carcinoma cell lines UM-SCC 14 C 
In vivo: cell lines UM-SCC 14 C xenograft 
[83]  
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
13
peptide receptor are more sensitive to the lethal effects of a medication 
when it is delivered via a targeted NP than when it is delivered via a 
non-targeted 
nanoparticle 
(mean 
IC50: 
35.53 ng/mL 
and 
142.23 ng/mL). This is shown by contrasting the average IC50 values of 
the two nanoparticle kinds. By attaching the doxorubicin-loaded 
PLGA-PEG NPs to the NR7-peptide, we were able to selectively target 
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) found on cancer cells and 
deliver the medicine to them [236]. It is well established that the 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) overexpression is a hallmark 
of several malignancies, including non-small-cell lung, head and neck, 
kidney, ovarian, and breast cancers [237,238]. Activating this receptor 
promotes cancer survival and metastasis by increasing cell proliferation, 
inhibiting apoptosis, triggering angiogenesis, and reducing apoptosis. 
Hence, it is thought that inhibiting the activity of this receptor can 
enhance 
cancer 
treatment. 
Compared 
to 
non-targeted 
NPs, 
NR7-peptide-conjugated PLGA-PEG NPs were more effective in killing 
human ovarian cancer cells (SKOV3) [239]. 
One study found that an H2009.1 peptide-conjugated liposome could 
not improve the efficacy of doxorubicin when delivered to cancer cells 
expressing the integrin v6 receptor, despite the majority of studies 
showing promising results when using peptide- or protein-conjugated 
NPs to target cancer cells. The liposome platform blocked the targeted 
ligand’s ability to attach to the cancer cell surface receptor, leading to 
inadequate drug accumulation in the malignant cells [240]. Table 3 
below explains the NPS and its use in the respective area. 
Clinical studies for another liposome, LEP-ETU, are now being con­
ducted at the phase 1 level (NCT00080418). To combat ovarian, breast, 
and lung cancers, researchers created LEP-ETU, a liposome made of 
DOPC (1, 2-dioleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphocholine2-dioleoyl-sn-glyc­
erol-3-phosphocholine), cholesterol, and cardiolipin that incorporates 
paclitaxel [241]. Moreover, preliminary clinical studies (NCT00765973) 
have started to examine the effectiveness and security of topotecan li­
posomes supplied intravenously (TLI). While the clinical testing phase 
for these four drugs is over, more information has yet to be available to 
the general public. Clinical studies for LiPlaCis, INX-0076, and TLD-1 are 
still being conducted. INX-0076, a liposomal form of topotecan, is 
intended for use against solid, metastatic tumors. To treat patients with 
advanced solid tumors, the liposomal formulation LiPlaCis was created. 
Cisplatin and lipids, whose breakdown characteristics are regulated by 
the sPLA2 enzyme, are part of a release mechanism triggered by tumors 
[242]. Those with advanced solid tumors may benefit from TLD-1, a new 
liposome containing doxorubicin [243]. 
6. Challenges and future direction 
There are still several issues in making nano drugs accessible to the 
general population despite these advancements. The main problem is 
that people must know how NPs interact with biomolecules. For many 
pharmaceutical firms, maintaining a consistent method for creating NPs 
that have an extended impact on cancer cells is risky. Drug manufac­
turers often discontinue producing their goods (e.g., DepoCyt). Several 
companies claim that technological issues are to blame for the delay. 
Before researchers and pharmaceutical firms can effectively promote 
cancer treatment, they must solve several problems. The FDA approved 
many nanoformulations, which were removed from the market. Feridex 
I.V. Lumirem, Resovist, and GastroMARK [244,245]. The application 
and sale of the findings of this study are fraught with issues. Several 
things might need to be corrected and cause the treatment to be delayed. 
Several of the problems are explored in this article. 
Understanding what cancer nanomedicine can and cannot achieve 
has advanced significantly. Thorough patient selection is required to 
identify the individuals who would benefit most from a specific nano 
therapy due to the complexity and diversity of malignancies. These 
specialized medications are being created and given the green light for 
usage in patient populations that biomarkers can recognize. When 
therapeutic nanoparticles intended to treat solid tumors are 
administered to the body, a phenomenon known as EPR occurs [246]. 
This is assumed to be a result of the tumor’s leaky blood arteries and 
inadequate lymphatic drainage. This interpretation of EPR, however, 
may be oversimplified because the effect can be influenced by a variety 
of biological processes, including interactions between NPs and pro­
teins, blood flow, extravasation into and interaction with the peri­
vascular TME, tumor tissue penetration, and internalization of tumor 
cells. These biological processes are all involved in the systemic delivery 
of NPs. The EPR effect and therapeutic results may thus be impacted by 
NP parameters like size, geometry, surface features, elasticity, stiffness, 
porosity, composition, and targeted ligand. It’s crucial to keep in mind 
that although we’ve learned a lot about how NPs act in real life (in vivo), 
most of what we know is based on data from animal models, and the 
ramifications of this information on how NPs function in humans are still 
largely unknown [247]. 
Lipid-based carriers can cure a broad range of diseases. The number 
of formulations undergoing preclinical testing does not reflect the 
number of effective medications approved for sale. This shows that there 
are still many challenges and barriers to overcome in transferring these 
NPs from animals to people. To increase the stability of NPs and stop 
drug leakage, lipid patterns have been created that ionically bind the 
medicine within the capsule. It has been proven that ionizing lipids, such 
as DOP-DEDA, are the most effective at protecting genes. The drugs are 
packed tightly because cholesterol is necessary to stabilize liposomal 
structures. As their surfaces have been modified with PEG-lipids, LNPs 
are stable under physiologic conditions and during systemic circulation. 
This makes it difficult for the reticuloendothelial system to find them. 
Nevertheless, it has been shown that when higher doses are given, 
the therapeutic effectiveness is reduced, and adverse consequences 
happen. This is because, after the first dose, anti-PEG antibodies start to 
build up. Thus, it is essential to find PEG substitutes so that injections 
may be given frequently. Long-circulating LNPs must reach the tissues, 
cells, or organs where they are to be used before piercing the cell 
membranes and releasing their payload. LNPs belong to this category 
because they are intelligent materials with unique ligands that degrade 
in reaction to variations in temperature, pH, reduction, or oxidation. 
Targeted LNP binding to specific cells is still challenging. For 
example, the spleen and lymph nodes, which house immune cells that 
generate antibodies and eliminate cancer cells, are unsuitable delivery 
sites for a nucleic acid vaccine. Migrating nucleic acids from the punc­
ture site to lymphocytes in the lymph nodes or spleen is the most 
effective way to generate antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes or 
long-lived antibodies. These methods must cross lymph node barrier 
cells and reach the proper lymph nodes to reach immune cells. After the 
drugs have entered the body, they must be controlled in their delivery to 
the abnormal cells. These technologies have yet to be the intended re­
sults, which help cells receive, internalize, and release their payload. 
The commercial success of LNPs with specific ligands has yet to be 
discovered. As a result, it is likely that clinical trials will soon start using 
various cell-type-specific ligands and stimulating agents to assess the 
effectiveness of modified LNPs against a range of diseases. In this field, 
adjuvants may boost a drug’s efficacy or control the immune system’s 
activity. It is also challenging to manufacture LNPs on a large scale. The 
most trustworthy LNP production methods now available are 
microfluidics-based, but they are limited in their ability to create LNPs 
with a wide range of relevant properties. 
Due to the lack of complexity in biological tissues and the inability to 
regulate fluid flow, conventional in vitro models using cells expanded in 
multiwall plates may not accurately replicate the complex interaction of 
NPs with physiological barriers. By adopting biomimetic "organ/tumor- 
on-a-chip" techniques, conventional in vitro models may be enhanced 
[248,249]. Suppose tumor-like spheroids are inserted into a microfluidic 
channel. In that case, it is expected that the impact of interstitial flow, 
cell attachment, and particle size on NP accumulation and diffusion will 
be better understood. Comparing NP behaviors in such chip systems to 
those in animal models may be helpful in understanding the future of 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
14
these biomimetic microdevices. 
Animal models must be used to figure out how well NPs work in 
living organisms (in vivo) and how safe they are. Many species, 
including humans, have shown that pharmacokinetic (PK) scaling works 
for several Nanotherapeutics. However, it is well known that the effects 
seen in preclinical research are different from those seen in clinical trials 
[250,251]. This is primarily a result of the lack of suitable tumor models. 
We have access to a broad range of animal models, including 
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs), subcutaneous and orthotropic xe­
nografts produced from cell lines, and mice genetically altered. No an­
imal model can accurately replicate every aspect of cancer. They exhibit 
more consistency in their responses than those with the disease. Because 
metastases are a leading cause of cancer-related mortality, human tumor 
migration models will help compare EPR and NP penetrating and 
placement in metastatic tissues to that of primary tumors. High-fidelity 
PDXs, humanized animal studies [252], and (GEMMs) genetically 
engineered mouse models with aggressive tumor growth are just a few 
examples of animal studies that could closely match the diversity and 
anatomical histology of malignant tumors and have the potential to 
improve the translation of Nano-therapeutics [253] significantly. 
7. Conclusion 
Conclusively, the overall study suggests that compared to conven­
tional chemotherapy methods, nanoparticles in anticancer therapy are 
rapidly developing fields that offer several benefits. To ensure that the 
drugs are delivered directly to the tumor cells with the least harm to 
healthy cells, nanoparticles can provide targeted and sustained release 
by encapsulating the drugs. The choice of nanoparticle type is critical to 
attaining good treatment outcomes, as various nanoparticles have 
diverse features, including size, shape, and surface charge. Many forms 
of nanoparticles, including liposomes, dendrimers, and quantum dots, 
have demonstrated substantial potential for improving the effectiveness 
of cancer treatment. To further increase the precision of nanoparticle 
drug delivery, active and passive targeting mechanisms have been 
established. As this review has shown, nanoparticles have the potential 
for the development of safer and more productive cancer therapies, such 
as co-delivery of combinational medications, stimuli-responsive drug 
release, and targeted drug delivery. These capacities could facilitate 
long-term outlooks and the development of innovative cancer treatment 
strategies. Studies conducted in vitro and in vivo have established the 
safety and effectiveness of nanoparticle-based therapeutics, and show­
cased some superior efficacy than conventional chemotherapy. To 
enhance these treatments, further study is needed, including creating 
more effective targeting mechanisms and advancements in nanoparticle 
designs. Though not all of these intelligent nanoparticles have been 
effective in their clinical translation, several innovative materials are 
now being created that show great potential and are encouraging new 
treatment options. Despite these obstacles, nanoparticles can potentially 
transform cancer treatment by providing a more focused and practical 
approach in the biomedical field. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
References 
[1] H. Khan, H. Ullah, M. Martorell, S.E. Valdes, T. Belwal, S. Tejada, A. Sureda, M. 
A. Kamal, Flavonoids nanoparticles in cancer: treatment, prevention and clinical 
prospects, Semin Cancer Biol. 69 (2021) 200–211. 
[2] A. Rivas-Domínguez, N. Pastor, L. Martínez-L´opez, J. Col´on-P´erez, B. Bermúdez, 
M.L. Orta, The role of DNA damage response in dysbiosis-induced colorectal 
cancer, Cells 10 (8) (2021) 1934, 2021. 
[3] R.K. Jain, Delivery of molecular medicine to solid tumors: lessons from in vivo 
imaging of gene expression and function, J. Control Release 74 (1-3) (2001) 7–25. 
[4] A. Jemal, F. Bray, M.M. Center, J. Ferlay, E. Ward, D. Forman, Global cancer 
statistics, CA Cancer J. Clin. 61 (2) (2011) 69–90. 
[5] P. Parhi, C. Mohanty, S.K. Sahoo, Nanotechnology-based combinational drug 
delivery: an emerging approach for cancer therapy, Drug Discov. Today 17 (17- 
18) (2012) 1044–1052. 
[6] K. Namrata, C. Tanushri, S. Suruchi, P. Sadanand, Application of stimuli 
responsive nanocomposites in drug delivery and theranostics to counter cancer 
proliferation and drug resistance, J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol. 88 (2023) 104958. 
[7] R.A.A. Fateme, P. Mehrab, A. Majid, B. Razieh, R. Abbas, P. Sadanand, Chitosan- 
Carbon nanotube Composite: an approach for controlled release of Quercetin, 
Modified with carboxymethyl Cellulose, for potential Anti-Cancer therapy, Inorg. 
Chem. Commun. 158 (2023) 111621. 
[8] P. Mehrab, M.E. Mohammad, S. Meysam, S.D. Sabya, A. Rabia, G. Suresh, 
R. Abbas, E.M. Amanda-Lee, P. Sadanand, Nano-scale drug delivery systems for 
carboplatin: a comprehensive review, OpenNano 12 (2023) 100175. 
[9] P. Boisseau, B. Loubaton, Nanomedicine, nanotechnology in medicine, Sci. Direct 
07051 (2011). 
[10] J.N. Tiwari, R.N. Tiwari, K.S. Kim, Zero-dimensional, one-dimensional, two- 
dimensional and three-dimensional nanostructured materials for advanced 
electrochemical energy devices, Prog. Mater. Sci. 57 (4) (2012) 724–803. 
[11] P. Mehrab, G. Amirhossein, S. Amin, R.-K. Maryam, S. Meysam, R. Abbas, 
P. Sadanand, Nanoparticles loaded with Daunorubicin as an advanced tool for 
cancer therapy, Eur. J. Med. Chem. 5 (258) (2023) 115547. 
[12] P. Mehrab, R.G. Arsalan, S. Zeinab, T. Ehsan, A. Iman, R. Abbas, P. Sadanand, 
Enhancing cancer therapy: the potential of mercaptopurine-based nanomaterials 
for targeted drug delivery, Nanotechnology 2 (2023) 100018. 
[13] M. Ghulam, H. Dilawar, R.-P. Gustavo, P. Mehrab, M.E. Mohammad, B. Razieh, S. 
T. Fatemeh, R. Abbas, I.M. Dora, P. Sadanand, J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol. 84 
(2023) 104494. 
[14] E. Nassireslami, M. Ajdarzade, Gold coated superparamagnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles as effective nanoparticles to eradicate breast cancer cells via 
photothermal therapy, Adv. Pharm. Bull. 8 (2) (2018) 201. 
[15] S. Gavas, S. Quazi, T.M. Karpi´nski, Nanoparticles for cancer therapy: current 
progress and challenges, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 16 (1) (2021) 173. 
[16] C.V. Fernandes, A. Francesko, C. Ribeiro, M. Ba˜nobre-L´opez, P. Martins, 
S. Lanceros-Mendez, Advances in magnetic nanoparticles for biomedical 
applications, Adv. Health Mater. 7 (5) (2017) 1–35. 
[17] S. Zhang, L. Zhang, B. He, Z. Wu, Preparation and characterization of 
thermosensitive PNIPAA-coated iron oxide nanoparticles, Nanotechnology 19 
(32) (2008) 325608. 
[18] M. Barrow, A. Taylor, P. Murray, M.J. Rosseinskya, D.J. Adams, Design 
considerations for the synthesis of polymer coated iron oxide nanoparticles for 
stem cell labelling and tracking using MRI, Chem. Soc. Rev. 44 (2015) 
6733–6748. 
[19] A.A. Hern´andez-Hern´andez, G. Aguirre-´Alvarez, R. Cari˜no-Cort´es, L.H. Mendoza- 
Huizar, R. Jim´enez-Alvarado, Iron oxide nanoparticles: synthesis, 
functionalization, and applications in diagnosis and treatment of cancer, Chem. 
Pap. 74 (11) (2020) 3809–3824. 
[20] F. Ahmad, M. Zahid, H. Jamil, M.A. Khan, S. Atiq, M. Bibi, A. Samreen, Advances 
in graphene-based electrode materials for high-performance supercapacitors: a 
review, J. Energy Storage 72 (2023) 108731. 
[21] H. Maeda, J. Wu, T. Sawa, Y. Matsumura, K. Hori, Tumor vascular permeability 
and the EPR effect in macromolecular therapeutics: a review, J. Control. Release 
65 (1-2) (2000) 271–284. 
[22] F. Ahmad, M.A. Khan, U. Waqas, S.M. Ramay, S. Atiq, Elucidating an efficient 
super-capacitive response of a Sr2Ni2O5@rGO composite as an electrode material 
in supercapacitors, RSC Adv. 13 (36) (2023) 25316–25326. 
[23] M. Danish, M. ul Islam, F. Ahmad, M.N. Madni, M. Jahangeer, Synthesis of M-type 
hexaferrite reinforced graphene oxide composites for electromagnetic 
interference shielding, J. Phys. Chem. Solids (2023) 111783. 
[24] F. Danhier, O. Feron, V. Pr´eat, To exploit the tumor microenvironment: passive 
and active tumor targeting of nanocarriers for anti-cancer drug delivery, 
J. Control. Release 148 (2) (2010) 135–146. 
[25] S. Taurin, H. Nehoff, K. Greish, Anticancer nanomedicine and tumor vascular 
permeability; where is the missing link? J. Control. Release 164 (3) (2012) 
265–275. 
[26] M. Saleem, F. Ahmad, M. Fatima, A. Shahzad, M.S. Javed, S. Atiq, M.A. Khan, 
M. Danish, O. Munir, S.M.B. Arif, U. Faryad, M.J. Shabbir, D. Khan, Exploring 
new frontiers in supercapacitor electrodes through MOF advancements, J. Energy 
Storage 76 (2024) 109822. 
[27] A. Qayyum, M. Okash, F. Ahmad, M. Ahmed, S.M. Ramay, S. Atiq, Performance 
optimization of Nd-doped LaNiO3 as an electrode material in supercapacitors, 
Solid State Ion. 395 (2023) 116227. 
[28] D. Rosenblum, D. Peer, Omics-based nanomedicine: the future of personalized 
oncology, Cancer Lett. 352 (1) (2014) 126–136. 
[29] Y. Matsumura, H. Maeda, A new concept for macromolecular therapeutics in 
cancer chemotherapy: mechanism of tumoritropic accumulation of proteins and 
the antitumor agent smancs, Cancer Res. 46 (12_Part_1) (1986) 6387–6392. 
[30] H. Kobayashi, R. Watanabe, P.L. Choyke, Improving conventional enhanced 
permeability and retention (EPR) effects; what is the appropriate target? 
Theranostics 4 (1) (2014) 81. 
[31] E. Huynh, G. Zheng, Cancer nanomedicine: addressing the dark side of the 
enhanced permeability and retention effect, Nanomedicine 10 (13) (2015) 
1993–1995. 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
15
[32] F. Yuan, M. Dellian, D. Fukumura, M. Leunig, D.A. Berk, V.P. Torchilin, et al., 
Vascular permeability in a human tumor xenograft: molecular size dependence 
and cutoff size, Cancer Res. 55 (17) (1995) 3752–3756. 
[33] H. Lee, B. Hoang, H. Fonge, R.M. Reilly, C. Allen, In vivo distribution of polymeric 
nanoparticles at the whole-body, tumor, and cellular levels, Pharm. Res. 27 
(2010) 2343–2355. 
[34] V.T. Devita Jr, R.C. Young, G.P. Canellos, Combination versus single agent 
chemotherapy: a review of the basis for selection of drug treatment of cancer, 
Cancer 35 (1) (1975) 98–110. 
[35] N. Kamaly, Z. Xiao, P.M. Valencia, A.F. Radovic-Moreno, O.C. Farokhzad, 
Targeted polymeric therapeutic nanoparticles: design, development and clinical 
translation, Chem. Soc. Rev. 41 (7) (2012) 2971–3010. 
[36] A.D. Bangham, M.M. Standish, J.C. Watkins, Diffusion of univalent ions across the 
lamellae of swollen phospholipids, J. MolBiol 13 (1965) 238–252. 
[37] P.P. Deshpande, S. Biswas, V.P. Torchilin, Current trends in the use of liposomes 
for tumor targeting, Nanomedicine 8 (9) (2013) 1509–1528. 
[38] M. Voinea, M. Simionescu, Designing of ‘intelligent’liposomes for efficient 
delivery of drugs, J. Cell. Mol. Med. 6 (4) (2002) 465–474. 
[39] Baabur-Cohen H., Omer L., Satchi-Fainaro R. Recent progress in polymer 
therapeutics as nanomedicines. Handbook for Harnessing Biomaterials for 
Nanomedicine: Preparation, Toxicity and Applications; Peer, D., Ed 2011:77–122. 
[40] G.S. Kwon, T. Okano, Polymeric micelles as new drug carriers, Adv. Drug Deliv. 
Rev. 21 (2) (1996) 107–116. 
[41] J. Djordjevic, L.S. Del Rosario, J. Wang, K.E. Uhrich, Amphiphilic scorpion-like 
macromolecules as micellar nanocarriers, J. Bioact. Compat. Polym. 23 (6) 
(2008) 532–551. 
[42] J.P. Rao, K.E. Geckeler, Polymer nanoparticles: preparation techniques and size- 
control parameters, Prog. Polym. Sci. 36 (7) (2011) 887–913. 
[43] R. Bazak, M. Houri, S.E. Achy, W. Hussein, T. Refaat, Passive targeting of 
nanoparticles to cancer: a comprehensive review of the literature, Mol. Clin. 
Oncol. 2 (6) (2014) 904–908, https://doi.org/10.3892/mco.2014.356. Epub 
2014 Jul 23. PMID: 25279172; PMCID: PMC4179822. 
[44] M. Suzuki, K. Hori, I. Abe, S. Saito, H. Sato, A new approach to cancer 
chemotherapy: selective enhancement of tumor blood flow with angiotensin II, 
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 67 (3) (1981) 663–669. 
[45] C.J. Li, Y. Miyamoto, Y. Kojima, H. Maeda, Augmentation of tumour delivery of 
macromolecular drugs with reduced bone marrow delivery by elevating blood 
pressure, Br. J. Cancer 67 (5) (1993) 975–980. 
[46] S. Gavas, S. Quazi, T.M. Karpi´nski, Nanoparticles for cancer therapy: current 
progress and challenges, Nanoscale Res Lett. 16 (1) (2021 5) 173, https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s11671-021-03628-6. PMID: 34866166; PMCID: PMC8645667. 
[47] S.S. Guterres, M.P. Alves, A.R. Pohlmann, Polymeric nanoparticles, nanospheres 
and nanocapsules, for cutaneous applications, Drug Target Insights 2 (2007) 
117739280700200002. 
[48] Y. Takakura, M. Hashida, Macromolecular drug carrier systems in cancer 
chemotherapy: macromolecular prodrugs, Crit. Rev. Oncol. /Hematol. 18 (3) 
(1995) 207–231. 
[49] F. Kratz, U. Beyer, M.T. Schutte, Drug-polymer conjugates containing acid- 
cleavable bonds, Crit. Reviews™ Ther. Drug Carr. Syst. 16 (3) (1999). 
[50] L. Liu, K. Xu, H. Wang, P. Jeremy Tan, W. Fan, S.S. Venkatraman, et al., Self- 
assembled cationic peptide nanoparticles as an efficient antimicrobial agent, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 4 (7) (2009) 457–463. 
[51] F. Masood, Polymeric nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery system for cancer 
therapy, Mater. Sci. Eng.: C. 60 (2016) 569–578. 
[52] P. Shi, Z. Cheng, K. Zhao, et al., Active targeting schemes for nano-drug delivery 
systems in osteosarcoma therapeutics, J. Nanobiotechnol. 21 (2023) 103, https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s12951-023-01826-. 
[53] X. Li, L. Wang, L. Wang, J. Yu, G. Lu, W. Zhao, J. Wu, Overcoming therapeutic 
failure in osteosarcoma via Apatinib-encapsulated hydrophobic poly (ester 
amide) nanoparticles, Biomater. Sci. 8 (21) (2020) 5888–5899. 
[54] J. Folkman, Fighting cancer by attacking its blood supply, Sci. Am. 275 (3) (1996) 
150–154. 
[55] J.D. Byrne, T. Betancourt, L. Brannon-Peppas, Active targeting schemes for 
nanoparticle systems in cancer therapeutics, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 60 (15) (2008) 
1615–1626. 
[56] S.M. Weis, D.A. Cheresh, V integrins in angiogenesis and cancer, Cold Spring 
Harb. Perspect. Med. 1 (1) (2011) a006478, https://doi.org/10.1101/ 
cshperspect.a006478. PMID: 22229119; PMCID: PMC3234453. 
[57] Q. Zhou, Y. Zhu, Z. Deng, H. Long, S. Zhang, X. Chen, VEGF and EMMPRIN 
expression correlates with survival of patients with osteosarcoma, Surg. Oncol. 20 
(1) (2011) 13–19. 
[58] W. Jiang, B.Y. Kim, J.T. Rutka, W.C. Chan, Nanoparticle-mediated cellular 
response is size-dependent, Nat. Nanotechnol. 3 (3) (2008) 145–150. 
[59] T. Reuveni, M. Motiei, Z. Romman, A. Popovtzer, R. Popovtzer, Targeted gold 
nanoparticles enable molecular CT imaging of cancer: an in vivo study, Int. J. 
Nanomed. (2011) 2859–2864. 
[60] J.G. Reynolds, E. Geretti, B.S. Hendriks, H. Lee, S.C. Leonard, S.G. Klinz, T. 
J. Wickham, HER2-targeted liposomal doxorubicin displays enhanced anti- 
tumorigenic effects without associated cardiotoxicity, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
262 (1) (2012) 1–10. 
[61] H. Pan, J.W. Myerson, L. Hu, J.N. Marsh, K. Hou, M.J. Scott, S.A. Wickline, 
Programmable nanoparticle functionalization for in vivo targeting, FASEB J. 27 
(1) (2013) 255. 
[62] R. Muralidharan, A. Babu, N. Amreddy, K. Basalingappa, M. Mehta, A. Chen, 
R. Ramesh, Folate receptor-targeted nanoparticle delivery of HuR-RNAi 
suppresses lung cancer cell proliferation and migration, J. Nanobiotechnol. 14 (1) 
(2016) 1–17. 
[63] S. Aryal, C.M.J. Hu, L. Zhang, Combinatorial drug conjugation enables 
nanoparticle dual-drug delivery, small 6 (13) (2010) 1442–1448. 
[64] N. Kolishetti, S. Dhar, P.M. Valencia, L.Q. Lin, R. Karnik, S.J. Lippard, et al., 
Engineering of self-assembled nanoparticle platform for precisely controlled 
combination drug therapy, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107 (42) (2010) 17939–17944. 
[65] L. Zhang, A.F. Radovic-Moreno, F. Alexis, F.X. Gu, P.A. Basto, V. Bagalkot, et al., 
Co-delivery of hydrophobic and hydrophilic drugs from nanoparticle–aptamer 
bioconjugates, ChemMedChem: Chem. Enabling Drug Discov. 2 (9) (2007) 
1268–1271. 
[66] S. Aryal, C.-M.J. Hu, L. Zhang, Polymeric nanoparticles with precise ratiometric 
control over drug loading for combination therapy, Mol. Pharm. 8 (4) (2011) 
1401–1407. 
[67] S. Sengupta, D. Eavarone, I. Capila, G. Zhao, N. Watson, T. Kiziltepe, et al., 
Temporal targeting of tumour cells and neovasculature with a nanoscale delivery 
system, Nature 436 (7050) (2005) 568–572. 
[68] Z. Wang, P.C. Ho, A nanocapsular combinatorial sequential drug delivery system 
for antiangiogenesis and anticancer activities, Biomaterials 31 (27) (2010) 
7115–7123. 
[69] H. Hajipour, M. Ghorbani, H. Kahroba, F. Mahmoodzadeh, R.Z. Emameh, R. 
A. Taheri, Arginyl-glycyl-aspartic acid (RGD) containing nanostructured lipid 
carrier co-loaded with doxorubicin and sildenafil citrate enhanced anti-cancer 
effects and overcomes drug resistance, Process Biochem. 84 (2019) 172–179. 
[70] D. Chitkara, S. Singh, A. Mittal, Nanocarrier-based co-delivery of small molecules 
and siRNA/miRNA for treatment of cancer, Ther. Deliv. 7 (4) (2016) 245–255. 
[71] T. Pho-Iam, P. Punnakitikashem, C. Somboonyosdech, S. Sripinitchai, 
P. Masaratana, V. Sirivatanauksorn, C. Srisawat, PLGA nanoparticles containing 
α-fetoprotein siRNA induce apoptosis and enhance the cytotoxic effects of 
doxorubicin in human liver cancer cell line, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
553 (2021) 191–197. 
[72] N.F. Maroufi, V. Vahedian, S.A.M. Mazrakhondi, W. Kooti, H.A. Khiavy, 
R. Bazzaz, M. Sabzichi, Sensitization of MDA-MBA231 breast cancer cell to 
docetaxel by myricetin loaded into biocompatible lipid nanoparticles via sub-G1 
cell cycle arrest mechanism, Naunyn-Schmiede ’S. Arch. Pharmacol. 393 (2020) 
1–11. 
[73] S. Doktorovova, E.B. Souto, A.M. Silva, Nanotoxicology applied to solid lipid 
nanoparticles and nanostructured lipid carriers–a systematic review of in vitro 
data, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 87 (1) (2014) 1–18. 
[74] S. Weber, A. Zimmer, J. Pardeike, Solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN) and 
nanostructured lipid carriers (NLC) for pulmonary application: a review of the 
state of the art, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 86 (1) (2014) 7–22. 
[75] Y. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Hao, B. Li, M. Li, W. Xiuwen, Lung cancer combination 
therapy: co-delivery of paclitaxel and doxorubicin by nanostructured lipid 
carriers for synergistic effect, Drug Deliv. 23 (4) (2016) 1398–1403. 
[76] H.L. Wong, A.M. Rauth, R. Bendayan, J.L. Manias, M. Ramaswamy, Z. Liu, et al., 
A new polymer–lipid hybrid nanoparticle system increases cytotoxicity of 
doxorubicin against multidrug-resistant human breast cancer cells, Pharm. Res. 
23 (2006) 1574–1585. 
[77] D.A. Tomalia, J.M. Fr´echet, Discovery of dendrimers and dendritic polymers: a 
brief historical perspective, J. Polym. Sci. Part A: Polym. Chem. 40 (16) (2002) 
2719–2728. 
[78] E. Abbasi, S.F. Aval, A. Akbarzadeh, M. Milani, H.T. Nasrabadi, S.W. Joo, et al., 
Dendrimers: synthesis, applications, and properties, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 9 (1) 
(2014) 1–10. 
[79] L. Zhao, Y. Cheng, J. Hu, Q. Wu, T. Xu, Host−
guest chemistry of dendrimer−
drug complexes. competitive binding of multiple drugs by a single dendrimer for 
combination therapy, J. Phys. Chem. B 113 (43) (2009) 14172–14179. 
[80] Y. Zhang, C. Sun, C. Wang, K.E. Jankovic, Y. Dong, Lipids and lipid derivatives for 
RNA delivery, Chem. Rev. 121 (20) (2021) 12181–12277. 
[81] L.M. Ickenstein, P. Garidel, Lipid-based nanoparticle formulations for small 
molecules and RNA drugs, Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 16 (11) (2019) 1205–1226. 
[82] A.Y. Antipina, A.A. Gurtovenko, Toward understanding liposome-based siRNA 
delivery vectors: atomic-scale insight into siRNA–lipid interactions, Langmuir 34 
(29) (2018) 8685–8693. 
[83] H. Song, S.L. Hart, Z. Du, Assembly strategy of liposome and polymer systems for 
siRNA delivery, Int. J. Pharm. 592 (2021) 120033. 
[84] T. Zhao, C. Liang, Y. Zhao, X. Xue, Z. Ma, J. Qi, X. Qi, Multistage pH-responsive 
codelivery liposomal platform for synergistic cancer therapy, 
J. Nanobiotechnology 20 (1) (2022) 177. 
[85] D. Chen, X. Liu, X. Lu, J. Tian, Nanoparticle drug delivery systems for synergistic 
delivery of tumor therapy, Front Pharm. 14 (2023 16) 1111991, https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fphar.2023.1111991. PMID: 36874010; PMCID: PMC9978018. 
[86] R. Duncan, L. Izzo, Dendrimer biocompatibility and toxicity, Adv. Drug Deliv. 
Rev. 57 (15) (2005) 2215–2237. 
[87] H. Patel, P. Patel, Dendrimer applications–a review, Int J. Pharm. Bio Sci. 4 (2) 
(2013) 454–463. 
[88] J.A. Hubbell, A. Chilkoti, Nanomaterials for drug delivery, Science 337 (6092) 
(2012) 303–305. 
[89] H. Cabral, Y. Matsumoto, K. Mizuno, Q. Chen, M. Murakami, M. Kimura, 
K. Kataoka, Accumulation of sub-100 nm polymeric micelles in poorly permeable 
tumours depends on size, Nat. Nanotechnol. 6 (12) (2011) 815–823. 
[90] R. Trivedi, U.B. Kompella, Nanomicellar formulations for sustained drug delivery: 
strategies and underlying principles, Nanomedicine 5 (3) (2010) 485–505. 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
16
[91] V.P. Chauhan, T. Stylianopoulos, J.D. Martin, Z. Popovi´c, Normalization of tumour 
blood vessels improves the delivery of nanomedicines in a size-dependent manner, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 7 (2012) 383–388. 
[92] M.D. Determan, J.P. Cox, S.K. Mallapragada, Drug release from pH-responsive 
thermogelling pentablock copolymers, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A: Off. J. Soc. 
Biomater., Jpn. Soc. Biomater., Aust. Soc. Biomater. Korean Soc. Biomater. 81 (2) 
(2007) 326–333. 
[93] Melo, E.P., Aires-Barros, M.R., & Cabral, J.M. S. (2001). Reverse micelles and 
protein biotechnology. 
[94] L. Qiu, J. Zhang, M. Yan, Y. Jin, K. Zhu, Reverse self-assemblies based on 
amphiphilic polyphosphazenes for encapsulation of water-soluble molecules, 
Nanotechnology 18 (47) (2007) 475602. 
[95] V.P. Torchilin, Micellar nanocarriers: pharmaceutical perspectives, Pharm. Res. 
24 (2007) 1–16. 
[96] Y. Bae, N. Nishiyama, S. Fukushima, H. Koyama, M. Yasuhiro, K. Kataoka, 
Preparation and biological characterization of polymeric micelle drug carriers 
with intracellular pH-triggered drug release property: tumor permeability, 
controlled subcellular drug distribution, and enhanced in vivo antitumor efficacy, 
Bioconjugate Chem. 16 (1) (2005) 122–130. 
[97] R. Singh, J.W. Lillard Jr, Nanoparticle-based targeted drug delivery, Exp. Mol. 
Pathol. 86 (3) (2009) 215–223. 
[98] Y. Bae, K. Kataoka, Intelligent polymeric micelles from functional poly (ethylene 
glycol)-poly (amino acid) block copolymers, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 61 (10) (2009) 
768–784. 
[99] A. Bose, D. Roy Burman, B. Sikdar, P. Patra, Nanomicelles: types, properties and 
applications in drug delivery, IET Nanobiotechnol 15 (1) (2021) 19–27, https:// 
doi.org/10.1049/nbt2.12018. Epub 2021 Feb 2. PMID: 34694727; PMCID: 
PMC8675821. 
[100] N. Rapoport, Physical stimuli-responsive polymeric micelles for anti-cancer drug 
delivery, Prog. Polym. Sci. 32 (8-9) (2007) 962–990. 
[101] N. Wiradharma, Y. Zhang, S. Venkataraman, J.L. Hedrick, Y.Y. Yang, Self- 
assembled polymer nanostructures for delivery of anticancer therapeutics, Nano 
Today 4 (4) (2009) 302–317. 
[102] P. Suetens, Fundamentals of medical imaging, Cambridge university press, 2017. 
[103] H. Koo, M.S. Huh, I.-C. Sun, S.H. Yuk, K. Choi, K. Kim, et al., In vivo targeted 
delivery of nanoparticles for theranosis, Acc. Chem. Res. 44 (10) (2011) 
1018–1028. 
[104] S.M. Janib, A.S. Moses, J.A. MacKay, Imaging and drug delivery using theranostic 
nanoparticles, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 62 (11) (2010) 1052–1063. 
[105] D.-E. Lee, H. Koo, I.-C. Sun, J.H. Ryu, K. Kim, I.C. Kwon, Multifunctional 
nanoparticles for multimodal imaging and theragnosis, Chem. Soc. Rev. 41 (7) 
(2012) 2656–2672. 
[106] J.V. Jokerst, S.S. Gambhir, Molecular imaging with theranostic nanoparticles, 
Acc. Chem. Res. 44 (10) (2011) 1050–1060. 
[107] T.M. Allen, P.R. Cullis, Drug delivery systems: entering the mainstream, Science 
303 (5665) (2004) 1818–1822. 
[108] D.F. Emerich, C.G. Thanos, The pinpoint promise of nanoparticle-based drug 
delivery and molecular diagnosis, Biomol. Eng. 23 (4) (2006) 171–184. 
[109] Y.-E.L. Koo, G.R. Reddy, M. Bhojani, R. Schneider, M.A. Philbert, A. Rehemtulla, 
et al., Brain cancer diagnosis and therapy with nanoplatforms. Adv. Drug Deliv. 
Rev. 58 (14) (2006) 1556–1577. 
[110] R.K. Jain, Transport of molecules, particles, and cells in solid tumors, Annu. Rev. 
Biomed. Eng. 1 (1) (1999) 241–263. 
[111] W.C. Zamboni, Liposomal, nanoparticle, and conjugated formulations of 
anticancer agents, Clin. Cancer Res. 11 (23) (2005) 8230–8234. 
[112] Y. Choi, R. Weissleder, C.-H. Tung, Selective antitumor effect of novel protease- 
mediated photodynamic agent, Cancer Res. 66 (14) (2006) 7225–7229. 
[113] Pridgen E.M., Langer R., Farokhzad O.C. Biodegradable, polymeric nanoparticle 
delivery systems for cancer therapy. 2007. 
[114] M. Bruchez Jr, M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss, A.P. Alivisatos, Semiconductor 
nanocrystals as fluorescent biological labels, science 281 (5385) (1998) 
2013–2016. 
[115] G.W. Evans, The built environment and mental health, J. Urban Health 80 (2003) 
536–555. 
[116] X. Gao, Y. Cui, R.M. Levenson, L.W. Chung, S. Nie, In vivo cancer targeting and 
imaging with semiconductor quantum dots, Nat. Biotechnol. 22 (8) (2004) 
969–976. 
[117] S.T. Lo, A. Kumar, J.T. Hsieh, X. Sun, Dendrimer nanoscaffolds for potential 
theranostics of prostate cancer with a focus on radiochemistry, Mol. Pharm. 10 
(3) (2013) 793–812. 
[118] M.E. Åkerman, W.C. Chan, P. Laakkonen, S.N. Bhatia, E. Ruoslahti, Nanocrystal 
targeting in vivo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 99 (20) (2002) 12617–12621. 
[119] M.V. Yezhelyev, X. Gao, Y. Xing, A. Al-Hajj, S. Nie, R.M. O’Regan, Emerging use 
of nanoparticles in diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer, Lancet Oncol. 7 (8) 
(2006) 657–667. 
[120] A.C. Samia, X. Chen, C. Burda, Semiconductor quantum dots for photodynamic 
therapy, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (51) (2003) 15736–15737. 
[121] Bakalova R.H. Ohba: Z. Zhelev; M. Ishikawa; Y. Baba;". Quantum dots as 
photosensitizers 2004:1360–1. 
[122] A.C. Samia, S. Dayal, C. Burda, Quantum dot-based energy transfer: perspectives 
and potential for applications in photodynamic therapy, Photochem. Photobiol. 
82 (3) (2006) 617–625. 
[123] F. Danhier, A. Le Breton, Vr Préat, RGD-based strategies to target alpha (v) beta 
(3) integrin in cancer therapy and diagnosis, Mol. Pharm. 9 (11) (2012) 
2961–2973. 
[124] L.D. Leserman, J. Barbet, F. Kourilsky, J.N. Weinstein, Targeting to cells of 
fluorescent liposomes covalently coupled with monoclonal antibody or protein A, 
Nature 288 (5791) (1980) 602–604. 
[125] L. Bello, M. Francolini, P. Marthyn, J. Zhang, R.S. Carroll, D.C. Nikas, et al., αvβ3 
and αvβ5 integrin expression in glioma periphery, Neurosurgery 49 (2) (2001) 
380–390. 
[126] S. Christian, J. Pilch, M.E. Akerman, K. Porkka, P. Laakkonen, E. Ruoslahti, 
Nucleolin expressed at the cell surface is a marker of endothelial cells in 
angiogenic blood vessels, J. Cell Biol. 163 (4) (2003) 871–878. 
[127] R. Pasqualini, E. Koivunen, R. Kain, J. Lahdenranta, M. Sakamoto, A. Stryhn, et 
al., Aminopeptidase N is a receptor for tumor-homing peptides and a target for 
inhibiting angiogenesis, Cancer Res. 60 (3) (2000) 722–727. 
[128] X. Ma, S.-J. Li, Y. Liu, T. Zhang, P. Xue, Y. Kang, et al., Bioengineered nanogels for 
cancer immunotherapy, Chemical Society Reviews 51 (12) (2022) 5136–5174. 
[129] L. Liang, W. Huo, B. Wang, L. Cao, H. Huo, Y. Liu, et al., DNAzyme-Based 
nanoflowers for reversing P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance in breast 
cancer, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 608 (2022) 2985–2993. 
[130] A.D. Pandya, A. Øverbye, P. Sahariah, V.S. Gaware, Hk Høgset, Mr Masson, et al., 
Drug-loaded photosensitizer-chitosan nanoparticles for combinatorial chemo-and 
photodynamic-therapy of cancer, Biomacromolecules 21 (4) (2020) 1489–1498. 
[131] V.L. Silva, A. Ruiz, A. Ali, S. Pereira, J. Seitsonen, J. Ruokolainen, et al., Hypoxia- 
targeted cupric-tirapazamine liposomes potentiate radiotherapy in prostate 
cancer spheroids, International journal of pharmaceutics 607 (2021) 121018. 
[132] S. Mignani, M. Bryszewska, B. Klajnert-Maculewicz, M. Zablocka, J.-P. Majoral, 
Advances in combination therapies based on nanoparticles for efficacious cancer 
treatment: an analytical report, Biomacromolecules 16 (1) (2015) 1–27. 
[133] Y. Nakamura, A. Mochida, P.L. Choyke, H. Kobayashi, Nanodrug delivery: is the 
enhanced permeability and retention effect sufficient for curing cancer? 
Bioconjugate chemistry 27 (10) (2016) 2225–2238. 
[134] B. Haley, E. Frenkel, Nanoparticles for drug delivery in cancer treatment, Elsevier, 
Urologic Oncology: Seminars and original investigations 26 (2008) 57–64. 
[135] Z. Su, S. Dong, S.-C. Zhao, K. Liu, Y. Tan, X. Jiang, et al., Novel nanomedicines to 
overcome cancer multidrug resistance, Drug Resistance Updates 58 (2021) 
100777. 
[136] K. Mortezaee, A. Narmani, M. Salehi, H. Bagheri, B. Farhood, H. Haghi-Aminjan, 
et al., Synergic effects of nanoparticles-mediated hyperthermia in radiotherapy/ 
chemotherapy of cancer, Life sciences 269 (2021) 119020. 
[137] W. Park, Y.-J. Heo, D.K. Han, New opportunities for nanoparticles in cancer 
immunotherapy, Biomaterials research 22 (2018) 1–10. 
[138] C. Mao, X. Chen, Q. Hu, G. Miao, C. Lin, Acute toxicity and in vivo biodistribution 
of monodispersed mesoporous bioactive glass spheres in intravenously exposed 
mice, Materials Science and Engineering: C 58 (2016) 682–691. 
[139] S.T. Duggan, G.M. Keating, Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin: a review of its use in 
metastatic breast cancer, ovarian cancer, multiple myeloma and AIDS-related 
Kaposi’s sarcoma, Drugs 71 (2011) 2531–2558. 
[140] S.-W. Kim, Y.K. Lee, J.Y. Lee, J.H. Hong, D. Khang, PEGylated anticancer-carbon 
nanotubes complex targeting mitochondria of lung cancer cells, Nanotechnology 
28 (46) (2017) 465102. 
[141] S. Van Den Brûle, E. Beckers, P. Chaurand, W. Liu, S. Ibouraadaten, M. Palmai- 
Pallag, et al., Nanometer-long Ge-imogolite nanotubes cause sustained lung 
inflammation and fibrosis in rats, Particle and fibre toxicology 11 (1) (2014) 
1–11. 
[142] L.M. Browning, K.J. Lee, T. Huang, P.D. Nallathamby, J.E. Lowman, X.-H.N. Xu, 
Random walk of single gold nanoparticles in zebrafish embryos leading to 
stochastic toxic effects on embryonic developments, Nanoscale 1 (1) (2009) 
138–152. 
[143] V. Kattumuri, K. Katti, S. Bhaskaran, E.J. Boote, S.W. Casteel, G.M. Fent, et al., 
Gum arabic as a phytochemical construct for the stabilization of gold 
nanoparticles: in vivo pharmacokinetics and X-ray-contrast-imaging studies, 
Small 3 (2) (2007) 333–341. 
[144] Y. Huang, L. Zhong, X. Li, P. Wu, J. He, C. Tang, et al., In Situ Silver-Based 
Electrochemical Oncolytic Bioreactor, Advanced Materials 34 (40) (2022) 
2109973. 
[145] C. Huang, B. Lin, C. Chen, H. Wang, X. Lin, J. Liu, et al., Synergistic Reinforcing of 
Immunogenic Cell Death and Transforming Tumor-Associated Macrophages Via a 
Multifunctional Cascade Bioreactor for Optimizing Cancer Immunotherapy, 
Advanced Materials (2022) 2207593. 
[146] J. Nowak-Jary, B. Machnicka, Pharmacokinetics of magnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles for medical applications, Journal of Nanobiotechnology 20 (1) 
(2022) 1–30. 
[147] C.A. Ferreira, S. Goel, E.B. Ehlerding, Z.T. Rosenkrans, D. Jiang, T. Sun, et al., 
Ultrasmall porous silica nanoparticles with enhanced pharmacokinetics for cancer 
theranostics, Nano letters 21 (11) (2021) 4692–4699. 
[148] I.V. Zelepukin, A.A. Popov, V.O. Shipunova, G.V. Tikhonowski, A.B. Mirkasymov, 
E.A. Popova-Kuznetsova, et al., Laser-synthesized TiN nanoparticles for 
biomedical applications: Evaluation of safety, biodistribution and 
pharmacokinetics, Materials Science and Engineering: C 120 (2021) 111717. 
[149] A.A. Abdellatif, G. Zayed, A. El-Bakry, A. Zaky, I.Y. Saleem, H.M. Tawfeek, Novel 
gold nanoparticles coated with somatostatin as a potential delivery system for 
targeting somatostatin receptors, Drug Development and Industrial Pharmacy 42 
(11) (2016) 1782–1791. 
[150] S. Acharya, F. Dilnawaz, S.K. Sahoo, Targeted epidermal growth factor receptor 
nanoparticle bioconjugates for breast cancer therapy, Biomaterials 30 (29) (2009) 
5737–5750. 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
17
[151] C. Alabi, A. Vegas, D. Anderson, Attacking the genome: emerging siRNA 
nanocarriers from concept to clinic, Current opinion in pharmacology 12 (4) 
(2012) 427–433. 
[152] M. Alibolandi, M. Ramezani, K. Abnous, F. Hadizadeh, AS1411 aptamer- 
decorated biodegradable polyethylene glycol–poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) 
nanopolymersomes for the targeted delivery of gemcitabine to non–small cell 
lung cancer in vitro, Journal of pharmaceutical sciences 105 (5) (2016) 
1741–1750. 
[153] S. Bakshi, A. Zakharchenko, S. Minko, D.M. Kolpashchikov, E. Katz, Towards 
nanomaterials for cancer theranostics: a system of DNA-modified magnetic 
nanoparticles for detection and suppression of RNA marker in cancer cells, 
Magnetochemistry 5 (2) (2019) 24. 
[154] L. Cabeza, G. Perazzoli, C. Mesas, C. Jim´enez-Luna, J. Prados, A.R. Rama, et al., 
Nanoparticles in colorectal cancer therapy: latest in vivo assays, clinical trials, 
and patents, AAPS PharmSciTech 21 (2020) 1–15. 
[155] L. Cheng, Q. Hu, L. Cheng, W. Hu, M. Xu, Y. Zhu, et al., Construction and 
evaluation of PAMAM–DOX conjugates with superior tumor recognition and 
intracellular acid-triggered drug release properties, Colloids and Surfaces B: 
Biointerfaces 136 (2015) 37–45. 
[156] H.-J. Cho, I.-S. Yoon, H.Y. Yoon, H. Koo, Y.-J. Jin, S.-H. Ko, et al., Polyethylene 
glycol-conjugated hyaluronic acid-ceramide self-assembled nanoparticles for 
targeted delivery of doxorubicin, Biomaterials 33 (4) (2012) 1190–1200. 
[157] D. Cornelio, R. Roesler, G. Schwartsmann, Gastrin-releasing peptide receptor as a 
molecular target in experimental anticancer therapy, Annals of Oncology 18 (9) 
(2007) 1457–1466. 
[158] P.C. Lyon, L.F. Griffiths, J. Lee, D. Chung, R. Carlisle, F. Wu, et al., Clinical trial 
protocol for TARDOX: a phase I study to investigate the feasibility of targeted 
release of lyso-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin (ThermoDox®) using 
focused ultrasound in patients with liver tumours, Journal of therapeutic 
ultrasound 5 (1) (2017) 1–8. 
[159] A.L. Fymat, Magnetic resonance imaging modalities with contrast enhancing 
nanomaterials, Current Trends in Clinical & Medical Imaging 1 (1) (2017) 11–14. 
[160] Y. Gao, Y. Zhou, L. Zhao, C. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Li, et al., Enhanced antitumor efficacy 
by cyclic RGDyK-conjugated and paclitaxel-loaded pH-responsive polymeric 
micelles, Acta biomaterialia 23 (2015) 127–135. 
[161] T. Golan, T. Grenader, P. Ohana, Y. Amitay, H. Shmeeda, N.M. La-Beck, et al., 
Pegylated liposomal mitomycin C prodrug enhances tolerance of mitomycin C: a 
phase 1 study in advanced solid tumor patients, Cancer medicine 4 (10) (2015) 
1472–1483. 
[162] B.P. Gray, M.J. McGuire, K.C. Brown, A liposomal drug platform overrides 
peptide ligand targeting to a cancer biomarker, irrespective of ligand affinity or 
density, PLoS One 8 (8) (2013) e72938. 
[163] M. Hong, S. Zhu, Y. Jiang, G. Tang, C. Sun, C. Fang, et al., Novel anti-tumor 
strategy: PEG-hydroxycamptothecin conjugate loaded transferrin-PEG- 
nanoparticles, Journal of Controlled Release 141 (1) (2010) 22–29. 
[164] X. Jiang, X. Sha, H. Xin, L. Chen, X. Gao, X. Wang, et al., Self-aggregated 
pegylated poly (trimethylene carbonate) nanoparticles decorated with c (RGDyK) 
peptide for targeted paclitaxel delivery to integrin-rich tumors, Biomaterials 32 
(35) (2011) 9457–9469. 
[165] G. Hu, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Ruan, Q. He, H. Gao, Integrin-mediated active 
tumor targeting and tumor microenvironment response dendrimer-gelatin 
nanoparticles for drug delivery and tumor treatment, International journal of 
pharmaceutics 496 (2) (2015) 1057–1068. 
[166] G.K. Hubbard, L.N. Mutton, M. Khalili, R.P. McMullin, J.L. Hicks, D. Bianchi- 
Frias, et al., Combined MYC activation and Pten loss are sufficient to create 
genomic instability and lethal metastatic prostate cancer, Cancer research 76 (2) 
(2016) 283–292. 
[167] D. Huh, B.D. Matthews, A. Mammoto, M. Montoya-Zavala, H.Y. Hsin, D.E. Ingber, 
Reconstituting organ-level lung functions on a chip, Science 328 (5986) (2010) 
1662–1668. 
[168] A. Jain, P. Kesharwani, N.K. Garg, A. Jain, S.A. Jain, A.K. Jain, et al., Galactose 
engineered solid lipid nanoparticles for targeted delivery of doxorubicin, Colloids 
and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 134 (2015) 47–58. 
[169] S. Jiang, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, L. Sun, Y. Pu, H. Yao, et al., CD20 monoclonal 
antibody targeted nanoscale drug delivery system for doxorubicin chemotherapy: 
an in vitro study of cell lysis of CD20-positive Raji cells, International journal of 
nanomedicine 11 (2016) 5505. 
[170] X. Jiang, X. Sha, H. Xin, L. Chen, X. Gao, X. Wang, et al., Self-aggregated 
pegylated poly (trimethylene carbonate) nanoparticles decorated with c (RGDyK) 
peptide for targeted paclitaxel delivery to integrin-rich tumors, Biomaterials 32 
(35) (2011) 9457–9469. 
[171] A. Kaplan, H.M. Kutlu, G.A. Ciftci, Fe3O4 nanopowders: genomic and apoptotic 
evaluations on A549 lung adenocarcinoma cell line, Nutrition and Cancer 72 (4) 
(2020) 708–721. 
[172] H. Kouchakzadeh, S.A. Shojaosadati, J. Mohammadnejad, M. Paknejad, M. 
J. Rasaee, Attachment of an anti-MUC1 monoclonal antibody to 5-FU loaded BSA 
nanoparticles for active targeting of breast cancer cells, Human antibodies 21 (3- 
4) (2012) 49–56. 
[173] H. Kulhari, D. Pooja, S. Shrivastava, V. Naidu, R. Sistla, Peptide conjugated 
polymeric nanoparticles as a carrier for targeted delivery of docetaxel, Colloids 
and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 117 (2014) 166–173. 
[174] U. Bulbake, S. Doppalapudi, N. Kommineni, W. Khan, Liposomal formulations in 
clinical use: an updated review, Pharmaceutics 9 (2) (2017) 12. 
[175] Z. Li, R. Zhao, X. Wu, Y. Sun, M. Yao, J. Li, et al., Identification and 
characterization of a novel peptide ligand of epidermal growth factor receptor for 
targeted delivery of therapeutics, The FASEB journal 19 (14) (2005) 1978–1985. 
[176] C. Liang, Y. Yang, Y. Ling, Y. Huang, T. Li, X. Li, Improved therapeutic effect of 
folate-decorated PLGA–PEG nanoparticles for endometrial carcinoma, Bioorganic 
& medicinal chemistry 19 (13) (2011) 4057–4066. 
[177] H.-F. Liang, S.-C. Chen, M.-C. Chen, P.-W. Lee, C.-T. Chen, H.-W. Sung, Paclitaxel- 
loaded poly (γ-glutamic acid)-poly (lactide) nanoparticles as a targeted drug 
delivery system against cultured HepG2 cells, Bioconjugate chemistry 17 (2) 
(2006) 291–299. 
[178] C.W. Liu, W.J. Lin, Polymeric nanoparticles conjugate a novel heptapeptide as an 
epidermal growth factor receptor-active targeting ligand for doxorubicin, 
International journal of nanomedicine (2012) 4749–4767. 
[179] P.C. Lyon, L.F. Griffiths, J. Lee, D. Chung, R. Carlisle, F. Wu, et al., Clinical trial 
protocol for TARDOX: a phase I study to investigate the feasibility of targeted 
release of lyso-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin (ThermoDox®) using 
focused ultrasound in patients with liver tumours, Journal of therapeutic 
ultrasound 5 (1) (2017) 1–8. 
[180] H. Maeda, Toward a full understanding of the EPR effect in primary and 
metastatic tumors as well as issues related to its heterogeneity, Advanced drug 
delivery reviews 91 (2015) 3–6. 
[181] M. Malumbres, M. Barbacid, Cell cycle, CDKs and cancer: a changing paradigm, 
Nature reviews cancer 9 (3) (2009) 153–166. 
[182] X. Luo, Y. Yu, X. Kong, X. Wang, Z. Ji, Z. Sun, et al., Rapid microwave assisted 
derivatization of nitrofuran metabolites for analysis in shrimp by high 
performance liquid chromatography-fluorescence detector, Microchemical 
Journal 150 (2019) 104189. 
[183] A.M. Master, A. Sen Gupta, EGF receptor-targeted nanocarriers for enhanced 
cancer treatment, Nanomedicine 7 (12) (2012) 1895–1906. 
[184] P.A. McCarron, W.M. Marouf, D.J. Quinn, F. Fay, R.E. Burden, S.A. Olwill, et al., 
Antibody targeting of camptothecin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles to tumor cells, 
Bioconjugate chemistry 19 (8) (2008) 1561–1569. 
[185] B.P. Gray, M.J. McGuire, K.C. Brown, A liposomal drug platform overrides 
peptide ligand targeting to a cancer biomarker, irrespective of ligand affinity or 
density, PLoS One 8 (8) (2013) e72938. 
[186] R. Namgung, Y. Mi Lee, J. Kim, Y. Jang, B.-H. Lee, I.-S. Kim, et al., Poly- 
cyclodextrin and poly-paclitaxel nano-assembly for anticancer therapy, Nature 
communications 5 (1) (2014) 3702. 
[187] N. Yang, Y. Jiang, H. Zhang, B. Sun, C. Hou, J. Zheng, et al., Active targeting 
docetaxel-PLA nanoparticles eradicate circulating lung cancer stem-like cells and 
inhibit liver metastasis, Molecular Pharmaceutics 12 (1) (2015) 232–239. 
[188] M. Hong, S. Zhu, Y. Jiang, G. Tang, C. Sun, C. Fang, et al., Novel anti-tumor 
strategy: PEG-hydroxycamptothecin conjugate loaded transferrin-PEG- 
nanoparticles, Journal of Controlled Release 141 (1) (2010) 22–29. 
[189] M. Nag, V. Gajbhiye, P. Kesharwani, N.K. Jain, Transferrin functionalized 
chitosan-PEG nanoparticles for targeted delivery of paclitaxel to cancer cells, 
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 148 (2016) 363–370. 
[190] C. Nazli, G.S. Demirer, Y. Yar, H.Y. Acar, S. Kizilel, Targeted delivery of 
doxorubicin into tumor cells via MMP-sensitive PEG hydrogel-coated magnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles (MIONPs), Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 122 
(2014) 674–683. 
[191] Y. Gao, Y. Zhou, L. Zhao, C. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Li, et al., Enhanced antitumor efficacy 
by cyclic RGDyK-conjugated and paclitaxel-loaded pH-responsive polymeric 
micelles, Acta biomaterialia 23 (2015) 127–135. 
[192] G. Hu, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Ruan, Q. He, H. Gao, Integrin-mediated active 
tumor targeting and tumor microenvironment response dendrimer-gelatin 
nanoparticles for drug delivery and tumor treatment, International journal of 
pharmaceutics 496 (2) (2015) 1057–1068. 
[193] H. Kulhari, D. Pooja, S. Shrivastava, V. Naidu, R. Sistla, Peptide conjugated 
polymeric nanoparticles as a carrier for targeted delivery of docetaxel, Colloids 
and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 117 (2014) 166–173. 
[194] C.W. Liu, W.J. Lin, Polymeric nanoparticles conjugate a novel heptapeptide as an 
epidermal growth factor receptor-active targeting ligand for doxorubicin, 
International journal of nanomedicine (2012) 4749–4767. 
[195] A. Taheri, R. Dinarvand, F. Atyabi, F. Ahadi, F.S. Nouri, M.H. Ghahremani, et al., 
Enhanced anti-tumoral activity of methotrexate-human serum albumin 
conjugated nanoparticles by targeting with luteinizing hormone-releasing 
hormone (LHRH) peptide, International Journal of Molecular Sciences 12 (7) 
(2011) 4591–4608. 
[196] G. Hu, X. Chun, Y. Wang, Q. He, H. Gao, Peptide mediated active targeting and 
intelligent particle size reduction-mediated enhanced penetrating of fabricated 
nanoparticles for triple-negative breast cancer treatment, Oncotarget 6 (38) 
(2015) 41258. 
[197] H. Xiong, S. Du, J. Ni, J. Zhou, J. Yao, Mitochondria and nuclei dual-targeted 
heterogeneous hydroxyapatite nanoparticles for enhancing therapeutic efficacy of 
doxorubicin, Biomaterials 94 (2016) 70–83. 
[198] Y. Zhong, J. Zhang, R. Cheng, C. Deng, F. Meng, F. Xie, et al., Reversibly 
crosslinked hyaluronic acid nanoparticles for active targeting and intelligent 
delivery of doxorubicin to drug resistant CD44+ human breast tumor xenografts, 
Journal of controlled release 205 (2015) 144–154. 
[199] H.-J. Cho, I.-S. Yoon, H.Y. Yoon, H. Koo, Y.-J. Jin, S.-H. Ko, et al., Polyethylene 
glycol-conjugated hyaluronic acid-ceramide self-assembled nanoparticles for 
targeted delivery of doxorubicin, Biomaterials 33 (4) (2012) 1190–1200. 
[200] B. Sun, C. Deng, F. Meng, J. Zhang, Z. Zhong, Robust, active tumor-targeting and 
fast bioresponsive anticancer nanotherapeutics based on natural endogenous 
materials, Acta Biomaterialia 45 (2016) 223–233. 
[201] K.K. Chenab, R. Eivazzadeh-Keihan, A. Maleki, P. Pashazadeh-Panahi, M. 
R. Hamblin, A. Mokhtarzadeh, Biomedical applications of nanoflares: targeted 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Next Materials 2 (2024) 100128
18
intracellular fluorescence probes, Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and 
Medicine 17 (2019) 342–358. 
[202] X.-M. Huang, L.-Z. Liu, S. Zhou, J.-J. Zhao, Physical properties and device 
applications of graphene oxide, Frontiers of Physics 15 (2020) 1–70. 
[203] D.R. Dreyer, A.D. Todd, C.W. Bielawski, Harnessing the chemistry of graphene 
oxide, Chemical Society Reviews 43 (15) (2014) 5288–5301. 
[204] F. De Maio, V. Palmieri, A. Salustri, G. Perini, M. Sanguinetti, M. De Spirito, et al., 
Graphene oxide prevents mycobacteria entry into macrophages through 
extracellular entrapment, Nanoscale Advances 1 (4) (2019) 1421–1431. 
[205] H.S. Jung, Y.-j Choi, J. Jeong, Y. Lee, B. Hwang, J. Jang, et al., Nanoscale 
graphene coating on commercially pure titanium for accelerated bone 
regeneration, RSC advances 6 (32) (2016) 26719–26724. 
[206] V. Mokkapati, N.P. Tasli, Z. Khan, A. Tufani, S. Pandit, H. Budak, et al., NaB 
integrated graphene oxide membranes for enhanced cell viability and stem cell 
properties of human adipose stem cells, RSC advances 6 (61) (2016) 
56159–56165. 
[207] O. Akhavan, E. Ghaderi, Flash photo stimulation of human neural stem cells on 
graphene/TiO 2 heterojunction for differentiation into neurons, Nanoscale 5 (21) 
(2013) 10316–10326. 
[208] X. Ding, H. Liu, Y. Fan, Graphene-based materials in regenerative medicine, 
Advanced healthcare materials 4 (10) (2015) 1451–1468. 
[209] S.K. Lee, H. Kim, B.S. Shim, Graphene: an emerging material for biological tissue 
engineering, Carbon letters 14 (2) (2013) 63–75. 
[210] A. Bianco, Graphene: safe or toxic? The two faces of the medal, Angewandte 
Chemie International Edition 52 (19) (2013) 4986–4997. 
[211] Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Tu, D. Chen, Z. Luo, D. Liu, et al., Sub-acute toxicity study of 
graphene oxide in the Sprague-Dawley rat, International journal of environmental 
research and public health 13 (11) (2016) 1149. 
[212] L. Horvath, A. Magrez, M. Burghard, K. Kern, L. Forr´o, B. Schwaller, Evaluation of 
the toxicity of graphene derivatives on cells of the lung luminal surface, Carbon 
64 (2013) 45–60. 
[213] J.-H. Liu, S.-T. Yang, H. Wang, Y. Chang, A. Cao, Y. Liu, Effect of size and dose on 
the biodistribution of graphene oxide in mice, Nanomedicine 7 (12) (2012) 
1801–1812. 
[214] H. Zhou, C. Cheng, H. Qin, L. Ma, C. He, S. Nie, et al., Self-assembled 3D 
biocompatible and bioactive layer at the macro-interface via graphene-based 
supermolecules, Polymer Chemistry 5 (11) (2014) 3563–3575. 
[215] S.H. Song, M.-H. Jang, J.-M. Jeong, H. Yoon, Y.-H. Cho, W.-I. Jeong, et al., 
Primary hepatocyte imaging by multiphoton luminescent graphene quantum 
dots, Chemical Communications 51 (38) (2015) 8041–8043. 
[216] M. Loeblein, G. Perry, S.H. Tsang, W. Xiao, D. Collard, P. Coquet, et al., Three- 
dimensional graphene: a biocompatible and biodegradable scaffold with 
enhanced oxygenation, Advanced healthcare materials 5 (10) (2016) 1177–1191. 
[217] K. Zhang, H. Zheng, S. Liang, C. Gao, Aligned PLLA nanofibrous scaffolds coated 
with graphene oxide for promoting neural cell growth, Acta biomaterialia 37 
(2016) 131–142. 
[218] C. Huang, Y. Ouyang, H. Niu, N. He, Q. Ke, X. Jin, et al., Nerve guidance conduits 
from aligned nanofibers: improvement of nerve regeneration through 
longitudinal nanogrooves on a fiber surface, ACS applied materials & interfaces 7 
(13) (2015) 7189–7196. 
[219] O. Akhavan, E. Ghaderi, E. Abouei, S. Hatamie, E. Ghasemi, Accelerated 
differentiation of neural stem cells into neurons on ginseng-reduced graphene 
oxide sheets, Carbon 66 (2014) 395–406. 
[220] G. Mittal, V. Dhand, K.Y. Rhee, S.-J. Park, W.R. Lee, A review on carbon 
nanotubes and graphene as fillers in reinforced polymer nanocomposites, Journal 
of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 21 (2015) 11–25. 
[221] Q. Tu, L. Pang, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, R. Zhang, B. Lu, et al., Effects of surface charges 
of graphene oxide on neuronal outgrowth and branching, Analyst 139 (1) (2014) 
105–115. 
[222] S. Goenka, V. Sant, S. Sant, Graphene-based nanomaterials for drug delivery and 
tissue engineering, Journal of Controlled Release 173 (2014) 75–88. 
[223] T. Kuilla, S. Bhadra, D. Yao, N.H. Kim, S. Bose, J.H. Lee, Recent advances in 
graphene based polymer composites, Progress in polymer science 35 (11) (2010) 
1350–1375. 
[224] C.L. Weaver, X.T. Cui, Directed neural stem cell differentiation with a 
functionalized graphene oxide nanocomposite, Advanced healthcare materials 4 
(9) (2015) 1408–1416. 
[225] N. Dubey, R. Bentini, I. Islam, T. Cao, A.H. Castro Neto, V. Rosa, Graphene: a 
versatile carbon-based material for bone tissue engineering, Stem cells 
international 2015 (2015). 
[226] S. Liu, T.H. Zeng, M. Hofmann, E. Burcombe, J. Wei, R. Jiang, et al., Antibacterial 
activity of graphite, graphite oxide, graphene oxide, and reduced graphene oxide: 
membrane and oxidative stress, ACS nano 5 (9) (2011) 6971–6980. 
[227] K.-H. Liao, Y.-S. Lin, C.W. Macosko, C.L. Haynes, Cytotoxicity of graphene oxide 
and graphene in human erythrocytes and skin fibroblasts, ACS applied materials 
& interfaces 3 (7) (2011) 2607–2615. 
[228] N.L. Teradal, R. Jelinek, Carbon nanomaterials in biological studies and 
biomedicine, Advanced healthcare materials 6 (17) (2017) 1700574. 
[229] Y. Yang, H. Shi, Y. Wang, B. Shi, L. Guo, D. Wu, et al., Graphene oxide/manganese 
ferrite nanohybrids for magnetic resonance imaging, photothermal therapy and 
drug delivery, Journal of biomaterials applications 30 (6) (2016) 810–822. 
[230] P.S. Wate, S.S. Banerjee, A. Jalota-Badhwar, R.R. Mascarenhas, K.R. Zope, 
J. Khandare, et al., Cellular imaging using biocompatible dendrimer- 
functionalized graphene oxide-based fluorescent probe anchored with magnetic 
nanoparticles, Nanotechnology 23 (41) (2012) 415101. 
[231] K. Yang, S. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Sun, S.-T. Lee, Z. Liu, Graphene in mice: ultrahigh 
in vivo tumor uptake and efficient photothermal therapy, Nano letters 10 (9) 
(2010) 3318–3323. 
[232] N. Shadjou, M. Hasanzadeh, B. Khalilzadeh, Graphene based scaffolds on bone 
tissue engineering, Bioengineered 9 (1) (2018) 38–47. 
[233] S.-R. Ryoo, Y.-K. Kim, M.-H. Kim, D.-H. Min, Behaviors of NIH-3T3 fibroblasts on 
graphene/carbon nanotubes: proliferation, focal adhesion, and gene transfection 
studies, ACS nano 4 (11) (2010) 6587–6598. 
[234] K. Wang, J. Ruan, H. Song, J. Zhang, Y. Wo, S. Guo, et al., Biocompatibility of 
graphene oxide, Nanoscale Res Lett 6 (2011) 1–8. 
[235] M. Nair, D. Nancy, A.G. Krishnan, G. Anjusree, S. Vadukumpully, S.V. Nair, 
Graphene oxide nanoflakes incorporated gelatin–hydroxyapatite scaffolds 
enhance osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells, 
Nanotechnology 26 (16) (2015) 161001. 
[236] Y. Yang, A.M. Asiri, Z. Tang, D. Du, Y. Lin, Graphene based materials for 
biomedical applications, Materials today 16 (10) (2013) 365–373. 
[237] S. Gulati, S. Vijayan, S. Kumar, V. Agarwal, B. Harikumar, R.S. Varma, Magnetic 
nanocarriers adorned on graphene: promising contrast-enhancing agents with 
state-of-the-art performance in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
theranostics, Materials Advances 3 (7) (2022) 2971–2989. 
[238] Y. Gao, Carbon nano-allotrope/magnetic nanoparticle hybrid nanomaterials as T2 
contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging applications, Journal of 
Functional Biomaterials 9 (1) (2018) 16. 
[239] E.J. Werner, A. Datta, C.J. Jocher, K.N. Raymond, High-relaxivity MRI contrast 
agents: where coordination chemistry meets medical imaging, Angewandte 
Chemie International Edition 47 (45) (2008) 8568–8580. 
[240] M. Fiorillo, A.F. Verre, M. Iliut, M. Peiris-Pag´es, B. Ozsvari, R. Gandara, et al., 
Graphene oxide selectively targets cancer stem cells, across multiple tumor types: 
implications for non-toxic cancer treatment, via “differentiation-based nano- 
therapy, Oncotarget 6 (6) (2015) 3553. 
[241] C. Wang, J. Li, C. Amatore, Y. Chen, H. Jiang, X.M. Wang, Gold nanoclusters and 
graphene nanocomposites for drug delivery and imaging of cancer cells, 
Angewandte Chemie 123 (49) (2011) 11848–11852. 
[242] F.M. Tonelli, V.A. Goulart, K.N. Gomes, M.S. Ladeira, A.K. Santos, E. Lorençon, et 
al., Graphene-based nanomaterials: biological and medical applications and 
toxicity, Nanomedicine 10 (15) (2015) 2423–2450. 
[243] T.P. Dasari Shareena, D. McShan, A.K. Dasmahapatra, P.B. Tchounwou, A review 
on graphene-based nanomaterials in biomedical applications and risks in 
environment and health, Nano-micro letters 10 (2018) 1–34. 
[244] M. Zhang, Y. Cao, Y. Chong, Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Z. Deng, et al., Graphene oxide 
based theranostic platform for T 1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging and 
drug delivery, ACS applied materials & interfaces 5 (24) (2013) 13325–13332. 
[245] L. Cheng, K. Yang, M. Shao, X. Lu, Z. Liu, In vivo pharmacokinetics, long-term 
biodistribution and toxicology study of functionalized upconversion nanoparticles 
in mice, Nanomedicine 6 (8) (2011) 1327–1340. 
[246] A.M. Jastrzębska, P. Kurtycz, A.R. Olszyna, Recent advances in graphene family 
materials toxicity investigations, Journal of Nanoparticle Research 14 (2012) 
1–21. 
[247] W. Chen, P. Yi, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Deng, Z. Zhang, Composites of 
aminodextran-coated Fe3O4 nanoparticles and graphene oxide for cellular 
magnetic resonance imaging, ACS applied materials & interfaces 3 (10) (2011) 
4085–4091. 
[248] S.K. Singh, M.K. Singh, P.P. Kulkarni, V.K. Sonkar, J.J. Gr´acio, D. Dash, Amine- 
modified graphene: thrombo-protective safer alternative to graphene oxide for 
biomedical applications, ACS nano 6 (3) (2012) 2731–2740. 
[249] M.L. James, S.S. Gambhir, A molecular imaging primer: modalities, imaging 
agents, and applications, Physiological reviews 92 (2) (2012) 897–965. 
[250] J. Li, A. Chaudhary, S.J. Chmura, C. Pelizzari, T. Rajh, C. Wietholt, et al., A novel 
functional CT contrast agent for molecular imaging of cancer, Physics in Medicine 
& Biology 55 (15) (2010) 4389. 
[251] C.T. Smith, C.A. Mills, S. Pani, R. Rhodes, J.J. Bailey, S.J. Cooper, et al., X-ray 
micro-computed tomography as a non-destructive tool for imaging the uptake of 
metal nanoparticles by graphene-based 3D carbon structures, Nanoscale 11 (31) 
(2019) 14734–14741. 
[252] Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Wu, A. Zhou, Q. Qu, X. Zhang, et al., Well-defined organic 
fluorescent nanomaterials with AIE characteristics for colorimetric/UV-vis/ 
fluorescent multi-channel recognition of Zn 2+ with multiple applications in 
plant cells and zebrafish, Materials Chemistry Frontiers 5 (13) (2021) 4981–4988. 
H. Ghazal et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
