Review
The translational challenges of precision oncology
Oriol Pich,1,6 Chris Bailey,1,6 Thomas B.K. Watkins,1 Simone Zaccaria,2,3 Mariam Jamal-Hanjani,2,4,5
and Charles Swanton1,*
1Cancer Evolution and Genome Instability Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK
2Cancer Research UK Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence, University College London Cancer Institute, London, UK
3Computational Cancer Genomics Research Group, University College London Cancer Institute, London, UK
4Cancer Metastasis Laboratory, University College London Cancer Institute, London, UK
5Department of Medical Oncology, University College London Hospitals, London, UK
6These authors contributed equally
*Correspondence: charles.swanton@crick.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2022.04.002
SUMMARY
The translational challenges in the ﬁeld of precision oncology are in part related to the biological complexity
and diversity of this disease. Technological advances in genomics have facilitated large sequencing efforts
and discoveries that have further supported this notion. In this review, we reﬂect on the impact of these dis-
coveries on our understanding of several concepts: cancer initiation, cancer prevention, early detection,
adjuvant therapy and minimal residual disease monitoring, cancer drug resistance, and cancer evolution in
metastasis. We discuss key areas of focus for improving cancer outcomes, from biological insights to clinical
application, and suggest where the development of these technologies will lead us. Finally, we discuss prac-
tical challenges to the wider adoption of molecular proﬁling in the clinic and the need for robust translational
infrastructure.
INTRODUCTION
The global burden of cancer is increasing. In 2020, there were an
estimated 19.3 million new cancer cases worldwide, with almost
10 million deaths (Sung et al., 2021). The incidence of cancer
cases is expected to rise by 47% to 28.4 million by 2040, with
widening inequalities between countries, ethnicities, and socio-
economic status. The reasons for the increase in incidence
include both a growing and aging population. However, for mul-
tiple tumor types, the age-speciﬁc risk is also increasing (Smitte-
naar et al., 2016). Environmental exposures are linked to the
increasing age-speciﬁc risk of many tumor types, in part driven
by the consequences or drivers of climate change through
increased exposure to environmental carcinogens, such as air
pollution and UV exposure. Moreover, extreme weather patterns
and rising sea levels are likely to drive population displacement,
further exacerbating socio-economic and international dispar-
ities in cancer outcomes (Nogueira et al., 2020).
Precision oncology refers to the concept of cancer treatment
strategies that are based on the distinct molecular characteristics
of a tumor. Although these characteristics are historically deﬁned
by genetic mutations, deﬁning these patterns to establish treat-
ment strategies has proven more complex due to key consider-
ations, such as the transcriptome, proteome, and tumor microen-
vironment, in governing tumor development and treatment
response. The advent of high-throughput genomic technologies
has brought with it exciting potential to further unravel early-
and late-stage disease biology. In this review, we reﬂect on the
impact that some of the discoveries in genomics have made on
our understanding of cancer initiation, cancer prevention, early
detection, adjuvant therapy and minimal residual disease moni-
toring, cancer drug resistance, and cancer evolution from early-
to late-stage disease. We discuss a number of key areas of focus
for improving cancer outcomes, from biological insights to clin-
ical application, and suggest where the development of these
technologies will lead us. Finally, we suggest knowledge gaps
that require complementary approaches to fully address.
CANCER INITIATION
Cancer initiation describes the process of molecular events that
lead a normal cell to transform into a cancer cell. In this section,
we discuss how the discoveries that have supported this view
have led to the conception of precision oncology and look at a
number of key research areas in the ﬁeld of cancer initiation
(Figure 1).
Genomics and cancer genes
The concept of cancer as a genetic disease has been considered
for over 100 years. This has been underpinned by a number of
key events, such as the heritability of breast cancer reported
by Pierre Paul Broca (Broca, 1866), the observation of aberrant
mitoses by David Von Hansemann (Hansemann, 1890), and
the hypothesis of Theodor Boveri (Boveri, 1914), that abnormal
chromosomal segregation was sufﬁcient to cause malignant
proliferation. The discovery that viral transmissibility of a chicken
sarcoma through injection of cell-free inﬁltrates by Peyton Rous
in 1910 laid the foundations for the ﬁrst discovery of a cancer-
related gene, SRC, in 1976 (Martin, 2004; Stehelin et al., 1976).
By the year 2000, around 300 cancer-related genes had been
identiﬁed (Futreal et al., 2004; Martı´nez-Jime´ nez et al., 2020).
The advent and widespread application of next-generation
ll
458
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022 ª 2022 Elsevier Inc.
sequencing (Bailey et al., 2018; McLendon et al., 2008; Parsons
et al., 2008; Sjo¨ blom et al., 2006) revealed that the coding re-
gions of the tumor genome harbored from tens of point muta-
tions in acute myeloid leukemias to thousands of mutations in
melanomas (Lawrence et al., 2013). Mutational processes acting
from embryological development onwards (Stratton et al., 2009)
were found to fuel clonal evolution by generating variation in the
tumor cell population, with a fraction of these mutations causing
somatic alterations in driver genes that result in positive selection
(Greaves and Maley, 2012; Nowell, 1976).
Analysis of point mutations and short insertions and deletions
in 9,423 exomes from 33 tumor types in the Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) revealed 229 genes under positive selection,
including TP53 in 80% (27/33) of cancer types, followed by
PIK3CA (17) and KRAS (16; Bailey et al., 2018). Recently, anal-
ysis of 28,000 tumors across 66 tumor types uncovered 568
mutational drivers (Martı´nez-Jime´ nez et al., 2020). Other key
studies have focused on the characterization of copy number
(Zack et al., 2013), structural variation (Li et al., 2020b), methyl-
ation (De Carvalho et al., 2012; Pan et al., 2021) and gene fusions
(Yoshihara et al., 2015), revealing alternative drivers of tumori-
genesis. Alterations through these mechanisms include focal
ampliﬁcations of EGFR in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
(McLendon et al., 2008), BRCA1 methylation in breast cancers
(Esteller et al., 2000), and EML4-ALK fusions in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) (Soda et al., 2007). The impact of large
scale structural rearrangements, DNA copy number gains and
losses and methylation events are far less well characterized
than point mutations. What is clear is that most cancer-related
genes are infrequently mutated across different cancer types.
Whole-genome sequencing has provided insights into the
noncoding driver landscape of tumors (Elliott and Larsson,
2021; Rheinbay et al., 2020). For example, hotspot mutations
Figure 1. Future directions in cancer
initiation research
In the cancer initiation ﬁeld, key directions for
research include (1) The relationship between so-
matic evolution and tumorigenesis from mutational
landscape to selection and order of events (Clonal
expansion in healthy tissues), (2) Paired germline
and tumor speciﬁc studies to understand the
impact of germline variation on cancer initiation
(Germline variation), (3) Understanding the immune
surveillance of somatic clones and its relationship
with clone size, evolutionary trajectory and driver
landscape (Tumour immunity and the microenvi-
ronment), (4) The relationship between ageing,
senescence, somatic evolution and tumorigenesis
(Ageing and senescence), (5) Mapping non-coding
driver events across tumour types and quantifying
non-genomic methods of selection (Cancer driver
events beyond coding regions), and (6) Under-
standing the processes of mutagenic and non-
mutagenic environmental carcinogenesis and the
effect of chronic inﬂammation on cancer initiation
(Environmental carcinogenesis).
in the TERT promoter, which increases
telomerase expression and activity (Bar-
thel et al., 2017; Rheinbay et al., 2020;
Sabarinathan et al., 2017), affects 9%
of all tumors within the Pan Cancer An-
alyses of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) consortium (Campbell
et al., 2020), while other noncoding driver mutations were
found to be relatively infrequent across cancer types (Elliott
and Larsson, 2021). The future of noncoding driver analyses
will beneﬁt from technologies that can characterize the impact
of mutations in regulatory regions (Mansour et al., 2014; Liu
et al., 2020b) and the investigation of further cancer types.
The discovery of cancer-related events led to the concept of
precision oncology, where treatments could be targeted to spe-
ciﬁc genomic alterations. Targeted therapies, such as imatinib in
BCR-ABL mutant chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) (Druker et al.,
2001), vemurafenib in BRAF V600E mutant melanoma (Chapman
et al., 2011), geﬁtinib in NSCLC with activating EGFR mutations
(Lynch et al., 2004), trastuzumab in HER2+ breast cancer (Pic-
cart-Gebhart et al., 2005), and exploiting synthetic lethality in
BRCA mutated breast and ovarian cancers through poly (ADP-
ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibition (Fong et al., 2009) are
well-known examples that have driven improvements in cancer
outcomes. However, treatment strategies based on genotype-
matched targeted therapy have yielded disappointing outcomes
in recent studies, as typiﬁed by the National Lung Matrix Trial
(NLMT) (Middleton et al., 2020a), LUNG-MAP (Redman et al.,
2020), and NCI-MATCH (Salama et al., 2020) trials, in which
over 13,000 patients with NSCLC were screened for actionable
mutations in HER2, FGFR1/2, MET, PIK3CA, PTEN, AKT,
TSC1/2,
KRAS,
STK11,
NRAS,
BRAF,
CCND1-3,
CDK4,
CDKN2A, ATM, ATR, BRCA1/2, PALB2, and NF1/2. Collectively,
across 37 genotype-matched cohorts involving 875 participants,
the overall response rate was 7.5%, which is no different from
the standard-of-care second-line chemotherapy docetaxel in
NSCLC (Middleton et al., 2021).
It is clear that an actionable alteration in one tissue context
may not be actionable in another. An example of this is the
ll
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
459
Review
contrast between vemurafenib monotherapy in BRAF V600E
melanoma and colorectal cancer (CRC), where reported overall
response rates range from 48% (Chapman et al., 2011) to less
than 10% (Kopetz et al., 2015), respectively. Combining two or
more treatments to target multiple actionable alterations has
proven effective in certain cases. In metastatic BRAF V600E mel-
anoma, combination therapy with a BRAF and a MEK inhibitor
represents a standard-of-care treatment option (Keilholz et al.,
2020); however, balancing efﬁcacy with toxicity remains a barrier
to widespread adoption of this strategy. Furthermore, the tran-
scriptomic context of a tumor with an actionable alteration can
be a determining factor in the treatment response to targeted
therapy, as typiﬁed by the differential response to BRAF/MEK/
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) therapy between the
BRAF V600E mutant (BM) transcriptional subtypes BM1 and
BM2 in CRC (Middleton et al., 2020b). The relative paucity of
actionable mutations and the impact of chromosomal instability
on evolving cancer genomes have hindered progress in preci-
sion oncology.
Clonal expansions in healthy tissues
The process of cancer initiation begins with the healthy tissue.
The concept that healthy tissue undergoes clonal expansion
was substantiated through the observation of skewed chromo-
some X inactivation in the blood of healthy women (Busque
et al., 1996). This was subsequently identiﬁed as a consequence
of clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP), an
aging-related clonal expansion of hematopoietic stem cells
(Busque et al., 2012; Jaiswal et al., 2014).
The study of clonal evolution in healthy and pre-malignant solid
tissues (Kakiuchi and Ogawa, 2021; Li et al., 2021; Moore et al.,
2021) has utilized technologies such as sequencing of laser cap-
ture microdissected tissue (Ellis et al., 2021) and high-resolution
duplex sequencing that accurately captures somatic mutations
at low frequency (Abascal et al., 2021; Schmitt et al., 2012). Using
these techniques, the process of small clonal expansions has
been detailed across different tissues, including skin (Martincor-
ena et al., 2015), colon (Lee-Six et al., 2019), esophagus (Martin-
corenaet al.,2018;Yokoyama et al., 2019),bladder(Lawson etal.,
2020), endometrium (Moore et al., 2020), liver (Brunner et al.,
2019; Ng et al., 2021), pancreas (Li et al., 2021), and bronchus
(Yoshida et al.,2020), with recentpublications proﬁling several tis-
sue types from the same individual (Li et al., 2021; Moore et al.,
2021). Applying the same computational methods used to infer
cancer driver genes (Martincorena et al., 2017) has uncovered
genes, previously classiﬁed as cancer driver genes, under posi-
tive selection in non-cancerous tissue, including NOTCH1 (skin,
bronchus, and esophagus), TP53 (esophagus and bronchus),
and PIK3CA (endometrium and esophagus; Kakiuchi and Ogawa,
2021). Mutations found in RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data from
healthy individuals within the Genotype-Tissue Expression
(GTEx)consortiumalso revealed clonalexpansionsindifferenttis-
sues (Garcı´a-Nieto et al., 2019; Yizhak et al., 2019). Somewhat
different from somatic mutations, which have been virtually ubiq-
uitously described in all tissues, DNA copy number aberrations
were observed in less than 10% (37/389) of 389 samples across
29 different histologies (Moore et al., 2021). Interestingly, esoph-
ageal and cardiac tissues harbor more copy number alterations
than other organ sites (Li et al., 2021).
A key question is how can ostensibly clear cancer-related
driver somatic events exist in small populations of cells in histo-
logically normal tissue? The cancer somatic driver landscape dif-
fers from the driver landscape in normal tissue, which suggests
the presence of distinct selective pressures. One clear example
is NOTCH1, commonly mutated in normal esophageal epithe-
lium (66%) but less frequently in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (15%; Yokoyama et al., 2019). NFKBIZ mutations
are commonly found in clonal expansions from non-cancerous
epithelium of patients with ulcerative colitis compared with coli-
tis-related cancer. NFKBIZ mutations may confer a selective
advantage in a chronically inﬂamed environment; however, these
mutations may be negatively selected in cancer and restrict tu-
mor formation (Kakiuchi et al., 2020). It has been proposed that
ongoing clonal competition in normal epithelium can result in
eradication of malignant cells (Colom et al., 2021). Fewer to-
bacco-related mutations and longer telomeres are detected in
the healthy lung of ex-smokers compared with current smokers,
suggesting that less affected cells expand after withdrawal of the
mutagenic stimulus (Yoshida et al., 2020). In the intestinal crypts,
however, it has been shown that Apc-mutant cells can outcom-
pete wild-type clones through the secretion of WNT antagonists,
such as NOTUM, resulting in the formation of adenomas (Flana-
gan et al., 2021).
Unraveling mechanisms that drive the clonal expansion of
normal tissue toward early cancer initiation will inform cancer
interception strategies. Understanding why cells are at risk of
transformation following acquisition of a somatic driver event
will be a key step in this process. Malignant transformation
seems to be intimately linked to the microenvironment, cell of
origin, and the underlying epigenetic and transcriptional program
(Chang et al., 2016; Haigis et al., 2019; Jonsson et al., 2019). For
example, the ability of BRAF V600E to drive tumor initiation was
evident in the neural crest and melanoblast lineages but less so
in the melanocyte lineage in zebraﬁsh (Baggiolini et al., 2021).
Single-cell lineage tracing and transcriptomic analyses in mice
have shown the propensity for malignant transformation in cells
with a BRAF V600E mutation is affected by the spatial context of
the cell and the tissue of origin (Ko¨ hler et al., 2017; Moon et al.,
2017). The timing of the acquisition of mutations also inﬂuences
disease phenotype; for example, the order of TET2 and JAK2
mutations inﬂuence the type, onset, and treatment sensitivity
of myeloproliferative disorders (Ortmann et al., 2015).
Genomic technologies have revealed the pervasive nature of
mutations capable of driving tumorigenesis across tissues, and
future discoveries will enhance our understanding as to which
local and systemic factors trigger both malignant and non-malig-
nant clonal expansions across these genetic backgrounds.
Mutagenic and non-mutagenic causes of environmental
carcinogenesis
The association between cancer initiation and environmental
carcinogens has been long established experimentally (Auer-
bach and Robson, 1946); however, during the past decade,
the use of mutational signatures to describe both exogenous
and endogenous mutational processes has strengthened the
assertion of causal links between environmental exposures
and their mutational footprints (Alexandrov et al., 2013, 2020;
Kucab et al., 2019; Zou et al., 2018). Exogenous mutational
ll
460
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
Review
processes, including UV light (mostly causing C to T transitions,
C > T, signature 7; Tessman et al., 1964), smoking (C > A, signa-
ture 4; Alexandrov et al., 2016), alcohol consumption (T > C,
signature 16; Chang et al., 2017; Letouze´ et al., 2017), aristolo-
chic acid (T > A, signature 22; Hoang et al., 2013; Ng et al.,
2017), platinum-based drugs (C > A and C > T, signatures 31
and 35; Boot et al., 2018; Pich et al., 2019), and pks+ E. coli
(T > G, signature 88; Pleguezuelos-Manzano et al., 2020) sug-
gest that, in some cases, the link between cancer incidence
and environmental exposures is related to the generation of
somatic mutations. It is likely, for example, that KRAS G12C
mutations in NSCLC are generated through smoking-related
mutagenesis (Muin˜ os et al., 2021; Temko et al., 2018). It is also
possible that environmental factors exacerbate some endoge-
nous mutational processes, for example, increased APOBEC
mutagenesis (C > T and C > G mutations, signatures 2 and 13)
after irradiation (Saito et al., 2020).
Despite this link, many environmental exposures initiate tumor-
igenesis in ways that appear to be non-mutagenic. In Riva et al.
(2020), 17/20 known suspected carcinogens in mice increased
tumorigenesis but did not increase mutational burden or
generate a speciﬁc mutational process. Furthermore, the Muto-
graph project revealed no distinct mutational patterns in esoph-
ageal cancers that could explain the international geographical
disparities in cancer incidence (Moody et al., 2021). One plausible
cause of non-mutagenic carcinogenesis is epigenetic aberra-
tions, which might deregulate expression of cancer-related
genes (Black and McGranahan, 2021; Hanahan and Weinberg,
2011). Several metals, including lead and arsenic, can cause
oxidative damage that hampers the interaction between methyl-
transferases and the DNA, ultimately altering the methylation
landscape of the cell, which can lead to tumorigenesis (Baccarelli
and Bollati, 2009; Zhao et al., 1997). Smoking also seems to affect
the methylation landscape in lung cancers; however, this is not
observed in other tissues exposed to tobacco, such as pharyn-
geal or oral cancers (Alexandrov et al., 2016). Particulate matter
seems to have a moderate impact on methylation patterns in leu-
kocytes (Tarantini et al., 2009). It is also possible that different
environmental exposures might lead to alterations in selection
pressures that permit malignant clonal expansion, a phenome-
non described in acute myeloid leukemias after exposure to
chemotherapy (Pich et al., 2021; Wong et al., 2015).
Environmental exposures may also facilitate malignant trans-
formation through chronic inﬂammation. The incidence of liver,
esophageal, and pancreatic cancer increases with alcohol con-
sumption (Wang et al., 2010), and the link between mesotheli-
oma and asbestos exposure is well established (Qi et al.,
2013). The association between lung cancer and air pollution
may also be driven by inﬂammation (Lim et al., 2012; Raa-
schou-Nielsen et al., 2010, 2013). Understanding the non-muta-
genic mechanisms of environmental carcinogenesis will in the
future incorporate cell-intrinsic processes, such as epigenetic
alterations, and extrinsic processes that may directly affect the
tumor microenvironment, permitting clonal expansions and
transformation.
Immune surveillance, aging, and senescence
Tumor growth is constrained by an active immune system (Hana-
han and Weinberg, 2011). Consequently, cancer cells resilient to
immune surveillance gain a selective advantage in a process
known as immunoediting. This process is facilitated by tumor-
intrinsic immune escape events, including loss of HLA alleles,
and mediated by the tumor microenvironment (McGranahan et
al., 2017). It is unknown when immune surveillance affects ex-
panding clones in normal tissues. It does not appear that micro-
scopic clonal expansions brought about by somatic mutations in
normal tissue elicit a strong immune response (Li et al., 2021;
Moore et al., 2021). However, the detection of immune inﬁltrates
in pre-invasive lung adenocarcinoma (Chen et al., 2019) and
squamous cell carcinoma (Pennycuick et al., 2020), with coin-
ciding putative immune escape events, such as HLA loss
of heterozygosity and in squamous cell carcinoma HLA promoter
hypermethylation, implies that there is a point where an expand-
ing non-malignant clone triggers detection. The increased inci-
dence of malignancies, such as Kaposi sarcoma, lymphomas,
and cancers of the stomach, lung, liver, oropharynx, and cervix,
in patients with HIV suggests the requirement for ongoing im-
mune surveillance to prevent tumor initiation and progression,
in particular (but not limited to) cancers related to viral infections
(Grulich et al., 2007).
The incidence of cancer is intimately related to aging,
increasing from 25 cases per 100,000 in those less than 20 years
old to more than 1,000 per 100,000 in those over the age of 60.
Genomic instability, telomeric dysfunction, epigenetic alter-
ations, and cellular senescence are all damaging cellular pro-
cesses that increase with age (Lo´ pez-Otı´n et al., 2013). Cells
also accumulate mutations with aging, the most common pro-
cess being spontaneous 5-methylcytosine deamination, which
leads to C > T mutations at CpG sites (signature 1; Alexandrov
et al., 2015; Moore et al., 2021). Most driver mutations can be
attributed to this age-related mutational process (Muin˜ os et al.,
2021); however, this temporal coincidence occurs independent
of the number of driver mutations themselves (Rozhok and De-
Gregori, 2019).
Senescence, a process whereby proliferation is arrested in
response to cellular stresses, is implicated in the association be-
tween aging and cancer (Fane and Weeraratna, 2020). This phe-
nomenon involves a senescence-associated phenotype (SASP),
which includes secretion of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, growth
factors, and proteases that can affect neighboring cells (Coppe´
et al., 2010; Rodier et al., 2009). This sustained and systemic
low-grade chronic inﬂammation is one of the hallmarks of aging
and is termed ‘‘inﬂammaging’’ (Lo´ pez-Otı´n et al., 2013). The
number of senescent cells increases exponentially with aging
(Dimri et al., 1995; Herbig et al., 2006), and it has been shown
that depletion of senescent cells from middle-aged mice delayed
cancer progression (Baker et al., 2016). The SASP has been
shown to suppress CD8+ T cell activity through the recruitment
of myeloid-derived suppressor cells and regulatory T (Treg) cells
in mouse models, diminishing immune surveillance and thus
promoting
the
emergence
of
neoplastic
clones
(Ruhland
et al., 2016).
Age also has a detrimental effect on the immune system (Fane
and Weeraratna, 2020). In vivo experiments have shown that the
induction of early-onset senescence in hematopoietic cells
causes impaired innate and adaptive immune function, in partic-
ular, of natural killer and follicular helper T cells (Yousefzadeh
et al., 2021). Senolytic therapy, the process of selectively
ll
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
461
Review
inducing apoptosis in senescent cells, is an intriguing concept as
adjuvant tumor therapy (Short et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022).
The inﬂuence of germline variation in cancer initiation
Sequencing the germline of patients with suspicion of hereditary
syndromes linked to an increased cancer incidence has revealed
recurrently affected genes, including BRCA1 and BRCA2 in
hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) syndrome and
TP53 in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. In a recent study, the proﬁle of
17,152 prospectively sequenced patients across 55 tumor types
using the MSK-IMPACT panel (which targets 341 cancer-related
genes) revealed that 7.8% patients harbored pathogenic germ-
line variants, with BRCA1 and BRCA2 affecting more than 2% of
the entire cohort (Srinivasan et al., 2021). However, the role of the
majority of these germline variants is unclear and the pathoge-
nicity of some may be conditioned by the cell of origin (Jonsson
et al., 2019; Srinivasan et al., 2021). These highly penetrant muta-
tions are rare in the general population, although it is expected
that the burden of low-penetrance germline variants that increase
cancer risk is much higher (Sud et al., 2017). Mosaic mutations
acquired in early embryogenesis affecting cancer-related genes,
including TP53 and RB1, were also found to impact cancer devel-
opment in 0.1% of patients (Pareja et al., 2021).
The interaction between the cancer cell and the micro-
environment can also be modulated by germline variation.
Speciﬁc germline variants, including those affecting STING1,
TMEM108, IFIH1, and major histocompatibility complex class I
(MHC class I) and MHC class II genes, can have an impact on an-
tigen presentation, immune inﬁltration, and immunotherapy re-
sponses (Chowell et al., 2019; Marty et al., 2017; Marty Pyke
et al., 2018; Naranbhai et al., 2022; Pagadala et al., 2021; Saya-
man et al., 2021; Shahamatdar et al., 2020).
Genome-wide association studies have provided more than
420 cancer associations at 262 genomic loci (Sud et al., 2017),
with only 5% located in the coding region. A few of these variants
have been linked to susceptibility to systemic and environmental
exposures, including one intronic SNP at the cholinergic nico-
tinic receptor subunit alpha 3–5 (CHRNA3–CHRNA5) gene,
which is associated with lung cancer through nicotine addiction,
increased smoking, and difﬁculties in quitting (Amos et al., 2008;
Freathy et al., 2009; Sud et al., 2017; Thorgeirsson et al., 2008).
Genomic technologies have allowed the proﬁling of germline
variation of hundreds of thousands individuals (Bycroft et al.,
2018; Taliun et al., 2021). Larger germline analyses in cancer pa-
tients together with detailed tumor characterization, mosaicism,
clinical histories, and environmental exposures will reveal new
variants linked to cancer susceptibility and in which context
they act. In turn, this will provide new tools for cancer prevention
and patient stratiﬁcation and perhaps will bring the implementa-
tion of polygenic risk scores into cancer-screening programs
(Adeyemo et al., 2021; Khera et al., 2018).
CANCER PREVENTION AND EARLY DETECTION
Cancer prevention is key to reducing cancer risk, and early
detection is key to improving cancer outcomes. Here, we
discuss mitigation of risk through primary prevention, touching
on chemoprevention and cancer vaccines, interception, and
screening approaches, including the use of circulating tumor
DNA (ctDNA) in early detection. We outline some of the key areas
for translational research in Figure 2.
The aim of primary prevention is to reduce cancer incidence.
This can be achieved through the reduction of causative expo-
sures, such as through human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination
(Falcaro et al., 2021), or through prophylactic intervention
following identiﬁcation of high risk individuals, for example,
risk-reducing mastectomy for carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 muta-
tions (Collins, 1996). For other cancer-predisposition syndromes,
the focus of management remains on early detection. High-
throughput sequencing is facilitating broader access to germline
testing in the clinic (Richards et al., 2015), resulting in vast
amounts of information concerning genetic variants in the popu-
lation, leading to a reﬁnement of prevention and targeted treat-
ment strategies. However, many variants do not have predictable
phenotypic consequences and are labeled variants of uncertain
signiﬁcance (VUS). Approaches such as saturated genome edit-
ing (Findlay et al., 2014, 2018) provide functional evidence of the
consequences of rare germline mutations, which can improve the
predictive accuracy of the information provided to patients.
Chemoprevention
Chemoprevention, the broad use of medication to prevent dis-
ease, is a common strategy used outside of the cancer ﬁeld,
for example, the administration of antihypertensives and reduc-
tion in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol synthesis used
to reduce the incidence of cardiovascular disease. This has
also been utilized in the cancer ﬁeld. The International Breast
Cancer Intervention Study (IBIS) I trial found that tamoxifen
reduced breast cancer incidence in women deemed to be at
high risk of cancer development by a third (Cuzick et al., 2002),
even after treatment cessation (Cuzick et al., 2015). The Mam-
mary Prevention 3 (MAP.3) (Goss et al., 2011) and IBISII (Cuzick
et al., 2014, 2020) clinical trials have reported a relative risk
reduction in breast cancer incidence of 65% and 49% after treat-
ment with exemestane and anastrozole, respectively. However,
adverse effects associated with exposure to tamoxifen (endo-
metrial cancers and venous thromboembolism) and aromatase
inhibitors (bone fractures) have restricted uptake of chemopre-
vention drugs outside clinical trials (Smith et al., 2016).
There
is
evidence
that
chemoprevention
with
5-alpha-
reductase inhibitors may reduce the incidence of prostate
cancer (Andriole et al., 2010; Thompson et al., 2003), and
cyclo-oxygenase (COX) 1 and 2 inhibitors, such as aspirin, lower
the risk of distant metastasis and increase survival in CRC (Liao
et al., 2012; Rothwell et al., 2012). Furthermore, from a pooled
analysis of two cohort studies involving 94,540 patients, aspirin
use initiated before 70 years of age was found to reduce the
incidence of CRC (Guo et al., 2021), likely through the interaction
between prostaglandin metabolism, WNT signaling pathway
regulation, and chronic inﬂammation (Drew et al., 2016). Break-
throughs in chemoprevention will stem from a deeper under-
standing of clonal competition in normal epithelium and the
impact of the tissue microenvironment and environmental expo-
sures upon this process, including cancer initiation.
Vaccines for prevention
Educating the immune system to eliminate pre-malignant lesions
has been successful in cancers driven by viral infection.
ll
462
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
Review
Vaccines based on viral antigens from the HPV not only reduced
the incidence of cervical cancer (Falcaro et al., 2021; Kenter
et al., 2009) but have also shown potential to control pre-malig-
nant clonal expansions (Trimble et al., 2015). The success of
hepatitis B vaccination in lowering the incidence of hepatocellu-
lar carcinoma is well documented (Chen, 2009).
Beyond vaccines based on viral antigens, tumor-speciﬁc neo-
antigens are the targets of effective tumor-immune responses
(Blass and Ott, 2021). Cancer neoantigens encoding peptides
with a strong MHC class I binding afﬁnity are ideal candidates
for vaccine targets, can be predicted computationally, and require
histocompatibility leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I typing from indi-
vidual patients. There are a number of ongoing trials of personal-
ized neoantigen vaccines in patients with established solid tumors
(NCT03633110, NCT03289962, and NCT03313778); however,
despite excellent T cell responses, objective response rates
remain modest. Broadening the therapeutic potential of cancer
neoantigen vaccines to the prevention setting (Crews et al.,
2021) to target clonal, cancer-initiating mutations in high-risk pop-
ulations, such as peptide vaccines to KRAS G12C in heavy
smokers, may reap future beneﬁts.
Interception
Interception lies at the interface of cancer prevention and early
detection and includes the process of identifying pre-malignant
cells or tissue with the goal of preventing tumor formation as
part of a cancer prevention strategy. Through genomic proﬁling
of pre-malignant tissue, important insights into early carcinogen-
esis have been revealed. One example is Barrett’s esophagus
(BE), a gastroesophageal-reﬂux-related precursor lesion to
esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) characterized by metaplasia
of the epithelium (Spechler, 2013). Patients will have a risk of pro-
gressing from low-grade dysplasia to EAC of 0.3% per year
(Hvid-Jensen et al., 2011). There have been developments in
minimally invasive strategies to detect high-risk individuals in
the general population. This is exempliﬁed by the Cytosponge-
trefoil factor 3 (TTF3), a test based on a non-endoscopic device
to detect dysplasia. The BEST3 clinical trial was conducted
among 109 general practices in England in patients over 50 years
old with a minimum 6-month history of gastroesophageal reﬂux.
After 12 months of follow-up, the rate of BE detection among
those randomized to the Cytosponge-TFF3 was 10-fold that of
the standard of care whereby patients only received an endos-
copy if requested by their general practitioner (Fitzgerald
et al., 2020).
Lung squamous cell carcinoma is often preceded by pre-ma-
lignant lesions in the bronchial airways, especially in the context
of smoking (Auerbach et al., 1961). Similarly, adenomatous hy-
perplasia in the lung can progress to invasive adenocarcinoma
(Weichert and Warth, 2014). Molecular characterization has re-
vealed differences between pre-malignant regions that sponta-
neously regress and those that progress to invasive disease
over time. Progressive lesions harbored evidence of greater
genomic instability and immune escape events, including B2M
mutations and HLA loss of heterozygosity, compared with
regressive lesions. Interestingly, regressive lesions had epige-
netic and transcriptomic proﬁles closer to normal bronchial
epithelium with increased CD8+ T cell inﬁltration deﬁned by
Figure 2. Key areas for translation in cancer prevention and early detection
In cancer prevention and early detection, key areas include (1) Risk stratiﬁcation of individuals who harbor germline variants that increase susceptibility to cancer
(Germline risk), (2) Reduction of environmental exposures, including mitigating the effects of climate change (Environmental exposures), (3) Identiﬁcation of
tumor-speciﬁc neoantigens or common oncogenic mutations as vaccine targets (Vaccination), (4) The use of preventative medication in high-risk individuals to
reduce cancer incidence (Chemoprevention), (5) Methods to better characterize and detect pre-malignant tissue to determine risk of malignancy and further
development of intervention strategies (Interception), (6) Adoption of enhanced screening protocols for high-risk individuals (National screening), and (7) The use
of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) to detect early-stage malignancies and the development of methods to detect low-burden disease (ctDNA screening).
ll
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
463
Review
RNA-seq and histopathology (Pennycuick et al., 2020; Teixeira
et al., 2019).
There has been progress in the understanding of the biology
of pre-malignant lesions and development of methods to
detect them. In cases such as cervical adenocarcinoma in
situ (AIS) and BE, there are also established and promising
interception strategies, such as cold knife conization or loop
electrosurgical excision for cervical AIS (Teoh et al., 2020)
and endoscopic submucosal resection for BE (Pech et al.,
2014). Initiatives such as the Precancer Genome Atlas (funded
by the US National Cancer Institute; Srivastava et al., 2018)
aim to proﬁle pre-malignant samples across different organs
with both imaging and genomic technologies. As our under-
standing of clonal expansions in pre-malignant and normal tis-
sue develops, strategies to identify early high-risk lesion
development and management will improve. Sampling healthy
tissue from most organs is often invasive; therefore, there is an
unmet need to establish programs that utilize the sampling of
normal tissue following surgery or routine procedures, such as
endoscopies.
Early detection
The aim of early detection is to reduce the proportion of patients
diagnosed with cancer at a late stage to maximize the probability
of cure (Hawkes, 2019). For many cancers, such as lung, breast,
and CRC, this is a crucial aspect of cancer control. In the UK, for
CRC, the 1-year net survival of patients diagnosed at stage 1 was
97.7% compared with 43.9% at stage 4 between 2013 and 2017.
For lung cancer, 1-year net survival at stage 1 was 87.7%, and at
stage 4, it was 19.3%. For breast cancer, this was 100% at stage
1 and 66% at stage 4 in the same time period (Ofﬁce for National
Statistics, 2019). There is strong evidence that screening pro-
grams reduce cancer mortality for patients diagnosed with these
cancer types. A systematic review of four clinical trials (Kronborg
et al., 2004; Lindholm et al., 2008; Mandel et al., 2000; Schole-
ﬁeld et al., 2002) estimated that the risk reduction of CRC mortal-
ity was 15% in studies that screened twice yearly (Hewitson
et al., 2007). The Dutch-Belgian Lung Cancer Screening Trial
(NELSON) of 13,195 male participants reported a rate ratio for
death from lung cancer of 0.78 comparing computed tomogra-
phy (CT) screening at baseline and after 1 year, 3 years, and
5.5 years with no screening (de Koning et al., 2020). The US
National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) also reported a relative
reduction in lung cancer mortality of 20% in a trial of 54,454 par-
ticipants (Team, 2011). For breast cancer, results of a meta-anal-
ysis of 11 randomized control trials estimated that the relative
risk reduction of breast cancer mortality was 20% (Independent
UK Panel on Breast Cancer Screening, 2012), with recent evi-
dence from the UK age trial concluding that reducing the
screening age of women by 10 years (to 40 years old) yields
further reduction in breast cancer mortality with minimal impact
on overdiagnosis (Duffy et al., 2020).
The beneﬁt of early detection is attenuated by the low positive
predictive value of the test, investigation and treatment of false-
positive results, and over-treatment of indolent cancers. This has
been keenly debated in the breast cancer ﬁeld (Paci et al., 2014),
and targeted screening of high-risk individuals or personalized
screening strategies based on individual risk will continue to be
developed (Louro et al., 2021).
The use of high-throughput genomic assays to facilitate early
detection is beginning to offer complementary approaches to
cancer screening, primarily using ctDNA. ctDNA is the tumor-
speciﬁc fraction of cell-free DNA (cfDNA), extracellular DNA
that is released into the plasma. ctDNA has great potential as a
minimally invasive tumor biomarker, and there are numerous
studies demonstrating that the amount of ctDNA detected in
the plasma correlates with tumor burden, metabolism, and rate
of proliferation (Abbosh et al., 2017; Bredno et al., 2021; McEvoy
et al., 2018). Examples in the ﬁeld include the CancerSEEK and
Galleri assays. The CancerSEEK assay combines ctDNA detec-
tion of tumor-speciﬁc mutations with protein biomarkers. In
2018, Cohen et al. (2018) used CancerSEEK to study 1,005 pa-
tients with eight tumor types of stages I–III, with the assay de-
tecting mutations in 1,933 distinct genomic positions and
eight blood-based biomarkers: cancer antigen 125 (CA-125),
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-
9), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), myeloperoxidase (MPO),
osteopontin (OPN), prolactin (PRL), and tissue inhibitor of metal-
loproteinases 1 (TIMP-1). The CancerSEEK assay was the basis
of the DETECT-A feasibility study, a prospective study of 10,006
women, which combined the blood tests with a diagnostic posi-
tron emission tomography (PET)-CT (where positive), to conﬁrm
and localize the site of disease (Lennon et al., 2020). Of 96 inci-
dent cancers, 26 were picked up through blood testing, from
which 15 underwent PET-CT and nine had surgery with curative
intent. Promisingly, the combined testing approach improved
the sensitivity of the blood test alone from 98.9% to 99.6%
and the positive predictive value from 19.4% to 28.3%. The
risk-beneﬁt and the clinical utility (i.e., does the test reduce can-
cer mortality) of this type of approach is to be determined.
Also in 2018, through the Circulating Cell-free Genome Atlas
(CCGA) study (Liu et al., 2018; Oxnard et al., 2018), three
ctDNA-based sequencing assays were compared that repre-
sented differing approaches to detection: through targeted panel
sequencing of single nucleotide variants and indels (targeted
panel), whole-genome sequencing for copy number variation
(WGS-CNV), and whole-genome bisulﬁte sequencing (WGBS)
for DNA methylation patterns with the aim of developing a
multi-cancer early detection (MCED) test. It was shown that
ctDNA detection through methylation patterns provided the
highest sensitivity across multiple-stage cancer types; among
63 stage I–IIIA patients with NSCLC, the sensitivity was 48%,
54%, and 56% for the targeted panel, WGS-CNV, and WGBS,
respectively.
Following this, a targeted MCED approach of >100,000 infor-
mative methylation regions was then evaluated among 6,689
participants (including 2,482 cancer patients in >50 cancer
types). In a pre-speciﬁed set of 12 cancer types, sensitivity
was 39% for stage I, 69% for stage II, 83% for stage III, and
92% for stage IV, at a speciﬁcity of >99% (Liu et al., 2020a).
Through a machine-learning classiﬁer, determination of tissue
of origin of the ctDNA signal was also >90% (Liu et al., 2020a).
This multi-cancer early detection approach formed the basis of
the Galleri assay, developed by GRAIL, from which the prospec-
tive NHS-Galleri trial has been established in the UK. The trial is
randomizing 140,000 participants between 50 and 77 years to
the Galleri assay or observation to assess whether the assay
can be used to shift cancer diagnoses to early disease stages.
ll
464
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
Review
Beyond methylation proﬁling, fragmentomics and topological
analyses are alternative approaches to ctDNA analysis (Lo et al.,
2021). Fragmentomics analyzes the product of differential enzy-
matic fragmentation in tumor and non-tumor cfDNA, in the form
ofplasmaDNA endmotifs(Jiangetal.,2020).Topologicalanalysis
includes the identiﬁcation of circular DNA structures, such as
extrachromosomal circular DNA (eccDNA) (Zhu et al., 2017).
The promise of ctDNA assays in early detection may be further
enhanced by our understanding of ctDNA kinetics and the rela-
tionship of ctDNA fraction that may complement conventional
pathological tumour staging. This understanding may identify
patients with tumors that are more likely to recur following surgi-
cal intervention and in whom neoadjuvant and adjuvant treat-
ment can be tailored accordingly.
ADJUVANT THERAPY AND MINIMAL RESIDUAL
DISEASE MONITORING
Minimal residual disease (MRD) monitoring refers to the process
of detecting and quantifying minute populations of cancer cells
that may persist post treatment. The application of next-genera-
tion sequencing approaches to MRD monitoring has led several
translational studies to evaluate clinical utility in the adjuvant
therapeutic setting, most notably through ctDNA detection. In
this setting, patients at high risk of recurrence are identiﬁed
through post-surgical MRD detection. This approach may
improve the stratiﬁcation of patients who may beneﬁt from adju-
vant therapy and potentially avoid unnecessary treatments in
those at low risk of disease recurrence. Moreover, the increasing
sensitivity of MRD testing has facilitated the detection of recur-
rence months before imaging or biopsy-conﬁrmed relapse.
Using a phylogenetic approach to MRD monitoring through the
detection of clonal and subclonal SNVs using a multiplex PCR
panel, we were able to detect the emergence of metastatic sub-
clones with a median lead time of 70 days prior to imaging recur-
rence (Abbosh et al.,2017).The ‘‘personalized’’ approach of utiliz-
ing tumor-speciﬁc mutations, developed through Tracking
Cancer Evolution through Therapy (TRACERx) collaborative
work, is used for the Signatera assay, which has been employed
in a number of trials to determine how serial ctDNA monitoring
canbe used as a predictive biomarker in patients receiving check-
point inhibition (CPI). The MERMAID-1 trial will assess the efﬁcacy
of durvalumab combination with chemotherapy in resected stage
II–IIINSCLC inthose who areMRDpositive (NCT04385368). In the
adjuvant setting, among 94 patients diagnosed with multiple tu-
mor types as part of the INSPIRE trial, baseline ctDNA concentra-
tion correlated with clinical response, disease-free survival, and
overall survival in patients treated with pembrolizumab (Bratman
et al., 2020; Powles et al., 2021). Furthermore, as a preplanned
retrospective analysis of the IMvigor010 trial, Powles and col-
leagues demonstrated that patients with detectable ctDNA had
improved disease-freesurvival andoverall survival fromatezolizu-
mab in a trial of 581 patients who had undergone surgery for oper-
able urothelial carcinoma (Powles et al., 2021).
Tracking tumor mutations in the context of low tumor burden
and at low allele frequencies presents a challenge. Zviran et al.
(2020) adopted an alternative approach (MRDetect) to targeted
deep sequencing through whole-genome sequencing of cfDNA.
MRDetect utilizes the cumulative signal of thousands of tumor
mutations as priors to enhance the detection threshold of variants
at both low allele frequencies and ctDNA fraction (Zviran et al.,
2020). By utilizing phased variants derived from whole-genome-
sequenced tumor samples (PhasED-seq), Kurtz et al. (2021)
were able to improve the sensitivity of ctDNA detection in diffuse
large B cell lymphoma, leveraging the fact that detection of two or
more mutations that occur in cis reduces the background error.
Beyond early detection and MRD monitoring, the utility of
ctDNA in selecting patients for mutation-directed therapy was
assessed in the plasmaMATCH trial, a multicenter phase 2a plat-
form trial of 1,051 patients with advanced breast cancer (Turner
et al., 2020). Patients with a targetable mutation in PIK3CA,
ESR1, HER2, and AKT1, conﬁrmed through digital droplet PCR
and the Guardant 360 targeted sequencing panel, were subse-
quently offered entry into one of four treatment arms. Agreement
for gene-level mutational status between the two assays was
96%–99%, with sensitivity of ctDNA digital droplet PCR and tar-
geted panel sequencing compared with contemporaneous tu-
mor biopsies at 98% (95% conﬁdence interval [CI] 87–100) and
100% (92–100), respectively. This provides a strong argument
for the clinical utility of ctDNA in identifying targetable mutations
in the advanced-stage disease setting (Turner et al., 2020).
ctDNA monitoring has highly promising potential in the neoad-
juvant setting, and may be employed across multiple tumor
types in the future. We expect progress in the adjuvant setting
to be accelerated using MRD biomarkers to switch therapies in
the absence of disease on imaging with the potential to set up
multi-arm trial adjuvant MRD programs where therapy could
be switched if ctDNA fractions rise on treatment. MRD assays,
by identifying patients who are at greatest need of adjuvant ther-
apy intervention, also offer signiﬁcant potential to reduce the
size, cost, and time taken to conduct and report adjuvant trials.
DRUG RESISTANCE
Tackling drug resistance is perhaps the biggest challenge to
achieving cancer cures in the advanced-disease setting. The na-
ture of drug resistance is multifaceted, with several interdepen-
dent key biological determinants that variably affect resistance
to chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy. These
facets can be broadly divided into intratumor heterogeneity,
adaptive responses to targeted therapeutic pressures, cancer
immunogenicity and the impact of the tumor microenvironment,
and physical constraints to intratumoral delivery of drug (Vasan
et al., 2019). These facets are further complicated by the current
panoply of undruggable targets, typiﬁed by transcription factors
and tumor-suppressor proteins. Here, we explore contributions
to four of those key determinants (Figure 3) and address the
broad areas for future research.
Intratumor heterogeneity
As cancers evolve, somatic mutations accumulate through
temporally and spatially distinct mutational processes. This cre-
ates geneticdiversity,anda subset of these mutations may confer
a ﬁtness advantage which drives clonal expansions of cancer
cells. These clonal expansions contribute to the genetically
distinct subclonal populations of cancer cells that underlie the in-
tratumor heterogeneity (ITH) observed across cancer types
through bulk multi-region sequencing and single-cell sequencing
ll
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
465
Review
approaches (Gerlinger et al., 2012; Marusyk et al., 2020; McGra-
nahan et al., 2017). ITH is known to contribute to poor outcomes
and drug resistance (Greaves, 2015) and provides genetic and
non-genetic diversity upon which clonal selection may act (Black
and McGranahan, 2021; Turati et al., 2021).
ITH at the single-nucleotide scale is driven by the mutational
processes active in the tissue, which includes age-related spon-
taneous deamination and APOBEC cytidine deamination, which
often occurs later in tumor evolution (Petljak et al., 2019; de Bruin
et al., 2014; Jamal-Hanjani et al., 2017). Structural variants (SVs)
and somatic copy-number alterations (SCNAs) are thought to
occur as a consequence of chromosomal instability (CIN): the
occurrence and tolerance of chromosome segregation errors
during cell division (Bakhoum and Cantley, 2018; Sansregret
et al., 2018), resulting in aneuploidy where the karyotype of the
cell is not a multiple of the haploid component. Large-scale
macro-evolutionary events, typiﬁed by whole-genome doubling
(WGD), have an extensive impact on the genome, and WGD is
associated with both increased SCNA heterogeneity (Dewhurst
et al., 2014; Watkins et al., 2020) and poor prognosis across can-
cer types (Bielski et al., 2018).
The mutational landscape has been shown to change after
treatment with both chemotherapeutics (Ding et al., 2012; John-
son et al., 2014; Murugaesu et al., 2015; Schuh et al., 2012) and
targeted therapies (Bettegowda et al., 2014; Diaz et al., 2012; Mis-
ale et al., 2014; Shah et al., 2012; Shi et al., 2014), often reﬂecting
selection of pre-existing resistant clones. However, genotoxic
agents,suchasplatinum-basedchemotherapeutics,topoisomer-
aseinhibitors,and radiotherapy, possessthepotentialtogenerate
DNA damage (Pich et al., 2019; Pilger et al., 2021) and may cause
genomic instability and somatic mutations (Boot et al., 2018; Pich
et al., 2019; Pilger et al., 2021), generating further ITH.
Identifying vulnerabilities particular to chromosomally unsta-
ble and WGD cells holds promise through approaches such as
KIF18A inhibition. KIF18A, a microtubule-associated kinesin,
was identiﬁed as important in WGD cells through mitotic kinesin
knockdown assays comparing chromosomally stable and unsta-
ble cell lines (Marquis et al., 2021), essentiality data from cancer
cell lines (Quinton et al., 2021), genomics data from Cancer Cell
Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) (Ghandi et al., 2019), and genetic
screening analysis (Cohen-Sharir et al., 2021).
ITH can also be supplemented through extrachromosomal
DNA (ecDNA). These are circular genomic SVs that often harbor
oncogenes but do not contain centromeres and so are subject to
random segregation during metaphase: contributing to extreme
SCNA ampliﬁcation, cell-to-cell copy number variation, high
oncogene expression, and genomic remodeling (Bailey et al.,
2020; Koche et al., 2020; Verhaak et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019).
ecDNA has been shown to drive targeted therapy resistance in
EGFRvIII mutant (deletion from exon 2–7) glioblastoma through
chromosomal reintegration (Nathanson et al., 2014) and metho-
trexate resistance through ampliﬁcation of dihydrofolate reduc-
tase encoded in ecDNA (Shoshani et al., 2021). Indeed, the
failure of targeted therapeutics to deliver meaningful impact in
glioblastomas, targeting oncogenic drivers such as EGFRvIII,
may be explained by the high prevalence of ecDNA in this
disease (Turner et al., 2017). Accumulation of ecDNA within
localized hubs has also been shown to result in oncogene over-
expression through enhancer-gene interactions (Hung et al.,
2021). ecDNA offers a target for therapeutic intervention by
attenuating extreme oncogene ampliﬁcation, expression, and
tumor heterogeneity. As a promising avenue, ecDNA hubs
have been shown to be disrupted through BET protein inhibition
(Hung et al., 2021).
Enhancing immune recognition of aneuploid cells may be a
cancer cell extrinsic approach to exploiting CIN. One mechanism
thought to be involved in this surveillance system in vivo is the
cGAS-STING pathway, whose activation by cytosolic DNA
from micronuclei rupture links CIN to metastasis (Bakhoum
et al., 2018). Targeting this and other mechanisms of escape
Figure 3. Selected key areas in the drug resistance ﬁeld
Genetic and non-genetic intratumor heterogeneity (ITH) is the variation from which Darwinian evolution and clonal selection of drug-resistant phenotypes may
occur. Understanding drivers of ITH, targeting molecular vulnerabilities, and enhancing immune responses to chromosomally unstable tumor cells offer routes to
forestall drug resistance (Intratumor heterogeneity). Stimulating tumor immune responses through checkpoint inhibition (CPI) and adoptive T cell therapies
(including CAR-T cells) have delivered success in attenuating tumor progression. Mechanisms of CPI and CAR-T resistance have been well characterized, from
which strategies to remodel the tumor microenvironment, prevent antigenic loss, and optimize T cell function will continue to develop (Immunogenicity and tumor
microenvironment). The success of targeting clonal driver alterations, such as KRAS G12C, may herald the development of further therapies toward targets
previously considered ‘‘undruggable’’ (Undruggable targets). Tumors can adapt rapidly to targeted therapeutic pressure through non-genetic feedback, including
pathway switching and epigenetic modulation, or acquire resistance through mechanisms such as oncogene ampliﬁcation, splice variants, or driver mutations.
Collateral sensitivity is a process where acquired resistance to a speciﬁc therapy results in increased therapeutic vulnerability to a different therapy, due to
resistance pathways that often converge on conserved downstream signalling pathways. Drug-tolerant persister cells enter a reversible epigenetic-driven
phenotype that arrests or proliferates slowly under therapeutic pressure. Acquiring resistance mechanisms may come at a ﬁtness cost if they affect important
cellular functions. This could be exploited when therapeutic pressure is removed, leading to emergence of drug-sensitive clones that outcompete drug-resistant
clones (Adaptation to targeted therapeutic pressure). Understanding the interplay between these mechanisms will lead to further approaches to tackling targeted
therapy resistance.
ll
466
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
Review
from immune recognition of aneuploidy could offer new routes to
forestall therapy resistance.
Undruggable targets and adaptation to targeted
therapeutic pressure
One of the major challenges over the last 2 decades has been the
targeting of clonal driver alterations, such as p53 and KRAS,
traditionally considered undruggable (Cox et al., 2014). In
2013, Ostrem et al. (2013) reported on the development of small
molecules that could irreversibly bind to KRAS G12C, providing
conﬁrmation that oncogenic mutations in KRAS could be specif-
ically targeted. On May 28th, 2021, the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved the KRAS G12C inhibitor sotora-
sib for use in adult patients with NSCLC. In the phase II
CodeBreaK100 trial of 126 patients with advanced KRAS
G12C mutant NSCLC previously treated with standard therapy,
sotorasib led to an objective response in 37.1%, with a median
duration of response of 11.1 months (Skoulidis et al., 2021); how-
ever, among 62 patients with CRC, the overall response rate was
9.7%, with median progression-free survival of 4.0 months (Fa-
kih et al., 2022). This stark difference may be a consequence
of the tissue of origin and microenvironmental context of the mu-
tation and is a contributing factor to limitations of the genotype-
matched targeted treatment approach (Middleton et al., 2021).
Tumors may display a rapid adaptive response or slower,
acquired resistance to therapeutic pressures. An adaptive
response usually occurs as a consequence of negative feedback
and pathway redundancy in receptor tyrosine kinase signaling
that results in parallel pathway activation or upstream reactiva-
tion of the targeted pathway. Acquired resistance mechanisms
are achieved in several ways, including gatekeeper mutations,
oncogene ampliﬁcation, splice variants, or driver mutations
that affect ATP-competitive tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI)-bind-
ing sites (Vasan et al., 2019). In many cases, acquired resistance
can be heterogeneous; for example, in a longitudinal study of 59
patients with relapsed and/or refractory FLT3 mutant acute
myeloid
leukemia
(AML),
multiple
activating
mutations
in
the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-signaling
pathway were most frequently observed, with polyclonal and
diverse patterns of selection (McMahon et al., 2019).
Through comprehensive mapping of key resistance pathways,
some interesting observations have been made regarding the
complexity of this adaptive process, primarily that, despite the
diverse and complex pathways of resistance found in tumor
cells, these pathways often converge toward common down-
stream signaling pathways that are conserved in residual and
resistant tumor cells. It may therefore be possible to utilize a
combination therapy strategy that exploits this collateral sensi-
tivity while mitigating systemic toxicity (Lin et al., 2020; Singleton
et al., 2017; Wood, 2015).
As a response to therapeutic pressure, tumor cells can enter a
drug-tolerant persister (DTP) state, a reversible epigenetic-driven
phenotype switch whereby a subclonal population arrests or cy-
cles slowly in the presence of a drug and a source of non-genetic
heterogeneity (Vallette et al., 2019). Recently, it has been shown
that a rare subpopulation of persister cells can proliferate under
treatment. By developing a system to simultaneously track indi-
vidual cell clonal origin, proliferative, and transcriptional states,
Oren et al. (2021) showed that persister cells exhibited a higher
expression of glutathione metabolism and an NRF2 signature.
NRF2 is an oxidative-stress-induced transcription factor, and it
is possible that the escape from senescence is linked to the ability
of the cell to mitigate oxidative stress. Furthermore, the authors
also demonstrated that cycling persister cells are dependent on
a metabolic shift to fatty acid oxidation, highlighting a potential
treatment strategy to target this metabolic constraint (Oren
et al., 2021). Through combining CRC-patient-derived xenograft
models with high-complexity lentiviral barcoding, RNA-seq,
whole-exome sequencing, and mathematical modeling, Rehman
et al. (2021) demonstrated that tumors that entered a DTP state
retained clonal complexity following withdrawal of treatment.
Furthermore, the authors demonstrated that a DTP state is
phenotypically and transcriptionally similar to diapause, a period
of developmental dormancy utilized by insects and mammalian
embryos through adverse environmental conditions (Dhimolea
et al., 2021; Rehman et al., 2021).
Mitigating acquired resistance may be enabled by taking
advantage of the potential ﬁtness cost following the evolution
of targeted therapy resistance. It has been observed that mutant
RAS clones that are resistant to anti-EGFR monoclonal anti-
bodies diminish on withdrawal of treatment, leading to re-emer-
gence of drug-sensitive clones. This phenomenon is being
exploited in the CHRONOS trial, from which patients with meta-
static CRC treated with anti-EGFR therapy are re-challenged
following monitoring of RAS, BRAF, and EGFR mutational status
through ctDNA (Sartore-Bianchi et al., 2021).
Immunogenicity and tumor microenvironment
The tumor microenvironment is constituted of immune cells,
stroma, and vasculature and is a determinant of drug resistance
in many cancer types. This is well demonstrated in the context
of checkpoint inhibitors (CPIs), drugs that stimulate tumor im-
mune responses through reactivation of tumor-antigen-speciﬁc
T cells. In a meta-analysis of CPI response that utilized whole-
exome sequencing and RNA-seq data, comprising studies
from seven tumor types, including over 1,000 CPI-treated pa-
tients, clonal tumor mutational burden (TMB) and CXCL9 expres-
sion were the strongest predictors of response (Litchﬁeld et al.,
2021). In this study, CCND1 ampliﬁcation was also associated
with resistance. There are many other tumor-intrinsic mecha-
nisms of CPI resistance described, such as JAK1/JAK2 muta-
tions that attenuate the expression of interferon-stimulated
genes (Shin et al., 2017; Zaretsky et al., 2016) and activating mu-
tations of RTK genes (point mutations and ampliﬁcations in
EGFR and ERBB2 and ampliﬁcations in MET, FGFR1, and
IGF1R), which are implicated in the regulation of immune re-
sponses through the MAPK and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)-AKT-mTOR pathways and are independent of TMB (Ana-
gnostou et al., 2020). Furthermore, the immunosuppressive tu-
mor environments have distinct phenotypes (immune excluded,
immune desert, and inﬂamed) that are associated with differing
responses to immunotherapy (Chen and Mellman, 2017).
The goal of remodeling the tumor microenvironment to
improve tumor immunogenicity holds much promise. Transform-
ing growth factor b (TGF-b) has a complex and diverse role
in tumor physiology, including the initiation of epithelial-to-
mesenchymal transition (EMT) in tumor cells and suppression
of anti-tumor immunity through activation of cancer-associated
ll
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
467
Review
ﬁbroblasts (Liu et al., 2021; Tauriello et al., 2018). Li et al. (2020a)
demonstrated that selectively targeting TGF-b signaling in CD4+
T cells may enhance tumor immunity, and as part of the IMvi-
gor210 trial, Mariathasan et al. (2018) demonstrated that TGF-b
activation in ﬁbroblasts was signiﬁcantly associated with non-
response in immune-excluded tumors, with combined blockade
of TGF-b and PD-L1 resulting in a signiﬁcant reduction of tumor
burden in an EMT6 mouse mammary carcinoma model. This
approach was the basis of the INTR@PID Lung 037 trial, which
compared bintrafusp alfa, a bifunctional fusion protein targeting
both TGF-b and PD-L1, with pembrolizumab in PD-L1-express-
ing advanced NSCLC (NCT03631706). The trial failed to meet its
primary endpoint, with similarly disappointing results in the
phase II INTR@PID BTC 055 trial involving patients with locally
advanced or metastatic biliary tract cancer (NCT04066491).
Evaluation of bintrafusp alfa in patients with HMGA2-expressing
triple-negative breast cancer (NCT04489940) and advanced, un-
resectable cervical cancer (NCT04246489) is ongoing.
An intriguing avenue to attempt to improve immune check-
point inhibition response is through the generation of de novo
immunogenic mutations. This approach is being assessed
through the ongoing ARETHUSA trial, whereby mismatch-
repair-proﬁcient, RAS mutant patients with metastatic CRC
and O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) deﬁ-
ciency (assessed through promoter methylation analysis and
immunohistochemistry) are treated with temozolomide to in-
crease TMB. In those patients with TMB over 20 mutations per
megabase, the patients are subsequently randomized to the
anti-PD-1 inhibitor pembrolizumab (Siena et al., 2019). The ﬁrst
stage of the phase 2 TONIC trial randomized 67 patients with
metastatic triple-negative breast cancer to receive another
PD-1 inhibitor, nivolumab, with either no induction, irradiation
(3 3 8 Gy), cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, or doxorubicin preced-
ing this (Voorwerk et al., 2019). The overall response rate was
greatest in patients who had received cisplatin and doxorubicin
at 23% and 35%, respectively. Moreover, an upregulation of im-
mune-related genes involved in PD-1 and PD-L1 and cytotoxic
T cell signaling was reported in samples post-cisplatin and doxo-
rubicin induction (Voorwerk et al., 2019).
There has been recent success of adoptive T cell therapies,
both through expansion of tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes (TILs)
and chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR-T) cells (Rosenberg and
Restifo, 2015). Parallel developments in the ﬁeld of adoptive
T cell therapies aim to target multiple clonal neoantigens in an
effort to prolong efﬁcacy and limit adoptive T cell therapy resis-
tance (McGranahan et al., 2016). In the CAR-T ﬁeld, the multi-
center ELIANA study of 75 patients with pediatric relapsed or
refractory acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) demonstrated
the efﬁcacy of the CD19 CAR-T cell tisagenlecleucel, with 81%
remission rate at 3 months and overall survival of 76% at
12 months, leading to the European Medicines Agency (EMA)
and FDA approval in 2017 (Maude et al., 2018). CAR-T therapy
holds great promise for multiple cancer types, with recent FDA
approvals in DLBCL (JULIET trial), multiple myeloma (Teoh and
Chng, 2021), and mantle cell lymphoma (Wang et al., 2020)
and renewed focus to translate this success to solid tumors,
including prostate cancer (Bagley and O’Rourke, 2020; Wolf
et al., 2021). Disease relapse in this treatment setting is broadly
divided between tumor-intrinsic mechanisms, which include
antigenic escape, and the failure of CAR-T-cell-mediated sur-
veillance, usually due to loss of persistence (Shah and Fry,
2019). CD19 antigenic loss was reported in 25% of patients in
the ELIANA study and has been well described in the context
of other studies (Majzner and Mackall, 2018). One mechanism
of antigenic loss that has been well described is the positive se-
lection of splice variants that lack the exons encoding either the
extracellular epitope or the transmembrane domain of CD19 (So-
tillo et al., 2015). Antigenic loss may be attenuated through tar-
geting of multiple antigens, such as CD19 and CD22 in refractory
B cell ALL (B-ALL) (Cordoba et al., 2021). Strategies to mitigate
loss of CAR-T persistence include changes to the co-stimulatory
domain and immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif,
with the overall goal of optimizing activation without inducing
exhaustion (Berger and Maus, 2021). These modiﬁcations are
incorporated in next-generation CAR-T cells (Tokarew et al.,
2019). Novel classes, such as synthetic enzyme-armed killer
(SEAKER) cells, CAR-T cells that are engineered to activate pro-
drugs at tumor sites, indicate further exciting developments in
this ﬁeld (Gardner et al., 2021).
As sequencing continues to become more affordable, trial
endpoints will more commonly incorporate high-throughput
DNA sequencing and RNA-seq data and tumor microenviron-
ment analysis to decipher the underlying causes of drug resis-
tance and treatment failure in each patient. The ﬁeld must
continue to adapt to clinical areas of need, describing resistance
in agents that are commonly used in the clinic and adapting
treatment strategies accordingly. Examples of this include the
development of osimertinib, developed following the identiﬁca-
tion of the T790M mutation in EGFR mutant NSCLC (Kobayashi
et al., 2005), which attenuates the binding of ﬁrst- and second-
generation TKIs to the ATP binding site in EGFR (Cross et al.,
2014). Through large, well-designed, clinically annotated, longi-
tudinal studies, it will become possible to capture these diverse
mechanisms in the clinic.
CANCER EVOLUTION IN METASTASIS
Metastasis is a complex, multi-stage process whereby cancer
cells disseminate from a primary tumor to distant anatomical
sites. Metastatic disease remains incurable for the majority of
solid tumors, accounting for >80%–90% of cancer-related
deaths (Lambert et al., 2017; Massague´ and Obenauf, 2016).
As DNA sequencing of metastatic samples has become readily
available (Nguyen et al., 2022; Priestley et al., 2019), analyses
of recurrent genomic patterns in large metastatic cohorts have
identiﬁed putative metastatic drivers (Priestley et al., 2019; Tur-
ajlic and Swanton, 2016). For example, the loss of chromosome
9p was reported as a highly selected event driving metastasis
from the analysis of 575 primary and 335 metastatic biopsies
across 100 patients with metastatic clear-cell renal cell carci-
noma in the Renal TRACERx program (Turajlic et al., 2018). Other
examples include MYC ampliﬁcation in lung and prostate adeno-
carcinoma as well as other cancer types (Nguyen et al., 2022;
Shih et al., 2020). Loss of CDKN2A/B may also play a role in
lung, pancreatic, and esophageal adenocarcinoma, among
others (Nguyen et al., 2022; Shih et al., 2020). Ongoing studies
are investigating the development of novel targeted drugs for
some of these genes, such as MAX-binding inhibitors for MYC
ll
468
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
Review
ampliﬁcation (Duffy et al., 2021) and PRMT5 inhibitors for
CDKN2A-deleted tumors (Mavrakis et al., 2016).
A detailed understanding of the mechanisms underlying the
process of metastatic dissemination would further support the
development of targeted therapeutic approaches (Massague´
and Obenauf, 2016; Turajlic and Swanton, 2016), and recent
studies have focused on investigating which cancer cell clones
are driving the metastatic process within heterogeneous primary
tumors. In early metastatic studies (Poste and Fidler, 1980; Fi-
dler, 2003; Talmadge and Fidler, 2010; Liu et al., 2009), the domi-
nant model of metastatic spread was a monoclonal model,
where a single tumor clone acquires the traits required to metas-
tasize and all metastatic cancer cells descend from it. However,
recent studies have provided evidence that different metastases
originate from distinct tumor subclones and that even a single
metastasis might originate from the migration of distinct tumor
clones from the primary tumor or from other metastases (Comen
et al., 2011; Gundem et al., 2015; El-Kebir et al., 2018).
The polyclonal nature of many tumors might result from neces-
sary cooperative interaction between different clones to support
tumor growth through clone-clone cooperative interactions.
Technological and methodological advancements have allowed
recent studies to demonstrate inter-clonal interactions in both
in silico or mouse models (Cleary et al., 2014; Marusyk et al.,
2014; McFadden et al., 2014) and in human cancer cell lines
(Janiszewska et al., 2019; Ombrato and Malanchi, 2019). The
importance of stromal cell recruitment to the tumor microenvi-
ronment has been demonstrated in the past few years (Hanahan
and Coussens, 2012; Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011), but the role
of distinct cooperating tumor clones still remains unclear.
Although polyclonality complicates the understanding of meta-
static mechanisms (El-Kebir et al., 2018), it also yields the oppor-
tunity to target tumor clones with different roles in the metastatic
process and to disrupt interactions between subclones in the
same tumor. Single-cell sequencing technologies are demon-
strating the possibility to identify distinct tumor subclones inde-
pendent of their prevalence in human tumors, paving the way to
functionally characterize their role in the metastatic process. For
example, Chan et al. (2021) used single-cell sequencing technol-
ogies to identify recurrent small subclones with PLCG2 overex-
pression from 21 small cell lung cancer patients and suggested
that such small subclones might have a critical role in supporting
metastatic progression in these cancers, possibly through an
interaction with monocyte and macrophage populations that
facilitate an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. Quinn
et al. (2021) have recently used these single-cell technologies to
develop a Cas9-based lineage tracer to track the evolutionary his-
tory and routes of dissemination of single metastatic cancer cells
in cancer xenografts, revealing different patterns of dissemina-
tion. Such studies provide a framework that can be used to func-
tionally validate the cooperative interactions between distinct tu-
mor clones and to investigate the underlying cellular mechanisms
that may lead to future treatment approaches.
PRACTICAL CHALLENGES TO WIDER APPLICATION
There are a number of practical challenges to the widespread
adoption of molecular proﬁling of cancer patients in translational
research and clinical practice. In translational research, large-
scale prospective and longitudinal studies of cancer patients
that incorporate multiple sampling with genomic analysis and
detailed clinical histories, imaging, and pathology analysis are
rare. Comprehensive tumor sampling facilitates the detailed
assessment of intratumor heterogeneity, and this often requires
the sampling of multiple regions in a surgically resected spec-
imen. Furthermore, sampling at relapse or recurrence is not al-
ways possible, especially in the context of the invasiveness of
the procedure and underlying comorbidities and potential beneﬁt
of the procedure to the patient. The use of ﬁxed formalin parafﬁn
embedded (FFPE) tissue samples, widely used in biobanks, often
limits the quality of RNA and DNA that can be extracted from the
specimens. In addition, a robust research infrastructure involving
collaboration with hospital departments, clinical trial units, and
research laboratories is essential in curating such data for
research (Bailey et al., 2021). Tackling these hurdles has provided
rationale behind large multi-region and longitudinal studies, such
as the Glioma Longitudinal Analysis (GLASS) consortium studies
(GLASS
Consortium,
2018),
TRACERx
(ClinicalTrials.gov
Identiﬁer:
NCT01888601
&
NCT03226886)
(Jamal-Hanjani
et al., 2017) and the UK national research autopsy study, PEACE
(Posthumous Evaluation of Advanced Cancer Environment; Clin-
icalTrials.gov Identiﬁer: NCT03004755).
Perhaps one of the biggest challenges lies at the translational
interface of basic and clinical research. From the perspective of
drug resistance, the importance of the scientiﬁc question is
linked to what is observed in the clinic and resources should
be directed as such. Infrastructure aimed at enhancing the dia-
logue between basic scientists and clinicians, including speciﬁc
educational training programs, should continue to develop.
In clinical practice, sequencing costs remain prohibitive to its
broader uptake. The National Human Genome Research Insti-
tute (NHGRI) has estimated that the current cost of sequencing
a whole human genome has plateaued at approximately
$1,000, and this does not consider the cost of additional re-
sources, such as consumables, staff costs, and bioinformatic
analysis (Schwarz et al., 2015). Beyond suitable infrastructure
and costs, the challenges to obtaining samples of sufﬁcient
quantity and quality for analysis are relevant to both research
and routine clinical practice.
CONCLUSION
The advances in genomic technologies have facilitated detailed
genomic proﬁlingoftumor typesthat have led toextensive catego-
rization of cancer-related genes; however, the early promise of
precision-based and personalized treatment strategies have
not been fully realized in the clinical context. There are many rea-
sons for this, including the incomplete categorization of SVs,
epigenomic and transcriptional driver alterations, incomplete
understandingoftheinterplaybetweenthetumorandthemicroen-
vironment, the attenuation of anti-tumor immunity during disease
progression, and an inability to fully prevent intrinsic, adaptive,
and acquired drug-resistance processes.A more complete under-
standing of these complex processes will be key to translational
success, and this will be achieved through extensive collaborative
efforts between research groups and clinical teams.
We have the tools to progress our understanding of aging, so-
matic evolution, and the interface between clonal expansion
ll
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
469
Review
and cancer initiation; however, there may be limitations to trans-
lating these discoveries to further the ﬁeld of cancer interception.
There have been exciting developments in the early detection and
minimal residual disease ﬁelds, and as advances are made to
improvectDNA limits ofdetection,thecombinationofcancersde-
tected at an earlier stage together with the reﬁnement of neoadju-
vant and adjuvant treatment strategies will improve outcomes for
cancer patients. We may see further implementation of targeted
chemoprevention, vaccines for prevention, and reﬁnement in
quantifying germline risk for better screening programs.
Despite this, the global burden of cancer will continue to in-
crease. This is in part due to an aging population; widening
disparities between countries, socio-economic groups, and
ethnicities; and exposure to environmental carcinogens, all of
which will be further driven by the impact of climate change.
The rising cost of drugs will also mean many patients will not
beneﬁt from cutting-edge discoveries discussed in this review.
This burden can be mitigated through robust cancer prevention
strategies, which will beneﬁt from implementation of policies that
address global inequalities in standard of living and access to
affordable
healthcare
together
with
meaningful
efforts
to
address climate change.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Will Hill, Eva Gro¨ nroos, and Emma Colliver for their review of the
manuscript and thoughtful comments. Figures were created with the
BioRender software at BioRender.com. C.S. is a Royal Society Napier
Research Professor (RSRP\R\210001). This work was supported by the Fran-
cis Crick Institute, which receives its core funding from Cancer Research UK
(FC001169), the UK Medical Research Council (FC001169), and the Wellcome
Trust (FC001169). This research was funded in whole, or in part, by the Well-
come Trust (FC001169). For the purpose of Open Access, the author has
applied a CC BY public copyright license to any author-accepted manuscript
version arising from this submission. C.S. is funded by Cancer Research UK
(TRACERx [C11496/A17786], PEACE [C416/A21999], and CRUK Cancer
Immunotherapy Catalyst Network), Cancer Research UK Lung Cancer Centre
of Excellence (C11496/A30025), the Rosetrees Trust, Butterﬁeld and Stoney-
gate Trusts, NovoNordisk Foundation (ID16584), Royal Society Professorship
Enhancement Award (RP/EA/180007), the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Center at University College London
Hospitals, the Cancer Research UK-University College London Center,
Experimental Cancer Medicine Center, and the Breast Cancer Research Foun-
dation (BCRF 20–157). This work was supported by a Stand Up To Cancer-
LUNGevity-American Lung Association Lung Cancer Interception Dream
Team Translational Research Grant (grant number: SU2C-AACR-DT23-17to
S.M. Dubinett and A.E. Spira). Stand Up To Cancer is a division of the Enter-
tainment Industry Foundation. Research grants are administered by the Amer-
ican Association for Cancer Research, the Scientiﬁc Partner of SU2C. C.S. is in
receipt of an ERC Advanced Grant (PROTEUS) from the European Research
Council under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement no. 835297). M.J.-H. is a CRUK Career Estab-
lishment Awardee and has received funding from CRUK, IASLC International
Lung Cancer Foundation, Lung Cancer Research Foundation, Rosetrees
Trust, UKI NETs, NIHR, and NIHR UCLH Biomedical Research Centre.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
C.S. acknowledges grant support from Pﬁzer, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Roche-Ventana, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Invitae (previously Archer Dx
Inc.)-collaboration in minimal residual disease sequencing technologies, and
Ono Pharmaceutical and is an AstraZeneca Advisory Board member and Chief
Investigator for the AZ MeRmaiD1 and two clinical trials. C.S. is also chief
investigator of the NHS Galleri trial and has consulted for Amgen, Pﬁzer, No-
vartis, GlaxoSmithKline, MSD, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, AstraZeneca, Il-
lumina, Genentech, Roche-Ventana, GRAIL, Medicxi, Metabomed, Bicycle
Therapeutics, Roche Innovation Center Shanghai, and the Sarah Cannon
Research Institute. C.S. had stock options in Apogen Biotechnologies and
GRAIL until June 2021, has stock options in Epic Bioscience, Bicycle Thera-
peutics and has stock options and is co-founder of Achilles Therapeutics.
M.J.-H. has consulted and is a member of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board and
Steering Committee for Achilles Therapeutics, has received speaker honoraria
from Astex Pharmaceuticals, and holds a patent PCT/US2017/028,013
relating to methods for lung cancer detection. C.S. holds European patents
relating to assay technology to detect tumor recurrence (PCT/GB2017/
053,289), target neoantigens (PCT/EP2016/059,401), identify patent response
to immune checkpoint blockade (PCT/EP2016/071,471), determine HLA LOH
(PCT/GB2018/052,004), predict survival rates of patients with cancer (PCT/
GB2020/050,221), and identify patients who respond to cancer treatment
(PCT/GB2018/051,912); a US patent relating to detecting tumor mutations
(PCT/US2017/28,013); and both European and US patents related to identi-
fying insertion and deletion mutation targets (PCT/GB2018/051,892). The
other authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
Abascal, F., Harvey, L.M.R., Mitchell, E., Lawson, A.R.J., Lensing, S.V., Ellis,
P., Russell, A.J.C., Alcantara, R.E., Baez-Ortega, A., Wang, Y., et al. (2021).
Somatic mutation landscapes at single-molecule resolution. Nature 593,
405–410.
Abbosh, C., Birkbak, N.J., Wilson, G.A., Jamal-Hanjani, M., Constantin, T.,
Salari, R., Le Quesne, J., Moore, D.A., Veeriah, S., Rosenthal, R., et al.
(2017). Phylogenetic ctDNA analysis depicts early-stage lung cancer evolu-
tion. Nature 545, 446–451.
Adeyemo, A., Balaconis, M.K., Darnes, D.R., Fatumo, S., Granados Moreno,
P., Hodonsky, C.J., Inouye, M., Kanai, M., Kato, K., Knoppers, B.M., et al.
(2021). Responsible use of polygenic risk scores in the clinic: potential bene-
ﬁts, risks and gaps. Nat. Med. 27, 1876–1884.
Alexandrov, L.B., Nik-Zainal, S., Wedge, D.C., Aparicio, S.A.J., Behjati, S.,
Biankin, A.V., Bignell, G.R., Bolli, N., Borg, A., Børresen-Dale, A.-L., et al.
(2013). Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature 500,
415–421.
Alexandrov, L.B., Jones, P.H., Wedge, D.C., Sale, J.E., Campbell, P.J., Nik-
Zainal, S., and Stratton, M.R. (2015). Clock-like mutational processes in
human somatic cells. Nat. Genet. 47, 1402–1407.
Alexandrov, L.B., Ju, Y.S., Haase, K., Loo, P.V., Martincorena, I., Nik-Zainal,
S., Totoki, Y., Fujimoto, A., Nakagawa, H., Shibata, T., et al. (2016). Mutational
signatures associated with tobacco smoking in human cancer. Science 354,
618–622.
Alexandrov, L.B., Kim, J., Haradhvala, N.J., Huang, M.N., Tian Ng, A.W., Wu,
Y., Boot, A., Covington, K.R., Gordenin, D.A., Bergstrom, E.N., et al. (2020).
The repertoire of mutational signatures in human cancer. Nature 578, 94–101.
Amos, C.I., Wu, X., Broderick, P., Gorlov, I.P., Gu, J., Eisen, T., Dong, Q.,
Zhang, Q., Gu, X., Vijayakrishnan, J., et al. (2008). Genome-wide association
scan of tag SNPs identiﬁes a susceptibility locus for lung cancer at 15q25.1.
Nat. Genet. 40, 616–622.
Anagnostou, V., Niknafs, N., Marrone, K., Bruhm, D.C., White, J.R., Naidoo, J.,
Hummelink, K., Monkhorst, K., Lalezari, F., Lanis, M., et al. (2020). Multimodal
genomic features predict outcome of immune checkpoint blockade in non-
small-cell lung cancer. Nat. Cancer 1, 99–111.
Andriole, G.L., Bostwick, D.G., Brawley, O.W., Gomella, L.G., Marberger, M.,
Montorsi, F., Pettaway, C.A., Tammela, T.L., Teloken, C., Tindall, D.J., et al.
(2010). Effect of dutasteride on the risk of prostate cancer. N. Engl. J. Med.
362, 1192–1202.
Auerbach, C., and Robson, J.M. (1946). Chemical production of mutations.
Nature 157, 302.
Auerbach, O., Stout, A.P., Hammond, E.C., and Garﬁnkel, L. (1961). Changes
in bronchial epithelium in relation to cigarette smoking and in relation to lung
cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 265, 253–267.
Baccarelli, A., and Bollati, V. (2009). Epigenetics and environmental chemicals.
Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 21, 243–251.
Baggiolini, A., Callahan, S.J., Montal, E., Weiss, J.M., Trieu, T., Tagore, M.M.,
Tischﬁeld, S.E., Walsh, R.M., Suresh, S., Fan, Y., et al. (2021). Developmental
chromatin programs determine oncogenic competence in melanoma. Science
373, eabc1048.
ll
470
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
Review
Bagley, S.J., and O’Rourke, D.M. (2020). Clinical investigation of CAR T cells
for solid tumors: lessons learned and future directions. Pharmacol. Ther.
205, 107419.
Bailey, C., Shoura, M.J., Mischel, P.S., and Swanton, C. (2020). Extrachromo-
somal DNA-relieving heredity constraints, accelerating tumour evolution. Ann.
Oncol. 31, 884–893.
Bailey, C., Black, J.R.M., Reading, J.L., Litchﬁeld, K., Turajlic, S., McGrana-
han, N., Jamal-Hanjani, M., and Swanton, C. (2021). Tracking cancer evolution
through the disease course. Cancer Discov. 11, 916–932.
Bailey, M.H., Tokheim, C., Porta-Pardo, E., Sengupta, S., Bertrand, D., Weer-
asinghe, A., Colaprico, A., Wendl, M.C., Kim, J., Reardon, B., et al. (2018).
Comprehensive characterization of cancer driver genes and mutations. Cell
173, 371–385.e18.
Baker, D.J., Childs, B.G., Durik, M., Wijers, M.E., Sieben, C.J., Zhong, J., Salt-
ness, R.A., Jeganathan, K.B., Verzosa, G.C., Pezeshki, A., et al. (2016). Natu-
rally occurring p16Ink4a-positive cells shorten healthy lifespan. Nature 530,
184–189.
Bakhoum, S.F., and Cantley, L.C. (2018). The multifaceted role of chromo-
somal instability in cancer and its microenvironment. Cell 174, 1347–1360.
Bakhoum, S.F., Ngo, B., Laughney, A.M., Cavallo, J.-A., Murphy, C.J., Ly, P.,
Shah, P., Sriram, R.K., Watkins, T.B.K., Taunk, N.K., et al. (2018). Chromo-
somal instability drives metastasis through a cytosolic DNA response. Nature
553, 467–472.
Barthel, F.P., Wei, W., Tang, M., Martinez-Ledesma, E., Hu, X., Amin, S.B., Ak-
demir, K.C., Seth, S., Song, X., Wang, Q., et al. (2017). Systematic analysis of
telomere length and somatic alterations in 31 cancer types. Nat. Genet. 49,
349–357.
Berger, T.R., and Maus, M.V. (2021). Mechanisms of response and resistance
to CAR T cell therapies. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 69, 56–64.
Bettegowda, C., Sausen, M., Leary, R.J., Kinde, I., Wang, Y., Agrawal, N., Bar-
tlett, B.R., Wang, H., Luber, B., Alani, R.M., et al. (2014). Detection of circu-
lating tumor DNA in early- and late-stage human malignancies. Sci. Transl.
Med. 6, 224ra24.
Bielski, C.M., Zehir, A., Penson, A.V., Donoghue, M.T.A., Chatila, W., Armenia,
J., Chang, M.T., Schram, A.M., Jonsson, P., Bandlamudi, C., et al. (2018).
Genome doubling shapes the evolution and prognosis of advanced cancers.
Nat. Genet. 50, 1189–1195.
Black, J.R.M., and McGranahan, N. (2021). Genetic and non-genetic clonal di-
versity in cancer evolution. Nat. Rev. Cancer 21, 379–392.
Blass, E., and Ott, P.A. (2021). Advances in the development of personalized
neoantigen-based therapeutic cancer vaccines. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 18,
215–229.
Boot, A., Huang, M.N., Ng, A.W.T., Ho, S.-C., Lim, J.Q., Kawakami, Y.,
Chayama, K., Teh, B.T., Nakagawa, H., and Rozen, S.G. (2018). In-depth char-
acterization of the cisplatin mutational signature in human cell lines and in
esophageal and liver tumors. Genome Res. 28, 654–665.
Boveri, T. (1914). Zur frage der entstehung maligner tumoren (Jena: Gustav
Fischer).
Bratman, S.V., Yang, S.Y.C., Iafolla, M.A.J., Liu, Z., Hansen, A.R., Bedard,
P.L., Lheureux, S., Spreaﬁco, A., Razak, A.A., Shchegrova, S., et al. (2020).
Personalized circulating tumor DNA analysis as a predictive biomarker in solid
tumor patients treated with pembrolizumab. Nat. Cancer 1, 873–881.
Bredno, J., Lipson, J., Venn, O., Aravanis, A.M., and Jamshidi, A. (2021). Clin-
ical correlates of circulating cell-free DNA tumor fraction. PLoS One 16,
e0256436.
Broca, P. (1866). Trait, des tumeurs (Paris: P. Asselin).
de Bruin, E.C., McGranahan, N., Mitter, R., Salm, M., Wedge, D.C., Yates, L.,
Jamal-Hanjani, M., Shaﬁ, S., Murugaesu, N., Rowan, A.J., et al. (2014). Spatial
and temporal diversity in genomic instability processes deﬁnes lung cancer
evolution. Science 346, 251–256.
Brunner, S.F., Roberts, N.D., Wylie, L.A., Moore, L., Aitken, S.J., Davies, S.E.,
Sanders, M.A., Ellis, P., Alder, C., Hooks, Y., et al. (2019). Somatic mutations
and clonal dynamics in healthy and cirrhotic human liver. Nature 574, 538–542.
Busque, L., Mio, R., Mattioli, J., Brais, E., Blais, N., Lalonde, Y., Maragh, M.,
and Gilliland, D.G. (1996). Nonrandom X-inactivation patterns in normal fe-
males: lyonization ratios vary with age. Blood 88, 59–65.
Busque, L., Patel, J.P., Figueroa, M.E., Vasanthakumar, A., Provost, S., Ham-
ilou, Z., Mollica, L., Li, J., Viale, A., Heguy, A., et al. (2012). Recurrent somatic
TET2 mutations in normal elderly individuals with clonal hematopoiesis. Nat.
Genet. 44, 1179–1181.
Bycroft, C., Freeman, C., Petkova, D., Band, G., Elliott, L.T., Sharp, K., Motyer,
A., Vukcevic, D., Delaneau, O., O’Connell, J., et al. (2018). The UK Biobank
resource with deep phenotyping and genomic data. Nature 562, 203–209.
Campbell, P.J., Getz, G., Korbel, J.O., Stuart, J.M., Jennings, J.L., Stein, L.D.,
Perry, M.D., Nahal-Bose, H.K., Ouellette, B.F.F., Li, C.H., et al. (2020). Pan-
cancer analysis of whole genomes. Nature 578, 82–93.
Chan, J.M., Quintanal-Villalonga, A´ ., Gao, V.R., Xie, Y., Allaj, V., Chaudhary, O.,
Masilionis, I., Egger, J., Chow, A., Walle, T., et al. (2021). Signatures of plas-
ticity, metastasis, and immunosuppression in an atlas of human small cell
lung cancer. Cancer Cell 39, 1479–1496.e18.
Chang, J., Tan, W., Ling, Z., Xi, R., Shao, M., Chen, M., Luo, Y., Zhao, Y., Liu,
Y., Huang, X., et al. (2017). Genomic analysis of oesophageal squamous-cell
carcinoma identiﬁes alcohol drinking-related mutation signature and genomic
alterations. Nat. Commun. 8, 15290.
Chang, M.T., Asthana, S., Gao, S.P., Lee, B.H., Chapman, J.S., Kandoth, C.,
Gao, J., Socci, N.D., Solit, D.B., Olshen, A.B., et al. (2016). Identifying recurrent
mutations in cancer reveals widespread lineage diversity and mutational spec-
iﬁcity. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 155–163.
Chapman, P.B., Hauschild, A., Robert, C., Haanen, J.B., Ascierto, P., Larkin,
J., Dummer, R., Garbe, C., Testori, A., Maio, M., et al. (2011). Improved survival
with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. N. Engl. J. Med.
364, 2507–2516.
Chen, D.-S. (2009). Hepatitis B vaccination: the key towards elimination and
eradication of hepatitis B. J. Hepatol. 50, 805–816.
Chen, D.S., and Mellman, I. (2017). Elements of cancer immunity and the
cancer–immune set point. Nature 541, 321–330.
Chen, H., Carrot-Zhang, J., Zhao, Y., Hu, H., Freeman, S.S., Yu, S., Ha, G.,
Taylor, A.M., Berger, A.C., Westlake, L., et al. (2019). Genomic and immune
proﬁling of pre-invasive lung adenocarcinoma. Nat. Commun. 10, 5472.
Chowell, D., Krishna, C., Pierini, F., Makarov, V., Rizvi, N.A., Kuo, F., Morris,
L.G.T., Riaz, N., Lenz, T.L., and Chan, T.A. (2019). Evolutionary divergence
of HLA class I genotype impacts efﬁcacy of cancer immunotherapy. Nat.
Med. 25, 1715–1720.
Cleary, A.S., Leonard, T.L., Gestl, S.A., and Gunther, E.J. (2014). Tumour cell
heterogeneity maintained by cooperating subclones in Wnt-driven mammary
cancers. Nature 508, 113–117.
Cohen, J.D., Li, L., Wang, Y., Thoburn, C., Afsari, B., Danilova, L., Douville, C.,
Javed, A.A., Wong, F., Mattox, A., et al. (2018). Detection and localization of
surgically resectable cancers with a multi-analyte blood test. Science 359,
926–930.
Cohen-Sharir, Y., McFarland, J.M., Abdusamad, M., Marquis, C., Bernhard,
S.V., Kazachkova, M., Tang, H., Ippolito, M.R., Laue, K., Zerbib, J., et al.
(2021). Aneuploidy renders cancer cells vulnerable to mitotic checkpoint inhi-
bition. Nature 590, 486–491.
Collins, F.S. (1996). BRCA1–lots of mutations, lots of dilemmas. N. Engl. J.
Med. 334, 186–188.
Colom, B., Herms, A., Hall, M.W.J., Dentro, S.C., King, C., Sood, R.K., Alcolea,
M.P., Piedraﬁta, G., Fernandez-Antoran, D., Ong, S.H., et al. (2021). Mutant
clones in normal epithelium outcompete and eliminate emerging tumours. Na-
ture 598, 510–514.
Comen, E., Norton, L., and Massague´ , J. (2011). Clinical implications of cancer
self-seeding. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 8, 369–377.
Coppe´ , J.-P., Desprez, P.-Y., Krtolica, A., and Campisi, J. (2010). The senes-
cence-associated secretory phenotype: the dark side of tumor suppression.
Annu. Rev. Pathol. 5, 99–118.
Cordoba, S., Onuoha, S., Thomas, S., Pignataro, D.S., Hough, R., Ghorashian,
S., Vora, A., Bonney, D., Veys, P., Rao, K., et al. (2021). CAR T cells with dual
ll
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
471
Review
targeting of CD19 and CD22 in pediatric and young adult patients with
relapsed or refractory B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a phase 1 trial.
Nat. Med. 27, 1797–1805.
Cox, A.D., Fesik, S.W., Kimmelman, A.C., Luo, J., and Der, C.J. (2014). Drug-
ging the undruggable RAS: mission possible? Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 13,
828–851.
Crews, D.W., Dombroski, J.A., and King, M.R. (2021). Prophylactic cancer
vaccines engineered to elicit speciﬁc adaptive immune response. Front. On-
col. 11, 994.
Cross, D.A.E., Ashton, S.E., Ghiorghiu, S., Eberlein, C., Nebhan, C.A., Spitzler,
P.J., Orme, J.P., Finlay, M.R.V., Ward, R.A., Mellor, M.J., et al. (2014).
AZD9291, an irreversible EGFR TKI, overcomes T790M-mediated resistance
to EGFR inhibitors in lung cancer. Cancer Discov. 4, 1046–1061.
Cuzick, J., Forbes, J., Edwards, R., Baum, M., Cawthorn, S., Coates, A.,
Hamed, A., Howell, A., and Powles, T.; IBIS investigators (2002). First results
from the international breast cancer intervention study (IBIS-I): a randomised
prevention trial. Lancet Lond. Engl. 360, 817–824.
Cuzick, J., Sestak, I., Forbes, J.F., Dowsett, M., Knox, J., Cawthorn, S., Saun-
ders, C., Roche, N., Mansel, R.E., Minckwitz, G., et al. (2014). Anastrozole for
prevention of breast cancer in high-risk postmenopausal women (IBIS-II): an
international, double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet.
383, 1041–1048.
Cuzick, J., Sestak, I., Cawthorn, S., Hamed, H., Holli, K., Howell, A., and For-
bes, J.F. (2015). Tamoxifen for prevention of breast cancer: extended long-
term follow-up of the IBIS-I breast cancer prevention trial. Lancet Oncol.
16, 67–75.
Cuzick, J., Sestak, I., Forbes, J.F., Dowsett, M., Cawthorn, S., Mansel, R.E.,
Loibl, S., Bonanni, B., Evans, D.G., Howell, A., et al. (2020). Use of anastrozole
for breast cancer prevention (IBIS-II): long-term results of a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 395, 117–122.
De Carvalho, D.D., Sharma, S., You, J.S., Su, S.-F., Taberlay, P.C., Kelly, T.K.,
Yang, X., Liang, G., and Jones, P.A. (2012). DNA methylation screening iden-
tiﬁes driver epigenetic events of cancer cell survival. Cancer Cell 21, 655–667.
Dewhurst, S.M., McGranahan, N., Burrell, R.A., Rowan, A.J., Gro¨ nroos, E., En-
desfelder, D., Joshi, T., Mouradov, D., Gibbs, P., Ward, R.L., et al. (2014).
Tolerance of whole-genome doubling propagates chromosomal instability
and accelerates cancer genome evolution. Cancer Discov. 4, 175–185.
Dhimolea, E., de Matos Simoes, R., Kansara, D., Al’Khafaji, A., Bouyssou, J.,
Weng, X., Sharma, S., Raja, J., Awate, P., Shirasaki, R., et al. (2021). An embry-
onic diapause-like adaptation with suppressed myc activity enables tumor
treatment persistence. Cancer Cell 39, 240–256.e11.
Diaz, L.A., Williams, R.T., Wu, J., Kinde, I., Hecht, J.R., Berlin, J., Allen, B.,
Bozic, I., Reiter, J.G., Nowak, M.A., et al. (2012). The molecular evolution of ac-
quired resistance to targeted EGFR blockade in colorectal cancers. Nature
486, 537–540.
Dimri, G.P., Lee, X., Basile, G., Acosta, M., Scott, G., Roskelley, C., Medrano,
E.E., Linskens, M., Rubelj, I., and Pereira-Smith, O. (1995). A biomarker that
identiﬁes senescent human cells in culture and in aging skin in vivo. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 92, 9363–9367.
Ding, L., Ley, T.J., Larson, D.E., Miller, C.A., Koboldt, D.C., Welch, J.S.,
Ritchey, J.K., Young, M.A., Lamprecht, T., McLellan, M.D., et al. (2012). Clonal
evolution in relapsed acute myeloid leukaemia revealed by whole-genome
sequencing. Nature 481, 506–510.
Drew, D.A., Cao, Y., and Chan, A.T. (2016). Aspirin and colorectal cancer: the
promise of precision chemoprevention. Nat. Rev. Cancer 16, 173–186.
Druker, B.J., Talpaz, M., Resta, D.J., Peng, B., Buchdunger, E., Ford, J.M., Ly-
don, N.B., Kantarjian, H., Capdeville, R., Ohno-Jones, S., et al. (2001). Efﬁcacy
and safety of a speciﬁc inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic
myeloid leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 344, 1031–1037.
Duffy, M.J., O’Grady, S., Tang, M., and Crown, J. (2021). MYC as a Target for
Cancer Treatment. Cancer Treat. Rev. 94, 102154.
Duffy, S.W., Vulkan, D., Cuckle, H., Parmar, D., Sheikh, S., Smith, R.A., Evans,
A., Blyuss, O., Johns, L., Ellis, I.O., et al. (2020). Effect of mammographic
screening from age 40 years on breast cancer mortality (UK Age trial): ﬁnal re-
sults of a randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 21, 1165–1172.
El-Kebir, M., Satas, G., and Raphael, B.J. (2018). Inferring parsimonious
migration histories for metastatic cancers. Nat. Genet. 50, 718–726.
Elliott, K., and Larsson, E. (2021). Non-coding driver mutations in human can-
cer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 21, 500–509.
Ellis, P., Moore, L., Sanders, M.A., Butler, T.M., Brunner, S.F., Lee-Six, H., Os-
borne, R., Farr, B., Coorens, T.H.H., Lawson, A.R.J., et al. (2021). Reliable
detection of somatic mutations in solid tissues by laser-capture microdissec-
tion and low-input DNA sequencing. Nat. Protoc. 16, 841–871.
Esteller, M., Silva, J.M., Dominguez, G., Bonilla, F., Matias-Guiu, X., Lerma, E.,
Bussaglia, E., Prat, J., Harkes, I.C., Repasky, E.A., et al. (2000). Promoter hy-
permethylation and BRCA1 inactivation in sporadic breast and ovarian tumors.
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 92, 564–569.
Fakih, M.G., Kopetz, S., Kuboki, Y., Kim, T.W., Munster, P.N., Krauss, J.C.,
Falchook, G.S., Han, S.-W., Heinemann, V., Muro, K., et al. (2022). Sotorasib
for
previously
treated
colorectal
cancers
with
KRASG12C
mutation
(CodeBreaK100): a prespeciﬁed analysis of a single-arm, phase 2 trial. Lancet
Oncol. 23, 115–124.
Falcaro, M., Castan˜ on, A., Ndlela, B., Checchi, M., Soldan, K., Lopez-Bernal,
J., Elliss-Brookes, L., and Sasieni, P. (2021). The effects of the national HPV
vaccination programme in England, UK, on cervical cancer and grade 3 cervi-
cal intraepithelial neoplasia incidence: a register-based observational study.
Lancet. 398, 2084–2092.
Fane, M., and Weeraratna, A.T. (2020). How the ageing microenvironment in-
ﬂuences tumour progression. Nat. Rev. Cancer 20, 89–106.
Fidler, I.J. (2003). The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis: the ‘‘seed and soil’’
hypothesis revisited. Nat. Rev. Cancer 3, 453–458.
Findlay, G.M., Boyle, E.A., Hause, R.J., Klein, J., and Shendure, J. (2014).
Saturation editing of genomic regions by multiplex homology-directed repair.
Nature 513, 120–123.
Findlay, G.M., Daza, R.M., Martin, B., Zhang, M.D., Leith, A.P., Gasperini, M.,
Janizek, J.D., Huang, X., Starita, L.M., and Shendure, J. (2018). Accurate clas-
siﬁcation of BRCA1 variants with saturation genome editing. Nature 562,
217–222.
Fitzgerald, R.C., Pietro, M., O’Donovan, M., Maroni, R., Muldrew, B., Debiram-
Beecham, I., Gehrung, M., Offman, J., Tripathi, M., Smith, S.G., et al. (2020).
Cytosponge-trefoil factor 3 versus usual care to identify Barrett’s oesophagus
in a primary care setting: a multicentre, pragmatic, randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 396, 333–344.
Flanagan, D.J., Pentinmikko, N., Luopaj€arvi, K., Willis, N.J., Gilroy, K., Raven,
A.P., Mcgarry, L., Englund, J.I., Webb, A.T., Scharaw, S., et al. (2021). NOTUM
from Apc-mutant cells biases clonal competition to initiate cancer. Nature 594,
430–435.
Fong, P.C., Boss, D.S., Yap, T.A., Tutt, A., Wu, P., Mergui-Roelvink, M., Mor-
timer, P., Swaisland, H., Lau, A., O’Connor, M.J., et al. (2009). Inhibition of pol-
y(ADP-ribose) polymerase in tumors from BRCA mutation carriers. N. Engl. J.
Med. 361, 123–134.
Freathy, R.M., Ring, S.M., Shields, B., Galobardes, B., Knight, B., Weedon,
M.N., Smith, G.D., Frayling, T.M., and Hattersley, A.T. (2009). A common ge-
netic variant in the 15q24 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor gene cluster
(CHRNA5–CHRNA3–CHRNB4) is associated with a reduced ability of women
to quit smoking in pregnancy. Hum. Mol. Genet. 18, 2922–2927.
Futreal, P.A., Coin, L., Marshall, M., Down, T., Hubbard, T., Wooster, R., Rah-
man, N., and Stratton, M.R. (2004). A census of human cancer genes. Nat. Rev.
Cancer 4, 177–183.
Garcı´a-Nieto, P.E., Morrison, A.J., and Fraser, H.B. (2019). The somatic muta-
tion landscape of the human body. Genome Biol. 20, 298.
Gardner, T.J., Lee, J.P., Bourne, C.M., Wijewarnasuriya, D., Kinarivala, N.,
Kurtz, K.G., Corless, B.C., Dacek, M.M., Chang, A.Y., Mo, G., et al. (2021). En-
gineering CAR-T cells to activate small-molecule drugs in situ. Nat. Chem.
Biol. 18, 216–225.
Gerlinger, M., Rowan, A.J., Horswell, S., Math, M., Larkin, J., Endesfelder, D.,
Gronroos, E., Martinez, P., Matthews, N., Stewart, A., et al. (2012). Intratumor
heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by multiregion sequencing.
N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 883–892.
ll
472
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
Review
Ghandi, M., Huang, F.W., Jane´ -Valbuena, J., Kryukov, G.V., Lo, C.C., McDo-
nald, E.R., Barretina, J., Gelfand, E.T., Bielski, C.M., Li, H., et al. (2019). Next-
generation characterization of the cancer cell line encyclopedia. Nature 569,
503–508.
GLASS Consortium (2018). Glioma through the looking GLASS: molecular evo-
lution of diffuse gliomas and the Glioma Longitudinal Analysis Consortium.
Neuro Oncol. 20, 873–884.
Goss, P.E., Ingle, J.N., Ale´ s-Martı´nez, J.E., Cheung, A.M., Chlebowski, R.T.,
Wactawski-Wende, J., McTiernan, A., Robbins, J., Johnson, K.C., Martin,
L.W., et al. (2011). Exemestane for breast-cancer prevention in postmeno-
pausal women. N. Engl. J. Med. 364, 2381–2391.
Greaves, M. (2015). Evolutionary determinants of cancer. Cancer Discov. 5,
806–820.
Greaves, M., and Maley, C.C. (2012). Clonal evolution IN cancer. Nature 481,
306–313.
Grulich, A.E., van Leeuwen, M.T., Falster, M.O., and Vajdic, C.M. (2007). Inci-
dence of cancers in people with HIV/AIDS compared with immunosuppressed
transplant recipients: a meta-analysis. Lancet. 370, 59–67.
Gundem, G., Van Loo, P., Kremeyer, B., Alexandrov, L.B., Tubio, J.M.C., Pa-
paemmanuil, E., Brewer, D.S., Kallio, H.M.L., Ho¨ gn€as, G., Annala, M., et al.
(2015). The evolutionary history of lethal metastatic prostate cancer. Nature
520, 353–357.
Guo, C.-G., Ma, W., Drew, D.A., Cao, Y., Nguyen, L.H., Joshi, A.D., Ng, K.,
Ogino, S., Meyerhardt, J.A., Song, M., et al. (2021). Aspirin use and risk of colo-
rectal cancer among older adults. JAMA Oncol. 7, 428–435.
Haigis, K.M., Cichowski, K., and Elledge, S.J. (2019). Tissue-speciﬁcity in can-
cer: the rule, not the exception. Science 363, 1150–1151.
Hanahan, D., and Coussens, L.M. (2012). Accessories to the crime: functions
of cells recruited to the tumor microenvironment. Cancer Cell 21, 309–322.
Hanahan, D., and Weinberg, R.A. (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the next gener-
ation. Cell 144, 646–674.
Hansemann, D. (1890). U¨ ber asymmetrische Zelltheilung in Epithelkrebsen
und deren biologische Bedeutung. Arch. Pathol. Anat. Physiol. Klin. Medicin
119, 299–326.
Hawkes, N. (2019). Cancer survival data emphasise importance of early diag-
nosis. BMJ 364, l408.
Herbig, U., Ferreira, M., Condel, L., Carey, D., and Sedivy, J.M. (2006). Cellular
senescence in aging primates. Science 311, 1257.
Hewitson, P., Glasziou, P.P., Irwig, L., Towler, B., and Watson, E. (2007).
Screening for colorectal cancer using the faecal occult blood test. Hemoccult.
Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2007, CD001216.
Hoang, M.L., Chen, C.-H., Sidorenko, V.S., He, J., Dickman, K.G., Yun, B.H.,
Moriya, M., Niknafs, N., Douville, C., Karchin, R., et al. (2013). Mutational signa-
ture of aristolochic acid exposure as revealed by whole-exome sequencing.
Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 197ra102.
Hung, K.L., Yost, K.E., Xie, L., Shi, Q., Helmsauer, K., Luebeck, J., Scho¨ pﬂin,
R., Lange, J.T., Chamorro Gonza´ lez, R., Weiser, N.E., et al. (2021). ecDNA
hubs drive cooperative intermolecular oncogene expression. Nature 600,
731–736.
Hvid-Jensen, F., Pedersen, L., Drewes, A.M., Sørensen, H.T., and Funch-Jen-
sen, P. (2011). Incidence of adenocarcinoma among patients with Barrett’s
esophagus. N. Engl. J. Med. 365, 1375–1383.
Independent UK Panel on Breast Cancer Screening (2012). The beneﬁts and
harms of breast cancer screening: an independent review. Lancet 380,
1778–1786.
Jaiswal, S., Fontanillas, P., Flannick, J., Manning, A., Grauman, P.V., Mar,
B.G., Lindsley, R.C., Mermel, C.H., Burtt, N., Chavez, A., et al. (2014). Age-
related clonal hematopoiesis associated with adverse outcomes. N. Engl. J.
Med. 371, 2488–2498.
Jamal-Hanjani, M., Wilson, G.A., McGranahan, N., Birkbak, N.J., Watkins,
T.B.K., Veeriah, S., Shaﬁ, S., Johnson, D.H., Mitter, R., Rosenthal, R., et al.
(2017). Tracking the evolution of non–small-cell lung cancer. N. Engl. J. Med.
376, 2109–2121.
Janiszewska, M., Tabassum, D.P., Castan˜ o, Z., Cristea, S., Yamamoto, K.N.,
Kingston, N.L., Murphy, K.C., Shu, S., Harper, N.W., Del Alcazar, C.G., et al.
(2019). Subclonal cooperation drives metastasis by modulating local and sys-
temic immune microenvironments. Nat. Cell Biol. 21, 879–888.
Jiang, P., Xie, T., Ding, S.C., Zhou, Z., Cheng, S.H., Chan, R.W.Y., Lee, W.-S.,
Peng, W., Wong, J., Wong, V.W.S., et al. (2020). Detection and characteriza-
tion of jagged ends of double-stranded DNA in plasma. Genome Res. 30,
1144–1153.
Johnson, B.E., Mazor, T., Hong, C., Barnes, M., Aihara, K., McLean, C.Y.,
Fouse, S.D., Yamamoto, S., Ueda, H., Tatsuno, K., et al. (2014). Mutational
analysis reveals the origin and therapy-driven evolution of recurrent glioma.
Science 343, 189–193.
Jonsson, P., Bandlamudi, C., Cheng, M.L., Srinivasan, P., Chavan, S.S., Fried-
man, N.D., Rosen, E.Y., Richards, A.L., Bouvier, N., Selcuklu, S.D., et al.
(2019). Tumour lineage shapes BRCA-mediated phenotypes. Nature 571,
576–579.
Kakiuchi, N., and Ogawa, S. (2021). Clonal expansion in non-cancer tissues.
Nat. Rev. Cancer 21, 239–256.
Kakiuchi, N., Yoshida, K., Uchino, M., Kihara, T., Akaki, K., Inoue, Y., Kawada,
K., Nagayama, S., Yokoyama, A., Yamamoto, S., et al. (2020). Frequent muta-
tions that converge on the NFKBIZ pathway in ulcerative colitis. Nature 577,
260–265.
Keilholz, U., Ascierto, P.A., Dummer, R., Robert, C., Lorigan, P., van Akkooi, A.,
Arance, A., Blank, C.U., Chiarion Sileni, V., Donia, M., et al. (2020). ESMO
consensus conference recommendations on the management of metastatic
melanoma: under the auspices of the ESMO Guidelines Committee. Ann. On-
col. 31, 1435–1448.
Kenter, G.G., Welters, M.J.P., Valentijn, A.R.P.M., Lowik, M.J.G., Berends-van
der Meer, D.M.A., Vloon, A.P.G., Essahsah, F., Fathers, L.M., Offringa, R.,
Drijfhout, J.W., et al. (2009). Vaccination against HPV-16 oncoproteins for
vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. N. Engl. J. Med. 361, 1838–1847.
Khera, A.V., Chafﬁn, M., Aragam, K.G., Haas, M.E., Roselli, C., Choi, S.H., Na-
tarajan, P., Lander, E.S., Lubitz, S.A., Ellinor, P.T., et al. (2018). Genome-wide
polygenic scores for common diseases identify individuals with risk equivalent
to monogenic mutations. Nat. Genet. 50, 1219–1224.
Kobayashi, S., Boggon, T.J., Dayaram, T., J€anne, P.A., Kocher, O., Meyerson,
M., Johnson, B.E., Eck, M.J., Tenen, D.G., and Halmos, B. (2005). EGFR mu-
tation and resistance of non-small-cell lung cancer to geﬁtinib. N. Engl. J. Med.
352, 786–792.
Koche, R.P., Rodriguez-Fos, E., Helmsauer, K., Burkert, M., MacArthur, I.C.,
Maag, J., Chamorro, R., Munoz-Perez, N., Puiggro` s, M., Dorado Garcia, H.,
et al. (2020). Extrachromosomal circular DNA drives oncogenic genome re-
modeling in neuroblastoma. Nat. Genet. 52, 29–34.
Ko¨ hler, C., Nittner, D., Rambow, F., Radaelli, E., Stanchi, F., Vandamme, N.,
Baggiolini, A., Sommer, L., Berx, G., van den Oord, J.J., et al. (2017). Mouse
cutaneous melanoma induced by mutant BRaf arises from expansion and
dedifferentiation of mature pigmented melanocytes. Cell Stem Cell 21,
679–693.e6.
de Koning, H.J., van der Aalst, C.M., de Jong, P.A., Scholten, E.T., Nackaerts,
K., Heuvelmans, M.A., Lammers, J.-W.J., Weenink, C., Yousaf-Khan, U., Hor-
eweg, N., et al. (2020). Reduced lung-cancer mortality with volume CT
screening in a randomized trial. N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 503–513.
Kopetz, S., Desai, J., Chan, E., Hecht, J.R., O’Dwyer, P.J., Maru, D., Morris, V.,
Janku, F., Dasari, A., Chung, W., et al. (2015). Phase II pilot study of vemura-
fenib in patients with metastatic BRAF-mutated colorectal cancer. J. Clin. On-
col. 33, 4032–4038.
Kronborg, O., Jørgensen, O.D., Fenger, C., and Rasmussen, M. (2004). Ran-
domized study of biennial screening with a faecal occult blood test: results af-
ter nine screening rounds. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 39, 846–851.
Kucab, J.E., Zou, X., Morganella, S., Joel, M., Nanda, A.S., Nagy, E., Gomez,
C., Degasperi, A., Harris, R., Jackson, S.P., et al. (2019). A compendium of
mutational signatures of environmental agents. Cell 177, 821–836.e16.
Kurtz, D.M., Soo, J., Co Ting Keh, L., Alig, S., Chabon, J.J., Sworder, B.J.,
Schultz, A., Jin, M.C., Scherer, F., Garofalo, A., et al. (2021). Enhanced detec-
tion of minimal residual disease by targeted sequencing of phased variants in
circulating tumor DNA. Nat. Biotechnol. 39, 1537–1547.
ll
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
473
Review
Lambert, A.W., Pattabiraman, D.R., and Weinberg, R.A. (2017). Emerging bio-
logical principles of metastasis. Cell 168, 670–691.
Lawrence, M.S., Stojanov, P., Polak, P., Kryukov, G.V., Cibulskis, K., Siva-
chenko, A., Carter, S.L., Stewart, C., Mermel, C.H., Roberts, S.A., et al.
(2013). Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-
associated genes. Nature 499, 214–218.
Lawson, A.R.J., Abascal, F., Coorens, T.H.H., Hooks, Y., O’Neill, L., Latimer,
C., Raine, K., Sanders, M.A., Warren, A.Y., Mahbubani, K.T.A., et al. (2020).
Extensive heterogeneity in somatic mutation and selection in the human
bladder. Science 370, 75–82.
Lee-Six, H., Olafsson, S., Ellis, P., Osborne, R.J., Sanders, M.A., Moore, L.,
Georgakopoulos, N., Torrente, F., Noorani, A., Goddard, M., et al. (2019).
The landscape of somatic mutation in normal colorectal epithelial cells. Nature
574, 532–537.
Lennon, A.M., Buchanan, A.H., Kinde, I., Warren, A., Honushefsky, A., Cohain,
A.T., Ledbetter, D.H., Sanﬁlippo, F., Sheridan, K., Rosica, D., et al. (2020).
Feasibility of blood testing combined with PET-CT to screen for cancer and
guide intervention. Science 369, eabb9601.
Letouze´ , E., Shinde, J., Renault, V., Couchy, G., Blanc, J.-F., Tubacher, E., Ba-
yard, Q., Bacq, D., Meyer, V., Semhoun, J., et al. (2017). Mutational signatures
reveal the dynamic interplay of risk factors and cellular processes during liver
tumorigenesis. Nat. Commun. 8, 1315.
Li, R., Di, L., Li, J., Fan, W., Liu, Y., Guo, W., Liu, W., Liu, L., Li, Q., Chen, L.,
et al. (2021). A body map of somatic mutagenesis in morphologically normal
human tissues. Nature 597, 398–403.
Li, S., Liu, M., Do, M.H., Chou, C., Stamatiades, E.G., Nixon, B.G., Shi, W.,
Zhang, X., Li, P., Gao, S., et al. (2020a). Cancer immunotherapy via targeted
TGF-b signalling blockade in TH cells. Nature 587, 121–125.
Li, Y., Roberts, N.D., Wala, J.A., Shapira, O., Schumacher, S.E., Kumar, K.,
Khurana, E., Waszak, S., Korbel, J.O., Haber, J.E., et al. (2020b). Patterns of
somatic structural variation in human cancer genomes. Nature 578, 112–121.
Liao, X., Lochhead, P., Nishihara, R., Morikawa, T., Kuchiba, A., Yamauchi, M.,
Imamura, Y., Qian, Z.R., Baba, Y., Shima, K., et al. (2012). Aspirin use, tumor
PIK3CA mutation, and colorectal-cancer survival. N. Engl. J. Med. 367,
1596–1606.
Lim, S.S., Vos, T., Flaxman, A.D., Danaei, G., Shibuya, K., Adair-Rohani, H., Al-
Mazroa, M.A., Amann, M., Anderson, H.R., Andrews, K.G., et al. (2012). A
comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to
67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 380, 2224–2260.
Lin, K.H., Rutter, J.C., Xie, A., Pardieu, B., Winn, E.T., Bello, R.D., Forget, A.,
Itzykson, R., Ahn, Y.-R., Dai, Z., et al. (2020). Using antagonistic pleiotropy
to design a chemotherapy-induced evolutionary trap to target drug resistance
in cancer. Nat. Genet. 52, 408–417.
Lindholm, E., Brevinge, H., and Haglind, E. (2008). Survival beneﬁt in a ran-
domized clinical trial of faecal occult blood screening for colorectal cancer.
Br. J. Surg. 95, 1029–1036.
Litchﬁeld, K., Reading, J.L., Puttick, C., Thakkar, K., Abbosh, C., Bentham, R.,
Watkins, T.B.K., Rosenthal, R., Biswas, D., Rowan, A., et al. (2021). Meta-anal-
ysis of tumor- and T cell-intrinsic mechanisms of sensitization to checkpoint
inhibition. Cell 184, 596–614.e14.
Liu, M.C., Klein, E., Hubbell, E., Maddala, T., Aravanis, A.M., Beausang, J.F.,
Filippova, D., Gross, S., Jamshidi, A., Kurtzman, K., et al. (2018). Plasma
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) assays for early multi-cancer detection: the circulating
cell-free genome atlas (CCGA) study. Ann. Oncol. 29, viii14.
Liu, M.C., Oxnard, G.R., Klein, E.A., Swanton, C., Seiden, M.V., Liu, M.C., Ox-
nard, G.R., Klein, E.A., Smith, D., Richards, D., et al. (2020a). Sensitive and
speciﬁc multi-cancer detection and localization using methylation signatures
in cell-free DNA. Ann. Oncol. 31, 745–759.
Liu, S., Ren, J., and ten Dijke, P. (2021). Targeting TGFb signal transduction for
cancer therapy. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 6, 1–20.
Liu, W., Laitinen, S., Khan, S., Vihinen, M., Kowalski, J., Yu, G., Chen, L., Ew-
ing, C.M., Eisenberger, M.A., Carducci, M.A., et al. (2009). Copy number anal-
ysis indicates monoclonal origin of lethal metastatic prostate cancer. Nat.
Med. 15, 559–565.
Liu, Y., Li, C., Shen, S., Chen, X., Szlachta, K., Edmonson, M.N., Shao, Y., Ma,
X., Hyle, J., Wright, S., et al. (2020b). Discovery of regulatory noncoding vari-
ants in individual cancer genomes by using cis-X. Nat. Genet. 52, 811–818.
Lo, Y.M.D., Han, D.S.C., Jiang, P., and Chiu, R.W.K. (2021). Epigenetics, frag-
mentomics, and topology of cell-free DNA in liquid biopsies. Science 372,
eaaw3616.
Lo´ pez-Otı´n, C., Blasco, M.A., Partridge, L., Serrano, M., and Kroemer, G.
(2013). The hallmarks of aging. Cell 153, 1194–1217.
Louro, J., Roma´ n, M., Posso, M., Va´ zquez, I., Saladie´ , F., Rodriguez-Arana, A.,
Quintana, M.J., Domingo, L., Bare´ , M., Marcos-Gragera, R., et al. (2021).
Developing and validating an individualized breast cancer risk prediction
model for women attending breast cancer screening. PLoS One 16, e0248930.
Lynch, T.J., Bell, D.W., Sordella, R., Gurubhagavatula, S., Okimoto, R.A.,
Brannigan, B.W., Harris, P.L., Haserlat, S.M., Supko, J.G., Haluska, F.G.,
et al. (2004). Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor un-
derlying responsiveness of non–small-cell lung cancer to geﬁtinib. N. Engl. J.
Med. 350, 2129–2139.
Majzner, R.G., and Mackall, C.L. (2018). Tumor antigen escape from CAR
T-cell therapy. Cancer Discov. 8, 1219–1226.
Mandel, J.S., Church, T.R., Bond, J.H., Ederer, F., Geisser, M.S., Mongin, S.J.,
Snover, D.C., and Schuman, L.M. (2000). The effect of fecal occult-blood
screening on the incidence of colorectal cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 343,
1603–1607.
Mansour, M.R., Abraham, B.J., Anders, L., Berezovskaya, A., Gutierrez, A.,
Durbin, A.D., Etchin, J., Lawton, L., Sallan, S.E., Silverman, L.B., et al.
(2014). Oncogene regulation. An oncogenic super-enhancer formed through
somatic mutation of a noncoding intergenic element. Science 346, 1373–1377.
Mariathasan, S., Turley, S.J., Nickles, D., Castiglioni, A., Yuen, K., Wang, Y.,
Kadel, E.E., III, Koeppen, H., Astarita, J.L., Cubas, R., et al. (2018). TGFb atten-
uates tumour response to PD-L1 blockade by contributing to exclusion of
T cells. Nature 554, 544–548.
Marquis, C., Fonseca, C.L., Queen, K.A., Wood, L., Vandal, S.E., Malaby,
H.L.H., Clayton, J.E., and Stumpff, J. (2021). Chromosomally unstable tumor
cells speciﬁcally require KIF18A for proliferation. Nat. Commun. 12, 1213.
Martin, G.S. (2004). The road to Src. Oncogene 23, 7910–7917.
Martincorena, I., Roshan, A., Gerstung, M., Ellis, P., Van Loo, P., McLaren, S.,
Wedge, D.C., Fullam, A., Alexandrov, L.B., Tubio, J.M., et al. (2015). Tumor
evolution. High burden and pervasive positive selection of somatic mutations
in normal human skin. Science 348, 880–886.
Martincorena, I., Raine, K.M., Gerstung, M., Dawson, K.J., Haase, K., Van Loo,
P., Davies, H., Stratton, M.R., and Campbell, P.J. (2017). Universal patterns of
selection in cancer and somatic tissues. Cell 171, 1029–1041.
Martincorena, I., Fowler, J.C., Wabik, A., Lawson, A.R.J., Abascal, F., Hall,
M.W.J., Cagan, A., Murai, K., Mahbubani, K., Stratton, M.R., et al. (2018). So-
matic mutant clones colonize the human esophagus with age. Science 362,
911–917.
Martı´nez-Jime´ nez, F., Muin˜ os, F., Sentı´s, I., Deu-Pons, J., Reyes-Salazar, I.,
Arnedo-Pac, C., Mularoni, L., Pich, O., Bonet, J., Kranas, H., et al. (2020). A
compendium of mutational cancer driver genes. Nat. Rev. Cancer 20,
555–572.
Marty, R., Kaabinejadian, S., Rossell, D., Slifker, M.J., van de Haar, J., Engin,
H.B., de Prisco, N., Ideker, T., Hildebrand, W.H., Font-Burgada, J., et al.
(2017). MHC-I genotype restricts the oncogenic mutational landscape. Cell
171, 1272–1283.e15.
Marty Pyke, R., Thompson, W.K., Salem, R.M., Font-Burgada, J., Zanetti, M.,
and Carter, H. (2018). Evolutionary pressure against MHC class II binding can-
cer mutations. Cell 175, 416–428.e13.
Marusyk, A., Tabassum, D.P., Altrock, P.M., Almendro, V., Michor, F., and Pol-
yak, K. (2014). Non-cell-autonomous driving of tumour growth supports sub-
clonal heterogeneity. Nature 514, 54–58.
Marusyk, A., Janiszewska, M., and Polyak, K. (2020). Intratumor heterogene-
ity: the rosetta stone of therapy resistance. Cancer Cell 37, 471–484.
Massague´ , J., and Obenauf, A.C. (2016). Metastatic colonization by circulating
tumour cells. Nature 529, 298–306.
ll
474
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
Review
Maude, S.L., Laetsch, T.W., Buechner, J., Rives, S., Boyer, M., Bittencourt, H.,
Bader, P., Verneris, M.R., Stefanski, H.E., Myers, G.D., et al. (2018). Tisagen-
lecleucel in children and young adults with B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia.
N. Engl. J. Med. 378, 439–448.
Mavrakis, K.J., McDonald, E.R., Schlabach, M.R., Billy, E., Hoffman, G.R.,
deWeck, A., Ruddy, D.A., Venkatesan, K., Yu, J., McAllister, G., et al. (2016).
Disordered methionine metabolism in MTAP/CDKN2A-deleted cancers leads
to dependence on PRMT5. Science 351, 1208–1213.
McEvoy, A.C., Warburton, L., Al-Ogaili, Z., Celliers, L., Calapre, L., Pereira,
M.R., Khattak, M.A., Meniawy, T.M., Millward, M., Ziman, M., et al. (2018). Cor-
relation between circulating tumour DNA and metabolic tumour burden in met-
astatic melanoma patients. BMC Cancer 18, 726.
McFadden, D.G., Papagiannakopoulos, T., Taylor-Weiner, A., Stewart, C.,
Carter, S.L., Cibulskis, K., Bhutkar, A., McKenna, A., Dooley, A., Vernon, A.,
et al. (2014). Genetic and clonal dissection of murine small cell lung carcinoma
progression by genome sequencing. Cell 156, 1298–1311.
McGranahan, N., Furness, A.J.S., Rosenthal, R., Ramskov, S., Lyngaa, R.,
Saini, S.K., Jamal-Hanjani, M., Wilson, G.A., Birkbak, N.J., Hiley, C.T., et al.
(2016). Clonal neoantigens elicit T cell immunoreactivity and sensitivity to im-
mune checkpoint blockade. Science 351, 1463–1469.
McGranahan, N., Rosenthal, R., Hiley, C.T., Rowan, A.J., Watkins, T.B.K., Wil-
son, G.A., Birkbak, N.J., Veeriah, S., Van Loo, P., Herrero, J., et al. (2017).
Allele-speciﬁc HLA loss and immune escape in lung cancer evolution. Cell
171, 1259–1271.
McLendon, R., Friedman, A., Bigner, D., Van Meir, E.G., Brat, D.J., Mastrogia-
nakis, G.M., Olson, J.J., Mikkelsen, T., Lehman, N., Aldape, K., et al. (2008).
Comprehensive genomic characterization deﬁnes human glioblastoma genes
and core pathways. Nature 455, 1061–1068.
McMahon, C.M., Ferng, T., Canaani, J., Wang, E.S., Morrissette, J.J.D., East-
burn, D.J., Pellegrino, M., Durruthy-Durruthy, R., Watt, C.D., Asthana, S., et al.
(2019). Clonal selection with RAS pathway activation mediates secondary clin-
ical resistance to selective FLT3 inhibition in acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer
Discov. 9, 1050–1063.
Middleton, G., Fletcher, P., Popat, S., Savage, J., Summers, Y., Greystoke, A.,
Gilligan, D., Cave, J., O’Rourke, N., Brewster, A., et al. (2020a). The National
Lung Matrix Trial of personalized therapy in lung cancer. Nature 583, 807–812.
Middleton, G., Yang, Y., Campbell, C.D., Andre´ , T., Atreya, C.E., Schellens,
J.H.M., Yoshino, T., Bendell, J.C., Hollebecque, A., McRee, A.J., et al.
(2020b). BRAF-mutant transcriptional subtypes predict outcome of combined
BRAF, MEK, and EGFR blockade with dabrafenib, trametinib, and panitumu-
mab in patients with colorectal cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 26, 2466–2476.
Middleton, G., Robbins, H., Andre, F., and Swanton, C. (2021). A state-of-the-
art review of stratiﬁed medicine in cancer: towards a future precision medicine
strategy in cancer. Ann. Oncol. 33, 143–157.
Misale, S., Di Nicolantonio, F., Sartore-Bianchi, A., Siena, S., and Bardelli, A.
(2014). Resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal cancer: from heteroge-
neity to convergent evolution. Cancer Discov. 4, 1269–1280.
Moody, S., Senkin, S., Islam, S.M.A., Wang, J., Nasrollahzadeh, D., Cortez
Cardoso Penha, R., Fitzgerald, S., Bergstrom, E.N., Atkins, J., He, Y., et al.
(2021). Mutational signatures in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma from
eight countries with varying incidence. Nat. Genet. 53, 1553–1563.
Moon, H., Donahue, L.R., Choi, E., Scumpia, P.O., Lowry, W.E., Grenier, J.K.,
Zhu, J., and White, A.C. (2017). Melanocyte stem cell activation and transloca-
tion initiate cutaneous melanoma in response to UV exposure. Cell Stem Cell
21, 665–678.e6.
Moore, L., Leongamornlert, D., Coorens, T.H.H., Sanders, M.A., Ellis, P., Den-
tro, S.C., Dawson, K.J., Butler, T., Rahbari, R., Mitchell, T.J., et al. (2020). The
mutational landscape of normal human endometrial epithelium. Nature 580,
640–646.
Moore, L., Cagan, A., Coorens, T.H.H., Neville, M.D.C., Sanghvi, R., Sanders,
M.A., Oliver, T.R.W., Leongamornlert, D., Ellis, P., Noorani, A., et al. (2021). The
mutational landscape of human somatic and germline cells. Nature 597,
381–386.
Muin˜ os, F., Martı´nez-Jime´ nez, F., Pich, O., Gonzalez-Perez, A., and Lopez-
Bigas, N. (2021). In silico saturation mutagenesis of cancer genes. Nature
596, 428–432.
Murugaesu, N., Wilson, G.A., Birkbak, N.J., Watkins, T., McGranahan, N., Ku-
mar, S., Abbassi-Ghadi, N., Salm, M., Mitter, R., Horswell, S., et al. (2015).
Tracking the genomic evolution of esophageal adenocarcinoma through neo-
adjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer Discov. 5, 821–831.
Naranbhai, V., Viard, M., Dean, M., Groha, S., Braun, D.A., Labaki, C., Shukla,
S.A., Yuki, Y., Shah, P., Chin, K., et al. (2022). HLA-A*03 and response to im-
mune checkpoint blockade in cancer: an epidemiological biomarker study.
Lancet Oncol. 23, 172–184.
Nathanson, D.A., Gini, B., Mottahedeh, J., Visnyei, K., Koga, T., Gomez, G.,
Eskin, A., Hwang, K., Wang, J., Masui, K., et al. (2014). Targeted therapy resis-
tance mediated by dynamic regulation of extrachromosomal mutant EGFR
DNA. Science 343, 72–76.
Ng, A.W.T., Poon, S.L., Huang, M.N., Lim, J.Q., Boot, A., Yu, W., Suzuki, Y.,
Thangaraju, S., Ng, C.C.Y., Tan, P., et al. (2017). Aristolochic acids and their
derivatives are widely implicated in liver cancers in Taiwan and throughout
Asia. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, 240–256.e11.
Ng, S.W.K., Rouhani, F.J., Brunner, S.F., Brzozowska, N., Aitken, S.J., Yang,
M., Abascal, F., Moore, L., Nikitopoulou, E., Chappell, L., et al. (2021). Conver-
gent somatic mutations in metabolism genes in chronic liver disease. Nature
598, 473–478.
Nguyen, B., Fong, C., Luthra, A., Smith, S.A., DiNatale, R.G., Nandakumar, S.,
Walch, H., Chatila, W.K., Madupuri, R., Kundra, R., et al. (2022). Genomic char-
acterization of metastatic patterns from prospective clinical sequencing of
25,000 patients. Cell 185, 563–575.e11.
Nogueira, L.M., Yabroff, K.R., and Bernstein, A. (2020). Climate change and
cancer. CA. Cancer J. Clin. 70, 239–244.
Nowell, P.C. (1976). The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations. Science
194, 23–28.
Ofﬁce for National Statistics (2019). Cancer Survival by Stage at Diagnosis
for England. https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/health
andsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/datasets/cancersurvivalratescancer
survivalinenglandadultsdiagnosed, Accessed date: November 28, 2021.
Ombrato, L., and Malanchi, I. (2019). Subclonal cooperation rewrites metas-
tasis. Nat. Cell Biol. 21, 797–798.
Oren, Y., Tsabar, M., Cuoco, M.S., Amir-Zilberstein, L., Cabanos, H.F., H€utter,
J.-C., Hu, B., Thakore, P.I., Tabaka, M., Fulco, C.P., et al. (2021). Cycling can-
cer persister cells arise from lineages with distinct programs. Nature 596,
576–582.
Ortmann, C.A., Kent, D.G., Nangalia, J., Silber, Y., Wedge, D.C., Grinfeld, J.,
Baxter, E.J., Massie, C.E., Papaemmanuil, E., Menon, S., et al. (2015). Effect
of mutation order on myeloproliferative neoplasms. N. Engl. J. Med. 372,
601–612.
Ostrem, J.M., Peters, U., Sos, M.L., Wells, J.A., and Shokat, K.M. (2013). K-
Ras(G12C) inhibitors allosterically control GTP afﬁnity and effector interac-
tions. Nature 503, 548–551.
Oxnard, G.R., Maddala, T., Hubbell, E., Aravanis, A., Zhang, N., Venn, O., Va-
louev, A., Shen, L., Patel, S., Jamshidi, A., et al. (2018). Genome-wide
sequencing for early stage lung cancer detection from plasma cell-free DNA
(cfDNA): the Circulating Cancer Genome Atlas (CCGA) study. J. Clin. Oncol.
36, LBA8501.
Paci, E., Broeders, M., Hofvind, S., Puliti, D., and Duffy, S.W.; EUROSCREEN
Working Group (2014). European breast cancer service screening outcomes: a
ﬁrst balance sheet of the beneﬁts and harms. Cancer Epidemiol. Prev. Bio-
mark. 23, 1159–1163.
Pagadala, M., Wu, V.H., Pe´ rez-Guijarro, E., Kim, H., Castro, A., Talwar, J.,
Gonzalez-Colin, C., Cao, S., Schmiedel, B.J., Salem, R.M., et al. (2021). Germ-
line variants that inﬂuence the tumor immune microenvironment also drive
response to immunotherapy. Preprint at BioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/
2021.04.14.436660.
Pan, H., Renaud, L., Chaligne, R., Bloehdorn, J., Tausch, E., Mertens, D., Fink,
A.M., Fischer, K., Zhang, C., Betel, D., et al. (2021). Discovery of candidate
DNA methylation cancer driver genes. Cancer Discov. 11, 2266–2281.
Pareja, F., Ptashkin, R.N., Brown, D.N., Derakhshan, F., Selenica, P., Silva,
E.M., Gazzo, A.M., Paula, A.D.C., Breen, K., Shen, R., et al. (2021). Cancer
causative mutations occurring in early embryogenesis. Cancer Discov. 12,
949–957.
ll
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
475
Review
Parsons, D.W., Jones, S., Zhang, X., Lin, J.C.-H., Leary, R.J., Angenendt, P.,
Mankoo, P., Carter, H., Siu, I.-M., Gallia, G.L., et al. (2008). An integrated
genomic
analysis
of
human
glioblastoma
multiforme.
Science
321,
1807–1812.
Pech, O., May, A., Manner, H., Behrens, A., Pohl, J., Weferling, M., Hartmann,
U., Manner, N., Huijsmans, J., Gossner, L., et al. (2014). Long-term efﬁcacy
and safety of endoscopic resection for patients with mucosal adenocarcinoma
of the esophagus. Gastroenterology 146, 652.
Pennycuick, A., Teixeira, V.H., AbdulJabbar, K., Raza, S.E.A., Lund, T.,
Akarca, A.U., Rosenthal, R., Kalinke, L., Chandrasekharan, D.P., Pipinikas,
C.P., et al. (2020). Immune surveillance in clinical regression of preinvasive
squamous cell lung cancer. Cancer Discov. 10, 1489–1499.
Petljak, M., Alexandrov, L.B., Brammeld, J.S., Price, S., Wedge, D.C., Gross-
mann, S., Dawson, K.J., Ju, Y.S., Iorio, F., Tubio, J.M.C., et al. (2019). Charac-
terizing mutational signatures in human cancer cell lines reveals episodic
APOBEC mutagenesis. Cell 176, 1282–1294.e20.
Piccart-Gebhart, M.J., Procter, M., Leyland-Jones, B., Goldhirsch, A., Untch,
M., Smith, I., Gianni, L., Baselga, J., Bell, R., Jackisch, C., et al. (2005). Tras-
tuzumab after adjuvant chemotherapy in HER2-positive breast cancer.
N. Engl. J. Med. 353, 1659–1672.
Pich, O., Muin˜ os, F., Lolkema, M.P., Steeghs, N., Gonzalez-Perez, A., and Lo-
pez-Bigas, N. (2019). The mutational footprints of cancer therapies. Nat.
Genet. 51, 1732–1740.
Pich, O., Cortes-Bullich, A., Muin˜ os, F., Pratcorona, M., Gonzalez-Perez, A.,
and Lopez-Bigas, N. (2021). The evolution of hematopoietic cells under cancer
therapy. Nat. Commun. 12, 4803.
Pilger, D., Seymour, L.W., and Jackson, S.P. (2021). Interfaces between
cellular responses to DNA damage and cancer immunotherapy. Genes Dev.
35, 602–618.
Pleguezuelos-Manzano, C., Puschhof, J., Rosendahl Huber, A., van Hoeck, A.,
Wood, H.M., Nomburg, J., Gurjao, C., Manders, F., Dalmasso, G., Stege, P.B.,
et al. (2020). Mutational signature in colorectal cancer caused by genotoxic
pks+ E. coli. Nature 580, 269–273.
Poste, G., and Fidler, I.J. (1980). The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis. Na-
ture 283, 139–146.
Powles, T., Assaf, Z.J., Davarpanah, N., Banchereau, R., Szabados, B.E.,
Yuen, K.C., Grivas, P., Hussain, M., Oudard, S., Gschwend, J.E., et al.
(2021). ctDNA guiding adjuvant immunotherapy in urothelial carcinoma. Na-
ture 595, 432–437.
Priestley, P., Baber, J., Lolkema, M.P., Steeghs, N., de Bruijn, E., Shale, C.,
Duyvesteyn, K., Haidari, S., van Hoeck, A., Onstenk, W., et al. (2019). Pan-can-
cer whole-genome analyses of metastatic solid tumours. Nature 575, 210–216.
Qi, F., Okimoto, G., Jube, S., Napolitano, A., Pass, H.I., Laczko, R., Demay,
R.M., Khan, G., Tiirikainen, M., Rinaudo, C., et al. (2013). Continuous exposure
to chrysotile asbestos can cause transformation of human mesothelial cells via
HMGB1 and TNF-a signaling. Am. J. Pathol. 183, 1654–1666.
Quinn, J.J., Jones, M.G., Okimoto, R.A., Nanjo, S., Chan, M.M., Yosef, N., Bi-
vona, T.G., and Weissman, J.S. (2021). Single-cell lineages reveal the rates,
routes, and drivers of metastasis in cancer xenografts. Science 371,
eabc1944.
Quinton, R.J., DiDomizio, A., Vittoria, M.A., Koty´nkova´ , K., Ticas, C.J., Patel,
S., Koga, Y., Vakhshoorzadeh, J., Hermance, N., Kuroda, T.S., et al. (2021).
Whole-genome doubling confers unique genetic vulnerabilities on tumour
cells. Nature 590, 492–497.
Raaschou-Nielsen, O., Bak, H., Sørensen, M., Jensen, S.S., Ketzel, M., Hvid-
berg, M., Schnohr, P., Tjønneland, A., Overvad, K., and Loft, S. (2010). Air
pollution from trafﬁc and risk for lung cancer in three Danish cohorts. Cancer
Epidemiol. Prev. Biomark 19, 1284–1291.
Raaschou-Nielsen, O., Andersen, Z.J., Beelen, R., Samoli, E., Stafoggia, M.,
Weinmayr, G., Hoffmann, B., Fischer, P., Nieuwenhuijsen, M.J., Brunekreef,
B., et al. (2013). Air pollution and lung cancer incidence in 17 European co-
horts: prospective analyses from the European Study of Cohorts for Air Pollu-
tion Effects (ESCAPE). Lancet Oncol. 14, 813–822.
Redman, M.W., Papadimitrakopoulou, V.A., Minichiello, K., Hirsch, F.R.,
Mack, P.C., Schwartz, L.H., Vokes, E., Ramalingam, S., Leighl, N., Bradley,
J., et al. (2020). Biomarker-driven therapies for previously treated squamous
non-small-cell lung cancer (Lung-MAP SWOG S1400): a biomarker-driven
master protocol. Lancet Oncol. 21, 1589–1601.
Rehman, S.K., Haynes, J., Collignon, E., Brown, K.R., Wang, Y., Nixon, A.M.L.,
Bruce, J.P., Wintersinger, J.A., Mer, A.S., Lo, E.B.L., et al. (2021). Colorectal
cancer cells enter a diapause-like DTP state to survive chemotherapy. Cell
184, 226–242.e21.
Rheinbay, E., Nielsen, M.M., Abascal, F., Wala, J.A., Shapira, O., Tiao, G.,
Hornshøj, H., Hess, J.M., Juul, R.I., Lin, Z., et al. (2020). Analyses of non-cod-
ing somatic drivers in 2,658 cancer whole genomes. Nature 578, 102–111.
Richards, S., Aziz, N., Bale, S., Bick, D., Das, S., Gastier-Foster, J., Grody,
W.W., Hegde, M., Lyon, E., Spector, E., et al. (2015). Standards and guidelines
for the interpretation of sequence variants: a joint consensus recommendation
of the American College of medical genetics and genomics and the association
for molecular pathology. Genet. Med 17, 405–424.
Riva, L., Pandiri, A.R., Li, Y.R., Droop, A., Hewinson, J., Quail, M.A., Iyer, V.,
Shepherd, R., Herbert, R.A., Campbell, P.J., et al. (2020). The mutational
signature proﬁle of known and suspected human carcinogens in mice. Nat.
Genet. 52, 1189–1197.
Rodier, F., Coppe´ , J.-P., Patil, C.K., Hoeijmakers, W.A.M., Mun˜ oz, D.P., Raza,
S.R., Freund, A., Campeau, E., Davalos, A.R., and Campisi, J. (2009). Persis-
tent DNA damage signalling triggers senescence-associated inﬂammatory
cytokine secretion. Nat. Cell Biol. 11, 973–979.
Rosenberg, S.A., and Restifo, N.P. (2015). Adoptive cell transfer as personal-
ized immunotherapy for human cancer. Science 348, 62–68.
Rothwell, P.M., Wilson, M., Price, J.F., Belch, J.F.F., Meade, T.W., and Mehta,
Z. (2012). Effect of daily aspirin on risk of cancer metastasis: a study of incident
cancers during randomised controlled trials. Lancet 379, 1591–1601.
Rozhok, A., and DeGregori, J. (2019). A generalized theory of age-dependent
carcinogenesis. ELife 8, e39950.
Ruhland, M.K., Loza, A.J., Capietto, A.-H., Luo, X., Knolhoff, B.L., Flanagan,
K.C., Belt, B.A., Alspach, E., Leahy, K., Luo, J., et al. (2016). Stromal senes-
cence establishes an immunosuppressive microenvironment that drives
tumorigenesis. Nat. Commun. 7, 11762.
Sabarinathan, R., Pich, O., Martincorena, I., Rubio-Perez, C., Juul, M., Wala,
J., Schumacher, S., Shapira, O., Sidiropoulos, N., Waszak, S.M., et al.
(2017). The Whole-Genome Panorama of Cancer Drivers. Preprint at bioRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/190330.
Saito, Y., Miura, H., Takahashi, N., Kuwahara, Y., Yamamoto, Y., Fukumoto,
M., and Yamamoto, F. (2020). Involvement of APOBEC3B in mutation induc-
tion by irradiation. J. Radiat. Res. (Tokyo) 61, 819–827.
Salama, A.K.S., Li, S., Macrae, E.R., Park, J.-I., Mitchell, E.P., Zwiebel, J.A.,
Chen, H.X., Gray, R.J., McShane, L.M., Rubinstein, L.V., et al. (2020). Dabra-
fenib and trametinib in patients with tumors with BRAFV600E mutations: re-
sults of the NCI-MATCH trial subprotocol H. J. Clin. Oncol. 38, 3895–3904.
Sansregret, L., Vanhaesebroeck, B., and Swanton, C. (2018). Determinants
and clinical implications of chromosomal instability in cancer. Nat. Rev. Clin.
Oncol. 15, 139–150.
Sartore-Bianchi, A., Pietrantonio, F., Lonardi, S., Mussolin, B., Rua, F., Fenoc-
chio, E., Amatu, A., Corallo, S., Manai, C., Tosi, F., et al. (2021). Phase II study
of anti-EGFR rechallenge therapy with panitumumab driven by circulating tu-
mor DNA molecular selection in metastatic colorectal cancer: the CHRONOS
trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 39, 3506.
Sayaman, R.W., Saad, M., Thorsson, V., Hu, D., Hendrickx, W., Roelands, J.,
Porta-Pardo, E., Mokrab, Y., Farshidfar, F., Kirchhoff, T., et al. (2021). Germline
genetic contribution to the immune landscape of cancer. Immunity 54,
367–386.e8.
Schmitt, M.W., Kennedy, S.R., Salk, J.J., Fox, E.J., Hiatt, J.B., and Loeb, L.A.
(2012). Detection of ultra-rare mutations by next-generation sequencing. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 109, 14508–14513.
Scholeﬁeld, J.H., Moss, S., Suﬁ, F., Mangham, C.M., and Hardcastle, J.D.
(2002). Effect of faecal occult blood screening on mortality from colorectal can-
cer: results from a randomised controlled trial. Gut 50, 840–844.
Schuh, A., Becq, J., Humphray, S., Alexa, A., Burns, A., Clifford, R., Feller,
S.M., Grocock, R., Henderson, S., Khrebtukova, I., et al. (2012). Monitoring
ll
476
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
Review
chronic lymphocytic leukemia progression by whole genome sequencing re-
veals heterogeneous clonal evolution patterns. Blood 120, 4191–4196.
Schwarz, R.F., Ng, C.K.Y., Cooke, S.L., Newman, S., Temple, J., Piskorz,
A.M., Gale, D., Sayal, K., Murtaza, M., Baldwin, P.J., et al. (2015). Spatial
and temporal heterogeneity in high-grade serous ovarian cancer: a phyloge-
netic analysis. PLoS Med. 12, e1001789.
Shah, N.N., and Fry, T.J. (2019). Mechanisms of resistance to CAR T cell ther-
apy. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 16, 372–385.
Shah, S.P., Roth, A., Goya, R., Oloumi, A., Ha, G., Zhao, Y., Turashvili, G., Ding,
J., Tse, K., Haffari, G., et al. (2012). The clonal and mutational evolution spec-
trum of primary triple-negative breast cancers. Nature 486, 395–399.
Shahamatdar, S., He, M.X., Reyna, M.A., Gusev, A., AlDubayan, S.H., Van Al-
len, E.M., and Ramachandran, S. (2020). Germline features associated with
immune inﬁltration in solid tumors. Cell Rep 30, 2900–2908.e4.
Shi, H., Hugo, W., Kong, X., Hong, A., Koya, R.C., Moriceau, G., Chodon, T.,
Guo, R., Johnson, D.B., Dahlman, K.B., et al. (2014). Acquired resistance
and clonal evolution in melanoma during BRAF inhibitor therapy. Cancer Dis-
cov. 4, 80–93.
Shih, D.J.H., Nayyar, N., Bihun, I., Dagogo-Jack, I., Gill, C.M., Aquilanti, E.,
Bertalan, M., Kaplan, A., D’Andrea, M.R., Chukwueke, U., et al. (2020).
Genomic characterization of human brain metastases identiﬁes drivers of met-
astatic lung adenocarcinoma. Nat. Genet. 52, 371–377.
Shin, D.S., Zaretsky, J.M., Escuin-Ordinas, H., Garcia-Diaz, A., Hu-Lieskovan,
S., Kalbasi, A., Grasso, C.S., Hugo, W., Sandoval, S., Torrejon, D.Y., et al.
(2017). Primary resistance to PD-1 blockade mediated by JAK1/2 mutations.
Cancer Discov. 7, 188–201.
Short, S., Fielder, E., Miwa, S., and von Zglinicki, T. (2019). Senolytics and se-
nostatics as adjuvant tumour therapy. EBioMedicine 41, 683–692.
Shoshani, O., Brunner, S.F., Yaeger, R., Ly, P., Nechemia-Arbely, Y., Kim,
D.H., Fang, R., Castillon, G.A., Yu, M., Li, J.S.Z., et al. (2021). Chromothripsis
drives the evolution of gene ampliﬁcation in cancer. Nature 591, 137–141.
Siena, S., Sartore-Bianchi, A., Personeni, N., Pietrantonio, F., Germano, G.,
Amatu, A., Bonoldi, E., Valtorta, E., Barault, L., Di Nicolantonio, F., et al.
(2019). Pembrolizumab in MMR-proﬁcient metastatic colorectal cancer phar-
macologically
primed
to
trigger
dynamic
hypermutation
status:
the
ARETHUSA trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 37, TPS2659.
Singleton, K.R., Crawford, L., Tsui, E., Manchester, H.E., Maertens, O., Liu, X.,
Liberti, M.V., Magpusao, A.N., Stein, E.M., Tingley, J.P., et al. (2017). Mela-
noma therapeutic strategies that select against resistance by exploiting
MYC-driven evolutionary convergence. Cell Rep. 21, 2796–2812.
Sjo¨ blom, T., Jones, S., Wood, L.D., Parsons, D.W., Lin, J., Barber, T.D., Man-
delker, D., Leary, R.J., Ptak, J., Silliman, N., et al. (2006). The consensus cod-
ing sequences of human breast and colorectal cancers. Science 314,
268–274.
Skoulidis, F., Li, B.T., Dy, G.K., Price, T.J., Falchook, G.S., Wolf, J., Italiano, A.,
Schuler, M., Borghaei, H., Barlesi, F., et al. (2021). Sotorasib for lung cancers
with KRAS p.G12C mutation. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 2371–2381.
Smith, S.G., Sestak, I., Forster, A., Partridge, A., Side, L., Wolf, M.S., Horne, R.,
Wardle, J., and Cuzick, J. (2016). Factors affecting uptake and adherence to
breast cancer chemoprevention: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ann. Oncol. 27, 575–590.
Smittenaar, C.R., Petersen, K.A., Stewart, K., and Moitt, N. (2016). Cancer inci-
dence and mortality projections in the UK until 2035. Br. J. Cancer 115,
1147–1155.
Soda, M., Choi, Y.L., Enomoto, M., Takada, S., Yamashita, Y., Ishikawa, S.,
Fujiwara, S., Watanabe, H., Kurashina, K., Hatanaka, H., et al. (2007). Identiﬁ-
cation of the transforming EML4–ALK fusion gene in non-small-cell lung can-
cer. Nature 448, 561–566.
Sotillo, E., Barrett, D.M., Black, K.L., Bagashev, A., Oldridge, D., Wu, G., Suss-
man, R., Lanauze, C., Ruella, M., Gazzara, M.R., et al. (2015). Convergence of
acquired mutations and alternative splicing of CD19 enables resistance to
CART-19 immunotherapy. Cancer Discov. 5, 1282–1295.
Spechler, S.J. (2013). Barrett esophagus and risk of esophageal cancer: a clin-
ical review. JAMA 310, 627–636.
Srinivasan, P., Bandlamudi, C., Jonsson, P., Kemel, Y., Chavan, S.S.,
Richards, A.L., Penson, A.V., Bielski, C.M., Fong, C., Syed, A., et al. (2021).
The context-speciﬁc role of germline pathogenicity in tumorigenesis. Nat.
Genet. 53, 1577–1585.
Srivastava, S., Ghosh, S., Kagan, J., and Mazurchuk, R.; National Cancer
Institute’s HTAN Implementation (2018). The making of a PreCancer atlas:
promises, challenges, and opportunities. Trends Cancer 4, 523–536.
Stehelin, D., Varmus, H.E., Bishop, J.M., and Vogt, P.K. (1976). DNA related to
the transforming gene(s) of avian sarcoma viruses is present in normal avian
DNA. Nature 260, 170–173.
Stratton, M.R., Campbell, P.J., and Futreal, P.A. (2009). The cancer genome.
Nature 458, 719–724.
Sud, A., Kinnersley, B., and Houlston, R.S. (2017). Genome-wide association
studies of cancer: current insights and future perspectives. Nat. Rev. Cancer
17, 692–704.
Sung, H., Ferlay, J., Siegel, R.L., Laversanne, M., Soerjomataram, I., Jemal, A.,
and Bray, F. (2021). Global cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of
incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA. Cancer
J. Clin. 71, 209–249.
Taliun, D., Harris, D.N., Kessler, M.D., Carlson, J., Szpiech, Z.A., Torres, R., Ta-
liun, S.A.G., Corvelo, A., Gogarten, S.M., Kang, H.M., et al. (2021). Sequencing
of 53,831 diverse genomes from the NHLBI TOPMed Program. Nature 590,
290–299.
Talmadge, J.E., and Fidler, I.J. (2010). AACR centennial series: the biology of
cancer metastasis: historical perspective. Cancer Res. 70, 5649–5669.
Tarantini, L., Bonzini, M., Apostoli, P., Pegoraro, V., Bollati, V., Marinelli, B.,
Cantone, L., Rizzo, G., Hou, L., Schwartz, J., et al. (2009). Effects of particulate
matter on genomic DNA methylation content and iNOS promoter methylation.
Environ. Health Perspect. 117, 217–222.
Tauriello, D.V.F., Palomo-Ponce, S., Stork, D., Berenguer-Llergo, A., Badia-
Ramentol, J., Iglesias, M., Sevillano, M., Ibiza, S., Can˜ ellas, A., Hernando-
Momblona, X., et al. (2018). TGFb drives immune evasion in genetically
reconstituted colon cancer metastasis. Nature 554, 538–543.
Team, T.N.L. (2011). Reduced lung-cancer mortality with low-dose computed
tomographic screening (Massachusetts medical society). N. Engl. J. Med. 382,
503–513.
Teixeira, V.H., Pipinikas, C.P., Pennycuick, A., Lee-Six, H., Chandrasekharan,
D., Beane, J., Morris, T.J., Karpathakis, A., Feber, A., Breeze, C.E., et al.
(2019). Deciphering the genomic, epigenomic, and transcriptomic landscapes
of pre-invasive lung cancer lesions. Nat. Med. 25, 517–525.
Temko, D., Tomlinson, I.P.M., Severini, S., Schuster-Bo¨ ckler, B., and Graham,
T.A. (2018). The effects of mutational processes and selection on driver muta-
tions across cancer types. Nat. Commun. 9, 1857.
Teoh, P.J., and Chng, W.J. (2021). CAR T-cell therapy in multiple myeloma:
more room for improvement. Blood Cancer J. 11, 1–18.
Teoh, D., Musa, F., Salani, R., Huh, W., and Jimenez, E. (2020). Diagnosis and
management of adenocarcinoma in situ. Obstet. Gynecol. 135, 869–878.
Tessman, I., Poddar, R.K., and Kumar, S. (1964). Identiﬁcation of the altered
bases in mutated single-stranded DNA. I. In vitro mutagenesis by hydroxyl-
amine, ethyl methanesulfonate and nitrous acid. J. Mol. Biol. 9, 352–363.
Thompson, I.M., Goodman, P.J., Tangen, C.M., Lucia, M.S., Miller, G.J., Ford,
L.G., Lieber, M.M., Cespedes, R.D., Atkins, J.N., Lippman, S.M., et al. (2003).
The inﬂuence of ﬁnasteride on the development of prostate cancer. N. Engl. J.
Med. 349, 215–224.
Thorgeirsson, T.E., Geller, F., Sulem, P., Rafnar, T., Wiste, A., Magnusson,
K.P., Manolescu, A., Thorleifsson, G., Stefansson, H., Ingason, A., et al.
(2008). A variant associated with nicotine dependence, lung cancer and pe-
ripheral arterial disease. Nature 452, 638–642.
Tokarew, N., Ogonek, J., Endres, S., von Bergwelt-Baildon, M., and Kobold, S.
(2019). Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells. Br. J.
Cancer 120, 26–37.
Trimble, C.L., Morrow, M.P., Kraynyak, K.A., Shen, X., Dallas, M., Yan, J., Ed-
wards, L., Parker, R.L., Denny, L., Giffear, M., et al. (2015). Safety, efﬁcacy, and
immunogenicity of VGX-3100, a therapeutic synthetic DNA vaccine targeting
ll
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
477
Review
human papillomavirus 16 and 18 E6 and E7 proteins for cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia 2/3: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2b trial.
Lancet 386, 2078–2088.
Turajlic, S., and Swanton, C. (2016). Metastasis as an evolutionary process.
Science 352, 169–175.
Turajlic, S., Xu, H., Litchﬁeld, K., Rowan, A., Chambers, T., Lopez, J.I., Nicol,
D., O’Brien, T., Larkin, J., Horswell, S., et al. (2018). Tracking cancer evolution
reveals constrained routes to metastases: TRACERx renal. Cell 173, 581–
594.e12.
Turati, V.A., Guerra-Assunc¸ a˜ o, J.A., Potter, N.E., Gupta, R., Ecker, S., Danevi-
ciute, A., Tarabichi, M., Webster, A.P., Ding, C., May, G., et al. (2021). Chemo-
therapy induces canalization of cell state in childhood B-cell precursor acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Nat. Cancer 2, 835–852.
Turner, K.M., Deshpande, V., Beyter, D., Koga, T., Rusert, J., Lee, C., Li, B.,
Arden, K., Ren, B., Nathanson, D.A., et al. (2017). Extrachromosomal onco-
gene ampliﬁcation drives tumour evolution and genetic heterogeneity. Nature
543, 122–125.
Turner, N.C., Kingston, B., Kilburn, L.S., Kernaghan, S., Wardley, A.M., Mac-
pherson, I.R., Baird, R.D., Roylance, R., Stephens, P., Oikonomidou, O.,
et al. (2020). Circulating tumour DNA analysis to direct therapy in advanced
breast cancer (plasmaMATCH): a multicentre, multicohort, phase 2a, platform
trial. Lancet Oncol. 21, 1296–1308.
Vallette, F.M., Olivier, C., Le´ zot, F., Oliver, L., Cochonneau, D., Lalier, L., Car-
tron, P.-F., and Heymann, D. (2019). Dormant, quiescent, tolerant and
persister cells: four synonyms for the same target in cancer. Biochem. Phar-
macol. 162, 169–176.
Vasan, N., Baselga, J., and Hyman, D.M. (2019). A view on drug resistance in
cancer. Nature 575, 299–309.
Verhaak, R.G.W., Bafna, V., and Mischel, P.S. (2019). Extrachromosomal
oncogene ampliﬁcation in tumour pathogenesis and evolution. Nat. Rev. Can-
cer 19, 283–288.
Voorwerk, L., Slagter, M., Horlings, H.M., Sikorska, K., van de Vijver, K.K., de
Maaker, M., Nederlof, I., Kluin, R.J.C., Warren, S., Ong, S., et al. (2019). Im-
mune induction strategies in metastatic triple-negative breast cancer to
enhance the sensitivity to PD-1 blockade: the TONIC trial. Nat. Med. 25,
920–928.
Wang, H.J., Zakhari, S., and Jung, M.K. (2010). Alcohol, inﬂammation, and gut-
liver-brain interactions in tissue damage and disease development. World J.
Gastroenterol. 16, 1304–1313.
Wang, L., Lankhorst, L., and Bernards, R. (2022). Exploiting senescence for the
treatment of cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer, 1–16.
Wang, M., Munoz, J., Goy, A., Locke, F.L., Jacobson, C.A., Hill, B.T., Timmer-
man, J.M., Holmes, H., Jaglowski, S., Flinn, I.W., et al. (2020). KTE-X19 CAR
T-cell therapy in relapsed or refractory mantle-cell lymphoma. N. Engl. J.
Med. 382, 1331–1342.
Watkins, T.B.K., Lim, E.L., Petkovic, M., Elizalde, S., Birkbak, N.J., Wilson,
G.A., Moore, D.A., Gro¨ nroos, E., Rowan, A., Dewhurst, S.M., et al. (2020).
Pervasive chromosomal instability and karyotype order in tumour evolution.
Nature 587, 126–132.
Weichert, W., and Warth, A. (2014). Early lung cancer with lepidic pattern:
adenocarcinoma: in situ: , minimally invasive adenocarcinoma, and lepidic
predominant adenocarcinoma. Curr. Opin. Pulm. Med. 20, 309–316.
Wolf, P., Alzubi, J., Gratzke, C., and Cathomen, T. (2021). The potential of CAR
T cell therapy for prostate cancer. Nat. Rev. Urol. 18, 556–571. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41585-021-00488-8.
Wong, T.N., Ramsingh, G., Young, A.L., Miller, C.A., Touma, W., Welch, J.S.,
Lamprecht, T.L., Shen, D., Hundal, J., Fulton, R.S., et al. (2015). The role of
TP53 mutations in the origin and evolution of therapy-related AML. Nature
518, 552–555.
Wood, K.C. (2015). Mapping the pathways of resistance to targeted therapies.
Cancer Res. 75, 4247–4251.
Wu, S., Turner, K.M., Nguyen, N., Raviram, R., Erb, M., Santini, J., Luebeck, J.,
Rajkumar, U., Diao, Y., Li, B., et al. (2019). Circular ecDNA promotes acces-
sible chromatin and high oncogene expression. Nature 575, 699–703.
Yizhak, K., Aguet, F., Kim, J., Hess, J.M., K€ubler, K., Grimsby, J., Frazer, R.,
Zhang, H., Haradhvala, N.J., Rosebrock, D., et al. (2019). RNA sequence anal-
ysis reveals macroscopic somatic clonal expansion across normal tissues.
Science 364, eaaw0726.
Yokoyama, A., Kakiuchi, N., Yoshizato, T., Nannya, Y., Suzuki, H., Takeuchi,
Y., Shiozawa, Y., Sato, Y., Aoki, K., Kim, S.K., et al. (2019). Age-related remod-
elling of oesophageal epithelia by mutated cancer drivers. Nature 565,
312–317.
Yoshida, K., Gowers, K.H.C., Lee-Six, H., Chandrasekharan, D.P., Coorens,
T., Maughan, E.F., Beal, K., Menzies, A., Millar, F.R., Anderson, E., et al.
(2020). Tobacco smoking and somatic mutations in human bronchial epithe-
lium. Nature 578, 266–272.
Yoshihara, K., Wang, Q., Torres-Garcia, W., Zheng, S., Vegesna, R., Kim, H.,
and Verhaak, R.G.W. (2015). The landscape and therapeutic relevance of can-
cer-associated transcript fusions. Oncogene 34, 4845–4854.
Yousefzadeh, M.J., Flores, R.R., Zhu, Y., Schmiechen, Z.C., Brooks, R.W.,
Trussoni, C.E., Cui, Y., Angelini, L., Lee, K.-A., McGowan, S.J., et al. (2021).
An aged immune system drives senescence and ageing of solid organs. Na-
ture 594, 100–105.
Zack, T.I., Schumacher, S.E., Carter, S.L., Cherniack, A.D., Saksena, G., Ta-
bak, B., Lawrence, M.S., Zhsng, C.-Z., Wala, J., Mermel, C.H., et al. (2013).
Pan-cancer patterns of somatic copy number alteration. Nat. Genet. 45,
1134–1140.
Zaretsky, J.M., Garcia-Diaz, A., Shin, D.S., Escuin-Ordinas, H., Hugo, W., Hu-
Lieskovan, S., Torrejon, D.Y., Abril-Rodriguez, G., Sandoval, S., Barthly, L.,
et al. (2016). Mutations associated with acquired resistance to PD-1 blockade
in melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 819–829.
Zhao, C.Q., Young, M.R., Diwan, B.A., Coogan, T.P., and Waalkes, M.P.
(1997). Association of arsenic-induced malignant transformation with DNA hy-
pomethylation and aberrant gene expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 94,
10907–10912.
Zhu, J., Zhang, F., Du, M., Zhang, P., Fu, S., and Wang, L. (2017). Molecular
characterization of cell-free eccDNAs in human plasma. Sci. Rep. 7, 10968.
Zou, X., Owusu, M., Harris, R., Jackson, S.P., Loizou, J.I., and Nik-Zainal, S.
(2018). Validating the concept of mutational signatures with isogenic cell
models. Nat. Commun. 9, 1744.
Zviran, A., Schulman, R.C., Shah, M., Hill, S.T.K., Deochand, S., Khamnei,
C.C., Maloney, D., Patel, K., Liao, W., Widman, A.J., et al. (2020). Genome-
wide cell-free DNA mutational integration enables ultra-sensitive cancer moni-
toring. Nat. Med. 26, 1114–1124.
ll
478
Cancer Cell 40, May 9, 2022
Review
