Cancer Gene Therapy
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41417-020-00248-7
REVIEW ARTICLE
The future of microﬂuidics in immune checkpoint blockade
Jonathan Briones1
●Wilfred Espulgar1
●Shohei Koyama2
●Hyota Takamatsu2
●Eiichi Tamiya3,4
●Masato Saito
1,3
Received: 2 June 2020 / Revised: 2 October 2020 / Accepted: 9 October 2020
© The Author(s) 2020. This article is published with open access
Abstract
Recent advances in microﬂuidic techniques have enabled researchers to study sensitivities to immune checkpoint therapy, to
determine patients’ response to particular antibody treatment. Utilization of this technology is helpful in antibody discovery
and in the design of personalized medicine. A variety of microﬂuidic approaches can provide several functions in processes
such as immunologic, genomic, and/or transcriptomic analysis with the aim of improving the efﬁcacy and coverage of
immunotherapy, particularly immune checkpoint blockade (ICB). To achieve this requires researchers to overcome the
challenges in the current state of the technology. This review looks into the advancements in microﬂuidic technologies
applied to researches on immune checkpoint blockade treatment and its potential shift from proof-of-principle stage to
clinical application.
Introduction
Cancer immunotherapy (CIT) is a promising anticancer
treatment strategy with more efﬁcient survival rate and
lesser adverse effect than conventional treatments such as
surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and molecular tar-
geted therapy [1]. The increasing demand for immu-
notherapeutics in clinical research as well as in hospital and
clinics has fueled a market growth with a USD 242.86
billion forecast by 2026 [2]. The immune system has the
ability to recognize and kill cancer cells without toxicity to
normal and healthy ones [3]. This treatment approach dates
back to the late 1800s but immunotherapy’s major break-
throughs in understanding the mechanisms in full T-cell
activation and tumor-induced immunosuppression came
about in the last decade [1, 4]. At present, immunotherapy is
an established strategy and has become a new standard of
care in clinical treatments with unprecedented survival
improvements to patients with advanced-stage tumors
[5, 6].
Although signiﬁcant responses have been recorded, not
all patients beneﬁt from the treatment approach because of
the immune system’s diversity and dynamic nature, together
with inter- and intratumor heterogeneity. Tumors can adapt,
mutate, and escape immune surveillance [3]. The efﬁcacy of
immunotherapeutics in modulating cancer progression is
still lacking for most human cancers [4]. The small number
of success of CIT agents poses a challenge to clinicians and
researchers [7–9]. For instance, only 12.46% of US patients
were reported in 2018 to respond to checkpoint inhibitor
drugs [10]. Overall, about 20–40% of cancer patients were
found to respond to immunotherapy [11]. To further
improve the treatment effectiveness and patient response
rates, more speciﬁc biomarkers and immune checkpoint
inhibitors are needed to be identiﬁed. This would require
better predictive tools and assays for careful screening of
responders to immunotherapy [1].
Microﬂuidic platforms have the capacity to address the
needs and challenges facing CIT. These tools are capable of
single-cell
analysis,
mimic
tumor
microenvironment
(TME), and perform real-time measurement. Microﬂuidic
technology provides high precision of liquid manipulation
that conventional bench-top approaches cannot perform
[12, 13]. Among other advantages include reduced size of
operating systems, reagent consumption, waste production,
and power requirement, while at the same time having more
speed in analysis and ﬂexibility in design. For example, a
* Masato Saito
saitomasato@ap.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp
1
Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, Suita,
Osaka 565-0871, Japan
2
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita,
Osaka 565-0871, Japan
3
AIST PhotoBIO-OIL, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871,
Japan
4
The Institute of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan
1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:
microﬂuidic platform for exosome analysis can increase the
assay sensitivity and reduce assay time and sample
requirement by at least two orders of magnitude [14].
Conventional bulk methods, meanwhile, are limited in
terms of depth and dimensionality of data, as it does not
take into account the phenotypic and functional states of
heterogenous cells [3, 15]. On the other hand, microﬂuidics
technology for single-cell analysis has the ability to address
complex immunological issues. Thus, it is capable of
identifying rare cell subsets and resolution between cells
with identical expression patterns.
A variety of microﬂuidic approaches can provide several
functions in processes such as immunologic, genomic, and/
or transcriptomic analysis with the aim of improving the
efﬁcacy and coverage of immunotherapy. These devices
have shown great promise in proﬁling TME, identifying
biomarkers in biopsies and revealing the biomarkers’ role in
triggering
or
arresting
antitumor
immune
response.
Advancements in microﬂuidic techniques have also enabled
researches to study sensitivities to immune checkpoint
blockade (ICB) and help clinicians design personalized
medicine [12].
In this review, we highlight immune checkpoint block-
ade in CIT and particularly discuss various microﬂuidic
platforms, both clinically approved and proof-of-concept
devices, and their applications in disease monitoring. We
look into the platforms’ capability in single-cell proﬁling
and small conditional RNA (scRNA) sequencing. We also
talk about microﬂuidic technologies developed to discover
and evaluate immune checkpoint inhibitors, test the efﬁcacy
of immune checkpoint blockade therapies, and monitor
treatment response. Finally, we discuss the future outlook of
microﬂuidic technology applications in immune checkpoint
blockade and its potential shift from proof-of-principle
stage to clinical application.
Immunotherapy and the TME
CIT is a promising cancer treatment strategy that utilizes the
body’s ability to launch an immune response, primarily
targeting the immune system or TME [16]. At present,
immunotherapy is an established strategy and has become a
new standard of care in clinical treatments with unprece-
dented survival improvements to patients with advanced
stage tumors [5, 6]. For example, signiﬁcant results have
been reported on metastasis reduction in melanoma and
kidney cancer patients under immunotherapies. Complete
response was also achieved with the use of high-dose
interleukin (IL)-2 [7, 17]. Use of CTLA‑4 antibody-based
drug has also been reported to clear 22% of patients with
advanced late‑stage melanoma [18].
Although signiﬁcant responses have been recorded, not
all patients beneﬁt from the treatment approach because of
the immune system’s diversity and dynamic nature together
with inter- and intratumor heterogeneity. These limitations
lead to the use of combination strategies and quest for
biomarkers and receptor routes that can destroy a wide
range of cancers in all patients [5, 6, 19]. Novel biomarkers
including speciﬁc mutations and immune function markers,
together with monitoring and evaluation of the TME
through new strategies, can improve early diagnosis and
therapeutic efﬁcacy prediction that are necessary to select
the patients who can get the therapeutic beneﬁt.
Targeting or modulating the TME has caught the atten-
tion of clinicians, as this microenvironment plays an
important role in suppressing antitumor immunity with its
signiﬁcant heterogeneity [16]. This cellular niche, which is
made up of tumor cells, ﬁbroblasts, tumor-inﬁltrating
immune
cells,
signaling
molecules,
cancer-associated
ﬁbroblasts, tumor vasculature, and extracellular matrix,
takes part in tumor development, progression, and recur-
rence. This makes proﬁling TME an important topic for
research in regulating tumor response for improved immu-
notherapy efﬁcacy for multiple types of cancers [16, 20].
There are several therapeutic strategies being used and/or
explored to date. Some Immunotherapies block inhibitory
pathways and immunosuppressive cells in the TME to
intensify antitumor immunity. This is done with the use of
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and checkpoint inhibitors
(i.e., anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4
(CTLA-4), anti-programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1),
and anti-programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1)), as well as
genetically modiﬁed immune cells via adoptive cell transfer
(i.e., chimeric antigen receptor, T-cell receptor engineered
T cells). Other therapies kill cancer cells by boosting the
immune system using cytokines (i.e., IL-2, Janus kinase
inhibitors), cancer vaccines (i.e., cancer cell antigen, peptide
vaccines, and genetic or viral vaccines), or a combination of
therapies [3].
Even though immunotherapy strategies have delivered
unprecedented responses from patients with advanced-stage
tumors, the problem with limited clinical response persists.
The small number of success of CIT agents poses a chal-
lenge to clinicians and researchers [7–9]. For example,
immune checkpoint antagonists targeting the PD-1 pathway
has a response rate of about 20–30% across tumor types.
Positive objective response rates (ORRs) from patients
under immune checkpoint blockade treatment were reported
on malignancies, 20% on gastric cancer, 12–25% on head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma, 20% on ovarian cancer,
15% on small-cell lung cancer, 20% on triple-negative
breast cancer, 25% on urothelial carcinoma, and 65–85%
on Hodgkin’s lymphoma [7, 21, 22]. Combination of
J. Briones et al.
CTLA-4- and PD-1-blocking antibodies resulted in 40%
ORR across all doses [11].
Monitoring cell heterogeneity
To have a more potent therapy and achieve complete
response, it is necessary to study the immune cell compo-
nents, its heterogeneity, and interaction with cancer in
arresting or promoting the latter’s progression, so as to
understand the immune effector mechanisms. Conventional
technologies that uses bulk samples are limited in terms of
depth and dimensionality of data. This is because bulk
analysis of immune cell populations only gives information
on the average immune response without taking into
account the phenotypic and functional states of these het-
erogenous cells and its intercellular signaling with other cell
subsets [3, 15]. This means that identiﬁcation of rare cell
types and resolution between cells with identical expression
patterns are not covered [15].
Monitoring the behavior of each immune cells has
resulted to discoveries of several biological functions that
were not observed in bulk analysis. This single-cell analysis
provides information on genotype, phenotype, protein
secretion, proliferation, maturation, activation, signaling
pathways of each activated cell, and the intercellular com-
munication among different immune cells [3, 13]. For
example, proﬁling individual tumor cells can provide
insights into its cellular behavior, which could result to
identiﬁcation of more potent drugs and improve the
response rates of patients to therapies [23].
At present, many researches are being conducted on
single-cell analysis with focus on technology development
to provide new tools for novel immunotherapies, point-of-
care diagnostics, cell proﬁling and drug screening. These
approaches address complex immunological issues that
conventional bulk methods fail to address. The design and
development of point-of-care devices, serving as alternative
clinical tools, allows for monitoring and proﬁling of com-
plex heterogenous cellular and molecular activities with the
aim of improving response prediction and treatment opti-
mization [13, 24].
Microﬂuidic technology
Among these technologies, the use of microﬂuidic plat-
forms is popular. For the past several years, it has shown
advantages by providing miniaturized devices with fast
isolation speeds and high efﬁciency that allows acquisition
of more information from single cells at higher resolution. It
can be integrated into multiple workﬂows, which allows
parallelization and streamlining of complex protocols with
minimal sample and reagent volume requirement. Micro-
ﬂuidic
technology
provides
high
precision
of
liquid
manipulation that conventional bench-top approaches can-
not perform [12, 13]. Automation and control of analytical
functions, manipulation of cells, its environment and
intercellular activity, mapping distinct immune cell subsets,
as well as simultaneous detection and quantiﬁcation of a
number of secreted molecules (multiplexing) are possible in
the design of these platforms [13, 22].
For instance, the microﬂuidic platform developed by
Merouane et al. [25] called time-lapse imaging microscopy
in nanowell grids uses sub-nanoliter wells and live-cell
microscopy to dynamically monitor cell-to-cell interactions
between immune effector cells and tumors cells, as well as
its cytotoxicity, cell motility, and cell survival. Using
ﬂuorescent labeled human T cells, natural killer (NK) cells
and target cells (NALM6, K562, and EL4), the said plat-
form was able to do automated quantiﬁcation of cell loca-
tion, morphology, movement, and death without manual
proofreading [22, 25]. Such high-throughput operation is
advantageous over conventional techniques, which handles
10–100 representative cell pairs, as many biologically sig-
niﬁcant cellular subpopulations and biotechnologically
relevant protein secreting cells are rare.
Another microﬂuidic platform used for monitoring of
single-cell pair activity and protein secretion is the single-
cell barcoding chip (SCBC) that was developed by the
Heath group. SCBC contains arrays of microwells and sets
of immobilized barcode-like patterned capture antibody for
proteins and other detections. This chip is capable of mul-
tiple protein quantiﬁcation from the same cell using ﬂuor-
escent sandwich immunoassay readout [26, 27]. Requiring
only a small amount of sample, the SCBC can accom-
modate up to around 40 plex protein detection from a
single-cell [22]. A similar concept is the beads-on-barcode
antibody microarray (BOBarray) by Yang et al. [22, 28] and
the work of Armbrecht et al. [23] on single-cell protein
proﬁling with barcode beads. In these works, ﬂuorescently
barcoded beads are either immobilized on glass surface and
positioned on top of microwell (BOBarray) or co-captured
in a microwell, together with the cell of interest, using a
magnet. The BOBarray made use of different bead sizes and
colors to encode 12 different proteins and characterize the
organ-of-origin and drug targets of rare tumor cells isolated
from blood samples. Meanwhile, the platform of Armbrecht
et al. [23] was able to perform on-chip immunoassay and
multiplexed
single-cell protein
quantiﬁcation
of three
mammalian cell lines (MCF-7, HEK-293T, and SK-BR-3
cells). In using the barcoded beads, the limits on ﬂexibility,
processing time, and occurrence of background signal when
unprocessed are avoided.
The future of microﬂuidics in immune checkpoint blockade
Applications in therapy assessment and disease
monitoring
Currently, there are a number of ﬂuidic devices that have
been developed and/or clinically approved for pre-screen-
ing, diagnostic, prognostic, therapy assessment, and mon-
itoring of the disease. One of the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-approved ﬂuidic technologies is
CellSearch (Menarini-Silicon Biosystems, Bologna, Italy),
shown in Fig. 1-I. A gold standard for circulating tumor cell
(CTC) enrichment, this device detects and quantiﬁes CTCs
of epithelial origin (CD45−, EpCAM+, and cytokeratins 8,
18+, and/or 19+) in the whole blood of metastatic breasts,
prostate, and colorectal cancer patients. Using antibody
coated magnetic particles to target epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM), the amount of detected CTC, against a
predetermined threshold, can be used to predict prognosis
and assess progression-free survival and overall survival
J. Briones et al.
[12, 29, 30]. Janning et al. [31] and Nicolazzo et al. [32],
e.g., have used CellSearch in investigating the role of PD-
L1+ CTCs in the clinical setting. The group of Janning
compared EpCAM-based (CellSearch®) system to epitope-
independent method (ParsortixTM system) in assessing PD-
L1 expression of CTCs from non-small-cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC) patients. Meanwhile, Nicolazzo et al. [32] used
CellSearch in analyzing CTCs from NSCLC patient treated
with Nivolumab [31–33].
Another microﬂuidic device for CTC enrichment is the
IsoFlux system (Fluxion Biosciences, Alameda, California,
USA), shown in Fig. 1-II. Combining antibody-based
magnetic bead separations with ﬂow cytometry precision,
Isoﬂux claims to have higher sensitivity in CTC identiﬁ-
cation from carcinoma patients as compared to CellSearch
[12, 34]. For instance, Isoﬂux enrichment system and CTC
isolation platform were used by Po et. [35] to aid their study
on screening PD-L1 levels induced from liquid biopsies
(melanoma CTCs), though targeted CTC isolation and
speciﬁc immunostaining-based CTC identiﬁcation com-
bined with PD-L1 detection.
Similarly, NanoVelcro (Fig. 1-III) is a microﬂuidic chip
for CTC identiﬁcation, capture, and release. The device,
however, makes use of nanowires coated with anti-EpCAM
antibody where the tumor cells stick on. Once captured,
cytokeratin/ CD45/4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining
can be performed to determine putative CTCs. The Nano-
Velcro device allows the analysis of tumor speciﬁc RNA
markers by purifying CTC without damaging RNA tran-
scripts [12, 36]. Antibody-based Nanovelcro microﬂuidic
chip have been used by Winograd et al. [37] to evaluate the
feasibility of isolating and detecting CTC-expressing PD-L1
in patients with HCC. With the aid of the multi-marker
antibody-based CTC capture device, they evaluated the PD-
L1 expression in HCC CTCs and its association with HCC
tumor stage, and the prognostic impact and predictive
ability of PD-L1+ CTCs to immunotherapy treatment
response [37].
Other than CTC, immune-afﬁnity microﬂuidic devices
have been applied to capture exosomes in liquid biopsy, as
it is believed to promote remodeling of distant, metastasis
organs. One of these is the ExoSearch chip (Fig. 1-IV),
which is capable of capturing blood plasma exosomes and
perform multi-marker probing for ovarian cancer. The
microﬂuidic method allows enriched blood plasma exosome
preparation for in situ, multiplexed detection and measure-
ment of exosomal tumor markers (CA-125, EpCAM,
CD24) using immunomagnetic beads [12, 38]. Likewise,
ExoChip (functionalized with antibodies against CD63) is
capable of on-chip isolation, detection, quantiﬁcation, as
well as recovery of exosomes with intact RNA for
exosomal-microRNA proﬁling via openarray analysis (Fig.
1-V)
[39].
nPLEX-
nano-plasmonic
exosome
sensor
(functionalized CD24, CD63, and EpCAM) can perform
simultaneous isolation and surface plasmon resonance
(SPR)-based multiplexed detection of ovarian cancer-
derived EpCAM (+) and CD24 (+) relative to CD63(+)
exosomes (Fig. 1-VI) [40, 41].
Capture and measurement of exosomes or exosomal
tumor markers (i.e., exosomal PD-L1) using these micro-
ﬂuidic platforms would be beneﬁcial in identifying response
to therapeutics that block exosome production. For instance,
exosomes derived from lung cancer cells that expresses PD-
L1 has a role in immune escape and tumor growth pro-
motion [42]. This is because exosomes have the ability to
impair immune functions through cytokine production
reduction and CD8+ T-cell apoptosis induction [43]. Thus,
use of this technology and clinical application would pro-
vide useful insight in cancer management and immune
checkpoint blockade, in particular.
Microﬂuidics and scRNA sequencing
One of the great challenges in cancer therapy is the intra-
tumoral heterogeneity, which allows cancer evolution and
therapeutics evasion. Analysis of CTCs in blood, e.g., has
the potential to use DNA as clinical diagnostic marker.
Fig. 1 Microﬂuidic devices developed for therapy assessment and
disease monitoring. I Schematic diagram of the CellSearch system
technology for detection and enumeration of CTCs from peripheral
blood. Magnetic iron nanoparticles coated with anti-EpCAM antibody
are used to give magnetic properties to epithelial cells. Anti-CK and
anti-CD45 ﬂuorescent antibodies are used to discriminate target cells.
CTC are separated using a strong magnetic ﬁeld and counted by digital
ﬂuorescent microscopy [Reproduced from ref. [30] with permission
from the Frontiers in Oncology, Frontiers Research Foundation]. II
Illustration of the IsoFlux device for CTC isolation, showing its parts
and ﬂow path [Reprinted from ref. [34], Copyright (2013), with per-
mission from Elsevier]. III Diagram of the NanoVelcro CTC chip
showing the features and improvements through four generations
[Reprinted from ref. [36], Copyright (2018), with permission from
Elsevier]. IV Image of ExoSearch and illustration of its workﬂow:
mixing, isolation, and in situ, multiplexed detection of circulating
exosomes [Reproduced from Ref. [32] with permission from the Royal
Society of Chemistry]. V ExoChip design and features (A). Illustration
of single channel and its dimensions (B). A twelve-channel chip for
simultaneous analysis of multiple samples (C). Image of the poly-
dimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-based ExoChip prototype showing the ﬂow
of serum for exosomes capture [Republished with permission of Royal
Society of Chemistry, from ref. [36]; permission conveyed through
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.]. VI nPLEX technology for label-
free detection of exosomes (A). A graph illustrating the changes in
transmission spectra showing exosome detection with nPLEX. Anti-
body conjugation and speciﬁc exosome binding were monitored by
transmission spectral shifts (B). Enhanced electromagnetic ﬁelds
tightly conﬁned near a periodic nanohole surface shown as ﬁnite-
difference time-domain simulation (C). SEM image of the periodic
nanoholes (diameter = 200 nm, periodicity = 450 nm) in the nPLEX
sensor (D). Image of nPLEX imaging system [Reprinted by permission
from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: Springer
Nature, Nature Biotechnology (ref. [41], Copyright (2014)].
The future of microﬂuidics in immune checkpoint blockade
In these cases, scRNA-seq can be applied to discover
unknown tumor features and generate cancer evolution
models through assessment of transcriptional heterogeneity
and analysis of expression proﬁles for speciﬁc pathways.
With these means, coding mutations and fusion genes can
be discovered from CTCs and other phenotypic con-
sequences of DNA and RNA variants [44]. Therefore,
CTCs are important noninvasive source of clinical infor-
mation, which can provide access to complete transcriptome
and proteome, as well as insights into biomarker char-
acterization, early cancer diagnostics and cancer develop-
ment
evaluation,
and
therapeutic
efﬁcacy
prognosis
[45, 46]. In contrast, conventional biopsy is invasive, poses
a challenge in accessing tumor sites (i.e., inside lungs or
brain), and may have negative impact on patient compliance
[46]. The development of microﬂuidic platforms, mean-
while, provides a noninvasive means for CTC isolation. It is
more convenient, accurate, and harmless to patients [45].
Integration of multistep isolation procedures and advanced
nanotechnologies can be done for higher-performance of
CTC isolation.
However, scRNA-seq has some limitations, such as low
capture efﬁciency and high dropouts, which misses weakly
expressed genes. The data produced are also nosier and
more variable in comparison to bulk RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq). Improving the RNA capture efﬁciency and
transcript coverage could minimize the noise in scRNA-seq
protocols [47].
Advances in microﬂuidics technology has enabled inte-
gration of scRNA-seg in its platforms. Single-cell isolation
platforms have attracted researchers because of its low
sample consumption and analysis cost, as well as its precise
ﬂuid control, which allows single-cell gene expression
proﬁles to be quantiﬁed in a highly parallel manner [44].
Together with the developments in cellular barcoding,
throughput of scRNA-seq has signiﬁcantly increased with
microﬂuidics integration [47]. This throughput increase was
achieved with the improvements in cell-capture techniques
like in droplet microﬂuidics.
For example, droplet microﬂuidics was employed by
Demaree et al. [48] for a high-throughput and low -deviation
single-cell sequencing (SiC-seq) platform (Fig. 2-I), which is
capable of separation, ampliﬁcation, and barcoding of the
single-cell genome [49]. Another high-throughput scRNA-
seq platform is the Microwell-seq (Fig. 2-II) by Han et al.
[50]. The said platform improved the detection abundance at
a lower cost as compared to oil droplet techniques [49, 50].
Meanwhile, Habib et al. [51] developed a droplet micro-
ﬂuidic platform (DroNc-seq) integrated with single-cell
nuclear RNA-seq, which provides a low-cost, high-sensi-
tive, and high-efﬁciency cell classiﬁcation (Fig. 2-III) [49].
Future microﬂuidic platforms should also be capable of
not only CTC isolation but also ctDNA and exosome
enrichment, as it enables complementary approaches to
cancer heterogeneity understanding and development of
personalized treatments. For example, measurement of
ctDNA and exosome levels could be used as predictive
biomarker in patients under ICB treatment [52]. The
advancements in microﬂuidic technologies mentioned above
can provide automated and high-throughput clinical valida-
tion needed for a more effective personalized medicine.
Role of microﬂuidics in immune checkpoint
blockade
Immune checkpoint blockade
The discovery of the underlying mechanisms that prevents
the immune system from attacking tumors by Dr. James
Allison and Dr. Tasuku Honjo, 2018 Nobel Prize awardees
in Physiology or medicine, has led to a cancer therapy by
inhibition of negative immune regulation [3, 18]. Allison,
who worked on CTLA-4, a protein that is a negative reg-
ulator of T-cell activation, discovered that blocking its
inhibitory effect enhances immune response against tumor
cells resulting in a signiﬁcant growth reduction or even
complete tumor rejection. This was demonstrated in an
in vivo antibody-mediated CTLA-4 blockade using murine
models. Honjo, on the other hand, discovered PD-1, a
member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily [18]. The
PD-1 receptor is expressed on activated T cells, regulatory
T cells, B cells, macrophages, and NK cells. Its binding to its
ligand, PD-L1 or PD-L2 results in the repression of T-cell
proliferation and cytokine secretion. This mechanism enables
tumors to evade antigen-speciﬁc T-cell immune response [8].
Therefore, blocking these proteins with mAbs or immune
checkpoint inhibitors can enhance antitumor activity of
T cells, normalize TME, and prevent hematogenous spread
of tumor cells [7, 16, 51]. Clinical trials have shown the
potency of this treatment strategy to patients with different
types of metastatic cancers and have led to approval of
therapeutic drugs by FDA for use in numerous cancer types,
consequently conﬁrming the immunotherapy-targeted TME.
Recent studies on immune checkpoint blockade are
investigating on antibody-based therapies that target mul-
tiple inhibitory receptors and other T-cell inhibitory recep-
tors such as T-cell immunoglobulin domain and mucin
domain-3, lymphocyte-activation gene 3 (LAG-3), V-
domain immunoglobulin suppressor of T-cell activation,
and B- and T-lymphocyte attenuator [53, 54].
Microﬂuidics in ICB treatment
From here on, this review will focus on microﬂuidic tech-
nologies applied to immune checkpoint blockade treatment
J. Briones et al.
strategies and how these technologies are helping to shape
the future of the immune-treatment approach.
The use of microchannels and chambers in microﬂuidic
devices enable the precise control of ﬂow and cell distribu-
tion, which can establish physical (i.e., interstitial pressure) or
chemical (i.e., cytokines) gradients. This make it a powerful
tool to study longitudinal monitoring of tumor cell interac-
tions by mimicking metastatic environment [17]. Replicating
these environments in vitro, using patient-derived cells, can
provide information on targeted therapeutic approaches [55].
Here, microﬂuidic assays can be designed to test the efﬁcacy
of immune checkpoint blockade therapies or in combination
with drugs to target immune regulatory pathways in order to
shed light on the mechanisms that trigger or arrest antitumor
response. At present, there are a number of studies using
microﬂuidic tools to evaluate the sensitivity of immu-
notherapies, particularly on immune checkpoint blockade, as
well as identify immune cell subsets responsible for the
antitumor response [23, 55, 56].
Many researches are focused on the discovery and/or
evaluation of anti-PD-1 antibodies and the corresponding
immunotherapy. For example, Adler et al. [57] made use of
an emulsion droplet microﬂuidic device to screen and dis-
cover new anti-PD-1 antibodies in wild-type mice. Here,
single-cell suspension of B cells, ﬂuorocarbon oil, and
oligo-DT beads were made to ﬂow in a co-ﬂow emulsion
droplet chip as shown in Fig. 3-I. They identiﬁed 269
molecules, expressed as yeast single-chain fragment (scFv),
which bind to PD-1 protein and screened the high-afﬁnity
binders. This device presents an alternative to hybridoma-
Fig. 2 Microﬂuidic tools with integration of single-cell RNA
sequencings and analysis. I Single-cell genome sequencing (SiC-seq)
is a high-throughput microﬂuidic platform that uses droplets to isolate,
amplify, and barcode the genomes of single cells (A). Illustration of
single-cell encapsulation in microgels via a dropmaker device (B).
Workﬂow for bacterial genomic DNA puriﬁcation and microgel tag-
mentation (C). Merging a digital PCR barcode, a tagmented microgel
genome, and an ampliﬁcation mix at a rate >1 kHz. The SOE-PCR
splices a unique single-cell barcode onto the tagmented genome and
selectively ampliﬁes fully barcoded constructs off-chip [Adapted from
ref. [48]]. II Illustration of the basic workﬂow for Microwell-seq.
[Reprinted from ref. [50], Copyright (2018), with permission from
Elsevier]. III Overview of DroNc-seq and schematic illustration of the
microﬂuidic device [Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature
Customer Service Centre GmbH]: ref. [51], Copyright (2017)].
The future of microﬂuidics in immune checkpoint blockade
Fig. 3 Microﬂuidic tools for the evaluation of the efﬁcacy and
sensitivity of immunotherapies. I Droplet microﬂuidics platform
used for scFv library generation to identify PD-1-binding molecules.
(A) Workﬂow for B-cell encapsulation with oligo-dT beads and lysis
solution for library generation. Droplets with mRNA-bound beads are
puriﬁed and injected into second emulsion with an OE-RT-PCR
ampliﬁcation mix that generates DNA amplicons that encode scFv
with native pairing of heavy and light chain Ig. (B) Image of the
channel junction that generates droplets [Reproduced from ref. [47]
with permission from mAbs, Taylor & Francis]. II Multiplexed
immune checkpoint biosensor (MICB) uses electrodes functionalized
with target-speciﬁc nanoyeast ScFvs for parallel detection of PD-1,
PD-L1, and LAG-3 in human serum [Republished with permission of
Royal Society of Chemistry, from ref. 58]; permission conveyed
through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.]. III A valve-based micro-
ﬂuidic device for single-cell compartmentalization and granzyme b
proﬁling. (A) Image of the chip with parts magniﬁed. (B) Device
mounted on the microscope stage connected to ﬂuid and air pumps.
(C) Image of the chambers with ﬂuorescence signal. [Reproduced from
ref. [46] with permission from Ivyspring International]. IV 3D
microﬂuidic cell culture chip to evaluate the immune-checkpoint
sensitivity of MDOTS/PDOTS. (A) Chip is injected with 40–100 μm
(S2) tumor fraction for ex vivo culture (scale bars: 100 μm). (B)
Schematic diagram showing the center gel region with posts separating
the gel region from the anti-parallel side channels [Reproduced from
ref. [51] with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry].
V SOFUSATM Nanotopographical device (schematic) for anti-CTLA-
4 infusion into sub-epidermal space to determine antitumor response of
checkpoint blockade therapy [Reproduced from ref. [57] with per-
mission from the Ivyspring International]. VI Microﬂuidic enrichment
of CTCs in digital CTC assays using CTC-iChip where whole blood
specimens are depleted with normal hematopoietic cells to generate
highly enriched CTC population. RNA isolated from these cells is
reverse transcribed into cDNA, within lipid droplets, and subjected to
ddPCR, quantifying the number of transcripts for each gene [Repro-
duced from ref. [49] with permission from PNAS].
J. Briones et al.
based antibody discovery but leads on comprehensiveness
and turnaround time as compared to conventional well-plate
screening. Although, humanizing these synthesized mAbs
and subjecting to in vitro afﬁnity maturation are needed in
order to be used in anti-PD-1 therapies [57]. Wuethrich
et al. [58], on the other hand, developed a multiplexed
immune checkpoint biosensor, a combination of micro-
ﬂuidic sandwich immunoassay and in situ nanoﬂuidic
mixing that is capable of parallel detection of PD-1, PD-L1,
and LAG-3 in human serum. The device is composed of 28
circular gold electrodes serving as alternating current elec-
trohydrodynamic mixer via electric ﬁeld application, which
stimulates the immune checkpoint interaction with the
nanoyeast ScFv functionalized electrodes (Fig. 3-II). The
said device can do simultaneous analysis of up to 28 sam-
ples from a single sample drop (about 20 µL) per target
immune checkpoint using high-afﬁnity yeast cell-derived
chain variables [58, 59]. In our work, we developed a
microﬂuidic platform to measure single-cell granzyme B
(GrB) expression as potential biomarker for evaluating anti-
PD-1 antibody therapy response. The said platform, shown
in Fig. 3-III, is integrated with pneumatic valves to com-
partmentalized trapped human peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells (PBMCs) from healthy donor and anti-PD-1
antibody-treated lung cancer patients. The expressed GrB
molecules from individual cells were quantiﬁed ﬂuorome-
trically through the cleaving of a peptide substrate (Ac-
IEPD-AFC), which was introduced in the microchambers.
Fluorescent immunostaining was also performed to distin-
guish speciﬁc cell subsets producing GrB. Here we
observed a marked increase in GrB expression in the anti-
PD-1-treated lung cancer patient sample as compared to the
PBMC from healthy donor. Within the patient cell expres-
sion proﬁle, TCR+ Ig-G4+ cells were found to have
high activity, which signiﬁes PD-1 blockade treatment
response [56].
Several groups have made use of a three-dimensional
(3D) microﬂuidic cell culture system (Fig. 3-IV) to evaluate
the immune-checkpoint sensitivity of murine or patient-
derived organotypic tumor spheroids (MDOTS/PDOTS).
The use of this tool arises from the need of a convenient and
easily accessible ex vivo diagnostic systems that can reca-
pitulate patient-speciﬁc tumor biology for immunotherapy
response prediction (i.e., response of patient tumors to ICB
treatment) [60]. Conventional culture methods that model
the efﬁcacy of immunotherapies are often faced with a
challenge to accurately recapitulate in vivo models. Using
murine models to circumvent this challenge is time and
resource intensive, not to mention the inconsistencies
between murine and human immune systems. Thus, it is a
poor predictor of clinical performance [61]. The use of
mouse models does not also permit mechanistic studies to
monitor real-time tumor progression and assay as function
of local environment parameters [62, 63]. With resistance to
PD-1 blockade still a challenge and biomarkers to guide
treatment lacking, new model systems adaptable to mouse
cancer models and human cancer can advance the ﬁeld of
immunotherapy. The 3D microﬂuidic culture systems can
provide a greater level of precision in interrogating the
tumor immune microenvironment and evaluating other
complex biological phenomena. For the past years, there
have been an increasing interests to using MDOTS/PDOTS
in proﬁling response to PD-1 blockade to demonstrate
immune-checkpoint
sensitivity
and
evaluation
of
tumor–immune interactions via RNA-seq to better under-
stand changes in TME and develop therapeutic combina-
tions [60].
The group of Jenkins et al. [63] cultured tumor spheroid
in collagen hydrogels suspended in 3D chambers where the
response to PD-1 blockade was proﬁled. Fluorescence live/
dead staining using dyes was performed to demonstrate the
CD8 T-cell mediated killing on tumor spheroids treated
with isotype control IgG antibody or anti-PD-1 antibody.
Direct immunoﬂuorescence labeling was also done using
MDOTS and/or PDOTS. The CD8 staining enables identi-
ﬁcation of the effector CD8+ T cells present in PDOTS
following anti-PD-(L)1 antibody treatment. In the case of
Cañadas et al. [64], multiplexed immunoﬂuorescence
staining of cytokeratin, CD8 and CD4 was also performed
in the platform. Their works showed that the 3D micro-
ﬂuidic culture maintains sensitivity to PD-1 blockade,
whereas 2D culture using well plates are unable to detect
the said response [60, 63–65]. Meanwhile, Sade-Feldman
et al. [66] tried to determine which of the CD8+ T-cell
state, CD8+CD39−TIM3−(DN, double negative) and
CD8+CD39+TIM3+ (DP, double positive), can be used as
a predictor for the success or failure of checkpoint immu-
notherapy. They isolated MDOTS from CT26GFP+ tumors
of BALB/cJ mice, suspended it in collagen, and injected it
into the gel region of the 3D microﬂuidic culture device.
CD8+ T-cell DN and/or DP state were incubated as sole
population or mixed one in the device together with
MDOTS and anti-PD-1 (or anti-IgG control antibodies) for
5 days. The results showed that DN cells supports antitumor
activity of the ex vivo checkpoint blockade [63, 64, 66].
The group of Rashidian et al. [67], on the other hand, made
use of the system to aid in modeling TME and determine the
distinction between responders and non-responders to anti-
PD-1 treatment (anti-PD-1 IgG or an isotype control IgG)
via CD8 immuno-positron emission tomography (PET).
MC38 cancer cells, ﬁbroblasts, and immune cells were used
in the culture with the number of dead MC38 accounted for
after 6 days. The effectiveness of the treatment, however,
was assessed using PET with the distribution of the CD8+
T cells. Together with single-cell RNA-seq from intratu-
moral CD45+ and CD11b+ cells in responders and non-
The future of microﬂuidics in immune checkpoint blockade
responders, it was shown that anti-PD-1 treatment affects
interaction of CD8+ T cells with tumor as well as impacts
the intratumoral myeloid compartment [67]. Further work
and development on these microﬂuidic platforms using
MDOTS/PDOTS in aid or in combination with other tech-
niques could lead to the selection and optimization of the
best combinations of treatments, whether of small mole-
cules, chemotherapy, or other immune agents in combina-
tion with ICB.
Other microﬂuidic platforms that were developed to
monitor checkpoint blockade treatment response were
designed as antibody delivery system or for CTC isolation.
One example is the microneedle-array in a microﬂuidic
chamber device assembly (SOFUSATM, Fig. 3-V), which
was used by Kwon et al. [68], to deliver anti-CTLA-4
antibody to an orthotopic mammary carcinoma murine
model and to human volunteers. The use of the said device
allows the researchers to compare the antitumor response of
the checkpoint blockade treatment strategy to that of the
conventional IV Infusion approach. Here, near-infrared
ﬂuorescence imaging was utilized to image the lymphatic
delivery of indocyanine green. The nanotopographic infu-
sion capability of the device results to a better inhibition of
tumor growth, arrest of metastases, increase in tumor-
inﬁltrating lymphocytes, and complete response, as com-
pared to the conventional systemic administration [68, 69].
Meanwhile the CTC-iChip (Fig. 3-VI) was used by Hong
et al. [70] to isolate melanoma CTCs from whole blood of
patients undergoing immune checkpoint inhibition therapy.
Using microﬂuidics to enrich CTC and RNA-based droplet
PCR for early tumor response quantiﬁcation, melanoma
cells in blood can be identiﬁed and accounted for through its
19-gene digital RNA signature (CTC score). This enables a
highly sensitive, noninvasive, and blood-based monitoring
of tumor burden. The results showed a decrease in CTC
score and an improvement in progression-free survival and
overall survival of the patient cohort under immune
checkpoint inhibition therapy [70]. A summary of the
advantages and disadvantages of the discussed microﬂuidic
technologies in ICB treatment and related clinical applica-
tion is presented in Table 1.
The use of microﬂuidic systems for ICB has several
advantages, some of which have already been mentioned in
the preceding discussions. Aside from being a noninvasive
technique, integration of several technologies, such as sur-
face enhanced Raman scattering for speciﬁc and multiplex
detection of immune checkpoint proteins has already been
demonstrated. Compared to conventional methods, the use
of microﬂuidic systems allows direct perfusion of vascu-
larized structures, increased control of microenvironment,
and real-time and improved imaging capabilities [59]. Thus,
it can provide greater insight and precision than existing
preclinical tools. It is of small size, requires fewer samples
and drugs, and can be mass-produced, thereby being cost-
effective and reproducible [17]. The incorporation of
microﬂuidic systems in clinical pipeline can reduce time
and cost for personalized treatments in immunotherapy.
This is exempliﬁed by successful start-ups to commercialize
microﬂuidic devices for single-cell analysis such as the
C1 system (Fluidigm) and chromium system (10× Geno-
mics) [71]. Advancement in microﬂuidic platforms are
continuously being sought to improve the immunotherapy
outcomes, particularly in immune checkpoint blockade.
These advancements have transformed the way researchers
and clinicians conduct research with great improvements in
technique efﬁciency, data collection, analysis, and repro-
ducibility. This has also led to collaborations with other
ﬁelds of science and engineering as interest in automation
and robotics, cloud computing, machine learning, and arti-
ﬁcial intelligence builds.
Future of microﬂuidics in immune
checkpoint blockade
The potential of immune checkpoint blockade therapy to
induce durable responses across multiple types of cancer is
undeniable as shown by its progression for the past years.
However, it has been demonstrated that only ≤20–30% of
tumor patients (melanoma, NSCLC, and renal cell carci-
noma) have beneﬁted from PD-1 or CTLA-4 antibody
treatment. With a number of cancer patient populations still
uncured, in addition to the high cost of treatment and
toxicities that the unresponsive patient has to endure, better
therapeutic solutions are needed [7, 11]. To predict the
response of the patients and determine who can be saved by
the immunotherapy, speciﬁc prognostic indicators requires
urgent identiﬁcation. This shifts the focus on identifying
robust biomarkers in biopsies via immunological analysis.
To help realize these, many researchers have turned to the
use of various technology platforms.
It has been shown in high-dimensional single-cell ana-
lysis that immuno-proﬁling can predict response rates of
patients treated with PD-1 inhibitors [11, 72]. Microﬂuidics
platforms has the potential to aid clinicians and researchers
in this search. A number of studies have already shown the
capability of these tools to do single-cell proﬁling and
analysis which can elucidate the role of the biomarkers in
triggering
or
arresting
antitumor
immune
responses
[11, 23, 73, 74]. Integration of microﬂuidic techniques such
as antibody barcoding and multiplexing, RNA-based dro-
plet digital PCR quantiﬁcation, indexing droplets, micro-
chamber/well multiple displacement ampliﬁcation, etc. can
be used to inspect biopsies through genomic and/or tran-
scriptomic analysis, provide information on the mechanisms
that restrict the efﬁcacy of the treatment, and give insight
J. Briones et al.
Table 1 Advantages and disadvantages of microﬂuidic devices for therapy assessment and disease monitoring.
Microﬂuidic platform
Discussed application
Advantages
Disadvantages
References
Emulsion droplet microﬂuidic device
Screen and discover new anti-PD-1 antibodies in
wild-type mice
Ultra-high throughput
Can identify and isolate hits in an
automated manner using ﬂuorescence-
activated sorting
More comprehensive and less turnaround
time as compared to conventional well-plate
screening
Can achieve native Ig pairing, capable of
rare antibodies discovery, lower false
negative
Require high number of starting material
(>10,000 cells)
Media exchange is difﬁcult or not possible
Difﬁcult to perform assays requiring proliferation
due to limited nutrients present in each droplet
Does not allow long-term culture or complicated
long-term culture process
[57, 82]
Valve-based microﬂuidic chip for single-cell
compartmentalization
Quantiﬁcation of single-cell granzyme B protein
expression
Require small volume of samples and
reagents
High level of control, capable of media
exchange and complex washing steps
Capable of single-cell analysis, long-term
and multiplexed monitoring
Limited throughput
Bulky and complex external control equipments
(i.e., motor pump)
[56, 82]
Nanotopographical microneedle-array in a
microﬂuidic chamber device assembly
(SOFUSA)
Deliver anti-CTLA-4 antibody to an orthotopic
mammary carcinoma murine model and to human
volunteers as well
Direct and controlled intracellular delivery
of agents/drugs
Can deliver very small amounts of drugs
Sustained drug release, ease of use, and
painlessness
Cost prohibitive and difﬁcult to scaleup
Limited dosing
[68, 69, 83]
Multiplexed immune checkpoint
biosensor (MICB)
Parallel detection of PD-1, PD-L1, and LAG-3 in
human serum
Parallel detection and simultaneous analysis
Requires small sample volume
Multiplexing capability, sensitivity, and
relative assay simplicity
Does not require expensive instrumentation
Low throughput
Limited sample Volume
Complex fabrication
[58, 84]
3D microﬂuidic cell culture system
To evaluate the immune-checkpoint sensitivity of
murine or patient-derived organotypic tumor
spheroids (MDOTS/PDOTS)
Requires small sample and reagent volume,
Micro-scale dimensions compatible with
in vivo system environments
Real-time imaging
Greater level of precision in TME
interrogation and complex biological
phenomena evaluation
Variability in number of spheroids within device
Low reproducibility and data variability (PDOTS);
high cost (MDOTS/PDOTS)
Difﬁcult to dispense cells in hydrogels and change
growth media
Difﬁcult to collect cells after 3D formation; needs
cell sorting to collect protein lysate and RNA from
each cell population
Needs experienced operators
[60, 85]
CTC-iChip
(microﬂuidic positive immunocapture)
CTC isolation from the blood of ICB therapy
patient
Whole-blood processing, high throughput
Fast, high CTC count, low CTC burdens
Various CTC-speciﬁc antigens can be used
Cells are unaltered and viable after capture
Low purity of captured CTC
Requires advanced knowledge on microfabrication
[86–88]
CellSearch
(immunoafﬁnity based)
CTC detection, quantiﬁcation, and enrichment in
patient’s blood
FDA-approved technique
Multi-day specimen preservation, suitable
for central laboratory testing
Can predict the prognosis, for metastatic
breast, prostate, and colorectal cancers
patients
Cannot process whole blood
Limited imaging and image analysis (intensity-
based image analysis is not feasible)
Low cell recovery, diminished viability
EpCAM-positivity dependent
[12, 34, 87, 89]
IsoFlux system
(microﬂuidic, immunomagnetic capture)
CTC enrichment and isolation
Higher sensitivity in CTC identiﬁcation (as
compared to CellSearch)
Automated, continuous ﬂow, low volume
transfer requirement
Intact viable CTCs, capable of cell retrieval,
high recovery rate
Requires sample preprocessing to reduce volume
Long, time-consuming process
[34, 87, 90]
The future of microﬂuidics in immune checkpoint blockade
Table 1 (continued)
Microﬂuidic platform
Discussed application
Advantages
Disadvantages
References
NanoVelcro
(nanomaterial-embedded diagnostic platform)
CTC identiﬁcation, capture, and release
Enhanced afﬁnity and contact frequency
with CTCs
Scalable, reproducible, cost effective
High sample-processing capacity, high-
efﬁciency capture and release
Can purify CTC without damaging RNA
transcripts
Requires sample preprocessing to reduce volume
Long, time-consuming process
Less informative about EpCAM-low cells
[12, 90–92]
ExoSearch chip
(microﬂuidic continuous ﬂow platform)
Exosome capture and multi-marker probing
High ﬂow rate and rapid isolation of
exosomes
High speciﬁcity in isolation of circulating
exosomes
Sensitive multiplexed exosomal marker
detection
Simple, cost-effective, robust
Requires sample pretreatment
Can only separate exosomes that contain the
targeted protein
[12, 38, 93, 94]
ExoChip
(functionalized (CD63) multi-chamber/channel
device)
On-chip exosome isolation, detection,
quantiﬁcation, and recovery
Increased exosomes’ retention time,
Can perform minimally invasive exosome-
based quick diagnostic test
Capable of simultaneous processing of
multiple samples
Design suitable for standard readout
instruments
Low fabrication complexity
Requires sample pretreatment
Difﬁcult to release
captured exosomes Intact and label-free for
downstream analysis
[39, 95]
nPLEX-nano-plasmonic exosome sensor
(periodic nanohole arrays)
Simultaneous isolation and surface plasmon
resonance (SPR)-based multiplexed detection
Scalable, high sensitivity, label-free
proﬁling of exosomal proteins
Fast, high-throughput, parallel exosome
analysis
Limited to detecting transmembrane or lipid-bound
proteins
Expensive and sophisticated fabrication of
nanostructures
[41, 95, 96]
J. Briones et al.
into the wide spectrum of patients and their response
[11, 75, 76]. From here on, target cell extraction can be
incorporated to retrieve cells of interest, which can be fur-
ther expanded or cloned for additional investigation, to have
a broader understanding of the T-cell cytotoxic property and
tumor immune evasion mechanisms, leading to persona-
lized immunotherapy and overcoming of treatment resis-
tance [24, 56].
These platforms could provide high volume and parallel
throughput for rapid characterization at the time of diag-
nosis that can possibly tell how the patient will respond to a
potential mAb treatment or ﬁne-tune the desired immune
response. Thus, future developments of this technology can
provide solution to the challenge of effective and efﬁcient
assessment of the immunotherapy or therapy combinations
in early-phase clinical studies. For instance, this can bring
clarity and understanding of the differential effects of
agents, such as PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors, on the inhibition
removal of exhausted effector T cells in the TME, the lifting
of restraints from cancer-speciﬁc T-cell proliferation in
draining lymph nodes, and on the effects on T-cell priming
and activation [77].
The 2D and 3D microﬂuidic platforms for in vitro tumor
models have the ability to replicate physical and spatial
characteristics of TME [78]. The use of tumor organoids to
these platforms allows the recapitulation of the immune
checkpoint inhibitor response (i.e., anti-PD-1 antibody). It
has the potential to optimize the efﬁcacy of immu-
notherapies, test therapeutic combinations, as well as
assess novel approaches. In particular, MDOTS/PDOTS in
3D microﬂuidic cultures can mimic the therapeutic sensi-
tivity and resistance in vivo to PD-1 blockade via the
assessment of tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocyte against tumor
cells [79].
Although conventional approach using Matrigel culture
for patient-derived organoids is promising for evaluating
functional responses, limitations arises with the need for
reproducing validation cohorts, effects of tumor hetero-
geneity, rapid real-time analysis, and correlation against
patient response and overall survival [79]. Meanwhile,
microﬂuidic culture for PDOTS-retaining tumor cells and
autologous immune components provides a short term (i.e.,
1 week) evaluation of cytokine proﬁling and T-cell cyto-
toxicity against tumor cell [79]. Organoid vascularization
can be achieved in compartmentalized microﬂuidic chip,
which is difﬁcult to do in ordinary culture dish. Thus,
represents the potential to predict patient’s response to ICB
therapy and possibly clinical translation from identiﬁcation
of
optimally
responsive
cohorts.
Furthermore,
future
developments and optimizations of these platforms could
increase modeling sensitivity to reveal underlying resistance
pathways that could lead to real-time resolution of patient
sensitivity to ICB or combination of treatments.
This means that these new tools must be able to improve
the efﬁcacy of existing immunotherapy or identify more
potent approach, at the same time reduce toxicity and
adverse effects. For instance, microﬂuidic technology can
provide novel and accelerated intracellular delivery strategy
for macromolecules using nanoparticles, hydrogels, etc., to
accommodate different therapeutic agents, based on patient-
speciﬁc target, which can improve the efﬁcacy of immu-
notherapy [80]. In addition, these devices must be able to
provide ultrasensitive, accurate, and comprehensive assays
for patient monitoring, before treatment, after treatment, and
during remission. It must be able to conduct multiple tests in
a singular chip. Furthermore, these tools must allow
immunotherapy to reach a greater number of patients by
being low cost and easy to use [12, 17, 53].
However, to realize these possibilities, several limitations
and technical challenges of the current technology must be
addressed. One big challenge is how to make microﬂuidic
technology a mainstream in biological and clinical research,
particularly its application to ICB therapy. Microﬂuidic
devices are envisioned to facilitate the development of
personalized medicine. However, many research works on
microﬂuidic platforms are mainly proof-of concept studies
and mostly published in engineering journals as opposed to
clinical
journals.
Increased
collaboration
and
inter-
disciplinary approach between engineers, scientists, clin-
icians, as well as organizations from the CIT community are
needed to produce devices that are clinically relevant. This
would require validation of the ﬁndings from models by
comparing it to in vivo results and conversion to automated
data analysis and readouts for routine clinical use.
To achieve this, microﬂuidic platforms have to diverge
from heavy dependence on high-resolution imaging and
time-consuming image analysis. Clinicians could use this
technology to build patient-speciﬁc platforms using patient
tumor and immune cells, and asses the efﬁcacy of the
immunotherapy prior to treatment. A high-throughput and
automated microﬂuidic device integrated with various
components (i.e., CTC isolation and diagnostic test in one
device) could be readily available for physicians to use in
the future.
Another challenge for this technology is mass production.
Majority of the microﬂuidic devices are made up of poly-
dimethylsiloxane (PDMS), which is limited in terms of
manufacturability and durability. There are, however, alter-
native materials that can be used. Current designs and fab-
rication techniques are time consuming. Platform operation is
still bench-top that needs external equipments (i.e., pumps,
pressure gauges, microscope), several tubing and wirings,
and a lot of human supervision. Although the integration of
artiﬁcial intelligence such as machine learning and compu-
tational modeling could make analysis faster, most of the
microﬂuidic platforms are still far from clinical application.
The future of microﬂuidics in immune checkpoint blockade
Continued advancement in the technology should be made
to create integrated chips that includes more portable external
devices and smart procedures that requires less human
operation. External systems should be limited whenever
possible [81]. For example, laboratory hardware like syringe
pumps can be removed by incorporating gravity driven ﬂow
or capillary action in the design. Likewise, end-user experi-
ence must be improved for ease of use in the clinical setting.
The realization of organs-on-chip or body-on-chip that mimic
multiple organs in different compartments of a single device
would not only allow us to predict responses to immu-
notherapies but could enable discovery of drugs or treatments
that can cure majority if not all types of cancer, in the future.
In addition, commercialization of these diagnostic devi-
ces is also a challenge, as a balance must be sought between
the scope and depth of its impact in immunotherapy, par-
ticularly in ICB, and the revenue that it can generate.
Microﬂuidic devices can be pitched as a consumable in
which multiple laboratories can integrate in several single-
cell analysis applications. For example, droplet microﬂuidic
chips sold by Dolomite and Fluigent, and used in labora-
tories for research applications still have to be integrated
with downstream analytical methods. On the other hand,
some companies such as μFluidix and microﬂuidic Chip-
Shop provide facilities for customized microﬂuidic device
fabrication, whereas others such as Sphere Fluidics provide
complete integrated analytical solutions. Meanwhile, 10×
Genomics allows proﬁling of immune cells at single-cell
level with high automation and parallelization [13]. These
are few examples of the many companies that have com-
mercialized microﬂuidic technology for research purposes.
Future endeavors would allow commercialization of these
devices as a ready-to-use product that will suit the needs of
immunotherapy research and clinical applications.
Conclusion
Finding a cure for cancer has gone a long way. From
conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy to the use of
immune checkpoint inhibitors in immunotherapy. However
unprecedented, the search for the cure is still a long way, as
the efﬁcacy and response rates of the treatment strategies
are still low. Combination therapies, new biomarkers, and
inhibitory receptors could potentially provide better results
and greater coverage. The use of microﬂuidic devices for
studies in immune checkpoint blockade provides new pos-
sibilities for an effective CIT. Microﬂuidic platforms can
potentially evolve from a bulky laboratory setup to a more
portable instrument that can be implemented on a larger
scale outside of lab benches and into clinical bedsides. The
continued innovation in this ﬁeld could allow a shift from
proof-of-concept stage to clinical application.
Acknowledgements We acknowledge the ﬁnancial support provided by
the Core Research for Evolutionary Science and Technology (CREST)
Program with JST CREST Grant Number JPMJCR16G2, Japan.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of
interest.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Sambi M, Bagheri L, Szewczuk MR. Current challenges in cancer
immunotherapy: multimodal approaches to improve efﬁcacy and
patient response rates. J Oncol. 2019;2019:4508794.
2. Reports and Data. Antibodies, Vaccines, Cytokines), By Appli-
cations (Lung Cancer, Breast Cancer, Liver Cancer, Head & Neck
Cancer), By End Users (Hospitals, Cancer Research Centers,
Clinics), And Segment Forecasts, 2016-2026. Available from:
https://www.reportsanddata.com/report-detail/cancer-immunothera
py-market. Accessed 1 May 2020.
3. Chao M, Harris J, Morales RT, Chen W. Microﬂuidics for
immuno-oncology. In: Jiang X, editor. Nanoﬂuidics and micro-
ﬂuidics. 1st edn. Wiley-VCH; 2020. p. 149–76.
4. Mitchell DA, Sampson JH. Toward effective immunotherapy for
the treatment of malignant brain tumors. Neurotherapeutics.
2009;6:527–38.
5. Nixon NA, Blais N, Ernst S, Kollmannsberger C, Bebb G, Butler
M, et al. Current landscape of immunotherapy in the treatment of
solid tumours, with future opportunities and challenges. Curr
Oncol. 2018;25:e373–84.
6. Li L, Yan S, Lin B, Shi Q, Lu Y. Single-cell proteomics for cancer
immunotherapy. In: Broome AM, editor. Cancer nanotechnology.
Elsevier; 2018. p. 185–207.
7. Ventola CL. Cancer immunotherapy, part 2: efﬁcacy, safety, and
other clinical considerations. P T. 2017;42:452–63.
8. Gong J, Chehrazi-Rafﬂe A, Reddi S, Salgia R. Development of
PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors as a form of cancer immunotherapy: a
comprehensive review of registration trials and future considera-
tions. J Immunother Cancer. 2018;6:8.
9. Kretschmer A, Schwanbeck R, Valerius T, Rösner T. Antibody
isotypes for tumor immunotherapy. Transfus Med Hemother.
2017;44:320–6.
10. Haslam A, Prasad V. Estimation of the percentage of US patients
with cancer who are eligible for and respond to checkpoint inhi-
bitor immunotherapy drugs. JAMA Netw Open. 2019;2:e192535.
J. Briones et al.
11. Park YJ, Kuen DS, Chung Y. Future prospects of immune
checkpoint blockade in cancer: from response prediction to
overcoming resistance. Exp Mol Med. 2018;50:109.
12. Kulasinghe A, Wu H, Punyadeera C, Warkiani M. The use of
microﬂuidic technology for cancer applications and liquid biopsy.
Micromachines. 2018;9:397.
13. Sinha N, Subedi N, Tel J. Integrating immunology and microﬂuidics
for single immune cell analysis. Front Immunol. 2018;9:2373.
14. Lu C, Verbridge S, editors. Microﬂuidic methods for molecular
biology. Cham: Springer; 2016.
15. Chuah S, Chew V. High-dimensional immuneproﬁling in cancer:
implications for immunotherapy. J Immunother Cancer. 2020;8:
e000363.
16. Yu Y, Cui J. Present and future of cancer immunotherapy: a tumor
microenvironmental perspective. Oncol Lett. 2018;16:4105–13.
17. Boussommier-Calleja A, Li R, Chen MB, Wong SC, Kamm RD.
Microﬂuidics: a new tool for modeling cancer-immune interac-
tions. Trends Cancer. 2016;2:6–19.
18. Fares J, Fares MY, Fares Y. Immune checkpoint inhibitors:
advances and impact in neuro-oncology. Surg Neurol Int. 2019;10:9.
19. Bird L. MR1-restricted pan-cancer T cells. Nat Rev Immunol.
2020;20:141.
20. Zhang J, Shi Z, Xu X, Yu Z, Mi J. The inﬂuence of micro-
environment on tumor immunotherapy. FEBS J. 2019;286:4160–75.
21. Jain P, Jain C, Velcheti V. Role of immune-checkpoint inhibitors
in lung cancer. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2018;12:1–13.
22. An X, Varadarajan N. Single-cell technologies for proﬁling T cells
to enable monitoring of immunotherapies. Curr Opin Chem Eng.
2018;19:142–52.
23. Armbrecht L, Müller RS, Nikoloff J, Dittrich PS. Single-cell
protein proﬁling in microchambers with barcoded beads. Micro-
syst Nanoeng. 2019;5:55.
24. Jiang X, editor. Nanotechnology and microﬂuidics. 1st edn.
Wiley-VCH; 2020.
25. Merouane A, Rey-Villamizar N, Lu Y, Liadi I, Romain G, Lu J,
et al. Automated proﬁling of individual cell–cell interactions from
high-throughput time-lapse imaging microscopy in nanowell grids
(TIMING). Bioinformatics 2015;31:3189–97.
26. Lu Y, Yang L, Wei W, Shi Q. Microchip-based single-cell
functional proteomics for biomedical applications. Lab Chip.
2017;17:1250–63.
27. Wei W, Shin YS, Ma C, Wang J, Elitas M, Fan R, et al. Microchip
platforms for multiplex single-cell functional proteomics with
applications to immunology and cancer research. Genome Med.
2013;5:75.
28. Yang L, Wang Z, Deng Y, Li Y, Wei W, Shi Q. Single-cell,
multiplexed protein detection of rare tumor cells based on a beads-
on-barcode antibody microarray. Anal Chem. 2016;88:11077–83.
29. Mathur L, Ballinger M, Utharala R, Merten C. Microﬂuidics as an
enabling technology for personalized cancer therapy. Small.
2020;16:1904321.
30. Truini A, Alama A, Dal Bello MG, Coco S, Vanni I, Rijavec E,
et al. Clinical applications of circulating tumor cells in lung cancer
patients by CellSearch system. Front Oncol. 2014;4:242.
31. Janning M, Kobus F, Babayan A, Wikman H, Velthaus JL,
Bergmann S, et al. Determination of pd-l1 expression in circu-
lating tumor cells of NSCLC patients and correlation with
response to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors. Cancers 2019;11:835.
32. Nicolazzo C, Raimondi C, Mancini M, Caponnetto S, Gradilone
A, Gandini O, et al. Monitoring pd-l1 positive circulating tumor
cells in non-small cell lung cancer patients treated with the pd-1
inhibitor nivolumab. Sci Rep. 2016;6:31726.
33. Kloten V, Lampignano R, Krahn T, Schlange T. Circulating tumor
cell PD-L1 expression as biomarker for therapeutic efﬁcacy of
immune checkpoint inhibition in NSCLC. Cells. 2019;8:809.
34. Harb W, Fan A, Tran T, Danila DC, Keys D, Schwartz M, et al.
Mutational analysis of circulating tumor cells using a novel
microﬂuidic collection device and qPCR assay. Transl Oncol.
2013;6:528–38.
35. Po JW, Ma Y, Balakrishna B, Brungs D, Azimi F, de Souza P,
et al. Immunomagnetic isolation of circulating melanoma cells and
detection of PD-L1 status. PLoS ONE. 2019;14:e0211866.
36. Jan YJ, Chen JF, Zhu Y, Lu YT, Chen SH, Chung H, et al.
NanoVelcro rare-cell assays for detection and characterization of
circulating tumor cells. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2018;125:78–93.
37. Winograd P, Hou S, Court CM, Lee YT, Chen PJ, Zhu Y, et al.
Hepatocellular carcinoma–circulating tumor cells expressing PD-
L1 are prognostic and potentially associated with response to
checkpoint inhibitors. Hepatol. Commun. 2020. https://doi.org/10.
1002/hep4.1577.
38. Zhao Z, Yang Y, Zeng Y, He M. A microﬂuidic ExoSearch chip
for multiplexed exosome detection towards blood-based ovarian
cancer diagnosis. Lab Chip. 2016;16:489–96.
39. Kanwar SS, Dunlay CJ, Simeone DM, Nagrath S. Microﬂuidic
device (ExoChip) for on-chip isolation, quantiﬁcation and char-
acterization of circulating exosomes. Lab Chip. 2014;14:1891–900.
40. Iliescu FS, Vrtačnik D, Neuzil P, Iliescu C. Microﬂuidic tech-
nology for clinical applications of exosomes. Micromachines
2019;10:392.
41. Im H, Shao H, Park YI, Peterson VM, Castro CM, Weissleder R,
et al. Label-free detection and molecular proﬁling of exosomes
with a nano-plasmonic sensor. Nat Biotechnol. 2014;32:490–5.
42. Daassi D, Mahoney KM, Freeman GJ. The importance of exo-
somal PD-L1 in tumour immune evasion. Nat Rev Immunol.
2020;20:209–15.
43. Kim DH, Kim H, Choi YJ, Kim SY, Lee JE, Sung KJ, et al.
Exosomal PD-L1 promotes tumor growth through immune escape
in non-small cell lung cancer. Exp Mol Med. 2019;51:1–13.
44. Hwang B, Lee JH, Bang D. Single-cell RNA sequencing tech-
nologies and bioinformatics pipelines. Exp Mol Med. 2018;50:96.
45. Zou D, Cui D. Advances in isolation and detection of circulating
tumor
cells
based
on
microﬂuidics.
Cancer
Biol
Med.
2018;15:335–53.
46. Cho H, Kim J, Song H, Sohn KY, Jeona MH, Han KH. Micro-
ﬂuidic technologies for circulating tumor cell isolation. Analyst
2018;143:2936–70.
47. Chen G, Ning B, Shi T. Single-cell RNA-Seq technologies and
related computational data analysis. Front Genet. 2019;10:317.
48. Demaree B, Weisgerber D, Lan F, Abate AR. An ultrahigh-
throughput microﬂuidic platform for single-cell genome sequen-
cing. J Vis Exp. 2018;135:e57598.
49. Tang X, Huang Y, Lei J, Luo H, Zhu X. The single-cell
sequencing: new developments and medical applications. Cell
Biosci. 2019;9:53.
50. Han X, Wang R, Zhou Y, Fei L, Sun H, Lai S, et al. Mapping the
mouse cell atlas by microwell-seq. Cell 2018;172:1091–107.
51. Habib N, Avraham-Davidi I, Basu A, Burks T, Shekhar K, Hofree
M, et al. Massively parallel single-nucleus RNA-seq with DroNc-
seq. Nat Methods. 2017;14:955–8.
52. Bratman SV, Yang, SYC, Iafolla MAJ, Liu Z, Hansen AR,
Bedard PL, et al. Personalized circulating tumor DNA analysis as
a predictive biomarker in solid tumor patients treated with pem-
brolizumab. Nat Cancer. 2020. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-
020-0096-5.
53. Jeanbart L, Swartz M. Engineering opportunities in cancer
immunotherapy. PNAS. 2015;112:14467–72.
54. Thurin M, Cesano A, Marincola F, editors. Biomarkers for
immunotherapy of cancer. Humana; 2020.
55. Jamalian S, Jafernejad M, Aref A. Microﬂuidics and future of
cancer diagnostics. In: Aref A, Barbie D, editors. Ex vivo
The future of microﬂuidics in immune checkpoint blockade
engineering of the tumor microenvironment. Cancer drug dis-
covery and development. Cham: Humana; 2016.
56. Briones J, Espulgar W, Koyama S, Yoshikawa H, Park J, Naito Y,
et al. A microﬂuidic platform for single cell ﬂuorometric gran-
zyme B proﬁling. Theranostics. 2020;10:123–32.
57. Adler A, Mizrahi R, Spindler M, Adams M, Asensio M, Edgar R,
et al. Rare, high-afﬁnity mouse anti-PD-1 antibodies that function
in checkpoint blockade, discovered using microﬂuidics and
molecular genomics. mAbs. 2017;9:1270–81.
58. Wuethrich A, Rajkumar AR, Shanmugasundaram KB, Reza K,
Dey S, Howard C, et al. Single droplet detection of immune
checkpoints on a multiplexed electrohydrodynamic biosensor.
Analyst 2019;144:6914–21.
59. Reza KK, Sina AII, Wuethrich A, Grewal Y, Howard C, Korbie D,
et al. A SERS microﬂuidic platform for targeting multiple soluble
immune checkpoints. Biosens Bioelectron. 2018;126:178–86.
60. Aref AR, Campisi M, Ivanova E, Portell A, Larios D, Piel BP,
et al. 3D microﬂuidic ex vivo culture of organotypic tumor
spheroids to model immune checkpoint blockade. Lab Chip.
2018;18:3129–43.
61. Balko JM, Sosman JA. A critical need for better cancer immu-
notherapy models: are organotypic tumor spheroid cultures the
answer? Cancer Discov. 2018;8:143–5.
62. Jeffrey T. Borenstein - microﬂuidic techniques for cancer thera-
pies. Eur Pharm Rev. Available from: https://www.europeanpha
rmaceuticalreview.com/article/62865/microﬂuidic-techniques-for-
cancer-therapies. Accessed 1 Aug 2020.
63. Jenkins RW, Aref AR, Lizotte PH, Ivanova E, Stinson S, Zhou
CW, et al. Ex vivo proﬁling of PD-1 blockade using organotypic
tumor spheroids. Cancer Discov. 2018;8:196–215.
64. Cañadas I, Thummalapalli R, Kim JW, Kitajima S, Jenkins RW,
Christensen CL, et al. Tumor innate immunity primed by speciﬁc
interferon-stimulated
endogenous
retroviruses.
Nat
Med.
2018;24:1143–50.
65. Jenkins RW, Barbie DA, Flaherty KT. Mechanisms of resistance
to immune checkpoint inhibitors. Br J Cancer. 2018;118:9–16.
66. Sade-Feldman M, Yizhak K, Bjorgaard SL, Ray JP, de Boer CG,
Jenkins RW, et al. Deﬁning T cell states associated with response
to
checkpoint
immunotherapy
in
melanoma.
Cell.
2018;
175:998–1013.
67. Rashidian M, LaFleur M, Verschoor V, Dongre A, Zhang Y,
Nguyen T, et al. Immuno-PET identiﬁes the myeloid compartment
as a key contributor to the outcome of the antitumor response
under PD-1 blockade. PNAS. 2019;116:16971–80.
68. Kwon S, Velasquez FC, Rasmussen JC, Greives MR, Turner KD,
Morrow JR, et al. Nanotopography-based lymphatic delivery for
improved anti-tumor responses to checkpoint blockade immu-
notherapy. Theranostics. 2019;9:8332–43.
69. Walsh L, Ryu J, Bock S, Koval M, Mauro T, Ross R, et al.
Nanotopography facilitates in vivo transdermal delivery of high
molecular weight therapeutics through an integrin-dependent
mechanism. Nano Lett. 2015;15:2434–41.
70. Hong X, Sullivan R, Kalinich M, Kwan TT, Giobbie-Hurder A,
Pan S, et al. Molecular signatures of circulating melanoma cells
for monitoring early response to immune checkpoint therapy.
PNAS. 2018;115:2467–72.
71. Jammes FC, Maerkl SJ. How single-cell immunology is beneﬁting
from microﬂuidic technologies. Microsyst Nanoeng. 2020;6:45.
72. Krieg C, Nowicka M, Guglietta S, Schindler S, Hartmann FJ,
Weber LM, et al. High-dimensional single-cell analysis predicts
response to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy. Nat Med. 2018;24:144–53.
73. Armbrecht L, Gabernet G, Kurth F, Hiss JA, Schneider G, Dittrich
PS. Characterisation of anticancer peptides at the single-cell level.
Lab Chip. 2017;17:2933–40.
74. Buder-Bakhaya K, Hassel J. Biomarkers for clinical beneﬁt of
immune checkpoint inhibitor treatment—a review from the mel-
anoma perspective and beyond. Front Immunol. 2018;9:1474.
75. Ma S, Murphy T, Lu C. Microﬂuidics for genome-wide studies
involving next generation sequencing. Biomicroﬂuidics. 2017;
11:021501.
76. Matula K, Rivello F, Huck W. Single‐cell analysis using droplet
microﬂuidics. Adv Biosys. 2020;4:1900188.
77. H PS, Chen DS. Top 10 challenges in cancer immunotherapy.
Immunity. 2020;52:17–35.
78. Adriani G, Pavesi A, Tan AT, Bertoletti A, Theiry JP, Kamm RD.
Microﬂuidic models for adoptive cell-mediated cancer immu-
notherapies. Drug Discov Today. 2016;21:1472–8.
79. Yuki K, Cheng N, Nakano M, Kuo CJ. Organoid models of tumor
immunology. Trends Immunol. 2020;41:652–64.
80. Zhao Z, Zheng L, Chen W, Weng W, Song J, Ji J. Delivery
strategies of cancer immunotherapy: recent advances and future
perspectives. J Hematol Oncol. 2019;12:126.
81. Sackmann E, Fulton A, Beebe D. The present and future role of
microﬂuidics in biomedical research. Nature. 2014;507:181–9.
82. Seah YFS, Hu H, Merten CA. Microﬂuidic single-cell technology in
immunology and antibody screening. Mol Asp Med. 2018;59:47–61.
83. Cote B, Rao D, Alany RG, Kwon GS, Alani AWG. Lymphatic
changes in cancer and drug delivery to the lymphatics in solid
tumors. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2019;144:16–34.
84. Wuethrich A, Howard CB, Trau M. Geometric optimisation of
electrohydrodynamic
ﬂuid
ﬂows
for
enhanced
biosensing.
Microchem J. 2018;137:231–7.
85. Joshi P, Lee MY. High content imaging (HCI) on miniaturized
three-dimensional (3D) cell cultures. Biosensors. 2015;5:768–90.
86. Bankó P, Lee SY, Nagygyörgy V, Zrínyi M, Chae CH, Cho DH,
et al. Technologies for circulating tumor cell separation from
whole blood. J Hematol Oncol. 2019;12:48.
87. Ferreira MM, Ramani VC, Jeffrey SS. Circulating tumor cell
technologies. Mol Oncol. 2016;10:374–94.
88. Ozkumur E, Shah AM, Ciciliano JC, Emmink BL, Miyamoto DT,
Brachtel E, et al. Inertial focusing for tumor antigen-dependent
and -independent sorting of rare circulating tumor cells. Sci Transl
Med. 2013;5:179ra47.
89. Wang L, Balasubramanian P, Chen AP, Kummar S, Evrard YA,
Kinders RJ. Promise and limits of the CellSearch platform for
evaluating pharmacodynamics in circulating tumor cells. Semin
Oncol. 2016;43:464–75.
90. Li X, Li Y, Shao W, Li Z, Zhao R, Ye Z. Strategies for enrichment
of circulating tumor cells. Transl Cancer Res. 2020;9:3.
91. Rao Q, Zhang Q, Zheng C, Dai W, Zhang B, Zanetti CI, et al.
Detection of circulating tumour cells in patients with epithelial
ovarian cancer by a microﬂuidic system. Int J Clin Exp Pathol.
2017;10:9599–606.
92. Lu YT, Delijani K, Mecum A, Goldkorn A. Current status of
liquid biopsies for the detection and management of prostate
cancer. Cancer Manag Res. 2019;11:5271–91.
93. Contreras-Naranjo JC, Wu HJ, Ugaz VM. Microﬂuidics for exo-
some isolation and analysis: enabling liquid biopsy for persona-
lized medicine. Lab Chip. 2017;17:3558–77.
94. Yang F, Liao X, Tian Y, Li G. Exosome separation using
microﬂuidic
systems:
size‐based,
immunoafﬁnity‐based
and
dynamic methodologies. Biotechnol J. 2017;12:1600699.
95. Jia Y, Ni Z, Sun H, Wang C. Microﬂuidic approaches toward the
isolation and detection of exosome nanovesicles. IEEE Access.
2019;7:45080–98.
96. Kordasht HK, Hasanzadeh M. Biomedical analysis of exosomes
using biosensing methods: recent progress. Anal Methods.
2020;12:2795–811.
J. Briones et al.
