Immunity
Review
Tumor Immunology and Tumor
Evolution: Intertwined Histories
Je´ roˆ me Galon1,* and Daniela Bruni1
1INSERM, Laboratory of Integrative Cancer Immunology, Equipe Labellise´ e Ligue Contre le Cancer, Sorbonne Universite´ , Sorbonne Paris
Cite´ , Universite´ Paris Descartes, Universite´ Paris Diderot, Universite´ de Paris; Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, F-75006 Paris, France
*Correspondence: jerome.galon@crc.jussieu.fr
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2019.12.018
Cancer is a complex disease whose outcome depends largely on the cross-talk between the tumor and its
microenvironment. Here, we review the evolution of the ﬁeld of tumor immunology and the advances, in lock-
step, of our understanding of cancer as a disease. We discuss the involvement of different immune cells at
distinct stages of tumor progression and how immune contexture determinants shaping tumor development
are being exploited therapeutically. Current clinical stratiﬁcation schemes focus on the tumor histopathology
and the molecular characteristics of the tumor cell. We argue for the importance of revising these stratiﬁca-
tion systems to include immune parameters so as to address the immediate need for improved prognostic
and/or predictive information to guide clinical decisions.
Introduction
Although the ﬁrst indications of the involvement of the immune
system in cancer control can be traced back to over a century
ago, tumor immunology can be regarded as an emerging ﬁeld,
rightly complementing and completing that of oncology. Indeed,
the renaissance of tumor immunology came in the past two de-
cades, with the demonstration of two key concepts that bring to
fore the major role of the pre-existing adaptive immunity within
tumors: immunosurveillance and immunoediting (Schreiber
et al., 2011; Shankaran et al., 2001) and the importance of im-
mune contexture (Galon et al., 2006; Mascaux et al., 2019).
The encouraging results obtained with the employment of novel
cancer immunotherapies such as immune checkpoint inhibitors
(ICIs) revealed the power of the immune system to counteract
and possibly defeat the disease. The recognition of the tumor
immunology ﬁeld was conclusively sealed by the Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine 2018, awarded for the discovery that
inhibiting the negative immune regulation of T cells could be
exploited as a powerful anti-cancer strategy. These ground-
breaking ﬁndings were accompanied by numerous studies eluci-
dating how various components of the immune system control or
contribute to disease progression, thus revealing their part in the
natural history of the tumor, as well as their prognostic value.
Indeed, it is now appreciated that innate and adaptive immune
cells inﬂuence cancer evolution directly and indirectly, including
at the pre-cancerous stages.
Here, we discuss the current understanding of the how com-
ponents of the immune system shape the progression of cancer.
The fact that ICIs yield clinical beneﬁt in a limited percentage of
patients indicates the need for a deeper knowledge of the
different actors playing a role in cancer development. Nonethe-
less, readily available powerful evidence makes it already plau-
sible to encourage the adoption of immune-based parameters
to improve patient stratiﬁcation and guide treatment decisions.
Thus, we argue for the importance of bringing the current cancer
classiﬁcation system up-to-date to take into account recent
advances in tumor immunology.
The Dawn of Tumor Immunology
The ﬁeld of tumor immunology has deep roots, dating back to the
nineteenth century (Figure 1). Rudolf Virchow reported a link be-
tween inﬂammation and cancer in 1863. Virchow hypothesized
that cancer is caused by severe irritation in the tissues; it was not
until the 1990s that his theory—known as ‘‘chronic irritation the-
ory’’—was substantiated by solid evidence, at least in certain can-
cer types (Balkwill and Mantovani, 2001). A few decades later, in
1891, the bone sarcoma surgeon William Bradley Coley started
theﬁrstsystematicstudyofimmunotherapy(Coley,1893).Inspired
by tumor regression in a Streptococcus-infected (and seemingly
doomed) patient, he ﬁrst formulated and tested the hypothesis
that cancer could be defeated by stimulating the patient’s immune
system. Hence, the so-called Coley’s Toxins (a mix of bacteria and
bacterial products) were injected in over 1,000 patients over the
subsequent 40 years, yielding remarkable results. Despite the
evidence, many clinicians didn’t trust his results, and his methods
were gradually forgotten, replaced by the more promising novel
radiotherapeutic (1896) (Holsti, 1995) and chemotherapeutic
(1942) (Fenn and Udelsman, 2011) approaches. What couldn’t
be suspected at the time is that the efﬁcacy of these seemingly
unrelated therapeutic modalities might be due at least in part to
their modulatory and potentially activating effects on the immune
system (Formenti and Demaria, 2013; Galluzzi et al., 2015).
Around Coley’s time, another important milestone was
provided by George Beatson (Beatson, 1896), who exploited
ovarian ablation in an attempt to cure unresectable breast can-
cer. In doing so, Beatson leveraged on the connection between
sex steroid hormones and cancer (Beatson, 1896), thereby
paving to way to hormonal therapy in hormone-sensitive cancers
(such as breast, ovarian, endometrial, and prostate cancers).
This treatment modality became later a widely deployed strat-
egy, still in use today (Shevach et al., 2019; Zang et al., 2019).
Nonetheless, the underlying link between hormones, inﬂamma-
tion, and cancer began to unravel only more recently (Gharwan
et al., 2015; Key, 1995; Mantovani et al., 2008; O¨ zdemir and
Dotto, 2019).
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020 ª 2020 Elsevier Inc.
55
A similarly hypothesis-driven path was followed by use of the
bacille Calmette-Gue´ rin (BCG) in bladder cancer settings. Origi-
nally developed by Calmette and Gue´ rin in the early 20th century
as a vaccine for tuberculosis (TB) (Calmette, 1927; Luca and
Mihaescu, 2013), the BCG remains to date the only available
vaccine against TB. TB was ﬁrst linked to low rates of cancer
Figure 1. History of Tumor-Immunology and Cancer (Immuno)therapy
The main milestones, by year, of tumor immunology are highlighted (top), including the ﬁrst proposed link between inﬂammation and cancer by Rudolf Virchow
(Balkwill and Mantovani, 2001); the hypothesis that the immune system prevents neoplastic development (Ehrlich, 1909); the prognostic value of immune
inﬁltration (MacCarty and Mahle, 1921); the concept of immunosurveillance (Burnet, 1957); the cloning of CTLA-4 and PD-1 (Brunet et al., 1987; Ishida et al., 1992)
and their anti-tumor immunity role (Dong et al., 2002; Leach et al., 1996); the ﬁrst cloning of a tumor antigen (van der Bruggen et al., 1991); the demonstration of
immunosurveillance (Shankaran et al., 2001), equilibrium (Koebel et al., 2007), and immunoediting (Matsushita et al., 2012) in mouse models; the concept of
immune contexture in humans (Galon et al., 2006); the Immunoscore and demonstration that TNM-staging is dependent on T cells (Galon et al., 2006); the
concept of immunome and the immune landscape in humans (Bindea et al., 2013); the demonstration of immune-based metastasis dissemination in humans
(Mlecnik et al., 2016b); the demonstration of an immune-based theory of cancer evolution in humans (Angelova et al., 2018); and the worldwide consensus
Immunoscore validation (Page` s et al., 2018). The main milestones of cancer therapy and immunotherapy are highlighted (bottom), with the Coley’s bacterial toxin
(Coley, 1893); radiotherapy (Holsti, 1995); hormonal therapy (Beatson, 1896); chemotherapy (Fenn and Udelsman, 2011); IFN-a and IL-2 FDA approval in 1986
and 1992, respectively; the ﬁrst targeted therapy (the tyrosine kinase inhibitor Imatinib) approved by the FDA against chronic myeloid leukemia (2001); the ﬁrst
FDA-approved therapeutic vaccine against prostate cancer (2010); the ﬁrst FDA-approved checkpoint inhibitor, anti-CTLA-4, for melanoma (2011);
FDA-approved anti-PD-1 in lung cancer (2013); Immunotherapy deﬁned as ‘‘Breakthrough of the Year’’ by Science (Couzin-Frankel, 2013); ﬁrst FDA-approved
bi-speciﬁc CD19-CD3 antibody (Blinatumomab) for the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (2014); anti-PD-1 approved by the FDA as ﬁrst-line treatment
in lung cancer (2015); FDA approval of an oncolytic virus (talimogene laherparepvec [T-VEC]) for use in melanoma patients (2015); the MAGE-3 vaccine failure in a
large Phase III study (Vansteenkiste et al., 2016); the ﬁrst FDA-approved CAR T cell therapy (tisagenlecleucel) for pediatric and young adult patients with relapsed
and/or refractory B cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (2017); and the current (as of February 2019) 43 checkpoint cancer immunotherapies overall
approved by the FDA.
56
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
in 1929 by Raymond Pearl (Pearl, 1929), while he was carrying
out a series of autopsies at Johns Hopkins Hospital. A few de-
cades later, also on the basis of this evidence, Morales et al.
(1976) performed the ﬁrst intravesical administration of BCG
to patients with recurrent superﬁcial bladder tumors, which
showed indeed promising results. Fibronectin was shown to
mediate the attachment of BCG to tumor cells (Ratliff et al.,
1988), and ﬁbronectin-mediated internalization of BCG was a
necessary prerequisite for its anti-tumor activity (Kavoussi
et al., 1990). The consequently initiated functional immune
response includes an enhancement of antigen presentation
and cytotoxic T-cell-mediated immunity, as well as an increase
in pro-inﬂammatory mediators occurring after successive treat-
ments (Fuge et al., 2015). Despite a lack of understanding of its
mode of action at the time, Morales et al. (1976) initiated a ther-
apeutic modality that is still used today for treating early-stage
bladder cancer, representing the only remnant of the microbial
era of immunotherapy efforts.
The Advent of Cellular and Antibody Therapies
Apart from these exceptions, the ﬁelds of oncology and immu-
nology developed relatively independently since the late 19th
century, and only truly merged in the past two decades. This is
despite some pioneering hypotheses such as that the host
defense might prevent neoplastic cells from developing into
tumors, by Paul Ehrlich in 1909 (Ehrlich, 1909); that the humoral
immune system might recognize newly arising tumors antigens,
by Lewis Thomas in 1959 (Thomas, 1959); the theory of cancer
immunosurveillance, by Frank MacFarlane Burnet in 1957
(Burnet, 1957); and related studies (Foley, 1953; Graham and
Graham, 1959; Gross, 1943).
In 1957, Edward Donnall Thomas treated a leukemia patient,
after total-body high irradiation therapy, with bone marrow infu-
sion from his identical twin (Thomas et al., 1957). This repre-
sents de facto the ﬁrst form of clinically useful cellular therapy,
or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Thomas was
awarded the 1990 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for
fathering this groundbreaking approach, which signiﬁcantly
boosted survival rates for blood malignancies. Therefore,
John Kersey performed the world’s ﬁrst bone marrow transplant
for lymphoma in 1975 (Kersey, 2007): although the technique
was admittedly crude and risky, his ﬁrst patient is still alive.
The success of this technique and other allogeneic HSCT is
because of the ability of donor-derived stem cells to provide
allo-immunity, thus enabling a graft-versus-tumor effect to
eradicate residual disease and prevent relapse. Indeed, graft
versus leukemia reaction (GvLR) remains an important therapy
against hematological malignancies (Dickinson et al., 2017;
Yeshurun et al., 2019).
Instrumental for paving the way from a tumor-centric to a
tumor plus immune vision of cancer were the advances in basic
immunology: the discovery of the interferons (IFN) by Isaacs and
Lindenmann in 1957 (Isaacs and Lindenmann, 1957; Isaacs
et al., 1957) and that of T cells and their critical role in the adap-
tive immune responses (Miller et al., 1967) were only the begin-
ning of an avalanche of crucial ﬁndings (Kiessling et al., 1975;
Steinman and Cohn, 1973; Zinkernagel and Doherty, 1974). Sub-
sequently, the ﬁrst steps into more modern immunotherapies
were taken. The use of puriﬁed, large-scale-produced IFN-a
against chronic myeloid leukemia yielded promising results
(Talpaz et al., 1983) but was still insufﬁcient to convince the clin-
ical oncologists of the utility of immunotherapy. Again, a deeper
basic knowledge was needed, as well as translational research
to bring it from bench to bedside.
First discovered in 1976 as a ‘‘T cell growth factor’’ (Morgan
et al., 1976), interleukin-2 (IL-2) represents the ﬁrst soluble im-
mune mediator administered to cancer patients (Lotze et al.,
1985). It subsequently received U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) approval for renal cell cancer in 1992. In 1986, the
adoptive transfer of IL-2-expanded tumor-inﬁltrating lympho-
cytes (TILs) efﬁciently cured tumor-bearing mice, providing a
rationale for the use of TILs in the treatment of humans with
advanced cancer (Rosenberg et al., 1986). First clinical trials
employing the adoptive transfer of expanded TILs to patients
with metastatic disease were reported in 1987 (Topalian et al.,
1987). Follow-up studies demonstrated the feasibility and safety
of using retroviral gene transduction for human gene therapy,
which had implications for the design of TILs with improved
antitumor potency (Rosenberg et al., 1990). The origin of one
of the most recently developed immunotherapies, chimeric
antigen receptor (CAR) T cells, can be traced back to the same
time period. In fact, the generation and expression of functional
CAR-expressing T cells were shown in 1989 (Gross et al., 1989),
thereby initiating a process ultimately leading to FDA approval of
CAR-T-cell-based therapies for hematologic malignancies in
2017. The potency of CAR T cell therapy was shown by several
clinical trials, in which even end-stage patients experienced a full
recovery of up to 92% in acute lymphocytic leukemia (Abramson
et al., 2018; Miliotou and Papadopoulou, 2018) and 82% objec-
tive response in refractory large B cell lymphoma (Neelapu et al.,
2017). Fratricide-resistant and allo-tolerant ‘‘off-the-shelf’’ CAR
T cells have facilitated clinical adoption of this costly therapeutic
modality (Cooper et al., 2018; Qasim et al., 2017; Sommer et al.,
2019). Nevertheless, disease relapse after CAR T cell therapy is
not uncommon (Abbasi, 2018; Kim et al., 2017; Ruella et al.,
2018), indicating the need to further reﬁne this type of therapy,
or to combine it with further treatments (Galon and Bruni,
2019; Liu et al., 2018), depending on the speciﬁc case. Mostly
successful against hematological malignancies, the use of
CAR T cells in solid tumor settings is hampered by their limited
ability to ﬁnd, enter, and survive in the tumor (Martinez and
Moon, 2019). These limitations are being gradually overcome
by the use of bispeciﬁc CAR designs or local administration,
and that of combinatorial strategies, such as the combination
with checkpoint inhibitors to mitigate T cell exhaustion (DeRenzo
and Gottschalk, 2019; Gargett et al., 2016).
Apart from T cells, other types of immune cells have been em-
ployed for adoptive cellular immunotherapies over the years,
including dendritic cells (DCs), natural killer (NK) cells, lympho-
kine-activated killer (LAK) cells, and cytokine-induced killer
(CIK) cells. As for T cells, cellular immunotherapies relying
on DCs require a ﬁrst antigenic characterization and, most
commonly, the use of autologous cells, thereby slowing clinical
development. By virtue of DCs’ ability to most efﬁciently prime
T cell responses (Banchereau and Steinman, 1998), and consid-
ering that vaccine adjuvants are known to act via the induction of
DC maturation, it’s not surprising that DCs are being studied as
tools
to
effective
therapeutic
vaccination
against
cancer
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
57
Immunity
Review
(Palucka and Banchereau, 2013; Lee et al., 2018) and approved
Sipuleucel-T (Cheever and Higano, 2011) in prostate cancer.
Conversely, LAK cells, CIK cells, and NK cells display antigen-
independent cytolytic activity against cancer cells, and repre-
sent attractive, off-the-shelf immunotherapy options. Since their
discovery by Kiessling et al. (1975) and, independently, by Her-
berman et al. (1975) in 1975, NK cells have been implicated in
anti-cancer surveillance and anti-tumor immunity (Chiossone
et al., 2018) and have been exploited for the design of anti-
cancer therapies (Cheng et al., 2011; Souza-Fonseca-Guimar-
aes et al., 2019). Instrumental to these developments was the
pioneering concept of missing-self recognition, whereby the
absence or incomplete expression of host major histocompati-
bility complex (MHC) class I molecules in a normal cell would
be make it susceptible to NK-cell-mediated killing. This hypoth-
esis was formulated by Klaus K€arre in his PhD thesis (K€arre,
1981), then in subsequent proceedings and articles (K€arre,
1985; K€arre et al., 1986). Hence, the groups of Yokoyama
(Karlhofer et al., 1992) and Moretta (Moretta et al., 1993) discov-
ered the ﬁrst NK inhibitory receptors (killer-cell immunoglobulin-
like receptors [KIRs]) restraining NK cells cytolytic activity. Since,
several KIRs as well as functionally opposite killer activation
receptors (KARs) have been described (Molgora et al., 2017;
Sivori et al., 2019; Ve´ ly et al., 1996). Anti-KIR antibodies recently
entered clinical trials because of their ability to unleash NK-cell-
mediated antitumor responses (Benson et al., 2015; Vey et al.,
2018). The ﬁrst successful use of allogenic mismatched NK cells
was reported in 2002 by Velardi’s group in acute myeloid leuke-
mia (AML) patients (Ruggeri et al., 2002).
First described in 1994, the generation of LAK cells (a mixture
of NK and NKT cells) involved culturing of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with IL-2 and then cluster of differ-
entiation 3 (CD3) antibody (OKT3 [Van Wauwe et al., 1980])
(Escudier et al., 1994). LAK-cell-based immunotherapy didn’t
elicit satisfactory anti-tumor efﬁciency in patients, especially as
a monotherapy. Novel combinatorial approaches might yield
clinical beneﬁt (Saito et al., 2014), which nonetheless remains
to be proven in human settings. CIK cells were described over
two decades ago (Lu and Negrin, 1994). CIK cells share features
of both NK and T cells, such as functional (T cell receptor) TCR
and NK cell molecules. They are expanded from circulating pre-
cursors by treatment with interferon-g (IFN-g), OKT3, and IL-2
(Introna and Correnti, 2018), after which they acquire a potent,
MHC-unrestricted cytotoxicity against (mostly) hematological
malignancies in a natural killer group 2 member D (NKG2D)-
receptor-dependent manner. CIK cells’ anti-tumor efﬁcacy has
been demonstrated in various hematopoietic neoplasms with
varying yet encouraging results (Introna et al., 2007; Introna
et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2013).
First discovered in 1883 by E´ lie Metchnikoff (Metchnikoff,
1883), a Russian zoologist, macrophages are innate immune
cells critically involved in a multitude of steps of tumor initiation
and progression. Notably, Metchnikoff and Paul Ehrlich (the
latter for his work on mast cells, described below) were jointly
awarded the 1908 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine ‘‘in
recognition of their work on immunity.’’ According to a current
paradigm, rooted in pioneering hypotheses formulated since
the late 1970s (Balkwill and Mantovani, 2001; Bottazzi et al.,
1983; Mantovani et al., 2017; Mills et al., 2000; North, 1978),
classically activated M1 macrophages accompany the early
stages of cancer initiation and development, where they play
an inﬂammatory, anti-cancer role. With disease progression, a
shift toward pro-tumor M2 or M2-like macrophages occurs:
these cells are responsible for the tissue remodeling, angiogen-
esis, and adaptive immune suppression typically contributing to
tumor growth and dissemination (Mantovani et al., 2017). Recent
reports indicate the possibility to leverage on the presence of
checkpoint molecules (such as programmed cell death-1
[PD-1] [Gordon et al., 2017] or the newly discovered Clever-1
[Viitala et al., 2019]) impairing the sought phagocytic ability and
anti-cancer functional properties of macrophages. Indeed,
blocking PD-1 on tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) re-
sulted in increased phagocytic properties, reduced tumor
growth and increased survival in vivo. Similarly, blocking
Clever-1 could switch TAMs toward an M1-like phenotype, re-
sulting in the activation of a protective cytotoxic T cell response.
Clever-1 targeting also decreased PD-L1 expression both on
TAMs and on cancer cells, providing a rationale for dual
(Clever-1 and PD-L1) blockade (Viitala et al., 2019). The exploita-
tion of macrophage-targeting strategies in humans, if success-
ful, could provide a further powerful anti-tumor weapon.
Another milestone in the ﬁeld of immunotherapy was reached
with the use of the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (mAb) ritux-
imab in patients with recurrent B cell lymphoma (Maloney
et al., 1994). Indeed, anti-CD20 mAb became the ﬁrst mAb
approved by the FDA for cancer treatment in 1997.
The ﬁrst human tumor-associated antigens (TAA) reported
was the epithelial mucin MUC-1, recognized by cytotoxic
T cells (CTLs) isolated and grown from a pancreatic cancer pa-
tient (Barnd et al., 1989). Since, other TAAs were discovered
such as MZ2-E (a product of the MAGE-1 gene) (van der Bruggen
et al., 1991) and MZ2-E (coded by the MAGE-3 gene) (Gaugler
et al., 1994), both on human melanoma. Subsequently, the anti-
gen encoded by the BAGE gene was found expressed in varying
percentages in several cancer types, including melanoma, inﬁl-
trating bladder carcinoma, mammary carcinoma, head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma, and non-small-cell lung carci-
noma (NSCLC) (Bo€el et al., 1995). Like the MAGE genes (Gaugler
et al., 1994; van der Bruggen et al., 1991), BAGE is not expressed
in healthy tissues, except for the testis (Bo€el et al., 1995). The ex-
istence of TAAs generated tremendous enthusiasm in the ﬁeld
for their possible exploitation as therapeutic targets. However,
recent ﬁndings indicate no increased beneﬁt associated with
tumor-antigen-speciﬁc vaccines, compared with placebo, in
the randomized phase III clinical trials in NSCLC (Vansteenkiste
et al., 2016) and melanoma (Dreno et al., 2018). Despite this
setback, it is possible that targeting TAAs could be effective in
combinatorial strategies. Indeed, neoantigen vaccines gener-
ated intra-tumoral T cell responses and demonstrated clinical
responses in recent studies (Hilf et al., 2019; Keskin et al.,
2019; Ott et al., 2017; Sahin et al., 2017).
The Renaissance: Immunosurveillance and Immune
Contexture
The term ‘‘immunosurveillance’’ refers to the physiological pro-
cess by which the immune system recognizes and destroys
transformed cells. Preliminary experimental evidence for tumor
immunosurveillance was provided over 60 years ago (Klein
58
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
et al., 1960; Prehn and Main, 1957) and further supported by ev-
idence on the role of IFN-g and perforin in tumor surveillance and
rejection (Dighe et al., 1994; Kaplan et al., 1998; Smyth et al.,
2000; van den Broek et al., 1996). Such was the scenario that
welcomed the concept of ‘‘tumor immunoediting’’ formulated
by Schreiber and colleagues (Shankaran et al., 2001), based
on a study in mouse models, which presented a renewed and
improved immunosurveillance hypothesis (Dunn et al., 2002).
Using WT and Rag2-deﬁcient mice, they found three outcomes
resulting from the continuous cross-talk between tumor cell
and immune system: tumor elimination (Shankaran et al.,
2001), equilibrium (Koebel et al., 2007), or tumor escape from im-
mune control (Matsushita et al., 2012). The equilibrium phase is
characterized not by tumor dormancy, as previously postulated
(Weinhold et al., 1979; Matsuzawa et al., 1991), but by a contin-
uous proliferation and mutation—the phenomenon of immunoe-
diting—in an attempt to attenuate tumor antigenicity and ulti-
mately escape the immune response (Dunn et al., 2002). The
ability of tumor cells to survive immune attack is now a recog-
nized hallmark of cancer (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011). In the
escape phase, when the tumor versus immunity battle is seem-
ingly won by the former, the immune system can still provide
useful information on patients’ prognosis and disease outcome.
The association of prolonged survival of patients with cancer
with intratumoral lymphocytic inﬁltration was noted in the
1920s (MacCarty and Mahle, 1921). This association become
clearer in the late 1990s and the early 2000s; the ﬁrst reports
showed how speciﬁc tumor-inﬁltrating immune cells types can
inﬂuence cancer progression and clinical outcome, and there
was a prominent role for cytotoxic and effector memory
T cells: the presence of these cells correlated with increased sur-
vival of patients with cancer (Clemente et al., 1996; Naito et al.,
1998; Page` s et al., 2005; Zhang et al., 2003). Since the original
classiﬁcation of rectal cancer (Dukes, 1932), now expanded to
all solid tumors, cancer staging relies on the Tumor (T), Node
(N), Metastasis (M) AJCC/UICC-TNM cancer classiﬁcation. The
importance of the density and location of cytotoxic and memory
T cells within the tumor was demonstrated by studies showing
that these parameters were superior predictors of outcome to
cancer staging using the AJCC/UICC-TNM classiﬁcation and
that, in fact, tumor progression and invasion were statistically
dependent upon the pre-existing T cells (Galon et al., 2006).
This evidence constituted the cradle of the concept of ‘‘immune
contexture’’ (Galon et al., 2007), highlighting the importance of
the quantity and the quality of the immune inﬁltrates for the sur-
vival of patients with cancer. The four major immune parameters
of the ‘‘immune contexture’’ are deﬁned by the nature, density,
immune functional orientation, and location of tumor-associated
immune inﬁltrates. Importantly, tumor progression (T-stage),
tumor invasion (N-stage), tumor differentiation (grade), and
early-metastatic invasion (emboli and vessel invasion) are
dependent upon pre-existing anti-tumor immunity (Galon et al.,
2013; Galon et al., 2006; Galon et al., 2014; Mlecnik et al.,
2011; Page` s et al., 2009). Originally applied to colorectal cancer
(CRC), the immune contexture concept is nowadays widely
applied to most solid cancers (Fridman et al., 2012; Remark
et al., 2015; Tazzari et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2018). Molecular
proﬁling of melanoma metastases revealed the importance of
T helper 1 (Th1) signature and suggested classiﬁers of immune
responsiveness (Wang et al., 2002). We previously proposed a
continuum of cancer immunosurveillance in human and a
broader immunological interpretation of three concepts: immune
contexture, Immunoscore, and immunologic constant of rejec-
tion, which segregated oncogenic processes independently
of their tissue origin (Galon et al., 2013). The strength of the im-
mune contexture proved instrumental for the development of
the consensus Immunoscore, an immunohistochemistry (IHC)-
based assay, deﬁning hot (inﬂamed) and cold (non-inﬂamed)
tumors and providing prognostic information based on the
presence of CD3+ and CD8+ in speciﬁc regions (center and
invasive margin) of the tumor (Galon and Bruni, 2019). A
recent worldwide validation conﬁrmed that the consensus
Immunoscore holds prognostic value superior to that of the
AJCC/UICC-TNM staging system (Page` s et al., 2018).
Tumor Immunology Coming-of-Age: Anti-CTLA-4 and
Anti-PD-1 as Prototype Checkpoint Inhibitors
Advances in molecular biology between the 1980s and the 1990s
enabled the elucidation of the mechanisms underlying T cell
cytotoxicity, such as the perforin-granzyme and the FAS-FASL
pathway (Golstein and Grifﬁths, 2018). These advances were
also instrumental to the discovery of key molecular players in
immunity. Brunet and colleagues reported the identiﬁcation of
the immunoglobulin superfamily member CTLA-4 in mice and re-
vealed its inducible nature upon T cell activation (Brunet et al.,
1987). These ﬁndings were soon extended to humans (Dariavach
et al., 1988). These discoveries were contemporary to the iden-
tiﬁcation of the co-stimulatory receptor CD28 (Aruffo and
Seed, 1987). Although the ability of CTLA-4 to bind the CD28
ligand B7-1 with high afﬁnity was demonstrated in 1991 (Linsley
et al., 1991), the role of CTLA-4 remained controversial until
1995, when an antibody blocking the interaction of CTLA-4
with antigen-presenting cell (APC)-derived B7-2 (functionally
equivalent to B7-1 [Pentcheva-Hoang et al., 2004; Sigal et al.,
1998]) was shown to inhibit T cell proliferation (Krummel and Al-
lison, 1995). Of note, at the time, the role of CD28 in preventing
T cell anergy had just been revealed (Harding et al., 1992).
Shortly after, the analysis of a CTLA-4-deﬁcient mouse model re-
vealed its crucial role as negative regulator of T lymphocyte acti-
vation, therefore contributing to T cell homeostasis and protect-
ing from lethal tissue damage (Waterhouse et al., 1995; Tivol
et al., 1995). Subsequent studies revealed that CTLA-4 ligation
inhibits CD28-dependent IL-2 production (Walunas et al.,
1996). Importantly, mAbs targeting CTLA-4 reversed its inhibi-
tory effect on T cells (Walunas et al., 1994). A big breakthrough
came with the discovery by Allison and colleagues that adminis-
tration of anti-CTLA-4 antibodies could mediate tumor rejection
in mouse models in vivo and confer long-lasting immune protec-
tion (Leach et al., 1996).
A similar pre-clinical path was followed by the other prototype
checkpoint inhibitor PD-1 (also known as CD279). Also belonging
to the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, PD-1 emerged during a
screen for genes involved in apoptosis carried out by Ishida et al.
(1992). PD-1 is expressed by activated T cells, and also by B cells
and myeloid cells. It took 8 more years to conclusively demon-
strate the immunoinhibitory role of PD-1 via ligation of the
B7 family member PD-L1 on antigen-presenting cells (APCs),
as
well
as
non-lymphoid
tissue
(Freeman
et
al.,
2000).
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
59
Immunity
Review
(legend on next page)
60
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
Altogether, these studies demonstrated the existence of ﬁne-
tuning mechanisms regulating tolerance and controlling autoim-
munity, and conversely (as we know now) contributing to tumor
immune escape. Tumor cells express PD-L1 (also known as
CD274 or B7 homolog 1-B7-H1), and an anti-PD-L1 antibody
reduced tumorigenesis and tumor invasiveness and enhanced
cytotoxic T-cell-mediated tumor cell lysis (Iwai et al., 2002).
PD-L1 is not normally expressed by healthy human cells (with
the exception of macrophages) but is highly expressed by tumor
cells in response to IFN-g (Dong et al., 2002). PD-1-PD-L1 bind-
ing, with concomitant TCR engagement, results in antigen-spe-
ciﬁc T cell apoptosis, thus promoting tumor growth in vivo
(Dong et al., 2002). PD-L2, another ligand for PD-1, appears to
be functionally redundant to PD-L1 and is expressed by tumor
cells as well as by some normal tissues and by APCs upon acti-
vation (Latchman et al., 2001).
It was already clear in the early 2000s that CTLA4 and PD-1
were profoundly different checkpoints. One of the most striking
observations was the different phenotypes of the CTLA-4- or
PD-1-deﬁcient mouse models, the former lethal within a few
weeks (Tivol et al., 1995; Waterhouse et al., 1995), the latter
developing lupus-like disease with age (Nishimura et al.,
1999). Furthermore, the relevant ligands display distinct
expression patterns: B7-1 and B7-2 are found mainly on pro-
fessional APCs (most typically residing in lymph nodes or
spleen), whereas PD-L1 and PD-L2 are widely expressed,
most notably in peripheral tissues (Buchbinder and Desai,
2016; Latchman et al., 2001).
At this point in time, three key concepts came together: (1)
the demonstration of the phenomenon of immunosurveillance
in mice; (2) the demonstration of the importance of a pre-
existing favorable immune contexture, and (3) the possibility to
unleash these tumor-inﬁltrating T cells induced by these immune
checkpoint antibodies. These major milestones generated
great enthusiasm and brought forth the renewal of the ﬁeld of tu-
mor immunology. Indeed, cancer immunotherapy was named
‘‘Breakthrough of the Year’’ by Science in 2013 (Couzin-Frankel,
2013). The subsequent clinical application of monoclonal anti-
bodies against CTLA-4 and PD-1 ultimately resulted in regulatory
approval in a growing number of indications (particularly for
PD-1) since 2011. The milestones in tumor immunology dis-
cussed here are summarized in a timeline (Figure 1). As of
February 2019, these agents have been approved for 43 different
cancer indications. The award of the 2018 Nobel Prize in Physi-
ology or Medicine to immunologists James Allison and Tasuku
Honjo should be seen not only as their recognition, but also as
a global acknowledgment of the ﬁeld and of the underlying effort
of all contributing parties.
Pre-cancerous Lesions: A Cradle for Cancer
It is assumed that most solid cancers develop through a multi-
step physiopathological process: the normal mucosa-to-
adenoma-to-carcinoma sequence, or pre-malignant-to-low-
grade-to-high-grade lesions (Figure 2). This sequence was
thought to be characterized by pre-deﬁned steps of sequential
genetic mutations (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990; Kinzler and
Vogelstein, 1996). More recently, the notion that a branched,
rather than linear acquisition of speciﬁc mutations applied to
the growth and dissemination of primary tumors (Gerlinger
et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2015; Sottoriva et al., 2015; Thirlwell
et al., 2010) has been widely accepted. This notion, together
with the observation that speciﬁc, supposedly required key
genetic mutations are not systematically found in established
tumors suggest further revisions to the classical model. Such
revision is even more strongly encouraged in the light of the
most recent ﬁndings on the role of the immune system in
shaping later stages of cancer evolution (Angelova et al.,
2018).
Whether
a
similarly
branched,
immune-inﬂuenced
modality applies to the stages of pre-cancer development con-
stitutes a plausible hypothesis, which nonetheless remains to
be established.
Mutations enhancing proliferative signaling by determining the
activation of oncogenes and/or the negative regulation of tumor
suppression genes, as well as those conferring resistance to cell
death and evasion of transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b)
signaling are among the most critically involved in the carcino-
genic process (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011). These mutations
can result from genomic instability, deﬁned as the loss or rear-
rangement of the chromosomes during cell division, but also
be initiated and/or potentiated by factors directly or indirectly
causing DNA disruptions and damage. Smoking (Murphy et al.,
2019; Siegel et al., 2015), exposure to radiation (Ozasa et al.,
2012; Preston et al., 2007; Williams et al., 2004), and oncogenic
viruses (Boda et al., 2018; Koeppel et al., 2015; McBride, 2017;
Parfenov et al., 2014; Slebos et al., 2013) are examples of estab-
lished carcinogens directly causing DNA damage, although indi-
rect effects also contribute to the carcinogenic process. Other
factors also play a pro-tumorigenic role, including obesity (Calle
et al., 2003; Wade et al., 2019) and lack of physical exercise
(Dietz et al., 2016; Stenholm et al., 2016; Zauber et al., 2012).
Linked to most, if not all the above-mentioned factors is chronic
inﬂammation, which in fact provides a fertile niche promoting
carcinogenesis, and is indeed a recognized hallmark of cancer
(Colotta et al., 2009; Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011). Apart from
setting up a tumorigenic microenvironment, several lines of evi-
dence indicate that chronic inﬂammation is associated with
chromosomal instability (Colotta et al., 2009; Kitamura et al.,
2015; Lin et al., 2016), thereby highlighting the crosstalk among
different tumorigenic components. It should be noted that
not all chromosomal abnormalities seem to be linked to cancero-
genesis (Vitre et al., 2015), further reiterating its complexity and
multifactorial nature.
Whereas the mechanism underlying the connections between
inﬂammation and carcinogenesis remain to be elucidated, a
Figure 2. History of Cancer: from Pre-cancerous Lesions, to Primary Tumors, to Metastases
The main pathological stages characterizing the pre-malignant lesions are shown, followed by the development of the primary tumor. The main parameters
regulating the progression of primary tumors along the classical, TNM-based tumor stages, are displayed: the immune contexture and adaptive immunity
counteracting tumor growth yet shaping tumor progression via the immunoediting. The ability of the tumor to evade the immune recognition, with the phenomena
of immune tolerance, immune suppression, and immune escape, favor tumor progression. Therefore, these factors contribute to the early metastatic invasion,
characterized by vascular emboli, lymphatic invasion and perineural invasion (VELPI) as well as sustaining distant metastatic spreading.
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
61
Immunity
Review
growing body of evidence implicates several immune and im-
mune-derived components in the onset and the progression of
cancer. Malignant cells release pro-inﬂammatory mediators
and chemoattractants that promote immune cell inﬁltration
(Gao et al., 2017; Johnson et al., 2014; Xia et al., 2012). Further-
more, malignant cells are able to reprogram resident ﬁbroblasts
turning them into cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts (CAFs); in turn,
CAFs play a pro-tumorigenic role, both directly (by stimulating
the growth of tumor cells and angiogenesis) and indirectly, via
the recruitment of immune cells to the tumor microenvironment
(TME) (Ao et al., 2007; Erez et al., 2010; Vicent et al., 2012).
Of note, CAFs in mouse pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) and mammary tumors, but not cervical tumors, are
pro-inﬂammatory (Erez et al., 2010). The use of a Kras-driven
mouse model of PDAC revealed the critical role for the inﬂamma-
tory mediator signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(STAT3) in supporting cell proliferation, metaplasia associated
inﬂammation and matrix metalloproteinase 7 (MMP7) expression
during tumorigenesis (Fukuda et al., 2011). Of note, MMP7 and
other metalloproteinases are involved in extracellular matrix
(ECM) remodeling, which typically accompanies the malignant
transformation (Das et al., 2017; Heslin et al., 2001; Page-
McCaw et al., 2007).
Neutrophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes inﬁltrate the in-
ﬂammatory site, release a plethora of soluble mediators
including pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and growth factors, and
determine the production of genotoxic species, such as reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and nitrogen oxide (NO), inducing DNA
damage and genetic mutations (Kanda et al., 2017; Okada,
2014). Langerhans cells can create a mutagenic environment
by metabolically converting chemical carcinogens into active
mutagens, thus inducing DNA-damage-induced squamous cell
carcinoma (Modi et al., 2012). Lesion-inﬁltrating bone-marrow-
derived myeloid cells not only drive the inﬂammatory process,
but also produce ECM remodeling factors, pro-angiogenic
growth factors and vascular-modulating enzymes (Jiang and
Lim, 2016), thereby setting up the stage for the developing ma-
lignancy. Neutrophils are generally pro-tumorigenic during the
initiation and progression of tumors (Tazawa et al., 2003), and
often a source of ROS (Canli et al., 2017; Nicola´ s-A´ vila et al.,
2017). Other neutrophil-derived genotoxic substances, such as
defensins, were shown to induce DNA strand breaks in target
cells (Gera and Lichtenstein, 1991). In vivo studies implicated
neutrophils in the neoangiogenetic process in early preneoplas-
tic hepatocellular (Huo et al., 2019; Kuang et al., 2011) and
pancreatic (Nozawa et al., 2006) lesions, thus favoring malignant
progression. The observation that systemic depletion of neutro-
phils inhibits bacteria-triggered mammary tumor development in
mice further demonstrates the key role of these cells in tumori-
genesis (Lakritz et al., 2015).
In addition to neutrophils, other ROS-producing myeloid cells,
i.e., macrophages, can contribute to carcinogen-independent
intestinal tumor initiation and progression (Canli et al., 2017).
In vivo evidence suggests a prominent role for macrophage-
derived inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS2) in promoting
lung squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) (Wang et al., 2018), con-
ﬁrming previous observations (Liu et al., 1998; Okayama et al.,
2013). Pro-inﬂammatory macrophages are among the respon-
sible for the low-grade inﬂammation observed in obese individ-
uals, involving the production of IL-6 and tumor necrosis
factor-a (TNF-a) and the derived hepatic carcinogenesis (Park
et al., 2010). However, pro-inﬂammatory M1-like macrophages
seem to play a less prominent role in tumor progression
than their anti-inﬂammatory counterparts, often referred to as
M2 macrophages (Wang et al., 2015). The expression pattern
of inﬂammatory macrophages is unchanged along the pre-
cancerous stages preceding CRC, whereas the frequency of
M2-like macrophages markedly increased with the pathological
stages of progression (Wang et al., 2015). M2-like macrophages
can promote carcinogenesis by driving an oncogenic program in
epithelial cells (Morales et al., 2014). The cytokine IL-4, in combi-
nation with macrophage colony-stimulating factor induces
macrophage polarization to an anti-inﬂammatory phenotype
(Yang and Zhang, 2017). The increased expression of the
oncogenic (Nussinov et al., 2016; Tao et al., 2014) protein
Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) found in colorectal adenocarci-
noma, compared with that in normal tissue, can drive IL-4- and
IL-13-induced macrophage polarization (Huang et al., 2017). It
should be noted that a high degree of plasticity exists among
the different macrophage populations, and that the M1 versus
M2 distinction represents an oversimpliﬁcation of a wide pheno-
typical spectrum. The signiﬁcance of the heterogeneity within
TAMs (Aras and Zaidi, 2017) in different cancer contexts is an
important area of investigation.
Eosinophils and mast cells can also contribute to malignant
transformation. The number of tissue-inﬁltrating eosinophils
decreases during the progression of colorectal adenoma-carci-
noma (Cho et al., 2016; Kiziltas¸ et al., 2008; Moezzi et al., 2000),
suggesting a protective role for these cells and/or the establish-
ment of mechanisms of escape. The association of mast cells
with tumorigenesis was ﬁrst reported by Paul Ehrlich (Ehrlich,
1879a, 1879b). Pioneering work in a model of skin carcinogenesis
showed that the number of mast cells increased throughout the
pre-cancerous stages and then decreased at the onset of cancer
(Cramer and Simpson, 1944). Mast cell activation, presumably
degranulation, occurred at the most advanced pre-malignant
phases, and high activation intensity was proposed to act as a
functional defensive process against the development of skin
cancer (Cramer and Simpson, 1944). Further studies in different
contexts have reported both pro- and anti-tumorigenic roles for
mast cells. For instance, mast cells promoted pre-malignant
angiogenesis and pro-tumoral stromal remodeling in squamous
epithelial carcinogenesis in mice (Coussens et al., 1999), and
degranulation-dependent (pre)tumor cell proliferation in mam-
mary carcinogenesis in rats (Faustino-Rocha et al., 2017).
On the other hand, mast cells promoted eosinophil inﬁltration
and tumor cell apoptosis in a model of early-stage intestinal
tumorigenesis (Sinnamon et al., 2008). These differences might
reﬂect a cancer- and/or localization-speciﬁc role for these cells,
as recently suggested (Varricchi et al., 2017).
It is estimated that chronic inﬂammation increases the risk
of human cancers involving almost all organs or tissues (Kanda
et al., 2017). In support of this observation, very recently, a tu-
mor-promoting inﬂammatory microenvironment was found to
promote skin carcinogenesis in discoid lupus erythematosus
(DLE) patients. Reduced CD8+ T cells, combined with enhanced
lesion-inﬁltrating regulatory T (TREG) CD4+ T cells, M2 macro-
phages, mast cells, as well as upregulated STAT3 signaling in
62
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
keratinocytes were found in cancer-prone DLE patients (Zaal-
berg et al., 2019). Therefore, it is not surprising that strategies
and candidate agents aiming at preventing inﬂammation-related
carcinogenesis have been proposed (Kanda et al., 2017),
including aspirin for CRC prevention (Coyle et al., 2016; Gar-
cia-Albeniz and Chan, 2011). Of note, not all chronic inﬂamma-
tions lead to carcinogenesis; for instance, some of chronic
inﬂammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, are not
linked to cancer risk, whereas others are even leading to tumor
regression (Okada, 2014). The crucial genetic and/or immune
determinants leading from inﬂammation to cancer haven’t
been fully elucidated yet. Notwithstanding, the notion that im-
mune-based mechanisms control the transformation of benign
to malignant lesions (or fail to do so) has been advocated (Cui
et al., 2012). Recently, the examination of the nine morphological
stages of lung squamous carcinogenesis identiﬁed speciﬁc
modules of co-expressed genes and evolutionary trajectories
of cancer and immune pathways (Mascaux et al., 2019). A
continuous increase of proliferation and DNA repair linearly
form normal tissue to cancer along the pre-cancerous stages
was found. This was accompanied by a transitory increase of
metabolism and early immune sensing through activation of
resident immune cells, including mast cells, in low-grade pre-
invasive lesions. Subsequently, the activation of the innate and
adaptive immune response and the expression of immune
checkpoints and suppressive interleukins were detected from
high-grade pre-invasive lesions, indicating the establishment of
an immune escape phase. The invasive, more advanced stage
was characterized by the activation of the epithelial-mesen-
chymal transition (EMT). High-grade lesions were characterized
by the highest percentage of immune-related gene expression,
including that of activated T cells, neutrophils, and M1 macro-
phages. The immune composition within lesions from the same
patients varied along the stages, and there was a shift from naive
to memory T and B cell and a gradual increase in mast cell acti-
vation. The abundance of naive CD4+ T cells peaked at the early
stage of mild dysplasia then rapidly declined concomitantly with
the increase of activated CD4+ memory T cells in the successive
stages. It would be of crucial interest to pinpoint key determi-
nants involved in the failure of the immune system in controlling
and possibly removing (pre)malignant clones. Nevertheless, this
study represents a ﬁrst comprehensive immune assessment at
the precancerous stages, a ﬁrst step toward a desired identiﬁca-
tion of biomarkers of (pre)disease progression or recurrence,
and the possibility to perform immunotherapy at a pre-can-
cer stage.
Immunity Versus (or Pro) Cancer in Primary Tumors
Primary tumors are characterized by a wide array of immunolog-
ical scenarios (Galon et al., 2013), partly depending on the tissue
of origin (Oliver et al., 2018; Santegoets et al., 2019), tumor loca-
tion (Zhang et al., 2018), the underlying spectrum of genetic
mutations (Giannakis et al., 2016) and genetic background (Lim
et al., 2018), epigenetic features (Jones et al., 2019), the compo-
sition of the host gut microbiome (Cremonesi et al., 2018; Gopa-
lakrishnan et al., 2018), and environmental conditions (Yi et al.,
2015). All these factors contribute to shape the tumor-associ-
ated immune landscape and consequently both the natural
progression of the disease, as well as the response to (im-
muno)therapeutic agents (Bindea et al., 2014; Galon and Bruni,
2019). The analysis of the prognostic value of individual cell types
enabled their labeling as friends or foes, although this clear-cut
distinction is not applicable to all cell subtypes and/or to all can-
cer types (Fridman et al., 2012) (Figure 3). Such prognostic vari-
ability might reﬂect local or tissutal differences, thereby affecting
the milieu of the TME, but it might also arise from: a lack of
harmonization in marker selection; technical differences; the
exclusion of spatial parameters (localization of speciﬁc immune
cells in speciﬁc tumor regions); the need for combinatorial as-
sessments, whereby combinations of immune cells and/or
factors (and their topography within the tumor), rather than indi-
vidual ones, hold superior prognostic power.
In mechanistic terms, what has been clearly established is that
CD8+ cytotoxic T cells are the ultimate effectors of tumor rejec-
tion because of their cytolytic capabilities and of course their
speciﬁcity against tumor cells, conferring long-lasting protec-
tion, thus protecting against cancer recurrence. It should be
noted that also innate immune cells can control cancer directly
by interacting with tumor cells, and/or indirectly by favoring the
anti-tumor activities of CD8+ T cells. NK cells, gd T cells and
macrophages are among the documented mediators of direct
tumor cell lysis (Chan et al., 2009; Hayakawa et al., 2002; Jadus
et al., 1996; K€agi et al., 1994; Uno et al., 2007; Wrobel et al., 2007;
Wu et al., 2015). Activated NK cells and gd T cells are also potent
IFN-g producers. IFN-g increases MHC and immunoproteasome
expression by tumor cells (Cheon et al., 2014; Rouette et al.,
2016), thereby sensitizing tumor cells to CD8+ T cell killing.
More complex is the role of macrophages, which are mostly
considered as pro-, rather than anti-tumor, as detailed below.
Nonetheless, the expression of a ﬁxed set of germline-encoded
receptors, characteristic of innate immune cells, shows that
innate cells mediated cancer surveillance, which is fundamen-
tally different from that by the adaptive immune system, which
instead relies on a unique speciﬁcity for tumor antigens. There-
fore, CD8+ cytotoxic T-cell-mediated tumor rejection represents
the last step of a complex dynamic process, nicely exempliﬁed
with the proposed cancer-immunity cycle (Chen and Mellman,
2013). As a result of the oncogenic transformation, cancer cells
express modiﬁed antigens (neoantigens) which are released
upon tumor cell death. Neoantigens are then captured by
APCs, most typically in humans by conventional type 1 dendritic
cells (cDC1s) (Sa´ nchez-Paulete et al., 2017), which then drive the
priming and activation of T cell responses, possibly within
tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs) (Zhu et al., 2015), in the pres-
ence of the right set of co-stimulatory signals and cytokine milieu
(Gardner and Ruffell, 2016). This represents a critical step, given
that distinct parameters and factors can tip the balance in favor
of either anti-tumor effector T cells, or pro-tumor TREG cells
(Chen and Mellman, 2013). Of note, the neoantigen speciﬁcity
of both tumor-associated and circulating TREG cells has been
demonstrated only very recently (Ahmadzadeh et al., 2019).
TREG cells are not the only immune cells shown to favor
cancer progression: monocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(MDSCs) and M2-like TAMs (both falling within the broad category
of monocyte/macrophage lineage cells [MMLCs]) are the most
notable examples of pro-tumor immune cells by acting at multiple
levels (reviewed in Chew et al., 2012; Lindau et al., 2013; Takeuchi
and Nishikawa, 2016) (Aras and Zaidi, 2017). The degree of CD8+
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
63
Immunity
Review
Figure 3. Prognostic Effect of Immune Cells in Solid Cancer
An overview of the main innate and adaptive immune cell types and their prognostic effect in distinct solid cancers in humans, as determined by IHC staining of
tumors. Adapted from Aponte-Lo´ pez et al. (2018), Delahaye et al., (2011), Dong et al., (2006), Dundar et al., (2008), Dyduch et al., (2012), Galon and Bruni, (2019),
Gu-Trantien et al., (2017), Mussai et al., (2012), Pasero et al., (2015), Powell and Huttenlocher, (2016), Rajput et al., (2008), Saute` s-Fridman et al., (2016), Sun et al.,
(2018), Truxova et al., (2018), Wouters and Nelson, (2018), Xu et al., (2016), and Yano et al., (1999).
64
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
Figure 4. Immune Contexture: Good and Bad Immunity
(A) The pre-existing natural intra-tumor immunity can classify cancer patients into four main categories based on Immunoscore: the optimal immunity (high
Immunoscore and hot, inﬂamed tumors), the altered immunity (intermediate Immunoscore and with either an immunosuppressed phenotype or an exclusion
phenotype [high density of T cells only at the tumor margin]), and the absent immunity (low Immunoscore and cold, non-inﬂamed tumors).
(B) The immune microenvironment comes in different ﬂavors including adaptive immunity, inﬂamed, immunosuppressed, or with a tolerogenic phenotype. The
immune contexture, deﬁned as the type, density, immune functional orientation, and location of immune cells within distinct tumor regions shapes the proper
(legend continued on next page)
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
65
Immunity
Review
T cell inﬁltration is affected by that by both TAMs and TREG
cells. Tumor cells are a source of colony stimulating factor 1
(CSF-1), which recruits CSF-1 receptor (CSF-1R)-expressing
TAMs (Dwyer et al., 2017), thereby providing at once a survival,
proliferation, and differentiation stimulus. The in vivo pharmaco-
logical inhibition of the CSF-1R signaling pathway (Strachan
et al., 2013), or the genetic ablation of CSF-1 in colorectal cancer
cells (Abbasi, 2018) promoted CD8+ T cell inﬁltration, which was
counteracted by an enhanced inﬂux of TREG cells (Gyori et al.,
2018). Co-depletion of both TAMs and TREG cells increased of
CD8+ T cell density and activity and reduced tumor growth (Gyori
et al., 2018). Hepatocellular carcinoma cells can activate tumor-
associated monocytes, showing increased HLA-DR, CD80, and
CD86 amounts with concomitant PD-L1 expression, thereby sup-
pressing tumor-speciﬁc T-cell-mediated immunity (Kuang et al.,
2009). Components of the TME such as mucins promote an im-
mune suppressive phenotype (increased production of IL-10,
decreased Th1-recruiting CCL3, and suppressed IL-12) in TAMs
by binding the mannose receptor on these cells and determining
its internalization (Allavena et al., 2010). Indeed, tumors would
seem to distinctively reprogram TAMs, as shown by the transcrip-
tional differences observed between monocytes, tissue resident
macrophages, and TAMs from endometrial and breast cancers
(Cassetta et al., 2019). Tumor cells (as well as TAMs themselves)
are a source of TNF-a, which supports CCL8 production by
TAMs; in turn, CCL8 promotes CSF-1 production by cancer
cells, thereby supporting TAM survival and proliferation (Cassetta
et al., 2019). Furthermore, TAMs can promote angiogenesis
(the ‘‘angiogenic switch’’) by producing a plethora of factors
(vascular
endothelial
growth
factor
A
[VEGFA],
epidermal
growth factor [EGF], basic ﬁbroblast growth factor 2 [FGF2], che-
mokines CXCL8 and CXCL12, TNF-a, semaphorin 4D, adreno-
medullin, and thymidine phosphorylase) and activating and
recruiting endothelial cells (Leek et al., 1998; Riabov et al.,
2014; Sierra et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2012).
Although a general consensus emerged on the pro-tumoral
role of TREG cells, MMLCs display a more complex proﬁle. A
recent study in early-stage human lung tumors showed that
PD-L1-expressing TAMs did not generally suppress tumor-
speciﬁc effector T cell responses, as opposed to PD-L1-
expressing tumor cells; on the other hand, tumor monocytes
tended to inhibit more the T cell responses (Singhal et al.,
2019). Apart from potentially expressing PD-L1, TAMs express
increasing amounts of checkpoint molecules (PD-1 [Gordon
et al., 2017] and Clever-1 [Viitala et al., 2019]) over the course
of primary human cancers, as discussed above. This evidence
indirectly shows the good, anti-tumor side of TAMs.
Chemokines and factors keeping the ‘‘good’’ immune cells
within the TME are essential to enable an efﬁcient anti-tumor
response. The rarity of cDC1s in the TME, and their most
frequent absence from early tumor stages was suggested to
contribute to cancer progression (Bottcher et al., 2018). NK cells
were recently shown to be important producers of the cDC1 che-
moattractants CCL5 and XCL1 in melanoma (Bottcher et al.,
2018); in turn, cDC1s can recruit effector T cells by releasing
CXCL9 and CXCL10, which of note can also attract NK cells in
a positive feedback loop (Fessenden et al., 2018; Spranger
et al., 2017; Zelenay et al., 2015). Th1 cells also signiﬁcantly
contribute to the production of CXCL9 and CXCL10; their epige-
netic silencing in these cells was associated with decreased in-
tratumoral CD8+ T cells and reduced survival in human ovarian
cancer, thus representing an immune-evasion mechanism of
tumors (Peng et al., 2015). The critical role played by chemokines
in creating an immune optimal or immune hot tumor (highly inﬁl-
trated by CD8+ T cells) was shown by using multiple approaches
(Mlecnik et al., 2010) and very recently conﬁrmed by the George
Coukos group (Dangaj et al., 2019). These studies showed an as-
sociation between CCL5 and CXCL9 co-expression and CD8+
T cell inﬁltration across human solid tumors. Tumor cells were
identiﬁed as a constitutive source of CCL5, where it could be
epigenetically repressed, whereas CXCL9 was induced in tu-
mor-associated myeloid cells (TAMs and DCs) by IFN-g, depen-
dently on tumor antigen recognition by TILs (Dangaj et al., 2019).
Novel proteogenomic approaches enabled the identiﬁcation
of further mechanisms regulating T cell inﬁltration into microsat-
ellite instability-high (MSI-H) colon tumors (Vasaikar et al.,
2019). MSI-H tumors are characterized by an increased muta-
tional and neoantigen load compared with the microsatellite
stable (MSS) phenotype, which is typically accompanied by
an increase in TILs (Smyrk et al., 2001). While no noticeable dif-
ferences were found at the messenger RNA (mRNA) level, a
marked increase in the protein amounts of glycolytic enzymes
was found in a subgroup of MSI-H tumors, and then linked to
impaired T cell function and trafﬁcking to the TME (Vasaikar
et al., 2019).
Once recruited to the TME, CD8+ effector T cells further prop-
agate this loop by producing, among others, CCL5 and XCL1
(Fessenden et al., 2018). Of note, a lack of recruitment of immune
pre-existing adaptive immunity, in contrast to immunosuppressed microenvironment. The main anti-cancer (left) and pro-cancer (right) immune cells and
soluble factors are illustrated. To shape a proper immune contexture, immune priming, recruitment of T cells and other immune cells, and T cell expansion are
necessary (right), whereas immune negative feedback-loop mechanism (checkpoint) could lead to immunosuppression, and intrinsic tumor mechanisms could
lead to immune exclusion (left). Immunotherapy could be performed by breaking tolerance through immune checkpoints such as FDA approved PD1, PDL1,
and CTLA4 or checkpoints undergoing clinical studies TIM3, LAG3, BTLA, and IDO1 and by modulating immunity with soluble molecules such as IL-2, TNF,
TLR agonists, GMCSF, IL-12, and IL-15. Cancer genetic parameters such as the immunogenicity, adjuvanticity, and immunologic cell death of tumor cells
could modulate the adaptive immunity. Host genetic parameters, environmental stress, life style, and gut microbiota could further modulate the immune
contexture.
Abbreviations are as follows: ThX, Type ‘‘X’’ T helper cell; TLS, tertiary lymphoid structure; cDC, conventional dendritic cell; iDC, immature dendritic cell; TREG,
regulatory T cell; TAM, tumor-associated macrophage; M2, alternatively activated macrophages; MDSC, myeloid-derived suppressor cell; CAF, cancer-
associated ﬁbroblast; GZMA, Granzyme A; GZMB, Granzyme B; GZMH, Granzyme H; PRF1, perforin 1; GNLY, Granulysin; IFN-g, interferon gamma; IFN-a,
interferon a; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; IL, interleukin; CXCL, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand; CCL, C-C motif chemokine ligand; CX3CL1, C-X3-C motif che-
mokine ligand 1; TGF-b, transforming growth factor beta; VEGFA, vascular endothelial growth factor A; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor; TLR, toll-like receptor; IDO, indoleamine-pyrrole 2,3-dioxygenase; BTLA, B- and T-lymphocyte-associated or cluster of differentiation 272 (CD272); TIM-3,
T cell immunoglobulin and mucin-domain containing-3; LAG-3, lymphocyte-activation gene 3; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen; PD-1,
programmed death-ligand 1; TIGIT, T cell immunoreceptor with Ig and ITIM domains.
66
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
cells was proposed to be one possible cause for the existence of
so-called excluded tumors, characterized by the presence of
effector T cells at the tumor borders, but not at its core (Figure 4)
(Galon and Bruni, 2019). It remains to be established how this
chain of events starts, i.e., how NK cells (which are lowly, if at
all present, within the TME) are recruited in the ﬁrst place; none-
theless, it is clear that it ends, when successful, with the CD8+
cytotoxic T-cell-mediated killing of cancer cells.
The epigenetic modulation of chemokine expression shown
above are only some of the numerous immune escape mecha-
nisms developed by cancers to avoid immune recognition,
activation, and effector functions. The expression of immune
checkpoints, which occurs already at the pre-cancerous stages
(Mascaux et al., 2019) and the development of tolerance are the
most notable examples of well-established mechanisms of im-
mune control. Apart from the immune-mediated mechanisms
of escape, the tumor itself can directly or indirectly evade the
anti-tumor immune response. A comprehensive analysis of
tumor-cell-intrinsic mechanisms of primary and secondary im-
mune evasion have been extensively provided elsewhere (Well-
enstein and de Visser, 2018). More recently, an additional
mechanism of tumor-mediated immune escape has been pro-
vided by Bottcher and colleagues. Tumor cells were previously
found to be a source of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) (Zelenay
et al., 2015) (Jung et al., 2003). Novel evidence showed how tu-
mor-derived PGE2 reduced the secretion of CCL5 and XCL1 by
NK cells, impaired the expression of chemokine receptors on
cDC1s, and increased NK cell death (Bottcher et al., 2018).
These novel mechanisms could contribute to explain the previ-
ously known pro-tumorigenic role of PGE2 and other eicosanoids
(Wang and Dubois, 2010), as well as further demonstrate the
complexity of the interplay between tumor and tumor-associ-
ated immune components. It is the combination and simulta-
neous crosstalk among all positive and negative factors that
ultimately shapes cancer progression (Figures 3 and 4).
The TME is a highly dynamic entity in terms of both cellular im-
mune components and soluble mediators. The great majority of
the studies describing the TME composition reﬂect a speciﬁc
point in space and time, which is an evident limitation of studies
in humans. Nonetheless, some studies assessed the changes
accompanying tumor progression, offering precious insights
into the associated everchanging immune landscape. To our
knowledge, we were the ﬁrst proposing an integrative study of
the spatio-temporal dynamics of tumor-associated immune
cell types with immune-cell-speciﬁc gene modules (immunome)
showing how the immune inﬁltrate composition changes at each
tumor stage (Bindea et al., 2013). Densities of the TLS-associ-
ated T follicular helper (TFH) cells and innate cells (including
macrophages, mast cells, neutrophils, and plasmacytoid DCs)
increased, whereas most T cell densities (activated T cells, mem-
ory T cells, effector T cells, CD4+ helper, and CD8+ cytotoxic
T cells) decreased along with tumor progression through T
stages and AJCC/UICC-TNM classiﬁcation (Bindea et al.,
2013), as also found in a previous study (Mlecnik et al., 2011).
B cells increased at a later stage, showing a dual effect on recur-
rence and tumor progression. CXCL13 and IL-21 were pivotal
factors for the TFH-B cell axis correlating with prolonged-survival
and supporting a good immune contexture (Th1, cytotoxic, and
memory T cells). These ﬁndings, ﬁrst observed with gene expres-
sion and immunome analyses, were conﬁrmed by multiple ap-
proaches, including quantitative IHC and mouse models (Bindea
et al., 2013). Recently, TFH cells were found to enhance CD8+
T cells effector function in an IL-21-dependent manner in CRC
patients (Shi et al., 2018). This potent TFH cell function was
impaired in the presence of PD-1/PD-L1-mediated suppression
(Shi et al., 2018).
The Immune Landscape of Primary Tumors: Clinical
Implications
The study of the immune landscapes associated with cancers
has deep clinical implications. One clear example is constituted
by primary CRCs, which are surgically removed in the majority of
cases. To date, there is no parameter in clinical use that can pre-
dict CRC recurrence, which indeed happens in 40% of surgically
removed CRC cases within 5 years (Augestad et al., 2017). The
analysis of the immune inﬁltrate and Immunoscore of the re-
sected primary tumors were demonstrated to predict tumor
recurrence: indeed, a low adaptive immune reaction in the center
and invasive margin of the primary tumor was found in recurrent
patients. This Immunoscore feature was observed in early-stage
tumor (stage I) as well as in late tumor stages (stages III or IV)
(Mlecnik et al., 2011; Page` s et al., 2009; Page` s et al., 2018).
Thus, immune features of the TME associated with CRC pro-
gression and recurrence could prove instrumental to guiding
the choice for additional (neo)adjuvant therapy.
The immune landscape of cancer across 33 different cancer
types was recently deﬁned, identifying six immune subtypes
on the basis of differences in both immune (macrophage or
lymphocyte signatures, Th1:Th2 cell ratio, and expression of
immunomodulatory genes) and seemingly non-immune parame-
ters (intratumoral heterogeneity, aneuploidy, neoantigen load,
overall cell proliferation, and patients’ prognosis) (Thorsson
et al., 2018). This genomic approach linked the presence of spe-
ciﬁc driver mutations with lower (CTNNB1, NRAS, or IDH1) or
higher (BRAF, TP53, or CASP8) leukocytes frequencies across
cancer types. Whether the occurrence of these mutations at
different stages of the disease has a differential effect on the
amount and/or composition of immune tumor inﬁltrates (and
therefore on patients’ prognosis) remains to be established. A
limitation of the study is that it only relied on RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq) and exome sequencing (Exome-Seq) data. Nonethe-
less, this work has the undoubted merit of having highlighted fea-
tures of the TME that are shared among histologically distinct
tumors, suggesting that the choice of therapeutic strategies
should rely on immune parameters rather than cancer type. A
ﬁrst regulatory opening in this sense came with the approval
by the FDA in May 2017 of the anti-PD-1 pembrolizumab for
the treatment of adult and pediatric patients with unresectable
or metastatic solid tumors based on a tumor biomarker (MSI-H
or mismatch repair deﬁcient [dMMR]). Immune biomarkers
constitute likely candidates for future regulatory approvals.
Another important consideration having likely repercussions
on prognosis and clinical management of cancer patients con-
cerns the spatial localization and relative distribution of immune
cells within the TME. The co-localization of TAMs or B cells with
cytotoxic T cells was associated with complete pathological
response after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy in inﬂammatory
breast cancer patients (Van Berckelaer et al., 2018). Moreover,
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
67
Immunity
Review
although the number of PDL1+ or CD8+ cells was not prognostic
per se, the presence of more PDL1+ cells around CD8+ cells
(r = 30 mm) correlated with worse prognosis (Van Berckelaer
et al., 2018) or with absence of immunoediting (Angelova
et al., 2018).
Multiplex immunohistochemistry (mIHC) enables the simulta-
neous detection and spatial resolution of multiple immune deter-
minants at once, and its adoption in clinical routine has been
advocated (Hofman et al., 2019). A multiplex analysis of PDAC
patients who received neoadjuvant a granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-secreting pancreatic tumor
vaccine (GVAX) (Lutz et al., 2014) showed how response to ther-
apy correlated with degree of myeloid cell density and percent-
ages of exhausted CD8+ T cells. Alternative approaches to mIHC
have been proposed. For instance, deep learning mapping of
TILs from hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain images from 13
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) tumor types revealed local
spatial structures in TIL patterns and their correlation with overall
survival (Saltz et al., 2018). Tumor, immune, and molecular sub-
types were characterized by differential TIL densities and spatial
structures enrichment, possibly reﬂecting speciﬁc tumor cell ab-
errations. Local clustering of TILs was a more distinctive (and
better prognostic) feature than overall TIL inﬁltration in pancre-
atic adenocarcinoma and prostate adenocarcinoma as opposed
to other tumor types (Saltz et al., 2018), indicating the impor-
tance of the spatial immune patterns in affecting survival in
speciﬁc cancer settings. The reason for these tissue-speciﬁc dif-
ferences are not clear; also unclear is the mechanism regulating
the formation and evolution of these patterns overtime. Future
investigation on these aspects is urgently needed, especially in
view of the adoption of evermore biomarker-based therapeutic
approaches.
Early Cancer Dissemination and Distant Metastases
Tumor progression comes most often with the spreading of the
primary tumor to other anatomical locations throughout the
body. The metastatic cascade is a multi-step process involving
incompletely deﬁned pathological changes of the tumor cell,
which has to be able to leave the primary tumor, enter in sys-
temic circulation, and penetrate and colonize distant sites, often
after a phase of dormancy (Kienast et al., 2010; Luzzi et al.,
1998). The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a widely
recognized process leading to tumor cell invasion and metasta-
tic spreading, and distinct EMT programs were recently associ-
ated with different invasion modalities (Aiello et al., 2018). The
hypothesis that the both innate and adaptive arms of the immune
system play a role in modulating (positively or negatively) one or
more steps in the metastatic cascade is being ever-growingly
appreciated and substantiated by compelling evidence.
Macrophages and MMLCs in general are among the most
prominent innate immune cells promoting all steps character-
izing metastatic spreading (Lewis et al., 2016; Nielsen and
Schmid, 2017; Qian and Pollard, 2010). Such prominence was
shown, for instance, by the observation that the genetic ablation
of CSF-1 completely abolished the metastatic process in a
mouse model of breast cancer (Lin et al., 2001). In fact, macro-
phages were directly linked to metastatic dissemination in multi-
ple pre-clinical models (Griesmann et al., 2017; Headley et al.,
2016; Linde et al., 2018).
Several mechanisms underpinning macrophages’ ability to
favor the metastatic process have been shown, involving in
many cases their angiogenic and ECM remodeling properties,
and cytokine and/or chemokine production. MMLC-driven re-
modeling mechanisms facilitate the migration of malignant cells
from the primary tumor to nearby or distant sites. Indeed, the
presence of venous invasion and liver metastasis were linked
to increased expression TAM-derived MMP-2 and MMP-9 in
pancreatic cancer patients (Nagakawa et al., 2002). TAMs,
together with tumor cells, are a source of cathepsin S, which is
able to proteolytically process the blood-brain barrier junctional
adhesion molecule JAM-B, thereby promoting transmigration of
breast-derived tumor cells into the brain (Sevenich et al., 2014).
Another pro-metastatic mechanism involves the typically M2
(Kodelja et al., 1998) chemokine CCL18, produced by TAMs
and acting on PITPNM3-expressing cancer cells, where it trig-
gers integrin clustering, thus enhancing their adherence to the
ECM (Chen et al., 2011). This mechanism was shown to promote
breast cancer metastasis formation in vivo (Chen et al., 2011).
MMLCs seem also to set up a favorable stage for metastatic
seeding, by remodeling the pre-metastatic niche and secreting
tumor-cell-attracting factors. Monocytic MDSCs (mo-MDSCs),
a subtype of MDSCs, are recruited in a CCL12-dependent
manner to the pre-metastatic lungs, where they constitute a ma-
jor source of IL-1b. This cytokine increases E-selectin expres-
sion on endothelial cells, thus promoting tumor cell arrest (Shi
et al., 2017). Within the metastatic site, macrophages and
MMLCs in general display most commonly an immunosuppres-
sive, M2-like phenotype (Biswas and Mantovani, 2010).
Neutrophils represent another crucial innate immune cell type
favoring the metastatic process, as shown in several pre-clinical
models (T€uting and de Visser, 2016). In patients, a relationship
between increased circulating neutrophils and metastases has
been established for several solid tumors including melanoma
(Bald et al., 2014) and PDAC (Tao et al., 2016). The proposed hy-
pothesis that neutrophils might interact with circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) in the blood and assist these potentially metastatic
cells (Tao et al., 2016) has been validated recently by Nicola Ace-
to’s team (Szczerba et al., 2019). The same group revealed how
the association with neutrophils promotes cell cycle progression
in CTCs, increasing their metastatic potential, compared with
that of unescorted CTCs (Szczerba et al., 2019). Further
evidence showed how neutrophils can also shape a favorable
pre-metastatic niche in distant organs. This has been ﬁrst shown
in pre-clinical models of breast cancer (Wculek and Malanchi,
2015) and ovarian cancer (Lee et al., 2019). Neutrophils undergo
a speciﬁc type of cell death termed NETosis involving the
extrusion of chromatin and the generation of neutrophil extracel-
lular traps (NETs) (Singel and Segal, 2016). NETs were previously
shown to facilitate tumor progression through promotion of
thrombosis and angiogenesis (Singel and Segal, 2016). NETs
were also required for awakening dormant metastatic cancer
cells in inﬂamed murine lungs, via the cleavage of laminin medi-
ated by NET-associated proteases. Proteolytically remodeled
laminin activated integrin a3b1 signaling in the dormant cancer
cells, thus inducing their proliferation (Albrengues et al., 2018).
Finally, recent
evidence showed how
omentum-migrating
neutrophils at the early ovarian cancer stages promoted
metastatic seeding in this organ in a NET-dependent manner
68
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
(Lee et al., 2019). Altogether, the presented evidence highlights
the multifaceted role of neutrophils in favoring tumor progres-
sion, although mechanisms showing anti-tumor roles for these
innate immune cells also exist (Bindea et al., 2013; Singel and
Segal, 2016), possibly suggesting an incomplete understanding
of such complex system.
A recently developed stable intravital two-photon imaging
model in mice enabled the direct observation of the arrival of
CTCs in the lung, and the subsequent immune dynamics (Head-
ley et al., 2016). Upon arrival in the lung capillaries, CTCs shed
microparticles that either remained attached to the lung vascula-
ture or migrated through it. These particles were then ingested
by distinct temporal waves of myeloid cells: neutrophil ﬁrst,
then
conventional
monocytes,
non-alveolar
macrophages,
patrolling monocytes, and cDCs. Successful metastatic devel-
opment occurred after accumulation of these interstitial myeloid
cells, which was favored by the CCR2-CCL2 axis, previously
shown to promote myeloid recruitment in the lung (Qian et al.,
2011). This study also implied a host-protective role for cDCs,
competing with the pro-tumor macrophages by engulﬁng
tumor-derived material in the lung and subsequently migrate
to the mesenteric lymph nodes to engage with cognate T cells
(Headley et al., 2016).
NK cells represent yet another innate immune cell type linked
to the modulation of metastatic spreading. NK cells are more
prominently known to exert direct cytotoxicity against tumor
cells, and they appear to kill tumor cells in circulation more efﬁ-
ciently than those within the TME (Larsen et al., 2014). NK cells
are scarcely inﬁltrating solid tumors but can be found at the
tumor borders, where EMT takes place (Cantoni et al., 2016).
Their ability to kill tumor cells undergoing EMT has been demon-
strated in lung cancer (Chockley et al., 2018), although mecha-
nisms of resistance to NK-mediated cytotoxicity have been
also described (Terry et al., 2017). Therefore, by potentially
acting on both the putative metastatic precursors (the EMT-
undergone malignant cells) and the CTCs, NK cells appear to
limit tumor colonization of distant sites.
NK cells inhibited lung colonization by tumor cells after admin-
istration of a phospholipid-conjugated Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7)
agonist in murine models of breast cancer, melanoma, and
Lewis lung carcinoma (Hosoya et al., 2018). Whether this effect
is due to an NK-mediated direct effect on metastatic precursors
or CTCs remains to be elucidated. The same study showed the
temporal sequence of immune-mediated anti-dissemination
effects, whereby NK cells constrain early tumor colonization, fol-
lowed by a cytotoxic CD8+ T cell anti-metastatic response at the
later phases (Hosoya et al., 2018). Indeed, cytotoxic immune
cells and other adaptive immune cells were also found to
affect metastatic spreading. For instance, the presence of
high amounts of inﬁltrating memory CD45RO+ T cells correlated
with the absence of early signs of invasiveness around the tumor
(such as venous emboli, lymphatic invasion, and perineural inva-
sion [VELIPI]) (Figure 2), as well as increased CRC patient’s
survival (Page` s et al., 2005). This also highlighted that a weak
pre-existing adaptive intra-tumor immunity gave the license to
the tumor to invade vessels, even at very early stage of disease.
A subsequent study on NSCLC correlated the presence of high
levels of intraepithelial CD45RO+ cells in lymph node metastases
with increased patients’ survival (Kilvaer et al., 2016). Of note,
this held true in squamous cell carcinoma, but not in adenocar-
cinoma patients (Kilvaer et al., 2016). The long-lasting anti-tumor
capacity of memory T cells (CD45RO+) was shown two decades
ago in mouse models of colon carcinoma metastases (Xiang
et al., 1999). The presence of enduring human memory T cells
(Sallusto et al., 2004) might be a key immune hallmark of tumor
control, explaining long-term survival in some cancer patients.
Recent evidence shows how the interplay between circulating
memory T cells and resident memory CD8+ T cells (TRM) is
needed to ensure optimal anti-tumor immunity (Enamorado
et al., 2017).
Apart from the demonstration of anti-metastatic effect in syn-
ergy with NK cells described above (Hosoya et al., 2018), further
in vivo studies demonstrated the ability of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells
to protect against metastatic lesion formation. CD8+ T cells (and
NK cells) protected against metastatic spreading in a type-I-IFN-
dependent manner, as demonstrated by the in vivo analysis of
bone metastasis from breast carcinoma (Bidwell et al., 2012).
Furthermore, depletion of CD8+ T cells in a spontaneous mela-
noma mouse model resulted in an increased formation of lung
and reproductive tract metastases (Eyles et al., 2010; Lengagne
et al., 2008). In patients with inﬂammatory breast cancer, a cor-
relation between CTCs (mediators of metastatic dissemination)
and defects in adaptive immunity has been demonstrated
(Mego et al., 2016). Similarly, CTC amounts negatively correlated
with circulating T cell amounts in lung cancer patients (Sun
et al., 2017).
Increased levels of immune cytotoxicity and lymphatic vessel
density were shown to hinder the generation of distant metasta-
ses from CRC, whereas tumor cell genomic alterations didn’t
seem to affect this process (Mlecnik et al., 2016b). Indeed, a
sole immune-related gene expression proﬁling could distinguish
patients with or without distant metastases, indicating the
strength of the immune parameters (Mlecnik et al., 2016b).
TILs have been shown to directly affect the metastatic landscape
in human CRC (Halama et al., 2011; Kwak et al., 2016; Mlecnik
et al., 2018; Van den Eynde et al., 2018). We provided ex vivo ev-
idence of the protective role of CD8+ T cells against metastatic
spreading, with killing of tumor cells by anti-frameshift mutations
neoepitope-targeting CD8+ T cells (Mlecnik et al., 2016b). We
also showed the non-dissemination of immunoedited tumor
clones in the presence of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells and proliferating
T cells in CRC (Angelova et al., 2018). Elevated TIL densities, as
determined by Immunoscore, measured on the least inﬁltrated
metastases correlated with longer patients’ survival (Mlecnik
et al., 2018); indeed, the phenotypes of such metastases were
the
better
predictor
patients’
outcome
(Van
den
Eynde
et al., 2018).
The brain is typically considered as an immune-privileged site.
Whether T cells exert an anti-metastatic effector response within
the brain parenchyma remained a matter of debate until recently
(Gonzalez et al., 2018). An analysis of the immune microenviron-
ment across brain metastases from any type of human primary
tumor revealed that Immunoscore was profoundly associated
with long-term patients’ survival (Berghoff et al., 2015). This
work would support the existence of a T-cell-mediated anti-
tumor immune responses within brain metastases.
A recent analysis comparing the TCR-b repertoire of NSCLC
primary lesions and paired brain metastases showed a minimal
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
69
Immunity
Review
overlap in T cell clones between paired lesions (Mansﬁeld et al.,
2018), showing clonal heterogeneity, as well as the occurrence
of effector responses in the brain. Brain metastases displayed
higher mutational burden, yet a signiﬁcant reduction in the
number of unique T cell clones, than did matched primary le-
sions (Mansﬁeld et al., 2018). This might reﬂect a more immuno-
suppressive nature of the TME within the brain than the lung
and/or the presence of less immunogenic clones in metastases,
compared with primary sites. Further evidence of the direct role
of TILs in the control of tumor dissemination was recently pro-
vided by Angelova et al. (2018) by following the metastatic pro-
gression of CRC patients, as well as their associated immune
landscape, over an 11-year follow-up period. In addition, this
study proved the validity of the concept of immunoediting in
humans and, for the ﬁrst time, its effect on progression and evo-
lution of human cancers (Angelova et al., 2018). Immunoediting
was previously deﬁned as the concept describing the change of
tumor immunogenicity over time under the selective pressure of
the immune system (Dunn et al., 2002; Mittal et al., 2014). The
immune system contribution to the steps deﬁning tumor evolu-
tion has been elegantly shown in mouse models (Matsushita
et al., 2012). The genetic evidence of immunoediting was then
shown in humans for missense (Rooney et al., 2015), then
missense and frameshift mutations (Mlecnik et al., 2016a). An-
gelova et al. (2018) ﬁrst demonstrated in humans that tumor
clones for which immunoediting was more prominent tend to
disappear, whereas, conversely, the least immunogenic ones
(therefore the most resistant to immune attack) were persisting
in subsequent metastatic sites. Accordingly, the immunoediting
and Immunoscore were found to be the two best predictors of
favorable clinical outcome (Angelova et al., 2018). Thus, a novel
‘‘parallel immune selection model’’ of tumor evolution in humans
was proposed, incorporating the effects of the immune system
(Angelova et al., 2018). The most currently accepted ‘‘branched
evolution model’’ by Gerlinger et al. (2012) describe a landscape
of multiple co-evolving and co-existing malignant clones
featuring distinct mutations and deriving from a common
mutated ancestor; similarly to previously proposed models
(Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990; Sottoriva et al., 2015), it is solely
focused and based on tumor cell features. Although agreeing
with the underlying concept of parallel co-evolution and co-ex-
istence, the parallel immune selection model ﬁrst assigns a cen-
tral role to the immune system in driving and directing this
process.
In vivo evidence shows how other types of adaptive immune
cells (CD4+ T helper cells and TREG cells) effect metastatic
spreading. CD4+ T cells can have both pro- and anti-metastatic
roles via their effects on other immune cells. By acting on TAMs
in an IL-4-dependent manner, CD4+ T cells promote invasion
and pulmonary metastasis of mammary carcinomas. The conse-
quent phenotypic shift from inﬂammatory M1-like TAMs to EGF-
expressing M2-like TAMs activated EGFR signaling programs in
malignant epithelial cells and resulted in tumor cell dissemination
and outgrowth in the lung (DeNardo et al., 2009). Of note, this
phenotypic switch in TAMs is well in line with the previously pro-
posed concept of ‘‘smoldering’’ inﬂammation that characterizes
tumor progression (Mantovani et al., 2008). On the other hand,
a mouse model of permanent immunomediated metastatic
dormancy showed a critical role for CD4+ T cells (but more prom-
inently for CD8+ T cells) in restraining the awakening of dormant
tumor cells and the development of pulmonary metastases
(Romero et al., 2014). Perhaps a better phenotypic characteriza-
tion of these cells could clarify these apparently contrasting
results. For instance, subgroups of CD4+FOXP3 T cells are
known to exhibit (as does their Foxp3+ counterpart) potent sup-
pressor functions (Han et al., 2009), and facilitated melanoma
metastasis in vivo, possibly via their inhibitory effect on NK cells
(Wang et al., 2012).
A more general, although not complete (Wang et al., 2014),
consensus exists on the pro-metastatic effect of TREG cells,
and an association between TREG cells and incidence of metas-
tasis has been reported in several cancer types, including
NSCLC (Erfani et al., 2012), breast cancer (Metelli et al.,
2016), and hepatocellular carcinoma (Ye et al., 2016). Inhibition
of TREG cells is likely to prevent metastasis, given the ability of
TREG cells to counteract cancer-killing immune cells from both
the adaptive and innate immune systems (Chen et al., 2005;
Ghiringhelli et al., 2005; McNally et al., 2011). Furthermore,
TREG cells supported directly mammary cancer metastasis by
producing receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand
(RANKL). RANKL-stimulated pulmonary metastasis of RANK+
human breast carcinoma cells in vivo (Tan et al., 2011). A
mechanism promoting metastatic development in the lung,
involving the induction of TREG cells and the concomitant limi-
tation of CD4+-T-helper-cell- and CD8+-T-cell-mediated re-
sponses has been recently proposed (Clever et al., 2016).
The oxygen-sensing prolyl-hydroxylase (PHD) proteins limit
hypoxia-inducible
factors
(HIF)-driven
glycolytic
programs
within T cells, thus inhibiting spontaneous CD4+ T helper differ-
entiation while promoting TREG cell commitment and restrain-
ing local CD8+ T cell responses, thereby establishing the lung
as an immunologically permissive metastatic site (Clever
et al., 2016).
Finally, it should also be noted that immune and non-immune
(stroma and tumor cell)-derived chemokines and cytokines,
apart from orchestrating the inﬁltration and function of the im-
mune cells, also modulate the colonization capabilities of tumor
cells, as broadly discussed elsewhere (Mantovani et al., 2008;
Yao et al., 2016).
Concluding Remarks
The realization that the concerted action and interaction among
all immune and non-immune components in space and time ul-
timately determine cancer initiation, development, and dissem-
ination and bring along the need to reconsider the way cancers
are
classiﬁed.
Conventional
classiﬁcation
strategies
are
based on histopathological features of tumor cells, tumor
morphology, tumor cell of origin, deregulation of tumor-cell-
associated molecular pathways, mutational status, and tumor
gene expression signatures, as well as on cancer progression
(tumor [T]) and invasion of nearby tissues, lymph nodes (node
[N]) and distant organs (metastasis [M]). The currently used
TNM tumor staging is indeed based on these cancer-cell-
focused characteristics. No immune parameter is yet used in
clinical practice, even if their inclusion in this context has
been
advocated
to
better stratify cancer
patients. This
is despite evidence that the histopathologic parameters of
tumor cells, tumor progression, and tumor invasion might be
70
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
determined by the immune components of the TME, and
that the lack of accuracy of the TNM-staging-based prog-
nosis among patients within the same tumor stage might be
Figure 5. Cancer Types Responding to
Anti-PD-1/PD-L1 Immunotherapy and to
CAR T Cell Therapy
Abbreviations
are
as
follows:
ORR,
overall
response rate; FDA, food and drug administration;
EMA, european medical association.
because of underlying differences in
the nature and density of tumor-inﬁl-
trating adaptive immune cells (Galon
et al., 2014; Page` s et al., 2018). Other
immune-based
prognostic
signatures
based on machine learning, which are
improving the TNM staging, have also
been recently proposed (Brieu et al.,
2018).
A
revised,
immune-including
classiﬁcation should take into account
a multimodal combination of several pa-
rameters
and
biomarkers,
possibly
including, but not limited to: parameters
of cytotoxic T cell response and T cell
exhaustion, tumor mutational burden,
immune gene expression signatures,
and parameters of immune suppression
(presence of immunosuppressive cells,
such as TREG cells and MDSCs). Funda-
mentally, the proposed models to guide
tailored treatment options, such as the
‘‘cancer immunogram’’ (Blank et al.,
2016), rely on the same valuable param-
eters and biomarkers to be adopted,
in our opinion, to upgrade the current
cancer
classiﬁcation
to
the
era
of
cancer immunotherapy. An opening to-
ward
the
introduction
of
immune
parameters in clinical settings has been
achieved after the ever-growing use
of immunotherapy (Figure 5) with the
adoption of immune-based response
parameters, including immune-related
adverse
effects
(irAEs)
(Kottschade,
2018), immune-related response criteria
(irRC) (Wolchok et al., 2009), irRECIST
(immune-related
response
evaluation
criteria in solid tumor) (Seymour et al.,
2017). As the ﬁeld progresses, it is likely
that more powerful stratiﬁcation sys-
tems will be implemented. Nonetheless,
it would be reasonable to apply our cur-
rent knowledge to better satisfy the
immediate need for an improved prog-
nostic
and/or
predictive
information
and ultimately guide clinical decisions.
What these past two decades have es-
tablished is not only the rebirth of tumor
immunology, and its rightful position as an academic entity, but
more importantly as a gold mine from which to draw rational
approaches to potentially defeat cancer.
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
71
Immunity
Review
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
For their support, we thank INSERM, the National Cancer Institute of France
(INCa), Canceropole Ile de France, La Ligue Contre le Cancer, La Fondation
ARC, Cancer Research for Personalized Medicine (CARPEM), Paris Alliance
of Cancer Research Institutes (PACRI), and LabEx Immuno-oncology.
REFERENCES
Abbasi, J. (2018). Relapses after CAR-T therapy. JAMA 320, 1850.
Abramson, J.S., Siddiqi, T., Palomba, M.L., Gordon, L.I., Lunning, M.A., Arna-
son, J.E., Wang, M., Forero-Torres, A., Albertson, T., Dehner, C., et al. (2018).
High durable CR rates and preliminary safety proﬁle for JCAR017 in R/R
aggressive B-NHL (TRANSCEND NHL 001 Study): a deﬁned composition
CD19-directed CART cell product with potential for outpatient administration.
Biol Blood Marrow Tr 24, S23.
Ahmadzadeh, M., Pasetto, A., Jia, L., Deniger, D.C., Stevanovic, S., Robbins,
P.F., and Rosenberg, S.A. (2019). Tumor-inﬁltrating human CD4+ regulatory
T cells display a distinct TCR repertoire and exhibit tumor and neoantigen
reactivity. Sci. Immunol. 4, eaao4310.
Aiello, N.M., Maddipati, R., Norgard, R.J., Balli, D., Li, J., Yuan, S., Yamazoe,
T., Black, T., Sahmoud, A., Furth, E.E., et al. (2018). EMT subtype inﬂuences
epithelial plasticity and mode of cell migration. Dev Cell 45, 681–695.
Albrengues, J., Shields, M.A., Ng, D., Park, C.G., Ambrico, A., Poindexter,
M.E., Upadhyay, P., Uyeminami, D.L., Pommier, A., K€uttner, V., et al. (2018).
Neutrophil extracellular traps produced during inﬂammation awaken dormant
cancer cells in mice. Science 361, eaao4227.
Allavena, P., Chieppa, M., Bianchi, G., Solinas, G., Fabbri, M., Laskarin, G.,
and Mantovani, A. (2010). Engagement of the mannose receptor by tumoral
mucins activates an immune suppressive phenotype in human tumor-associ-
ated macrophages. Clin. Dev. Immunol. 2010, 547179.
Angelova, M., Mlecnik, B., Vasaturo, A., Bindea, G., Fredriksen, T., Lafontaine,
L., Buttard, B., Morgand, E., Bruni, D., Jouret-Mourin, A., et al. (2018). Evolution
of metastases in space and time under immune selection. Cell 175, 751–765.
Ao, M., Franco, O.E., Park, D., Raman, D., Williams, K., and Hayward, S.W.
(2007). Cross-talk between paracrine-acting cytokine and chemokine path-
ways promotes malignancy in benign human prostatic epithelium. Cancer
Res. 67, 4244–4253.
Aponte-Lo´ pez, A., Fuentes-Panana´ , E.M., Cortes-Mun˜ oz, D., and Mun˜ oz-
Cruz, S. (2018). Mast Cell, the neglected member of the tumor microenviron-
ment: role in breast cancer. J. Immunol. Res. 2018, 2584243.
Aras, S., and Zaidi, M.R. (2017). TAMeless traitors: macrophages in cancer
progression and metastasis. Br. J. Cancer 117, 1583–1591.
Aruffo, A., and Seed, B. (1987). Molecular cloning of a CD28 cDNA by a high-
efﬁciency COS cell expression system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84,
8573–8577.
Augestad, K.M., Merok, M.A., and Ignatovic, D. (2017). Tailored treatment of
colorectal cancer: surgical, molecular, and genetic considerations. Clin.
Med. Insights Oncol. 11, 1179554917690766.
Bald, T., Quast, T., Landsberg, J., Rogava, M., Glodde, N., Lopez-Ramos, D.,
Kohlmeyer, J., Riesenberg, S., van den Boorn-Konijnenberg, D., Ho¨ mig-Ho¨ l-
zel, C., et al. (2014). Ultraviolet-radiation-induced inﬂammation promotes an-
giotropism and metastasis in melanoma. Nature 507, 109–113.
Balkwill, F., and Mantovani, A. (2001). Inﬂammation and cancer: back to
Virchow? Lancet 357, 539–545.
Banchereau, J., and Steinman, R.M. (1998). Dendritic cells and the control of
immunity. Nature 392, 245–252.
Barnd, D.L., Lan, M.S., Metzgar, R.S., and Finn, O.J. (1989). Speciﬁc, major
histocompatibility complex-unrestricted recognition of tumor-associated mu-
cins by human cytotoxic T cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 7159–7163.
Beatson, G.T. (1896). On the treatment of inoperable cases of carcinoma of the
mamma: suggestions for a new method of treatment, with illustrative cases.
Trans Med Chir Soc Edinb 15, 153–179.
Benson, D.M., Jr., Cohen, A.D., Jagannath, S., Munshi, N.C., Spitzer, G., Hof-
meister, C.C., Efebera, Y.A., Andre, P., Zerbib, R., and Caligiuri, M.A. (2015).
A Phase I trial of the Anti-KIR antibody IPH2101 and lenalidomide in patients
with relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma. Clin. Cancer Res. 21, 4055–4061.
Berghoff, A.S., Fuchs, E., Ricken, G., Mlecnik, B., Bindea, G., Spanberger, T.,
Hackl, M., Widhalm, G., Dieckmann, K., Prayer, D., et al. (2015). Density of tu-
mor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes correlates with extent of brain edema and overall
survival time in patients with brain metastases. OncoImmunology 5, e1057388.
Bidwell, B.N., Slaney, C.Y., Withana, N.P., Forster, S., Cao, Y., Loi, S., An-
drews, D., Mikeska, T., Mangan, N.E., Samarajiwa, S.A., et al. (2012). Silencing
of Irf7 pathways in breast cancer cells promotes bone metastasis through im-
mune escape. Nat. Med. 18, 1224–1231.
Bindea, G., Mlecnik, B., Tosolini, M., Kirilovsky, A., Waldner, M., Obenauf,
A.C., Angell, H., Fredriksen, T., Lafontaine, L., Berger, A., et al. (2013). Spatio-
temporal dynamics of intratumoral immune cells reveal the immune landscape
in human cancer. Immunity 39, 782–795.
Bindea, G., Mlecnik, B., Angell, H.K., and Galon, J. (2014). The immune land-
scape of human tumors: Implications for cancer immunotherapy. OncoImmu-
nology 3, e27456.
Biswas, S.K., and Mantovani, A. (2010). Macrophage plasticity and interaction
with lymphocyte subsets: cancer as a paradigm. Nat. Immunol. 11, 889–896.
Blank, C.U., Haanen, J.B., Ribas, A., and Schumacher, T.N. (2016). CANCER
IMMUNOLOGY. The ‘‘cancer immunogram’’. Science 352, 658–660.
Boda, D., Docea, A.O., Calina, D., Ilie, M.A., Caruntu, C., Zurac, S., Neagu, M.,
Constantin, C., Branisteanu, D.E., Voiculescu, V., et al. (2018). Human papil-
loma virus: Apprehending the link with carcinogenesis and unveiling new
research avenues (Review). Int. J. Oncol. 52, 637–655.
Bo€el, P., Wildmann, C., Sensi, M.L., Brasseur, R., Renauld, J.C., Coulie, P.,
Boon, T., and van der Bruggen, P. (1995). BAGE: a new gene encoding an an-
tigen recognized on human melanomas by cytolytic T lymphocytes. Immunity
2, 167–175.
Bottazzi, B., Polentarutti, N., Acero, R., Balsari, A., Boraschi, D., Ghezzi, P.,
Salmona, M., and Mantovani, A. (1983). Regulation of the macrophage content
of neoplasms by chemoattractants. Science 220, 210–212.
Bottcher, J.P., Bonavita, E., Chakravarty, P., Blees, H., Cabeza-Cabrerizo, M.,
Sammicheli, S., Rogers, N.C., Sahai, E., Zelenay, S., and Reis e Sousa, C.
(2018). NK cells stimulate recruitment of cDC1 into the tumor microenviron-
ment promoting cancer immune control. Cell 172, 1022–1037.
Brieu, N., Gavriel, C.G., Harrison, D.J., Schmidt, G., and Caie, P.D. (2018).
Augmenting TNM staging with machine learning-based immune proﬁling
for improved prognosis prediction in muscle-invasive bladder cancer pa-
tients. Annals of Oncology 29, viii14–viii57, https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/
mdy1269.
Brunet, J.F., Denizot, F., Luciani, M.F., Roux-Dosseto, M., Suzan, M., Mattei,
M.G., and Golstein, P. (1987). A new member of the immunoglobulin superfam-
ily–CTLA-4. Nature 328, 267–270.
Buchbinder, E.I., and Desai, A. (2016). CTLA-4 and PD-1 pathways: similar-
ities, differences, and implications of their inhibition. Am. J. Clin. Oncol.
39, 98–106.
Burnet, M. (1957). Cancer; a biological approach. I. The processes of control.
BMJ 1, 779–786.
Calle, E.E., Rodriguez, C., Walker-Thurmond, K., and Thun, M.J. (2003). Over-
weight, obesity, and mortality from cancer in a prospectively studied cohort of
U.S. adults. N. Engl. J. Med. 348, 1625–1638.
Calmette, A. (1927). Prophylactic vaccination of the newly born against tuber-
culosis. BMJ 1927, 987.
Canli, O., Nicolas, A.M., Gupta, J., Finkelmeier, F., Goncharova, O., Pesic, M.,
Neumann, T., Horst, D., Lower, M., Sahin, U., and Greten, F.R. (2017). Myeloid
cell-derived reactive oxygen species induce epithelial mutagenesis. Cancer
Cell 32, 869–883.
Cantoni, C., Huergo-Zapico, L., Parodi, M., Pedrazzi, M., Mingari, M.C., Mor-
etta, A., Sparatore, B., Gonzalez, S., Olive, D., Bottino, C., et al. (2016). NK
cells, tumor cell transition, and tumor progression in solid malignancies: new
hints for NK-based immunotherapy? J. Immunol. Res. 2016, 4684268.
72
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
Cassetta, L., Fragkogianni, S., Sims, A.H., Swierczak, A., Forrester, L.M.,
Zhang, H., Soong, D.Y.H., Cotechini, T., Anur, P., Lin, E.Y., et al. (2019). Human
tumor-associated macrophage and monocyte transcriptional landscapes
reveal cancer-speciﬁc reprogramming, biomarkers, and therapeutic targets.
Cancer Cell 35, 588–602.
Chan, K.S., Espinosa, I., Chao, M., Wong, D., Ailles, L., Diehn, M., Gill,
H., Presti, J., Jr., Chang, H.Y., van de Rijn, M., et al. (2009). Identiﬁca-
tion, molecular characterization, clinical prognosis, and therapeutic tar-
geting of human bladder tumor-initiating cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 106, 14016–14021.
Cheever, M.A., and Higano, C.S. (2011). PROVENGE (Sipuleucel-T) in prostate
cancer: the ﬁrst FDA-approved therapeutic cancer vaccine. Clin. Cancer Res.
17, 3520–3526.
Chen, D.S., and Mellman, I. (2013). Oncology meets immunology: the cancer-
immunity cycle. Immunity 39, 1–10.
Chen, M.L., Pittet, M.J., Gorelik, L., Flavell, R.A., Weissleder, R., von Boehmer,
H., and Khazaie, K. (2005). Regulatory T cells suppress tumor-speciﬁc CD8
T cell cytotoxicity through TGF-beta signals in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 102, 419–424.
Chen, J., Yao, Y., Gong, C., Yu, F., Su, S., Chen, J., Liu, B., Deng, H., Wang, F.,
Lin, L., et al. (2011). CCL18 from tumor-associated macrophages promotes
breast cancer metastasis via PITPNM3. Cancer Cell 19, 541–555.
Cheng, M., Ma, J., Chen, Y., Zhang, J., Zhao, W., Zhang, J., Wei, H., Ling, B.,
Sun, R., and Tian, Z. (2011). Establishment, characterization, and successful
adaptive therapy against human tumors of NKG cell, a new human NK cell
line. Cell Transplant. 20, 1731–1746.
Cheon, H., Borden, E.C., and Stark, G.R. (2014). Interferons and their stimu-
lated genes in the tumor microenvironment. Semin. Oncol. 41, 156–173.
Chew, V., Toh, H.C., and Abastado, J.P. (2012). Immune microenvironment in
tumor progression: characteristics and challenges for therapy. J. Oncol. 2012,
608406.
Chiossone, L., Dumas, P.Y., Vienne, M., and Vivier, E. (2018). Natural
killer cells and other innate lymphoid cells in cancer. Nat. Rev. Immunol.
18, 671–688.
Cho, H., Lim, S.J., Won, K.Y., Bae, G.E., Kim, G.Y., Min, J.W., and Noh, B.J.
(2016). Eosinophils in colorectal neoplasms associated with expression of
CCL11 and CCL24. J. Pathol. Transl. Med. 50, 45–51.
Chockley, P.J., Chen, J., Chen, G., Beer, D.G., Standiford, T.J., and Kesha-
mouni, V.G. (2018). Epithelial-mesenchymal transition leads to NK cell-medi-
ated metastasis-speciﬁc immunosurveillance in lung cancer. J. Clin. Invest.
128, 1384–1396.
Clemente, C.G., Mihm, M.C., Jr., Bufalino, R., Zurrida, S., Collini, P., and Cas-
cinelli, N. (1996). Prognostic value of tumor inﬁltrating lymphocytes in the ver-
tical growth phase of primary cutaneous melanoma. Cancer 77, 1303–1310.
Clever, D., Roychoudhuri, R., Constantinides, M.G., Askenase, M.H., Suku-
mar, M., Klebanoff, C.A., Eil, R.L., Hickman, H.D., Yu, Z., Pan, J.H., et al.
(2016). Oxygen sensing by T cells establishes an immunologically tolerant
metastatic niche. Cell 166, 1117–1131.
Coley, W.B. (1893). The treatment of malignant tumors by repeated innocula-
tions of erysipelas: with a report of ten original cases. Am. J. Med. Sci.
487–511.
Colotta, F., Allavena, P., Sica, A., Garlanda, C., and Mantovani, A. (2009). Can-
cer-related inﬂammation, the seventh hallmark of cancer: links to genetic
instability. Carcinogenesis 30, 1073–1081.
Cooper, M.L., Choi, J., Staser, K., Ritchey, J.K., Devenport, J.M., Eckardt, K.,
Rettig, M.P., Wang, B., Eissenberg, L.G., Ghobadi, A., et al. (2018). An ‘‘off-the-
shelf’’ fratricide-resistant CAR-T for the treatment of T cell hematologic malig-
nancies. Leukemia 32, 1970–1983.
Coussens, L.M., Raymond, W.W., Bergers, G., Laig-Webster, M., Behrendt-
sen, O., Werb, Z., Caughey, G.H., and Hanahan, D. (1999). Inﬂammatory
mast cells up-regulate angiogenesis during squamous epithelial carcinogen-
esis. Genes Dev. 13, 1382–1397.
Couzin-Frankel, J. (2013). Breakthrough of the year 2013. Cancer immuno-
therapy. Science 342, 1432–1433.
Coyle, C., Cafferty, F.H., and Langley, R.E. (2016). Aspirin and colorectal can-
cer prevention and treatment: is it for everyone? Curr. Colorectal Cancer Rep.
12, 27–34.
Cramer, W., and Simpson, W.L. (1944). Mast cells in experimental skin carci-
nogenesis. Cancer Res. 4, 601.
Cremonesi, E., Governa, V., Garzon, J.F.G., Mele, V., Amicarella, F., Muraro,
M.G., Trella, E., Galati-Fournier, V., Oertli, D., D€aster, S.R., et al. (2018). Gut mi-
crobiota modulate T cell trafﬁcking into human colorectal cancer. Gut 67,
1984–1994.
Cui, G., Shi, Y., Cui, J., Tang, F., and Florholmen, J. (2012). Immune microen-
vironmental shift along human colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence: is it
relevant to tumor development, biomarkers and biotherapeutic targets?
Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 47, 367–377.
Dangaj, D., Bruand, M., Grimm, A.J., Ronet, C., Barras, D., Duttagupta, P.A.,
Lanitis, E., Duraiswamy, J., Tanyi, J.L., Benencia, F., et al. (2019). Cooperation
between constitutive and inducible chemokines enables T cell engraftment
and immune attack in solid tumors. Cancer Cell 35, 885–900.
Dariavach, P., Matte´ i, M.G., Golstein, P., and Lefranc, M.P. (1988). Human Ig
superfamily CTLA-4 gene: chromosomal localization and identity of protein
sequence between murine and human CTLA-4 cytoplasmic domains. Eur. J.
Immunol. 18, 1901–1905.
Das, A., Monteiro, M., Barai, A., Kumar, S., and Sen, S. (2017). MMP proteo-
lytic activity regulates cancer invasiveness by modulating integrins. Sci.
Rep. 7, 14219.
Delahaye, N.F., Rusakiewicz, S., Martins, I., Me´ nard, C., Roux, S., Lyonnet, L.,
Paul, P., Sarabi, M., Chaput, N., Semeraro, M., et al. (2011). Alternatively
spliced NKp30 isoforms affect the prognosis of gastrointestinal stromal tu-
mors. Nat. Med. 17, 700–707.
DeNardo, D.G., Barreto, J.B., Andreu, P., Vasquez, L., Tawﬁk, D., Kolhatkar,
N., and Coussens, L.M. (2009). CD4(+) T cells regulate pulmonary metastasis
of mammary carcinomas by enhancing protumor properties of macrophages.
Cancer Cell 16, 91–102.
DeRenzo, C., and Gottschalk, S. (2019). Genetic modiﬁcation strategies to
enhance CAR T cell persistence for patients with solid tumors. Front. Immunol.
10, 218.
Dickinson, A.M., Norden, J., Li, S., Hromadnikova, I., Schmid, C., Schmetzer,
H., and Jochem-Kolb, H. (2017). Graft-versus-leukemia effect following he-
matopoietic stem cell transplantation for leukemia. Front. Immunol. 8, 496.
Dietz, W.H., Douglas, C.E., and Brownson, R.C. (2016). Chronic disease pre-
vention: tobacco avoidance, physical activity, and nutrition for a healthy start.
JAMA 316, 1645–1646.
Dighe, A.S., Richards, E., Old, L.J., and Schreiber, R.D. (1994). Enhanced
in vivo growth and resistance to rejection of tumor cells expressing dominant
negative IFN gamma receptors. Immunity 1, 447–456.
Dong, H., Strome, S.E., Salomao, D.R., Tamura, H., Hirano, F., Flies, D.B.,
Roche, P.C., Lu, J., Zhu, G., Tamada, K., et al. (2002). Tumor-associated
B7-H1 promotes T-cell apoptosis: a potential mechanism of immune evasion.
Nat. Med. 8, 793–800.
Dong, H.P., Elstrand, M.B., Holth, A., Silins, I., Berner, A., Trope, C.G., David-
son, B., and Risberg, B. (2006). NK- and B-cell inﬁltration correlates with
worse outcome in metastatic ovarian carcinoma. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 125,
451–458.
Dreno, B., Thompson, J.F., Smithers, B.M., Santinami, M., Jouary, T.,
Gutzmer, R., Levchenko, E., Rutkowski, P., Grob, J.J., Korovin, S., et al.
(2018). MAGE-A3 immunotherapeutic as adjuvant therapy for patients with re-
sected, MAGE-A3-positive, stage III melanoma (DERMA): a double-blind,
randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 19, 916–929.
Dukes, C.E. (1932). The classiﬁcation of cancer of the rectum. J. Pathol. Bac-
teriol. 35, 323–332.
Dundar, E., Oner, U., Peker, B.C., Metintas, M., Isiksoy, S., and Ak, G. (2008).
The signiﬁcance and relationship between mast cells and tumour angiogen-
esis in non-small cell lung carcinoma. J. Int. Med. Res. 36, 88–95.
Dunn, G.P., Bruce, A.T., Ikeda, H., Old, L.J., and Schreiber, R.D. (2002). Can-
cer immunoediting: from immunosurveillance to tumor escape. Nat. Immunol.
3, 991–998.
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
73
Immunity
Review
Dwyer, A.R., Greenland, E.L., and Pixley, F.J. (2017). Promotion of tumor inva-
sion by tumor-associated macrophages: the role of CSF-1-activated phos-
phatidylinositol 3 kinase and Src family kinase motility signaling. Cancers
(Basel) 9, E68.
Dyduch, G., Kaczmarczyk, K., and Okon, K. (2012). Mast cells and cancer: en-
emies or allies? Pol. J. Pathol. 63, 1–7.
Ehrlich, P. (1879a). Beitrage zur Kenntnis der granulierten. Bindegewebszellen
und der eosinophilen Leukozyten. Arch Anat Physiol 3, 166–169.
Ehrlich, P. (1879b). Uber die speziﬁschen Granulationen des Blutes [abstract].
Arch Anat Physiol. 571.
Ehrlich, P. (1909). U¨ ber den jetzigen stand der karzinomforschung. Ned.
Tijdschr. Geneeskd. 273–290.
Enamorado, M., Iborra, S., Priego, E., Cueto, F.J., Quintana, J.A., Martı´nez-
Cano, S., Mejı´as-Pe´ rez, E., Esteban, M., Melero, I., Hidalgo, A., and Sancho,
D. (2017). Enhanced anti-tumour immunity requires the interplay between resi-
dent and circulating memory CD8+ T cells. Nat. Commun. 8, 16073.
Erez, N., Truitt, M., Olson, P., Arron, S.T., and Hanahan, D. (2010). Cancer-
associated ﬁbroblasts are activated in incipient neoplasia to orchestrate tu-
mor-promoting inﬂammation in an NF-kappaB-dependent manner. Cancer
Cell 17, 135–147.
Erfani, N., Mehrabadi, S.M., Ghayumi, M.A., Haghshenas, M.R., Mojtahedi, Z.,
Ghaderi, A., and Amani, D. (2012). Increase of regulatory T cells in metastatic
stage and CTLA-4 over expression in lymphocytes of patients with non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Lung Cancer 77, 306–311.
Escudier, B., Farace, F., Angevin, E., Charpentier, F., Nitenberg, G., Triebel, F.,
and Hercend, T. (1994). Immunotherapy with interleukin-2 (IL2) and lympho-
kine-activated natural killer cells: improvement of clinical responses in meta-
static renal cell carcinoma patients previously treated with IL2. Eur. J. Cancer
30A, 1078–1083.
Eyles, J., Puaux, A.L., Wang, X., Toh, B., Prakash, C., Hong, M., Tan, T.G.,
Zheng, L., Ong, L.C., Jin, Y., et al. (2010). Tumor cells disseminate early, but
immunosurveillance limits metastatic outgrowth, in a mouse model of mela-
noma. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 2030–2039.
Faustino-Rocha, A.I., Gama, A., Neuparth, M.J., Oliveira, P.A., Ferreira, R., and
Ginja, M. (2017). Mast Cells in mammary carcinogenesis: host or tumor sup-
porters? Anticancer Res. 37, 1013–1021.
Fearon, E.R., and Vogelstein, B. (1990). A genetic model for colorectal tumor-
igenesis. Cell 61, 759–767.
Fenn, J.E., and Udelsman, R. (2011). First use of intravenous chemotherapy
cancer treatment: rectifying the record. J. Am. Coll. Surg. 212, 413–417.
Fessenden, T.B., Duong, E., and Spranger, S. (2018). A team effort: natural
killer cells on the ﬁrst leg of the tumor immunity relay race. J. Immunother. Can-
cer 6, 67.
Foley, E.J. (1953). Antigenic properties of methylcholanthrene-induced tumors
in mice of the strain of origin. Cancer Res. 13, 835–837.
Formenti, S.C., and Demaria, S. (2013). Combining radiotherapy and cancer
immunotherapy: a paradigm shift. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 105, 256–265.
Freeman, G.J., Long, A.J., Iwai, Y., Bourque, K., Chernova, T., Nishimura, H.,
Fitz, L.J., Malenkovich, N., Okazaki, T., Byrne, M.C., et al. (2000). Engagement
of the PD-1 immunoinhibitory receptor by a novel B7 family member leads to
negative regulation of lymphocyte activation. J. Exp. Med. 192, 1027–1034.
Fridman, W.H., Page` s, F., Saute` s-Fridman, C., and Galon, J. (2012). The im-
mune contexture in human tumours: impact on clinical outcome. Nat. Rev.
Cancer 12, 298–306.
Fuge, O., Vasdev, N., Allchorne, P., and Green, J.S. (2015). Immunotherapy for
bladder cancer. Res. Rep. Urol. 7, 65–79.
Fukuda, A., Wang, S.C., Morris, J.P., 4th, Folias, A.E., Liou, A., Kim, G.E.,
Akira, S., Boucher, K.M., Firpo, M.A., Mulvihill, S.J., and Hebrok, M. (2011).
Stat3 and MMP7 contribute to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma initiation
and progression. Cancer Cell 19, 441–455.
Galluzzi, L., Buque´ , A., Kepp, O., Zitvogel, L., and Kroemer, G. (2015). Immu-
nological effects of conventional chemotherapy and targeted anticancer
agents. Cancer Cell 28, 690–714.
Galon, J., and Bruni, D. (2019). Approaches to treat immune hot, altered and
cold tumours with combination immunotherapies. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.
18, 197–218.
Galon, J., Costes, A., Sanchez-Cabo, F., Kirilovsky, A., Mlecnik, B., Lagorce-
Page` s, C., Tosolini, M., Camus, M., Berger, A., Wind, P., et al. (2006). Type,
density, and location of immune cells within human colorectal tumors predict
clinical outcome. Science 313, 1960–1964.
Galon, J., Fridman, W.H., and Page` s, F. (2007). The adaptive immunologic
microenvironment in colorectal cancer: a novel perspective. Cancer Res. 67,
1883–1886.
Galon, J., Angell, H.K., Bedognetti, D., and Marincola, F.M. (2013). The contin-
uum of cancer immunosurveillance: prognostic, predictive, and mechanistic
signatures. Immunity 39, 11–26.
Galon, J., Mlecnik, B., Bindea, G., Angell, H.K., Berger, A., Lagorce, C., Lugli,
A., Zlobec, I., Hartmann, A., Bifulco, C., et al. (2014). Towards the introduction
of the ‘Immunoscore’ in the classiﬁcation of malignant tumours. J. Pathol. 232,
199–209.
Gao, D., Cazares, L.H., and Fish, E.N. (2017). CCL5-CCR5 interactions modu-
late metabolic events during tumor onset to promote tumorigenesis. BMC
Cancer 17, 834.
Garcia-Albeniz, X., and Chan, A.T. (2011). Aspirin for the prevention of colo-
rectal cancer. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Gastroenterol. 25, 461–472.
Gardner, A., and Ruffell, B. (2016). Dendritic cells and cancer immunity. Trends
Immunol. 37, 855–865.
Gargett, T., Yu, W., Dotti, G., Yvon, E.S., Christo, S.N., Hayball, J.D., Lewis,
I.D., Brenner, M.K., and Brown, M.P. (2016). GD2-speciﬁc CAR T cells undergo
potent activation and deletion following antigen encounter but can be pro-
tected from activation-induced cell death by PD-1 blockade. Mol. Ther. 24,
1135–1149.
Gaugler, B., Van den Eynde, B., van der Bruggen, P., Romero, P., Gaforio, J.J.,
De Plaen, E., Lethe´ , B., Brasseur, F., and Boon, T. (1994). Human gene MAGE-
3 codes for an antigen recognized on a melanoma by autologous cytolytic T
lymphocytes. J. Exp. Med. 179, 921–930.
Gera, J.F., and Lichtenstein, A. (1991). Human neutrophil peptide defensins
induce single strand DNA breaks in target cells. Cell. Immunol. 138, 108–120.
Gerlinger, M., Rowan, A.J., Horswell, S., Math, M., Larkin, J., Endesfelder, D.,
Gronroos, E., Martinez, P., Matthews, N., Stewart, A., et al. (2012). Intratumor
heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by multiregion sequencing.
N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 883–892.
Gharwan, H., Bunch, K.P., and Annunziata, C.M. (2015). The role of reproduc-
tive hormones in epithelial ovarian carcinogenesis. Endocr. Relat. Cancer 22,
R339–R363.
Ghiringhelli, F., Me´ nard, C., Terme, M., Flament, C., Taieb, J., Chaput, N., Puig,
P.E., Novault, S., Escudier, B., Vivier, E., et al. (2005). CD4+CD25+ regulatory
T cells inhibit natural killer cell functions in a transforming growth factor-beta-
dependent manner. J. Exp. Med. 202, 1075–1085.
Giannakis, M., Mu, X.J., Shukla, S.A., Qian, Z.R., Cohen, O., Nishihara, R.,
Bahl, S., Cao, Y., Amin-Mansour, A., Yamauchi, M., et al. (2016). Genomic
correlates of immune-cell inﬁltrates in colorectal carcinoma. Cell Rep. 15,
857–865.
Golstein, P., and Grifﬁths, G.M. (2018). An early history of T cell-mediated cyto-
toxicity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 18, 527–535.
Gonzalez, H., Robles, I., and Werb, Z. (2018). Innate and acquired immune sur-
veillance in the postdissemination phase of metastasis. FEBS J. 285, 654–664.
Gopalakrishnan, V., Helmink, B.A., Spencer, C.N., Reuben, A., and Wargo,
J.A. (2018). The Inﬂuence of the Gut Microbiome on Cancer, Immunity, and
Cancer Immunotherapy. Cancer Cell 33, 570–580.
Gordon, S.R., Maute, R.L., Dulken, B.W., Hutter, G., George, B.M.,
McCracken, M.N., Gupta, R., Tsai, J.M., Sinha, R., Corey, D., et al. (2017).
PD-1 expression by tumour-associated macrophages inhibits phagocytosis
and tumour immunity. Nature 545, 495–499.
Graham, J.B., and Graham, R.M. (1959). The effect of vaccine on cancer pa-
tients. Surg. Gynecol. Obstet. 109, 131–138.
74
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
Griesmann, H., Drexel, C., Milosevic, N., Sipos, B., Rosendahl, J., Gress, T.M.,
and Michl, P. (2017). Pharmacological macrophage inhibition decreases
metastasis formation in a genetic model of pancreatic cancer. Gut 66,
1278–1285.
Gross, L. (1943). Intradermal immunization of C3H mice against a sarcoma that
originated in an animal of the same line. Cancer Res. 326–333.
Gross, G., Waks, T., and Eshhar, Z. (1989). Expression of immunoglobulin-T-
cell receptor chimeric molecules as functional receptors with antibody-type
speciﬁcity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 10024–10028.
Gu-Trantien, C., Migliori, E., Buisseret, L., de Wind, A., Brohe´ e, S., Garaud, S.,
No€el, G., Dang Chi, V.L., Lodewyckx, J.N., Naveaux, C., et al. (2017). CXCL13-
producing TFH cells link immune suppression and adaptive memory in human
breast cancer. JCI Insight 2, 91487.
Gyori, D., Lim, E.L., Grant, F.M., Spensberger, D., Roychoudhuri, R., Shuttle-
worth, S.J., Okkenhaug, K., Stephens, L.R., and Hawkins, P.T. (2018).
Compensation between CSF1R+ macrophages and Foxp3+ Treg cells drives
resistance to tumor immunotherapy. JCI Insight 3, 120631.
Halama, N., Michel, S., Kloor, M., Zoernig, I., Benner, A., Spille, A., Pommer-
encke, T., von Knebel, D.M., Folprecht, G., Luber, B., et al. (2011). Localization
and density of immune cells in the invasive margin of human colorectal cancer
liver metastases are prognostic for response to chemotherapy. Cancer Res.
71, 5670–5677.
Han, Y., Guo, Q., Zhang, M., Chen, Z., and Cao, X. (2009). CD69+ CD4+ CD25-
T cells, a new subset of regulatory T cells, suppress T cell proliferation through
membrane-bound TGF-beta 1. J. Immunol. 182, 111–120.
Hanahan, D., and Weinberg, R.A. (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the next gener-
ation. Cell 144, 646–674.
Harding, F.A., McArthur, J.G., Gross, J.A., Raulet, D.H., and Allison, J.P.
(1992). CD28-mediated signalling co-stimulates murine T cells and prevents
induction of anergy in T-cell clones. Nature 356, 607–609.
Hayakawa, Y., Kelly, J.M., Westwood, J.A., Darcy, P.K., Diefenbach, A., Rau-
let, D., and Smyth, M.J. (2002). Cutting edge: tumor rejection mediated by
NKG2D receptor-ligand interaction is dependent upon perforin. J. Immunol.
169, 5377–5381.
Headley, M.B., Bins, A., Nip, A., Roberts, E.W., Looney, M.R., Gerard, A., and
Krummel, M.F. (2016). Visualization of immediate immune responses to
pioneer metastatic cells in the lung. Nature 531, 513–517.
Herberman, R.B., Nunn, M.E., and Lavrin, D.H. (1975). Natural cytotoxic reac-
tivity of mouse lymphoid cells against syngeneic acid allogeneic tumors. I. Dis-
tribution of reactivity and speciﬁcity. Int. J. Cancer 16, 216–229.
Heslin, M.J., Yan, J., Johnson, M.R., Weiss, H., Diasio, R.B., and Urist, M.M.
(2001). Role of matrix metalloproteinases in colorectal carcinogenesis. Ann.
Surg. 233, 786–792.
Hilf, N., Kuttruff-Coqui, S., Frenzel, K., Bukur, V., Stevanovic, S., Gouttefan-
geas, C., Platten, M., Tabatabai, G., Dutoit, V., van der Burg, S.H., et al.
(2019). Actively personalized vaccination trial for newly diagnosed glioblas-
toma. Nature 565, 240–245.
Hofman, P., Badoual, C., Henderson, F., Berland, L., Hamila, M., Long-Mira,
E., Lassalle, S., Roussel, H., Hofman, V., Tartour, E., and Ilie´ , M. (2019). Multi-
plexed immunohistochemistry for molecular and immune proﬁling in lung can-
cer-just about ready for prime-time? Cancers (Basel) 11, E283.
Holsti, L.R. (1995). Development of clinical radiotherapy since 1896. Acta
Oncol. 34, 995–1003.
Hosoya, T., Sato-Kaneko, F., Ahmadi, A., Yao, S., Lao, F., Kitaura, K., Matsu-
tani, T., Carson, D.A., and Hayashi, T. (2018). Induction of oligoclonal CD8
T cell responses against pulmonary metastatic cancer by a phospholipid-con-
jugated TLR7 agonist. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, E6836–E6844.
Huang, Y.J., Yang, C.K., Wei, P.L., Huynh, T.T., Whang-Peng, J., Meng, T.C.,
Hsiao, M., Tzeng, Y.M., Wu, A.T., and Yen, Y. (2017). Ovatodiolide suppresses
colon tumorigenesis and prevents polarization of M2 tumor-associated mac-
rophages through YAP oncogenic pathways. J. Hematol. Oncol. 10, 60.
Huo, X., Li, H., Li, Z., Yan, C., Agrawal, I., Mathavan, S., Liu, J., and Gong, Z.
(2019). Transcriptomic proﬁles of tumor-associated neutrophils reveal promi-
nent roles in enhancing angiogenesis in liver tumorigenesis in zebraﬁsh. Sci.
Rep. 9, 1509.
Introna, M., and Correnti, F. (2018). Innovative clinical perspectives for CIK
cells in cancer patients. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19, E358.
Introna, M., Borleri, G., Conti, E., Franceschetti, M., Barbui, A.M., Broady, R.,
Dander, E., Gaipa, G., D’Amico, G., Biagi, E., et al. (2007). Repeated infusions
of donor-derived cytokine-induced killer cells in patients relapsing after alloge-
neic stem cell transplantation: a phase I study. Haematologica 92, 952–959.
Introna, M., Lussana, F., Algarotti, A., Gotti, E., Valgardsdottir, R., Mico` , C.,
Grassi, A., Pavoni, C., Ferrari, M.L., Delaini, F., et al. (2017). Phase II study of
sequential infusion of donor lymphocyte infusion and Cytokine-Induced Killer
Cells for Patients Relapsed after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplan-
tation. Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant. 23, 2070–2078.
Isaacs, A., and Lindenmann, J. (1957). Virus interference. I. The interferon.
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 147, 258–267.
Isaacs, A., Lindenmann, J., and Valentine, R.C. (1957). Virus interference. II.
Some properties of interferon. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 147, 268–273.
Ishida, Y., Agata, Y., Shibahara, K., and Honjo, T. (1992). Induced expression
of PD-1, a novel member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, upon pro-
grammed cell death. EMBO J. 11, 3887–3895.
Iwai, Y., Ishida, M., Tanaka, Y., Okazaki, T., Honjo, T., and Minato, N. (2002).
Involvement of PD-L1 on tumor cells in the escape from host immune system
and tumor immunotherapy by PD-L1 blockade. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99,
12293–12297.
Jadus, M.R., Irwin, M.C., Irwin, M.R., Horansky, R.D., Sekhon, S., Pepper,
K.A., Kohn, D.B., and Wepsic, H.T. (1996). Macrophages can recognize and
kill tumor cells bearing the membrane isoform of macrophage colony-stimu-
lating factor. Blood 87, 5232–5241.
Jiang, D., and Lim, S.Y. (2016). Inﬂuence of immune myeloid cells on the extra-
cellular matrix during cancer metastasis. Cancer Microenviron. 9, 45–61.
Johnson, S.D., De Costa, A.M., and Young, M.R. (2014). Effect of the prema-
lignant and tumor microenvironment on immune cell cytokine production in
head and neck cancer. Cancers (Basel) 6, 756–770.
Jones, P.A., Ohtani, H., Chakravarthy, A., and De Carvalho, D.D. (2019). Epige-
netic therapy in immune-oncology. Nat. Rev. Cancer 19, 151–161.
Jung, Y.J., Isaacs, J.S., Lee, S., Trepel, J., and Neckers, L. (2003). IL-1beta-
mediated up-regulation of HIF-1alpha via an NFkappaB/COX-2 pathway iden-
tiﬁes HIF-1 as a critical link between inﬂammation and oncogenesis. FASEB J.
17, 2115–2117.
K€agi, D., Ledermann, B., B€urki, K., Seiler, P., Odermatt, B., Olsen, K.J., Po-
dack, E.R., Zinkernagel, R.M., and Hengartner, H. (1994). Cytotoxicity medi-
ated by T cells and natural killer cells is greatly impaired in perforin-deﬁcient
mice. Nature 369, 31–37.
Kanda, Y., Osaki, M., and Okada, F. (2017). Chemopreventive strategies for
inﬂammation-related carcinogenesis: current status and future direction. Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 18, E867.
Kaplan, D.H., Shankaran, V., Dighe, A.S., Stockert, E., Aguet, M., Old, L.J., and
Schreiber, R.D. (1998). Demonstration of an interferon gamma-dependent tu-
mor surveillance system in immunocompetent mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 95, 7556–7561.
Karlhofer, F.M., Ribaudo, R.K., and Yokoyama, W.M. (1992). MHC class I allo-
antigen speciﬁcity of Ly-49+ IL-2-activated natural killer cells. Nature
358, 66–70.
K€arre, K. (1981). On the immunobiology of natural killer cells (Karolinska
Institute).
K€arre, K. (1985). Role of target histocompatibility antigens in regulation of nat-
ural killer activity: a reevaluation and a hypothesis. In Mechanisms of NK Medi-
ated Cytotoxicity, D. Callewert and R.B. Herberman, eds. (Orlando: Academic
Press), pp. 81–91.
K€arre, K., Ljunggren, H.G., Piontek, G., and Kiessling, R. (1986). Selective
rejection of H-2-deﬁcient lymphoma variants suggests alternative immune
defence strategy. Nature 319, 675–678.
Kavoussi, L.R., Brown, E.J., Ritchey, J.K., and Ratliff, T.L. (1990). Fibronectin-
mediated Calmette-Guerin bacillus attachment to murine bladder mucosa.
Requirement for the expression of an antitumor response. J. Clin. Invest.
85, 62–67.
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
75
Immunity
Review
Kersey, J.H. (2007). Blood and marrow transplantation: a perspective from the
University of Minnesota. Immunol. Res. 38, 149–164.
Keskin, D.B., Anandappa, A.J., Sun, J., Tirosh, I., Mathewson, N.D., Li, S., Oli-
veira, G., Giobbie-Hurder, A., Felt, K., Gjini, E., et al. (2019). Neoantigen vac-
cine generates intratumoral T cell responses in phase Ib glioblastoma trial.
Nature 565, 234–239.
Key, T.J. (1995). Hormones and cancer in humans. Mutat. Res. 333, 59–67.
Kienast, Y., von Baumgarten, L., Fuhrmann, M., Klinkert, W.E., Goldbrunner,
R., Herms, J., and Winkler, F. (2010). Real-time imaging reveals the single
steps of brain metastasis formation. Nat. Med. 16, 116–122.
Kiessling, R., Klein, E., Pross, H., and Wigzell, H. (1975). ‘‘Natural’’ killer cells in
the mouse. II. Cytotoxic cells with speciﬁcity for mouse Moloney leukemia
cells. Characteristics of the killer cell. Eur. J. Immunol. 5, 117–121.
Kilvaer, T.K., Paulsen, E.E., Khanehkenari, M.R., Al-Saad, S., Johansen, R.M.,
Al-Shibli, K., Bremnes, R.M., Busund, L.T., and Donnem, T. (2016). The pres-
ence of intraepithelial CD45RO+ cells in resected lymph nodes with metasta-
ses from NSCLC patients is an independent predictor of disease-speciﬁc sur-
vival. Br. J. Cancer 114, 1145–1151.
Kim, T.M., Jung, S.H., An, C.H., Lee, S.H., Baek, I.P., Kim, M.S., Park, S.W.,
Rhee, J.K., Lee, S.H., and Chung, Y.J. (2015). Subclonal genomic architec-
tures of primary and metastatic colorectal cancer based on intratumoral ge-
netic heterogeneity. Clin. Cancer Res. 21, 4461–4472.
Kim, H.N., Lee, S., Fousek, K., Li, S.Y., Kim, A., Watanabe, J., Bonig, H.,
Ahmed, N., Abdel-Azim, H., Heisterkamp, N., and Kim, Y.M. (2017). CAR
T cell relapse CD19 negative ALL cells express integrins and integrin blockade
can prolong survival in vivo. Blood, 130.
Kinzler, K.W., and Vogelstein, B. (1996). Lessons from hereditary colorectal
cancer. Cell 87, 159–170.
Kitamura, J., Uemura, M., Kurozumi, M., Sonobe, M., Manabe, T., Hiai, H.,
Date, H., and Kinoshita, K. (2015). Chronic lung injury by constitutive expres-
sion of activation-induced cytidine deaminase leads to focal mucous cell
metaplasia and cancer. PLoS ONE 10, e0117986.
Kiziltas¸, S., Sezgin Ramadan, S., Topuzoglu, A., and K€ull€u, S. (2008). Does the
severity of tissue eosinophilia of colonic neoplasms reﬂect their malignancy
potential? Turk. J. Gastroenterol. 19, 239–244.
Klein, G., Sjogren, H.O., Klein, E., and Hellstrom, K.E. (1960). Demonstration of
resistance against methylcholanthrene-induced sarcomas in the primary
autochthonous host. Cancer Res. 20, 1561–1572.
Kodelja, V., M€uller, C., Politz, O., Hakij, N., Orfanos, C.E., and Goerdt, S.
(1998). Alternative macrophage activation-associated CC-chemokine-1, a
novel structural homologue of macrophage inﬂammatory protein-1 alpha
with a Th2-associated expression pattern. J. Immunol. 160, 1411–1418.
Koebel, C.M., Vermi, W., Swann, J.B., Zerafa, N., Rodig, S.J., Old, L.J., Smyth,
M.J., and Schreiber, R.D. (2007). Adaptive immunity maintains occult cancer in
an equilibrium state. Nature 450, 903–907.
Koeppel, M., Garcia-Alcalde, F., Glowinski, F., Schlaermann, P., and Meyer,
T.F. (2015). Helicobacter pylori infection causes characteristic DNA damage
patterns in human cells. Cell Rep. 11, 1703–1713.
Kottschade, L.A. (2018). Incidence and management of immune-related
adverse events in patients undergoing treatment with immune checkpoint in-
hibitors. Curr. Oncol. Rep. 20, 24.
Krummel, M.F., and Allison, J.P. (1995). CD28 and CTLA-4 have opposing ef-
fects on the response of T cells to stimulation. J. Exp. Med. 182, 459–465.
Kuang, D.M., Zhao, Q., Peng, C., Xu, J., Zhang, J.P., Wu, C., and Zheng, L.
(2009). Activated monocytes in peritumoral stroma of hepatocellular carci-
noma foster immune privilege and disease progression through PD-L1.
J. Exp. Med. 206, 1327–1337.
Kuang, D.M., Zhao, Q., Wu, Y., Peng, C., Wang, J., Xu, Z., Yin, X.Y., and Zheng,
L. (2011). Peritumoral neutrophils link inﬂammatory response to disease pro-
gression by fostering angiogenesis in hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Hepatol.
54, 948–955.
Kwak, Y., Koh, J., Kim, D.W., Kang, S.B., Kim, W.H., and Lee, H.S. (2016). Im-
munoscore encompassing CD3+ and CD8+ T cell densities in distant metas-
tasis is a robust prognostic marker for advanced colorectal cancer. Oncotar-
get 7, 81778–81790.
Lakritz, J.R., Poutahidis, T., Mirabal, S., Varian, B.J., Levkovich, T., Ibrahim,
Y.M., Ward, J.M., Teng, E.C., Fisher, B., Parry, N., et al. (2015). Gut bacteria
require neutrophils to promote mammary tumorigenesis. Oncotarget 6,
9387–9396.
Larsen, S.K., Gao, Y., and Basse, P.H. (2014). NK cells in the tumor microen-
vironment. Crit. Rev. Oncog. 19, 91–105.
Latchman, Y., Wood, C.R., Chernova, T., Chaudhary, D., Borde, M., Chernova,
I., Iwai, Y., Long, A.J., Brown, J.A., Nunes, R., et al. (2001). PD-L2 is a second
ligand for PD-1 and inhibits T cell activation. Nat. Immunol. 2, 261–268.
Leach, D.R., Krummel, M.F., and Allison, J.P. (1996). Enhancement of anti-
tumor immunity by CTLA-4 blockade. Science 271, 1734–1736.
Lee, C., Lee, M., and Rhee, I. (2018). Distinct features of dendritic cell-based
immunotherapy as cancer vaccines. Clin. Exp. Vaccine Res. 7, 16–23.
Lee, W., Ko, S.Y., Mohamed, M.S., Kenny, H.A., Lengyel, E., and Naora, H.
(2019). Neutrophils facilitate ovarian cancer premetastatic niche formation in
the omentum. J. Exp. Med. 216, 176–194.
Leek, R.D., Landers, R., Fox, S.B., Ng, F., Harris, A.L., and Lewis, C.E. (1998).
Association of tumour necrosis factor alpha and its receptors with thymidine
phosphorylase expression in invasive breast carcinoma. Br. J. Cancer 77,
2246–2251.
Lengagne, R., Graff-Dubois, S., Garcette, M., Renia, L., Kato, M., Guillet, J.G.,
Engelhard, V.H., Avril, M.F., Abastado, J.P., and Pre´ vost-Blondel, A. (2008).
Distinct role for CD8 T cells toward cutaneous tumors and visceral metastases.
J. Immunol. 180, 130–137.
Lewis, C.E., Harney, A.S., and Pollard, J.W. (2016). The multifaceted role of
perivascular macrophages in tumors. Cancer Cell 30, 18–25.
Lim, Y.W., Chen-Harris, H., Mayba, O., Lianoglou, S., Wuster, A., Bhangale, T.,
Khan, Z., Mariathasan, S., Daemen, A., Reeder, J., et al. (2018). Germline ge-
netic polymorphisms inﬂuence tumor gene expression and immune cell inﬁl-
tration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, E11701–E11710.
Lin, E.Y., Nguyen, A.V., Russell, R.G., and Pollard, J.W. (2001). Colony-stimu-
lating factor 1 promotes progression of mammary tumors to malignancy.
J. Exp. Med. 193, 727–740.
Lin, R., Zhang, C., Zheng, J., Tian, D., Lei, Z., Chen, D., Xu, Z., and Su, M.
(2016). Chronic inﬂammation-associated genomic instability paves the way
for human esophageal carcinogenesis. Oncotarget 7, 24564–24571.
Lindau, D., Gielen, P., Kroesen, M., Wesseling, P., and Adema, G.J. (2013). The
immunosuppressive tumour network: myeloid-derived suppressor cells, regu-
latory T cells and natural killer T cells. Immunology 138, 105–115.
Linde, N., Casanova-Acebes, M., Sosa, M.S., Mortha, A., Rahman, A., Farias,
E., Harper, K., Tardio, E., Reyes Torres, I., Jones, J., et al. (2018). Macrophages
orchestrate breast cancer early dissemination and metastasis. Nat. Commun.
9, 21.
Linsley, P.S., Brady, W., Urnes, M., Grosmaire, L.S., Damle, N.K., and Ledbet-
ter, J.A. (1991). CTLA-4 is a second receptor for the B cell activation antigen
B7. J. Exp. Med. 174, 561–569.
Liu, C.Y., Wang, C.H., Chen, T.C., Lin, H.C., Yu, C.T., and Kuo, H.P. (1998).
Increased level of exhaled nitric oxide and up-regulation of inducible
nitric oxide synthase in patients with primary lung cancer. Br. J. Cancer 78,
534–541.
Liu, S.Y., Deng, B.P., Lin, Y.H., Yin, Z.C., Pan, J., Wu, T., Gao, Z.Y., Song, Y.Z.,
Zhao, Y.Q., and Tong, C.R. (2018). Sequential CD19-and CD22-CART cell
therapies for relapsed B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia after allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Blood, 132.
Lotze, M.T., Frana, L.W., Sharrow, S.O., Robb, R.J., and Rosenberg, S.A.
(1985). In vivo administration of puriﬁed human interleukin 2. I. Half-life and
immunologic effects of the Jurkat cell line-derived interleukin 2. J. Immunol.
134, 157–166.
Lu, P.H., and Negrin, R.S. (1994). A novel population of expanded human
CD3+CD56+ cells derived from T cells with potent in vivo antitumor activity
in
mice
with
severe
combined
immunodeﬁciency.
J.
Immunol.
153,
1687–1696.
76
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
Luca, S., and Mihaescu, T. (2013). History of BCG Vaccine. Maedica (Buchar.)
8, 53–58.
Lutz, E.R., Wu, A.A., Bigelow, E., Sharma, R., Mo, G., Soares, K., Solt, S., Dor-
man, A., Wamwea, A., Yager, A., et al. (2014). Immunotherapy converts non-
immunogenic pancreatic tumors into immunogenic foci of immune regulation.
Cancer Immunol. Res. 2, 616–631.
Luzzi, K.J., MacDonald, I.C., Schmidt, E.E., Kerkvliet, N., Morris, V.L., Cham-
bers, A.F., and Groom, A.C. (1998). Multistep nature of metastatic inefﬁciency:
dormancy of solitary cells after successful extravasation and limited survival of
early micrometastases. Am. J. Pathol. 153, 865–873.
MacCarty, W.C., and Mahle, A.E. (1921). Relation of differentiation and lym-
phocytic inﬁltration to postoperative longevity in gastric carcinoma. J. Lab.
Clin. Med. 6, 473–480.
Maloney, D.G., Liles, T.M., Czerwinski, D.K., Waldichuk, C., Rosenberg, J.,
Grillo-Lopez, A., and Levy, R. (1994). Phase I clinical trial using escalating sin-
gle-dose infusion of chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody (IDEC-C2B8) in
patients with recurrent B-cell lymphoma. Blood 84, 2457–2466.
Mansﬁeld, A.S., Ren, H., Sutor, S., Sarangi, V., Nair, A., Davila, J., Elsbernd,
L.R., Udell, J.B., Dronca, R.S., Park, S., et al. (2018). Contraction of T cell rich-
ness in lung cancer brain metastases. Sci. Rep. 8, 2171.
Mantovani, A., Allavena, P., Sica, A., and Balkwill, F. (2008). Cancer-related
inﬂammation. Nature 454, 436–444.
Mantovani, A., Marchesi, F., Malesci, A., Laghi, L., and Allavena, P. (2017).
Tumour-associated macrophages as treatment targets in oncology. Nat.
Rev. Clin. Oncol. 14, 399–416.
Martinez, M., and Moon, E.K. (2019). CAR T cells for solid tumors: new strate-
gies for ﬁnding, inﬁltrating, and surviving in the tumor microenvironment. Front.
Immunol. 10, 128.
Mascaux, C., Angelova, M., Vasaturo, A., Beane, J., Hijazi, K., Anthoine, G.,
Buttard, B., Rothe, F., Willard-Gallo, K., Haller, A., et al. (2019). Immune
evasion before tumour invasion in early lung squamous carcinogenesis. Nature
571, 570–575.
Matsushita, H., Vesely, M.D., Koboldt, D.C., Rickert, C.G., Uppaluri, R.,
Magrini, V.J., Arthur, C.D., White, J.M., Chen, Y.S., Shea, L.K., et al. (2012).
Cancer exome analysis reveals a T-cell-dependent mechanism of cancer im-
munoediting. Nature 482, 400–404.
Matsuzawa, A., Takeda, Y., Narita, M., and Ozawa, H. (1991). Survival of
leukemic cells in a dormant state following cyclophosphamide-induced cure
of strongly immunogenic mouse leukemia (DL811). Int. J. Cancer 49, 303–309.
McBride, A.A. (2017). Oncogenic human papillomaviruses. Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 372, 20160273.
McNally, A., Hill, G.R., Sparwasser, T., Thomas, R., and Steptoe, R.J. (2011).
CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells control CD8+ T-cell effector differentiation by
modulating IL-2 homeostasis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 7529–7534.
Mego, M., Gao, H., Cohen, E.N., Anfossi, S., Giordano, A., Sanda, T., Fouad,
T.M., De Giorgi, U., Giuliano, M., Woodward, W.A., et al. (2016). Circulating Tu-
mor Cells (CTC) Are Associated with Defects in Adaptive Immunity in Patients
with Inﬂammatory Breast Cancer. J. Cancer 7, 1095–1104.
Metchnikoff, E. (1883). Untersuchungen ueber die mesodermalen Phagocyten
einiger Wirbeltiere. Biologisches Centralblatt, 560–565.
Metelli, A., Wu, B.X., Fugle, C.W., Rachidi, S., Sun, S., Zhang, Y., Wu, J., Tom-
linson, S., Howe, P.H., Yang, Y., et al. (2016). Surface expression of TGFb
docking receptor GARP promotes oncogenesis and immune tolerance in
breast cancer. Cancer Res. 76, 7106–7117.
Miliotou, A.N., and Papadopoulou, L.C. (2018). CAR T-cell Therapy: a new era
in cancer immunotherapy. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 19, 5–18.
Miller, J.F., Mitchell, G.F., and Weiss, N.S. (1967). Cellular basis of the immu-
nological defects in thymectomized mice. Nature 214, 992–997.
Mills, C.D., Kincaid, K., Alt, J.M., Heilman, M.J., and Hill, A.M. (2000). M-1/M-2
macrophages and the Th1/Th2 paradigm. J. Immunol. 164, 6166–6173.
Mittal, D., Gubin, M.M., Schreiber, R.D., and Smyth, M.J. (2014). New insights
into cancer immunoediting and its three component phases–elimination, equi-
librium and escape. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 27, 16–25.
Mlecnik, B., Tosolini, M., Charoentong, P., Kirilovsky, A., Bindea, G., Berger,
A., Camus, M., Gillard, M., Bruneval, P., Fridman, W.H., et al. (2010). Biomol-
ecular network reconstruction identiﬁes T-cell homing factors associated with
survival in colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 138, 1429–1440.
Mlecnik, B., Tosolini, M., Kirilovsky, A., Berger, A., Bindea, G., Meatchi, T.,
Bruneval, P., Trajanoski, Z., Fridman, W.H., Page` s, F., and Galon, J. (2011).
Histopathologic-based
prognostic
factors
of
colorectal
cancers
are
associated with the state of the local immune reaction. J. Clin. Oncol. 29,
610–618.
Mlecnik, B., Bindea, G., Angell, H.K., Maby, P., Angelova, M., Tougeron, D.,
Church, S.E., Lafontaine, L., Fischer, M., Fredriksen, T., et al. (2016a). Integra-
tive analyses of colorectal cancer show immunoscore is a stronger predictor of
patient survival than microsatellite instability. Immunity 44, 698–711.
Mlecnik, B., Bindea, G., Kirilovsky, A., Angell, H.K., Obenauf, A.C., Tosolini, M.,
Church, S.E., Maby, P., Vasaturo, A., Angelova, M., et al. (2016b). The tumor
microenvironment and Immunoscore are critical determinants of dissemina-
tion to distant metastasis. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 327ra26.
Mlecnik, B., Van den Eynde, M., Bindea, G., Church, S.E., Vasaturo, A., Fre-
driksen, T., Lafontaine, L., Haicheur, N., Marliot, F., Debetancourt, D., et al.
(2018). Comprehensive intrametastatic immune quantiﬁcation and major
impact of immunoscore on survival. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. https://doi.org/10.
1093/jnci/djx123.
Modi, B.G., Neustadter, J., Binda, E., Lewis, J., Filler, R.B., Roberts, S.J.,
Kwong, B.Y., Reddy, S., Overton, J.D., Galan, A., et al. (2012). Langerhans
cells facilitate epithelial DNA damage and squamous cell carcinoma. Science
335, 104–108.
Moezzi, J., Gopalswamy, N., Haas, R.J., Jr., Markert, R.J., Suryaprasad, S.,
and Bhutani, M.S. (2000). Stromal eosinophilia in colonic epithelial neoplasms.
Am. J. Gastroenterol. 95, 520–523.
Molgora, M., Bonavita, E., Ponzetta, A., Riva, F., Barbagallo, M., Jaillon, S.,
Popovic, B., Bernardini, G., Magrini, E., Gianni, F., et al. (2017). IL-1R8 is a
checkpoint in NK cells regulating anti-tumour and anti-viral activity. Nature
551, 110–114.
Morales, A., Eidinger, D., and Bruce, A.W. (1976). Intracavitary bacillus calm-
ette-guerin in the treatment of superﬁcial bladder tumors. J. Urol. 116,
180–183.
Morales, C., Rachidi, S., Hong, F., Sun, S., Ouyang, X., Wallace, C., Zhang, Y.,
Garret-Mayer, E., Wu, J., Liu, B., and Li, Z. (2014). Immune chaperone gp96
drives the contributions of macrophages to inﬂammatory colon tumorigenesis.
Cancer Res. 74, 446–459.
Moretta, A., Vitale, M., Bottino, C., Orengo, A.M., Morelli, L., Augugliaro, R.,
Barbaresi, M., Ciccone, E., and Moretta, L. (1993). P58 molecules as putative
receptors for major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules in hu-
man natural killer (NK) cells. Anti-p58 antibodies reconstitute lysis of MHC
class I-protected cells in NK clones displaying different speciﬁcities. J. Exp.
Med. 178, 597–604.
Morgan, D.A., Ruscetti, F.W., and Gallo, R. (1976). Selective in vitro growth of T
lymphocytes from normal human bone marrows. Science 193, 1007–1008.
Murphy, N., Ward, H.A., Jenab, M., Rothwell, J.A., Boutron-Ruault, M.C., Car-
bonnel, F., Kvaskoff, M., Kaaks, R., Kuhn, T., Boeing, H., et al. (2019). Hetero-
geneity of colorectal cancer risk factors by anatomical subsite in 10 european
countries: a multinational cohort study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 17,
1323–1331.
Mussai, F., De Santo, C., and Cerundolo, V. (2012). Interaction between
invariant NKT cells and myeloid-derived suppressor cells in cancer patients:
evidence and therapeutic opportunities. J. Immunother. 35, 449–459.
Nagakawa, Y., Aoki, T., Kasuya, K., Tsuchida, A., and Koyanagi, Y. (2002).
Histologic features of venous invasion, expression of vascular endothelial
growth factor and matrix metalloproteinase-2 and matrix metalloproteinase-
9, and the relation with liver metastasis in pancreatic cancer. Pancreas 24,
169–178.
Naito, Y., Saito, K., Shiiba, K., Ohuchi, A., Saigenji, K., Nagura, H., and Ohtani,
H. (1998). CD8+ T cells inﬁltrated within cancer cell nests as a prognostic factor
in human colorectal cancer. Cancer Res. 58, 3491–3494.
Neelapu, S.S., Locke, F.L., Bartlett, N.L., Lekakis, L.J., Miklos, D.B., Jacob-
son, C.A., Braunschweig, I., Oluwole, O.O., Siddiqi, T., Lin, Y., et al. (2017).
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
77
Immunity
Review
Axicabtagene Ciloleucel CAR T-cell therapy in refractory large B-cell lym-
phoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 2531–2544.
Nicola´ s-A´ vila, J.A., Adrover, J.M., and Hidalgo, A. (2017). Neutrophils in ho-
meostasis, immunity, and cancer. Immunity 46, 15–28.
Nielsen, S.R., and Schmid, M.C. (2017). Macrophages as key drivers of cancer
progression and metastasis. Mediators Inﬂamm. 2017, 9624760.
Nishimura, H., Nose, M., Hiai, H., Minato, N., and Honjo, T. (1999). Develop-
ment of lupus-like autoimmune diseases by disruption of the PD-1 gene en-
coding an ITIM motif-carrying immunoreceptor. Immunity 11, 141–151.
North, R.J. (1978). The concept of the activated macrophage. J. Immunol. 121,
806–809.
Nozawa, H., Chiu, C., and Hanahan, D. (2006). Inﬁltrating neutrophils mediate
the initial angiogenic switch in a mouse model of multistage carcinogenesis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 12493–12498.
Nussinov, R., Tsai, C.J., Jang, H., Korcsma´ ros, T., and Csermely, P. (2016).
Oncogenic KRAS signaling and YAP1/b-catenin: Similar cell cycle control in
tumor initiation. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 58, 79–85.
Okada, F. (2014). Inﬂammation-related carcinogenesis: current ﬁndings in
epidemiological trends, causes and mechanisms. Yonago Acta Med.
57, 65–72.
Okayama, H., Saito, M., Oue, N., Weiss, J.M., Stauffer, J., Takenoshita, S.,
Wiltrout, R.H., Hussain, S.P., and Harris, C.C. (2013). NOS2 enhances
KRAS-induced lung carcinogenesis, inﬂammation and microRNA-21 expres-
sion. Int. J. Cancer 132, 9–18.
Oliver, A.J., Lau, P.K.H., Unsworth, A.S., Loi, S., Darcy, P.K., Kershaw, M.H.,
and Slaney, C.Y. (2018). Tissue-dependent tumor microenvironments and
their impact on immunotherapy responses. Front. Immunol. 9, 70.
Ott, P.A., Hu, Z., Keskin, D.B., Shukla, S.A., Sun, J., Bozym, D.J., Zhang, W.,
Luoma, A., Giobbie-Hurder, A., Peter, L., et al. (2017). An immunogenic
personal neoantigen vaccine for patients with melanoma. Nature 547,
217–221.
Ozasa, K., Shimizu, Y., Suyama, A., Kasagi, F., Soda, M., Grant, E.J., Sakata,
R., Sugiyama, H., and Kodama, K. (2012). Studies of the mortality of atomic
bomb survivors, Report 14, 1950-2003: an overview of cancer and noncancer
diseases. Radiat. Res. 177, 229–243.
O¨ zdemir, B.C., and Dotto, G.P. (2019). Sex hormones and anticancer immu-
nity. Clin. Cancer Res. 25, 4603–4610.
Page-McCaw, A., Ewald, A.J., and Werb, Z. (2007). Matrix metalloproteinases
and the regulation of tissue remodelling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8, 221–233.
Page` s, F., Berger, A., Camus, M., Sanchez-Cabo, F., Costes, A., Molidor, R.,
Mlecnik, B., Kirilovsky, A., Nilsson, M., Damotte, D., et al. (2005). Effector
memory T cells, early metastasis, and survival in colorectal cancer. N. Engl.
J. Med. 353, 2654–2666.
Page` s, F., Kirilovsky, A., Mlecnik, B., Asslaber, M., Tosolini, M., Bindea, G., La-
gorce, C., Wind, P., Marliot, F., Bruneval, P., et al. (2009). In situ cytotoxic and
memory T cells predict outcome in patients with early-stage colorectal cancer.
J. Clin. Oncol. 27, 5944–5951.
Page` s, F., Mlecnik, B., Marliot, F., Bindea, G., Ou, F.S., Bifulco, C., Lugli, A.,
Zlobec, I., Rau, T.T., Berger, M.D., et al. (2018). International validation of
the consensus Immunoscore for the classiﬁcation of colon cancer: a prog-
nostic and accuracy study. Lancet 391, 2128–2139.
Palucka, K., and Banchereau, J. (2013). Dendritic-cell-based therapeutic can-
cer vaccines. Immunity 39, 38–48.
Parfenov, M., Pedamallu, C.S., Gehlenborg, N., Freeman, S.S., Danilova, L.,
Bristow, C.A., Lee, S., Hadjipanayis, A.G., Ivanova, E.V., Wilkerson, M.D.,
et al.; Cancer Genome Atlas Network (2014). Characterization of HPV and
host genome interactions in primary head and neck cancers. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 111, 15544–15549.
Park, E.J., Lee, J.H., Yu, G.Y., He, G., Ali, S.R., Holzer, R.G., Osterreicher,
C.H., Takahashi, H., and Karin, M. (2010). Dietary and genetic obesity promote
liver inﬂammation and tumorigenesis by enhancing IL-6 and TNF expression.
Cell 140, 197–208.
Pasero, C., Gravis, G., Granjeaud, S., Guerin, M., Thomassin-Piana, J., Roc-
chi, P., Salem, N., Walz, J., Moretta, A., and Olive, D. (2015). Highly effective
NK cells are associated with good prognosis in patients with metastatic pros-
tate cancer. Oncotarget 6, 14360–14373.
Pearl, R. (1929). Cancer and tuberculosis. Am. J. Hyg. 9, 97–159.
Peng, D., Kryczek, I., Nagarsheth, N., Zhao, L., Wei, S., Wang, W., Sun, Y.,
Zhao, E., Vatan, L., Szeliga, W., et al. (2015). Epigenetic silencing of TH1-
type chemokines shapes tumour immunity and immunotherapy. Nature 527,
249–253.
Pentcheva-Hoang, T., Egen, J.G., Wojnoonski, K., and Allison, J.P. (2004). B7-
1 and B7-2 selectively recruit CTLA-4 and CD28 to the immunological syn-
apse. Immunity 21, 401–413.
Powell, D.R., and Huttenlocher, A. (2016). Neutrophils in the tumor microenvi-
ronment. Trends Immunol. 37, 41–52.
Prehn, R.T., and Main, J.M. (1957). Immunity to methylcholanthrene-induced
sarcomas. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 18, 769–778.
Preston, D.L., Ron, E., Tokuoka, S., Funamoto, S., Nishi, N., Soda, M., Mabu-
chi, K., and Kodama, K. (2007). Solid cancer incidence in atomic bomb survi-
vors: 1958-1998. Radiat. Res. 168, 1–64.
Qasim, W., Zhan, H., Samarasinghe, S., Adams, S., Amrolia, P., Stafford, S.,
Butler, K., Rivat, C., Wright, G., Somana, K., et al. (2017). Molecular remission
of infant B-ALL after infusion of universal TALEN gene-edited CAR T cells. Sci.
Transl. Med. 9, eaaj2013.
Qian, B.Z., and Pollard, J.W. (2010). Macrophage diversity enhances tumor
progression and metastasis. Cell 141, 39–51.
Qian, B.Z., Li, J., Zhang, H., Kitamura, T., Zhang, J., Campion, L.R., Kaiser,
E.A., Snyder, L.A., and Pollard, J.W. (2011). CCL2 recruits inﬂammatory mono-
cytes to facilitate breast-tumour metastasis. Nature 475, 222–225.
Rajput, A.B., Turbin, D.A., Cheang, M.C., Voduc, D.K., Leung, S., Gelmon,
K.A., Gilks, C.B., and Huntsman, D.G. (2008). Stromal mast cells in invasive
breast cancer are a marker of favourable prognosis: a study of 4,444 cases.
Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 107, 249–257.
Ratliff, T.L., Kavoussi, L.R., and Catalona, W.J. (1988). Role of ﬁbronectin in in-
travesical BCG therapy for superﬁcial bladder cancer. J. Urol. 139, 410–414.
Remark, R., Becker, C., Gomez, J.E., Damotte, D., Dieu-Nosjean, M.C.,
Saute` s-Fridman, C., Fridman, W.H., Powell, C.A., Altorki, N.K., Merad, M.,
and Gnjatic, S. (2015). The non-small cell lung cancer immune contexture. A
major determinant of tumor characteristics and patient outcome. Am. J. Re-
spir. Crit. Care Med. 191, 377–390.
Riabov, V., Gudima, A., Wang, N., Mickley, A., Orekhov, A., and Kzhyshkow-
ska, J. (2014). Role of tumor associated macrophages in tumor angiogenesis
and lymphangiogenesis. Front. Physiol. 5, 75.
Romero, I., Garrido, C., Algarra, I., Collado, A., Garrido, F., and Garcia-Lora,
A.M. (2014). T lymphocytes restrain spontaneous metastases in permanent
dormancy. Cancer Res. 74, 1958–1968.
Rooney, M.S., Shukla, S.A., Wu, C.J., Getz, G., and Hacohen, N. (2015).
Molecular and genetic properties of tumors associated with local immune
cytolytic activity. Cell 160, 48–61.
Rosenberg, S.A., Spiess, P., and Lafreniere, R. (1986). A new approach to the
adoptive immunotherapy of cancer with tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes. Sci-
ence 233, 1318–1321.
Rosenberg, S.A., Aebersold, P., Cornetta, K., Kasid, A., Morgan, R.A., Moen,
R., Karson, E.M., Lotze, M.T., Yang, J.C., Topalian, S.L., et al. (1990). Gene
transfer into humans–immunotherapy of patients with advanced melanoma,
using tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes modiﬁed by retroviral gene transduction.
N. Engl. J. Med. 323, 570–578.
Rouette, A., Troﬁmov, A., Haberl, D., Boucher, G., Lavalle´ e, V.P., D’Angelo, G.,
He´ bert, J., Sauvageau, G., Lemieux, S., and Perreault, C. (2016). Expression of
immunoproteasome genes is regulated by cell-intrinsic and -extrinsic factors
in human cancers. Sci. Rep. 6, 34019.
Ruella, M., Xu, J., Barrett, D.M., Fraietta, J.A., Reich, T.J., Ambrose, D.E., Kli-
chinsky, M., Shestova, O., Patel, P.R., Kulikovskaya, I., et al. (2018). Induction
of resistance to chimeric antigen receptor T cell therapy by transduction of a
single leukemic B cell. Nat. Med. 24, 1499–1503.
78
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
Ruggeri, L., Capanni, M., Urbani, E., Perruccio, K., Shlomchik, W.D., Tosti, A.,
Posati, S., Rogaia, D., Frassoni, F., Aversa, F., et al. (2002). Effectiveness of
donor natural killer cell alloreactivity in mismatched hematopoietic transplants.
Science 295, 2097–2100.
Sahin, U., Derhovanessian, E., Miller, M., Kloke, B.P., Simon, P., Lo¨ wer, M.,
Bukur, V., Tadmor, A.D., Luxemburger, U., Schro¨ rs, B., et al. (2017). Personal-
ized RNA mutanome vaccines mobilize poly-speciﬁc therapeutic immunity
against cancer. Nature 547, 222–226.
Saito, H., Ando, S., Morishita, N., Lee, K.M., Dator, D., Dy, D., Shigemura, K.,
Adhim, Z., Nibu, K., Fujisawa, M., and Shirakawa, T. (2014). A combined
lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cell immunotherapy and adenovirus-p53
gene therapy for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Anticancer Res.
34, 3365–3370.
Sallusto, F., Geginat, J., and Lanzavecchia, A. (2004). Central memory and
effector memory T cell subsets: function, generation, and maintenance.
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 22, 745–763.
Saltz, J., Gupta, R., Hou, L., Kurc, T., Singh, P., Nguyen, V., Samaras, D.,
Shroyer, K.R., Zhao, T., Batiste, R., et al. (2018). Spatial organization and mo-
lecular correlation of tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes using deep learning on
pathology images. Cell Rep 23, 181–193.
Sa´ nchez-Paulete, A.R., Teijeira, A., Cueto, F.J., Garasa, S., Pe´ rez-Gracia, J.L.,
Sa´ nchez-Arra´ ez, A., Sancho, D., and Melero, I. (2017). Antigen cross-presen-
tation and T-cell cross-priming in cancer immunology and immunotherapy.
Ann. Oncol. 28, xii74.
Santegoets, S.J., van Ham, V.J., Ehsan, I., Charoentong, P., Duurland, C.L.,
van Unen, V., Ho¨ llt, T., van der Velden, L.A., van Egmond, S.L., Kortekaas,
K.E., et al. (2019). The anatomical location shapes the immune inﬁltrate in tu-
mors of same etiology and affects survival. Clin. Cancer Res. 25, 240–252.
Saute` s-Fridman, C., Lawand, M., Giraldo, N.A., Kaplon, H., Germain, C., Frid-
man, W.H., and Dieu-Nosjean, M.C. (2016). Tertiary lymphoid structures in
cancers: prognostic value, regulation, and manipulation for therapeutic inter-
vention. Front. Immunol. 7, 407.
Schreiber, R.D., Old, L.J., and Smyth, M.J. (2011). Cancer immunoediting:
integrating immunity’s roles in cancer suppression and promotion. Science
331, 1565–1570.
Sevenich, L., Bowman, R.L., Mason, S.D., Quail, D.F., Rapaport, F., Elie, B.T.,
Brogi, E., Brastianos, P.K., Hahn, W.C., Holsinger, L.J., et al. (2014). Analysis of
tumour- and stroma-supplied proteolytic networks reveals a brain-metastasis-
promoting role for cathepsin S. Nat. Cell Biol. 16, 876–888.
Seymour, L., Bogaerts, J., Perrone, A., Ford, R., Schwartz, L.H., Mandrekar,
S., Lin, N.U., Litie` re, S., Dancey, J., Chen, A., et al.; RECIST working group
(2017). iRECIST: guidelines for response criteria for use in trials testing immu-
notherapeutics. Lancet Oncol. 18, e143–e152.
Shankaran, V., Ikeda, H., Bruce, A.T., White, J.M., Swanson, P.E., Old, L.J.,
and Schreiber, R.D. (2001). IFNgamma and lymphocytes prevent primary
tumour development and shape tumour immunogenicity. Nature 410,
1107–1111.
Shevach, J., Chaudhuri, P., and Morgans, A.K. (2019). Adjuvant therapy in
high-risk prostate cancer. Clin. Adv. Hematol. Oncol. 17, 45–53.
Shi, H., Zhang, J., Han, X., Li, H., Xie, M., Sun, Y., Liu, W., Ba, X., and Zeng, X.
(2017). Recruited monocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells promote the
arrest of tumor cells in the premetastatic niche through an IL-1b-mediated in-
crease in E-selectin expression. Int. J. Cancer 140, 1370–1383.
Shi, W., Dong, L., Sun, Q., Ding, H., Meng, J., and Dai, G. (2018). Follicular
helper T cells promote the effector functions of CD8+ T cells via the provision
of IL-21, which is downregulated due to PD-1/PD-L1-mediated suppression in
colorectal cancer. Exp. Cell Res. 372, 35–42.
Siegel, R.L., Jacobs, E.J., Newton, C.C., Feskanich, D., Freedman, N.D., Pren-
tice, R.L., and Jemal, A. (2015). Deaths due to cigarette smoking for 12 smok-
ing-related cancers in the united states. JAMA Intern. Med. 175, 1574–1576.
Sierra, J.R., Corso, S., Caione, L., Cepero, V., Conrotto, P., Cignetti, A., Piaci-
bello, W., Kumanogoh, A., Kikutani, H., Comoglio, P.M., et al. (2008). Tumor
angiogenesis and progression are enhanced by Sema4D produced by tu-
mor-associated macrophages. J. Exp. Med. 205, 1673–1685.
Sigal, L.J., Reiser, H., and Rock, K.L. (1998). The role of B7-1 and B7-2 costi-
mulation for the generation of CTL responses in vivo. J. Immunol. 161,
2740–2745.
Singel, K.L., and Segal, B.H. (2016). Neutrophils in the tumor microenviron-
ment: trying to heal the wound that cannot heal. Immunol. Rev. 273, 329–343.
Singhal, S., Stadanlick, J., Annunziata, M.J., Rao, A.S., Bhojnagarwala, P.S.,
O’Brien, S., Moon, E.K., Cantu, E., Danet-Desnoyers, G., Ra, H.J., et al.
(2019). Human tumor-associated monocytes/macrophages and their regula-
tion of T cell responses in early-stage lung cancer. Sci. Transl. Med. 11,
eaat1500.
Sinnamon, M.J., Carter, K.J., Sims, L.P., Laﬂeur, B., Fingleton, B., and Matri-
sian, L.M. (2008). A protective role of mast cells in intestinal tumorigenesis.
Carcinogenesis 29, 880–886.
Sivori, S., Vacca, P., Del Zotto, G., Munari, E., Mingari, M.C., and Moretta, L.
(2019). Human NK cells: surface receptors, inhibitory checkpoints, and trans-
lational applications. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 16, 430–441.
Slebos, R.J., Jehmlich, N., Brown, B., Yin, Z., Chung, C.H., Yarbrough, W.G.,
and Liebler, D.C. (2013). Proteomic analysis of oropharyngeal carcinomas re-
veals novel HPV-associated biological pathways. Int. J. Cancer 132, 568–579.
Smyrk, T.C., Watson, P., Kaul, K., and Lynch, H.T. (2001). Tumor-inﬁltrating
lymphocytes are a marker for microsatellite instability in colorectal carcinoma.
Cancer 91, 2417–2422.
Smyth, M.J., Thia, K.Y., Street, S.E., MacGregor, D., Godfrey, D.I., and Tra-
pani, J.A. (2000). Perforin-mediated cytotoxicity is critical for surveillance of
spontaneous lymphoma. J. Exp. Med. 192, 755–760.
Sommer, C., Boldajipour, B., Kuo, T.C., Bentley, T., Sutton, J., Chen, A., Geng,
T., Dong, H., Galetto, R., Valton, J., et al. (2019). Preclinical evaluation of allo-
geneic CAR T cells targeting BCMA for the treatment of multiple myeloma.
Mol. Ther. 27, 1126–1138.
Sottoriva, A., Kang, H., Ma, Z., Graham, T.A., Salomon, M.P., Zhao, J., Marjo-
ram, P., Siegmund, K., Press, M.F., Shibata, D., and Curtis, C. (2015). A Big
Bang model of human colorectal tumor growth. Nat. Genet. 47, 209–216.
Souza-Fonseca-Guimaraes, F., Cursons, J., and Huntington, N.D. (2019). The
emergence of natural killer cells as a major target in cancer immunotherapy.
Trends Immunol. 40, 142–158.
Spranger, S., Dai, D., Horton, B., and Gajewski, T.F. (2017). Tumor-residing
Batf3 dendritic cells are required for effector T cell trafﬁcking and adoptive
T cell therapy. Cancer Cell 31, 711–723 e714.
Steinman, R.M., and Cohn, Z.A. (1973). Identiﬁcation of a novel cell type in pe-
ripheral lymphoid organs of mice. I. Morphology, quantitation, tissue distribu-
tion. J. Exp. Med. 137, 1142–1162.
Stenholm, S., Head, J., Kivim€aki, M., Kawachi, I., Aalto, V., Zins, M., Goldberg,
M., Zaninotto, P., Magnuson Hanson, L., Westerlund, H., and Vahtera, J.
(2016). Smoking, physical inactivity and obesity as predictors of healthy and
disease-free life expectancy between ages 50 and 75: a multicohort study.
Int. J. Epidemiol. 45, 1260–1270.
Strachan, D.C., Ruffell, B., Oei, Y., Bissell, M.J., Coussens, L.M., Pryer, N., and
Daniel, D. (2013). CSF1R inhibition delays cervical and mammary tumor
growth in murine models by attenuating the turnover of tumor-associated
macrophages and enhancing inﬁltration by CD8+ T cells. OncoImmunology
2, e26968.
Sun, W.W., Xu, Z.H., Lian, P., Gao, B.L., and Hu, J.A. (2017). Characteristics of
circulating tumor cells in organ metastases, prognosis, and T lymphocyte
mediated immune response. OncoTargets Ther. 10, 2413–2424.
Sun, H., Huang, Q., Huang, M., Wen, H., Lin, R., Zheng, M., Qu, K., Li, K., Wei,
H., Xiao, W., et al. (2018). Human CD96 correlates to NK cell exhaustion and
predicts the prognosis of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology.
https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.30347.
Szczerba, B.M., Castro-Giner, F., Vetter, M., Krol, I., Gkountela, S., Landin, J.,
Scheidmann, M.C., Donato, C., Scherrer, R., Singer, J., et al. (2019). Neutro-
phils escort circulating tumour cells to enable cell cycle progression. Nature
566, 553–557.
Takeuchi, Y., and Nishikawa, H. (2016). Roles of regulatory T cells in cancer im-
munity. Int. Immunol. 28, 401–409.
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
79
Immunity
Review
Talpaz, M., McCredie, K.B., Mavligit, G.M., and Gutterman, J.U. (1983). Leuko-
cyte interferon-induced myeloid cytoreduction in chronic myelogenous leuke-
mia. Blood 62, 689–692.
Tan, W., Zhang, W., Strasner, A., Grivennikov, S., Cheng, J.Q., Hoffman, R.M.,
and Karin, M. (2011). Tumour-inﬁltrating regulatory T cells stimulate mammary
cancer metastasis through RANKL-RANK signalling. Nature 470, 548–553.
Tao, J., Calvisi, D.F., Ranganathan, S., Cigliano, A., Zhou, L., Singh, S., Jiang,
L., Fan, B., Terracciano, L., Armeanu-Ebinger, S., et al. (2014). Activation of
b-catenin and Yap1 in human hepatoblastoma and induction of hepatocarci-
nogenesis in mice. Gastroenterology 147, 690–701.
Tao, L., Zhang, L., Peng, Y., Tao, M., Li, L., Xiu, D., Yuan, C., Ma, Z., and Jiang,
B. (2016). Neutrophils assist the metastasis of circulating tumor cells in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: A new hypothesis and a new predictor
for distant metastasis. Medicine (Baltimore) 95, e4932.
Tazawa, H., Okada, F., Kobayashi, T., Tada, M., Mori, Y., Une, Y., Sendo, F.,
Kobayashi, M., and Hosokawa, M. (2003). Inﬁltration of neutrophils is required
for acquisition of metastatic phenotype of benign murine ﬁbrosarcoma cells:
implication of inﬂammation-associated carcinogenesis and tumor progres-
sion. Am. J. Pathol. 163, 2221–2232.
Tazzari, M., Brich, S., Tuccitto, A., Bozzi, F., Beretta, V., Spagnuolo, R.D., Ne-
gri, T., Stacchiotti, S., Deraco, M., Baratti, D., et al. (2018). Complex immune
contextures characterise malignant peritoneal mesothelioma: loss of adaptive
immunological
signature
in
the
more
aggressive
histological
types.
J. Immunol. Res. 2018, 5804230.
Terry, S., Savagner, P., Ortiz-Cuaran, S., Mahjoubi, L., Saintigny, P., Thiery,
J.P., and Chouaib, S. (2017). New insights into the role of EMT in tumor im-
mune escape. Mol. Oncol. 11, 824–846.
Thirlwell, C., Will, O.C., Domingo, E., Graham, T.A., McDonald, S.A., Oukrif, D.,
Jeffrey, R., Gorman, M., Rodriguez-Justo, M., Chin-Aleong, J., et al. (2010).
Clonality assessment and clonal ordering of individual neoplastic crypts shows
polyclonality of colorectal adenomas. Gastroenterology 138, 1441–1454.
Thomas, L. (1959). Discussion. In Cellular and Humoral Aspects of the
Hypersensitive States., H.S. Lawrence, ed. (New York: Hoeber-Harper),
pp. 529–532.
Thomas, E.D., Lochte, H.L., Jr., Lu, W.C., and Ferrebee, J.W. (1957). Intrave-
nous infusion of bone marrow in patients receiving radiation and chemo-
therapy. N. Engl. J. Med. 257, 491–496.
Thorsson, V., Gibbs, D.L., Brown, S.D., Wolf, D., Bortone, D.S., Ou Yang, T.H.,
Porta-Pardo, E., Gao, G.F., Plaisier, C.L., Eddy, J.A., et al. (2018). The immune
landscape of cancer. Immunity 48, 812–830 e814.
Tivol, E.A., Borriello, F., Schweitzer, A.N., Lynch, W.P., Bluestone, J.A., and
Sharpe, A.H. (1995). Loss of CTLA-4 leads to massive lymphoproliferation
and fatal multiorgan tissue destruction, revealing a critical negative regulatory
role of CTLA-4. Immunity 3, 541–547.
Topalian, S.L., Muul, L.M., Solomon, D., and Rosenberg, S.A. (1987). Expan-
sion of human tumor inﬁltrating lymphocytes for use in immunotherapy trials.
J. Immunol. Methods 102, 127–141.
Truxova, I., Kasikova, L., Hensler, M., Skapa, P., Laco, J., Pecen, L., Belicova,
L., Praznovec, I., Halaska, M.J., Brtnicky, T., et al. (2018). Mature dendritic
cells correlate with favorable immune inﬁltrate and improved prognosis in
ovarian carcinoma patients. J. Immunother. Cancer 6, 139.
T€uting, T., and de Visser, K.E. (2016). CANCER. How neutrophils promote
metastasis. Science 352, 145–146.
Uno, S., Kinoshita, Y., Azuma, Y., Tsunenari, T., Yoshimura, Y., Iida, S., Kiku-
chi, Y., Yamada-Okabe, H., and Fukushima, N. (2007). Antitumor activity of a
monoclonal antibody against CD47 in xenograft models of human leukemia.
Oncol. Rep. 17, 1189–1194.
Van Berckelaer, C., Colpaert, C., Rypens, C., Marien, K.M., Waumans, Y.,
Kockx, M., Vermeulen, P., Dirix, L., Van Laere, S., and Van Dam, P. (2018).
The spatial localization of immune cells predicts prognosis and response to
therapy in inﬂammatory breast cancer Proceedings of the 2018 San Antonio
Breast Cancer Symposium San Antonio, TX. https://doi.org/10.1158/1538-
7445.SABCS18-P4-06-08.
van den Broek, M.E., K€agi, D., Ossendorp, F., Toes, R., Vamvakas, S., Lutz,
W.K., Melief, C.J., Zinkernagel, R.M., and Hengartner, H. (1996). Decreased
tumor surveillance in perforin-deﬁcient mice. J. Exp. Med. 184, 1781–1790.
Van den Eynde, M., Mlecnik, B., Bindea, G., Fredriksen, T., Church, S.E., La-
fontaine, L., Haicheur, N., Marliot, F., Angelova, M., Vasaturo, A., et al. (2018).
The link between the multiverse of immune microenvironments in metastases
and the survival of colorectal cancer patients. Cancer Cell 34, 1012–1026.
van der Bruggen, P., Traversari, C., Chomez, P., Lurquin, C., De Plaen, E., Van
den Eynde, B., Knuth, A., and Boon, T. (1991). A gene encoding an antigen
recognized by cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human melanoma. Science 254,
1643–1647.
Van Wauwe, J.P., De Mey, J.R., and Goossens, J.G. (1980). OKT3: a mono-
clonal anti-human T lymphocyte antibody with potent mitogenic properties.
J. Immunol. 124, 2708–2713.
Vansteenkiste, J.F., Cho, B.C., Vanakesa, T., De Pas, T., Zielinski, M., Kim,
M.S., Jassem, J., Yoshimura, M., Dahabreh, J., Nakayama, H., et al. (2016). Ef-
ﬁcacy of the MAGE-A3 cancer immunotherapeutic as adjuvant therapy in pa-
tients with resected MAGE-A3-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (MAGRIT):
a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol.
17, 822–835.
Varricchi, G., Galdiero, M.R., Loffredo, S., Marone, G., Iannone, R., Marone,
G., and Granata, F. (2017). Are Mast Cells MASTers in Cancer? Front. Immu-
nol. 8, 424.
Vasaikar, S., Huang, C., Wang, X., Petyuk, V.A., Savage, S.R., Wen, B., Dou,
Y., Zhang, Y., Shi, Z., Arshad, O.A., et al. (2019). Proteogenomic analysis of hu-
man colon cancer reveals new therapeutic opportunities. Cell 177, 1035–1049.
Ve´ ly, F., Olcese, L., Ble´ ry, M., and Vivier, E. (1996). Function of killer cell inhib-
itory receptors for MHC class I molecules. Immunol. Lett. 54, 145–150.
Vey, N., Karlin, L., Sadot-Lebouvier, S., Broussais, F., Berton-Rigaud, D., Rey,
J., Charbonnier, A., Marie, D., Andre´ , P., Paturel, C., et al. (2018). A phase 1
study of lirilumab (antibody against killer immunoglobulin-like receptor anti-
body KIR2D; IPH2102) in patients with solid tumors and hematologic malig-
nancies. Oncotarget 9, 17675–17688.
Vicent, S., Sayles, L.C., Vaka, D., Khatri, P., Gevaert, O., Chen, R., Zheng, Y.,
Gillespie, A.K., Clarke, N., Xu, Y., et al. (2012). Cross-species functional anal-
ysis of cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts identiﬁes a critical role for CLCF1 and
IL-6 in non-small cell lung cancer in vivo. Cancer Res. 72, 5744–5756.
Viitala, M., Virtakoivu, R., Tadayon, S., Rannikko, J., Jalkanen, S., and Holl-
me´ n, M. (2019). Immunotherapeutic blockade of macrophage Clever-1 reacti-
vates the CD8+ T-cell response against immunosuppressive tumors. Clin.
Cancer Res. 25, 3289–3303.
Vitre, B., Holland, A.J., Kulukian, A., Shoshani, O., Hirai, M., Wang, Y., Maldo-
nado, M., Cho, T., Boubaker, J., Swing, D.A., et al. (2015). Chronic centrosome
ampliﬁcation without tumorigenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112,
E6321–E6330.
Wade, K.H., Carslake, D., Sattar, N., Smith, G.D., and Timpson, N.J. (2019).
Obesity BMI and mortality in UK Biobank: revised estimates using mendelian
randomization. Obesity (Silver Spring) 27, 349.
Walunas, T.L., Lenschow, D.J., Bakker, C.Y., Linsley, P.S., Freeman, G.J.,
Green, J.M., Thompson, C.B., and Bluestone, J.A. (1994). CTLA-4 can function
as a negative regulator of T cell activation. Immunity 1, 405–413.
Walunas, T.L., Bakker, C.Y., and Bluestone, J.A. (1996). CTLA-4 ligation
blocks CD28-dependent T cell activation. J. Exp. Med. 183, 2541–2550.
Wang, D., and Dubois, R.N. (2010). Eicosanoids and cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer
10, 181–193.
Wang, E., Miller, L.D., Ohnmacht, G.A., Mocellin, S., Perez-Diez, A., Petersen,
D., Zhao, Y., Simon, R., Powell, J.I., Asaki, E., et al. (2002). Prospective molec-
ular proﬁling of melanoma metastases suggests classiﬁers of immune respon-
siveness. Cancer Res. 62, 3581–3586.
Wang, X., Cui, Y., Luo, G., Wang, Q., Hu, J., He, W., Yuan, J., Zhou, J., Wu, Y.,
Sun, X., et al. (2012). Activated mouse CD4+Foxp3 T cells facilitate mela-
noma metastasis via Qa-1-dependent suppression of NK-cell cytotoxicity.
Cell Res. 22, 1696–1706.
Wang, Q., Feng, M., Yu, T., Liu, X., and Zhang, P. (2014). Intratumoral regula-
tory T cells are associated with suppression of colorectal carcinoma
metastasis after resection through overcoming IL-17 producing T cells. Cell.
Immunol. 287, 100–105.
80
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
Immunity
Review
Wang, W., Li, X., Zheng, D., Zhang, D., Peng, X., Zhang, X., Ai, F., Wang, X.,
Ma, J., Xiong, W., et al. (2015). Dynamic changes and functions of macro-
phages and M1/M2 subpopulations during ulcerative colitis-associated carci-
nogenesis in an AOM/DSS mouse model. Mol. Med. Rep. 11, 2397–2406.
Wang, X., Gray, Z., Willette-Brown, J., Zhu, F., Shi, G., Jiang, Q., Song, N.Y.,
Dong, L., and Hu, Y. (2018). Macrophage inducible nitric oxide synthase circu-
lates inﬂammation and promotes lung carcinogenesis. Cell Death Discov.
4, 46.
Waterhouse, P., Penninger, J.M., Timms, E., Wakeham, A., Shahinian, A., Lee,
K.P., Thompson, C.B., Griesser, H., and Mak, T.W. (1995). Lymphoproliferative
disorders with early lethality in mice deﬁcient in Ctla-4. Science 270, 985–988.
Wculek, S.K., and Malanchi, I. (2015). Neutrophils support lung colonization of
metastasis-initiating breast cancer cells. Nature 528, 413–417.
Weinhold, K.J., Miller, D.A., and Wheelock, E.F. (1979). The tumor dormant
state. Comparison of L5178Y cells used to establish dormancy with those
that emerge after its termination. J. Exp. Med. 149, 745–757.
Wellenstein, M.D., and de Visser, K.E. (2018). Cancer-cell-intrinsic mecha-
nisms shaping the tumor immune landscape. Immunity 48, 399–416.
Williams, E.D., Abrosimov, A., Bogdanova, T., Demidchik, E.P., Ito, M., LiVolsi,
V., Lushnikov, E., Rosai, J., Sidorov, Y., Tronko, M.D., et al. (2004). Thyroid car-
cinoma after Chernobyl latent period, morphology and aggressiveness. Br. J.
Cancer 90, 2219–2224.
Wolchok, J.D., Hoos, A., O’Day, S., Weber, J.S., Hamid, O., Lebbe´ , C., Maio,
M., Binder, M., Bohnsack, O., Nichol, G., et al. (2009). Guidelines for the eval-
uation of immune therapy activity in solid tumors: immune-related response
criteria. Clin. Cancer Res. 15, 7412–7420.
Wouters, M.C.A., and Nelson, B.H. (2018). Prognostic Signiﬁcance of Tumor-
Inﬁltrating B Cells and Plasma Cells in Human Cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 24,
6125–6135.
Wrobel, P., Shojaei, H., Schittek, B., Gieseler, F., Wollenberg, B., Kalthoff, H.,
Kabelitz, D., and Wesch, D. (2007). Lysis of a broad range of epithelial tumour
cells by human gamma delta T cells: involvement of NKG2D ligands and T-cell
receptor- versus NKG2D-dependent recognition. Scand. J. Immunol. 66,
320–328.
Wu, D., Wu, P., Wu, X., Ye, J., Wang, Z., Zhao, S., Ni, C., Hu, G., Xu, J., Han, Y.,
et al. (2015). Ex vivo expanded human circulating Vd1 gdT cells exhibit favor-
able therapeutic potential for colon cancer. OncoImmunology 4, e992749.
Xia, J., Chen, N., Hong, Y., Chen, X., Tao, X., Cheng, B., and Huang, Y. (2012).
Expressions of CXCL12/CXCR4 in oral premalignant and malignant lesions.
Mediators Inﬂamm. 2012, 516395.
Xiang, R., Lode, H.N., Gillies, S.D., and Reisfeld, R.A. (1999). T cell memory
against colon carcinoma is long-lived in the absence of antigen. J. Immunol.
163, 3676–3683.
Xu, B., Chen, L., Li, J., Zheng, X., Shi, L., Wu, C., and Jiang, J. (2016). Prog-
nostic value of tumor inﬁltrating NK cells and macrophages in stage II+III
esophageal cancer patients. Oncotarget 7, 74904–74916.
Yang, L., and Zhang, Y. (2017). Tumor-associated macrophages: from basic
research to clinical application. J. Hematol. Oncol. 10, 58.
Yano, H., Kinuta, M., Tateishi, H., Nakano, Y., Matsui, S., Monden, T., Oka-
mura, J., Sakai, M., and Okamoto, S. (1999). Mast cell inﬁltration around
gastric cancer cells correlates with tumor angiogenesis and metastasis.
Gastric Cancer 2, 26–32.
Yao, M., Brummer, G., Acevedo, D., and Cheng, N. (2016). Cytokine regulation
of metastasis and tumorigenicity. Adv. Cancer Res. 132, 265–367.
Ye, L.Y., Chen, W., Bai, X.L., Xu, X.Y., Zhang, Q., Xia, X.F., Sun, X., Li, G.G., Hu,
Q.D., Fu, Q.H., and Liang, T.B. (2016). Hypoxia-induced epithelial-to-mesen-
chymal transition in hepatocellular carcinoma induces an immunosuppressive
tumor microenvironment to promote metastasis. Cancer Res. 76, 818–830.
Yeshurun, M., Weisdorf, D., Rowe, J.M., Tallman, M.S., Zhang, M.J., Wang,
H.L., Saber, W., de Lima, M., Sandmaier, B.M., Uy, G., et al. (2019). The impact
of the graft-versus-leukemia effect on survival in acute lymphoblastic leuke-
mia. Blood Adv. 3, 670–680.
Yi, B., Rykova, M., J€ager, G., Feuerecker, M., Ho¨ rl, M., Matzel, S., Ponomarev,
S., Vassilieva, G., Nichiporuk, I., and Chouke` r, A. (2015). Inﬂuences of large
sets of environmental exposures on immune responses in healthy adult men.
Sci. Rep. 5, 13367.
Zaalberg, A., Moradi Tuchayi, S., Ameri, A.H., Ngo, K.H., Cunningham, T.J.,
Eliane, J.P., Livneh, M., Horn, T.D., Rosman, I.S., Musiek, A., et al. (2019).
Chronic inﬂammation promotes skin carcinogenesis in cancer-prone discoid
lupus erythematosus. J. Invest. Dermatol. 139, 62–70.
Zang, Y., Dong, M., Zhang, K., Gao, C., Guo, F., Wang, Y., and Xue, F. (2019).
Hormonal therapy in uterine sarcomas. Cancer Med. 8, 1339–1349.
Zauber, A.G., Winawer, S.J., O’Brien, M.J., Lansdorp-Vogelaar, I., van Balle-
gooijen, M., Hankey, B.F., Shi, W., Bond, J.H., Schapiro, M., Panish, J.F.,
et al. (2012). Colonoscopic polypectomy and long-term prevention of colo-
rectal-cancer deaths. N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 687–696.
Zelenay, S., van der Veen, A.G., Bo¨ ttcher, J.P., Snelgrove, K.J., Rogers, N.,
Acton, S.E., Chakravarty, P., Girotti, M.R., Marais, R., Quezada, S.A., et al.
(2015). Cyclooxygenase-dependent tumor growth through evasion of immu-
nity. Cell 162, 1257–1270.
Zhang, L., Conejo-Garcia, J.R., Katsaros, D., Gimotty, P.A., Massobrio, M.,
Regnani, G., Makrigiannakis, A., Gray, H., Schlienger, K., Liebman, M.N.,
et al. (2003). Intratumoral T cells, recurrence, and survival in epithelial ovarian
cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 348, 203–213.
Zhang, L., Zhao, Y., Dai, Y., Cheng, J.N., Gong, Z., Feng, Y., Sun, C., Jia, Q.,
and Zhu, B. (2018). Immune landscape of colorectal cancer tumor microenvi-
ronment from different primary tumor location. Front. Immunol. 9, 1578.
Zhao, J.J., Zhou, Z.Q., Wang, P., Chen, C.L., Liu, Y., Pan, Q.Z., Zhu, Q., Tang,
Y., Weng, D.S., and Xia, J.C. (2018). Orchestration of immune checkpoints in
tumor immune contexture and their prognostic signiﬁcance in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Manag. Res. 10, 6457–6468.
Zhou, H., Binmadi, N.O., Yang, Y.H., Proia, P., and Basile, J.R. (2012). Sema-
phorin 4D cooperates with VEGF to promote angiogenesis and tumor progres-
sion. Angiogenesis 15, 391–407.
Zhou, X., Zhu, J., Sun, H., Shao, L., Xu, M., and Guo, H. (2013). Family haploi-
dentical donor-derived cytokine-induced killer cell biotherapy combined with
bortezomib in two patients with relapsed multiple myeloma in a non-allogeneic
transplant setting. Leuk. Lymphoma 54, 209–211.
Zhu, W., Germain, C., Liu, Z., Sebastian, Y., Devi, P., Knockaert, S., Brohawn,
P., Lehmann, K., Damotte, D., Validire, P., et al. (2015). A high density of tertiary
lymphoid structure B cells in lung tumors is associated with increased CD4+
T cell receptor repertoire clonality. OncoImmunology 4, e1051922.
Zinkernagel, R.M., and Doherty, P.C. (1974). Restriction of in vitro T cell-medi-
ated cytotoxicity in lymphocytic choriomeningitis within a syngeneic or semi-
allogeneic system. Nature 248, 701–702.
Immunity 52, January 14, 2020
81
Immunity
Review
