Tumor Microenvironment in Breast Cancer Theme Issue
MINI-REVIEW
Tumor Microenvironment and the Role of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Breast Cancer Detection
and Prognosis
Kathryn Malherbe
From the Department Radiography, Faculty Health Sciences, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa
Accepted for publication
January 28, 2021.
Address correspondence to
Kathryn Malherbe, M.Rad.,
Bs.C. Hons., B.Rad., Depart-
ment Radiography, Faculty
Health Sciences, University of
Pretoria, 1 Bophelo Rd., Pre-
toria, South Africa. E-mail:
kathryn.malherbe@up.ac.za.
A critical knowledge gap has been noted in breast cancer detection, prognosis, and evaluation between
tumor microenvironment and associated neoplasm. Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has multiple subsets or
methods for data extraction and evaluation, including artiﬁcial neural networking, which allows
computational foundations, similar to neurons, to make connections and new neural pathways during
data set training. Deep machine learning and AI hold great potential to accurately assess tumor
microenvironment models employing vast data management techniques. Despite the signiﬁcant po-
tential AI holds, there is still much debate surrounding the appropriate and ethical curation of medical
data from picture archiving and communication systems. AI output’s clinical signiﬁcance depends on its
human predecessor’s data training sets. Integration between biomarkers, risk factors, and imaging data
will allow the best predictor models for patient-based outcomes. (Am J Pathol 2021, 191: 1364e1373;
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2021.01.014)
The tumor microenvironment (TME) or surrounding stroma
contains various vital components such as immune cells and
extracellular matrix (ECM), which act against antitumor
immune
cells
(https://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/
2018-10/c-mdf101618.php, last accessed July 12, 2021;
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/12/19122613
4100.htm, last accessed July 12, 2021).1e4 This leads to
tumor progression, and ultimately, metastasis.5e8 The
stromal environment contains many interesting signaling
pathways and molecular structures related to prognostic
outcomes of breast cancer.7 The genetic alterations of
cancer cells related to signaling pathways control both the
processes
of
tumorigenesis
and
progression.
These
alterations
are
due
to
overexpression
of
oncogenic
mutations such as growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases
and nuclear receptors such as estrogen receptors (ERs).
Due to the above complexities related to cancer signaling
networks, the efforts to produce anticancer drugs are
challenging
because
of inordinate signaling pathways
translating to pathway reactivation. However, individual
pathways, such as Ras-ERK, are strongly related to cancer
mutations and promise targeted therapies in the future.9
The latest studies are now focusing on the TME as a
critical
element
for
determining
tumor
development,
progression, and treatment response.5,6,10,11
In the same research interest, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
has multiple subsets or methods for data extraction and
evaluation.
One
such
method
is
artiﬁcial
neural
networking,5,10,12e14 which allows computational founda-
tions, similar to neurons, to make connections and new
neural pathways during data set training (Figure 1). One
such method used for quantitative biology is massive
parallel reporter assay, which assesses DNA.4 This allows
biologists the ability to predict molecular and gene in-
teractions. The mechanistic framework of gene regulation
Disclosures: None declared.
This article is a part of a review series on the role of the tumor micro-
environment in breast cancer pathogenesis.
Copyright ª 2021 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2021.01.014
ajp.amjpathol.org
The American Journal of Pathology, Vol. 191, No. 8, August 2021
allows the possibility of new therapies to be devel-
oped.2,5,6,11 There is a lack of congruence between bi-
ologists and artiﬁcial neural networking (ANN) systems; the
latest custom ANNs allow mathematical assumptions of
common biological concepts so that the output reﬂects how
a biologist would interpret results.6,10,12e14
The ﬁrst attempt at computerizing medical images15
occurred during the 1960s, which is, to date, an important
research
topic
in
medical
imaging,
with
recent
research delving into the AI era for the medical ﬁeld.16e18
Computer-aided detection (CAD) serves as a diagnostic aid
to support the physician’s role by using noninvasive and ac-
curate computer systems.15 CAD incorporates quantitative
analysis of images during the diagnostic process, proven from
previous studies to increase the sensitivity of diagnosis by
21.2% and reduce the false-negative rate of diagnostic
screening by 77%. Despite these ﬁgures, automated detection
software is not widely used during breast screening.19 A
prospective study using CAD software during diagnosis has
shown a 74% increase in cancer detection.19 Certain technical
advances in breast imagingdsuch as harmonic tissue imag-
ing, compound imaging, and an extended ﬁeld of viewdhave
made its use integral during a breast cancer diagnosis. Stan-
dardized CAD techniques used in conjunction with ultra-
sound reduce the interobserver variation.18
The detection rate of invasive cancers measuring <1 cm
increases with the use of CAD systems. It can reduce false-
negative rates from 31% to 19%,20,21 in conjunction with
dedicated breast imagers. The system assigns various sensi-
tivity and speciﬁcity rates to cancers based on the lesion type.
The sensitivity for malignant calciﬁcations is 86% to 99%
with CAD, with only 57% marked as amorphous calciﬁca-
tions.22 The sensitivity for masses is estimated at 43% to
85%.23 Further research is required to recognize suspicious
asymmetries as they develop over time during serial imaging
follow-up and to assess the medico-legal implication of
retained CAD-marked image information. A more extensive
explanation of the various AI subtypes is discussed below.
ANN is the process of nonlinear mapping between set
inputs and outputs. It achieves physical performance using
dense processing elements similar to biological neurons.
The ANN can learn and generalize from the examples given.
Success is measured if complex linear functions govern the
relationship between variables. Evolutionary computing
consists of a collection of algorithms based on population
evolution toward the solution of a problem. It is subdivided
into genetic algorithms and genetic programming, as well as
evolutionary algorithms. Using select features for classiﬁ-
cation of mammogram calciﬁcations is a measure of
success.4,8,24e26
Overall, the best approach is to combine these three main
methods, for example, using a fuzzy logic system to design
ANN evolutionary computing in automatic training and
generating ANN architecture. Feature extraction can reduce
an image to a small set of parameters called features
(Figure 1). The quality of a feature depends on its
contribution to detection, cancer classiﬁcation, and the
preprocessing steps and classiﬁcation methods.15,25,27
The quality of features cannot be categorized because the
quality of a feature depends on its contribution to detection,
classiﬁcation, prognosis, and features dependent on its
preprocessing steps and the classiﬁcation measures. There
are various types of features, such as geometric, which refer
to factors such as size and shape. The boundary is the
starting point of extracting an object using AI. Various
boundary methods are used, such as binary sets, which
Multiple input 
nodes
Hidden layer
Output 
layer
Image 
acquisition
Noise filtering
Data 
processing
Deep
neural networks 
have 
hundreds of layers
Nodes receive products 
of prior layer notes, a 
summation is done, and 
then an activation 
function is applied, 
producing the output 
layer value
Values are multiplied 
by weights and 
connected to next 
layer
Segmentation 
methods
Figure 1
Illustration of mechanistic framework model.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Breast Cancer
The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org
1365
refers to the sets of pixels in a grayscale image, and edge
detection, which deﬁnes an object by its edges. Other geo-
metric features include area, volume, contrast, counting
pixels inside an object boundary, and perimeters, as well as
shape (no single shape descriptor can be used on its own to
deﬁne an object).13,14,26,28e30
A computation method of predictive models through
algorithms is referred to as machine learning (ML). As more
data are applied to the training data set, accuracy and
predictability are optimized. Over the years, advances in
algorithms and ML have allowed deep learning in recent
studies. This has a similar output as the human brain’s
neural architecture, with neural nets responding to multiple
data set training cycles using statistical frameworks. This
learning method is ideal for image classiﬁcation in radiology
and pathology with above-average accuracy compared with
human reader outputs.3,6,26,31e33
The Tumor Microenvironment
The breast cancer microenvironment can be subdivided into
three main subsets: local, regional, and distant. Each of
these proposed subsets contains cellular contents such as
ﬁbroblasts, leukocytes, ECM, cytokines, growth factors, and
hormones,5 described in detail below as the various cell type
subsets related to breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis.
As Dvorak34stated, tumors are much more than wounds that
do not heal. Tumor cells undergo signiﬁcant changes causing
release from regulatory signals, promoting proliferation and
invasion. The most crucial factor thereof is the overexpression
of vascular endothelial growth factor, allowing surrounding
stroma to be incorporated in its progression process.
The use of AI technology to improve diagnostic detection
rates and remote disease monitoring can reduce the overall
time required for overall patient treatment planning. Anti-
vascular endothelial growth factor agents and AI-generated
prognoses have been studied using vision loss, which could
promote
the
prevention
of
vision
loss
before
its
occurrence.35
The angiogenesis process includes a complex interplay
between tumor, endothelial, and stromal cells, promoting
tumor growth. A study in 2006 found a novel method of
assessing angiogenesis employing chick embryo and its
chorioallantoic membrane. An automated image analysis
method was developed to quantify the microvessel density
and growth potential in images. This shows the potential to
be used for tumor growth detection in breast cancer
imaging,6,6,12,34,36; however, it lacks efﬁcacy for extensive
tumor series analysis of TME. Other methods proposed for
TME composition analysis are Gene Set Enrichment Anal-
ysis (San Diego), xCell (California), and TIminer (Russia),
which allows immunogenic analysis and quantiﬁcation of
the immune inﬁltrate.5,6,7,11,14,37,38
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis39 is a computational
method able to deﬁne concordant differences between two
biological states as a statistical output (Figure 2).39 xCell40 is
a novel signature-based method used for 64 immune and
stromal cell types. Utilizing in silico analyses and cross-
comparison to cytometry immunophenotyping, xCell shows
excellent promise when compared with other methods.40
TIminer41
is
a
computational
pipeline
used
for
the
assessment of tumor-to-immune cell interactions based on
sequencing data.
Anther computational method42 in 2016 reported a
Microenvironment Cell Populations-counter that analyzes
the transcriptomic markers in single-cell populations, but
this method is robust compared with other used samples.6
The discussion below states the current body of knowl-
edge and attributes of each factor/cell/protein related to
breast cancer and the TME, followed by the latest
technology and insights related to AI and deep ML.
Fibroblasts and Tumor Progression
The vast majority of cells within the TME are ﬁbroblasts
and secrete various soluble factors modulating tumor
stroma, growth, and invasion properties. Recent studies
have found that cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts have unique
protein expression proﬁles making them unique in their
identiﬁcation
properties.
A
bidirectional
signaling
pathway7 has also been suggested between these unique
ﬁbroblasts and their adjacent cancer cells, suggesting a
possible inﬂuence in the transcription of breast cancer cell
proﬁles. This was also afﬁrmed by Orimo et al,36 who
found that cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts enhance tumor
angiogenesis.
These individual cells originate either from bone marrow,
normal ﬁbroblasts, or epithelialemesenchymal transition.5
The microcellular environment is maintained by ﬁbro-
blasts using remodeling of the ECM.7,34 Fibroblasts, asso-
ciated with carcinoma, have unique characteristics that
promote tumor progression, presenting as either heteroge-
neous or myoﬁbroblasts with ﬁbroblast activation protein.
The potential of carcinoma-associated ﬁbroblasts promoting
tumor growth uses secreted stromal-derived factor-1, acting
as
a
paracrine
activator
that
increases
tumor
cell
proliferation through CXCR4.36
An interesting ﬁnding was a coculture of ﬁbroblasts in
healthy breast tissue educating ﬁbroblasts to secrete HGF to
promote tumor progression activities.
The main question that arises from these studies is from
what are these cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts derived? One
hypothesis is that healthy ﬁbroblasts undergo phenotype
modiﬁcation from constant aberrant signaling from adjacent
tumor cells.43
Dendritic Cells and the Role of Estrogen Receptors
Dendritic cells (DCs) play an essential role in prohibiting
neoplastic cell growth by presenting antigens to CD4þ and
CD8þ and T cells. 5e8,11,12,34,36,37 The maturation process of
DCs depends on their local microenvironment, which
Malherbe
1366
ajp.amjpathol.org - The American Journal of Pathology
determines their tolerance of immunosuppression of localized
neoplastic invasion. Studies show that DCs surrounding
tumor-associated stroma are unable to stimulate antitumor
immunity. These so-called tumor-associated DCs produce
proangiogenic factors, enhancing endothelial cell migration,
and causing tumor progression.6,6,12,34,36
DCs have multiple roles in essential processes such as
immunity, autoimmunity, and differentiation of T cells. They
are mainly activated by a stress response or pathogen-induced
damage, which causes the secretion of cytokines, stimulates
T lymphocytes, and leads to an immune response. ERs play a
crucial role in DC function.5e8 Binding of DC ligand to ERs
triggers migration processes. Recent studies have shown that
treatment of E2 alongside mature DCs and T cells can stim-
ulate T-cell proliferation.6,11
Fibroblasts, DCs, and AI
Fibroblasts play a role in mortality prediction of idiopathic
pulmonary ﬁbrosis. The use of AI to quantify prognostic
histologic features was studied, and interstitial mono-
nuclear inﬂammation and intra-alveolar macrophages were
shown to be novel biomarkers in detecting idiopathic
pulmonary ﬁbrosis.44 A group of researchers at Osaka
University used microscopic images to develop an AI-
based system to identify various cancer cells. A convolu-
tional neural network was trained with 8000 images of
cells obtained with a phase contrast microscope. Following
the data set training process, additional 2000 images were
tested to distinguish mouse cancer cells from human cells
and radioresistant cells from radiosensitive ones. This
study holds much promise in developing a universal sys-
tem to identify and distinguish between all variants of
cancer cells.45
Another research group, based at Tufts Medical Center in
Boston, developed multiple AI tools to detect and tract
dendritic cells. An AI algorithm was developed using
in vivo confocal microscopy analysis of the human cornea,
typically done manually, making it a time-consuming
process. The use of such AI models for analysis ensures
high accuracy and reduced objectivity associated with
human analysis.46
Macrophages, Lymphocytes, and the Role of ERs
Macrophages associated with tumor cells display unique
phenotypes, and promote tumor growth, angiogenesis, and
tissue remodeling.4,5,5e8,10e14,34
The immune response includes a key role of macrophages
to promote T-cell recruitment and activation. Their activa-
tion alongside that of T and B cells is due to the release of
cytokines and chemokines.5,12,37 Despite their functional
role in tumor defense, they are active in the TME, and lead
to tumor progression and immunosuppression. ER is present
in macrophage precursor cells during various stages of its
differentiation, and E2 treatment changes macrophage
behavior.2e8,10,12e14,36,37
Lymphocytes
have
been
key
in
the
recent
TME
research.14 Lymphocytes are mostly T cells, CD4þ helper
cells, Treg with CD4þ, and CD8þ cells.
Treg cells in the TME block its normal antitumor function
and suppress other immune cells such as CD8þ T cells.
Tregs also produce a large number of receptor activator of
nuclear
factor-kb
ligands
(RANKL),4e8,10e14,31,34,36,37
which
promote
metastasis
and
RANK-expressing
neoplastic cells. A high concentration of Treg cells is
associated with advanced-type
breast
cancer. This is
postulated to occur due to neoplastic cells recruiting Treg
using prostaglandin E2 secretion, suppressing effector cells,
and
producing
an
immunosuppressive
microenvironment.4,5,7,13,34
Macrophages, Lymphocytes, and AI
ML can distinguish various cell and tissue types in a biopsy
specimen based on a training set of ground truth examples.
A research study in 2018 made use of ML algorithms as a
method to identify macrophages from digital scans of non-
small cell lung carcinoma tissue slides. The study compared
Gene Set 
Database
Molecular Profiling 
Data
Enriched Data Sets
Figure 2
A method of gene expression signature proﬁling.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Breast Cancer
The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org
1367
pathologist output to the ML algorithm, which held
improved accuracy compared with humanereader inter-
vention and output.47
A working group collaboration with the Massive Anal-
ysis and Quality Control Consortium works on ML algo-
rithms to characterize tumor-inﬁltrating lymphocytes. Such
methods are expected to enhance the validity of prognostic
prediction methods in pathology. Besides the clinically
evident improved prediction rates, ML also permits
changes to the current feature set used for analysis, thus
improving accuracy and interpretation of current standard
methods.48
ECM, Mast Cells, and Neutrophils
The main proteins within the complex ECM are collagen
(structural), ﬁbronectin (glycoproteins), and chondroitin
sulfate (proteoglycans). Recent studies have shown that
ECM7 is more versatile than initially thought, acting as a
critical player in cell growth, proliferation, and migration. In
cancer, ECM is typically disorganized in appearance,
causing abnormal feedback regulatory mechanisms. This is
mainly due to ECM metabolism being altered by cancer-
associated ﬁbroblasts and immune cells.5,6,7,11,14,37 One of
the main proteins within ECM, namely collagen, promotes
cancer cell invasion using collagen IV degradation. ECM
also promotes the passage of cytokines and growth factors,
enabling intercellular communication. The alteration in
protein activity seen in cancer is associated with patient
outcomes.
Mast cells (MCs) form part of the immune system
associated with parasitic infections. Depending on the type
of inﬂammatory stimulus, MCs release various inﬂam-
matory
mediators.
Mucosal
MCs
produce
tryptase,
whereas connective tissue MCs secrete tryptase, chymase,
and carboxypeptidases. All of these enzymes, along with
IL-8, transforming growth factor-b, and tumor necrosis
factor-a, have a strong association with angiogenesis and
MMP
modulation
of
various
breast
cancer
phenotypes.5,12,13
ERa is present in the MCs. E2 treatment in rat MC
models leads to a release of histamine. This is exciting
because histamine release plays a role in breast cancer
promotion through its H3R and H4R receptors.6,11
Neutrophils are a fundamental component of the immune
response, acting as a ﬁrst-line defense mechanism against
infection by employing phagocytosis. Neutrophils work
alongside other immune-ﬁghting cells such as macrophages
and DCs.5,6,7,11,14,37
Neutrophils have nuclear receptors, and E2 and ER
binding helps regulate neutrophil survival and function.
Several serine proteases are secreted by neutrophils, such as
neutrophil elastase (NE), proteinase 3, and cathepsin G,
essential for infectious agent elimination and inﬂammation
modulation.5,34
MCs, ECM, Neutrophils, and AI
One of the critical elements of MC granules is histamine,
because it has been shown to promote tumor cell prolif-
eration and growth of mammary carcinomas through H2
receptors.49 Histamine hypersensitivity in response to a
local inﬂammatory response in a ML functional genomic
networks study questions its underlying molecular and
genetic traits, and the promotion of the prognostic indi-
cator role of ML in tumor progression.50 MCs have been
the most misunderstood cell type during breast cancer
proliferation and immune response since their discovery
140 years ago, making them a key focus of future research
endeavors.51
Advances in three-dimensional cell tissue engineering
have led to the development of cancer-on-a-chip platforms,
which improve the analytic outputs of TME models, espe-
cially for discovering the role of the ECM during tumor
progression. These chip platforms integrate AI for improved
drug-screening models.52,53
Microscopy has reached the age of digitization with
outputs such as CellaVision (Lund, Sweden), which
classiﬁes degenerated lymphocytes and web-like rem-
nants. These remnants are hypothesized to be neutrophil
extracellular traps. AI platforms are being developed to
rapidly detect neutrophil extracellular traps on blood
smears.54
The use of computational models to screen endocrine-
active compounds holds much promise as a cost-effective
alternate method. An ML algorithm was applied to over
7500 compounds related to nuclear ER (ERa and ERb)
activity. The model’s performance was evaluated using
receiver-operated characteristic curve values obtained from
ﬁvefold cross-validation procedures, with values ranging
from 0.56 to 0.86.6,33
The following sections elaborate on the surrounding en-
vironments related to breast cancer and TME. Each section
discusses the current trends and research, and the latest AI
technology being developed.
Breast Cancer and Local Microenvironment
Normal mammary gland development relies on appro-
priate cross talk between epithelial and stromal cells,
inhibiting abnormal cell growth and neoplasm formation.
Myoepithelial cells are known for their tumor suppression
capabilities as they produce a base membrane barrier
around luminal epithelial cells. The loss of such myoe-
pithelial cells promotes the transition of in situ carcinoma
to invasive type carcinoma.4,5,6,8,36 Two models have
been suggested to explain this carcinoma invasion. The
escape model suggests genetic changes of tumor epithelial
cells, allowing the invasion to adjacent ducts. The release
model suggests that the TME disrupts the basement
membrane, allowing tumor cells to spread into the stroma
Malherbe
1368
ajp.amjpathol.org - The American Journal of Pathology
(Figure 3). Figure 3 describes the concept of escaped
immune cells during the transition from in situ to invasive
carcinoma. Both of these models prove the importance of
both
epithelial
and
stromal
components
in
tumor
progression.37
AI and the Local Microenvironment
In the last decade, many approaches have been used to
quantify the noncancerous cell populations from acquired
tumor
samples,
using
computational
algorithms
with
different statistical frameworks and data sets. The two most
common
algorithms
used
for
TME
estimation
are
regression-based deconvolution algorithms and gene-set
enrichment methods. The algorithms are dependent on
preacquired knowledge of the data sets for accurate
measurement, a statistical framework, and a predetermined
signature for each cell type. The regression-based decon-
volution algorithm determines the gene expression proﬁle
ratio in the total tumor expression proﬁle. Gene set
enrichment assigns scores to the various cell types as a
function of its expression in each gene set.55
A recent study at the University of Eastern Finland6
developed an AI model capable of predicting breast cancer
risk based on demographic risk factors and genetic variants.
The method used for the AI model is a gradient tree with
adaptive iterative searching methods. The gene interaction
map includes ESR1 and FGFR1 genes,2,4e7,11e14,34,36,56
linked to ER subtype breast cancer. Because cancer inci-
dence is a multifactorial process, the use of AI in predicting
breast cancer risk through this novel method holds much
promise for future disease incidence.6,10,13
Breast Cancer and the Metastatic Microenvironment
During the complex metastasis process, tumor cells either
have a dormant state or an active state of forming micro-
metastases. During the primary tumor recruitment, the
cytokines select associated bone-marrow cells to incur a
premetastatic process before tumor mobilization. Fibroblasts
and cancer cells travel alongside one another during the
metastatic process. Breast cancer cells promote RANKL
through
active
secretion
of
cytokines
and
growth
factors.4,6,5,7,11,34,36 This activates osteoclast formation and
bone resorption. RANKL has more recently been noted in
the formation of lung metastases, thus providing a hypoth-
esis of speciﬁc immune cells partaking in metastases
formation.
Malignant disease remains the foundation of tumor pro-
gression, whereas the TME facilitates the invasion ability of
these cancer cells. For this reason, research currently fo-
cuses on epithelialemesenchymal transition, where speciﬁc
mediators allow the progression of tumor cells to invasive
type lesions. Examples of these mediators are IL-1, IL-6,
and IL-8, which allow tumor cell proliferation with
epithelialemesenchymal transition, increasing their ability
to metastasize.4,5,14,36
A fundamental attribute to tumor progression and drug
resistance is the TME, which implies that various ill-
controlled cells all relate to cancer progression. This
concept has been around since the 1880s, with the seed and
soil concept,57 where fertile soil (the TME) and the seed
(cancer cells) work in harmony to promote growth.
Both intrinsic and extrinsic inﬂammatory pathways promote
an inﬂammatory microenvironment. Tumor cells promote in-
ﬂammatory mediators, which leads to the progression of
cancer within the microenvironment using T cells, natural
killer (NK) cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells.34
AI and the Metastatic Microenvironment
Recent AI insights allow assessing molecular subtypes and
their therapeutic response via predictive image analysis of
breast cancer phenotypes.
In a research study of the TCGA Breast Phenotype
Group,5,13
multidisciplinary
researchers
phenotypically
characterized 84 solid breast tumors to gain insights into the
underlying molecular characteristics and gene expression
Neutrophils 
Activated CD8+ cells
T cells 
Myoepithelial cells 
Cancer cells 
Basemembrane
A
C
B
Figure 3
Illustration of escape model from in situ to invasive carcinoma. A: In situ carcinoma and the immune environment. B: Locally invasive in situ
carcinoma. C: Invasive carcinoma causes enrichment of TREG gene sets and less activated CD8þ T cells.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Breast Cancer
The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org
1369
proﬁles.
Signiﬁcant
similarities
were
noted
between
enhancement texture (entropy) and molecular subtypes
[normal-like, luminal A, luminal B, human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-enriched, basal-like] even
after controlling for tumor size (P Z 0.04 for lesions 2
cm; P Z 0.02 for lesions from 42 to 5 cm).12,13,34,37,57
Regarding treatment outcomes, a semimanual delineation
method of tumor volume using breast magnetic resonance
imaging proved a high prediction anomaly for low recur-
rence rate in patients, proving the potential for digital
automation in its prediction outcomes.
Breast Cancer and Inﬁltrated Immune Cell
Microenvironment
Signiﬁcant gene expression changes occur within myoepi-
thelial cells, conﬁrming a change during tumor progression
in the microenvironment. An example of overexpression of
genes is chemokine CXCL14, and binding to CXCR4 pro-
moting proliferation and migration of tumor cells. The result
from this study conﬁrms previous results indicating that
changes in the stroma and gene expression occur most
frequently
when
healthy
breast
tissue
transitions
to
DCIS.5,36,56
Because breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, it has
three main phenotypes: luminal, HER2 type, and triple-
negative type. Because breast cancer promotes an inﬂam-
matory microenvironment, immune ﬁltration is currently
based on ER presence.5,11,31,36 There is a substantial pro-
portion of NK cells and neutrophils within ER-positive
breast cancer and cytotoxic and TCD4þ cells in smaller
amounts. The presence of eosinophils, monocytes, and B
lymphocytes
indicates
a
good
prognosis
following
chemotherapy.5,6,37,57
AI and Molecular Alterations of the Microenvironment
Despite the signiﬁcant potential AI holds, there is still much
debate surrounding the appropriate and ethical curation of
medical data from picture archiving and communication
systems. The clinical signiﬁcance of AI output depends on its
human predecessor’s data training sets.
The integration between biomarkers, risk factors, and
imaging data will allow the best predictor models for
patient-based outcomes (https://xtalks.com/webinars/using-
ai-multiplexbiomarker-analysis-for-deeper-insights-into-the-
tumor-microenvironment-broad-1, last accessed July 12,
2021).4,5
State-of-the-art research has found a ML approach,
named CytoReason (version 1.0),1 that can distinguish be-
tween nivolumab responders and nonresponders. Because
adipocytes are postulated to be involved in the TME, this
study also shows evidence of their regulatory role in
ipilimumab-resistant nivolumab patients. The study requires
extensive research on the role of adipocytes in tumor pro-
gression, leading to new immunotherapy methods. CytoR-
eason1 integrates genetics, proteomics, cytometry, and
literature with ML to help create disease models.
A key focus on T-cell subsets related to cancer immu-
nology and therapy is imperative because a prediction of
such subsets could promote advances in immunology
research. Immune Cell Abundance Identiﬁer (ImmuCellAI,
China) allows gene set signature-based algorithms to esti-
mate the abundance of 24 immune cell types from gene
expression data.58 However, the method has limitations,
such as measuring the abundance of cells being limited to
the deviation from gene signatures. The method also does
not include spatiotemporal attributes of the immune cells.58
A wild-type adeno-associated virus (AAV) particle capsid
is currently the most commonly used gene therapy method
Knowledge Matching
Input Sources
Input Features
Trained ML Models
Computational Units
Output Classification 
Clustering
Output Predictions
usterin
Figure 4
Illustration of ML mechanistic framework. ML, machine learning.
Malherbe
1370
ajp.amjpathol.org - The American Journal of Pathology
due to its established ability to deliver genetic material to
organs. However, some naturally derived AAV capsids are
deﬁcient in the essential components required for gene
therapy. The limitations of current capsids may be overcome
by the new machine-guided technologies to rapidly and
systematically engineer a suite of new, improved capsids for
widespread
therapeutic
use,
which
outperform
AAVs
generated by conventional random mutagenesis approaches.
Thus the iterative machine-guided design to develop
improved synthetic AAV capsids is a powerful tool for
sizable
broad-scale
DNA
synthesis
(https://www.
healtheuropa.eu/artiﬁcial-intelligence-has-potential-to-transform-
gene-therapy/95354, last accessed July 12, 2021).59
The current and latest trends for the local, metastatic, and
microenvironment hold much potential for the forthcoming
years in breast cancer research and AI technology. The next
section discusses the most recent research and trials
from 2020.
AI and Beyond
A recent 2020 study in Italy14,32 focused on predicting the
disease, establishing a therapeutic plan, and providing
patient-focused follow-up sessions. In this regard, a multi-
disciplinary approach has been encouraged during the
development of the Multigene Signature Panels and Not-
tingham Prognostic Index. ML allows the cross-correlation
of prognostic indicators to determine possible markers
related to patient outcomes. Two ML methods were
deployed, namely ANN and Support Vector Systems
(Figure 4), using SPSS IBM Modeler version 18.1 software
(IBM, Chicago, IL). Their accuracy, sensitivity, and speci-
ﬁcity were measured as 95.29% to 96%, 0.35 to 0.64, and
0.97 to 0.99, respectively.32 The study was limited to a
select
study
population
without
long-term
recurrence
following 20 years of remission in breast cancer patients.
Breast cancer comprises a complex genetic background,
and the intricate relationship between these cancer cells and
surrounding stromal/immune cells is essential to ensure that
adequate treatment methods are implemented. In vitro cell
culture systems lack the dedicated physiological outputs
during drug testing.6,36 Mouse models are the ideal animal
models for assessing drug tolerance; however, they are
limited in testing human TME. Various models have been
proposed for TME studies, where the latest in vitro three-
dimensional
models
can
study
both
cellecell
and
cellematerial interactions parametrically.6,36
The use of stromal-to-epithelial yield using spatial
extraction of features is also a novel approach to assess
disease progression. These studies allow further insights
into the role of epithelial and stromal cells, and an alternate
tiered approach to deep ML.4,7,8,12,14,34,36e38,42,57
Therapists, pathologists, and clinicians primarily seek an
improved prognosis method in breast cancer. Shimizu and
Nakayama60 developed a complete atlas of prognostic breast
cancer genes, a computational framework, and prediction
score, applicable to all breast cancer subsets. The method is
unique in its stratiﬁcation of patients at the clinical stage and
by ER-negative subtypes.60
Conclusions
The use of tissue engineering61 in cancer research allows an
accurate representation of TME in human studies.5,8,13
Because there is currently vast recognition of TME in
tumor progression, it is now the current therapeutic research
focus. New strategies to normalize the surrounding stroma,
modulation of the immune system, and antitumor activity
enhancement are evident. The critical role of E2 and its
signaling pathways requires additional research on the use
of intertumoral therapy as part of an adjuvant therapy
approach to immune response.
Despite some limitations in mouse models, the data
support the role of TME in the treatment of breast
cancer.4,6,5,7,8,11,13,31,62
The various TMEs and their latest research endeavors
using AI and Deep machine learning show that improved
prognostic and therapeutic methods are imperative. The role
of unique cancer signaling pathways, targeted therapies, and
novel diagnostic trends will boast signiﬁcant strides when
combined with AI. The development of a comprehensive
prognostic cancer gene mutation atlas will aid future pa-
thologists, even more so as a multidisciplinary approach for
developing the Multigene Signature Panels and Nottingham
Prognostic Index. Although most studies are experimental
and restricted to clinical trials, they hold promise of inte-
gration in clinical practice.
References
1. Web P: Machine learning-assisted prognostication based on genomic
expression in the tumor microenvironment. Edited by Cision. AI
powered analysis provides quantitative measurements of human
interpretable features in tumor microenvironment. Boston, MA:
PRWEB, 2020
2. Ehteshami Bejnordi B, Mullooly M, Pfeiffer RM, Fan S, Vacek PM,
Weaver
DL,
Herschorn
S,
Brinton
LA,
van
Ginneken
B,
Karssemeijer
N,
Beck
AH,
Gierach
GL,
van
der
Laak
J,
Sherman ME: Using deep convolutional neural networks to identify
and classify tumor-associated stroma in diagnostic breast biopsies.
Mod Pathol 2018, 31:1502e1512
3. Koelzer VH, Sirinukunwattana K, Rittscher J, Mertz KD: Precision
immunoproﬁling
by image
analysis and
artiﬁcial
intelligence.
Virchows Arch 2019, 474:511e522
4. Behravan H, Hartikainen JM, Tengstrom M,Kosma VM,Mannermaa A:
Predicting breast cancer risk using interacting genetic and demographic
factors and machine learning. Sci Rep 2020, 10:11044
5. Allinen M, Beroukhim R, Cai L, Brennan C, Lahti-Domenici J,
Huang H, Porter D, Hu M, Chin L, Richardson A, Schnitt S,
Sellers WR, Polyak K: Molecular characterization of the tumor
microenvironment in breast cancer. Cancer Cell 2004, 6:17e32
6. Tsai MJ, Chang WA, Huang MS, Kuo PL: Tumor microenvironment:
a new treatment target for cancer. ISRN Biochem 2014, 2014:351959
7. Soysal SD, Tzankov A, Muenst SE: Role of the tumor microenvi-
ronment in breast cancer. Pathobiology 2015, 82:142e152
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Breast Cancer
The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org
1371
8. Mittal S, Stoean C, Kajdacsy-Balla A, Bhargava R: Digital
assessment of stained breast tissue images for comprehensive tumor
and microenvironment analysis. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 2019, 7:246
9. Sever R, Brugge JS: Signal transduction in cancer. Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Med 2015, 5:a006098
10. Wang S, Yang DM, Rong R, Zhan X, Fujimoto J, Liu H, Minna J,
Wistuba II, Xie Y, Xiao G: Artiﬁcial intelligence in lung cancer
pathology image analysis. Cancers (Basel) 2019, 11:1673
11. Segovia-Mendoza M, Morales-Montor J: Immune tumor micro-
environment in breast cancer and the participation of estrogen
and
its
receptors
in
cancer
physiopathology.
Front
Immunol
2019, 10:348
12. Doukas CN, Maglogiannis I, Chatziioannou A, Papapetropoulos A:
Automated angiogenesis quantiﬁcation through advanced image
processing techniques. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2006,
2006:2345e2348
13. Bi WL, Hosny A, Schabath MB, Giger ML, Birkbak NJ, Mehrtash A,
Allison T, Arnaout O, Abbosh C, Dunn IF, Mak RH, Tamimi RM,
Tempany CM, Swanton C, Hoffmann U, Schwartz LH, Gillies RJ,
Huang RY, Aerts HJWL: Artiﬁcial intelligence in cancer imaging:
clinical challenges and applications. CA Cancer J Clin 2019, 69:
127e157
14. Reichling C, Taieb J, Derangere V, Klopfenstein Q, Le Malicot K,
Gornet JM, Becheur H, Fein F, Cojocarasu O, Kaminsky MC,
Lagasse JP, Luet D, Nguyen S, Etienne PL, Gasmi M, Vanoli A,
Perrier H, Puig PL, Emile JF, Lepage C, Ghiringhelli F: Artiﬁcial
intelligence-guided tissue analysis combined with immune inﬁltrate
assessment predicts stage III colon cancer outcomes in PETACC08
study. Gut 2020, 69:681e690
15. Chen DR, Chien CL, Kuo YF: Computer-aided assessment of tumor
grade for breast cancer in ultrasound images. Comput Math Methods
Med 2015, 2015:914091
16. Castellino RA: Computer aided detection (CAD): an overview.
Cancer Imaging 2005, 5:17e19
17. Qiu J, Wu Q, Ding G, Xu Y, Feng S: A survey of machine learning
for big data processing. EURASIP J Adv Signal Process 2016.
Article number: 67 (2016)
18. Muralidhar
GS,
Haygood
TM,
Stephens
TW,
Whitman
GJ,
Bovik AC, Markey MK: Computer-aided detection of breast cancer -
have all bases been covered? Breast Cancer (Auckl) 2008, 2:5e9
19. Selinko VL, Middleton LP, Dempsey PJ: Role of sonography in
diagnosing and staging invasive lobular carcinoma. J Clin Ultrasound
2004, 32:323e332
20. Berg WA, Gilbreath PL: Multicentric and multifocal cancer: Whole-
breast US in preoperative evaluation. Radiology 2000, 214:59e66
21. Berg WA, Gutierrez L, NessAiver MS, Carter WB, Bhargavan M,
Lewis RS, Ioffe OB: Diagnostic accuracy of mammography, clinical
examination, US, and MR imaging in preoperative assessment of
breast cancer. Radiology 2004, 233:830e849
22. Hogg P, Kelly J, Mercer C (Eds): Digital Mammography: A Holistic
Approach. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing
Switzerland, 2015
23. Berg WA, Leung K. Edited by Diagnostic Imaging: Breast. ed 3.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2019
24. Gruszauskas NP, Drukker K, Giger ML, Sennett CA, Pesce LL:
Performance
of
breast
ultrasound
computer-aided
diagnosis:
dependence on image selection. Acad Radiol 2008, 15:1234e1245
25. Shan J, Alam SK, Garra B, Zhang Y, Ahmed T: Computer-aided
diagnosis for breast ultrasound using computerized BI-RADS features
and machine learning methods. Ultrasound Med Biol 2016, 42:
980e988
26. Acs B, Rantalainen M, Hartman J: Artiﬁcial intelligence as the next
step towards precision pathology. J Intern Med 2020, 288:62e81
27. Brkljacic B, Divjak E, Tomasovic-Loncaric C, Tesic V, Ivanac G:
Shear-wave sonoelastographic features of invasive lobular breast
cancers. Croat Med J 2016, 57:42e50
28. Wang S, Liu J-B, Zhu Z, Eisenbrey J: Artiﬁcial intelligence in ul-
trasound imaging: current research and applications. Adv Ultrasound
Diagn Ther 2019, 3:53e61
29. Jain A, Jain A, Jain S, Jain L (Eds): Artiﬁcial Intelligence Techniques
in Breast Cancer Diagnosis and Prognosis. Singapore: World Scien-
tiﬁc, 2019
30. Ranschaert ER, Orozov S, Algra PR (Eds): Artiﬁcial Intelligence in
Medical Imaging: Opportunities, Applications and Risks. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2020
31. Abdou Y, Baird A, Dolan J, Lee S, Park S, Lee S: Machine learning-
assisted prognostication based on genomic expression in the
tumor microenvironment of estrogen receptor positive and HER2
negative breast cancer [abstract 4387]. Ann Oncol 2019, 30(Suppl 5):
v55ev98
32. Boeri C, Chiappa C, Galli F, De Berardinis V, Bardelli L, Carcano G,
Rovera F: Machine learning techniques in breast cancer prognosis
prediction: a primary evaluation. Cancer Med 2020, 9:3234e3243
33. Ciallella HL, Russo DP, Aleksunes LM, Grimm FA, Zhu H:
Predictive modeling of estrogen receptor agonism, antagonism, and
binding activities using machine- and deep-learning approaches. Lab
Invest 2021, 101:490e502
34. Dvorak HF: Tumors: wounds that do not heal-redux. Cancer Immu-
nol Res 2015, 3:1e11
35. Adamis AP, Brittain CJ, Dandekar A, Hopkins JJ: Building on the
success of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor therapy: a vision
for the next decade. Eye (Lond) 2020, 34:1966e1972
36. Orimo A, Gupta PB, Sgroi DC, Arenzana-Seisdedos F, Delaunay T,
Naeem R, Carey VJ, Richardson AL, Weinberg RA: Stromal
ﬁbroblasts present in invasive human breast carcinomas promote
tumor growth and angiogenesis through elevated SDF-1/CXCL12
secretion. Cell 2005, 121:335e348
37. Petitprez F, Sun CM, Lacroix L, Sautes-Fridman C, de Reynies A,
Fridman WH: Quantitative analyses of the tumor microenvironment
composition and orientation in the era of precision medicine. Front
Oncol 2018, 8:390
38. Paeng K, Jung G, Lee S, Cho SY, Cho EY, Song SY: Pan-cancer
analysis of tumor microenvironment using deep learning-based can-
cer stroma and immune proﬁling in H&E images [abstract 2445]. In:
Proceedings of the American Association for Cancer Research
Annual Meeting 2019; 2019 Mar 29-Apr 3; Atlanta, GA. Bioinfor-
matics Convergence Sci Syst Biol 2019, (79 Suppl):Abstract nr 2445
39. Subramanian E, Tamayo A, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL,
Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL, Golub TR, Lander ES,
Mesirov JP: Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based
approach for interpreting genome-wide expression proﬁles. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005, 102:15545e15550
40. Aran D, Hu Z, Butte AJ: xCell: digitally portraying the tissue cellular
heterogeneity landscape. Genome Biol 2017, 18:220
41. Tappeiner E, Finotello F, Charoentong P, Mayer C, Rieder D,
Trajanoski Z: TIminer: NGS data mining pipeline for cancer immu-
nology and immunotherapy. Bioinformatics 2017, 33:3140e3141
42. Becht E, Giraldo N, Lacroix L, Buttard B, Elarouci N, Petitprez F,
Selves J, Laurent-Puig P, Sautès-Fridman C, Fridman WH, de
Reyniès A: Estimating the population abundance of tissue-inﬁltrating
immune and stromal cell populations using gene expression. Genome
Biol 2016, 17:218
43. Ohlund D, Elyada E, Tuveson D: Fibroblast heterogeneity in the
cancer wound. J Exp Med 2014, 211:1503e1523
44. Mäkelä K, Mäyränpää MI, Sihvo HK, Bergman P, Sutinen E,
Ollila H, Kaarteenaho R, Myllärniemi M: Artiﬁcial intelligence
identiﬁes inﬂammation and conﬁrms ﬁbroblast foci as prognostic
tissue biomarkers in idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Hum Pathol 2021,
107:58e68
45. Toratani M, Konno M, Asai A, Koseki J, Kawamoto K, Tamari K, Li Z,
Sakai D, Kudo T, Satoh T, Sato K, Motooka D, Okuzaki D, Doki Y,
Mori M, Ogawa K, Ishii H: A convolutional neural network uses
Malherbe
1372
ajp.amjpathol.org - The American Journal of Pathology
microscopic images to differentiate between mouse and human cell
lines and their radioresistant clones. Cancer Res 2018, 78:6703e6707
46. RSIP vision Detection and segmentation of dendritic cells with deep
learning. Tufts Medical Centre; 2015
47. Weigel KJ, Paces W, Ergon EJ, Caldara J, McFadden K, Luengo C,
Gianai R, Vennapusa B: Artiﬁcial intelligence assisted macrophages
classiﬁcation in tumor biopsies [abstract 4918]. In: Proceedings of the
American Association for Cancer Research Annual Meeting 2019;
2019 Mar 29-Apr 3; Atlanta, GA. Cancer Res 2019, (79 Suppl):
Abstract nr 4918
48. McShane LM, Cavenagh MM, Lively TG, Eberhard DA, Bigbee WL,
Williams PM, Mesirov JP, Polley MY, Kim KY, Tricoli JV,
Taylor JM, Shuman DJ, Simon RM, Doroshow JH, Conley BA:
Criteria for the use of omics-based predictors in clinical trials. Nature
2013, 502:317e320
49. Aponte-Lopez A, Fuentes-Panana EM, Cortes-Munoz D, Munoz-
Cruz S:Mastcell, the neglected member of the tumor microenvironment:
role in breast cancer. J Immunol Res 2018, 2018:2584243
50. Tyler AL, Raza A, Krementsov DN, Case LK, Huang R, Ma RZ,
Blankenhorn EP, Teuscher C, Mahoney JM: Network-based func-
tional prediction augments genetic association to predict candidate
genes for histamine hypersensitivity in mice. G3 (Bethesda) 2019, 9:
4223e4233
51. Varricchi G, Marone G: Mast cells: fascinating but still elusive after
140 years from their discovery. Int J Mol Sci 2020, 21:464
52. Roma-Rodrigues C, Mendes R, Baptista PV, Fernandes AR: Tar-
geting tumor microenvironment for cancer therapy. Int J Mol Sci
2019, 20:840
53. Fetah
KL,
DiPardo
BJ,
Kongadzem
E-M,
Tomlinson
JS,
Elzagheid A, Elmusrati M, Khademhosseini A, Ashammakhi N:
Cancer modeling-on-a-chip with future artiﬁcial intelligence integra-
tion. Small 2019, 15:e1901985
54. Ikemura K, Barouqa M, Fedorov K, Kushnir M, Billett H, Reyes-
Gil M: Artiﬁcial intelligence to identify neutrophil extracellular traps
in peripheral blood smears [abstract PB0642]. Res Pract Thromb
Haemost 2020, (4 Suppl 1):314e315
55. Jimenez-Sanchez A, Cast O, Miller ML: Comprehensive bench-
marking and integration of tumor microenvironment cell estimation
methods. Cancer Res 2019, 79:6238e6246
56. Molla M, Waddell M, Page D, Shavlik J: Using machine learning
to design and interpret gene-expression microarrays. AI Mag
2015, 25:23
57. Langley RR, Fidler IJ: The seed and soil hypothesis revisited–the role
of tumor-stroma interactions in metastasis to different organs. Int J
Cancer 2011, 128:2527e2535
58. Miao Y-R, Zhang Q, Lei Q, Luo M, Xie G-Y, Wang H, Guo A-Y:
ImmuCellAI: a unique method for comprehensive T-cell subsets
abundance prediction and its application in cancer immunotherapy.
Adv Sci (Weinh) 2020, 7:1902880
59. Church G: Dyno advances AI-powered gene therapy. Nat Biotechnol
2020, 38:661
60. Shimizu H, Nakayama KI: A 23 gene-based molecular prognostic
score precisely predicts overall survival of breast cancer patients.
EBioMedicine 2019, 46:150e159
61. Bahcecioglu G, Basara G, Ellis BW, Ren X, Zorlutuna P: Breast
cancer models: engineering the tumor microenvironment. Acta
Biomater 2020, 106:1e21
62. Place AE, Huh SJ, Polyak K: The microenvironment in breast cancer
progression: biology and implications for treatment. Breast Cancer
Res 2011, 13:227
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Breast Cancer
The American Journal of Pathology - ajp.amjpathol.org
1373
