Visualization strategies of extracellular vesicles: Illuminating the invisible 
‘dust’ in theranostics
Kaiyue Zhang *,1, Jingxuan Hu 1, Yilan Hu 1
Columbia University, New York City, NY, 10032, USA
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Extracellular vesicles
Visualization labeling methods
Theranostic applications
A B S T R A C T
Extracellular vesicles (EVs), lipid bilayer vesicles with diameters of 30-150 nm derived from nearly all cell types, 
were once dismissed as “platelet dust” but are now recognized as key mediators of intercellular communication, 
playing vital roles in both physiological and pathophysiological processes. However, the clinical applications of 
EVs in theranostics remain limited by the challenge of effectively visualizing them at high resolution both in vitro 
and in vivo, primarily due to their nanoscale size. To address this limitation, researchers worldwide are devel­
oping innovative methods for labeling and visualizing EVs, aiming to unlock their full potential in optimized 
theranostic applications. This review provides a comprehensive overview of current strategies for EV labeling 
across various experimental settings and highlights their promising theranostic applications of diverse diseases.
1. Introduction
Extracellular vesicles (EVs), composed of the plasma membrane with 
embedded transmembrane proteins and encapsulated contents, play a 
critical role in cell-to-cell communication under both physiological and 
pathophysiological conditions.1–3 Based on their size and biogenesis, 
EVs are typically categorized into three subtypes: exosomes (30–120 
nm), microvesicles (50–1000 nm), and apoptotic bodies (50–2000 nm).4
Exosomes are generally believed to form and be released from endo­
somes, while microvesicles bud directly from the cell membrane. 
Apoptotic bodies, on the other hand, are considered to originate from 
the cell membrane during cell apoptosis.5,6 It is important to note that 
there remains some debate over the size distribution and naming con­
ventions of different EV types, so we refer to them collectively as EVs 
rather than distinguishing between exosomes and microvesicles here.
All kinds of EVs have been reported to carry a wide range of bioactive 
molecules, including proteins, peptides, genetic materials (mRNAs and 
microRNAs), and lipids, which can facilitate intercellular communica­
tion by shuttling information in an endocrine or paracrine manner.1,7
These vesicles transport specific biomolecules-such as proteins, lipids, 
mRNAs, microRNAs, and DNAs-to recipient cells, regulating their 
physiological and pathological processes (Fig. 1).8,9 EVs offer advan­
tages such as immune tolerance and stability in the circulatory system 
and are widely distributed in body fluids, including plasma, urine, 
saliva, tears, and cerebrospinal fluid.10 In some cases, the distribution of 
EVs varies depending on their sources, for example, tumor-derived EVs 
exhibit tumor targeting ability, while the intrinsic properties of EVs can 
determine organ-specific targeting and contribute to tumor metastasis 
preferences11. Given these features, there is growing interest in the 
diagnostic and therapeutic potential of EVs in cancer and other dis­
eases.12–14 For instance, EVs derived from mesenchymal stem cells 
(MSCs) have shown remarkable promise in promoting tissue regenera­
tion and delivering antitumor drugs.10,15–20 Therefore, it is crucial to 
develop a reliable, high-resolution visualization strategy to monitor EVs 
in both in vitro and in vivo, to better understand their biodistribution and 
pharmacokinetics in current clinical applications. Intense efforts from 
global are underway to advance research in EV visualization to maxi­
mize their potential in theranostic applications.21–25 Here, we will 
discuss the current strategies for labeling and visualizing EVs in both in 
vitro and in vivo contexts, with a focus on their theranostic applications.
2. EV isolation
Based on current research, EVs are secreted from almost all cell types 
and have been isolated from cultured cells, tissues, and a wide range of 
bodily fluids, including plasma,26 breast milk,27 urine,28 saliva,29,30
synovial fluid,31 bile,32 amniotic fluid,33 semen,34 and ascites fluid.35
Multiple methods have been proved that can be used to isolate EVs. At 
* Corresponding author. Columbia University, 3960 Broadway, New York City, NY, 10032, USA.
E-mail address: kz2518@columbia.edu (K. Zhang). 
1 There authors contributed equally to this work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Extracellular Vesicle
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/vesic
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vesic.2024.100061
Received 27 October 2024; Received in revised form 2 December 2024; Accepted 4 December 2024  
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
Available online 11 December 2024 
2773-0417/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of American Association of Extracellular Vesicles. This is an open access article under the CC 
BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ). 
present, there is still debate about the best EV isolation method.
The gold standard for EV isolation is ultracentrifugation. It includes 
differential centrifugation and density gradient centrifugation. Differ­
ential centrifugation uses different speeds to gradually precipitate and 
remove large cell debris. The final separated EV pellet can be deter­
mined based on its size.36 Density gradient centrifugation loads EV 
samples into a density gradient medium, usually sucrose. During ultra­
centrifugation, EVs are located in a specific density gradient.37 The 
purity of EVs obtained by this isolation method is relatively high. Other 
methods for EV isolation, often used in combination with differential 
centrifugation, include: 1) Precipitation. For the precipitation method to 
isolate EVs, samples containing EVs are incubated with a buffer (such as 
polyethylene glycol, PEG) that changes their solubility or sedimentation 
rate. After incubation, high yield EVs can be recovered at low centrifugal 
force, usually lower than 4000×g.38 2) Size exclusion chromatography. 
EVs can be separated from other extracellular molecules by exclusion 
columns based on their size.39
3) Immunoaffinity isolation. 
Immuno-isolation of EVs is achieved through the conjugation of mag­
netic beads with antibodies that can bind to EV proteins.40 4) Membrane 
filtration. Separate EVs through continuous filtration using membranes 
of different sizes.41 The purification efficiency is limited by the mem­
brane’s molecular weight cut-off (MWCO). 5) Microfluidics techniques. 
The recent progress of microfluidics platform combined with above 
isolation 
principles 
(e.g., 
immune-affinity-based 
micro-device, 
size-based microchip, and multi-approaches integration microfluidic 
platform) makes integration of EV isolation and further analysis 
possible.24
Lately, more new instruments are being developed for EV isolation. 
For example, Luo et al. utilized tangential flow filtration (TFF) systems 
to separate the supernatant of NK cells, and ultracentrifugation to obtain 
NK cell-derived exosomes (NK-Exo). This represents an efficient and 
large-scale method for isolating EVs.42 An automatic EV isolation system 
named EXODUS is another label-free and high-efficient EV isolation 
system. Its utilization of negative pressure oscillation and dual-coupled 
oscillator membrane vibration enables purification efficiency far supe­
rior to other isolation methods.43 The development of these new in­
struments is ultimately aimed at achieving a streamlined closed 
production line to efficiently isolate large-scale good manufacturing 
practices (GMP)-grade EVs.
For the quality control of isolated EVs, common methods include 
using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and nanoparticle 
tracking analysis (NTA) to determine the morphology and size of EVs.44
Protein components in EVs can be investigated by western blotting.45 As 
for determining the subtype of EVs, the emergence of nano flow 
cytometry offers some new possibilities. The next development trend 
will inevitably be a digital and automatic system that integrates 
large-scale manufacturing of EVs with a fileable quality control system.
3. Conventional labeling strategies for EV visualization
Many label-free EV visualization strategies have been developed to 
characterize EVs’ morphology, size, and other physical properties, 
including transmission electron microscopy (TEM), cryo-electron mi­
croscopy (cryo-EM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), nanoparticle 
tracking analyzer (NTA), atomic force microscopy (AFM), Raman 
spectroscopy, and microfluid-based imaging et al. (Table 1). However, 
one of the biggest challenges in EV research is investigating how EVs 
transfer to recipient cells and where EVs go in the recipient cells in vitro 
and in vivo. To visualize these processes, it is important to choose a 
suitable method to label EVs for different visualization purposes. As we 
Fig. 1. Biogenesis of extracellular vesicles. In addition to apoptotic bodies, EVs are usually categorized into exosomes and microvesicles according to biogenesis and 
size. At present, it is typically believed that exosomes are formed and released from endosomes, while microvesicles are generated by budding directly from the cell 
membrane. Several proteins are implicated in EV biogenesis and are usually used as EV markers, such as CD9, CD81, CD63, TSG101, Alix et al. Other proteins are may 
also present in EVs including adhesive molecules (such as integrins), immunomodulatory proteins (such as PD-1, PD-L1) and more. In general, EVs can contain 
different types of cell surface proteins, intracellular proteins, RNA, DNA, amino acids, and metabolites.
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
2 
know, the EVs have a lipid bilayer containing transmembrane proteins 
and carry special cargos including cytosolic proteins, and nucleic acid.46
Thus, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids of EVs are all capable of being 
labeled directly for tracking EVs in vitro and in vivo (Fig. 2).
3.1. Lipids
Many lipid dyes, such as PKH26/PKH67, DiR/DiD, and MemGlow, 
have been widely used for labeling EVs.60–64 For instance, Hoshino et al. 
labeled EVs derived from different tumor cell lines with lipophilic 
PKH26 dye (red) to investigate the tumor organotropic metastasis 
determined by the tumor EV integrins.65 Similarly, Grange et al. labeled 
the EVs with lipophilic fluorescent stain DiD to study the biodistribution 
and the renal localization of EVs in acute kidney ischemia mouse 
model.66 These lipophilic fluorescent dyes with distinct fluorescence 
colors, can bind to lipophilic molecules and incorporate into mem­
branes, providing a convenient tool for multicolor imaging of EVs in vitro 
and in vivo. Compared to the previous two kinds of lipid dyes, MemGlow 
offers superior contrast, brighter imaging, and less tendency to aggre­
gate. It has numerous applications in neuroscience.67
However, the practical issue of lipid dyes is that their half-life is 
much longer than that of EVs. Therefore, when EVs are taken up by cells, 
the lipid fluorescent dye is absorbed by the cells and redistributed.68
Thus, lipid dye labeled EVs are only suitable for monitoring bio­
distribution of EVs in a short term. For long-term monitor or pharma­
cokinetic analysis of EV research, using lipid dyes may lead to a false 
positive result.
3.2. Proteins
To investigate the stability or pharmacokinetic properties of EVs, 
such as blood levels, urine clearance, and tissue retention, various 
genetically encoded fluorescent or bioluminescent reporters have been 
developed for labeling EV proteins. In general, when exogenously 
expressing these reporter proteins in the donor cell cytosol, the reporter 
proteins can freely shuttle into the lumen of EVs.69 However, the la­
beling efficiency will be extremely limited. To elevate the labeling ef­
ficiency, several general methods were developed to label all subtypes of 
EVs. For instance, fusing a palmitoylation signal in-frame to the N-ter­
minus of a fluorescent protein (eGFP or tdTomato) induces its locali­
zation at the cell membrane and the secreted EVs membrane.70 By the 
fluorescent EVs membrane reporters, Lai et al. tracked tumor EV 
transference between cells in culture and visualized the EVs in the tumor 
process in tumor animal models by intravital microscopy. In addition to 
anchoring reporter proteins inside of EV membrane, expression of the 
reporter proteins which fused with the C1C2 domain of lactadherin in 
Table 1 
Label-free EV visualization strategies.
Visualization 
methods
EV resources
Equipments
In 
vivo/ 
in vitro
Target cells or organs
Applications
Advantages and limitations
Refs
TEM
Milk
TEM
In 
vitro
RAW264.7, 
splenocytes, and 
intestinal cells
Observing the particle size of 
EVs
Advantages: Low sample size, single 
EV analysis, visualization of 
membrane structure and intravesicular 
structure 
Limitations: Complex sample 
preparation and high-resolution 
limitations
47
Astrocytes
TEM
In 
vitro
Microglial 
endosomes
Prove the diameter range of 
EVs
48
Urine
TEM
In 
vitro
NA
Observe the morphology of EVs 
and measure their diameter
49
Cryo-EM
Cardiac-resident 
progenitor cells 
(CPC)
Cryo-EM
In 
vitro
Cardiomyocytes 
(CM)
Verify the correct 
transmembrane direction of 
receptors in Exo CXCR4
Advantages: Most native EV 
morphology, single EV analysis, low 
sample size
50
Stem/stromal cells 
(SCs)
Cryo-EM
In 
vitro
Colo-cutaneous 
fistulas
Prove the high size 
polydispersity of EVs
Limitations: Using specialized 
equipment, sample preparation is 
complex
51
SEM
293T cells
SEM
In 
vitro
Brain neuron cells
Study the morphology and size 
of exosomes
Advantages: Low sample size, single 
EV analysis, and visualization of 
surface morphology.
52
Limitations: Risk of agglomeration 
and dehydration during sample 
preparation
NTA
Placenta
NTA
In 
vitro
NA
Quickly determine the size and 
phenotype of EVs
Advantages: Real time, high- 
resolution analysis of individual EVs
53
Human fibroblasts
NTA
In 
vitro
Mesenchymal 
progenitor cells
Analyze the concentration and 
size distribution of EVs
Limitations: Unable to provide 
information on the composition or 
cargo of EVs, unable to distinguish 
between individual EVs and 
aggregated EVs
54
AFM
143B cells, 
osteosarcoma (OS) 
cell line
AFM
In 
vitro
NA
Revealing the structure and 
nanomechanical properties of 
exosomes with high spatial 
resolution
Advantages: Single EV analysis, 3D 
morphology, the substructure details 
of EVs 
Limitations: Possible morphological 
changes may occur
55
Saliva
AFM
In 
vitro
NA
Explain the nanoscale structure 
of exosomes under different 
forces
56
264.7 
macrophages
AFM
In 
vitro
Mouse brain
Observing the morphology of 
exoCAT
57
Raman 
spectroscopy
Lung cancer cells 
and alveolar cells
Raman 
spectroscopy
In 
vitro
NA
Detection of EVs derived from 
cancer cells
Advantages: Identify detailed 
information and draw spatial 
distribution maps, study heterogeneity 
and monitor changes in EV cargo
58
Microfluid- 
based 
imaging
Plasma
Microfluidic 
ExosSearch 
chip
In 
vitro
NA
Measurement of EV tumor 
markers for cancer diagnosis
Advantages: Low sample size, high 
sensitivity, integrated with various 
analytical and imaging techniques
59
Limitations: Special equipment 
required
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
3 
the donor cells enables to label EVs via the secreted reporter protein 
binding to the phosphatidylserine on the surface of EVs. For example, 
Takahashi et al. inserted a Gaussia luciferase (Gluc) into a truncated 
lactadherin gene sequence to label B16-BL6 EVs for investigation of 
B16-BL6 EV distribution.71
To label specific subtype EVs, researchers usually fuse reporter 
proteins to their marker proteins, such as labeling exosomes by CD63 
fused eGFP.72 Using this fusion protein, the author could trace the CD63 
positive exosomes by GFP signal in vitro or ex vivo. In addition to CD63, 
there are several EV-sorting proteins that can be chosen to label EVs via 
a genetic engineering method, including CD81, CD9, CLC1 protein, 
TNFR, and so on.73,74 In some cases, researchers need to label EVs 
derived from specific lineage of cells. To solve this problem, 
exosome-reporter transgenic mice were generated for in situ 
cell-type-specific exosome labeling. Men et al. generated Cre-dependent 
exosome reporter (CD63-GFP) mice by inserting a loxP-floxed stop 
codon upstream of human CD63 tagged with GFP at its C-terminal.75
When injected AAV-Cre virus or crossed with a Cre recombinase 
expressing strain with a cell type specific promoter (such as CaMKII 
promoter, a neural cell marker protein), all exosomes derived from this 
kind of cells (neural cells) will be labeled by CD63-GFP. These 
Cre-dependent exosome reporter mice provide the possibility to observe 
or isolate cell-type specific exosomes in vivo.
While these methods are delicate, dynamic real-time monitoring of 
EVs in living animals is still a huge challenge due to the limitation of 
fluorescence imaging (FI) including restricted penetration depth and 
unavoidable background noise. Using luciferase as a reporter protein to 
label EVs can solve this problem.23 Compared to fluorescent proteins, 
the luciferase family proteins react with their substrate and generate 
signature bioluminescence that can be captured by a charge-coupled 
device (CCD)-spectrometer system. For example, Takahashi et al. 
fused a Gaussia luciferase gene with the C1C2 domain of lactadherin 
gene to produce a fusion protein (Gluc-lactadherin) to label exosomes.71
Gaussia luciferase is from the marine copepod Gaussia princeps, which 
emits bioluminescence when coelenterazine is present. Compared with 
Firefly or Renilla luciferases, Gaussia luciferase has many advantages, 
including it is smaller (only 19.9 KDa) and more sensitive. Recently, a 
novel bioluminescence platform, NanoLuc luciferase, with enhanced 
Fig. 2. Conventional EV labeling methods for visualization. Conventional EV labeling methods could be classified into 3 categories: A. labeling based on EV lipid, B. 
labeling based on EV proteins, and C. labeling based on EV nucleic acids.
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
4 
stability, smallest size (19 kDa), and >150-fold increase in lumines­
cence, was developed for EV imaging.76,77 All these luciferase genes can 
help visualize EV internalization in recipient cells or ex vivo organs, as 
well as real-time trace EV distribution in vivo. These protein-based la­
beling methods represent a powerful tool for understanding the molec­
ular mechanisms underlying EV biogenesis, uptake, long-term 
distribution, and pharmacokinetic properties.
3.3. Nucleic acids
EVs can also be labeled with nucleic acid using nucleic acid-selective 
fluorescent cationic dye such as acridine orange.78,79 Another elegant 
approach to directly labeling EVs is tagging EV mRNAs with MS2 
binding site sequence and co-expressing a bacteriophage MS2 coat 
protein (MCP)-fused GFP in the donor cells. The GFP will bind to EV 
mRNAs via the interaction between MCP and MS2 binding site.70 While 
this strategy is promising, studies so far have only demonstrated 
EV-mRNA transfer between cultured cells in vitro. To trace EV-RNA 
transfer between cells and organs in vivo, some indirect imaging strate­
gies were designed by hiring the Cre-LoxP reporter system.69,80,81 One of 
the Cre-LoxP reporter systems reported by Zomer et al. induces the 
conversion of DsRed to eGFP specifically in recipient cells that take up 
Fig. 3. Novel EV labeling methods for visualization. Some novel methods have been developed, such as methods based on A. metabolic labeling with chemical 
reaction, B. hybrid EVs with other particles, and C. other non-optical imaging methods based on electrostatic adsorption or incubation.
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
5 
EVs derived from donor cells expressing the Cre recombinase.69 This 
ingenious strategy provided direct in vivo evidence of local and systemic 
EV-mRNAs exchange between tumor cells. More specifically, EV-RNAs 
derived from malignant tumor cells could enhance migration and 
metastasis of less malignant tumor cells. Similarly, another team used 
the Cre-LoxP system and LacZ reporter gene to trace the crosstalk of 
EV-mRNAs between the hematopoietic system and various organs in the 
inflammation condition.81 In this study, Ridder et al. expressed the Cre 
recombinase under a hematopoietic lineage specific promoter in a LacZ 
reporter transgenic mice; in other words, Cre mRNAs and proteins only 
existed and triggered LacZ expression specifically in the hematopoietic 
lineage.81 However, they observed LacZ expression not only in he­
matopoietic cells but also in neurons and other non-hematopoietic cells. 
These results indirectly traced the transfer of Cre mRNAs in EVs between 
hematopoietic lineage and other tissue cells. As EV research has begun to 
progress towards delivering nucleic acid drugs, more labeling methods 
for nucleic acid in EVs are urgently to be developed.
4. Novel direction of labeling strategies for EV visualization
Lately, as researchers in the fields of physics and chemistry turn their 
attention to EVs, an increased number of novel EV labeling methods 
have been developed, such as methods based on physical methods or 
chemical 
reactions 
(Fig. 
3).82–84
Zhang 
et 
al. 
reported 
a 
phospholipid-based bioorthogonal labeling strategy to endow EVs with 
optical probes to trace EVs in vivo.82 They adopted a metabolic strategy 
to incorporate EV phospholipids with an unnatural choline analogu 
bearing an azide (N3, a typical bioorthogonal functional group), which 
can be conjugated with a fluorescent probe using a bioorthogonal re­
action (copper-free click chemistry). Compared with the lipid-based 
labeling methods we mentioned above, this strategy has better speci­
ficity and avoids many deficiencies of lipid dyes, including 
self-aggregation and non-specific binding.
Furthermore, another direction of EV labeling is transforming 
nanoscale EVs, which are difficult to observe, into optically imageable 
micrometer scale clusters. Liu et al. reported a pH-mediated EV assem­
bly system through incorporating pH-responsive diacyl lipid-conjugated 
polymers (DLP) into the EV membrane. Under acidic conditions, DLP is 
highly dispersed, while under neutral conditions, DLP self-assembles 
into EV clusters through deprotonation and hydrophobic interactions, 
resulting in a size of approximately 1 μm, which is larger than the 
detection limit of conventional imaging methods such as flow cytometry 
or confocal microscope. Therefore, EV imaging can be completed via 
conventional methods, overcoming the size limitations of EVs and of­
fering advantages of sensitive and rapid detection.85
In addition to labeling EV itself, the emergence of hybrid EV provides 
new possibilities to label EVs by labeling the hybrid ligand. For example, 
EV-liposome hybrid particles, which combine the advantages of EVs and 
liposomes, can be labeled via both EV and liposome components. In 
detail, liposomes can be labeled by their lipid composition and their 
cargos. Fluorescent dyes can be conjugated to lipids, nucleic acids, or 
small molecule drugs according to the liposome formulations.86,87 This 
strategy also helps to characterize the fusion efficiency of EV-liposome 
hybrid. According to research by Zhang et al., they analyzed these 
particles using the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) 
method to confirm membrane fusion by labeling EVs with DiI and li­
posomes with DiO.88 Another example is the hybridization of EVs with 
pH-sensitive liposomes to deliver doxorubicin (Dox), which used the 
cargo Dox as a fluorescent probe as well as a chemotherapeutic drug for 
investigation of their endosomal escape capacity.89
Recent breakthroughs have also been made in labeling EVs in vivo.90
Excepted for the use of transgenic mice to label EVs from lineage specific 
cells, one study has reported that EVs derived from foam cells can be 
labeled in vivo.83 To achieve this, Ji et al. designed a foam cell-targeting 
fluorescent nanoprobe that can be specifically degraded inside the cells 
to produce a metabolite: trifluoromethyl-bearing boron-dipyrromethene 
fluorophore (termed B-CF3). This metabolite B-CF3 was then enriched 
into all membrane structures including EVs of the recipient foam cells 
via hydrophobic interaction. This strategy overcame the limitation of 
endogenous EV labeling methods in transgenic mice and provided a 
practice platform to label specific EVs by an exogenous approach.83
In addition to the fluorescent dyes and various reporter proteins 
mentioned above, more and more new luminescent materials, such as 
quantum dots and aggregation-induced emission agents (AIEgens), have 
been developed for labeling EVs.84,91,92 Lin et al. developed a novel type 
of AIEgens and camouflaged it with engineered EV-derived mem­
branes.92 Since AIEgens are highly luminescent and stable luminophores 
capable of generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) in their aggregated 
state, they serve as ideal fluorescent materials for image-guided tumor 
cell therapy and diagnosis. By incorporating them into EVs, in vivo 
photodynamic and photothermal therapy of EVs targeting lung cancer 
cells can be achieved. The development of these new materials makes it 
possible to integrate EV imaging and therapeutic functions in a single 
system.
The fluorescence and bioluminescence labeling methods described 
above are very effective for investigating the behavior of EVs in pre- 
clinical research. However, optical imaging still has some intrinsic 
limitations that prevent it to be transformed into clinical use. Thus, lots 
of researchers devote themselves to developing new approaches to trace 
EVs using advanced modern medical technologies. Case in point, la­
beling EVs with radioisotope is suitable for tracing EVs in vivo via nu­
clear 
imaging.26
Do 
Won 
Hwang 
et 
al. 
used 
99mTc- 
hexamethylpropyleneamineoxime (HMPAO) to label macrophage 
derived EVs for dynamic monitoring of EVs in living mice by 
SPECT/CT.27 Once the uncharged and highly lipophilic 99mTc-HMPAO 
enters the EVs, it will be trapped inside them because the endogenous 
glutathione in EVs can convert lipophilic 99mTc-HMPAO to a hydrophilic 
form. By using SPECT/CT, the radioisotope labeled EVs can be virtual­
ized with great clarity and resolution in mice after injection. Apart from 
this, Hu et al. labeled EVs with superparamagnetic iron oxide nano­
particles (SPIONs) via electroporation.28 After labeling EVs with 
SPIONs, melanoma EVs were found distributed in lymph nodes in a 
C57BL/6 mouse model by a standard MRI approach. Like the above two 
methods, labeling EVs with modern medical imaging contrast agents can 
help understand the natural behavior of EVs in vivo at a super high 
resolution and inspire clinical transformation.
5. Applications of EV visualization in theranostics
EV labeling and visualization strategies have seen significant ad­
vancements in recent years, enabling researchers to better track and 
study EV behavior in biological systems. A growing number of imaging 
technologies are now available for EV visualization, including fluores­
cence imaging (FI), bioluminescence imaging (BLI), computerized to­
mography (CT) scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), radionuclide 
imaging, and photoacoustic imaging (PAI). These imaging modalities, 
along with the development of specialized imaging probes and labeling 
techniques, have greatly expanded the potential for EV applications in 
clinical diagnostics and therapeutics (Table 2). By enabling early 
screening and precise tracking of EVs in vivo, these technologies pave the 
way for improved understanding and utilization of EVs in disease 
diagnosis and treatment (Fig. 4).
5.1. Cancer theranostics
In cancer theranostics, EV visualization integrates early diagnosis, 
targeted drug delivery, and real-time treatment monitoring into a uni­
fied framework, emerging as a groundbreaking tool in the realm of early 
cancer diagnosis. Early detection is a critical component of cancer 
diagnosis and treatment. EVs derived from circulating tumor cells carry 
specific biomarkers, enhancing the sensitivity of tumor identification.113
Researchers can detect the unique biomolecular signatures carried by 
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
6 
Table 2 
Visualization methods of labeled EVs.
Visualization 
methods
EV resources
Imaging probes
Equipments
In 
vivo/ 
in 
vitro
Target cells or 
organs
Applications
Advantages and 
limitations
Refs
FI
Human placental 
and umbilical 
derived 
mesenchymal stem 
cells (hP-MSCs and 
hUC-MSCs)
CM-DiI
Fluorescence 
microscope
In 
vitro
Chemotherapy- 
damaged cells
Verify that EVs are 
internalized by target 
cells
Advantages: High 
sensitivity, low cost, high 
signal contrast, and easy 
detection 
Limitations: Limited 
penetration depth
93
Human placenta- 
derived 
mesenchymal stem 
cells (hP-MSCs)
Cy5.5
Fluorescence 
microscope
In 
vitro
Kidneys
Detection of organ 
distribution of EV and 
PBP-EV in renal IRI mice
94
Urine
Ce6
Fluorescence 
microscope
In 
vitro
Human gastric 
carcinoma cells 
(MGC-803)
Detecting the absorption 
capacity of target cells for 
EVs
95
Colon tumor
GP-ACM
Fluorescence 
microscope
In 
vivo
NA
Real time monitoring of 
CD26 activity in EVs 
secreted by tumor cells
96
Murine lung cancer 
(LL/2) cells, murine 
colon cancer (MC- 
38) cells, human 
lung cancer (A549) 
cells, and healthy 
human liver biopsy 
samples
DiD
Fluorescence 
microscope
In 
vivo 
+ in 
vitro
NA
In vivo monitoring the 
biodistribution of EVs, in 
vitro characterizing the 
targeting properties of 
EVs
97
BLI
Mesenchymal stem 
cells (MSCs)
Gaussia 
luciferase
IVIS Lumina 
imaging system 
(Xenogen 
Corporation)
In 
vivo 
+ in 
vitro
Kidney
Detecting biological 
distribution of EVs and 
indicating EV stability in 
vivo
Advantages: 
High sensitivity, can 
quantify the intensity of 
bioluminescence signals 
to estimate the number of 
EVs 
Limitations: 
Low spatial resolution, 
limited organizational 
penetration
98
Human cancer cell 
lines (human colon 
cancer cell lines 
HCT116, HT29 cells 
and human lung 
cancer cell lines 
A431, A549 cells)
Nano luciferase
IVIS® Lumina III 
imaging system
In 
vivo 
+ in 
vitro
NA
Detecting long-term 
biodistribution analysis
77
HEK-293T, Huh7, 
B16F10 cells
Firefly 
luciferase, 
Super Rluc8, 
Thermoluc, 
Nanoluc
IVIS® Spectrum 
imaging system
In 
vivo
NA
Monitoring the 
biodistribution of EVs
99
CT
Mesenchymal stem 
cells (MSCs)
Glucose-coated 
gold 
nanoparticle 
(GNP)
Micro-CT scanner
In 
vivo
Brain
Imaging and tracking of 
EV in vivo
Advantages: 
High resolution imaging, 
real-time imaging 
capability, can be 
combined with other 
imaging technologies 
such as PET-CT 
Limitations: 
Radiation dose has low 
resolution for soft tissues 
and is limited to static 
imaging
100
Mesenchymal stem 
cells (MSCs)
Glucose-coated 
gold 
nanoparticle 
(GNP)
Micro-CT scanner
In 
vivo
Liver, spleen, and 
kidney
Visualize the in vivo 
distribution of EVs
101
Mesenchymal stem 
cells (MSCs)
Glucose-coated 
gold 
nanoparticle 
(GNP)
Micro-CT scanner
In 
vivo
Brain
Visualize the distribution 
of EVs in the brain 
through imaging
100
MRI
Melanoma
SPION5 iron
Varian small 
animal scanner
In 
vivo 
+ in 
vitro
Lymph nodes
In vitro detection and in 
vivo monitoring of the 
biological distribution of 
exosomes and exosomes 
in lymph nodes
Advantages: 
High resolution, good 
biosafety, and high image 
depth 
Limitations: 
Low sensitivity, long 
scanning time, stability of 
contrast agent labeling 
still needs to be improved
28
Hepatic cancer cells 
(HCCs)
GOD- 
ESIONs@EVs 
(GE@EVs)
Clinic MR scanner
In 
vivo 
+ in 
vitro
HCC cells
Study the targeting 
characteristics and in vivo 
and in vitro biological 
distribution of EVs
102
Human bone 
marrow 
mesenchymal stem 
cells
Molday ION
7T scanner
In 
vitro
NA
Real-time imaging of EVs
103
Radionuclide 
imaging
Goat milk
99mTc (IV)
The SPECT (single 
photon emission 
computed 
tomography)
In 
vivo
NA
In vivo tracking of EVs and 
evaluating their 
pharmacokinetic 
characteristics
Advantages: 
More suitable for 
evaluating the in vivo 
distribution of EVs, with 
high stability, infinite 
tissue penetration, high 
104
(continued on next page)
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
7 
tumor cell-derived EVs using sophisticated imaging techniques, such as 
super-resolution fluorescent imaging or microfluidic-based imaging. 
This provides a noninvasive strategy for diagnosing cancer at early 
stages.113–116 For instance, Villa et al. demonstrated that blood-derived 
EVs from colorectal cancer (CRC) patients exhibit a stronger 
tumor-targeting ability compared to those from healthy individuals. 
They incubated EVs with indocyanine green (ICG) for labeling and used 
fluorescence microscopy to observe the EV distribution. In a 
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) mouse model, these EVs recognized the 
homologous tumor, suggesting a novel strategy for cancer patient 
diagnosis.117 Furthermore, EVs can also enhance the accuracy of cancer 
diagnosis. Guo et al. (2018) utilized microfluidic technology to detect 
biomarkers such as DNA, miRNA, and ncRNA in body fluid-derived EVs. 
These biomarkers were used to assess the tumor microenvironment and 
identify the type and stage of tumors. For instance, the validation of 8 
miRNAs was conducted, proposing their potential use in diagnosing the 
stage of ovarian cancer. They also envisioned the integration of 
emerging artificial intelligence with microfluidic systems in the future, 
which may enhance pre-diagnostic capabilities regarding cancer.118
EV-based cancer screening has also made significant progress. Several 
companies have captured and detected EVs from blood to aid potential 
prostate cancer patients in deciding whether to undergo a biopsy. They 
employed Fe3O4@SiO2@TiO2 particles to adsorb exosomes and detected 
the presence of tumor-derived EVs using a fluorescence-responsive 
PSMA aptamer sensor. This method has been successfully applied in 
clinical settings, highlighting its accuracy and speed advantages in 
enhancing clinical diagnosis efficiency.119 Therefore, this early diag­
nostic capability of EV visualization and detection not only facilitates 
timely intervention but also lays the foundation for precise and 
personalized treatment tailored to the molecular profile of the detected 
cancer.115,120
Besides early diagnosis, EV visualization is also invaluable in moni­
toring treatment response in modern therapeutics. Researchers can 
assess treatment-induced changes by real-time visualization and anal­
ysis of EVs after treatment.120 For example, Takahashi et al. designed 
EVs derived from B16-BL6 mouse melanoma cells containing Gaussia 
luciferase protein by inserting Gaussia luciferase fragment into the C1C2 
domain of EV specific protein MFGE8.71 After injection into mice, 
bioluminescence imaging revealed that these EVs initially accumulated 
in the liver and subsequently spread to the lungs, enabling real-time 
tracking of EVs in vivo and facilitating pharmacokinetic studies on 
EVs.71 Similarly, Shi et al. used positron emission tomography (PET) for 
non-invasive in vivo monitoring of copper-64 (^64Cu) and polyethylene 
glycol (PEG)-modified exosomes. The addition of PEG enabled the suc­
cessful accumulation of EVs around tumor cells and reduced hepatic 
clearance. PET images demonstrated high-quality imaging and quanti­
tatively measured EVs accumulation in tumors, providing an effective 
method for accurately assessing the in vivo biological distribution of 
Table 2 (continued)
Visualization 
methods 
EV resources 
Imaging probes 
Equipments 
In 
vivo/ 
in 
vitro 
Target cells or 
organs 
Applications 
Advantages and 
limitations 
Refs
sensitivity, and easy 
clinical translation 
Limitations: 
High cost, radioactive 
exposure
4T1 cells, HEK-293 
cells
111 in-oxine
MicroSPECT/CT 
4R
In 
vivo
M2 macrophages
Detect the targeting 
ability and in vivo 
distribution of EVs
105
RAW264.7
99m Tc-HMPAO
SPECT/CT 
scanner
In 
vivo
NA
Evaluate the targeting 
and pharmacokinetic 
characteristics of EVs in 
mice
27
Tumor cells, 
myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells, and 
endothelial 
progenitor cells
111I
SPECT/CT 
scanner
In 
vivo
NA
Evaluate the biological 
distribution of different 
EVs in vivo
106
Murine mammary 
carcinoma 4T1 cells
64 Cu or 68 Ga
PET
In 
vivo
NA
Monitoring the biological 
distribution of 
extracellular vesicles in 
vivo, as well as the 
metastasis pathways of 
EVs through lymph and 
bloodstream
107
Pancreatic cancer 
sEVs (PANC1)
[89Zr] Zr 
(oxinate)4
PET
In 
vivo
NA
In vivo tracking of EVs and 
detection of the biological 
distribution of REVS
108
Moues liver 
proliferative cells
124INaI
PET
In 
vivo
NA
Evaluate the distribution 
of surface glycosylation 
complexes modified EVs
109
PAI
Tumor cells
Au nanostars
Vevo LAZR 
photoacoustic 
imaging system
In 
vivo
Mouse tumor 
tissue
Detect the PA imaging 
performance of TDSP- 
Exos in vivo
Advantages: 
High resolution 
visualization of the 
structure and function in 
biological tissues, with 
high sensitivity and 
spatial resolution, 
achieving high contrast 
imaging at the molecular 
level 
Limitations: 
Image depth limit
110
Red blood cells
Exosome-like 
GQDzyme/ 
ABTS 
nanoparticle
Not indicated
In 
vivo
Nasopharyngeal 
cancer (NPC) 
tumor tissue
Targeted accumulation of 
EVs detected in vivo
111
HEK-293T cells
SBC-EV(ICG/ 
PTX)
Q-switched pump 
laser, optical 
parametric 
oscillator laser, 5 
MHz US 
transducer
In 
vivo 
+ in 
vitro
Mouse tumor 
tissue
Evaluate the PA 
characteristics of ICG 
encapsulated EVs in vitro, 
monitor the biological 
distribution of EV based 
imaging agents in vivo, 
and achieve pH 
responsive PA imaging 
guided chemoacoustic 
dynamic combination 
therapy
112
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
8 
EVs.121 Furthermore, Wu et al. developed a nano-catalyst GOD-­
ESIONs@EVs (GE@EVs) for targeted therapy of advanced hepatocellu­
lar carcinoma (HCC). GE@EVs served as nano-scale contrast agents, 
allowing real-time monitoring of EVs’ tumor targeting through magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), proposing a feasible strategy for precise EV 
visualization.102
Moreover, combining EV visualization with other detection tech­
nologies, such as nanoflow cytometry or high-throughput sequencing, 
allows researchers to monitor alterations in the EV profile, including 
changes in protein expression or nucleic acid content. This provides a 
dynamic and comprehensive overview of treatment response, enabling 
real-time adjustments.116 For example, Takahashi et al. employed Taq­
Man MicroRNA assay to measure plasma exosomes in patients with 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). They found that miR-451a 
in EVs is correlated with tumor size and stage, and patients with 
higher levels of miR-451a have lower survival rates. The EV miR-451a 
can effectively detect the potential risk of postoperative recurrence in 
PDAC patients.122 Furthermore, integrated nanofluidic chips can be 
utilized to detect miRNAs from breast cancer-derived EVs123 as well as 
miR-25-3p and miR-92a-3p produced by adipose tissue sarcoma cells.124
This serves as an effective strategy for monitoring tumor recurrence and 
can be used for postoperative adjuvant therapy. EV visualization in 
cancer theranostics enhances the precision of personalized medicine and 
contributes to our understanding of the molecular landscape of 
treatment response.
Furthermore, EV visualization plays a critical role in the develop­
ment of targeted drug delivery strategies for cancer therapeutics. 
Benefiting from their natural ability to carry and transfer biomolecules, 
EVs can be used as effective carriers to deliver therapeutic agents 
directly to tumor cells while minimizing off-target effects.116,125 Re­
searchers engineer EVs to load specific drugs, proteins, and RNA mole­
cules to maximize therapeutic efficacy. For instance, Kim et al. 
engineered dendritic cell-derived EVs expressing human leukocyte an­
tigen (HLA)-A2 and co-stimulatory molecules. These EVs effectively 
stimulate antigen-specific CD8+ T cell immune responses, enhancing 
anti-tumor immunity.126 Additionally, Nie et al. utilized engineered EVs 
to deliver miRNA-126, inhibiting lung cancer cell growth.127 By inte­
grating imaging reporter genes into EV cargo, the release kinetics of 
therapeutic drugs can be effectively tracked, providing deep insights 
into therapeutic efficacy.64,128 For example, Gong et al. validated the 
effective delivery of EVs to target tumor cells by monitoring 
Cy5-Cho-miRNA, which emits a purple fluorescence, using confocal 
laser microscopy. Imaging techniques further validate the accuracy of 
targeted drug delivery by visualizing interactions between EVs and 
tumor cells.129 For example, Peng et al. developed magnetic particle 
imaging (MPI) as an emerging imaging modality. MPI offers high reso­
lution and sensitivity, making it suitable for studying the relationship 
between tumor cells and EVs. Efforts are currently underway to develop 
Fig. 4. Summary of EV visualization strategies and their applications in theranostics.
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
9 
human MPI scanners and other devices, showing promising clinical 
potential.130 In conclusion, the multiple roles of EV visualization in early 
diagnosis, treatment response monitoring, and targeted drug delivery 
underscore its significance in advancing precise, personalized, and 
effective cancer theranostics.
5.2. Neurodegenerative diseases
In neurodegenerative disease research, EV visualization has emerged 
as a powerful tool for identifying biomarkers and therapeutic in­
terventions, offering valuable insights into accurate diagnosis and 
addressing neurodegenerative diseases.131–133 As EVs are derived from 
cells and contain proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids reflecting the phys­
iological and pathological states of donor cells, they serve as potential 
biomarkers for neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s disease and 
Parkinson’s disease.132,134–137 For instance, neuronal EVs can be infer­
red through L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM, CD171),138 microglial 
EVs through CD11b or transmembrane protein 119 (TMEM119),139 and 
oligodendrocyte EVs through myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
(MOG).140 Biomarker specific EV visualization enables scientists to 
identify specific EVs associated with disease progression. Using multiple 
visualization and analysis techniques, researchers study EV composi­
tions isolated from cerebrospinal fluid and blood to identify early in­
dicators of neurodegenerative disorders, which are critical for timely 
diagnosis and intervention.135,141 For example, Xylaki et al. revealed a 
significant increase in α-synuclein (aSyn) and leucine-rich repeat kinase 
2 (LRRK2) in neuronal EVs from Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients, 
proposing these biomarkers for early diagnosis.142 Similarly, visualiza­
tion techniques like MRI, CT, and PET have been used to detect 
EV-carried AD-related proteins Aβ1-42 and miR-193b as biomarkers for 
diagnosing Alzheimer’s disease (AD).141
In advancing therapeutic interventions, EV visualization plays an 
irreplaceable role. EVs have gained attention as potential carriers for 
targeted drug delivery to the central nervous system due to their ability 
to cross the blood-brain barrier.57,143 By loading therapeutic cargos and 
imaging probes into EVs, researchers can simultaneously track their 
biodistribution and optimize drug efficacy in the central nervous system 
using imaging techniques, thereby increasing treatment precision.144,145
This imaging-assisted targeted therapy minimizes off-target effects and 
improves the overall effectiveness of therapeutic interventions. For 
example, Perets et al. (2019) developed an in vivo neuroimaging method 
for tracking EV migration using X-ray computed tomography (CT) and 
mesenchymal stem cell-derived EVs modified with gold nanoparticles. 
This technique enables real-time monitoring of EVs and has demon­
strated targeted effects in various neurodegenerative diseases such as 
stroke, autism, Parkinson’s, and Alzheimer’s.146
Moreover, EV visualization can also monitor treatment responses, 
providing noninvasive real-time feedback on therapy impact within the 
brain. For instance, Shi et al. monitored the severity of Parkinson’s 
disease (PD) by detecting levels of radiolabeled EV α-synuclein in blood 
samples.147 Like their application in cancer theranostics, EV visualiza­
tion in neurodegenerative diseases offers dual benefits in biomarker 
discovery and therapeutic interventions, enhancing our understanding 
of these diseases and improving clinical outcomes.
5.3. Tissue injuries
Like in the above applications, EVs can also be considered as bio­
markers of tissue injury. EV-based noninvasive visualization is a trans­
formative technique for diagnosing tissue injury.148 After injury, cells at 
the injury site release EVs with a specific biomolecular profile reflecting 
the type and severity of the injury.149 These EVs can traverse biological 
barriers and protect their cargo under harsh conditions, enhancing their 
accessibility for sampling.12,150,151 This makes EVs particularly suitable 
for minimally invasive diagnostic procedures, such as liquid biopsies, 
where the analysis of circulating EVs in bodily fluids can provide 
valuable information about the status of distant tissues.152–154 By 
analyzing individual EVs and their cargo using visualizing modalities 
and other downstream methods, researchers can obtain information on 
potential tissue injuries, enabling timely diagnosis.153 This noninvasive 
approach holds promise for personalized medicine, allowing for tailored 
regenerative strategies based on the molecular signatures detected 
through EV visualization. For example, Ji et al. designed a foam 
cell-targeting fluorescent nanoprobe that can be specifically degraded 
inside the cells to produce a metabolite: trifluoromethyl-bearing bor­
on-dipyrromethene fluorophore (termed B-CF3). This metabolite B-CF3 
was then enriched into all membrane structures including EVs of the 
recipient foam cells via hydrophobic interaction. This strategy overcame 
the limitation of endogenous EV labeling methods in transgenic mice 
and provided a practice platform to label specific EVs by an exogenous 
approach.83
Another key application of EV visualization in tissue injury is 
monitoring EV-based therapies. EVs possess unique homing features, 
targeting the cell type from which they are released, and can be engi­
neered with desired ligands to target specific sites with overexpressed 
cell surface biomarkers.155–161 Imaging techniques allow researchers to 
track the biodistribution of EVs, ensuring therapeutic payloads reach the 
intended site of action. Additionally, visualization of EV treatments can 
indicate the location and severity of tissue injury in vivo, integrating 
diagnosis and treatment into a single process.98 Zhang, K. et al. reported 
a Cy5 and P-selectin binding peptide modified EVs, which can target 
bind to ischemia induced P-selectin expression on renal endothelial 
cells, could indicate the kidney injury degree and achieve the target 
treatment at the same time.98 The combination of EV-based treatment 
and imaging technologies holds great promise for developing precise 
and personalized therapeutic strategies for tissue regeneration. 
Currently, ongoing research includes real-time tracking of EVs in liver 
regeneration, as reported by Cao, H. et al. They utilized 
aggregation-induced emission luminogenic DPA-SCP to label EVs 
derived from human placental MSCs and applied them for the treatment 
of acute liver injury in mice. DPA-SCP features high brightness and 
biocompatibility, exhibiting superior labeling efficiency and tracking 
capability compared to traditional commercial membrane dyes, without 
affecting the therapeutic efficacy of EVs on liver tissue. The use of 
DPA-SCP enables long-term and safe tracking of EVs in liver regenera­
tion through real-time in vivo imaging.84 Cardiovascular disease (CVD) 
remains a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, and EVs 
showed effectively therapeutic functions in promoting cardiac repair 
after myocardial infarction.162 Wang et al. designed EVs containing the 
ischemic myocardium-targeting peptide CSTSMLKAC (IMTP). Flow 
cytometry and fluorescence imaging showed these EVs effectively 
accumulated in the ischemic heart region, significantly reducing 
myocardial cell apoptosis, decreasing fibrosis, and increasing angio­
genesis.163 In another study, EVs derived from cardio sphere-derived 
cells (CDCs) fused with the myocardial cell-specific peptide (CMP) 
also achieved myocardial cell targeting, reduced apoptosis, and 
improved cardiac injury through real-time fluorescence imaging.164 In 
conclusion, EV visualization plays a crucial role in diagnosing and 
real-time EV tracing in tissue injury theranostic, offering a promising 
approach for personalized and regenerative medicine.
5.4. Metabolic diseases
EVs are also emerging as effective tools for early screening, accurate 
diagnosis, and treatment of metabolic diseases and their associated 
complications. Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a major metabolic disorder 
characterized by elevated blood glucose levels due to pancreatic β-cell 
damage and insulin resistance. Its complications can cause severe 
damage to the retina, central nervous system, kidneys, and other organs. 
Early screening and diagnosis of DM patients are crucial, and timely 
intervention can alleviate the symptoms of diabetes. Since the comple­
tion of the Human Genome Project, various microRNAs (miRNAs) have 
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
10 
been found to be closely associated with DM and its complications. 
Therefore, cell-secreted EVs miRNAs can serve as DM biomarkers for 
detection.165 EVs miRNAs are easily extracted, highly specific, and can 
be detected by qRT-PCR and in situ hybridization.166 Recent studies 
have shown distinct differences in EVs miRNAs in the serum and urine of 
healthy individuals compared to diabetes patients. For example, sig­
nificant differences in miR-1 and miR-133a in serum-derived EVs can 
distinguish between diabetes and non-diabetes.167 MiR-30a, miR-342, 
and miR-133b in urine isolated EVs can also serve as markers for 
screening diabetes patients.168
EVs are also being used to treat DM, offering new strategies and hope 
for a diabetes cure. In a recent study, EVs were combined with super­
paramagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) and loaded with the 
insulin-promoting peptide BAY55-9837. Confocal microscopy and IVIS 
images revealed that they could be magnetically targeted to pancreatic 
islets, significantly increasing insulin secretion and lowering blood sugar 
levels.169 In another study, fusogenic EVs induced by the viral fusogenic 
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) successfully transferred glucose trans­
porter 4 (GLUT4-GFP) to the recipient cell membrane, and the locali­
zation of the protein was monitored using confocal microscopy. This 
EV-mediated delivery of GLUT4 has high clinical value and can ach­
ieve higher glucose uptake.170
5.5. Bone and cartilage diseases
EV visualization also shows application value in some other diseases, 
such as bone diseases.171 In bone diseases, EVs secreted by mesenchymal 
stem cells (MSCs) are important therapeutic tools in bone regenerative 
medicine. These MSC-derived EVs possess the ability to promote 
angiogenesis, alleviate inflammation, and regulate cell proliferation and 
differentiation.172 The role of EVs in regulating bone cell regeneration 
has been confirmed through EV visualization. For instance, Qin et al. 
constructed an EV delivery system to investigate its effect on bone for­
mation in Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats with cranial defects. Observation of 
PKH67-labeled EVs under confocal microscopy confirmed that EVs 
entered osteoblasts via endocytosis and promoted their differentiation. 
Micro-CT analysis in in vivo experiments also showed a significant in­
crease in newly formed bone quantity due to EV administration. These 
novel EV labeling and visualizing methods contribute to identifying the 
specific roles of EVs in bone cells.173
Osteoporosis is a chronic disease of the skeletal system, primarily 
characterized by reduced bone density due to insufficient osteoblast 
formation from bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs), leading to 
increased bone fragility and susceptibility to damage. EVs offer prom­
ising approaches for treating osteoporosis. It has been reported that EVs 
derived from bone marrow stromal cells (STExos) can promote osteo­
blast formation in vitro. Moreover, when specific antibodies targeting 
BMSCs are fused to the surface of STExos, analysis using a fluorescence 
tomography imaging system has revealed their ability to effectively 
target BMSCs in the skeleton, promote bone regeneration, and signifi­
cantly enhance bone mass.174
In a recent study, the application of EV visualization helps scientists 
elucidate the role of bone-derived EVs in aging. Shen et al. isolated and 
characterized EVs from bone tissues of different age groups by TEM and 
NTA, revealing that their properties changed with age. Furthermore, the 
study demonstrated that EVs from aging bone tissues can induce age- 
related skeletal diseases and impact the aging of other systems and tis­
sues in the body through the circulatory system, such as triggering age- 
related cardiovascular diseases, metabolic diseases, and neurodegener­
ative diseases. Therefore, they proposed using aging EVs as biomarkers 
for age-related diseases and introducing EVs from young bone cells as a 
treatment method for these conditions. However, more research is 
needed to clarify the association between EVs and human aging.175
Due to the limited regenerative capacity of cartilage, injuries often 
lead to osteoarthritis (OA), a degenerative joint disease. EVs derived 
from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) or chondrocytes have been shown 
to induce chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation in vitro. EV 
visualization could be employed to study the pathogenesis of OA. Re­
sults from luciferase activity assays indicate that lncRNA-KLF3-AS1 
within EVs can inhibit miR-206, which in turn suppresses the expres­
sion of GIT1 protein. GIT1 is known to induce chondrocyte apoptosis. 
Therefore, EVs can guide chondrocyte differentiation and promote 
proliferation by inhibiting miR-206.176 Additionally, OA is closely 
associated with cartilage degradation, primarily mediated by the protein 
Wnt5A. According to research reports, MSC-EVs containing miR-92a-3p 
can effectively inhibit cartilage degradation in mice. Luciferase assays 
revealed that this inhibition is mainly due to miR-92a-3p within the EVs 
directly targeting Wnt5A and suppressing its expression, demonstrating 
the potential of EVs as a cell-free therapy for OA.177
5.6. Inflammation
EVs can also be utilized for alleviating inflammation. EVs derived 
from M2 macrophages contain various anti-inflammatory cytokines, 
making them suitable for treating inflammatory diseases.178,179 Several 
targeted inflammation therapy strategies using EVs derived from M2 
macrophages have been reported, and EV visualization has important 
applications in all of these. In one recent study, the anti-inflammatory 
drug curcumin was incorporated into EVs derived from macrophages 
to create a novel drug delivery vehicle. This EV-based drug delivery 
system, which is stable and maintains high concentrations in the 
bloodstream, holds the potential for treating numerous inflammatory 
conditions. Moreover, in studies based on Odyssey infrared fluorescence 
imaging technology, the fluorescence signals of EVs are primarily 
observed in the liver, kidney, and spleen tissues, highlighting the tar­
geting capabilities associated with EVs.129
In another study, Tang et al. utilized microvesicles (MVs) derived 
from macrophages to targeted deliver dexamethasone (DEX) to inflamed 
kidneys. DEX, a synthetic glucocorticoid, is an effective drug for treating 
renal diseases. However, its side effects such as hypertension, hyper­
glycemia, and obesity limit its dosage. Confirmed by confocal fluores­
cence microscopy, the MV-DEX drug delivery system successfully 
reduced systemic adverse reactions of glucocorticoids by targeting the 
kidneys. This increased the drug utilization of dexamethasone and 
effectively suppressed renal inflammation. This represents a safe drug 
delivery strategy with promising medical applications.180 In summary, 
EVs demonstrate outstanding imaging potential and therapeutic effi­
cacy, offering novel methods and strategies for curing a multitude of 
complex inflammatory diseases.
6. Outlook
The field of EV visualization is set to progress in multiple directions, 
emphasizing enhanced insights into cell-to-cell communication, early 
disease diagnosis, and targeted therapeutic applications. One major 
focus will likely be the development of innovative imaging contrast 
agents, EV labeling methodologies with high resolution and specificity, 
and new instruments of EV visualization both in vivo and in vitro. 
Technologies like super-resolution microscopy and advanced contrast 
agents are expected to allow researchers to observe single EVs at the 
nanoscale, offering new levels of detail into their formation, cargo 
composition, and interactions with target cells.23 The use of artificial 
intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) algorithms is also antici­
pated to become a key part of EV visualization, enabling the analysis of 
large datasets and the detection of complex patterns that may not be 
immediately apparent to human observers.
In addition, the pursuit of multiplexed EV visualization techniques 
will likely take a central role in upcoming research, as these methods 
allow for the simultaneous detection of various EV-derived signals-such 
as size, concentration, and specific molecular contents like proteins and 
nucleic acids-yielding a detailed molecular profile. Such information is 
invaluable for accurate diagnostics, especially in complex diseases like 
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
11 
cancer and neurodegenerative conditions. Recent advancements, for 
example, include a single-EV analysis platform using a microfluidic 
chamber and immunofluorescence for cancer-related EV analysis, 
enabling robust measurements of individual EV biomarkers.181,182
Similarly, dual imaging approaches combining fluorescence and biolu­
minescence have shown promise for tracking EV biodistribution and 
therapeutic contents in vivo.70,183 These advanced multiplexed imaging 
techniques will likely be instrumental in refining EV-based therapies to 
improve targeting, distribution, and therapeutic outcomes.
In conclusion, the evolution of EV visualization appears to be driven 
by the integration of innovative technologies such as high-resolution 
microscopy, AI, multiplexed imaging approaches, and noninvasive in 
vivo tracking. Together, these advancements are expected to reshape our 
understanding of EV biology, while paving the way for diagnostic and 
therapeutic innovations. Looking forward, interdisciplinary collabora­
tions among biologists, imaging specialists, and engineers will be 
essential to unlocking the full potential of EV visualization in healthcare 
and regenerative medicine.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kaiyue Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. 
Jingxuan Hu: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Data curation. 
Yilan Hu: Visualization, Investigation.
Declaration of competing interest
None.
References
1. Tkach M, Thery C. Communication by extracellular vesicles: where we are and 
where we need to go. Cell. 2016;164:1226–1232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cell.2016.01.043.
2. van Niel G, D’Angelo G, Raposo G. Shedding light on the cell biology of 
extracellular vesicles. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2018;19:213–228. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/nrm.2017.125.
3. Zhang K, Cheng K. Stem cell-derived exosome versus stem cell therapy. Nat Rev 
Bioeng. 2023;1:1–2. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44222-023-00064-2.
4. Liu S, Wu X, Chandra S, et al. Extracellular vesicles: emerging tools as therapeutic 
agent carriers. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2022;12:3822–3842. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apsb.2022.05.002.
5. Mathivanan S, Ji H, Simpson RJ. Exosomes: extracellular organelles important in 
intercellular communication. J Proteonomics. 2010;73:1907–1920. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jprot.2010.06.006.
6. Simpson RJ, Lim JW, Moritz RL, Mathivanan S. Exosomes: proteomic insights and 
diagnostic potential. Expert Rev Proteomics. 2009;6:267–283. https://doi.org/ 
10.1586/epr.09.17.
7. Kalluri R, LeBleu VS. The biology, function, and biomedical applications of 
exosomes. Science. 2020;367, eaau6977. https://doi.org/10.1126/science. 
aau6977.
8. Rao Q, Zuo B, Lu Z, et al. Tumor-derived exosomes elicit tumor suppression in 
murine hepatocellular carcinoma models and humans in vitro. Hepatology. 2016;64: 
456–472. https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.28549.
9. Zhu D, Liu S, Huang K, et al. Intrapericardial long non-coding rna–tcf21 antisense 
rna inducing demethylation administration promotes cardiac repair. Eur Heart J. 
2023;44:1748–1760. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehad114.
10. Armstrong JPK, Stevens MM. Strategic design of extracellular vesicle drug delivery 
systems. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2018;130:12–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
addr.2018.06.017.
11. Nguyen SL, Ahn SH, Greenberg JW, et al. Integrins mediate placental extracellular 
vesicle trafficking to lung and liver in vivo. Sci Rep. 2021;11:4217. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41598-021-82752-w.
12. Zhang Y, Wu W, Pan X, et al. Extracellular vesicles as novel therapeutic targets and 
diagnosis markers. Extracellular Vesicle. 2022;1, 100017. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.vesic.2022.100017.
13. Zhu D, Liu S, Huang K, et al. Intrapericardial exosome therapy dampens cardiac 
injury via activating foxo3. Circ Res. 2022;131:e135–e150. https://doi.org/ 
10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.321384.
14. Li J, Sun S, Zhu D, et al. Inhalable stem cell exosomes promote heart repair after 
myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2024;150:710–723. https://doi.org/10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.123.065005.
15. Kamerkar S, LeBleu VS, Sugimoto H, et al. Exosomes facilitate therapeutic 
targeting of oncogenic kras in pancreatic cancer. Nature. 2017;546:498–503. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22341.
16. Aghajani Nargesi A, Lerman LO, Eirin A. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived 
extracellular vesicles for kidney repair: current status and looming challenges. Stem 
Cell Res Ther. 2017;8:273. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13287-017-0727-7.
17. Todorova D, Simoncini S, Lacroix R, Sabatier F, Dignat-George F. Extracellular 
vesicles in angiogenesis. Circ Res. 2017;120:1658–1673. https://doi.org/10.1161/ 
CIRCRESAHA.117.309681.
18. Zhang K, Zhao X, Chen X, et al. Enhanced therapeutic effects of mesenchymal stem 
cell-derived exosomes with an injectable hydrogel for hindlimb ischemia 
treatment. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2018;10:30081–30091. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsami.8b08449.
19. Zhang Y, Xu J, Liu S, et al. Embryonic stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles 
enhance the therapeutic effect of mesenchymal stem cells. Theranostics. 2019;9: 
6976–6990. https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.35305.
20. Wei Y, Wu Y, Zhao R, et al. Msc-derived sevs enhance patency and inhibit 
calcification of synthetic vascular grafts by immunomodulation in a rat model of 
hyperlipidemia. Biomaterials. 2019;204:13–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2019.01.049.
21. Betzer O, Barnoy E, Sadan T, et al. Advances in imaging strategies for in vivo 
tracking of exosomes. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotechnol. 2020;12, 
e1594. https://doi.org/10.1002/wnan.1594.
22. Zhang K, Li Z. Imaging and tracking stem cells: methods and protocols. In: Kursad 
Turksen. Springer US; 2020:213–225.
23. Verweij FJ, Balaj L, Boulanger CM, et al. The power of imaging to understand 
extracellular vesicle biology in vivo. Nat Methods. 2021;18:1013–1026. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41592-021-01206-3.
24. Bai J, Wei X, Zhang X, et al. Microfluidic strategies for the isolation and profiling of 
exosomes. TrAC, Trends Anal Chem. 2023;158, 116834. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
trac.2022.116834.
25. Wei JX, Qi TS, Hao CH, Zong SF, Wang ZY, Cui YP. Optical microscopic and 
spectroscopic detection of exosomes. Trac Trends Anal Chem. 2023;163, 117077. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2023.117077. ARTN 117077.
26. Morishita M, Takahashi Y, Nishikawa M, et al. Quantitative analysis of tissue 
distribution of the b16bl6-derived exosomes using a streptavidin-lactadherin 
fusion protein and iodine-125-labeled biotin derivative after intravenous injection 
in mice. J Pharmaceut Sci. 2015;104:705–713. https://doi.org/10.1002/jps.24251.
27. Hwang DW, Choi H, Jang SC, et al. Noninvasive imaging of radiolabeled exosome- 
mimetic nanovesicle using (99m)tc-hmpao. Sci Rep. 2015;5, 15636. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/srep15636.
28. Hu L, Wickline SA, Hood JL. Magnetic resonance imaging of melanoma exosomes 
in lymph nodes. Magn Reson Med. 2015;74:266–271. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
mrm.25376.
29. Tengler L, Tiedtke M, Schutz J, et al. Optimization of extracellular vesicles 
preparation from saliva of head and neck cancer patients. Sci Rep. 2024;14:946. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50610-6.
30. Cheshmi B, Cheshomi H. Salivary exosomes: properties, medical applications, and 
isolation methods. Mol Biol Rep. 2020;47:6295–6307. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11033-020-05659-1.
31. Mulcahy LA, Pink RC, Carter DR. Routes and mechanisms of extracellular vesicle 
uptake. J Extracell Vesicles. 2014;3, 24641. https://doi.org/10.3402/jev.v3.24641.
32. Yanez-Mo M, Siljander PR, Andreu Z, et al. Biological properties of extracellular 
vesicles and their physiological functions. J Extracell Vesicles. 2015;4, 27066. 
https://doi.org/10.3402/jev.v4.27066.
33. Fitzner D, Schnaars M, van Rossum D, et al. Selective transfer of exosomes from 
oligodendrocytes to microglia by macropinocytosis. J Cell Sci. 2011;124:447–458. 
https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.074088.
34. Feng D, Zhao WL, Ye YY, et al. Cellular internalization of exosomes occurs through 
phagocytosis. Traffic. 2010;11:675–687. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600- 
0854.2010.01041.x.
35. Montecalvo A, Larregina AT, Shufesky WJ, et al. Mechanism of transfer of 
functional micrornas between mouse dendritic cells via exosomes. Blood. 2012; 
119:756–766. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2011-02-338004.
36. Raposo G, Nijman HW, Stoorvogel W, et al. B lymphocytes secrete antigen- 
presenting vesicles. J Exp Med. 1996;183:1161–1172. https://doi.org/10.1084/ 
jem.183.3.1161.
37. Thery C, Amigorena S, Raposo G, Clayton A. Isolation and characterization of 
exosomes from cell culture supernatants and biological fluids. Curr Protoc Cell Biol. 
2006:3.22.21–23.22.29. https://doi.org/10.1002/0471143030.cb0322s30.
38. Zhang K, Chen S, Sun H, et al. In vivo two-photon microscopy reveals the 
contribution of sox9(+) cell to kidney regeneration in a mouse model with 
extracellular vesicle treatment. J Biol Chem. 2020;295:12203–12213. https://doi. 
org/10.1074/jbc.RA120.012732.
39. Lobb RJ, Becker M, Wen SW, et al. Optimized exosome isolation protocol for cell 
culture supernatant and human plasma. J Extracell Vesicles. 2015;4, 27031. https:// 
doi.org/10.3402/jev.v4.27031.
40. Clayton A, Court J, Navabi H, et al. Analysis of antigen presenting cell derived 
exosomes, based on immuno-magnetic isolation and flow cytometry. J Immunol 
Methods. 2001;247:163–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-1759(00)00321-5.
41. Lamparski HG, Metha-Damani A, Yao JY, et al. Production and characterization of 
clinical grade exosomes derived from dendritic cells. J Immunol Methods. 2002;270: 
211–226. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-1759(02)00330-7.
42. Luo H, Zhang J, Yang A, et al. Large-scale isolation of exosomes derived from nk 
cells for anti-tumor therapy. Bio Protoc. 2023;13, e4693. https://doi.org/ 
10.21769/BioProtoc.4693.
43. Chen Y, Zhu Q, Cheng L, et al. Exosome detection via the ultrafast-isolation system: 
exodus. Nat Methods. 2021;18:212–218. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-020- 
01034-x.
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
12 
44. Sokolova V, Ludwig AK, Hornung S, et al. Characterisation of exosomes derived 
from human cells by nanoparticle tracking analysis and scanning electron 
microscopy. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2011;87:146–150. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2011.05.013.
45. Escola JM, Kleijmeer MJ, Stoorvogel W, Griffith JM, Yoshie O, Geuze HJ. Selective 
enrichment of tetraspan proteins on the internal vesicles of multivesicular 
endosomes and on exosomes secreted by human b-lymphocytes. J Biol Chem. 1998; 
273:20121–20127. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.32.20121.
46. Colombo M, Raposo G, Thery C. Biogenesis, secretion, and intercellular 
interactions of exosomes and other extracellular vesicles. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 
2014;30:255–289. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-cellbio-101512-122326.
47. Arntz OJ, Pieters BC, Oliveira MC, et al. Oral administration of bovine milk derived 
extracellular vesicles attenuates arthritis in two mouse models. Mol Nutr Food Res. 
2015;59:1701–1712. https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201500222.
48. Hu G, Niu F, Liao K, et al. Hiv-1 tat-induced astrocytic extracellular vesicle mir-7 
impairs synaptic architecture. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2020;15:538–553. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11481-019-09869-8.
49. Cheng L, Sun X, Scicluna BJ, Coleman BM, Hill AF. Characterization and deep 
sequencing analysis of exosomal and non-exosomal mirna in human urine. Kidney 
Int. 2014;86:433–444. https://doi.org/10.1038/ki.2013.502.
50. Ciullo A, Biemmi V, Milano G, et al. Exosomal expression of cxcr4 targets 
cardioprotective vesicles to myocardial infarction and improves outcome after 
systemic administration. Int J Mol Sci. 2019;20:468. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ijms20030468.
51. Buschmann D, Mussack V, Byrd JB. Separation, characterization, and 
standardization of extracellular vesicles for drug delivery applications. Adv Drug 
Deliv Rev. 2021;174:348–368. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2021.04.027.
52. Kim G, Kim M, Lee Y, Byun JW, Hwang DW, Lee M. Systemic delivery of microrna- 
21 antisense oligonucleotides to the brain using t7-peptide decorated exosomes. 
J Contr Release. 2020;317:273–281. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jconrel.2019.11.009.
53. Dragovic RA, Gardiner C, Brooks AS, et al. Sizing and phenotyping of cellular 
vesicles using nanoparticle tracking analysis. Nanomedicine. 2011;7:780–788. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2011.04.003.
54. Geiger A, Walker A, Nissen E. Human fibrocyte-derived exosomes accelerate 
wound healing in genetically diabetic mice. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015; 
467:303–309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.166.
55. Sajidah ES, Lim K, Yamano T, et al. Spatiotemporal tracking of small extracellular 
vesicle nanotopology in response to physicochemical stresses revealed by hs-afm. 
J Extracell Vesicles. 2022;11, e12275. https://doi.org/10.1002/jev2.12275.
56. Sharma S, Rasool HI, Palanisamy V, et al. Structural-mechanical characterization 
of nanoparticle exosomes in human saliva, using correlative afm, fesem, and force 
spectroscopy. ACS Nano. 2010;4:1921–1926. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
nn901824n.
57. Haney MJ, Klyachko NL, Zhao Y, et al. Exosomes as drug delivery vehicles for 
Parkinson’s disease therapy. J Contr Release. 2015;207:18–30. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.03.033.
58. Park J, Hwang M, Choi B, et al. Exosome classification by pattern analysis of 
surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy data for lung cancer diagnosis. Anal Chem. 
2017;89:6695–6701. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.7b00911.
59. Zhao Z, Yang Y, Zeng Y, He M. A microfluidic exosearch chip for multiplexed 
exosome detection towards blood-based ovarian cancer diagnosis. Lab Chip. 2016; 
16:489–496. https://doi.org/10.1039/c5lc01117e.
60. Gonçalves MST. Fluorescent labeling of biomolecules with organic probes. Chem 
Rev. 2009;109:190–212. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr0783840.
61. Tao H, Chen X, Cao H, et al. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles 
for corneal wound repair. Stem Cell Int. 2019;2019, 5738510. https://doi.org/ 
10.1155/2019/5738510.
62. Yu L, Liu S, Wang C, et al. Embryonic stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles 
promote the recovery of kidney injury. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2021;12:379. https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s13287-021-02460-0.
63. Zhang C, Shang Y, Chen X, et al. Supramolecular nanofibers containing arginine- 
glycine-aspartate (rgd) peptides boost therapeutic efficacy of extracellular vesicles 
in kidney repair. ACS Nano. 2020;14:12133–12147. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.0c05681.
64. Fang W, Li L, Lin Z, et al. Engineered il-15/il-15rα-expressing cellular vesicles 
promote t cell anti-tumor immunity. Extracellular Vesicle. 2023;2, 100021. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.vesic.2022.100021.
65. Hoshino A, Costa-Silva B, Shen TL, et al. Tumour exosome integrins determine 
organotropic metastasis. Nature. 2015;527:329–335. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nature15756.
66. Grange C, Tapparo M, Bruno S, et al. Biodistribution of mesenchymal stem cell- 
derived extracellular vesicles in a model of acute kidney injury monitored by 
optical imaging. Int J Mol Med. 2014;33:1055–1063. https://doi.org/10.3892/ 
ijmm.2014.1663.
67. Collot M, Ashokkumar P, Anton H, et al. Membright: a family of fluorescent 
membrane probes for advanced cellular imaging and neuroscience. Cell Chem Biol. 
2019;26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.01.009, 600-614 e607.
68. Gray WD, Mitchell AJ, Searles CD. An accurate, precise method for general labeling 
of extracellular vesicles. MethodsX. 2015;2:360–367. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
mex.2015.08.002.
69. Zomer A, Maynard C, Verweij FJ, et al. In vivo imaging reveals extracellular vesicle- 
mediated phenocopying of metastatic behavior. Cell. 2015;161:1046–1057. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.042.
70. Lai CP, Kim EY, Badr CE, et al. Visualization and tracking of tumour extracellular 
vesicle delivery and rna translation using multiplexed reporters. Nat Commun. 
2015;6:7029. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms8029.
71. Takahashi Y, Nishikawa M, Shinotsuka H, et al. Visualization and in vivo tracking 
of the exosomes of murine melanoma b16-bl6 cells in mice after intravenous 
injection. J Biotechnol. 2013;165:77–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jbiotec.2013.03.013.
72. Wiklander OP, Nordin JZ, O’Loughlin A, et al. Extracellular vesicle in vivo 
biodistribution is determined by cell source, route of administration and targeting. 
J Extracell Vesicles. 2015;4, 26316. https://doi.org/10.3402/jev.v4.26316.
73. Soderberg A, Barral AM, Soderstrom M, Sander B, Rosen A. Redox-signaling 
transmitted in trans to neighboring cells by melanoma-derived tnf-containing 
exosomes. Free Radic Biol Med. 2007;43:90–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
freeradbiomed.2007.03.026.
74. Ivanova A, Badertscher L, O’Driscoll G, et al. Creating designer engineered 
extracellular vesicles for diverse ligand display, target recognition, and controlled 
protein loading and delivery. Adv Sci. 2023;10, e2304389. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/advs.202304389.
75. Men Y, Yelick J, Jin S, et al. Exosome reporter mice reveal the involvement of 
exosomes in mediating neuron to astroglia communication in the cns. Nat Commun. 
2019;10:4136. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-11534-w.
76. England CG, Ehlerding EB, Cai W. Nanoluc: a small luciferase is brightening up the 
field of bioluminescence. Bioconjugate Chem. 2016;27:1175–1187. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.6b00112.
77. Hikita T, Miyata M, Watanabe R, Oneyama C. Sensitive and rapid quantification of 
exosomes by fusing luciferase to exosome marker proteins. Sci Rep. 2018;8, 14035. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-32535-7.
78. Gray WD, French KM, Ghosh-Choudhary S, et al. Identification of therapeutic 
covariant microrna clusters in hypoxia-treated cardiac progenitor cell exosomes 
using systems biology. Circ Res. 2015;116:255–263. https://doi.org/10.1161/ 
CIRCRESAHA.116.304360.
79. Hannafon BN, Carpenter KJ, Berry WL, Janknecht R, Dooley WC, Ding WQ. 
Exosome-mediated microrna signaling from breast cancer cells is altered by the 
anti-angiogenesis agent docosahexaenoic acid (dha). Mol Cancer. 2015;14:133. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-015-0400-7.
80. Flora K, Ishihara M, Zhang Z, et al. Exosomes from von hippel-lindau-null cancer 
cells promote metastasis in renal cell carcinoma. Int J Mol Sci. 2023;24, 17307. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms242417307.
81. Ridder K, Keller S, Dams M, et al. Extracellular vesicle-mediated transfer of genetic 
information between the hematopoietic system and the brain in response to 
inflammation. PLoS Biol. 2014;12, e1001874. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pbio.1001874.
82. Zhang P, Dong B, Zeng E, et al. In vivo tracking of multiple tumor exosomes labeled 
by phospholipid-based bioorthogonal conjugation. Anal Chem. 2018;90: 
11273–11279. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.8b01506.
83. Ji M, Wei Y, Ye Z, et al. In vivo fluorescent labeling of foam cell-derived 
extracellular vesicles as circulating biomarkers for in vitro detection of 
atherosclerosis. J Am Chem Soc. 2024;146:10093–10102. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
jacs.4c01173.
84. Cao H, Yue Z, Gao H, et al. In vivo real-time imaging of extracellular vesicles in 
liver regeneration via aggregation-induced emission luminogens. ACS Nano. 2019; 
13:3522–3533. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.8b09776.
85. Liu X, Zong Z, Xing M, Liu X, Li J, Liu D. Ph-mediated clustering of exosomes: 
breaking through the size limit of exosome analysis in conventional flow 
cytometry. Nano Lett. 2021;21:8817–8823. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
nanolett.1c03211.
86. Allen TM, Cullis PR. Liposomal drug delivery systems: from concept to clinical 
applications. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2013;65:36–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
addr.2012.09.037.
87. Torchilin VP. Recent advances with liposomes as pharmaceutical carriers. Nat Rev 
Drug Discov. 2005;4:145–160. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrd1632.
88. Zhang W, Ngo L, Tsao SC, Liu D, Wang Y. Engineered cancer-derived small 
extracellular vesicle-liposome hybrid delivery system for targeted treatment of 
breast cancer. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2023;15:16420–16433. https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsami.2c22749.
89. Geng T, Tang M, Yee Paek S, Leung E, Chamley LW, Wu Z. A simple approach to re- 
engineering small extracellular vesicles to circumvent endosome entrapment. Int J 
Pharm. 2022;626, 122153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2022.122153.
90. Han C, Yang J, Yin T, et al. Cd63-snorkel tagging for isolation of exosomes. 
Extracellular Vesicle. 2023;2, 100031. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
vesic.2023.100031.
91. Zhang M, Vojtech L, Ye Z, Hladik F, Nance E. Quantum dot labeling and 
visualization of extracellular vesicles. ACS Appl Nano Mater. 2020;3:7211–7222. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.0c01553.
92. Lin Y, Yi M, Guan X, et al. "Two birds with one stone" strategy for the lung cancer 
therapy with bioinspired aie aggregates. J Nanobiotechnol. 2023;21:49. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s12951-023-01799-1.
93. Li H, Huang H, Chen X, et al. The delivery of hsa-mir-11401 by extracellular 
vesicles can relieve doxorubicin-induced mesenchymal stem cell apoptosis. Stem 
Cell Res Ther. 2021;12:77. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13287-021-02156-5.
94. Huang H, Qian M, Liu Y, et al. Genetically engineered mesenchymal stem cells as a 
nitric oxide reservoir for acute kidney injury therapy. Elife. 2023;12, 84820. 
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.84820.
95. Pan S, Pei L, Zhang A, et al. Passion fruit-like exosome-pma/au-bsa@ce6 
nanovehicles for real-time fluorescence imaging and enhanced targeted 
photodynamic therapy with deep penetration and superior retention behavior in 
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
13 
tumor. Biomaterials. 2020;230, 119606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2019.119606.
96. Wang DD, Qian XK, Li HX, et al. Sensing and imaging of exosomal cd26 secreted 
from cancer cells and 3d colorectal tumor model using a novel near-infrared 
fluorogenic probe. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2021;130, 112472. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.msec.2021.112472.
97. Garofalo M, Villa A, Crescenti D, et al. Heterologous and cross-species tropism of 
cancer-derived extracellular vesicles. Theranostics. 2019;9:5681–5693. https://doi. 
org/10.7150/thno.34824.
98. Zhang K, Li R, Chen X, et al. Renal endothelial cell-targeted extracellular vesicles 
protect the kidney from ischemic injury. Adv Sci. 2023;10, e2204626. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/advs.202204626.
99. Gupta D, Liang X, Pavlova S, et al. Quantification of extracellular vesicles in vitro 
and in vivo using sensitive bioluminescence imaging. J Extracell Vesicles. 2020;9, 
1800222. https://doi.org/10.1080/20013078.2020.1800222.
100. Betzer O, Perets N, Angel A, et al. In vivo neuroimaging of exosomes using gold 
nanoparticles. ACS Nano. 2017;11:10883–10893. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.7b04495.
101. Gong L, Weng Y, Zhou W, et al. In vivo ct imaging of gold nanoparticle-labeled 
exosomes in a myocardial infarction mouse model. Ann Transl Med. 2021;9:504. 
https://doi.org/10.21037/atm-21-981.
102. Wu H, Xing H, Wu MC, Shen F, Chen Y, Yang T. Extracellular-vesicles delivered 
tumor-specific sequential nanocatalysts can be used for mri-informed nanocatalytic 
therapy of hepatocellular carcinoma. Theranostics. 2021;11:64–78. https://doi.org/ 
10.7150/thno.46124.
103. Walker S, Busatto S, Pham A, et al. Extracellular vesicle-based drug delivery 
systems for cancer treatment. Theranostics. 2019;9:8001–8017. https://doi.org/ 
10.7150/thno.37097.
104. Gonzalez MI, Martin-Duque P, Desco M, Salinas B. Radioactive labeling of milk- 
derived exosomes with (99m)tc and in vivo tracking by spect imaging. 
Nanomaterials. 2020;10:1062. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano10061062.
105. Rashid MH, Borin TF, Ara R, Alptekin A, Liu Y, Arbab AS. Generation of novel 
diagnostic and therapeutic exosomes to detect and deplete protumorigenic m2 
macrophages. Adv Ther. 2020:3. https://doi.org/10.1002/adtp.201900209.
106. Rashid MH, Borin TF, Ara R, et al. Differential in vivo biodistribution of (131)i- 
labeled exosomes from diverse cellular origins and its implication for theranostic 
application. Nanomedicine. 2019;21, 102072. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nano.2019.102072.
107. Jung KO, Kim YH, Chung SJ, et al. Identification of lymphatic and hematogenous 
routes of rapidly labeled radioactive and fluorescent exosomes through highly 
sensitive multimodal imaging. Int J Mol Sci. 2020;21. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ijms21217850.
108. Khan AA, Man F, Faruqu FN, et al. Pet imaging of small extracellular vesicles via 
[(89)zr]zr(oxinate)(4) direct radiolabeling. Bioconjugate Chem. 2022;33:473–485. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.1c00597.
109. N’Diaye ER, Orefice NS, Ghezzi C, Boumendjel A. Chemically modified 
extracellular vesicles and applications in radiolabeling and drug delivery. 
Pharmaceutics. 2022:14. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14030653.
110. Zhu D, Lyu M, Huang Q, et al. Stellate plasmonic exosomes for penetrative 
targeting tumor nir-ii thermo-radiotherapy. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2020;12: 
36928–36937. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c09969.
111. Ding H, Cai Y, Gao L, et al. Exosome-like nanozyme vesicles for h(2)o(2)- 
responsive catalytic photoacoustic imaging of xenograft nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma. Nano Lett. 2019;19:203–209. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
nanolett.8b03709.
112. Nguyen Cao TG, Kang JH, Kim W, et al. Engineered extracellular vesicle-based 
sonotheranostics for dual stimuli-sensitive drug release and photoacoustic imaging- 
guided chemo-sonodynamic cancer therapy. Theranostics. 2022;12:1247–1266. 
https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.65516.
113. Mohammadi M, Zargartalebi H, Salahandish R, Aburashed R, Wey Yong K, Sanati- 
Nezhad A. Emerging technologies and commercial products in exosome-based 
cancer diagnosis and prognosis. Biosens Bioelectron. 2021;183, 113176. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bios.2021.113176.
114. Shi YH, Wang XH, Zhang SF, et al. Research progress in in vivo tracing technology 
for extracellular vesicles. Extracell Vesicles Circ Nucleic Acids. 2023;4:684–697. 
https://doi.org/10.20517/evcna.2023.49.
115. Zhao J, Xu L, Yang D, et al. Exosome-driven liquid biopsy for breast cancer: recent 
advances in isolation, biomarker identification and detection. Extracellular Vesicle. 
2022;1, 100006. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vesic.2022.100006.
116. Wang S, Lin Y, Zhang Y, et al. Complex rna world in small extracellular vesicles for 
liquid biopsy in cancer management. Extracellular Vesicle. 2022;1, 100015. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.vesic.2022.100015.
117. Villa A, Garofalo M, Crescenti D, et al. Transplantation of autologous extracellular 
vesicles for cancer-specific targeting. Theranostics. 2021;11:2034–2047. https:// 
doi.org/10.7150/thno.51344.
118. Guo SC, Tao SC, Dawn H. Microfluidics-based on-a-chip systems for isolating and 
analysing extracellular vesicles. J Extracell Vesicles. 2018;7, 1508271. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/20013078.2018.1508271.
119. Li Q, Wang Y, Ling L, et al. Rapid and specific detection nanoplatform of serum 
exosomes for prostate cancer diagnosis. Mikrochim Acta. 2021;188:283. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s00604-021-04934-7.
120. Zhang S, Li D, Liu Y, Qin C, Tong L, Xu L. Multifunctional exosome-driven 
pancreatic cancer diagnostics and therapeutics. Extracellular Vesicle. 2023;2, 
100022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vesic.2023.100022.
121. Shi S, Li T, Wen X, et al. Copper-64 labeled pegylated exosomes for in vivo positron 
emission tomography and enhanced tumor retention. Bioconjugate Chem. 2019;30: 
2675–2683. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.9b00587.
122. Takahasi K, Iinuma H, Wada K, et al. Usefulness of exosome-encapsulated 
microrna-451a as a minimally invasive biomarker for prediction of recurrence and 
prognosis in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2018; 
25:155–161. https://doi.org/10.1002/jhbp.524.
123. Lim J, Kang B, Son HY, et al. Microfluidic device for one-step detection of breast 
cancer-derived exosomal mrna in blood using signal-amplifiable 3d nanostructure. 
Biosens Bioelectron. 2022;197, 113753. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bios.2021.113753.
124. Casadei L, Calore F, Creighton CJ, et al. Exosome-derived mir-25-3p and mir-92a- 
3p stimulate liposarcoma progression. Cancer Res. 2017;77:3846–3856. https:// 
doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2984.
125. Liu M, Hu S, Yan N, Popowski KD, Cheng K. Inhalable extracellular vesicle delivery 
of il-12 mrna to treat lung cancer and promote systemic immunity. Nat 
Nanotechnol. 2024;19:565–575. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-023-01580-3.
126. Kim S, Sohn HJ, Lee HJ, et al. Use of engineered exosomes expressing hla and 
costimulatory molecules to generate antigen-specific cd8+ t cells for adoptive cell 
therapy. J Immunother. 2017;40:83–93. https://doi.org/10.1097/ 
CJI.0000000000000151.
127. Nie H, Xie X, Zhang D, et al. Use of lung-specific exosomes for mirna-126 delivery 
in non-small cell lung cancer. Nanoscale. 2020;12:877–887. https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/c9nr09011h.
128. Qiao L, Hu S, Huang K, et al. Tumor cell-derived exosomes home to their cells of 
origin and can be used as trojan horses to deliver cancer drugs. Theranostics. 2020; 
10:3474–3487. https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.39434.
129. Sun D, Zhuang X, Xiang X, et al. A novel nanoparticle drug delivery system: the 
anti-inflammatory activity of curcumin is enhanced when encapsulated in 
exosomes. Mol Ther. 2010;18:1606–1614. https://doi.org/10.1038/mt.2010.105.
130. Peng Z, Lu C, Shi G, et al. Sensitive and quantitative in vivo analysis of pd-l1 using 
magnetic particle imaging and imaging-guided immunotherapy. Eur J Nucl Med 
Mol Imag. 2023;50:1291–1305. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00259-022-06083-2.
131. Sarko DK, McKinney CE. Exosomes: origins and therapeutic potential for 
neurodegenerative disease. Front Neurosci. 2017;11:82. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnins.2017.00082.
132. Ellison TJ, Stice SL, Yao Y. Therapeutic and diagnostic potential of extracellular 
vesicles in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Extracellular Vesicle. 2023;2, 100019. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vesic.2022.100019.
133. Xi J, Wang T, Xian P, et al. Proteomic insights uncover enhanced neurotherapeutic 
potential in conditioned mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles. 
Extracellular Vesicle. 2024;3, 100037. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
vesic.2024.100037.
134. Malm T, Loppi S, Kanninen KM. Exosomes in alzheimer’s disease. Neurochem Int. 
2016;97:193–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2016.04.011.
135. Van Giau V, An SS. Emergence of exosomal mirnas as a diagnostic biomarker for 
alzheimer’s disease. J Neurol Sci. 2016;360:141–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jns.2015.12.005.
136. Wu X, Zheng T, Zhang B. Exosomes in Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci Bull. 2017;33: 
331–338. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12264-016-0092-z.
137. Yuan L, Li JY. Exosomes in Parkinson’s disease: current perspectives and future 
challenges. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2019;10:964–972. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acschemneuro.8b00469.
138. Dutta S, Hornung S, Taha HB, Bitan G. Biomarkers for parkinsonian disorders in 
cns-originating evs: promise and challenges. Acta Neuropathol. 2023;145:515–540. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-023-02557-1.
139. Acosta C, Anderson HD, Anderson CM. Astrocyte dysfunction in alzheimer disease. 
J Neurosci Res. 2017;95:2430–2447. https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.24075.
140. Dutta S, Hornung S, Kruayatidee A, et al. А-synuclein in blood exosomes 
immunoprecipitated using neuronal and oligodendroglial markers distinguishes 
Parkinson’s disease from multiple system atrophy. Acta Neuropathol. 2021;142: 
495–511. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-021-02324-0.
141. Kandimalla R, Saeed M, Tyagi N, Gupta RC, Aqil F. Exosome-based approaches in 
the management of alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2023;144, 104974. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104974.
142. Xylaki M, Chopra A, Weber S, Bartl M, Outeiro TF, Mollenhauer B. Extracellular 
vesicles for the diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease: systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Mov Disord. 2023;38:1585–1597. https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.29497.
143. Xu M, Feng T, Liu B, et al. Engineered exosomes: desirable target-tracking 
characteristics for cerebrovascular and neurodegenerative disease therapies. 
Theranostics. 2021;11:8926–8944. https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.62330.
144. Kojima R, Bojar D, Rizzi G, et al. Designer exosomes produced by implanted cells 
intracerebrally deliver therapeutic cargo for Parkinson’s disease treatment. Nat 
Commun. 2018;9:1305. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03733-8.
145. Qu M, Lin Q, Huang L, et al. Dopamine-loaded blood exosomes targeted to brain for 
better treatment of Parkinson’s disease. J Contr Release. 2018;287:156–166. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2018.08.035.
146. Perets N, Betzer O, Shapira R, et al. Golden exosomes selectively target brain 
pathologies in neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental disorders. Nano Lett. 
2019;19:3422–3431. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b04148.
147. Shi M, Liu C, Cook TJ, et al. Plasma exosomal alpha-synuclein is likely cns-derived 
and increased in Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neuropathol. 2014;128:639–650. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-014-1314-y.
148. Cheng K, Shen D, Smith J, et al. Transplantation of platelet gel spiked with 
cardiosphere-derived cells boosts structural and functional benefits relative to gel 
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
14 
transplantation alone in rats with myocardial infarction. Biomaterials. 2012;33: 
2872–2879. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.12.040.
149. Xie Y, Ibrahim A, Cheng K, et al. Importance of cell-cell contact in the therapeutic 
benefits of cardiosphere-derived cells. Stem Cells (Dayton). 2014;32:2397–2406. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.1736.
150. Vallabhajosyula P, Korutla L, Habertheuer A, et al. Tissue-specific exosome 
biomarkers for noninvasively monitoring immunologic rejection of transplanted 
tissue. J Clin Invest. 2017;127:1375–1391. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI87993.
151. Lee KS, Yeom SH, Kim MK, et al. Therapeutic potential of human stem cell-derived 
extracellular vesicles in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Extracellular Vesicle. 2024;4, 
100045. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vesic.2024.100045.
152. Sahoo S, Losordo DW. Exosomes and cardiac repair after myocardial infarction. 
Circ Res. 2014;114:333–344. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.300639.
153. Merchant ML, Rood IM, Deegens JKJ, Klein JB. Isolation and characterization of 
urinary extracellular vesicles: implications for biomarker discovery. Nat Rev 
Nephrol. 2017;13:731–749. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneph.2017.148.
154. Cheng K, Malliaras K, Shen D, et al. Intramyocardial injection of platelet gel 
promotes endogenous repair and augments cardiac function in rats with 
myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:256–264. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jacc.2011.10.858.
155. Tran PHL, Xiang D, Tran TTD, et al. Exosomes and nanoengineering: a match made 
for precision therapeutics. Adv Mater. 2020;32, e1904040. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adma.201904040.
156. Zipkin M. Exosome redux. Nat Biotechnol. 2019;37:1395–1400. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41587-019-0326-5.
157. Li Z, Hu S, Huang K, Su T, Cores J, Cheng K. Targeted anti-il-1beta platelet 
microparticles for cardiac detoxing and repair. Sci Adv. 2020;6, eaay0589. https:// 
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aay0589.
158. Popowski KD, Lopez de Juan Abad B, George A, et al. Inhalable exosomes 
outperform liposomes as mrna and protein drug carriers to the lung. Extracell 
Vesicle. 2022;1, 100002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vesic.2022.100002.
159. Henry E, Cores J, Hensley MT, et al. Adult lung spheroid cells contain progenitor 
cells and mediate regeneration in rodents with bleomycin-induced pulmonary 
fibrosis. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2015;4:1265–1274. https://doi.org/10.5966/ 
sctm.2015-0062.
160. Du W, Zhang K, Zhang S, et al. Enhanced proangiogenic potential of mesenchymal 
stem cell-derived exosomes stimulated by a nitric oxide releasing polymer. 
Biomaterials. 2017;133:70–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2017.04.030.
161. Li Z, Zhang K, Zhao X, et al. Abstract 490: enhanced therapeutic effects of msc- 
derived exosomes with an injectable hydrogel for hindlimb ischemia treatment. 
Circ Res. 2018;123. https://doi.org/10.1161/res.123.suppl_1.490. A490-A490.
162. Zhu D, Li Z, Huang K, Caranasos TG, Rossi JS, Cheng K. Minimally invasive 
delivery of therapeutic agents by hydrogel injection into the pericardial cavity for 
cardiac repair. Nat Commun. 2021;12:1412. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021- 
21682-7.
163. Wang X, Chen Y, Zhao Z, et al. Engineered exosomes with ischemic myocardium- 
targeting peptide for targeted therapy in myocardial infarction. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2018;7, e008737. https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.118.008737.
164. Mentkowski KI, Lang JK. Exosomes engineered to express a cardiomyocyte binding 
peptide demonstrate improved cardiac retention in vivo. Sci Rep. 2019;9, 10041. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-46407-1.
165. He X, Kuang G, Wu Y, Ou C. Emerging roles of exosomal mirnas in diabetes 
mellitus. Clin Transl Med. 2021;11, e468. https://doi.org/10.1002/ctm2.468.
166. Ibrahim A, Marban E. Exosomes: fundamental biology and roles in cardiovascular 
physiology. Annu Rev Physiol. 2016;78:67–83. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev- 
physiol-021115-104929.
167. de Gonzalo-Calvo D, van der Meer RW, Rijzewijk LJ, et al. Serum microrna-1 and 
microrna-133a levels reflect myocardial steatosis in uncomplicated type 2 diabetes. 
Sci Rep. 2017;7:47. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-00070-6.
168. Sidorkiewicz I, Niemira M, Maliszewska K, et al. Circulating mirnas as a predictive 
biomarker of the progression from prediabetes to diabetes: outcomes of a 5-year 
prospective observational study. J Clin Med. 2020;9:2184. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/jcm9072184.
169. Zhuang M, Du D, Pu L, et al. Spion-decorated exosome delivered bay55-9837 
targeting the pancreas through magnetism to improve the blood glc response. 
Small. 2019;15, 1903135. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201903135.
170. Yang Y, Hong Y, Nam GH, Chung JH, Koh E, Kim IS. Virus-mimetic fusogenic 
exosomes for direct delivery of integral membrane proteins to target cell 
membranes. Adv Mater. 2017;29. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201605604.
171. Lu L, Liu F, Wu W, et al. Stem cell-derived exosomes prevent the development of 
thoracic aortic aneurysm/dissection by inhibiting aim2 inflammasome and 
pyroptosis. Extracellular Vesicle. 2024;4, 100046. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
vesic.2024.100046.
172. Tsiapalis D, O’Driscoll L. Mesenchymal stem cell derived extracellular vesicles for 
tissue engineering and regenerative medicine applications. Cells. 2020:9. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/cells9040991.
173. Qin Y, Wang L, Gao Z, Chen G, Zhang C. Bone marrow stromal/stem cell-derived 
extracellular vesicles regulate osteoblast activity and differentiation in vitro and 
promote bone regeneration in vivo. Sci Rep. 2016;6, 21961. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/srep21961.
174. Luo ZW, Li FX, Liu YW, et al. Aptamer-functionalized exosomes from bone marrow 
stromal cells target bone to promote bone regeneration. Nanoscale. 2019;11: 
20884–20892. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9nr02791b.
175. Shen J, Hu L, Huang X, et al. Skeleton-derived extracellular vesicles in bone and 
whole-body aging: from mechanisms to potential applications. Bone. 2024;183, 
117076. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2024.117076.
176. Song H, Zhao J, Cheng J, et al. Extracellular vesicles in chondrogenesis and 
cartilage regeneration. J Cell Mol Med. 2021;25:4883–4892. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/jcmm.16290.
177. Mao G, Zhang Z, Hu S, et al. Exosomes derived from mir-92a-3p-overexpressing 
human mesenchymal stem cells enhance chondrogenesis and suppress cartilage 
degradation via targeting wnt5a. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2018;9:247. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s13287-018-1004-0.
178. Wu P, Zhang B, Ocansey DKW, Xu W, Qian H. Extracellular vesicles: a bright star of 
nanomedicine. Biomaterials. 2021;269, 120467. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2020.120467.
179. Lei X, He N, Zhu L, et al. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicles 
attenuate radiation-induced lung injury via mirna-214-3p. Antioxidants Redox 
Signal. 2021;35:849–862. https://doi.org/10.1089/ars.2019.7965.
180. Tang TT, Lv LL, Wang B, et al. Employing macrophage-derived microvesicle for 
kidney-targeted delivery of dexamethasone: an efficient therapeutic strategy 
against renal inflammation and fibrosis. Theranostics. 2019;9:4740–4755. https:// 
doi.org/10.7150/thno.33520.
181. Lee K, Fraser K, Ghaddar B, et al. Multiplexed profiling of single extracellular 
vesicles. ACS Nano. 2018;12:494–503. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.7b07060.
182. Wang J, Ma P, Kim DH, Liu BF, Demirci U. Towards microfluidic-based exosome 
isolation and detection for tumor therapy. Nano Today. 2021;37, 101066. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.nantod.2020.101066.
183. Xia Y, Chen T, Chen G, et al. A nature-inspired colorimetric and fluorescent dual- 
modal biosensor for exosomes detection. Talanta. 2020;214, 120851. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.talanta.2020.120851.
K. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Extracellular Vesicle 4 (2024) 100061 
15 
